3071 99837866 2213
THE TRVE DIFFE∣RENCE BETVVEENE CHRI∣STIAN SVBIECTION AND VNCHRISTIAN REBELLION: WHEREIN THE PRINCES LAWFVLL power to commaund for trueth, and indepriuable right to beare the sword are defended against the Popes censures and the Iesuits sophismes vt∣tered in their APOLOGIE and DE∣FENCE OF ENGLISH CATHOLIKES: With a demonstration that the thinges refourmed in the Church of England by the Lawes of this Realme are truely Catholike, notwithstanding the vaine shew made to the contrary in their late Rhemish Testament: by THOMAS BILSON Warden of Winchester. Perused and allowed by publike authoritie. Matth. 22.Yeelde to Caesar the things which are Caesars, and to God the things which are Gods. August. contra epist. Permen. Lib. 1. Cap. 7.These men inobedient and impious in either, neither yeeld Christian loue to God, nor humane feare to Princes. AT OXFORD, Printed by Ioseph Barnes Printer to the Vniuersitie, MDXXCV.
TO THE MOST EX∣CELLENT, VERTVOVS AND NOBLE PRINCESSE, ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF GOD QVEENE OF ENG∣land, France and Ireland, Defendor of the faith, &c. MOST RENOWMED AND VER∣tuous Princesse: I am in hope, it shall seeme no presumption, to offer these my rude labours to the sight & view of your Maiestie: The cause is Christs, as being the defence of his will and ordinance, who hath mercifully placed and mightily preserued your Highnes in your fathers throne: and expecteth, as it were in recompence, that the power which he hath giuen you, and honor which hee hath heaped on you, should bee im∣ployed to protect his trueth, and safegarde his Church within your Realme. Which your religious and gratious disposition so wisely considereth and so carefully putteth in execution, that not onely with good liking you beare the title to bee DEFENDOR of the Christian faith, but with manie daungers and some enuie you stoupe to the verie burden of harbouring the afflicted, and helping the distressed by all conuenient and godly meanes: not refu∣sing with Princely courage and constancie to endure the displeasures and abide the disfauours of such as seeke to restoare or vphold the decayed and accursed kingdome of Antichrist. A thing rare in so high a state, but a great
blessing from God our Sauiour, to be both protectour of his persecuted seruaunts, and partaker of his sonnes re∣proches: which perhappes worldly mindes doe warilie shun: but your Christian wisedome well perceiueth to be the assured signe of Gods fauour, and to haue his vn∣doubted promise of an immortall and farre more glori∣ous Crowne, than this, which hee hath alreadie possessed you with. This good & long experience of your Maiesties most willing inclination and affection to plant pietie and re∣lieue innocencie, might embolden mee, if there were no farther cause, to presse to your Highnesse for the Patro∣nage of so good a purpose: but as the case nowe stan∣deth, besides this generall inducement, I haue a speciall nforcement to leade mee to this onset. The whole dis∣course doth so directly and namely treate of your Maie∣sties Scepter, Sworde, and Crowne, that neither I might aske protection of anie other but of your royall person, nor such demurres be published without your Highnesse leaue. So is it, most gratious Soueraigne, that certaine your subiectes borne, forsaking your happie gouernment and their natiue Countrie, vpon doubt of Religion as they pretend, haue feated themselues in two Societies or Col∣leges, which they call Seminaries, founded and furnished at the Popes charges beyond the Seas, the one at Rome, the other at Rhemes:Apol. chap. 3. with purpose thither to drawe the best wittes out of England, as well from both vniuersities as from other Grammer schooles, there to traine them to their fansies, and faction, and thence to direct them backe into this Realme, for the
reconciling of poore soules, as they say, to the Catholike Church: or in truer termes, for the peruerting of simple and ignorant persons from the duetie which they owe to God and your Highnesse. This attempt beeing throughlie looked into by the Lordes and others of your Maiesties most wise and wor∣thie Counsel, was thought, as in deede it is, verie dange∣rous and pernicious to your Realme, that the capitall en∣uier of your state, disturber of your peace, and pursuer of your person should allure and abuse so great a number of your subiectes with a shewe of liberalitie: and haue them in such bondage, by the Rules of their Societie, that they must obeie the will of their SVPERIOR, (the Popes Agent among them) none other-wise than they would the voice of Christ from heauen:Campian in his 2 article. (for so them-selues professe:) and thereupon by your Highnesse authoritie, proclamation was giuen out, that none should depart the Realme with∣out licence: and a time prefixed for those that were a∣broade, to returne home, vpon some paines there speci∣fied, & farther threats if your Highnesse were thereunto prouoked. The Guiders of these vngodlie Societies in steede of obeying your Highnesse edict, fell to defend their owne act in departing this Land and resorting to Rome: as also the Popes intent in erecting those Seminaries, and ap∣poincting a number of them to be sent into England to reduce the Realme to the Romish obedience, which they call the faith of their fathers. And because they were to laie the fault of their vnlawful departure & long absence, either on them-selues, which they would not, or on the
state from which they were estraunged, they (decla∣ring their founder by their fruites) spared not in a slaunderous pamphlet of theirs intitled, An Apologie and te declaration of the institution and  of the two Englishe Colledges, to charge your Christian, milde, and aduised regi∣ment with no lesse crimes than heresie, tyrannie and blasphemie: as the onely causes why they depar∣ted and absented themselues so long from their natu∣rall countrie: agising none of your Ecclesiasticall Lawes to bee orderlie or duelie made (but calling them straunge and vnnaturall dealings,fol. 7 violent disorders,fol. 38 which to all posteritie must needes breede shame & rebuke, repugnant to the lawes of God, the church & nature) and most of all spurning at the act and othe which abo∣lished the Popes vsurped power out of this Realme, and declared your Highnesse to bee the SVPREME bearer of the sworde, and establisher of publike Lawes within your Dominions (a power confirmed to Prin∣ces by God, and therefore not to be infringed or clai∣med by Priestes or Popes.) And to make their mat∣ter more saleable in the eares of the simple they vsed all their Rhemish art and eloquence to deface and tra∣duce that right of your authoritie and bande of our o∣bedience with cauilling Sophismes & florishing termes: as if that SOVERAIGNTIE vsed by your Highnesse were a thing improbable, vnreasonable, vnnaturall, impossible:fol. 10 and the O THE yeelded by vs fol. 12 intollerable, repugnant to God, the Church, your Maiesties honour, and al mens consciences. Of such wastfull words, and mightie bragges that booke is full, hauing other∣wise for matter and proofe nothing in it, that is worth the reading, much lesse the answering: as being rather
a Rhetoricall declamation of an vngracious witte, than a substantiall confirmation of their actes and attemptes against God and the Magistrate. But, as it seemed, they trusted rather to their pra∣ctises, which haue beene of late verie rife with the Church of Rome: than to their proofes, of which theie bee vtterlie destitute: and therefore they dispatched into your Highnesse Realme vnder the conduction of one more presumptuous than learned, (as his wri∣ting and disputing, whiles hee liued, declared) a whole swarme of Boie-priestes disguised and proui∣ded at all assaies with secrete instructions how to deale with all sortes of men and matters, and with commis∣sion from Rome to confesse and absolue such as they should winne with anie pretence or policie to mislike the state and affect noueltie, and to take assuraunce of them by vowe, othe, or other meanes, that they shoulde bee euer after adherent and obedient to the Church of Rome and to the faith thereof: which there made the ruder and vnwiser sort beleeue was christian and Catholike. Religion onelie founded in their mouthes, and the faith of their Fathers: and yet that poison they caried couertlie in their hearts, and cunninglie in their bookes, that your Maiesties deceiued and beguiled Subiectes by the verie sequence of their Romish faith and absolution were tied to obeie the Pope depriuing your highnesse of the sword and scepter: & bound to assist him, or whom he should send to take the same by force of armes out of your Highnesse handes.
I knowe, most noble Soueraigne, they stoutly de∣nied this, and earnestly protested in open audience, that they had no such meaning, but for their partes did account your Maiestie their lawfull and true Prin∣cesse, and taught all others so to doe (hauing first ob∣tained, like wilie Friers, a dispensation at Rome, that to auoide the present daunger, they and all other their obse∣quents might serue and honour your Highnesse for a time vntill the bull of Pius the fifth might safely bee executed):The dispen∣sation of Campian & Parsons. and it may bee the common sort of such as they peruerted, were not acquainted with these hainous mysteries: but yet this was the full resolution of them all, which I last reported, as well appeared by their examinations: and this verie conclusion stood in their written bookes as a ruled case, that they must rather loose their liues than shrinke from this ground-woorke that the Pope maie depriue your Highnesse of your Scepter and Throne: and the reason is added, because, saie they, it is a pointe of fayeth,In their cases of conscience: the 55. Arti. and requireth confession of the mouth, though death insue. This daungerous, if not diuelish Doctrine was not printed nor publyshed to the sight of all your Sub∣iectes, vntill the time that some of the chiefe procu∣rers and kindlers of this flame, for these and other interprises of lyke condition and qualitie were by the iust course of your Highnesse Lawes adiudged to death. After whose execution the almes-men of An∣tichrist sawe no remedie, but they must either leaue their brethren as rightlie condemned for hatching re∣bellion vnder a shewe of Religion, and bee in daun∣ger
to dissolue the plotte which they had laide to bring this Lande to the Popes subiection, (the true ende and intent of their Seminaries and full repaiment of all his charges) or else with all their cunning vnder∣take the quarrell of their vn-holie father: and pleade the cause of their vnluckie brethren. Hauing no bet∣ter choice, they resolued, as venturers must, that haue a desperate case in hand, to trie what successe they might gette by facing and shifting in such sort as the simple shoulde hardlie discerne them. To that end haue they put foorth A Defence of English Catholikes: Wherein according to their wonted vaine, manie thinges are statelie and stoutelie auouched, but nothing attempted or inten∣ded to bee prooued, saue onelie the Popes power to depriue Princes: which with all furniture of witte and woordes they labour to inferre: not shaming to saie, that Subiectes bearing armes against their naturall Princes vpon the Popes warraunt, do an holy, iust and honorable seruice:The Defence of Catholikes the 5. chap. and that this hath beene the faith of this Land euer since it was conuerted vnto Christ. Against this canker, consuming the verie soule and conscience where it taketh holde, I thought it not amisse,In the third part of this booke. to oppose the Soueraigne salue of Gods eter∣nall will and commaundement, and to let it appeare to your Graces people, that Princes are placed by God, and so not to bee displaced by men: and subiectes threat∣ned damnation by Gods own mouth if they resist, from which no Popes dispensation shall saue them: and therefore the Iesuits Doctrine in that point to be as wic∣ked, as their proofes bee weake: hauing neither Scrip∣ture,
Councell, nor Father, for a thousande yeares that euer allowed, mentioned or imagined anie power in Popes to depose Princes. I haue thereto added a confirmation of the right which the Lawes of this Lande do attribute vnto your Highnesse,In the second part. and an explication of that othe, which the Iesuits so much stumble at: laieng my foundation in the sacred testimonies of the holie Ghost, and persuing the same in the continual practise of Christs church for eight hundreth yeares & vpward, (so long as there was either godlines in Bishops to regard their duties, or corage in Princes to call for their owne) and iustifieng euerie part thereof seuerallie and sufficientlie by diuine and humane both authorities and examples. The Iesuites absurdities and allegations pretended a∣gainst your Maiesties interest to beare the sword ouer all persons and in all causes, without dependence or refe∣rence to anie earthlie tribunal or superior, I haue like∣wise particularlie refelled, and proued them both imper∣tinent to their purpose, and nothing obstant to that Su∣preme power of the sword which is claimed and vsed by your Maiestie: but their obiections to be meere cauils & mistakings of a matter which they do not or will not vn∣derstand: as also their flieng this Realme, and running to Rome I haue examined,In the first part. and not onelie found them re∣pugnant to the ancient lawes of the Conqueror & other your noble progenitors, but also shewed great difference betweene the Catholike Fathers writing and sometimes going to the Bishop of Rome, as to their fellow seruaunt and a dutifull subiect to the same state that they were: &
our English Italians giuing him an Antichristian power to turne & wind the whole church at his will, and dispose kingdomes and displace Princes, if they be not obedient and suppliant to his Censures. Lastlie because the temper and colour of all their wic∣ked sayings & doings is the catholik faith & the catholik seruice,In the fourth part. I haue entered a speciall discourse, that the refor∣mation of the church in this Realme made by your Maie∣sties power & lawes is wholie & truelie catholike: such as the Scriptures do preciselie command & the ancient fa∣thers expresly witnes was the faith and vse of Christes church for manie hundrethes. These things most (religious & worthie Princesse) I haue done sincerely, that the doctrine & precepts of our Saui∣or might take place before the deuises & pleasures of mē: familiarly, that the meaner sort of your subiects which are most obnoxious to this infection might perceiue the way to recouer their former health: & temperatly, that the e∣nimy should not thinke himselfe rather illuded then aun∣swered. Which if it please your most excellent Maiestie to like & alow that it may passe to the hands of your people, I trust in Christ that such as haue any feare of God before their yes, and care of life to come will hold themselues satisfied, and the rest be better aduised before they runne headlong into that extreeme perdition of bodie & soule, and horrible downefall of disobedience, and infidelity to God, and their Prince. The king of kings and Lord of Lordes blesse and pre∣serue your Maiestie, and as hee hath begun a good and glorious worke in you, and in this Realme by you:
so continue the same by lightening you with his holie Spirit, and defending you with his mightie arme as hee hath doone from the daie, that hee chose you to bee the Leader and Guider of his People: that you maie long keepe them in trueth and peace by the assistaunce of his grace, to the praise of his glorie, increase of the God∣lie, and griefe of his and your enimies. Euen so Lord Iesus. Your Maiesties most humble and dutifull subiect, THOMAS BILSON.
THE GENERALL CONTENTS of euerie part. The first part Examineth all the proofes and places of the Iesuits Apologie, their forsaking the Realme and running to Rome, what aid the Fathers sought at Rome: and how the Bi∣shop thereof in all ages hath beene resisted: the intent of his Seminaries: and vertues of his Clergy. The second part Prooueth the Princes supreme power to commaund for truth within her Realme: and the Pope to haue beene a duetifull subiect to the Romane Emperors Ecclesiastical Lawes for eight hundred yeares and vpward: answereth the Iesuites authorities and absurdities heaped against the Princes regiment: searcheth the safest way for the Princes direction in matters of religion, and concludeth the Pope in doubts of doctrine to be no sufficient nor superiour iudge. The third part Refelleth the Iesuits reasons and authorities for the Popes depriuing of Princes, & the bearing of armes by subiects against their Soueraignes vpon his censures: decla∣reth the tyrannies and iniuries of Antichrist seeking to exalt himselfe aboue kings & Princes: & conuinceth that no deposition was offered by the Pope for a thousand yeres after Christ, and none agnised by anie Christian Prince vntil this present day. The fourth part Sheweth the reformation of this Realme to be warranted by the woord of God and the auncient faith of Christs Church, and the Iesuites for all their crakes to bee no∣thing lesse than Catholikes.
To the Christian Reader. IT is some time since, good Christian Reader, that lighting on the Iesuits Apologie, I receiued the same with purpose to refute it, if the matter so imported. Perusing it ouer, I found it curiouslie penned with picked termes, and beautified with plausible and popular persuasions & reasons: but as for sub∣stāce or learning, or weight of proofe, I saw nothing in it that should occupie a meane Scholer the space of two daies. Laying that booke therefore aside I determined at mine own choice and libertie to handle the matters there most impugned, I meane the othe and the Princes supremacy, in such sort as men of meane capacitie, abused by their secret whisperinges and open raylings might plainly perceiue, both the Princes power to com∣maund for truth to be lawfull and good, and the Iesuits cauils impugning the same to be vaine and childish. As I was in this resolution, & saw no cause, for that I should refute no di∣rect aduersarie, to make more hast than both health, which was not great: & businesse, which I cannot want, would suffer me: there hapned an iniurie to bee offered to the inheritance of the College where I am, by a false title de∣riued from before the foundation of the house, and so strengthened on euery side with auncient deedes and euidence, that the forgerie was hard to bee discerned and harder to be conuinced but by infinite searching in the mu∣niments of many churches and Bishopricks as well as in our owne, and re∣examining sundrie large and laborious commissions which they had taken out before my time, to testifie the keeping and iustifie the deliuering of those suspected deedes and ligiers. To the deecting and impugning of this, no person was or would be vsed (I speake for the paines and not for the skill) but my selfe, the cause was so huge, the comparing of the circum∣stances and contrarieties both of deeds and witnesses so tedious: the proofe so perplexed and intricate: and the daunger so neerely touched the whole state of the house: I was forced for two yeares to lay all studies aside and addict my selfe wholy first to the deprehending, and then to the pursuing of this falsehood. No sooner had I breathed from this vnwoonted trauell, and betaken my selfe to my former purpose, but my happe was to light on the Iesuites De∣fence of English Catholikes, not hauing the Authors name, but in order of writing and phrase of speech resembling right D. Allen the maker of their Apologie: Looking earnestly into the contents thereof, I percei∣ued the pen-man to haue such confidence in his tongue that hee doubted not but to ouerrule the world with words, & his pretensed policies. So far he wadeth in other mens causes and common wealthes: So boldly he pronoun∣ceth what himselfe pleaseth of Popes and princes, and of their titles, Coun∣selles, Lawes and actions, neither alloweth hee any man to bee religious or
catholike but such as him-selfe liketh: and euerie-where hee sheweth a speciall care to smooth and stroke his holy Fathers indeuors and censures, actes and iudgementes, warres and wickednesse with termes of the greatest deuotion and reuerence: subiecting all things vnder his feete, inuesting him with both swords, and suffering no man, king nor Cesar to haue assurance of honor or life longer than he kneeleth downe and adoreth the image of the beast. In this maiestical course & surrly conceit hee goeth on, thinking he can captiuate kingdomes with the volubilitie and intemperauncy of his tongue; which is so swift to furnish a lie, that he disdaineth the basenesse & plainesse of trueth. The saucinesse and egernesse of that Defence, I was then, and am yet per∣suaded to ouerskip: as hauing learned that princes affaires and actions are aboue my vocation, and wholy without my profession: neither doe I thinke it lawfull for priuate men rashly to speake, or possible for them vprightly to iudge of Princes doinges, vnlesse they be fully acquainted with the secretes and circumstances of the things, which Princes vse not to commit to many, nor to any but those that are of their counsell. I therefore then did & now do determine to leaue this peremptorie prater, whosoeuer he be, to his own vaine: knowing that besides open rightes and titles, secret preuentions are often vsed betweene Realmes, and sometimes reuenges, which Magi∣strates by lawful meanes may procure. Onely the Popes power to depriue Princes, which with all his skill, learning and eloquence hee seeketh to proue and perswade to the people of this Realme, (as the chiefest Bulwark of their De∣fence, that were condemned, he saith for religion, we say for treason, and in deed the very ground of all their actions) I thought needefull to examine; and to let the simple see, on what a sandy slime they haue built as well their consciences as their Colleges, and in how wretched and vnrigh∣teous a quarell they haue hazarded their liues in this world, and their soules in the next, to inlarge the power and make vp the purse of their Rhemish founder. Taking that therefore in hande I haue worde by worde refelled the fifth chapter of their Defence which purposely treateth of this matter: and in∣serted so much of the fourth as tended to this ende, the rest being a volun∣tarie pang of their vnbridled eloquencc: as also I haue ripped vp the shame∣full attemptes and tumults of Popes these last fiue hundred yeares, (for be∣fore that time Antichrist neither was, nor durst be so bold) presuming to displace & depose their Lord & Maister, the Romane Emperor, & incoun∣tering him & other Princes with treasons, poysons, battayles, bloodsheds, periuries, & treacheries, such as Christendom neuer before tasted of, & euer since rued. Where, I haue not only opened the facts & noted the meeknes of their martial spirits, but haue vnfoulded the causes & quarels for which those Princes were thus pursued with such excommunications and depriuations from Rome; shewing as I go, the Italian stories in fauour of their countrie∣man and foreman the Pope, to bee exceeding partiall.
The like order I would haue followed in their Apologie, but that, as I first protested, I found nothing in it worthy to bee refuted, vnlesse I should haue banded their idle and emptie termes backe againe to them with others of the same making, and so brought the cause of Christ and trueth of Re∣ligion to a warfare of woordes: which I neither ought, nor would. If any man thinke me no indifferent iudge of their paines, it may please him to cast his eye on the second sheete, and hee shall find all the proofes and places of their Apologie aunswered in three leanes: and of those fewe and weake quotations to haue made a conquest in open writing had beene incke and paper ill imployed. I would therefore not take that course, which seemed to me neither needeful nor profitable: but to benefite the poore deceiued subiectes of this Realme and bring the Iesuites cause to the touch-stone in deede, I haue chosen the principall intentes of their Apologie, on which their whole foundation standeth; and after mine owne course debated them more exactly and largely than the confutation of their Apology would haue suffered me. The chiefest matters of the Apologie.For where they pretend they departed for lacke of the Catholike Sacrifice, Sacramentes and Seruice, which want in this Realme;Cap. 1. and because they were forced by oth to confesse an vnnaturall and impossible power in the Prince to be supreme Gouernour of all persons and causes as well ecclesiasticall as tem∣porall:Cap. 4. and in their absence they resort for reliefe to none but to him that is the head of their catholike communion,Cap. 2. the chiefe Pastour and Bishoppe of their soules in earth, and the vicar generall of Christ, to whose predecessors all the fa∣mous Fathers called for aide, comfort and counsell in their like distresses: and traine vppe such as come vnto them in obedience to the churches Lawes,Cap. 5. Apostolike Traditions both written and vnwritten, and to the precepts of Ancients & Superiours, who haue the promised spirit of trueth: and are sent backe againe into this Land to execute spirituall offices, and to absolue in foro conscientiae the penitent people from their sinnes, of what sort soeuer, schisme and heresie not excepted:Cap. 6. who seeth not that these assertions being the seueral brāches of their Apologie, de∣pend either on religion, that is in strife betwixt vs: or on the Princes power, which they impugne: or on the Popes claime to bee head of the church, which we deny? And therefore the proofe or disproofe of their particular actions, must be fet and deriued from those chiefe and capitall springs. The consideration whereof first induced mee to neglect the rouing dis∣courses, and vaunting florishes of their Apologie no lesse voide of trueth than of proofe, and to betake my selfe to a stricter and directer kinde of exami∣ning  the most materiall pointes on which the rest did hang: as first their running to Rome, & siding themselues with the Pope as Christs Vicar gene∣rall against their Prince, for which they haue no president in the primatiue  Church. The next is the princes power to commaund for trueth, and right to beare the sword within her owne Realme ouer all persons for thinges and causes as well Ecclesiasticall as Temporall, without any subiection or re∣lation to the Popes tribunall, which I prooue is agreeable to the Lawes of
God and practise of Christes church: and therefore the oth importing the same to be good and godlie. Thirdly the Popes censuring and depriuing princes of their crownes, I shew to be nothing else but a wicked & vnchri∣stian  pride & contumelie not long since deuised by Antichrist to frustrate the word and ordinance of almighty God, and to make himselfe great: and so of force the subiects, which be partakers with him in that hainous con∣spiracie, by perswading, assisting, executing, or defending the same in worde or deede against their princes, to bee traytours and not mar∣tyrs, if they die for that quarell: Lastly the publique reformation of diuine Sacramentes and Seruice made by her Maiestie, I declare to be Chri∣stian  and Catholike: and the partes of poperie repealed and abolished by the lawes of this Realme, to be repugnant, (I speak for the substance of thē, and not for certain indifferent ceremonies in them) to the sacred scriptures and ancient fathers. Other incident and adiacent matters I haue handled, and those not a fewe, as the generall and speciall contentes before and after will better insinuate: but these foure bee the pointes that beare the burden both of their first Apologie for their Seminaries, and last Defence of English Catho∣likes. By these shal we soone discerne the truth or falshood of their preten∣ces & clamors against the Princes Lawes and such as are authorized by her highnesse: & therefore from the sober & sad discussing hereof, if they get them, as they haue done to outragious and tragicall exclamations, we must leaue them as men wilfully diuerting from the right way, & crying as loude as they can for life, to drowne the voices of such as woulde recall them. If they looke that all the parts of their Defence should haue bin answered in like sort as the fifth chapter is, that labour I say for a man of my calling wold haue bin as fruitles, as it is needles: the proofs that are not here discus∣sed, may afely be despised, the rest of their rolling rhetorik, a diuine neither need regard, nor should repeate. As much as is inforcing, & to their purpose, is here cōprised: their politik obseruations, as they be for the most part fals & passing slāderous: so to their defēce are they idle & altogether superfluous; and argue rather mindes loaden with malice, and tongues fraighted with poyson against the present state euen for very temporall and ciuill affaires: than anie religious or dutifull respect of authoritie and submission to the Magistrate. But such is the doctrine and education of their Romish semina∣ries: they fell first to flattering, and because that tooke no place, in a rage they be now run to leude and open slaundering. An example whereof, to him that hath the booke, and may read it, appeareth, as through the the whole, so in fewe lines pag. 177. more spitefull wordes than which the rankest caterpiller in Rome could not haue vttered against the state and kingdom where wee liue: not touching the persecution which they suffer, but obiecting in plaine wordes to the whole body of her Maiesties most ho∣norable
& most christian Counsel, ignominious practises, & plaguie iniustice:The 8 chapter of their De∣fence, page 177. yea euen piracies, proditions, spiries, & soule artes to afflict and coosen the world round about vs, with many such disloyall, vnnaturall, vntrue and vnhonest both surmises and reproches, whereof that fardle is full. This is one of the reasons why I neither might nor would at large refell their Iesuiticall Defence of English Catholikes, as they terme it: in deede an artificiall inuectiue defacing and slaundering the publike Gouernment of this realme to the vttermost of their powers. The other is for that the summe and effect of those chapters which I haue omitted, and might not without offence to the state be published, are wholy reduced to those principal que∣stions which I haue handled. The summe of the Defence.In their first, second, and fourth chapters their chiefe scopes are these, that 1 cap.Manie Priests & catholike in England haue bin condemned & executed for meere matter of religion: that 2 cap. Campian & the rest of the Priests condemned & executed vpon pretence of treason, were neuer yet guiltie of any such crimes: but4 cap. behaued them¦selues verie discreetly, and nothing seditiously in their answeres to the questions of the Bull of Pius Quintus. In these the wise Reader soone perceiueth the whole contention toucheth the Popes iurisdiction and claime denied him by the Lawes of this Realme, and his power to depriue the Prince of her crowne and scepter, which was the sole respect the Bull of Pius Quintus had. The iustifying then of these two foundations with cleare and pregnant proofes had beene requisite for the Iesuites, if they had purposed to manifest the innocencie of their brethren: where nowe by their rhetoricall vaga∣ries inucighing at the partes and circumstances of their inditementes, conuictions and executions, they storme at the course, which the Iudges obserued, but saie nothing to the crime wherewith the guiltie were bur∣dened. The Popes power to depriue Princes, they will say, they haue fully pro∣ued: and so their brethren in trueth and equitie to be cleared. If that were so, they sayde somewhat: but as I haue shewed they profferre it often, they neuer proue it. And therefore on the contrarie part, as I neede not strengthen the publike iudgements of this Realme with the particular re∣portes, behauiors, hopes and enterprises of the Iesuites hauing their triall in Courtes of Recorde and places of vsuall and open iustice: neither is that incident to my calling or requisite in these cases: so for the maine and ge∣nerall ground of the crime there fastned on them, and after punished in thē; which was, that to aide, assist, persuade or defend the Popes Bull depri∣uing the Prince of her crowne and throne, to incourage her Subiectes or enimies on that pretence to rebellion or inuasion, was high and hai∣nous treason, the trueth, I say of this illation, is euident by the third part of this my booke, where that point of their Defence is refuted. So for the rest, which would needes venter their liues in the like quarell: I meane for inuesting the Pope with the princes sworde: the Iesuites should
haue brought sound and sufficient proofe that the Pope by Gods lawe hath a Soueraigne and supreme power ouer this Realme, to make Lawes, to ap∣point penalties, to dispose the goods, landes, and bodies of Clerkes and o∣thers, for such causes and crimes as they count spirituall. For this is the power which the Pope lately vsurped in this Realme; and from which hee is now rightly and orderly repelled by the Lawes of the same. It is no trea∣son with vs to make him chiefe Pastour of your soules, nor to giue him an Episcopall or Apostolicall authoritie ouer the whole Church, though that also bee a wicked and frantike Heresie: but to giue him an exter∣nall dominion, and coerciue iurisdiction ouer this Realme aboue and a∣gainst the Prince, which the Apostles of Christ neither had, nor could haue without apparent iniurie to the Magistrate: this is it the Execution of iustice doeth duelie respect, and this is farre from any matter of faith or religion. Right to commaunde, and power to compell belong properly to the sworde by the Lawe of God: which they can not attribute to the Pope, but they must make him a Superiour Magistrate to the prince in guiding and prescribing the vse of the sworde, and consequently the prince to holde her sword and scepter at his pleasure: and if she refuse, to be streight∣way displaced. This wilie conueiaunce to tie Princes swordes fast to the Popes side, and to spoyle them of their Crownes, if they doe not execute his rage, is the chiefest plotte that Iesuites haue at this instant to re∣settle the kingdome of Antichrist, for which they haue not so much as the paring of anie Scripture or Councell, or Father in the Church of Christ for a thowsande yeares: and yet in our dayes it must bee a meere matter of Religion: and the forefront of their brethrens defence. But no maruell if they, which make open rebellion a point of their faith, so soone consent to haue the Popes presumption holden, as the surest key of their Religion. To their thirde chapter, that they haue great cause to complaine of in∣iust persecution, intollerable seueritie and crueltie towardes Catholikes in Eng∣lande: and wee no reason to doe the like for the iustice (as thy call it) doone on vs in Queene Maries and other Princes dayes, I neede not replie. To this conceite of the Iesuites, that they may consume whome they will with fire and faggotte, and no man must stoppe them of their passage, or hinder their pastimes without iniustice and crueltie: what shoulde I saie, but that I thine the Scribe was skant waking, whiles hee was pen∣ning this drowsie Diuinitie? What learning, I will not aske what witte, was in this, to make such definitiue resolutions that no Prince may amerce or imprison their adherentes without intollerable seueritie and crueltie? forsooth, they might hang and burne olde and young, men and women, for doubting of their Decretalles, and all this with prayse, though it neuer pleased anie good man in the Catholike Church that He∣retikes
should be put to death for onely religion as S. Augustine verie ear∣nestly auoucheth? Their sixt chapter is a maruelous profound Rhetorication, that it is much to the benefite and stabilitie of Common wealthes and specially of Kinges Scep∣ters,See pa. 19. cap. 6. that the differences betwixt them and their people for Religion or any o∣ther cause for which them may seeme to deserue depriuation, may rather be decided, by (the Pope as the Iesuits would haue it, and so they shall be on the surest side) than by Popular mutinie and phantasie of priuate men as (wee) desire and practise, or else they bely vs, which is no wonder in such Seminists. To these trifling and tedious discourses of men trusting wholie to their tongues, and seeking with deintie speach and couched termes to hoodwinck Princes eyes, and delight subiects eares, that all the world may daunce in a string, after the pope and his nourceries, what other aunswer should we giue, then, that, if there were not a God to be serued and honoured, who hath com∣mitted the sword to Princes, and will exact at their hands the well vsing of the same for the publike maintenance of his will and worship, surely Prin∣ces should doe more safely to followe that aduise of the Iesuits. For their holie father will neuer leaue practising by all the meanes hee possibly may to subuert their states, and shorten their liues, except they receiue his keyes and busse his shoes. The warres of Ireland and dangers of England, which this roming man so much bableth of, as matters of State, I referre to such as be Common∣wealth men,The defence cap. 7. fol. 140. I will not passe the bounds of my profession; the Pope may continue his olde worme-eaten claime to the Soueraigntie of Ireland, which these louing subiects pleade in open writing against the Crowne of En∣gland: and God no doubt hath meanes enow to visite our sinnes, vnlesse it please him to be mercifull and gracious to this Realme; but as we from the bottome of our harts, submit our selues to his holy will, and wisdome, as well to tast of his chastisement, whereof all his children are partakers, as to enioy his blessings: so let these prophane Rouers and Vaunters vnder∣stand, that the arme of God is long enough to reach euen them and their holy father at Rome, and to take from him his desired vsurpation of the kingdomes of England, Scotland, Fraunce and Spaine, &c. though he shuf∣fle neuer so shamefully to keepe them in his obeysaunce. For the matters handled, this may suffice: for the manner, I haue not ma∣ny thinges, good Christian Reader, to warne thee of. By forme of Dia∣logues I thought best to lay open the whole before thine eyes, as well for a∣uoiding of tedious repetitions, as for adding of perspicuitie, to the pointes, which I would haue knowen to the simpler sort, as farre as the nature and weight of the thinges them-selues permit. And being to refute no cer∣taine text, I was constrained to take this course, that I might in the aduersa∣ries person obiect not only what they had said, if it were worth the hearing, but I am sure what they could say, that the matter might be more manifest.
If any thinke I fauour my selfe in opposing:I catch not after cauils nor vse to seek for nouelties, as hauing to doe with car∣ping & quicke eyed aduersa∣ries, besides that in euery part I bring the very choice of their strongest and latest proofs, as in the first and second part, their Apologie: in the third, their Defence of Catholikes: in the fourth, their Rhemish Testament: whether I spare to presse and persue the same to the vttermost, let the Christian Reader in Gods name be my iudge. It may be the aduersarie would haue often replied in hotter and larger manner: but my intent was to discusse the thinges, and not to holde on a brable in wordes: and of that which to any purpose might bee saide I haue omitted nothing. And yet somtimes though seeldom where the place so forceth, I stick a little at a letter, and shew howe greate a chaunge it maketh in the sense, which is soone missed in the printe:Part. 4. pag. 583. Part. 1. pag. 53. Chrysost. epi. 1. ad Innocen. As where in Sainct Augu∣stine they printe Esset, I thinke it should bee Esse: And so likewise in Chrysostome, (whose Greeke exemplar I then hadde not when I first mistrusted the Latine) the worde is printed , Suffer thy selfe to bee intreated to write. Which the verbes precedent & consequent im∣port should be . Suffer your selues to be intreated to write, & so the other parte of the sentence doth plainly conuince where hee saith , and graunt vs to enioy your letters still, & your loue, and all other things as before. for is easily ouerseene: and yet in the matter the difference is much, though not so much that it shoulde either helpe them, or hurte vs: as they perhaps will imagine. In these and such like corrections of words or printes I leaue the lear∣ned reader to his iudgement when he considereth the sentence: and yet I see no reason why the aduersarie should builde himselfe on such sus∣pected places. In the fourth parte, I haue examined the chiefe and publike actions of the Rhomish Church, which are nowe reformed by the lawes of this Realme: and not only refuted them as vncatholike, but confirmed the Sacramentes and Seruice of the Church of England to bee conso∣nant to the sacred Scriptures and Catholike Fathers. In handling the which, where their Rhemish Testament offered any shew of proofe, I haue particularly refelled their authorities: where they fayled, I was constrained to make the Iesuite supply of his owne the best obiections that they haue. Other thinges named in the beginning of my fourth parte, be∣cause the volume increased, and they were not so materiall partes of the Church Seruice as the former, I haue reserued to bee handled by themselues in a seuerall treatie. Of quotations and translations I had speciall care in my copy, that they should be direct and true, howsoeuer the Composers haue now and then displaced the one, and in the other not distinguished my additions, which I sometimes interserted to illustrate the rest, with an other letter and two inclosures in my copy: and this caueat I am forced to giue thee gentle Reader, that whatsoeuer in alleaging is inclosed with two halfe
Moones () though it bee the same letter with the rest, yet it is no part of that authoritie which I cite, but my adiection to shewe the force of the place I produced, because I could not stand beating on euerie word, without extreme losse of time and labour. The Lord treade downe Satan vnder our feete, that the honour may bee his, and the comfort ours, and abolish the strength of wickednesse till his comming.
THE TRVE DIFFE∣RENCE BETWEENE CHRISTI∣AN SVBIECTION AND VNCHRI∣STIAN REBELLION. THE FIRST PART EXAMINETH ALL THE PROOFES AND places of the Iesuits Apologie, their forsaking the Realme and running to Rome, what aide the Fathers sought at Rome: and how the Bishop thereof in all ages hath beene resisted: the intent of his Seminaries: and vertues of his Clergie. THEOPHILVS the Christian. PHILANDER the Iesuite. THEOPH. It is so long since I saw you, Philander, that I had almost forgotten you: I thought I should remember your face, but this apparell made me doubt of you. Philand. Euen he, Theophilus: and though you haue descried me, where I would not be knowen, yet I trust for olde acquaintance you meane me no harme. Theo. If you be as far from doing euill, as I am from wishing you euill, I dare warrant you for any hurt you shall haue: but what meaneth this strange attire? are you wearie of a stu∣dients life,The Iesuites disguised. that you fall to ruffling in your latter daies? Phil. Not choice, The∣ophilus, but feare driueth me to this: I take small pride in going thus disgui∣sed. Theo. What neede you feare if you be faultlesse? true men hide not their heades. Phi. Not where truth may take place, but where falshood ouer beareth all, it is time for true men to hide their heads except they wil loose them. Theo. Is your case so desperate, that you stand in danger of loosing your head? Phil. Not my deserts, but the rigour of your lawes giue me iust cause to feare that which so many of our side haue felt. Theo. Your frindes neuer felt the least part of that they did to others, neither haue they cause to complaine but of too much ease. Phil. You haue spoyled them of their goods, cast them in prisons among theeues,They com∣plaine of cru∣eltie. hanged them as traitours: call you this ease? what could they feele worse? what could you do more? Theo. Whom meane you? the Northren re∣bels, or Irish conspiratours, that were thus hardly dealt with? Phi. As though you knew not, whom I meant. Their heads and quarters pitched in rowes on your gates and bridges are to this day witnesses of their constancie, and momi∣ments of your cruelty. Theo. Though I can gesse, you only ean tell whom you meane. Belike the Iesuits that lately suffered for Treason. Phi. Treason was obiected to them for a colour to make them odious to the people, but in deede
religion was the very cause why they were condemned: for would they haue re∣canted their faith, they should neuer haue bene brought to the barre. Theo. It may be Pardon was offered them, so they would recant their Trayterous as∣sertion, that Popes at their pleasures may depose Princes, and discharge their subiects from all obedience, which Christian mildnes in seeking their amend∣ment, and shewing them so much fauour, doth not quite them from the lewdnes of their enterprise. The Princes mercy is no proofe of their innocencie. But in sadnes Philander are you since your departure become a Iesuite, that you take their part so freshly? Phi. The question you aske mee, is very dangerous, considering the strait∣nes of your lawes: Yet promise me that you will not bewray me, and I wil be plaine with you, what I am. I loue not to dissemble, much lesse to deny my vocation. Theo. Promise me likewise, that you wil attempt nothing against your duetie to God and your Soueraigne, and I wil do the best I can for your safety. Without this condition I may not yeeld to your petition. Phi. I re∣quire no more: but will you performe that? Theo. None so deceitfull, as those that be most mistrustfull. Hauing our former acquaintance for a warrant, and my promise now made you for your better securitie, why feare you? Phi. Blame mee not if I bee somewhat curious in disclosing my selfe:They be curi∣ous to disclose themselues. life is sweete, and that nowe must I put wholly into your hands, which is no smale aduenture. Theo. Were your life in my hands, as it is not, you should well perceiue wee delight not in blood: Howbeit you cast greater perill than you neede. The lawes of this lande doe not touch you so neere for entering the new found order of Iesuits, neither for infecting the simple with the leauen of your doctrine, but onely for making deuotion a cloke for sedition. Leaue your vndermyning the Princes right & state by these secrete and suttle meanes, & I see no daunger of death that is toward you. Phi. If I be taken with any practise against the Prince,They pretend obedience. I refuse no kind of torment: onely from preaching & publishing the Ca∣tholique faith I neither can, nor wil be drawen. Theo. Wel profered if it be wel performed. In deed true Christians euer endured, neuer displaced Princes, no, not when they were tyrants & heretiques: for God is not serued with resi∣sting the sword, which himselfe hath ordeyned to cherish the good, & chasten the bad, but with duetiful obedience to Magistrates when their lawes agree with his: & in case their willes be dissonant from his, thē is he serued with meekenes, & readines to beare, and abyde that, which earthly powers shall inflict. And this was the cause why the Church of Christ alwayes reioyced in the blood of her Martyrs, patiently suffering the cruell rage both of Pagans and Arrians, and neuer fauoured any tumult of rebelles, assembling themselues to withstande authoritie. Phi. Tell vs that we knowe not, this we neuer doubted of. Theo. Then if your late Iesuites were sent hither as Pioners to make ready the way for the Popes bull, that should disherite the Prince, and giue her crowne to an other, what say you, were they iustly condemned for Treason, or no? Phi. You shall neuer be able to proue them sent to that end. Theo. I doe
not as yet say they were, but what if they were, doe you thinke them Mar∣tyrs or Traytours? Phi. I am sure they were not. For I my selfe came in the same message with them, and knowe what charge was giuen both to them and to me, that in no wise we should meddle with matters of state. Theo. I thought all this while by the counterfaiting of your apparell, and earnest de∣fending of Iesuites, that you were of that crewe. Phi. You vrge mee so farre, that I can not conceale it. The truth is, I am of their societie, and haue so been euer since my last going beyond the Seas: and am now sent backe with others to labour the conuersion of this Realme, and to reconcile men to the Catho∣lique fayth, and Apostolique Sea, for the sauing of their soules. Theo. I am the more sory for it, if sorow would helpe: your lighting on them was vnhappy: your ioyning with them is vngodly. Phi. You do the men great wrong to carie that hard opinion of them with∣out cause: for my part I protest I neuer mette with a more religious, vertu∣ous, and learned company, than the Iesuites are. Theo. You take light occa∣sions to set forth your owne prayses, as if it were a poynt of perfection to com∣mend your selues.They com∣mend them∣selues. Phi. Though we striue to excell others in learning and vertue, which we lawfully may, yet bragge we not of it. Theo. You need not. The maker of your Apologie doth it for you: whose fingers ytched till he came to the comparing, and aduancing of himselfe and his fellowes, in this insolent manner.Apolog. cap. 5. Our wittes, sayth he, be of God in as plentifull measure as theirs: our founda∣tion in all kinde of faculties, requisite for the studie of diuinitie, is as deepely layed as theirs: our diligence rather more than theirs: our time both of age and studie more complete than theirs cōmonly can bee: our order, methode, & course of diuinitie much more profitable than theirs: we haue moe disputations, lessons, conferences, examinati∣ons, repetitions, instructions, catechizings, resolutions of cases, both of conscience and controuersie, methodes and manners to proceede to the conuersion of the deceiued, and such like exercises in our two Colleges thā are in their two Vniuersities cōtayning neere hand 30. goodly Colleges. As for the Masters & professors of our Colleges, specially the Romane readers, we may be bold to say, They be in all kind, the most choyse and cunning men of Christendom, for vertue, learning, &c. Nowe for that part of education which pertayneth to Christian life & manners, our chiefe endeuour is in both the Colleges to breede in our scholers deuotion, &c. Which is done by diuers spirituall exercises, as dayly examinations of their consciences, often communicating or receiuing the. B. Sa∣crament, much praying, continuall hearing and meditation of holy things. Phi. Can you in all this charge him with a lye? Theo. Whether it bee true or false that he saith, we neither care, nor come to discusse. The comparison of wits, ages and exercises would rather beseeme boyes in the schoole, than diuines in the Church: this vaunting of vertue, learning, oftē communicating, much pray∣ing, continuall meditation of holy thinges is fitte for Pharisees, vnfit for Chri∣stians. Better is,Sententiarum ex August. de∣cerptarum 118. sayth Austen, an humble confession in doing euill, than a proud vaunt in doing well. Phi. To speake truth is no vaunt. Theo. To speake trueth in the commendation of your selues, is the greatest pride you can
shewe.Prouer. 27. Let an other man prayse thee, sayth Salomon, and not thine owne mouth. But this is the iust reward of your error, that you take notable paynes to please your selues with an inward perswasion of your owne worthines, & to be reuerenced of others for ye deepenes of your learning & holines of your liues: which desire of glorie so possesseth your heads, yt when other heraults fayle you, you sticke not, openly to the whole world, to blaze your owne vertues. Phi. We neuer spake but forced, & that in the necessarie defence of our selues. Theo. Who forced Campion to write backe to Rome not only what admiration, but what veneration (a worde fitter for Saints than friers) himselfe, and his bande of Iesuites had gotten in England, by their singular learning and holines. The Priests,Camp. in Epist. ad praepositū or∣dinis general. saith hee, of our societie, they excelling in knowledge and sanctitie, haue raysed so great an opinion of our order, that the veneratiō, which the Catholiques yeeld vs, I thinke not good to be spokē but fearefully. The fra∣mer of your Apologie what occasion had hee to braue both Uniuersities, in such sort as he doth, as well with the scholasticall, as spiritual exercises of your two Colleges, but only that he would haue the Iesuites waxe famous for the great∣nes of their skill, and purenes of their liues, that the chiefest praise might re∣dound to him selfe,The Iesuites answere this proclamation with vaunting of their pri∣uate orders & exercises. and others the Masters and Gouernours of those two Col∣leges? Phi. We were charged in open proclamation, that we liued contrary to the lawes of God and the Realme. Theo. And doth your dayly disputing, or much praying discharge you from that? Phi. It sheweth our domesticall conuersation to be honest and orderly. Theo. That is nothing to this pur∣pose. The Princes Edict did not meane your priuate disputatiōs or deuotions, of which you cracke, but obiected vnto you, that you trayned vp your scholers in false and erroneous doctrine, and vsed them to lewde and vngodly purposes, as to withdrawe the people from their obedience to God and the Magistrate. Phi. Let your Edict meane what it will, our Apologie cleareth vs from all that was vntruely surmised against vs, and I am right glad you haue seene the booke: for there shall you find vs sufficiently proued to be both good subiects and good Catholiques, notwithstanding your often and earnest inuectiues to the contrary. Theo. If facing and cracking will doe the deede, the conquest is yours: Your defender hath fraighted his booke with so many solemne prote∣stations, patheticall exclamations, and confident asseuerations: but to the wiser sort, that are led with euident trueth, not with eloquent speach, vnlesse you make some better demonstration of your integritie to God and your Prince, than I yet see, you bee like to goe neither for good subiects, nor for good Catholiques. Phi. Can you wish for a better than our Apologie? Theo. I neuer mette with a worse.No one thing prooued in all their Apol. Phi. What doth it lacke? Theo. Not wordes, they be copious & curi∣ous enough: but I neuer sawe fewer or weaker proofes. Phi. What one poynt is there left vnproued? Theo. Nay, what one thing haue you iustly proued? Phi. Come to the parts. The first chapter giueth the reasons of our leauing this lande, and liuing beyonde the seas, what say you to those? bee they not eui∣dent? be they not sufficient? Theo. Repeate them your selfe, lest I chaunce
to misse them.Apolog. cap. 1. Sect. 8. The causes why they fled the Realme. Phi. The vniuersall Lacke of the Soueraigne sacrifice and Sacra∣ments Catholiquely ministred, without which the soule of man dyeth as the body doeth without corporall foode: this constraint to the contrary seruices, whereby men perish euerlastingly: this intollerable othe repugnant to God, the Church, her Ma∣iesties honour, and all mens consciences: and the dayly dangers, disgraces, vexations, feares, imprisonments, empouerishments, despites, which they must suffer: and the raylings and blasphemies against Gods Sacraments, Saints, Ministers, and all holies, which they are forced to heare in our Countrie are the onely causes why so many of vs are departed out of our naturall Countrey, and doe absent our selues so long from that place, where we had our being, birth, and bringing vp. These they be, what fault find you with them? Theo. The selfe same that I finde with the rest of your Apologie: You say what you list, and neuer offer to proue that you say: your bare word is your best argument, and other authoritie than your owne, you produce not. Phi. The matter is so manifest, that it needeth no proofe. Theo. That presumption is so foolish, that it needeth no refuter. Phi. If you doubt or deny them, wee bee readie to proue them. Theo. That must you first doe, before wee refell them. Yet lest you should glorie too much of your paynted sheath, the replie to your first chapter may shortly bee this. The sacrifice which Christ offered on the crosse for the sinnes of the worlde wee beleeue with all our heartes,Our sacrifice. and reuerence with all our might: accounting the same to bee perfect without wanting, eternall without re∣newing, and this is our Soueraigne sacrifice. The Lordes table, which himselfe ordeined to bee the memoriall of his death and passion wee keepe and continue in that maner and forme that hee first prescribed, and this may bee called, and is a sacrifice, both in respect of the thankes there gi∣uen to God for the redemption of man, and the bloodshedding of our Sa∣uiour expressed and resembled in that mysterie. More than this no Ca∣tholique father euer taught, and lesse than this our Churches doe not receiue. Touching the Sacramentes,Our Sacra∣ments. I meane baptisme and the Supper, if Christ and his Apostles did minister them Catholiquely, wee can not fayle, but doe the same: wee swarue not a iote from their example: the Scriptures will not lye, let them bee iudges. Shewe but one worde, element, or action added, omitted, or altered in either of them, and we graunt your Apologie to be sound and good, which otherwise we see to be replenished with many spitefull slaunders, and shamefull errors. But if the Catholicisme, which you stand on, were not knowen to them, as in truth it was not, the lacke of some ceremonies, which be matters indifferent, and set your abuses aside, may be kept, or left without hurting the faith or offending the godly, can bee no iust cause for you to flie the realme, and forsake the Prince. The diuine seruice here established you may lewdly despise,Our diuine seruice. you shall hardly disproue: ye Psalmes, yt we sing, be Dauids: ye bookes yt we read, be Canonical: ye praiers yt we make, be consonant to ye rule & proportiō of faith & true godlines: &
quitting them for our owne parts to the present possessioners & incombents, or to whom soeuer God shall permit. Theo. You fled the Realme not forced to that extremitie, but moued with a priuate dislike of the Princes regiment:An answer like their A∣pologie. and therefore if the lack of your Countrey were not eased by many supplies, both abroade as you graunt, and from home, as we know, you may thanke your selues: you were the first autors and wilfull contriuers of your owne woe. You want no commodities, nor cur∣tesies in the common wealthes, where you liue: yet such is your Nicenes, that you can not beare the ordinarie difficulties, and accidents that follow strangers in euery place, without sorowfull bewayling before God, and often lamenting one to another the hard state of your long banishment. Your dayly praiers haue their dayly purposes, your continuall sighes and teares shewe the secret griefe, you conceiue to see your counsels disclosed, and attempts defeated: which ra∣ther enforceth the sharpnes of your humor, than the goodnes of your cause. That you be willing to come home wee well beleeue, howbeit that proueth not your departure lawful, nor your returne peaceable. The Wolfe would fayne be with the sheepe, and the Lion is glad to bee with his pray: Yet this is no token of their friendly meaning. To preuent all suspicion of euill, you deepely pro∣test, that you voyd your thoughts of honour and preferment, relinquishing those to the present incumbents, and addressing your selues to serue the poore soules to their saluation. The strife betwixt vs is not for Bishoprickes and benefices, but for Christs glorie, and the Princes safetie, whom God hath appointed both your and our Soueraigne: and therefore your renouncing of titles and digni∣ties before hand, sauoreth of your accustomed vanitie, and nothing concerneth the matter. Saluation of soules is well pretended, but ill perfourmed. Your bores of oyle, your glasses of holy water, your fardles of other consecrated tri∣fles, wherewith you haue fraighted this Realme, are slender helpes to saue soules: nay rather, your reconciling of those, that receiue you, to the Sea of Rome: your trayning them to neglect of the scriptures, and reuerence of your fansies: your leading them from the Church of God, and communion of their brethren, to your barbarous and Idolatrous Masse: your withdrawing them from their obedience to the Princes wholesome and Christian lawes, is their vtter destruction and your assured condemnation. Yet to proue your selues louing wormes, you wish to be admitted to your Countrie, in what state soeuer, were it in penance and pouertie neuer so great: euen so the snake being frozen lyeth quiet and still, waxing once warme hee vseth not onely to stirre, but also to sting. Your sugred words can not sweeten the bitternes of your actions. God hath blessed her Maiestie with greater respect of religion, than to suffer the ve∣neme of your doctrine to poyson her people: and with better intelligence of your drifts, than to harbour a rowte of Iesuites, the very forerunners and factours of her open and professed enemie. The Pageants of your holy father and founder, were so lately tried, and are so iustly feared, that her highnes nei∣ther with her safetie may, neither of her wisedome will permit you to beginne
a newe reuell. Her graue and worthie Counsell perceiue that a small leake sin∣keth a strong vessell, and the least sparke kindleth a mightie flame. Phi. Call you this answering?The proofes & places of their whole Apolo. answe∣red in sixe leaues. You say what you list without warrant or witnes. Theo. And what did you when you sent vs ouer whole chapters, yea the most part of your Apologie, bringing no better nor other reason nor proofe than your simple worde, which is, God knoweth, a single proofe? Phi. You will hardly speake well of our doings or writings. Theo. Let your booke be seene. If I lye, reproue me. Your first chapter hath in all fiue authorities,The 1. chapter of the Apolog. Socrat. eccl.  lib. 2. ca. 18 & lib. 4. ca. 12.16. Niceph lib. 11. ca. 49.50. Amb. lib. 5. de Bas. traden. Cyp. epist. 5. Niceph. lib. 9. chap. 23. Sect. 8. and not one of them toucheth any matter in question. The three first shewe, that certaine Arrian Emperours suffered true and false religion in one Citie, a proper president for Christian Princes: the two next proue, that godly men assembled in priuate houses, when they coulde not in Churches for feare of persecution. Wee neuer sayde other∣wise. Your seconde chapter hath fiue other places besides the first booke of Bede, which wee doubt not of. Three declaring that the Romanes twelue hundred yeres agoe were deuout and charitable;The second Chapter of the Apologie. Hiero. Epist. 16. Euseb. lib. 4. Cap. 22. Hiero. praef. lib. 2. in Epist. ad Gal. August. de vtilit. cred. Cap. 17. Cypri Epi. 55. See folio 222. which is nothing to our dayes, or your purpose: the other two you safely enforce to helpe the Sea of Rome, and yet were they so ment, they conclude but coldly for you. Your third chapter alleageth S. Austen twise, mary not against vs, but at rouers to make vp your reckoning: and once S. Hierom, warning a gentlewo∣man of Rome, to preferre the fayth of Innocentius and Anastasius, which at that time he knew to be sound and syncere, before certaine poysoned plants then freshly springing in Rome. This aduise wee refuse not, and at this day we seeke to recall your holy father from his newe found heresie and tyrannie to the right imitation of their fayth and humilitie,The third Chapter of the Apolo. Hiero. Epist. 8. ad Demetri∣adem. that were godly, learned and auncient bi∣shops in that Sea before him. On your fourth and fift chapters, which are the chiefe strength and force of your Apologie, you bestowe some more cost, but not much, or at lest not much to the matter in question. Your fourth chapter euen at first entrance you fill the page with eleuen texts of scriptures,The fourth Chap. of the Apolog. Luc. 22.10. Mat. 16.28.18. Ioh. 14.16. Esa. 59. Deut. 17. Mala. 2. Act. 15. 1. Cor. 14. & 1. Tim. 2. 1. Pet. 2. Esa. 60. declaring what promises & assistance from God ye true preachers and ministers of his word haue: then alleage you S. Paul prohibiting women to teach or speake in the Church, and S. Peter, calling Princes humane crea∣tures: these be things that wee neither doubt of, nor striue for. This done you draw neere the skirmish, and arming your selues with three scriptures and se∣uen fathers, you thinke to vanquish and ouerrunne the Princes power in cau∣ses ecclesiasticall: but soft Sirs, you mistake your weapons, their force is not great. The nation and kingdome, sayth God to Sion, that wil not serue thee shal perish. The kingdome, he sayth not the king: but graunt it were directly spo∣ken of kings:August. contra Cresco. lib. 3. ca. 51. what seruice that is which God requireth of kings, if you doe not knowe, S. Austen will tel you. In this, sayth he, Kings serue God, if their king∣domes
they command that which is good and forbid that which is euill, not in temporall affayres onely, but in matters of religion also. And againe, Yee Kings serue Christ, in making lawes for Christ.Agust. Epi. 48. So that the cōmanding their people to reuerence the word and obey the will of God, and the making of strait lawes to keepe men in the faith and Church of Christ, that is I say the seruice, which Princes owe to God and his Sion, and which you deny lawful for them to medle with. Acts. 20. & Hebr. 23.By the two next places of S. Paul you prone that Pastors & Bishops be ru∣lers of the Church. That worde Rulers you catch hold of, as if the wordes in S. Paul did not also signifie feeders and leaders, which be the two signes and due∣ties of good shepheards: and yet we neuer denied but the messengers and dispo∣sers of Gods mysteries by preaching the woord, administring the sacraments, and well vsing the keyes, haue their internall and spirituall regiment ouer the soules and consciences as wel of Princes, as others: which is the true meaning of the place that you bring out of Nazianzene.Nazian. ora. 15. Epist. ad solit. vit. degentes.Athanasius, Suidas in Leon. Lib. imperf. ad Constantium. Osius, Leontius, Hilarie and Epist. 33. ad for.Ambrose, sharply reproue Con∣stantius, & Valentinian, for taking vpon them to chaunge the faith, & abolish the godhead of Christ: & plainely told those Princes they were no iudges of faith, nor arbiters of doctrine; which was true, which false: neither might they so much as interpose their iudgement or authoritie, whiles such cases were debated. That very lesson haue wee from the beginning taught with our lippes, & sealed with our blood, more stedfastly than you. We neuer gaue prince, nor Pope, right to controle the trueth, or reuerse the worde, which God hath established in his Church: and the constant auouching thereof against earthly States & powers, hath cost vs, as you can not choose but knowe, many thousande mens liues: Yet this is no let,1. Iohn. 4. Mat. 7. but Princes, as well as other priuate persons, may trie spirits, and beware false Prophets. And this, I trust, you dare not impugne, that Princes may doe that for Christ which you defend they must do for Antichrist: graunt vs that, we require no more. Chrysostome is the last of the seuen. Christ, sayth he, when he willed Peter to feede his sheepe,Lib. 2. de Sacer. cōmitted the charge of (them) to Peter, & Peters successors. Meaning by Peters successors not onely the bishops of Rome, but him selfe and all other Bishops,Ibidem. as appeareth by his owne words in the same place. This was Christes purpose at that time (when he sayd feede my sheepe) to teach Pe∣ter, and the rest of vs, howe well he loued his Church, that therefore we also should take the charge and care of the same Church with al our hearts.Ambro. de dig∣nitat. sacerdo∣ali, Cap. 2. Am∣brose extendeth the wordes of Christ in like manner to al Bishops & preachers. It was thrise repeated by the Lord, feed my sheepe. Which sheepe, & which flocke not onely Peter receiued then in charge, but he with vs, and wee all with him receiued them in cure.August. de agone Christi, Cap. 30. And so doth Austen, When it is said to Peter, it is said to all: Louest thou me? Feede my sheepe. That women may not vndertake this charge to feede Christs sheepe, it was needelesse to cite Chrysostome, S. Paul sayde it before in other wordes, and
wee bee farre from any such follie. These bee the maine and mightie proofes wherewith you thought to shake the Princes seate, which conclude vtterly no∣thing against that we defende, nor against that her Maiestie claymeth or vseth. The rest of your authorities, which be sixe, touch not vs at all, nor any thing in question betwixt you and vs:Epist. 57. a Damas. saue the last, where S. Hierom writeth to Da∣masus, He that gathereth not with thee, scattereth. Which words we graunt were very true, when S. Hierom spake them, for that Damasus rightly pro∣fessed the Christian fayth, which the Bishop of Rome now doeth not: and by ga∣thering with him, is ment no subiection to him, but a felowship with him in tea∣ching the same trueth, and keeping the bande of peace, which is common to all Christians. Your fift chapter,The 5. Chap. of the Apolog. which should cleere you from false doctrine, and proue you to be good Catholiques, hath in all but one Section of twentie sixe lines to that purpose: the rest is a desperate discourse of your owne, full of your bolde asserti∣ons & vayne presumptions, without scripture, or father, that helpeth you, or hin∣dereth vs.Enchiri. 110. & haeresi. 53. Contra Vigi∣lantium. Lib. 6. contra Iulianum. In 10. Cap. ad Hebreos. Lib. 7. ind. 2. Epist. 109. & 53. Lib. 1. de paenit. Cap. 2. For prayer for the dead, you alledge S. Augustine; for honouring of Kelikes and Pilgrimage, S Hierom; for vocation of Saints, worshipping the crosse, and memories of Martyrs, S. Cyril; for the sacrifice of the Masse, Saint Chrysostome; for the corporall presence of Christ in the Sacrament, the Late∣ran Councell for Images, the second Councel of Nice, Gregorie to Serenus, and Damascene: for the power of Priesthood to remit sinnes, S. Ambrose. A weake foundation to beare so great a frame. Cyril, Chrysostome, and Ambrose in the places which you quote, teache no∣thing lesse than those errors and abuses which you mayntaine. The seconde Councell of Nice was very neere 800, the Lateran Councell aboue a thou∣sand yeres after Christ, both too yong to make any doctrine Catholique. Gre∣gorie liketh that stories should be painted in the Church, but adoration of thē he detesteth, which yet that wicked Councell of Nice, did after establish. Damas∣cene, you may take backe againe: his credite is so smale, that we neede not answere him. S. Hierom is hoat against Vigilantius, and so hoat, that Erasmus is faine to say,Argumentum Epistolae ad∣uersus Vigi∣lantium. Conuiciis debacchatur Hieronimus: Hierom rayleth without measure: Yet the most honour that he gaue to the bodies or ashes of Martyrs, by whom God after their deaths wrought great miracles, was to be fairely wrapt, and honest∣ly kept in their Chappels: The tending of tapers, and setting vp of waxe can∣dles before them, he denieth to be vsed in the Church: in other places if any such thing were,Hierom aduer∣sus Vigilant. he imputeth it to the vnskilfulnesse and simplicitie of some Lay men and deuout women, that had zeale, but not according to knowledge. What is this for your defence? You make newe Relikes, you set foorth vn∣shamefast Legends, and deuise false miracles to deceiue the people: you giue them Pardons for manie thowsande thowsande yeeres: you promise them helpe in all their needes, and effect in all their desires: you make a very marte of the graces and gyftes of God, to cause men to
runne from place to place, from Saint to Saint, from shrine to shrine, to en∣crease your offerings: which wickednes if S. Hierom had seene in his time, he would haue taunted you a litle better than euer he did Vigilantius. August. de cura pro mortuis ge∣renda, ca. 1.In the prayers which were made to God at his Altar, we graunt with S. Austine, The commendation of the dead, by the custome of the Vniuersall Church, had a speciall place, but your prayer for soules in Purgatorie was ne∣uer Catholique. And where you send vs to S. Austens Enchiridion ca. 110. for that kind of prayer, looke againe to the wordes, and you shall find there no cer∣taine doctrine, but a doubtfull diuision, consisting of three partes, and not one of them prouing your Purgatorie.Augu. Enchir. ca. 110. When the sacrifices of the Altar, or any other almes are offered for all, that were baptized before they died: for such as are very good, they be, saith he, thankesgiuings (to God:) for those that be not al∣together ill, they be propitiations (that is procuring of mercie:) for such as be very bad, though they be no helpers to the dead, they bee some comforts to the liuing: and whome they profite, they profite them thus farre, either to purchase them ful remission, or at least, more tolerable damnation. The first part of this diuision, that sacrifices for the dead, are thankesgiuings to God, is a poynt that now you can not heare of: the last, that they comfort the liuing, but helpe not the dead, by no meanes you will admit: the middle is it, that you stand on, and that is nothing but this, whom they profit, they procure either full remission, or at lest a more tolerable damnation. Where S. Austen doth not affirme which of the twaine they shall procure, but vseth a disiunctiue, and of the twaine rather enclineth to the later, as the likelier, by correcting him selfe in this wise, they shall haue remission, or at lest a more tolerable damnation. And for your better assurance that S. Austen, on whom you relie, neuer taught your Purgatorie for a matter of Catholique faith, we send you back to the same father,Augu. Enchir. ca. 69. and the same booke, the 69. chapter, where he sayth, It is not incredible, that there is some such thing after this life: and whether it be so, it may be a question, and it may be either found out, or lie hid, that some of the faithfull obteine saluation by a Purgatorie fire so much the sooner, or later, by howe much the more, or lesse they loued the transitorie goods of this life. If it may lie hid, then is it no ground of Christian faith which must be fully beleeued of all men, neither coulde the prayers of the Church depende vpon the doubtfull opinion of Purgatorie,August. de ciui∣at. Dei, lib. 21. a. 27. which by S. Austens owne iudgement, is superfluous to be discussed, and most dangerous to be resolued. The rest of your places in this chapter, amounting to the number often, doe you litle good, and vs lesse harme: we receiue them without exception or distinc∣tion. The words of Maximinus the Arrian you wittingly peruert to make them like ours: wherein you discouer your malice, and touch not our doctrine: for A∣rius, as you may reade in that disputation,Disputat. A∣thanas. contra Arium Laodic. habita. which Athanasius had with him, vpbrayded the fathers for vsing the word  not found in all the bookes of the new or old testament: whereas the Church of Christ alwayes professed to beleeue nothing, but what was plainely written in the sacred scriptures. The
selfe same cauil Maximinus vrged S. Augustine with.August. contra Maximinum Arrian. Epist. lib. 10. Hae verò voces, quae ex∣tra scripturam sunt, nullo casu a nobis suscipiuntur: These wordes (and not as you translate, these sayings) which are not in the scripture, by no meanes we receiue. This obiection wee grant was both foolish and hereticall, and if wee vrge you wt any such, spare vs not. We striue with you not for names & words, but for poynts and Principles of faith, and those we say must bee proued by the scriptures.Rom. 10. S. Paul sayd so before vs, Faith is by hearing, & hearing out of the word of God. Mauger your traditions and vnwritten verities, this is a Chri∣stian and Catholique position, which all the fathers confirme with one consent, as shall be shewed in place conuenient. In the meane time wee saie with Basill, that I trowe was no Arrian,Basil. sermo. de fide. Manifestus: est a fide lapsus, & crimen maximae superbiae, vel a scripto recedere, vel non scriptum admittere: It is a manifest fall from faith, and a sinne that argueth infinite pride, either to leaue that which is written, or admit that which is not written. Your sixt chapter handleth no matter of religion,The 6. Chap∣ter of the Apologie. Iren. lib. 4. ca. 32. Cyp. epist. 63. Chry. homil. 17. in Epi. ad Heb. Amb. in Psal. 38. Conc. Nic. ca. 14. Hier. epist. 1. ad Heliod. Leo. ep. 81. ca. 2. Amb. li. 5. ep. 33. Cyp. ep. 5. Au. de ciu. Dei, li. 22. ca. 8. lib. 10. conf. ca. 12.13. Euseb. in vita Const. li. 4. ca. 45. Chry. de sacerd. Amb. in 1. Tim. 4. Greg. li 2. ep. 9.93. lib. 7. ep. 63. lib. 77. ep. 57. ad 3. interrog. Aug. as being purposely made to excuse you from Treason: and hath nothing in it any way materiall, saue onely that vpon the name of Masse-priest, you fall into a great rage, and will needes proue, the Apostles themselues, & the ancient fathers of all ages were masse priests. And that you do ful clarkly. For wheresoeuer you find the word oblation or sacrifice in any father, you presently put him in the Decke for a masse-Priest. I maruaile you be not ashamed, professing so deepe knowledge, to send vs ouer such vaine trifles. The very children in England doe knowe the Lordes supper is a sacrifice of thankesgiuing, & a memoriall of Christes oblation on the crosse, dayly renewing his death in a mysterie, which is the true meaning of the twelue places that here you bring, and of twelue hundred mo, that might be brought to the like effect: but this is nothing to the sacrifice of your masse, where you pro∣fesse that Christ is couered with accidents of bread and wine, and offered really with your handes to God his father for the remission of your sinnes: shewe but one father for this kinde of sacrifice, and we will agnise not onely these whome you name, but also Melchisedec and Malachie for Masse-priests. Searching fiue hundred foure score and thirteene yeres after Christ with al diligence, you find the worde Missa twise: once in Ambrose, and once in Leo: and in a brauerie you demaund of vs, Were they Masse-priests, that sayd those mas∣ses? But what if the word Missa did then not signifie the Masse, but a dismissing of the Catechists before, and of the faithful after the Lords supper: where is your great and glorious triumphe become? Looke to the fourth Counsell of Car∣thage, the 84. Canon:Concil. Cartha. ginensis 4. Ca∣non. 84. Let the Bishop forbid no man to enter the Church, and heare the word of God, neither Iew, Gentile, nor heretike, vsque ad missam Catechumenorum: that is, till the Catechists be sent away: not, vntil the Ca∣techists masse. For they which were not yet baptized, could not be present at the ministration of the Lords supper, & therefore Missa doth signifie the dismissing of them: as the manner was in the primitiue Church to send away, first the Ca∣techists, next the Repentants, and last of all to giue the faithfull leaue to depart
when the communion was ended:Ie, missa est. Goe your way, depart. Smo. 237. de tempore sub nomine August. Ambros. Lib. 5. Epist. 33. which three dimissions were sometime called in the plurall number, Missae, & missarum solemnia. The like phrase is elsewhere to be found in the workes of S. Austen: Post sermonem fit missa Catechumenis: After the sermon the Catechists are willed to depart: and Ambrose in the same epistle which you quote, Post lectiones atque tractatum, dimissis Catechume∣nis: After the reading and expounding of the scriptures, the Catechists being demised: Where these wordes, that you sticke on, follow: Ego mansi in munere, missam facere caepi: I went forward, and sent the rest away: that might not bee partakers of the mysteries.Missam facere, not, dicere. And that missam facere is not to say masse, as you dreame, but to giue leaue to depart, the very Latine tongue woulde leade you if you were not more than froward:Masse, and yet no masse-Priests. Inter August. Epist. 31.34.35. Grego. Lib. 1. Epist. 72.86. Lib. 3. Epist. 30. Lib. 5. Epist. 6. Lib. 7. Epist. 53.126. and so may you find the word missa in Leo, Gregorie and others, and yet they no Masse-priests. To maintaine your beades, Agnusdets, and other consecrated creatures: you note where S. Austen and Paulinus as familiar friendes, sent eche other cakes, and where Gregorie gaue some monuments of Peter, Paul, and others to Princes & Bishops, for presents. This is not answerable to your enterprise: you bring vs certaine toyes hallowed, as you say, with the Popes blessing: and where you deliuer them, you take promises, vowes and othes, that such persons shall keepe communion, and yeeld subiection to the Bishop of Rome: which is nothing els but the slocking of her Maiesties people from her, and the deuoting of them, their bodies, goods, and forces to serue the Popes turne. That power to forgiue sinnes must bee holden in Capite of the Pope, you produce Cyprian, who saith no such thing in that place, which you cite, but only calleth the Church of Rome a principal Church,Cyprian. E∣pistola 55. Leo Epist. 89. whēce vnitie among priests, (in former ages) did spring: and Leo, whose priuate affection in aduauncing his Sea, doth carie light credit in the iudgement of wise men, & is farre from a Catholique consent in the iudgement of all men: yet if hee meane as Cyprian and Austen doe,Cyprian. de v∣nitate Eccles. August. in Ioh. tract. 50. Idem in Ioh. tracta. 124. when they say: Exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur vt ecclesia vna monstretur: The beginning (of this power) came from one (which was Peter) to declare the Church to bee one: Et Petrus quando claues accepit, ecclesiam sanctam (& vniuersam) significauit: ecclesia ergo, quae fundatur in Christo, claues ab eoregni caelorum accepit in Petro: Peter when he receiued the keyes signifi∣ed the holy (and Vniuersall) Church: for the Church which is built vppon Christ, receiued of him the keyes of the kingdome of heauen in Peter. If this be his meaning, as it may well be, we refuse him not: and then, ab ipso, quasi quodam capite, must bee, from him the first that had it. For caput is either the chiefe, or the first: otherwise that the Apostles held their function, and power, vn∣der, and of Peter, in capite, is a false and erroneous sense, flatly resisted by S. Paul,Gal. 2. affirming, that they which seemed to bee somewhat, (as Iames, Peter, and Iohn,) bestowed nothing on him: and refuted by our Sauiour him selfe, where hee sayth:Iohn. 20. As my father sent mee, so I (not Peter) sende you. The rest of your authorities, be they scriptures or fathers, impeach not vs, nor our doctrine, but are such as we may well admit, without any doubt or scruple.
Your seuenth and last Chapter hath neither text nor title,The 7. Chap. of the Apolo. that is any way preiudicial to vs. We grant your allegations, & deny your applicatiōs. Martyrs be glorious witnesses of Gods trueth, & their death is pretious in his sight: but flatter not your selues, you be no Martyrs. You bend your selues against God, and his annoynted, in a wicked and desperate quarell, & receiue your desertes for preparing the subiects of this Realme by colour of religion to take her Ma∣iestie for no Queene, when the Pope shall say the word; and to be ready to re∣fuse their allegeance, and ioyne with any straunger that will inuade the land. This is the whole furniture of your Apologie:Not one place more in all the Apologie touching vs than here is answered. to my knowledge I haue not omitted one place that maketh any thing for you. The rest is a fardle of phrases, shadowed with faire pretences and plausible perswasiōs, fit to preuaile with worldly minds, that neuer tasted the trueth: which if we should seeke to re∣pell with like maner and order of writing, we should but wast paper, and wea∣rie the reader: and therefore if you list to discusse the Principall intents of your Apologie, more exactly than hitherto you haue, I will ioyne this issue with you, that, notwithstanding all you haue sayd, or can say, you be neither good subiects, nor Catholiques: If not, I will referre the iudgement of your proofes to ye lear∣ned, and leaue you to God. Phi. We know our cause to be so good, that wee neede not shrinke from any triall. Theo. Then take what helpe you can of your Apologie to defend your selues, and as wee passe through your chapters, obiect you that which you thinke strongest. Your vauntes and vanities I will not answere, but onely such things as bee most materiall. Phi. Content with that. Theo. And as occasion is offered I will shewe, that you neither obey God, nor your Prince. Phi. Do what you can, we feare you not. Theo. If you thinke any thing worth your paynes, in your first chapter, you were best begin. Phi. Haue wee not good cause to finde our selues agreeued,Apolog. Cap. . Sect. 2. that so many strange nations hauing their Churches with freedome to serue God after their man∣ner in our Country, onely Catholiques (which in our fathers dayes had all, & for whom and by whome all Churches and Christianitie arose) can by no intercession of forraine Potentates, nor no sighes nor sorrowes of innumerable most loyall subiects, obtayne one place in the whole land to serue their Lord God after the rites of all other good Chri∣stian Princes, Priests, and people of the worlde? Theo. If you meane that strangers haue leaue to professe diuers religions in this Realme,Strangers haue not di∣uers religions in this Realm. you wittingly slaunder vs against your owne conscience: for in England the people both strange and liege, worship God the father in spirite & trueth, according to the Gospel of his sonne, agreeing together in the substance of one fayth, and the right order of Christes sacraments: onely straungers are suffered in their Churches to vse that tongue, which they best vnderstand, as S. Paul appointeth:1. Cor. 14. and to retaine such ceremonies of their owne, as bee nei∣ther against faith, nor aduerse to good maners: and therefore by S. Austens iudgement goe for INDIFFERENT,Epist. 118. and may bee borne in Christian vnitie without offence or confusion. But if this bee your meaning, that where straun∣gers haue fréedome to serue God, after the same manner that wee doe,
you should also be licenced to bring in your Masse, notwithstanding it be quite repugnant to the seruice of God, which this land receiueth. Your consequent is more than absurd: because their faith and religion agreeth with ours, yours is cleane contrarie. Next you sorow to see no mediation of friends, no threats of foes, no tumults at home, no despites abroade, able to withdrawe the Princes hart from liking and louing the trueth: but the godly reioyce to see so perfect a mirrour of faith and deuotion in a Christian Queene, that shee rather chooseth to suffer your wrongs and abide your reproches with patience, than to steppe one foote from that Lord which hath graciously blessed, and mightily preserued her person, Scepter, and people from the iawes of his, and her enemies. Phil. Apol. chap. 1. sect. 2.And where no Iewe, no Turke, no Pagan, can by the law of God, nature or na∣tions, he forced from the manner, and perswasion of his owne Sect and seruice to any o∣ther which by promise or profession he or his progenitors neuer receiued: onely we (that neither in our owne persons, nor in our forefathers, euer gaue consent to any other faith or worship of God, but haue in precise termes by protestation and promise bounde our selues in Baptisme to the religion, fayth, and seruice Catholique alone) are against di∣uine and humane Lawes, and against the Protestants owne doctrine in other nations, not onely bereaued of our Christian dew in this behalfe, but are forced by manifold co-actions to these rites which we neuer knew nor gaue our consent vnto. Theo. Papists may be forced to trueth.Fewe men without your cunning, could huddle so many, so manifest vntruthes in one sentence. No Iew, no Turke, say you, may be forced from his religion. If that were so, what maketh it for your defence, which chalenge both the names and roomes of Christian men, and are in respect thereof, for iust cause, required to performe that in deede, which you pretend in woorde, and by moderate correction driuen to keepe the Christian faith, which in Baptisme you professed. For heretikes of al sects and sortes may be compelled to followe truth, though infidels might not: and so your inference fayleth when you say, no law forceth Iewes or Pagans from their perswasion, therefore not Christians: nay rather, if we graunt Iewes and Turkes excusable for these two reasons, lacke of knowledge, and want of promise: certainely Papists being neither void of the first, nor free from the last, may, yea must, bee compelled of Christian ma∣gistrates, for dread of punishment, tempered with good instruction, to for∣sake their heresies and forbeare their idolatries, wherewith Christ is dishonou∣red, and his trueth defaced. Forcing to re∣ligion with∣out former promis.As the ioynts of your argument bee loose, so bee the parts vntrue. For king Darius seeing Daniel strangely deliuered from the Lions denne made this de∣cree, that all people, nations, and languages in the worlde should reuerence and feare the God of Daniel.Daniel. 6. Likewise the king of Niniueth at the first de∣nouncing of Gods wrath by Ionas immediatly with the consent of his Counsel caused this proclamation to be made through the Citie,Ionas 3. that man and beast shoulde put on sackcloth, and cry mightily to God, and euery man turne from his euill way. Lo, Sir, two kings precisely commaunding their subiects,
(and therefore readie to punish the refusers) without delay to worship a strange and vnknowen God, (albeit the true God) whome neither they, nor their forefa∣thers made promise to serue; and yet I thinke, you will not say they brake the Law of God, nature, or nations in so doing. S. Austen will assure you, that the King of Niniueh did God good seruice by compelling the whole Citie to please God.Episto. 50. A thirde instance for this matter is the calling of Paul; first as a Iew,Acts. 9. and so within the limits of your assertion: then strooken with blindnes, & a∣mased with terror from heauen; and therefore compelled to Christianitie by cor∣poral violence, y touched Paul neerer, than impouerishments or imprisonments, wherewith you find your selues greeued. Behold (saith that learned father) in Paul,August. E∣pistola 50. Christ first compelling, afterward teaching; first striking, then comfor∣ting; and hee that entred into the Gospel, constrained with bodyly punish∣ment, laboured more than all those, that were called only by mouth. I might refel your idle florish by the later examples of Polonia,Munster. Cos∣mogra, lib. 4. fol. 894.902. Idem lib. 3. fol. 719.743. Russia, Lithu∣ania, forced at the commaundement of their rulers to forsake their auncient I∣doles, and receiue baptisme: By the long and sharpe warres, which diuers good Princes maintained of purpose to compell the Saxons and Vandales to ye faith: By the sore vexations and afflictions of the Iewes in euery Christian common wealth: Al which, both old and new, first & last, serue to conuince that Pagans & Iewes haue bene forced by rigor of lawes, and other meanes, to yeeld to ye truth, without any former promise, or farther knowledge, which you stifly deny: but as I said this is not our question. You are no Iewes, no Pagans, but in shew Catho∣liques, in deed heretikes: you were baptized, you chalēge an interest in ye Church & Sacraments: by reason of this your first promise, and next your outward pro∣fession of Christes name, you stand in duetie bound, and of right may be compel∣led to serue God, not as your owne fansies perswade you, nor as the Church of Rome leadeth you; but according to the prescript of his word, and that tenor of faith, which the Prophets and Apostles did teach. Phi. We bound our selues in precise termes by protestation in Baptisme to the reli∣gion,Apolog. Cap. 1. sect. 2. fayth, and seruice Catholique alone: other faith and worship of God wee neuer con∣sented vnto, neither in our owne persons, nor in our forefathers. Theo. This is your common charme wherewith you bewitch many simple soules, bearing them in hand, that in Baptisme they vowed to professe your Italian religion: which God knoweth is nothing so. For in whose name were you baptized, Philander? In Pius the fift, or Gregorie the thirteenth? I thinke you were not, I knowe you should not;1. Cor. 1. no not in Peters, or Pauls, but in Christes alone. Then stande you bound by baptisme to yeelde faith and obedience to no person or place, but onely to Christ the first author, and ordayner of this sacrament. Preach ye the Gospel,Mark. 16. saith Christ, He that beleeueth and is baptized shal∣be saued.Al men boūd by Baptisme vnto truth. What els must you preach, what els must they beleeue, that will be baptized, but the Gospel? ergo the preacher and the beleeuer, that is the baptiser and the baptised are bound precisely to the Gospel.Gal. 3. All yee, saith Paul, that are baptised into Christ, haue put on Christ, and are the sonnes of God by faith
in Christ Iesus [hauing] one Lord,Ephes. 4. one faith, one Baptisme. Perceiue you not, that in baptisme, which no Protestation of yours can frustrate, the beleeuers do put on Christ their Lorde, not his pretended vicar; and are made the sonnes of God, not the vassals of Rome, by faith, which dependeth neither on man nor An∣gell, but directly belongeth to God and his word?1. Peter. 1. Acts. 8. Rom. 10. If thou beleeue with al thine heart, sayth Philip to the conuerted Eimuch, thou mayest be [baptized.] Now fayth commeth of hearing, and (that) hearing of the worde of God, as Paul witnesseth. So that when you were Christned you made promise to beleeue no∣thing saue the word of God, whereby faith is engendred and nourished. Iohn. 10.My sheepe heare my voyce, sayth our sauiour, a stranger they follow not, but flee from him. And in baptisme you receiued no mans marke but his, & for that cause stand bound to regard no mans voyce but his alone. Doubt you this? Then view the Commission that Christ sent you to baptise with.Mat. 28. Goe teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the father, & the sonne, and the holy ghost, teaching them to obserue all the things, which I haue cōmanded you. This text needeth no gloze. Baptisme bindeth no man to the Bishop or Church of Rome, but to the wil & precepts of Christ. Therfore proue your religion & ser∣uice, (which you stoutly, but falsely terme Catholike) to be cōmanded by Christ, or els women & children,No man boūd to poperie by Baptisme. be they neuer so seely, wil collect by the manifest words of our sauiour, that their promise in baptisme doth streitly bind them from belee∣uing your errors, & admitting your masses, vntill you shew good and effectuall warrant out of the word of God, that you do, what Christ did, and teach, what he taught;Mat. 23. Iohn. 10. Ephe. 4. Iames. 4. Esa. 55. without adding or altering any iot. For this is the duetie that baptisme requireth of vs; to beleeue no teacher but one, which is Christ; to followe no stranger, to regard & obey no Lord, or lawmaker in ye Church, but only ye sonne, whom the father appointed to be Master, leader, and ruler of the Gentiles. And as for your odious outcrie, since the lawes of this Realme force you to nothing, but what is directly commanded in ye scriptures (as by discussing your Apologie shal appeare) & you vowed, whē you were Christened, to beleeue & obey the will of God reueiled in his word: let the worlde iudge, whether your Soue∣raigne offer you wrong, in seeking with milde and gentle correction to reforme your frowardnes; or you rather forgetting your promise to God, and duetie to your Prince, take the way to forsake the Christian faith, & withstand authoritie. Phi. Apolog. Cap. 1. sect. 2. Athanas. ad solitariam vitā agentes. Hilar. ad Con∣stantium Au∣gustum.It is against your owne doctrine in other nations that any should be forced to religion. Theo. When you note the places and name the men, I will an∣swere you more directly, than I can at this present to so generall an obiection. Howbeit with what face can you reproue the sober and moderate proceedings of his Realme, which reuenge the smalest contempt of your idle ceremonies with vnsufferable torments? for shame rebuke not that in others which in your selues is most rife. But graunt some wel disposed persons happily warned you, that true religion vseth to perswade, not to compell: that God did rather teach than exact the knowledge of himselfe,How some haue misly∣ked forcing to religion. and winning credite to his pre∣cepts by the strangenes of his heauēly wōders, despised the wil that is forced
to confesse him: Their purpose was to moue your clergy to delight rather in teaching than in tormenting their brethren.Grego. Episto. lib. 2. Cap. 91. They thought it a strange and new kind of preaching (for bishops) to driue men to beleeue with whipping, as Bonner did: or else they detested your violent and furious maner of compulsion, which neither tooke pains to persuade, nor alowed mē time to learn those things which you forced them to beleeue. They knewe, that if such as wander astray, should be terrified, & not instructed, it might be coūted a wicked ouerruling.August. Epist. 48. Or last of al, if they spake resolutely without limitation, they were nused with ouermuch pitie, which also beguiled S. Austen at ye first, in the selfe same point, vntil he tooke better aduisemēt.August ibidē. I was once so minded, saith he, that I thought no man ought to be forced to Christian vnitie, but that we shoulde deale by perswading, striue by disputing, conquere by reasoning, least they prooued dissembling Catholiques, whom we knewe professed heretiques. Our doctrine which you say,What we teach of for∣cing to reli∣gion. maketh so much for you, is this: that your Pre∣lats should not make it their occupation to persecute to death al sorts, ages and sexes, which refuse your schole trickes, or reiect the dregs of your Clementines and Decretals; but rather with mildnes & patience seeke to recouer such as you thinke lost: yet in Princes who beare the sword, and are Gods Liuetenants not only to procure peace betweene men, but also by lawes to maintaine igiō to∣wards God, we neither did nor do dispraise moderate correction when neede so requireth: only we would haue such as stray from truth,August epist. 127. Idem contra Cresconium lib. 3. Cap. 50. Idem contra literas Petilia. lib. 2. cap. 86. Chry. in Matth. homil. 47. Codicis. lib. 1. tit. 5. de haereti∣cis & Mani∣cheis. Idem leg. Arriani. August. de hae∣resibus, haere. 46. Saint Austen defendeth the same. August. Epist. 48. Idem Epist. 50. The Donatists would haue none com∣pelled to faith. corrected, not murde∣red. For it neuer pleased any good men in the Catholique Church that here∣tikes should be put to death, as Austen affirmeth. Many lawes were made to punish them, but no Princes law commanded thē to be slaine. Yea the Lorde doth not forbid to skatter the couents of heretikes, to stop their mouthes, to barre them freedom of speach: but to murder and kil them, that he forbiddeth saith Chrisostome. And therefore your tyranous & barbarous hauocke of olde, yong; men, women; learned, vnlearned; we detest with heart, and disswade with tongue, wishing al Princes to folow the steps of Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadi∣us, Honorius, & other Christian Emperours, who with conuenient sharpnes of positiue laws amerced, banished, & diuersly punished heretikes, yet none receiued iudgement of death, except only ye Maniches, whose monstrous blasphemies in agnising ye deuil for a god, & beastly defiling ye sacred Eucharist deserued no lesse. Such manifold coactions decreed by vertuous Princes, when the Donatists rayled at for life, the learned & catholike father S. Austen earnestly defended to be lawful, & highly cōmended in sundrie places. Thinkest thou (saith he to Vin∣centius) no man ought to be forced to righteousnes, whē as thou readest that the master said to his seruants: Compel al that you find to come in: and also that Paul was forced to receiue & embrace the truth by the great and violent cō∣pulsiō of Christ, except thou iudge goods & landes dearer to men than their eyes? Where is nowe (sayth hee to Bonifacius) that, which these [Donatists] harp at so much? it is free for a man to beleue or not to beleue▪ what violence did Christ vse? whom did he compel? behold Paul (for an example:) Let them marke in him, Christ first cōpelling, & afterward teaching; first striking, & thē
comforting. Let them not mislike that they be forced, but examine whereto they be forced.Ibidem. And citing that part of the second Psalme, Be wise ye kings, vnderstand ye that iudge the earth, serue the Lord in feare: how do (saith he) kings serue the Lord in feare, but when they forbid and punish with a religi∣ous seueritie those things which are done against the commandements of God: as Ezekiah did serue him, by destroying the groues and temples buylt against the precepts of God: as Iosiah did in like manner: as the king of Nini∣ueh did, forcing the whole Citie to please God: as Nabuchodonosor did, restrai∣ning all his subiects from blaspheming God, with a dreadfull lawe. Gaudentius reason, that the peace of Christ inuited such as were willing, but forced no man vnwilling,Idem contra 2. Gaudentij Episto. Lib. 2. cap. 17. the same father refuteth in this wise: Where you thinke that none must be forced to truth against their wils, you be deceiued, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God, which maketh those wil∣ling [at last] which were vnwilling [at first.] Did the Niniuites repent against their willes, because they did it at the compulsion of their king? What nee∣ded the kings expresse commandement, that all men should humbly submit themselues to God, but that there were some amongst them which neither would haue regarded nor beleeued Gods message, had they not bene terri∣fied by the kings edict? This Princely power and authoritie giueth many mē occasion to be saued, which though they were violently brought to the feast of the great housholder, yet being once cōpelled to come in, they find there good cause to reioyce that they did enter [against their willes.] When Peti∣lian obiected that no man must be forced by lawes to doe well or to beleeue, S. Austen replieth:Idem contra literas Peti∣liani lib. 2. Cap. 83. To faith in deed may no man vnwilling bee forced, but yet by Gods iustice, or rather mercy. The breath of faith is chastened with the rod of affliction. Because the best thinges are freely chosen with good lyking, must not therefore ill deedes be punished by syncere Lawes? You be not forced to doe well by these lawes that are made against you, but for∣bidden to doe euill. Preposterous were discipline to reuenge your ill liuing: but when you first contemne the doctrine that teacheth you to liue well. And euen they which make lawes to bridle your headynes, are they not those, which beare the sworde, as Paul speaketh not without cause, being Gods ministers and executors of wrath on him that doth ill? Who list to be farther satisfied, that Christian Princes may compel their sub∣iects to the true worship of God prescribed in his word, and punish the refusers, let him read at large the places aboue cited, or shortly consider that the spirit of God cōmendeth king Iosiah,2. Cor. 34. Iosiah com∣mended for compelling Israel to serue God. for making all Ierusalem and Beniamin to stand to the couenant, which he renewed with God and COMPELLING ALL THAT WERE FOVND IN ISRAEL TO SERVE THE LORD THEIR GOD. So that you might haue well spared your wanton complaint to God, and kept in your Crocodiles teares. Your Soueraigne doeth nothing against you, but what is agreeable to Gods and mans lawe, consonant to the doctrine of our Churhes, & much easier than that which your selues practised on others:
neither is this our question, what rites you consented vnto, but what fayth Christ deliuered his Church in the writings of his Apostles and Euangelists: for to that euery man which is baptised may bee lawfully forced by the Prin∣ces authoritie, let him and his forefathers assent to what they list, except you can proue that baptisme serueth no longer for a sacrament of Christian religion, but goeth now for a Romish recognisance. Phi. Our griefe of heart is much encreased,Apolog. cap. 1. sect. 3. either when we looke into other States and Countries, as Germania, Suitzerland, Suecia, Boemia, and the like, where though there haue bene great alterations in religion these late yeeres, yet lightly none bee for∣ced so, but if they can not haue the exercise of their profession in one torritorie, Canton, towne, Church or Parish, yet they may haue it neere them in an other, as also in all the Prouinces and Kingdomes subiect either to the Persians or the Turke at this day. The old Christians be permitted to vse freely their deuotions: or when we looke backe to the like distresses of Catholikes in old time when certaine Emperours were chiefe fautors of Arianisme and other Sectes, who yet were often enduced of their naturall benignitie to yeeld certaine Churches or at lest Oratories in Churchyards and other places ad∣ioyning,Socrat. li. 2. ca. 18. & li. 4. ca. 12.16. Niceph. li. 11. ca. 49.50. Lib. 5. de Basil. trad. Two religions in one Realm. for the Catholique seruice in their dominions. So did Constantius the Arian Emperour & Valens graunt to S. Athanasius and his followers in Alexandria: which Valens God plagued afterward, because he would not suffer the same at Antioche. Va∣lentinian also the yonger profered the like to S. Ambrose in Millan. Theo. Are you well in your wits to lament the lacke of that in this Realme, which God in plaine words detesteth, and with sore plagues reuengeth? Haue you forgotten how sharply king Achab and the commons of Israel were repro∣ued of Elias for that error? He did not say, why permit you not those that will to the Lord,1. King. 18. those that list, to Baal; but how long halt you betweene two sides or opiniōs? If the Lord be God, follow him [forsaking al other,] if Baal be (God) get you after him.Psal. 18. Esa. 48. Deut. 10. Since then it is confessed on both partes, yours and ours, that there can bee no God saue the Lord, and hee neuer ment to surrender any piece of his glorie, but is so ielous of it, that hee wil be serued, and onely serued with all our heart, mind and strength: these things I say being out of question, I recken it can not stande with a Princes duetie to reuerse this heauenly decree (THOV SHALT VVORSHIP THE LORD THY GOD,Matth. 4. AND HIM ONLY SHALT THOV SERVE) with establishing two religions in one Realme: the first authorized by Christ & bequeathed in his testament to the Church: the next inuented of Antichrist and flatly repugnant to the propheticall and Apostolicall scriptures. For if God be trueth,Psal. 31. & Iohn 14. Iohn 8. they which presume to worship him with lies (as in contrarie faith must needes come to passe) serue nowe not God, but the deuill, a lyer himselfe and the father of lyes: whose seruice no Christian Prince may so much as tolerate. What are (saith Vincentius) strange Gods but strange errors,Vincentius Li∣rinens. aduersus haereses. Heresie is an inward ido∣latrie. which ye scrip∣tures so cal figuratiuely, for that heretiques reuerence their opinions no lesse than the Gentiles their Gods? By the which wee learne that the first precept forbidding moe Gods than one barreth all other seruices of the same God, saue
that which himselfe hath appointed for himselfe.August. de ve∣ra religione Cap. 38. It is the vilest & basest kinde of idolatrie, when men worship their owne fansies, obseruing that for a religion which their deceiued and swelling minds imagine. Then may not Princes winke at corrupt & vitious religion, which is an inward & ghostly wor∣ship of Idoles,Matt. 6. seeing no man, & therefore no Prince, can serue two masters: & the seruice that Princes yeelde Christ, in respect of their royall vocation, consist∣eth in making lawes for Christ, which if they doe likewise for Antichrist, it can not be salued, but that they serue God and Mammon, or rather cease to bee the seruaunts of Christ in that they renounce their master by seruing his aduersa∣rie. Nowe what accompt God will exact for his name blasphemed, his sonne refused, his sacraments prophaned, his word exiled: and what answere must be made for the ruine of faith, haruest of sinne, murder of soules consequent alwaies to the publique freedome of heresies, I leaue to bee fully considered and wisely preuented by Christian Magistrates, who must thinke that silence prouoketh, & sufferance boldeneth their subiectes to forsake God and his Church, euen as in ciuill affaires the slacking of iustice doth maintaine disorder. Apolog. Cap. 1. sect. 7.So that in this point your defender betrayeth his vnsetled humor, which ad∣monisheth her Maiestie that she must answere (to God) not onely for things done by her commandement and knowledge, but for whatsoeuer is done vniustly by her name or authoritie, though she neuer knew thereof: And yet here find great fault, that her Highnes (respecting her duetie to God and accompt that she must make) denieth to beare the burden of your wicked abuses and poysoned errors: which no prince can auoyde, that permitteth your Masses and licenceth your rites, because the seeing and suffering your impieties is a plaine consent and in manner an open communion with your vnfruitful workes of darknes. We may not imitate exam∣ples, except they be good.To couer the shamefulnes of your demaund you produce certaine kingdoms and Countries affected in religion otherwise than you, neuerthelesse content to suffer your seruice within their dominions. If it were so, what inferre you thence? that wee safely may doe the like? Your consequent is nothing worth: their doings can be no discharge for vs: we may not imitate the vices, but ye ver∣tues of good men. First proue they do well, then vrge their example. Your soue∣raigne perceiuing by Gods law, what euery Prince ought to doe, regardeth not what other Princes please to doe: deseruing thereby the more thanks with God, and praise with men, for that in guiding her people she rather embraceth Chri∣stian pietie, than irreligious policie. No newes to see diuers religions in diuers states.But in deede you doe the Germanes and Heluetians wrong, to quote their names for tolerating two religions. The reformed Churches and States there bee so farre from admitting the full Dose of your heresies, that by no meanes they can digest one dramme of your ceremonies: the rest I thinke persisting in ignorance, retaine your faith in ye same fashion they were wont. Amongst whom because many Dukes, Landgraues, Marquesses, Counties, yea Bishops, Ba∣rons, Abbots and Gentlemen haue regall iurisdiction within their precincts, it is no newes to see many lawes vnder many Lordes, and in diuers regiments
diuers religions. As for the kings of Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, (not able to re∣duce their Countries to the profession of one faith) neither we may reproue thē, as negligent, nor you can alledge them as indifferent: since not their owne fault but other mens force keepeth thē from attempting any redresse by their prince∣ly power, which the nobles restraine and Commons receiue with this prouiso, that their accustomed freedome of conscience bee no way prohibited or inter∣rupted. Howbeit this kind of dealing in my iudgement is very captious. When you should exemplifie two religions vnder one Magistrate, you tell vs of seuerall rulers bent to maintaine their seuerall faiths: in steede of shewing some that be willing to ioyne falsehoode with trueth, you repeat such as can not auoyde that confusiō. We looked for Princes which at least had bene Christians, you make your supplie with infidels and heretiques. To passe the loosenes of your first al∣legations, what meaneth the lewdnes of your latter examples? Is your cun∣ning so small or purpose so vile, that you bring Pagans and Arians to counte∣nance your intention? What follie, what madnes was it for you to thinke that a Prince furnished with so rare gifts of wisedome, learning and vertue, woulde swarue from the steps of the famous and worthie kinges of Iudah to bee sorted with Saracens:Saracens & Arians vn∣fit exam∣ples for Chri∣stians. Psal. 16. Dauids zeale. and repeale the lawes of religious and auncient Emperours, to take part with the chiefest vpholders of Arianisme? For if God him self had not decided the case, but examples of men might beare some sway, King Dauid was so farre from suffering the worshippe of any strange God within his Realme that he protesteth, Their offerings of blood will I not offer, neither make mē∣tion of their names with my lippes. When would he think you confirme their honour and seruice with his royall authoritie that thus disdayned them commō humanitie? The good kings of Iudah were fauoured and blessed of God for walking in the wayes of Dauid their father, and purging the lande from all sa∣crifices and ceremonies not prescribed by Moses Law: contrariwise Salomon was reiected, for admitting other Gods to be serued within his dominiōs besids the God of Israel,Salomons doubling with God. though this toleration were graunted in respect of his owne wiues that were strangers, and Ieroboams politike deuise to worship the same God in Dan and Bethel after a newe manner turned to the destruction of him selfe and his posteritie. Which feareful effects of God wrath made Constantine to decree,Christian Princes could suffer no heresie to be publike∣ly professed. Eusebi. de vita Constant. lib. 3. Cap. 63. Socrat. lib. 5. Cap. 2. Codicis 1. tit. 5. lege omnes. that al tē∣ples of heretikes should bee without any denial ouerthrowen: & in no place publike or priuate, from that day forward should their assēblies be suffered. Iouianus refused to gouere those which were not found in faith. I saith he, that am a Christiā, can not become your Emperour that are the disciples of Iuliā: a renegate from Christ: Gratian at his first entrie finding al places ful of Arians & the lawes of Valens his vncle making for them, fearing some generall tumult if he should presētly distresse so many, gaue leaue, that euery Religiō might haue Churches & Oratories with freedom & immunitie. But being once selted, & ioyned with Theodosius, he cōmanded that al heresies should keepe silēce for
euer, as interdicted by Gods and mans law: that none should any longer presume to teach or learne prophane doctrine. The same prohibition did Arcadius and Honorius continue with great seueritie:Ibidem leg. Cuncti. Let all heretickes vn∣derstand that all places must be taken from them as well Churches & other open places of resort, as priuate houses: in all which let them be debarred from seruice both by night and by daie: the (Lord) deputie to be fined an hundred pounds, if (he) permit any such thing in sight or in secret. Theodo∣sius the yonger, & Valentinian his cosin comprising in a long beadrole sundrie sorts of hereticks,Ibidem leg. Ariani. appoint that no where within the Romane Empire their assemblies or praiers be suffered: & that all lawes made to prohibite their meetings should be reuiued, & stand good euerlastingly. These we take to be meeter Presidents for Christian Princes than Turks, Persians, and Arians, not worthy to be named in the Church of God, much lesse to be followed. No more would the Arians. Four stories wrested by the Ies.But imagine the credit of your Arian Emperours were lesse than it is, why should you peruert their actions? why depraue you foure stories in sixe lines? Constantius & Valens were not enduced, as you pretend, of their naturall beni∣gnitie, to yeeld Athanasius a Church in Alexandria: they were compelled much against their wils, of necessitie to suffer that, which of curtesie they would neuer haue consented vnto. For Constans the West Emperour denounced open hostilitie to Constantius his brother if Athanasius were not restored.Socr. lib. 2. Cap. 18. He, saith Socrates, driuen to this extremitie, was aduised by the Bishops of his owne faction,Socra. li. 4. cap. 16. rather to grant Athanasius the regiment of a Church than to feele the smart of ciuill warres: and Valens knowing that an infinite number in Aegypt and Alexandria fauoured Athanasius, and fearing least a sedition kindled in those partes (the people being vehement and fierce by nature) might indanger his state, ceased from molesting him and his followers. These things expressed in your Author you purposely skip, vrging the facts & dissembling the causes. Niceph. li. 11. cap. 49. Idem lib. 11. cap. 50.With like boldnesse you falsifie the reason, why Valens was afterward pu∣nished. It is true that he did teare the supplication of Terentius his Captaine, requesting one church for the Catholiks at Antioch. It is also true that his ar∣mie was ouerthrown, & himselfe terriblie cōsumed in fire by the Gothes: but that he was therfore plagued because he would not suffer two faithes to be plāted in Antioch, that is your own surmise. Nicephorus hath no such circūstāce. Nei∣ther did Valētiniā profer ye like to S. Ambrose.Lib. epistolarū 5. oratione con∣tra Auxentiū. S. Ambrose chooseth ra∣ther to yeeld his life, than one of his Churches to the Arrian seruice. You wrest the story frō his right course to serue your purpose: but he required Ambrose to diliuer vp a church in Millā, to the which he with other Arians would resort. To this Ambrose made answere: If I be forced [from my Church] I can not resist, I wil neuer consent to yeeld my right. Naboth defended his vine with his blood, shal I betray the Church of Christ? [Valentinian] shall rather take from me my life than my faith. And for ought that I see, ye constant refusall of this graue, learned & godly Bishop withstanding to death the toleration of two religions in one Citie, doth preiudice your assertiō more than the demand of a rash yong Arian cā further it.
If you tell vs, that your Catholike seruice may be suffered in this Realme, notwithstanding both Gods and mans lawes banish hereticall assemblies, then you recant the permission of two contrarie faithes in one Realme, and resume the case which lieth in question betwixt vs; fondly supposing your selues to bee right Catholikes, and those that mislike you, to be condemned hereticks; which is still denied by vs, and of your part neuer yet proued. Athanasius and Am∣brose were Catholikes in deede,Athanasius & Ambrose were Catho∣likes: and therefore Pa∣pists be not. but not acquainted with your worshipping of Images, your adoring the Sacrament, your praying in a strange tongue, your changing the Lords supper into priuate Masses: the rest of your impieties they neuer hard, they neuer taught: & therefore till you can make good proofe that your faith and religion agreeth with theirs, they standing by your owne con∣fession for Catholiks, you must of consequent, as differing from them in manie substantiall points of doctrine, be reputed for hereticks. Phi. Which only grace of our Prince if we might haue obtained,Apol. Cap. 1. Sect. 4. no pleasure, profit, or preferment that the world beside yeeldeth in any part of Christēdom should haue kept vs out of our deerely beloued countrie so long, for whose saluation, and so much libertie of conscience as is mentioned, we haue often wished diuerse of our persons in perpetuall prison, for pledge and warrant of the peaceable and loyall demenor of our brethren the Catholickes, and for securitie of the state, whereof hir wise Counsellers haue alwayes in such cases greatest regard. But neither this durst our Catholike brethren demand in their manifold feares, doubts and disgraces at home, nor we in such suspition and misconstruction of all our actions, could euer with hope attempt it abroade. And, alas, much lesse then the graunt of publike places for exercise of our auntient religion, would haue giuen vs infinite contentment of the Catholikes within, and haue called home most of them abroad, when both sortes would haue counted it a singuler grace, during the distresse of these dayes, to haue had by permission, pardon conniuence, their soule rights (without which men perish doubtlesse euerlastingly in ther priuate houses and cham∣bers, yea in prisons, in the closest and least offensiue manner in the world: as the Apostles and Confessours did often in the primitiue Church,Cyprian. Epist. 5. Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 23. and S. Cyprian testifieth that some did in his time, and S. Anastasius him selfe did with the Catholiks in Antioch.) From all which, being by rigour of penall statutes, diligent inquirie of temporall Offi∣cers, watchfulnesse of ministers, spies, and promotors, continually restrained, and by them often chased from their houses, spoiled of their goods, disgraced and discouraged in all their affaires, many thousandes, yea the farre greater part of hir Maiesties sub∣iects languish awaie in sorrow and sadnesse irremediable. Theo. You departed this Countrie neither expecting hir Maiesties leaue, nor regarding hir lawes,The wise de∣maundes of the Iesuites. and would you now be fet home with a triumphe iniu∣rious to God, infamous to the Land, dangerous to the Prince? No man asketh of his equall anie thing but that which is honest and safe for the graunter: onely the Iesuites step foorth confidently, to demaund at their Soueraignes handes, no lesse than the manifest breach of Gods law, ioyned with the subuersion of hir royal estate. For how displeasant is it to God, that light should be matched with darknesse, and Christ yoked with Antichrist? And how pernicious it is for hir
Maiesties quiet and happie continuance, to suffer him, that hath alreadie cursed hir person, remoued hir crowne, discharged hir subiectes, inuaded hir dominiōs (whose seedmen, and sworne legates ye be) to steale from hir the peoples harts vnder a clowde of Catholike religion and fained deuotion, the most honorable and wise Sages of this Realme so well conceiue, that I gesse you shall haue much to do, with all your colourable pretences and eloquent florishes to shadow the clearnesse of their long and grounded experience. To salue this sore, we shall haue you foorthcomming for warrant that your brethren shall vse loyall and peaceable behauiour. Were this contention for earth∣ly, not heauenly things; and did it concerne not Christs glory, but hir graces in∣demnitie; what a toie this is, for a few shifting Friers to thinke them selues meete pledges for a Princes securitie?A few Friers thinke them∣selues suffici∣ent hostages for a Prince. Submission to God and your Prince would better become you, than this malepert kinde of prescribing, on what con∣ditions you will returne, what hostages you will giue, what lawes you will ag∣nise: which couenants whether you rudely purpose them, or manerly wish them, no Magistrate will receiue, least your burning harts, and vnquiet heades slide from misliking to murmuring, and so to resisting. But your brethren are so bashfull at home, that they neuer durst demaund any such thing, & you so fearful abroad, that you could not attept it with hope: yet are you so bold that you scatter this inuectiue which chargeth the state with many vile and vnciuill outrages, and your associates of the North were so brainsicke, that putting themselues in armes against their liege Lady,The bashful∣nesse of Pa∣pistes. they required by solemne proclamation forsooth, not only safe-conduct for your Masse, but also ye releasing of prisoners, vanishing of preachers, reuersing of laws & displacing of coūselers. Phi. If the grant of publike places for our seruice seeme much we wil content our selues with chambers & prisons. Theo. The priuatnes of the place, when the fact is il, neither acquitteth the doer frō wickednes, neither excuseth the permit∣ter from negligence.Priuate per∣mission of error, vnlaw∣full as well as publike. No corner is so secret, no prison so close, but your impietie there suffred doth offend God, infect others, & confirme your own frowardnes. If your religion be good, why should it lacke Churches? if it be naught, why should it haue chambers? A christian Prince may not pardon or winke at your falshood. S. Paul hath put in a caueat against that sleight of permitting, which in truth is consenting.Rom. 1. Elie reproued his sonnes, yet was he sharply punished of God for his indulgence,1. Sam. 2. which is all one with your conniuence. S. Iohn saith,Iohn. Epist. 2. he that lod∣geth, or biddeth an heretike God speede, is partaker of his euill works. Thē how can the Magistrate beare with your sacrilegious prophaning the Lordes supper, or licence the rest of your blasphemies, & hope to be free from your pla∣gues? When Valentinian the yonger was requested to winke at the renewing of an altar for the Pagās in Rome, S. Ambrose disswadeth him in these words: All mē serue you that be Princes,Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 30. God alloweth no conniuēce & you serue that mighty God. He that ser∣ueth this God, must bring no dissimulation, no conniuence, but faithful zeale & deuotion: he must giue no kind of cōsent to the worship of Idols, & other prophane ceremonies. For God will not be deceiued, which searcheth all
things, euen the secrets of [our] heartes. This earnest desire to serue God in hir Princely vocation without any shrinking or wauering, hath bin so long plā∣ted, & is so well setled in hir Maiesties deuoute minde, that no possible meanes e∣uer could, as you presently finde; euer shall, as we trust in Gods mercy, quench in hir Highnesse that religious affection. Phi. This the Apostles & confessors did often in the primitiue Church, & S. Cypriā testifieth that some did in his time, & S. Athanasius himselfe did with the Catholikes in Antioch. Theo. What did they?The Apostl had priuate places, but not priuate Masses. marchandize priuate Masses, or feede men wt demie Communions? Did they mock the simple with praiers not vnderstood, or weary them with empty gestures? They did no such thing, but Priest & people ioyned togither to celebrate the Lords supper, tasting al of one bread which was broken, of one cup which was blessed: & offred thanks to God with one consent of hart & voice, for the flesh of Christ yt was wounded, & blood y• was shed for the re∣mission of their sinnes. This was done in prisons, whiles persecution lasted in chambers, if necessitie forced, & in those churches which ye Christians frequēted. Straine Cyprians words at your pleasure, yet will they neuer be drawen to make for your vanities. He warneth the people not to flock to ye prisons in heaps least their resort be noted of Infidels, & by that meanes all accesse denied: he ra∣ther aduiseth them, that a Priest & a Deacon by course, should visite the Confes∣sors. To what end you shal find at large in a leter of his to Cornelius. Let vs not leaue thē naked & vnarmed, whō we prouoke & incite to the skirmish, but defend them with the munitiō of the body & blood of Christ:Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 2. our Eucharist hauing that vertue to safegard the receiuers. How do we prepare thē to take the cup of Martyrdom, except we first admit them in the church, as cōmuni∣cāts, to drink of the Lords cup?The cup of the Lords ta∣ble then thought need¦full for Mar∣tyrs, which the Ies. now barre the people from Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 23. 1. Corinth. 10. Matt. 26. 1. Cor. 11. He yt cōcludeth both kinds to be needful for such as were ready to spend their liues in ye professiō of Christs name, doubtles neuer ment to procure thē a priuate Masse, that should keep thē frō receiuing of either. Athanasius refusing Leontius the Bishop of Antioch for heresie, did cōmu∣nicate in priuat houses with such as fauored Eustathius. It skilleth not where, but what he did: our Sauiour appointed neither time, nor place, to be respected in his supper, but the word & elemēts: charging vs to do what he did, which is to breake & giue, that all may be partakers of one bread; to diuide the cup, that all may drincke thereof. Do that which he commanded to be done, who first ordai∣ned this mystery. Do that which S. Paul receiued of the Lord, & deliuered to the Church of Corinth: do that I say which the primitiue Church of Christ al∣wayes did, and as for places we wil not greatly striue. The rigor of penal statutes, searches of temporal officers, & watchfulnes of (poore) ministers, doth maruelously trouble your spirits. I wil not requite you with the flames you kindled in England to burne your brethren to dust; with that holy house which your Friers haue planted in Spaine, resembling the tor∣tures of Neroes garden;The Popish mercy. with the Massacres of Prouince, Piemont, and Pa∣ris. Let passe with silence the cruel executions of your inordinate rages: God giue you grace to repent your murders past, and soften your vnmercifull
harts in time to come: you were brought vp in lambes lease belike, that you startle thus at the fatherlie chastisement, wherewith this Realme seeketh your amendment, and sucketh not your blood. Compare the penalties, which you fret at, with the lawes of former Emperours, and you shall see that hir Maie∣sties gracious inclination to shew you fauour aboue your deserts hath eased the burden, and tempered the sharpenesse of their auncient edictes, which restrai∣ned such as forbare to communicate with the Church of Christ,The auncient penalties of heresie and schisme. Codic. lib. 1. tit. 5. § Manicheos. Ibidem § cūcti. August. from buying, selling, disposing, bequething goods or lands by will or otherwise, yea from re∣ceiuing any legacies, or enioying their fathers inheritance, the place (where schismaticall seruice was saide) chappell or house to be forfaited, and the Bi∣shop and Cleargie-man to paie tenne pound weight in gold, or to be banished. S. Austen, when it was expected by reason of the goodnesse of his nature, that he should mediate for some part of these penalties to be released, gaue this quick & stout answere:Aug. Epist. 48. Yea marie, what else, I should gain-say this constituti∣on, that you loose not the things which you call yours, & you without feare spoile Christ of all his:S. Austen al∣lowed & com∣mended those penalties. that the Romane lawes should permit you to make your last wils, and you with cauelling reuerse that which God bequethed our fathers: that in buying and selling your contracts might be good, and you share that among you which Christ bought, when he was solde: that you might freely giue what you list, and what the God of Gods hath bestowed on his owne children from East to West should be voide: that you should not be banished from the place where your bodies rest, and you driue Christ from the kingdom (purchased) with his blod to reach from sea to sea. Nay, nay, let Princes [on Gods name] serue Christ in making lawes for Christ. You neede not complaine of rigour so long as our penall statutes be farre more fauourable than these lawes,Our penal∣ties far gent∣ler thā those. which the Christian Emperours established, and the Catholike fathers commended. Acquaint the world with the persecu∣tion that you suffer in England, and your vntrue reports shall soone be conuin∣ced. The greatest brunt your friends did beare till this last reuolt, which you procured (if they ioyned therewithall no traiterous intent) was imprisonment, where no man was denied the freedom of his goods, the comfort of his wife, the succor of his friends: the basest among them neuer knew, what dungeon, stocks, or Irons ment: yet say you, They were chased from their houses, spoiled of their goods, and handled I know not with what extremitie. Phi. Apol. Cap. 1. Sect. 5.Neither be such men miserable onely by so long lacke of things necessarie to saluation, but much more that they be inforced to things which assuredly procure dam∣nation. In which case verie lamentable it is to thinke vpon all the distressed conscien∣ces that throughout the Realme repine with inconsonable sighes and grones against their receiuing, hearing and vsing of the pretended Sacraments, Seruice, Sermons and other actions, whereunto they be inuoluntarilie and against their will drawen, and espe∣ciallie for the oth of the Queenes soueraintie in spirituall regiment, a thing improba∣ble, vnreasonable, vnnaturall, impossible: and yet the forme thereof so conceiued in
statute, and so tendered, that the takers must sweare vpon the Euangelists (howsoeuer they thinke in deede) that they acknowledge euen in their conscience that, which neuer learned man of any sort or sect did euer thinke to be true, and which they know euerie Catholike man to condemne in heart, and which the chiefe makers of the same, by ex∣empting themselues from it by a speciall prouiso, haue iudged either damnable or very dangerous. Which oth therefore to exact of most Officers in the Commonwealth of euery one that is preferred in the Vniuersities, or otherwise almost throughout the Realme, and namely of all such as they suspect thinke it vntrue, is nothing else but wittingly to driue men to pitifull torment of minde, remorse and vtter desperation. Which thing if hir Maiestie did know, she would neuer of hir naturall clemencie, for a title & claime that neuer king (much lesse Queene) Christiā nor Heathen, Catholick nor Hereticke, in hir owne dominions or in all the world beside before our age, did chalendge or accept, suffer hir poore subiectes to be so inwardly and deepelie afflicted in their soules, &c. Theo. I confesse the lacke of things necessarie to saluation maketh men ve∣rie miserable: but you should haue shewed what those thinges are which this Realme wanteth: your mouth is no measure what is requisite for the sauing of our soules, and your reader I dare saie, looked for some grauer authoritie. Receiue with meekenes the word that is graffed [amongst you] saith Iames: it is able to saue your soules.Iames. 1. So long as wee refuse no part of the Gospell, which is the power of God for the saluation of euery beleeuer, al other wāts we nothing esteeme.Rom. 1. S. Paul doth acertaine vs,2. Tim. 3. that the Scriptures are able to [direct and] instruct to saluation by faith in Christ Iesus. Lesse wee be∣leeue not, more we neede not; dreame you what you list of damnation or saluati∣on, the comfort of Scriptures shall nourish our hope.Rom. 15. It greeueth you sore to thinke on the distressed consciences of such as be drawen against their wills to frequent our Sacraments and Seruice. Beginne you now to mislike that any mans conscience should be forced? Then why did you, why yet at this day do you force numbers with extreme violence to recant & forsweare the perswasiou of their faith?The Iesuites would force, but not be forced to reli∣gion. what reason can you bring that you may compell others, and none must compell you? Where gat you that exemption? Or if com∣pulsion be lawfull for both sides alike, why grate you so much at our small and easie penalties, when your selues bee iustly charged with many cruell and vn∣christian tragedies? Your inquisiting, your burning, your murdering of thow∣sands without any respect of innocent or ignorant is in deede very lamentable: this kinde of compelling, which hir Highnesse vseth, neither can your friendes denie to be charitable, nor your selfe gainsaie to bee semblable to that coaction, which the Scriptures commend in Iosiah, which the most vertuous Empe∣rours followed in the primitiue Church, and which S. Austen vpon deepe de∣ating the case, found allowed by God himselfe, as the chiefest point of that ser∣uice, which he requireth of Christian Princes. Our Sacraments, Seruice and Sermons are, you say, pretended: wee say, reformed by the constat of Christs will and testament: farther defence till you name the faultes shall be needlesse; Lightly saide without proofe may bee
lightly contemned without answere. The Princes interest to Persons and causes ecclesiasticall sticketh in your stomacks, as a thing improbable, vnreasonable, vnnaturall, impossible, which neuer king, much lesse Queene, Christian or Heathen, Catholike or Hereticke in this lande or in all the world beside before our age, did chalenge or accept. If great vauntes were sound proofes, the victorie were yours. You haue wordes and crakes at will, they cost you nothing: as for the matter in question, when wee are come to your fourth chapter,Examining the oth respe∣cted to the fourth chapt. where you seeme to shew the ground of these spee∣ches, it shall then appeare, notwithstanding your tempest of tearmes here, and trifling cauelles there, that the power of Princes to commaunde for truth, and to make lawes for Christ, standeth not onely with probabilitie, possibilitie, reason and nature, but also with euident vtilitie, necessitie, religion and equi∣tie, confirmed expreslie by the Scriptures, and plainly warranted by the lawes, actions and examples of the most famous and renowmed Princes that euer were: keepe your courage for that combat, the time is not long. Phi. I am content to respect you till then: yet this I will adde by the way; the contentes of that oth for the Princes supremacie, neuer learned man of any sort or sect did thinke to be euer true.Manie lear∣ned men of their side as wel as ours haue both ta∣ken, and de∣fended the oth. Theo. No? what did the Bishoppes and Preachers of England for these fiftie yeares, which liked and accepted this oth for good and godlie? Not a learned man among them, saie you: then happie be those Seminaries of yours, that of ignorant boyes, starting hence but last daie, can so soone bring foorth learned and graue Diuines. What say you then to some of your owne sect, I meane Tonstall in his Epistle to Cardinall Poole, and Gardiner in his Oration of true obedience? Did not ei∣ther of them take this or the like oth, and willinglie defende the same? Phi. They changed their mindes in Queene Maries time. Theo. They did so, but their latter inconstancie doth not abolish the truth of their former confession. Well if this whole Realme be voide of learning (such is your modestie) come to strangers. Was there euer any learned of our side, that impugned your errors? I trust you will not reiect them as vnlearned, left men beginne to doubt not of your learning, but of your right wittes. Graunt them to be learned, and I will proue their iudgements to goe with ours in this question. You require me to shew their wordes. Ywis that were no great masterie. Reade Molineus against your holy Fathers abuses, Peter Martyr vpon the 19. chapter of Iudges, Symlerus his preface before Boetius, Cassianus, Gelasius, &c.Other natiōs both by words and deedes haue allowed and shewed that power of the Prince, which the oth proposeth. And tell me what difference betwixt vs and them. But I choose rather to produce the Common wealthes, where these learned men and infinite mo did, and do liue: for beholding their deedes, what neede we their wordes? Their actions will testifie their opinions. Scotland, Flaunders, Denmarke, Suetia, Polonia, Bohemia, the free Cities and States of Germanie, Suyt∣zerland, and other nations, which haue displaced your impieties, and receiued the Gospell: made they this change by the Popes permission and assent of his Bishoppes, or else by the Magistrates ayde and assistance? The first of
these twayne you dare not auouch; for God knoweth it went much against your willes: then must you confesse the seconde, and so those learned Prea∣chers and writers which either at first perswaded and incouraged, or at this daie commend and allowe the Princes and Magistrates of those kingdomes and Countries, for remouing Antichrist with all his trinckettes out of their dominions, and embracing the truth of Christ by publicke authoritie, yea for reforming their Churches and setting an order in causes Ecclesiasticall as farre foorth in euerie point, as her Highnesse hath done in this Lande: all these learned and worthie Diuines, I saie, consent with vs in this, that the Magistrate may lawfullie settle matters of Religion, maugre your Ro∣mish Idoll, and punishe errour and iniquitie by the temporall sworde as well in Bishoppes and Priestes as in others: which is the verie summe and effect of this oth that you by no meanes can awaie with. Phi. The chiefe makers of it them-selues haue iudged it either damnable or verie daungerous. Theo. This no doubt is a vehement accusation, if it can bee proued; if it bee rashlie surmised, then is it as pestilent a slaunder. Goe to, what reason leadeth you to charge the Nobles of this Land in this sorte? Phi. The Barons exempted them-selues from taking this oth by a spe∣ciall prouiso. Theo. What if they did not exempt them-selues, but her Ma∣iestie for the confidence shee reposed in her Nobles,The Nobles of this Realm shamefullie slaundered by the Iesuits. and for a difference be∣tweene them and the Commons, woulde not haue their othes, but accepted their honours as sufficient pledges of their fidelitie, will you wrest her Graces good opinion of them to their vtter and open diffamation? Or what if some Barons of this Realme skant fullie resolued in that point (which then was no wonder) made meanes to bee respited for a season till they might be farther instructed, which coulde not bee graunted to particular persons by name without infamie to them-selues and iniurie to the rest; and for that cause, least anie shoulde bee pointed at, or distrusted more than others, this gene∣rall exemption were deuised as most indifferent; who but a wrangling Ie∣suite would inferre that the chiefe doers in heart condemned their own law? You demaund, how my supposals can be proued. That needeth not, your ile and infamous report is sufficiently confuted, if I bring other & better occasions, that were but possible. For where many good reasons of this exemption may bee produced, why do you spitefully presume the worst: and that vpon a blinde suspition, without anie proofe? Why doe you rashly coniecture their secret thoughtes, which you by no meanes could know? why boldly pronounce you that of Christian and godlie States, which no sober man will suspect in Turkes and Infidels? to wit, that they met in Parliament to make wic∣ked and bloodie lawes against their owne consciences? And what if I coulde not resolue you whence this exemption first sprang, (such mat∣ters of counsell pertayning little to your vocation and myne) yet due respect to their places, which we shoulde not despise: good triall of their wisedomes, which we can not deny: common charitie to their persons, which wee may not
purposelie diffame; withhold me Philander, and should haue restrained you from this lewd and insolent reproching the consciences of so many noble men & wor∣thie Counsellors, except you could shew some iust and ineuitable proofe, which you can not, hauing for your vnhonest surmise no surer ground than this, that the Statute doth not compel Barons or any temporal person aboue that degree to take this oth, but exempteth them from the penalties of this Act, prouided for o∣thers of meaner calling and lesse credit with hir Maiestie. Phi. To exact this oth of most Officers in the Commonwealth, and of euerie one that is preferred in the Vniuersities is nothing else but wittingly to driue men to pitiful tor∣ment of minde, remorse, and vtter desperation.The oth exa∣cted of Offi∣cers and pro∣ceeders. The law bar∣reth Papists from prefer∣ments and offices, vntill they demon∣strate their o∣bedience by oth. Is that to driue them to despera∣tion? The Iesuits buzzing in corners doth trouble their consciences, and not the oth. Theo. Why so good Sir? Is this consequent, that he which keepeth your men from degrees and offices dri∣ueth them to desperation? Gape your friendes so mightilie for honor and lucre, that rather than they will lacke earthly preferments they can not choose but vē∣ter their soules? No law forceth them to seeke for offices and dignities, but on∣ly debarreth them frō such, vntill they renounce that vsurped authoritie, which your holie Father claimeth to commaund, correct and depose Princes at his beck. If any be tormented in minde for abiuring that vniust title, which the Pope pretendeth; blame not the Lawes of this Realme, which you can not disproue; blame the couetous and ambitious humor of those, that for worldlie respectes would rush headlong against the perswasion of their heartes; blame your odious and erronious whispering in their eares, which hath troubled and altered their conceits, that were caulmed and setled in quietnesse. Such tem∣porising hipocrites, if any such be so vexed in minde, as you tell vs (which I scantly beleeue: for ambition and gaine breed in them rather delight than re∣morse) yet were they not thereto driuen by the Magistrate, who proposed this law with condition, and left them to the choise; but their greedinesse first baited them, next your secret buzzing in corners disordered their vnconstant affections, and now perhaps foolish fantasie doth afflict them, without reason of their partes, or occasion of ours. Phi. But to compell namely all such as you suspect to thinke it vntrue, that is wilfullie to force men to desperation. Theo. The time was when you and your fellowes cared little for driuing others to desperation. The strange tor∣mentes you deuised and practised on thowsandes, to compell them from the confession of their faith without any regard of their consciences, can witnesse the same: mary now the sword is out of your handes, you growe so tender and delicate that neither religion nor obedience may be forced on you, for feare least you fall to desperation. You can shift for your selues, I perceiue, what euer betide your neighbours:The Magi∣strates may compel two things that be lawfull, though des∣peration doe ensue. but in sadnesse Philander where learned you this diui∣nitie, that subiectes may not be compelled against their wils, if they list to pretende conscience, least they despayre? Shall the peeuish opinion of such as bee frowarde and ignorant, or to speake with fauour, the priuate per∣swasion of such as be weake, sppe Magistrates from yeelding that seruice which God requireth of them? May Princes displease God, to please men? or
breake the least of his preceptes, to content neuer so great a multitude? No doubt they may not. For rulers in making their lawes must depend on the wil of God reuealed in his word,A thiefe may be hanged, though he would pretēd desperation. not on other mens consciences. Idolaters, here∣tickes, and schismatikes lacke not an inward and strong perswasion of their sects, yet dare you not denie, but Christian Princes ought to force their sub∣iectes from idolatrie, dissention, and heresie. The Scriptures commend Iosiah, for compelling the people to serue God:2. Chronic. 34. Luc. 14. the seruant is charged to compell the guestes that were loth to come: God hath ordained the sword (which neuer entreateth or perswadeth, but onlie commaundeth and compelleth) to punish falshood and assist truth. Now men that bee willing neede no forcing, ergo Princes may compell their subiectes, that is constraine them against their wils to keepe the faith and communion of Christs Church, notwithstanding they pretend, or in deede haue neuer so reso∣lute and strong an opinion to the contrarie. The Donatistes, rather than they would bee forced from their fansies, slew themselues,August. epist. 50. & 204. The Dona∣tists were not spared though they offered themselues violence. yet this did nothing fraie the Church of God frō compelling them by the rigour of Princes lawes, without any respect to their wilful desperation. We graunt he that woundeth a weake conscience sinneth against Christ; mary to be grieued with that which is good, is no weakenesse but wickednesse; and he that tendereth or regardeth a wicked conscience, by your leaue, is a fauo∣rer and confirmer of his euill works. To such saith Paul, I gaue no place, no not an hour:1. Corinth. 8. Galat. 2. Galat. 1. for if I should [so] please mē, I were not the seruant of Christ. We may not for thinges indifferent trouble the weake mindes of our brethren, yet this rule bindeth no Magistrate to remit the punishment of error and infide∣litie, because God hath charged them to suffer no kinde of euill vnreuenged, (and this is the greatest) whose voice they must heare, whose will they must obeie, though they were sure thereby to scandalize neuer so many both aliens & subiectes. Phi. Wo to that man by whom offences come. Theo. True Sir, but an offence fondly taken,Luc. 17. not iustly giuen, entangleth no man besides the taker. Blessed is he (saith Christ) that is not offended at me. Where cursed is he that taketh an offence,Luc. 7. the giuer is blessed for euer. We preach Christ cruci∣fied a stumbling blocke to the Iewes, and wo to me (saith Paul) if I preach not the Gospell,1. Cor. 1. 1. Cor. 9. 2. Cor. 2. yet doth it bring the wicked to their destruction, and is the sauour of death vnto death in them that perish. Then as the minister must dispense the worde of truth, be therewith offended and greiued who list:Offence ta∣ken not iustly giuen hurteth no man but the taker. so the Magistrate may drawe the sworde of iustice to compell and punish such as bee blindly led, or maliciouslie bent to resist sound doctrine; without any respect what afterward befalleth such ouerthwart creatures. If vpon compulsion, des∣peration ensue; wo not to the compeller, vsing those meanes which God hath appointed, and discharging that duetie, which God hath commaunded; but wo rather, and double wo to the despayrer, who first framed his conscience to for∣sake truth and beleeue lies; and nowe receiuing the iust reward of his error
hath his heart hardened, that when good discipline, which healeth others, is applied as a wholesome medicine to recouer him, it causeth or sheweth him to be past cure, without any sinister action, or ill intention of the Magistrate. Thus much for the making, and exacting of that oth. The contents where∣of shall be fully discussed when we come to the place which I named. We stand too long I feare about these foolish and impertinent quarels. I will passe to your second Chapter as finding nothing left in your first, but an action of vn∣kindnesse against such as call you Fugitiues: which name you well deserue, though you be loth to beare. Phi. That is but your saying, which wee little regard. Theo. Much lesse neede wee regard your slaunderous and false re∣ports published of purpose to deface this Realme: they bee but your sayinges, which no good man esteemeth. Phi. You fall now to wordes. Theo. What else haue you done, since we began? We be now come to the shutting vp of your first Chapter; reuiew the same: what one line, what one letter haue you proued, that hurteth vs, or helpeth you? Phi. You were not here to looke for many Scri∣ptures or Fathers: we giue you the reasons of our departure, which bee mat∣ters of fact, and admit no proofes. Theo. If you can not proue them, wee neede not disproue them; and so let vs end with this, and proceede to the next. Phi. You answere not halfe that which we haue obiected. Theo. You obiect much & proue litle: which forceth me to neglect the most part of that you haue obiected. For when you heape vp idle words, that are but winde; and raigne ouer your aduer∣saries with Lordlike vauntes, which are better despised than answered; why should I follow your vaine humor, or bring the cause of Christ to a meere brable or wordes, as your Apologie doth? Phi. Say your pleasure. Theo. Your first Chapter we haue seene: what doth your seconde containe? Phi. Their rūning to Rome.The causes of our repairing sometime to the Citie and Court of Rome. Theo. If this be all, I will neuer open my mouth for the matter. Your pri∣uate actions and secret purposes we can not see, wee neede not search. There∣in you may pretende what you please, without any truth, and wee beleeue what we list without any wrong. Phi. In faith and truth they were none other, but to make humble ste for the establishment,Apolog. chap. 2. Se 6. and perpetuall foundation of the Col∣lege or Seminarie which his Holinesse had long before instituted in place of the hospitall of our nation there: this was one thing. Another was, that the Gouernours of that College in Rome aboue, and of this other now resident in Rhemes beneath might giue and take mutuall direction for correspondence in regiment, discipline and education most agreeable to our Countrie mens natures, and for preuention of all disorders that youth and companies of Scholers namely in banishment are subiect vnto. Theo. It may be this you did, but did you nothing else? Phi. It was strong∣ly surmised we know, that our going to Rome was to procure some matter a∣gainst the Prince, but God is our witnesse it was no part of our meaning. Theo. That intelligence was giuen by such as were daily conuersant with you, and those articles of confederacie betweene the Pope, and others to inuade this Realme were rife in your Seminaries there, and closely sent to your friendes
here; but whether interprised & followed by cōmon consent amongst you, or only deuised & scattered by some of you, to strike a feare in the peoples harts to make them the readier for your perswasions, we can not exactly say: this wee be sure, such practises in subiects be lewd & seditious. Phi. If that informatiō were true. Theo. What reasons haue you to proue it false? Phi. Enow: The second chapter of our Apologie doth refell it at large. Theo. You refell it in deed, as your maner is; that is, you say that you wil without any further proofe or paines. Certain yong fellowes,Apolog chap. . sect. 1. say you, Fugitiues from their Masters, deprehēded in diuerse cosinages, coun∣terfaiting of letters, & plaine thefts haue of malice, hope of impunity and lucre traite∣rously slaundered you. Thus as if you sate supreme Iudges ouer al the world, you bring nothing to quite your selues and confute your aduersaries, but onely the breath of your own mouthes. Phi. Wee giue you an oth for our discharge:A Iesuites oth is no great as∣surance: they haue such cū∣ning to make othes, & pow∣er to dispence with othes. Apolog. Cap. 2. Sect. 2. will you not beleeue vs, when wee sweare? Theo. If wee do it, is more of our good meaning than your wel deseruing; you dispence so fast with the breach of othes. Phi. You misreport vs, we do not so. Theo. That shal appeare in place conuenient. I will not now disgresse from the matter. An oth, you say, we haue to purge al suspition: Let vs hear it. Phi. The principall of the viage doth protest, that he neither ioyned with rebell nor traitor, nor any other against the Queene or Realme, or traiterously sought or practised to irritate any Prince or potentate to hostility against the same. Further in∣uocating vpō his soul that he neither knew, saw nor heard during his aboad in the court of Rome, of any such writings, as are mentioned in the proclamation of Iuly, containing certaine articles of confederation of the Pope, king of Spaine & other Princes for the inuasion of the Realme. Theo. We heare you sweare, but meane you plainly? Phi. Why doubt you that? Theo. You teach others,Inter quaestio∣nes ad tribunal indicis perti∣nentes, quaest. 2. quomodo re∣spondendum in tribunali haere∣ticorum. whē they be called before such as you count heretiks; sophisticè iurare, & sophisticè, respōdere, sophistically to swear, & sophistically to answere, that is to mocke the Magistrate with a captious & cunning oth or answere. And therefore vnlesse you giue vs a preciser & strickter oth than this, we trust you not. You did not traiterously seeke or practise to irritate any Prince or Potentate to hostilitie against the Queene or Realme: What needed this addition, you sought it not traiterously? Your meaning may bee, you sought it, but lawfully. Phi. What fraud you suspect, where we meane simply?. Theo. Then for the better explication of our selues,They make it no treason to inuade the Land, if the Pope so com∣maund vpon pretence of heresie and schisme. do you thinke it treason for an English man to ioyne with the Pope or any other appointed by him to inuade the Land for the restoring of Religion, and execution of the sentence, which Pius the fift pronoū∣ced against her Maiestie? Phi. That sentence is extrauagant. Theo. Not so. For if you count it no treason, as we can proue the most part of you do not, to obey ye Pope deposing the Queene, then in your own conceits may you safely sweare, you did not these thinges trayterouslie, though touching the factes it were certaine you did them. Phi. What a compasse you fet to intrap vs? Theo. What euasions you get to delude vs? but how doth this cleare the rest of your side? Phi. Wee bee most assured that no English Catholike woulde or coulde bee the
author thereof. Theo. It is much to bee sure what euerie man of your faction would or could doe: you must bee gods and not men, if you can doe that. Phi. Wee knowe they woulde not. Theo. Leaue this follie, you can not search the secretes of other mens heartes, nor accompt for their deedes: in a matter so impossible; the more vehement, the more impudent. Phi. Apolog. chap. 2. sect. 2.It verily may bee thought (and so is it certaine, that some of the prin∣cipall ministers of the forenamed Princes haue answered being demaunded there∣of) that the Protestantes hauing exercised skill and audacitie in such practises and counterpractises (of which Fraunce, Flaunders, Scotland and other coun∣tries haue had so lamentable experience) did contriue them to alter her Maie∣sties accustomed benignitie and mercie towards the Catholickes. Theo. It is great pitie that Papistes bee no practisers. Aske England, Scotland, Flaunders, Fraunce, Spaine, Italie, Scicile, Germanie, what practises they haue found, I say not in your temporall men, but in the Priestes, Prelates and Pillours of your Church.Popes for these 600. yeares haue been nothing else but pra∣ctisers. Righter Macheuels than the Popes them-selues Christen∣dome hath not bred: mary this indeede you were alwayes better with poy∣sons and Treasons, than with papers and pamflets: and yet you spared neither Scriptures, Councels, nor Fathers; but corrupted and enterlaced them to serue your turnes. As for the procurers and setters of this late confederacie to assaulte the Realme, if you knowe not who they were, Charles Paget and others with you can tell; or if they would dissemble, Throckmorton hath tolde. There shall you see, whether this were a meere deuise and sleight of ours, or a lewde intente and practise of yours. These bee the chiefe pointes of your seconde Chapter: the rest is lippe-labour and noe waye concerneth your cause. Phi. Yes: wee prooue it lawfull for men in our case to flie to the Bishoppe of Rome, for reliefe either of bodie or soule. Theo. Wee bee sure you will saie it with boldnesse enough, but will you prooue it? Phi. Wee will prooue it. Theo. Howe? Phi. Apolog. Cap. 2. Sect. 5. Hiero. Epist. 16 A fond florish for their go∣ing to Rome.Whither should wee rather flie than to the head, or as Sainct Hierom speaketh (to the most secure part of our Catholike communion) to the rocke of refuge in doubtfull dayes and doctrines, to the chiefe Pastour and Bishoppe of our soules in earth, to the Vicar generall of Christ, out of the compasse of whose fold and familie no banishment can bring vs: to him that by office and vnction had receiued the grace of loue, pitie and compassion: to him that counteth no Christian nor domesticall of faith a stranger:This is no flatterie. to him whose Citie and Seat is the natiue home of all true beleeuers, and the paterne of all Bishoply hospitalitie and benignitie. Theo. Whither nowe Maisters, are you well aduised? Phi. Why not? Theo. You presume that to be most true, which is most in question betwixt vs; and as if your vnshamefast flatteries were sounde and substantiall verities, you conclude without prouing the precedents, or respecting the consequent. For first, what witnesse bring you, that the Pope is as you say, the head, the rocke of refuge in doutful daies & doctrines, the chiefe Pastor and Bishop of your souls in earth,
the Vicar generall of Christ: or that his seat is the natiue home of all true belee∣uers, and the whole Church his folde and familie? What auncient Father or Councell euer liked, or suffered these proude and false titles? Why proue you not that which you speake? Or why speake you that which you can not proue? In so weightie matters do you thinke it enough to saie the worde, and by and by wee must hush? Phi. Wee haue else-where brought you so manie demonstrations for these thinges, that nowe wee take them to bee cleare. Theo. Omit these vauntes, we aske for proofes: and till you bring them, by your owne rule we neede frame you no farther answere. Phi. Make you merrie with that aduantage, but yet Sainct Hierom is not so shifted. Theo. His name you set in the forefront to lead on the rable of your vnsauorie speeches, but the wordes of Sainct Hierom doe little releeue you. For let it be that Athanasius and after him Peter Bishops of Alexandria,Hiero. ad Prin∣cip. epita∣phium Mar∣cell. de∣clining the persecution of the Arian heresie, fled to Rome as to the safest port of their communion; because Rome was then free from the tumults of Ari∣ans, so long as Constans liued,Rome was then safe frō Arians whiles Constans li∣ued, but not after when the Bishop of Rome was ba∣nished by the Arians. Apol. Cap. 2. Sect. 5. Bede lib. 1. hist. Ang. The pretēces of their run∣ning to Rome and readie to receiue such as suffered affliction, for the truth of Christ, which is all that Sainct Hierom saith: what inferre you thence? that Rome is now the like? This illation commeth twelue hundred yeares too short of your antecedent, and no waie dependeth vpon S. Hieroms wordes; vnlesse you thinke that Rome now, because shee beareth the same name, must also chalenge the same vertues, and praises, which Rome so longe since both had and deserued; which were verie ridiculous. But is this all you will adde before you growe to your maine conclusion? Phi. The greatest part is yet behinde. For as I beganne, whither shoulde we rather flie than to him, whose Predecessors gaue vs our first faith in the time of the Britanes, restored it after in the dayes of the English, recouered vs from Paga∣nisme, from Arianisme, from Pelagianisme, from Zwinglianisme: often recei∣ued, harbored, and releeued, diuerse blessed Bishops and Priestes of our nation, as well in the times of their prosperitie, as persecution; and who haue receiued againe of all our Princes, Prelats and People, all duetifull and correspondent honours and good Of∣fices for so many hundred yeares togither, when they and their dominions florished in much glorie and felicitie, and were dreadfull to Gods enemies, the Churches and their owne: among whom hir Maiesties Father for his worthie writinges and do∣ings against the Lutherans receiued the glorious and eternall title of Defender of the faith, to him of whose Predecessors all the famous Fathers called for ayde, com∣fort and counsell in their like distresses, Cyprian of Cornelius and Stephanus, Athanasius of Iulius and Marcus, Chrysostom and Augustine of Innocentius, Basill of Tiberius, Felix and other Bishops of Italie: Hierom and Milecius of Da∣masus, Theodorete of Leo the great, and all the rest of otherholy Popes, as time and necessitie required:Lib. 4. cap. 22. Eccle hist. to him whose Seat (as Eusebius reporteth of Sainct Denys of Corinth) did alwayes sende reliefe to all the Christians persecuted, and con∣demned to mettalles, and refreshed all the faithfull comming vnto it as the Pa∣rent the children: to him who as he canonically succeedeth all these in Seate, do∣ctrine
and dignitie, so is inferiour to none, farre passeth many, and resembleth most Sainct Gregorie the great our Apostle in all charitie, hospitalitie, zeale, and tendernesse of heart and affection toward the desolate, namely our nation: for the spi∣rituall calamitie whereof the writer of this hath seene him weepe full hartily, and hath heard him saie, the goods of that holie Seat, whereof he had the dispensation, were for the poore afflicted domesticals of faith. Finallie, whither could we with more hope haue recourse, than to him, by whose bounteous goodnesse so manie Patriarches, Bishops, learned, Gentlemen and Christians of all sortes, English, Scottish, Irish, Almans, Hungarians, Syrians, Armenians, Cyprians, and all other vnder the Turke, or any way for Christes sake oppressed or impouerished haue beene and shall be relieued. Theo. A long processe to little purpose. Graunt that diuerse good men in times past haue sent and gone to Rome for counsell and comfort in cases of distresse, which is all in effect which you can or doe say: what conclude you nowe? Phi. That wee may doe the like. Theo. The like you may, but not the contrarie. Phi. We follow precisely their steps. Theo. That we denie. Well,The Iesuites go to Rome, but not as the Fathers did. you may goe to Rome as they did, and so your iourney not differ from theirs in the paines, which you take; nor the place, which you see; but you neither carrie with you the same mindes, that they did; neither doth your holy Father content him selfe with those meanes, which his predecessors vsed. For the auncient Bishoppes of Rome were duetifull and obedient Subiectes to the Christian Emperours, and dealt by petition and supplication in most humble wise for their afflicted brethren: they neuer offered armes, nor encouraged Rebell against the superiour Powers, no not when Constantius the Arian banished Liberius the Bishop of Rome for dissenting from his opinion; nor when Iulius the Apostata renounced the faith, and openly fell to Gentilisme: but euer submitted them selues to the same Lawes and paines that other god∣ly Bishops did, when the Prince tooke part with error. And for this cause the traueling then to Rome, whiles the Bishop there embraced the truth, o∣beyed the State, & assisted their brethren by good and lawfull meanes, coulde no waie be displeasant to God, iniurious to Princes, nor daungerous to com∣mon-wealthes: In our dayes it is farre otherwise. The Pope nowe taketh vpon him to depose Kinges, to inuade Realmes, to authorize rebellion, yea to curse all that yeelde any subiection, or duetie to those Magistrates that with∣stand their fantasies: Which vile and intollerable presumption of the late Bi∣shops of Rome, neither Cyprian, nor Athanasius, nor Chrysostome, nor Augustine, nor Basill, nor Hierom, nor Theodorete in their times euer founde or feared. And therefore both you must alter the leude perswasions of your heartes, and your holie Father must leaue his wholie practises to pull Princes out of their thrones by stirring sedition and inuading their Dominions, before your flocking to Rome can bee warranted by these examples. Phi. I maruell you still obiect that, which wre by oth haue purged.
You knowe wee haue sworne that in going to Rome wee had no such in∣tent. Theo. Your oth, if it bee true, cleareth one man for one viage; but which of you doeth, or can sweare for all other times and persons? Howbeit in this place wee doe not vrge you with your intentes nor attempts against her Maiestie, wee onely weigh the strength of your argument, that you may slie to Rome, as well as some learned and auncient Fathers haue done. This collection of yours is not good:They may not goe to Rome in these dayes though the Fathers did, when the Bi∣shop of Rome behaued him∣selfe as a due∣tifull subiect to the Empe∣rour. because the bishop of Rome nowe claymeth full power to depriue Princes of their Crownes, and dis∣charge their Subiectes from all obedience, contrarie to the worde of God, and examples of Christes Church; which in those dayes, whiles these Fathers, whom you mention, liued, the Bishoppes of Rome neither did or durst presume. Phi. Wee meddle not with the Popes clayme, hee can answere for him∣selfe. Theophil. You must meddle with it, and bring ineuitable proofe for it, before your consequent will bee currant, or your slight to Rome lawfull. Phi. If wee sought to Rome, for succour against the Prince, your saying were somewhat, but I haue often tolde you we doe not. Theo. And I haue told you as often, that graunt you did not, the Popes clayme to discharge Kinges and Queenes at his pleasure, is enough to reuerse your argument.If this pride and tyrannie be vnlawfull: resorting to him, and par∣taking with him, can not be lawfull. Wee care not what you dissemble of pollicie for a season, but what he cha∣lengeth for euer as of right. His pride, not your craft is the thing we stand on, and that being such as the learned Fathers whom you name, neuer sawe nor suspected, maketh so great a difference betweene those dayes and these, that from their fact to yours no good consequent can be framed. And yet I could tell you besides, that when hee commaundeth you must and will execute. So that although you were no seekers nor prouokers of his vnchristian dealinges against our Soueraigne, you neither may, nor doe refuse to bee commenders, assisters, perfourmers of his vngodlie pur∣poses, tende they neuer so much to the preiudice of this Realme, and di∣sturbance of her Maiesties Title, State, and wel-fare. Which tyranous vsurpation in him, and trayterous affection in you, no Father, that is Catholicke,Not one of their exam∣ples toucheth the Popes power ouer Princes: but conuince ra∣ther the con∣trarie. Counsell and comfort may be fet from a∣nie place as well as frō Rome. did euer allowe; no Prince, that is auncient, did euer en∣dure. And as for your skattered and maymed examples, which here you heape to fraie the simple with emptie names and loftie words, not one of them auoucheth and such matter or meaning. Phi. If they prooue not the Popes iurisdiction ouer Princes which you stoutelie denie, yet I trust they proue, that wee may sende, or goe to Rome, to bee resolued in doubtes of Religion, and to bee relieued in times of affliction, which is all wee require. Theophil. Counsell in cases of fayth, and comforte in dayes of daunger, bee no signes of autho∣ritie, but dewties of Charitie, neyther those peculiar to the Bishoppe of Rome, but common to the whole Church of God: and therefore if your examples reache no farther, but that Princes haue beene some∣times
aduised, and other good men harbored by the Bishops of Rome, whiles the Citie was famous for learning and religion, you take great paines to proue that which neither helpeth you, nor hindereth vs. All this may bee graunted, and your running to Rome no whit the sooner concluded to bee lawfull. Phi. What reason barreth vs now from trauelling to Rome more than others heretofore? Theo. Your holie Father pretendeth and exerciseth in our daies a monstrous and pernicious power ouer the Church of Christ, which at that time when these godly men wrote, and repayred to Rome, was neither at∣tempted by him, nor mistrusted by them. So that they might resort to the Bishop of Rome,The Fathers resorted to the Bishop of Rome as to their brother and fellow seruant. as to their fellow seruaunt without offence to the Church, or contempt to the state: because the Bishops then behaued themselues as religious members, not as presumptuous heades of the Church; and liued as subiectes, not as superiors to the Prince: you can now not flie to the Bishop of Rome, but you must do violent wrong to them both: to the Prince by renoū∣cing your subiection, breaking your oth, and bearing armes against your liege Ladie, when the Pope commaundeth: to the Church in thinking & tea∣ching the Bishop of Rome to bee the decider of all doubtes, vpholder of all truth, expounder of all Scriptures, Confirmer of all Councelles, dispenser with all lawes, yea supreme and infallible Iudge of all men and all matters, that any waie touch or concerne Religion. Which strange and incredible pride those examples which you bring, are so far from allowing, that we need no better witnesse to confute you with. Phi. You doe but iest I dare saie. Theo. Examine the particulars, & you shall finde them make cleane against you, or at least nothing for you. The Bishop of Rome, you saie, gaue vs our first faith in the time of the Britanes, restored it afterward in the dayes of the English, recouered vs from Paganisme, from Arianisme, from Pelagianisme, from Zwin∣glianisme. This last I may skip as a fond effect of your distempered choler. The Gospell nowe preached among vs you call in your heat Zwinglianisme: from the which though some of you be lightly stept, I trust in God, the worst your holie Father can doe, shall neuer remoue vs. That this lande was in∣fected with Arianisme and Pelagianisme,Bede Eccle hist. gentis Ang. lib. 1. Cap. 8. lib. 1. Cap. 17. This land recouered from Pela∣gianisme by two French Bishops. Lib. 1. Cap. 17. as manie other places then were, I finde it reported in the storie of Bede: that the Bishop of Rome recouered vs from both, or from either, I finde it not; yea rather certaine it is, the Bishoppes of Fraunce our neighbours vppon request made vnto them by the Britanes, sent Germanus and Lupus two french Bishoppes, chosen in a Synode by the generall liking, to conuert this Realme from Pelagius error, which also they did with great celeritie. So that of those foure recoueries to the faith, which you reckon in fauour of the Bishoppes of Rome, the last is the present estate which we striue for, the two next be false, the first is only left & that furthereth your conclusion but little. Phi. Will you denie that the Bishop of Rome first caused the Britanes and Saxons to bee christened? Theo. I will denie nothing that is true: pre∣sume
you no more than you proue, and we shall soone growe to an ende, Lucius an auncient king of the Britanes wrote to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome for his helpe,Bede. Eccle. hist. gentis Angl. lib. 1. Cap 4. Lucius Chri∣stened, and Edelbert con∣uerted from Rome. that him selfe and his people might be baptised: and Gregorie the great sent Augustine the Moncke to see whether he could king Edelbert and the Saxons. Doth this proue the Pope superiour to Princes, or that he may send his factours hither without the Princes leaue? Phi. There was somewhat in it, that Lucius sent so farre. Theo. This Realme was then rude, learning here skant, religion newly sprong, & no where setled, Coilus, his father, brought vp at Rome from a child,The occasi∣ons of Lucius sending vnto Rome. and one that of his owne accorde yeelded both friendship and tribute to the Romanes, Lucius him¦selfe a great fauourer of the Romane Empire, and no place neere home so fa∣mous & well furnished with able men to serue his turne as Rome. What mar∣uaile then if Lucius, so wel acquainted and frinded at Rome before, thought best to be thence directed and instructed at his first entrie to the Christian faith? But can you proue that Lucius was bounde to doe that hee did, or that Eleutherius did any thing against the Princes will? Phi. I say not so. Theo. Then this example maketh litle for you, which be sent hither not on∣ly without the Princes leaue, but against her liking and Lawes, to withdrawe the peoples hearts from her, and to prepare them for a farther purpose: Grego∣ries fact in sending to conuert the Saxons maketh lesse.They that came from Rome, would not enter this land nor preach here without the Kings ex∣presse li∣cence. Bede lib. 1. Cap. 25. For Augustine and his felowes, notwithstanding they were sent from Rome, as you are, and taught no∣thing but subiection and obedience to Princes, which you doe not; yet woulde they not enter this land without the kings consent and permission, but rested in the Isle of Tenet til his pleasure were knowne; and offered not to preach in this Realme before the king in expresse wordes gaue them licence. They came not in disguised as you doe, they lurked not in corners, they traueled not by night, they brought no bulles in their bosomes to discharge the subiects and depose the Prince: the Bishop of Rome that sent them, neither stirred rebellion, nor inua∣ded king Edelberts dominion. And where you being subiects offer that wrong to a Christian Queene, which they being straungers did not to an heathen king; yet would you beare men in hand you follow their example; but lay downe the true report of these stories and see howe handsomely they fitte your conclusion. Eleutherius being requested by king Lucius sent some to baptise him and his subiects; and Gregorie sent others to te whether king Edelbert woulde giue them leaue to preach to the Saxons: ergo you may flee to the Bishoppe of Rome notwithstanding he professe him selfe an open enemie to the Queene. Phi. You still presse vs with that which we neuer ment. Theo. You stil de∣fend your selues there where we doe not strike. This is the very drift and scope of all your examples, as your owne wordes witnes:Apolog. Cap. 2. What greater hostilitie than this could the Turk himself offer? And sor vs of the schoole and Clergie, whither should we rather flee than to him. Now that he hath openly shewed himselfe an enemie to her Highnes, in accursing her Person, in remouing her Crowne, in forbidding her subiects to obey her, in ayding rebelles against her, and assaulting her land with force, you can not so much as doubt, woulde you
neuer so faine; the facts are so notorious and fresh in the memories of all men. Phi. We noted this in you, that where the Britanes and Saxons receiued prea∣chers from Rome with honour and thankes, you persecute them with all kinde of torments. Theo. Your attempt is as contrary to theirs, as your reward is diuers from theirs. They came with religion to God and submission to Prin∣ces, you come with neyther. Phi. I woulde you knewe it, wee come with both. And you may bee ashamed to charge vs with two such haynous crimes, prouing neyther. Theo. Haue patience till wee come to the place, where both shall bee discussed, and see whether that which is nowe saide shall then be proued or no: but in the meane time goe forwarde with the rest of your examples. Phi. Wee flee to him of whose predecessors all the famous fathers called for aide, comfort and counsel in their like distresses, as Cyprian of Cornelius and Stephanus, Athanasius of Iulius, Chrysostome and Augustine of Innocentius, Basil of Li∣berius, Felix and other Bishops of Italie, Hierom and Miletius of Damasus, Theo∣doret of Leo the great, and all the rest of other holy Popes. Theo. This is no rea∣soning but rouing. You florish with a few general and doubtful termes, neither opening the causes, nor expressing the circumstances. They called, you say, For ayde,What ayde the fathers sought at Rome. comfort and counsell. What ayde? such as the Bishops of Rome might and did yeeld in those dayes without chalenging any supremacie? That is nothing to your purpose, neither will that warrant your gadding to Rome. Such as none could giue but they that were rulers & heads of the whole Church? That were somewhat, if it could bee proued: but your examples cōtaine no such thing. Uiew the particulars. Cypri. lib. 1. Epist. 1. & li. 2. Epistola 1.Cyprian in his epistles to Cornelius & Stephanus neuer calleth them other∣wise than brethren and collegues: and in matters concerning the regiment of the Church as well giueth as taketh both counsell and comfort. But can you shewe that Cyprian euer allowed any man to runne to Rome for helpe against the iudgements and acts of other Bishops?Cypriā misli∣keth running to Rome. if you can not, as wee bee right sure you be not able, then can we shew you, where Cyprian misliketh, and plainely reproueth this posting of yours to Rome, writing to Cornelius. Hee saith, that certaine persons condemned in Africa by the Bishops there,Cypri. lib. 1. Epist. 3. Romam cum men∣daciorum suorum merce nauigauerunt, sailed to Rome with their fraight of lies: adding farther, And now what is the cause of their comming? for either they like that they did, and so perseuere in their wickednes; or if they mislike & relent they know whither they may returne. For where it is a thing prescri∣bed to vs al, and besides that equal and right, that euery mans cause be there heard, where the crime was committed; and euery Pastor hath his portion of the flocke assigned him, which he must gouerne and rule, as one that shall giue an accompt of his doings to God, Oportet vtique eos quibus praesumus non circūcursare: Those that be vnder vs must not runne thus about [to Rome] but there plead their cause, where they may finde both accusers and witnesses; vnlesse perhaps a few desperat and loose companions take the authoritie of
the Bishops of Africa to be lesse than [at Rome.] The like hee sayth of one Basilides that being depriued of his Bishopricke procured letters from Rome for his restitution.Cyprian. lib. 1. Epistola 4. Cyprian en∣courageth the Spaniards to neglect the Popes letters. Neither can this infringe the ordering [of the next Bishop,] lawfully finished, that Basilides running to Rome deceiued Stephanus our collegue by reason he is farre off, & not acquainted with the truth of the case, getting himselfe to be restored vniustly to the Bi∣shopricke from the which he was iustly deposed. If Cyprian did not like that Cornelius should medle with matters concluded in Africa, neither esteemed the restitution of Basilides made by Stephanus, but reiected it as voyde and vniust, what other ayde thinke you would he call for at their hands, but onely such mu∣tual concorde, as should profite the Church, and well beseeme the seruantes of Christ? Phi. If Cyprian woulde not, Athanasius did; who being Patriarke of A∣lexandria fled twise to Rome for succour, in his owne person, and was there not onely receiued and harboured, but also restored to his former dignitie of Iulius, notwithstanding the Councels of Tyrus and Antioche had decreed the contra∣rie, and Constantius the Emperour consented thereto. Theo. The troubles of Athanasius gaue Iulius good cause both to claime and vse the vttermost of his authoritie.How Iulius helped Atha∣nasius. The wrong offered Athanasius was so shamefull, the madnes of A∣rians subuerting the faith and oppressing the Church so manifest, the rage of Constantius, assisting their heresie with all his might so cruell, that if euer the Bishop of Rome woulde stirre, this time must needes force him to doe his best. Phi. And so he did I warrant you. Theo. What did hee? Phi. You knowe well inough, hee summoned the Arians to appeare before him, examined their proceedings, reuersed the sentence giuen against Athanasius, and placed him in his Bishopricke in spite of his aduersaries. Theo. Can you proue that Iulius did al this alone without the help of others, or that he did any part of this as head of the Church & Uicar general to Christ?He did al that he did, as Pa∣triark of the west with the help of the west Bishops. Phi. What cauils you inuent when you be vrged with any thing? Theo. What broken reedes you leane too and thinke them strong pillers? It is well knowen the Bishop of Rome was not onely Patriarke of the West parts, but of ye foure Patriarkes also which were the chiefest Bishops of Christendome, in order and accompt the first. By reason whereof no Councell could be generall vnlesse hee were called, no matters concerning the whole Church or principall Patriarks could be handled,The Bishop of Rome had his preroga∣tiue from the citie of Rome, not from Peter. vnlesse he were present or priuie to the same. Which preroga∣tiue was giuen him by consent of men, not by graunt from Christ; in respect of the Citie that was the Seate of the Empire, then ruling the worlde; not in to∣ken of any supremacie descending from Peter. Thus much we graunt without any proofe of yours, & more than this, if you would sweate out your heartes, you shall neuer proue by these nor any other examples of the primitiue Church. Phi. Then by your owne confession hee was the chiefest and highest Bishoppe in the worlde.He was cheef among them, not supreme ouer them. Theo. He was before the rest in honour and digni∣tie, but not ouer the rest in power and authoritie. His place was first
when the Patriarkes met, but his voyce not negatiue: he might assemble his pro∣uince and consult with them, but not conclude without them: himselfe was sub∣iect both to the decrees of Councels, and to the lawes of the Christian Empe∣rours euen in causes ecclesiasticall: and was oftentimes not only resisted by fa∣mous men, but ouer-ruled as well by prouinciall as ecumenicall Councels, when he attempted any thing against the Canons. Which differeth much from the supremacie that he now chalengeth and vsurpeth. And therefore you did wel to walke in a mist of ambiguous wordes, to couer the lamenesse of your con∣clusion. Phi. Why did Athanasius flee to the Bishoppe of Rome for helpe, if Iulius had nought to do with his matter? Theo. Athanasius being wrongfully thrust from his Bishopricke, and an other forciblie set in his roome by certaine Arians assembled at Antioche, vpon this pretence, that he was deposed in the Councell of Tirus, before he was banished, and after his returne presumed of his own head without a Councell to reenter and keepe his place: and finding the East Church not able to succour him, for that Constantius the Emperour supported his ene∣mies with a strong hand:Atha. sought to the west Emperour and to al the west Bishops that his cause might be heard in a Councel. fled to the Bishop of the West, where Constans a reli∣gious and curteous Prince, brother to Constantius, raigned, and made his com∣plaint, as reason was he should; first to the Bishop of Rome, the cheefest man a∣mongst them and the ringleader of the rest, with whom he was ioined in consort and communion as the right and true Patriarke of Alexandria, desiring no more but that his case might be heard, and the desperate and furious proceedings of his aduersaries against him examined in a iust and lawfull Councell. Which petition of Athanasius doth not proue the West Bishops to be controllers and ouerseers of such things as were done in the East, much lesse ye Bishop of Rome to be supreme Iudge ouer all: but rather sheweth that the Church of Christ was guided by the common consent and mutuall agreement of both parts, as well East as West, indifferently balanced; and that the West Bishops might call for a reason of the sentence giuen against Athanasius, before they allowed the same, or receiued his successour to the felowship of their communion. Phi. Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 15.The ecclesiasticall historie saith otherwise; that Athanasius opened his cause to Iulius Bishop of Rome, and that hee vpon the prerogatiue of the Romane See wrote threatning letters in his behalfe, and restored him to his place, reprouing them that rashly deposed him. Theo. Socrates as an Hi∣storiographer noteth in fewe wordes the chiefe points, and chiefe persons: but if you will take the paines to reade the particular discourse of these thinges, which Athanasius writeth in defence of himselfe, you shal find that true which I say. Phi. What shall we finde? Theo. That the West Bishops were ioy∣ned with Iulius in all this action, and nothing done without their Sinodal de∣cree. Phi. How proue you that? Theo. Athanasius cause inti∣mated to al the west Bishops.First the letters of credit which Athanasius brought with him to Rome from the Bishops of his communion in Egypt, Thebais, Lybia, Penta∣polis, witnessing the manifold wrongs which he suffered, and earnestly crauing
a dew reformation of the same, were written not to Iulius alone, but Omnibus vbique ecclesiae catholicae Episcopis, to all the Bishops of the Catholique Church wheresoeuer: hauing these words in the cōclusion; For this cause in a publike assemblie by the consent of vs all wrate wee these letters vnto you, praying your wisedomes in Christ to receiue this testimonie touching Athanasius, & to admit him to your fellowship and communion, and to bee moued with a zealous indignation against the Eusebians [his enemies] the authors of these disorders; and that such lewdnes and mischiefe preuaile no longer against the Church, vos certe vindices huius iniustitiae imploramus, we call for your help to be the reuengers of their vnrighteous dealing. Haec quidem Aegyptij ad om∣nes & ad Episcopum Romanum Iulium scripsere: this they of Egypt wrate to all, and to Iulius the Bishop of Rome. So that in sight the complaint was made ge∣nerally to them all. Phi. But Iulius alone cited the contrarie part to appeare before him by a day limited,Iulius had the consent of both parts, that a councel should be called. and that argueth his authoritie ouer them that were not of his Prouince. Theo. Iulius by the consent of both parts, and aduise of all the Bi∣shops of Italie and other places neere him, appointed the matter to be heard in a Councell, and exhorted the aduersaries of Athanasius to bee present at the time and place prefixed. Phi. What a mincing you make of this matter? Iulius ci∣ted, that is Iulius exhorted them to come: Iulius heard the cause, that is Iulius called a Councell to heare it. Theo. What a mountaine you make of a mole hill? I repeate the very wordes of Iulius, and good reason in his owne fact to be∣leeue him best. Phi. If he say so; but I doubt you mistake the words. Theo. Then may you take them righter: but I am perfect, I misse them not. Heare first what Athanasius,Athanas. eadem Apolog. and then after what Iulius writeth. Quin & Eusebiani ad Iulium literas misere, & vt nos terrerent, Synodum conuocari iusserunt, & ipsi Iu∣lio si vellet arbitrium causae detulerunt: The Eusebians also sent letters to Iulius, and the rather to fray vs, willed a Synode to be called, and Iulius himselfe to be Iudge in the cause, if he would. Which Socrates doeth not omit. Eusebius verò cum quod volebat perfecisset,Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. 11. legationem ad Iulium Romanum Episcopum misit, obsecrans vt ipse Iudex esset in causa Athanasij, & ad se litem hanc vocaret. Eusebi∣us when he had done all that he woulde, sent messengers to Iulius Bishop of Rome, praying him to be Iudge in the cause of Athanasius, and to call for the hearing of this contention. Phi. Athanasius aduersaries seeme to consent, that Iulius alone shoulde sit Iudge in this cause. Theo. That Iulius as chiefe, but not that Iulius alone should examine this quarel. For they required to be heard in a common Coun∣cell both of East and West Bishops. Phi. As yet I see no such thing. Theo. Say not so:Episto. Iulij ad eos qui ex An∣tiochia scripse∣runt citatur ab Athanasio Apologia 2. for Athanasius euen now told you, that his enemies, to fray him, in their letter to Iulius, willed a Councell to be held for this matter: and Iulius in his epistle replying to those that were gathered at Antioch the second tyme, writeth thus, What is there done worthie of offence? or what cause haue I giuen you, to whom I wrate, to be angrie? An quia adhortati vos sumus, vt ad
Synodum occurreretis? Is it for that we exhorted you to meet vs at a Synode? The Bishops assēbled in the great Coūcel of Nice not without the wisedom of God, gaue leaue that the acts of one Synode myght be discussed in an o∣ther, to this end,Iulius preten∣deth not Pe∣ters keyes for his authority. that both they which were Iudges, knowing a secōd exami∣nation of the self same matter was to folow, should with al diligence weigh the cause; and those, against whom sentence was giuen, might cleerely con∣fesse themselues to be condemned, not by any faction of the former Iudges, but iustly and worthily. And if this were an auncient custome and the me∣morie therof renewed and put in writing by the great [Nicene] Councell, & you now will not suffer the same to take place with you, trewly you doe an vnseemly thing. For no equitie doth alow, that a few of you shuld abrogate a custome once receaued in the Church, & confirmed by [so great] a Synode, & yet that being granted you, the offence which you take is without al rea∣son, for your Legats Macarius and Hesiochus, no way able to match those that Athanasius sent, but in euery thing conuicted and refuted by them, Concilium indici postularunt, literasque ad Eusebianos & Athanasium, Alexan∣driam, quibus conuocarentur, mitti; vt coram omnibus iusto iudicio de causa cog∣nosci posset; tunc enim se de Athanasio probaturos esse quod iam nequirent: requi∣red a Councell to bee summoned, and letters to be sent to the Eusebians and to Athanasius at Alexandria, to giue them warning to come, that the cause might bee debated before all, in an euen and vpright iudgement: [adding] that they would then conuince Athanasius of those things wherin now they failed. Yea publikely in our presence Martyrius and Hesichius were con∣founded, Athanasius Priestes readily answering them with great boldnes;This spirit differeth much from the late spirit of Rome. & to say the trueth, Martyrius and his side were alwayes put to the worst, Ac proinde Concilium generale postulauit: And for that cause he requested a gene∣rall assemblie of Bishoppes. If therefore Martyrius and Hesichius [your a∣gents] not requiring a Councell, I had exhorted you, that they which wrote to mee on either side might bee called to a Councell, namely in fauour of my brethren, which complayned they were oppressed: that motion of mine had beene honest and iust; for so much as it is acceptable to God & agreeable to the Canons: but now where those very men, whom you counted to be discreete and worthy to be trusted [with your message] were the first inciters of mee to cal you to a Synode, surely you ought not to take that in so ill part. By these words, these two pointes are more than manifest. First that Iulius did not peremptorily commaund them to appeare before him, but exhorted them to meete in a lawfull Councell for the better discussing of matters in que∣stion: Next, that for the warning of a Councel which should examine their acts, hee pretendeth not his supreme power ouer all the Church, nor his Lieutenant∣ship to Christ, but groundeth himselfe on their consents, which were the chiefe authors of this tragedie, and citeth the Nicene Councel agreeing with the aun∣cient vsage of the Church, that Synodes might discusse and redresse the wrongs
done by Bishoppes. Phi. You can not denie but Iulius heard their Legats, before the Bishoppes met. Theo. I graunt, for his better information hee might heare them alone, but not to giue iudgement thereof without others:Idem in Epist. Iudij. so sayth Iulius himselfe. A∣thanasius was neither condemned at Tyrus, nor present at Mareota, where you proceeded in his absence. And you know that the records of those acts bee very suspitious, and of no force, where one part onely was admitted [to proue]. Yet we, though it were so, for the more full discussing of the matter, did neither preiudice you that wrate against him nor those that wrate for him: but exhorted all as many as wrate, to present themselues here in iudgement, that all thinges might exactly bee skanned in a Synode. In the which Synode when the contrary side refused to appeare, Athanasius was hearde at large, and there receiued to the communion of all the West Church as right Bishoppe of Alexandria, notwithstanding his former depositi∣on by the Bishoppes at Antioche, and the violent intrusion of an other in his place. Phi. This you say, but this you proue not. Theo. If Athanasius say the same,Athana. Apo∣logia 2. Athana. heard and restored by a councel. it is proofe sufficient; and that you shall heare him say. Viton the Priest (whom Iulius sent for that purpose) brought with him to the councel moe than fiftie Bishops, where our defence was admitted and wee counted worthie to bee receiued to their communion and brotherly feast, and great indignation kindled against the Eusebians, to whome they willed Iulius to write backe [in his owne name] for that their letters were written to him [not to them.] And so Iulius did,The councel willed Iulius to write in his own name because the Arrians wrate to him and not to them. putting them to wit (which is the thing that you stagger at) that although his name were alone to the letters, yet the common consent, & ap∣probation of the Synode wanted not to the matter. Notwithstanding, saith he, that I alone wrate to you, yet I wrate the iudgement and opinion, not of my selfe onely, but of all the Bishops of Italie, and of all in these quarters. The Bishops met at the time appointed, and were of that mynde which I nowe signifie to you againe: wherfore though I alone write, yet I would haue you knowe that I write the common opinion of them all. And his Epistle ended, This, sayth Athanasius, the Synode at Rome wrate by Iulius the Bi∣shop of Rome.Idem in Epist. Iulij. Iulius clai∣meth an e∣qualitie with the East Bi∣shops, no su∣premacie ouer them. So that all this while Iulius did nothing of himselfe without a Synode; neither did hee or the Synode challenge any superioritie ouer the East Bi∣shops, but rather an equalitie with them; and for that cause might require to see the reason of their doings against Athanasius, before they would reiect him as no Bishop, and communicate with Gregorie that was placed in his seate. And so much the East Bishops should haue doone without asking. For where a prouinciall Synode bindeth no man out of the same Prouince, they were by the discipline and custome of the Church to sende their letters to the Bi∣shops of euery Prouince, & namely to the chiefest; and to expect the general con∣sent of their brethren, before they proceeded to the deposition of a Bishop, and so
great Bishoppe as the Patriarke of Alexandria was, which is the thing that Iulius vrgeth them with.Ibidem in Episto. Iulij Si, vt dicitis, omnino in culpa fuerunt, oportuit secundum Canonem & non isto modo iudicium fieri: oportuit scribere omnibus nobis, vt ita ab om∣nibus quod iustum esset decerneretur. Episcopi enim erant, & non vulgares ecclesiae, qui ista patiebantur. If, as you pretend, they were guiltie in deede, yet iudge∣ment should haue gone forwarde according to the Canon [of the Church,] and not after this [strange] sort:They should haue written to all the west Bishops, & not to the Bishop of Rome alone. you should haue written to vs all, that that which had been iust might haue been determined by all. For they were Bi∣shops, and no meane Churches, that were thus vsed. By this you see that in ayding and helping Athanasius, the Bishop of Rome did neither by worde nor deed take vpon him to be vicar generall to Christ on earth, nor supreme iudge of all men and matters in the Church, as nowe he doeth; but claymeth rather a societie with the East Bishops for himself and the rest of his prouince, as hauing no lesse interest in the Church than they had. Phi. Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 15. Idem lib. 3. Cap. 17.What say you then to the prerogatiue of the Romane See, and to that ecclesiastical Canon, which forbiddeth to meddle in the Church without the consent of the Romane Bishop? Theo. The Bishop of Rome had this prerogatiue, that first he should be written vnto, by reason of his place, which was first;In Epist. Iulij. but not that he alone should be written vnto. So saith Iulius: Cur igitur, & in primis de Alexandria ciuitate, nihil nobis scribere voluistis? an igna∣ri estis hanc esse consuetudinem, vt primùm nobis scribatur, vt hinc quod iustum est definiri posset? Why then would you write nothing to vs, & especially tou∣ching the citie of Alexandria? Are you ignorant of this custome that you shoulde write to vs first,By reason his place was first and after to the rest. that hence, that which is iust, might bee deter∣mined? Phi. No better text: from Rome must bee determined what is right in the regiment of the Church. Theo. A wise catch I promise you. Did you not heare Iulius euen now speake the same wordes of euery Bishoppe; Vt ab omnibus, quod iustum esset, decerneretur; that euery one might determine what was iust? So that Iulius by this had no greater authoritie than the rest: for right was to bee determined by them all. Phi. The Canon of the Church made euery thing voyde that was done without the Bishop of Rome.Sozomen. lib. 3. Cap. 10. Theo. That which you call a Canon, in deed was an order taken by the Bishops among thēselues for the better guiding of ye Church by common consent, when as yet there were no Christian Magistrates; and the same was afterward liked and allowed of Godly Princes,In weightie matters the consent of al the Pa∣triarks was to be requi∣red. as the best way to keepe the Church in peace from quarrels and factions. And this it was. In waightie matters no prouinciall Councell might deale without consulting the rest of the Patriarkes, who straightway conferring with the Bishoppes of their Prouinces, wrate backe the generall opinion of themselues and their bre∣thren. This if any Councell did omit, the Prouinces rounde about were at li∣bertie to reiect their proceedings, if they saw cause. This Canon or kind of re∣giment obserued in the Church, Iulius obiecteth against the councel of Antioch.
Oportuit secundum Canonem iudicium fieri, Iudgement should haue proceeded according to the Canon:In Epistola Iulij. that is, Oportuit omnibus nobis scribere, vt ab omnibus quod esset iustū decerneretur: You should haue written to vs al, that that which was iust might haue beene concluded by all. And as by the Canon they should haue written to al, so first to the Bishop of Rome, by reason that his place was ye first in order among the Patriarkes, which is all the prerogatiue that Iulius in his Epistle claymeth for himselfe and his See.Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 17. & Sozome. lib. 3. Cap. 10. This is that ecclesiasticall Ca∣non and priuilege, which Socrates and Sozomenus doe mention when they say the Councell of Antioch did against the Canons, in that they called not ye Bi∣shop of Rome to their assemblie. Phi. The deposition of a Bishoppe was no matter of such importance that a Prouinciall Synode might not attempt it without the rest.The depositi∣on of Atha∣nasius a mat∣ter of great weight. Theo. Yes, the deposing of a Patriarke was in it selfe a matter of great weight, and required the consent of the rest, as appeareth by that which the Councell of Antioch long before this did against Paulus Samosatenus, where you shall finde the causes of his condemnation layde downe at large in their letters written to all Prouin∣ces, and namely to Dionysius and Maximus Bishops of Rome and Alexandria:Euseb. lib. 7. Cap. 30. but yet the wrong offered Athanasius at this time touched the fayth & Church of Christ nearer than one mans iniurie. Phi. Why? Theo. The Arians by their shifts and practises had almost gotten the most part of the East Churches, and finding the two principall Archbishops of Constantinople and Alexandria greatly to hinder their enterprise, for that their prouinces were very wide, and many that stoutly defended the trueth, were shielded by them, they thought best to inuade them both at one time, thrusting Paulus from his Bishopricke by plaine force, and pretending a Canon of their owne making against Athanasi∣us. Which if the West Bishops had quietly suffered without enterposing them selues and assisting their brethren, two parts of the worlde by their silence had beene drowned in Arianisme, and themselues in great danger not long to re∣maine without the same infection. This respect made them earnest for Atha∣nasius, as Sozomene noteth.Sozome. lib. 3. Cap. 7. The Bishops throughout the East, that fauou∣red the Nicene faith, were deposed; and the cheefest Seates inuaded [by the Arrians] as Alexandria in Egypt,The Arrians sought by de∣posing him to posses the East Church. Antioche in Syria, the Royal Citie [of Constan∣tinople] in Hellespont. This the Bishop of Rome, & the Priests of the west tooke to be their reproch, and [therefore] very friendly entertayned Athanasius at his comming to them, and tooke vpon them the defence of his cause. Phi. This is not all that Iulius did for Athanasius. Theo. What els can you shew that hee did? Phi. Hee called a generall Councell to determine this matter,Iulius when he coulde doe no good in Athanasius cause, be∣sought the west Emperor to put to his helping hand. and made Constantius the Emperour glad to receiue Athanasius to his former seate. Theo. By mine aduise you should haue left out this; it will come very short of your reckoning. Phi. Not a whit. Theo. Be not so per∣emptorie. Phi. What? was not this, that I say, done for Athanasius? Theo. It was. Phi. Who then besides Iulius could bring this to passe? Theo. An o∣ther if you could light on him. Phi. What was he? Theo. Constans the West
Emperour. Phi. Who sayth so besides you? Theo. The three writers of the Church storie, which with one consent agree, that the West Emperour called the Councel, and threatened his brother if Athanasius and Paulus were not suf∣fered to enioy their former places. Iulius when the letters which he sent tou∣ching Paulus and Athanasius,Sozome. lib. 3. Cap. 10. did nothing preuaile with the East Bishoppes, opened their cause to Constans the Emperour. Constans wrote to his brother, that he should send some of the Bishops of the East, to shewe [him] the rea∣son why these men were deposed. Three were chosen, who comming to Italie, went about to perswade the Emperour,Sozome. lib. 3. Cap. 11. that the Synode of the East Bishops had done well; and Constans perceiuing they had done vniustly, sent thē backe whence they came. And because Constans requiring this fauour at his brothers hands, that Athanasius & the rest with him might be restored, could not ob∣taine so much; and those that were with Paulus and Athanasius getting to his presence besought him that a Synode might be called, it pleased the Empe∣rour that the bishops of either side should meet at Sardica by a certaine day prefixed. Phi. Athanasius with teares requesteth a councel of the west Em∣perour. Theodoret. lib. 2. Cap. 4.It might please him they should do so, but how proue you ye thither they came by his authoritie? Theo. Athanasius going to Constans bewayled vnto him the violence that was offered the Apostolicke faith, Putting the Prince in mind of his fathers acts, that the greatest Councel that euer was, was called by him, & the determination of those fathers lawfully confirmed; beseech∣ing the Emperour with teares to imitate his Father. Constans vpon the hea∣ring of these thinges presently writeth to his brother, and warneth him to keepe inuiolably the inheritance of his fathers faith. Constantius moued with thse letters, appointed a Councel to be held at Sardica, and willed the Bi∣shops as wel of the East as the west to be their present.Socra. lib. 2. Cap. 20. The Empe∣rours let∣ters for A∣thanasius restitution. After this Councel had likewise concluded for Paulus and Athanasius against their deposers, Con∣stans wrate to his brother the resolution of the Synode, and exhorted him to restore them to their places; which when Constantius delayed and differred, the West Emperour offereth him this choyse, either to restore them their Churches, or if he woulde not, to looke for hostilitie and warre. Wherupon the [East] Emperour, being driuen to this streit, sent for Athanasius and his fellowes, by three seuerall letters, and not only restored them, but abolished all things that might any way be preiudiciall to them. By this you see Iulius had no power to cal a general Councel, but Athanasi∣us was fayne to begge it of the Prince with teares; and the Bishoppe of Rome was not then taken for the last and supreme Iudge on earth: But the Councel sate in Iudgement after him, where matters were ended by number of voyces. Phi. Yet we saide trueth, that Athanasius called for ayde of Iulius. Theo. I said as truely that you florish with generalities and ambiguities, & conclude nothing. For what haue you gotten nowe more than we graunted at first? or which way doth this example perteyne to that which is in question betwixt vs? Phi. You make too light of our proofes. Theo. Then put you more weight to
them; I take them as I find them, and for ought that I see, you can not mend them. Phi. Well: esteeme them as you lift, they proue that the Bishop of Rome was euer a sure refuge for the Catholiques against heretikes, which he neuer perfourmed more worthily than in our dayes. Theo. I thinke in deede Rome was neuer fuller of deuises and practises than at this present; Antichrist is so carefull for his kingdome, lest it fall, that hee spareth neither men, nor mo∣ney to be reuenged on those that shrinke from him;Ambros. de incarnatio. Domin. sacra∣ment. Cap. 5. Cyprian. sermo. 5. de laps. but when all is done, God will strike the stroke. Phi. No doubt he will, but neuer for you, that bee so shamefully fallen from his Church. Theo. You be more shamefully fallen from his word; & consequently from faith, which is the foundation of the Church: neither can he be ioyned to the Church, which is seuered from the Gospel. But we go from the matter, your examples bee not yet all discussed. Phi. Returne when you will. Theo. Chrysostome and Augustine, you say, asked ayde of Innocentius.What Chry∣sostome re∣quested of Innocentius. Phi. They did so. Theo. Ayde they might aske, and he might yeeld; and yet neither make for your purpose. Phi. That were maruaile. Theo. None at all▪ Chrysostome, whom you first name, sought for helpe as Athanasius did, but the displeasure which Arcadius the East Emperour had conceiued against him was so great, that Innocentius coulde not preuaile. Phi. It serueth our turnes, that Chrysostome did seeke to the Bishop of Rome, notwithstan∣ding Arcadius by force did ouerbeare him. Theo. Chrysostome sought no∣thing, but that his cause might bee heard in a full Synode before indifferent Iudges. Phi. It maketh much for Innocentius supremacie, that Chry∣sostome sought this at his handes. Theo. You must make your foundati∣on surer, before your building will stand. You sawe by the last example of A∣thanasius, that the Bishop of Rome and the west Church might reiect & refuse the sentence of any Prouinciall Synode giuen against the Patriarke, vnlesse their consents were first had; And euen the very same doeth Chrysostome re∣quest of Innocentius, that he would neither admit, nor allowe the proceedings of his aduersaries against him, as good; nor communicate with him, that was chosen by them to succeede in his place. Phi. This still confirmeth that nothing was good,The Bishops of the west Church were to consent before the sentence could be gi∣uen. if the Bishop of Rome did dissent. Theo. And still that inferreth nothing, but y• the Bishop of Rome and his Prouince were a part of the Church, and by reason and equitie were to giue their voyces as wel as others, before the rest might conclude any thing that did concerne, or should bynde the whole Church. And this is strange that where the Bishoppe of Rome for himselfe and his Prouince seeketh en equali∣tie with others, as a part of the Church; you frame him alone a superioritie ouer all others, as the heade of the Church. Your examples shewe this, that others without him could not bind ye whole Church, because ye consēt was not general; & your conclusion must be this, that he without all others, as Christes Uicege∣rēt in earth, might dispose ye whole Church at his pleasure. See you no differēce betwixt these two positions? Phi. I confesse they differ, but can you shew that
others withstoode him, as well as he withstood them? Theo. Yea that I can. Phi. Arians perhaps or Donatists. Theo. Nay, Catholike fathers & Coun∣cels. Phi. Shew that, and you say somewhat to the matter. Theo. That I will shew when your proofes are ended. I thinke not good to mingle yours and ours together. Phi. Ours I graunt, are much after one sort, and therefore I long to heare yours. Theo. No hast but good, anon you shall: you would faine I see ridde your hands. Phi. You shall well know the contrarie. Say what you can. Theo. I say nothing but that you gaine litle by Chrysostoms example. Phi. Doe we not? These be Chrysostomes wordes to Innocentius: Where∣fore least this confusion inuade euery nation vnder Heauen,Chrysost. Episto. 1. ad Innocent. tomo 5. I beseech you write, that these vniust proceedings, both in our absence and when wee refused not iudgement, may be of no force; as in deed of themselues they are not: and let them which haue doone this wrong, feele the censure of the ec∣clesiasticall Lawes, and suffer vs that were neither conuicted, nor charged with any crime, nor so much as conuented, to enioy your letters [of commu∣nion] and charitie, and likewise of all others, whose fellowship wee had be∣fore. Doeth he not in these wordes request Innocentius to pronounce the sen∣tence voyd, that was giuen against him, & to remoue the authors of this disorder from the communion? Theo. To Dissent from it was enough to vndoe it; because neither he nor his prouince were acquainted with it: to excommunicate the doers, was nothing els, but to communicate no longer with them; which e∣uery Bishop and prouince might do, when any wilful breach of the Canons was offered. Phi. This petition was made to Innocentius alone, and not to the re∣sidue of the West Bishops. Theo. If Innocentius alone were spoken to, the matter is not great: Sure it is the Bishop of Rome neither did, nor might deale in these cases without the consent of his brethren; for feare, least when the mat∣ter came to voyces as in the end it must, his owne prouince shoulde take stitch against him. But howe can you proue, that he alone was spoken to? Phi. The words be plaine.Chrysost. vt supra. Obsecro vt scribas: I beseech you to write in ye singular nūber. Theo. What if a man should distrust the print or the Copie, woulde it not tempt your patience? Phi. Haue we not good cause, if you beginne to discredite euery thing that maketh against you? Theo. Whether I suspect the place vppon iust occasion or no, your selfe shall bee Iudge. Chrysostome in this Epistle hauing reported at large the violent and enormous rage of his ene∣mies against him and his adherents, commeth at last to make his petition not to Ionnocentius alone,Eadem episto. ad Innocentium. Chrysost. ma∣keth this pe∣tition to all the west Bishops. as you conceiue; but generally to the West Bi∣shoppes. Igitur Domini maxime venerandi & pij, cum haec ita se habere didi∣ceritis, studium vestrum & magnam diligentiam adhibite, quo retundatur haec, quae in ecclesias irrupit, iniquitas: Therefore most reuerent and religious Lordes, since you see what is done, put to your endeuours and diligence, that this wickednes which is broken into the Church, may be beaten back. Quippe si mos hic inualuerit, scitote quod breui transibunt omnia. Quapropter ne confusio haec omnem, quae sub celo est, natione minuadat, obsecro, [vt scribatis] quod haec
tam iniquè facta robur non habeant: nobis verò literis vestris & charitate vestra frui concedite. For if this grow to a custome, knowe you that al things wil shortly come to nought: & therfore least this confusion attempt euery nation vnder heauen, I beseeche [not one of you, but al] you, to write that these things so vniustly doone, may be taken as voide, and you [all] graunt that we may en∣ioy your letters & your fauours. And so goeth he on to the very end with verbes of the plural number, leauing off with these words: Haec omnia cum ita se habere intellexeritis a dominis meis pientissimis fratribus nostris Episcopis,Ibidem. obsecro vt praeste∣tis, id quod petent officij. Al these things when you shall perceaue to be true by these my Lordes and most godly brethren the Bishops [whom I haue sent] I beseeche you giue them that assistance which they shall aske. The whole petition from the first word to the last is made to them al without exception: the selfe same sentence, where hee prayeth them to write hath these woordes,A verbe of the singular number thrust in a∣mong verbes of the plural, to claw the Bishop of Rome. Theodores. lib. 5. Cap. 34. nobis verò literis vestris frui concedite, you [all] graunt vs your letters. Now whether, obsecro vt scribas, can stand with these wordes literis vestris frui concedite, or ra∣ther obsecro vt scribatis, I referre it to your selfe: this you can not denie but hee requireth ayde of them all, and prayeth their common letters, which is enough to shew that Chrysostome ment Innocentius shoulde take with him the gene∣rall consent of the West Bishops. And so he did. For this wrongful and vnrigh∣teous dealing against Chrysostome, sayth Theodorete, the Bishops of Europe did greatly detest, and therefore seuered themselues from the communion of those that were the doers thereof. Phi. I graunt they did, but Innocentius alone did excommunicate the chiefe doers euen Arcadius the Emperour, Eudoxia the Empresse, Arsacius & Theo∣philus the Patriarkes of Constantinople and Alexandria.A bul absurd∣ly forged to make men beleeue the Pope did ex∣cōmunicate the Emperour for Chrysost. banishment. Nicepho. lib. 13. Cap. 34. Cronologia Canisij. The Bull proued to be forged. Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 18. Theo. Who told you so? Phi. The bull is extant to this day. Theo. A bull of that antiquitie were newes in deede. Phi. You may soone finde him. Theo. Where? Phi. In the 13. booke and 34. Chapter of Nicephorus ecclesiasticall historie. Theo. I was afraide you would haue quoted Socrates or Sozomene. Phi. Nicepho∣rus is as good. Theo. Not by ten parts of twelue. Phi. Why not? Theo. Besides that he loadeth the whole historie of the Church with many fables and visions, he liued thirteene hundred yeres after Christ, as your owne frinds con∣fesse: which in comparison of the rest, is but yesterday. Therefore if Socrates, Theodorete and Sozomene, which wrote at that very time when these thinges were done, report no such matter, I would faine know, which way Nicephorus, that came a thousand yeere after them could light on a true constat of this eccle∣siasticall censure. Phi. Perhaps he found it in some auncient Librarie. Theo. As though the Patriarks and Princes of Greece would suffer such a president against themselues to lie quiet in their Libraries a thousand yeres. Phi. That reason of yours is but coniecturall.The first yere of Chrysost banishment. Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 19. Theo. Then heare that which is effectual; and you shal see the framer of this bull proue himselfe a calfe. The twentieth day of Iune Honorius and Aristinetus being Consuls, Chryso∣stome was caried from his Church into banishment by the Emperours Edict,
as Socrates witnesseth. The thirtieth of September the same yere, a migh∣tie hayle fell in Constantinople, and the suburbes thereabout; and the fourth day after the hayle [Eudoxia] the Empresse died.The same yeare the Empresse died. Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 20. The second yeare of his banishment. Eodem Capite The third yeare. Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 21. The next yere the eleuenth day of Nouember, when Stelichon the second time & Anthemius were Con∣suls, Arsacius died. The next yere after that which was the sixt of Arcadius and the first of Probus, a very religious man named Atticus was chosen [Bi∣shop of Constantinople.] The next yeere, which was the seuenth of Honorius, and the second time of Theodosius Consulship, the fourtenth day of Nouem∣ber Iohn Chrysostome died in banishment. You doubt not of this accompt I trust. Phi. As yet I see no cause to doubt it. Socrates was then aliue, when these things were in action. Theo. The same order of their deaths you shall finde in Sozomene, a writer of that age also when these troubles were hottest. Phi. What then after all this? Theo. Your solemne Bull auoucheth Chrysostome to be dead,The fourth yeare Chryso. himselfe died. Sozome. lib. 8. cap. 27. & 28. The Bull sup∣poseth the Empresse to be liuing after Chrysostoms death. Niceph. lib. 13. Cap. 34. A blind Pro∣phet to threa∣ten that shee should shortly die which was dead foure yeares before. and Eudoxia to be liuing after him, which died three whole yeres before him. Phi. What? It doeth not I hope. Theo. Marke the wordes: Tamet si enim beatus Iohānis vitam reliquit, in eterna tamen secula immor∣talis vitae haereditatem est consecutus, Verùm illa excipiet & presentem hic paenam, & futurum sempiternum supplicium post non multos hosce dies ei adueniens. Itaque ego minimus, & peccator cui thronus magni Apostoli Petri creditus est, segrego & reijcio te & illam a perceptione immaculatorū mysteriorum Christi. For although blessed Iohn [Chrysostomde] parted this life, yet hath he gottē the inheritance of an immortal life for euer: but Eudoxia shall receaue a present punishment in this world, and eternal paines that shall befall her afore many dayes be past. Therfore I, though the least and a sinner, to whom the throne of Peter the great Apostle is committed, do segregate and cut off thee [O Emperour] & her from receauing the vndefiled mysteries of Christ, &c. How think you, was the contriuer of this Bull wel in his wits, to threaten that the Empresse should shortly die, which was dead long before; & to put her from receauing the Communion, after she had beene three yeres buried? Phi. Perhaps Innocentius knew not of her death. Theo. Then suerly was Innocentius all that while a sleepe: for the continuall entercourse betweene the two Cities both for temporall and ecclesiasticall affaires was so great, the per∣son so famous, the time so long, that no meane man in Rome could bee ignorant of her death.Sozome. lib. 8. Cap. 28. Besides that Innocentius Legats were at Constantinople to in∣treate Arcadius for a Councell, a litle before Chrysostome died, and there vn∣lesse they wanted both eyes and eares, they could not choose but learne, that the Empresse was dead. Phi. She was then liuing as Nicephorus saith. Theo. The more he fableth,Niceph. lib. 13. Cap. 33. the lesse credite he deserueth. Eudoxia died before Arsa∣cius, and after his death was Atticus chosen: then how could she bee liuing when Atticus was Bishop, in whose time the Legats of Innocentius came to intreat for Chrysostome? Phi. Let Nicephorus answere for himselfe. I layde before you what I finde in him.
Theo. If this be all you can say for his defence, giue vs leaue to tell you that this Bull bearing Innocentius name is some foolish and late forgerie deuised to perswade men that Popes in those dayes coulde quaile Emperours, which God knoweth is nothing so. Next for Chrysostomes cause,Chrysostom appealed not to the Bishop of Rome, but to a Councel. Socra. lib. 6. Cap. 15. as it helpeth you litle, so doeth it hinder you much. For first Chrysostome when himselfe and his Clergie were called to appeare before the Synode, where Theophilus the Pa∣triarke of Alexandria his mortall enemie was the chiefe man, appealed from them, not to the Bishoppe of Rome, but to a generall Councell. So sayth So∣crates. Iohannes eos, a quibus vocabatur, tanquam inimicos exceptione recusabat, & vniuersalem Synodum appellabat. Chrysostome refused those that called him vp∣pon this exception, that they were his enemies, and appealed to a ge∣nerall Councell. So sayth Chrysostome himselfe:Episto. 1. ad Innocentium. Though wee were absent and appealed to a Synode, and sought for iudgement, and refused not audience but manifest enimitie; yet [Theophilus] receiued accusors a∣gainst mee, excommunicated such as helde with mee, and tooke libels at all their hands which had not yet purged themselues of such crimes, as were layde to their charge; al which things are contrarie to the lawes and Canons. Next when Innocentius saw the matter could not be ended but in a general Councel,Sozome. lib. 8. Cap. 28. Ibidem. The Popes legates sent awaie with reproch. They were punished by the Princes law that did communicate with the Bishop of Rome. Niceph. lib. 13. Cap. 30. Sozome. lib. 8. Cap. 24. by reason ye three Patriarks of Constantinople, Antioche & Alexan∣dria were against him, he sent Legats to Honorius and Arcadius, to beseech them that a Synode might be had, and the time and place appointed. Wher∣in his supplication was so litle regarded, that his Legats were sent away with reproch as disturbers of the west Empire, and Chrysostome caried farther off in banishment than before. Lastly when such as fauoured Chrysostome in the East parts, would not cō∣municate with his enemies, but ioyned themselues in communion with the Bi∣shop of Rome, who likewise seuered himselfe from those that were the begin∣ners of this garboyle; Arcadius made this Law: If any Bishop refuse to com∣municate with Theophilus, Atticus and Porphyrius, hee shall loose both his Church and his goods: If any that beare office, they shall forfeite their dignitie: If any Souldier, hee shall lose his seruice: If any of the common people, let them bee fyned and exiled. Phi. Will you nowe trust Ni∣cephorus? Theo. Sozomene in effect sayth the same. For the communion of Arsacius, Porphyrius, and Theophilus, at the suite of the Nobles, there was a lawe made, that no Christians should meete at prayers out of their Churches, and those that woulde not communicate with these [three Patriarkes] should bee ex∣pelled.Theodoret. lib. 5. Cap. 34. Chrysost. ene∣mies were men of good accompt in the church. So smally was Innocentius communion at that time respected, that the followers of it were sharply punished. Phi. You know what manner of men they were that did it. Theo. Such as you may not easily despise. Entending to write the wrong done to Chrysostome, sayth Theodorete, I am forced to shrinke at the doers
thereof for their other vertues.Socrat. lib. 7. Cap. 2. Theodor. lib. 5. Cap. 35. Atticus, as Socrates confesseth, was a very learned, religious, and wise man. Porphyrius, sayth Theodorete, left many monuments of his benignitie, being a man endewed with excellent wise∣dome. Arcadius, besides that Chrysostome calleth him after his banishment, Christianissimum & pientissimum Regem,Epistola 1. ad Innocentium. Socrat. li. 6. Cap. 23. a most Christian and Godly prince: a litle before his death wan estimation of holynes not without the admiration of a great multitude saued from destruction by his prayers. Theophilus, Epi∣phanius and others that held tooth and nayle against him were no babes in the Church of Christ.eo. Epist. 64. & 69. Cyrillus a famous father was after long time with much a∣doe drawen to yeeld thus much, that Chrysostomes name should be rehearsed in the Catalogue of those that had bene Bishops.Niceph. lib. 14. Cap. 27. Arsacius, if Cyrillus may bee tru∣sted, was a blessed man and most worthie of commendation. Phi. You goe about to deface Chrysostome by commending his enemies. Theo. It is the least part of my thought:Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 21. Chrysost. very passio∣nate. and yet Socrates doth not altogether excuse him, in saying hee was a man Iracundiae magis quàm reuerentiae indulgens, more addicted to serue his passions, than to reuerence any person. And sure∣ly the wordes that he spake of the Empresse in his sermon openly before all the people, Againe Herodias is madde, againe she rageth, againe shee daunceth, againe she wil haue Iohns head in a dish,Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 18. were very bitter; but my meaning is to shewe they were great and good men in the Church, that about Chrysostoms quarrell, were it right, were it wrong, neglected the communion of the Bishop of Rome. Phi. Though they made light of it in this tumult and faction, yet Augustine, Hierom, and others did highly esteeme it. Theo. The communion and felow∣ship of Christian loue and peace may not rashly be broken with any Church, es∣pecially not with the chiefe and principall Churches, vnlesse the cause be weigh∣tie and vrgent; but looke whē the Bishop of Rome attempted any thing against the faith or ye Canons, & tel me then what accompt they made of him. Phi. That you must looke out, I know no such thing. Theo. So will I, when my course commeth, but yours as yet is not ended. Phi. Myne shall not bee long. Theo. As short as you will. I thinke the best be spent. Phi. Augustine and the fathers assembled in the Mileuitan Councell aske helpe of Innocentius for the condemnation of Pelagius and his heresie. Theo. The Bishops of Africa themselues in this and an other Councell helde at Car∣thage condemned the error of Pelagius,What help Saint Austen and others sought of Innocentius. as repugnant to the Scriptures, and iniurious to the grace of God. And because it was a matter of faith that indiffe∣rently concerned all, they thought it necessarie to aduertise the Bishop of Rome what they had done, and to pray him also to condemne the same: that as the in∣fection was farre spred and found many defenders; so the condemnation thereof might be generall, and ratified by the publique liking of the Bishops in euery prouince. What can you gather by this, but that it was then the manner of the Church, as in trueth it was, by their letters sent too and fro, both to aske and to giue their mutuall consents, for the suppressing of errors, that dayly
sprang, when generall Councels coulde not bee called? In which case the Bishop of Rome both in respect of his Citie, that was Imperiall; and his See, that was Apostolicall, vsed to receiue the first letters. Phi. The Councell of Carthage writeth thus to Innocentius:Inter August. Epist. 90. They reque∣sted Innocen∣tius to concur with them in the condem∣nation of Pe∣lagianisme. Hoc itaque gestum charitati tuae intimandum duximus, vt statutis nostrae mediocritatis etiam Apostolicae sedis adhibeatur auctoritas pro tuenda salute multorum: That which was done, we thought good to intimate to your charitie, that to the decrees of our meannesse, the authoritie of your Apostolike See might be added, for the sauing of many from infection. Theo. First they for their partes decreed against Pelagius without the Bishop of Rome; next they seeke the consent of the Bishop of Rome, not to make that good which they had done, but to preuaile the rather with many that were out of their Prouince.Idem Epist. 90. Error ipse & impietas quae tam multos assertores habet per diuersa dispersos, etiam auctoritate Aposto∣licae sedis anathematizanda est: This error and impietie which hath so many fauorers dispersed in so many places, had neede be condemned by the cre∣dit and authoritie of your Apostolike See. Phi. Innocentius saith they did but their dueties. Theo. A man might soone intreate Innocentius to take enough vpon him, and yet the worst he saith is this:Inter August. Epist. 93. The Bishops of Rome will quickly take enough vpon them. What is ment by referring matters to Peter. Arbitror omnes fratres & Episcopos nostros, quoties fidei ratio ventilatur, non nisi ad Petrum, id est sui nominis & honoris authorem referre debere, velut nunc retulit vestra dilectio: I thinke that all our brethren and fellow Bishops when any matter of faith is in question, ought to referre the same to none but to Peter the author of their office and honor, as now your kindnesse hath done. Where by referring to Peter he did not meane as you do, that all faith and Re∣ligion should depende on the Popes sleeue; but that when they had concluded as they saw cause, they should giue him intelligence to this ende, that he might cō∣cur with them for the better repressing of heresie with full consent. Now that which Innocentius made but a thought of, you since that time proclaime for a Gospell. Phi. Innocentius would not thinke so without some ground. Theo. Thoughts are weake proofes, when the case is our owne. And Innocentius Epistles in answere of these two Councels,Censura in E∣pist. 90. & 93. Erasmus noteth for want of words, wit and learning, requisit for so great a Prelate. Phi. Erasmus is very bolde with the Fathers. Theo. Your decretall Epistles be euen such for the most part, mary that is not to this purpose. Basill is the next man in your beadrole, who called, as you say, for helpe of Liberius, Felix and other Bishops of Italie;Basill wrote to the West Bishops in ge∣nerall, but ne∣uer to the Bi∣shop of Rome but can you tell vs where we shall finde all these thinges that you affirme? Phi. In his Epistles. Theo. There be foure or fiue Epistles of his written to the West Bishops in general, and to the Bishops of Italie and Fraunce, for succor and helpe; where the Bishop of Rome perhaps is included as one amongst the rest, but neuer intreated, nor so much as named, asunder from the rest. And here may you learne of Basill, the cause why good men being oppressed in the East Church by the craft and power of heretikes or enimies, sought to the West for ayde and assistance. Not
that they tooke the Bishop of Rome for supreme Iudge of all doubts and doc∣trines,The end why the East Bi∣shops sought to the West. as left in Christs steede; but that the number & concorde of the West Bishops might temper and hinder the malice of their aduersaries, and bring their quarels to be decided in an open and euen Councell. Basilij epistola 48. ad Athan.So Basill aduiseth Athanasius to do. For the experience that I haue had in things, I know this to be the only way to get help, that our Churches are linked with the West Bishops. For if they will readily shew the same zeal for our Coūtries, which they did against one or two, that were diffamed in the West, perhaps somwhat wil be done that shall generally profit all; whereby those that are in authority may be moued to reuerence their number, & the people euery where wil follow thē without contradiction. And Basil himself writing to thē:Basilij Epist. 61. occidentalibus frasribus. As much cōfort & helpe as you can, saith he, delay not to yeeld to the distressed and afflicted Churches. As we thinke the concord & vnitie, which you enioy there among your selues, to be our own happines; so ought you to labor with vs in these dissentions which assault vs. If then there be any comfort of loue, if any communion of the spirit, if any bowels of pitie, be mo∣ued to helpe vs: take ye the zeale of godlines, & deliuer vs from this tempest. And describing at large the miserable state of the Churches thereabout The principles of godlines, saith he, be ouerthrowen, the rites of religion peruerted,Basilij Epist. 69 Italicis ac Galli. faith it selfe in daunger, godlie preachers put to silence, euery blasphemous mouth is open; holy thinges are prophaned, and those that are sound amōg the people flee the house of prayers as in the which impietie is published. Therefore while yet some stand, before a perfect and full ship∣wrack oppresse the Church, hastē vnto vs, hasten at the lēgth yet. What you shall do to help vs we neede not tell you, but onely this, that you must make speed, & the presence of many brethren will be requisite for this matter, to this end that they which come may make a full and iust Synode.Basilij epist. 70. Galliae & Ita∣liae episc. This is the chiefest thing that we require, that by your meanes the troubles of our coū∣tries may be knowen to the Emperours own person, or if that be hard, that some of you come to see & comfort the afflicted. The thinges that we spake, many suspect,Marke what thinges Basill requested of the West Bi∣shops. Basilij epist. 74. occidentali∣bus episc. The greater number, and the further off, the lesse suspected of the people. Ibidem. as proceeding of priuate contention; you the farther you dwel off, the more credit you haue with the people. If therfore many of you with one consent shal decree the same, it is euident that the verie number of you concurring in one minde with vs, shall cause all men to receiue this doctrine without any doubting. You see what helpe Basill asked of the West Bishops, making no mention of the Bishop of Rome, but praying them all to ioyne togither, and to shewe their zeales for the truth either by meeting in a ful Synod for the condēnation of such errors, as were newly risen in the church; or by writing their letters to the East Bishops, that the teachers & embracers of those impieties should be seuered frō the communion of the faithfull vntill their amendment. The redresse of these things we seeke for at your hands, the which you shall performe, if it please you to write to all the East Churches, that those which in this sort haue cor∣rupted
the doctrine of truth be then admitted to the communiō, when they correct their errors; & if they will not be brought from this innouation, but frowardly continue the same, then the rest to depart from them. We know it behoued vs to be with you, as assessors to your wisedoms, and in common to consider how these things should be handled: but these times do not per∣mit that, and the differing of it would be daungerous, for that their poison taketh hold apace. Phi. But Basill conferring with Athanasius howe to helpe the Church, saith;Basilij epist. 52. ad Athanasiū. I haue thought it meete, that the Bishop of Rome be written vnto, to consider of our state, and to giue vs his counsel; and because it is a matter of more difficultie to sende some thence by the common decree of a Synode,The Bishop of Rome might counsell but not cōmaund. he himselfe vsing his owne authoritie in this matter may chose men both a∣ble to indure the iourney, & fit for the mildnesse & easinesse of their dis∣positions, to correct those that here with vs are wrested awry, or started a∣side. This proueth that the Bishop of Rome had authoritie sufficient of him∣selfe without a Synode to send Legattes to reforme things amisse in the East Churches, which is cleane against your assertion. Theo. You mistake the matter for lacke of due marking the circumstances. When these troubles were first beginning,Why Basill required mes∣sengers from the West pa∣triarke. before they came to that extremi∣tie, which after fell out, Basill knowing that the credit and opinion of the West Church might stay many from falling, and reduce others that were not too far gone, because it would be long to tarie the assembling of a Synode, and the eni∣mie perceiuing their intent would hinder the fruit of their labours: wisheth that the Bishop of Rome woulde vse his discretion in chosing some that were fit for this purpose, and sende them very closely to see what good might be done by gentle and faire perswasions. Phi. You qualifie the text with your owne additions. Theo. You shall find them expressed in Basils owne wordes if you weigh them well. First he woulde haue the Bishop of Rome written vnto, to consider their state, & to giue thē counsell, what to do.Basil epist. 52. Next, because it is hard to haue some sent by the com∣mon decree of a Synode, he vsing his owne authoritie in this [so small] a matter, may choose men fit, &c. And that no man knowing of it, without any stir, let them come secretly by Sea to those that are here, least the ene∣mies of peace discrie their comming. Lastly they fitting and applying their speach to content euery man, with mildnesse and gentlenes may re∣ctifie such of our side as tread awry. So that these messengers should bee but mediators and procurers of peace betweene those that were of the same reli∣gion & ioyned in communiō with the West Churches. Whē they come which by Gods grace shalbe sent,Ibidem. let them not occasion any schismes in the chur∣ches, but rather by all meanes draw those that be of one religion to vnity. Care must be had, that all things be borne with, to win peace; & that the Church of Antioch in any case be prouided for; least that which is yet syn∣cere in her, bee weakened & rent in peeces through respect of persons.
meaning the schisme at Antioch where the Catholikes had diuided themselues and their Churches, some cleauing to Miletius, and some to Paulinus. Phi. You could neuer speake it in a better time. Upon this and other such occasions I remember S. Hierom consulteth Damasus the Bishop of Rome, both what to beleeue, and with whom to communicate. Theo. Indeede S. Hieroms name is next,S. Hierom cō∣sulting Da∣masus. and if he serue your turnes he doth more for you than al the rest of the Fathers besides: but was Hierom in his old-age to seeke what to beleeue? Phi. I say not so; but that touching the faith and communion of the Church he submitted himselfe to the Bishoppe of Rome. His wordes are worth the noting.Hiero. Damas. Episto. tom. 2. Because the East parts are togither by the eares by an in∣ueterate madnesse of the people, and Foxes there do roote vp the Vineyard of Christ, therefore thought I best to consult Peters chaire, and the faith which was praysed by the Apostles mouth, thence desiring foode for my soule, whence long ago I receiued the garments of Christ. I know not Vi∣talis, I refuse Miletius, I care not for Paulinus; hee that gathereth not with you, skattereth; that is, he that is not Christes, is Antichristes. And hauing opened his griefe, and shewed what was demaunded at his handes by the East Bishops in the matter of the Trinitie, he concludeth:Ibidem. I beseech your blessed∣nesse by him that was crucified, euen the Sauiour of the world, and by the Trinitie, three persons of one and the same substance, that by your letters you will appoint me whether I shall confesse [there bee three Hypostases in one diuine nature] or denie the same; and also that you will signifie with which of those [three] at Antioch I ought to communicate. And vrging the same matter the second time.Epist. sequent. ad Damasum. Miletius, Vitalis, and Paulinus say they be ioi∣ned in communion with you. I could beleeue them if one [and no mo] said it; but now either two, or all three lie. Therefore I beseech your blessed∣nesse by the Crosse of the Lord, by the necessarie ornament of our faith, by the passion of Christ, that by your letters you will signifie with whom I should communicate in Syria. Despise not the soule, for which Christ died. Giue me leaue to be as long in repeating the wordes of S. Hierom, as you were euen now in alleadging S. Basill. Theo. With a good will, you spend but a little the more time, and we shall haue day enough. Mary now you haue saide all, marke first; that most of these praises be not seuerall to the Citie of Rome, but generall to the West Church. The vnthriftie children [of the East] haue wasted,Epist. ad Da∣masum prior. S. Hierom pre¦ferreth the West Church before the East as more syncere in faith; and not Rome before all the world. saith he, their patrimonie: onely with you [in the West] is the inheritance of your Fathers kept vndi∣minished. There the good ground yeeldeth an hundred fold increase, that still resembleth the purenesse of the Lordes seede: here the corne that was cast into the furrowes doth degenerate into tares and oates. Nowe in the West the Sonne of righteousnesse shineth, in the East, Lucifer that fell, hath set his throne aboue the starres. You are the light of the world, the salt of the earth, the vessels of siluer and gold: here are the wodden and earthen pots that staie for the yron rod and vnquenchable fire. This comparison
he maketh, as you see, not betweene all other places and Rome, but between the East and West Churches; preferring the one many degrees before the other. Secondly the reason why Hierom himselfe depended so much on the Church of Rome, was, as he saith, for that hee was baptized in the Citie of Rome; and therefore as one of that Citie still desireth thence to bee fed in Christ, where he was first cloathed with Christ. Thirdlie the pointes that hee doubted of, and sought to be directed in, were no matters of doctrine nor Principles of faith, but a question of wordes, and a dissention about the Bishopricke of Antioch: for the which trifles, who can blame Hierom if he were loth to lose the commu∣nion of that Citie, where hee was Christened? And as Hierom here honoreth the Church of Rome for keeping her faith, so elsewere he taketh vp roundly both the Citie and Clergie of Rome when occasion was offered. And in this verie place by your leaue he protesteth that he followeth no man as chiefe,Ibidem. much lesse as head of the Church, but onely Christ. Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, beatitudini tuae, id est cathedrae Petri communione consocior: I following none chiefe, but Christ; hold the fellowship of communion with your blessednesse, that is with Peters chaire.S. Hierom sought no re∣solution in faith at Da∣masus mouth, but letters to keepe him frō trouble in a strange place. Ibidem. Neither doth hee pray the Bi∣shop of Rome to appoint him what he shall beleeue touching the Trinitie, as if Damasus word were the rule of his faith; but where he confessed in the Trini∣tie three persons subsisting of one and the same substance, with the Councell of Nice, and the whole West Church: and certaine Bishops of the East not ther∣with content vrged him precisely to graunt the worde tres hypostases; and for sticking at it, traduced him as an heretike, his request to the Bishop of Rome is, vt siue dicendarum, siue tacendarum hypostaseon detar autoritas; that he might be licenced to vse, or refuse that word, without being molested at their hands any farther. When we aske them, saith Hierom, what they meane by tres hypostases, they say, three persons subsisting: we aunswere that wee beleeue the same.Ibidem. Non sufficit sensus, ipsum nomen efflagitant; & quia vocabula non e∣discimus, haeretici iudicamur. It is not enough to beleeue so, they vrge the very word it selfe; and because we can not frame our selues to [these new] wordes, wee bee charged with heresie. So that Hierom craued Damasus letters and authoritie for his quietnesse, least hee should bee troubled in Syria where he lay among strangers, for a word that he suspected to be skant sounde. The other petition that he maketh is but to know, which of those three at An∣tioch were ioyned in communion with the Church of Rome, and the West Bi∣shops; that he might safely communicate with that side. Graunt these two ca∣ses wherein Hierom prayeth helpe of Damasus, and what are you the neerer? Phi. Nay, graunt the wordes that Hierom speaketh in his Epistle, and see what then will follow.Ibidem. Theo. What wordes? Phi. Cathedrae Petri commu∣nione consocior; super illam Petram edificatam Ecclesiam scio. Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit, prophanus est. Si quis in Arca Noe non fuerit, peri∣bit regnante diluuio: I hold the communion of Peters chaire [that is of the Church of Rome] vpon that rocke I know the Church to be built. Whoso∣euer
shall eat the [Paschall] lambe out of that house, is a prophane per∣son. If any man be not in Noahs Arke when the flood riseth, he shalbe drow∣ned. This is as much as we do affirme, or could desire for the Church of Rome: graunt this, and the quarrell betwixt vs shall soone cease. Theo. You be so hastie when you heare of Peters chayre, that you neuer looke at Christ himselfe, though hee stande in your way. For Hierom in the same sen∣tence protesteth, that although he keepe the fellowship of communion with Pe∣ters chaire,Epist. ad Da∣masum. yet he followeth none chiefe but Christ. Vpon that rocke I am sure, saith he, the Church is built. Why may not these words now be referred as well to Christ, as to Peter? Phi. For shame, what an euasion this is? Theo. Nay shame to your selues that are so wedded to your own conceits. The words are more likely to belong to Christ than to Peter,Super illam Pe¦tram in Hierō stand fitter to be referred to Christ than to Peter. if you soberly view them. Christs name going first, and Peters second in the sentence, by the very rules of Grammer, super illam Petram, vpon that rocke, serueth more aptly for Christ, than for Peter. Againe, the vehemencie of the verbe scio, I am right sure, doth argue the wordes to be more fitly referred to Christ than to Peter. For that the Church is built on Christ, no Christian euer doubted: but that Peter is the Rocke on which the Church is built, S. Austen and others do plainly denie. Phi. But S. Hierom in the third Epistle before this, saith expresly, Petrus super quem Dominus fundauit Ecclesiam: Peter on whome our Lorde built his Church.Hieron. ad Marcellum ad∣uersus Monta∣num: tomo epi. 2. Vpon this rocke: diuers∣ly expounded of the fathers Aug. de verbis Domini secun∣dum Mat. serm. 13. The Church built on none but on Christ. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 2. Ibidem lib. 6. Theo. The wordes of our Sauiour in the Gospell, Vpon this rocke will I build my Church, diuerse men haue diuersly taken. S. Austen ex∣poundeth them thus: Tu es ergo, inquit, Petrus; & super hanc Petram quam con∣fessus es, super hanc Petram quam cognouisti, dicens, tu es filius Dei viui, edificabo Ec∣clesiam meam; id est super meipsum filium Dei vini edificabo Ecclesiam meam. Super me edificabo te, non me super te: Thou art Peter, saith Christ, and vppon this rocke, which thou hast confessed, vppon this rocke which thou hast acknowledged by saying; Thou art Christ the Sonne of the liuing God, will I build my Church; that is vpon my selfe the Sonne of the liuing God will I build my Church. I will builde thee vpon mee, not my selfe on thee. Hilarie likewise, Vnum est immobile fundamentum, vna haec est faelix fidei Pe∣tra Petriore confessa, tu es filius Dei viui: super hanc igitur confessionis Petram Ecclesiae edificatio est. Haec fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est: This only is the immoueable foundation, this onely is the happie rocke of faith, which was confessed by Peters mouth; thou art the Sonne of the liuing God. Then vpon this rocke of confession standeth the building of the Church. This faith is the foundation of the Church. So doth Ambrose:Ambros. in 2. cap. Epist. ad Ephesio. Idem de in∣carnat. Domi∣nici sacrament. cap. 5. Dominus dicit ad Petrum, super istam Petram edificabo Ecclesiam meam; hoc est, in hac Ca∣tholicae fidei confessione. Eides ergo est Ecclesiae fundamentum. Non enim de car∣ne Petri, sed de fide dictum est, qùia portae mortis ei nòn praeualebunt. Sed confessio vicit infernum: The Lord saith to Peter, vpon this rocke will I builde my Church, that is, in this confession of the Catholike Faith. Faith there∣fore is the foundation of the church. For it was not spoken of Peters flesh,
but of faith, that hell gates should not preuaile against it. But that confes∣sion conquered hell.Chrysost. homil. 55. in Matth. Bede in cap. 21. Iohannis. Vpon this rocke will I builde my Church, that is, saith Chrysostom, vppon this faith and confession. Bede; Vppon this rocke, saith Christ, which thou hast confessed will I build my church. That rocke was Christ, vpon the which foundation euen Peter him selfe was to be builded. These meane as S. Paul doth, that the right and true foundatiō of the Church is Christ, and none else.1. Cor. 3. An other foundation can no man lay, than that which is already laid, which is Iesus Christ. Others I knowe applie these wordes vppon this rocke will I builde my Church,Peter laide in the founda∣tion of the Church as a principal mē∣ber thereof. Origen. in 16. Mat. tract. 1. to Peter; mary not as if hee alone were laide in the foundation of the Church, and the rest of the Apostles excluded; but that which is here spoken to him, they make common to all, or as much elsewhere to be giuen to all. Ori∣gen, If onely vpon Peter thou thinkest the whole Church to be built, what wilt thou say to Iohn and euery of the Apostles? shall we dare say, that a∣gainst Peter onely, the gates of hell shall not preuaile, and against the rest of the Apostles they shall? and not rather in them all and euerie one of them, that to be true, which is saide, the gates of hell shall not preuaile? and that also vpon this rocke will I build my Church? For if this speech, to thee will I giue the keyes of the kingdom of heauen, be common to all, why then should not all that which goeth before and followeth after, as spoken to Peter, be common to them all? Hierom himselfe, whose authoritie you pretend,Hieron. lib. 1. aduersus Iui∣niaman. as he placeth Peter in the foundation of the Church, so doth he the rest of the Apostles likewise. Thou wilt say, the Church is built on Peter: notwith∣standing the selfe same in another place is done vpon all the Apostles, and they all receiue the keyes of the kingdom of heauen, and the stedfastnesse of the Church is equally setled vpon them. This sense doth somewhat agree with that place of S. Paul,Ephes. 2. were he saith: Ye bee built vpon the foundation (not of Peter alone) but of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ being the head corner stone. And in that respect Paul saith of Iames, Peter & Iohn ioint∣ly, they that seemed to be the pillours,Galat. 2. gaue me their right handes of fel∣lowship. Both these constructions we can admit,Neither of these constru∣ctions make for the church of Rome. Tertul. de prae∣scription. Cyprian. lib. 1. Epi. 3. though we prefer the first, as most re∣ligious & cunning, nearest the true meaning of our Sauiour; but you wrest the wordes of S. Hierom quite against him selfe & all the rest of the learned & Ca∣tholike fathers. It is one thing to say the church is built on Peter which Origē, Hierom & others affirme in the sense that I told you before: & an other thing to say the Church is built on Peters chaire at Rome, which no Father euer said or thought. And therefore if we shoulde graunt that S. Hierom in these wordes spake of Peter, what are you the better? This is no proofe that Rome is the Rocke, on which the Church is built; but onely that Peter is a Rocke laide in the foundation of the Church, where also the rest of the Prophetes and Apo∣stles are. Phi. The place doth mention the chaire of Peter, which is Rome. Theo. The wordes stande so, that they may respect either Peter himselfe
or his chayre: but the likenesse of the names Petrus and Petra both for sound & for sense, the alluding to that, which Christ spake to Peter in the Gospell, long before hee knewe Rome; the generall consent of the Fathers expounding the Rocke to be taken either for Christ or for Peter, and neuer for Rome, import that these words in S. Hierom, haue their relation to Peters person, and not to his chaire. This exposition the place which you brought confirmeth. Petrus, super quem Dominus fundanit Ecclesiam:Ad Marcellum tomo epistolarū 2. Testimonia. Peter, on whom, (that is on whose person, not on whose successors at Rome) the Lord built his Church. Phi. The rest of S. Hieroms wordes can not be referred to Peters person; as namely these, that next insue: Without this house whosoeuer shall eate the [Paschall] Lambe,Hieron. Damas. quoniā vetusto. tomo 2. is prophane. And why shoulde the former more than these? Theo. Peruse the words as they lie, and you shall finde your owne er∣ror. Vpon that rocke I know the Church is built. The Church not of Rome only, but of Christ generally. Then followeth, extra hanc domùm, without this house. What house; but the church, which he said before was built on the rock? And out of this house (meaning thereby not the particular Church of Rome,The house of God, is the Church of God, and not the Church of Rome. What S. Au∣gustine mea∣neth by Pe∣ters seat. but the Catholike church of Christ) whosoeuer eateth the Passouer, is indeed, as Hierom saith, aprophane person. This is farre wide from the mark which you shoote at. Phi. S. Augustine I trust shooteth streight, when he applieth the wordes of Christ in the 16. of Matthew, to the chaire of Peter. Theo. That were mar∣uaile, if he which by no meanes would allow Peter him selfe to be the founda∣tion of the Church, be now content to yeelde that honor to the Bishop of Rome. Phi. He doth so. These be his wordes: Numerate sacerdotes vel ab ipsa Petri sede,Aug. in Psalm. contra partem Donati. From, not in Peters seat. & in ordine illo Patrum, quis cui successit, videte. Ipsa est Petra quam non vincant superbae inferorum portae: Number the Priestes euen from Peters seate, and see who succeded one an other in that rew of Fathers: that is the Rocke which the proude gates of hell do not conquere. Theo. This place proueth nothing, vnlesse you bee suffered to referre the words, Ipsa est Petra, (that is the rocke,) whither you list. You can not re∣fer them, but either to the succession of Priests from Peter, or else to Peters seate, which is all one with Peters chaire. Theo. Why not to Peter himself? Phi. That were farre fet. Theo. The wordes stand indifferent for both, as S. Hieroms did; and not onely the same reasons I made there, serue here, but also the proposition hath a manifest reference to Peters person. He saith not number the Priests in Peters seat,Why may not ipsa est Petra be referred to Peters person as well as su∣per hanc Pe∣tram in the Gospel, as the Iesuits would haue it? but number them vel ab ipsa Petri sede, euen from the very seat of Peter, that is from the time yt Peter sate: He is the Rock, against which the proud gates of hell do not preuaile. Phi. You seeme to reade, Ipse est Petra, He is the Rocke; but the wordes are, Ipsa est Petra, that is the Rocke. Theo. There are greater corruptions crept into S. Austens works, by the negligence of Scribes than of a for e: Neither did I translate the words, but giue you the right meaning of them; and yet, ipsa est Petra, in S. Austen may be referred to Peter him selfe, as wel, as super hanc Petram, in the Gospell
expounded for Peter, which you all vphold. But graunt, which is more than euer you shall iustly conuince, that Peters chaire is thereby ment: Saint Au∣sten doth not say that is the rocke on which the Church is built: but that is the Rocke which the gates of hell do not conquere: not promising that Rome still should, but witnessing that Rome then did withstand the gates of hell, by kee∣ping the faith vndefiled, which Peter deliuered. Phi. What S. Austen lacketh S. Cyprian supplyeth.Cyprian. de v∣nitate Reclesiae Catholicae. Qui Cathedram Petri super quam edificata est Ecclesia, deserit; in Ecclesia se esse confidit? He that forsaketh the chayre of Peter, on which the Church is built, doth he hope himselfe to be in the Church? I trust these wordes be plaine enough. Theo. The wordes as you set them bee plaine enough: but where saith Cyprian so? Phi. In his booke De vnitate Ecclesiae Catholicae, you call it corruptly De sim∣plicitate Praelatorum. Theo. Call the booke howe you will, so the wordes bee there. Phi. There shall you finde them. Theo. There we finde them not. Phi. What Prints haue you?S. Cyprian lately falsified by the papists. Theo. Prints enow. Alopecius at Cullen, Herua∣gius at Basill, Langelier at Paris, Crinitus at Antuerp, Gryphius at Lions, Manutius at Rome. In all these and diuerse others we finde no such wordis. Phi. In deede I confesse the wordes were wanting, till Pamelius a Canon of Bruges found them in an old written copie lying in the Abbay of Cambron. In his edition printed at Antuerp by Stelsius you shall finde them. Theo. And thinke you Philander, that all other copies both printed & written lacking those words,A Canon of Bruges with his blind Cā∣bron copie, hath inlarged Cypriās text against all the copies of chri¦stendom. Pamelius did wel to put them to Cyprians text? Phi. He laid them down as he found them written in the copie, which is kept at Cambron. Theo. As though the blinde Abbay of Cambron were of greater credit & authoritie than all the Churches and Libraries of Christendom. Phi. I say not so. Theo. What else do you say, when you cite these words for Cyprians, which no copie printed, nor written hath besides that of Cambron? There haue trauelled in the correcting & setting forth of Cyprian at sundry times, men of your owne religion, not a few; namely Remboltus, Canchius, Costerius, Erasmus, Grauius, Manutius, Morelius; euerie one of these for their seuerall editions searching farre and neere, and vsing the best written copies that coulde be gotten or heard of, and they all agree that no such wordes are founde in their copies: yea Pamelius himselfe hauing as hee confesseth the sight and helpe of eight other written copies from diuerse places, founde these wordes in none but in Cambron copie.Either the Cambron copie, or all the written copies in the world must be corrupted; & which of these twaine thinke you, do the Iesuits chose? Since then either Cambron copie must be corrupt, or an infinite number of other written copies, that haue beene viewed by these learned men of your owne side, and are yet extant in diuerse Ab∣bayes and Churches obedient to the See of Rome at this houre; say your selfe in reason, whether we ought to beleeue your Cambron copie before all the co∣pies that haue beene perused, and are yet remaining in Europe. Phi. That were much, but how could this copie be corrupted? Theo. What a question that is? How could whole books be thrust into the workes of Cyprian, Ambrose, Hie∣rom, Austen & others, & ly forged vnder their names not in one, or two, but in
the most part of the Abbayes and auncient libraries of the West Church? Your Monkes and Friers that were so skilfull in committing these manifold forge∣ries were not to seeke how to corrupt your Cambron copie. Phi. It helpeth Pamelius very much, that Gratian 400. yeares agoe cited the very same words as out of Cyprian.Distinct. 39. qui cathedram. Theo. Gratian might be deceiued by the same or some other false copie, as wel as Pamelius: & of al men Gratian him selfe is most corrupt in alleadging the Fathers; but what if Gratian be forged as wel as Cyprian?Gratian late∣ly augmented as well as Cy∣prian. Phi. Nay then al shalbe forged, that liketh not you. Theo. They that ventered on Cyprian & others, would neuer sticke to frame Gratian to their purpose. Phi. This is but your suspicion. Theo. Yes I haue some reason to chalenge this in your Canon law for a corruption. The very same place of Cyprian is elsewhere alleaged at large by Gratian in his decrees,Caus. 24 quaest. 1. loquitur Do∣minus ad Pe∣trium. This place was not in the auncient de∣crees. where we find no such words: and therefore this or that must needes be forged. Againe ohannes Seneca, who liued seuen skore yeares after Gratian ouer-skipph this place without any glosse, as not finding it in the decrees extant in his time. Phi. You be deceaued: there is a glosse vppon this place. Theo. I am not deceaued, there is none. Looke to the lesser volume of your decrees printed by Iohn Petit, and Thielman Keruer, and you shall see there is none. And he that in the bigger volume of your decrees, thinking to preuent this ob∣iection, set a certaine glosse to the chapter, Qui Cathedram, shewed himselfe not to be his crafts maister;Glos▪ ibidem qui Cathedrā. The glosse lately forged as wel as Gra∣tians text. for he grossely mistaking the wordes that follow, (Epis∣copi verò, which are Gratians) & thinking them to be Cyprians, put the summe of Gratians words, as a glosse to Cyprians text, which is nothing neare: and so betrayeth him a willing, but no skilful forgerer. Last of all the relatiue, that you most esteeme, and I most withstand, super quam, on which [chayre] the Church is built,And al this to make Cypriā speake cleane contrarie to himself with∣in the com∣passe of eight lines. Cyprian de v∣mitate Eccle∣siae. Peter the first stone that Christ laid in the foundatiō of his church. Cyprian de v∣mitate Ecclesiae. is contrarie to the plaine wordes of Cyprian not many lines before cited by Gratian, and confessed by Pamelius to be foūd in his Cambron copie, super vnum illum edificat Ecclesiam, vppon him alone (meaning Peter) Christ buildeth his Church. So that either you must mend your booke, and reade super quē; on whom the Church is built, or els make Cyprian so forget∣ful that wt in eight lines he contradicteth himselfe & refuteth his former saying. Phi. May not the Church bee built on him and his successours? Theo. If Peter alone were chosen by Christ to be the foundatiō, that is the first stone that should be layed in the building of his Church; how can that possibly bee exten∣ded to his successors? Can you remoue Peter frō the foundation where Christ laied him, & not do him wrong? Or can you change the foundation, and not shake the building of the Church? Phi. You tooke ye foundation I perceaue for the first beginning. Theo. And what call you that which is first layed in the buylding of an house, but the foundation? Phi. Did Cyprian meane so? Theo. Cyprian expresseth his meanyng in this sort: Though Christ after his resurrection gaue all his Apostles equall power, yet for the declaratiō of vnitie, with his owne [voyce and] autoritie did he dispose the originall of that vnitie to beginne in one [which was Peter]. The rest of the Apostles were the selfesame that
Peter was, endewed with like fellowship of honor and power, but the first beginning came from oe,Exordium and fundamentum all one. that is, Christ chose Peter alone to be the original or first beginning of his Church. Now this is proper to Peters person to be the first Stone that was laied in he foundation of the Church, and can not be deri∣ued from him to his successour. Phi. That priuilege died with Peter, vnlesse it remayne in some successour. Theo. Not so, Peter as well after death as during life, keepeth the same place which Christ gaue him in the building of his Church,Peter at this day lieth in the founda∣tion of the church where Christ placed him. Galat. 4. Ephes. 2. Heb. 12. vnlesse you meane to ex∣clude the Saincts cleane frō the Church of Christ. Phi. They be of the Church triumphant, not militant. Theo. And those be not two, but one Church. Ieru∣salem which is aboue is the mother of vs all. Ye be now, sayth Paul, no more strangers and forreners, but Citizens with the Saincts and of the howshold of God. For you be come to the Citie of the Liuing God, the heauenly Ie∣rusalem, and to the Church of the first borne written in heauen, and to the spirits of iust men (now) made perfect. Where you see the Saincts in heauē be not remoued from the Church of God, but we receaued to their fellowship, they keeping still that honor and excellencie which they had in Christ before our comming. Abraham is to this day the father of the faythful; the Patriarkes & Prophets are not depriued of their dignitie; Peter no doubt as he was, so he is the first Stone that Christ layed in the foundation of his Church, which dignity you can not take from him after his death. Phi. What then shall his successour haue? Theo. The charge that he had to feede, & the same keyes that were giuen him and the rest, to binde & lose: Which office if the Bishop of Rome will execute, he may haue. Phi. A fayre promotiō: You meane he shalbe a Bishop, as others are. Theo. God graunt he be so much. More if he will haue by warrant from Peter, you must proue it better than by such forged autorities & manned exāples as here you bring. Those that are past, your self see, were to litle purpose; Theodoretes example which is yet behind, is like the rest. Phi. He submitted him self to Leo the great, & was by him restored to his Bi∣shoprike,Chalcedonens. concilij actio. 1. Leo tooke Theodoretes part against Dioscorus. Euagrius lib. 1. cap. 10. Leo Epist. 61. ad Theodoretū. though he were not of his Prouince. Theo. Leo toke his part against Dioscorus the Patriarke of Alexandria, yt like a tyrant in the second Councell of Ephesus not only was the death of Flauianus by spurning & tredding on him, but also cōfirmed the wicked opinion of Eutiches, & deposed Theodorete with∣out any iust cause: whō the Bishop of Rome receaued to the cōmunion & acce∣pted for a lawfull and Catholike Bishop, not regarding the sentence pronoun∣ced against him by Dioscorus. Phi. Then Leo reuersed the lewd acts of Diosco∣rus in that Ephesine Councell. Theo. Leo withstood thē, as all other good men did throughout the world, but the iudgement was reuersed by the great Coūcel of Chalcedon,Chalcedonens. Concilij actio. 8. & not by the Bishop of Rome: where Theodorete was forced with his own mouth in their presence to cleare him selfe from all suspition, not∣withstanding his restitution by Leo, before he could be admitted to make his complaynt against Dioscorus.
Phi. Still you see the Bishop of Rome resisted other, & by dissenting from them ouerthrew their interprises.Their exam∣ples proue the Bishop of Rome had no such power as he now clai∣meth. Theo. And still you see the Bishop of Rome neuer ended these matters at home in his owne Csistorie as supreme Iudge of the whole earth, but euer made suite to Christin Princes, that these thinges might be determined in full assemblies of Bisops by the iudgement & opinion of the most part, which is cleane contrarie t that absolute power, he now clay∣meth, as Uicar generall to Christ, & the only Ruler of his vniuersall Church. And therefore these examples which you haue brought, & many like which you might bring, proue no that power, which you defend at this day, to belong to the Bishop of Rome, but rather euert the same. For what needed his prede∣cessors with all ouetie become suppliants to Catholike Emperours for the ga∣thering of Bishops out of all quarters to decide matters in doubt, and that sute often refused, as when Innocentius messengers came backe from Arcadius wt a shamefull repulse, and Leo the great, whom you last spake of, besought The∣odosius the yonger with sighes & teares to graunt a Councell for the repealing of Dioscorus actes,The Pope be∣sought the Emperour with sighes & teares for a Councel, and could not pre∣uaile. & could not obtaine it: what needed, I say, such earnest and humble request to those that neglected their prayers, if Christ had appointed them as Peters successors, and his deputies without depending on Princes pleasures, or other mens voices to say but the word, which should stand good in his Church, against all persons, in all causes both of doctrine & discipline? And what better conuiction of your falshood can there be, than that in all these trou∣bles & tempests of the Church, which you haue chosen out of many for your best aduantage,In all these examples the Bishop of Rome neuer so much as al∣leadged or mentioned his vniuersall power, which your Iesuites defend. the Bishop of Rome neuer so much as pretended or mentioned his Lieutenantship to Christ, which you now defend, but euer keeping his place, which by reason of his Citie was the first among the Patriarkes, & ioyning him selfe to the West Bishops which were then a good part of Christendom, by their helpe and the fauour of religious Princes gate those thinges, that oppressed the Church and impugned the faith, to be debated and determined by common cō∣sent, in generall and lawfull Councels, without any reseruation or motion of his absolute power, or negatiue voice? Phi. Our examples, you grant, proue this, that he resisted others: now shewe you that others ouerruled him. Theo. If I could not, the matter were not great, cōsidering your examples conclude nothing against vs:As the Bishop of Rome resi∣sted others, so others resi∣sted him. but least you should flat∣ter your selues too much in your follies, you shal see that others withstood him, as well as he withstood others. Phi. Were they Catholiks? Theo. I trust you dare not account them heretikes. Peter, as you say, the first Bishop of Rome, was resisted by Paul the teacher of the Gentiles;Who they were that re∣sisted the Bi∣shop of Rome Anicetus by Policarpus Saint Iohns owne scholer; Victor by Polycrates, Ireneus, and al the bre∣thren of Asia; Stephanus by Cyprian; Damasus, Syricius and Anasta∣sius by Flauianus and all the Churches of the East, of Asia, Pontus, Thra∣cia, and Illyricum; Innocentius by Cyrill; Sozimus and Bonifacius by Au∣gustine and two hundred and sixteene Bishoppes of Africa; Caelestinus by Theodorete; Leo by the great Councell of Chalcedon; Gregorie by the
Britanes; and many other Bishops of Rome by diuerse godly Princes, Pre∣lates, Countries, and Councels. Phi. I like not these generall florishes which serue onely to obscure the truth, and beguile the simple. Theo. Howe then can you like your Apologie which consisteth of nothing else? And what a slender kinde of proofe, was that idle rehearsall of names, which you made euen now for your running to Rome? But our particulars I am well con∣tent you shall skan. The first, Paul himselfe affirmeth.Galat. 2. Ibidem. Paul resisting Peter, & that after his in∣stallation at Rome if the Romish ac∣count be true, which most men doubt. When Peter came to Antioch, I with∣stood him to his face, for hee was to be blamed. Phi. The quarell be∣twixt them was not great. Theo. Not walking the right way to the truth of the Gospell, and compelling the Gentiles to liue, like the Iewes, was no such petite fault as you make it; but graunt it were. The smaller the fault, the stronger our instance. If Paul for a light matter resisted Peter to his face, what woulde hee haue done in a cause of more weight? Phi. Was Peter then Bishop of Rome when Paul reproued him? Theo. It forceth not whether hee were or no. Peter as you pretende had his prerogatiue not from Rome, but from Christ, long before hee sawe Rome; and therefore was in as full authoritie when Paul resisted him, as when Nero martyred him: and yet if their account bee true, that were the first authours of his pre∣ferment to Rome, hee was rebuked at Paules handes euen when hee was Bishoppe of Rome.Euseb. Chronic. in anno 44. For, Peter (as Eusebius or some other in his name recordeth) went to Rome, and was Bishoppe there in the 44. yeare of Christ, that is, eleuen yeares after his passion, Christ being put to death in the 33. yeare of his age: and Paul in the fifteenth yeare of his conuersion, or as him∣selfe speaketh,Galat. 2. The Papistes make Peter a Nonresident. After fourteene yeares, came not to Rome, but to Ierusa∣lem to conferre with Peter; which at least must be the 48. yeare of Christ and foure yeares after Peters installation at Rome. And after that when Peter came to Antioch, and began to dissemble for feare of the Iewes which were sent from Iames, Paul resisted him to his face, and sharpely rebuked him, not respecting that hee was then in his pontificalibus and newly made Bishop of Rome, as you your selues beleeue. Now choose whether you will disclaime Peter for no Bishop of Rome, and so loose your succession from him, or graunt that the Bishop of Rome may be lawfully resisted as Peter was, which is the very thing you required vs to proue. One of these twaine you shall neuer a∣uoide; do what you can. Phi. I may not deny that Paul did it, the Scripture is plaine, I resisted him to his face; but whether he did no more than he might, or how to his face, is a Schole-point and a pretie question.Rhemish annor. in Epi. ad Gal. cap. 2. vers. 11. Whether Paul might resist Peter, is an vngodly doubt. Theo. No question at all, vnlesse you will charge Paul with rashnesse in doing it, vnshamefastnesse in writing it, and wilfulnesse in directlie defending it. For by this dissention doth he proue the oundnesse of his doctrine; and by Peters yeelding hee confirmeth the Gala∣thians that were wauering. And therefore you must either allowe this re∣sistaunce for good and lawfull, or else conclude this Epistle to bee no Scrip∣ture,
and Paul to be voide of the holy Ghost, in proposing an vnhonest and vngod∣ly fact of his owne for a president, which to say, were no small blasphemie. Phi. I did not auouch it, but only moue the question. Theo. You must moue no such questions, if you be a Christian: they be reprochfull to the spirit of God, and iniurious to his word. You were driuen to a narrow straite, when you came to this shift. You be loth I see, to confesse either; but there is no remedy Philander, you must yeelde vs one of these, whether you will or no. Phi. Let me heare the rest, and then you shall know my minde. Theo. Resist not truth, to maintaine your credit; God will surely reuenge it. This example is ineuita∣ble, studie till your braines ake for an answere. But the rest you shall heare. Polycarpus withstood A∣nicetus for the obserua∣tion of Easter.Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 26.Polycarpus being at Rome when Anicetus was Bishop there, they dissen∣ting in some other small matters were by and by reconciled; but touching the obseruation of Easter-day, which in diuerse places was diuersely kept, A∣nicetus could not perswade Polycarpus to leaue those thinges, which he had alwayes obserued with Iohn the Disciple of our Lord, and the rest of the A∣postles, with whom he had beene conuersant. Phi. The contention was but in words betweene them. Theo. Yes they differed in deedes, and Polycar∣pus could not be induced by any wordes to follow that manner of celebrating Easter-day, which Anicetus receiued from those Apostles, that founded the Romane Church. This cōtrouersie waxed hoatter in Victors time, who for the very same cause went about to cut off al the Churches of Asia from the vnitie of commu∣nion,Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 25. Polycrates withstood Vi∣ctor for the same cause. Ibidem. as intangled with some strange opinion; and by letters inueighed a∣gainst them and vtterly denounced al the brethren there excommunicated, but for all his hast he was quickly staied. Phi. By whom? Theo. Polycrates in the behalfe of the Churches of Asia, amongest other thinges replyeth thus to Victor: I that haue seene threescore & fiue yeares in the Lord, and haue cō∣ferred with the brethren throughout the world, and haue turned and sear∣ched the holy Scripture, will neuer be afraid of those thinges that are done to terrifie me.A great mul∣titude of Bi∣shops with Polycrates a∣gainst Victor. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 26. Victor repro∣ued by his owne side for offering to excommuni∣cate the chur∣ches of Asia, that stood a∣gainst him. I could make mention of the Bishops that are with me, whō you required me to send for, and so I did, whose names if I would recken they would make a great multitude, which taking the paines to visit me, a man of small account, consent to this Epistle. Victors deede did not please all the Bishops that otherwise were of his side: Yea many of their letters, saith Eusebius, are extant that did sharply reproue Victor. Amongest whom Ire∣neus was one that wrote in the name of his brethren of Fraunce where he was chiefe, and allowed [Victors opinion] that the mysterie of the Lordes resurrection should bee kept onely vpon Sundaie. But yet he wisely and largelie warneth Victor, that he should not excommunicate all the chur∣ches of God obseruing their auncient tradition. Phi. They withstood him in a small and trifling cause. Theo. You take holde of that which doth hurt you. To resist whom they should not, in a matter that they neede not, is
a double offence; and then shoulde Ireneus and others haue rather reproued Polycrates and his adherentes for neglecting their dueties, than the Bishop of Rome for passing his boundes; but in that hee was stoutly resisted by the one, and sharpelie reproued by the other, it is euident that neither of them tooke him for his sole and supreme directer of Christes Church on earth. Of Cyprian,Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 4. I said before, that he counselled the Church of Spain to reiect Basilides, notwithstanding his restitution by Stephanus Bishop of Rome: and howe vehemently the saide Stephanus was resisted by Cyprian for the rebaptizing of such as forsooke their heresies, his Epistle to Pompeius doth aboundantlie witnesse.Cyprian. Epist. ad Pompeium contra Epist. Stephan. Cypriās stout¦nesse against Stephanus Bishop of Rome. Because you desired to knowe what aunswere our brother Stephanus [Bishoppe of Rome] returned to our letters, I haue sent you a copie of that he wrote. By the reading whereof you shall more and more perceiue his error, that hee laboureth to maintaine the cause of heretickes against the Church of God. For amongest other thinges ei∣ther superfluous, or impertinent, or contrarie to themselues, which he wri∣teth vnskilfully and vnwisely, hee added this, &c. And hauing repeated and refuted the wordes of Stephanus, What blindnesse of heart, saith Cyprian, is this and what peruersenesse,Ibidem. that hee will not acknowledge the vnitie of faith comming from God the Father by the deliuery of our Lorde Iesus Christ? And where no heresie no nor schisme, can haue the sanctification of healthfull baptisme out of the Church, why doth the inflexible obstina∣cie of our brother Stephanus breake out so farre, that of Martions baptisme, and such like blasphemers against God the Father, he auoucheth children may be borne [vnto God]? It commeth of too much presumption and fro∣wardnes, that a man had rather defende his owne, though it bee false and naught, than yeelde to an others deedes and words. How like you this resi∣sistance? doth it go to the quicke or no? Phi. This was an error in Cyprian,Cyprian in an ill cause resi∣sting the Bi∣shop of Rome did and doth go for a Mar∣tyr and father of the church. for Stephanus held the truth. Theo. The question is not whether Cypryan were deceiued, but whether Stephanus were resisted. I grant in this case Stephanus had the better part, but yet Cyprian & the Bishops of Africa thought thēselues to be right: & vpon that opinion of truth how far they resisted the Bishop of Rome, their acts & Epistles declare. Phi. Their matter, I tel you, was naught. Theo. That doth rather fasten than shake my conclusiō. For if Cyprian & the Bishops of Africa, when their cause was not good resisting ye Bishops of Rome both in words & deeds, were taken & accoun∣ted in the Church of God for Christian & Catholike Bishops, yea Cyprian the chiefe leader of them, and most earnest against him, for a worthie Father & glo∣rious Martyr; how much more then in a right and iust cause might the Bishops of Rome be lawfully resisted in those dayes?Flauianus withstood 4. Bishops of Rome though their cause were not much amisse. The which I may likewise conclude by the next example, where the Bi∣shops of Rome were not onely resisted, but at length forced to yeelde to Flauia∣nus, although their strife with him at the first seemed to carry some reason. Phi. Did they not wel to reiect him, yt was made Bishop against his oth? Flauianus
was one of those that were sworne neither to seeke, nor to accept the Bi∣shopricke of Antioch,Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 3. if they were chosen, till Miletius & Paulinus were both dead; that thereby the Church of Antioch, which before was diuided in two partes vnder two Bishops, might be ioyned togither and vnited in one: and hee vpon the death of Miletius, whiles Paulinus yet liued, not respecting his oth, was content to take the place. Theo. I sayde there was some cause for the Bishoppes of Rome to refuse him, and yet notwithstanding the goodnesse of their quarrell,Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 23. Who tooke part with Fla∣uianus against the Bishops of Rome. The Prince willeth Flaui∣anus to keepe his Church, though foure Popes for 17. yeares togither im∣pugned him. Ibidem. and sharpenesse of contention, which Dama∣sus, Syriius, Athanasius and Innocentius maintayned against him, all the Churches of the East, of Asia, Pontus, Thracia, and Illyricum tooke part with Flauianus, defended his election and receiued his communion, though the Bishops of Rome would do neither. And Theodosius the elder a very religious Emperour, hauing the courage and wisedom of Flauianus in admiration, and seeing the number of Churches that did communicate with him, willed him to returne, & feede the Church [or flock] committed to his charge. Against whom when the Bishoppe of Rome made a long accusation, the godly Prince vndertooke his defence, pleaded his cause, and exhorted them to knit their Churches togither, and to leaue striuing and extinguish those foolish brables. And so was the Bishop of Rome glad to giue ouer the quarell, which hee and three of his predecessors had for the space of seuenteene yeares egerly followed against Flauianus. Ibidem.How little Cyrillus esteemed the communion of the Bishop of Rome doeth well appeare by his answere to Atticus,Nice. lib. 14. cap. 27. Cyrill estee∣med not the communion of the Bishop of Rome. Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 34. where hee vehemently diswadeth that Chrysostoms name after his death should be put in the Catalogue of Bishops, notwithstanding Innocentius and the West Bishops, would not communicate with Egypt or the East partes till that were obtayned. Phi. It was a fault in Cyrill to be so vehement against Chrysostom in fauor of his vnkle Theophi∣lus the chiefe doer of all this, and that ouersight he after corrected, by yeelding to that which before he rufused. Theo. What moued Cyrill at the first to with∣stand, and after to yeeld, I neede not care, you may not iudge; were the cause good or bad, to my purpose all is one; this is it that I vrge, neither Cyrill nor Atticus, nor the Churches with them were reputed schismaticall for lacking or neglecting so long time the communiō of the Bishop of Rome, though the mat∣ter they stood on, were skant sound. Phi. You should bring vs an example where the Bishop of Rome was with∣stood by a Councell: the factes of priuate men carie not so great credit, as when they bee done in a publike Synode. Theo. The men, that I haue named vnto you,Those resi∣stances were offered not by priuate per∣sons but by Councels and Countries. were no such obscure persons, that you neede doubt of theyr credit. They were for their calling and function, Bishops and Patriarkes: for their learning and holinesse, lightes in the Church of Christ, and are so taken to this daie. Neither, as you suppose, were they alone in these ac∣tions, but had the Bishoppes and Churches adioyning to take their partes, and did these thinges, which I spake of, in open Councell. Polycrates
had with him a Councell in Asia, when he resisted Victor,Euseb. lib. 5. Cap. 24. &. 25. Ibidem. Cap. 26. and Ireneus had like∣wise an other in Fraunce, when he reproued him. Cyprian and 84. Africane Bi∣shops ioyned together in ye Coūcel of Carthage, against Stephanus. With Fla∣uianus,Concil. Cartha. de haeret. bap∣tisandis inter opera Cypriani. as Sozomene writeth, were the Bishops of Syria, Phenica, Armenia, Cappadocia, Galatia: as Theodorete sayth, all the Churches of Asia, Pontus, Thracia, Illyricum, besides all the East Churches. That which Cyrill defen∣ded was done by two Councels & allowed by the three Patriarkes of Alexan∣dria,Sozome. lib. 7. Cap. 11. Constantinople, Antioche and their Prouinces. And therefore these are no priuate men nor matters,Theodoret. li. 5. Cap. 23. as you pretend, but thinges done in open Synodes by no meane Bishoppes. And yet to content your mind, you shall see where the Bishop of Rome clayming farre lesse authoritie than hee doeth at this day,Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 18. was openly resisted in a Councell of 217. Bishops to his immortall shame, and your vtter ouerthrow in this cause.The sixt coū∣cel of Car∣thage stoutly resisted the Bishop of Rome, and conuin∣ced him of forgery. Sozimus Bishop of Rome, sending his Legats Faustinus, Philippus, and Asellus to the sixt Councell of Carthage, in fauour of Apiarius a Priest, that fled to Rome for ayde against Vrbanus his Dioecesane, which had taken both his function, & the communion from him for his lewdnes; amongst other things gaue them in charge, to clayme this prerogatiue for him and his See, that if a∣ny Bishoppes were accused or deposed, and appealed to Rome, the Byshoppe of Rome might either write to the next Prouince to determine the matter, or send some from his side to represent his person, and to sit in iudgement with the Bi∣shoppes.Vide Concilium Carthaginense sextum, Cap. 3. And to proue this lawfull, he cited in writing vnder his hande a Canon of the Councell of Nice tending to that effect. The Godly fathers assembling themselues out of all Africa, to the number of 217. and finding no such Canon in their bookes either Greeke or Latine, wrate to the Patriarkes of Alexandria, Constantinople, and Antioche for true and authentike copies of the Nicene Councell: and seeing their owne copies agree worde for worde with those that were brought, and no such thing to bee found in any Canon there, first by their decree cut off appeales to Rome, and secondly by their letters traduced the Bi∣shop of Rome, as well for his ambition, as forgerie. Phi. An old broken matter,Bonifacius saith the di∣uelled Saint Augustine & the rest to be sawcie with the Bishop of Rome. often alleaged, and offen answered. Theo. You could doe litle if you could not crake, but that will not serue your turnes: you must spare vs a better answere. In deede Bonifacius the second doeth an∣swere ye matter in this sort: Aurelius praefatae Carthagiensis ecclesiae olim Episcopus cum collegis suis instigante Diabolo superbire temporibus praedecessorum nostrorum Bonifacij & Caelestini contra Romanam ecclesiam cepit: Aurelius once Bishoppe of Carthage with his collegues (amongst whom was S. Austen with many other learned and Godly fathers) in the time of Bonifacius and Caelestinus our predecessours,Bonifacius se∣cundus ad Eu∣lalium de re∣concilia. Cartha∣ginens. Eccl. Concilio: tomo 1. began through the instigation of the Deuill to be malepart with the church of Rome. If you take this for an answere, so is it: other I know none, that your friends haue made. Phi. The Bishops of Africa, you know were deceiued in the number of the Nicene Canons. Theo. I know they were not; but graunt they were, this suffi∣ceth
me that they resisted three Bishoppes of Rome, Sozimus, Bonifacius and Coelestinus one after an other, both by their decrees and their letters. For vpon occasion of Apiarius flight to Rome, they decreed that Priests, Deacons, and other inferiour clerks, if they complayned of the iudgements of their Dioe∣cesanes,Aphric. con∣cilij, Cap. 92. Appeales to Rome con∣demned by Saint August. and his Col∣legues. should be heard by the Bishoppes adioyning. Quod si & ab eis prouo∣candum putauerint, non prouocent nisi ad Africana Concilia, vel ad primates Prouin∣ciarum suarum. Ad transimarina autem qui putauerit appellandum, a nullo intra Africam ad communionem suscipiatur: And if they think good to appeale from them also, let them not appeale but to the Coūcels of Africa, or the primates of their owne Prouince. And hee that ventereth to appeale ouer the Seas [to Rome] let him be receiued of no man within Africa vnto the cōmunion. Phi. This decree barreth Priests & inferiour Clerks from appealing to Rome, but not Bishops. Theo. The Canon was fitted to the matter in question. Ap∣piarius that ranne to Rome, was a Priest and no Bishop: and yet touching ap∣peales of Bishops to Rome, what answere they made, followeth in their letters first to Bonifacius, before they sent for authentike copies to the chiefe places of Christendom:Aphric. con∣cil. Cap. 101. to whom they signifie, that cōcerning appeales of Bishops to the Priests of Rome, they would suffer that to be kept for a while, till they could get the Canons of the Nicene Councell; & after they had receiued ye same from Cyrillus and Atticus, they framed their answere to Coelestinus on this wise. Our dewe salutations remembred and done: we entreat & earnestly pray you that hereafter you will not lightly giue audience to those,Aphric. con∣cil. Cap. 105. that come from hence to you, neither any more receiue such to the communion as we excommunicate; because your reuerence shall easily perceiue that order ta∣ken by the Nicene councel.The fathers neuer heard of Christs vi∣car general. For if there appeare a prouiso for inferior clerks, and lay men, how much more would the Synode haue the same obserued in Bishops; that being excōmunicated in their own Prouince, they should not be suddēly, hastily, or vnduly restored to the cōmuniō by your holines? And likewise your holines must repel these wicked refuges of pristes & other cler∣gie men [to Rome] as becōmeth you: for that by no determination of the fa∣thers this is derogated frō the church of Africa: & the Nicene Canons do most euidently cōmit both inferiour Clergie men,Where then are appeales to Rome? & the Bishops thēselues to their owne Metropolitanes. No doubt they most wisely and rightly prouided, that al matters should be ended in the places where they first arose; neither shall the grace of the holy Ghost be wanting to any Prouince, by the which equitie may be grauely weighed, and stoutly followed by the Priestes of Christ; especially, where as euery man hath liberty, if he mislike the iudge∣ment of those that heare his cause,The holy Ghost as wel  one pro∣ace as in . to appeale to the Councels of his own Prouince, or to a general Councel. Or how shall the iudgement ouer the Seas [at Rome] be good, whereto the necessarie persons of the witnesses ei∣ther for sex or for age, or sundrie other impedimēts, can not be brought? For that any shuld be sent [as Legats] from your holines side, we find decreed by no Synod of the fathers. That which you sent vs hither by Faustinus, as a part
of the Nicene Coūcel in the truer copies, which we haue receiued from holy Cyril Bishop of Alexandria,The Councel of Nice cor∣rupted by the Bishop of Rome. & reuerent Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, takē out of the originals thēselues, (which also we sent to Bonifacius your prede∣cessor) In them, we say, we could find no such thing. And as for your agents or messengers, send thē not, grant thē not at euery mās request, lest we seem to bring the smoky pride of the world into the Church of Christ,The Popes claime called the smokie pride of the world. which pro∣poseth the light of simplicitie & humilitie to those that desire to see God &c. Doth your eye sight serue you Philander to marke in this olde broken mat∣ter, as you call it, howe many wayes the Bishoppes of Africa withstood the Bi∣shop of Rome?What the Councel of Africa denied to the Bishop of Rome. Appeales to Rome, which Sozimus claymed by the Councell of Nice, they confute by the same Councell, and impugne with other graue & pi∣thie reasons: Legates a latere, which he chalenged, they reiect as neuer spoken of in any Councell: Running to Rome, which you make lawfull, they call a wic∣ked refuge; and sending of messengers from Rome, a smokie pride of the worlde. The corrupting the Nicene canons by Sozimus, they disproue by co∣pies that were true and authentike; and Apiarius whome the Bishoppe of Rome harboured and restored the second time to the communion, they vtterly banished from the Church of Christ; and not therwith content, they set downe a rule that if any Priest afterwarde did appeale to Rome, no man in Aphrica should receiue him to the communion.Was this re∣sisted or no? What thinke you, woulde these men haue done, if Sozimus had claimed to be head of the vniuersall Church, Uicar generall to Christ, supreme and infallible Iudge of all men and matters eccle∣siastical, and that not by consent of Synodes, but by graunt from Christ? What could they haue sayde to your vntydie vanities, that the Popes [seate is the na∣tiue home of all true beleeuers,] himselfe [the rocke of refuge in doubtfull dayes and doctrines,] and the whole worlde [his fold and familie?] You must frame vs some better answere to this geare than Bonifacius your holy father did. I trust in these dayes you dare not say, the diuel led S. Augu∣stine & al the Bishops of Aphrica, to be pragent & saucie with Coelestinus, as he sayd. For if the diuell led them that in defence of themselues & their right sear∣ched and auouched the true Canons of the Nicene Councell, what spirite led Sozimus, that began a strange and new clayme; and to bolster vp his pride, wil∣fully corrupted the Councell of Nice? Phi. He did not corrupt the Councell of Nice,Epist. Aegiptio∣rum ad Marcū pro exempla. Niceni Concilij tomo Conci∣liorum 1. The Papists to saue the Popes credit haue cōmit∣ted shameful forgeries. but rather their Bishoppes of Aphrica that withstoode him were beguiled in the number of the Nicene Ca∣nons. Theo. He did corrupt the Councell of Nice, and the Bishops that de∣tected his falshood were not beguiled. Phi. They had but twentie Canons, where the Councell of Nice made threescore and ten, as we find in an Epistle written by those of Egypt to Marcus Bishop of Rome, for a true extract of se∣uentie Canons after the Arians had burnt the Authentike copie which Atha∣nasius brought from Nice. Theo. You rescue one forgerie with an o∣ther. When your adherents saw that Sozimus was taken tardie with belying the Nicene Councell, to saue his credite they deuised that the councell of Nice
should make seuentie Canons, though there were neuer seene but twentie. And to giue this tale some life they coyned a letter in the name of Athanasius and o∣thers to Marcus Bishop of Rome, complayning what the Arians had done at Alexandria, & requesting at his hands the true copie of those seuentie Canons: neuer remembring howe fond and foolish a fable this would be, when it shoulde come to skanning: and howe substantially the Bishoppes of Aphrica went to worke, when this title was first pretended. Phi. Rescriptum Iulij contra ori∣entales pro Athanasio. And he a wise man to chose the worst.Doth not Iulius in his Epistle to the East Bishops repeate 27. Canons of ye Nicene Councell more than our copies haue; & sixe of them clearer for the Popes authoritie, than that which Sozimus alleadged? Theo. You come in with your decretals, as if they were some worthie monuments. But Sirs, the more you forge, the lesse you gaine. All the decretals you haue will not counter∣uaile the reason which S. Austen and the rest make to Bonifacius.Episto. Africani conci. ad Bonif. Cap. 101. No decretals can discredit. the diligence of the African Bishops. Concilium Carthaginense sextum Cap. 9. Quis dubi∣tet exemplaria esse verissima Nicenae Synodi, quae de tam diuersis locis & de nobili∣bus Graecis ecclesijs adlata & comparata concordat? Who can doubt those copies of the Nicene Councell to be most true, which being brought from so many places, & from the noble Churches of Greece, agree when they bee compa∣red? The letters of Marcus and Iulius framed in corners, and founde at Rome, light of credite, and full of lies; are not able to frustrate the great paynes and good meanes which the Bishops of Africa bestowed and vsed in searching the trueth. Concilij. Afric. Cap. 102. & 103.They had their owne bookes which were many both in Greeke and Latine: they had the very copie, which Coecilianus Bishoppe of Carthage, that was present and subscribed in the Councell of Nice, brought with him from thence:Their Decre∣tales are too yong to out∣face the au∣thenticke copies. they had a faithful transcript from the Churches of Alexandria and Constan∣tinople out of their originall recordes. These three copies so many thousande miles asunder, and euery one of them Authentike, when they were brought to∣gether and compared, did word for worde agree with themselues, and with the bookes that were in euery mans priuate keeping. If that be not enough,Ruffin. lib. 1. Cap. 6. The Popes silence then, conuinceth this forgerie since. Marke the likelihoode of this fable, and see the shame∣fastnes of Pa∣pists that mocke the worlde with them. Ruffi∣nus that liued in Italie and wrate in the dayes of Theodosius the elder before this matter came in question, published in his Latine historie to the eyes of all men the very same number and order of the Nicene Canons, which the Coun∣cell of Africa followed: Yea the Bishops of Rome themselues, Bonifacius and Coelestinus, to whom this answere was made, neuer replied, neuer vrged, nor offered any mo Canons than these twentie, which were sent from other places, though the cause required, and the time serued to bring forth their seuentie Ca∣nons, as well for Sozimus discharge, as their owne interest & authoritie which was then not only doubted, but also resisted. Besides, this your assertion of seuentie Canons, what a peeuish and senselesse fable it is? Howe coulde all the true copies of the Nicene Councell throughout the worlde bee consumed and destroyed within three score yeeres, and no man mislike it, no man perceiue it, no man report it? Or howe coulde fiftie Ca∣nons bee suddenly lost, and euery where twentie left in faire and Authentike
writings? Why would the Arians, (for they must bee the doers of it,) wreake their malice on those Canons that did not touch them;Extat Socratis lib. 1. Cap. 9. and spare the Nicene creede & Epistle written to ye Church of Alexandria, which directly condem∣ned their impietie? Nay why did the church of Rome suffer those 50. Canons to perish, that made most for her prerogatiue, and kept these twentie safe, which rather restraine than enlarge her authoritie? Phi. Trust you not Athanasius, that was present when the Canons were made?The Canons burnt before they were made. Theo. I trust him well, but I trust not your shuffeling in what you list vnder his name. Your forged Athanasius is soone disproued. For if Iulius were Bishop of Rome when the Councell of Nice was called, as Sozomene & Bede doe witnes;Sozome. lib. 1. Cap. 17. & Beda distinc. 16. sexta. how could Athanasius write to Marcus next before Iulius, that the Canons of the Councell of Nice were burnt? Were the Canons burnt, trow you, before they were made? Againe, though al men did not allow the decrees of the Nicene Councel,Sozom. lib. 3. Cap. 1. yet whiles Constantine liued, no man, saith Sozomene, durst openly and plainely refuse them, much lesse burne them in a furious & publike tumult. And what if Athanasius were not then néere Aegypt when Marcus wrate this solemne Epistle,Athanas. not neere Aegypt when this let∣ter was writ∣ten thence in his name. will you neuer bee weaned from these foolish forgeries? Marcus letter beareth date, decimo calendas Nouembris, Nepotiano & Secundo Consulibus: the 21. of October, Nepotianus and Secundus being Consuls; which was the later end of the 30. yere of Constantines raigne. Nowe all that yeere was Athanasius kept from Aegypt at the Councel of Tyrus,Rescriptuu Marci Atha∣nasio & Aegyptijs. & without retur∣ning home, fled to Constantinople, where he stayed till hee was banished into Fraunce. Neither was there any such persecution in Aegypt that yere, or any time before vnder Constantine, as this Epistle doth specifie,Vide Sozome lib. 1. Cap. 25. & 28. but a great while after vnder Constantius, when Marcus was dead and rotten. And to conclude if the copie which Athanasius brought with him from Nice were burnt by the Arians in his time, as his letter to Marcus importeth;Concil. Africa. Cap. 102. howe coulde Cyril that came long after him find an Authentike copie in the same Church, as his words inferre to the Councell of Africa?An other for∣gerie vnder Iulius name worse than the former. Phi. Marcus Epistle might be suspected if Iulius letter did not affirme the same. Theo. Iulius Epistle is a right paterne of your Romish recordes. For there besides impudent forgerie, you shall find wilfull periurie. Phi. Why so? Theo. Your counterfayte Iulius is not content to forge Canons,Rescript. Iulij ad Orientales Cap. 29. but hee byn∣deth thē also with an othe. Verū me dixisse testis est diuinitas: god is my witnes, that I speake trueth.The Papists haue forged a decretal in Iulius name, where as his true letter is extant in A∣thanasius Apologie. Phi. You should the rather beleeue him. Theo. Be∣leeue him? As though the right and true rescript of Iulius to the Synode of An∣tioche were not set downe by Athanasius himselfe in his seconde Apologie to the manifest detection of your shamelesse forging and forswearing? Compare that letter with this, and you will blush to see the Church of Rome so fowlely ouershot. And yet were there no such thing extant, this blind decretall doth con∣uict it selfe. For it beareth date the first of Nouember, Felicianus [and his fel∣low] being Consuls:Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. 40. which was the very yere that Constantine the great died.
Now the councel of Antioch y• deposed Athanasius,A man may feele this for∣gerie with his fingers. Sozome lib. 3. Cap. 5. to the which Iulius wrate, was gathered by Constantius the fift yere after Constantines death: and so this answere to the councel of Antioch was written fiue yeres before there was any such councel assembled. Again Iulius himself sayth in his Epistle to those of An∣tioch, that Athanasius [stayed at Rome] with him one whole yere & sixe mo∣neths, expecting their presēce,Athanasij Apologia 2. The first da∣ted Calend. Octobris, the second calend. Nouembris the same yeare. after they were cited by his first letters to shew ye reason of their proceeding against Athanasius: & these two decretals of Iulius, which you bring vs, beare date iust 31. dayes asunder, in which tune you can not go from Rome to Antioch, & returne with an answere, except you get you wings. And so notwithstanding your shifts & deuises to cloke & hide the matter, if it would be; your holy father falsified the coūcel of Nice to serue his ambitiō, & the Bishops of Africa by common cōsent both stoutly, & rightly withstood him. Phi. Well Theophilus, ye truth of these things God knoweth, I will defend no more than I may with honestie. The. You were not best. God be thanked, mens eies are open, you can not blind thē wt such canuisadoes. But I wil go forward. Theodorete is the next, who was one of those that tooke part with Iohn of Antioch against Cyrill in the first Councell of Ephesus, and both charged him with heresie, and deposed him notwithstanding he supplied the place of Coele∣stinus Bishoppe of Rome.Euag. li. 1. ca. 4. Phi. Theodorete did this in a faction to serue other mens humors. Theo. I grant it was a priuate grudge between the two Patri∣arks, & that ye Bishop of Antioch, wt whom Theodoret came,Theodoret against the Popes deputy. sought vnlawfull meanes to be reuenged of Cyril; but yet this Theodoret & the rest did. Phi. It skilleth not what they did, so long as their doings were condemned by two ge∣neral Councels, & thēselues glad to reuoke their own acts. Theo. In that they deposed Cyrillus & Memnon against al order, and without iust cause, & vpon sto∣make defamed the Chapters, as heretical, which ye councel of Ephesus by Cyrils direction proposed against Nestorius, they were worthily reproued: & whē choler was a litle digested, both sides did wisely to relent, & remit al former offēces: but what coūcel did euer obiect this to thē as a fault, yt they resisted ye popes deputie? Nay rather the rest of the bishops yt held wt Cyril, (when ye letters of Theodo∣sius came,The Legats of Rome threat∣ned by the first Ephesine Councel. wherein he approued the deposition as wel of Cyril & Memnon, as of Nestorius) not only prescribed & limited the Popes Legate & others that were sent in Embassage to ye Prince, what they should do, but added this threatning: Scire autē volumus vestrā sanctitatē, quod si quid horū a vobis contemptū fuerit, ne∣que sancta Synodus acta habebit rata, neque vos cōmunionis sinet esse participes.In Apologet. Cyril. mandatū Synod. Ephes. We giue your holines to vnderstand, that if any of these things (which we haue appointed you) be omitted by you, neither will this holy Synod ratifie your acts, nor receiue you to the cōmunion. If you respect not those that impugned Cyril, I shew you that ye Popes legate was both cōmanded & menaced by those which assisted Cyril, whom you can not choose but allow. By the which it is eui∣dent that the lawful & general coūcel of Ephesus thought they might, and sayd they would, not only controle, but euen excōmunicate the popes vicegerent, if he did not that which was enioyned him by the Synode. The great Councel of Chalcedon gaue the Bishop of Constantinople equall
priuileges with the Bishop of Rome:Vide concilij Chalcedonens. actionē 16. The great councel of Chalcedon o∣uerruleth the Bishop of Rome. & when those that represented the person of Leo, ye next day desired of the noble men that sate there as iudges & moderators, that the matter might be brought about againe & put to voices, pretending that it was not orderly past; ye councel, that in ye absence of ye Popes Legats had made this decree, in their presence confirmed ye same, they contradicting & doing what they could for their liues to withstand it. Phi. If they were not present, ye decree was not good. Theo. There you beguile your self. If the bishop of Rome were not called, the Councell was not generall; but though neither he nor his Le∣gates were present, the decree might be good. Phi. How proue you they were absent? Theo. Their own words to ye Iudges be so. Paschasinus & Lucentius Vicegerents to the See Apostolike saide: If it please your highnes,Actio. 16▪ concil. Chalcedonen. we haue somwhat to say to you. The most glorious Iud∣ges answered; say what you wil. Paschasinus & Lucentius sayd, yesterday after your H. were risen, & we followed your steps, there were certaine things de∣creed, as we heare; which we think were done besides the order & Canons of the church. We beseech you therfore that your excellencies would cōmand the same to be red again, that the whole [coūcel or] cōpanie may see whether it were rightly or disorderly done.The Popes Legates could not then com∣maund in ge∣neral coūcels. The most glorious Iudges answered: If a∣ny thing were decreed after our departure, let it be read againe. And before the reading, Aetius the Archdeacon of Constantinople said: The maner is in Sy∣nods, after the chiefest points are cōcluded, to dispatch such other things as be needful. We had somwhat to do, for the church of Costantinople. We praied the bishops [that came] frō Rome,The Councel of Chalcedon proceeding without the Romish Legates. that they would [stay &] communicate with vs. They refused, saying, we may not, we are otherwise charged. We acquain∣ted your honors with it, & you willed that this holy coūcel should cōsider of it. Your highnes then departing▪ the Bishops that are here, conferring of a cōmon cause, required this to be done. And here they are. It was not done in secrete, nor by stealth, but orderly and lawfully. They were absent as you see, & because they were required & refused, the Councel proceeded in their absence and decreed without them on this wise. Following euery where the steps of the sacred fathers,Chalcedo. Cōcil. cano. 28. actio. 15. repetitur actio. 16. For what cause Rome had the supre∣macie giuen her. we determine & de∣cree the selfe same thing [which they did] for the priuiledges of the most holy church of Constātinople being new Rome. Our fathers not without good aduise gaue to the throne of elder Rome the chiefest place of honor, because that city raigned [or was the Seat of the kingdome] And the hundred & fifty Bishops which were gathered vnder Theodosius the lder in the royal city of Constanti∣nople, moued with the same consideration; bestowed equal [& like] priuileges on the most holy throne of new Rome: hauing great reason to determine that the Citie which is now honored with the Empire and Senate should enioie equal priuiledges with the elder Royall Citie of Rome, and in Ecclesi∣asticall affaires bee aduanced as the other, beeing the second after her. Phi. Neither Leo nor his Legates would euer consent to this decree. Theo. I care not for that. First the iudgement & opinion of the coūcel of Chalcedon is cleare with vs, that the chiefest honour and highest place was allotted the Bi∣shop
of Rome, not as Christes Uicar, nor as Peters successour, but in regard of his citie, that was Imperiall. Next, the same consideration now seruing them, to aduaunce Constantinople, which moued their fathers to preferre Rome, they thought it lawfull for them to make the Bishop of Constantinople equall with the Bishop of Rome: and so they did, notwithstanding the Legats of Leo laboured tooth and nayle to preuent the same. Phi. They placed the Bishop of Constantinople next after the Bishoppe of Rome, not in equall degree with him. Theo. The Bishop of Rome kept his place, which was first in order among the Patriarkes, when they went in coū∣cell; and next after him was the Bishop of Constantinople to sit before the Pa∣triarkes of Alexandria and Antioche: but in playne termes the Councell of Chalcedon gaue ye See of Constantinople ; equall priuileges with elder Rome, and in causes ecclesiastical to be aduanced as far forth as Rome. Against the Councell of Chalcedon if you oppose the Legates or letters of Leo, you make but a slender match. In this Councell were sixe hundred & thir∣tie Bishops, double the number of the Nicene Synode; and Leo was led with priuate respects to crosse this Canon,Why Leo was so earnest a∣gainst this Canon. as loth to see the Bishoppe of Constanti∣nople rise too fast, for feare least at length he should offer to pricke before ye Bi∣shop of Rome, which in deede came to passe not long after in the dayes of Gre∣gorie the first; and therefore the fathers lightly reiected all that his Legates could say, when the matter came the second time to voyces, as appeareth in the sixteenth Action of the sayd Councell, where the Iudges, after either side had proposed what they could,The Romish Legates & their alle∣gations re∣iected the second time in the Coun∣cel of Chal∣cedon. Eiusdē Concilij cio 16. The selfsame priuileges that Rome had, giuen to Constanti∣nople. The Pope had no nega∣tiue in Coun∣cels. resolued on this wise: By these things that haue bin done and alleaged we perceaue the first and chiefest honor, according to the Canons, is reserued to the Archbishop of ancient Rome: and moreouer that the Archbishop of the Royal Citie of Constantinople, which is new Rome, must enioy the selfesame prerogatiues and priuileges &c. Thus we conceiue you. Nowe let the sacred and oecumenical Councels speake their mindes. The reuerend Bishoppes answered: This is a right iudgement; wee all say the same; euery one of vs is well contented therewith; this is a good decree; let this determination stande in force: all this is orderly concluded: wee pray you demisse vs; wee al continue in the ame mind. Lucentius Vicegerent to the Bishop of Rome replied: The See Apostolike, which gaue vs this in charge, must not be abased by this decree. And therefore whatsoeuer was yesterday concluded in our absence to the preiudice of the Canons, we pray your excellencies to commaund that it may be put againe to voices. Yf not, that our protestation against it may be set downe in record, that wee may knowe what to informe the Pope of the Vniuersal Church. The Iudges an∣swered: That which we pronounced, the whole Councel hath approued. Phi. The Synode approued it, but the Bishop of Rome resisted it. Theo. You confesse that which I would inferre. Phi. What doe I confesse? Theo. That the Councell made this Canon, the Legates of Leo gainsaying it.
Phi. The more to blame they that did it. Theo. So you reuerence generall Councels when you be disposed: yet this is apparant that the councel of Chal∣cedon ouer ruled the Bishop of Rome,Canons made in Counceles mauger the Bishop of Rome & his legates. Liberatus Cap. 13. Concilij sexti Constantinop. Cap. 36. and mauger his Legats that were pre∣sent & earnest against it, they concluded without them that which they most mis∣liked. Neither could Leo for al his eger & sharpe resistance preuaile with them or against them; the Christian Emperours still fauouring, and the sixt gene∣rall Councell againe confirming that which their fathers before them had en∣acted at Chalcedon. Renewing the decrees of the 150. fathers that met in this royall Citie of Constantinople, & of the 630. Bishops which assembled at Chalcedon, we likewise determine, that the See of Constantinople shall haue e∣quall priuileges and honors with the Seate of elder Rome, and in ecclesiasti∣call matters be aduanced as farre forth as it, being next vnto it. Which wordes are falsely reported or rather lewdly corrupted in your Ca∣non lawe, by putting a negatiue to the later part of them that draweth ye whole to a contrarie sense;How the Popes law vseth ancient customes. Distinct. 22. Renouantes A monsterous corruption of a councel tur∣ning an affir∣matiue into a negatiue. Non tamen in ecclesiasticis rebus magnificetur vt illa, sed se∣cunda post illam existens, And yet for all that, shall not [the See of Constantino∣ple] be aduanced in ecclesiasticall affaires as high, as Rome; but be the second after her. And so where the Councell decreed, that Constantinople shoulde bee aduanced in ecclesiasticall matters as farre forth as Rome, you falsifie ye words and conclude, that Constantinople shall not bee aduanced as farre foorth as Rome, which is no forgerie. Phi. Let him answere for it, that did it. Theo. Bee your decrees no more worth nowe than to bee thus shaken off, to shift for themselues? Not long since they were the fairest flower in your garland: but if you renounce your Canon law, we will presse you no farther with it. Phi. Not so neither. Theo. Then howe can you salue this shamefull corruption? Phi. Perhaps it was mistaken. Theo. And neuer after perceiued? Phi. I do not say so. Theo. Why then not amended;Africani concil, Cap. 92. The Canon law glozeth the Councell of African quite against the text. Caus. 2. quaest. 6. placuit. Saint Austen forged to make the Popes decre∣tals of equall authoritie with the scriptures. De doctrina Christiana, lib. 2. Cap. 8. but openly suffered? Phi. An error it might be, wilfull it was not, I dare sweare. Theo. Is your Canon law so free from wilful corruptiō, that you dare sweare for it? Phi. As I thinke. Theo. How doeth it handle the wordes of the Mile∣uitane and Africane Councell, which I last alleaged? Ad transmarina qui puta∣uerint appellandū a nullo intra Africam in comunione suscipiatur. They that offer to appeale ouer the seas, let them be receiued of no man within Africa to the communion. That is true saith your lawe, nisi fortè Romanam sedem appel∣lauerint: vnlesse perhaps they appeale to Rome. And so where the councel pur∣posely decreed this, to keepe all men from Rome, your lawe wittingly peruer∣teth their words, and addeth, except they appeale to Rome; Which is both a ridiculous and malicious corruption. The like prancke you play for authorizing your decretals out of S. Augu∣stine, and making them equall in credite with the canonicall Scriptures. In which wordes you not only commit grosse forgerie, but also runne into haynous blasphemie. For where S. Augustine sayth: In canonicis autem scripturis, ecclesia∣rum
Catholicarum quam plurium autoritatem sequatur, inter quas sane illae sint, quae Apostolicas sedes habere, & epistolas accipere meruerunt. In [esteeming] the Ca∣nonicall scriptures, let [a Christian man] follow the authoritie of the greater number of catholike churches; amongst whom those [Churches] are, which deserued to haue both the seates of the Apostles, and to receiue their letters. Your canon law turneth and altereth his words thus:Distinct. 19. In canonicis. Inter quas [scripturas Ca∣nonicas] sane illae sint quas Apostolica sedes habere & ab ea alij meruerunt accipere epistolas: In the number of which [Canonical scriptures] let those epistles bee, which the Apostolike See [meaning Rome] hath, and others haue receiued from her. And least you should thinke any other Epistles are ment than such as the Bishops of Rome themselues wrate, in fayre red letters before the text these wordes are placed:Rubricae Ibidem Inter Canonicas scripturas, Decretales epistolae connumerantur. The Decretall epistles [of Popes] are counted [by S. Austen] for Canonicall scriptures. What greater blasphemie can be deuised or vttered against Christ & his spirit than that the Popes Epistles should bee canonicall scriptures, that is of equall authoritie with the worde of God? And how farre S. Augustine was from any such thought, the very place, which your law so wickedly peruerteth, doth best witnes.Glosa Ibidem. First you grossely mistake the antecedent to the relatiue, Inter quas [scripturas] for Inter quas [ecclesias.] Next you chaunge the nominatiue case into the accusatiue, and the accusatiue into the nominatiue, as also the plurall number into the singular; saying, quas Apostolica sedes habere, for quae Apostoli∣cas sedes habere. Thirdly you put in these words of your own heads; & ab ea alij: which are not in S. Augustins text. And so where S. Austen saith, Among the which those Churches are, that deserued to haue the seates of the Apostles, and to receiue their letters, you say plainly: Among which (Canonical scrip∣tures) those Epistles are, which the Apostolike see (of Rome) hath & (which) others haue deserued to receiue from her. I report mee to your owne consci∣ence Philander, whether this be not a barbarous kind of corrupting the fathers, which is often vsed in your canon law, as I could shew, but that I should make too long a digression. Phi. If it be naught I excuse it not. Theo. Come you with an if, as though the case were not cleare? Phi. A man may be soone ouerseene. Theo. These be shrewd ouersights. But returne to the matter that was first in hande. The britanes 4000 yeare a∣goe woulde yeelde no sub∣iection to the Popes legate. Beda lib. 2. Cap. 2. Bed. histo. gentis Anglorum lib. 2. Cap. 2.The Britanes are the last that I named, but not the last that resisted the Bi∣shop of Rome; whom Augustine the Monke, that came from Gregorie, coulde by no meanes get to yeeld him any subiectiō, though king Edelbert slew twelue hundred of their Monkes in one day for refusing obedience to that Romish Le∣gate. Phi. Beda sayth so many were slayne, but he sayth not for that cause. Theo. Beda confesseth that seuen Bishops of the Britanes, & plures viri doctissi∣mi, and many very learned men vtterly refused Augustine, when they met him in a Councell. His woordes bee: At illa nihil horum se facturos, neque illum pro Archiepiscopo habituros esse respondebant. Conferentes ad inuicem, quia si modo nobis assurgere noluit, quanto magis, si ei subdi ceperimus, iam nos pro nihilo contemnet?
The Britanes answered they woulde doe none of those thinges [which hee required] neither would they acknowledge him for their Archbishoppe. Casting thus with themselues, that if nowe hee will not so much as rise to vs, howe litle accompt will hee make of vs, if wee become subiect vnto him? The auncient Brittish Storie, which Galfridus Monemutensis transla∣ted, writeth thus of them:Galfrid. mone∣mutens. lib. 8. Cap. 4. In a part of the Britanes, Christianitie yet florished, the which beginning in the daies of Eleutherius neuer failed a∣mong them. After Augustine came he found seuen Bishopriks and an Arch∣bishopricke supplied with yery godly gouernours; & Abbies a great nūber, in which the flock of Christ was kept in good order. Besides other Cities, in the Citie of Bangor there was a most noble Church of 2100 Monkes, all liuing with the labor of their hands. Their Abbat was named Dinooch a man marueously well learned. Who by diuers arguments made it appeare, when Augustine required the Bishops to be subiect to him, that they ought him no subiection. Edelbert therefore the king of Kent, as soone as he saw them re∣fuse to yeeld obedience to Augustine,1200 monks in one time chose rather to die than to be subiect to the Bishop of Rome. and despise his preaching, stirred vp E∣delfride and other Princes of the Saxons to gather a great armie, and goe to Bangor to destroy Dinooch and his Clergie. Who taking the Citie comman∣ded the swordes of his men to be turned first vpon the Monkes, & so twelue hundred of them the same day decked with Martyrdome entred the king∣dome of heauen. Lower, if I would go, examples are infinite, where the Bishop of Rome hath beene not only stayed of his course, and ouerruled, but seuerely repressed and de∣priued of his Papacie. Phi. By some tyrants or schismatiks I warrant you. For neuer Catholike Prince or Bishop would offer him that abuse. Theo. Fit∣ten not so fast least you recant it with shame. Godly Princes and prelats, your owne Cardinals and Councels haue without any scruple,Concili. Laterae. sub Innocentio 3 Cap. 4 The Grecians detesting the Bishop of Rome. Paul. Aemil. in Philippo 4. Idem Aeneas Syluius, lib. 9. epitomes in de∣cades Blondi. Sessio vltima Florentiae in literis vnionis. Graecorum res∣ponsio in vlti∣ma sessione Florentiae▪ cited, suspended, and deposed him: which I trust is a plaine kind of resistance. Phi. If they did all that which you speake. Theo. I speake no more than your owne men doe witnesse. The Grecians I will omit, that neuer obeyed; and long since so detesteth both him and his Church, that if at any time the latine Priests had celebrated on their Altars, they would not offer on the same, except they first washed them, as (thinking them thereby to be) defiled. Michael Paleologus their Emperour they reiected from Christian burial, for that in a councel at Lyons he professed the Greeke church to be subiect to the Romane See. Phi. But after in the Councel of Florence they submitted themselues to the Bishop of Rome as to the true vicar of Christ & head of the whole church & father & teacher of al christiās. Theo. When ye questiō was first moued thē at Florence, their answer was, We haue no leaue [nor cōmission from the greeke church] to speak these things. And being vrged the second time, responderunt vt pridie, they answered as before, nolentes, vt de alia quaestione, praeter illā de spiritus sancti
processione, in vnionis literis vlla mentio fieret; not willing that in the letters of vnion any other matter should be contained besides the proceeding of the holy Ghost. And though they were wonne at length to suffer it to passe in the letters of concorde, hoping the West Princes vpon that perfect agreement would ayde them against the Turke,Platina in Eugenio 4. and two of them were made Cardinals, that by their authoritie the Greeke nation might bee kept in obedience: Yet the whole Countrie, saith Platina, non ita multò post in antiquos mores recidit, not long after fell to their former bent: but I will not vrge the dislike betweene the two Churches. The West Church will serue my turne better and stop your mouth sooner, in the which we shall finde presidents enowe for this purpose. Luitprand. li. 6. Cap. 10. Ibidem Cap. 7. The germans against the Bishop of Rome. Platina in Gregorio 6.Otho the great called a Councel of Bishoppes in Italie, where Iohn the 13. was deposed for his infamous and lewd life: the thinges bee so lothsome that I will not name them. This fact of the Prince and the Synode, the Church sawe, suffered, and allowed, and receiued Leo the eight placed by them in his steede. Henry the seconde likewise in a Councell draue Benedict the 9. Syluester the thirde, and Gregorie the sixt, three most vile monsters, to forgoe the Pope∣dome, and chose Clemens the second to succeede them. About Henry the fourth and Gregorie the seuenth though the stories bee di∣uided, some taking the Princes and some the Popes part: yet the Bishoppes of Germanie and Italie from Woormes, Mentz and Brixia sent him but homely greetings, as Vrspergensis confesseth.Cronicon Abba. Vrspergensis. In the yere of our Lord 1076 saith hee, there was kept a Councell at Wormes, where king Henry being present, al∣most all the Bishops of Germanie, except the Saxons, deposed Pope Hilde∣brand, writing him a letter after many crimes recited with this conclusion: For so much then as thine entrance [into the Popedome] is infected with so great periuries; and the Church of God dangerously tossed by reason of thy nouelties; and thy life stayned with so manifold infamies; wee let thee vn∣derstand, that as we neuer promised thee obedience, so hereafter will wee yeeld thee none; & because no man amongst vs (as thou openly gauest out) hath bene hereto accounted a Bishoppe by thee, thou also from henceforth shalt be taken by none of vs for Apostolike. The Bishops and nobles at Brixia concluded against him in these woordes: Because it is certaine that he was not chosen by God,Ibidem anno 1080. This was he that first ven∣tred to de∣pose Princes. but by fraude and bri∣berie most shamelesly intruded himselfe; which also subuerteth the order of the Church, and troubleth the Christian Empire, which practiseth to kill both the body and soule of our Catholike and peaceable king, and maintai∣neth a periured king which hath sowed discord betwene those that agreed; strife betwene those that were at peace; offences betwene brethren; and di∣uorces betweene man and wife; and hath shaken whatsoeuer stood quiet a∣mongst the godly; we assembled togither in the name of God agaynst the said Hildebrand a most impudent person, breathing out sacrileges & spoiles, defending periuries and murderers, calling in question the Catholicke and
Apostolike faith of the body and blood of our Lorde, an olde disciple of the heretike Berengarius, an obseruer of diuinations & dreames, a manifest cōiu∣rer, & vsing familiaritie with diuels, and therefore fallen from the true faith: adiudge him to be Canonically deposed & expelled.Ibidem anno 1083. The Romans reiected him as wel as the Germans did And this toke place three yeres after when the Romanes desired a day to be appointed, in the which the Pope and all the Senators shoulde come before the Emperour: but the Pope woulde not come in presence, whereupon the Romanes being moued yeelded to the king, and with one consent reiected Pope Hildebrand; who secretly fleeing gate him to Salerna, and there stayed till he dyed. Phi. Henry did this by force, and the Bishops that so reuiled the Pope were of his faction:Platina in Gregorio 7. The later Italians make Hil∣debrand a Sainct for his presump∣tion against the Empe∣rour. Beno Cardinal. de vita & gestis Hildebrandi. Sigibertus in anno 1084. but the stories commend Gregorie the seuenth for a wise, iust & milde man, a fauourer of the poore, of orphanes and widowes, and the only stout and earnest defender of the Romane Church against the treacheries of heretikes and power of ill disposed princes, seeking to possesse the goods of the Church by violence. Theo. Gregories life I will not examine, it is not incident to this matter. Yet if we beleeue Beno the Cardinall that liued at the same time, he deserueth no such prayse as you giue him; but I respect not that in this place. Certaine it is the Bishops of Germanie and Italie not onley refu∣sed but also deposed him; yea thirteene Cardinals of the wiser and better sort, the Archdeacon and chiefe president and many of the Laterane Clergie [at Rome] seeing his intollerable Apostasie, forsooke his communion: and so by the iudgement of the Romanes themselues Hildebrand was turned out of his Popedome. Phi. I know they did it, but therein they passed their boundes. Theo. If the crimes by them obiected were true, they did but their dueties. Phi. Their accusations were all false. Theo. That is lustily spoken, but faintly proued: and yet if it were so, my first assertion standeth good, that your owne Cardinals & Councels haue often resisted, & repressed ye Bishop of Rome. Phi. And my answere standeth as good, yt they were schismatikes which did so. Theo. What say you then to the Councel at Pisa,Platina in Gregori. 12. The general Councel of Pisa deposed two Popes Idem in Ale∣xandro 5. where the whole Colledge of Cardinals with one consent depriued Gregorie & Benedict of their Pope∣domes, all nations allowing that strait sentence, besides [a few] that fa∣uoured Benedictus: and Alexander the fift on his death bed protesting their actes in that Councel to be good and lawfull? Will you nowe replie that all nations, and all the cardinals, yea the Pope himselfe were schismatikes? Or if you care not for that, what say you to the generall Councell of Constance that deposed as many Popes as the Councell of Pisa, and not only de facto did it, but also expressely and aduisedly decreed that they might doe it? Dare you thinke the Councell of Constance to be schismatical? And what if the general Councel of Basill by manifest positions conclude you an heretike, for holding that a Coun∣cell may not depose the Pope? will you rather incurre the guilt of heresie, than forsake your new found diuinitie? Phi. You load mee with too many allega∣tions at once. I can not tell which to answere first. Theo. I will seuer them with a good will, say what you can against them. The general Councel of Pisa
deposed two Popes and chose Alexander the first: ergo the Pope may bee both resisted, and depriued by a Councell. Phi. Was that Councell generall? Theo. Reade the Bull of Iohn the 23. conuocating the Councell of Constance,Concil. Constan∣tiensis sessio. 1. Their church allowed the Councel of Pisa for sacred and generall. Laziardi histo∣riae vniuersalis epitome ca. 267. Dudum felicis recordationis Ale∣xander Papa quintus, praedecessor noster in sacro generals Pisano Concilio tunc praesi∣dens &c. Not long since Alexander the fift of happie memorie, our predeces∣sor, then sitting chiefe in the sacred generall Councell at Pisa. Laziardus a writer of that age sayth: Both Colleges of Cardinals, or at least the most part of them, called a generall Councell at Pisa, where they stayed from the An∣nuntiation of the virgine Marie till the xxvi. of Iune, with a great number of Prelats & Ambassadours of Kings, Princes, & Vniuersities. Vpon which day, those [two] which stroue for the Popedome, being first depriued by sentence, and order of lawe in all thinges obserued, they chose Alexan∣der the fift. Phi. Doe al stories agree that they deposed Gregorie and Benedict? Theo. See Blondus, Auentinus, Nauclerus, Sabellicus, Paulus Aemylius, or whome you will.Iohannes Nau∣clerus in anno 1408. The Cardinals of Gregorie and Benedict, sayth Nauclerus, meeting & conferring, resolued the citie of Pisa to be the fittest place for a general coū∣cel to be kept. Whereupon by letters and messengers they called al Bishops, Prelats, Princes & cōmunities to come to the Coūcell, that should be held at Pisa, exhorting them to send their Legats, & to withhold obedience from those [two] Popes, whom they had cited to be present there. In the yeere of our Lord 1409. at Pisa they began to proceed,Two Popes condēned by the councell of Pisa for he∣retikes and schismatikes. and against both Popes Gre∣gorie and Benedict, not appearing vpon lawfull citation, but wilfully refusing, they pronounced sentence of deposition and depriuation, as against here∣tikes and schismatikes: forbidding all Christians to cal either of them Pope, or yeld either of them obedience as Bishop of Rome. This done they went to the election of an other, whom they called Alexander the fift. Phi. Might they cal and keepe a Councell without any Pope? Theo. Looke you to that.Ibidem. The Cardi∣nals conclude it lawful for them to cal a Coūcel with∣out the Pope, and if neede be to depose hym. Nauclerus addeth that About the deposition of these two Popes there was a great debating in the Councel of Pisa; whether (graunting that both these Popes did scandalize the Church by manifest collusion, and per∣iurie, &c.) the Cardinals might cal a councel, & both of them being cited to come to the Councell, & not appearing but persisting in their contumacie, whether they might be deposed, and an other chosen. And after long dispu∣tation in the presence of very many Doctors of diuinitie, and of both lawes, no man gainesaying, but all consenting, it was concluded that it might bee lawfully & canonically done. Marke Philander: a generall Councell called without a Pope, and two Popes deposed in the same for not appearing before the councell, & al this good & lawful by the iudgement of your owne Cardinals, diuines and Canonists, without contradiction, and the Pope himselfe accepting this for a sacred and ecumenicall Councell. Phi. I maruaile they went so farre.
Theo. Neuer maruaile at that.The Councel of Constance deposed three Popes. Constantiensis Con cilij sessio. 1. Sessione 3. Sessione 10. & 12. Sessione 37. The Pope cō∣demned for an incorrigi∣ble heretike & schismatike. Sessio. 4. & 5. Sessio. 3. Sessio. 4. & 5. The general Councel of Constance which followed fiue yeres after this, went a great deale farther. For when Iohn the 23 had by his letters called the Councell, and sate amongst them in person as pre∣sident and head of the Councell, the first thing they did, they began to sift him; and notwithstanding he fled and left the Councel without Uicegerent or depu∣tie, yet they proceeded, and not onely suspended but also depriued him for his notorious Symonie and detestable and vnhonest life and maners. And like∣wise when by no meanes they could get Gregorie the 13 to resigne or appeare before them, they condemned him for a schismatike and an heretike incorrigi∣ble, and cut him off as a withered member. And least you shoulde thinke this rashly or lightly done, they solemnly decreed that the Pope was subiect to them and bound to obey them, & could not without their liking dissolue or remoue the councell, and to that end they did frustrate and reuerse all that was done or might be done by the Pope present or absent to the preiudice and disturbance of their Synode. Can you wish for playner examples that a Councell may pro∣ceede without and against the Bishoppe of Rome, than these be? Phi. I confesse they make me stagger;Their owne Church hath allowed and honored these Councels. and yet I dare not trust them, vnlesse the Church receiue them. Theo. And doth your church nowe mislike the pro∣ceedings at Constance and Pisa, which the church of Rome then and all other nations, by the witnes of your nearest frinds, approued and followed as right and syncere? Phi. I refuse not the Councels. Theo. But doth your Church allow them for general? Phi. I think she doth. Theo. Keepe your thoughts to your self; my question is whether your Church accept them, or no? Phi. Shee doth not reiect them. Theo. Answer directly. Doth your Church embrace thē, or no? Phi. Shee doth. Theo. You might haue sayd so rather; what needed this circumquaque to no purpose? Then I inferre; the doctrine of your church, litle more than eight skore yeres agoe, was, that a Councell might ouerrule and de∣pose the Pope, and the same Councel be called and kept without him, if he col∣luded or refused. This is proued, as well by the deedes of the councels of Con∣stance & Pisa, which are alreadie shewed; as by their decrees, which are extant to this day. What was concluded at Pisa by generall assent, I sayde before: what the Councell of Constance resolued in the like case, their words shall declare. First this holy Synode [of Constance] lawfully congregated in the holy Ghost,Constantiensis Synodi sessio 4. The Pope boūd to obey his own coun∣cels. Sessione 5. being a general councel, and representing the catholike church mi∣litant, hath power immediate from Christ, the which [power] euery one of what state or dignity soeuer he be, yea the Pope himself is bound to obey in those things that concerne the faith & general reformatiō of the church of God, in the head & mēbers. Again it declareth that whosoeuer of any cōdi∣tion, state or dignitie, yea though he be Pope, shal stubburnly refuse to obey the statutes, ordinances & precepts which this sacred Synode, or any other general coūcel lawfully gathered, hath already made or shal hereafter make concerning the premisses, or any their appertinents, except hee repent hee
shal be driuen to condigne satisfaction and dewly punished, and if need be, o∣ther helps and remedies of law and Iustice vsed.Ibidem. Item this holy Synode orde∣reth, defineth, determineth and declareth, that if our sayd Lord the Pope be∣ing required for vnities sake by this sacred Councel, do refuse to forsake his Popedome, or defer the renouncing thereof longer than he should; as then, so now; and as now, so then; shal be counted by al Christian faithful men to be depriued of his Popedome, and al obedience withdrawen from him. And not herewith content after they had cited and expected him, they proceeded first to his suspention, and after to his depriuation in this wise:Sessio. 10. Pope Iohn suspended for his Pope∣dome. Because it plain∣ly appeareth to vs, that our Lord Pope Iohn the 23. from the time that hee was chosen to the Popedome til this present, hath il gouerned that office to the publike slaunder of himselfe & the Church, and with his damnable life & filthie manners hath giuen and yet giueth to others an example of loose life; and moreouer hath by playne Symonical contracts sold Cathedral churches, Monasteries, Priories and other Ecclesiastical benifices; therefore by this our sentence we pronounce and decree the said Lord Pope Iohn worthie to bee suspended from al administration of the Popedome, both spiritual and tem∣poral, and wee doe suspend him, and by this writing forbid him the executi∣on thereof. And we declare that for and vpon the premisses, as being notori∣ous, we ought & mind to proceed to the final reiecting him from the Pope∣dome. Wherefore we streitly prohibite you and euery one of you by the te∣nor of these presents in vertue of your obedience, & vnder payne to be coun∣ted fauourers of this schisme, whether you bee kings, Cardinals, Patriarkes, Archbishops, bishops or whatsoeuer, spiritual or secular persons, that you, nor any of you, directly or indirectly hereafter obey, regard or assist the sayd Pope Iohn being iustly suspended by vs from al intermedling with the Popes function &c. Sessio. 12. Sententia defi∣nitiua contra Iohannem Papam 23. The Pope so∣lemnly de∣priued.The very same causes they repeat when they depriue him, adding that his departure from the Citie and sacred generall Councell of Constance, closely by night, at an vnseasonable houre, in strange and dissembled appa∣rel, was vnlawful and scandalous to the Church & the Councel, as troubling and hindering the peace and vnion of the Church, nourishing an inueterate schisme, and swaruing from his vowe, promise & oth: & therfore say they, the sacred general councel of Constance by this definitiue sentence here cōprised in writing, pronounceth, adiudgeth and declareth the saide Pope Iohn, as vnworthie, vnprofitable, and hurtful, to be remoued, depriued, and deposed from the Popedome, and from al spiritual and temporal administration ther∣of: & therwithal doth remoue, depriue, and depose him: declaring al christi∣ans of what state, or degree or condition soeuer they be, to stand quiet and discharged from his obedience, and the fidelitie, and oth, which they haue made to him: Inhibiting al the faithful of Christ hereafter so much as to call him Pope, being now deposed from his office, or to cleaue to him or any way to obey him as Pope.
Phi. You repeate this at large, that the simple might see how solemnely the Pope was deposed. Theo. I doe in deede, and you must thinke they looke for your answere. Phi. How hastie you be when you haue a little aduantage? Theo. How loth you be to come to that which at length you must? For say Philander, might the Councell of Constance do that which they did,Not lōg since the Pope was subiect to Councels by the confessiō of their owne Church, and now he wil be Lord ouer them. or no? You holde a Wolfe by the eares, I can tell you. Phi. The truth is, I finde my selfe in some straite. If I say they did well, then I confesse that a Councell may lawfully resist and depriue the Pope, for all this they did; if I say they did e∣uill, then must the Councell of Constance be schismaticall in offering Christs Uicar so great and open wrong; and the Church of Rome yea the Catholike Church that allowed and honored their actes and decrees, fowly deceiued; and Martin the Sixt whom this Councell elected, and the Christian world obeied, no lawfull successour, but a violent intruder: which God forbidde I shoulde af∣firme. Theo. Then if you dare not say the Synode did euill, you must yeelde they did wel, and consequently the point which you first doubted, is fully pro∣ued; that a Councell may lawfully controle, correct, and depose the Pope, not∣withstanding you make him chiefe iudge on earth & head of the whole Church. Phi. Was Pope Iohn lawfully chosen? Theo. You search euery angle, but in truth you can not scape.In Ioan. 24. it should be 23. To quarell with Pope Iohns electiō is to no pur∣pose. Phi. Platina saith some such thing. Theo. So some would shift the matter; but if his entrie to the Popedome were not good, his summoning the Councell of Constance could not bee good, and so this Synode neuer lawfully called. Next the Councell did not reiect him as vn∣orderly chosen, nor disclaime him for no Bishop, but remoued him from the function which he had, as vnworthy the same. And their generall decree, by which they define the Pope to be subiect to the Councel, must not be referred to wrongfull inuadors, but wholy restrained to lawfull possessors of the Romane See: else, no masterie for the Councell to bee superiour to those that were no Popes, but onely vsurpers. And therefore if there were any fault in his elec∣tion, since the Councell did omit the same in his depriuation, and proceeded a∣gainst him for other crimes, it can do you small pleasure. Phi. Did hee not submit himselfe to their definitiue sentence, and with his owne mouth ratifie their actes whatsoeuer before they ventered to de∣pose him?Pope Iohn when he sawe no remedie, submitted himselfe to their wils, but did not au∣torize them to bee his iudges. Nauclerus in anno 1415. Vide Constan. Synodi sessionē 11. Theo. When Pope Iohn sawe the Duke of Austria proscri∣bed and adiudged by the Emperour to forfeit all his goodes and landes, for helping and receiuing him in his flight, and himselfe now brought backe and kept in prison, to abide the determination of the Councell; and foule matters obiected against him, and witnesses produced and examined vpon the same: & being already suspended from his Popedom by the Councell, & then required to say for his defence what he coulde; and warned against the next day to bee present in the Councell, to heare the iudgement that should be giuen vpon the premisses: what maruell if hee seeing no way to preuent that which the Synod would execute, thought better to please them with a forced humilitie, than to prouoke them to farther bitternesse with a bolde defiance? But did the Coun∣cell
ground themselues vpon that his submission, or else did they deriue their au∣thoritie from Christ without the Pope, & aboue the Pope?The Councel grounded themselues neither on Pope Iohns permission nor submissiō, but on their owne power & proofes. Phi. I know they cha∣lenged their power immediatly from Christ. Theo. By that you may see they ment to exclude the Popes consent & allowance; which also well appeared by their doings. For they cited, suspended, conuicted, imprisoned, & assigned him a tearme to receiue iudgement before euer he came to that submission. And last of all, if you could light on it, there is a great difference betweene confessing the proces, & referring himselfe to the discretion of the Councell, which Pope Iohn did at length much against his stomake, & authorizing the Iudges to proceede, which they neither did aske, nor would accept at his handes. And least you should thinke I mistake the Councel of Constance, ye Councel of Basil, which began 14. yeares after, doth not only confirme that which I de∣fend, but also repute you for heretikes that egerly withstand it. Their words be these:Basiliensis con∣cilij sessio 33. The Councel of Basill a∣gainst the Pope. Veritas de potestate Concilij generalis supra Papam, declarata per Constantinē∣se, & hoc Basiliense Concilia generalia, est veritas fidei Catholicae: veritas haec; Papa generale Concilium actu legitimè congregatum, sine eius cōsensu nullatenus potest au∣toritatiue dissoluere, aut ad aliud tempus prorogare, aut de loco ad locum transferre, veritas est fidei Catholicae. Veritatibus duabus praedictis pertinaciter repugnās, est cē∣sendus haereticus. This position that a general councell hath power ouer & a∣boue the Pope, declared in the generall councell of Constance & Basill, is a truth of the catholike faith. Againe that the Pope by no means can dissolue, defer, or translate a generall councell lawfully called & once sitting of his own authoritie, without the consent of the said councell, this is likewise a truth of the catholike faith. These two former truthes he that stifly denieth, must be taken for an heretike. Now choose whether you will forgo your asser∣tion, or else abide the verdict of your own Councell. Phi. Against the Councel of Basill much might be saide if time and place did serue. Theo. Time and place do serue, except you relent, by their illation to conclude you an heretike. Phi. That Councell was neither generall, nor lawfull. Theo. It is not e∣nough for you to say the worde, you must tell vs why.The Cardi∣nals and the Bishops be∣gan to be so busie with the Pope, that the Church of Rome is forced to re∣nounce hir owne Coun∣cels. Phi. They bent them∣selues against Eugenius the fourth, and did what they could to thrust him from his Seate. Theo. Perhaps Eugenius deserued no lesse. Phi. No, they did it vpon a faction, in fauour of the Duke of Millan, that hated Eugenius. Theo. Contention is no iust exception against a Synode. For so you may refuse the best that euer were. But what can you say, why the Councell of Basill shoulde not be counted in your Church both lawfull and generall? Was it not orderly summoned as your manner is? Were not all nations called? The Bull of Martin the fift is extant, by the which the Councell was first indicted; and Eugenius himselfe, that struggled a while to dissolue the Councell, was glad at length to chaunge his tune, and to retract all that hee had done in dero∣gation of the Synode, and with an other Bull fairely subscribed with the Cardinalles handes, to confirme and confesse the Councell of Basill to bee a
generall, sacred and lawfull Councell. And here you shall see a plaine president that the Princes and Bishops assembled at Basill not onely resisted Euge∣nius, labouring what hee could to disperse them, but also forced him to yeeld, and acknowledge the lawfulnesse of their Synode. Eugenius,Platina in Eu∣genio 4. Eugenius for∣ced to allow the Councell of Basill, by reason of the number that tooke part with the Sy∣node. saith Platina, much distressed first with warres on euery side, next for that he saw the councell of Basill began by Pope Martins decree, daily increase; the Princes of Spaine, Fraunce, Germanie and Pannonie repai∣ring thither, and referring the common cause of christendom to the iudge∣ment of the councell; meaning to shut it vp, translated the same from Basill to Bononia by the consent of all the cardinals that were about him. But the Emperour and the rest of the Princes and Prelates that were at Basill, were so farre from obeying the Pope, that they summoned him twise or thrise to present himselfe with his cardinals at Basill, chosen by Pope Martin as a fit place to keepe the councell in; otherwise they would proceed against him as a transgressor and wilfull refuser. Eugenius troubled with this mes∣sage, confirmeth the councell of Basill with his Apostolike letters, licencing all men to go to the councell. Phi. I graunt they resisted Eugenius, but I doubt of the Councell whether it were lawfull or no. Theo. Will you trust Eugenius himselfe? Phi. If he say the word.Basiliensis con∣cilij sessio 16. Eugenius bull for the confir∣mation of that councel. Theo. Thus he saith: Not long since for certaine causes expressed in our letters, and by the consent and aduise of our brethren the cardinalles of the church of Rome, we dissolued the sacred general councell of Basill law∣fully begun by the decrees of the generall councels of Constance and Senes, & by commission from Martin the fift, & likewise from vs. Mary seeing great dissention hath risen, & greater may rise by the saide dissolution, wee deter∣mine & declare that the foresaid generall councel of Basill from the first be∣ginning of it was & is lawfully continued, & alwaies hath, yet doth, & ought to dure, as if no dissolution had bin made. And that our affection and inte∣gritie to the sacred generall councell of Basill may plainly appeare, whatso∣euer hath beene done, attempted, or alleadged by vs, or in our name, to the preiudice or derogation of the sacred generall councell of Basill, we vndoe, reuoke, frustrate, and annihilate. If this be enough, Nicolaus the 5. that came next after Eugenius vpon the composing of the schisme betweene the Councell and the Pope,The Bull of Nicolaus the 5. for the like purpose. Bulla Nicolai 5. super appro∣batione actorū & gest. in con∣cil. Basiliensi. gaue out a ge∣nerall Bull for the confirmation of all their doinges without exception. Om∣nia & singula tam iustitiam, quàm gratiam concernentia per ipsum tunc Basiliense Concilium qualitercunque facta, gesta, concessa, data, disposita & ordinata cuius∣cunque naturae existant, motu proprio ex certa scientia & de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, de consilio & assensu venerabilium fratrum nostrorum sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinaliū praesentium serie approbamus, ratificamus, & etiā confirmamus, rata{que} & firma haberi volumus. All & euery thing, that concerneth either fa∣uor or iustice, done, deuised, granted, giuen, disposed & ordred by the coūcel of Basil, of what nature soeuer, we of our own motiō & certain knowlege by
the fulnesse of our Apostolike power, and with the assent and aduise of our brethren the Cardinals of the holy church of Rome, allow, ratifie, and con∣firme by the tenor of these presents, and will haue to stand sure and firme. So that the Councell of Basill hath ill lucke, if after all these buls it bee not both a lawfull and generall Councell. Phi. The Bishops of Rome, that came after, neuer liked ye Councell of Ba∣sill; but we will not striue for that: we shall see what you will inferre. Theo. No newes for Popes to mislike that which pared their ambition, and hindered their gaine, as the Councell of Basill did: but can you, or they denie yt the Coun∣cell was orderly called? Phi. I do not stand so much on that. Theo. Then I conclude,A Councell might then commaund, correct, and depose the Pope: & now they will be obeied aboue and against Councels. that a Councell may lawfully resist, commaund, correct, and de∣pose the Pope; for so did the late Councels of Pisa, Constance, and Basill (which your Church then helde for sacred and ecumenicall) both determine in wordes, and practise in deedes. You must confute, or confesse this illation. Phi. I haue saide what I coulde, and all will not helpe. The Councels you proue to be generall: and I see they not onely resisted and deposed Popes, but also concluded it lawfull for them so to do. Theo. Then you confesse they did and might resist the Pope. Phi. Coun∣cels I graunt might, and did; but not others. Theo. Why may not others do the like? Phi. They must rather obey than resist. Theo. We dispute not as yet, whether it be lawfull or no for euery man to resist the Pope, the cause being iust; and when that commeth in question, you must shewe good and ap∣parent reason why they may not: that which I first auouched was this: your owne Cardinales and Councels, your owne friendes and fellowes, which you may not count schismatikes and heretikes,The Pope in the midst of his pride resi∣sted by his owne crew. haue stoutly resisted him, and re∣strained and limited his dominion, euen in the middest of his pride and ioylitie. For Councels I haue saide sufficient: Now for others. The famous Uniuersitie of Paris, which I thinke you will not condemne; and the whole kingdom of Fraunce haue often times opposed them-selues a∣gainst the Pope, and withdrawne their obedience from him in part or in all as occasion required. Phi. For some monie matters it may be they withstood his Collectors and Officers. Theo. The Diuines of Paris openly confuted the conclusions and articles of Iohn the 22. touching the beholding and seeing of God,The Diuines of Paris con∣demned Pope Iohns do∣ctrine with the sound of trumpets. Gerson serm. in festo Paschae reperitur in 4. parte operum. Iohannes Ma∣rius de schism. & concil. cap. 2. and gate the same to be condemned before the king of Fraunce with the sound of trumpets, as Gerson reporteth. By this, saith he, appeareth the falsitie of [Pope] Iohns doctrine, which was condemned with the sound of trumpets before Philip king [of Fraunce] by the Diuines of Paris, and the king beleeued the Diuines of Paris before the [Popes] court. And Ioannes Marius, Iohn the second Pope that sate at Auinion, fell into suspition of heresie. For he taught and defended certaine articles touching the sight and vision of God, which the Diuines of Fraunce, king Philip taking their part, very freely contradicted. The yeare before the Councell of Pisa, which I last spake of, was gathered,
when Benedict the 13. would yeeld to no reason, for ending the schisme between him & Gregory the 12. Charles the French king,Laziard. Epi∣tom. cap. 267. Ioan. Marius cap. 22. The French king dischar∣geth his realm from the Popes obedi∣ence. Naucler. gene∣ratio. 48. circae annū 1438. The Pragma∣ticall sanctiō maintained in Fraunce an 100. yeares against the Pope. with the aduise of the Bishops, Princes, and Vniuersities of his Realme caused himselfe to bee proclaimed adherent [or obedient] to neither of the twaine; & by them all it was decreed, that the whole Church of Fraunce should depart from the o∣bedience of Benedict, and by the authoritie of this Councell, all the French Cardinals forsooke him. When the Councell of Basill was ended, the Germans, the king of France, the king of England, the Prince of Millan, & others fauored the same with all their power, neglecting Eugenius authoritie, then sitting in the Councel of Florence: and the rather to giue it full force and effect, in the kingdome of Fraunce, Charles the 7. in a Parliament at Burdeuz made a law, called the Pragmaticall sanction, for the perpetuall obseruation of those thinges, which the Councell of Basill had decreed. And this law the Bishops of Fraunce, and Schole of Paris defended and followed almost an hundred yeares, in spite of al that Pius the 2. Sixtus the 4. Innocentius the 8. and other Bishops of Rome could do to the contrarie. Phi. Did the Bishops of Rome labour against it so long, and coulde not preuaile?Robertus Gua∣guinus in Caro. 7. Theo. First heare how well they did like it; and then how long they did impugne it. The [Pragmaticall] constitution made by the authoritie of the Councell of Basill, the Bishops of Rome, that came after, detested as a pernicious heresie; and not one of them, the Synod of Basill once dissolued, did euer allow the same. Which well appeareth by the message that Pius the 2. sent to Lewes the 11. for the repealing of this constitution, as the king him∣selfe reporteth,Ludouic. Pio 2. inter Epist. Ae∣neae Syluij Epi. 388. writing backe to the Pope in these wordes: We haue consen∣ted to those thinges which were aduertised vs in your name [by your Le∣gate a latere] to wit, that the Pragmaticall sanction grieued and iniu∣red both you & your See, as being made in the time of sedition, & schisme, & subuerting all right, & all law by taking what authoritie they list frō you. And this besides, which the same [Legate] in the name of your holines affir∣med, that whereas by this Pragmaticall constitution, the authoritie of your supreme Seat in the Church is restrained, & a castle of libertie prouided for the Prelats of our Realme; & vnitie & conformitie towards your Seat (as o∣ther kingdoms obserue) is refused;Guaguinus in Ludouic. 11. The Bishops of Fraunce & the vniuersity of Paris with∣stod the Pope labouring to abrogate the pragmaticall sanction. Ibidem. the foresaide law is to be remoued & a∣bolished out of our Realme, as made by inferiour Prelats against your See, the mother of all Churches. By these perswasions, and with vrging a former promise, Pope Pius the 2. (a great fauourer and expresse defender of the Councell of Basill before his pro∣motion, though after blinded with ambition, of all others he most detested the pragmaticall sanction, & called it heresie,) wan the kinges good will and had his letters to the Senate of Paris for the repealing of this law: but neither the kings Atturny, nor y• Bishops would cōsent therto. Yea the Schole of Paris fea¦red not to resist the (Popes proctor) appealing to the (next) general Coūcell.
This wisedom and freedom the Clergie men of Fraunce and students of Pa∣ris shewed and vsed in maintaining the Pragmaticall sanction against diuerse Popes from the yeare of our Lord 1438. till the yeare 1516. which Leo the 10. (that in our dayes wrested it out of their handes) is forced to confesse. We weigh with our selues howe many treaties haue past betweene Pius the 2. Sixtus the 4. Innocentius the 8. Alexander the 6. and Iulius the 2. Bishops of Rome,Lateranensis Concil. sub. Leo. 10. Sess. 11. in bulla quae inci∣pit, primitiua. Fiue Popes before Leo had labored in vaine a∣gainst that law. our predecessors, and the most christian kinges of Fraunce for abolish∣ing a certaine constitution called the Pragmaticall, bearing great sway in that kingdom: and though Pius the 2. by his Legats sent to Lodouike the 11. perswaded him with so many reasons, that the king himselfe by his letters Patents did abrogate the said Pragmatical sanction as autorized in the time of seditiō & diuisiō; yet neither the said abrogatiō, nor the Apostolike letters of Sextus [the 4.] made vpon concordates with the Ambassadours of the said Lodouike were receiued by the Prelates and Ecclesiasticall persons of Fraunce; neither would the saide Prelates and Clergie obey them, or giue eare to the admonitions of Innocentius and Iulius aforenamed, but woulde needes sticke and cleaue still to the said Pragmaticall sanction. And when vpon agreement with Frauncis the French king Leo the 10. in a Councel at Rome did abrogate the said constitution, & pronoūced it vtterly void, the whole Uniuersitie of Paris in the yeare 1517. appealed from the Pope and his assem∣bly to a generall & free Councell. Their wordes be worth the hearing. Appellatio v∣niuersitatis Parisien. repe∣vitur in fasci∣culo rerum ex∣petendarum. Paris appea∣leth from the Pope. The Pope may lawfully be resisted. The French king cōmaun∣ded the Pra∣gmatical san∣ction to be ob¦serued in his Realme whe∣ther the Pope would or no. The Diuines of Paris denie the Popes as∣sembly to haue the ho∣ly Ghost.Because he which is Gods Vicar in earth, whō we cal the Pope, though he haue autority immediatly frō God, yet is not therby free frō sin, neither hath receiued licence to sin: so that we must not obey him, if he decree any thing against the diuine precepts, but rather may lawfully resist him, &c. And wher as the coūcel of Basil made many good & holsom decrees for the increase of Gods seruice, & health & peace of others, which Charles the 7. a most religi∣ous aduācer, & excellent preseruer of the worship of God, & Ecclesiasticall honor, in that famous coūcel of the church of France held at Burdeux caused to be recited, & cōmanded to be kept inuiolable, as euer since they haue bin kept & obserued, &c. But now the Romanes eger on their own lusts & gains; & perceiuing by this meanes siluer & gold not to come out of the kingdō, & delphin [of Frāce] as before it did, & as they wish it should; spiting these laws, haue oftē practised to haue them abrogated by the Bishop of Rome, which hitherto by Gods helpe hath bin withstood; vntill Leo the 10. came, who, fa∣uouring the Romanes more than he should, in a certaine meeting at Rome, which is we know not how, but surely not in the holy ghost gathred against vs, hath decreed we know not vpon what reason, the said holsom statutes to be abolished, & opposing him self against the catholike faith & authority of sacred generall councels, hath condemned the holy councell of Basill, &c. Therefore in these writings we appeale from our Lord the Pope, not well aduised: & frō his infringing the sacred coūcel of Basill, & the Pragmaticall sanctiō, to the next councel that shalbe lawfully & freely called. So far your
own fellowes, in this very age wherin we liue, durst & did resist your holy father. And least you should think y• only scholers & not Bishops, were of this opiniō: the prelats of France not past 7. yeares before this appeale, in a coūcel at Tours, gaue their ful resolution to Lodouike the 12. that it was lawfull for him to for∣sake the Popes obedience,Cronicon. Mas∣saei, in anno 1510. The French Bishops re∣solue their king that the Pope might be forsaken & his censures neglected. & to despise the Popes curses. An. 1510. the French king gathered a councel at Tours, where he proposed these questions: whe∣ther it were lawfull for the Pope to wage war with a Prince for no cause: & whether such a Prince defending his own, might inuade the beginner, and withdraw himselfe from his obedience. The councel answered, the Pope might not: & the Prince might do that which was demāded, & that also the Pragmatical sanction was to be kept throughout the Realme of France: nei∣ther need the king to care for [the Popes] vniust cēsures, if he cast out his thū∣derbolts. This answer of the councel the king sent to Iulius, who when Peters keies would not preuaile, drew out Pauls sword, & wt the shedding of much chri∣stian blood, sought an vnchristian reuēge. The French mē, saith Erasmus, which with their blood gate Iulius so many notable triūphs,Adagiorum Chiliadis 2. cē∣turia 5. adag. 10. by his means, with the spilling of a great deal more blood, were thrust out of Italy, & as though that were too litle, followed with all kind of reproches: & if death had not preuē∣ted Iulius, we had seene that most florishing kingdom vtterly ouerthrowen. Phi. They gat nothing, you see, by withstanding the Popes keies. Theo. Chri∣stendom hath gotten lesse by wtstanding the Turke, & yet that doth not make his cause good: but Lodouike the 12. did herein no more than Philip ye faire king of France also did before him, & put the Pope to the worse. Phi. What did he? Theo. He not only contemned the Popes Buls & curses,King Philip of Fraunce v∣sed the Pope in his kinde. Laziardus hi∣storiae vniuer∣salis epitom. ca. 247. but clapt his Legat by ye heels, sequestred himselfe & his whole realm from his obedience, & at length caught ye Popes own person, & kept him in prison til he died. Phi. Durst he be so bold wt his holines? Theo. How bold ye king of France was, a frier, as you bee, shal tel you. Bonifacius the 8. minding to send an armie to Hierusalem, & ho∣ping to get Philip [of France] to furder the matter, sent the Bishop of Apamea to the king: who, when he perceiued he could do no good, began to threa∣ten king Philip that he should be depriued of his crown, if he did not satisfie the Popes request; & was therfore by the commādement of the king cast in prison. Which done, Bonifacius a mā aboue measure arrogāt, pretending that Philip had violated the law of natiōs would needs be reuēged, & sending the Archdeacon of Narbon into Frāce, forbiddeth Philip to take any more of the church reuenues, wheras before, the king (& that Bonifacius could suffer) had one yeares fruit of euery vacāt church which we cal the kings due: farther he denoūceth that the crown of Frāce is deuolued to the church of Rome by Phi¦lips cōtumacy,The Pope claimed to be the depriuer of Princes. adding that if Philip refused this, he would pronoūce both him & those that fauored him heretikes: moreouer he appointed the bishops & certain Abbats with the diuines & Canonists a day to appeare before him at Rome, & withal declareth the charters & grāts bestowed on the Frēch by the bishop of Rome to be void. This message done by the Archdeacō with pride
enough, Philip set the Bishop, which was kept in ward for his lewd wordes, at libertie; and charged him with speede to depart the Realme; & the next spring the Prince gathered an assembly at Paris, & rehearsing the iniuries that he had receiued at Bonifacius hands, asked first the Bishops of whō they held their lands & reuenewes;The king re∣futeth the Popes claime then turning himselfe to the Nobles, & you my Lords, saith he, whom do you take for your king & ruler? (both) answe∣ring without staie, that they helde & inioyed all those things by his Prince∣ly lawes: but, saith the king, Bonifacius so dealeth, as if you & the whole Realme of Fraunce were subiect to his See. For the Empire of the Almanes, which he thrise denied Albert, hath he now giuen him and also the king∣dom of Fraunce.The French king promi∣seth to defend the libertie of his land a∣gainst the Pope. But we thanking you for your fidelitie & good will, & tru∣sting to your helpe, doe promise to defende the libertie of our Lande. The Councell risen the king by open Proclamation forbad all men to carrie gold, siluer, or any other thing out of his Realme, a paine set for the brea∣kers of this Edict; & besides watch & ward was appointed at euery passage & port to apprehend those that came in, or went out of his Countrie. And not long after a (second) Councell of Bishops and Nobles were assembled at Paris, where they discussed Bonifacius claime to the kingdom of Fraunce, the Fathers affirming that Bonifacius was vnworthie to be Bishop, for that he was an homicide, and an heretike, whereof they had witnesses present. Therefore with one consent, they concluded that Bonifacius ought not to be obeyed,The Realm of Fraunce con∣clude the Pope ought not to obeied. vnlesse he first cleared himselfe of that he was charged with: Af∣ter this king Philip taking the pride of Bonifacius in very ill part sent some to intimate his appeale against the iniuries of Bonifacius, who (belike meaning to gratifie the king) caught the Pope in his fathers house at Anagnia, whēce the proud Prelate was led to Rome, & cast in prison, where within foure & twentie daies he ended his life, either by violence, or else for griefe of hart. Thus died Bonifacius like a dogge, that went about to strike a terrour into Emperors, Kings, Princes, Countries & Commonwealthes rather than any religion; & which assaied to giue kingdoms & take them away, to aduance men and pull them downe at his pleasure. Wherefore it was truely saide of him, he entered like a Foxe [craftily] liued like a Lion [furiously] & died like a dogge [shamefully.]Thomas Wal∣singham in Ed∣wardo 1. anno 2304. The French king would suffer none of his lande to go or send to Rome. Sabell. Ennea∣dis 9. lib. 7. Platina in Bo∣nifacio 8. Phi. This is but one mans iudgement. Theo. Yet a man of your owne side: and if our English Monkes do not deceiue vs, it was the prophesie of Cae∣lestinus his predecessor, who sayd to him, Thou hast entered like a Foxe, thou wilt raigne like a Lion, & shalt die like a dogge: but the truth of the storie is it that I seeke for, and that in effect, a few circumstances altered, is confessed by the best of your writers: and this they adde, which I would haue you marke; that the king not only withdrew his obedience from the Pope, but also restray∣ned his subiectes from sending or going to Rome. So Sabellicus; Philip of∣fended with Bonifacius, by open Edict forbad all French men to go to Rome, or to send any mony thither. So Platina; The king meaning in part to re∣uēge
the wrōgs which the Pope had done him, made a law, that none of his Realme should go to Rome,AEmylius in Philippo 4. or send mony thither. So Paulus AEmylius; The Bishops and prelats of France were commaunded by Bonifacius to appeare at Rome by a certaine day. The king suffered no man to depart out of Fraunce: which you thinke much her Maiestie should at this present in a far better cause commaund within her dominions. Phi. One Swallow maketh no summer. Theo. One such Sommer is able to mar the Popes haruest: but herein the king of France is not alone, the kings of England haue done the like. Phi. Which of them? Theo. I could easily name them, but I need not. The ancient Lawes & Liberties of this Realm permit no man to go out of this land, nor appeale to Rome without the kings consent. Phi. Uery ancient I promise you:The auncient lawes of this Realme are against resor∣ting and ap∣pealing to Rome. Math. Paris in Guilielmo 2. anno 1094. 500. yeares a∣goe no Bishop of this Lande subiect to the Pope. Ibidem. those lawes were first made by king Henrie the 8. about fiftie yeares since. Is not that great antiquitie? Theo. The lawes that I speake of are 500 yeares old, and were in full force vnder William Rufus, and Henrie the 1. the Sonnes of William the Conquerer. Phi. Did they restraine their subiectes from going to Rome? Theo. Whether they did or no, iudge you. When Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury asked leaue of William Rufus to go to Rome; the king replied, that no Archbishop nor Bishop of his realm should be subiect to the Pope or court of Rome, especially since hee had all those liberties in his kingdom, which the Emperour had in the Empire. And for this cause was Anselmus conuented by the king as an offendour a∣gainst the State. And to this accusation did the most of the Bishops except the Bishop of Rochester giue their consentes. And for that he ventered ouer the Seas to Rome without leaue, All his goods & cattels were seased to the kings vse, all his actes & proceedings in the Church of England reuersed, & himselfe constrained to liue in banishmēt during the life of king William. Which An∣selmus in his Epistle to Pope Paschalis complaineth of in this sort. The king requireth of me,Anselm. Epist. 36. ad Pascha∣lem. Was this Land then thinke you, subiect to the Pope? that vnder pretence of right, I should yeeld to his pleasures, which are repugnant to the law & will of God. For he woulde not haue the Pope receiued, nor appealed vnto, in his Land, without his cō∣maundement; neither that I should write to him, or receiue answere from him; or that I should obey his decrees. In all these thinges and such like, if I demaunded aduise, all the Bishops of his Realme denied to giue me any, but according to the kings pleasure. After that I asked licence of him to goe to Rome, vnto the Sea Apostolike, the king answered, that I offended against him for the onely asking of leaue: and offered me, that either I should satis∣fie him for the same, as a trespasse; by assuring him neuer to aske this leaue any more, nor to appeale to the Pope at anytime hereafter; or else that I should speedilie depart out of his Land. And after in the time of king Henry the 1.Math. Paris in Henrico 1. anno 1104. when the said Archbishop was re∣turning home frome Rome, the kings Atturney in his masters name forbadde him to enter the Land, vnlesse he would faithfully promise him to keepe all the customs both of [William conqueror] his father, & [William Rufus] his bro∣ther.
And K. Henry as soone as he perceiued the Pope & the Archbishop to continue their former opinion [against his liberties] presently seased the Bi∣shoprike into his hands,The two Arch¦bishops bani∣shed for re∣sorting to the Pope. Idem anno 1119. and arested all Anselmus goods. The like successe had Thurstane Elect of Yorke, who gate leaue of K. Henry the 1. to go to the councell of Rhemes, giuing his faith that he would not re∣ceiue consecration from the Pope: & comming to the Synode, by his liberal gifts as the fashion is, wan the Romanes fauor, & by their meanes obtained to be consecrated at the Popes handes: which as soone as the king of England knew he forbad him to come within his dominion. To this & other such liberties of the crown, K. Hēr. the 2. not long after made al his Bishops & Nobles to be sworne,Mat. Paris in Henrico 2. anno 1164. The lawes stood in full force an 100. yeares after the conquest. in a generall assembly at Claredon. In the yeare of our Lord 1164. K. Henrie being at Claredon in the presence of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons & great men of the realme, there was made a rehearsal or acknowledgemēt of some part of the Customes & liberties of his Ancestors, to wit of K. Henrie his grandfather & others, which ought to be kept in his realme & obserued of all, to auoide the dissention & discord that often happened between the clergie & the kings Iustices & nobles of the realm. Amongst the which custams being 16. in num∣ber these were two.Ibidem. The Iesuites departing this Realme is against the ancient lawes of the same. Appeales to Rome prohi∣bited by the old Lawes of this Realme. An oth taken to obserue the same. Ibidem. No Archbishop, Bishop, nor any other person of the realme may go out of the land without the kings leaue. For appeales, if any be made, they shal come frō the Archdeacō to the bishop, & frō the Bishop, to the Archbishop; & if the Archbishop faile in doing iustice, it shalbe lawful to come last of al to the king, that by his cōmandement the matter may bee ended in the Archbishops court, so that no mā shal proceede to appeale any farther, without the kings consent. This acknowledging & recording of the customes & liberties of the crown, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors [yea] the clergie with the Earles, Barons & all the Nobles sware, & by word of mouth faithfully promised should be kept & obserued to the king & his heires for euer simply without fraud. Phi. The selfsame writer, that you bring, dispraiseth those customes, & calleth them wicked & detestable. Theo. His report is the stronger against you, in that he was a Monke & a misliker of those lawes; & his iudgemēt against vs, the wea∣ker. For these princely dignities had preuailed from the Conquest til that time, & were in that age, yeelded & sworne vnto by the Bishops & clergy of his realm: & are in themselues, if you list to discusse them, agreeable both to the sacred scri∣ptures & ancient councels, notwithstanding some Friers & fauorers of the Ro∣mish See did then & doe now to their power withstand them. Ph. Thomas of Canterburie made a sainct for resisting his Prince.S. Thomas of Canterbury withstood them vnto death, & chose rather to lose his life, than to yeeld to any such customes. The. Do you make him a Saint for resisting his prince, or else for sauing certaine lewde priests from the due pu∣nishment of the princes lawes? Ph. I count him a martyr for spending his blood in defence of the church liberties. The. Their rage that slew him I do not com∣mend, because it was done by priuate violence not by publike authority: but his
stout stāding in a peeuish quarrel against his oth, against his prince to purchase impunity for homicides & other hainous offendors against the common course of law & iustice, I thinke in these daies you dare not openly defend, for feare least the world cry shame on you. Ph. You charge him with more thā you can proue. The. I charge him with no more than your friendes & his are forced to confesse. Th. Archbishop of Canter. when he had granted these [16.] lawes, (which this superstitious monk calleth) wicked & detestable,Mat. Paris Ibidem. Thomas Bec∣ket the first that impug∣ned the liberty of this realme. & promised with an oth to keep them: examining diligently that which he had rashly done, afflicted himself grieuously, & sent straightway messengers to the court of Rome to si∣gnifie the grief of the church & his own, & asked absolution from the band which he had vnwisely entred into, which also he obtained. The same yeare K.H. meaning as he said, to punish with due seuerity the disorders of al sorts, affirmed it to be against reason that he should deliuer to the bishop such cler¦gie men vnpunished, as were conuicted before his Iustices of any publike & hainous crime. And therfore he decreed that whō the Bishops sound guiltie in the presence of the kings iustice, they should degrade and deliuer to the kings court to be punished.The Arch∣bishop stan∣deth against the king in defence of theeues and murtherers. The Archbishop held on the contrary, that they ought not to be punished by laymē after they were degraded by the Bishop, lest they shold be twise punished for one thing. The occasiō of this strife was giuē by one Philip de Broc, a canō of Bedford, which being indicted of murder, spake reprochfully to the Iudge: which when he could not deny before the Archbishop, he was depriued of his prebend, & exiled the land for 2. yeares. The Archbishop seeing the liberties of the Church now troden vnder foote: without the kings knowledge, tooke ship, & intended to go to Rome, but the wind being against him, he was driuē back to the shore. And immediat∣ly vpō that when he was called to accompt for the whole receits, that came to his handes whiles he was Chauncelor of England, least he should vniustly be cōdemned, he appealed to the See of Rome, & vnder paine of excōmuni∣cation forbad as well the Bishops as all the nobles to giue sentence against him,The fine shift of a rebell to saue himselfe. The Monke fauoreth the rebellion of the Bishop. that was there both their father and their Iudge. The Nobles and Bi∣shops, that were called by the king for this purpose, without conuiction or confession of his gaue iudgement against him [alleaging and] protesting the priuilege of himselfe, & his church. The Archbishop driuen to this extremi∣ty and forsaken of al the rest of the Bishops, hoysed the crosse which he held in his hand aloft: & marched away frō the kings court in the eyes of thē al, & the next night stale frō the place, & gate him ouer to Flaūders, & so to ye Pope. He brake the oth which he took, for the keeping of the foresaid lawes & liberties of the crown:The dutiful∣nesse of Tho∣mas Becket. he claimed a freedom for theeues & murderers y• they should not be subiect to the princes power: he refused ye kings court, & appealed to the pope for a matter of debt, lest he shuld rēder an accoūt of his tēporal office whiles he was Chācelor; which of these three points cā you now wt learning or honestie defend? Phi. The liberty of ye holy Church is a iust & good quarell for a man to die in. Theo. If you meane thereby an impunitie for mutherers & such like offendors,
then is it a most wicked and irreligious part for a Bishop to open his mouth for such libertie; much more to resist his Prince for that quarrell. Phi. His quarrel was better than so. Theo. Neubrigensis a man of that age, and one that hono∣red the person, and praised the zeale of Th. Becket, reporteth thus of the quarell betweene the king & him.Gulielm. Neu∣brigensis rerum Ang. lib. 2. cap. 16. This is the li∣bertie of the church, which Becket stri∣ued for with the king. The king, saith he, was aduertised by his Iudges, that many crimes were committed by clergie mē against the lawes of his Realm, as thefts, roberies & murders. In so much that in his audiēce, it was, they say, declared; that more than an hundred murders were done in England by cler∣gie men in the time of his raigne. Wherefore the king very much kindled in a vehement spirit made lawes against malefactors of the clergie: which hee thought to make the stronger by the cōsent of the Bishops. Calling there∣fore the Bishoppes togither hee so plied them, (what with faire meanes, what with foule) that they al saue one, thought it best to yeeld and obey the kings will, and set their seales to those new statutes. I say all saue one; for the Archbishop of Canterburie would not bow, but stood immoueable. Where∣upon the king began to be greatly offended with him, and seeking all occa∣sions to resist him, called him to account for those things which he had done before as Chauncellour of the Realme. Now must you shewe that by Gods lawes theeues and homicides, if they be clerks, may not be punished by the prin∣ces sword; or if you dare not plead that in these dayes for very shame, then must you grant that your Canterbury saint resisting his Prince where he should not, was an Archrebell against God and the Magistrate:Mat. Paris in Henri. 2. eodem anno. King Henrie the second a∣gainst the Pope. Appeales to Rome againe prohibited. In quadrilogo. Treason to bring an in∣terdict from Rome. Mat. Paris vt supra. Not lawfull to depart the Realme with∣out the kings letters. Banishment to regard the Popes Bul in∣terdicting this Land. one of these twaine you must needes choose. Phi. We shal digresse too far, if we discusse these things in this place. Theo. Your stomake, I see, doth not serue you at this present, & wee shall haue some o∣ther oportunitie to debate the same: in the meane time learne what lawes king Hērie the 2. enacted & executed, in spite of your holy father & his deuout chaplin. The king at the returne of his Legates, perceiuing his request [for the confirmation of his ancient liberties] to be repelled by the Pope, not a little offended therewith, wrote letters to all his Shirifes & Lieutenants in Eng∣land on this wise: I command you that if any clergie man or lay men in your coūtie, appeale to the court of Rome, you attach him, & hold him in fast ward till our pleasure be known. And to his Iudges in this sort: If any man be foūd to bring letters or mandate from the Pope, or from Thomas the Archbishop, interdicting the Realme of England, let him be taken and kept in prison, till I send word what shalbe done with him. The four that wrate the life & extol ye facts of Th. Becket ad to this law: Let him be streightway apprehended for a traitor, & execution done vpon him. Also let no clerk, monk, canon, or other religious person go ouer the Seas without letters of pasport frō vs of our offi∣cer; if any venture otherwise, let him be taken & cast into prison. Let no man appeale to the Pope, or to Th. the Archbishop, neither let any suite surcease at their cōmandement. If any Bishop, Abbot, Clerk or lay man shal obserue [their] sentence, interdicting our [Land,] presently let him bee banished the
Realme, and all his kindred with him; and their goods and landes confis∣cated. Let the Bishops of London and Norwich bee summoned to appeare before our Iustices, and there to answere for interdicting the Land, and ex∣communicating the person of Earle Hugh contrarie to the Statutes of our Realm. Thus far the valiant & worthie Prince went in defending his Lawes & liberties against the Bishop of Rome, & how far hee would haue gone, but that the time was not yet come, when God would deliuer his Church from ye yoke of Antichrist, appeareth by an Epistle of his written to the Archbishop of Cullain in these wordes. I haue long desired to finde a iust occasion to depart from Pope Alexan∣der and his persidious cardinals,Mat. Paris in Henrico 2. anno 1167. The Pope 400 yeares ago a∣betted trai∣tours against the king. which presume to maintaine my traytour Thomas of Canterbury against me; whereupon by the aduise of my Barons & cleargie, I meane to send the Archbishop of Yorke, the bishop of London, the Archdeacon of Poictiers, (&c.) to Rome, which shall publikely denounce, & plainly propose this on my behalfe, and all the Dominions I haue, to Pope Alexander and his cardinals: that they maintaine my traytour no longer, but rid me of him, that I with the aduise of my cleargie may set an other in the church of Canterburie. They shall also require them to frustrate all that Becket had done, and exact an oth of the Pope, that he and his successors, as much as in them lieth, shall keepe and conserue, inuiolable to me and all mine for euer,The king voweth open∣ly to impugne the Pope and all his. the Royal customs of king Henrie my grandfather. If they re∣fuse any of these my demands, neither I nor my Barons, nor my clergie will yeeld them any kinde of obedience any longer: yea rather we will openly impugne the Pope, and all his, and whosoeuer in my Lande shalbe founde hereafter to sticke to the Pope, shalbe banished my Realme. Phi. The king made amends for all, when the Archbishop was slaine, renoū∣cing the liberties which he striued for so long, and honoring him as a Martyr whom before he pursued as a traitor. Theo. The manifold deuises & practises of the late Bishops of Rome, (God so punishing the dulnesse, and discorde of Princes, neglecting his truth, and enuying one an other) haue weakened and wearied very many both kings and Emperours, partly with a false perswasion of religion, partly with a number of fayned miracles, but chiefly by drawing their subiectes from them, and setting other nations vpon them; yea by stirring and arming their owne blood and bowels against them. And therefore no mar∣uaile if king Henrie relented somewhat of his former stoutnesse, when the king of Fraunce,Math. Paris i anno 1173. This was one of the Popes common pra∣ctises. the Earle of Flaunders, the king of Scots, the yong king his sonne, and two other of his children, the Duke of Aquitane and Earle of Britaine, cō∣spired against him; but it is euident, that frō the conquest till ye time these lawes and liberties stood in their full force and were publikely receiued and vsed in this Realme. Phi. Did the Pope procure him these enemies? Theo. What packing there was betweene the French king and the Pope, though the stories in this place do not confesse, yet we may soone coniecture by the generall drift of your holy Fa∣ther
& his blessed adherents in those daies, & specially by the exāple of king Iohn the sonne of the said king Henrie,Math. Paris in vita Iohannis anno 1212. Anno 1213. whom (for refusing the disordered election of Stephen Langton to the church of Canterbury) Innocentius the 3. so terrified with open inuasion of enemies, & secret defection of subiects, that for safegard of himselfe he was driuen to resigne his kingdome, & take it againe at the Popes hands in fee farme vnder the yearly rent of a thowsand marks: binding himself & his heires for euer to do the like homage & fealtie to the Bishops of Rome for the crowne of England.The barons of this realme pursued the king in cōtēpt of the Pope Anno 1216. Which shamefull seruitude of the Prince, & vtter ruine of the Realme so much displeased the barōs & bishops, that before toke ye Popes part against the king, that in plaine contempt of the Popes keies & curses, they chose them an other king, & chased king Iohn, the Popes farmour, from place to place in despite of al y his new Landlord could do or deuise. But this I omit be∣cause the quarel touched the right & title to the crown; I medle only wt those re∣sistances, which the kings of England made for men and matters ecclesiastical. Phi. Be not these two lawes an∣cient that be as old as the conquest?I trust they were not many. Theo. For the first hundred yeares next the cōquest, it is clear the kings of this Realm would neuer allow their subiects to run to Rome, nor suffer appeals to be made to the Pope without their expresse consent: now shall you see, what they which came after, did. When king Edw. the 3. reuiued the statute of Premunire (made by king Edw. the 1. in the 35. year of his raign) against such as sought to Rome to prouide thē of benefices & other ecclesiastical promotions wtin this realm, enacting the same penalty for those that by processe frō thence impugned any iudgement giuen in ye kings courts, or brought from Rome any Bul, writing or instrumēt to those & other like effects;Polydorus Vir∣gilius in Eduar. 3. The Pope would faine haue preuai∣led against the statute of premunire, & could not. Ibidem. Gregory the 11. then Bishop of Rome, vnderstanding therof, was very earnest against it, (protesting) this was nothing else but to make a schism in the church of Christ, to abolish religion, to subuert right & reason, & infringe al coūcels; & speedily dealt with king Edw. to abrogate this law. A schisme rising not long after (in the church of Rome) there was not a Pope that had any care of this, til at lēgth Martin the 5. wrote more vehemēt let∣ters to K. H. the 6. But these two bishops of Rome receiued one & the same answer; which was that an act of Parliament could not be repealed without the autority of a Parliamēt, & that shortly one should be called to that end, which neuer after was performed. Yea the king that came after did not only cause that law to be kept & put in vre, but increased the terror of it with a ri∣gorous punishmēt, which is, that the party so offending shal forfeit his goods & himself be condemned to perpetual imprisonmēt. This writer an Italian born, & a man wedded to the See of Rome, confesseth the Popes authority was abated & restrained by the lawes of this Realm, in the time of king Edward the 3. and so continued euer after; & that not only the Popes letters were twise re∣fused, but the sharpnesse of the punishment increased to strengthen the Statute that pared their power, and limited his iurisdiction within this Realme. Phi. Perhaps they wtstood him for tēporal matters. Theo. The matters were such as your own church accoūteth spiritual; to wit, electiōs of Bishops, gifts of
benefices & procedings in other causes; tending, as ye cōmplaint of Gregory tea∣cheth you,In loco supra citato. to the diuision of the church, extirpation of religion, & subuersion of al councels, which you may not thinke to be temporall matters. And this re∣sistance which the Bishop of Rome so much repined at, in the daies of king Ed∣ward the 3. neuer ceased till king Henry the 8. of famous memory banished the Popes vsurped power cleane out of this Land. Phi. So did none of his progenitors before him. Theo. It may be they wēt not so far as he did;Polydor. in Ri∣chard. 2. anno. 1391. but as Polydor writeth, R. Rich. ye 2. wēt fairly towards it. In a Parliament held ye 14. yeare of his raigne the king & his princes were of o∣pinion that it would be very good for the realme of England, if some part of the Popes dominion were determined with the Sea (that is excluded out of this lād) for that many wer daily vexed for causes, which they thought could not so easily be ended at Rome. Wherefore they made a law that no mā euer after should deal with the Bishops of Rome,No person might pro∣cure or exe∣cute any cen∣sure frō Rome that any person in Englād should by his autority for any cause be excōmunicated, & that none should execute any such precept if it were sent him. If any mā brake this law, the pain apoin∣ted was, he should lose al he had, & ly in prison during his life. And where the pope trauailed by al means to ouerthrow ye statute of prouisiō & premunire, ye par∣liamēt held in ye 13. year of Rich. ye 2. for ye better establishing & surer executing of ye law, made it death for any mā to bring or send Bul, or other proces frō Rome to impugn ye same. These be the words: Itē it is ordained & established that if a∣ny mā bring or send within this realm or the kings power any sūmōs,Ex Richardo 2. anno 13. sentēce or excōmunicatiō against any persō of what cōditiō that he be, for the cause of making motiō, assent or executiō of the said statute of Prouisors (or premu∣nire) he shalbe takē,Richard the 2. made it death to bring any summons or sentence from Rome. Princes may resist the pope in their Parli∣aments as wel as Bishops in their Synods. arested, put in prison & forfeit al his lands & tenements, goods & catle for euer: & moreouer incur the pain of life & mēber. So ye king¦doms & cōmonwelths, as wel as councels: & of al others Frāce & England haue from time to time resisted your holy father in the midst of his terror & tyrany. P. You shew they did it: but you do not shew they did wel in it. Th. I need not, you must shew they did il. The prince by gods ordināce beareth ye sword, & not ye pope; therfore ye presumption lieth for ye prince against ye pope, til you proue ye cōtrary: besids if bishops in a synod may lawfully resist him, why may not princes in their parliamēts do ye like? Thirdly since ye Romane Emperors were wōt to cōmand him, what reason cā you bring why christiā princes shold not now restrain him? And last of al, if you forget not your self, my promise was to shew, yt not in ye pri∣matiue Church only, when there was no question of his obedience to religious princes; but in latter times, when the Bishop of Rome presumed to be Lorde ouer all, he was controled & resisted by those Councels & Common-wealthes, which your owne Church neuer durst reiect as schismaticall and hereticall.They resisted him for the regiment of their Realme, not for the faith of christ. Phi. In some thinges they withstood him, but not in all thinges as you doe. Theo. That shift is litle worth. If resistāce be lawful in part, why not in al, whē iust cause requireth? Phi. In matters of faith they neuer resisted. Theo. That maketh our resistāce the more lawful. They withstood him for an earthly policy,
we for Christes glorie; they for externall discipline, we for Apostolicall doctrine. Therefore if they might lawfully resist, much more may we. But my demand is, onely whether you see, that as the Bishop of Rome withstood others in the regiment of the Church, so many Councels & Countries, Princes & Prelats withstood him, as the places, which I bring, conuince? Phi. What if they did? Theo. First did they that which I speake or no? Phi. Grant they did. Theo. Then your examples conclude nothing against vs. For as hee resisted others in causes Ecclesiasticall, so did others resist him: and our examples inferre a∣gainst you that your owne Church neuer obeied that supreme power and infal∣lible iudgement, which he now claimeth, & you now yeeld, to flatter him with. Phi. They tooke him for Christes Uicar and Peters successour. Theo. How they tooke him in latter ages, it greatly skilleth not; the learned and an∣cient Fathers call him Peters successor, Christes Uicar they neuer call him. And graunt he be Peters successor, that importeth no supremacie. Phi. Doth it not?Many things to be proued (which are starke false) before the su∣premacie will follow. Theo. No mary doth it not. You must first proue that Peter was su∣preme gouernour of all the Church: which you shall neuer do. Next you must proue, that this dignitie was not proper to Peters person, but common to Pe∣ters successour, which we denie. For Peters primacie was giuen him in respect of the confession which he made, not in respect of the place which he should inioy. Lastly you must shew which of Peters chayres must haue Peters priuiledge; that is, why Rome rather than Antioch. These three points when you iustly proue, we will say more to your vaine pretences and glorious titles: in the meane time, till occasion serue to make farther triall, you may go forwarde with the rest of your Apologie; which if it be like this, it will do your friendes litle good, and your foes lesse hurt. Phi. You disgrace that which you can not disproue. Theo. Wee neede no better disproofe, than the sober reading of your insolent and impertinent dis∣courses purposely made to commend and aduaunce your selues and your adhe∣rentes aboue the skies.They must flatter the Pope, that liue of his almes, as you do. Phi. Where do we so? Theo. Almost in euerie leafe. For example, this whole chapter is spent in flattering your holy Father, & prai∣sing his deuout citie. The next hath nothing else, but the commendation of your selues & your Seminaries; as if the proclaiming of his & your vertues, were the chiefest point of his and your faith. Phi. You say not well, we do not so. Theo. Reade the places, you shall finde them full of these and such like flowers. To Rome Whatsoeuer is learned,Apolog. Cap. 2. wise, vertuous, of all the most famous Vniuersities, Mo∣nasteries, Societies and Celleges through the world, is recuiled as to a continuall mar of all kinde of doctrine & prudence.Ibidem. And againe: These and such other high experi∣ments with innumerable examples of vertue and deuotion shall this Romane institu∣tion giue to our Countrimen, vnder the famousest teachers & gouernours of youth in our age, or som worlds before: Who otherwise would admire their pety masters at home, the cause of al error & ignorāce. Ar you not liberal in praising your selues? Belike you thinke with your only looks to daūt all the Diuines & preachers of Englād, as if not a fewe wandring friers & craking Iesuites, but some new Cyprians, or
famous Augustins were lately arriued at your Romish Seminarie. But let passe your follies & come to your autorities. To what end aleage you S. Hierō? Phi. S. Hierom calleth [Rome] the place of greatest faith and deuotion.Praefat. lib. 2. in episto. ad Gal. Esa. 1. Nahum. 3. Rome is not that it was. Theo. What then? Ierusalem was first a faithfull Citie, & yet in time became a shamelesse strumpet. Niniueth was spared for her true repentance, & afterward plagued for her robberies and lies. What Rome was then, doeth no way proue what Rome is now. You must send vs better reasons from Rome & for Rome before you shall perswade vs, that there is at Rome such store of learning and vertue as you vaunt of. If Rome be changed since Hierom wrate, your conclusiō halteth, though his wordes goe right. Phi. That change you must proue. Theo. Alas good Sirs, begin you now to doubt whether Rome be changed?Rome chainged.Mantuanus Syluarum lib. 1. Reade your owne Friers, Monkes and Abbots, and you shall soone be resolued in that doubt. Frier Mantuan sayth shortly, but truely: Viuere qui sanctè cupitis, discedite Roma, Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum. You that wish to liue godly, depart from Rome; al things are there suffred saue godlines. Mathew Paris a Monke of S. Albons, euery where toucheth ye vertues of the church of Rome, & saith they were known to the verie miscreants. For when y• Souldan of Iconium desired to be baptised from Rome,Math. Paris in Henrico 2. sub anno 1169. his nobles by reason of so many vices abounding at Rome, sayd, Howe can there come sweet and salt water from the same fountaine? whence Christians should fet the water of righteousnes,Idem in Henrie 3. anno 1241. there they find a poysoned pudle. And in the yere of our Lord 1241 he sayth: The vnsatiable greedines of the Church of Rome so increased, confounding right and wrong, that without shame as a com∣mon & impudent harlot, she lay open for money to euery man, counting v∣surie for a small fault, and Symonie for none. But no man more liuely describeth the maners and dispositions of the latter Romanes than Bernard Abbot of Clareuallis,Bernardes report of the Romanes in his time. Bernardus de. consideratione ad Eugenium lib. 4. and that not priuily behind their backs, but openly to their faces: forewarning Eugenius the pope what to looke for at their hands: Quid tam notum seculis, quàm proteruia & fastus Romanorum? Gens insueta paci, tumultui assueta. Gens immitis & intractabilis, vsque ad huc subdi nescia, nisi cum non valet resistere. Experire paucis, nouerim ne & ego gentis mores. Ante omnia sapientes sunt vt faciant mala, bonum autem facere nesciunt. Impij in deum, temerarij in sancta, seditiosi in inuicem, emuli in vicinos, inhumani in extraneos. Hij sunt qui subesse non sustinēt, praeesse non norunt, superioribus infideles, inferioribus importabiles, inuericundi ad petendum, ad negandum frontosi. Importuni vt accipiant, inquieti donec accipiant, ingrati vbi acceperint. Docuerunt linguam suam grandia loqui, cum operentur exigua, largissimi promissores, & parcissimi exhibitores, blandissi∣mi adulatores, & mordacissimi detractores, simplicissimi dissimulatores, & malignissimi proditores. What hath been so famous for many yeres,What exam∣ples of vertue & deuotion the Romane institution hath giuen. as the frowardnes and hautines of the Romanes? A nation not acquainted with peace, accustomed to tumults. A nation fierce & intractable, to this day not able to be ruled, but when it cannot resist. Listen a while whether I knowe the manners of
that people or no. [The Romanes] are wise to do euill, good they know not how to do. Irreligious toward God, presumpteous against holy things, sediti∣ous among thēselues, enuious to their neighbours, vncurteous to strangers. They wil neither obey, nor can tel how to rule; vnfaithfull to their superiours, vntolerable to their inferiours: shameles to aske, & bold to denie. Importune to haue, vnquiet til they haue, & vnthākful when they haue: great speakers & litle doers.If we should say as Ber∣nard doth I deeme you would be angrie. Most liberal to promise, most loth to performe: most sweet to flat∣ter, most bitter to backbite; most curious dissēblers, most mischieuous traitors. Lupi sunt, &c. They bee wolues, not sheepe: of such art thou shepheard: If I durst speake all, they be rather pastures of diuels than sheepe. Phi. If this be true, they be changed in deed. Theo. The truth thereof you may not wel doubt, vnlesse you wil now returne him for a liar, whom Alexander ye 3. 400. yeres since did canonize for a saint: but wil you stand to his iudgemēt whose name you pretēd? Phi. What els? Theo. Thē gaine you litle for the cōmendation of Rome.S. Hieroms report of the madnes of Rome. Hieron. praefat. lib. 2. in Episto. ad Galaas. Idem in Esaiae Cap. 2. Idem ad Prin∣cip. Mar∣elle Epitaph. Idem aduersus Iianum li. 2. Idem praefat. in lib. Dydimi de∣spiri sancto. For Hierom doth attribute no more to the Romanes than Paul doth to ye Iewes, which is to be naturally zealous. And this as in true religiō we compt it praise worthie, so whē error preuaileth nothing is more pestilent. Again, this one vertue of theirs is by & by requited in ye very same place with two shrewd vices. Rursus facilitatis & superbiae arguuntur. Paul noteth the Romanes, saith he, to be proud of nature, & easily seduced. What els he found in thē, & what he thought of thē, you shal soone perceiue, if you list to beleeue him. Narrant historiae tam gracae quālatinae, nihil Iudaeorū & Romanorū gente esse auarius. The stories both greek & Latine confesse, none to bee more couetous than the Iewes & the Romanes. Difficile est in maledica ciuitate non aliquā sinistri rumoris fabulā contrahere. It is an hard matter in this slanderous citie [of Rome] to be free from il tongues. Nul∣lane fuit alia in toto orbe prouincia, quae reciperet praeconiū voluptatis, nisi quam Petri doctrina super Petrāfūdauerat Christū? Was there neuer an other place in al the world to receiue this voluptuous doctrine, but that which Peters preaching had built on the rock christ? Cum babilone versarer, & purpuratae meretricis esse co∣lonus & iure Quiritū viuerē, ecce olla illa, quae in Hieremia cernitur, a facie Aquilonis cepit ardere, & Pharisaeorū conclamauit Senatus, & omnis quasi indicto sibi praelio do∣ctrinarū aduersū me imperitiae factiō coniurauit. Whiles I staied at Babilon, & was an inhabitant of that purple whore, & liued amongst the Romanes, beholde the pot which was seene in Hieremie frō the North began to seeth, & the Se∣nate of Pharisees made an vprore, & the whole faction of rude & ignorant, as it were in defiance of learning, conspired against me. He y• saith the Romans be zealous, addeth also yt they be couetous, enuious luxurious & proud pharises. Lay your one vertue to these foure vices which Hierom saw growing, and Bernarde found ripe at Rome,Cyprian and Augustine forced by the Iesuites to make for Rome. Cypri. epist. 55. vel li. 1. epist. 3. and tell vs what you get by this accompt. With as great discretion you cite the words of S. August. & S. Cypriā for the praise of the see of Rome, drawing S. Augustins words frō their true meaning, & corrupting in Cyprian both the saying & the sense. For S. Aug. saith, Heretikes barke in vaine, at the church, not of Rome, but of Christ. And Cyprian meaneth himself, not yt bishop of Rome, whē he saith: Ob hoc ecclesiae praepositu persequitur, vt
gubernatore sublato atrocius atque violentius circa ecclesiae naufragia grassetur. The aduersarie for this cause persueth the bishop of the church, that the gouernor being made out of the way, the shipwrack of the church may follow with the greater mischief & violence. Other words in y• epistle which you quote there be none: & these differ much from the words which you alleage.Apolog. Cap. 1. They baul against the Pastor, the sooner to sease vpon the flocke, as Cypriā speaketh. And so with three may∣med and miswrested authorities you close vp the loosenes of your secōd chapter. Phi. S. Aug. surely meaneth ye see of Rome whē he saith,August. de vti∣litate Credendi Cap. 17. From the A∣postles See, is from the time the Apostles sate or taught in the church. Quae ab Apostolica sede∣per successiones Episcoporū frustra circūlatrantibus haerelicis culmen autoritatis obti∣nuit: Which frō the Apostolik See, by successiōs of bishops, (heretiks barking roūd about in vaine,) hath obtained the highest authority. Theo. Meane what you wil by Apostolike See: ye word (frustra haereticis circumlatrantibus, heretikes barking on euery side in vaine) must be referred either to the chiefest, or els to ye nearest substātiue in ye sentēce, & Sedes apostolica is neither. The chiefest substātiue is the [catholike] church; the nearest is, the successiōs of bishops on one side, the heigth of authoritie on ye other side.August. de vti∣litate credendi Cap. 17. For thus saith Aust. Shal we dout to cōmit our selues to the bosome of that [catholike] church, which by the confessiō of al mē, frō the Apostles seate [or time] by [many] successiōs of bishops, heretiks barking on euery side in vaine, hath gotten the chiefest credite or authoritie? By this assertiō heretikes did bark in vaine either at ye catholike church it selfe, or at the successiōs of bishops, or at ye credite & authoritie which the Church of Christ had by ye confessiō of al mē. But yt they did bark in vaine at ye see of Rome, I find no such thing in these words of Aust. Phi. The church receiued her autho∣ritie frō ye Apostolik See, which is Rome. Theo. The phrase ab ipsa Petri sede, frō Peters seate, which is vsual in S. Aust. & more effectual thē this, doth not signifie frō Rome, but from Peters seat. As Numerate sacerdotes vel ab ipsa Petri sede. Nū∣ber the priests (not frō Rome,August. in Psalmo contrae partem Donati. but) frō Peters seate; that is, frō Peters time. And again, Tenet me ab ipsa Petri sede successio sacerdotū: The succession of priests frō Peters time staieth me in the church. And likewise in this place, Ab apostolica se∣de,Idem contrae epistolam quam vocant Funda∣menti, Cap. 4. From, not in the Apostles seate. frō the apostles seat, is, euer since ye apostle sate: & yt the words following con∣firme. For in Rome you can recken but one successiō of bishops: & Austē saith, Ab apostolica sede per successiones Episcoporū, by many successions of bishops euen frō the apostles time. So yt neither the words which you alleage, should be referred to Sedes Apostolica, the apostolike seate, nor if they were doth y• phrase infer y• the church had al her credite frō Rome, but y• by the confessiō of al men, the [catho∣like] Church had bene in greatest credite euer since the time that Peter sate, through the successions of [her] bishops, heretiks barking [against her] in vain. Phi. You said there was nothing in our secōd chapter worth answering: it hath cost you more paines thē you thought. Theo. Your general & dissolute discourses I told you were to litle purpose. For grant yt some godly men resorted to Rome, whiles the bishop there was equal with his brethren & obediēt to the magistrate, which is all that you proue; what doth this help you, to cōclude that you may now runne to Rome, the Pope clayming and vsurping a newe founde power repug∣nant to the scriptures, iniurious to the Church of Christ, and pernitious to the
Prince, whom God hath annoynted ouer you. Phi. In our dayes the Pope clai∣meth a new found power ouer the church and Prince. Apolog. Cap. 2.The Pope claymeth no such power as you speake of. Theo. What power he claimeth & vseth ouer princes, is too wel knowen for you to denie. The worlde hath had long experience of it, this Realme hath had late. What autho∣ritie he chalengeth ouer the Church of Christ, if he did keepe secret, you doe not. You make him the rocke of refuge in doubtful daies & doctrines, the chiefe pastor & Bishop of your soules in earth. The vicar generall of Christ: and he that taketh these titles to himselfe without alowance from God, is an enemie to Christ, & oppres∣seth his Church. Phi. God hath allowed the Bishop of Rome that power which he claymeth. Theo. That if you could proue, the matter were answered; & that til you do proue, your popular perswasions are, as I said, but lip-labour, and no way concerne the cause. Phi. That is & shal be proued. Theo. Neuer feede vs with shales, you neuer were, nor euer shall be able to proue it. Phi. Suspend your iudgement till you see the end. Theo. I am content to heare all, mary in the meane time you may not presume that which is but lightly touched by you, to be clerely proued. Phi. We wil not. Theo. By that which you haue done I gesse what you wil do. We haue discussed two chapters of your Apology: where we found nothing but words. And therefore vnlesse you drawe to some matter, I see no reason why I should stand refelling your phrases. Phi. The thirde chap∣ter goeth neerer. Theo. The intent of the Popes Seminaries.In your third chapter what shall we find? Phi. The meaning & pur∣pose why both our Seminaries were erected. Theo. Your owne purposes you can best tell. Phi. First to draw diuers youth who for their conscience liued in the lowe Countries, from sole, seueral & voluntarie studie, to a more exact methode & course of common conference & publike exercise to be pursued by their superiours appointment rather than their own choyse. Secondly doubting the time of our chastisement might be so long as to weare out either by age, imprisonment, or other miseries, the elder sort of the learned Catholikes both at home and abroad, it was thought a necessarie duetie for th posteritie to prouide for a perpetual seed & supplie of Catholikes, namely of the Clergie. Thirdly their purpose was, to draw vnto this College the best wits out of England, that were either Catholikely bent, or desirous of more exact educatiō than is in these daies in either of the vniuersities (where through the delicacie of that sect, there is no Art holy or prophane throughly studied, & some not touched at al) or that had scruple of cōsciēce to take the oth of the Queenes supremacie in causes ecclesiastical, or that misliked to be forced to the Ministerie, as the vse is in diuers Colleges: a calling contemptible euen in their own conceipt, & very damnable in the iudgement of others, or that were dout∣ful whether of the two religions were true, which hath driuē diuers ouer to their great satisfaction, & admiration of the euidence of our part. These were the chiefe re∣spects that led his holines to found our two Seminaries, the fruits wherof we haue seene to our great comfort. Theo. And this I see, you keep your old wont. You affirme what you list vpon your own credite; & disdaining your aduersaries as prophane & vnlearned, you cōmend your selues for the onely minions of the world: set this aside, and what one thing is there in your third chapter worth the
speaking to. Phi. You mislike that Seminaries were appointed for English Students beyond the seas. We now proue the first erection of them to be needful & health∣full for this realme. Theo. Sir, your liege Ladie misliked and had good cause so to doe, that her subiects were locked from her & encouraged against her by your practises & promises, & that her open and sworne enemie kept them in co∣uerts, which you cal Seminaries, and trayned them vp at his charges to bee fit instruments for his secret deuises and purposes. Of this you speake not a word, but arrogantly defacing both Uniuersities with loosenes of life & slackenes of studie, you come in with your exact education, & holy conuersation, as if the re∣port of your owne vertues from your owne mouthes were enough to auoyd and preuent al obiections. Phi. That answere might serue, where nothing was pro∣ued, but only surmised against vs. Theo. You forget that a Prince did obiect it, to whom you were bound with all reuerence and duetie to make your ful and sufficient answere. Phi. So haue we done. Theo. Mary that you haue in deede. The things misliked were these.What things were misliked in the Semi∣naries. First, that by your meanes yong boyes were prouoked and allured to forsake their parents, vnstable wittes their Studies, subiects their Prince without asking leaue, no tyrannie nor torment inflicted or offered to cause them to flie. Next, that your seminaries, as well for their direc∣tion as prouision, do wholy depend on his pleasure & fauour, that hath euer since the beginning professed & shewed himselfe a mortal enemie to your soueraigne; deposing her Person, inuading her land, and pulling her subiects from her obe∣dience. Thirdly, that your teachers & learners in either of your colleges, do not only nourish this trayterous position in their own brests, that her highnesse nei∣ther is, nor ought to bee taken for lawfull Queene of England longer than the Pope shall permit: but also labour to poyson her people with that diuelish per∣swasion, vnder colour of religion. These points your Patrone cunningly skip∣peth, and falleth to the cōmending and preferring the maners, orders, & vertues of your two Colleges before our two vniuersities, which comparison is neither seemely to be published, nor easie to be credited. Phi. Concerning his holinesse intentions,Apolog. cap. 3. if they be any other in the institution & en∣tertainement of those Seminaries, than ours are, they by vnknowen to vs, none being so presumptuous to search further into his secrets than standeth with his good pleasure & wisedome to vtter of himselfe, nor any hauing iust cause to deeme worse or otherwise of his doings, than is agreeable to his high calling, approued good affection to our Country, his great vertue, and the euidence of the thing. Theo. The Iesuites know not the Popes inten∣tion, and yet they take part with him a∣gainst their Prince.In trueth we seeke for your founders intentions, not for yours: and therefore this onely sentence in all your third chapter maketh toward the matter in question, which you conclude with an ignoramus, protesting his holines intentions to be vnknowen to you. Phi. Uerily so are they. Theo. You may winke at noone dayes & say you see nothing: yet this you know, that subiects should not leaue their prince vpon euery dislike and flee the Country, much lesse linke and ioyne themselues with the Princes foes: least of all take the crowne from the Princes head, at the Popes becke. His secretes
though you search not, these doings you may soone discerne. Phi. We be farre from any such dealings. Theo. As farre as water from the Tems. Do none flee the realme to come to your Seminaries? Phi. They may flee that be persecuted. Theo. Doth the prince persecute children in Grammer schooles? Phi. Apol. Cap. 3. Iesuits draw∣ers of childrē from their Parents, and subiects from their Prince. Apolog. Cap. 3.That in cōscience were too much. Theo. Yet you confesse, Grammer scholers from al parts of the realme haue yeelded you many youthes, & many (gentlemens sonnes specially) aduenture ouer to you without their parents consent, and sometimes much a∣gainst their wils. And think you this lawful to entice children from their parents, & subiects frō their Prince, to be infected by you before they can iudge of you? Phi. We do not entice them to come, but instruct them when they come. Theo. Re∣member you not, your third purpose was to draw into these Colleges the best wittes out of England? So that your owne wordes conuince you to be drawers, which is all one with enticers of boyes from their schooles, of childrē from their parents, and this I winne, you can hardly defend to be Catholike. Besides, your purpose was to draw (for this is your terme) those that were desirous of exact education,Apolog. Cap. 3. or had scru∣ple of conscience to take the oth of the Queenes supremacie, or that misliked to be forced to the ministerie, or that were doubtful whether of the two religions were true. So that your Seminaries be not only receits for such as be lightly touched by the lawes of this Realme, but harbours for all that bee desirous, scrupulous, dislykers or doubters: that is in effect, baits for all mens appetites, & marts for all mens pur∣poses, that be any way greeued with the State, or affect nouelties. What is it to be the slaues of men if this be not? Campion in his 2. article.Next that you be fedde and clothed at the Popes expences, and in such thral∣dome to the Popes agent, your superiour as you call him, that you will and must accept his voice, as a warrant from heauen and an oracle of Christ, since you proclaime it, we need not proue it. And this is to be right of the Popes fold and familie, whose hatred and hostilitie to the Prince and this Realme how deadly and daily it hath been and is, England, Ireland, yea Rome it selfe can witnes; and if you would dissemble neuer so deeply, you neither are nor can be ignorant. Campion & Parsons did aske leaue of the Pope to agnise her maiestie for lawful Queene, vntil the Bul might be put in exe∣cution: Or if these be not suffici∣ent, the late defence will serue for all. In his 40. motiue.Lastly what you thinke and teach of her Maiesties right to the Crowne since Pius the fift gaue foorth his Bull to depriue her of the same, if Sanders monar∣chie, Bristoes motiues, Campions & Parsons dispensation did not fully conuince, the answere of your fellowes vpon their examinacions & at their araignements, your refusal to speake when you be required, and ambiguous maner of speaking when you be therto pressed, do plainely shew you that you thinke that which you dare not vtter, & teach more than you would haue known. Or if that which is past be not proofe enough, for your better discharge let vs haue your answere at this present: Is her Maistie right and lawfull Queene of this Realme notwithstan∣ding the Pope did or doe depose her? Phi. You now digresse from our purpose. Theo. Then belike obedience to ye magistrate doth not stand with your purpose. Phi. Your question is very dangerous. Theo. No danger at all if you be good subiects. Phi. As good subiects as you for your liues. Theo. And, as Bristowe saith, better; saue that crakes be common with Iesuites. But this is a shrewd signe of an ill subiect, to refuse to confesse your rightfull Prince. Phi. Wee
be not Iudges betweene the Pope and the Queene. Theo. So said Campion at the kings bench, but til you make vs some directer answere, geue vs leaue to take your seminaries, if not for schooles of treason, yet at least for nourceries of disobedience. Your opinion in this point if it be good, why doe you not confesse it? If it be nought, why doe you not reuoke it? Your Apologie should haue either defied it as no part of your meaning,And that your defence of English Catholikes expressely doth. or els defended it as honest and lawfull. You doe neither in this place; but flattering the Pope you beleeue it, and fearing the Prince you conceale it. And least your dissembling should be suspected, you fill this chapter with needlesse vagaries, from your selues to your aduersaries, from doctrine to manners, from Englande to Scotland, auouching what you list, defa∣ming whom you can, presuming al that you dreame to be true without care, with∣out cause; without shame, without sense. Phi. You raile Theophilus.Apol. Cap. 3. Theo. And what doe you Philander; when you say, The fruites of the Protestants doctrine, their prophane life and manners, their restlesse contentions, debates, and dissentions among themselues, their scandals mo in those fewe dayes of their felicitie, than was giuen of the true Clergie in a thousand yeres before, though al the aduersaries slaunderous reports of them were Gospel, as many of them bee more false than Esops Fables.Apolo. chap. 3. And againe of Scotland you say, The Caluinists hor∣rible infamous murdering of his highnesse father, and more than barbarous vilany and misuse of his deerest mother whiles shee was among them, & the sundry detestable trea∣sons cōtriued against his Roial person when he was yet in his mothers womb, as oftē since, as wel otherwise by wonted treacheries, as by infecting his tender age both with their damnable heresie, and with ill affection towards his deerest parents. What cal you this, if it bee not railing? What libell could be more lewde and infamous than this? Happie men are you that may thus disdaine, reproch, belie and reuile others and not be counted railers. Touching our liues, we will say litle, we referre the iudgement therof to such as be sober; neither doe we denie, but that among so great a number as this realm yeeldeth, it is easie to finde some that serue not God but their bellies, and seeke not Christ but theire owne. And yet I see no cause why you should ouerlash so much in excusing your selues and accusing others, as if our scandals (so it plea∣seth you to speake) were mo in these fewe daies,Experiments of Popes and their clergie out of the re∣ports of their owne friends. than yours in a thousand yeres before. For if those things be true, which not our fauorers, but your owne fellowes haue reported & lamented in no worse than the fountaines of your faith, and heads of your Church; I wil not say the refues of England, but euen the Priests of Baal and Bacchus, were Saints in comparison of so lewd and into∣lerable monsters. Stephanus the sixt,Martin. Polo. in an. 898.907. Platina in Ste∣pha. 6. & Ser∣gio 3. Luitpr and▪ Ti∣cinensis li 6. ca. 6. & 7. and Sergius the third pulled Formosus their predecessor out of his graue, the one cutting off his fingers, the other his head, and cast his carkas into Tybris. Iohn the twelfth gaue orders in a stable amongst his hor∣ses, abused his fathers concubine, made his pallace a stues, put out his Ghost∣ly fathers eyes, gelded one of his Cardinals, ranne about in armes to set how∣ses on fiar, drank to the diuel, and at dise called for help of Iupiter and Venus.
Martin. Polon. in anno 986. Platina in Bonifacio 7. Platina in Syluestro 2.Boniface the seuenth getting the Popedom by il meanes, robbed Saint Pe∣ters church of al the Iewels & pretious things he could find, & ranne his waies; & returning not long after, caught one of his Cardinals & put out his eies. Syluester the seconde, leauing his Monasterie, betooke himselfe wholly to the diuel, by whose help he gate to be Pope; on this condition, that after his death he should be the diuels both bodie and soule. Benedict the ninth sold his Popedome to Gregorie the sixt,Platina in Benedicto 9. and was therefore worthily blamed of all men, and by Gods iudgement condemned. For it is certaine that after his death he appeared in an ougly shape,Martin. Polon. in anno 1042. (with the head and taile of an asse, & the body of a beare) and being asked what that horrible sight ment, because, saith he, whiles I was Pope, I liued like a beast, without law, without reason, defiling the Chaire of Peter with al kind of lewdnes. Beno Cardinalis de vita & ge∣stis Hildebrād.Of Gregorie the seuenth and his adherents Beno ye cardinal writeth thus: Let these hypocrites hold their peace, that haue disgraced & almost drouned the name of blessed Peter, by cloking the flames of their malice, vnder a colour of Catholicisme & pretēce of iustice. Let these false prophets be astonished that are curteous in shew, scorpiōs in sting, wolues vnder lambs skinnes, killing the bodies & deuouring the soules of men with the sword of their mouth, whose religion sauoureth nothing but of traiterousnes and couetousnes, entring the houses of widowes, they lead women captiues that bee loden with sinnes; and by reason of our troublesome times giue eare to spirits of error and do∣ctrines of diuels, which Hildebrand their captain learned of his maisters Bene∣dict the ninth, and Gregorie the sixt. Abbas vrsper∣gensis in anno 1228.Gregorie ye ninth, as Vrspergensis cōplaineth, taking occasion by the Empe∣rours absence (that was fighting against the Turke,) sent a great armie into A∣pulia, and inuaded & subdued the Emperours dominions being thē in the ser∣uice of Christ; a fact most hainous: and did his best both in Apulia and Lum∣bardie to hinder such as were going that viage from passing the Sea (seeking thereby to betray the Christian Emperour & his armie to the Turke:Ibidem.) Yea the men of Verona & Millan would suffer none to passe by their coasts, spoyling the very souldiers that were sent to fight against the Turke, and that by the cōmandement of the Pope as they affirmed: which alas is horrible to be spo∣ken. Who rightly considering, wil not lament and detest these things, as por∣tending and foreshewing the ruine of the Church? Math. Paris in anno 1213.Mathewe Paris giueth Innocentius the 3. this commendation. King Iohn, saith he, knew and by often experience had tried, that the Pope aboue al mor∣tal men was ambitious and proude, an vnsatiable thirster after money, and easie to be drawen and induced to all wickednes by gifts or promises. Sixtus the fourth, made his playfelow Cardinal, who was wont to weare cloth of gold at home in his house,Baptist. fulgo. lib. 9. Agrippa de Le∣inio & orat. ad Lounienses. to ease nature in stooles of siluer, and to deck his harlot Tiresia with shoes couered with pearle: as Agrippa reporteth, he built a sumpteous stewes in Rome, appointing it to be both masculine and feminine, and making a gaine of that beastly trade: As Vuesselus Gronnigensis sayth, he
gaue the whole familie of the Cardinal of S. Luce,Vuesselu Grō∣nigensis tract. de Indulgenijs. free leaue in Iune, Iulie, & August, to vse that which nature abhorreth, & God in Sodome reuenged with fire and brimstone. One of your owne side perceiuing the lothsomnes of his life, maketh the diuel giue him this entertaynment in hell: At tu implume caput, cui tanta licentia quondam,Baptist. Mant. Alphon. lib. 4. Femineos fuit in coitus; tua furta putabas Hic quoque praetextu mitrae impunita relinqui? Sic meruit tua faeda venus, sic prodigia in omnem Nequitiam, ad virtutis opus tua auara libido. But thou, thou bauld pate, which hast so licentiously defiled thy self with women, didst thou thinke thy secrete sinnes by reason of thy myter shoulde here goe vnpunished? Receiue the rewarde of thy filthie pastimes, so hath thine outragious lust to all lewdnes, and voyde of all goodnes, deserued. It is too shameful that Iohannes Iouianus Pontanus writeth of Lucretia the daughter of Alexander the sixt.Pontan. tumu∣lorum lib. 2. in tumulo Lu∣cretiae Alexan. 6. filiae. Hoc tumulo dormit Lucretia nomine, sedre Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus. Here lyeth Lucretia in name, in deede a shamelesse whore; the daughter of [Pope] Alexander, her fathers & brothers harlot. The fact so horrible, that it were not credible,Acti Sannazar. epigram. lib. 1. & 2. if others did not confirme the same. I will trouble chast eares no longer with this vnsauory repetition. These disorders of Popes if you weigh them well be more than scandalous, & giue you smal cause to vaunt of your vertues. Phi. These be the things that we told you, were more false than Esops fables. Theo. It were reason you shoulde proue them false, before you reiect them as fables: men of your owne sect and side laying thē down for truths in their writings, you may not now take vpō you to pronounce them fables, lest your credite be called in question, & your selues reputed to bee worse than lyars. These things, be they true, bee they false, wee report them as we find them in your owne stories; not your aduersaries but your welwillers were the first autors of them. And vnlesse wee see some surer ground than your bare deniall, we may better charge you with open flatterie, than you may them wt wilful forgerie. Phi. The number is not great though y• matters were true. Theo. The rest of their outrages if I would recken; namely their schismes, cō∣tentions & tumults for the Popedom, their ambition, presumption, oppression; briberie, periurie, tyrannie; pride, craft, hypocrisie; to conclude their garboyles, battailes and bloodshed; an whole volume would not suffice. And where you make your Clergie so free from scandals, heare what men of former times and of your owne side haue spoken and written of your Bishops, Priests, Monkes and others. Bernard of his age.Bernard. supra Cant. serm. 33. The Iesuites promise high experiments of their Ro∣mane institu∣tion; the pat∣ternes where∣of if any man will see, let him ead these com∣plaints of their owne fellowes. Behold, saith he, these times very much defiled with the worke that walketh in darknes. Wo bee to this generation because of the leauen of Pharisees, which is hypocrisie; If it may be called hypocrisie, which is now so rife, that it can not; and so shamelesse, that it seeketh not to bee kept secrete. A rotten contagion creepeth at this day through the whole body of the Church, the wyder the desperater; the
more inward, the more deadly. All friends, & al enemies: al familiar; & none peacemakers; they be the ministers of Christ, & serue Antichrist. Thēce is it, as thou maist dayly see, that they be trimmed like whoores, attired like plai∣ers, serued like Princes. Thence is it, that they wear gold in their bridles, sa∣dles & spurs; yea their spurs shine brighter, than the Altars: thence are their bankets & drunkennes; thence their musike & instrumēts; thence their wine presses running ouer, & stoarehouses stuffed with all varietie; thence their barrels of oyntments to paint thēselues; thence their bags & bugets full. For these things are they, & seek they to be rulers of churches, Deanes, Archdea∣cons, Bishops, Archbishops. The wound of the Church is inward & incura∣ble. Rest frō infidels, rest frō heretikes, but not from children. They haue des∣pised & defiled [her] with their filthie life, with their filthie gain, with their filthie trade.Sermo. ad Cle∣rum in concil. Rhmensi con∣gregatum inter opera Bernardi. Ye be called Pastors, when in deed ye be spoylers, and woulde God the milke & fleese did suffice ye, ye thirst for blood. The Archpriest vi∣siteth his charge to fil his purse; he betraieth innocent blood, he selleth mur∣ders, adultries, incests, fornications, acrileges, periuries, & filleth his pouch to the brim. And as for the ornament of chastitie, how keep they that, which being deliuered into a reprobate sense, do that which is not fit? It is a shame to name those things, which the bishops do in secrete. But why should I be ashamed to speak that, which they are not ashamed to do? Yea the Apostle is not ashamed to write, mē vpon mē work filthines, receiuing the reward of their error. With the patrimony of the crosse of Christ you feede whores in your chambers,Idem sermo. ad Pastores in Synodo con∣gregatos. you fat your flesh, you furnish your horses with pectorals & headstals of golde. For this you claw Princes and Powers of darkenes, both men and diuels. Hee that list to reade more of your scandals, may in that place whence this is taken, haue enough. Albert. in Ioh. Cap. 10.Albertus Magnus of his time giueth this testimonie: Those which now rule in the Church, be for the most part theeues & murderers, rather oppressors than feeders, rather spoilers than tutors, rather killers than keepers, rather peruerters than teachers, rather seducers than leaders. These be the messen∣gers of Antichrist, and vnderminers of the flocke of Christ. Opusculi tri∣partiti parte 3. Cap. 7. reperi∣tur in tomo conciliorum 2.The tripartite worke that standeth next to the Councel of Lateran vnder In∣nocentius the 3. long since complained of your Clergie in this sort: So great is the notorious vncleannes of lecherie in many partes of the worlde, not in clerks only, but in Priests also, & that (which is horrible to heare) in the pre∣lates thēselues. Again, they spend the goods of the Church so badly, in vani∣ties, superfluities, setting vp & aduancing their kinsmen, and in many other riots & sinnes; yea there is such a number, & those no smale ones, that do no good in the church, but spend their daies in pleasures by reasō of the wealth of the church, that it is much to be feared, least God for these & other hay∣nous offences [of the clergie] passing great, very many, & now inueterate; do ouerthrowe, or cause the ecclesiastical state to bee ouerthrowen, as it came to passe in the Iewes first exalted by God, and after destroyed for euer. Holcot 20. yeres since. The Priests of our age, sayth he, be like the Priestes
of Baal:Holcot in lib. Sapientiae lectio. 182. Platina in vi∣ta Marcellini. they are wicked Angels: they resemble the Priestes of Dagon: they are Priestes of Priapus and Angels of hell. And lest you should dreame that nearer our time your Clergie began to bee better reformed, Platina saith, What shall we thinke will become of our age, wherein our vices are growen to that heighth, that they skant haue left vs place with God for mercie? How great the couetousnes of priests is, & espe∣cially of the rulers amōg thē, how great their lecherie of al sorts, how great their ambition & pompe, how great their pride & slouth, howe grosse their ignorance both of thēselues & of christian doctrine, how smal their deuotiō, & that rather fained than true, how corrupt their maners, I neede not speak. Frier Mantuan not long after him,Mantua. Calae∣mitatum lib. 3. in that point agreeth with him. Petrique domus polluta fluenti Marcescit luxu, nulla hic arcana reuelo, Non ignota loquor: liceat vulgata referre. Sic vrbes populique ferunt, ea fama per omnem Iam vetus Europam mores extirpat honests. Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara Cynedis Seruit, honorandae diuum Ganimedibus edes. Quid miramur opes recidiuaque surgere tecta? Venalia nobis Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae, Ignes, thura, preces, celum est venale deusque. The house of Peter defiled with excessiue riote is quite decayed; I reueale here no secrets, neither speak I things vnknown: I may vtter that which is in euery mans mouth. Cities & Countries talke of it, & the very bruite thereof scatered lōg since ouer al Europe hath quēched al care of vertue. The church lands are giuen to cōmon Iesters: the sacred altar allotted to wantons: the temples of saints to boyes prouided for filthie lust. Why wonder wee to see wealth flow, and houses that were fallen to be stately built? We sell temples, Priests, Altars, sacrifices, garlands, fier, frankensense, prayers, wee sell heauen and God himselfe. Of your Priests he sayth,Ibidem. Inuisi superis faedaque libidine olentes Heu frustra incestis iterant sacra orgia dextris. Irritant, irasque mouent, non numina flectunt. Nil adiutoribus istis Auxilij sperate, nouis date templa ministris; Sacrilegum genus ex adytis templisque Deorum Pellite, nec longos scelera haec vertantur in vsus. Hateful to heauen, & lothsome with vncleane lust, alas in vaine attempt they sacred rites with incestuous hands. They rather kindle and prouoke God, than appease him: neuer hope for help as long as such pray for you: giue the Churches to new ministers, and chase this sacriligious generation from the diuine places; neither let their haynous sinnes grow to a custome. By him wee may learne what fruits to looke for of your Romish Seminarie.Mantuan. ecoga 5. Heu Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat,
Exilium virtus patitur. Idem factorum lib. 2. de carni∣spriuij con∣suetud. Vrbs est iam tota lupanar. Idem Sylua∣rum, lib. 1.Roma quid insanis toties? quid sanguine gaudes? Quid geris imbelli spicula tanta manu? Si foris arma tacent, tu bella domestica tentas, Nec feritas requiem ferre superba potest. Tu fratres in bella vocas, in pignora patres, Et scelus omne audes, & paris omne nefas. Fas & iura negas, homines & numina fallis, Nec Iouis imperium, nec Phlegethonta times. Alas at Rome now nothing but money doth raign, vertue is quite banished: the whole Citie is a stewes. Rome why art thou so often mad? why delightest thou in blood? Why with weake hands dost thou assay so mightie weapons? If peace be abroad, thou makest war at home; neither can thy fierce pride a∣way with rest. Thou settest brother against brother, father against sonne, thou venterest on al mischief & hatchest al vilany: thou regardest neither right nor law: thou beguilest both God & man: thou feaest neither heauen nor hell. Auentinus annalium Bolo∣rum lib. 6. praefat.Auentinus a man likewise of your side and not long since aliue complaineth not without cause. Since [the Bishop of Rome] hath so great power, why doth he not vse it? since the haruest is so great, why doth hee not reape? why doth he not feed when he seeth so many sheepe die for hunger? Why doth he set ouer the flocke, goates, wolues, libidinous, adulterous persons, abusers of vir∣gins and Nunnes, cookes, Mulettors, theeues, banckers, vsurers drones, hun∣ters after gayne, luxurious, perfidious, forsworne, ignorant asses? I speake not by hearesay; I write that I see with these eyes. Why doth he cōmit sheepe to wolues? why doth he suffer his flocke to be in subiection to most perniti∣ous hypocrites, prouiding only for their owne bellies? nay why doth hee let boyes & wantons rule his lambes? I am ashamed to say what manner of Bi∣shops we haue. With the reuenues of the poore they feede houndes, horses; I need not say whores; they quaffe, they make loue, & flee all learning as in∣fection. Such is the miserie of these times, we may not speak that we thinke, nor thinke that we speake. As for the sheepe committed to their charge; to sheere them, strip them, and kill them, as euery man list, vnder a pretence of deuotion, is now an auncient custome. If one witnes be not sufficient, you shal haue more, & those of your not our re∣ligion, to confesse the same. Palingenius an Italian suppliant to the Church of Rome describeth at large the monsterous corruption of your Romane Clergie.Marcel. Palin. Zodiaci vitae lib. 5. in Leone. Sed tua praecipue non intret limina quisquam Frater vel Monachus, vel quauis lege sacerdos. Hos fuge, pestis enim nulla hac immanior. Hi sunt Faex hominum, fons stultitiae, sentina malorum. Agnorum sub pelle lupi, mercede colentes, Non petate Deum: falsa sub imagine recti Decipiunt stolidos, ac relligionis in vmbra,
Mille actus vetitos, & mille piacula condunt. Raptores, moechi, puerorum corruptores Luxuriae atque gulae famuli celestia vendunt. Hos impostores igitur, vulpesque dolosas Pelle procul. Mystae vafrique cuculliIdem lib. 6. in Virgine. Quos castos decet esse, palam cum pellicibus vel Furtim cum pueris, matronis, virginibusque Nocte dieque subant: sunt qui consanguiniarum Inguinibus gaudent: ineunt pecudes quoque multi: Prô pudor, hos tolerare potest ecclesia porcosIdem lib. 9. in Sagittario. Duntaxat ventri, veneri somnoque vacantes? Let no Frier, Monke or any Priest come within thy dores. Take heede of them; no greater mischiefe. These are the dregges of men, the fountaines of follie, the sinckes of sinne, wolues vnder lambes skinnes, sruing God for re∣ward, not deuotion; deceiuing the simple with a false shewe of honestie; and vnder the shadow of religion hyding a thousand vnlawfull actes, a thousand haynous offences: committers of rapes, fornicators, abusers of boyes, slaues of gluttonie and luxurie, they sel heauenly things. These imposters & craftie foxes chase farre from thee. The Priests and Monkes that shoulde bee chast, spend night and day either openly with whoores or closely with boyes, ma∣trones and maydes. Some spare neither blood, nor beast. O shame! Can the Church endure such hogs giuen only to feed their bellies, satisfie their lusts, and take their ease? Cornelius one of the bishops that were present at your late councel of Trent in the midst of your assemblie doth acknowlege that to be true which Auentinus and Palingenius before complayned of.Oratio Cornelij Epi. Bitonti. 3. Dominica ad∣uent. in concil. Triden habit. With what monsters of filthines, saith he, with what canel of vncleannes, with what pestiferous contagion are not both people and priests defiled and corrupted in the holy church of God? I make your selues Iudges, and beginne at the sanctuarie of God; if there were any shamefastnes, any chastitie, any hope or helpe of honest conuersation left: if there were not lust vnbridled and vntamed, singular boldnes, and in∣credible wickednes. For those two bloodsuckers, which alwayes crie bring, bring; one the mother, the other the nource of all euill; I meane couetousnes & ambition, either a secrete and subtile mischiefe, poyson, plague, and mon∣ster of the worlde (whiles learning and vertue are despised, and in their pla∣ces ignorance & vice highly aduanced by those whom we should take for quicke and liuing lawes) haue brought to passe that edification is changed to destruction, examples to offences, custome to corruption, regard of lawes to contempt thereof,Experiments confessed in the late Councl of Trent. seueritie to slacknes, mercie to impunitie, pietie to hy∣pocrisie, preaching to contention, solemne dayes to filthie Mares, and that which is most vnhappie, the sauour of life to the sauour of death. Would god they were not fallen with one consent from religion to superstition, from
faith to infidelitie, from Christ to Antichrist, yea from God to Epicurisme, saying with their wicked hearts and shamelesse faces, there is no God. The Turkes proude with the victories, and rich with the spoyles that they haue gotten frō Christiās; grew not by their own strength, but by our corrupt ma∣ners; they were not so much enemies, as scourges from God; their weapons assaulted vs, but our sinnes preuailed against vs; they shewed their fiercenes, we suffred for our iniquities. And would God we alone had suffered, & that the sacred & admirable name of Christ Iesu had not bin a iest & fable amōg the faithlesse Iewes and Gentiles by reason of vs, whose slouthfulnes & wic∣kednes is bruted ouer all the world with a most shamefull report. Phi. You neede not reproch vs so bitterly, your selues bee not free from all faults. Theo. I neuer said we were. I know these be the later times, when ini∣quitie shall abound,Mat. 24. 2. Tim. 3. and the charitie of many waxe cold, yea when men shall be louers of themselues, couetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, vngrate∣full, vnholy, vnkinde, vnfaithfull slaunderers, intemperate, fierce, headie, high minded, preferring their pleasures before God, as the holy Ghost fore∣told vs they should. Of this soyle many no doubt on either side, yours and ours, haue a tast at this day: but in vnshamefastnes you passe all others; that the wide world crying shame on the manifold corruption of your clergie & that Citie, you only step forth wtout any blushing to denie that which your nearest friends haue confessed,Apolo. chap. 2. & with insolēt words to promise this land high experimēts & innumera∣ble examples of vertue & deuotion, as if that sinke of sin were lately become a foū∣taine of grace, or ye famous whore of Babilō newly changed into chast Ierusalē. The main drift of their Apologie was to flatter the Pope, to magnifie thē∣selues, and to dissemble their wicked∣nes against the Prince with colou∣rable preten∣ces and spea∣ches, which they haue ful∣ly performed.But you must bee borne with; your purpose was to lift & extoll Gregorie the 13. aboue the skies, thereby to kindle his loue and deuotion towards your Col∣leges, as very zealous for his highnes & holines, which you could not wel do but by deiecting and disgracing those that vtterly refused him, as lewd & light per∣sons. And this maketh you so falsly without al truth, so boldly without al shame, so desperately without all feare to belie both England & Scotland, as if our dis∣orders in twentie yeres were mo than yours in a thousand: and theApol. Cap. 3. The Iesuites haue a com∣mission to be∣ly whom they list without controlemēt. treacheries, treasons, murders, & vilanies done in Scotland, were ye protestants doings: which virulent & impudent reproches vttered against two Christian Common weales without any maner or colour of truth, shew what liquor boyleth in your hearts, and what humour raigneth in your heades. Phi. And what salt seasoneth your mouth when you raile at Rome so fast as you do? Theo. If I report any thing of Rome which your own fellowes doe not witnes, let it go for a slander: but what proofe bring you, that in Scotlande the professors of the Gospell murdered the kinges father, or sought to destroy their Prince when he was yet in his mothers wombe? Phi. Sure it is, the kings fa∣ther was horribly murdered amongst them. Theo. Can you tel by whom? Phi. I can not tel: but he lost his life. Theo. No doubt of that, but who did the deed? Phi. It was secretly done in the night season, we know not by whom; of likely∣hood by enemies. Theo. It could be no friendship to murder him in his bed: ne∣uer
heard you,Mat. 10. A mans enemies shalbe they of his owne houshold? But since you know not the doer, is it not mere malice in you to charge your enemies, and not his with it; especially those, that did hazard their liues to reuenge his death? Phi. A faire reuenge, to displace their Queene for other mens faults. Theo. If y• Nobles of Scotland did any thing against their Queen, which the lawes of that land did not warrant, wee defend them not: you were best obiect it to them, they can answere for themselues. Yet are you not ignorāt whom they deepely charge with the death of that Earle: but I wil not meddle with other mens matters: I returne to this land,Apolog. Cap. 3. where you say you haue wrought great alteration of mindes throughout the whole Realme, & wonderfull increase of courage in all sortes, not only to thinke well in heart, but openly and boldly to prosesse their faith and religion, and re∣fuse all actes contrarie to the same. Phi. And this haue we done only by the power of priesthood in spiritual,Apolog. Cap. 3. silent and peaceable maner, & not with riots, tumults or warlike concourse: we haue done it as the Apostles & other holy mē did in the primatiue church, by trauels, watchings, fastings, perils at the Portes, perils in the Sea, perils on the Land, perils of open enemies, perils of false brethrē, feares of the laws, feares of hurting our frinds, feares for scandalising the weake: by contumelies, disgraces, pouerties, prisonmēts, fetters, dungeons, racks, deaths. And this the omnipotent God, because it is his owne worke, enterprised by order and au∣thoritie of his chiefe Minister in earth, hath prospered exceedingly: though it seemed at the beginning a thing hard or impossible, you hauing so many yeres, the lawes, the sword, the pulpits, and al humane helps for you. Theo. Neuer vaunt of your victories,An ignorant boy with a whispering report mig soone worke this conuersion. vnlesse they were greater. Papists that before dissembled are now by your meanes encouraged to professe your religion against a day: this was no such conquest. The priuie report of a forraine power to be landed in this realme was enough to turne them al. For they which twen∣tie yeres together perished their cōsciences to saue their goods, would they now rather hazard their lands & life, which you threatned; & hinder that action, which they long desired; than shew themselues? The rest of your conuerts be fearefull women,Such tea∣chers such conuerts. hungrie craftesmen, idle prentices, seelie wenches, and peeuish boyes, for the most part voyd of all reason & sense, desirous of nouelties by nature, and soone enticed to any thing: & al the religion you haue taught them, is to name the catholik church as parats, & to pretend their cōsciēces when they lacke al vnder∣stāding of god & godlines. Such in some places for want of good order, haue bin of late inueigled by you, to mislike those with whō they liue, & to fansie that they neuer saw: which was no masterie, cōsidering ye mildenes of our discipline, ye ma∣ner of your whispering, & ye rudenes of those simple soules whom you peruerted. Phi. We did nothing but in spiritual, silent & peaceable maner, as the Apostles & other holy men did in the primatiue Church. Theo. We know you can cōmend your selues: but a man may soone discerne ye fierbrands of Rome, from the disci∣ples of Christ. Throckmortōs kalēder was ye chiefest end of your running ouer, which was to soūd,See Throck∣mortons cō∣fession. whether your pretēded catholiks wold not back any such force as should be sent, to inuade the land. This no Apostle nor any other holy
man in the primatiue Church did: they neuer made religion a cloake for rebel∣lion. Phi. God is our witnes we knew no such thing when we were sent ouer. Theo. But they which sent you, knew what they did. Phi. That was counsell to vs: own  they  superior  voice  oracle  heauen  them. we are bound to obey our superiour that sent vs. Theo. To rebell against your Prince, and to procure others to doe the like, if the Pope commaund you? Phi. We say not so. Theo. But you must doe so. Phi. Can you proue that? Theo. We neede no plainer proofe than your silence. For how say you, will you take her maiestie for lawful and rightful Queene of this Realme, notwithstan∣ding the Pope depriue her? Phi. You still aske mee that question. Theo. Wee must still aske it till you answere it. One woorde of your mouth woulde suffice vs and discharge you from all suspition: which you would neuer refraine if it were not against you. Phi. Remoue the daunger of your lawes, and I will quickly tell you what I think. Theo. That speach is enough to bewray your affection. Our Lawes be not dangerous vnlesse you say the Pope may take the crowne from the Princes head,These two  they . & licence her subiects to rebell against her, which is the treason we charge you with. Phi. Is that so trayterous a position that Popes may depose Princes? Theo. That point you should either freely defend or flatly deny. By that we shall see what the bent and drift was of your late perswading & reconciling so ma∣ny to the Church of Rome. For if this be your doctrine, that such as wil be Ca∣tholikes must obey the Pope deposing the prince, then is it euident, that you sow religion, but intend to reape treason; and make your first entrance with prea∣ching, that afterward you may prepare the people to rebelling. Phi. This is your false surmise, not our meaning. Theo. Then answere mee, What if the Pope publish a Bull to depriue the Queene, which part will you teach the peo∣ple to followe? The Popes or the Queenes? Phi. We will tell you that, when the Pope doth attempt it. Theo. Wel sayde Philander, you play sure to mu∣scer no men till your captaine bee readie, least you loose your labour as the Re∣bels of the North did. Is this the faith and allegeance your Soueraigne Ladie shall looke for at your handes, when strangers inuade, then to resolue which side you will take? Go to masters; if this be subiection, I maruaile what is rebelliō. Phi. His holinesse doth the like things, for almost euery other Nation in distresse, & none so ill, so suspitious, or so vngrateful as to mistrust his benefites to be their destructi∣on, not the Germanes, not the Hungarians, not the Greekes, not any other Prouinces, for al which his holines hath erected Colleges euen as for our Countrie, of which though all take not so much good as they might doe, yet none feare hurt nor make lawes against his holy and charitable actions but we. Theo. Offer that wrong to other Princes euen of your owne religion, which your hly father hath done to her maiestie, and see which of them will doubt to make sharper and sorer lawes against you than her highnes hath yet made. Pro∣nounce them no Princes, inuade their lands, conuert hostilities abroade and at ne to thrust them from their thrones, and then tell vs howe they will reward you. These wicked and diuelish attempts against your Soueraigne you cal
holy and charitable actions, and such is your madnesse, that you blame the State for preuenting and repressing this haynous iniurie with wholsom lawes. Phi. Call you that preuenting of iniurie to put innocēts to death?The Iesuites wile inno∣cents though they teach it to be lawfull for subiectes to resist and murther their Princes. The dispensa∣tion of Cam∣pion and Fa∣ios hath those expresse wordes. Theo. You refuse to confesse that her Highnesse is rightfull Queene of this Realme, and yet would be counted innocentes? Phi. You say not well. We confesse her Ma∣iestie to be true Queene of this Realm. Theo. And ought to be so taken of al her Subiectes, though the Pope depose her? Phi. Why doe you pose vs with the Popes authoritie? That which wee spake was plaine enough. Theo. Not so. You be licenced from Rome to agnise her Grace for true Queene of Englande for a time, vntill the Bull of Pius the 5. may be put in publike execution, that is, vntill shee may by force of armes be violently driuen from the Crowne. Phi. Is it not strange that you report these thinges of vs, and can not proue them? Theo. Is it not stranger that you know these thinges to be true, and yet denie them? Phi. I protest for my part, I know them not. Theo. Wee will reason farther thereof in an other place. I hasten now to your fourth chapter. Phi. Will you leaue S. Hierom vnanswered? Theo. This whole chap∣ter hath neither Scripture nor Father with you, nor against vs, but onely one poore allegation, and therefore we may not skip that in any case; but what saith S. Hierom?Epist. 8. ad De∣meriadem. Phi. This one thing I thinke good of charitable pietie and af∣fection to forewarn thee, that thou hold fast the faith of holie Innocentius who is successour and sonne of the Apostolike chaire, and of the forenamed Anastasius, & that thou receiue not a strange doctrine, though thou seeme to thy selfe neuer so wise and subtile. Theo. This proueth that Innocentius and Anastasius in the dayes of S. Hierom held the true Christian faith; & that the Romanes, (for Demetriades, to whom S. Hierom gaue this counsell, dwelt in Rome) should rather follow the Bishop of their owne Citie teaching sound and Apostolike doctrine, than embrace strange errors vpon presumptiō of wit: What doth this helpe you? Phi. Gregory the 13. that lately liued was their successor & sonne in Seat & beliefe. Theo. Doth S. Hierom say so? Phi. Nay we say so. Theo. Proue that, and set vp your Masse. Phi. In Seat you graunt. Theo. Skant enough. Phi. What not in Seat? Theo. No not in Seat. Phi. Why so? Theo. First, Atheists, heretikes, sorcerers, and women haue been Popes, and that interrupteth your succession.Their succes∣sion interrup∣ted. Next, the plentie of Popes during the two and twentie schismes in the Church of Rome, whereof the last dured 40. yeares, and was so doubtfull, that the best learned and most religious of your side, could not tell which to cleaue to. I say, this pluralitie of Popes at one time confoundeth your reckoning. Thirdly, discontinuance shaketh your seat in peeces; as when Peters chaire was emptie threeskore and fourteene yeares, sixe Popes sitting one after an other, not at Rome but in Auinion in Fraunce. Last of all, the most part of your Popes for these 600. yeares entred not by law∣full and Canonicall election, neither expected the consent of the Romane Prince and people, as they should and were wont to do; but by violence, seditiō,
corruption and bribery inuaded the Seat of Peter. Which fault was so commō, that your best friendes coulde not choose, but finde it. The Popedome, sayth Platina,Platina in Syl∣uestro 3. was come to that passe, (500. yeares agoe) that he which could do most with ambition and briberie, he only obtained the Papal dignitie, good men oppressed and reiected: which manner would God our times had not kept: but this is nothing; we shall see worse, if God preuent it not. In the daies of Damasus the 2. hee saith, This fashion was nowe so rie, that euery ambitious Marchant might catch vppe Peters seat.Idem in Dama∣so 2. Idem in Bene∣dicto 4. And an hundred yeares before that in the time of Benedict the fourth, As soone as the Church, saith he, was indued with riches, and waxed lasciuious; the worshippers of God turning from seueritie to wantonnesse; the great impunity of sinne, no Prince then repressing the lewdnesse of men, bred vs these monsters and mischiefs, who by corruption & ambition rather inuaded than possessed the most holy Seat of Peter.Idē in Ioan. 10. And for a conclusion he saith, The Popes were cleane depar∣ted from Peters steps. Phi. These be trifles, they barre not succession. Theo. They be iust and true exceptions, but for this present I say with S. Hierom, They bee not the sonnes of the Saints,Distinct. 40. c. Non est facile. that occupie their places, but that exercise their works. If Gregorie the 13. taught Peters faith, let him be Peters successor: if he did set forth any other doctrine, he succeeded S. Peter at Rome, no more than the Turke doth S. Iames at Ierusalem, or the Scribes & Pharisees did Moses, in whose chaire they sate, when they crucified the Sonne of God. But we spend time, which might bee better imployed. Phi. Then goe to the fourth chapter which I looked for all this while, that the sight of our proofes and sound of our places, which here we bring against the Princes supremacie, might euen dis∣credite and confounde your newe doctrine. Theo. The impertinent vagaries and plausible colours of your Apologie doe but hinder the seriousnesse of the matter, & fulnesse of the proofe that in this case were requisite; since therfore we be come to the maine foundation of al your doinges, omit your florishing, and fall to a stricter and exacter kinde of reasoning. Phil. Agreed.
THE SECOND PART PROVETH THE PRINCES SVPREME POWER TO command for truth within her Realme: and the Pope to haue been a due∣tifull Subiect to the Romane Emperours Ecclesiasticall Lawes for 800. yeares and vpward: answereth the Iesuites authorities and absurdities heaped against the Princes regiment: searcheth the safest way for the Princes direction in matters of Religion, and concludeth the Pope in doubts of doctrine to be no sufficient nor superiour Iudge. Phi. FIRST then whereas in the Proclamation we be char∣ged to liue contrary to the lawes of God & the Realme,Apoc. cap. 4. sect. 1. &c. We answere that if the lawes of God & the lawes of the Realme did alwaies consent & concur in deed, as in this clause & other cō∣mon writings & speeches proceeding frō autority, they be lightly in words couched togither against vs: hardly could wee defende our doctrines and doings frō error & vnduetifulnes towards our prince. But seeing the lawes of kings and Countries are not euer consonant but may be contrary to Gods commandements, we may iustly mislike the one without disloyalty to the other. When Emperours (saith Augustine) be in errour,Aug. Epist. 166. they make lawes for their errour against the truth, by which iust men are tried & crowned, for not doing that which they command, because God forbiddeth it. Theo. That some princes haue made lawes against God & his truth is a case so cleare that it needed no proofe; as also that wee must rather obey God than men, when their lawes do swarue frō his: & again on the other side that princes haue made lawes for the true seruice & worship of God, & did rightly iudge it to be a part of their charge: & yt all they which resist those lawes, shalbe grieuously punished at Gods hands: though you craftily dissemble, you can not deny: S. Au∣sten in this very place, which you bring for your defence, & the very next words wil tel you so much. Quando autē Imperatores veritatem tenent, pro ipsa veritate contra errorē iubent,Aug. epist. 166. quod quisquis contempserit, ipse sibi iudicium acquirit. When Emperors hold the truth they cōmand for truth against error, which [cōmā∣dement] whosoeuer despiseth he purchaseth to himselfe iudgement.Princes com∣manding for truth must be obeied. For he shalbe punished by mē, & haue no part with God, for not doing that, which truth it selfe by the kings hart commanded him. These words you did wel to cut off, they were enough to mar your market. Phi. Not ours. The. Wil you thē cōfesse that princes may commād for truth & against error, & that whosoeuer despiseth their commandement in those cases shal incur iudgement. So saith S. Austen in plaine wordes. Phi. They may commaund, mary the Church must appoint them what they shall commaund.The Iesuites play with the name of the church. Theo. What mean you by the Church? Phi. What should I meane by the Church, but the church? Theo▪ You loue to play with wordes. Mean you laimen or priests, or both? Phi. Euer heard you ye church taken for lai∣men? The. When S. Paul sent for the elders of Ephesus, & willed them to take heed to themselues & the whole slocke, ouer which the holy Ghost had placed
them to rule,Act. 20. The Church of God is the people of God. or feed the Church of God, what ment hee by the Church; the Priestes to whom he spake, or the people? Phi. There you see the Priestes are to rule the Church. Theo. There also you may see, the Church is not to rule the Prince. Phi. How doth that follow? Theo. The Church is there taken for the people, which must not rule, but obey the Prince. Phi. By the Church in my first answere I ment the Priestes and not the people. Theo. Can you shew where the Church in all the Scriptures is takē for the Priests without the people? Phi. We call them only Churchmen. Theo. We respect not your abuse,The Church neuer taken in the Scrip∣tures for the Priest alone. but the right vse of the word. The Church is neuer taken in the new nor old Testament for the Priestes alone, but generally for the whole congregation of the faithfull. And therefore when you say the Prince must be ruled by the Church, you dallie with a doubtfull word, and put a faire colour vppon a foule cause; but you must distinctly tell vs what persons you mean, when you say the Church must appoint, what the Prince shal command. Phi. I meane Churchmen, that is, Priestes, and Bishops. Theo. And what if Churchmen do not agree which is truth,The Iesuites steales from the Church to Churchmē and from thē to the Pope. as in our dayes they do not; may Princes make their choyse what Churchmen they will follow? Phi. No: the chiefe ruler of the Church and head Bishop on earth must appoint them, what faith they shall imbrace. Theo. That chiefe ruler of the Church you take to be the Pope. Phi. We do. Theo. We like you well for your plainesse. Then Princes may commaund that which the Church,By the Iesuits diuinitie the Prince shall commaund what pleaseth the Pope. you meane Churchmen; or if they agree not, the chiefe Churchman, which is the Pope, shall appoint. This is your assertion, is it not? Phi. It is. Theo. What you say Princes must do for the Pope, we say princes may do for Christ: that is, they may plant and establish the Christian faith in their Realmes by their Princely power though the Pope say nay. This is our doctrine, can you reproue it? Phi. Who shall be iudge, which is the true Christian faith? Theo. You slip now to an other question.They be two distinct que∣stions who shall commād for truth, and who shall di∣rect vnto truth. It is one thing, who may command for truth, & ano∣ther who shal direct vnto truth. We say, Princes may command for truth & pu∣nish the refusers; this no Bishop may chalenge, but onely the Prince that bea∣reth the sworde. This is the first part of our question: And touching the se∣cond, which is the safest way for princes to be guided vnto the truth, though we differ about the meanes: you reseruing it as a speciall priuilege to the Pope, we referring it as a common duetie to the Preacher; yet this is euident that Princes must be directed vnto truth the same way that al other Christians are, to wit, by perswasion and not by coaction. For no Prelate, nor Pope hath au∣thoritie from Christ to compel priuate men, much lesse princes to the profession of faith, but onely to teach and instruct them. These be the two pointes wee stand on, disproue them if you can. Phi. This is not al. You would haue Our faith and saluation so to hang on the Princes will and Lawes,The Iesuites would make men beleeue that we teach the Princes will to be the rule of faith. Neuer man of our side affir∣med any such thing. that there could be imagined no neerer waie to religion, than to beleeue what our temporall Lord and Maister list. Theo. It is a cunning, when
you can not confute your aduersaries, at least to beelie them, that you may seeme to say somewhat against them. In deede your fourth chapter is wholie spent in refelling this position, which we detest more than you. Phi. You begin to shrinke from your former teaching. Theo. You will neuer shrink frō your former facing. Did euer any man on our side affirm the princes will to be the rule of faith? Haue we not earnestly written, and openly taught that Religion must not depend vpon the pleasures of men? Haue not thow∣sandes of vs here in England and elsewhere giuen our liues for the witnesse and confession of Gods truth, against princes lawes and Popes decrees? In Spaine,If the world can witnesse thus much for vs, then is this a colde cauill of the Iesuites. Fraunce, Italie, and other places at this day, do wee not indure all the tormentes you can deuise, because wee will not beleeue what tempo∣rall Lordes and Masters list? Your owne conscience knoweth it is true that wee saie. Why then doe you charge vs with this wicked assertion, from the which wee bee farther off than you? For you holde opinion of Popes, that they cannot erre, we do not of Princes. Why do you father your owne fansies vppon vs? Why dee you purposely peruert the question, heaping absurdities, and alleaging authorities against that which we do not defend? Phi. The oth,Marke how the Iesuites plaie with the oth. which you take your selues and exact of others, induceth vs thus to thinke of you. For there you make Princes the onely supreme Go∣uernours of all persons, in all causes, as well spirituall as temporall: vtterly renouncing all forraine iurisdictions, superiorities and authorities. Uppon which wordes marke what an horrible confusion of all faith and Religion insu∣eth. If Princes bee the onely Gouernours in Ecclesiasticall matters,The right ex∣tract of the Iesuites absur∣dities. Apolog. cap. 4. Apolog. chap. 4. Apolog. cap. 4. then in vaine did the holy Ghost appoint Pastours and Bishops to gouern the Church. If they bee supreme, then are they superiour to Christ himselfe, and in effect Christes Masters. If in all thinges and causes spirituall, then they may prescribe to the priestes and Bishops what to preach, which way to worship and serue God, how & in what forme to minister the Sacramentes, and generally howe men shall be gouerned in soule. If all forraine iurisdiction must bee renounced, then Christ & his Apostles (because they were & are forreners) haue no iurisdiction nor authoritie ouer England. A thowsand other absurdities are consequent to this oth which anon you shall heare. Theo. Wake you or dreame you Philander,Their absur∣dities are no way conse∣quent to our doctrine. that in matters of no lesse weight than your duetie to God and the Prince, you fall to these childish and pelting sophismes? What kinde of concluding call you this? Princes onely beare the sword to commaund and punish, ergo Bishops may not teach and exhort. Prin∣ces be not subiect to the Pope, ergo superiours to Christ. They may by their lawes establish those thinges that Christ hath commaunded, ergo they may change both Scriptures and Sacramentes. No forrainer at this day hath a∣ny iurisdiction ouer this Land, ergo Christ and his Apostles fifteene hundred yeeres ago might not preach the Gospel. Phi. We make no such fond reasons. Theo. The former propositions are the true contens of the oth, which wee take; the later are those very absurdities which you infer vpon vs for taking that oth.
Phi. You would slip from your words which wee knowe, to your meaning which we know not;This is the right suppo∣sal of their A∣pologie. but that you shal not. We groūded our absurdities vpō the words of your oth. For if princes be supreme gouernors in al spiritual things & causes, ergo they be supreme iudges of faith, deciders of controuersies, interpre∣ters of scriptures, deuisers of ceremonies, appointers of sacramēts, & what not? The. You might euen as well haue cōcluded: princes be supreme gouernors in al tēporal things & causes; ergo they be supreme guiders of grāmer, moderators of Logik, directors of Rhetorik, appointers of Musike, prescribers of Medicines, resoluers of al doubtes, & iudges of al matters incident any way to reason, art, or actiō. If this be leud & irreuerēt iesting, yours is no better. Ph. I promise you we iest not. The. The more shame for you, if you be in earnest, to conclude so loosely. Phi. Princes be su∣preme gouer∣nours of the persons, not of the things in the church Do you make princes supreme gouernors of al spiritual things? Theo. You reason as if we did; but our words, since you wil needes rest vpon wordes, are not so. Phi. What are they then? The. We cōfesse them to be supreme gouer∣nors of their Realms & Dominiōs. Phi. And that in al spriritual things & causes. The. Not of al spiritual things & causes. Ph. What differēce between those two speeches? Theo. Iust as much as excludeth your wrangling. Wee make them not gouernors of the things themselues,The wordes of the othe. but of all their subiectes, which I trust you dare not withstand. Phi. I grant they be gouernors of their subiects, but not in Ecclesiasticall things or causes.The Iesuites lack neither crakes nor wordes. They must leaue those matters for Bi∣shops, whō Christ hath appointed to be y• rulers of his church. And therfore your oth yeelding that power to princes, which is proper to Bishops; is repugnant to the lawes of God, the church & nature: Yea it is an euidēt error reproueable by al hu∣mane & diuine learning, that the souerainty or supremacy in causes Ecclesiasticall is by nature or by christian lawes implied in the right & title of a temporal king,Apolog. cap. 4. or that it euer was due, or can be due, to any temporall gouernor, heathen or christiā in the world. And if you will but giue eare, you shal heare what a number of absurdities we wil fasten vpon you. The. This oth is a great eye sore with you, and I remem∣ber I promised to discusse the same in this chapter. I will therefore first exa∣mine the chiefe parts of it, and after you shall obiect against it what you can. Where we professe that her Highnes is the onely gouernor of this Realme, the word gouernor doth seuer the magistrate from the minister,The partes of the othe exa∣mined. & sheweth a ma∣nifest differēce between their office. For Bishops be no gouernors of countries; princes be: that is, Bishops bear not the sword to reward & reuenge; princes do: Bishops haue no power to command & punish; princes haue. This appeareth by the words of our Sauiour expressely forbidding his Apostles to be rulers of na∣tions,What is ment by Gouernour & leauing it to princes. The kings of nations rule ouer [their people] and they that be great ones, exercise authority. With you it shal not be so: that is, you shall neither beare rule,Matth. 20. & Mark. 10. Christ by that word distin∣guisheth the minister from the magistrat. nor exercise authority ouer your brethren. Phi. The word is : they ouerrule their subiects with iniustice & violence; you shal not do so. Theo. So your new translatiō ouer ruleth the word: howbeit Christ in that place doth not traduce the power of princes as vniust or outragious, but distinguisheth y• calling of his Apostles frō the maner of regimēt
which God hath allowed the magistrate. Christ aith not, princes bee tyrantes, you shal deale more curteously than they do;Luk. 22. but he saith, Princes bee Lords and rulers ouer their people,Luk. 22. by Gods ordināce you shal not be so. Again the word which S. Luke hath is  without any composition. They be Lords and masters; & S. Paul confesseth of himselfe & other Apostles, ,2. Corinth. 1. Not that we be Lords or Masters of your faith: yea the compound  is with power & force to rule mē whether they will or no, not with wrong & iniury to oppresse them; & therefore the conclusion is ineuitable, that princes may lawfully compell & punish their subiects which Bishops may not.Publik gouernment is by correctiō and compulsion. Rom. 13. Matth. 26. 1. Tim. 3. and Tit. 1. Matth. 24. 2. Tim. 2. Bishops for∣bidden to vse violence. 2. Timoth. 3. & 4. This distinction between them is euident by their seueral cōmissions which God hath signed. The prince, not the priest, beareth the sword; ergo the prince, not the priest is Gods minister to reuēge male factors. Peter himself was sharp∣ly rebuked by Christ for vsing the sword, & in Peter all Pastors & Bishops are straitly charged not to meddle with it. Al that take the sword shall perish with the sword. And of al men a Bishop must be no striker. For if he that should feede his masters houshold fal to striking, he shall haue his portion with hypocrites. The seruants of God must be gentle towards all, instructing those that resist, with mildnes, not cōpelling any with sharpnes. Their function is limited to the preaching of the word & dispensing the sacraments, which haue no kinde of cōpulsion in thē, but inuite men only by sober perswasions to beleeue & imbrace the promises of God. To conclude, pastors may teach, exhort, & reproue, not force, cōmand or reuenge: only princes be gouernors that is publik magistrates to prescribe by their lawes, and punish with the sword such as resist them within their dominions, which Bishops may not do: speake we truth or no? Phi. We grant Bishops be no magistrates,Bishops no Magistrates to beare the sword but on∣ly charged with cure of soules, which the sword can not touch. neither haue they to do wt the bo∣dies or goods of mē, which god hath permitted to the princes power; but yet they be gouernors of soules which princes be not. Theo. No better reason, to warrāt our opinion. The Bishops charge concerneth the souls of mē, but the soule of mā can neither be forced, nor punished by man; ergo Bishops be no commanders nor punishers, but only directors & instructors of the flocke of Christ. Phi. That we know. The. Thē since by gouernors we mean rulers, such as God hath authori∣zed to bear the sword, why do you fondly cauil that the princes power to cōmand & punish, excludeth the Bishops vocation to teach & exhort, which is nothing so? Phi. You say princes may command and punish as well Bishops as others. Theo. If they bee subiectes no lesse than others, why should they not obey the prince or abide the sword as wel as others?Princes may commaund & punish as well bishops as o∣thers. Rom. 13. Rom. 13. Bern. ad Seno∣nensum archie∣piscopum epist. 42. Phi. Do you make them meere sub∣iects? Theo. Not I, but he that said, You must be subiect, not only for [feare of] wrath, but also for conscience sake. Phi. Doth he speake that of clergymē? Theo. He y• speaketh of al, exempteth none. Let euery soule bee subiect to the higher powers, &c. In these words clergymen be not excepted, ergo cōprised. Out of this place Bernard reasoneth thus wt an archbishop of Frāce: Let euery soul be subiect. If euery, thē yours. Who doth except you (y• be bishops) frō this general speech? He that bringeth an exceptiō, vseth but a delusion. For these
things,Chrysost. homil. 23. in Epist. ad Romanos. saith Chrysostom, are commanded to all, as well Priestes and Monks as secular men: which appeareth by the first sentence, Let euery soule bee subiect to the superiour powers; yea though thou be an Apostle, an Euan∣gelist, a Prophet, or what soeuer thou be. So Theodorete. Whether he be Priest,Theo. in cap. 13 epist. ad Roma∣nos. Bishop or Monk, let them be subiect to Magistrates. This do∣ctrine dured in the Church a thousand yeares before your exemption of Clerkes from secular powers, as you call them, was knowen. Paul teacheth euerie soule,Theo. in cap. 13. ad Romanos. Oecumen. in E∣pist. ad Rom. Greg. Epistol. lib. 3. cap. 100. saith Theophilact, whether he be Priest, Monk, or Apostle, to be sub∣iect and obey Princes. He teacheth euery soule, saith Oecumenius, whe∣ther he be Priest, Monk, or Apostle, to submit themselues to Magistrates. Gregorie the first, perceiued and yeelded this exposition to be true. Power, saith he, ouer all men is giuen to my Lord [the Emperour] from heauen. And least you should thinke priests exempted, in the person of Christ he speaketh thus to Mauritius the Emperour,Ibidem. Sacerdotes meos tuae manui commisi, I haue put my Priestes into thy handes, and dost thou withhold thy souldiers from my ser∣uice? And elsewhere writing of the same prince,Greg. Epistol. lib. 3. cap. 103. Christ hath granted him to be ruler, not ouer souldiers only but ouer Priestes also. This is euident by the whole course of the Scripture. Whom did our Sa∣uiour charge to giue to Caesar that which was Caesars? Not Scribes and high Priests,Luke 20. as well as others? Christ himselfe was a priest and a prophet, and yet he not onely submitted himselfe to the Romane Magistrate, but confessed the presidēts power ouer him to be from heauen.Iohn. 19. Act. 25. Iude Epist. S. Paul appealed vnto Caesar & appeared before Caesar as his lawful gouernor. S. Iude detested thē for false pro¦phetes that despised gouernment or spake euil of rulers. It is no Religion, it is rebellion against God & his word for clergie men to exempt themselues from the princes power. The commandement is general: Let euery soule be subiect the punishment is eternall, Whosoeuer resisteth power resisteth the ordināce of God,Rom. 13. and they that resist shall receiue to themselues damnation. Phi. Yet reason the clergie be fauoured aboue the Laitie. Theo. Tush, we talke not what fauour princes may do well to shew, but whether Clergie men by Gods law may chalenge an exemption from earthly powers or no? Phi. Not, except princes commaund against God. And if they do so, whom must lay men obey? God or man? Phi. No doubt God. Theo. Then the prince cō∣maunding against God, all men are bound, be they lay men or clerkes, to prefer the will of God before the princes lawes: but when the prince ioyneth with God,The Clergie must be to the people an example of obedience to Princes. and commaundeth for truth, may the clergie resist the prince more than the people may? Phi. They may not. Theo. You say well. Of the twaine they must rather obey, that they may be teachers of obedience, not in wordes onely, but in deedes also. For if they must admonish others to be subiect to princi∣palities and obedient to Magistrates, then must they not hinder their doctrine by their doings, nor leade the rest by their example to contemn or resist powers, which they should reuerence and obey. Phi. By no meanes. Theo. And in case the prince be repugnant to God, may priestes or people be violent withstanders,
or must they rather be patient indurers of the sword? Phi. They must not resist, but in patience possesse their soules:Luke 21. Rom. 13. They that resist shal receiue iudgemēt. Theo. Ergo whether princes be with God or against God, Priests & Bishops must with gladnes obey,He that must suffer is a sub∣iect, as well as he that must obey. Princes go∣uernours of all persons. or with meekenes abide the sword. Phi. They must. Theo. And he that suffereth is a subiect as wel as he that obeyeth. For if they be rulers that commaund & punish; certainely they be subiects that must obey the commandement, or abide the punishment. Phi. I think so. Theo. Then monks, Prists & Bishops by Gods law be subiects as well as others, and consequently Princes be Gouernours of all persons within their dominions, bee they Pre∣lates, Prophetes, Apostles, or whatsoeuer they be. Phi. In temporal things we graunt, but not in spiritual. Theo. Where Princes may lawfully commaund, all subiects of dewtie must obey. Phi. True: but in Ecclesiastical causes Princes may not meddle. Theo. So say you: but if I proue that the Princes power and charge, by Gods law reacheth as well vnto matters of religion as other things, will you bethink your selues better, and acknowledge your error? Phi. When you proue that we may do this, which will neuer be. Theo. Marke first what we reath, and next what we proue, that you be not deceaued. Wee teach that God in deliuering the sworde to Princes,And that in causes Eccle∣siasticall as wel as in tem∣porall. hath giuen them this direct charge to prouide that as well true religion be maintayned in their Realmes, as ciuil iustice ministred: and hath to this end allowed Princes ful power to forbid, preuent, and punish in all their subiects, be they laymen, Clercks, or Bishops, not only murders, thefts, adulteries, periuries, and such like breaches of the seconde table; but also schismes, heresies, Idolatries, and all other offences against the first table pertayning onely to the seruice of God and matters of religion.The Prince charged with both tables. Wee doe not imagine this of our owne heades, we find it annexed to the crowne by God himself: who when he first gaue the chil∣dren of Israel leaue to choose them a king, withall appointed, that the Law truely copied out of the Leuites original (which was kept in the tabernacle) should be deliuered the king sitting on his royal seate with this charge:Deut. 17. That booke shall remaine with the king, he shall reade in it all the dayes of his life, that he may learne to feare the Lord his God, & obserue all the wordes of the law [there written] and these statutes to do them. This was not doone till he was placed in his throne, so sayth the text: therefore this touched not the kings priuate conuersation as a man; but his Princely function as a magistrate; which will you, nill you, stood in cōmaūding others, not in guiding his own person. For no man is a king in respect of himself, but in ruling his subiects.Aug. Epist. 50. As a man he serued God one way, sayth Austen, as a king an other way. As a mā by faythful lyuing, as a king in setting forth lawes to cōmaund that which is good and remoue the contrarie. So that kings, as kings, serue God in doing that for his seruice, which none but kings can do. Then if the whole Law were cōmitted to the king, as a king, at his coronation; that is, to cōmaund it others; which none but kings could doe within their Realmes;
ergo the publishing, preseruing and executing of the first table touching the sin∣cere worship of God, was the chiefest part of the Princes charge. To make my cōclusion ye stronger, let vs see what ye godly kings of Israell & Iu∣dah did in matters of religiō, hauing no farther nor other cōmission frō God, than this which I last repeated.How the god∣ly kings of Iu∣dah did inter∣prete their charge. The diligēt executiō of their office wil serue for an eui∣dēt expositiō, what God required at their hānds. We cā look for no plainer declara∣tiō of Gods meaning in this point, thā Gods own cōmendatiō of their acts in this case. The lawmaker is ye best interpreter: if they by their princly power remoued idols,2. Kings 23. 2. Kings 18. 2. Chro. 34. & 35. razed hilalters, slue false prophets, purged the land frō al abominations, not sparing the brasen serpent (made by Moses) whē they saw it abused: if again by ye same power they caused the tēple to be clensed, the law to be read, the co∣uenant to be renued with God, the passouer to be kept, the Leuits to minister in their courses inuēted by Dauid:1. Kings 2. if to conclude, the prince deposed the chiefe bishop placing a fitter in his steed, & forced al [prophets, priests & people] that were found in Israel (sincerely) to serue the Lord their God; if I say they did al this (as the scripture beareth record they did) & their zealous proceedings in these cases were liked, accepted, & praised by Gods own mouth: who besides Iesuits is either so blind that he seeth not, or so froward that he confesseth not, that princes were charged by God himselfe to plant & establish his true seruice in their domi∣nions, & with their Princely power to prohibite & punish all offences & abuses, be they temporal or spiritual, against the second or first part of this heauenly law? Phi. This charge concerned none but ye kings of Israell & Iudah. The. That re∣fuge doth rather manifest your folly,The same charge extē∣deth to the kings of the new testamēt. thā satisfie my reason: did, I pray you Sir, ye cōming of Christ abolish the vocatiō of princes? I tro not. Thē their office remai∣ning as before, per cōsequent, both ye same precept of God to them stil dureth, & al∣so ye like power to force their subiects to serue God & Christ his son, standeth in as ful strēgth vnder the gospel as euer it did vnder ye law. For princes in ye new testa¦mēt be Gods ministers to reuēge malefactors, as they were in ye old, & ye greater ye wickednes,Rom. 13. They be gods ministers to reuenge all e∣uill. Rom. 15. How kinges must serue the Lord and Christ his sonne. Psalm. 2. Aug. contra literas Petilia. lib. 2. cap. 92. y• rather to be punished, ergo ye greatest (as heresies, idolatries & blas∣phemies) are sonest of al other vices to be repressed by christiā magistrates: whose zeal for Christs glory, must not decrease, Christs care for their scepters being in∣creased; and those monuments of former kinges left written for their instructiō. Were not this sufficient, as in truth it is to refute your euasion: yet king Dauid forseeing in spirit ye heathē kings would bād thēselues & assemble togither against ye Lord & his Christ, extēdeth ye same charge to ye gētiles which the kings of Iurie receiued before, & warneth thē al at once, Be wife ye kings, vnderstād ye iudges of the world: serue the Lord. Upon which words S. Aug. inferreth thus: Al men ought to serue God: in one sort, by cōmon cōdition as mē; in an other sort, by seueral gifts (& offices) by the which som do this, some that. No priuat person could cōmand idols to be banished clean frō among men, which was so long before prophesied. Therfore kings (besides their duty, to serue God common with al other men) haue,Idem contra Cresconium lib. . cap. 51. in that they be kings, how to serue the Lord in such sort, as none can do which are not kings. For in this kings (in respect they be kings) serue the Lord (as God by Dauid enioyneth them) if in their kingdoms
they cōmand that which is good, & prohibite that which is il, not in ciuile af∣faires only, but in matters also concerning diuine religion. With this indeuor of christian princes, God cōforteth his church by ye mouth of Esay.The church shall suck the brestes of kinges. Thou shalt suck the brests of princes, kings shalbe thy foster fathers, and Queenes thy nurcing mothers. What Esay saith princes shal do, that I cōclude princes must do, because God would not promise they should vsurp an other mās office but discharge their own. Thē if you frō Rhemes, or your brethrē frō Rome tel vs y• the nurcing of christs church is no part of the princes duty, we detest your insolēt negatiue: God is truth, who saith it, & you be liars. If you take ye milke of princes for tēporal honors, lāds & goods (which your church in deed hath greedily swallowed) the very children wil laugh you to skorne.The milke of princes is not temporall wealth. The church of Christ is no wāton, she lusteth for no worldly wealth, which is rather hurtful poison, than hol∣som food: Gods prouision for hir, is spiritual, not carnal; hir delights are not out∣ward in flesh, but inward in grace: the prophet, good mā, had no leasure to thinke on your farms, demeans & reuenues: This promise must be common to the faith∣full, not priuat to your cloisterers, which in earthly things plied the bottle so fast, that they suckt their nurces dry. No remedy, you must needs yeeld vs, that christiā princes in respect of their office, not of their riches, haue receiued an expresse com∣mandemēt from God to shew thēselues nurces to his church. Now nurces by na∣ture must prouide food for their infants, & defend them from dāger, ergo kings & queenes in ye new testamēt are boūd to tēder ye church of Christ, & by their prince∣ly power & publik lawes to defend the same from infection of heresies, inuasion of schisms, & all other apparent corruptions of faith & good maners. Who,August. epi. 50. saith S. Aug. being in his right wits, wil say to (christiā) kings, take you no care who defēdeth or impugneth in your realms the church of (christ) your master? Let it not pertain to you, who lift to be religious, or sacrilegious with∣in your kingdōs? And left he should seem skāt resolued in this opinion, he biddeth opē defiāce to the Donatists in these words:Idem contra 2. Gaudenij epist. lib. 2. cap. 11. Idem contrae Epist. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 7. The Prince charged to punish false and corrupt religion. Cry thus if you dare, let murders be punished, let adulteries be punished, let other degrees of lust & sinne be puni∣shed; only sacrileges (that is cōtēpt of God his truth, or his church) we wil not haue punished by princes lawes. And againe, Will (the Donatists) though they were cōuinced of a sacrilegious schisme, say that it belongeth not to the prin∣ces power to correct or punish such things? Is it because such powers do not stretch to corrupt & false religiō? But (christiā) emperors persecute the Pagās: doth that displease thē? The works of the flesh Paul nūbreth these; fornicatiō, vncleanes, strife, dissentiō, heresie, drunkēnes & such other. What thinke these mē, may the crime of idolatry be iustly reuēged by the magistrate? wel, if that like them not, why cōfesse they that witches be rightly punished by the rigor of (princes) lawes, & will not agnise that heretikes & schismatikes may bee repressed by the same, seeing Paul doth rehearse them togither with other fruites of iniquity? Will they reply that earthly powers are not to medle with such matters (of religion?) To what end then beareth he the sword, which is called Gods minister, seruing to punish malefactors? Certainly Princes, Read on the place, contra epist. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 7. &c.
Compell them to come in; spoken to the magistrates.If this learned father can not fray you from reuiuing the frantick error of ye Donatists against the Princes power in matters of religion, I trust you will somwhat reuerence the precept which our Sauior in his Gospell gaue the magistrate, when he had the first sort of ghestes to be brought to the great sup∣per, the second to be forced:Luke 14. Aug. contra 2. Gaudent. Epist. lib. 2. cap. 17. Mat. 21. 1. Corinth. 10. Go, sayth he, forth into the wayes and hedges: Compell thē to come in, that mine house may be filled. Wee take wayes, sayth Austen, for heresies, hedges for schismes; because wayes in this place signifie the diuersenes, and hedges the peruersenes of opinions. House, God hath none, but his house of prayer, neither table beside the Lords table. So that this seruant is expressely charged to Compel them from heresies, and schismes to the confession of truth, consent of prayer, and communion of the Lordes table. To performe this, Christ hath left no seruant but the minister or the magistrat: no meanes saue the word or the sword. To compell heretiks and schismatiks, neither is it possible for the preacher if he would, nor lawful if he could: he lacketh both meanes and leaue to constraine them. His calling is with patience to teach,2. Tim. 2. Mat. 24. Tit. 1. Mat. 20. 2. Pet. 5. not with violence to force; to feede, not to stryke; to reproue with tongue, not to subdue with hand. Only the Prince beareth the sword, which can and may compell recusants: and therefore Bishops since they be flatly forbidden to Rayne, must not meddle with the material sword being the chiefest part & strength of an earthly kingdom: neither ought any to draw ye sword, but he that holdeth it in Gods stead to reward and reuenge. Ergo, these wordes,Luke 14. Compell them to come in, that mine house may be filled, were spoken to Christian Princes, and are to them both a warrant and a charge to represse schismes and heresies with their Princely power, which they receiued from aboue; cheefly to maintaine Gods glorie, by causing the bands of vnitie to be preserued in the Church, and the rules of fayth obserued. August. Ep. 50.To the same purpose S. Austen in many places alleageth this parable. The Lord himself, sayth he, willed the ghests first to be brought, then to be for∣ced. What meaneth he by this, Compell them to come, when as he sayd of the first, bring them? If he ment they should be compelled by terror of mi∣racles, then might the first sort of ghests which saw many diuine wonders be rather thought to be forced: (but) if by the power, which the Church receaued at Gods hand in due time through the religion & faith of kings, those that are found in high wayes & hedges, that is in heresies & schismes (must) be compelled to come, let them not mislike that they be forced. This cōmaunding by Princely power occasioneth many to be saued,Idem contra 2. Gaundentij epist. lib. 2. cap. 17. which though they be violently brought to the feast of the great householder, and compelled to come, yet being within they find cause to reioyce that they did enter: for both [sorts of commers as well violently forced, as willingly brought] the Lord fortold & hath fulfilled.Idem Epist. 48. Idem Epist. 50. Idem Epist. 48. Therfore let earthly princes serue Christ, in making Lawes for Christ, wherby mē [may] be forced to come to the (great &) holy banquet, yea by banishments & other losses let [their sub∣iects] begin to weigh with themselues what & why they suffer, & learne to
prefer the Scriptures which they read, before the reportes and cauils of mē. I thinke it superfluous to staie longer in confirming so manifest a truth. He that is of God, heareth the words of God: he that impugneth them, quarreleth not with Princes, which yet is no small offence, but with him by whom Prin∣ces raigne,The Princes charge, as the scriptures do expresse it. whose wisedom may not easily be neglected, nor will resisted. If you deny that this is the Princes charge to see the law of God fully executed, his Sonne rightly serued, his spouse safely nourced, his house timely filled, his ene∣mies duely punished, you must counteruaile that which Moses prescribed, Da∣uid required, Esay prophesied, Paul witnessed, & Christ commaunded with some better & sounder authority than theirs is: If you grant so much, we wil aske no more: the Princes duety to God once cōfessed, the rest shal quickly be concluded. Phi. In a sense, it is true that you say. Theo. It is simply true that I say: for in your owne iudgement may the Christian faith be freely permitted, & publike∣ly receiued in kingdoms & common wealthes? Phi. No doubt. Theo. May godly discipline be likewise planted and preserued amongest men,Al these things must bee done in euery christiā cōmō wealth; and who shall do them but the Prince? and the dis∣turbers and neglecters of it repressed and ordered? Phi. It may. Theo. Should corrupt & false Religion be displaced & banished, and the spredders of it disper∣sed & skattered? Phi. In any case. Theo. Ought malefactors against God, as he∣retikes, blasphemers, sorcerers, idolaters & such other transgressours of the first table, to be reuenged and punished, as well as offenders against men, and the breakers of the second table? Phi. What else? Theo. Can any man freely per∣mit, safely defend, generally restrayne and externally punish, within a realme, but onely the Prince? Phi. None. Theo. Then if these things needfully must and lawfully may bee done for Christ and his Church, & none can doe them but Magistrates, it is euident that the Princes power & charge doth stretch vnto thinges & causes that bee spirituall as well as temporall.August. contra Cresconium lib. 3. cap. 51. Or if S. Austens wordes do better please you, that Princes may command that which is good, and prohibite that which is euill within their kingdomes, not in ciuile af∣faires onely, but in matters also that concerne diuine Religion. Phi. Did the Christian Princes in the primatiue Church since the cōming of Christ commaund & punish in matters Ecclesiasticall?Christian Princes from the beginning haue delt in causes eccle∣siasticall. Theo. If their exam∣ples do not concur with my former proofes, good leaue haue you to beleeue nei∣ther: if they do, take heede you withstand not a manifest truth. And here you shal choose whether you will haue a short report or a large rehearsal of their doings. Socrates touching them all, saith:Socrat. in prooe∣mio lib. 5. We therefore make mention of Emperors throughout this historie, for that since they became Christians, Ecclesiasti∣cal matters depend on them, & the greatest Synods haue been, and are yet called by their appointment. And Alciat a man of your own side: Nemim dubiū est,Alciatus inco∣dicem rubric. de sacrosanct. ec∣clesijs tomo 3. pag. 198. quin in primatiua ecclesia de rebus & personis ecclesiast. &c. THERE CAN BE NO DOVBT saith he, but in the primatiue Church Emperors had the iurisdiction (that is the ruling and gouerning) of persons and causes Ecclesiasticall. Ius dicere referred to Princes, is not to decide matters in question by law, for so did Iudges & not Princes, but to make lawes: and betweene lawma∣kers
& gouernors you can find litle difference: for by publike lawes commāding good & punishing euil princes do chiefly gouerne. Then if christian Monarks in the primatiue church guided ecclesiastical matters & persons by their imperiall lawes, as this learned & famous lawier putteth vs out of doubt they did; you must shew when & how they forfeited this power. If it were thē lawful & vsual, how can it be now strange & vsurped? If there be no doubt of this, with what cō∣science do you, not doubt, but deny this? Perhaps you disdaine the witnesse. Al∣ciat in euery respect was well learned, & in his faculty, which was law, deser∣ueth more credit than the best of you: yet least I should seeme to presse you with names & not with proofes, let vs view the proceedings of some Christiā Empe∣rors, and iudge you whether they be not both ancient and euident. Constantines example. Euseb. hist. lib. 10. cap. 5.What power Constantine claimed & vsed in causes ecclesiasticall, the foure books of Eusebius & other church stories describing the lawes, letters & acts of Cōstantine, beare witnes sufficient. First, he gaue the christiās free liberty to professe their religion, built them places of praier at his own charges, & en∣treated their bishops with all possible fauor & honor. Next he prohibited the gen∣tiles their ancient & vsual idolatries, diuinatiōs, oracles, images & sacrifices. Heretiks he debarred not only churches & secret conuents, but excluded them also from the priuileges which him-selfe had prouided for Catholike persons. If Constantines example deserue to be praised & followed, which no man, except he be void of common sense, wil gainsay, then may christian Princes in the right of their scepter & sword, I meane their publike vocation & charge, without seek∣ing any farther warrāt from Rome, forbid wicked and idolatrous superstition, admit and assist to the best of their power the preaching of the trueth, sequester heretikes from the dignities and liberties graunted to good and religious sub∣iectes: for so did Constantine, whose godly vertues and happie paines all na∣tions then imbraced, all ages since confessed, all Princes now should imitate. Besides this he did many thinges both for spredding the faith & guiding the church of Christ worthy great cōmendation.Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 2. cap. 28. Socrat. lib. 10. cap. 34. By my ministery (saith this good Emperor) mākind is brought to the keeping & obseruing of the most sacred law: by the seruice which I perform to God, al things euery where (directly speaking of things ecclesiasticall) are setled in order, yea the barbarous nati∣ons, which til this time knew not the truth, now praise the name of God sin∣cerely, whom they reuerēce for dread of vs.Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. 37. Towards the church of Christ he shewed an excellēt & special care: calling coūcels of bishops when any dis∣sention sprang, as a common bishop & ouerseer appointed by God, not dis∣daining to be present & confer with them (the rather) to keep thē al in chri∣stian peace.Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 13. For his maner was in their synods not to sit idle, but to marke ad∣uisedly what euery man said, to help their either side disputing, to tēper such as kindled too fast, to reason mildly with ech part, & vndertake iointly with thē to search out the truth: confirming their decrees with his seal, least other (tēporal) iudges & rulers should infringe them. When occasiō serued him not to gather a coūcel,Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 22. he did by writing aduertise the parties dissenting of his o∣piniō & iudgemēt, interposing himself as an arbiter in their cōtrouersies: som¦times
Prescribing the bishops what was profitable for the church of God,Ibidem. lib. 3. cap. 23. somtimes the people: to which end he wrot many letters, emitting neither re¦bukes nor threats, whē need so required.Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 28. Whē ye coūcel of Tyrus was gathered by his edict, he cōmāded thē first to discusse the truth of such crimes, as were pretēded against Athan. who was loth to come before thē, saue that he feared the thretning letters of Const. writtē to this effect.Euseb. de vita Constan. lib. 4. cap. 42. If any, which I think not, in contēpt of our mādate, fail to come before you, we wil send a warrāt frō our roial autority, that he shalbe banished, to teach him, what it is (for bishops & clerks) to withstād the precept of the chief ruler defending the truth. Athan. & ye bishops of his part appeared; but finding the coūcel very partial, protested a∣gainst thē & appealed frō thē in these words:Athanas. Apol. 2. cap. Quum multas. Athanasius and his side appeale from the councel to the prince. Because we see many things spite∣fully cōtriued against vs, & much wrōg offred the catholik church vnder our names, we be forced to request, that the debating of our maters may be kept for the princes most excellēt person: we can not bear the drifts & iniuries of our enimies, & therfore require the cause to be referred to the most religious & deuout emperor, before whō we shalbe sufferd to stād in our own defēces, & plead the right of the church. Yet to preuēt the worst Athan. himself fled to Constant. beseeching him to send for the bishops & examine their acts. Upon whose cōplaint ye good prince wrote this to the whole councel:Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 34. Your synod hath decreed, I know not what in a tumult & vprore, whiles you seeke to peruert truth by your pestilent disorder, for hatred against your fellow (bishops:) but the diuine prouidēce wil (I doubt not) scatter the mischief of your contentiō & make it plain in our sight, whether your cōuent had any regard of truth or no. You must therefore al of you resort hither to shew the reason of your do∣ings: for so doth it seem good & expedient to me:The Councell of Tyrus com∣manded to come before the Prince & giue account of their do∣ings. What Con∣stantine did in Athana∣sius his cause. to which end I willed this rescript to be sent you, that as many of you, as were present at the councel of Tyrus, without delay repair to the place of our abode, there to giue accompt, how sincerely, & soundly you haue iudged: and that before me, whom your selues shal not deny to be the sincere minister of God (in these cases.) The prince summoned, ye coūcel prescribed thē what they should hādle, gaue charge to ye parties accused to come before thē, sharply rebuked ye bishops assembled in this synod, cōmāded thē to come corā nobis, & rēder a reason of their tumultuous iudge¦mēt, assured thē yt he would in his own person examin their doings whether they were good & substātial or no. This power he chalēged ouer churchmē & church∣matters, not as a violēt vsurper, but as gods minister ordained to y• intēt: which ye catholik bishops, yt took part wt Athan. cōfessed to be true by their appeal, ye rest y• deposed him, neither did nor durst deny. So ye Const. was both an orderly re∣fuge for Athan. & a lawful cōtroler of ye coūcel of Tyrus, notwtstāding ye crimes obiected there to Macarius & Atha. were spiritual, to wit,Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 27. the striking of a priest ouerthrowing the Lordes table, dashing in peeces the mystical cup, burning the sacred books, vsing a dead mās hand to sorcery, wt many such hainous of∣fences leudly deuised by their accusers, not any way proued against them, yet taken by their aduersaries, then iudges, for iust matter to condemne them. In restoring Arius,The restoring of Arius. the mildnesse of Constantine was somewhat abused by
the crafty dissembling of heretikes: yet thereby may well appeare what autho∣rity this Prince claimed to command Bishops & release the rigor of their eccle∣siastical cēsures. Thus stood the case. The Princes was often tolde that Arius held no such opinion as the world misdouted in him.Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 25. If Arius, saith he, consent to the Nicene coūcel, I wil admit him to my sight, & send him home with ho∣nor. Arius & his adherents accepting the cōdition, were willed to put their faith in writing; & with their wily submission so pleased Cōstantine (very glad to see them yeeld to the Nicene creed) that he sent thē with his letters towards Alexandria to be receiued. At their cōming Athanasius the Bishop of those parts refused to cōmunicate with them, aduertising his Maiesty by writing, ye heretiks once deposed might not be restored to their former estate. Constantine tooke this exception in such il part, that he fel to cōmanding Athanasius in short & sharp terms.Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 27. Constantine threatneth Athanasius for not recei∣uing Arius. Knowing our pleasure, WE CHARGE YOV, that you suffer freely those that will, to returne to the church. For if I learn, that you forbid, or ex∣clude such as would gladly be partakers of the church, I WILL PRESENTLY SEND ONE, THAT SHALL BY COMMISSION from me DEPOSE YOV. This, saith Socrates, he wrote minding to profit the church, & end al dissē∣tion: but it fel out otherwise: for the citizēs of Alexādria were so troubled with the boldnes of Arius, & lack of Athanasius then banished, that Cōstantine doub∣ting the peruerse mind of Arius sent for him,Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 37. & 31. & asked him whether he wold subscribe to the Nicene faith: which he did there in presence very readily, but slily. The Prince musing at it, exacted an oth: that he took likewise.Ibidem lib. 1. cap. 38. Then the christian Emperor finding no cause to suspect him farther, COMMANDED ALE∣XANDER BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE TO RECEIVE HIM (the next day) TO THE COMMVNION,The Prince cōmaundeth the Patriarke to receiue A∣rius to the cō∣munion. which God preuēted with a suddain & shameful death in detestation both of his heresie so long defended, & periury then freshly cōmitted. Now chose whether you wil affirm, yt Cōstantine was ouer presumptuous & im¦perious in the church of Christ against al reason & good order: or else agnise that Princes had then authority to require the subscriptions & othes of such as they suspected in religion, to restore those that were deposed, to their ancient places vpon their submission, and command the chiefe Bishops (for so were both these, the first of Alexandria, the second of Constantinople) to receiue such as had pur∣ged themselues, in the Princes iudgement and presence, to the communion. Phi. Uengeāce frō heauen, decided the case with Athanasius against Arius. Th. No doubt Arius was worthly plagued for his false swearing, & wicked meaning to trouble the church of God worse with his secret dissembling, than he did be∣fore with his open rebelling: but what is this to Constantine, whose zeale to preserue truth was neuer doubted, whose care to procure concord in the church can not be blamed, whose diligence to sift Arius with an oth could not be bette∣red? We propose not the lewed fact of Arius blaspheming God, & iugling with man, we detest that mōster as much as you: but we lay forth the steps of Cōstā∣tine seeking & hoping his reformatiō, & to ye end cōmanding the very Patriarks themselues, & threatning due punishement if his princely will were not obeyed.
Iustinian in his Code repeateth the lawes of former Emperours not onely touching the Christian faith,Codi. lib. 1. tit. 1.6.2.3. Tit. 5.7.9.11. baptisme, Churches and bishops, but also, touching heretiks, Apostataes, Iewes, and Infidels. In his Authentikes he maketh ma∣ny new cōstitutions in which he disposeth OF SACRAMENTS,Nouel. consti∣tut. 57.37. & 42.123. Nouel. constit. 123.131. Nouel. constit. 5. & 131.3.67.79. Nouel. constit. 123.133. Nouel. const. 6. & 123. Nouel. consti∣tutione, 123. in what places, by what persons, wt what lowdnes of voice they shalbe ministred: OF SYNODS, when they shall be kept, what things shalbe reformed in them according to the sacred Canons, and his Princely lawes; also what Canons of Councels shall stand in ye same strength with his Lawes: OF CHVRCHES AND ABBAIES, guiding the maner of their erection, the number of their Clerkes, their expen∣ces, suites and priuileges: OF MONKS, who shal elect their Abbate what time shall suffice for their triall; what rules they shall keepe for praier, diet, rest, and such like dueties of life; to whom the correction and ouersight of them shall be∣long: OF PRIESTS, DEACONS, AND OTHER SERVITORS in the Church, limi∣ting their age, condition, learning and good report before they shall be receiued to this charge; their diligēt, sober and chast behauiour afterward: OF BISHOPS, howe they shall bee chosen, in what sort their soundnes in faith, skill in common prayer, and clearnes from all iust accusations, prohibited by the sacred rules, or lawes imperiall, shalbe throughly sifted, before they may bee confirmed; what causes they shall medle with in their Consistories, what superior iudges they themselues shall haue, from whom they shal not appeale; what punishment they shall endure for Simonie, non residence, wrongfull excommunication, playing at tables, resorting to spectacles, ordering any Clerke without diligent exami∣nation, or contrarie to the Princes ecclesiastical lawes: in which cases Iustinian commandeth them to bee SVSPENDED, EXCOMMVNICATED, DEPOSED, as the fault meriteth, and his edict appointeth. It was then no newes for a Prince to say:Nouel. constit. 123. The prince receaueth in∣formation & cōmaundeth correction. Nouell. consti∣tutione 6. The doctrine & discipline of the church must be the Princes chee∣fest care. The Bishops & Patriarks of euerie dio∣cesse cōmaū∣ded and threatned. Diuers complaints haue beene brought vs against Clerks, Monks and many Bishops, that some leade not their liues according to the sacred Canons, others can not the publike prai∣ers which should be sayd at the sacred oblation and baptisme: we therefore recounting the iudgement of God with our selues, HAVE COMMAVNDED THAT IN EVERY MATTER THVS DETECTED, LAWFVLL INQVISITION AND CORRECTION PROCEEDE, comprising in this edict those things that were before skattered in sundry constitutions touching the most religious Bi∣shops, Clerkes and Monkes, with such punishments added, as wee rhought expedient. And againe, OVR CHIEFEST CARE IS FOR THE TRVETH OF GODS DOCTRINE, AND SEEMELY CONVERSATION OF THE CLER∣GIE. THE THINGS THEN WHICH WE HAVE DECREED AND MAKE FOR THE PRESERVATION OF THE SACRED ORDER AND STATE, CONSONANT TO THE TENOR OF HOLY RVLES, LET THE MOST GODLY PATRIARKES OF EVE∣RY DIOCESSE, THE METROPOLITANES AND RIGHT REVEREND BISHOPS AND CLERKES KEEPE FOR EVER HEREAFTER INVYOLABLE: THE BREAKER OF THEM SHALBE SVRE TO BE SEQVESTRED VTTERLY FROM GOD AND EX∣CLVDED FROM HIS PRIESTLY FVNCTION: Licencing all men, of what
sort or calling soeuer they bee, that perceiue the least point of these our Lawes transgressed, to denounce and infourme the same to our highnes, that wee, which following the sacred rules and Apostolike tradition haue commaunded these thinges, may reuenge such offendours as they well deserue. Nouel. Con∣stitut. 5.Farther hee sayth, Our purpose in this present Lawe is next after those matters which wee haue disposed of the most holy Bishoppes and reue∣rend Clerkes to set a good order in monasticall discipline: for so much as there is no kinde of thing exempted from the Princes inquisition,Nouel. Con∣stitut. 133. The Prince soueraigne o∣uer all men, and that in things cōcer∣ning God which must be preserued from corrup∣tion by the prelates, but most of all by the Prince. which hath receiued from God a common regiment, and soueraintie ouer all men: and these things which concerne God must bee preserued from corruption by the sacred Prelates and [ciuill] Magistrates, but most of all by our Maiestie, which vse not to neglect any diuine causes, but labour by all meanes, that our common wealth (by the fauour of the great God, and our Sauiour Christ towardes men) may reape the fruite of that pure∣nes and integritie, which Clerkes, Monkes and Bishoppes from the high∣est to the lowest, shall shewe foorth in keeping the sacred Canons, & our lawes prouided in that behalfe: which constitutions, by this our decree, wee strengthen a fresh and ratifie. Put on your spectakles, and see whether Iustinian do not take vppon him to gouerne the doctrine and discipline of the Church, the conuersation of Clerkes, Monkes and Priestes: and to com∣maunde Prelates and Patriarkes in the celebration of sacraments, conuo∣cation of Synodes, election and confirmation of Bishoppes, ordering of Clerkes, and such like functions (except our eyesight fayle vs) wholy spiri∣tuall, and in the iudgement of your neerest friends acknowledged for causes ecclesiasticall. I will omitte what Iustinian enacted touching mariages, diuorces, le∣gacies, funerals, incests, adulteries, and such like:The things were then in the Princes charge which the Pope now tieth to spiri∣tual courtes. then pertinent to the Princes power and sworde, nowe claymed by your holy father for a sur∣plussage to causes ecclesiasticall; and with that seely shift conueyed out of Princes handes, who first vppon fauour and opinion of holynes and wise∣dome in Bishoppes, gaue them leaue to meddle with such matters: I will omitte, I say, that; and descende to the Lawes of Charles the great, Emperour of the West partes, eight hundreth yeeres after Christ, which Ansegisus gathered together within thirteene yeeres of the death of the sayde Charles. In his preface of those Lawes thus speaketh that wise Prince. Careli praefa. in leges Franciae. The preface of Charles to his lawes di∣recting com∣missioners to reforme the Church in his name and by vertue of his autho∣ritie.Considering the passing goodnes of Christ our Lord towardes vs and our people, and howe needefull it is, not onely to giue thankes to God incessantly with heart and mouth, but also with good endeuours con∣tinually to set foorth his (honour and) praise &c. Therefore (O you Pa∣stours of Christes Church, and teachers of his flocke,) Haue wee
directed Commissioners vnto you that shall ioyne with you to redresse those thinges, which neede reformation, in our name and by vertue of our authoritie: and (to this ende) wee haue here annexed certaine briefe chapters of Canonicall (or ecclesiasticall) institutions, such as we thought meetest. Let no man iudge this our admonition to godlines to bee presumptuous, Whereby wee seeke to correct thinges amisse, to cutte off superfluities and leade men to that which is right, but rather receiue it with a charitable mynde. For in the booke of kinges wee reade what paynes godly Iosias tooke to bring the kingdome giuen him of GOD to the true worship of the (same) God, by visiting, correcting and instructing them; not that wee compare our selues with his sanctitie, but that we should alwayes imitate such examples of the godly. We see the reason why these Lawes were published, and commissioners sent from the Prince to put them in execution: now let vs examine the Lawes them∣selues, and marke what causes they chiefely concerne. Peruse the booke: you will (on my woord) expect no farther proofe, that Princes had then to doe with persons and causes ecclesiasticall. If your leasure serue you not, by these fewe, which I will report, you may coniecture the rest. The first seuen and fiftie Canons are borowed out of such generall, and prouinciall Coun∣cels as Charles best liked: for example. That no man excommunicated in one place shall bee taken to the communion in an other place:Legū Franciae li. 1. Cap. 1.2.3. That when any Clerk is ordered, his faith and life bee first ex∣actly tried: That no strange Clerke bee receaued or ordered without letters of commendation, and licence from his owne Bishop:Cap. 23. That no seruant bee made Clerk or Moncke without his masters consent:Chap. 49.25. That no man bee made Priest vnder thirtie yeares of age: neither then at randon, but appointed and fastned to a certaine cure:Cap. 11. That no Bishop meddle with giuing orders in an other mans diocesse:Cap. 57.45. That no Bishop veele any widoes at all,Cap. 13. nor maydens vnder the age of twentie and fiue: That the Bishop of each Prouince, and the Metropolitane meete yerely twise in Councel, for causes of the Church:Cap. 6. That Priests when they say their masses shall also communicate:Cap. 20. That only the bookes canonical shall bee read in the Church:Cap. 41. That the false names of Martyres and vncertaine memo∣ries of Sainctes bee not obserued:Cap. 15. That Sunday bee kept from euening on (Saturday) till euening (the next day:) with other such constitutions prescri∣bing a direct order to Bishoppes, Priestes, and Monkes, for ecclesiasticall causes. Phi. These bee Canons of former Councels. Theo. True, but selected and deliuered by Charles to those visitours which he sent with his au∣thoritie to refourme the Church: and the rest that followe, to the number of an hundred and fiue chapters, did Charles frame by conference with learned and godly men at his discretion. Which yet concerne the regiment of the Church no lesse than these doe. You must beare with the length of them, they be matters profitable to be knowen (I speake for the most part of them) & great∣ly pertinent to this question. You shall thereby resolue your selfe howe farre
Princes then lawfully might, and carefully did medle with guiding and ruling the Church of God: and see both a worthie memoriall and a right president of a Princes visitation and reformation of all states, aswell in matters of fayth, as good order and discipline. These be the Lawes. Cap. 160. Chap. 76.The Priests, euery man in his calling, shall preach, and teach the people committed to their charge: The Bishops shall not suffer any man vnder them, to propose to the people newe fangled opinions, or not Canonical, of their owne deui∣sing, not agreeable to the scriptures: but shall themselues preach fruitfull & good doctrine, tending to life euerlasting, and instruct others to do the like. And first they shall teach all men generally to beeleeue the father, the sonne and the holy Ghost to bee one omnipotent, eternal and inuisible God, creator of heauen and earth and all things in them, and that there is but one Godhead, substance & maiestie in these three persons, the father, the sonne and the holy ghost. Cap. 76.ITEM they shall preach, that the sonne of God, through the working of the holy spi∣rit, tooke flesh of Marie (shee remaining still a virgine) for the saluation and redemp∣tion of mankind, his death, buriall, rising the third day from the dead, his ascending into heauen, and how he shall come againe in diuine glorie to iudge all men according to their deserts, the wicked (for their vnrighteousnes) to bee cast into perpetuall flames of fire with the Diuell: the iust to bee taken to Christ and his elect angels into [blessed] life for euer. Ibidem.ITEM they shall diligently set forth the resurrection of the dead, that men may knowe and beleeue they shal haue their reward [good or euill] in the same bodies which they now beare about them. Ibidem.ITEM they shall admonish all men with all industrie, for what offences they shal∣be condemned to paynes euerlasting: Paul telling vs, that the workes of the flesh are manifest, which are, fornication, vncleannes, wantonnes, hatred, debate, emulation, wrath strife, sedition, heresie, sects, spite, murder, drunkennes, gluttonie, and such other, of which I warne you now, as I did before, that they which commit these things shal not inherit the kingdome of God: these things therefore, which the great Preacher of the Church of God reckoneth by name, let them be with all care prohibited, remembring how terrible that saieng is, They which doe these things, shall neuer come to the king∣dome of God. Ibidem.BESIDES, you shall earnestly teach them the loue of God, and their neighbour, faith and hope in God, humilitie and patience, charitie and continencie, liberalitie and mercie, to giue almes, to acknowledge their sinnes, and forgiue such as trespasse a∣gainst them according to the Lordes prayer: assuring them that they, which followe these thinges, shall enter the kingdome of God. THIS WEE CHARGE AND ENIOINE YOV THE MORE PRECISELY, BECAVSE WEE KNOWE, THAT FALSE TEACHERS SHALL COME IN THE LATER DAYES, as the Lord in the Gospel foretold, and his Apostle Paul to Timothie witnesseth. Cap. 66.ITEM the Bishoppes shall diligently discusse in euery parish the fayth of the Priestes, their manner of baptizing, and saying masse: that their faith may be
sound, their baptisme Catholike, and themselues well conceiue the prayers of their masse, and sing the psalmes by the distinction of verses. They must wel vn∣derstand the Lordes prayer themselues, and teach that all others must vn∣derstand the same [to this end] that euery man may know what he asketh at gods hand. This verse, Glorie be to the father & the sonne (&c.) shal be song of all with great deuotion: & the Priestes together with the people shal sing with one voyce, holy, holy, holy (Lorde God of hostes) and all the faithfull shall communicate, and prouide at the time of masse so to do,Cap. 132. without any other cal∣ling or warning. No Priest shall admitte an other mans parishioner to the masse,Cap. 147. ex∣cept he be a wayfaring man, or one that is tyed there with some matter in law. ITEM that false and suspected legends or such as bee repugnant to the Catholike faith (as that vile and erroneous epistle, which some deceaued themselues,Cap. 73. and deceiuing others, pretended a yeare past to fal from heauen) bee neither beleeued, nor reade, but burnt, lest the people be seduced by such Pamphlets: & only the canonical bookes, Catho∣like treaties, and sentences of holy writers be read, and taught. ITEM the Priests shall haue alwaies in readinesse the sacred Eucharist,Cap. 155. that when any falleth sick, or an infant be in danger of death, he may minister the communion to him, least he die without a communion. ITEM we decree, that as God hath commaunded,Cap. 75. no seruile worke to be taken in hand on the Lords day, as also the Prince my father of blessed memorie gaue charge by his Synodal Edict, to wit, no kind of husbandrie, neither cutting of vines, nor tilling the ground, neither reaping, nor mowing, nor hedging, neither rooting or felling of trees, nor digging in rocks, nor building, nor gardening, no not keeping of courts, or hunting [the women likewise to forbeare all kind of manuall works] but that all people resort to the Church and praise God for all his blessings.Cap. 139. On the Sunday shal no market nor faire be kept in any place. ITEM the holy dayes, that shalbe kept throughout the yere, are these:Cap. 158. the birth of Christ, S. Steeuens, S. Iohns, the Innocēts day, the octaues of our Lord, the Epiphanie & octaues thereof, the purification of the virgine Marie, eight daies of Easter, the time of [the solemne procession or] greater Letanie, the Assension of the Lord, Whitsontide, S. Iohn Baptist, S. Peter and Paul, S. Martine, S. Andrew. The assumption of our Ladie I leaue in doubt. ITEM the Moncks shall perfectly learne the manner of the Romane tunes like as our father king Pipine decreed they should,Cap. 74. when he did abrogate the french kinde of singing. ITEM that Bishops be chosen by the consent of the clergie and people out of the same dioces,Cap. 78. according to the Canons, without respect of persons, or rewards: and that they traine vp their Priests in sobrietie and chastitie:Cap. 103. and see them haue the bookes of their masses and lessons well corrected: and that they repaire their Churches decaied to their abilitie, & instruct the (Church) widoes how they should be conuersant after the Apo∣stolike precept, & roote out the superstitions that are in many places about the exequies of the dead, and wholly bend themselues to do their duties in al things con∣cerning the Church of God: and this that they may the more freely doe, wee will bee
ready to assist them by all meanes possible. Cap. 129. Cap. 128. Cap. 130. Cap. 131. Cap. 141. Cap. 136. Cap. 86. Cap. 67.ITEM that in one Citie bee not two Bishops, nor one prouince diuided betweene two Metropolitanes: and that the confirming of Bishops be not long differed, neither any Bishop remoue from his diocesse, without the decree of other Bishops. That no lay man presume to place or displace Clerks, but by the Bishops Consent. That excommunica∣tions be not ouer rife and for trifeling causes. That euery Church haue a Priest as soone as the Bishop can prouide. Item the Bishop shal looke that the Church of God haue due honor: no secular busines, nor vaine iangling shalbe suffered in the Church, because the howse of God is the howse of praier, but that al men haue their mindes attentiuely bent to God, when they come to masse, and not depart before the Priest haue ended his blessing. Cap. 79.Because Canonicall profession partly for ignorance, partly for sloth, was very much defaced, we tooke paines at our sacred session to gather as it were certaine sweet flowers out of the monuments of blessed writers, and proportion a rule both for women and men of Canonicall conuersation: which the whole assemblie so well liked of, that they thought it worthie to bee kept without alteration: and therefore wee de∣cree, that all of that sort hold it without failing, and in any case hereafter ob∣serue the same. Cap. 81.How we haue disposed touching Monckes, and giuen them leaue to chose an Abbat of themselues, and ordered their purpose of life, wee haue caused to be drawen in an other schedule, and confirmed it,Cap. 110. that it might stand good and inuiolable with (the Princes) our successors, (Prouided always) that laymen be neither ouerseers of Moncks, nor Archdeacons. Cap. 71.We heare say that certaine Abbesses, against the manner of the Church of God, giue blessing with laieng their hands, and making the signe of the Crosse on the heads of men. Know you, sacred fathers, that this must be vtterly forbidden in your diocesse. Cap. 62.Wee haue a precept in Deuteronomie, No man shall consult a southsaier, obserue dreames or respect diuinations: there shal bee no sorcerer, no inchaunter, no coniurer. Therefore wee commaund that none calculate, practise charmes, or take vppon them to Prophesie what weather shall come: but wheresoeuer such bee founde, either to bee refourmed or condemned. Likewise for trees, rockes, springs, where some fooles make their obseruations, wee giue straite charge that this wicked vse, detected of GOD, be banished euerie where and destroyed. Cap. 163.Of mariage your demaund, whether a man may take to wife a mayde that is espoused to an other. In any case we forbid it: because that blessing, which the Priest giueth her that is betrothed, is to the faithful in manner of a sacrilege if it any way be violated. Cap. 116. The Prince visiteth and cōmaundeth for ecclesiasti∣cal rules and discipline.THAT our visitours looke diligently in euery Citie, Monasterie, and Nunrie, howe the buildinges and ornaments of the Church bee kept, and make diligent inquirie for the conuersation of all persons there,
and howe that which wee commaunded, is refourmed in their reading, singing, and other disciplines pertayning to the rules of eccelsiasticall order. Certaine Chapters,Cap. 104. The Prince promiseth by the aduise of his faithful determinatiō for such ec∣clesiasticall matters as were not ex∣pressed in his chapters. as of incestuous mariages, Churches that lacke their right honour or haue beene lately spoyled, and if there bee any other eccle∣siasticall, or common wealth matters worthie to bee redressed, which for shortnes of tyme wee coulde not nowe finish, wee thinke good to differre them, vntill by Gods helpe, and the aduise of our faythfull [Counsellers,] oportunitie serue vs to determine the same. There bee sixe score chapters besides these, recorded by the same wri∣ter of the lawes, that Charles made touching ecclesiasticall Persons and cau∣ses, which I for breuitie sake omitte, leauing you to consider of them when you see your time. Charles,Charles by his lawes rectified al ecclesiasticall things and causes. by these publike lawes, appointed what doctrine should be preached, what abuses in the Lords supper amended, what parts of diuine seruice pro∣nounced by the Priest and people together with one voyce, what bookes should bee read in the Church, what holy dayes obserued, what memories of Saints abolished, what woorkes on Sonday prohibited: hee prescribed the Bishops their dueties, the Priestes their charge, the Monkes their rules: hee di∣rected thee keeping of Synodes, electing and translating of Bishoppes, or∣dering and placing of Clerkes, paying and employing of Tythes: decided what shoulde become of their mariages that were taken away by force, or affianced before to others: forbad the burying of dead corses in the Church, banished Sorcerie, Simonie, Usurie, Periurie: last of all vndertooke, that if any thing were wanting, which needed reformation in causes ecclesiasti∣call, it shoulde bee supplyed of him at his leasure. If Charles had the re∣giment of monasticall profession, episcopall iurisdiction, canonicall conuersati∣on: if hee did, I say, medle with redressing errors in fayth, abuses in sacra∣mentes, disorders in diuine seruice, superstition in funerals, othes, charmes, and such other matters, as by the purport of these chapters it is euident he did, what causes can you deuise more spirituall than these? Will you per∣mitte these thinges of most importance to the Princes power, and except other of lesse moment? That were notorious follie. You must either inuest them with all, or exclude them first from the weightiest. For if they be gouer∣nours of the greatest ecclesiasticall affayres, much more doth their authoritie stretch to the smalest. Againe, these Lawes of Charles, which amount to the number of eight skore and three,If any wanted he promised at his leisure to supply that defect. what do they lacke of a full direction for all matters needing re∣formation in the Church of God? Any thing or nothing? If nothing, then this prince gouerned & ordered al ecclesiasticall causes. If any thing, yt Charles him selfe assureth vs he would determine, when occasion serued. Choose whether you wil, Charles either way shewed ye lawful power of Princes to direct & establish
all thinges requisite to the faith and Church of Christ. For what hee promised aduisedly to doe; no doubt, hee ment it shoulde, and thought it might, bee iustly perfourmed. His sonne & his nephew followed his steps and executed his lawes.So did Ludouike his sonne, and Lotharius his nephew the next Emperours after him, whose proceedings declare what account they made of these chapters, and with what diligence they put them in executiō. The monuments of so good Princes I may not ouerslip with silence, their deeds did then profit the Church of God, their wordes will nowe profite vs. Thus did Ludouike, and Lotharius his sonne write to the Bishoppes and magistrates of their Empire. Legion franciae lib. 2. Cap. 1.You haue all I doubt not either seene or heard, that our father and our progenitors, after they were chosen by God to this place, MADE THIS THEIR PRINCIPAL STVDIE,Cap. 2. howe the honour of Gods holy Church, and the state of their kingdome might bee decently kept: and wee for our part, following their example, since it hath pleased God to appoint vs that we should haue the care of his holy church, and this Realme, are very desirous, so long as wee liue, to labour earnestly for three speciall points, I meane to defende, exalt and honour Gods holy Church and his mini∣sters in such sort as is fit, to preserue peace, and do iustice among the people. Cap. 3. The cheefe of this ministe∣rie consisteth in the princes person to whom the Bi∣shops are co∣adiutors. Cap. 12. Cap. 11. The Prince willeth all without ex∣ception to obserue his commaunde∣ments in all things as well ecclesiastical as temporal. Cap. 26. Bishops to be reformed by the Kings visitours. Cap. 27. The kings decrees tou∣ching all things and causes to be obserued of all men.AND THOVGH THE CHIEFE OF THIS MINISTERIE CONSIST IN OVR PERSON, yet by Gods and mans ordinance it is so diuided, that euery one of you in his order and calling hath a part of our charge, in so much that I should bee your admonisher, and you all my coadiutors. For which respect our intent is by other good meanes, and by commissioners appointed for this purpose, to learne and trie howe well our lieutenants fauour and execute iustice, and howe religiously our Bishops liue and preach: WILLING TOV ALL VVITHOVT EXCEPTION TO OBSERVE OVR COMMANDEMENT IN ALL THINGS AND HONOVR SVCH AS WE SEND FOR ANY OCCASION OR BVSINES EITHER ECCLESI∣ASTICALL OR TEMPORAL, AND IN RESPECT OF OVR AVTHORITIE NOT TO FAILE BVT PERFORME THOSE THINGS WHICH WE HAVE ENIOYNED YOV BY THEM. Nowe the charge that wee giue our visitours is this. First they shall indict assem∣blies in two or three places, whither all within the limittes of their commission shall resort, and there make it knowne to all men what is the summe and effect of their message, to witte, that wee haue appointed them for this cause, that IF ANY BISHOP or Lieutenant can not do his duetie by reason of any impediment, hee should haue recourse to them, and by their helpe discharge his dutie: and if the matter bee such as by their industrie can not bee redressed, then shall it bee brought by them to our knowledge: and againe, IF ANY BISHOP or Lieutenant BE FOVND NEGLIGENT IN HIS OFFICE, by their moniti∣on he shalbe refourmed. Wee charge them likewise to make knowen to all men the Chapters or Lawes, QVAE GENERALITER DE QVIBVSCVNQVE CAVSIS STATVIMVS, WHICH WE HAVE DECREED GENERALLY CONCERNING ALL MANER OF CAVSES, and do their best to see them throughly kept of all men. And if any of the things which we haue ordained and commaunded be found imperfect by some defect happily which they can not amend, then shall they with speede make relation thereof
to vs that we may correct that which they cannot. And because the last yere our expectation was not satisfied in such sort as we looked for,Chap. 28. we will that this present (yere) our visitours whom wee haue allotted to this seruice, haue (better) respect and care how euery man that we haue pre∣ferred to the gouernance of our people in his calling dischargeth his dewtie to Gods pleasure, our honor, & the benefite of our subiects: and this shall be the very course of their inquirie, whether the things contained in our Capitular, which we deliuered them this yere past, be kept and obserued according to Gods will & our commaundement. Therefore about the midst of May next shall they assem∣ble, I meane our visitours euerie man in his diuision with all the Bishops, Ab∣bats, Lieuetenants, our fee men and aduocats (the Abbesses and such as cannot come to send their proxies the liuetenant to bring with him his vnder officers and hundreders) and in that conuent shall they first conferre touching Christian religion and ecclesiastical order,The first part of the Princes commission concerned religion and ecclesiastical order. next they shall inquire of our officers how they doe their du∣ties, last of our people in what concord and peace they liue. And this inquisition shall they make so diligently and exactly, that we may be trewly certified by thē of al these points. And if any such cause be brought before thē which needeth their help according to the condition of the causes specified in the short rehearsal of our lawes, then our wil is they shall go to the place and re∣dresse it by the warrant of our authoritie. You can neither bee so simple but you may see,Legū Franciae Cap. 12. nor so partial but you must graunt that Ludouike and Lotharius behaued themselues as rightful superui∣sours of the Bishops in their Empire,Cap. 26. how they liued and preached: ayding those that were hindered, correcting those that were negligent in their mi∣nisteries:Cap. 28. and sent visitours to inquire and redresse by their Princely power any cause that needed reformation in Christian religion or ecclesiastical or∣der:Cap. 11. What lacketh this of gouer∣ning al men in al matters both ecclesi∣asticall and ciuil? commaunding all men generally to reuerence and obay them as wel in ecclesiastical as common wealth matters in respect of their royal authoritie. What more than this doth that oth impart, which you so much declaime against? Or what lesse than this did Ludouike and Lotharius execute? Can their procee∣dings please you, and our words expressing the selfesame right offend you? You must either reiect both or admit both: they bee so neare linked, you can not disseuer them. I now make your selfe iudge, whether these Christian and Catholike Prin∣ces were not commaunders and punishers (those we call gouernours) of Bishops, Priests, and Moncks, in maters and causes ecclesiasticall. Phi. I see they were, but yet not supreme, which is the cheefest thing that we mislike in your oth. Theo. I beleeue you well; for by that worde we denie Princes to bee subiect to the Popes consistorie, which is the chiefest thing you respect. Phi. That worde maketh them superiours to God himselfe: for supreme is superiour to all, neither Christes owne per∣son, nor his Church excepted. Theo. Can you make such merriments when you be disposed? Phi. Doth
not the word inferre superiour to all, or at least subiect to none? Theo. Was it in question, when this othe was made, whether God should be superior to man, or whether Princes should bee subiect to the Pope?Supreme is not superiour to Christ, but not subiect to the Pope. Phi. It skilleth not what was then in question, these bee nowe your woordes. Theo. By this cun∣ning you may conclude all that euer wrate with pen or spake with tongue to be wicked blasphemers. Phi. Why so? Theo. Where the superlatiue is vsed, by your rule, God himselfe is not excepted. And so these phrases, a most wise teacher, a most holy Bishoppe, a most mightie prince, and ten thousand such like, which we find in all mens bookes and speeches, bee meere impieties. For they import that many bee wiser, holyer, and mightier than Christ himselfe, or at lest as wise, holy and mightie as he, which is open & inexcusable blasphemie. Name me what father or writer you will, and see by this art of yours whether I proue him not a blasphemer. Phi. The superla∣tiue includeth not God, be∣cause God with man is not cōpared.That is no right vnderstanding but a foolish carping at mens wordes. For when we giue these titles to men, sanctissimus, potentissimus, beatissimus, the most holy father, the most puissant king, the most blessed Martyr, we meane amongst men; wee compare them not with God. Theo. And since all men euen your selues speake so, why doe you take that foolish aduantage at the word supreme, which we vse; as if we ment not amongst men, but exalted Princes a∣boue God? Phi. But the Church of Christ is not excepted, and that consisteth of men. Theo. If by the Church of Christ you meane the faithfull liuing on earth, certainely Princes be not subiect, but superiours to all Christian men. Peter spake to the chosen and elect of God when hee sayde,1. Pet. 2. Tit. 3. Rom. 1. Cap. & 13. Cap. Bee subiect to the king as to the chiefe; Paul willed Titus to warne not the miscreants but the be∣leeuers in Creta, to bee subiect to principalities and powers: and wrate him∣selfe to all the Saintes at Rome, You must bee subiect for conscience sake. If the Saintes must bee subiect to Princes, ergo the Church; for the Church on earth is nothing els but the collection of Saintes. And if euery soule, that is euery man, must bee subiect,The saints on earth are sub∣iect to the Princes sword the graces of God are not. howe can the Church consi∣sting of men bee exempted? But if by the Church you meane the preceptes and promises, giftes and graces of God preached in the Church and pou∣red on the Church, Princes must humbly obey them and reuerently receiue them as well as other priuate men. So that Prophets, Apostles, Euan∣gelists and all other buylders of Christes Church, as touching their Persons, bee subiect to the Princes power; mary the word of trueth in their mouthes, and the Seales of grace in their handes, because they are of God, not of themselues, they be farre aboue the Princes calling and regiment, and in those cases, kinges and Queenes, if they will bee saued, must submit themselues to Gods euerlasting trueth and testament, as well as the meanest of their peo∣ple: but this neither abateth the power which God hath giuen them ouer all men, nor maketh them thrall to the Popes iudiciall processe to bee forced and punished at his pleasure: and therefore, this notwithstanding, Prin∣ces
bee supreme, that is superiour to all, and subiect to none but onely to God. Phi. Who euer taught before you that Princes were subiect only to God?The Church cōfessed prin∣ces to be sub∣iect to none but to God. Tertul. ad Scapulam. Idem in Apolo∣getico. Contra Parme∣nian. lib. 3. Ad Populū an∣tioch homil. 2. Theo. The Church of Christ from the beginning, Colimus Imperatorem, vt hominem a Deo secundum, & solo Deo minorem: Wee reuerence the Empe∣rour, sayth Tertullian, as a man next vnto God, and inferiour only to God. Againe, Deum esse solum in cuius solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, ante omnes & super omnes Deos & hommes: It is onely God in whose power alone (Princes) are: in comparison with him they bee second, and after him first, afore all and ouer all both Gods and men. So like∣wise Optatus: Super Imperatorem non (est) nisi solus Deus qui fecit Impe∣ratorem: Aboue the Empe-rour is none but onely GOD, who made the Emperour. And Chrysostome: Parem vllum super terram non habet: (The Emperour) hath no peere on earth, much lesse any superiour. And that Princes are aboue all,Superiour to al, is subiect to none. Ad popu Ant. homil. 2. Nouel. const. 133. De obitu Theodosij. Greg. epist. li. 3. ca. 100. & cap. 103. Saint Paul is cleare. Let euery soule bee subiect to the Superiour powers. All must bee subiect to them, ergo they bee superiour to all; and superiour to all, is supreme. Chrysostome calleth the Emperour, The highest and head of all men vpon earth. Iu∣stinian, sayth the Emperour, hath receiued a common gouernement and Principalitie ouer all men. Ambrose sayth of Theodosius, that hee had power ouer all men. And Gregorie, as you hearde, affirmeth that Power is giuen to Princes from heauen ouer all men, not onely Souldiers but also Priestes. And since I before concluded and you confessed all men, were they Monkes, Priestes, Bishoppes, or whatsoeuer, to bee sub∣iect to the Princes power and authoritie both in causes ecclesiasti∣call and temporall, why shoulde that nowe bee reuoked or doub∣ted? Phi. I neuer did nor will confesse Princes to bee supreme. For he that iudgeth on earth in Christes steade is aboue them all. Theo. You come nowe to the quicke.The word su∣preme was added to set Princes at li∣bertie from the Pope, and that is it that so much offē∣deth the Iesuites. This very clayme was the cause why the woorde su∣preme was added to the othe: for that the Bishoppe of Rome taketh vppon him to commaund and depose Princes as their lawfull and superiour iudge. To exclude this wicked presumption, wee teach that Princes be supreme rulers, wee meane, subiect to no superiour iudge to giue a reason of their doings but onely to God. Phi. This you teach, but this you can not prooue. Theo. It forceth not what wee can doe. The burden in this case to prooue is yours and not ours. You say Princes bee subiect to the Popes Consistorie, wee say they bee not. Must wee prooue the nega∣tiue, or must you rather make good your affirmatiue? Againe Saint Paul auoucheth with vs that euery soule is subiect to their power: You contradict those woordes, and say the Pope is not subiect but Superiour to Princes. The generall in precise tearmes concludeth for vs; you except the Pope: must you not prooue your exception?
Phi. You be loth to proue;They must proue Princes to be subiect to the Pope: we need not proue them to be free. you knowe the weakenes of your side. Theo. You crosse the plaine wordes of the holy Ghost, and woulde put vs to refute your fan∣sies. Phi. Wee say Christs Uicar is not included in those woordes. Theo. Wee say the generall includeth euery particular. Phi. How could Paul make Peter a subiect to Princes, when Peter was none? Theo. Why shoulde not Peter bee subiect to Princes, when God himselfe pronounced by the mouth of Paul that euery soule was subiect to them? Phi. Who euer constred S. Pauls words so, besides you? Theo. The Church of Christ neuer constred them otherwise. Peter and the Bishoppes of Rome for the first three hundred yeeres, did they not patiently submit themselues as sub∣iects to those punishments and torments which heathen Princes inflicted on o∣ther Christians? Phi. In deede they were martyred for the most part by the rage of Infidels, that knewe them not. Theo. And the Christians that knewe them, neuer tooke armes to defend thē against the rage of Infidels, but thought them subiect to higher powers by force of S. Pauls words, as well as all other Bishoppes were. Phi. They might not resist though they were wrongful∣ly vexed. Theo. And why might they not, but because they were subiect by Gods ordinance to the Princes power? Unlawfull violence might well bee resisted. Phi. The Bishops of Rome for 300. yeres en∣dured heathē Princes.Christian Princes were neuer superiours to the Bishoppes of Rome. Theo. Syr, your courage is more than your cunning. The Bishops of Rome for eight hundred and fiftie yeres after Christ, that we can directly proue, were duetifull and obedient subiects to Christian Emperours. Phi. Are you not ashamed to tell such a tale? Theo. Will you be ashamed of your error, if I proue it a trueth? Phi. Shewe mee that, and I will yeeld the rest. Theo. The rest is alreadie proued,Martin. Polon. in Iulio & Liberio. Platina in Bonifacio I. Martin. Polon. in Syluer. Vigil. & Martino I. Caus. 2. quaest. 7. Cap. Nossi. The popes submission to the Emperour. and this shall be presently shewed. I might alleage that after the Romane Emperours began to professe the name of Christ, Iulius and Liberius were banished by Constantius; Bonifacius the first by Honorius; Syl∣uerius and Vigilius by Iustinian; Martyne the first by Constantine the thirde; and diuers other Popes by sundrie Princes, but that I will skippe, & come to the submission of Leo the fourth made to Ludouike the West Emperour with these wordes: If we haue done any thing otherwise than well, and not dealt vprightly with those that are vnder vs, wee will amend all that is amisse by the iudgement of your highnes, beseeching your excellencie to sende, for the better triall of these surmises, such as in the feare of God may narrowly sift not onely the matters infourmed, but all (our doings) great and smal, as well as if your Maiestie were present: so that by lawfull examination all may bee finished, and nothing left vndiscussed or vndetermined. In all things, great and small, the Pope submitteth himselfe to the Princes commissioners, and offereth to amend all that is amisse by the princes iudgement. This lowly submission importeth an euident subiection.Ibidem Cap. Perrus. A lewd elusiō of Gratian. Phi. It was a dispensation of the Popes humilitie, not any part of his bounden duetie thus to doe. Theo. So Gratian the compiler of your decrees
falueth the matter; which is as much as if you sayde, the Pope by right might haue commaunded the Prince, but in a merie moode, for once, to make sport, he would needes bee iudged and ordered by the Prince. Is not this a proper kind of diuinitie, when the Pope protesteth his obedience to the Princes power and lawes, to say the Pope speaketh in iest, his wordes are but a tricke of vo∣luntarie, which he may recall or refuse when hee will? If such vnlearned, irreli∣gious, and vnsavory shiftes may serue for good answeres, you may soone defend what religion you lift. It is a very short and easie methode to be rid of all exam∣ples and histories, to say they did so: but it was more than needed or should haue beene done. Phi. In temporall matters it might be the Pope was subiect to the Prin∣ces power,The Prince superior to the Pope euē in causes ecclesiastical. but not in spirituall. Theo. No man can bee both a subiect and a su∣periour to the Princes power. A subiect is alwayes a subiect, that is at al times to bee commaunded and punished by the magistrate: neuer to command or pu∣nish the Magistrate. Againe Leo referreth him selfe in all thinges both great and small to the Princes pleasure and censure: now a subiect in all thinges, is superiour in nothing: yet left you shoulde cauill, that ecclesiasticall cau∣ses are not expresty mentioned in this place, you shall see that the Bishoppes of Rome for eight hundred yeeres and aboue, were suppliants and seruants not of curtesie but of duetie to Christian Emperours, and obeyed their ec∣clesiasticall Lawes and edicts, and were commaunded and ouerruled by them in the regiment of the Church, as the stories that follow shall plainely declare. Donatus and his fellowes pretending that Cecilianus could not be Bishop of Carthage for many crimes falsely surmised,The quarel between Donatus & Cecilian. and specially for that Felix, which layed handes on him had (as they sayde) betrayed or burnt the scriptures: not onely refused his communion, and procured his condemnation in a Pro∣uinciall Synode by lxx. Africane Bishoppes, but in a tumult erected an o∣ther Bishoppe besides him, diuided the people from him, and offering a bill of complaint against him to the Proconsull of Africke, made a request to Constantine, that hee woulde giue them iudges to decide the matter. The Prince carefull to keepe the Church in peace, did authorize Meltiades Bi∣shoppe of Rome, Marcus a Clergieman of the same Citie, but as then no Bi∣shop, Rheticius, Maternus, and Maximus three Bishoppes of Fraunce to con∣sider their allegations and determine the strife: Where sentence passing with Cecilianus, the contrarie part appealed from the commissioners to the Prince. This appeale Constantine might haue iustly reiected as made from his owne delegates; but seeking all meanes to pacifie the schisme, comman∣ded a greater number of their Bishoppes to meete together at Arle in France, there to sit in Councell a fresh about the hearing and ending of this quarell: from whome, for that they likewise concluded Cecilianus to be right Bishop of Carthage, the Donatists appealed as they had done from the first: adding nowe, that if Cecilianus himselfe were cleare, yet so long as Felix was
guiltie, which ordered and confirmed him, his election must needes bee voyde. The patient and mild Emperour seeing them twise conuicted and not conten∣ted, but still murmuring against the Bishoppes as partiall, and dayly mole∣sting his eares with importunate suite, neuer troubled Bishoppe or Councell with the clearing of Felix, but appointed Aelianus a ciuill Magistrate to search out the trueth of these later accusations in a temporall Court, where Felix after diligent examination was iudicially discharged and acquitted from all suspition of that sacrilegious abusing the woorde of God. Then were both sides called before Constantine to receiue iudgement at his handes without appeale, who taking paynes in his owne Person to sit iudge betweene them, and exactly weighing what either part could say, gaue sentence with Cecilia∣nus, against Donatus, making therewithall a most sharpe Lawe to punish the Donatists (if they persisted in their wilfulnes) as dissentious schismatikes, from the Church of Christ: which rigour the Christian Emperours that followed, did rather increase than diminish. This I thought good to report out of Eusebius,Lib. 10. Cap. 5. Lib. 1. contra Parmenianum epist. 162.166. & alibi. This quarell was forthings & causes spiritual. Optatus and Austen somewhat the larger, that the circum∣staunces being fully knowen, the conclusion might the better bee per∣ceiued. I trust you will not denie but the strife betweene Cecilianus and Donatus consisted both of persons and causes ecclesiasticall. The parties accused and ac∣cusing were Bishoppes; the faultes obiected, were iust impediments of episco∣pall dignitie; the matters in doubt were the committing and partaking of sa∣crilege, the right election of Bishoppes, the lawfull deposing of them by Sy∣nodes, the needefull communion with them, or schismaticall dissention from them. No causes can possiblely touch the regiment of Christes Church neerer than these: wel then in these causes who was supreme, Meltiades or Constan∣tine?Constantine superior to Meltiades. The bishop of Rome or the Emperour? The prince sent commission to the Pope, ioyned other collegues with him, receiued an appeale from him, gaue se∣cond iudges after him, and in his owne person pronounced finall sentence with∣out him: the least of these facts proueth the prince superiour to the Pope; and all these did that famous Emperour, and his doings in this case were very well ly∣ked and accepted in the Church of Christ. Which of these things wil you now encounter? Did not Cōstantine authorize Meltiades?Euseb. lib. 10. Cap. 5. The Pope with others were authori∣zed by the Prince to heare this cause. August. epist. 162. His commission is yet extant to Meltiades Bishoppe of Rome and Marcus with these words: My pleasure is, that Cecilianus with ten Bishops of his accusers and other tenne of his fauourers come to Rome, there to be heard before you both, ioyning with you Rheticius, Maternus, and Marinus your collegues, whom purposely for this matter I haue willed with speede to re∣paire vnto you. S. Austen debating with the Donatists what iust exceptions they could take to so many sentences giuen against them, moueth this doubt & maketh this answere, Should not (thinke you) Meltiades Bishop of Rome with his collegues haue vsurped that iudgement, which lxx. Africane Bishops had ended? What, that he did not vsurpe? For the Emperour vpon motion made
(by you) sent Bishops to sit with him as iudges, and to rule that matter in e∣uery point as iustice should leade them. This we proue by the Donatists sup∣plication and the Princes owne wordes. If S. Austen defend the Bishoppe of Rome from vsurping in this case, by producing & vrging a commission from the prince, then apparētly, both the pope was authorized by y• princes power to giue iudgemēt in a matter ecclesiastical, & had bin, but for that warrant, an vsurper. Phi. S. Austen sayth that Constantine durst not be iudge of a Bishops cause.Epist. 166. Theo. At the first hee was loth to sit iudge in his owne person, for that he was not acquainted with the Church Canons which were then brought in question:Constantine himself would not at first fit iudge in the cause for want of skill. but at length when he saw no remedie, himself sate in iudgement both after the Pope and after the Councell, and heard the whole matter, and ended it for euer. This inferreth that at the first when he refused he wanted not power to commaund, but skill to discerne; more requisite in a iudge than the former: Yea at the first when he durst not sit iudge himselfe for lacke of experience, hee shewed his soueraintie by making delegates to heare and order the cause. So sayth S. Austen the very next wordes.August. epist. 166. For that Constantine durst not be iudge himselfe of a Bishops cause, eam discutiendam at que finiendam Episcopis delega∣uit: he made delegates of the Bishops to discusse and determine the same. And againe, causam Ceciliani iniunxit eis audiendam, he gaue foorth a precept (to the Bishoppe of Rome and others) for hearing of Cecilianus his matter.Cellatio. 3. dici cum Donatistis Now to delegate the Bishoppe of Rome with others, and to giue fresh iudges after them, is an argument of greater authoritie, than if the Prince in Person had beene iudge in the cause. Did not Constantine receiue that appeale which the Donatists made from Meltiades,The Prince receiued an appeale from the Pope. Euseb. li. 10. Cap. 5. and assigne them other iudges? His Epistle to Chrestus Bishoppe of Siracusas in Sicile, whom he willed to be present at the Councell of Arle for the ending of the same matter, is an euident proofe that hee did. At the first, sayth Constantine, when this schisme beganne, I wrate my letters and tooke this order: that certaine Bishops comming from Fraunce, & the parties in strife called for out of Africke, the Bishop of Rome being also there, in their pre∣sence this quarrell should be throughly considered and pacified. Mary for so much as they will not agree to the sentence there giuen, but goe forward in their outragious dissention, I must take care that (the strife) which should haue caulmed of it selfe at the first decision, at least may now bee composed by the meeting of many. Hauing therefore charged a great number of Bi∣shops out of diuers coastes to assemble by the kalends of August at Arle, I thought it not amisse by letters to require you, that you fayle not to be with them at the time & place appointed: that by your vprightnes with the good aduise and full consent of the rest, which shall then & there meete you, vp∣on diligent hearing what either side can say (whom we haue commanded to be likewise present) they may be reduced from the schisme yet during, to religion, fayth, and brotherly concord, as in duetie they be bound. When Meltiades and his collegues (sayth Austen to the Donatists) hadAugust. epist. 166.
pronounced Cecilianus innocent and condemned Donatus as authour of the schisme raised at Carthage, your side came backe to the Emperour, & com∣plained of the iudgement of the Bishops against them. The most patient & mild Emperour the second time gaue them other iudges (namely) the Bi∣shops (that met) at Arle in Fraunce.And gaue thē other Iudges after the Pope. Certes the taking of an appeale made from the Bishoppe of Rome and appointing other iudges after him, and besides him, strongly concludeth the Princes authoritie to bee farre aboue the Popes, euen in causes ecclesiasticall, or as you terme them spirituall. August. epist. 166. The Prince sate himselfe in iudgement both after the Pope and after the Councel. Idem epist. 162. Idem contra Crescon. lib. 3 Cap. 17.Will you lastly say that Constantine sate not iudge himselfe in this mat∣ter, as well after Meltiades, as after the Councell of Arle? S. Austen is flat a∣gainst you. Your men, sayth he, speaking to the Donatists, appealed (from the Bishoppes at Arle) to the Princes owne person, and neuer left till the Empe∣rour himselfe tooke the hearing of the cause betweene them both, and pro∣nounced Cicilianus innocent, and those (his accusers) to be malitious wrang∣lers. And againe: the Donatists appealed from ecclesiasticall iudgement that Constantine might heare the cause. Whither when they came, both partes standing before him, Cecilianus was adiudged to bee innocent, & the Dona∣tists ouerthrowen. To proue this, I will bring you (sayth Austen) the very wordes of Constantine taken out of his letters where hee witnesseth that vp∣on iudiciall hearing of both sides, hee found Cecilianus to be cleare. For first declaring how the parties were brought to his iudgement, after two iudge∣ments of Bishoppes (alreadie past,) there (saith Constantine) I fully percei∣ued, that Cecilianus was a man most innocent, obseruing the dueties of his religion, and folowing the same: neither coulde any crime bee faste∣ned on him as his aduersaries had in his absence suggested. August. epist. 166. The Prince made a pe∣nal law to confirme his finall decision. Ibidem.And shewing what followed vppon this iudgement: Then did Constantine sayth hee, first make a most sharpe lawe to punish the Donatists. His sonnes continued the same: read what Valentinian; read, when you will, what Gra∣tian and Theodosius decreed against you. Why wonder you then at the chil∣dren of Theodosius, as if they shoulde haue followed any other president in this cause than the iudgement of Constantine which so many Christian Emperours haue kept inuiolable? Though Constantine bee dead, yet the iudgement of Constantine giuen against you liueth. For when Emperours commaunde that which is good, it is Christ and no man els that commaun∣deth by them. The Prince in these foure facts superior to the Pope.Lay these thinges together, and marke the consequent. First the Bishoppe of Rome and his assessours were appointed by the Prince to meddle with this matter as his delegates. Next vppon complaint of their partiall dealing the Prince commaunded others (leauing out the Bishoppe of Rome) to sit in Fraunce to conclude the same cause. Thirdly the Donatistes still appealing, the Prince called for both sides, hearde them in his owne per∣son, gaue small iudgement with Cecilianus, and discharged him as innocent, & therewith made a penall edict against the Donatists. Fourthly these prince∣ly
proceedinges of Constantine, the Church of God receiued with honor, and vsed with gladnesse; the Christian Emperours imbraced as vertuous, and con∣firmed as religious; S. Austen alleadgeth them as substantiall proofes for the Catholikes, and effectuall iudgements against the Donatistes: Now speake vprightly, whether in this case the Prince were not superiour to the Pope, yea supreme gouernour of Ecclesiasticall persons and causes. To Theodosius the elder Damasus,The Prince willeth Flaui∣anus to keepe his Church after foure Popes had repelled him for no Bishop. Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 23. Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 28. Arcadius de∣nied the Pope a Councel, & punished the Bishops that kept his com∣munion. Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 30. Siricius, & Anastasius, as I shewed be∣fore, made grieuous complaints one after an other, against Flauianus for en∣tring and possessing the See of Antioch contrarie to the Canons of the church. The prince sending for Flauianus, heard his answere, and admiring the cou∣rage and wisedome of the man, willed him to returne to his countrie, and feede the flocke committed to his charge, notwithstanding the Bishops of Rome for the space of seuenteene yeares before would neither acknowledge him for a Bishop, nor communicate with him. Of Arcadius his son, Innocentius the Bishop of Rome requested a Councel for the trial of Chrysostoms cause: but his petition was denied, his messengers sent awaie with reproach as troublers of the West Empire, Chrysostom ba∣nished farther off, and this edict giuen forth by Arcadius the East Emperour a∣gainst those that taking part with Innocentius, and fauouring Chrysostom, refused to communicate with Theophilus his deposer and Atticus his succes∣sor. If any Bishop will not communicate with Theophilus & Atticus, let him be depriued of his church and his goods: if they be laymen they shall for∣feite, the magistrates their dignities, the souldiers their girdle, the common sort let them be fined and exiled. By Honorius an other of his sonnes, ruling the West partes,Ex libro pontif. in vita Bonifa∣cij. Epist. Bonifacij ad Honorium Augustum. Rescript. Honor. ad Bonifac. tom. con. 1. Bonifacius and Eulalius, chosen Bishops of Rome in a tumult, were both commaunded to depart the Citie: and Bonifacius, after he was restored, put vp The Pope maketh a sup∣plication to the Prince for a law to pu∣nish ambition in getting the Popedom. a suppli∣cation to the prince for a decree that no man by suite or other vnlawfull meanes might be made Bishop of Rome: to whom Honorius sent back this rescript, By the mouth of your holines we hill haue this knowen to al Clergy men, that when you shall forgo this life, which we wish not, they may learne to surcease from ambitiō. For if two striuing be chosen, neither of them shall continue Bishop, but he onely shall remaine in the See Apostolike, whom the diuine iudgement and general consent shall elect a fresh out of the cler∣gie. This must therefore be kept, that all may put on quiet and contented mindes by our gentle admonition, and not attempt any thing by seditious packing, since we be resolued that neither faction shall preuaile. It was no strange thing in those daies for the Bishop of Rome to be suppliāt and subiect in church matters to christian Princes. When Eutiches first bro∣ched his error,Leo epist. 9. The Pope maketh sup∣plication to the Prince for a Councell, & missed his sute. that the fleshe of Christ in substance was not like this of ours: Leo thē Bishop of Rome made this sute to Theodosius the yonger: If it please (your Highnesse) to graunt my supplication, & to command a Councell of Bishops to be kept in Italie, speedily by Gods helpe might all things be re∣dressed,
which nowe trouble the whole Church: but hee did not obtayne so much. For Theodosius appointed their meeting at Ephesus, and for hast prefixed so short a time, that the Bishoppes of Italie could not bee pro∣uided for the iourneie:Leo. Epist. 12. Idem Epist. 13. Idem Epist. 17. Yet Leo sending his Deputies excuseth his absence by writing in these wordes: Although to bee present at the day which your godlinesse prescribed for the Councell no possible meanes doe per∣mit, neither by former examples (is my presence required,) and vrgent occasions at this time suffer me not to forsake this Citie, specially conside∣ring the point of faith (which Eutiches infringeth) is so cleare that a Coun∣cell might well haue beene spared: yet haue I doone my best, to obeie your graces precept in this, by dispatching thither such of my brethren as may suffice for this matter and shall supplie mine absence. When this Councell by the violent threatning and mischieuous packing of Diosco us Bishop of Alexandria, there president, had allowed the cursed opi∣nion of r Eutiches, and deposed Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople for procee∣ding against him: Leo becommeth a fresh suter to Theodosius in most earnest and humble manner.Idem Epist. 24. The Pope with sighes & teares, sueth for a generall Councell to the Prince, & was repelled. For so much as the Councell of Bishops, which you commanded to be kept at Ephesus, concerning the matter of Flauianus, hath (in sight) hurt the faith, and wounded all churches: all the churches of these parts about vs, al the Priests make supplication to your Maiestie with sighes and teares, that it might please you to commaund a generall councell to bee held within Italie: behold most christian and reuerent Emperour, I with the rest of my fellow Bishops beseech you to command that all things may stād in the same state, in which they were before any of these iudgements, vntill a greater number of Bishops may be gathered out of the whole world. Leo Epist. 26. The Pope de∣sireth a gentle woman to fur∣ther his sute to the Prince.This request of his he besought the Princesse Pulcheria to commend vnto Theodosius hir brother. I haue written to the most glorious and christian Prince; that for the calling of a councell within Italie, time might be set, & and place appointed; all quarrels and iudgementes past on either side (for the meane while) suspended: which thing that wee may the rather obtaine (I beseech you) let your accustomed deuotion, which neuer failed the church in her troubles, further our supplication with his Maiestie. Idem Epist. 23. The Pope praieth others to helpe him with putting vp a supplica∣tion to the Prince for a Councell.The same Leo desireth the clergie, Nobles, & citizēs of Constantinop. where Theodosius lay, to ioyne with him, for the better preuailing in his suite: Put vp an humble supplication (I pray you) with good aduise, that the most grati∣ous Emperour wil vouchsafe to grant our petition which we make for a ge∣neral councel to be summoned: yet all the prayers & meanes that Leo coulde vse notwithstanding, Theodosius perswaded to the contrarie by Chrysaphius master of his pallace (who was present at the said councel of Ephesus & great∣ly fauoured the faction of Dioscorus) would neuer incline to graunt him any thing, but alwaies refused his request. If the Bishop of Rome might then haue commā∣ded, why did he intreate with teares, & yet misse his purpose?If the Bishop of Rome might haue commanded thus much against the Princes will, and with-out the Princes power, what needed such lowly
supplications? Why did he make so great friendes, fet so deepe sighes, shed so many teares, and all in vaine? What follie was it to wast so much labour and time to no purpose, when the least word of his mouth, as you pretende, might haue commaunded both Emperour and Councell? But if, for restitution of the parties grieued on either side to their first estates, for suspension of all actes and proceedings past in three Synodes, for indiction of a generall Councell to debate their cause; the Pope were to sue, the Prince to graunt; as appeareth by the plaine confession and humble submission of Leo: then you see that in the Primatiue Church of Christ the Pope was wont to come to the Prince with a supplicamus for matters Ecclesiastical, and not onely besought him as his superiour with all humilitie, but obeyed him in such cases as his Lord and Soueraigne with all dutie. After Theodosius succeeded Martian, who by the perswasion of the vertu∣ous Ladie Pulcheria ioynt Empresse with him, was content to call a gene∣rall Councell: but as touching the time which Leo requested, and the place which he desired,Epist. 43. The Pope a fresh suter to the next Em∣perour. Idem Epist. 50. the prince refused the Popes petitiō in them both. I besought your Grace (saith Leo) that the councell which wee made sute for, and you iudged needful to pacifie the East church, might by your commandement bee differred till some better opportunitie: but because you led with a de∣uoute respect prefer Gods matters before mans, I labour not against that, which your Highnes hath disposed: yea rather I did with so great gladnes imbrace your Maiesties trauell to call a Synode for reducing the church to concord, that although my selfe were a suter to haue it kept within Italie, and a fitter time to be chosen that more store of Bishops might be sent for from the farthest partes; yet so soone as your Graces writ was deliuered me, foorthwith I directed (some) to supplie my roome. When this Councell was assembled, Leo began to make farther sute to Martian in this wise:Epist. 43. The Pope be∣seecheth the Prince by his royall decree, to voide the Councell of Ephesus; and to commaund the Councell of Chalcedon not to depart from the Ni∣cene faith. [The second councell of Ephesus] can not rightly be called a councell, which apparantly subuerted the faith, and which your Highnes for verie loue to trueth will make voide, by your decree, to the contrarie, most glorious Emperour. I therefore earnestly request and beseech your Maiestie by the Lord Iesus Christ the founder and gui∣der of your kingdom, that in this councell (of Chalcedon) which is pre∣sently to bee kept, you will not suffer the faith to bee called in questi∣on, which our blessed Fathers helde, deliuered them from the Apostles, neither permit such (errours) as haue beene long since condemned by them, to bee nowe reuiued againe: but that you will rather com∣maunde the faith concluded in the first Nicene Councell to stande in full force, remouing all the (latter) deuises of Heretikes. Which re∣quest Martian accomplished, entering the Councell in his owne person, and there by word of mouth absolutely forbidding the Bishops to defend or auouch any thing of the flesh and birth of our Sauiour otherwise thā the Nicene creed did containe.Concil. Chalced. actio. 1.
To this councel of Chalcedon Leo willed by Martiā to subscribe returned his answere in this suppliant & duetifull order:Leo pist. 59. The Pope must obey the Princes will in subscribing to the decrees of the Coun∣cell. Because I must by all meanes obey your sacred and religious will I haue set down my consent (in writing) to those Synodall constitutions which for the confirmation of the catholike faith, and condemnation of heretiks pleased me very well. What better wit∣nesse can we produce, that in causes Ecclesiasticall the Prince was the Popes superiour than this, that for repealing the Councell of Ephesus, for summo∣ning the Councell o Chalcedon, for charging those 600. and 30. fathers not to decline from the Nicene faith, and requiring the Bishop of Rome to sub∣scribe to their actes, Martian commaundeth with authoritie, Leo with al rea∣dinesse obeyeth: yea that Leo beseecheth Martian to commaund, and protesteth that for his part, he did and must obey the Princes will in those cases? Nouell. constit. 123. Iustiniā com∣maundeth the Patriarkes & namely the Bishoppe of Rome for Ec∣clesiasticall affaires.We COMMAVND (saith Iustinian) the blessed ARCHBISHOPS of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Theopolis, and Ierusalem, to receiue for ordering and instauling of Bishoppes onely that which this present Lawe doeth allow. And taxing the charges of euery Bishoppe according to the yearly value of his Church: Ibidem. If any man (saith hee) presume to take for installations or other duties aboue the rate which we prefixe, we cōmand that he repay thrise so much of his own to the church or bishop in that sort grieued. Neither doth he limit the Popes receites onely, but also bindeth him with the rest by this ge∣neral constitution: If any man be made Bishop contrary to the forme which this law prescribeth,Ibidem. the party confirmed shall loose his Bishopricke, and the confirmer stand suspended from his Ecclesiasticall function one whole year, and besides forfeit all his goods to the vse of his owne church: mary when a bishop is accused of any thing that doth by the (sacred) canons or (our) lawes hinder his consecration; if any man order him before diligent exa∣mination had,The Prince inflicteth depriuation for the breach of his Ecclesi∣asticall lawes. as well he that did order him, as he that is ordered, shal for euer be depriued. Thus coulde auncient Princes commaund in causes, and correct for offences Ecclesiasticall, euen the chiefest Patriarkes, and namely the Bishop of Rome, who now taketh on him to depose Princes, and dispose kingdomes at his pleasure. This illation is more than euident by the wordes of Gregorie the first, who writing to the Emperour Mauritius,Gregories submission to Mauritius in causes Eccle∣siasticall. vseth euery where this stile: My Lord, my most gracious Lord, I your seruant, and subiect to your commaunde∣ment; and that not in temporall causes, but in things concerning the rules and orders of Christes church, as by the speciall circumstances will appeare. Mau∣ritius, perceiuing that many coueted to be Clergi-men and Monkes, some to preuent the daunger of their accomptes, others to decline the burden of war∣fare, made this decree, that no souldier, nor officer accountant to the Prince for any summes of mony, should be receiued to sacred orders, or Monastical pro∣fession: charging the Bishoppe of Rome, to giue notice thereof to the rest of his Prouince. Gregorie though very much amased and grieued at the strange∣nesse of this law, yet durst not resist or refuse the same, but first with all dili∣gence
put the commaundement of Mauritius in execution, and afterward fell to beseeching him to relent somewhat from the rigour of this hard and seuere pro∣hibition. My Lord hath giuen forth this edict, saith he, that no man entangled with seruice for the common weale should enter any ecclesiasticall function,Greg. Epi. lib. 2. cap. 100. which I greatly praysed; knowing that he which on the suddaine steppeth from a secular trade to a spiritual charge, doth not meane to leaue, but ex∣change the world. Where it is added that none such should be suffered in any Monasterie;Ecclesiasti∣call Lawes made by the Prince with∣out the Popes knowledge & against his li∣king. How far was this man from deposing Princes? The Pope subiect to the Princes com∣maundement sendeth the princes pre∣cept through∣out his pro∣uince. The Pope of duetie yeel∣deth obediēce to his Prince. The Pope the Princes seruāt by publike right. He confesseth the Prince to be Lord ouer all. Idem Epist. lib. 4. cap. 74. The Prince commaunded the Bishop of Rome to be at peace with the Bishop of Constantino∣ple. this I maruailed at, seeing the place doth not hinder the making of his accompts, nor the paiment of his debts. It followeth in the same law; That no man once mustered as a souldier should cōuert (from that calling and become a Monke.) Which constitution, I confesse to my Lord, did euen astonish mee: because the way to heauen is thereby shut vp from many men, and that now prohibited as vnlawfull which hath hitherto bin (frankly) permitted. And what am I that speake to my Lord but dust and a verie worme? Yet for that this Edict tendeth against God the creator of all thinges, I can not conceale so much from my Lord. I therefore beseech you by the dreadful iudge, that your holines wil either mitigate or abrogate this rigorus proclamation. I for my part as subiect to your commaunde∣ment, haue sent your precept into sundrie coastes: yet because your Lawe doeth not stand with Gods glorie, Lo by letters I haue acquainted my most glorious Lord there-withall. So that I haue either way done my duetie, which haue both yeelded obedience to my Prince, and in Gods behalfe dis∣burdened my conscience. I your vnworthie suppliant waxe not thus bold, either in respect I am a Bishop, or in that I am your seruant by publike right, but resting on your (speciall) and priuate fauour, for that most gracious So∣ueraigne, you were my Lord (and master) when as yet you were not Lord (and chiefe) ouer all. If it be possible for a subiect to shew more submission and dutie to the Princes commaundement, than the Bishop of Rome doth to Mauritius, restraining all Bishops by his princely power from admission of such Monkes, and election of such Clerkes as hee disabled; let your Apologie bee had in some credit: but if greater obedience than these wordes import, nei∣ther Gods law doth exact, nor Princes can expect; I trust Gregories owne confession shalbe taken without exception. The like submission vpon like occasion is extant in other his Epistles: as when Mauritius willed him to grow to some concord with Iohn Bishop of Cō∣stantinople, to whom or from whom Gregorie would in no wise send or ac∣cept letters of communion & societie, because the saide Iohn entitled him v∣niuersall Patriarke. I haue, saith hee, receiued letters from my vertuous Lord, that I should be at peace with my brother and fellow Bishop Iohn. In deed it well beseemeth a religious Prince to commaund Bishops in such things: mary this was heauie to me, that my Soueraigne Lord did not re∣buke him for his pride, but indeuor to bow me from my purpose, which in
this cause stand with humilitie and sinceritie to defend the Gospel and Ca∣nons.Idem Epist. lib. 4. cap. 76. Hee rather is worthie to bee threatned with your Maiesties com∣mandement which refuseth to be subiect to the Canons: he to be repressed, which offereth a wrong to the vniuersall Church. Let my Lord (I beseech him) somewhat respect me being his own, whom he hath alwayes fauored aboue others, which am also very desirous to yeeld him obedience, and yet am I loth to be conuicted in that last & fearfull iudgement of (ouer much) negligence. Let my Soueraign Lord voutsafe to sit iudge in this matter him∣self, or els to make him to surcease his intēt. I as obediēt to my Lords precepts haue gentlely written to my said fellow Bishop, & humbly warned him to forgo that vaine title.The Pope re∣dy to obey the Princes commaunde∣ment. As much as in me lieth I am readie to obey the com∣mandement of your Maiestie: yet for that the cause is not mine, but Gods, & not I alone, but the whole church is troubled, let my gracious Lord launce the right place where the wound is, and subdue the patiēt that resisteth him with the strength of his imperiall power. Againe when Maximus was ordered Bishop of Salona within Gregories Prouince, yet without Gregories knowledge, thus he cōplaneth of him to Con∣stantia then Empresse.Idem Epist. lib. 4. cap. 78. The Bishop of Salona was ordered, neither I, nor my respōsarie witting therof, which thing was neuer attēpted vnder any of the Princes your predecessors. Assoone as I vnderstood therof I sent him word, that he should not presume to celebrate diuine seruice (that he meaneth by the name of Masse) vntill I heard from my Soueraigne Lords, that it was their pleasure it should be so:The Pope sub¦mitting him∣selfe to the Princes plea∣sure in cau∣ses ecclesi∣asticall. but he setting naught thereby & despising me (goeth on stil) & will not resort vnto me according as my Lords cōmanded him. Yet I obeying their graces precept did from my hart remit vnto the said Maximus this his presumption as freely as if he had been ordered Bishop by my consent. Onely other offences of his, as fleshly wantonnes, entrance by Simony, ministring the Lords supper after he was put from the cōmuniō, these things I can not skip vnexamined for my duties sake to God: & before these things could be tried,The Pope o∣uerruled in his consistorie with the prin∣ces precept. my soueraign Lord preuenting me with his pre∣cept commanded that I should receiue (the said Maximus) at his comming with all honour. This is a pitifull case that a man accused of so great crimes should be honored, before hee bee cleared: & if the faultes of those Bishops which be committed to my charge be born out with my gracious Lords (in this sort) by secret fauorers, vnhappy man that I am, what make I here in this church? Wel, that mine own Bishops contemne me, & haue a refuge against me to secular iudges, I can not but thanke God, & impute it to my sinnes. If the Bishop of Rome despised and ouerruled in his Episcopall iurisdictiō, neither plead his own supremacy, nor once kick at the Princes autority, but ra∣ther submit himselfe as a seruant & subiect of duty to the princes pleasure, so far as he might, with a safe conscience to Godward: & besides the man so religious, the matter so serious, that in this case iesting were not excusable, lying intolle∣rable, then may you be fully resolued that the primatiue church neuer heard of
this leud & arrogant presumption, which the Pope now claimeth & vsurpeth, I meane to be master & deposer of Princes, but that contrariewise the Bishops of Rome themselues, euen in causes Ecclesiasticall, kept the lawes and obeied the precepts of Christian Emperours, as of their liege Lords & soueraigne rulers. The wordes of Gregorie be so vehement & euident to this effect, that no face cā deny them, no cunning auoid them. You must needs seeke farther for a new di∣stinction: Your first is foolish, your second is false, neither of them coherent with the sacred Scriptures, or auncient histories. Neither was Gregory the last Bishop of Rome that yeelded obedience to the princes power in causes ecclesiastical. Agatho Bishop of that See 680. yeares after Christ, when Constantine the 1. sent for certaine learned & skilful men of the West parts to treat & confer with the Grecians in the sixt general councell about the truth of religion, returned this dutiful & effectual answere: Most gra∣cious Lord (saith he to Cōstantine,Sextae Synod. act. 4. ioyning with him Heraclius & Tiberius his brethren) your sacred letters incouraging vs to shew foorth effectually our prompt & diligent seruice for perfourming that which your edict cōmaun∣ded, & for discharge of our duty, to choose the fittest that could be found in this decaied age, & wretched prouince; we haue directed these our fellow seruants according to the most godly precept of your Maiesty in regard of obediēce which we did ow, not for presumption of their knowledge,The Popes o∣bedience to the Emperour was no curte∣sie but duetie. Sext. Synod. act. 4. Agathonis Epist. 2. All the Bi∣shops of the North and West partes seruants to the Emperour as well as they of the East. for we waxed not bold vpon their cunning, but your princely fauor mildly cōman∣ding (so much) did incite vs, & our basenesse hath obediently fulfilled that which was (by you) commaunded. And in his second epistle to the same Princesse, he saith: Al the Bishops of the North & West partes, seruants of your christian Empire, giue thanks to God for this your religious intent. The calling of generall Councels to debate mat∣ters of faith, is a point that precisely concerneth the regiment of Christs church: & in that case, we see, the Bishop of Rome confesseth himselfe a seruant, & shew∣eth himselfe obedient to the princes precept: assuring vs by plaine words and a∣geeable deeds that this humility proceeded not frō any iesting humor or fained submission, but from the singlenes of his hart, & in respect of his bounden duty: which auerreth our assertion & clearly conuinceth that the Princes authoritie was then superiour to the Popes, euen in causes Ecclesiasticall, which you de∣fend to be no way pertinent to the ciuill magistrate. I wil end with Leo the 4. the selfsame that first submitted himself to Lodouik the father,Distinct. 10. ca. de capitulis. The Pope pro¦fesseth 850. yeares after Christ that he will inuiola∣bly keepe the Princes eccle∣siastical chap∣ters & lawes. & after cōfirmed his obedience to Lotharius the son in these words: As touching the chapters & imperiall preceps of your Highnes & the Princes your predecessors irrefragablely to be kept & obeied, as much as in vs did or dothly; we by al meanes professe that we wil by Christes helpe now and for euer obserue the same: & if any man hath or shall informe otherwise, your Maiestie may right well assure your selfe it is an vntrue tale. The chap∣ters of Charles, Lodouike, and Lotharius, for persons and causes Eccle∣siastical I repeated before: to those the Bishop of Rome eight hundred and fiftie
yeares after Christ promiseth and sweareth not onely present but also per∣petuall obedience to the vtmost of his power without all contradiction. It is easie to see which of these twaine was superiour: hee that had power to make Lawes, not he that was bound to keepe them: he that might commaund, not he that must obey: Lotharius, not Leo. Can you looke for stronger proofes or plainer wordes that the Prince was the Popes superiour in causes Ecclesiasticall? If the Bishop of Rome were a SERVANT to christian Emperours,How farre the Pope was thē from the supe∣rioritie which he nowe clai∣meth ouer Princes. then was he not their ruler: If a SVB∣IECT vnder them, then no superiour ouer them: If SVPPLIANT to their persons, and OBEDIENT to their lawes, then no deposer of Princes, nor reseruer of their edicts: to bee short, if they were correctors and iudges of his demainour and doinges, then his claime to punish and depriue them of their kingdomes is vsurped and wicked: and so Princes hauing no superiour but onely God, are consequently supreme gouernours ouer all their subiectes, be they laie-men or Clerkes, to August. contra Cresconium, lib. 3. cap. 51. commaund that which is good, and pro∣hibite that which is euill, not in ciuill affaires only, but in matters also con∣cerning diuine Religion. Phi. The Iesuites cauils against the Princes soueraigntie.I confesse places somewhat moue me, neither can I vppon the sud∣daine answere them; yet are there many both authorities and reasons that make with vs for the contrarie. Theo. Shew me but one Scripture, Fa∣ther or Councell all this while that proueth the Pope to bee the Princes supe∣riour, and I will aske no further answere. Phi. God saith to Ieremie, I haue appointed thee this day ouer nations & kingdomes to pull vppe, to beate downe, to disperse, to ouerthrow, to build and plant. Theo. Ieremies wordes con∣clude nothing for the Pope.Was Ieremie euer Pope? Phi. I doe not saie, hee was. Theo. Then that which God spake to Ieremie concludeth no∣thing for the Pope. Phi. If a meane Prophet had that power to plant and remoue kingdomes, how much more he, that is head of the vniuersal church, and iudge ouer the whole earth? Theo. Your antecedent is false, and your consequent foolish. For Ieremie had no such power as you dreame of: hee was appointed a Prophet to denounce the wrath of God against nations and Countries, not a Prince, to displace Rulers and translate kingdomes. It is a grosse peruerting of the Scriptures to wrest them to that sense. Next your consequent supposeth that the Pope is head of the vniuersall Church and iudge ouer the whole earth; which vaine presumption, is no good illation; you must bring vs better conclusions before they wilbe currant. Phi. The text is plaine: I haue appointed thee ouer nations and king∣domes. Theo. Ieremie ap∣pointed a Pro¦phet ouer na∣tions. Ierem. 1.I haue appointed thee ouer them; not a Prince to subdue them, but a Prophet to warne them. Phi. How proue you that exposition? Theo. The text it selfe saith so. Prophetam Gentibus dedite: I haue made thee a Prophet ouer nations. And the verie next wordes before yours are these, Ecce posui verba mea in ore tuo; ecce constitui te hodie super gentes & super regna, &c.Ierem. 1. Behold I haue put my wordes in thy mouth, behold I haue ap∣pointed
thee ouer nations and kingdomes: that is a Prophet with my wordes in thy mouth, not a magistrate with the materiall sworde in thine hand. This we likewise proue by the execution of his office. For he prophesied the cap∣tiuitie of the Iewes, the taking of the king and the citie, the destruction of the Aegyptians, Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumeans, Persians, Damas∣cus, Babylon and other kingdoms & nations; but he neuer deposed king, nor al∣tered state: ergo his cōmission was to foreshew the ruines, ouerthrows, decaies & changes of kingdoms, natiōs & common-wealthes, not to practise them: he was the man that foretolde them, he was not he meanes to worke them. Theodorete saith of these words: I haue appointed thee ouer natiōs & king∣doms, to pul vp,Theodor. in 1. cap. Ierem. beat down, disperse, ouerthrow, build & plant:] for he pro∣phesied not only the Iewes captiuity, but their deliuerance by Cyrus. He pro∣phesied also to many other nations al kinds of calamities. And likewise Ber∣nard,Bernard. consi∣derat. lib. 2. Rusticani sudoris quodam schemate labor spiritualis expressus est. Disce sarculo, non sceptro tibi opus esse, vt facias opus Prophetae. By a certaine resemblance of the husbandmās paines the spirituall labor (of the Preacher) is expressed. Learne that thou must haue an hooke to weed, not a scepter (to rule) if thou wilt do the worke of a Prophet. Nicolaus de Lyra 1300. yeares after Christ could hit ye right sense of this place.Lyra in 1. cap. Ierem. I haue appointed thee to roote vp] that is, to de∣noūce the inhabitāts shalbe remoued out of the lād: to built & plāt] that is, to denoūce that the Iewes shalbe builded & plāted again in their own coūtry. This I take to be the right meaning of the text: if that please you not, but you will haue the Prophet himselfe to be the workman, then Ieremy was sent not to plant and pul vp Pries, not to build and beate downe kingdomes, but as your own gloze saith, to roote vp vices, to beate downe heresies, to build vp vertues.Lyra in 1. cap. Ierem. Hieron. in 1. ca. Ierem. Euery plant, saith Hierom vpon those words, which the heauenly fa∣ther hath not planted, shalbe rooted vp; & the building which hath not his foundation on the rock but in the sand, is vndermined & ouerthrown by the word of God. And Gregory: The Prophet is first willed to destroy, & after to build;Grego. Pastoral. part. 3. admoni∣tio 35. Hieron. in 1. cap. Ierem. first to roote vp, & after to plant; because the foundation of truth is ne∣uer wel laid, except the frame of error be first subuerted. Yea Many, saith Hi∣erō, vnderstand this place of the person of Christ, which destroied the king∣dom of the diuell. Take which of these senses you like best, so you bestowe not that on Ieremy which is proper to Christ,1. Tim. 6. Reuel. 19. to be king of kings & Lord of lords, nor allow him the liberty that God reserueth to himselfe, to bear rule ouer the kingdom of men, & to giue it to whome hee will; which no Prophet before Christ, no Apostle since Christ, no mortall creature euer claimed or vsed,Dan. 4. Reuel. 17. Esai. 6. Esaie maketh not the prince subiect to the Pope. Hieron. in 60. cap. Esai. but onely the whoore of Babilon that raigneth ouer the kinges of the earth. Phi. The nations and kings, saith God by Esaie, that wil not serue thee, shall perish. Theo. Whose translation is that? Phi. The Septuagintes. Theo. But the Hebrew is: That nation and kingdom which wil not serue thee, shall perish. And so doth S. Hierom translate. Phi. There is no great difference betwixt them. Theo. As much as is betweene the Prince and the
people. Phi. Both Prince and people must serue the church, or else they shall perish. Theo. Wee reason not what they must doe, but what Esaie saith: and hee saith, the kingdome must serue, the king must nurce the church, which is a word of more dignitie than seruice is.Esai. 60. Esai. 49. Thou shalt sucke the breastes of kinges. And againe: Kinges shall bee thy foster fathers, and Queenes thy nurcing mothers: but I sticke not on this. Phi. You neede not: for in plaine wordes it is said a little before:Esai. 60. Reges eorum ministrabunt tibi: Their kings shal serue thee. Theo. Their kings shall attend thee, or minister vnto thee. The word  signifieth him that is next about a mā to attend on his person. Phi. And they be seruants as well as others. Theo. It may be so: neither do I denie that Princes must serue, but whom? Phi. The church: so saith S. Hierom: The nations & kings, that will not serue the church,Hieron. in Esai. cap. 60. shall perish with that destru∣ction which is prepared for the wicked. Theo. You should shew that Princes, which will not serue the Pope must loose their crownes. Phi. Grant that Prin∣ces must serue the church, & for the rest we will do well enough. Theo. First, grant you that Popes were subiects & seruants to christiā Princes 850. yeares after Christ, which I haue proued & you haue not answered, and for seruice to be done by Princes to the church of Christ, I will not long dissent. Phi. Howe can they serue the church, & not serue the Pope, which is head of the church? Theo. To whom were these wordes spoken, The kingdome that will not serue thee,Euerie mem∣ber of Christs church hath as good inter∣est in Esaies wordes as the Pope. shall perish? Phi. To the church. Theo. To the whole church, or to some speciall members of the church? Phi. To the whole. Theo. Then may the poorest member of Christs church, & euery Parish-priest chalenge to be the master of Princes & to be serued at their hands as well as the Pope. That which is spoken to all must be common to all. Againe, your owne answere o∣uerthroweth your own assertiō, for this was spoken, you say, to the church: but the Pope is not the church, ergo this was not spoken to the Pope. Phi. Princes shall serue thee, that is e∣uerie part of thee, or the noblest part of thee: nei∣ther of which maketh for the Pope.You go too far. It was spoken to the whole but not ment of the whole. Theo. Of whom then was it mēt? Phi. Of the head, which is a part of the whole. The members of Christs church are not bound to serue one an other, but all to serue the head. In respect of their head they be seruants, in respect of themselues they be brethren. Theo. Is the head a part of the bodie? Phi. Though the head can not properly be called a member of the bodie, but the head; yet in the whole are contained both the head and the members: as in an Armie some∣times the Captaine and Souldiers; and a kingdom compriseth both the king and his subiects. Theo. Then where Esaie saith to Ierusalem, kingdoms shall serue thee; that is, not euery member of thee, but the chiefest and noblest part of thee, which is the head, that all the members serue. Phi. And that head is the Pope.Princes may serue none but Christ. Theo. When you proue the Pope to bee head of the church, then call for Princes to doe him seruice: In the meane time let Princes heare what Dauid saith: Bee wise yee kinges, serue the Lord: and what our Sa∣uiour alleadgeth,Psalm. 2. Matth. 4. Philip. 2. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God and him onelie shalt thou serue. At the name of Iesus euerie knee shall bowe, of thinges
in heauen, and of thinges on earth: Yea,Heb. 1. Colos. 1. let (not onely Princes, but) all the Angels of God worship him: hee is the head to the church which is his bo∣die. Your holy father must staie for his seruice, till his headship may be found in some better records than in your bare supposals. Phi. You infer this vpon my confession, which I may change vppon better aduisement. The nation & kingdom that wil not serue thee shall perish. No doubt these words bind Princes to do seruice to the church if not to the Pope. Theo. You bound them before to serue the head, and not the bodie: now you wil haue them serue the bodie, and not the head. Well since there is no more hold in your word, I will take surer hold of Esaies wordes. The text which you bring is allegorical,An allegori∣call text yeel∣deth no lite∣rall conclusiō. Esai. 60. as the whole chap. besides is: & therefore you may draw no literal conclusion from these words, no more than from wals, gates, brasse, yron, gold, siluer, Sunne, Moone, milk, teats, camels, rammes, firre trees, & pine-trees, which also be reckned and promised to Ierusalem in this place. Phi. Run you to allegories? Theo. You cannot run from them, vnlesse you run from this chapter: read it ouer and see whether I faine or no. Phi. Shall then the promises of God be frustrate, because the speaches bee figuratiue? Theo. Did I saie they should? No, they bee greater and richer than mans tongue can expresse. But if you presse the letter, they bee false and absurde.Esai. 60. For example: All the sheepe of Kedar shall bee gathered vnto thee, the rammes of Nabaioth shall serue thee. For brasse will I bring golde, and for yron siluer; for wood brasse, and for stones yron: Thou shalt haue no more Sunne to shine by daie, neither shall the bright∣nesse of the Moone shine vnto thee: These thinges bee not literally true. Phi. I know they be not. Theo. The whole chapter goeth after the same sort, ex∣pressing by temporal and terrestrial things, the blessings of God vpō his church which be celestial and eternal. Phi. I mislike not this. Theo. Euen so the seruice which kinges must do to the church, is not corporall nor external, such as ser∣uing-men yeeld to their masters, or subiectes to their superiours; but an in∣ward deuotion and an humble submission to the graces and mercies of God, proposed & offered in his church.What it is for Princes to serue and sub∣mit them∣selues to the church. In effect kings must become religious & faith∣ful members of the church to serue God in holines & righteousnes al the daies of their life. To beleeue the word that is preached, to frequent the sacraments that be ministred, to fear the Lord that is honored in al & aboue al: this is the seruice which the church of Christ hartily wisheth & earnestly seeketh at al mens hāds: other solemnities with cap and knee shee neither liketh nor looketh for. Phi. Kinges in respect of their calling must serue the church, I meane with their princely power. Theo. You say somwhat. In deed kings in that they be kings haue to serue the Lord:Aug. contr. lit. Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 92. Idem. contr. 2. Gauden. Epist. lib. 2. cap. 26. so as none cā do which are not kings. For their power ought so to serue the Lord, that by their power they which refuse to be subiect to the wil of God should be punished: but this seruice you will not haue thē to busie wt, & if happily they command against your liking, you not only discharge thē of their seruice, but of their kingdoms also. Phi. Not if they serue
the church as Esaie saith they should. Theo. The seruice that is done to Christ the church imbraceth as done to hir self, because she requireth no more but that Christ her Lord & master be serued: and yet the seruice which I nowe speake of namely to preserue subiects in godlines & quietnes, & with wholsome lawes to fraie men from vices & heresies, is done to Christ not in respect of himselfe, but of his church; & concerneth the profit & welfare of the whole church & euery mē∣ber thereof. Phi. This is not to serue, but to rule the church. Theo. Kings as kings, that is as publike Magistrates, can not serue the church, but by defending her mem∣bers, & repressing her enemies, & this is better seruice to God & his church, than that which your holy father hath taught kings & Emperours, to waite on his trencher, to hold his stirrop, and kisse his feete. Phi. We would haue Princes to serue, that is to obey the church, & so S. Paul willeth them.Heb. 13. Obey your rulers as well all, as one. Obey your rulers & be subiect to them, for they watch as being to giue accōpt for your souls. This is spoken as well to Princes as to priuate men. Theo. You leape from one thing to an other, & neuer resolue certainly any thing. Can you shew where S. Paul or Esaie, or any other Prophet or Apostle teacheth Princes to be the Popes Bedels & Bailifs to execute his pleasure? The questiō betwixt vs is not whether princes as wel as others must be guided & directed by religious & godly Pastours the way to eternall life, which is S. Pauls meaning in this place, but whether the Pope cloathing himselfe with the name of the church, may command the swords of Princes, & if he like not their doings, take their kingdoms frō thē. Do the places which you bring proue this that I mention? say yea or no. Phi. Not expressely, but only because the Pope is Christs Uicar on earth, & head of the church. Theo. Will you neuer vnderstand how weake your proofes, & how wide they be from your intention? The Iesuites windlace to bring the Prince in subiection to the Pope.First, you stil presume & we stil deny that your holy father is the head of the church, and Christs Uicar general vpon the face of the earth. On that false foū∣datiō, what God promiseth to the church in respect of her head which is Christ, you closely conuey to the Bishop of Rome, as heire apparant to that honor and excellency which Christ hath in his church; a friuolous but a blasphemous ima∣gination. Next, what submission & obedience God requireth at al mens, euen at Princes hands, for the reuerencing of his word & obseruing of his law, that you wittingly confound with the temporall iurisdiction & dominion, that the church of Rome claimeth ouer Princes to command their scepters, & if they resist, to depose their persons, which is a wicked & wilfull error. If you loue truth deale plainly, let this cunning go. Phi. I seeke for truth, let truth preuaile. Theo. Would God you were so minded. Phi. I am. Theo. That shall wee see by your proceeding. Phi. What say you by the wordes of S. Paul, Obey your rulers. Theo Heb. 13.I say the word  signifieth leaders as well as rulers, & in this place standeth rather for leaders than rulers, because S. Paul in this very chap. v∣sing the same worde  Remember your leaders; addeth
Beholding the end of their conuersation,Heb. 13. The words of S. Paul, obey your rulers, make nothing for the Pope. Heb. 13. imitate their faith, that is, followe their steppes. If wee must marke them and imitate them, then surely must they be leaders to direct vs and not rulers to master vs. Secondly by  whether it be leaders or rulers, are ment not the Pope and his Cardi∣nals, but all that be christian and godly Preachers; this is S. Pauls own con∣struction. Remember your leaders, which haue spoken to you the word of God. We be not bound to their fansies or pleasures, but only to the word of truth proceeding from their mouthes. Lastly obedience here required is no cor∣poral subiection to their persons, but an inward liking and imbracing of their doctrine. For as touching their persons, whom it pleaseth you to call rulers in this place, S. Paul maketh seruāts in other places.2. Cor. 4. We preach not our selues, saith he, but Christ Iesus (to be) the Lord; & our selues your seruants. And a∣gaine,2. Corin. 1. Not that we haue dominion (or rule) ouer your faith, but wee are hel∣pers of your ioy. And that was our Sauiours charge to them al. Kings of nati∣ons rule:Mark. 10. with you it shal not be so, but whosoeuer wil be chiefe among you, shalbe the seruant of all. Their function is, as you see, TO SERVE, not to rule their brethren; I meane to feede, not to master the flock of Christ. Phi. The Apostle saith, God hath placed thē To rule the Church. Attend to your self & to your whole flock ouer which the holy Ghost hath put you to rule the church.Act. 20. Bishops are set in the Church by the holy ghost to feede, not to rule. Theo is not, To rule the church, but to feed the church:  be no rulers, but Sheepheards. Are you not very desi∣rous of rule, when you thus wrest the Scriptures to make your selues rulers? Phi. S. Hieroms translation hath Regere ecclesiam, to rule the church. That we follow. The. You follow the old corrupt translatiō where it maketh for you, and where you list you leaue it. S. Hierom vpon the first chapter to Tite, saith, In quo posuit vos spiritus sanctus Episcopos, pascere ecclesiam Dei, not regere: And yet regere is to lead & guide with counsel, as wel as to rule or force with authoritie, as you may perceiue by dirigere the compound, which is to direct any man what way he shal go,Regère applied to Bishops is to rule ang gouerne with aduise & coū∣cell, not with power and dominion. what things he shal do, what words he shal speake, & yet these be no rulers, nor haue any iudiciall power ouer the parties so directed. The english word that you abuse hath the same sense. In many matters men are ruled by their friends, in sicknes they are ruled by their Physition, in traueling they bee ruled by their guides; and yet neither friends, Physitions nor guides haue any iurisdiction ouer the persons that are ruled by them. Why then do you trouble the world with such ambiguities & perplexities of words? why speake you not distinctly? why conclude you not directly? The Bishops of Ephesus were set by the holy Ghost to attend their flock, & feede the church.S. Pauls words haue no rela∣tion to the Popes person, nor to that kinde of rule which he clai∣meth. If by this you collect that they were placed by God to teach & instruct the faithful how to walke in his waies, that we graunt & that we know to be most true so long as they do their message from God sincerely, without adding, altering or diminishing: but if by colour of those wordes to rule the church, you seeke to giue the Pope iudiciall power to compell and punish Princes as a Superiour iudge, which is the point we striue for, see what
shamefull violence you offerre the Scriptures. First you falsifie the Text by putting ruling for feeding the church: Next you dawe the word ruling from instructing and exhorting, which is Apostolike; to commaunding and forcing, which our Sauiour forbiddeth all his Disciples: thirdly that which was spo∣ken to the Elders of Ephesus and is common to all Pastours, you present the Bishop of Rome with, as his peculiar charge, though hee neither feede, nor leade the flocke. And so where S. Paul ment the Bishops of Ephesus were set to teach and instruct their brethren, you conclude, the Pope must o∣uer-rule Princes, and take their crownes from them, if they yeelde not the sooner. Phi. You mistake me, I do not bring these places to that end. Theo. To that end you should bring them; for that is the doubt betwixt vs, & that was my demaund. I required you to shewe Scripture, Father, or Councell for 800. yeares that proueth the Pope superiour to the Prince. Bring somwhat to that end,They pretend the Church when they meane the Pope. or else say you can not, and I am answered. Phi.. I proue the church supe∣rior to the Prince, which is enough to confute the supreme power that you giue to Princes. Theo. And what for the Pope? Shall he be superiour to Princes or no? Phi. We wil talke of that an other time, we be now reasoning of the church; which I trust you will grant to be superiour to Princes. God saide to the Church, The nation and kingdom, that will not serue thee shall pe∣rish. And,Esai. 60. Ibidem. kinges shall serue thee. Theo. This is right the trade of your Apologie, to pretende the church, and meane the Pope. You sawe you were neuer able to proue the Popes v∣surped power ouer Princes, and therefore you thought it best to put a vi∣sarde of the Church vppon the Popes face, and to bring him in that sort disguised to the stage; to deceiue the simple with the sounde and shewe of the Church.The cunning of their Apo∣logie. Apolog. cap. 4. And for that cause your fourth chapter neuer nameth the Pope, but stil vrgeth The regiment of the church, The iudgement of the church, The churches tribunall, conuerted kingdomes must serue the church; and e∣uerie where the church, the church; and when the Church is confessed to bee superiour to Princes, you set vppe the Pope as heade of the Church to take from her all the superioritie, power and authoritie, which before you claymed for her: and so you make the Church but a cloke-bagge to carrie the Popes titles after him: but staie your wisedomes, the Church may bee superiour, and yet the Pope subiect to Princes; Kinges may serue the Church, and yet commaund your holie father and his gymmoes, the parish Priestes of Rome, for their turning & winding euery way, iustly called Cardinals. Phi. The Prince is supreme, though the Church bee superiour.Can Princes bee supreme and the church their superiour? Theo. Why not? Phi. If any thing bee superiour, Princes bee not supreme. Theo. That I denie. The Scriptures bee superiour to Princes, and yet they supreme; the Sacramentes bee likewise aboue them, and yet that hin∣dereth not their supremacie. Truth, Grace, Faith, Prayer and other
Ghostlie vertues bee higher than all earthly states, and all this notwith∣standing Princes may bee supreme gouernours of their kingdomes and Countries. Phi. You cauill nowe, you shoulde compare persons with persons, and not thinges with persons; there may bee thinges aboue Princes, and yet they supreme; but if anie persons bee superiour, then can they not bee supreme. Theo. No? The Sainctes in heauen and An∣gels of God bee persons superiour to Princes, and yet may Princes bee su∣preme. Phi. Why Theophilus, these bee wrangling quiddities, for shame leaue them. The Sainctes bee superiour in perfection and dignitie, but not in externall vocation and authoritie.Howe the Church is su∣periour to the Prince. Theo. I like that you saie: but if you looke backe you shall see Philander that you giue iudgement against your selfe. Phi. Against my selfe? Why so? Theo. The Church is superiour to Princes for those very respectes, which I nowe repeated. First, because the Saincts in heauen, which are part of the church, in happines, per∣fection and dignitie bee many degrees aboue worldely states. Secondly, though the members of the Church bee subiect and obedient to Princes, yet the thinges contayned in the Church and bestowed on the Church by God him-selfe, I meane, the light of his worde, the working of his Sa∣cramentes, the giftes of his grace and fruites of his spirite bee farre superi∣our to all Princes. Nowe view your consequent. The Church in respect of her members in heauen, and graces on earth, is aboue the Prince, ergo the Prince is not supreme but subiect to the Pope. This is worse than wrangling. You confound things and persons, heauen and earth, God and man, to beare out the Popes pride. Phi. You stretch the name of the church whither you list. Theo. I may better stretch it to these thinges which I specifie, than you restraine it to one onelie man as you doe:The Saintes in heauen bee part of the church. But why doe I stretch the church farther than I should? The Sainctes in heauen bee they not members of the church? Phi. They bee membees of the church, which is in heauen. Theo. And the church in heauen is it an other church from this on earth, or the same with it? Phi. I thinke it bee the same. Theo. You must not goe by thoughtes. Sainct Paul saith,Ephe. 2. Galat. 4. Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 10. cap. 7. You are of the same citie with the Sainctes, and Ierusalem which is aboue, (is no straunger to vs but) the mother of vs all. Cum ipsis (Angelis) sumus vna ciuitas Dei, cuius pars in nobis, per∣egrinatur, pars in illis opitulatur. Wee, saith Austen, are one and the same citie of God with the (Angels) whereof part wandereth (on earth) in vs, part in them assisteth vs. And againe,Aug. in Psalm. 149. The true Sion and true Ierusalem is euerlasting in heauen, which is the mother of vs all. She hath begotten vs, shee hath nurced vs, in part a stranger (on earth) in a greater part remaining in heauen.Idem de ciuit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 9. 1. Cor. 10. For the soules of the godly that be dead be not seuered from the church which euen now is the kingdome of Christ. Certaynely Christ hath but one bodie which is his church, and of that body since the Sainctes be
the greater and worthier part, they must bee counted of the same Church with vs. Phi. I stick not at that so much as at the next, where you make the word and Sacramentes togither with their effectes and fruites to be parts of the church. Theo. In the name of the Church are many things contai∣ned.I do not say they be members of the Church, but thinges required in the church, without the which we can neither become, nor continue the members of Christ. In a naturall bodie the spirits and faculties be no members, & yet with∣out them the members haue neither life, motion, sense nor action. So in the my∣sticall bodie of Christ, the members be men, but the meanes and helpes, to make vs and keepe vs the members of Christ, are the word and Sacraments, without the which we can neither be planted, quickned, nor nourished in Christ. For the members be dead if they liue not by faith, if they grow not by grace, if they cleaue not by loue to their heade, and moue at his will by obedience. And therefore these thinges though they bee not members, yet they bee ioyntes and sinewes, vaines and vessels that giue life, groeth, strength, and state to the bodie of Christ, which is his church, and may iustly bee called the principall powers or partes of his bodie. Phi. Powers if you will, but not partes. Theo. As though the powers of the soule were not partes of the soule. Phi. Not properly partes, but powers and faculties. Theo. What call you partes? Phi. Whereof the whole consisteth. Theo. And since without these there can be no Church, ergo these be partes of the church. Phi. You take partes very largely. Theo. No larger than I should. The foundation of the house, is it not a part of the house?Ambros. de in∣carnat. Domin. sacra. cap. 5. August. quaest. super Leuit. lib. 3. cap. 57. Idem de cate∣chizan. rudibus cap. 3. Persons are not the church with∣out other things anne∣xed to them. Phi. Yes a chiefe part. Theo. Faith is the foundation of the church, why then should not faith be a part of the church? Phi. The Church consisteth of persons, not of thinges. Men are the church saith S. Augustine. Againe, The church, that is, the people of God through∣out all nations. Theo. I doe not deny the church to bee many times taken for the faithfull on earth, but I adde that the graces, mysteries, and word of God bee contained in the Church, and without them the Persons are no Church. Our bodies and soules doe not make vs members of Christ, but our faith and obedience. By Baptisme, not by birth doe we Galat. 3. Hebre 13. Rom. 8. Rom. 8. Put on Christ, and grace not meates establish our heartes. They bee the sonnes of God that he led by the spirit of God. And if any man haue not the spirit of Christ, the same is no member of his. Phi. All this is true. Theo. The church then consisteth not of men, but of faithfull men; and they bee the Church not in respect of flesh and blood, which came from earth, but of trueth and grace which came from heauen. Phi. I graunt. Theo. Ergo the perfection of Gods giftes, the communion of his graces and direction of his word are the verie life and soule of his Church, & so within the compasse of the church are comprised not onely the persons that bee earthly, but also the things that be heauenly:Ambro. Epist. lib. 5. oratio contra Auxen∣tium. whereby God gathereth, preserueth, and sanctifieth his Church. Phi. What doth this helpe you? Theo. That when wee saie with S. Am∣brose, Imperator bonus intra Ecclesiam, non supra Ecclesiam est: A good Empe∣rour
is within the Church, not aboue the Church, you can conclude no∣thing out of these words against vs. Phi. Can we not? If good Princes bee not aboue the church, ergo they be not aboue the prelats & pillours of the church. Theo. That is no consequent. Phi. Why not?August epist. 157. The Church is sometimes taken for the place. Idem quaest. sup. Leuit .3. cap 57. Idem in psal. 137. Sometimes for the persōs. Idem in Euchi∣vid. Cap. 56. The Church of all the cho∣sen men and Angels. Ibidem. August. de Cate∣chiz. vudibus, Cap. 3. Idem in Psal. 62. The Church is the number of the faithful that euer were, ae, or shalbe. Theo. By the Church are ment sometimes the places, somtimes the per∣sons, sometime the things, that be cheefely required in the Church. Of the place S. Austen saith, We cal the Church the temple; where the people, which are trewly called the Church are conteined, that by the name of the Church, I meane, the people which is conteined; we may signifie the place which con∣teyneth. And againe, The Church is the place where the Church is assem∣bled, for men are the Church. The Church as it is taken for persons hath a triple distinction. First the Church of glorious and elect Angels and men. Ecclesia deorsum, ecclesia sursum. Ecclesia deorsum in omnibus fidelibus, ecclesia sursum in omnibus Angelis. There is a Church beneath, there is a Church aboue. The Church beneath in all the faithfull: the Church aboue in all the Angels. And againe, The right order of confession required that (in our creed) next to the (three persons in) Tri∣nity should stand the Church; as next to the owner his howse, to God his tē∣ple, to the builder his citie: which must here be taken for the whole; not on∣ly that part which is a pilgrime on earth, but also for that part which abiding in heauen hath euer since it was created, cleauen vnto God. This part in the holy Angels persisteth in blessednes, and helpeth as it ought, her other part wandring in earth. The temple of God therfore is the holy Church, I mean, the vniuersall in heauen and earth. Secondly the Church is the people of God through out all nations, ioy∣ning & reckning al the Saints, which before his cōming liued in this world. The Idem in Psal. 90. concio. 2. The church is the num∣ber of parti∣cular men in seueral times and places. August. de vni∣tate eccles. cap. 11. Idem in Psal. 64 & 121. whole Church euerie where diffused is the bodie (of Christ) and he is the head of it. Not only the faithful which are now, but also they that were before vs, and they that shall be after vs to the end of the world, they al per∣taine to his bodie. The Church is the body (of Christ) not the church which is here or there, but that which is here and euery where throughout the world: neither that Church which is at this time, but from Abel vnto those which shall hereafter bee borne and beleeue in Christ euen till the end, the whole companie of saintes belonging to one Citie, which is the bodie of Christ, and whereof he is the head. Thirdly the Church may bee limited by time and place, as the particular Churches of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus and such like. Behold, saith Austen, in the Church there be Churches, which be members of that one Church, dis∣persed throughout the world. There be many Churches & yet one Church, and in that sort many that there is but one. Somtimes the church importeth, besides the persons, y• things in which those persons must communicate before they can be members of the Church; as when the church is called the kingdome, citie and howse of God: whereby wee learne
that it is furnished not onely with persons, but with all thinges needefull for the seruants, citizens and people of God, to the conuerting and sauing of their soules.Rom. 14. In that sense saith S. Paul, The kingdome of God is righteousnes, peace and ioy in the holy Ghost, meaning these be fruits and effects of Gods kingdome: which our Sauiour threatned to take from the Iewes. The king∣dome of God shall bee taken from you and giuen to a nation that shall bring forth the fruites thereof;Mat. 21. shewing, that when the woorde of trueth and seales of grace are taken from vs, wee cease to bee the people and Church of God. Christ raigneth in his Church by his word and spirit, without these men are not the Church. An earthly citie must haue vnitie, societie, regiment, & suf∣ficiencie for an earthly state: the number of men doeth not make a citie if these thinges want. Howe much more must the citie of God haue abundance of al thinges profiting to eternall life?1. Tim. 3. August. de ver∣bis Apostoli sermo. 22. S. Austen sayth of the house of God, which is the Church, It is founded by beleeuing, erected by hoping, perfected by louing: noting these three to bee the maine partes in the building of Gods house. That which entereth the definition must nedes be cōtained in the appel∣lation of the Church.It is playner than that longer proofe shall neede. If wee woulde define the Church wee must comprehend not onely men, but other thinges also which may seuer the Church from those that are not the Church, and those thinges that are required to the explication, are wee say contained in the appellation of the Church. The Church is not simply a number of men; for Infidels, heretikes and hypocrites are not the Church, but of men regenerate by the woord and Sacraments, truely seruing God according to the Gospell of his sonne, and sealed by the spirite of grace against the day of redemption. Men thus qualified are the Church, and the giftes and graces of GOD that so qualifie them, bee not onely the iewels and ornaments wherewith the spouse of Christ is decked, but euen the seede and milke, whereby like a mother shee conceyueth and nourceth her children. August. epist. 38. Idem de baptis. lib. 1. cap. 10. Idem in Psal. 57. & 30. Idem epist. 203. Ambros. in psal. 118. sermo. 15. Idem in psal. 36. 1. Tim. 3.The church our mother, saith Austen, conceiued vs of Christ, & nourished yea nourisheth vs with the milke of faith. Shee conceiueth by the Sacra∣ments as by the seede of her husbande. Thou wast conceiued, in that thou receiuedst the name of Christ; and the Lorde to make his wisedome milke for vs, came clothed with flesh vnto vs. Shee is a most true mother which openeth her bosome to all nations when they shall bee newe borne, and offereth her teates when they are newe borne. The teeth, cheekes, and lippes of (this) spouse wee vnderstande, sayth Ambrose, to bee the vertues of the soule. Yea the Church is life, and as Paul sayth, the Pillour of trueth. These speeches and others that might bee alleaged shewe the Church to bee resembled to a woman, and trueth, sayth, life, grace and such like giftes of God bee counted not onely the garments, but euen the bowels and partes of the Church. And therefore the name of the Church sometimes imployeth as well the thinges that bee in the Church as the per∣sons
that bee of the Church, which was the third point that I noted. Phi. These speeches bee figuratiue. Theo. I did not seeke for the proprie∣tie, but the vse of the woord; and yet in proper speach persons without these thinges are not the Church, and in the very definition of the Church, as well thinges as persons bee comprised. Phi. In deede persons enduen with those giftes and graces of God, that bee needefull for eternall life; are properly the Church: but thinges without Persons are not the Church. Theo. I do not exclude Persons, but include those thinges which cause the Persons to bee members of the Church. Phi. I will not much impugne that. Theo. Returne then to the woordes of Ambrose, which occasioned me to make this distinction. A good Emperour is not aboue the church.Ambros. oratio contra Auxent. The Prince not aboue the Church, though supe∣riour to al persons in the Church. Not aboue the Church vniuer∣sal, for that consisteth of men & Angels, aboue whom princes be not. Neither a∣boue the Church militant in earth, for that containeth all the faithfull of all ages and Countries, ouer whom there can bee no Prince but onely Christ. Phi. And what? For the Church dispersed through the Romane Empire in the time of S. Ambrose, was the Prince aboue it, or no? Theo. You must here distinguish the thinges proposed in the Church, from the Persons that were members of the Church. The Persons both Laymen and Clerks by Gods lawe were the Princes subiects: the thinges comprised in the Church, and by God himselfe committed to the Church, because they were Gods, coulde bee subiect to the power and will of no mortall creature, Pope nor Prince. Phi. Say that againe. Theo. In shorter termes the Prince was aboue the Persons in the Church, but not aboue the thinges in the Church. Phi. Aboue the Persons but not aboue the thinges in the Church? What thinges meane you? Theo. Those thinges which God commaundeth in his Church, and requireth of his Church. Phi. I vnderstande you not. Theo. Understande you our sauiour when hee sayth,Mat. 22. Giue vnto God the things which bee Gods? Phi. Hee meaneth as I take it, faith, deuotion, ho∣lynes,What things Princes haue neither right to cōmaund nor power to rule. repentance, patience, obedience, and such like christian dueties and vertues. Theo. You say well: these bee thinges which Princes haue no right to clayme, nor power to rule. They belong onely to God. To these I adde the meanes, whereby God worketh these thinges in his church; to witte, the woord and Sacraments; ouer these thinges wee graunt Princes haue no power. Phi. S. Ambrose sayth, not ouer the Church. Theo. That is, not ouer the thinges which God hath setled in his church, but ouer the Persons, Prin∣ces haue power. Phi. What a shift of descant that is? Theo. Call you that a shift which I before confirmed, and you confessed to bee true? Phi. What did you confirme? Theo. That Princes haue power by Gods appointment ouer al men. I brought you Tertullian, Chrysostome,See fol. 147. Iustinian, Gregorie and Ambrose himself witnessing that Princes had power
ouer al men. S. Paul auoucheth the same, Let euery soule be subiect to their power. It is no shift, it is trueth that our sauiour saith, kings of nations beare rule ouer them,Mat. 20. that is, ouer their subiects. You must either take the names of Princes and Gouernours from them, or els yeeld them Countries and peo∣ple to be subiect vnder them. Phi. I doe so. Theo. Then Princes haue power ouer all men, that is ouer all Persons. Phi. Ouer all persons, but not ouer the Church.Princes are aboue al per∣sons, but not aboue the Church, Ergo the Church is taken for more than for persons. Ambros. lib. 5. Cap. 33. Theo. What doe you nowe but make the same distinction your selfe, which before you refused at my handes? Ouer all persons they haue power; ouer the Church they haue not; ergo the Church is not here taken for persons. And it must needes be taken either for the persons, or things: for the persons it is not, ergo for the thinges; and so by your confession mine answere standeth good, that Princes haue power ouer the persons, but not ouer the things in the Church. And so saith S. Ambrose, Ea quae diuina, imperatoriae potestati non esse subiecta; The thinges that be Gods be not subiect to the Emperours power, though the Emperour had power ouer all Persons, as Ambrose himselfe affirmeth. Phi. Ambros. de obi∣tu Theodosij.Shall S. Ambrose strike the stroke in this case? Theo. The stroke is alreadie giuen by the sacred scriptures, by the publike Lawes, and auncient stories of the primatiue Church:Apolog. Cap. 4. sect. 30. and yet in this point wee reiect not the iudge∣ment of S. Ambrose, Phi. S. Ambrose is cleane against your opinion that Princes should bee gouernours in causes ecclesiastical. To the yonger Valenti∣nian the Emperour,Epist. 33. ad Sororem. thus he answereth: Vexe not thy selfe so farre, O Emperour, to thinke that thy Emperiall right perteyneth to diuine thinges, exalt not thy selfe aboue thy measure. For it is written, Giue to Cesar that which is Cesars, and to God that which belongeth vnto God. The Palace for the Emperour, but the Churches are for the Priest.Ibidem. Againe the same holy Doctor, When didst thou euer heare, most clement Prince, that Lay men haue iudged Bishoppes? Shall wee bend by flatterie so farre, that forgetting the right of our Priesthood we shoulde yeelde vp to others that which God hath commended vnto vs? And recounting the whole course of holy scriptures and all times past, who can deny but that in the cause of faith, in the cause of faith I say, Bishoppes haue iudged of Emperours and not Emperours of Bishoppes? Theo. Omit the circumstances and causes that moued Ambrose thus to write, which bee the wordes you take most hold of? Phi. These, Thy Emperiall right pertay∣neth not to diuine thinges. The Palace for the Emperour, but the Chur∣ches are for the Priest. In a cause of faith Bishoppes haue iudged of Empe∣rours, and not Emperours of Bishops. Theo. The Iesuits nippe saint Ambroses wordes.You helpe the matter forward with false translating and nypping the wordes, and yet they proue nothing against vs. In steede of vt putes te in ea quae diuina sunt, imperiale aliquod ius habere; Do not think thy selfe, to haue an Em∣periall right ouer those things which bee Gods, (or ouer diuine thinges) you say cunningly, Do not thinke thy Emperiall right pertayneth to diuine thinges. For, Noli te extollere, sed esto Deo subditus, exalt not thy selfe, but bee subiect to God, you say, Exalt not thy selfe aboue thy measure, and suppresse the rest
which should declare when a Prince exalteth himselfe aboue his measure; to wit, when he is not subiect to God. The next wordes which you bring, When didst thou euer heare most, clement Prince, that Lay men haue iudged Bishops? are not found Ibidem as you quote them, that is Epistola 33 ad sororem, but Epistola 32 ad Valentinianum Imperatorem. And In causa fider, In a matter of faith, which Ambrose addeth, you leaue out in the first sentence, though you double it at y• latter end. These scapes I will winke at and come to the words themselues. Thinke not thy selfe to haue any Emperial right ouer diuine things. Nei∣ther do we say Princes haue, for an emperial right is to commaund, alter and abrogate what they think good; which is lawful neither for men, nor Angels in diuine matters. Palaces are for Princes and Churches for Priests, this was truely saide, & if you know not the reason, Churches were first appointed for publike praier and preaching; which belong to the Priests and not to the Princes function. And for that cause Bishops were to teach Princes which was the right faith, Princes were not to teach the Bishops, much lesse to professe thēselues iudges of trueth, as Valentinian did, when he said, Ego debeo iudicare, I ought to bee iudge,Ambros. lib. 1. epist 32. whether Christ be God or no; for that was the question between the Arri∣ans and Ambrose, and that was the word which S. Ambrose stoutly but wisely refused. When we say that Princes be iudges of faith, bring S. Ambrose a∣gainst vs and spare not: but we bee farther off from that impietie to make men iudges ouer God, than you be. Doe you not make the Prince iudge of faith? Theo. You know we do not. Phi. Produce not vs for witnesses, we know no such thing. Theo. Your own acts shall depose for vs if your mouthes will not. If we make Princes to bee iudges of faith, why were so many of vs consumed not long since in England with fier and fagot for disliking that which the Prince and the Pope affirmed to be faith? Why at this day doe you kill and murder elsewhere so many thou∣sands of vs for reiecting that as false religion, which the kings & princes of your side professe for true?We make no Prince iudge of faith. If wee make Princes iudges, why do we rather loose our liues than stand to their iudgemēts? Your stakes that yet be warm, your swords that yet be bloodie, do witnes for vs and against you that in matters of faith we make neither Prince nor Pope to be iudge. God is not subiect to the iudgemēt of man, no more is his trueth. Phi. What power then do you giue to Princes? Theo. What power so euer we giue them, we giue them no power to pronounce which is trueth. Phi. What do you then? Theo. Neuer aske that you know. Haue we spent so many words, and you now to seeke what we defend? But you see S. Ambrose maketh nothing for you. And therefore you picke a quarell to the question. Phi. S. Ambrose would not yeeld Valentinian the Emperour so much as a Church in Millan:Wherin Saint Ambrose withstood Valentinian. and when hee was willed to appeare before the Emperour in his consistorie or els depart the Citie, he would do neither. Theo. You care not, to fit your purpose, though you make S. Ambrose a sturdie rebell. You
would fayne find a president to colour your headynes against the Prince; but in Ambrose you can not, his answere to Valentinian was stout, but lawfull; con∣stant, but Christian; as the circumstances of the facts will declare. Valentinian a yong Prince incensed by Iustina his mother and other Eunu∣ches about him, willed Ambrose to come and dispute with Auxentius the Arri∣an in his consistorie before him, and hee would bee iudge whether of their two religions were truest and which of them twaine shoulde bee Bishop of Millan, Auxentius or Ambrose, otherwise to depart whither he would. To this Am∣brose made a sober and duetifull answere in defence of himselfe and his cause, and gaue it in writing to Valentinian,The reasons why S. Ambr. refused Valen∣tinians iudge∣ment as nei∣ther fit nor in∣different. shewing him amongst other things that he was yong in yeres, a nouice in faith not yet baptised, & rather to learne, than to iudge of bishops: that the consistorie was no fit place for a priest to dispute in, where the hearers should be Iewes on gētiles & so scoffe at Christ, & the Empe∣rour himselfe partial as appeared by his Law published before that time to im∣pugne the truth. As for departing, if he were forced, he would not resist; but with his consent he could not relinquish his church to saue his life, wtout great sinne. And because Auxentius & his companions vrged this, that the Emperour ought to be iudge in matters of faith, Saint Ambrose followeth and refelleth that word as repugnant not onely to the diuine Scriptures, but also to the Romane lawes. Conclusus vndique ad versutiam patrum suorum confugit, de Im∣peratore vult inuidiam commouere,Ambros. lib. 5. orat. contra Auxentium. dicens iudicare debere adolescentē, catechumenū, sacrae lectionis ignarum, & in consistorio iudicare. Auxentius driuen to his shiftes hath recourse to the craft of his forefathers, seeking to procure vs enuie by the Emperours name, and sayth the Prince ought to bee iudge, though hee bee yong, not yet baptized and ignorant of the Scriptures, and that in the Consistorie.Idem lib. 5. epist. 32. And to the Emperour himselfe, Your father, a man of riper yeeres sayde; It is not for mee to bee iudge betweene Bishoppes, doeth your clemencie nowe (at these yeeres) say, I ought to bee iudge? And hee baptized in Christ, thought himselfe vnable for the weight of so great a iudgement: doeth your clemencie, that hath not yet obtayned to the Sacrament of baptisme, chalenge the iudgement of fayth, whereas yet you knowe not the mysteries of fayth? No man shoulde thinke mee stubburne, when I stand on this, which your father of famous memorie not onely pronounced in woordes, but also confirmed by his Lawes that in a cause of fayth or ecclesiasticall order hee shoulde be iudge, that was both like in function, and ruled by the same kind of right. For those be the words of the Rescript: his meaning was hee woulde haue Priests to bee iudges of Priests.Ibidem. Then follow the wordes which you cite. When euer didst thou heare most clement Emperour, in a cause of fayth that Laymen iudged of bishops? Shall wee so bend for flatterie, that we should forget the right (or duetie) of Priests; and what God hath bequeathed to me, I should commit to others? If a Bishop must be taught by a Layman what to follow, let a Lay man then dispute (or speake in the Church,) and a Bishop be an auditor, let the Bishop
learne of a Layman. But surely if we suruey the course of the diuine Scrip∣tures or auncient times, who is there, that can deny, but in a cause of faith, in a cause I say of fayth Bishops are wont to iudge of Christian Emperours, not Emperours of Bishoppes? And where Valentinian required Ambrose to yeeld his Church,Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 33. Ambrose would not yeeld his con∣sent to let the Arrians haue his Church. Idem orat. contra Auxent. Ibidem. Ibidē. epist. 32. Ibidem orat. contra Auxent. Ambrose re∣sisted not the Prince but denied his consent to part stakes with the Arrians. Ibidē epist. 33. He submitted himselfe to the punish∣ment, for that he could not with a good conscience obey the cōmaunde∣ment. Ibidē. epist. 32. Ambrose ment to obey the Prince but not to flie for feare thereby to saue his life. Ibidem oratio. contra Auxen∣tium. Ibidē epist. 33. Ibidem oratio. Contra Auxen. & depart whither hee woulde; for yeelding his Church, his answere was, Nec mihi fas est tradere, nec tibi accipere Imperator expedit. Domum priuati nullo potes iure temerare; domum dei existimas auferendam? Allegatur, imperatori licere omnia, ipsius esse vniuersa. Respondeo. It is neither lawfull for mee to yeeld it, nor expe∣dient for you, O Emperour, to take it. The house of a priuate man you can not by right inuade: doe you thinke you may take away the house of God by violence? It is alleaged, the Emperour may do what hee will, all things are his. I answere: Doe not burden your selfe O Emperour to thinke, you haue any Emperiall right ouer those thinges, which bee Gods. Exalt not your selfe (so high) but if you will raigne long, bee subiect to God. Palaces pertayne to Emperours, Churches to Priests. The Church is Gods, it ought not to be yeelded (by mee) to Cesar. The temple of God can not bee Cesars right. I can not deliuer that which I receiued to keepe (in Gods behalfe, to heretiks.) Would God it were apparant to me that my church should not be deliuered to the Arrians, I would willingly offer my self to the iudgement of your highnes. Would God it were decreed that no (Arrian) should trouble (my) Churches, and of my Person pronounce what sentence you will. With my consent I will neuer forgoe my right, if I bee compelled I haue no way to resist. I can sorow, I can weepe, I can sigh, teares are my weapons; Priests haue (only) those defences, by other meanes I neither ought, nor can resist. Flee & forsake my church I vse not, lest any thinke it done to auoyde some sorer punishment. If my goods bee sought for, take them; if my body, I will be ready. Will you put me in Irons, or lead me to death? You shal do me a pleasure, I wil not gard my self with multitudes of people, I wil not flee to the altar to intreat for life, but wil gladly be sacrificed for the altars (of god.) Depart Ambrose would not, thereby to saue himselfe & leaue his Church to Arians; the Emperour should banish him, or els he would not forsake his flocke. I could wish you had not sent me word to go whither I would. I came euery day abroad, I had no gard about me. You should haue appointed me, whither you would. Now the rest of the Priests say to me, there is no difference, whe∣ther thou be content to relinquish, or thy selfe yeelde vp the altar of Christ; for when thou doest forsake it thou doest deliuer it. If a strong hande re∣moue me from my Church, my flesh may bee caried thence, my minde shall not. Betray my Church I cannot, but fight I ought not. These answeres bee full of humilitie and as I thinke full of that affection (and reuerence) which a Bishoppe should beare to a prince. Wee see the groundes that Am∣brose stood on, resolued rather to suffer any death, than by his consent or de∣parture to betray the Church of Christ into the handes of Auxentius the
Arrian. His meaning was not with violence to resist, or with pride to despise the yong prince, but either to die with his flocke, or at least to bee remoued from his flocke by the princes power without his own cōsent, because it were sinne in him to resigne or leaue the house of God as a pray for heretikes, vnlesse he were thereunto compelled, and forced against his will. Phi. I thereby gather that Princes may not meddle with Churches with∣out the Bishoppes assent. Theo. You may thereby well collect that Bi∣shoppes were better to giue their lyues, than yeelde their churches for Christ to bee blasphemed in, except they bee constrained. Phi. The Bishoppe refused, though the Prince commanded. Theo. Hee refused to put his consent to the Princes will; but hee resisted not the Princes power. Phi. No thankes in that hee could not. Theo. Yes great thankes in that hee would not, when all the citizens of Millan tooke part with him, and the soul∣diers denyed to wayte on the Emperour, to any other church but onely to that where he was; and greater obedience in that hee confessed he should not. Aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere, otherwise (than by teares and sighes) I neyther ought,Ibidem orat. contra Auxent. Ibidem epist. 33. nor can resist: and likewise hee commended the people for saying, Rega∣mus Auguste, non pugnamus; wee make request O Soueraigne, wee make no tumult. So that Ambrose in these wordes which you bring doth not general∣ly dislike that Princes should meddle with religion or make Lawes for Christ, but first affirmeth, which wee confesse, that Princes be no iudges of faith; and next auoucheth that his refusall to deliuer his Church to the handes of Arrians was no stubburnnes against the Prince, but obedience to God, whose house it was; and, that he could not consent to betray the same to Gods enemies but hee should highly displease and offend God in so doing. By this you may proue, that wee must obey God before man, and that al Pastours ought rather to giue their liues than their consents, that heretikes shoulde inuade their flockes; but a∣gainst the Princes authoritie to commaund for trueth and punish error by the wordes or deedes of Ambrose, for ought that I see, you can conclude no∣thing. Phi. Hee reporteth and commendeth the wordes of Valentinian the elder, the father of this yong Valentinian.Ibidem epist. 32. Non est meum iudicare inter episcopos, It is not for me to iudge among Bishops. Theo. He gaue the yong Prince to vn∣derstand what a weightie matter it was,Why Valen∣tinian would not iudge be∣tweene the Bishops of diuers faiths. To sit iudge betweene Bishoppes in cases of fayth, and not among Bishoppes as you translate it; in that his father a man of ripe yeres, great wisedome, and good experience refused this as a bur∣den too heauie for him. And what if the question betwixt the christians and Arrians were so intricate that Valentinian durst not take vpon him to discusse or determine the same, is that any reason to proue that princes may not establish trueth and abolish falshood by their publike Lawes? Phi. Was that the matter wherein Valentinian refused to bee iudge be∣tweene the Bishoppes? Theo. Euen that, if you dare beleeue the storie of the Church. For,Sozom. lib. 6. Cap. 7. The Bishops of Hellespontus and Bithinia, sayth Sozomene, and
as many as professed the sonne of God to be of the same substance with his father, sent Hypatianus in a legacie to Valentinian the Emperour to request him that he would permit them to meete (in a Councell) to correct the Do∣ctrine (which trobled the Church.) When Hypatianus came to him, & declared the petition of the Bishops, Valentinian aswered: For me that am a Lay man I think it not lawful to search curiously such (deepe) matters: let the priests that haue charge of these things, meete where they like best among themselues. This fearefulnes of Valentinian,Valentinian distrusting his iudgement suffered the Arrians to doe what they would. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 6. Socrat. lib. 4. Cap. 1. Sozom. lib. 6. Cap. 21. whiles he could not so much as looke into the contention betwixt the Christians and the Arrians, did the Church no good. For though Valentinian were for his owne person well perswaded in religion, yet he suffered the Arrians to do what they would, as Sozome confesseth. Va∣lentinian being himselfe of the Nicene faith, made much of those that were of the same opinion with him, but molested not any that were of the contrarie. And that note Socrates giueth him. Valentinian honoured those that were of his faith, but in the meane time he let the Arrians do what they would. And though himself very religiously embraced the Godhead of Christ, yet would he commaund nothing to the Bishops (in that behalfe) neither thought hee good to change other ecclesiastical lawes into better or worse. For he took them to be aboue his reache, though he were (otherwise) a very good Em∣perour and fitte to rule, as appeared by his doings. Phi. Mislike you this in Valentinian? Theo. Doe you like that he suffered Arrians to haue their foorth & neither molested nor resisted them? Phi. We like not that. Theo. Then you mislike the timerousnes or remissenes, call it what you will, in the church affaires as well as we doe: for what commendation could it be for him neither to meddle nor make with ecclesiasticall matters, but to per∣mit all sortes and sects to follow their appetites? Phi. The stories commend him as excelling in wisedome,Theodoret. li. 4. Cap. 5. Sozom. lib. 6. Cap. 6. Valentinian maried two wiues & gaue al men leaue to doe the like. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 31. moderation and iustice. Theo. The best men haue their faults and are somtimes led with priuate fansies. Valentinian was a good man and worthie the Empire, and yet he made a Law that euery man that would, might haue two wiues, and him∣selfe gaue the first example in taking two. Phi. What he did not? Theo. Mea∣ning to Marrie Iustina for report of her bewtie, he made a law and published the same in euerie citie, that it should be lawful for al men to haue two wiues at once. And after the law so made he tooke Iustina to wife, by whom hee had Valentinian the yonger and three daughters, not diuorcing Seuera the mother of Gratiaen (his elder sonne) whom hee a little before had created Emperour. Phi. That was a fault in deede. Theo. And this was an other,Socra. lib. 4. Cap 29. that hee gaue himselfe to quietnes, and molested no sect of heretikes: vpon this opi∣nion that it passed his capasitie to iudge betweene ye Bishops in matters of faith. Phi. But Ambrose doth commend it. Theo. Ambrose doth alleage it to stay the yong prince frō rashly presuming to iudge of their matters, before he knew the first principles of religion, because his father when he was aged, Inhabilem
se ponderi tanti putabat esse iudicij,Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 32. thought himself vnable to iudge in so weigh∣tie a cause, but farther he doth not commend it: and yet he might commend that in Valentinian and not hurt vs. For wee doe not encourage Princes to professe themselues iudges of fayth, which Valentinian thought too great a burden, but onely wee wish them to discerne betwixt trueth and error, which euery priuate man must do that will be a Christian. Theodosius discerned be∣tweene the Bishops though Valē∣tinian would not or could not. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 10.And though Valentinian distrusted his owne iudgement in matters of faith, yet that did not fray Theodosius a Prince highly commended by Ambrose him self, from looking into the strife betweene the Homousians and Arrians and ap∣pointing by a solemne edict which of them should be counted Catholikes, which heretikes: and taking their Churches from them without their consents. For hee, not long after hee was called to the Empire by Valentinians eldest sonne, willed euery sect to put their fayth in writing. At the day prefixed the Bi∣shoppes of euery religion, being sent for, came to the Court, Nectarius and Agelius for the Homousians (or Catholikes) Demophilus or the Arrians, Euno∣mius himselfe for his followers, and for the Macedonians Eleusius. When they were come the Prince admitted them to his presence, and taking the Pa∣per of eche mans opinion hartily besought God to helpe him in choosing the trueth. Then reading their confessions written hee reiected al the rest, as diuiding and seuering the sacred Trinitie and tare them in peeces, and one∣ly liked and embraced the Homousian fayth; and therewithall made a Lawe, that such as followed that fayth should bee counted Christian Catholikes, the rest infamous heretikes.Codic. li. 1. tit. 1. de summa tri∣nitate & side Catholica § Cunctos. The trewe faith in Theo∣dosius time was kept at Rome; & that was the same which we pro∣fesse at this day. All people subiect to our Empire wee will haue continue in that religion, which S. Peter the Apostle deliuered to the Ro∣manes as the fayth kept from his tyme to this day doth declare, and the which it is euident Bishop Damasus, and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, a man of Apostolike sanctitie doe professe: to witte, that according to the Apo∣stolike and Euangelike Doctrine, wee beleeue one Godhead of the father, sonne and holy Ghost of like Maiestie in sacred Trinitie. The obser∣uers of this Lawe wee commaund to bee taken for Christian Catholikes, the rest, as mad and frantike we adiudge to beare the reproch of heretikes: which must looke to feele first the vengeance of God, & next such penalties as the motion of our heart directed from aboue shall appoint. Princes com∣maunded such as were herees to be  of the Churches. Sozom. lib. 7. Cap. 9. Codic. lib. 1. tit. 1. § nulius.As this religious Prince published by his Lawes which opinion should be counted trueth and which heresie, so did hee by the same authoritie commaund the Churches throughout his Empire to bee presently taken from the Arrians and deliuered into the handes and possession of such as were of a right fayth. So sayth Sozomene, The Emperour (Theodosius) made a Law, that the Nicene fayth shoulde bee authentike, and all Churches to bee deliuered to them which professed the same Godhead of the father, sonne and holy Ghost in three persons of equall honour and like power. The Lawe it selfe is extant. The rule of the Nicene faith receiued from our fathers and confirmed by the witnes and assertion of diuine religion, let it stand good for euer. And he
shall bee counted a follower of the Nicene fayth, and a true professor of the Catholike religion, that holdeth the vndiuided substance of the incorrupt Trinitie, which by a Greeke worde is called  of right beleeuers. They which bee not of this faith, let them cease by cunning deuises to shroud thē selues vnder the name of true religion which they professe not, & be plaine∣ly noted by their heresies, and vtterly remoued and expelled from all Chur∣ches, that throughout the worlde the Churches may bee deliuered to the Bishops which hold the Nicene fayth. So Gratian the sonne of Valentinian, after the Empire came entirely to his hands,Theodoret. li. 5. Cap. 2. commanded the preachers of the Arrian blasphemie, as wild and cruel beasts to be driuen from their Churches, and the same to be restored to good Pastors, & the executiō of this law he cōmitted to Sapores a most famous captaine of that time.Euagrius lib. 1. Cap. 12. The like did Theodosius the yonger decree that they which followed the wicked faith of Nestorius, or cleaued to his vnlawfull doctrin, if they were Bishops or Clerks should be cast out of their churches, if they were Laymen they should bee accursed.So did Iusti∣nian appoint depriuation for the breach almost of eue∣ry of his ec∣clesiasticall lawes. Apolog. Cap. 4. sect. 28. Epist. ad solitar. vitam degentes. By this it is euident that the christian Emperours did and might dispose both of Bishops and Churches, & therfore Ambrose could not be of that mind that princes by their lawes might not put Bishops from their Churches without their consents: but hee brought this as a reason, why the Prince at his pleasure without lawe might not com∣maund, and himselfe, though the Prince commanded, might not consent. Phi. You shift off S. Ambrose, but Athanasius, Osius, Leontius and Hi∣larius wil not be so shifted. Of Constantius the Arrian Emperour, S. Athana∣sius saith, What hath he left for Antichrist? for yet againe in place of Ecclesiasticall cognition hee hath appointed his palace the iudiciall seate of such causes, & made him selfe the chiefe iudge & arbiter of our controuersies. And who seeing him to make him selfe the ruler of Bishops, and president of spiritual iudgements, would not iustly deeme him to bee that very abomination of desolation foretold by Daniel? And in an other place of the same work: When was it euer heard since the beginning, that the Chur∣ches iudgement did depend of the Emperours authoritie? Or who euer accepted that for lawfull iudgement? The renoumed Osius writeth to the same Emperour:Apolog. Cap. 4. sect. 29. Cited of S. Athanas. in the epistle aforesaid. Suidas in verbo Leontius. Lib. imperfect. 2. ad Constant. Medle not O Emperour in causes ecclesiasticall, nor do thou cōmand vs in this kinde, but leaue such thinges to vs rather: God hath giuen thee the Empire, but to vs the church. At the same time, & to the same Emperour, thus saith Leontius the Mar∣tyr: I maruel that thy vocation being for other things, thou medlest with these mat∣ters. Thy charge is of ciuil & Martiall affaires only, and yet thou wilt needes be pre∣sident of ccclesiastical causes. S. Hilarie also to the same Emperour writeth thus, We beseech thy clemencie to prouide▪ that charge to be giuen to all iudges of Prouin∣ces, that hereafter they presume not, nor vsurpe the hearing of Ecclesiasticall causes. Theo. You do well to put them together;Constantius reproued for his tyrannous and iniurious oppressing the Church. they all spake of one man & ment one matter: reprouing Constantius the Arian Emperour and that worthily for his tyrannous and violent oppressing the Church of Christ against al trueth and reason. Phi. You would faine giue these fathers the slip, as though Constantius
were reproued by them not for intermedling with causes ecclesiasticall; but for his iniurious and outragious ouerruling those matters; what a mockerie that were? Theo. Mocke not your selues, and of our answere let the world iudge. Phi. What is it? Theo. We say these fathers did not reproue that in Con∣stantius, which the whole Church of Christ before them and after them for eight hundered yeres and vpward obeyed, embraced and honoured in her Christian & Catholike princes, namely Constantine, Gratian, Theodosius, Honorius, Mar∣tian, Iustinian, Charles, Lodouike, Lotharius, and others. Phi. Who saith they did? Theo. Doe you graunt they did not? Phi. What if we doe? Theo. Speake expresly whether you graunt it or no. Phi. We graunt they did not. Theo. Ergo these places of Athanasius, Osius, Leontius, and Hilarius, doe not impugne that which we defend, but only traduce Constantius for his wilful and headie subuerting the faith, and infringing the Canons, without all regard of trueth or equitie. They refute not his authority to commaund for trueth and punish error, which other Princes had and vsed with the contentation and com∣mendation of all good men, but they dissuade him from the tyranny which hee shewed in confounding both the doctrine and discipline of the church to serue his humor and wrecke his anger on those that would not yeeld to his heresie. Phi. You may not scape so, we must haue a direct answer to the words which we bring. Theo. I neede not answere them, till you vrge them. Phi. As for vrging, that shall not want. Theo. If I faile in answering, take you the ad∣uantage. Phi. Be sure, I will. First then Constantius was reproued by S. Athanasius for appointing his Palace to bee the tribunal seat of ecclesiastical causes, and making himselfe the chiefe iudge and arbiter of those controuersies.Apolog. cap. 4. Athanasius wordes dis∣cussed. Apolog. Cap. 4. Theo. We do not make Princes chiefe iudges and arbiters of ecclesiasticall controuersies, Ergo these wordes of Athanasius disproue not our assertion. Phi. Do you not make them Rulers of Bishops and presidents of spiritual iudgements, which is that very abhomination of desolation foretold by Daniel? Theo. Doe not you purposely clippe the text, to drawe the words from their right meaning to your malicious intent, which is a ready way to deface the trueth and vphould the kingdome of Antichrist?Athanas. epist. ad solitar. vitā agentes. For where the words are, Quis videns eum in decernēdo Principē se fa∣cere Episcoporū, & praesidere iudicijs ecclesiasticis, non merito dicat, &c. who seeing him to make himselfe the ruler of Bishops, and the ringleader of ecclesiasti∣cal iudgements (in decernendo) what they shall determine, may not iustly pro∣nounce him to be that abomination of desolation which Daniel foretold;The Iesuitical madnes of citing the fa∣thers to beare out that which should expound the rest. Hilar. de trinit. lib. 4. you strike out cleane, in decernendo, In iudgeing or determining, and would haue it a note of Antichrist to be a ruler of Bishops. Againe, where The vnder∣standing of that which spoken must bee fet from the causes that moued (mē) to speake as Hilarie wel admonisheth, you let passe al that Athanasius hath said in that long epistle for the confirmation of this sentence and explication of him∣selfe, and ll out a word or two that may bee diuersly taken, and thinke with a phrase of speach both doubtfull and generall to surprise a settled and certaine trueth.
Princes should not be rulers of Bishops: if by this you meane that Princes shoulde not bee superiour magistrates to commaunde Bishops that which is good and forbid them that which is euill,How Princes may rule Bishops, and how not. yea to punish them as well for eccle∣siasticall as cyuill disorders, Athanasius was neuer of that mynde; his owne wordes expounding S. Pauls Epistle to the Romanes (if those be his woorkes that carie his name) are cleare to the contrarie.Comment. sub nomine Atha∣nas. in 13. Rom. Let euery soule be subiect to the higher powers.] He teacheth al men, sayth Athanasius, whether it bee Priest, Monke or Apostle, to submit themselues to princes (or rulers.) And speaking of himselfe when hee was commaunded to conferre with Arius, not the first and famous heretike, but an other of that name and tyme concerning matters of fayth,Disputa. Atha. cum Arrio Laodicee habitae Who, sayth he, is so besides his wittes that hee dare refuse the Princes precept? His deedes are as manifest; for when the Councel of Ty∣rus would haue proceeded against him for his crimes and causes ecclesiastical, the Cotholike Bishoppes of Egypt that tooke part with him made their ap∣peale to the Prince, as I shewed you before,Sorat. lib. 1. Cap. 33. Idem li. 1. ca. 33. and Athanasius in person fled to Constantine and desired the Synode to bee sent for, and his cause to bee hearde before the Emperour. What Athanasius liked in himselfe, he might not mislike in others; what hee thought to bee lawfull in the father, hee could not thinke vnlawfull in the sonne; hee doeth not now refell that in woordes, which hee before approued in deedes: you must so conster his sayings as they may stand with his doings, or els you make a madde construction. But if you meane that Princes should not rule Bishops in ecclesiastical causes & iudgements, that is, not worke them, nor force them against the witnes of their heartes and con∣sciences to follow the willes and appetites of Princes as Constantius did by the report of Athanasius in this place: then the wordes which you bring be ve∣ry true, but nothing pertinent to this question. The ruling then of Bishoppes and sitting as president of ecclesiasticall iudgements which Constantius vsed and Athanasius reproued was nothing elss but a wilfull contempt in himselfe of the faith and Canons of the Church,Princes may not rule Bi∣shops, that is not force them, nor frame them to their fansies. and a furious compulsion of others to make them determine what hee listed, and condemne whom him pleased without respect of trueth, and against all or∣der of common iustice. Phi. This is your gloze, which wee doe not beleeue. Theo. Your owne witnesses say the same, whom you may not well discredite. Phi. Which of them? Theo. Athanasius and Hilarie. Phi. Where say they so? Theo. Not farre from the places which your selfe alleage. The whole E∣pistle of Athanasius which you quote, is a large repetition of y• tirannous words and deedes of Constantius touching causes ecclesiasticall. The first booke of Hilarie against Constantius (the first I meane, as they nowe stande in order, though the last in time as they were written) doeth handle the same argument. Reade either of them, you can not choose amisse. Let passe the horrible persecution raysed by Constantius, wherein the Pa∣gans were set to inuade the Churches of Christians and to beate the people with staues and stones:Vide Athanas. epist. ad solitar. vitam agentes. the Bishops, Priests and Monkes were bound with
chaynes and scourged with roddes; the women were haled by the hayre to the iudgement seate; may play the tirāts in temporal things, much more in spiri∣tual if they passe christiā moderation and sobriety. Ibidem. the virgins were tosted by the fire, and whipped with Prickles, others were banished, strangled, trampled to death vnder feete, and their limmes and ioyntes euen torne and rent asunder after they were dead, in so much that Athanasius is fayne to crie out, who was not amazed at these things? who would giue them the name of Ethnicks, much lesse of chri∣stians? who will thinke them to haue the conditions of men and not rather of beastes? who perceiued not the Arrians to bee crueller than beasts? The straungers standing by, yea the Ethnicks detested the Arians as Antichristes, and butchers of men. O new found heresie, which in villanies and impieties hast put on the fulnes of the Diuell, howe great so euer hee bee: let passe I say these thinges, and come to his behauiour in matters and causes eccle∣siasticall. Ibidem.Paulinus, Lucifer and other Bishoppes being called before him, the Empe∣rour commaunded them to subscribe against Athanasius and to communi∣cate with the Arrians: they marueiling at this strange endeuor & answering that the ecclesiastical Canons would not suffer them so to doe, hee straight∣way replied:Constantius would haue his will to be the Canon of the church. AT QVOD EGO VOLO, PRO CANONE SIT: ita me loquentem Sy∣riae episcopi sustinent, aut ergo obtēperate, aut vos quoque exules esrote. LET MY WIL BE TAKEN OF YOV FOR A CANON: the Bishoppes of Syria content them∣selues with this speach of mine. Therefore doe as I will you, or depart into banishment. And when the Bishoppes held vp their hands to God and with great libertie proposed their reasons, shewing him that the kingdome was not his, but Gods, of whom he receiued it; and that it was to bee feared, lest hee that gaue it would speedyly take it from him: also setting before him the day of iudgement, and aduising him not to subuert ecclesiasticall order, nor to mingle the Romane Empire with the constitutions of the Church, nor to bring the Arrian heresie into the Church of God: he woulde neither heare them, nor permit them to speake: but greeuously bending his browes for that they had spoken, and shaking his sword, willed (them) to be caried away. This was Constantius manner in conuenting Bishoppes, and thus hee peruerted the fayth and good order of Christes Church vppon a selfe wil, subiecting all Lawes both diuine and humane to his eger and erroneous fan∣sie. And who seeing him (thus) to make himselfe the ruler of Bishoppes, & president of ecclesiasticall iudgements, would not iustly deeme him to bee that desolation of abomination foretold by Daniel? Phi. You put (thus) to the text which Athanasius hath not. Theo. But the right meaning of Athanasius woordes must bee gathered hy that which goeth before and followeth after.Hilar. de trin. lib. 9. The wordes of   o tht which s antecedent & consequent in the same epistle. Intelligentia dictorum, sayth Hilarie, ex praece∣dentibus & consequentibus expectetur: The vnderstanding of any speach must bee taken from the precedents and consequents. The conclusion is not pro∣ued but by the premisses, and therefore must bee measured by the premisses. Athanasius bringeth many particulars to shewe in what sort Constantius
ouer-ruled the Bishoppes and preferred his owne will before all constituti∣ons and Canons of the Church, and then inferreth, Who seeing him to make himselfe the ruler of Bishoppes and president of ecclesiasticall iudgements (in that ort as hee doeth) would not pronounce him to be Antichrist? Now in what sort he did it, the whole Epistle besides doeth declare; thither must you repaire if you will see howe Constantius behaued himselfe in ecclesi∣asticall causes, and consequently what thinges Athanasius and the rest misli∣ked in him. Phi. Howe did Constantius behaue himselfe, say you? Theo. That is worth the searching. By that you shal see what cause Athanasius, Osius, Leon∣tius and Hilarius had to reproue him. Phi. Say no more than you iustly proue. Theo. No more shall bee sayde than your owne witnesses report. I hope you will take them for direct and true deponents. Phi. I doe not mistrust them. Theo. Then heare them. There were fiue principall points wherein Constantius dealt very intemperately & wickedly as the writings of Athanasi∣us and Hilarie doe testifie.Fiue things misliked in Constantius as tyrannical. The often altering of the fayth, the wresting from Synodes what hee would, the banishing of Bishoppes vpon false accusations, the intruding of others in their places against all order, and the forcing of all sorts to communicate with the Arrians. Of his altering the fayth Hilarie thus complayneth:Hilar. lib. 3. ad Constant. Oftē chaing∣ing his faith. Fayth is come nowe to depend rather on the tyme than on the Gospel. Our state is dangerous & miserable that we haue nowe as many fayths as wils, and as many doctrines as manners, whiles faiths are either so written as we list, or so vnderstood as we will. We make euery yere and euery moneth a faith,Ibidem. Hilar. lib. 1. contra Constan∣tium defunct. and still wee seeke a fayth as if there were no faith. This O Constantius would I fayne knowe of thee, what fayth at length thou beleeuest. Thou hast changed so often that now I knowe not thy fayth. That is hapned vnto thee which is wont to fol∣low vnskilfull buylders, euer disliking their own doings, that thou stil pullest downe that which thou art stil setting vp. Thou subuertest the olde with newe, and the newe thou rentest in sunder with a newer correction; and that which was once corrected thou condemnest with a second correcti∣on. O thou wicked one, what a mockerie doest thou make of the Church?Ibidem. Constantius was dead and so no Prince, when Hilarie was so bould with him in his termes. Onely dogges returne to their vomit, and thou compellest the Priestes of Christ to sup vp those thinges which they had spitte foorth, and doest thou commaund them in their confessions to allow that which before they con∣demned? What Bishops hand hast thou left innocent? whose tongue hast thou not forced to falsehood? whose heart hast thou not brought to the con∣demning of his former opinion? Substrauisti voluntati tuae sed & violentiae. Thou hast subiected (all) to thy will, nay to thy violence. His violent oppressing of Bishops in their Synodes & wresting from them what he would, is witnessed by thē both.Hilar. lib. 1. contra Constan. Forcing Sy∣nods to his fansie. Synodos contrahis, conclusos vrbe vna mi∣nis terres, fame debilitas, hyeme conicis, dissimulatione deprauas: Thou gatherest Synods, saith Hilarie to him, & when they be closed in one citie, thou terrifiest
them with threates, thou pynest them with hunger, thou lamest them with cold,Athanaes. ad Solitar. vitam agentes. thou deprauest them with dissembling. He pretendeth, saith Athanasi∣us, a iudgement (or Synode) of Bishops for a shewe, but in the meane tyme hee doeth whatsoeuer hee list himselfe. What libertie of perswasion, what place for aduise is there, when hee that contradicteth, shall for his labour loose his life or his Countrie? By that meanes hath the Emperour ga∣thered so great a number of Bishoppes partly terrified with threates, partly enticed with promises to graunt they woulde no longer commu∣nicate with Athanasius. The order of such tyrannicall Synodes, the Bishoppes of Aegypt, Libia, Pentapolis, and Thebais doe liuely report in defence of Athanasius, whereby wee shall see howe farre they bee from the moderation and regiment of Godly Princes. With what face dare they call this conuent a Synode, where the Lieutenant was president?Athans. Apolo. 2. in epis. Synod. Alexand. where the tormentour stoode ready? where the Iaylour in steede of the Deacons of the Church, brought in those that were called for? where the Lieutenant spake, the rest that were present kept silence, or rather yeelded their seruice to him? where that which the Bishoppes by common consent liked, was reiected by the Lieutenant? Hee sate and commaunded, wee were led by souldiers, yea the Lieute∣nant him selfe did whatsoeuer the Eusebians (our aduersaries) bid him. To bee short, what shewe of a Synode was there, where death or banishment, if Cesar sayd the word, was decreed? This violence Liberius toucheth in his answere to Constantius messenger. If the Emperour seeke in deede to interpose his care for the peace of the Church,Athanas. ad Solitar. vitam agentes. or if he commaund those thinges which wee haue decreed for Athanasius to be reuersed, let those things also that are decreed against him be reuersed, and after let an ecclesiasticall Synod be called farre from the Palace, where the Emperour is not presēt, nor the Lieutenant intermedleth, nor the iudge threatneth (as Constantius doth in his Synodes) but only the feare of God and institution of the Apostles suffice for all things. And this dissimulation the Bishops were brought to by the Emperours meanes, as your own author confesseth,Suidas in Leon∣tio Tripolis Episco. that Constantines sitting presidēt among the Bishops and prescribing rules for (their) churches, the most part of thē receiued with applause & admiratiō whatsoeuer he said, affirming it to be diuinely spokē. What maruaile then if Athanasius reproued Constantius for sitting among the bishops in their Synods, as president of (their) iudgements & ringleader or ruler of the bishops in their determinations, when as hee oppressed the free∣dome of their voyces with terror, corrupted the secrets of their harts with pro∣mises, & hindered the vprightnes of their proceedings with his presence? Or if Leontius brake out into these words:Apud Suidam ibidem. I woonder that hauing charge of other things thou enterest into these matters, and that being gouernour of the campe and common welth thou prescribest those things to Bishops which pertaine only to Bishops.
Touching accusations of Bishops his tyrannie was greater.Admitting false accusa∣tions against Bishops, and not suffering them to speak for thēselues. He made his Palace the Consistorie for such causes and himselfe iudge of them, where if any Arrian accused an other Bishop, were the complaint neuer so false, the proofe neuer so slender, the man neuer so giltlesse, the partie accused should not cleare himselfe, no not so much as speake for himself, but was sure, though he were ab∣sent and innocent, to die the death or suffer banishment. Phi. You imagine this of your own head to make Constantius seeme a very tyrant. Theo. The words which you brought do fully proue so much, but that you cut them off from the rest, to make them sound for your purpose. Put the wordes that follow to thē, and see whether they do not import that which I saide.Athan. ad Solit. vitam agentes. Now againe in steed of Ecclesiasticall cognition, (that is, the triall of Bishops by their Synodes when they are accused) he hath appointed his palace the iudgement seate of those causes, and himselfe the chiefe iudge and arbitrer of those conten∣tions (or accusations:) and that which you would wonder at, if at anie time hee perceiue the accusers to stagger or faile in their proofes,This was plaine tyran∣ny repugnant to the lawes of God and man. hee him∣selfe plaieth the accuser, so as the partie conuented is suffered to replie no∣thing by reason of his violence. Which he plainly shewed in Athanasius cause. For in that matter hearing the free speach of Paulinus, Lucifer, Eu∣sebius and Dionysius (all foure Bishops) prouing by the recantation of Vrsa∣cius and Valens that the crimes obiected to Athanasius were false, and the sayings of Vrsacius and Valens, which they themselues had reuoked, ought not to be credited, Constantius straightway rising vp said, I am Athanasius accuser, on my word beleeue those thinges (that are obiected to him.) Here the Bishops answering againe, howe can you accuse (Athanasius) in his absence? Graunt you would accuse him, the absence of the partie accu∣sed is a let that you can not proceed to iudgement. The iudgement is not of any common-wealth matter, that you should bee beleeued as Emperour; but a Bishop is accused, and in this case he that wil accuse and hee that is ac∣cused must be delt withall in like condition. How can you accuse him that could not be present for the distance of place? If you haue those thinges which you obiect, by hearesay, reason is you also beleeue that which Atha∣nasius shall bring in defence of himselfe. For if you beleeue these (his ac∣cusers) and beleeue not him, it may be thought they say these thinges and accuse Athanasius to content and please you. This when the Emperour heard, expounding their honest allegations for his reproches, he banished them: and waxing the sharper against Athanasius, gaue foorth a terrible e∣dict that he should be punished, and his churches deliuered to the Arrians, and his aduersaries haue leaue to do what they would. Hereby the Arians waxed so confident that they spared no man. Whom haue they not touched, saith Athanasius, with their false accusations?Athan. ad solis. vitam agentes. Whom haue they not intrapped? Whom hath not Constantius banished that was accused by them? When did he not giue them both audience and allow∣ance? Whom euer did he admit to saie any thing against them? Or what
did he not admit which they said against others? Hee euer doth that which the Arrians woulde haue, and they againe saie that which hee liketh. And whereas the Bishops in those dayes were wont to be lawfully chosen by the people of the place, and sufficiently examined and allowed by other Bi∣shops adioyning and openly created in the church; Constantius in steede of the church would haue his palace succeed, and for the multitude of people, and right of assemblies (to elect) hee commaunded three Eunuches to bee present,Athan. in ead Epist. Disordered e∣lecting of Bi∣shops. and three of his spies (or prolers) for you can not call them Bi∣shops, that they (sixe) in his palace might create one Felix a Bishop. And noting what manner of Bishops the Emperour and his Eunuches made, hee saith, In illorum locum iuuenes, libidinosos, Ethnicos, ne catechismo quidem im∣butos, necnon & digamos & de maximis criminibus malè audientes modò aurum darent,Athan. ibidem. veluti emptores è foro ad Episcopatus summisere: They sent in their places (that were banished) yong men, leacherous persons, Ethnickes, not so much as taught the first principles of faith, hauing two wifes, and spotted with enormous crimes, so they would giue mony, as cheepe-men out of a market. The furious violence that was vsed in the time of Constantius to driue men to participate with Arrians, not onely by imprisonmentes and banishmentes, but by chaining,Tyrannous persecuting. whipping, scalding with fire, trampling vnder feete, sto∣ning, choking, and secret murdering such as refused, without all respect of vocation, age or sexe, was so lamentable, that no christian hart can read it without teares, and it is so largely described and pithily disproued by Hilarie and Athanasius, that no man except he be blinder than a bitle, can doubt whe∣ther Constantius were a wilfull tyrant in the church of God, or no. Per∣use the places and you shall find proofes enough of that which I say. I proclaime, saith Hilarie, that to thee, Constantius, which I woulde to Nero, Decius, and Maximinian; thou fightest against God, thou ragest against the Church,Hilar. lib. 1. contra Constan. defunct. thou doest persecute the Sainctes, thou ha∣test the Preachers of Christ, and ouerthrowest Religion, a tyrant not in humane, but in diuine thinges; a newe kinde of enemie to Christ, the forerunner of Antichrist. I repeate nothing rather than thy doings in the Church, because I would open no other tyrannie, but that (which thou vsest) against God. Athan. ad soit. vitam agentes.And Athanasius shewing the reasons why hee calleth Constantius Anti∣christ; Who seeing or hearing, saith he, these thinges, who considering the rage of these wicked ones and so great iniustice, would not deepelie sigh at it? Who hereafter will dare to call Constantius a Christian and not rather the image of Antichrist? For which of Antichristes markes doth hee lacke? Or what cause is there why Constantius should not in euerie res∣pect bee counted Antichrist? Haue not the Arrians and Ethnickes as it were by his precept, vsed their sacrifices and blasphemies against Christ in the great church at Caesarium (in Aegypt?) As a Giant he ex∣alteth
himselfe against the most high and hath inuented waies to change the Lawe (of God) breaking the ordinances of Christ and his Apo∣stles, and inuerting the customes of the church. And since he is cloa∣thed with Christianitie and entereth into holy places, there standing and wasting the churches, Abrogating the Canons, and by force compel∣ling that his pleasure may preuaile, who at any time will affirme that these dayes are peaceable to christians? and not rather, that this is a persecution, and such a persecution as was neuer before, and no man after shall make the like, except that sonne of perdition, (which is the true Antichrist?) Howe thinke you, did not these Fathers reproue Constantius for change∣ing the faith, oppressing Synods, corrupting iudgementes, infringing the Canons, barbarons enforcing the christians, and shortly, for subiecting all to his will and violence? Phi. I knowe they make mention of these things,These fathers reproued Cō∣stantius for that he did. Now what he did, their own wordes doe witnesse. but yet they reproue him generally for intermedling with Ecclesia∣sticall causes. Theo. I hope they reproued him for that he did. Phi. The case is cleare, they coulde not reproue him for that hee did not. Theo. These things which I last rehearsed, Constantius did; as I proue by their wit∣nesse that chiefly rebuked him; ergo Constantius was reproued of Athana∣sius, Osius, Leontius, and Hilarius for these thinges, that is for playing the tyrant in diuine matters, or as you call them in causes Ecclesiasticall. Phi. But Osius saith, Medle not O Emperour in causes Ecclesiastical, nor do thou commaund vs in that kind,Osius wordes examined. but leaue such things to vs rather. Theo. You were answered before, but that you wil neuer be satisfied. Osius dissuadeth Constantius from vsing his absolute power & obstinate wil in those things that were then in question betwixt the Christians & Arians. He saw the manifolde and excessiue disorders of Constantius in forcing Synodes of Bishops by ter∣ror and violence to bow at his becke, in making his palace a consistorie for their causes, and there iudging what his Eunuches would, in dissoluing the ordinances of Christ and his Apostles, and doing all thinges against the Rules of the church,Athan. ad solit. vitam agentes. and therefore had good cause to saie: Ne te misceas ecclesiasticis neque nobis in hoc genere praecipe, sed potius ea a nobis disce: Enter∣pose not thy selfe (as thou doest) O Emperour in Ecclesiasticall matters, neither commaund vs in this kinde, but learne such things rather of vs, and not as you say (leaue such things rather to vs.) God hath cōmitted the Em∣pire to thee, to vs the things of the church: & as he that enuieth thine Em∣pire contradicteth the ordinance of God, so take thou heede, least draw∣ing vnto thy selfe the things of the church thou be guilty of great sinne.It is neither lawfull for a Bishop to hold a kingdō: nor for a Prince to take a Bi∣shops functiō on him. It is written, Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars, & vnto God that which is Gods. It is therefore neither lawfull for vs to holde a kingdome on earth, neither hast thou power, O Prince, ouer sacrifices & sacred things. These words put a difference between the function of Priestes & Princes, & shew that neither may intrude with ech others charge, which we confesse with a good wil.
But as Priestes must teach truth and conuict error, that is their office, so prin∣ces must commaund for truth, and punish error, because publike authoritie to commaund and punish is not the Priestes, but the Princes right, where-with Priestes must not meddle. Phi. Yet the Prince must learne at the Priestes hande, which is truth and which error. Theo. If the Priest teach truth and the Prince reiect it, the Prince shal answere to God for the cōtempt of truth: but if the priest teach error in steed of truth, a godly prince hath lawful power to banish the doctrine, & pu∣nish the teacher. Phi. And if the Prince saie that truth is error & error is truth, shall truth be banished and the Priest punished vpon the Princes saying? Theo. And what if the Priest saie that light is darkenesse and darkenesse light,The Priest shall not ex∣cuse the Prince before God: and therefore the the Prince can not bee bound to the Priests mouth shall Princes be excused before God for displacing the truth and maintaining false∣hood vpon the Priestes warrant? Phi. Let Princes ioyne themselues to the Church, & they can not mistake. Theo. Shal they trust euery sect that clai∣meth to be the church, or must they learn to know the true church of Christ from the counterfait? Phi. The Church is soone knowen. Theo. Not so soone as you thinke. But we slip from our matter; How Princes must be directed to light on truth is an other, and the next question: we be now discussing their au∣thoritie to commaund for truth, not their abilitie to discerne the truth; and as far as I coniecture by your speaches, you be loth to graunt that Princes may defende or assist the truth, were it neuer so well knowen, to bee the vndoubted truth of Christes church. Phi. Yes we graunt they should defend the faith & assist the church, but we would haue them not go beyonde their calling. Theo. No more woulde wee: but the wordes of Osius as you presse them infer that Princes may not so much as meddle with defending the faith, or assisting the church of Christ, by their Princely power, which euerteth as well your opiniō, as ours. If you will haue these wordes, Meddle not in causes Ecclesiasticall, to be taken as they lie without restriction,The limiting of Osius words. ergo Princes must not meddle neither in word nor deede with the defending nor impugning the faith or church of Christ. And this, you see, were no sober perswasion but a franticke conclusion wrested out of Osius wordes against his meaning, against all truth and your owne con∣fession. Who in his right wittes will saie to kings, take you no care who de∣fendeth or impugneth the church (of Christ) in your realmes;Aug. epist. 50. let it not pertaine to you who list to bee religious or sacriligious in your kingdoms? The actes of Constantine, the Lawes of Iustinian, the chapters of Charles, the stories of the church, the Scriptures themselues, do clearly conuince that the best and most famous Princes haue medled in Ecclesiasticall matters: the office and oth of a Prince, as anon you shall heare, require the same: your own assertion is that Princes ought to defend the faith and assist the church, and that they can not doe without medling in Ecclesiasticall matters. Now choose whe∣ther you will thwart the whole church of God and disproue your own doctrine, or else limit the wordes of Osius as we do by the particulars that moued him to
reproue Constantius for his immoderate presumption. The generall is absurd and refuteth your intention as well as ours;The words of Osius must be limited, & the limitation whatsoeuer it be cannot hurt vs. for you would haue Princes medle with the publishing, assisting and executing of your pleasures and iudgementes, and wee would haue them yeelde that seruice to Christ and his truth, which you chalenge to your selues: the limitation, let it be what it will agreeable to the circumstances, can not hurt vs. Medle not in causes Ecclesiasticall (in such sort as thou doest) which rebuketh his ty∣rannie; medle not, neither appoint vs what wee shall doe, that is, medle not (with appointing and directing vs) in these thinges, but learne them rather of vs, which represseth his insolencie: Ne te misceas ecclesiasticis, thrust not thy selfe into those thinges (which belong to the Priestes and not to the Princes charge) which is Osius owne distinction: or else: ne te misceas, interpose not thy self, that is, (thy resolute will and power to commaund & compell vs) to subscribe against Athanasius an innocent, and to communi∣cate with Arians condemned heretikes, which were the two points that Con∣stantius exacted of Osius. All these constructions import that Constantius medled in that sort, and with those thinges, that he should not; but they doe not exclude Princes from establishing the truth & punishing sacrileges, schisms and heresies, which is medling with matters ecclesiasticall. Phi. Leontius is as earnest against him as Osius. I maruell, saith hee to Constantius, thy vocation being for other thinges, thou medlest with these matters. Thy charge is of ciuill and martiall affaires onely, and yet thou wilt needes be president of Ecclesiasticall causes. Theo. I maruell that professing to seeke a truth, you be not ashamed to temper and alter your witnesses in this sort. You cut off the first part that would expound the whole, and the latter you wilfully corrupt to force it to your purpose. The place of Suidas is this. Constantius at a time sitting chiefe among the Bishops, and going about to set them orders for their churches,Suidas in Leon. Tripolis Epis. the most part recei∣ued with applause and admiration whatsoeuer he saide, affirming it to bee most excellently spoken. Leontius helde his peace: whom when the Em∣perour asked,Princes may not do what they list in the church of God. Leontius wil∣fullie corrup∣ted by the Ie∣suites. why doest thou onely of all the rest keepe silence? I maruel, saith Leontius, that hauing charge for other thinges thou entrest into these matters, and that being appointed ouer the campe and common-wealth thou prescribeth to the Bishops those thinges which belong onely to Bi∣shops. In steede of , you say, (Thy charge is of ciuill and martiall affaires onely) that word onely is your owne and not your Authors, and so be the rest that follow. Thou wilt needes be president of Ecclesiastical causes: Leontius saide: ; Thou prescribest vnto Bishops those thinges which belong onely to Bishops. This is no good dealing with Fathers, to forge them and frame them to your fansies. Leontius had some reason to say as he did, Constantius was sitting chiefe among the Bishops & prescribing them rules and orders for their churches,This was a∣boue Constā∣tius each and without his vocation to teach bishops in his owne person.
in thinges that were both beyond his cunning and besides his calling. What things those were the story doth not expresse, but saith, such things as belonged onely to Bishops. Now why should not Leontius thinke that Princes in some thinges had no skill to direct Bishops, neither might prescribe what rules and orders they listed, for the churches of God? And yet your author is not ancient that reporteth this. Suidas liued twelue hundred yeares after Christ, a man learned,Suidas a late writer. but of very late time and far from the credit of antiquitie. Leon∣tius himselfe, if all be true that Suidas writeth of him, had no more discretion than needed. For when the Empresse sent to speake with him, he returned this answere: If thou wilt haue me come to thee, let mee haue the reuerence due to Bishoppes,Suidas in eodē Leont. that when I come in, thou by and by descend from thy throne and reuerently meete me, and submit thy head vnder my handes to receiue (my) blessing,Leontius a man of no great iudge∣ment. and then will I sit, and thou shalt stand manerly by, and not offer to sit till I bid thee. If these couenantes please thee, I wil come. A high point of diuinitie that a subiect will not come to his Prince but on these saueie conditions. Such fables you seeke to further your cause, and yet all wil not helpe. Phi. I trust you wil make more account of Hilarie, whose words are these, We beseech thy clemencie to prouide that charge be giuen to al iudges of pro∣uinces, that hereafter they presume not, nor vsurp the hearing of Ecclesiasti∣cal causes.Hilarie would not haue men forced to reli∣gion with tor∣tures. Theo. Proofes go very low with you when you fal from Princes to inferiour iudges, & yet mistake your text. For Hilarie beseecheth nothing of Cōstantius in that place, but that the iudges of euerie Prouince should forbear medling in matters of religiō (with tortures & violēce.) The whole book, the words before the next part of the same sentence ioyned to this which you bring with a coniunction copulatiue confirme that to bee the true meaning of Hilarie. This is the right order of the place:Hilar. lib. 2. ad Constant. We beseech not only with words but also with teares, that the catholike churches be no longer oppressed with gree∣uous iniuries & sustain intolerable persecutions & cōtumelies, & that which is shameful, euē of our brethren. Let your clemency prouide & appoint that all iudges euery where, to whom prouinces are committed, which ought to take care & charge of commonwealth matters onely, refrain from medling with religion. Neither let them presume & vsurp & think they may enter in∣to clergymens causes & force & vexe innocent men with diuerse afflictions, threats, violence & terrours. Your singular & admirable wisedome per∣ceiueth it is not seemely, it ought not to be, that men should be forced & cō∣pelled against their wils & harts to yeeld & addict themselues through vio∣lent oppressiō to such as cease not to sow the corrupt seeds of false doctrine.Temporall Iudges had their charge by the Re∣mane lawes limited vnto temporall . This was the medling with clergie mens causes that Hilarie ment, and which he would haue temporall iudges restrained from: and yet were his mea∣ning neuer so generall, he required nothing but that which Constantine the father of Constantius had by his publike lawes ordained, & al christian Princes haue since obserued, to wit, that Ecclesiasticall persons should be conuented be∣fore
ecclesiasticall iudges.Niceph. lib. 7. cap. 46. Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 32. Nouel. Constit. 83. For so Constantine decreed, Cōmitting iudgemēt & iurisdiction ouer clearks to Bishops; & Valentinian the elder would haue priests to iudge of priests: Yea Iustinian excludeth all secular iudges from hea∣ring the causes of clergie men, except it were for ciuill offences. If the crime be ecclesiasticall, needing ecclesiasticall reformation & punishment, let the Bi∣shop determine the same, the iudges of the Prouince no way intermedling, for we wil not haue temporall iudges enter into such matters where as such faults must be examined ecclesiastically by the sacred and diuine rules (and Canons) which our lawes take no scorne to follow. And though he bar ciuill iudges from the hearing of such causes,Clergiemen exempted frō temporall lawes, but not frō the Prin∣ces lawes. Ibidem. yet doth not exempt clergie men, Bishops nor others from the obedience of his ecclesiastical lawes, as the wordes import that bee next to these; Omnibus quae iam a nobis sancita sunt, siue super sanctiss. ecclesus, siue super Deo amabilibus Episcopis siue su∣per clericis, siue super monachis propriam virtutem habentibus: All thinges which we haue already decreed concerning the most holie churches, and blessed Bishops, and touching clerkes and monks standing in their ful force. Hee quiteth clergie men from temporall barres, but he bindeth both them and their iudges to the tenor of his ecclesiasticall lawes as well in their Synods as in their Consistories, as appeareth at large by his 123. constitution; so that this place of Hilarie might well haue been spared saue onely to make vp your tale. Phi. Is this your opinion that Princes themselues may lawfully medle with Ecclesiasticall causes and persons though their inferiour iudges may not? Theo. We say princes exempted clergie men from secular iudges but not from themselues: And that Princes from the beginning haue medled with persons & causes Ecclesiasticall,Princes haue euer medled with ecclesia∣stical matters, wee bring you, not onely fiue authorities that shall bee neither maimed nor wrested as yours bee, but fiue hundred actes, examples, lawes and edictes that shall bee strong and effectuall proofes for this purpose. Phi. You talke of cost, when you saie fiue hundered. Theo. Wee coulde far passe that number if the number would moue you to leaue follie, but I will go an other waie to worke with you. What good king can you name before or after Christ for 1000. yeares, but such as medled with Ecclesiasticall mat∣ters? Phi. Nay, what good king can you name that did? Theo. They be sooner named than answered. Nabuchodonosor in making a law that euery people,Nabuchodo∣nosor. Daniel. 3. nation & language, which spake any blasphemie against the God of Sidrac, Misac and Abdnago should bee drawen in peeces & their houses made priuies, did hee not medle with matters of Religion? Phi. Nabuchodonosor was a tyrant? The. But be∣ing corrected by the diuine miracle,Aug. Epist. 50. he made, saith Augustine, a religious and commendable law for the truth, that who so blasphemed the God of Si∣drac, Misac, and Abednago should with his house perish vtterly. Darius vpon the sight of an other miracle wrote to all people, nations and languages that dwelt in the world with these words:Darius. Daniel. 6. I make a decree, that in
all the dominion of my kingdome men tremble and feare before the God of Daniell. The king of Niniueth, hearing of that which Ionas threatned from God, proclaimed a fast,Ionas 3. The king of Niniueth. and charged all men to put on sack-cloath and crie migh∣tily to God and to turne from (their) euill wayes and the wickednesse that was in their handes. I trust you dare not condemne the king of Niniueth for an intruder vpon ecclesiasticall causes, whose seruice so well pleased God, that he spared the king and his subiectes from destruction hanging ouer their heads: and yet fasting, praier and repentance be causes meere spirituall, in which the king interposed his royall authoritie by the councell of his Nobles,Ionas 3. and not of Ionas who departed the citie grieued and angrie with God for pardoning the Niniuites vpon their conuersion. The factes of these three kinges I alleadge the rather because S. Augu∣stine grounded himselfe vpon them,August. Epi. 50. S. Austen pro∣poseth their examples to be followed of christiā kings. as proofes that christian kinges may medle with matters of Religion, and as patternes for them to follow. Ye kinges vnderstand, be wise ye that iudge the earth, serue the Lord with feare, and reioyce before him with trembling. How do kings serue the Lord in feare, but by forbidding and punishing with a religious seueritie, those thinges which are done against the precepts of God? As the king of Niniueth ser∣ued by compelling the whole citie to appease the Lord. As Darius serued by giuing the Idole into Daniels power to bee broken, and casting his ene∣mies to the Lions. As Nabuchodonosor serued by restraining all that were in his kingdom from blaspheming God, with a terrible law. And againe, Whē Emperours professe the truth they commaunde for truth against error.Aug. Epist. 166. As Nabuchodonosor proposed an edict for truth against error, that whosoeuer blasphemed the God of Sidrach, Misaach, and Abednago should be destroi∣ed and his house dispersed. And you (Donatistes) will not that christian Emperours command any such thing against you. If the commaundements of kinges haue nothing to do with the publishing of religion and prohibi∣ting of sacrileges,The comman¦dementes of kinges may lawfully reach to the publish▪ why then do you signe your selues at king (Nabuchodosors) edict commaunding such thinges? For when you heare it, doe you not an∣swere Amen, and saying so with a loud voice, do you not signe your selues in the holie solemnitie at the kinges edict? What Moses, Iosua, Dauid, Salomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Manas∣ses, Iosias,Kinges and rulers commā¦ded by the holy Ghost for medling with religion. ing of religiō. Nehemias did for the planting, preseruing and purging of true reli∣gion, and how they commaunded, reproued and punished as well Priestes as others for spirituall crimes and causes, the places are infinite, and witnessed in no worse recordes than the Scriptures themselues: I will not touch them all but onely shew that euery one of these in their times & raignes medled with Ecclesiasticall men and matters, which is the point that you would impugne by your allegations. Moses the ciuill Magistrate reproued Aaron the high Priest, for making the golden calfe,Moses. Exod. 32. and stamping it to powder cast it into the water that Israell
might drinke it, and in one daie put three thowsand of them for that idolatrie to the sworde. And after the rebellion of Corah, when the residue were pla∣gued for murmuring against Moses and Aaron,Numbers 16. Moses commaunded Aarō to take the censer and stand betweene the liuing and the dead to make attone∣ment for the people. And as during life Moses guided & ruled them in al things both spiritual and temporal, so, readie to depart, he carefully warned, and final∣ly blessed the twelue tribes of Israell.Deut. 32.33. Iosua that succeeded him,Iosua. Iosua. 1. a Prince not a Priest was charged by God to me∣ditate in the booke of the law day & night, that thou maiest obserue, saith God, and do according to all that is written therein, and the people receiued him with this submission,Iosua. 1. As we obeied Moses in all things so will we obey thee. Whosoeuer shall rebell against thy commaundement, and will not obey thy wordes in all that thou commandest him, let him be put to death. And least you should thinke that he commaunded in nothing but temporall matters,Iosua. 5 8. Iosua. 8. he circumcised the sonnes of Israell, erected an Altar of stone for their offerings, read the whole law to them, there was not a word of all that Moses commaunded, which Iosua read not before all the congregation; searched and punished the concealer of thinges dedicated to idols,Iosua. 7. Iosua. 24. & not long before he died, in his owne person renewed the couenant betweene God and the people, & caused them to put away the strange Gods that were among them,Iosua. 24. insomuch that by his diligent care and good regiment, Israell serued the Lord all the dayes of Iosua. How far king Dauid medled with matters of religion,Dauid. 1. Chron. 16.1. Chron. 23.24 25.26. if the Psalmes which he made for Asaph and his brethren to sing in assemblies, and order which hee set for the whole seruice of the Temple, appointing the Priestes, Leuites, Sin∣gers and other Seruitours of the church their dignities, courses and offices, did not declare; the charge which he gaue to king Salomon his sonne, and the praise which he gate at Gods handes for the faithfull execution and religious obseruation of his law giuen by Moses in all thinges and causes both spirituall and temporall are sufficient euidence. Take heede to the charge of the Lord thy God,3. King. 2. saith Dauid to Salomon, to walke in his waies and keepe his sta∣tutes, & his commaundementes, and his iudgementes and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses: This God himselfe repeated to Salomō, proposing Dauid his father for a paterne vnto him: If thou wilt walke be∣fore me,3. King. 9. (as Dauid thy father walked in purenesse of heart and vprightnes) to doe according to all that I haue commaunded thee, and keepe my sta∣tutes and my iudgementes, I will establish the throne of thy kingdom vpon Israell for euer. Phi. Do these wordes proue that Dauid did or Salomon might medle with Ecclesiasticall matters?The Magi∣strate charged with all the wordes of Moses law. Theo. These places and such like doe fully proue that the Kinges and Gouernours of Israell and Iudah were appointed by God himselfe to haue the custodie, charge and ouersight of all thinges mentio∣ned and expressed in Moses law. Here you see the wordes are, to do accor∣ding
to all that I haue commaunded thee and keepe my statutes and iudgementes:3. Kinges 9. To Iosua God saide; that thou maiest obserue and doe ac∣cording to all that is written (in the booke of the Law;Iosua 1.) and likewise of the king in generall,Deut. 17. The booke of the Law shall be with him, and he shal read therein all the daies of his life, that he may learne, to keepe all the wordes of this Law and these ordinances to fulfill them. The king was charged with all the wordes and ordinances of Moses Law: the law of Moses contained al thinges which God required of Priestes or people both spirituall and tempo∣rall, ergo the king was charged by God himselfe as well with all Ecclesiasti∣call thinges and causes as with Temporall. And consequently Dauid and all other kinges that discharged their duties to God in such sort, as hee inioy∣ned them,They which discharged their duties to God medled with all things as well Eccle∣siasticall as ciuill. medled with all thinges and causes Ecclesiasticall and Temporall. Phi. Frame your argument shorter. Theo. They were charged with all, er∣go they should medle with all: and some discharged their dueties to God, for ex∣ample, such as were commended and fauored by God, whom I before named; ergo some did medle with al the preceptes of God both Ecclesiastical and Tem∣porall. Phi. They were charged to obserue the whole Law as all other men were. Theo. They were charged for their owne persons as all priuate men were, but as kinges they were charged for others in such manner as no subiect coulde be charged,Kinges be charged with Gods law in respect of cō∣maunding it to others. namely to see the lawe of God to be publikely receiued & fully obser∣ued within their Realmes, and all other sortes of Religion and policie to bee cleane forbidden and banished. Phi. This is your surmise. Theo. It is S. Augustines maine collection in sundrie places, fet from the verie Principles of reason and nature; and confirmed by the warrant of the sacred Scrip∣tures. The king serueth God, saith Saint Augustine,August. Epi. 50. As a man one waie, as a king an other way. As a man by liuing faithfully, as a king by make∣ing Lawes with conuenient vigor to commaund that which is right & for∣bid the contrarie.Idem contra lit. Petiliani, lib. 2. cap. 92. Idem. contra Cres. lib. 3. cap. 51. Idem. Epist. 50. And againe, Kinges euen in that they be kinges haue to serue the Lord, in such sort as none can do which are not kinges. For kings (in respect as they be kinges) serue the Lord, if in their kingdomes they cō∣maund that which is good, and forbid that which is euill. How then, saith he, do kinges serue the Lord, but by forbidding and punishing with a religious seueritie those thinges that are done against the commaundementes of the Lord?Idem. in Psalm. 44. No man is a king in res∣pect of him∣selfe but of his people. Keeping and obseruing re∣ferred to ma∣gistrats, is no∣thing else but to commaund & see the law of God kept & obserued by others. And thus much the verie deriuation of the name doth inferre. Rex à regendo dicitur, a king is he that ruleth (others) and the relation of the worde doth teach vs there can be no king but in respect of his subiectes, and his duetie towardes them is to direct and correct, that is to commaund and punish in all thinges needefull. Phi. What conclude you of all this? Theo. That where God chargeth the king to keepe and obserue all the wordes of the lawe, keeping and obseruing are not there referred to his priuate actions as a man, but to his publike function as a king: and therefore the king in these wordes receiued the
charge and ouersight of the whole lawe, that is an expresse commaundement from God to see the lawe kept, and euerie part thereof obserued of all men within his Dominions, and the breakers of it, Prophetes, Priestes and People to bee duely punished. Nowe the Lawe contained all thinges that any way touched the true seruice and worshippe of God, ergo the king had one and the selfe-same power and charge to commaund and punish as well for the preceptes of pietie as other pointes of policie, neither did God fauour or pros∣per any of the kinges of Israell or Iudah but such as chiefly respected and care∣fully maintained the ordinances of Religion prescribed vnto them in Moses lawe.Aug. Epist. 50. In the times of the Prophetes, saith S. Augustine, all the kinges which in the people of God did not forbid and ouerthrow those thinges which were brought in against the commandementes of God, are blamed: and they that did prohibite and subuert such thinges, are praysed aboue the rest. God blessed Salomon with wisedome,Salomon. honour, riches and peace so long as hee walked in the steppes of Dauid his father: during the which time Sa∣lomon did dedicate the Temple in his owne person,3. Kings 8. 3. Kinges 2. and cast out Abiathar from being Priest vnto the Lord, and set Zadocke in his roome: but when his heart once turned from God to builde places also for Idols and to suf∣fer his outlandish wiues to burne incense and offeringes to their Gods,3. Kings 11. then the Lorde was angrie with Salomon and stirred vppe aduersaries a∣gainst him and threatned to rent his kingdom from him, and to giue it to his seruant. Asa tooke awaie the Altars of the strange Gods,Asa. 2. Chron. 14. and the high places, and brake downe the images, and cut downe the groues, and commaun∣ded Iudah to seeke the Lord God of their fathers, and tooke awaie out of all the cities of Iudah the high places and images, therefore the kingdome was quiet before him. And hee tooke an oth of all Iudah and Beniamin, that Whosoeuer woulde not seeke the Lorde God of Israell shoulde be slaine,2. Chro. 15. whether hee were small or great, man or woman, and hee deposed Maachah his mother from her regencie, because she had made an idoll: & Asa brake downe her idol and stamped it and burnt it, and the Lord gaue him rest round about. Iehosaphat his sonne walked in the first waies of Dauid and sought the Lord God of his father,Iehosaphat. 2. Chro. 17. Vers. 3. Vers. 4. Vers. 5. Vers. 7. Vers. 8. 2. Chro. 19. Vers. 4. Vers. 8. Vers. 9. Vers. 10. Vers. 11. and walked in his commaundementes, and therefore the Lord established the kingdome in his handes, so that hee had riches and honour in aboundance. In the thirde yeare of his raigne he sent his Princes that they should teach in the cities of Iudah, and with them Leuites and Pristes, and him selfe went through the people from Beer-sheba to Mount-Ephraim, and brought them againe to the Lord God of their fa∣thers. In Ierusalem he sent of the Leuites and of the Priests and of the chiefe of the families of Israell for the iudgement and cause of the Lord. And he charged them saying, Thus shal ye do in the feare of the Lord faithfully and
with a perfect heart.Vers. 10. Vers. 11. Thus shall ye do and trespasse not. And behold Ama∣riah the Priest shall be the chiefe among you for al the matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah for all the kinges affaires, and the Leuites shall be helpers vn∣to you.2. Chron. 20. Vers. 3. Vers. 5. Vers. 6. Be strong and doe it. And when the Moabites and Ammonites came against him, he proclaimed a fast throughout all Iudah and stood in the congregation of Iudah and Ierusalem in the house of the Lord & pray∣ed in his owne person for all the people. Ezechiah. 2. Chron. 29. Vers. 2. Vers. 3.4. Vers. 5. Vers. 10. Vers. 15. Vers. 20. Vers. 21. Vers. 27. Vers. 21. Vers. 29.Ezechiah did vprightly in the sight of the Lord according to all that Da∣uid his father had done. Hee opened the doores of the house of the Lorde, and brought in the Priestes and the Leuites, and saide vnto them; heare mee yee Leuites, sanctifie your selues and sanctifie the house of the Lord God of your fathers. I purpose to make a couenant with the Lord God of Israell: And they sanctified themselues according to the commaunde∣ment of the king. And the king rose early and gathered the Princes of the citie and went vppe to the house of the Lord. And they brought (sinne-offeringes) and Ezechiah commaunded to offer the burnt offering vppon the Altar, yea hee commaunded the Priestes the sonnes of Aaron to offer them.Vers. 30. And when they had made an end of offering, Ezechiah the king & the Princes commaunded the Leuites to praise the Lord with the wordes of Dauid and Asaph the Seer.2. Chron. 30. Vers. 1. And Ezechiah sent to all Israell and Iudah & also wrote letters to Ephraim and Manasses that they should come to the house of the Lord at Ierusalem to keepe the Passouer.Vers. 6. So the Postes went with letters by the commission of the king and his Princes throughout all Israel and Iudah, and with the commandement of the king, saying: Yee children of Israell, turne againe vnto the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Israell.Vers. 12. 2. Chron. 31. Vers. 2. And the hand of God was in Iudah, so that he gaue them one heart to doe the commaundement of the King. And Ezechiah appointed the courses of the Priestes and Leuites by their turnes, euerie man according to his office for the burnt offeringes and peace offeringes, to minister and giue thankes to praise in the gates of the tentes of the Lord.Vers. 21. And in all the workes that hee beganne for the seruice of the house of God, hee did it with all his heart and prospered.4. Kings. 18. Hee tooke away the high places and brake the Images and cutte downe the groues and brake in peeces the brasen Serpent which Moses had made, for in those dayes the children of Israell did burne incense to it. Manasses. 2. Chron. 33. Vers. 3.Manasses at the first wēt back & built the high places which Ezechiah his father had broken down, and set vp altars for Baalim, & made groues & wor∣shipped all the host of heauen & serued them, but after hee was taken by the king of Babylon & put in fetters,Vers. 11. Vers. 12. Vers. 13. & bound in chaines, he hūbled himself great∣ly before the God of his fathers; & God was intreated of him, and heard his prayer, and brought him againe to Ierusalem into his kingdom. Then hee tooke awaie the strange Gods, and the image out of the house of the Lord,Vers. 15. and all the Altars that hee had built in the mount of the Lordes
house and in Ierusalem,Vers. 16. and cast them out of the citie. Also he repaired the Altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace-offeringes and of thankes, and commaunded Iudah to serue the Lord God of Israell. Iosiah,Iosiah. 2. Chron. 34. vers. 3. in the eight yeare of his raigne, when he was yet a childe (of sixe∣teene yeares) began to seeke after the God of Dauid his father, and in the twelfth yeare he began to purge Iudah & Ierusalem from the high places & the groues and the carued and molten Images.Vers. 4. And they brake downe in his sight the Altars of Baalim, and hee caused to cut downe the images that were on them: he brake also the groues, and the karued & molten images, and stampt them to powder and strewed it vpō the graues of them that had sacrificed on them;Vers. 5. Vers. 7. Also hee burnt the bones of the Priestes vpon their Al∣tars, and purged Iudah and Ierusalem. And when hee had destroyed the Altars, and cut downe all the idols throughout the lande of Israell, he returned to Ierusalem.Vers. 29. Vers. 30. Then the king sent and gathered all the Elders of Iudah and Ierusalem. And the king went vp to the house of the Lord, and all the men of Iudah and inhabitantes of Ierusalem, and the Priestes and the Leuites, and all the people from the greatest to the smallest, and hee read in their eares, all the wordes of the booke of the couenant, that was found in the house of the Lord.Vers. 31. And the king stood by his Piller, and made a co∣uenant before the Lord to walke after the Lord and to keepe his comman∣dementes, and his statutes with all his heart, & with all his soule, & that hee would accomplish the wordes of the couenant written in that booke. And hee caused al that were found in Ierusalem and Beniamin to stand to (the couenant.)Vers. 32. Vers 33. So Iosias tooke awaie all the abominations out of all the countries that pertained to the children of Israell, and compelled all that were founde in Israell to serue the Lord their God: & al his dayes they turned not backe from the Lord God of their fathers. Moreouer Iosiah kept a Passouer vnto the Lord in Ierusalem and hee ap∣pointed the Priestes to their charges and said to the Leuites,2. Chron. 35. vers. 1. Vers. 2. Vers. 3. Vers. 4. Vers. 5. Vers. 6. Serue now the Lord your God and his people Israell, & prepare your selues by the houses of your fathers according to your courses, as Dauid the king of Israell hath written, and according to the writing of Salomon his sonne. And stand in the sanctuarie, according to the diuision of the families of your brethren: Kill the Passouer and sanctifie your selues and prepare your brethren, that they may doe according to the word of the Lord by the hande of Moses. Thus the seruice was prepared,Vers. 10. and the Priestes stood in their places, also the Leuites in their orders according to the kinges commaundement. So all the seruice of the Lord was prepared the same day to keepe the Passouer & to offer burnt offeringes vpon the Altar of the Lord according to the com∣maundement of king Iosiah.Vers. 16. Nehemias though he were no king but a captaine sent frō king Artaxerxes,Nehemias. Nehem. 6. Nehe. 10. vers. 1. yet he discerned & resisted the Prophetes, that would haue put (him) in feare, & was the first that sealed the couenant between God & the people with an oth
to walke in the law of God,Vers. 29. and to obserue all the commaundementes of the Lord. And he displaced Tobiah an Ammonite whom Eliashib the high Priest had receiued and lodged within the court of the house of God,Nehem. 13. Vers. 7. Vers. 8. Vers. 9. Vers. 11. Vers. 17. Vers. 10. & 11. Vers. 22. Vers. 23. Vers. 25. Vers. 28. and cast out all the vessels of the house of Tobiah, and commaunded them to clense the chambers for the vessels of the house of God: And reproued the rulers for that the house of God was forsaken, & the Sabbaoth day bro∣ken: assembling the Leuites & singers: & setting them their places; & charg∣ing the Leuites to clense themselues and to sanctifie the Sabbaoth daie. And when he saw Iewes that maried (strange) wiues, he rebuked them and cursed them and smote certain of them & tooke an oth of them by God, that they should not mary with strangers. And one of the sonnes of Ioiadah the sonne of Eliashib the high Priest maried the daughter of Sanballat the Horonite, but Nehemiah chased him awaie;Ver. 30. and clensed (the Priestes and Leuites) from all strangers, and appointed them their courses euerie one in his office. The illation vpon the for∣mer examplesThere needeth no great skill to set this togither. To remoue idols, & all abo∣minations out of the land, to enter a couenāt with God, & to walke in his waies, to proclaime fastes, an d make publike praiers, to sanctifie the Temple, and celebrate the Passouer, to seeke and serue God according to his law; bee mat∣ters ecclesiasticall, not temporall; and yet in the same cases the godly kinges of Iudah commaunded and compelled all that were found in Iudah, Priest and Prophet, man and woman, to stand to that order, which they tooke for the better accomplishing of those their interprises. Acknowledge that right and power in Christian Princes at this day, to medle with matters of Religi∣on, which the Scriptures report and commend in kinges of religious and fa∣mous memorie, we presse you no farther: If you sticke to graunt so much, others will not stick to distrust the soundnesse of your doctrine, notwithstan∣ding the smoothnesse of your tongues and loftynesse of your spirites, where∣with you thinke to compasse and quaile kingdomes. Phi. The kinges decreed and commaunded those thinges though hap∣pily the Pro∣phetes did aduise them and persuade them.The kinges of Iudah did that which they did at the motion of the Prophetes and direction of the Priestes. Theo. You shun that, which you shal not auoide. Wee reason not, who moued and aduised, but who decreed and commaunded these thinges to be done; Priestes or Princes? The Scriptures in plaine termes saie, that Princes DECREED, APPOINTED, COMMAN∣DED them to be done. Contradict the wordes if you dare. Take from Asa, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Iosias, the king of Niniueth and others the Princely power which they shewed, & due praise which they merited in medling with these matters, & impugne the words whereby God expresseth & approueth their doings,To be dire∣cted and ad∣uised by o∣thers doth not hinder the Princes authoritie. & see whether the consciēces of all good men will not detest & abhor your wilfull impietie. Phi. The Scripture saith in deede, they commaunded, appointed, de∣creed these thinges, but no doubt they were directed by Prophetes and other spirituall Pastours what they should do. Theo. What if they were? Doth
that hinder their authoritie? Princes in ciuill affaires are guided and direc∣ted by learned and wise Counsellers; doe they therefore not commaund in tem∣porall matters neither? Or finde you no difference betweene counselling and commaunding? Phi. Againe these Princes were before the comming of Christ,The high Priest among the Iewes had his commissi∣on from Gods owne mouth, the Pope hath not. Deut. 17. when as yet there was no supreme Pastour ouer the whole Church. Theo. There was an high Priest ouer the twelue Tribes with surer and better authoritie than your holy father can shewe for him-selfe. All Israell by Gods owne mouth were referred to the iudgement of the Priestes and Leuites, and not to decline from the thing which they speake: & The man, saith God, that will do presumptuouslie not harkning vnto the Priest (that standeth before the Lord to minister) that man shall die. This was their commission, & yet this notwithstanding the kings of Iudah commaunded both Prist and people for matters of religion. And so did the Christian Emperours after the comming of Christ,The best chri∣stian Princes haue followed the steppes of the kings of Iudah. for eight hundred yeares that wee shewe, commaund both Bishoppes and o∣thers, yea the Bishoppe of Rome no lesse than others in causes as well Ecclesiasticall as Temporall. The particulars I noted before. The Lawes were publike, the time long, the Princes wise; the factes knowen, the Church of Christ honoured and obeyed those decrees: It is no doubt∣full question, but a manifest trueth that the best Princes before Christ, and after Christ for many yeares, medled with the reformation of the Church, and prescribed lawes both Ecclesiasticall and Temporall. S. Augustine accompteth them not vsurpers,God himselfe speaketh and commandeth by the hearts and lawes of Princes. as you doe, but happie Princes that imployed their authoritie to delate and spreade the true wor∣shippe of God as much as they coulde, and auoucheth plainely that God him-selfe speaketh and commaundeth by the mouthes and heartes of Princes when they commaunde in matters of Religion that which is good, and whosoeuer resisteth their Ecclesiasticall Lawes made for trueth shall bee grieuouslie plagued at Gods handes.August. de ciui. Dei li. 5. cap. 24. (Imperatores) felices dicimus, si suam potestatem ad DEI cultum maximè dilatandum maiestatis eius famu∣lam faciunt. Wee count (Princes) blessed, if they bende their pow∣er to doe God seruice, for the spreading of his (true) worshippe, as much as they can.Idem. Epi. 166. Hoc iubent imperatores quod iubet & Christus: quia cum bonum iubent, per illos non iubet nisi Christus. Emperours commaunde the selfe-same that Christ doeth: because when they commaunde that which is good, it is Christ him-selfe that commaundeth by them. And  little after:Ibidem. Attendite qua manifestissima veritate per cor regis quod in manu Dei est ipse Deus dixerat inista ipsa lege quam contra vos prolatam dicitis: Marke yee with howe manifest trueth by the Kinges heart, which is in Gods hande, GOD himselfe spake in that verie Lawe, which you saie was made against you. And therefore hee concludeth: Quicunque legibus Imp∣ratorum, quae pro Dei veritate feruntur,Aug. Epist. 50. obtemporare non vult, grande acquirit
supplicium: Whosoeuer will not obey the lawes of Princes which are made for the truth of God, is sure to beare an heauie iudgement. Religion the chiefest care that Princes ought to haue Cod. lib. 1. tit. 17 de veter. iure enucleando, § Deo authore. Authen. constit. 6. Codic. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 4. de religione, § Ea quae. Legum nouell. Theodos. tit. 2. de Iudeis & Sa∣maritanis, § In∣ter caeteras.The Princes themselues will teach you that by their power they may, by their charge they should medle with matters Ecclesiasticall. The authority of (our) lawes, saith Iustinian, disposeth diuine and humane thinges. Thence is it that we take greatest care for the true religion of God, and honest con∣uersation of Priestes. So likewise Theodosius and Valentinian: Ea quae circa Catholicam fidem vel ordinauit antiquit as, vel parentum nostrorum autho∣ritas religiosa constituit, vel nostra Serenitas roborauit, nouella superstitione remo∣ta, integra & inuiolata custodire praecipimus. Those thinges which ancient (Princes) haue ordained, or the religious authoritie of our Progenitours decreed, or our highnesse established concerning the catholike faith, wee commaund you to keepe them firme and inuiolable, all latter superstition remoued. And this they recken to be the first part of their Princely charge. Inter caeteras sollicitudines, quas amor publicus peruigili nobis cogitatione indixit, prae∣cipuam Imperatoriae, maiestatis curam esse praecipimus verae religionis indaginem. A∣mong the rest of those dueties which the common-wealth exacteth at our handes, we perceiue the inquirie of true religion should be the chiefest care of our Princely calling. Valentinian the elder, though at first hee refused to deale with profound questions of religion, yet after hee was content to enterpose his authoritie with others,Valentinian himselfe was content at length to cō∣maund for truth. Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 8. Codic. lib. 1. tit. 6. Nesacrū Bap∣tisma iteratur. and to commaund that the faith of the Trinitie should be right∣ly preached, & the Sacrament of Baptisme by no meanes doubled. The blessed Bishops, saith he with Valens & Gratian, haue made demonstration that the Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghost be a Trinitie coessentiall; & nostra po∣tentia eandem praedicari mandauit, and our power hath commaunded the same (truth) to be preached. And againe: The bishop which shall reiterate holy Baptisme, we count vnworthy of his place. For wee condemne their er∣ror, which treading the Apostolike preceptes vnder their feete, doe not clense but rather defile those with a second washing that are once alreadie baptized. Zeno seeking to reconcile the Bishops, Clerkes, Monkes and people of E∣gypt and Alexandria to the Nicene faith,Euagrius lib. 3. cap. 14. The right faith is the only strength of an earthly kingdom. beginneth with these wordes, For so much as wee know that onely faith, which is right and syncere, to bee the grounde, staie, strength and inuincible defence of our Empire, wee haue alwaies emploied our desires, endeuours and lawes, that thereby wee might multiplie the holie Catholike and Apostolike church, the per∣petuall and vndefiled mother of our Scepter. And Iustinus nephewe to Iustinian writing a publike Edict to all Christians concerning ma∣nie pointes of true Religion maketh his conclusion with these wordes: Omnes eos qui contraria hijsce vel sentiunt vel sensuri sunt, Anathemate damnamus,Idem lib. 5. cap. 4. & alienos à sancta Dei Catholica & Apostolica Ecclesia iudi∣camus: Wee condemne them all as accursed that presentlie doe or here∣after
shall thinke contrarie to these things, & we adiudge to haue no part in the holy Catholike and Apostolike Church of God. This care to prouide, and power to commaund for matters of religiō, Prin∣ces as well in this realme as els where continued a thousand yeres after Christ. The Bishop of Rome himselfe 850 yeres after Christ promiseth all kind of o∣bedience to the chapters and lawes ecclesiasticall of Lotharius & his ancestours. In Greece the Emperours lost not their authoritie to call Councels and esta∣blish trueth till they lost Empire and all. More than thirtine hundred yeres af∣ter Christ, Nicephorus highly commendeth a Greeke Emperour for his labors and endeuours in the Church affaires.Niceph. dedica∣tio operis. In Greece the Emperours kept this pow∣er 1300. yeres after Christ. You haue, saith he to the Prince, resto∣red the Catholike and vniuersal Church to her auncient state that was trou∣bled with nouelties: impure and vnsound doctrine you haue banished from her; you haue purged the temple from heretikes that were corrupters and deprauers of heauenly doctrine, not so much with a three corded whippe as with the worde of trueth. You haue established the faith, and made consti∣tutions for it: you haue walled about true godlines with mightie defen∣ces, you haue repaired that, which was ruinous. Priestly vnction decaied, you haue made purer than gold, and by lawes and letters taught them so∣briety of life and contempt of mony. Wherefore their order is now sacred in the common wealth which in former times was degenerated & infected with corruption of discipline and manners.Ibidem paulo ante. Yea, when you sawe our true religion brought in danger by false and absurd doctrines, you did most zea∣lously and most wisely vndertake the defence of it. And knowing very well that piety of it selfe & the diligent care of Gods causes,Diligent care of Gods cau∣ses the surest proppe of a Princes seat. are the surest proppes of an Empire, you tooke a diuine and passing wise course. For by medling with these matters (of religion) you wanne great thankes of God, and gaue him iust cause to bee fauorable to your praiers, to direct al your doings and confirme and setle the Empire in your hands. Canutus a King of this land not full 32 yeres before the conquest apparent∣ly proueth that Princes kept their authoritie to commaund for matters of reli∣gion more than a thousand yeeres after Christ.A king of this land making lawes for reli∣gion a 1000 yeres after Christ. His lawes made by a Councel of his sages at Winchester, are yet extant. Heare some of them, and then tell vs whether he did meddle with ecclesiastical causes or no. First he commaundeth all men to loue one God for euer aboue all things,Lege. 1. and one rule of Christian religion wel and aduisedly to hold. Item he willeth al men to discharge their functions,Lege. 6. specially the seruants of god, Bishops, Abbots, Moncks, Canons, & Nonnes to do their duties, to liue according to their rules, to make their praiers night and day for all Christian folke. Item hee biddeth and on Gods behalf forbiddeth that any Christian man take to wife a kinsewoman within six degrees,Lege. 7. or his wiues kinswoman or his Godmother at the font, or a professed Nonne, or a diuorced woman, or keepe harlots, or haue mo wiues than one, and that in lawfull mariage. Item that holy dayes, and fasting dayes be kept,Lege. 14 & 15. & Sunday be kept holy from satur∣day
noone till munday morning. Fayres, Courts, huntings and worldly woorkes on that day to bee forborne. Lege. 16.Item that all fasts which bee bidden, ember dayes and Lent bee kept, and the feasts of our Lady and the Apostles to bee fasted, saue Philip and Iacob: euery friday to bee fasted, except it bee holy day: and no man to fast from Easter to Whit∣suntide, or from Christmas to the Octaues of the Epiphanie, vnlesse hee will or it bee enioyned him. Lege. 19 & 21.Item that euery Christian prepare himselfe for the communion thrise a yere: And truely keepe his othe and promise, and loue God with an inward reuerence, and heare diligently heauenly teachers, and oft and many times search and looke on Gods Law & his dictrine. Lege. 22.Item that euery Christian man learne so much, that hee can the true fayth and the true vnderstanding thereof, namely, the Lordes prayer and the Creede: Or else not to haue Christian buriall, neither to bee admitted whiles he lyueth to the Lordes table nor to vndertake for others at the font or before the Bi∣shoppe. Lege. 26. iter politica ira erusilem. Lege. 4 & 6.Item that Bishops be preachers, and teachers of Gods Lawe, and carefull followers of goodwoorkes. Item that Witches, sorcerers, Idolaters, periures, strumpets, breakers of or∣der and wedlocke be banished the realme: with other Lawes for tythes, temples, Church rightes, trial of Clergie men accused, and such like dueties and offences ecclesiasticall. Phi. You presse me with a number of places, that proue nothing against vs directly. Theo. Take the weakest of them, and see whether it will not inferre that Princes medled with causes ecclesiasticall.The weakest of these pla∣ces proue that Princes meddle with ecclesiasticall causes, which they would seeme to ray them from by Osis wordes. Phi. We knowe they medled with them, but not as supreme Gouernours of them. Theo. I brought these places to refell that generall obiection which you framed out of Osius, Leonti∣us and others, that Princes shoulde not medle with causes ecclesiasticall. If you graunt they did▪ and might lawfully meddle with such matters, as the places which I bring do proue, then by your owne confession Constantius was not re∣proued for medling with religion, for so did other godly Princes that were not reproued but highly commended and honoured in the Church of Christ: but ra∣ther he was reproued, as I answered you at the first, for his insolent and tyran∣nous kind of medling with these matters, which was, as I shewed, you for that in his owne person, hauing no skil nor experience in such cases, he would needes end and determine all thinges according to his owne fansie without respect of right or trueth, and execute the same with terrible force and rigor exceeding the boundes of all Christian humanitie. And conse∣quently their sword stretch∣eth vnto spi∣ritual things as well as vn∣to temporal.Againe these later examples as well as the former import that Princes had all this while full power to plant and establish the Christian fayth in their realmes and to punish ecclesiasticall transgressions and disorders in all sorts of subiects, Lay men and Clerkes, which is all that wee seeke for and all that wee meane when wee make them Gouernours of their dominions in all cau∣ses
both ecclesiasticall and temporall; and since you can neither deny the lawes, Edicts nor acts of Princes, which wee produce to this purpose, nor possi∣bly shift them, why doe you wickedly slaunder and malitiously peruert that doctrine which you shall neuer soberly confute? Phi. You will haue Princes to bee supreme Gouernours in these cases;When papists be posed with these places and cannot auoide them, they slip to an other question and cauill about the direction of Princes vnto trueth. this is it that wee most impugne. Theo. Well then let vs goe by degrees. Doe you graunt them to bee Gouernours in those cases? Phi. What meane you by Gouernours? Theo. Such as haue lawfull authoritie from God to commaunde for trueth and punish error. Phi. Doe you make them Iudges and Deciders of trueth? Theo. No, but receiuers and establishers of it. Phi. Yea but who shall tell them which is trueth? Theo. That is not this question. When wee reason whether Princes may com∣maund for trueth and punish error, you must not cauill about the meanes to knowe trueth from error, but suppose that trueth were confessed and a∣greed on: and in that case what may Princes doe for trueth. Phi. Mary Sir if trueth were not in strife the doubt were not so great. Theo. If I shoulde aske you whether Princes may reuenge murders and punish theftes, were this an answere to say, but howe shall they knowe what murder is, and who bee theeues? No more, when wee demaunde what duetie Princes owe to God and his trueth, shoulde you stand quarel∣ling what trueth is or howe trueth may bee knowen? The Princes due∣tie to God is one question which wee nowe handle; the way to discerne trueth from error is an other, which anon shall ensue when once this is ended; but first let vs haue your direct answere whether Princes may com∣maunde for trueth or no? Phi. For trueth they may: but if they take quid pro quo they both hazard them selues and their whole Realmes, and for that cause we say they must bee directed by Bishoppes. Theo. You slide to the second question againe before the first bee finished. Stay for that till this bee tried.Princes may commaund for all points of trueth as well as for one. You graunt that Princes may command for trueth, Do you not? Phi. Wee doe. Theo. When you say they may commaunde for trueth, you doe not meane this or that poynt of trueth, but indefinitely for trueth, that is for all parts of trueth alike, without the which God can not rightly bee serued. Phi. They may commaunde for all as well as for part, if the Bishoppes neede their helpe in all. Theo. And commaunding is not onely the free per∣mitting of those that wil,He that may commaund for trueth may iustly punish for trueth. but the moderate punishing of those that will not. For punishment is the due desert of him that neglecteth the commaundement which he should obey. So that he which may iustly commaund, may iustly pu∣nish; and hee that may lawfully punish may certainely commaund. Howe say you then, may Princes punish for matters of religion? Phi. No doubt they may, but when and where the Priest must guyde. Theo. Who beareth the sworde? The Priest or the Prince? Phi. The Prince, not the Priest. Theo. And that sworde, which the Prince
beareth,As lawfull for the Prince to punish Ido∣laters and he∣retikes, as theeues and murderers. must doe the deede, must it not? Phi. It must. Theo. And the fact is as lawfull in Princes when they punish schismatikes, heretikes and Idola∣ters as when they punish adulterers, theeues and murderers? Phi. What else? Theo. And if they leaue such impieties against God vnpunished they do not that duetie which God requireth of them. Phi. All this wee grant. Theo. Will you not recall it when we come to the push? Phi. Recall it? As though this could hurt vs? Theo. Since you promise not to recall it, I will trust you for this once and will come to the true difference betwixt your opinion & ours. Both sides graunt that Princes must punish as well spirituall as temporall offences.You flatly confesse, and the generall practise of your Church is, that Prin∣ces of duetie should and lawfully may punish all spiritual & ecclesiasticall offen∣ces, namely, Apostasie, Idolatrie, sorcerie, sacrilege, schisme, heresie and such like impieties against God and his Church, as well as ciuill disorders and in∣iuries against our neighbours: Can you denie this? Phi. I can not. Theo. Wee confesse the same. Let it stand irreuocable for both sides. Phi. Agreed. But remember they bee punishers not determiners, of those thinges. Theo. I said punishers if you looke to my words. Phi. I grant that doctrine to bee good and sound. Theo. He that wil punish must first prohibit.Then foorth. What you say Princes may punish, we say Princes may prohibite. Prohibiting is lesse than punishing, & a meane to make subiectes do their dueties without punishing, which euery Christian Magistrate shoulde rather embrace. Princes by common iustice must open their mouthes to speak, before they lift vp their handes to strike; their lawes must bee knowen, before their sword must be drawen to reuenge disobedience. Nothing can be iustly pu∣nished except it bee first prohibited. So that princes may punish those things, ergo they may prohibite them. Phi. Great reason Princes should warne their subiects as well as punish them. Prohibiting is but forewarning what thinges they must auoyde lest they fall into the paynes prescribed. Theo. If Princes may punish & prohibite that which is euill in matters of religion, ergo they may commaund & establish that which is good in the same causes. August. epist. 50. Idem contra Cresconium lib. 3. cap. 51.If they may punish and prohibite that which is euill, ergo they may commaund and establish that which is good in matters of religion. Howe like you the sequele? Phi. You thinke it holdeth by reason of the contrarietie that is betweene both parts. Theo. All learning will tell you that contraries bee consequent to contraries. If they may forbid and abolish that which is euil, ergo they may bid and establish that which is good. And so S. Augustine coupleth them. You hearde the places before. As a king hee serueth God by making Lawes commaunding iust thinges and prohibiting the contrarie. And a∣gaine, Kings as they bee kings, serue God as they bee willed by God, if in their kingdomes they commaunde that which is good and prohibite that which is euill, not in ciuill affayres only but in matters also touching diuine religion. They serue not God by prohibiting euill except they likewise com∣maund that which is good in diuine religion. By duetie they must, by conse∣quent they do both. How thinke you, say we not trueth? Phi. I see your meaning. You would haue Princes commaund in matters of religion. Theo. Wee would haue them in those thinges to commaund that
which is good as well as prohibites that which is euill.Papists grant princes may punish for religion but not cōmaund: & yet punish∣ing is a very forcible kind of cōmaund∣ing. You graunt the later, why should you sticke at the former? Phi. Commaunding is a woord of too great authoritie. Theo. Whether thinke you the greater, with woordes to commaund, or with deedes to compell? Phi. Compelling is more than com∣maunding. Theo. And hee that punisheth, apparently compelleth. Since then by your owne confession Princes may compell men by punishments from that which is euill to that which is good in matters of religion, ergo they may much more command them that which is good. Phi. You snare mee with wordes. Theo. Doe I snare you with wordes when I say that Princes may commaund that which is good in matters of re∣ligion as well as punish that which is euill, or do you rather harden your faces and whet your tongues against the Scriptures, against the fathers, against the lawes and Edicts of all godly Princes in all ages and Countries?Nothing clea∣rer than that Princes may commaund for matters of religion Looke no far∣ther than to the places which I haue brought you as well out of the holy scrip∣tures as ancient stories and lawes, & you shal find where princes commanded in causes ecclesiasticall (I meane the very woord) aboue three skore times: If that bee not sufficient you shall haue three hundred when you will. So that you make a bad march if you stand on this point with vs, that Princes may not commaund that which is good in matters of religion. Phi. You shall haue no such aduantage at vs.August. epist. 166. Ibidem. The word cō∣maunding which they most auoide is most vsual in the sacred scriptures & auncient lawes of Christian Princes. Epist. 66. Wee knowe S. Augustine sayth, When Emperours take part with trueth, they commaund for trueth against error; which whosoeuer contemneth, hee purchaseth to himselfe iudgement. And againe, Emperours commaund the selfe same that Christ doth, for when they commaund that which is good, no man commaundeth by them but Christ. Theo. You did well to pull your fingers out of the fier; you sawe it was too hoat for you. S. Austen in that epistle which you quote vseth that very word twelue times to shew that Kings and Princes did and might COMMAVND in matters of religion. Reade the Nouel, consti∣tut. 3.5.6.16.37.42.57.58.59.67.77.79.83.109.117.131.132.133.141.144.146. If princes at all may meddle with matters of religion they must needes commaund. twentie constituti∣ons wherein Iustinian disposeth of crimes and causes ecclesiastical, and see whe∣ther euery sentence be not a commaundement. Or if that be too much, ouerrun the 123 intitled of diuers ecclesiasticall Chapters, and tell vs whether in that one constitution you do not finde aboue fourteene score imperatiue and prohi∣bitiue verbs, whereby the Prynce WILLETH, PRESCRIBETH, AP∣POINTETH, COMMAVNDETH, DISPOSETH, of persons and causes ecclesiasticall. And this you can not choose but perceaue except you bee voide of common sense, that Princes vse not to perswade and intreate, but require and command their subiects. And therfore they must either not medle with matters of religi∣on at all, or els of necessitie they must commaund, and afterward punish if their commaundement be despised. Phi. Let it be so, since you will needs haue it so; but yet this doth not proue that Princes be supreme Rulers and masters of the faith and Church of Christ. Theo. You leape before you come to the stile. Anon you shall heare what
this doth proue: but first, Doe you graunt that Princes may commaund that which is good, & prohibite that which is euil in matters of religion? Phi. What gaine you by that if I graunt it? Theo. Take you no care for our gaines. Do you graunt it or no? Phi. What if I doe? Theo. What if, doth not answer my question; speake off or on to that which I demaund. Why be you so dainty to graunt that which you dare not deny? Phi. Take your pleasure in that point, and yet you shall misse your purpose. Theo. My purpose is trueth, which neither your high wordes nor indirect shifts shall disappoint. You spend time with delaies, we might otherwise sooner end. Phi. Will you answer, as briefly when I aske you the like? Theo. If I doe not, charge me with myne owne wordes. Phi. Or if the Ie∣suites will not graunt so much, let them looke to the places that went be∣fore and pre∣sently follow.Then I graunt that Princes may commaund that which is good, and prohibite that which is euill in matters of religion. Theo. You graunt it as an euident trueth confirmed by the Scriptures, confessed by the fathers, repor∣ted by the Stories of the Church, and infinitly repeated in the lawes and edicts of religious and auncient Emperours made for persons and causes ecclesiasti∣call: Or if you doubt any part of this diuision, haue recourse to the textes & pla∣ces before produced, and if euery part be not fully proued, refuse the whole. Phi. They would none of this if they could chose, because they hold that Bishops in these cases must com∣mand Princes.I see they did, and therefore I resolue my selfe they might commaund in those cases. Theo. As well Bishops as others. Phi. God forbid Princes should commaund Bishops in matters of religion. Haue you forgotten what Osius saide to Constantius, Do not commaund vs in this kinde? Theo. Osius and others were commaunded by Constantius to condemn Athanasius against all order of equitie, and their certaine knowledge of his innocencie. For Osius was present and president in the Councell of Sardica where the cause of Atha∣nasius was fully debated by the consent of both Emperours East and West, and his accusers proued to bee wicked slaunderers; and in that case, he might iustly say to Constantius, Commaund vs not in this kind (or in these things) but learne (the trueth of) them rather at our hands that were by,What Osius ment by say∣ing Cōmand vs not, in this kinde. when these matters were narowly sifted and Athanasius clearly discharged from all that could be saide against him. And what if Osius had not limited his wordes to these particular respects, as in sight he doth; shall one poore place, thinke you, beare downe al the proofes, examples and authorities that I haue shewed you to the contrarie, where reli∣gious and auncient Emperours appointed, prescribed, commanded Bishops yea the chiefest Bishops in matters of doctrine and discipline? Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 23. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 28. Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 4. cap. 42. Socra. lib. 1. ca. 4.Constantine prescribed the bishops what was profitable for the Church, and commaunded the Councel of Tyrus to discusse the crimes obiected to A∣thanasius, and threatned to banish him if hee failed to present himselfe before the Synode, to teach him what it was to withstand the precept of the chiefe ruler defending the trueth. And vpon complaint made by Athanasius against them hee sent for the whole Councell with this commaundement: You must all of you resort hither to shewe the reason of your doings, and to giue ac∣compt
howe sincerely and soundly you haue iudged and that before mee, whom you shall not denie to bee Gods syncere minister: and when Arius should be restored, this was the stile that he vsed to Athanasius, knowing our pleasure, We charge you to suffer such as will to returne to the Church, and after commaunded Alexander Bishoppe of Constantinople to receiue (Arius) to the communion.Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 27. Idem. lib. 1. cap. 38. Theodoret. li. 4. cap. 8. Valentinian the elder rehearsing the Nicene fayth in his Edict added, Our power hath commaunded the same to bee preached. And when the people of Millan cried to haue Ambrose for their Bishop though hee were not yet bapti∣zed, the same prince commanded he should be presently baptized and conse∣crated,Idem. lib. 4. cap. 7. notwithstanding the Canons were strong against it & S. Paul seemeth not willing that a nouice should be a Bishoppe.1. Tim. 3. Gratian commanded the Arrian Bishoppes to bee thrust from their Chur∣ches,Cod. lib. 1. tit. 6. Ne sanct. bapt. ieretur. and by vigor of his Princely Lawes depriued the Bishoppe, that rebapti∣zed, of his Priestly function. Theodosius the elder commanded the followers of his Edict,Cod. lib. 1. tit. 1. Bishops and others, to be counted Christian Catholikes, and for the rest that beleeued other∣wise,Ibidem. § nullus he sayd Propelli iubemus, wee commaunded them to bee driuen from their Churches; and when Demophilus a Bishoppe refused to embrace the Nicene fayth, the Emperour in his owne person replied,Socrat. lib. 5. ca. 7. then I commaunde thee to forgoe thy Churches. It well be seemed a religious Prince,Gregor. epist. li. 4. ca. 78. Legū Franciae lib. 1. ca. 76. sayth Gregorie, to commaunde Bi∣shoppes in such things. And Charles appointing the Bishoppes what doctrine they should teach, sayth, This we charge and enioyne you the more precisely because we know that false teachers shall come in the later dayes. And for the reformation of certaine abuses in the Church hee keepeth this tenor of speach,Ibidem, cap. 71. Know ye sacred fathers this must be forbidden in your Diocesses. The rest of the Lawes, Edicts and precepts of Godly Princes for causes ec∣clesiastical, which I before alleaged in no small number, doe they not either comprehend al men, and by consequent Bishoppes, or else directly and expresse∣ly commaunded Bishoppes by name? If those bee not sufficient you may & shall haue more. Theodosius the younger sent his letters to the Patriarke of Alexandria for the seconde Councel of Ephesus with these wordes:Chalced. Concil. actio. epist. Theodosii & Valentiniani ad Dioscorum. Wee decree that the most holy Bishoppes meeting together, this vayne doubt may bee discussed, and the true Catholike fayth confirmed. Therefore Your holines bringing with you tenne of the most reuerend Metropolitanes that bee within your pro∣uince, and tenne other holy Bishoppes well accompted of for their lear∣ning and conuersation, shall hasten with all speede to meete (the rest) at Ephesus by the first of August next:The Prince appointeth what Bishops shalbe pre∣sent at the Councell. no Bishoppe besides the foresaide troubling the sacred Synode. If any Bishoppe faile to come to the place prefixed at the time appointed, hee shall haue no excuse neither with GOD nor with vs. As for Bishoppe Theodorete, whom wee commaund to
attend at home on his owne Church, wee determine that hee shall bee none of your assemblie, vnlesse the whole councell thinke good to haue him one. But if any dissent, We commaund that the Synode sit without him, and dis∣patch those thinges which we haue appointed them. Ibidem Impe∣ratoris epist. ad eund § Diosco. reuerendo. The Prince maketh the president of the Councel. The Prince limiteth who shall haue voyces in the Councell. Ibidem Impe∣ratoris commo∣nitorium ad Elpidum.And in his second letters to the same Bishoppe, Because wee suspect that some of Nestorius fauourers will doe their best to be present at this Coun∣cell, therefore wee thinke needefull to aduertise you and the whole Synode that not onely in respect of Theodorete, but of all others which haue ought to do in your Councell, we giue you the preeminence and chiefe authoritie. And those that adde or diminish any thing to or from the Nicene fathers & the fathers since that assembled at Ephesus, Wee suffer them not to presume any thing in this sacred Synode, but wil haue them subiected to your iudge∣ment, because wee haue appointed this Synode for that purpose. In the very same councell hee likewise commaunded, that those Bishoppes which not long before sate in iudgement vppon Eutiches should be present but silent and giue no voyces (with the rest) as iudges, but expect the cōmon determination of all the rest of the sacred fathers. And also commaunded that they should neither say neither do any thing in the sacred Councel, vn∣till the (right) fayth were concluded. Ibidem oratio. Martiani ad Synodum.Martian charged the 630. Bishops in the great Councell of Chalcedon, that None of them should dare dispute of the natiuitie of our Lord and Sauiour Christ otherwise than the 318. fathers of Nice deliuered. Ibidem epist. Euseb. ad Im∣perator.Eusebius Bishoppe of Dorilaeum at the same time put vp a supplication to Martian & Valentinian the third against Dioscorus Patriarke of Alexandria with these wordes, In most humble wise we beseech your Maiesties that you will cōmand the reuerend Bishop Dioscorus to answere to those things that we lay to his charge, for confirming a wicked heresie & deposing vs vniust∣ly directing your sacred precept to oecumenical councel of Bishops to heare the matter between vs and the said Dioscorus, and certifie your Maiesties of the whole cause, that you may do therein what shal please your Graces. Nouel. Constit. 6. § Maxima quidem. These com∣maundemēts of Iustinian bound the Bi∣shop of Rome no lesse than other Bishops. Ibidem § & hanc non pe∣cunijs.Iustinian in his sixt Constitution prescribing what persons he will haue made Bishops, and how they shalbe qualified and examined, before they be ad∣mitted, threatneth in sharp manner: He that doth any thing besides this (which we haue appointed) both he that (is ordered) shalbe depriued of his function, and he that did order him, shall loose his Bishopricke for offend∣ing this law. The like punishment he setteth downe for Simonie. Though, sayth Iustini∣an, he haue all other things that we before required, yet, if hee procure a Bi∣shopricke by mony or mony worth, Let him knowe that hee shall be turned out of his Bishoprike, and doe his orderer this pleasure, that he also shall be remoued from his office and from the Clergie. So for ordering and not examining that was obiected against the Person: If one come to bee made a Bishop, and any man contradict and offer to lay
somewhat to his charge,Ibidem §  quis aute talis. Let him not be ordered, before such complaints be discussed. And if he that should make him, hasten to consecration, after such contradiction without examining the matter, Let him know that which he doth shall be vtterly void, and also he that goeth against our law shall be de∣priued of his Priestly function, and he that ordered him without trial, shall likewise be remooued from his Episcopall dignitie So for absence from his church after he is Bishop.Ibidem § & illud etiam definimus. This also we define, that no Bishop bee so hardie as to absent himselfe from his Church aboue one whole yere. If he be away longer than a yere, let the Patriarke of that regi∣on cite him orderly to returne: If he continue disobedient, let him be clean expelled from the sacred number of Bishops. And generally for all matters comprised in that constitution;Ibidem § sed ne{que} effusas. The prince cōmaundeth the whole clergie, Patri∣arks, Metro∣politanes, Bi∣shops and the rest whatso∣euer, to ob∣serue his ecclesiastical lawes. The things which we haue decreed for the preseruation of ecclesiastical order and state agreeable to the tenor and prescript of the sacred rules, let the most holy Patriarkes of euery Prouince, the Metropolitanes and the rest of the most reuerend Bishops and Clerks see that they keepe for euer hereafter sure and inuiolable; the punishment to him that transgresseth these things, shal be to be seuered quite from God, and excluded from his Priestly degree. In his sixteene constitution, commaunding Clerks to be remoued from one Church to an other till the iust number which he decreed were supplied in eue∣ry Church, he writeth to the Patriarke of Constantinople in this wise.Nouel. constit. 16. ad finem. Your blessednes shall endeuour to put in execution the things which we haue thought decent for the profite of the sacred and holy Churches. And if any thing be attempted to the contrarie, let him assure himselfe, that durst enter orders against this our law, that it doe him no good. In his 57 Constitutiō prohibiting the sacred mysteries to be celebrated in priuat Chappels;Constit. 57. these things, saith he, we commaund to the most holy Arch∣bishop and vniuersall Patriarke of this Citie. In his 123 Constitution you shal find examples enough, of his Princely pro∣hibitions and commaundements to Bishops for matters concerning the regi∣ment of the Church. For first appointing how Bishoppes shall bee chosen, and that the Person elected shall before his admission deliuer a confession of the true faith subscri∣bed with his owne hand, and recite the praiers vsed in the sacred communion & holy Baptisme, and sweare that hee neither hath giuen nor promised, nor will giue any thing to those that elected him, nor to him that ordereth him, nor to any other the rather to attaine his ordering, he addeth;Constit. 123. § exigatur autem prius. These lawes. extēded to all prouinces & patriarkes. Ibidem, § prae omnibus autem illud. If any be made Bishope against this obseruation, as well he shall be cast out of his Bishoprike as the other that presumed to create him against this forme shall bee seuered one yere from the sacred ministerie and shall forfeit all his goods to the Church where he is Bishop. But if any man consecrate one that is accused before hee examine the matter, both he that is made and he that did make him shal bee depriued of their episcopall functions. Aboue al things This we decree
to bee kept that no man be made a Bishop by rewards. And therefore as well hee that giueth, as he that taketh, and he that would bee the meanes to worke it, shal be degraded. Ibidem § inter∣dicimus autem. Ibidem § quis a vero.And so going on with Diuers ecclesiastical Chapters he saith, We forbid the Bishops to leaue their Churches, and to trauell into other coasts. And we commaund that in euery Prouince there be yerely kept a Synode, where causes of faith and doubts concerning the Canons and administration of ecclesiasticall things,Synodes cal∣led for eccle∣siastical cau∣ses were tied to the Lawes imperiall. Ibidem C. ad haec iubemus. All Bishops commanded by the Prince. Ibidem § Insu∣per interdici∣mus. Eadem constit. § omnibus ve∣ro epis. Vniust excō∣munication punished by the Princes lawes. Eadem constit. § praeterea si qui. The Courts and consisto∣ries of all Bi∣shops, Archbi∣shops & patri∣arks limited as well to the Princes lawes as to the Canons. as also touching Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other Clerks and Rulers of Monasteries and Moncks either for their liues or other things needing reformation shall be handled; and in conuenient manner examined and corrected according to the sacred Canons and OVR (im∣perial) LAVVES. Besides we command that all Bishoppes and Priests doe celebrate the sa∣cred oblation and praiers in the holy Baptisme, not secretly but with a loud voice, so as the faithfull people may heare: the religious Priests (and Bi∣shops) knowing that if they neglect any of these things they shall answer for it in the dreadfull iudgement of the great GOD and our Sauiour Christ, neither will wee vnderstanding thereof passe it ouer or leaue it vnpunished. We also forbid the most religious Bishops, Priests, and all other Clerks to play at tables or to companie with such gamsters or to be present at specta∣cles. If any of them offend in this point, we command that he bee suspended from his function for three yeres. Likewise we forbid all Bishops and Priests to separate any man from the communion til a cause be shewed for which the Canons wil it to be doone. If any man separate an other from the communion against this law, the par∣tie that is greeued vniustly shal be absolued and receaued to the communi∣on by an higher Priest: And he that durst excommunicate vniustly shall be put from the communion by the Bishop that is (next) aboue him as long as it seemeth good to (that superiour). Moreouer if the Bishops of the same Synode haue any controuersie be∣tweene them touching ether ecclesiastical right or causes, first their Metro∣politane with two other Bishops of the same Synod shall determine the matter. And if either part find fault with that iudgment, then shal the Patri∣arke of that Prouince heare the cause and define that which is consonant to the canons ecclesiastical and our lawes, neither part hauing leaue to cōtra∣dict his sentence. If a Clerke or any other of what cause soeuer, appeale from a Bishop, first the Metropolitane shall iudge the matter according to the sacred canons and our lawes. If either side mislike, the cause shal deuolue to the Patriarke of the Prouince,No appeal from the Patriark. and he shall end it by the direction of the Canons and our lawes. Clerks we permit none to bee made except they be lettered, of a right faith & honest conuersation;Eadem constit. § Clericos autē. & haue neither Concubine nor bastardes; but
such as either be single men or had or haue one lawful wife and her the first, no widowe, nor diuorced woman, nor otherwise interdicted by the lawes or Canons. A Priest wee will not haue made vnder the age of fiue and thir∣tie, neither a Deacon or Subdeacon vnder the age of fiue and twentie, nei∣ther a Reader vnder eighteene: A woman shall not bee admitted to serue the Church that is vnder fourtie, or hath beene twise maried. Many skore precepts besides these that I recken shall you finde in that consti∣tution touching persons and causes ecclesiasticall with these words, Volumus, sancimus, iubemus: Wee wil, decree, commaund, and other verbes equiualent, prescribing directly to Bishops what order and course they shall keepe for the seemely regiment of Christes Church. By the commandement of Iustinus vncle to Iustinian the Councell of Chal∣cedon was preached (and established) through the most holy Churches:Euagrius. lib. 4. cap. 9. Idem li. 5. ca. 6. And by the commandement of (an other) Iustinus (his nephew) was Gregorie cal∣led from Mount Sina to be chiefe Bishoppe (of Antioch) next after Anastasius whom the Prince remoued from his seate for wasting the Church treasures.Idem lib. 5. ca. 5. Leo the successor and Anthemius that maried the daughter of Martian gaue forth this commandement:Cod. lib. 1. tit. 3. de epist. & cle∣ri, C. si quen∣quam. Let no man be made a Bishop for intreatie or for mony. If any man be detected to haue gottē the seate of a bishop by rewards or to haue taken any thing for the electing or ordering of others, let him be accused as for a publike crime and an offence committed against the state, & repelled from his priestly degree. And we adiudge him not only to be de∣priued for euer of that honor, but also to be condēned to perpetual infamie. And the same princes by their Edict more general,Cod. lib. 1. tit. 2. de sacrosactis ecclesiis C. de∣cernimus. We decree, say they, that those thinges which were in sort done against the Lord himselfe of true re∣ligion, being abrogated and vtterly abolished, al things be restoared againe to their former condition and order in which they were established before our times, as well touching the points of christian faith, as touching the state of the most sacred churches, & Martyrs chappels; Al innouations in the time of this tyrannie against the holy churches, & their reuerend bishops concer∣ning the right of their Episcopall creations, the deposing of any Bishop du∣ring those times, their prerogatiue to sit before others within Councell or without the priuileges of Metropolitanes and Patriarks (al such innouations we say) repealed, Let the grants & CONSTITVTIONS of the godly Prin∣ces before vs, and likewise ours touching churches, chappels of Martyrs, Bi∣shops, Clerkes, and Monkes be kept inuiolable. Much more might be sayd, but this shal suffice. You bring vs one seely mista∣ken authoritie where Constantius commaunding against right and trueth in a Bishoppes cause was reproued; wee bring you, if you viewe the precedents well, an hundred expresse places and aboue, that auncient and religious prin∣ces commaunded Bishoppes and Councels in matters of doctrine and discipline, and were not reproued, but honoured and obeyed in the Church of God. Now choose whether you will shew your selues so voyd of al religion &
reason,Osius words if they were not diuersly answered by vs, may not controle the perpetuall practise of Christs Church. that you will preferre a single and solitarie text, and the same so many wayes answered by vs, before the publike and perpetuall practise of the prima∣tiue Church; or else acknowledge with vs that Princes for trueth did & might commaund Bishoppes and preuent and punish in them as well errors in fayth as other ecclesiasticall crimes and disorders. Phi. All this I may graunt, and yet your supremacie will not followe. Theo. Neuer tell vs what you may doe, but what you will doe. Deny the premisses if you dare: or the consequent, if you can. Phi. I graunt Princes may commaunde Bishoppes, but not what they list; which is your opinion. Theo. The cunning of the papists in this point is either to belie our do∣ctrine, or to slip them∣selues frō the question.If you may bee the reporter of our doctrines wee shall defende many mad positions, leaue your malitious and odious slaunders, wee maintaine no such opinion. Phi. What doe you then? Theo. If you did not range thus besides all order and trueth, you should perceiue what wee doe: but when wee come to conclude, you slide from the matter and fall to your wonted outfacing and wrangling. Phi. Doe I not answere directly to that which you aske? Theo. For a while you doe, but when we come to touch the quicke, you start aside and busie the reader with other quarrels. Forbeare that till wee come to the sifting of your absurdities, and then take your fill. In the meane time suffer vs to say what we defend, and to know what you assent vnto, that the difference betwixt our opinions may be rightly conceiued, and the proofes of either part duely considered. Phi. With a good will. Theo. The summe & effect of the former alle∣gations & au∣thorities for the Princes power.Doe you then  for a matter fully proued that auncient kings and Christian Emperours  maund for trueth, as well Priest as people; and that they chiefly did, and iuly might enterpose their royall power and care for the reformation and correction of errours in fayth, abuses in discipline, disorders in life, and all other ecclesiasticall enormities, as appeareth plainely by the publike lawes and acts of Constantine, Theodosius, Iustinian, Charles, Lodouike, Lotharius and other no lesse Godly than worthie Gouernours? If the places which I haue brought import not so much, refell the particulars, I will be of your mind: if they doe, why stande you so doubtfull as lothe to con∣fesse, and yet not able to gainesay the proofes? Phi. For trueth I knowe Princes haue commaunded as well Bishops, as others, and vy their Princely power established and preserued the faith and Canons of Christes Church. Theo. And this the sacred Scriptures, the learned fathers, the stories ecclesiasticall, the lawes and monuments of Catho∣like Princes in the primatiue church of Christ for eight hundred and fiftie yeres doe fairely warrant.Or if they doe not, disproue them. Phi. They do. Theo. And the places that proue this, are both innumerable and inexpugnable? Phi. The proofes for this point bee pregnant euough. Theo. And this is no way repugnant to probabilitie, possibilitie, reason or nature? Phi. It is not. Theo. You will not eate these words when you come to the purpose? Phi. I will not. Theo. And if you were to bee sworne on a booke, doe you beleeue in your conscience this which you say to bee true? Phi. I doe. Theo. Then here I will stay.
Phi. Haue I not answered directly to your questions? Theo. You haue; and wee vrge you no farther. Phi. What are you the nearer? Theo. That shall you now see. You make shamefull outcries at the power which we giue to Princes to be supreme Gouernours of their Realmes in al thinges and causes, as wel ecclesiastical as temporal,Apolog. cap. 1. as A thing improbable, vnreasonable, vnnatu∣rall, impossible, reproueable by all diuine and humane learning, which neuer king, much lesse Queene Christian nor heathen, Catholike nor heretike in this Realme, or in all the worlde besides, before our age did chalenge, or accept: You heape authorities and absurdities,The Iesuites in their Apo∣logie, for all their vaunts neuer come neere the princes power which we defend. and terrifie the simple with woordes and crakes of the largest life, as if the doctrine were so barbarous and monsterous that heathen and pro∣phane men would abhorre it; and when the bottom of your skil is seene and the pride of your tongues spent, notwithstanding your often and ioyly profers, you neuer so much as come neere the question. Phi. Will you make vs beleeue that? Theo. Marke the points that wee teach, and see howe wide you bee from refuting that which wee defend. Wee say Princes onely be Gouernours, that is, higher powers ordayned of God and bearing the sword with lawful and publike authoritie to command for trueth;The Princes authoritie as we defend it. to prohibite and with the sword punish errors and al other ecclesiastical disorders as well as temporall, within their Realmes. This wee proue, this you graunt to bee good and sound doctrine. Of this then there is no question betwixt vs. Secondly, wee teach, that as all their subiects, Bishoppes and others must obey them commanding that which is good in matters of religion, and endure them with patience when they take part with error, so they, their Scepters and swordes bee not subiect to the Popes tribunall, neither hath he by the lawe of God,The Princes supremacie as we main∣taine it. or by the Canons of the Church any power or preeminence to reuerse their doings and depose their persons, but this is a wicked and arrogant vsur∣pation lately crept into the West partes of Europe since the Bishops of Rome exalted themselues aboue all that is called God; and for this cause we confesse Princes within their owne regiments to bee SVPREME, that is not vnder the Popes iurisdiction, neither to bee commaunded, nor displaced at his plea∣sure, but to bee reserued to the righteous and Soueraigne iudgement of God, who will syncerely iudge and seuerely punish both Popes and Princes if they bolster or suffer any kind of Impietie within their dominions. This is the very point that is in question betwixt vs,Neither of these points touched in the Apolog. of which in your whole Apologie you speake not one woord, but cunningly shift your handes of it, knowing your selues not able to iustifie your wicked assertion. And lest the reader should distrust your silence in that behalfe, you followe the woorde su∣preme with huy and crie, as if God were highly dishonoured and the Church of Christ robbed of her right and inheritance, because the Pope may not set his feete in Princes neckes and be Lord Paramount of all earthly states and kingdomes. Phi. Doe wee mistake your meaning, or doe you rather pull in your hornes, when you see your selues compassed round with so many grolie and
sensible absurdities?The absurdi∣ties which the Iesuites mus∣ter against the Princes supremacie. Apolog. cap. 4. sect. 21. 1. Cor. 14. 1. Tim. 2. Theo. What one inconuenience can you fasten on vs for teaching this doctrine? Phi. A thousand. Theo. You bee better at craking than concluding. Proue but one and spare the rest. Phi. This Soueraigntie giueth power to the Queene to conferre that to others (as to the Priestes and Bishops, to preach, minister Sacraments, haue cure of soules, and such like) which shee neither hath, nor can haue nor doe, her selfe. It giueth her that may neither preach nor speake in publike of matters of religion, to do that which is much more, euen to prescribe by her selfe or her deputies or Lawes autho∣rised onely by her, to the preachers what to preach, which way to worship and serue God, howe and in what forme to minister the Sacraments, to punish and depriue, teach and correct them, and generally to prescribe and appoint which way shee will bee gouerned in soule. Sect. 22.It maketh the body aboue the soule, the temporall regiment aboue the spiritual, the earthly kingdom aboue Christs body mysticall. It maketh the sheepe aboue the Pastor: It giueth her power to command them, whom and wherein she is bound to obey: It gi∣ueth power to the subiect to be iudge of the Iudges, yea and of God himselfe, as S. Cy∣prian speaketh:Epist. 55. It maketh her free from Ecclesiasticall discipline, from which no true child of Gods familie is exempted. Sect. 23.It derogateth from Christes Priesthoode, which both in his owne person, and in the Church, is aboue his kingly dignitie. It diuideth (which is a matter of much im∣portance) the state of the Catholike Church and the holy communion or societie of all Christian men in the same,August. contra Gaudentij epist. lib. 2. Cap. 25. into as many partes not communicant one with on o∣ther, nor holding one of an other, as there bee worldly kingdomes differing by cu∣stomes, Lawes and manners, eche from other, which is of most pernitious se∣quele, and against the very natiue qualitie of the most perfect coniunction, socie∣tie, vnitie, and entercourse of the whole Church and euery Prouince and person thereof together. It openeth the gappe to all kinde of diuisions, schismes, sectes & disorders. Sect. 24.It maketh all Christian Bishops, Priestes, and what other soeuer borne out of the Realme, forainers and vsurpers in all iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall towardes vs: & there can bee no iurisdiction ouer English mens soules, but prooceeding and depending of her soueraigne right therein. Which is directly against Christes expresse commaunde∣ment and commission giuen to Peter first, and then to all the Apostles of preaching, baptizing, remitting, retayning, binding and loosing, ouer all the worlde, without diffe∣rence of temporall state, or dependance of any mortall Prince therein. Sect. 25.It keepeth the Realme from obedience to generall Councels, which haue beene or shalbe gathered in forraine Countries. It taketh away al conuenient meanes of gathe∣ring, holding, or executing any  Councels and their decrees, as appeared by refu∣sing to come to the late Councell of Trent, notwithstanding the Popes messengers, & letters of other great Princes, which requested and inuited them to the same. When a Realme or Prince is in error, it taketh away all meanes of reducing them to the trueth againe: no subiection being acknowledged to Councels or Tribunals abroad, all other Bishoppes, Patriarkes, Apostles, Christ and all (because they were and
bee forrainers) not hauing iurisdiction nor sufficient authoritie to define against English Sectaries and errors. Finally if this iurisdiction spirituall bee alwaies of right a sequele of the Crowne and scepter of all Kings, assuredly Christ nor none of his Apostles could otherwise enter to conuert Countries, preach, and exercise iu∣risdiction spirituall, without Caesars and others the Kinges of the Countries licence and delegation. Theo. Upon what part of our doctrine inferre you these absurdities? Phi. Upon the supremacie wherewith you flatter Princes. For all these thinges be consequent to the princes ecclesiasticall soueraigntie. Theo. You must tell vs howe.Their absur∣dities be grounded on their owne dreames, not on our do∣ctrine. Phi. See you not that? Theo. Surely not I. There bee two partes of our assertion as I shewed you before: the first auouching that Princes may commaunde for trueth and abolish errour: the next that Princes bee supreme, that is, not subiect to the Popes iudiciall processe to bee cited, suspended, deposed at his becke: Upon one of these twayne, if you reason against vs, must your absurdities bee grounded. The first you can not impugne,To this that Princes may cōmaund for trueth, no ab∣surdity can be consequent. but you must therewith impugne the Scriptures, the best and most famous Princes of Christendome, the Church of God it selfe, which for eight hundred yeeres and vpwarde embraced and obeyed the Lawes and Edicts of religious Princes commaunding for truth. And if you thinke you may say and vnsay with a breath, and refell that now as absurd which I before proued and you yeelded to bee sounde and good doctrine, take either of our positions rightly vnderstoode for your antece∣dent, and marke howe ioyntlesse and senselesse the sequeles bee, that you set downe for ineuitable consequents. When Princes commaunde for trueth,Whē Princes cōmaund that which is good it is Christ & no man els that com∣maundeth by their mouthes. Epist. 166. Ibidem. it is euident they commaund the selfe same thing that God commaundeth, or rather as S. Augustine plain∣ly declareth God himselfe commaundeth by their heartes, that are in his handes, the thinges which no man shoulde refuse. Emperours, saith hee, commaund the selfe same thing that Christ commaundeth: for when they commaund that which is good, it is Christ and no man els that comman∣deth by them. Againe, Marke, sayth hee, with howe manifest trueth God himselfe speaketh by the Princes heart which is in his hande, euen in this lawe, which you complaine to bee made against you. And therefore hee concludeth,Ibidem. when Princes commaund for trueth, Whosoeuer neglecteth (their commaundement) shall haue no part with God for not doing that which TRVETH BY THE KINGS HEART COMMAVNDED HIM TO DOE. If you build your absurdities vpon the first part of our doctrine, then must you thus conclude. When God commandeth by the Princes heart, that which is good in matters of religion, The bodie is aboue the soule, the sheepe aboue the Pa∣stor, the subiect is iudge of the Iudges, yea of God himselfe, and consequently, Nei∣ther Christ, neither any of his Apostles could enter to conuert Countries, preach and
exercise iurisdiction spirituall without Caesars licence and delegation. Well, your Rhetorike may beguile fooles, sure your Logike will neuer enforce wise men to regard your conclusions. Phi. Wee make no such arguments. Theo. You must make these or worse. The first part of our assertion is that Princes bee Gods seruants and ministers appointed to beare the sword with full commission to command what God commandeth, and to prohibite what God prohibiteth as well in matters pertayning to religion as Ciuill iustice.Their ab∣surdities must be inferred vppon our assertion, if they bring them against vs. You inferre vpon vs that wee make The body aboue the soule, the temporall regiment aboue the spirituall, the earthly kingdome aboue Christes body mysticall, the sheepe aboue the Pastor, the subiect to bee iudge of the Iudges, yea of God himselfe, with many like childish and friuolous consequents. Let your owne fauourers bee iudges in this case, whether we be absurd in affirming that we doe, or you more absurd in refelling vs as you doe. May not Christ appoint as well as the Pope what Princes shall commaund.If it be no absurditie with you for princes to command that which the Pope appointeth them, as your selues defend, that is your opinion; what inconueni∣ence can it bee for Princes to commaunde that which Christ the Soueraigne Lorde and head of the Church commaundeth: which is all the power that wee giue to Princes, notwithstanding your fayned and false reports in this slaunde∣rous libell of yours to the contrarie? Phi. To cōmaund that which God com∣maundeth is pietie and no absurditie.Wee neuer denyed but Princes might commaund that which God commaundeth; and in so doing they be rather to be commended for their pietie than to be charged with any absurditie. Theo. And wee neuer affirmed that Princes might commaund that which God forbiddeth, or prohibite that which God commandeth. And therefore you must seeke out some others whome you may persue with your absurdities, they touch no part of our doctrine. Phi. They shewe what an absurd thing it is for temporall Princes to cha∣lenge supreme power ouer Christes Church in causes of religion. Theo. If you take the word supreme, as it euer was and is defended by vs, to make Prin∣ces free from the wrongfull and vsurped iurisdiction which the Pope claimeth ouer them,Supreme, as we professe it, hath no ab∣surditie con∣sequent to it. your illations haue as litle strength and trueth as the former: for what fond and vntoward reasons bee these? If the Pope may not depose Prin∣ces and discharge their subiects from all obedience, ergo we giue Power to the Queene to prescribe to the Preachers what to preach, which way to worshippe and serue God, howe and in what forme to minister the Sacraments, to punish and depriue, teach and correct them, and generally to prescribe and appoint which way shee will bee gouerned in soule: ergo, wee make her free from ecclesiasticall discipline, wee derogate from Christes Priesthoode, and open the gap to all kinde of diuisions, schismes, sectes and disorders: ergo, there can bee no iurisdiction ouer English mens soules but proceeding and depending of her: wee keepe the Realme from obedience to ge∣nerall Councels, and take away all meanes of reducing the Realme and Prince, when they bee in error, to the trueth againe, with many such loose and vnsauo∣ry sequences.
Phi. If the Prince be supreme,This miscon∣stering of su∣preme is the ground of all their absurdi∣ties. she may doe what she list in all matters of religion and Ecclesiasticall regiment, and so these absurdities follow very di∣rectly vpon that assertion of yours. Theo. That Princes may do what they list in matters of religion and the regiment of the Church, is neither coherent nor consequent to our opinion, but a wicked and wylie pretence of yours, to cause men that can not so wel discerne of your sophismes to distrust our doctrine as false and absurde, and in the meane time to conuey your selues awaie as it were in a mist vnespied. And as for the wordes supreme gouernour, which you wring and wrest to that purpose, take the true construction of them, as the oth importeth and we professe them, and infer duly but one of your absurdities vp∣on them, we yeeld you the rest. Phi. What, not one? Theo. No, not one, des∣cend to the specialties when you will. Phi. It giueth power to the Queene to conferre that to others,Apol. cap. 4. Sect. 21. which she neither hath, nor can haue, nor doe her selfe, as to the Priestes and Bishops to preach, mini∣ster the Sacramentes, haue cure of soules, and such like. Theo. It giueth no such power to the Queene as you speake of. Bishoppes haue their authoritie to preach and minister the Sacramentes, not from the Prince, but from Christ himselfe.Mat. 28. Goe teach all nations, baptising them, & so forth; onely the Prince giueth them publike libertie without let or distur∣bance to do that which Christ commaundeth. If you see no difference between the commission which Christ giueth vnto Bishops,Princes giue no commissiō but a permissi∣on and free libertie with∣out let to the ministers of the word and Sacramentes. and the permission where∣by Princes suffer and incite them with peace and praise to doe their duties, your learning is not so great as you would make the world beleeue it is. For what a foolish collection is this, The Prince permitteth those that are sent of Christ to preach and administer the Sacramentes, ergo the Prince conferreth that power or function to them? You might as well conclude, The Prince per∣mitteth men to liue & breath, ergo the Prince conferreth life and breath to thē. Or, the Prince permitteth her Subiectes to beleeue in God and relieue ech o∣thers, ergo the Prince conferreth faith and charitie to them. Phi. It giueth her to do that which is more, euen to prescribe by her selfe, or her deputies,Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 21. or lawes authorised onely by her selfe, which waie to worship and serue God, how and in what forme to minister the Sacramentes, to punish and depriue, teach and correct them, and generally to prescribe and appoint which waie she will be gouerned in soule.God hath al∣readie by his law prescri∣bed which way he wilbe serued: that Princes may and must com¦mand in their realms though the Pope say nay. Theo. That Princes may prescribe what faith they list, what seruice of God they please, what forme of administring the Sacraments they thinke best, is no part of our thought, nor point of our doctrine: And yet that Princes may by their lawes prescribe the christian faith to be preached, the right seruice of God in spirit and truth to be vsed, the Sacraments to be ministred according to the Lords institution, this is no absurditie in vs to defend, but impietie ra∣ther in you to withstande. And that Princes may punish both Bishoppes and others for heresie, dissention and all kinde of iniquitie, by banishing and commaunding them to bee remoued from their Churches, which you call
depriuing, cā not now be coūted absurd, vnlesse you reiect ye stories of the church and lawes of christian Princes, which I before cited, as absurd. For there shall you finde that Emperours by their Lawes and Edictes haue commaunded Bishops to be iudicially depriued by other bishops & actually displaced by their temporal Magistrates, as well for erronious teaching as vicious liuing. Phi. Princes be not supreme to do what they list in religion, but only free from the Popes iu∣risdiction. The feare of God and not the practises of Popes must keepe Princes from doing e∣uill.When you giue princes supreme power in matters of religion, you giue thē leaue to do what they lift. The. If you affirm that of vs, your report is vtter∣ly vntrue: if you infer it vpon vs, your reason is very ridiculous. For what a fond illation is this? Princes be supreme, that is not subiect to the Popes iurisdictiō, ergo princes may lawfully do what they wil. Phi. We say not lawfully, but if there be none to cōtrole thē, none can let thē to do what they list. The. The dread¦ful iudgements of God, not the leud practises of Popes must bridle Princes frō doing euill; If they feare not a reuenger in heauen, whom they can not escape; they will neuer regard a conspirator in earth, whom they may soone preuent: & yet we dispute not what tyrāts de facto wil do, but what godly Princes of dutie should, of right may do. This is it that we seek for, & therfore you must conclude this or nothing. Phi. You giue thē authority to make lawes & punish for religion without anie mētion of truth or error.The other toucheth our duetie to the Prince, & not the Princes duety vnto God. The. The oth expresseth not their duty to God, but ours to thē, & as they must be obeied whē they ioin with truth, so must they be endured whē they fal into error, which side soeuer they take, either obediēce to their wils, or submissiō to their swords is their due by Gods law, & that is al which our oth exacteth. And yet when we professe thē to be gouernors, that word restraineeh thē from their own lusts, & referreth thē to Gods ordināce. For they which resist God, impugn the truth, oppresse the righteous, assist error & fauor impietie, be no gouernors vnder God as all princes oughtto bee, but tyrantes against God; not bearers but wilful abusers of the sword which God hath appointed for the pu∣nishment of euill doers and for the praise of them that do well. And this, though it be not expressed, yet is it euer imploied in the very scepters, swords & thrones of princes. For dominiō, power & maiesty belōg of right to god alone & are by him imparted to Princes,The Prince beareth the sword vnder and not aboue God. wt this condition & to this end that they shold raign vnder him not ouer him, cōmand for him not against him, be honored & obeied after him not before him; & therefore this quarrell sauoreth not of igno∣rance but of malice, when you say we giue Princes power to do what they wil in matters pertaining to God & his seruice. We reiect & detest that sinful as∣sertion more than you do. In deede we say that the Pope may not pull Princes crownes frō their heads, nor seeke to master them with contriuing rebellions & treasons against them, whiles hee pretendeth to depose them. In this onely sense wee defende them to bee supreme, that is not at libertie to do what they lift, without regard of truth or right, but without superiour on earth to re∣presse them with violent meanes and to take their kingdomes from them. Phi. Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 22.It maketh the bodie aboue the soule, the temporall regiment aboue the spi∣rituall, the earthly kingdom aboue Christes mysticall bodie. It maketh the sheepe aboue
the Pastour; it giueth her power to commaund them, whom & wherein she is bound to obey. It giueth power to the subiect to be iudge of the iudges, yea & of God himselfe, as S. Cyprian speaketh.Epist. 55. Theo. I am loth to bring you out of loue with your owne conceits, other∣wise I neuer saw more boldnes & lesse soundnes in any man. If we did preferre earthly things before heauenly, you might iustly charge vs that we set the body aboue the soule: but betweene Princes & Priests that comparison is foolish, ex∣cept you thinke Priests to be without bodies, & Princes without soules, which were a mery deuise. The spirituall regiment which Christ hath ouer the faithfull in his Church is infinitely before the temporal regiment of Princes ouer their subiects.The spirituall regiment of the soule is properlie Christes and not the piests. But if by this you would inferre that good Princes may not punish euill Priestes, you deface godlinesse and trueth in Princes as temporall, and exact wicked∣nesse and error in Priestes as spirituall, which is more than absurde. As for the right functions of Preachers and Princes,The Prea∣chers functiō excelleth the Princes in perfection & comfort, but not in power to commaund or meanes to compell. if that bee the mat∣ter you speake of, for you speake so doubtfully that wee can gather no cer∣taintie what you meane, know you that as in spiritual perfection and consola∣tion the Preacher excelleth the Prince by many decrees, God hauing appoin∣ted Preachers not Princes to bee the sowers of his seede, messenges of his grace, stewardes of his mysteries: so for externall power and authoritie to compell & punish, which is the point that we stande on, God hath preferred the Prince before the Priest, so long as the Prince commaundeth that which God alloweth.The same god forceth by the Princes sword that teacheth by the preach¦ers mouth. And in this case, wee make not temporall aboue spirituall, as you tricke it with termes: but auouch that the same God, who teacheth the simple and leadeth the willing by the Preachers mouth; driueth the negli∣gent, and forceth the froward by the Princes sword, which himselfe, that is a Iohn. 3. spirit and Heb. 12. The kingdom is not aboue the Church though the Prince punish wicked priests. the father of spirites, hath ordained to that end. The mystical bodie of Christ which is his church, containeth not only Prists & bishops but all the faithfull, & in heauenly graces & inward vertues far excee∣deth all earthly kingdomes, and yet hath God himselfe authorized the sword on earth in Princes handes to be keepers of his truth and clensers of his Church, that is with lawfull force to remoue such as impugne the faith, and with publik authorit to punish those that defile the Church of God with their shamelesse manners, be they Priestes or People; and this doth not place earthly king∣domes aboue the Church, but prepare them as aydes and defences for the Church, which is the right end of all earthly States, & was the first cause why God erected them. Though the sheepe may not rule their sheepeheards,The true sheepeheard is only Christ the rest are his seruantes and not the owners of the sheepe. yet giue them leaue to discerne strangers and flie from theeues and murderers, and giue the great and 1. Pet. 5. Archpastor that is in heauen leaue to gard his flock not only with watch∣men but also with armed men, that if the greedinesse and hardinesse of the wolues bee such that they feare not the clamours of Preachers, at least they may shrinke for the terrours of Princes. And this is no such absurditie as you
make it,Princes in their vocatiō be shepheards and beare the staffe to com∣pel where the voice will not serue. 1. Chron. 11. Psal. 78. that Princes should serue the true sheepeheard, Christ Iesus, by tur∣ning their swords against those raueners and spoylers which vnder the colour & shew of feeding would kill the fattest, and gorge themselues with the fairest of Christes flocke: Yea Princes in their sort be sheepeheardes as well as Bishops; in that they beare the sword vnder God, to compell and punish such as the gen∣tle perswasion of the Preacher can not moue; and for that cause God said to Dauid, Thou shalt feede my people Israell: and Dauid maketh this report of himselfe, So he fed them according to the simplicitie of his hart, and gui∣ded them by the discretion of his handes. The Prince is bound to obey the prea¦chers worde, if he speak truth and so is the Preacher bound to obey the Princes Lawes, if they be good. 1. Thes. 4.As Princes are bound to heare preachers directing them vnto truth because the wordes of God are in their mouthes, and hee that despiseth those thinges despiseth not mā but God: so likewise are Preachers bound to obey Princes commanding for truth, & who so neglecteth (that commandement of theirs) shall haue no part with God, for not doing that which trueth by the kinges hart commanded him. And the Princes obedience to be due not to Preachers persons or pleasures, but their message deliuered them by God the Lord & Ru∣ler of all Princes, appeareth by this, that Princes may lawfully punish the preachers if they falsifie the word of truth, or shame their calling with their dis∣ordered liuing. Aug. Epist 166. Princes be no iudges of Re∣ligion.That Princes be iudges of Religion we neuer said it nor thought it, much lesse that they be iudges of God himselfe; this argueth rather your impudencie in reporting than our ignorance in not affirming it. Gods name be blessed we know what difference there is and ought to be betweene God and man as well as you: but such is the badnesse of your cause, and blindnesse of your harts, that you must and will rather childishly quarrell and wittingly belie the truth, than come to a faire and euen triall. S. Cyprians words allead∣ged without his meaning. Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 3S. Cyprian hath some such wordes, but no such meaning as you alleage. He saith when a Bishop is orderly chosen in any Church, he that After the di∣uine (allowance or) iudgement, after the suffrages of the people, after the consent (and liking) of other Bishops, erecteth a second in the same Church against him, maketh himselfe now the Controler and Iudge not of the Bishop, but of God, which wee beleeue to be verie true; but how doth this proue that Christiā magistrates may not displace wicked and vnworthy Bishops for their iustes desertes, which is our question? And as Cyprian in his sense is not againste vs, so Cyprian in our case is cleare against you.Cyprian al∣lowed the people to re∣iect their Bi∣shop, if hee were vnwor∣thy. Lib. 1. Epist. 4. For when as yet there were no Princes Chri∣stened, that with publike authoritie might remoue vngodly Bishoppes, Cyprian assureth vs that the people might lawfully seuer them-selues from a wicked Bishoppe and elect an other. His words bee these: Therefore the (flocke or) people obeying the Lordes preceptes, and fearing God, ought to separate themselues from a sinfull Bishop, and not to participate with the sacrifices of a sacrilegious Priest, whereas they chiefly haue power to chose worthy Bishops, and to reiect vnworthie, perswading and incou∣raging
the people to goe forwarde in that their attempt, notwithstanding the Bishop of Rome tooke stitch with the partie deposed, and wrote letters for his restitution; of the which Cyprian maketh no great account, as you may see by his words that follow.Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 4. Though the Bishop of Rome tooke his part. Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 22. The Prince not free from Christes Pre∣ceptes. Princes must hear the word and receiue the Sacra∣ments in such sort as God hath appoin∣ted. The Preacher is prescribed how he shall minister the Sacramentes, not how hee shall depose Princes. We deny this argument. Neither is (the Bishop of Rome) so much to be blamed that was deceiued through negligence, as this man to be detested that fraudulently deceiued him. And though Basilides coulde circumuent men, yet can he not beguile God. Phi. It maketh her free from Ecclesiasticall discipline, from which no true childe of Gods familie is exempted. Theo. It maketh her free from the Popes Buls and decretals, but not from the Lawes and Precepts of Christ, which is the true discipline of Gods children. Touching the regiment of their owne persons and liues Princes owe the verie same reuerence and obedience to the word and Sacraments that euerie priuate man doth: and if any Prince would be baptised, or approach to the Lords table with manifest shew of vnbeliefe or irrepentance, the minister is bound freely to speake, and rather to lay downe his life at the Princes feete, than to let the king of Kings be prouoked, the mysteries defiled, his owne soule and the Princes indangered, for lacke of often and earnest admonition. Phi. I am glad you graunt that Princes may be excommunicated: for that proueth Priestes to be their superiours and ouerthroweth quite their suprema∣cie. Theo. You reason very profoundly. The seruants of God may not receiue any mortall man to the diuine mysteries except he bring with him a right faith in God & an inwarde sorrowe for his former sinnes, ergo the Pope may depose Princes, & set their subiectes in open fielde against them to thrust them from their thrones. Phi. We reason not so, but we say, Priestes may excommunicate Princes, ergo they be superiours to Princes. Theo. I speake of not admitting Prin∣ces to the Sacramentes, but with those conditions that God requireth of all Christian men without respect of States or persons, and you by and by leape to excommunication,Excommuni∣cation made a wrest to lift Princes out of their seates. which word you egerly sease on, not for any meaning you haue to guide Princes right lest they prouoke the wrath of God to their euerla∣sting destruction by the contempt of his graces, but for a cunning to defeate them of their crownes by your indirect and vngodly deuises. For first you wil excōmunicate them; that is you wil haue no cōmunion with them in anie thing spiritual or tēporal; next you descend from not cōmunicating with thē, to not obeying them; & lastly from not obeying, to open rebelling against them, & placing others in their steedes. And thus when Princes displease you, you ne∣uer leaue them till with this wreath of excommunication, you wring their Scepters out of their handes. But if you looke better about you, you shall finde great difference between not deliuering them the sacred mysteries of God except they repent and beleeue the Gospell, and your diuelish conspiracie to deny them all obedience, & with armed violence to take their swords from them: but thereof more hereafter.
In the meane time your argument is very foolish: Priestes must not deli∣uer the Sacramentes but on such conditions as God hath limited, ergo Priests be superiour to Princes. You might haue concluded, ergo God is superiour to them both, in that he prescribeth how the one shal deliuer & the other take the Seales of his grace: but for the Priest no such illation can be made. For were you Porter in any Princes palace, and commaunded that no man Noble nor o∣ther shoulde enter the Court with weapon, woulde you thence conclude your selfe superiour to all the Nobles and counsellours of the Land,The seruant must not thinke him∣selfe superiour to all that his master may commaund. because you might not suffer thē to come within the gates, except they first lay their swords aside; or would you rather excuse your selfe, that the Princes precept being streit and you a seruaunt, you could not choose but do your dutie, and put them in minde of your Lord and masters pleasure. Phi. Our case is not like. The. You say truth. You haue not so much reason to make Priestes superiour to Princes, as this Officer hath to prefer himselfe before all other persons. Princes haue soueraign power ouer the goods, liues & bodies of Priestes, Nobles haue not ouer the meanest attendant in the Prin∣ces Court: Princes must be obeyed or endured with meekenesse and reuerence offer they neuer so hard dealing to their Preachers and Pastours:In vaine seeke they reasons to make the Priest superi∣our to the Prince, whom God himselfe hath made subiect to the Prince. That sub∣mission no man oweth to any subiect be he neuer so Noble. And therefore euerie seruant in the Princes house, hath better cause to aduance himselfe before al the Nobles of the Realme, than you haue to set the Priest aboue the Prince whom God himselfe hath pronounced superiour to the Priestes, and to whom he will haue euerie soule, bee they Monkes, Priestes, or Bishoppes, to be subiect with al submission & duetie: Much lesse is this a warrant for you to depose Princes, and to pursue them with armes against the preceptes of God, against the gene∣rall and continuall obedience and order of Christs Church, as you shal perceiue in place where: for this present go on with your absurd lies, I shoulde haue said absurdities. Phi. It derogateth from Christes Priesthood which both in his owne person, and in the Church is aboue his kingly dignitie.Apol. cap. 4. Sect. 23. Theo. Call you this a derogation from Christes Priesthood,They harp on Christs priest∣hoode, as if they were Christes own fellowes in his priestly dignitie. if the Pope may not tread Princes vnder his feet? Your Seminaries must needes be fa∣mous that coine vs such conclusions. Phi. Neuer mocke at our Seminaries, you shall finde them too well furnished for your stoare. Theo. So wee thinke, your learning is so strange, it passeth our intelligence. Wee fooles conceiue not how these thinges hang togither. For first what meane you by this; The Priesthood of Christ in his owne person, is aboue his kingly dignitie?Christ hath no higher title than the king of glorie, and Prince of the world to come He is king of glorie in that he is the sonne of God; can you name any thing in Christ that is aboue his diuine dignitie? Your doctrine is verie curious if it be not dangerous. The glorie of the sonne of God, as hee is owner and ruler of all thinges in heauen and earth, hath no title nor name aboue it. As a Priest he purged our sinnes in humilitie: as a king hee nowe doeth and euer shall raigne in the highest degree of celestiall and euer∣lasting
glorie. His Priesthood washed our vncleannesse in this life. His kingdome placeth and preserueth men and Angels in perfect and eternall blisse. If you speake this in respect of vs, that the Priesthood of Christ which wash∣eth our sinnes, and saueth vs from the wrath to come; is more comfortable and accceptable to our weake consciences, by reason of our guiltinesse and dai∣ly transgressions, than the power wherewith hee subdueth his enemies, be∣sides the straungenesse of your speach that his Priestood should bee aboue his kinglie dignitie in his owne person: note the losenesse of your argument. The Priesthood of Christ in fauour and mercie to vs ward is aboue his power, er∣go the Prince must be subiect to the Pope. May not we much rather conclude; Christ cōpelleth & punisheth as a king, not as a Priest, ergo power to commaund & punish belongeth to the kingdom & not to the Priesthood, that is to the Magi∣strate, not to the minister. Phi. It diuideth (which is a matter of much importance) the state of the Catho∣like Church and the holie communion or societie of all Christian men in the same,Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 23. into as manie partes not communicant one with an other nor holding one of an other, as there be worldlie kingdoms differing by Customs, Lawes & manners, ech from other: which is of much pernicious sequele, and against the verie natiue quality of the most perfect coniunction, society, vnitie and intercourse of the whole Church & euery Prouince and Person thereof togither. Theo. It is a most pernicious fansie to thinke the communion of Christes Church dependeth vpon the Popes person or regimēt,The commu∣nion of Saints consisteth not in obedience to the Pope. and that diuerse nations and countries differing by customes, lawes & maners (so they hold one & the same rule of faith in the band of peace) can not be parts of the Catholike Church com∣municant one with an other, & perfectly vnited in spirite and truth ech to other: And fie on your follies that racke your Creede & rob Christ of his honor and the Church of all her comfort and securitie whiles you make the vnitie and societie of Christes members to consist in obedience to the Bishop of Rome and not in coherence with the sonne of God. The communion of Saintes, and neere dependaunce of the Godly ech of other and all of their heade standeth not of externall rites,Nor in exter∣nall rites and ceremonies. customes and manners, as you woulde fashion out a Church obseruing the Popes Ca∣nons and deseruing his pardones as his deuote and zealous children: but in beleeuing the same trueth,The true com¦munion of the church. tasting of the same grace, resting on the same hope, calling on the same God, reioycing in the same spirite, whereby they bee sealed, sanctified and preserued against the daie of redemption. And why may not Christians in all kingdomes & countries haue this communion and fellowshippe though they lacke your holy fathers beads,The commu∣nion of the Church not dissolued by the varietie of rites. blessinges and such like bables? To what ende you alleadge S. Augustine in that place which you quote, we cannot so much as coniecture; you must speake plainly what you would haue, we be not bounde to make search for your meaning. As for the commu∣nion
of the Catholike Church, it is not broken by the varietie and diuersitie of rites, customes, Lawes and fashions, which many places and Countries haue different ech from others, except they be repugnant to faith or good manners, as S. Augustine largely debateth in his epistle to Ianuarius;Epist. 118. and Irineus, whē the bishop of Rome would haue cut the East Churches from the communion of the West, for obseruing Easter after an other maner & order than their brethrē did, sharpely reproued him and shewed him, that Polycarpus and Anicetus dis∣senting in the same case Communionem inter se habuerunt, were, this notwith∣standing, ioyned in communion;Euseb. lib. 5. c. 26. & pacem in vniuersa Ecclesia tum seruantes tum non seruantes retinuerunt,Ibidem. and both sides kept the band of peace in the Catholike Church. For the discrepant obseruation of fasting before Easter he saith the like:Euseb. lib. 5. ca. 23. Alij vnum sibi diem ieiunandum esse putant, alij duos, alij plures, alij quadraginta horas. Nihilo minus tamen omnes illi pacem inter se retinuerunt & retinemus etiamnū, & dissonantia ieiunij fidei concordiam commendat. Some fast one daie, some two dayes, some more, some fourtie houres: and yet all these continued in peace among themselues, and to this day we continue the same, and our difference in fasg commendeth our concord in faith. The Church from the be∣ginning had diuersitie of rites.Socrates hath a whole chapter purposely made to shew what diuersitie there was in the Church of Christ about Lent, the Lordes Supper, marying, bapti∣zing, praying, fasting and such like Ecclesiasticall obseruances, and yet all those places and countries parts of the Catholik Church and communicant one with an other in Christian peace and vnitie.Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. Operosum & molestum fuerit imò impos∣sibile, omnes ecclesiarum quae per ciuitates & regiones sunt ritus conscribere. It were an hard and laborious thing, saith he, yea an impossible, to write al (the dif∣ferent customes and) manners of the Churches in euerie citie and countrie. Qui eiusdem sunt fidei de ritibus inter se dissentiunt.Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. They that are of the same faith, differ in their rites. So that this is no breach of the Christian and Ca∣tholike communion which all the faithfull ought to keepe among themselues & with their head, the author and finisher of their faith.Heb. 12. Phi. Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 23.It openeth the gappe to all kinde of diuisions, schismes, sectes and disorders. Theo. Why so? Because your holy father can not marchandize the soules & empt the purses of men as he was wont to do? What Sectes, Schismes, dis∣orders or heresies can there arise if we defend it lawfull for Princes to commād for truth within their own Realmes? Nay rather hath not the subiecting of Princes to the Popes pride wrought the vtter ruine and decaie of the West Church?The Popes pride first de∣caied the West Chur∣ches. Where Rulers be many it is easie to finde some good, and they wil resist that which is euill, and reforme that which is amisse: where one ruleth al, if he fal as he quickly may, he draweth the whole Church into the same danger and error with him. Phi. But the successour of Peter can not erre, and therefore the Church is safest when it is ruled by him, for whose faith Christ praied that it might not faile. Theo. Proue that the Pope can not erre, and we will graunt not onely
this but all your religion besides to be true. Phi. What, you wil not? Theo. The word is spoken, accept the condition when you list. Till you do we prefer Cy∣prians iudgement before yours:Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 13. A number of watchmen in the Church better than one. Therefore deare brother, saith he writing to Stephanus Bishop of Rome, is there a plentifull number of Priestes (in the church) ioyned togither with the knot of mutuall concorde and bande of peace, that if any of our companie make a breach, and rent and wast the the flocke of Christ, the rest should helpe, and as profitable and pitifull Pa∣stours reduce the Lordes sheepe to the flocke againe. The number of Ru∣lers in his opinon is no cause of sectes and dissentions, but rather a remedie pro∣uided in the Church against disorder and heresie. Phi. It maketh all Christian Bishops,Apol. chap. 4. sect. 24. Priestes and whatsoeuer borne out of the Realme forrainers and vsurpers in all iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall towardes vs, & that there can be no iurisdiction ouer English-mens soules, but proceeding and depending of her soueraigne right therein. Theo. Your force is almost spent, when you come to these frozen and wood∣den obiections. Wee call those that were borne and liue out of the Realme forrainers. What else should wee call them? And such as pretend Peters keies to dispose crownes and remoue Princes from their seates, ioyning rebellion with remission of sinnes, we thinke them vsurpers and abusers of Ecclesiastical iurisdiction.Vsurpers and forrainers. A maruelous ouersight in deed. We might haue spared you some sharper and quicker termes; but by these wee thought good to manifest to the world, your iniurious and irreligious drift to be masters of earthly kingdomes, by winding and turning Peters keies at your pleasure. Phi. Your words exclude Christ & his Apostles, (in as much as they were and be forrainers) from hauing any iurisdiction ouer England. Theo. It is pitie you can not cauil.The Iesuits cauill at the word Forrai∣ner. We striue for iudicial authoritie to depriue Princes, you vrge vs with Apostolike power to preach the Gospell and remit sinnes: Wee speake of that which is at this present, you tell vs what was fifteene hundred yeares since: We reason of States in earth, you run to Saints in heauen: We reiect the Bishop of Rome, you wrangle with vs as though wee refused the sonne of God. Doth not matter faile you, when you flie for helpe to such vnsauo∣ry toies? Phi. Your oth is so absurdly conceiued, that though you ment not to exclude Christ and his Apostles, yet in wordes you doe. For if No forraine person, Prelat, State, nor Potentate hath nor ought to haue any iurisdiction, power, superiority, preeminence, or authority ecclesiasticall or spiritual within this Realme of England, surely neither Christ nor his Apostles (because they were & be forrainers) haue or ought to haue any. Theo. Not our speaking, but your wresting and wrenching of our wordes is far fet & most absurd. For first where you auouch Christ himself to be a forrainer whō we acknowledge to be the right inheritor & owner of the whole worlde, yea the mighty Lord & king of heauen & earth;God is no forrainer to men. in gibing at vs, you iest on his birth; as if Christ were a forrainer to the Gentiles because he tooke flesh among the Iewes. And though you might haue
takn some aduantage at his cradle, yet you should haue remembred, that the Creator is no forrainer to the worke of his handes, as likewise the heade is not to the members, nor God incarnate to the sonnes of men. Soules in hea∣uen be no for∣rainers.As for his Apostles in deede whiles they liued on earth, they were forrainers: but that their spirits now present with God & raigning in blisse with Christ, bee forrainers, is a mad speech of yours, no meaning of ours. You must send vs word from Rhemes how soules can be French, Spanish, Scottish, or English: These wt vs be distinctions of coūtries not of souls, & after death til your new doctrine came wee tooke them to cease: With a little helpe I thinke you will make vs some men soules and some women soules, you be so skilfull in these conceites. Soules in hea∣uen exercise no iurisdictiō ecclesiasticall nor spirituall on earth.Againe, might the soules in heauen be called or counted forrainers, you must tell vs what ecclesiasticall power & authoritie they now exercise on earth. We do not affirme that forrainers neuer had any such power in England, the Apo∣stles had their commission from Christ to teach and baptise all nations without exceptiō, but we say none hath at this present, nor ought to haue any such power within the Realme: and vnlesse you will defende that soules in heauen doe nowe preach the Gospel and minister the Sacramentes, we see not how the Apostles haue any actuall function or ecclesiasticall power on earth, here or elsewhere. These quarrels full of spite and voide of al trueth and common reason, doe more than you thinke, impaire the credit of your religion and learning: but so great is your malice that it shutteth your senses & kindleth your cholor whiles you would say somwhat, to say you care not what, be it neuer so vntrue or vntidy. Phi. Apol. Cap. 4. sect. 24.The Princes soueraignty is directly against the commandement & commission giuen to Peter first, & then to all the Apostles, of preaching, baptising, remitting, retai∣ning, binding, loosing ouer all the world without difference of temporall state, or depen∣dance of any mortall Prince therein. Theo. That cōmandement & promise of our Sauior to his Apostles is no way preiudiciall to our doctrine, nor beneficial to yours, as also the charge which the preachers & bishops of England haue ouer their flocks proceedeth neither from Prince nor Pope, nor dependeth vpon the wil or word of any earthly creature: & therfore you do vs the more wrong, so confidently to say what you list of vs, as if your enuious reports were authentik oracles. Phi. Princes beare the sword in these causes to see that permitted and defen∣ded in their realms which Christ com∣manded.You make the Prince su∣preme gouernor in al spiritual & ecclesiasticall thinges & causes; preaching, bap∣tising, binding, loosing, & such like be spiritual things & causes, ergo you make the Princes supreme gouernor euen in these things. And here you may see that we iustly charge you with all the former absurdities, though to shift thē & vs off, you say we do nothing but slander & cauil. Theo. And here you may see the truth of our speech & vniustnes of your charge, & that as you began, so you cōtinue wt spite full peerting & deprauing our words. For by GOVERNORS we do not mean moderators, perscribers, directors, inuentors, or authors of these things, as you misconster vs, but rulers & magistrates bearing the sworde to permit & defende that which Christ himselfe first appointed & ordained, & with lawfull force to di∣sturbe the despisers of his wil & testament. Now what inconuenience is this if
we say that Princes as publike Magistrates may giue freedom,None but Princes can giue freedom and protectiō to these spiri∣tual functions and actions. Apolog. Cap. 4. Sect. 25. protection and assistance to the preaching of the word, ministring of the Sacraments, & right vsing of the keies, & not fet licence from Rome? Is that against Christs cōman∣dement or commission giuen to Peter & the rest? or doth that proue all ecclesia∣sticall power & cure of soules to proceed & depend of the Princes right? Phi. It keepeth the realme from obedience to general Councels which haue bin or shal be gathered in forraine countries: It taketh away al conuenient meanes of gathering, holding or executing any such Councels & their Decrees, as appeared by refusing to come to the late Councel of Trent, notwithstanding the Popes messengers and letters of other great Princes, which requested and inuited them to the same. Theo. Princes ought to heare & obey the truth proposed by priuate persons & Preachers,Generall coū∣cels were wōt to be assistāts vnto Princes, not tribunals aboue princes A generall councel must haue the con∣sent of al chri∣stian coūtries. much more to reuerence the same declared by a number of faithful & godly Bishops meeting in a general councel: But the pleasures & orders of o∣ther princes & prelats, be their assembly neuer so great, the rulers of this realme are not bound to respect vnlesse their consents be first required and obtained. Particular councels you may call without vs, and as we are not acquainted with them, so are we not obstricted to them: Generall Councels you can not call, without the liking and warning of all Christian Princes and common∣wealthes; and if you neglect or skippe any, they may lawfully refuse and des∣pise that which you shal then and there decree: For that which pertaineth to all can not be good, without the knowledge and consents of all. Phi. To the Councel of Trent you were requested and inuited by messengers frō the Pope,The late coun¦cel of Trent a mere factiō of the Popes, sworne to take his part and content to refer all things to his power. and letters of other great Princes. Theo. To your Chapter at Trent we came not for many good and sufficient reasons. The Pope tooke vppon him to call that Councell which he had no right to do: None might haue voices in the Councel, but such as were his creatures and sworne to bee true & trustie to his triple crowne: The conclusion and resolution of all thinges was euer reserued to him or his Legates: This Realme and others were inuited to come but as suppliants to your Synod, & to stand at your curtesies, and to suffer your selues to be iudges in your owne cause, and yet you thinke much that wee refused to come. Let a christian councell bee agreed on by all their consentes that haue to do with it, let both sides haue like interest in the councell:Concil. Triden. Sess. 25. decres. de reformatione cap. 21. Item. Sess. 7. Let your Salua semper in omnibus Apostolicae sedis authoritate, Forprising in all thinges the Popes power and pleasure be reiected, and the Scriptures inspired from God be laid in the middest as the ballance and touchstone of truth, which was the wont of former councels. Let both partes bee sworne to respect nothing, but in the feare of God to examine the faith, & seeke out the ancient canons of Christs church, & if we faile to meete you, declaime against vs on Gods name, as hinde∣rers of peace & despisers of general councels: Otherwise no duety bindeth vs to resort, much lesse to be subiect to your vnlawfull routes, voide of al christian au∣thority, liberty, truth & indifferency. Phi. Was the Councell of Trent vnlawfully called? Theo. Proue it the Popes right to cal generall Councels; & that none must sit there but his feed &
sworne men; & lastly that he must rule & raigne as he doth in all assemblies, & bee iudge against al law & reason in his own cause, though he be chiefe in resisting the truth & oppressing the church, & then will we grant your conuenticle at Trēt was orderly called:Such wronges were neuer offered in the Councell of ancient times. But if these things be repugnant to christian equitie & the sincere canons of Gods Church, whereby the Catholike Councels of former a∣ges were directed, as apparently they be, then had your Tridentine chapter nei∣ther the calling, keeping, concluding, nor meaning of a generall Councel. Phi. Who shoulde call Councels, if not the Pope? Theo. The Prince for 1200. yeres called gene∣ral Councels, and not the Pope.Shew what one generall Councell the Pope called, for the space of twelue hundred yeares after Christ, and then aske vs who should call them but he; if you can not, learn that vsurpation is no right and that generall Councels were called by Princes and not by Popes, and therefore the Popes power to summon generall Coun∣cels, if it bee any, grewe very lately and is not yet olde enough to bee currant or Catholike. Phi. The poore Friers were 18 yeares dispu∣ting, whether the Pope and his Cardinals were conspi∣ring against the godly.To the Councell of Trent other Princes consented. Theo. Certaine Friers were set there to wast day light & wearie the wals with declaiming a∣gainst the Gospell of Christ whiles your holy father and his Cardinals were eighteene yeres prouoking & working the Princes & States adherent to them, to spill christian blood & to make hauocke of al places & persons that were not dient to the Bishop of Rome; & yet you count it some great absurditie for vs to reiect this Councell as not generall. Phi. Apolog. cap. 4. Sect. 25.You acknowledge no subiection to Councels or Tribunals abroad, all other Bishops, Patriarkes, Apostles, Christ & all (because they were & be forrainers) not hauing iurisdiction or sufficiēt authoritie to define against English Sectaries or Errors. And this, when a Realme or Prince is in error, taketh away all meanes of reducing thē to the truth againe. Theo. To Christ & his Apostles we acknowledge more subiection than you doe.We yeld more subiection to Christ & his Apostles than they do. We honor & adore him as the true son of God equall wt his father in autho∣rity & maiesty. We make him no forrainer to this Realm as you do, but professe him to be the only master, redeemer, & ruler of his church as wel in this as in all other Nations: To whom Princes & Preachers are but seruāts; the preachers to propose, the Princes to execute his will & commandements: & whom all that wil be saued must beleeue & obey aboue & against all Councels & Tribunals,The Apostles we reuerēce & obey as the messengers of Christ. be they regall or papall, if they dissent from his word. The preachings & writings of the Apostles we receiue with greater reuerēce & exacter obedience, than you do. We giue no man leaue to dispence against thē which your law witnesseth of the Pope.Distinct. 34. ¶ Lector. & caus. 15. q. 6. ¶. auto∣ritate in gloss. Pig. Hierar. lib. 1. cap. 2. 1. Thes. 2. 1. Thes. 2. Rm. 1. Papa cōtra Apostolū dispensat, The Pope dispēseth against the Apostle: We neuer said as Pigghius saith, The Apostles wrote certaine things, not that their writinges should bee aboue our faith and religion, but rather vnder. Wee confesse, The Apostles were men al∣lowed of God, to whom the Gospel should be committed, & therefore we re∣ceiue the word from thē, not as the word of man, but, as it is in deed, the word of God, assuring our selues, it is the power of God to saue all that beleeue, &
detesting your erronious and heynous presumptions, that take vppon you to adde, alter, diminish, and dispence with that which the spirite of Christ spake as well by the pennes as mouthes of the Apostles. To Councels,We owe com∣munion not subiection vn∣to Councels. Reuelat. 22. such as the Church of Christ was wont by the helpe of her re∣ligious Princes to call, we owe communion and brotherly concord so long as they make no breach in faith, nor in christian charitie: subiection and seruitude wee owe them none: the blessed Angels professe themselues to bee fellowe seruantes with the Sainctes on earth, what are you then that with your Tribunals and iurisdictions woulde bee Lordes and Rulers ouer Christes in∣heritance? Peter, saith Cyprian,Cypr. ad Qui∣rinum. Peter claimed no subiection to his tribu∣nall. whom the Lord made first choice of & on whom he built his church, when Paul after stroue (with him) for Circumcision did not take vpon him, nor chalenge any thing insolentlie or arrogantly, nor ad∣uaunce him-selfe as Primate and one to whom the nouices and puinees shoulde bee subiect. And as it were in open defiance of your Tribunals and iurisdictions which Stephen the Bishoppe of Rome began then to exercise, he directeth the Bishops assembled in a Councell at Carthage on this wise: It resteth that of this matter wee speake euerie one of vs what we thinke,In sententijs Concilij Cartha. iudging no man nor remouing any man from the communion, though he be not of our minde. For none of vs maketh himselfe Bishop of Bishops,The Popes councels are tyrannicall. or by terrour like a tyrant, forceth his collegues to yeeld him obedience whe∣ther they will or no, considering euerie Bishop by reason of his (Episcopal) power and freedom, hath the rule of his owne iudgement as one that can not bee iudged of an other, nor hee him-selfe iudge an other but let vs al expect the (tribunal or) iudgement of our Lord Iesus Christ, which only & solely hath power to set vs in the gouernment of his Church and to iudge of our actes. And because you be so earnest with vs for subiection to Tribunals abroade to bee plaine with you it is boyes plaie, before you name them, or proue that wee owe them any subiection, to skore it vppe as an absurditie that wee ac∣knowledge none vnto them;Many before vs haue refu∣sed forraigne tribunall. Cypr. in senten∣tijs Concil. Car. and yet least you shoulde thinke vs the first that refused Tribunals abroade, you shall see that ancient and worthy fathers haue done the like before vs. What Tribunals abroade did Cyprian and the 80. Bishoppes at Carthage with him acknowledge, when hee saide as you hearde? Christus vnus & so∣lus habet potestatem de actu nostro iudicandi, Christ only and none else hath au∣thoritie to iudge of our act. And agaie,Ibidem. Episcopus ab alo iudicari non potest, cum non ipse nec alterum iudicare: A Bishop may not be iudged of others, nor iudge others.Ibidem. Expectemus vniuersi iudicium Christi; Let vs all (both abroad and at home) expect the iudgement of Christ. What Tribunals abroade did Polycrates and the Bishops of Asia with him acknowledge when hee replied to the Bishoppe of Rome,Polycrates. threatning to ex∣communicate him and the rest? Non turbaborijs, quae terrendi gratia obijciun∣tur,
I passe not for these threats that are offered to terrifie me.Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 25. Augustine. Concil. African. cap. 29. Concil. African. cap. 105. What Tribunals abroad did S. Aug. & the 216. African Bishops acknowledge when they decreed that none Appealing ouer the Sea (to Tribunals abroad) should be receiued to the communion within Africa? And when they repelled the Bishop of Rome, laboring to place his Legates a latere within their Pro∣uince & willed him nt to bring Fumosum seculi Typhum, That smoky pride of the world into the Church of Christ? The Britons. Gafrid. Mone∣mutens. lib. 8. ca. 4.What Tribunals abroad did the Bishop of the Britons acknowledge, when they proued to August. the Moncke that was sent from Rome, that they ought him no subiection. Lib. 7. indict. 1. Epist. 30. This Bishop of Rome clai∣med no Tri∣bunall ouer o∣ther countriesNay what Tribunal abroad did Greg. the Bishop of Rome chalenge, when he wrote thus to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria: Vestra beatitudo mihi loquitur di∣cēs, sicut iussistis, quod verbū iussionis peto à meo auditu remouete: quia scio quis sum, qui estis. Loco enim mihi fratres estis, moribus patres. Nō ergo iussi, sed quae vtilia visa sunt iudicare curau. Your blessednes (in your letters) saith to me as you cōmā¦ded, which word of cōmāding I beseech you remoue frō mine eares, because I know who I am, & what you are. In calling you are brethrē to me; in beha∣uior fathers. I did not thē cōmand you but aduertise you what semed best to me.Greg. Lib. 4. Epist. 38. The same Greg. teacheth you what it is for any one man to require vniuer∣sall subiection of the whole church, as your holie father now doth. If Paul, saith he, would not haue the mēbers of the Lords body to be subiect to any heads but to Christ,No Tribunall ouer the whole church, but onelie Christ. no not to the Apostles themselues; what wilt thou answere to Christ the head of the vniuersall church in the last daie of iudgement which goest about to haue all his members in subiection to thee by the title of vni∣uersall? Whom doest thou imitate in so peruerse a name, but (Lucifer) that despising▪ legions of Angels his fellowes, would needes aspire to be singular and alone to be ouer all? To let one man haue all the members of Christ in subiection vnder him, is not the meane to reduce Princes and their people to trueth, as you falslie sup∣pose, but the high way to wrappe them and the whole church in blindnesse and error.Gregor. lib. 6. Epist. 24. Ecclesia vniuersa corruit, si vnus vniuersus cadit; If he that is vniuersall fall, the whole church falleth with him. The Popes Tribunall made him first forget both God & man.Yea this very subiection of all kingdomes and countries to the Popes beck, made him first forget his duetie to God and man, whiles his clawbacks aduan∣ced him to the height of heauen, and gaue him all power both in heauen and earth, and so quailed & disabled all others that they neither might reproue nor durst resist his wicked and wilfull fansies were they neuer so pernicious to the faith or opprobrious to the church. For you made it Sacrilege to dispute of his fact,A Tribunal fit for the diuell him selfe. Heresie to doubt of his power, Paganisme to disobey him, Blasphe∣mie against the holy Ghost to doe or speake against his decrees and canons; and that which is most horrible, you made it Presumption not to goe to the di∣uel after him without any grudging. O shameful & sinful subiection, such as Lu∣cifer himselfe neuer offered the bondslaues of hell!
Phi. Nay rather, O shamefull and sinnefull report:Distict. 40. ¶ Non nos glos. i∣bidē ¶ quis enim. Caus. 17. quaest. 4. ¶ Si quis. doeth hee require any such subiection? Theo. If your lawe doe not auouch as much as I re∣port, let mee beare the shame. Sacrilegij instar esset, disputare de facto (Papae) It were no lesse than sacrilege to dispute of the Popes fact. And the Capi∣tall Register of your decrees, Commit tunt sacrilegium, qui contra diuinae legis san∣ctitatem, aut nesciendo committunt,Sacrilege to doubt of the Popes fact, or dispute of his iudgement. Distinct. 19. ¶ Sic omnes. aut negligendo offendunt. Similiter de iudicio summi Pontificis alicus disputare non licet. They commit sacrilege which of ignorance transgresse, or of negligence breake the Lawe of God. Vnder the like paine (of sacrilege) it is vnlawfull for any man to dispute of the Popes iudgement. For all the sanctions of the Apostolike See (of Rome) are to be receiued as confirmed with the diuine voice of Peter himselfe. Hee,Distinct. 22. ¶ Omnes. Heresie to mutter a∣gainst the Popes pride. saith Pope Nicolaus, that defraudeth any church of her right doeth vniustlie, but hee that indeuoureth to take from the church of Rome her pri∣uilege, hic procul dubio in haeresin labitur & est dicendus haereticus, hee out of all doubt slideth into heresie and is to bee counted an heretike. Uppon the warrant of this and such like textes your Glozer as it were falling on his knees and holding vppe his handes to that Idoll exalting him-selfe in the Temple of God, pronounceth distinctly and leasurably:Extrau. Iohan, 22. ¶ cum inter nonnullos; glos. ibide. ¶ decla∣ramus. Extra. Iohan. 22 ¶ quia quondā. glos. ¶ non vt Papa. Extrau. commu∣nium, de maio∣ritate & obedi∣ent. ¶. Vnam sanctam. Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam non potuisse statuere prout statuit, haereticum censere∣tur: To thinke that our Lord God the Pope coulde not decree as he hath decreed, must bee counted hereticall. For as Pope hee might doe manie things, & not only declare, but also bring in a new article of faith. Bonifacius the eight would needes haue it to bee Manicheisme, and that he found by the first booke of Moses: Whosoeuer, saith he, resisteth (the Popes) power resisteth the ordinance of God, vnlesse with Manicheus he dreame of mo beginninges (than one) which we adiudge to be false and heretical, be∣cause, as Moses saith in the beginning God made heauen and earth, not in the beginnings. Therefore we declare, affirme, define, pronounce, that it is a necessarie point to saluation, for euerie humane creature to bee subiect to the Bishop of Rome. Gregorie the seuenth produceth Samuell to proue that it is idolatrie and infidelitie to disobey the Pope.Manicheisme and Paganism not to obey the Popes worde. Distinct. 81. ¶ Si qui sunt. What saide Samuell more of God, than the Pope here applieth to himselfe? Caus. 25. quaest. 1. ¶. violateres. Ibidem glos. ¶ Blaspheae. Hee that will not obey this most holsome precept of ours (forbidding Priestes their wiues vnder the colour of fornication.) incurreth the sinne of Idolatrie as Samuell witnes∣seth; Not to obey is the sinne of witchcraft, & not to be content is the wic∣kednesse of idolatrie. Therefore he falleth into Paganisme, whosoeuer obei∣eth not the Apostolike See (of Rome.) They may be well saide to blaspheme the holy Ghost, saith Pope Dama∣sus, which willingly or frowardly do or dare speake against the holy canons. For this presumption is plainly one kinde of blasphemie against the holie Ghost. And as though this were too litle the gloze addeth Blasphemie, nay ipso facto he is accursed, and an heretike. Phi. You wrest that to the Popes decrees which was spoken of the canons of councels. Theo. I wrest it not, the same place will tell you, the word com∣priseth
as well the Popes decrees as canons of councels.Cans. 25. quaest. 1. ¶ ideo permit∣tente. Ibidem. No canons but what the Pope maketh or alloweth. Ibidem. Sancta Romana Ec∣clesiaius & authoritatem sacris Canonibus impertitur, habet enim ius condendi Ca∣nones. The holy Romane church giueth strength and authoritie to the sa∣cred canons, for shee hath right to make canons. And againe, Sic summae sedis Pontifices Canonibus siue à se, siue ab alijs sua authoritate conditis reuerentiā exhibent: So the Bishops of the supreme See, doe reuerence the canons which them-selues make or others by their authoritie. And lastly, speak∣ing of the Bishoppes of Rome, Ipsi soli Canones valent interpretari qui ius condendi eos habent: Popes onely may interprete the canons, which haue right to make canons. Or if you thinke Popes woulde not accompt it blasphemie to breake their decrees, reade the words of Pope Adrian in the same section.Caus. 25. quaest. 1. ¶ generali. A breach of the faith to violate the popes decrees Generali decreto censemus & constituimus vt execrandum anathema sit, & velut praeuaricator fidei Catholicae semper apud Deum reus existat, quicunque Regum, Episcoporum, vel Potentum deinceps Romanorum Pontificum Decretorum censuram in quoqua credi∣derit vel permiserit violandam: By a generall decree we order and determine that he shalbe execrably accursed and guiltie for euer before God, as a trans∣gressor of the catholike faith, whatsoeuer king, Bishop or Noble man here∣after shal beleeue the censure of the Popes decretals may be broken in any thing or shall permit the same. That horrible curse which the Apostle pronou∣ceth, If any man loue not the Lord Iesus,1. Corinth. 16. this Apostata thundreth on them that doe but doubt of his decretals. This is bad enough, & yet this is not the worst. For Bonifacius a Martyr as you make him requireth al men to follow the Bishop of Rome to the diuel of hell without making any words.Distinct. 40. ¶ i Papa. Si Papa suae & fraternae salutis negligens depre∣henditur, inutilis & remissus in suis operibus, & insuper à bono taciturnus qui ma∣gis officit sibi & omnibus, nihilominus innumerabiles populos cateruatim secum du∣cit primo mancipio gehennae: huius culpas istic redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus. Your forgeries be as grosse as they be wicked, the latine is so good that I can skant english it; yet thus it is, or should bee:No man must finde fault with the Pope for leading men to hel by heapes. If the Pope be found to neglect the saluation of himselfe & his brethren, vnprofitable & slacke in his office, silent in that which is good, hurtfull to himselfe & all others, yea though hee leade with him innumerable soules by heapes to the diuell of hell, yet let no mortal man presume to find fault with him, or reproue him for his doings. This is the subiection which your holy father wold haue, & which you count vs absurd for not acknowledging: But may we not iustly say to you as S. August. saide to the Donatistes?Contra 2. Gau∣dentij Epist. lib. . cap. 25. This which you affirme, that al the worlde must bee subiect to one man as to Christs Uicar, Did God or man tell it you? If God, read it vnto vs out of the law, the Prophets, the Psalms, the Apostolical or E∣uangelicall writings. Read it if you can, which (hitherto) you ueuer coulde. But if men haue saide it (or rather no men but your selues) beholde the deuise of men, beholde what you worship, behold what you serue, behold wherefore you rebel, you rage, you waxe madde.
Phi. If you will not bee subiect to the Pope,The Pope not Patriark ouer England. as Christes Uicar and head of the Church, which no doubt he is, yet haue you no colour to withstande his authoritie, as hee is and euer was Patriarke of the West. Theo. His vicarshippe to Christ and headshippe ouer the Church bee thinges that you speake much of, but shewe small proofe for: It were good you woulde ei∣ther prooue them, or not presume them as you doe: they bee matters of greater weight than that you may carie them away with your faire lookes. Patriarke of the West wee graunt he was, which is a foule fall from head of the Church and Uicar generall to Christ himselfe, and yet this way you come too short of your reckoning. For first,Patriarks not erected by Christ but by consent of Bishops. the tytle and authoritie of Archbishoppes and Patriarkes was not ordayned by the commaundement of Christ or his Apostles, but the Bishops long after, when the Church began to bee troubled with dissentions, were con∣tent to lincke themselues together, and in euery Prouince to suffer one (whome they preferred for the worthines of his Citie and called their Metropolitane, that is Bishoppe of the chiefe or mother Citie) to haue this prerogatiue in all doubts of Doctrine and discipline to assemble the rest of his brethren or consult them absent by letters, and see that obserued, which the most part of them determined. Before there beganne schismes in religion the Churches,Hiero. in epist. ad Tit. cap. 1. Ibidem. sayth S. Hierom, were gouerned by the common Councell of the Seniors. And therfore Episcopi nouerint, se magis consuetudine quam dominicae dispositionis verita∣te Presbyteris esse maiores: Let the Bishoppes vnderstand that they bee grea∣ter than (ministers or) elders, rather by Custome, than by any trueth of the Lordes appointment, and that they ought to gouerne the Church in common. And in his Epistle to Euagrius hauing fully prooued by the Scriptures that the Apostles called themselues but Presbyteros,Hiero. Euag tom. epist. 2. Elders or Se∣niors, he addeth Quod autē postea vnus electus est qui ceteris praeponereter, in schis∣matis remedium factum est ne vnusquisque ad se trahens Christiecclesiā rumperet: That after their times, one was chosen in euery Church and preferred be∣fore the rest to haue the dignitie of a Bishoppe this was prouided for a re∣medie against schismes,Ibidem. lest euery man drawing some vnto him shoulde rent the Church of Christ in pieces. For what doth a Bishop, except orde∣ring of others, which an Elder may not doe? And lest you should thinke he speaketh not as well of the chiefe as of the mea∣ner Bishoppes, hee compareth three of the greatest Patriarkes with three of the poorest Bishops he could name.Hierom. Ibidē. Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, siue Romae, siue Eugubij, siue Constantinopoli, siue Rhegij, siue Alexandriae, siue Tains, eiusdem meriti, eiusdem est & Sacerdotij. Potentia diuitiarum & paupertatis humilitas vel sublimio∣rem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit: ceterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. A Bishop of what place soeuer hee be, either of Rome, or of Eugubium, or of Constantinople, or of Rhegium, or of Alexandria, or of Tains hath the same merite and the same (function or) Priesthood. Abundance of riches or base∣nes
of pouertie doeth not make a Bishoppe higher or lower, for they all be successours to the Apostles. So that the Bishoppe of Rome by commission from Christ and succession from the Apostles is no higher than the meanest Bi∣shop in the worlde. The Patriarks grew by con∣sent and custome. Concil. Nicen. Cap. 6.The superioritie which he and others had as Metropolitanes in their owne Prouinces came by custome, as the great Councell of Nice witnesseth, not by Christes institution. Let the olde vse continue in Aegypt, Lybia, and Pentapo∣lis, that the Bishoppe of Alexandria bee chiefe ouer all those places, for so much as the Bishoppe of Rome hath the like custome. Likewise at Antioch and in other Prouinces, let the Churches keepe their prerogatiues. Concil. Ephes. 1. Decretum postquā Cypr. episc. accessissent ad concil.The generall Councell of Ephesus confesseth the same. It seemeth good to this sacred and oecumenicall Synode to conserue to euery prouince, their right priuileges whole and vntouched, which they haue had of olde accor∣ding to the custome that now long hath preuayled. Patriarks al∣wayes subiect to Princes & their ecclesi∣astical lawes.Next their authoritie was subiect not only to the discretion and moderation of their brethren assembled in Councell, but also to the lawes & Edicts of Chri∣stian Princes, to be graunted, extended, limited and ordered as they saw cause. For example the first Councell of Constantinople aduaunced the Bishoppe of that Citie to bee the next Patriarke to the Bishoppe of Rome, which be∣fore he was not. And the Councel of Chalcedon made him equall in ecclesiasti∣call honours with the Bishoppe of Rome,Concil. Chalced. actio. 16. and assigned him a larger Prouince than before he had. So Iustinian gaue to the Citie in Africa that he called after his owne name, the See of an Archbishoppe.Nouel. constit. 131. Princes gaue Bishops their prerogatiues ouer others. Archiepiscopale munus, quod Episcopo Iustinianeae Carthaginis Africanae Dioeceseos dedimus, conseruari iubemus. Sed & aliae ciuitates atque horum Episcopi, quibus passim in diuersis locis ius Metropoliticum concessum est, in perpetuum hoc priuilegio perfruuntor. The Archiepiscopal dignitie which wee gaue to the Bishoppe of Iustinianea within the Prouince of Africa, we commaund to continue still. And likewise let other Cities and their Bishops to whom in diuers places and Countries the right of Metropolitanes hath beene graunted, enioy that priuilege for euer. Constit. 123. The Prince cōmaunded the Patriarks by name.The same Prince as you heard before commanded the Archbishops and Patriarkes of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Theopolis and Ierusalem, and ge∣nerally subiecteth them in ecclesiasticall causes and iudgements to the sacred Canons and his (Imperiall) Lawes, as appeareth expressely in his publike E∣dicts made to that end. This Realme not in the Popes ancient Prouince. Inter August. epist. 95. Ibidē epist. 96.Thirdly by the right and auncient diuision of prouinces this Realme was not vnder the Bishoppe of Rome. For when the Bishoppes of Africa prai∣ed Innocentius either to send for Pelagius the Britan or to deale with him by letters to shewe the meaning of his lewde speaches tending to the derogation of Gods grace, the Bishoppe of Rome made answere; Quando se nostro iudicio, quibusuis acceptis literis, cum sciat damnandum esse, committet? Qui si accersendus esset, ab ijs melius fieret quimagis proximi & non longo terrarum spacio videntur esse
dsiuncti. When will hee commit himselfe to our iudgement, write I what letters I will, whereas hee knoweth hee shalbe condemned? And if hee were to bee sent for, they may better doe it that are neerer (to him) and not so farre distant (from him as I am.) Innocentius 400. yeeres after Christ confesseth hee had not sufficient authoritie to call one poore Briton out of this Realme. And two hundred yeeres after that the Bishoppes of Britannie woulde yeelde no subiection to him that was sent from Rome, nor accept him for their Archbishoppe.Beda. hist. gen∣tis Angler. lib. 2. C. 2. And euen their manner of baptizing, obseruing Easter, and other ecclesiasticall institutions contrarie to the rites and customes of the Church of Rome, as Augustine the Monke then obiec∣ted vnto them, make manifest proofe that they were neuer vnder the iurisdic∣tion of the Bishop of Rome. Fourthly the Pope coueting and affecting to bee that hee was not,The Pope affecting to be Christs vicar neglected his Patriakdom. disdayned and refused euer since the conquest to bee that hee was: and so by his owne fact hath extinguished his owne right, if any hee gate in the time of the Saxons, who to settle themselues in the possession of this Realme, after the chasing out of the Britons, were soone entrea∣ted to receiue the Bishoppe of Rome for their Patriarke. And seeing the headshippe of the Church, which hee violently and wrongfully enfor∣ced vpon the Normans, by Gods Lawe is not his, no reason hee should now clayme by his Patriarkshippe, which himselfe aspiring to higher tytles so many hundred yeres disused and contemned. Lastly the Kinges of England for the most part of them from the Con∣querour to this day,The Kings of this land re∣sisted the Popes power in whole or in part euer since the con∣quest. in the right of their Crowne haue either resisted or rebated the iurisdiction Ecclesiasticall which the Pope claymed in this Lande. Wherefore hee was neuer any long tyme in full and quiet posses∣sion of his pretensed power in this Realme: And her Maiesties Father and brother excluding him both from that authoritie which hee woulde haue o∣uer this Iland, as vnlawfull and repugnant to the woord of God, and al∣so from that which for these fiue hundred yeeres and vpward himselfe neglec∣ted and omitted, had Gods Lawes and mans Lawes for the warrant of their doings, and for their leauing him no kind of power or preeminence with∣in this Realme. So that his Uicarshippe to Christ must bee prooued by stronger and playner euidence than yet you haue shewed,This Land subiect to him neither as Christs vicar, nor as Patri∣arke of the west. before wee may graunt it: And as for his Patriarkeshippe, which you woulde nowe take holde of, by Gods Lawe hee hath none, in this Realme for sixe hundred yeeres af∣ter Christ hee had none, for the last sixe hundred, as looking to greater matters, hee woulde haue none: aboue or against the sword which God hath ordayned, hee can haue none; to the subuersion of the fayth and op∣pression of his brethren in reason, right and equitie hee should haue none: You must seeke farther for subiection to his Tribunal, this Land oweth him non.
Phi. Apol Cap. 4. sect. 25.Finally if this iurisdiction spirituall bee alwayes of right a sequele of the crowne and Scepter of all kinges, assuredly Christ nor none of his Apostles coulde otherwise enter to conuert Countries preach and exercise iurisdiction spiritual, with∣out Caesars and others the kings of the countries licence and delegation. Theo. Finally, if this bee all you can say, you may wipe your bill and goe to rest. You were told before that Princes haue no right to call or confirme Preachers, but to receiue such as bee sent of God, and giue them libertie for their preaching,Bishoppes may preach wihout Cesars leaue if they submit themselues to Cesars sword as the Apo∣stles did. and securitie for their persons; & if Princes refuse so to doe, Gods labourers must goe forward with that which is commaunded them from heauen, not by disturbing Princes from their thrones nor inuading their Realmes, as your holy father doth and defendeth hee may doe, but by myld∣ly submitting themselues to the powers on earth, and meekely suffering for defence of the trueth what they shall inflict. Howe you gather out of this or any wordes of ours, that Christ and his Apo∣stles might not preach the Gospell without Cesars delegation, and licence from others the kinges of the Countries, whither they went, I see not, except you take the woord supreme for superiour to Christ, and all which, as I haue often signified vnto you, standeth neither with our assertion nor in∣tention, but is a very pestilent and impudent sophistication of yours, which you still repeate, though we still refute. Phi. The word supreme is such a Laberinth that wee knowe not what to make of it. Theo. You know well enough, but you will not acknowledge the true meaning of the woord, lest you should discouer your selues and dis∣credite your cause.The Iesuites cunning in playeng with the worde Supreme as they doe. For then either you must shewe which you are no way a∣ble to doe, that the Pope as a superiour iudge may lawfully commaunde, punish and displace Princes if they withstande him: or else with vs con∣fesse Princes to bee supreme, which your stomackes will not abide. And therefore finding your proofes too slender to beare vp the height of his pride and the loade of your follie, you thought best to skippe it ouer, and in all your Apologie not so much as to offer vs one halfe woorde for the con∣firmation of the superioritie which the Pope claymeth ouer Princes, that being the right construction of the word supreme, & the first occasion why prin∣ces were so called, but to braule rather with vs about some words of ours, and therefore to make such monsterous and impious imaginations, that the simple should be afraid at the very sound of thē, as though we made the prince supreme, that is,What the Ie∣suits imagine of the word Supreme. superiour to Christ himselfe, and Christs master, & gaue her absolute & infinite power to doe what she listed in al ecclesiastical matters, and taught that trueth and faith, Scriptures and Sacraments, vocation of ministers, remission of sinnes, preaching, baptising and seruing God must proceed from her Soue∣raigne right and depend on her only will, and in this vaine you runne on with a iolly persuasion of your selues, that you worke woonders, when indeed you doe nothing but leudly peruert our wordes and falsely charge vs with your owne fictions.
Phi. Neuer burden vs with the peruerting of your words,The wordes of the oth be sound eough if they cease peruerting them. Ruler and Prince, be as doubtfull as gouernour, if men be dispo∣sed to cauill. Bishops be called Rulers, Princes, Kings & Queenes. Heb. 13. Act. 20. In. 1. Cap. epist. ad Titum. Idem in 3. Ca. 1. ad Tim. Lib. 4. Cap. 33. Morali. in Iob. In 49. ca. Esaiae. Euerie of the faithfull is a King and a Priest. Reuelat. 1. 1. Peter. 2. Lib. Cap. 37. Idem. lib. 4. Cap. 24. Ibidem. Princes are Bishops and Priests. Euagrie, tom. epist. 2. Idem Oceano eodem tom. Exod. 24. Iosua. 24. Iudges. 8. Iudth. 6. we take them as we finde them; and as you sayd before to vs, we be not bound to search for your mea∣ning; if there bee any generalitie or ambiguitie in your words, which you ment not, the blame is yours that made choise of such. Theo. Cease you to wrest them against the grounds of faith and rules of speach receaued and vsed on both sides, we aske you no fauor, our wordes be sound and good. We call her highnes the Gouernour of this Realm, that is the publike ma∣gistrat bearing the sword, which God hath ordained to commaund good things and punish euill as well in religion as ciuill policie: How els should we cal her? Phi. Not Gouernour, but Prince or ruler. For Bishops be Gouernours in their kind as well as Princes. Theo. As though these words were not subiect to the same cauils with the former. Bishops be Princes and Rulers in their kind as well as gouernours. Your selues proue them to be rulers by S. Paul, Obey your Rulers: and againe, The holy Ghost hath set you to rule the Church. And where you say Rulers in S. Paul, S. Hierom saith, Parete Principibus vestris: Obey you Princes. And elswhere; A Bishop must be ir∣reproueable, or he shall be no Prince of the Church. Yea Gregorie doubteth not to call them Kings. The holy preachers of the Church, saith he, be Kings. And S. Hierom ventereth to call them Queenes. The Kings and Queenes, that nource the Church be plainly the Apostles and Apostolike men. So that if we were disposed to play with wordes, as you be, we coulde driue you to seeke newe names not only for Kings & Princes, but also for Priests and Bishops. S. Iohn saith of himselfe and of al the faithfull (Christ hath) made vs Kings and Priests vnto god his father: and S. Peter confirmeth the same, You are a Roiall Priesthood. Eusebius writeth of Constantine, that He called the seruants of God to Synods as a cōmon Bishop appointed by God: and sate among them, and made himselfe partaker of their consultations; and that in his hearing the Prince Named himselfe a Bishop with these wordes, You are Bishops of things within the Church, I am appointed by God a Bishop of those things that are without the Church. And this he might well doe. For , a Bishoppe, is in Greeke nothing else but an ouerseer, or a superinten∣dent, which woord Hierom vseth; and , whence our English woorde Priest seemeth to be deriued, he sayth, is nomen aetatis, a name of age, and signi∣fieth an Elder, and nothing in the Scriptures more common than to call Prin∣ces and rulers  Elders: as the seuentie Elders, all the tribes of Israel and their Elders, Princes and iudges: the Princes and Elders of Sucoth: the Elders of Bethulia; and infinite other places; where the woord  is vsed of the Septuagint. Phi. We know you may confound all things if you list to dally with equi∣uocatiōs,The ground of al their ab∣surdities is the cauilling at  words. but S. Paul hath expresly prohibited al good teachers strife of words, Theo. You say well, and since al your absurdities haue none other ground but the carping at our words, or rather the manifest abusing and pererting of the same, what are your labours, to requite you with Saint Paul, but vaine brables
of men corrupted in mind and depriued of trueth. The gouern∣ment of Prin∣ces & Prests are distinct.If the word gouernour were common to Bishops with Princes as you would haue it, yet are their offices and regiments many wayes distinguished. The gouernment of Princes is publike, of Bishops is priuate; of Princes is compulsiue, of Bishops is persuasiue; of Princes is Lordly with Rule, of Bi∣shops is brotherly with seruice; of Princes is externall and ordereth the actions of the bodie, of Bishops is internall, and guideth the motions of the mind; to bee short, Princes haue the sworde with lawfull authoritie from GOD, in his name to commaunde and prohibite, rewarde and reuenge that which hee pre∣scribeth and appointeth: Bishoppes haue the woorde and Sacramentes com∣mitted to their charge with fidelitie and sinceritie to diuide and dispence the same in his Church according to his will. And therefore though Bishoppes may bee called Gouernours in respect of the soule,Gouernours of this realme none is but on¦ly the Prince. yet onely Princes bee Go∣uernours of Realmes: Pastours haue flockes and Bishoppes haue Diocesses; Realmes, Dominions, and Countries none haue but Princes and Ma∣gistrates, and so the stile Gouernour of this Realme, belongeth onely to the Prince and not to the Priest, and importeth a publike and Prince∣ly regiment with the sworde, which no Bishoppe by Gods Lawe may claime or vse. Phi. Wee coulde graunt you with a good will that the Prince is the only Gouernour of this Realm, but you adde, as well in all spirituall or ecclesiasti∣call things or causes, as temporall: which is most absurde and direct against your owne distinction. For if the Prince be the only Gouernour of all spirituall things and causes,This is the profound Logike of Rhemes. Ergo Bishops bee no Gouernours of the word nor Sacra∣mentes, rites nor ceremonies, praiers nor preachings of the Church, but all must bee as please the Prince: and so you fall into that shameful error againe from the which you seeke to cleare your selues. Theo. A right Frier that will ne∣uer be answe∣red, though the Sophisme be neuer so grosse.Is it for weakenes of witte, that you cannot, or for rustines of hart that you will not see the defect of your argument? Phi. The reason to my thinking is very sure. For if only Princes be Gouernours in those cases, Ergo not Priests. Theo. A childish sophisme. Your antecedent hath a special accep∣tion of the word Gouernour, and your conclusion a generall. Princes only bee Gouernours in things and causes ecclesiastical, that is with the sword. For so their vocation inferreth, and your assertion witnesseth, and so must you limite your antecedent before it will be good or agreeable to the Doctrine, which wee teach, & oth which we take. Then if you conclude, Ergo Bishops be no gouernors in those things with the sword, your illation is sound and sufficient: for in all things and causes ecclesiasticall and spirituall Princes beare the sworde, and not Bishops. But if you inferre, Ergo Bishops bee no Gouernours in those things, meaning thereby no dispencers, guiders nor directors, of those things, your conclusion is larger than your antecedent, which neuer maketh good consequent. Phi. I see your meaning: you will haue Princes only to be Gouernours of
their Realmes & dominions, that is to beare the sworde within their Realmes and dominions in all thinges as well spirituall as temporall. Theo. You see what wee say,Only Princes beare the sworde within their owne dominions. peruert it no more, but confute it if you can. Phi. That Princes and none els shoulde beare the sworde within their Dominions I meane not to confute, I confesse it as well as you: But what hath the tem∣porall sword to do, with ecclesiasticall thinges and causes? Princes should med∣dle with common wealth matters, and not busie themselues with Church cau∣ses. Theo. Runne you backe againe to this issue, that Princes may not med∣dle with causes ecclesiasticall? Haue you forgotten how largely that is prooued before; and sealed with your owne consent as irreuocable? Phi. Meddle they may with some spirituall thinges and causes, but when and as they shall bee required by the Priest. Theo. Wee are not at this present to heare what you can imagine, but to see what you can impugne in our othe as absurd. And thus farre you agree with vs, that Princes bee the onely Gouernours of their Realmes and dominions, taking Gouernours for Magistrates which beare the sworde in Gods behalfe with publike pow∣er to compell or punish.If only Prin∣ces beare the sword, they beare it in al things as well spiritual as tē∣porall where the sword is required. Phi. And what of this? Theo. Thus much, that if onely Princes beare the sworde and no man else by Gods appoint∣ment, ergo they beare it in all thinges, where the sworde must or may be vsed, as well spirituall as temporall. Phi. No doubt where the sword must or may bee borne, they beare it: but howe proue you that in spirituall thinges and causes the temporal sword must or may bee vsed? Theo. Pitch that for the question, and trie how wel you shall speede with it. Phi. Wee neuer denyed but in some sort the temporall sword might bee v∣sed for spirituall thinges and causes, as namely to defend the fayth and Ca∣nons of the Church, and to put them in execution. This Princes may do and must doe with their royall power, but they may not commaund what they list in ecclesiasticall causes as you would haue them. Theo. You snarle stil when you see your selfe brought to the wall. What we woulde haue Princes to doe, shall soone appeare, if you cease from slaundering, and keepe to the matter. Our tongues ake with telling you that we hold no such opinion, and yet you ne∣uer leaue grating at vs as if we did. The point,The sworde must be vsed in spirituall things and causes as wel as temporall. that nowe wee stande at, is this, whether in a Christian common wealth the temporall sworde, as you call it, that is the publike au∣thoritie of the Magistrate must bee vsed to receiue, establish and defende the true faith of Christ and wholesome discipline of his Church, and to prohi∣bite, displace and punish the contrarie: say nay if you dare. Phi. Wee neuer ment it. Theo. Then in all spirituall thinges and causes Princes onely beare the sword, that is haue publike authoritie to receiue, establish and defende all poyntes and partes of Christian Doctrine and Discipline within their Realmes, and without their helpe, though the fayth and Canons of Christes Church may bee pryuately professed and obserued
of such as bee willing, yet can they not bee generally planted and setled in any kingdome, nor vrged by publike Lawes & externall punishments on such as re∣fuse, but by their consents that beare the sword. This is it that wee say, refell it if you can. Phi. Princes cānot be defenders of the faith & officers of the Church but by means of the sword.This is not your opinion but ours. Wee confesse Princes to bee defenders of the faith, and assisters of the Church with their secular might and power: you auouche them to bee supreme moderatours and directours of all spirituall thinges and causes without restraint. Theo. Wee a∣uouche you to bee Supreme lyars, and that which is worse, you thinke with facing in time to get some credite to your fabling. You finde no such thing in our words nor deedes as you report of vs. We confesse Princes to bee supreme gouernours, that is as wee haue often told you, supreme bearers of the sworde, which was first ordained from aboue to defend and preserue as well goodlines and honestie,1. Tim. 2. The sword ordeined chiefly to pre∣serue godli∣nesse and ho∣nesty among men. as peace and tranquillitie amongest men. We giue Princes no power to deuise or inuent new religions, to alter or change Sacraments, to de∣cide or debate doubtes of faith, to disturbe or infringe the canons of the church. The publike power and outward meanes, which God hath vnited and annexed to their swords, as namely to commaund by their Edicts, and dispose the goods and bodies of such as resist them, this power and meanes, wee say, must be con∣uerted and vsed first to the seruice and glorie of God, next to the profit and wel∣fare of their Realmes, that is as much or rather more for thinges spirituall than temporall. Phi. If you giue Princes no iudicial nor spiritual power in matters of religiō but an externall and temporall power to permit and establish that which God commaundeth,The sword of Princes is supreme in that it is not subiect to the Pope, & must be obeyed of al in things that be good. howe can they bee supreme? Theo. Supreme they be for that by Gods Lawe they bee not vnder the Popes checke and correction, though to leade on the simple sort with a better shewe, you conceale that superiority which the Pope chalengeth ouer Princes, and enter your whole action for the Church; which woord you knew was more gratious, and will in no case bee brought to take our meaning right, lest you shoulde bee driuen either to proue your assertion, which you can not; or to confesse ours, which you will not. And therefore you wrest the word supreme against the very grounds of our common fayth and rules of your priuate speach, to make it seeme false and absurde; and then as valiant Captaines you wrestle with the fansies which your selues haue deuised, & fighting thus with your own shadowes you thinke your Seminaries the only lights and lanternes of Christendome; but you must go more syncerely to worke, before you can winne the cause. Phi. Supreme is superiour to all and subiect to none. Theo. And so bee Princes superiour to all men within their Realmes, and subiect to no man without their Realmes. Phi. What, superiour to Christ, the Church and all? Theo. Haue you neuer done with that idle and eluish obiection? Wee compare not man with God,These bee right Iesuiti∣call conceits. nor bodies on earth with spirites in heauen; but wee conferre mortall men with their like, bearing flesh about them which the
sworde may touch: and in comparison of them wee say Princes are superi∣our to all men within their dominions, Bishoppes and others, and subiect to no man without their dominions, Prelate nor Pope, to bee commaunded, cor∣rected and deposed by their tribunals.The true su∣premacie of Princes. This is the supremacie which wee at∣tribute to Princes, that all men within their Territories shoulde obey their Lawes or abide their pleasures, and that no man on earth hath authoritie to take their swordes from them by iudiciall sentence or martiall violence: Leaue wrangling and rouing and speake directly to this question. Phi. I will, if you first graunt that your meaning is not so large as your woordes bee. Theo. You would fayne seeme with your eloquent nifles to woorke some masteries: but it will not bee. Our woordes are no larger than our meaning, and both be true. Phi. Why? supreme is superiour to al none excepted, no not Christ himselfe. The. And what are these phrases,The Papists in euery stile which they giue the Pope make him su∣preme. ye most holy, the most mightie, the most blessed, which you applie to the Pope; do they except Christ or no? Phi. If nothing else be added, they doe not by rigor of comparison, but common vse of speach vn∣derstandeth them of earthly men, and alwayes excepteth first God with whom there can bee none compared, and next his Saints which be farre from vs in an other and better life. Theo. I crie you mercie. You may salute your Ro∣mish Pharaoh when you will,Caus. 25. quaest. 1. § Nulli fas. Acclamationes in fine Concil. Triden. Sess. 25. with the most mightie Priest, the most bles∣sed father, the chiefe Pastor, and many such loftie stiles, and wee must come after with salt and spoones and conceaue that Christ is excepted though he bee not, because your flatteries bee common: and if wee to signifie that Princes by Gods lawe bee not vnder the Popes yoke, defende them to bee superiour to all men at home and subiect to no mans Courts or Consistories abroade and ther∣fore call them supreme Gouernours of their owne people and Countries, you sounde alarme against vs as if wee went about to defeate Christ of his king∣dome and disseism the Church of her inheritaunce when your selues eue∣ry day if that speach bee not tolerable commit blasphemies innumerable. If other examples doe not stay your wisedomes,Supreme go∣uernour doth not touch Christ so nere as Supreme Bishop doth, which is the Popes vsuall stile. 1. Pet. 5. 1. Pet. 2. My Kingdom is not of this world: Ioh. 18. Who made me Iudge ouer you: Luke 12. remember your vsual stile for the Pope, is summus Pontifex, Supreme Bishoppe; summus and supre∣mus being all one I meane not in sense onely but in speach also. For they both bee superlatiues from the same comparatiue Superior, and summus is nothing else but the very contraction of the woorde Supremus. So that if Supreme Bishoppe with you doe not spoile Christ of his Priesthoode, how can supreme Gouernour with vs lift him out of his kingdome; he clayming expressely to bee chiefe Pastor and Bishoppe of our soules and renouncing in woordes, and refusing in deedes to bee an earthly Prince and iudge in tem∣porall thinges as the Scripture plainely recordeth? And therefore first con∣fesse and correct your owne ouersight, if not error, which taketh from Christ or at lest diuideth with him his speciall and peculiar title: and then if we proue not that all men haue written and spoken in like sort as wee doe, you shall find vs readie, if that be your feare to retract euery syllable that is preiudicial
to the sonne of GOD, and to giue him as much honour as you can wish, or wee deuise: which when it is most, is no more than hee well deser∣ueth. Phi. You content vs somewhat if you stand to this which you say, that you giue Princes no Power against the faith nor Canons of the Church, and that the gouernment which you acknowledge in them for spirituall things and causes is nothing els but their temporall and externall might and meanes to see the Rules and precepts of Christ and his Church receiued and settled in their Realmes, and to punish the neglecters and resisters of the same. And yet your termes were so large that your owne friendes reproued them as well as wee. Theo. Princes must be indured whatsoeuer they cōmand, but not obeyed agaynst the faith or canōs of the church. In temporall things Prin∣ces may not frustrate the lawes of their progeni∣tors, nor the liberties of the people.Neither misplace nor mistake my wordes: Against the precepts of Christ or Canons of his Church wee giue Princes no power: most true, we doe not; mary by the Canons of the Church we do not meane the Popes Bulles or decrees, nor the partiall iudgements of such Councels as he hath assembled for his faction and framed to his fansies: These bee late, violent and wicked intrusions, but the auncient and Godly Rules of Christes Church generally receaued of all good Christians and generally confirmed of all good Princes, these be the Canons which Princes in dutie should not, in equitie may not subuert, if they wil be taken for faithful defenders and not or wilfull op∣pressours of Christes church. For if in temporal things Princes may not dis∣solue the Lawes of their Progenitors, nor frustrate the liberties of their peo∣ple against reason and Iustice, how much lesse ought they to violate the true Canons and euacuate the good orders and discipline of the Church, concluded by so many Godly Fathers, confirmed by so many worthie Princes, and set∣led in so many sundrie places and ages? Lib. 4. cap. 27.Constantine, saith Eusebius, confirmed with his authoritie the Canons which the Bishops had agreed on in their Synodes, lest the Rulers of (his) Prouinces should infringe them.Constit. 131. de Eccle. Canon. Al godly prin∣ces haue ad∣mitted the Canons of the Church. Constit. 6. Athanas. ad solitar. vitā agentes. We decree, saith Iustinian, that the sacred ecclesiastical Canons concluded and confirmed in the fower (first generall) Councels, haue equal force with (our) lawes. For, we keepe the Canons of the foresaid Councels as lawes. And again, It hath beene rightly said of Em∣perours before vs and of vs also, that the sacred Canons ought to take place as lawes. Athanasius obiected this to Constantius as a note of a tyrant, that he did abrogate the Canons with violence, and ordered all things against the Canons. And Gregorie, when it was written to him that the Emperour com∣manded an other to be chosen for the Bishop of Iustiniana within his prouince, by reason of the sicknes which the said Bishop was troubled with in his head, made this answere: The Canons do no where commaund that a Bishop should loose his office for sicknesse.Gregor. lib. 9. epist. 41. And therefore it is against iustice, if a Bishop fall sick, that he should be depriued of his honor. If the said reuerēd Bishop for his own ease do require to be discharged of his Episcopal functi∣on, when hee deliuereth that petition in writing, it must bee graunted.
Otherwise I dare not doe it, for feare of almightie God. Whatseeuer the Emperour commaundeth, is in his owne power. Let him prouide as hee seeth cause:The Pope obeyed the Princes lawes not against the Canons. onely let him not cause mee to bee partaker of this mans depo∣sition. That which hee doeth, if it bee according to the Canons, wee follow it; if it be against the Canons, we beare it (with silence) so long as wee may without sinne on our parts. Phi. Where haue you this place? Theo. Why doe you aske? Phi. Because wee find the former words in our Decrees but not the later. Theo. In deede you say trueth, they were not for your diet; they shewe that the Bishoppe of Rome was obedient to the Emperour in ecclesiasticall causes, so long as the Prince did ioyne with the Canons, and that hee was silent when the Prince went besides the Canons so farre foorth as hee might with∣out sinne in himselfe.The Popes name put in steed of the Princes. Caus. 7. quaest. 1. Scripsit. And therefore the Collector of your Decrees, left out the last wordes and changed the first by putting the Popes person in steede of the Princes. For where Gregorie begynneth, Scripsit mihi tua dilectio pijssi∣mum Dominum nostrum reuerentissimo fratri meo Ioanni primae Iustinianae Episco∣po, pro egritudine capitis quam patitur praecipere succedi: Your Louingnes wrate vnto mee that our most religious Lord commaundeth an other to be cho∣sen in the place of our reuerende brother Iohn Bishoppe of Iustmiana, be∣cause of the griefe of his head: Your Lawe reporteth it thus, Scripsit mi∣hitua dilectio, me reuerentissimo fratri Do. &c. Your Louingnes wrate vnto me that I commaunded an other to bee chosen, &c. which is a detestable and inexcusable forgerie: but my purpose is to shew that good Princes ob∣serued and esteemed the Canons of the Church no lesse than their owne Lawes, and tooke them for paternes to guyde their Edicts in causes ecclesi∣asticall,Nouel. cōst. 83. Item const. 6. as sayth Iustinian: Our Lawes doe not disdaine to follow the sacred Rules (or Canons.) Phi. It abateth the supreme power of Princes very much to bee bound to the Canons of the Church.To be tyed to the saith and canons of the Church doth not diminish their supre∣macie. Theo. No more than it doeth in ciuill regi∣ment to bee tied to the groundes of nature, reason and equitie, from which no wise nor sober Prince woulde wish to bee loosed. And Princes bee Su∣preme not in respect that all thinges bee subiect to their willes, which were plaine tyrannie, not Christian authoritie; but that all Persons within their Realmes are bounde to obey their Lawes, or abide their paynes, and them∣selues not depriueable by the Pope but reserued to the righteous and terrible iudge, if they abuse their swordes to the maintaining of error and oppressing of innocents. Phi. Yet this is cleare that the sworde which Princes beare is tem∣porall and therefore the power which Princes haue is not spirituall.The Princes sword is not spirituall. Theo. Wee neuer sayde that Princes had any spirituall power, it is a false col∣lection of yours, it is no part of our confession, and the sworde which they beare wee neuer called but externall and tem∣porall. For the true spiritual
and eternall sworde is the woorde of God.Ephes. 6. The sworde of the spirite, sayth S. Paul, which is the word of God; and S. Iohn describing the sonne of God, sayth,Reuelat. 1. Out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword. The word of GOD, as S. Paul writeth,Hebr. 4. The word of god is the spirituall sword. is more percing than any two edged sword, and entereth through euen to the parting in sunder of the soul and spirit. And as for both these causes it is spirituall, so it indureth for euer and is eternall. The magistrats sword compared with this is but corporall and temporall. Corporall in respect it toucheth the body,The magis∣trats sword is corporall. Mat. 10. Mat. 10. And tem∣porall. but not the soule. Our sauiour for war∣ning his Disciples that they should be brought before Gouernours and Kings for his sake, addeth to encourage thē, Feare not those which kill the body, but cannot kill the soul. Temporal it is in respect either of Gods ordinance which lasteth no longer than the time of this worlde, or of mans vengeance which cea∣seth by death and rageth no farther, or if you will for that it ordereth the things of this life and praiseth or punisheth the senssible and external actions of the bo∣dy which be temporall.2. Cor. 4. The things which bee seene are temporal, saith S. Paul, but the things which are not seene are eternal. Phi. You take temporal for that which dureth for a season and is not eter∣nall; and we take temporal as it is opposite to spirituall. And in that sense be∣cause the sword hath to doe with temporal men and matters only, we call it the temporall sworde: and haue good reason to defend that temporall Princes should not meddle with spirituall Persons or causes. Theo. How the Pa∣pists abuse the word spi∣rituall in ex∣tending it to men and matters that they should not.The distinction of spirituall and temporal Persons, things and cau∣ses as you limite them sprang first from your selues without all authoritie, or rather in deed against the authoritie of the holy scriptures: and was nothing els but a mere deuise of yours to encrease your Courts and to wind the sword by litle and litle out of other mens fingers & hang it at your owne girdles. For when you saw that the things which be truly spiritual, as faith, hope & charitie with other vertues and fruites of the spirit, belonged only to GOD and not to man, and therefore by the resolution of our Sauiour must bee giuen to God and not to Cesar, first you would needs be termed spirituall men, taking the name which is common to all the sonnes of GOD, as proper to your selues and your seruants, and by that colour exempt not onely Priests but also doore keepers, torche bearers, bell ringers, Church sweepers, and all your retinue from subiection to temporall magistrates. They be spiri∣tuall which haue the spi∣rit of God. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 2. Gal. 6.But S. Paul calleth them spirituall men which haue the spirit of GOD, as all his children haue, and the rest carnal or natural men. I could not speak to you brethren as vnto spiritual men but as vnto carnal, euen as vnto babes in Christ. For where as there is yet among you enuieng, strife & dissention, are you not carnal? And againe, The naturall man sauoureth not the thinges of the spirit of God, but the spiritual man discerneth al things. And so, Brethrē, if a mā be fallen into any fault, you that be spiritual restore such a one with the spirit of meeknesse.Iude epist. As also S. Iude: These be fleshly men, hauing no spirit.
And likewise Saint Peter:1. Pet. 2. Bee you made as liuely stones, a spirituall house. What wrong then you doe the faythfull when you name them temporall, as if the hope of their calling reached no farther than this life, let the wise and Godly iudge. That reproche of temporall, and pride of spirituall men, no lear∣ned nor auncient father euer vsed.Hieron. ad Iulian. tomo epist. 1. Secular S. Hierom calleth them, Laymen & Clerkes that were not Monkes. Temporall no man euer called the people of God besides your selues. Next, that your landes and liuings might speede no worse than your selues,Their lands & liuings must be spirituall though Saint Paul call thē carnall. 1. Cor. 9. Rom. 15. for gaine was the mother of your earely and dayly deuotion, you tooke or∣der to haue them goe for spirituall thinges also, notwithstanding Saint Paul expressely called them carnal. If wee haue sowen vnto you spirituall things, is it a great matter if wee reape your carnall thinges? And speaking of the poore Saintes at Ierusalem, If the Gentiles bee made partakers of their spirituall thinges, their duetie is also to minister vnto them in carnal things. And where the Lorde himselfe willed the Scribes and high Priestes to giue vnto Caesar the thinges that were Caesars,Mat. 22. and vnto God the things that were Gods, you, as if that graunt had beene too liberall, thought it expedient vppon some wiser consideration belike, to set the image and superscription of God and his Church vpon your corruptible and earthly Mammon, and by that cunning to keepe it from Caesar.Ambros. epist. lib. 5. orat. cōtra Auxent. Farre better S. Ambrose: If the Empe∣rour aske for tribute, we deny it not. The lands of the Church pay tribute. If he affect the lands themselues, he hath power to take them, no man amōgst vs is any let vnto him. The almes of the people is enough for the poore. Let them neuer procure vs enuie for (our) Landes, let them take them, if they please. I doe not giue them to the Emperour; but I doe not de∣nie them. Thirdly to enlarge your kingdome and stretch your winges ouer all men and matters as farre as you needed or listed,The Romish kalender of spirituall things. you tooke the punishment of incest, adulterie, fornication, drunkennes, vsurie, periurie, simonie, sorcerie, blasphemie, witchcraft, Apostacie, and such like grosse and fleshly vices out of the Magistrates handes vnder the colour of spirituall thinges, and fastened them to your consistories: And not therewith content, you caught holde of tithes, testaments, legacies, intestates, patronages, mariages, diuorces, dow∣ries, espousals, funerals, affinitie, consanguinitie, bastardie, bondage as of spirituall causes and questions: and if the matter concerned the goods and Landes of Churches or Church men, you made no bones to venter on giftes,See the tytles of their De∣cretals. sales, exchaunges, possession, alienation, restitution, conuenti∣ons, conditions, exactions, sureties, pledges, payments, dammages, iniuries, forgeries, hyring, lending, farming, and a thousand such, as if all actions, cau∣ses and contracts that any way touched your gayne or ease must by and by goe for spirituall, and the magistrate by that poore shift bee secluded from ordering and entermedling with those things, which were wont to bee wholy guided by the Princes Lawes.
Phi. Mislike you that Priestes shoulde punish sinne, or that Bishoppes should deale in those cases which bee incident to the Lawes of GOD and Canons of the Church? Theo. Malefactours of al sortes should opēly repent before they be recei∣ued to the Sa∣craments.I doe not mislike that malefactours of all kindes, not onely drunkards, raylers, periurers, adulterers, vsurers and such like, but also theeues, robbers, rauishers, murderers, plagiaries, incendiaries, trytours and all other haynous offendours, when their liues bee spared by Prines, shoulde bee driuen to earnest and open repentaunce before they bee eceiued into the Church, or admitted to the diuine mysteries: yea rather I thnke it very needefull in a Christian common-wealth that God bee pleased and the Church preserued from all felowshippe with these monsterous impie∣ties as well as the Scepter is intreated for their liues; but that you shoulde exempt or saue the workers of wickednes from the Princes sworde and their iust desertes by your priuileges or penances in steede of punishmentes, that is quite repugnant to the sacred Scriptures. Saint Paul sayth, the Prince is Gods minister to reuenge him that doeth euill,Rom. 13. and not the Priest. You may not reuenge malefactours, you may separate your selues from them, and haue no communion with them: the Prince must punish them. It passeth your Commission to beare the sworde, and without the power of the sworde your corporall correcting and afflicting of them is vnlawfull and wrongfull violence. The goods, lands, and li∣uings of Cler∣gie men be Cesars right.And so for tythes, testaments, administrations, seruitude, legitimations and such like, you went beyonde your boundes, when you restrayned them to your Courtes, and without Caesar, made Lawes for thinges that belon∣ged vnto Caesar. The goodes, Landes, Liuings, States and families of Lay men and Clerkes are Caesars charge, not yours; and therefore your decrees, iudgements and executions in those cases, if you claime them from Christ as thinges spirituall,What things Christiā Prin∣ces first com∣mitted to Bi∣shops for their learning and integritie, the Pope after∣ward toke thē vp as his own. Bishops the fittest men to deale in these causes, but by the Princes power and lawes. not from Caesar as matters committed of trust to you by Christian Princes, are nothing else but open and wilfull inuasions of other mens rightes, you chaunging the names, and calling those things spirituall and ecclesiasticall, which in deede bee ciuill and temporall, and shouldering Princes from their cusshins, who first suffered Bishoppes to sitte iudges in those causes, of Honour to their Persons and fauour to their functions, which on your part is but a bad requitall of their Princely graces and benefites. Phi. Affinitie, consanguinitie, contractes, mariages, diuorces and a number of those which you recken, are thinges that depende vpon the lawes of GOD, and haue often times such questions incident to them as none but Bishoppes are fit to resolue. Theo. All vertues and vices, all the partes of mans life both priuate and publike, as namely the dueties of Princes, Counsellours, Captaines, Iudges, Parents, Husbandes, Masters, Sub∣iectes, Souldiers, Children, Wiues, and Seruants, yea the woords, thoughts and actions of all men depend in this respect vppon the woorde of God, whe∣ther they shall bee followed as lawfull or auoyded as vnlawfull, and haue
often tymes in them such questions, as none but diuines are it to resolue: will you therefore inferre that all crimes, causes and consultations dome∣sticall, Politicall and martiall are within the limittes of your spirituall iurisdiction, to bee guided, ordered and ended, as it seemeth good to your Ghostly fathers? Phi. Bishoppes haue power to binde and loose as well in all sinnes as in some. Theo. Bishoppes are to teach and instruct men what the will of GOD is in all priuate,Bishops by their function may deny the sacraments to such as will not repent, but they may not compel or punish any man without commission from the Prince. Compulsion & correction in all things is the Princes right. publike, spirituall, temporall, yea ciuill and warlike affayres, but their authoritie goeth no farther than to denounce the woorde and dispence the Sacramentes in such sort as GOD hath pre∣scribed them: It passeth their power to make Lawes and appoynt ex∣ternall and corporall punishments for any sinne: that is proper to the sword, which GOD hath ordayned of purpose to compell and punish for the bet∣ter execution of his will and obseruation of his Lawe, which ee things of all other most spirituall. And therefore as Preachers by their office haue instruction and direction in all thinges both temporall and spirituall, to compare them and pronounce them consonant or dissonant with the Lawe of GOD, so Princes haue compulsion and correction annexed to their swordes as well for spirituall causes as temporall, or rather of the twaine to see Godlinesse and honestie preserued amongst men, than foode and ray∣ment prouided. Phi. This were a Paradoxe in deede that the Princes sworde was first ordayned by God rather for spirituall thinges and causes than for temporall. Theo. None at all,The sword ordayned chiefly for things spiri∣tuall. Rom. 7. Ibidem. if you marke it well. To buyld and plant, sowe and reape, eate and drinke there needed no sworde on earth; but to preserue the Rules of pietie, charitie, sobrietie and equitie amongest men, for this cause were Magistrates first ordayned by God, and these bee thinges precise∣ly and properly called spirituall in the sacred Scriptures. The lawe is spi∣rituall, sayth the Apostle, and the commaundement (both the whole and e∣uery part of it) is holy, iust and good, which bee the right notes of spiritu∣all vertues. If then the sworde were first erected by GOD to defend and exe∣cute the partes and braunches of his Lawe, and the contentes of his Lawe be spirituall, ergo the Princes power was first ordayned of God for thinges spirituall and not onely for temporall, as you fondly dreame and are foully deceiued. And this is the meaning of Saint Paul when hee sayth that Princes are not to bee feared for good workes but for euill.Rom. 13. 1. Pet. 2. Mark. 10. Worldly thinges be neither good nor euil: for which two causes Prin∣ces beare the word. With whome Saint Peter agreeth calling the king preeminent for the punishment of euil do∣ers, and the prayse of them that doe well. Nowe good and euill are to bee measured by Gods law, not by mans: for as no man is good but only God, so no mans Lawe is the rule of good and euill but onely Gods. And tempo∣rall thinges bee neither good nor euill, but altogether indifferent, ergo Prin∣ces were not ordayned of God for temporall things, but the goods, bodyes,
and liues of their subiects were cōmitted to their handes for spirituall respects, that is, for the preseruation of fayth and good maners, which shall go for spiritu∣all thinges and causes, when your tithes and testaments shall stande backe for temporall. Phi. Understand you what temporall is? Theo. It should seeme you doe not by your diuiding temporall against spirituall.The spiritual things which the Pope clai∣meth are tē∣porall. Repugnant to spiritual is carnall, corporall and naturall, not temporall, as you counter set them; and opposite to temporall is not spirituall, but eternall. And here you may see the falsenes and absurdnes of your diuision. The spirituall thinges which your Courtes discusse bee temporall not eternall: for after this life there bee no such questions nor actions. The keyes and Sacraments in which con∣sisteth your spirituall power bee not eternall but temporall, they serue for the Church in earth,1. Cor. 13. not in heauen. Saint Paul will teache you that Prophe∣syings, tongues and knowledge, notwithstanding they bee giftes of the spi∣rite,1. Cor. 14. and namely rehearsed among spirituall thinges by the holy Ghost, yet shall they cease and bee abolished. So that all the spiritual things which wee striue for, are but temporall, and thinges eternall bee neither vnder the Priestes power nor the Princes, but reserued onely to God and expec∣ted onely from God. Phi. Eternall they bee not, but spirituall they bee. Theo. Then may the selfe-same thinges bee both spirituall and tempo∣rall, which euerteth cleane your loose diuision of Temporall against spi∣rituall. Phi. Princes were not ordained to cloa the backe & feede the bel. . Tim. 6.Temporall wee call those thinges that serue to maintaine this tem∣porall life. Theo. The necessities of this life are nourishment and ray∣ment, the rest are superflities. When wee haue foode and apparel, sayth the Apostle, let vs bee therewith content, whatsoeuer is aboue is need∣lesse and noysome. Our Sauiour willing his not to bee carefull for their life, expresseth all thinges that bee needefull for this present life. Take no thought saying what shall wee eate?Mat. 6. what shall wee drinke? or where∣with shall wee bee clothed? Your heauenly Father knoweth that you haue neede of these thinges. These thinges wee neede, and therefore are they promised: other thinges are not promised, and therefore we neede them not. If Princes were first ordained of God for those thinges onely which are needefull to maintaine this temporall life (for thinges superfluous are besides the promise and without the protection of GOD,) the power and charge of Princes shoulde consist in meates, drinkes and apparell, and Princes haue no farther care of their people than they haue of their houndes and Horses, to see them well fedde and smoothe kept, which is a very wicked and brutish opinion. Phi. They are besides to maintaine peace and quietnes among their sub∣iects. Theo. You might haue ioyned godlines and honestie therewithall, as S. Paul doeth,1. Tim. 2. and then had you done well. I exhort, sayth hee, that prayers and supplications be made for Kings & for all that are in authoritie, that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and honestie.Godlines and honestie the chiefest cau∣ses why Prin∣ces were or∣dained. Prayers must bee made for kinges, that they may discharge their duties according to Gods ordinance, which is, that their subiects by their helpe and meanes, may leade an honest, godly and quiet life, godlinesse and honestie being the chiefest endes of our praiers and effectes of their powers. For God hath not put the goodes, landes, bodies and liues of men into Princes handes to cloath their backes and fill their bellies, but with praise to prouoke those that be willing, & to driue those that be not willing, with punishments, to imbrace pietie towards God, sobrietie towardes themselues, and charitie towardes their neighbours. This you may learne by the regiment of euery priuate familie,The Prince hath the same charge in the cōmonwealth that euerie priuate man hath in his familie. Ephes. 6. The parentes charge to∣wardes their children. Psalm. 34. Deut. 4. Deut. 4. which is both a part and a paterne of the common-wealth. Al parents and masters haue a farther charge ouer their children and seruantes than to see them defended frō hunger and colde. A wicked father is hee that feedeth and cloatheth; and nour∣ereth not his children. Ye fathers, saith S. Paul, bring vp your children in the instruction and information of the Lord. Come children, saith Dauid, harken vnto me, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. Moses admonishing the whole people of the Iewes & as it were speaking to euery particular mā: Take heed, saith he, to thy selfe that thou forget not the thinges which thine eyes haue seene, and that they depart not out of thine heart all the dayes of thy life: but teach them thy sonnes and thy sonnes sonnes: and so God him∣selfe said to Moses, Gather mee the people togither, and I will cause them to heare my words, that they may learne to feare me all the dayes that they shall liue vpon the earth, and that they may teach their children. This di∣ligence God cōmended and rewarded in Abraham as the best part of a fathers duetie:Genes. 18. I know him, saith God, that hee will commaund his sonnes and his houshold after him that they keepe the waie of the Lord, to do righteousnes and iudgement, that the Lord may bring vpon Abraham that (good) which he hath spoken vnto him. If priuate men be bound to traine vp their fami∣lies in the feare of God and loue of vertue, much more are Princes (the publike fathers of their countries and exalted to farre greater and higher authoritie by Gods ordinance than fathers or masters) I say much more are they in cōscience charged & by calling licenced to frame their subiectes to the true seruice of God & right obedience of his law, which be thinges not temporal but spiritual. This king Dauid protesteth and promiseth vnto God he will doe in his king∣dom. Him,Psalm. 101. Dauids charge in his king∣dome. that priuilie slaundereth his neighbour, will I destroy. Mine eyes shall be to the faithfull of the Land, that they may dwell with mee, hee that walketh in a perfect way, he shal serue me. There shall no deceitful (or proude) person dwell within mine house, hee that telleth lies shall not re∣maine in my sight. Betimes will I destroy all the wicked of the Land that I may cut off al the workers of iniquitie from the citie of the Lord. This christian Princes,Religion the Princes chie∣fest charge. Nouel. Consti. 6. as you heard before, made not onely a part but the chiefest part of their duetie. The true religion of God and honest conuersa∣tion (euen) of Priests (themselues) is our chiefest care, saith Iustinian. And
so Valentinian & Theodosius:Legum Theod. Nouel. tit. 2. de Iudaeis & Sa∣maritanis. Aug. epist. 162. The sifting & examining of a Bishop did most pertaine to the princes charge by S. Aug. iudgemēt The search of true religion we finde to be the chiefest care of the Imperiall Maiestie. With whom S. Austen agreeth de∣fending Felix a catholike Bishop against the Donatists for that he was cleared at a temporall bar by the Princes commandement of such crimes as were ob∣iected to him notwithstanding they were ecclesiasticall. One (of you) saith a Bi∣shop ought not to be cleared at the Proconsuls bar, as though he sought it & not rather the Emperour commanded that kinde of trial to be had, to whose charge that matter did most pertaine, and whereof the Prince was to render an account to God. Of this mind were the Bishops of Rome themselues in former ages. Eleu∣therius not long after Christ wrote to Lucius king of this realm amongst other things in this wise:Epist. ad Luciū inter leges Ed∣ward. cap. 17. Eleutherius opinion of the Princes charge. Inter leges Ed∣ward. Reg. cap. 17. Pope Iohns opinion of the Princes charge. You are Gods Vicar in that kingdom. The natiōs & peo∣ple of Britanny are yours; whom you ought to gather & bring vnto concord & peace, vnto the faith & law of Christ, & vnto his (holy) Church, & to nou∣rish, maintaine, protect & rule, & alwaies to defende from iniuries, mischiefs & frō enemies. A king you shalbe, whiles you rule wel, which except you do you shalbe vnworthy the name of a king & loose it, which God forbid. So Pope Iohn made answere to Pipin & Charles. Illos decet vocari Reges, qui vigilā∣ter defendunt & regunt ecclesiam Dei & populum eius imitati Regem Psalmogra∣phum dicentem, non habitabit in medio domus meae, qui facit superbiam, &c. We must cal those kings, which doe carefully defend & rule the church of God & his people, after the example of king Dauid in his Psalmes, a proude man shall not dwel in mine house. Beda hist. gentis Anglor. cap. 32. Gregories cō∣fession of the Princes charge.This Gregory the great earnestly exhorted Edelberth vnto, the first that was christened of the Saxon kings in this Land. For this cause the almightie God bringeth good Princes to the regiment of his people, that by them hee may bestow the gifts of his mercy vpon al that are vnder thē. Therfore glorious son, the grace which you haue obtained at Gods hands keepe with a careful minde, & hasten to extend the faith of Christ in the nations vnder you. In∣crease the zeale of your vprightnes to their conuersion, subuert the worship of idols, ouerthrow their tēples, edifie the maners of your subiects by exhor∣ting, threatning, faire intreating, correcting, & shewing examples of wel do∣ing, that you may find him a rewarder in heauen, whose name & knowlege you haue dilated in earth. For so Constantine a most religious Emperor, reuo∣king the Romane Empire from the peruerse seruice of idols subdued the same with himself to the almighty God, our Lord Iesus Christ, & turned him self together with the people vnder him to God with al his heart. And nowe let your excellency labor to poure the knowledge of one God the father, the son & the holy Ghost into the Princes & people that are subiect to you, that he may make you partaker of his kingdom, whose faith you cause to be re∣ceiued and obserued in your kingdom. This the kings of England before & since the cōquest were taught to be their duty & sworn to execute faithfully as the lawes of king Edward the good make
proofe,The king of Englands oth expressing his charge. Inter leges Ed∣ward. cap. 17. de Regis offcio. which William the Conquerer receiued & confirmed: where the office & charge of a king are thus expressed: A king, because he is the Lieutenant of the most high king, was appointed to this end that he should regard & gouerne the earthly kingdom and the people of God, and aboue all thinges his holie Church, and defend her from wronges, and roote out male factors from her, yea scatter and destroy them. Which except he do he can not iustly be cal∣led a king. A king ought to feare God, and aboue all thinges to loue him and to establish his commaundementes throughout his kingdom. He ought also to keepe,Ibidem. nourish, maintaine, and gouerne the holie Church of his kingdome with all integritie and libertie according to the constitutions of (his) fathers and predecessours, and to defende it against enemies, so as God may be honoured aboue all, and euer had in minde. He ought to establish good lawes and approued customes, and abolish euill (lawes and customes) and remoue them all out of his Realme. Hee ought to doe right iudgement in his kingdom, and execute iustice by the counsell of his Nobles. All these thinges ought the king to sweare in his owne person be∣fore he be crowned. The verie Heathen perceiued & confessed this to be true. Aristotle a prophane Philosopher writing of the first institution of kings,The very hea∣then were of the same opi∣nion. sheweth how many things they were by office to medle with , A king (in olde time) was the leader in warres, pronouncer in iudge∣ments, and ouerseer of religion.Politic. lib. 3. cap. 11. Ibidem, cap. 5. And againe, , Diuine things were committed to Princes (as part of their charge.) Al Mo∣narchies, kingdomes and common-wealthes, Assyrians, Persians, Medes, Grae∣cians, Romanes,In all king∣domes and common-wealthes since the foundati∣on of the earth religion hath been set∣led & defen∣ded by the Magistrates sword. Iewes, Gentiles, Pagans, Christians, haue euer kept this for a generall rule, that religion shoulde bee setled and establissed by publike lawes, and maintained by the Magistrates sword. So that if you take the de∣fence of pietie, the reward of honestie, and balance of equitie from the Princes charge, you run headlong against God and man to feede your owne appetites, and see not that which reason and nature taught the heathen to confesse, that as euery priuate man is bound to seeke and serue God aboue all thinges, so euerie societie of men, be it familie, citie or countrie, is likewise bound to haue a spe∣ciall and principall care of his seruice, which can not be done, vnlesse it be plan∣ted & preserued by publike lawes: & of these lawes as of all other amongst men, onely Magistrates be the makers, keepers and reuengers. Phi. Princes be charged after a sort with godlines, and honestie. Theo Your delaies do not answere our proofes. We shew the chiefest part of their charge to be godlines and honestie, which be thinges spiritual, not temporall. Phi. What if that be granted? Theo. If their duty stretch so far, their autho∣ritie must stretch as far.Their autho∣ritie must stretch as far as their dutie. Their charge ceaseth where their power endeth. God neuer requireth princes to do that which he permitteth thē not to do: but rather his commanding them to care for those thinges is a full authorizing of them to medle with those thinges. If then godlines and honestie bee the chiefest part
of their charge, ergo they be likewise the chiefest end of their power, and conse∣quently Princes beare the sword chiefly for spiritual thinges and causes, & not, as you defend, onely for temporall. Phi. You put all thinges temporall, spirituall and ecclesiasticall into their handes. Theo. In all these thinges and other things whatsoeuer, we say, they beare the sword,God hath gi∣uen Princes the sword in those thinges which himself commandeth. and why should that displease you? God hath giuen them the sworde euen in those thinges which himselfe commaundeth and prescribeth, as namely faith and good manners, which be the chiefe contentes of his lawe and respectes of our life, and do you think it much that they beare the sword in those indifferent matters which Bishops haue agreed on for seemelinesse and good order to be kept in the church, no way comparable to those thinges which God hath put them in trust with, and made them defenders and auengers of? The Priest in no cause may beare the sword.And if Princes shall not beare the sworde in thinges and causes ecclesiasti∣call, you must tell vs who shall. The Priest or the Prince of force must do it; and since by Gods law the Priest may not medle with the sword, the consequēt is ineuitable, that Princes alone are Gods ministers, bearing the sword to re∣ward and reuenge good and euill in all thinges and causes, bee they temporal, spirituall or ecclesiasticall, vnlesse you thinke that disorders and abuses ecclesi∣asticall should be freely permitted and neither preuented nor punished by pub∣like authoritie, which in these froward ages, would breede a plain contempt of all ecclesiasticall order and discipline, and hasten the subuersion of those king∣domes and common-wealthes where such confusion is suffered. Phi. The Rites and Ceremonies of the Church are not in the Princes power.The confir∣ming of Rites and Ceremo∣nies needeth the sword. Theo. To deuise new Rites and Ceremonies for the Church, is not the Princes vocation, but to receiue and allow such as the Scriptures and Canons commend and such as the Bishops and Pastours of the place shall ad∣uise, not infringing the Scriptures or Canons. And so for all other ecclesiasti∣call thinges and causes, Princes be neither the deuisers nor directors of them, but the confirmers and establishers of that which is good, and displacers and reuengers of that which is euill, which power we say they haue in all thinges & causes, be they spirituall, ecclesiasticall or temporall. Phi. And what for excommunications and absolutions, be they in the Prin∣ces power also?The abuse or contempt of excommuni∣cation reuen∣ged by the sword. The sworde committed to the Prince. Rom. 13. His Apostles forbidden the sword. Mat. 26. Theo. The abuse of excommunication in the Priest, & con∣tempt of it in the people, Princes may punish; excommunicate they may not, for so much as the keies are no part of their charge. But these particulars if we seuerally discusse we shall neuer end: the generall rules on which our assertion is grounded, may be sooner proposed and resolued. First, to whom hath God committed the sword, to the Priest or the Prince? Phi. To whom say you? Theo. S. Paul expressely writeth of the Prince that He beareth the sword not without cause, and is Gods minister to reuenge him that doth euil. And our Sauiour seuerely forbiddeth Peter & the rest of his A∣postles to medle with the sword: All that take the sword shall perish by the sworde; and to them all, You know that kinges of Nations raigne ouer thē,
and they that be great exercise authoritie, with you it shall not be so.Mat. 20. The sword is but the signe of publike and Princely power, and where the thing is not lawfull, the signe is vnlawfull. Since then the Lord interdicteth his A∣postles and messengers all princely power, it is euident, the sword which is but a signe thereof, is likewise interdicted them. Thus much Bernard sticketh not to tell Pope Eugenius to his face.Bernard de con∣siderat. lib. 2. It is the Lordes voice in the Gospell: Kinges of Nations are Lordes ouer them, and they that haue power on them are called gracious, and the Lord infer∣reth, you shall not be so. It is a cleare case, the Apostles are forbidden do∣minion. Go thou then,Dominion in¦terdicted the Pope himself. saith Bernard to the Pope, and vsurpe if thou dare, either an Apostleship if thou be a Prince, or dominion if thou be Apostolik. Thou art expressely forbidden one of them. If thou wilt haue both, thou shalt loose both. The paterne of an Apostle is this, dominion is interdicted, seruice is inioyned. Gird thy selfe with thy sworde, the sworde of the spirit, which is the word of God. And this Pope Nicholas fairely confesseth.Caus. 33. quaest. 2. ¶ Inter haec. The church of God hath no sword but the spirituall, wherewith she quickeneth, she killeth not. Your owne law saith:Cas. 33. quaest. 8. ¶ De Episc. No clergimen may vse the sword no not by the Popes authoritie. It is easily proued of Bishops and other clergimen whatsoeuer, that they may not either by their owne authoritie, or by the authoritie of the Bishop of Rome, take weapon in hand (& exercise the ma∣teriall sworde) & addeth this reason, For euery man besides him and his au∣thoritie which hath lawfull power and which, as the Apostle saith, beareth the sworde not without cause, to whom euerie soule ought to bee subiect, euery man, I say, that without this authoritie taketh the sword, shall perish with the sword. He that beareth the sword may lawfully put malefactors to death, and wage warre with his enimies when neede so requireth, which Bishops may not doe. The weapons of our warfare are not carnall,2. Cor. 10. saith S. Paul. Quid Episcopis cum bello? What haue Bishops to do with batle,Ad solitar. vitā agentes. Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 33. saith Athanasius; & Ambrose, Pugnare non debeo: I ought not to fight. If they may not fight much lesse kil, if they may do neither, they can not beare the sword, which is appointed by God, & receiued of men to doe both. The words of our Sauior are cleare with vs for the negatiue. My kingdom, saith he,The seruants of Christ may haue no earth¦ly kingdome, since their ma∣ster had none. Iohn. 8. Matth. 10. 2. Tim. 2. is not of this world. If then your Priests, Prelats & Popes wil be the seruants of Christ, they must chalēge no worldly kingdom as frō him or in his name. The seruant is not aboue his master. If the master with his own mouth haue denied it, the seruāts may not affirm it, or vsurp it. The souldiers of Christ must not intangle them-selues with secular affaires, much lesse make them∣selues Lords and iudges of earthly matters, which office properly belongeth to the sworde and must be sustained of all those that beare the sword. The Popes themselues before their power and pride grew so great, were of this opinion with vs.Distinct. 96. ¶ Cum. ad verum. When the truth (which is Christ) was once come, af∣ter that, saith Pope Nicolas, neither did the Emperour take vppon him
the Bishops right,A Bishop may not vsurp an Emperours name, much lesse his sword nor the Bishop vsurpe the Emperours name, because the same mediatour of God and man, the man Christ Iesus, distinguisheth the offices of ech power with proper actions and different dignities, to this end that (the Bishop) which is a souldier vnto God shoulde not intangle and snare himselfe with wordly affaires, and againe (the Prince) which is occu∣pied in earthly matters should not be Ruler of diuine things. Distinct. 10. ¶ Quoniam idē. Cyprian wri∣teth to Iulian an 100. yeares before Iulian was borne. The Disci∣ples of Christ straitly char∣ged not to medle with Princely swords.The very same text, word for word, your Decrees make Cyprian write to Iulian the Emperour, if those be Cyprians wordes, and not rather an impu∣dent forgerie in his name. For how could Cyprian that died vnder Valerian 260. after Christ, write to Iulian that began his raigne 360. after Christ? But such proppes are fittest to bolster vp your kingdom of darkenesse and error. Sure it is, which the wordes of our Sauiour apparantly proue, that all the Disciples and Apostles of Christ are straitly charged not to medle with prince∣ly Scepters and swordes, and therefore out of all question only Princes beare the sworde within their owne Realmes and dominions, for so much as that ho∣nour and power is expressely prohibited and interdicted by the Lord himselfe to all Preachers and Bishops. Phi. This wee woulde haue graunted you with halfe these wordes. Theo. And this wee woulde haue depende not on your grant, which is fickle, but on such proofes as we might make iust accoūt of. Phi. How then? Theo. As the first is apparant, that onely Princes haue the sword commit∣ted to their charge by Gods appointmēt, so the next is as euident that the sword I meane the publike authoritie of Magistrats in Christian common-wealthes,The sworde hath beene, may be, and should be vsed for that which is good in al spi¦rituall things and causes. hath been, may be, and should be vsed for the receiuing, establishing and deen∣ding of that which is good, and prohibiting, abolishing and punishing of that which is euill in all spirituall and ecclesiasticall thinges and causes, as well as in temporall: which the sacred Scriptures, the auncient Fathers, the Church Stories, the lawes and examples of al ages and countries do sufficiently proue, as you saw before. Phi. This is not it that we stand on. Theo. This is that we affirme, stand you on what you lift. Phi. If this be granted, what will you conclude? Theo. If this be proued, you shall see what we conclude. If it bee not, shew where the defect is. Phi. That onely Princes beare the sword within their own realms, which may be and should bee vsed for the receiuing, establishing, and defending of the faith & Cannons of the church & all thinges incident or pertinent to the same, and for prohibiting and punishing whatsoeuer is repugnant to either, in this we finde no defect; Let vs therefore see what you will infer. The. First then the words of our oth, that Her Highnes is the only gouernor of this realm (bearing the sword) as wel in al spiritual,The oth clea∣red. or ecclesiastical things & causes as tēporal, be not only tolerable & resonable, but such by your own cō∣fessiō as we may truly defend, & you can not iustly confute.Their absur∣dities retur∣ned on their owne heades. Next the absurdities which you bring against vs, as if we deriued the spirituall power of preaching, baptizing, binding, loosing, imposing handes and offering prayers to God,
from the Princes Soueraigne right and title, which we doe not: all these ab∣surdities I say bee mere follies, grounded vpon the carelesse mistaking, if not spitefull peruerting of our wordes. Thirdly, your defacing and imouing the Princes sworde,The Popes power ouer Princes vsur∣ped. and aduauncing and defending against all Princes one that shall commaund them and depose them at his pleasure, what else is this but a resisting of the powers which God hath ordained, & recting and  in the Church of Christ without authoritie, that vnder the couert of binding and feeding shall make him-selfe Lorde of all kingdomes and countries? Phi. Supreme is the worde that wee most impugne. Theo. And Su∣preme is the worde which you shall neuer ouerthrow, being a plaine and ma∣nifest deduction out of the wordes of S. Paul. Let euerie soule,Rom. 13. Supreme is a manifest de∣duction out of S. Paul. saith hee, bee subiect to the superiour Powers. If all men must be subiect to them, ergo they be superiour to all, and superiour to all is supreme. Consult both your Seminaries, and refell this one sequele if you can: marie cauill not as your Apologie doeth, that Supreme bringeth Christ and his Sainctes in subiection to Princes. The Apostle speaketh of mortall men, and so doe wee: And in comparison, with them if Sainct Pauls words be true that euery soule must be subiect to Princes as vnto Superiours; our consequent is irrefutable, that Princes be supreme. Phi. S. Paul maketh them superiours ouer all persons but not ouer all thinges.Supreme ouer Persons, not ouer things. Theo. That distinction is ours, not yours: we did euer interprete supreme for superiour to all men within their dominions. Phi. And so wee graunt them to bee, but not in all thinges. For in temporall thinges they be superiours to all men, in spirituall they bee not. Theo. That restraint commeth too late.We may not limit where we will obey the sword, & where not. The holy Ghost charging you to be subiect to them sim∣ply without addition, it passeth your reach to limit in what thinges you will, and in what thinges you will not be subiect. Againe wee haue inuinciblie proued and you haue clearely confessed that Princes may commaunde for trueth,Where they may com∣maund, we must obey. We may not resist them, but with reue∣rence indure them, though they cōmand against God and his truth. Heathen Ty∣raunts had power of the sword ouer Christ and his Apostles. and that they beare the sworde for the perfect obseruation and execution of Gods lawe, and publike defence of the faith and Cannons of the Church, which bee thinges not temporall but spirituall; and out of all question, where they may by Gods law command, all men must obey them, not onely for feare of wrath; but also for conscience sake. Lastly what better proofe can you wish that in all thinges they bee superi∣ours to all men, than that their sworde may not bee resisted for any tempo∣rall or spirituall cause, but must bee rather indured with meekenes & reue∣rence, though they persecute truth, & shew themselues enemies to God and his church? For so the Lord in his owne person taught vs, & his Apostles after him, in their writings & sufferings followed the same course. Phi. Had Heathen tyrantes lawfull power ouer Christ and his Apo∣stles in spirituall thinges? Theo. Lawfull power of the sworde to re∣warde and punish, they had ouer Christ and his Apostles in thinges and causes
spiritual.Christ sub∣mitted him∣selfe to the Magistrate. The Lord of grace and life being deliuered by the Priests to the Ma∣gistrate for blasphemie which is a spirituall crime, refused not the iudge, but submitting him-selfe to the Princes Deputie, confessed Pilates power ouer him to bee from heauen, notwithstanding Pilates sentence against him was wrongfull and wicked.So Paul & Pe∣ter both did and taught. S. Paul imprisoned for preaching the Gospel required to be sent to Caesar and to make answere before Caesar concerning his doctrine and doings. S. Peter patiently endured Neroes sword euen vnto death for tea∣ching the trueth, and warned all Christians to doe the like. Let none of you suffer (publike punishment) as a murderer,1. Pet. 4. or as a theefe, or a malefactour, or as a medler with other mens matters: but if (any man suffer) as a Chri∣stian (that is for religion) let him not be ashamed but glorifie God in this re∣spect.Rom. 13. They that resist (especially whē they be punished for religiō) shal receiue to themselues iudgement) and damnation; for God is then most dishonoured when wee make religion a buckler for rebellion. If none must resist that suffer as christians, ergo by Gods ordinance, al men be subiect to the Princes sword, e∣uen in spirituall causes as well as in temporall. Phi. Whom we must indure in that which is euill, those must we obey in that which is good. Aug. Epist. 50. Idem Epist. 166. To suffer, but not to obey. Theo. Suffering is as sure a signe of subiec∣tion as obeying. And yet whom you must indure commaunding that which is euill in matters of religion, those you must obey when they commaunde that which is good in the selfe same causes: which you heard concluded out of S. Augustine before. Whosoeuer will not obey the lawes of Emperors which are made for the truth of God, incurreth a grieuous iudgement. And againe, When Emperours hold truth they commaund for truth, which whosoeuer despiseth purchaseth to himselfe iudgement. So that all men are bound to be subiect to the sword in all thinges be they temporall or spirituall, not only by suffering, but also by obeying; mary with this caution, that in thinges which bee good and agreeable to the law of God, the sword must be obeyed: in things that be otherwise, it must be indured. The summe of the do∣ctrine which we teach con∣cerning the Princes su∣premacie.This then is the supreme power of Princes which we soberly teach and you so bitterly detest; that they be Gods ministers in their owne dominions, bea∣ring the sword, freely to permit, and publikely to defend that which God com∣maundeth in faith and good manners, and in ecclesiasticall discipline to receiue and establish such rules and orders as the Scriptures and Canons shal decide to be needfull and healthfull for the Church of God in their kingdomes. And as they may lawfully commaund that which is good in all thinges and causes, bee they temporall, spirituall, or ecclesiasticall, so may they with iust force re∣moue whatsoeuer is erronious, vitious, or superstitious within their Landes, and with externall losses and corporall paines represse the brochers and abet∣ters of heresies and all impieties: from which subiection vnto Princes, no man within their Realmes, Monke, Priest, Preacher, nor Prelate is exempted; and without their Realmes no mortall man hath any power from Christ iudicially to depose them, much lesse to inuade them in open field, least of al to warrāt their subiectes to rebell against them.
These be the things which we contend for,The Iesuites iestes where∣with they mocke the Reader. & not whether Princes be Christs masters, or the functions to preach, baptise, impose hands & forgiue sinnes must be deriued from the Princes power and lawes, or the Apostles might enter to conuert countries without Caesars delagations, those bee iestes and shiftes of yours, no braunches nor sequeles of our opinion. You see the partes & proofes of our doctrine, neither draw back, nor dally, but go to the matter: and say what fault you finde with our assertion. Phi. The former branches of your assertion might be receiued, if it were a∣greed, by whom the sword should be directed.THE DI∣RECTION of PRIN∣CES VNTO TRVETH. We our selues confesse that the Princes sworde should permit, defend and execute that which is good in all spi∣rituall and ecclesiasticall thinges, causes and iudgementes, and repell and pu∣nish the contrarie. But least Princes shoulde wade too farre or tread awry, we would haue their swords guided, and if need be restrained by such as haue grea∣ter experience and better intelligence in those affaires. For ecclesiasticall rules and Canons be not incident to the Princes vocation, and therefore no maruell if Princes be raw in those thinges wherewith they be not acquainted. And since the danger is great if they command for error, & their skil not so great but that they may soone misse the truth, why should you bee loth that others of deeper iudgement & exacter knowledge, whom God hath placed to teach both priuate men & Princes their duties in those cases, should direct & moderate the swordes of Princes for feare least they should be missed to the ruine of themselues, and many thowsandes with them? Theo. We be not loth they should be directed, but rather exhort all Prin∣ces to take great care,Princes must take good care to come by faithfull di∣rection. and spare no paines to come by faithfull and true direc∣tion in those thinges that pertaine to God. For if in temporall matters where the losses are but temporal, they do nothing without the mature and sound ad∣uise of their graue & trustie Counsellours, how inexcusable is their negligence, if in heauenly things where the bodies & soules of them-selues & their subiectes may be lost for euer, they serue their affectiōs & seek not his wil that set them in place, & gaue them power to maintain his truth, & safegard his Church? Phi. We then agree on both sides,The right di∣rectors vnto truth must be discerned by their doctrine not by their dignitie. that Princes must be directed. Theo. We do. Phi. If they must be directed, ergo by Bishops. Theo. Bishops for their calling and learning are the likeliest men to direct them right, but yet your ergo doth not hold. It is not enough for them to be Bishops, they must also be tea∣chers of truth, before they may claime to be directours of Princes. Phi. Who be more likely to teach truth than Bishops? Theo. I said before they were likelie, but your conclusion inforceth a necessitie which you can not proue. Many Bi∣shops haue taught lies and seduced Princes in the church of God, and therefore not their dignitie, but their doctrine is it that Princes must regarde: for nei∣ther Prince, nor people stand bound to the persons of men, but vnto the truth of God, and vnto their teachers so long as they swarue not from truth. Phi. And who shall be iudge of truth? Theo. Absolute iudge of truth,No mortall man may neither Prince nor Priest may chalenge to bee. Phi. Why so? Theo. God
is truth, & of God I trust no man may be iudge. The son of God saith of himself, I am truth:Iohn. 14. & S. Iohn giueth this record of the spirit of God, The spirit is truth. Ye can therfore be no iudges of truth vnles ye will be iudges of God.1. Iohn. 5. Phi. Who shal then be iudge of truth? The. Who but Christ? Phi. He shalbe iudge at the last daie. Theo. Hee shall then giue generall and finall iudgement of all men, but in the meane time hee onely is the soueraine and supreme iudge of truth. The Father hath committed all iudgement to the sonne, and Iohn. 5. & 8. De Nuptijs ad Valentin. lib. 2. ap. 33. my iudge∣ment, saith Christ, is iust. This strife, saith Augustine, requireth a iudge. Iudi∣cet ergo Christus: Let Christ be therefore iudge. In earth, saith Optatus, of this matter there can be no iudgement,Optat. lib. 5. ad ermenianum. we must seeke for a iudge from hea∣uen. But why knocke wee at heauen, when as we haue his will here in the Gospell? Phi. They mean that Christ speaketh in his church at this day by his word, & so iudgeth.Iohn. 17. Bishops no iudges of the word of God. The church is not iudge of the Scriptures Iohn. 10. Theo. And we meane that his word is truth, and therefore your Bi∣shops can not be iudges of the word of Christ, but they must be iudges of Christ himselfe, that speaketh by his word, which is no small presumption. Phi. Shall not the Church be iudge of the Scriptures? Theo. My sheepe, saith Christ, heare my voice, they be no iudges of his voice. A iudge of the lawe is no Iames 4. Aust. in Psal. 2. obseruer of the law, as S. Iames auoucheth: and since the whole church is bound to obey the law of God, they be no iudges of the law. Inferius est nobis quicquid iudicamus. It is inferior to vs whatsoeuer we be iudges of: Idem de vera religione, ca. 31. Eternam igitur legem mundis animis fas est cognoscere, iudicare non fas est. The eternall law of (God) therefore, it is lawfull for cleane harts to know, it is not law∣full for them to iudge. Wee Idem confess. lib. 13. cap. 23. must not, saith Augustine to God, iudge of so high authoritie, neither of the booke which is thine, because we submit our vnderstanding to it. And againe: To the canons of the Scriptures pertaine Contra Cresc. lib. 2. cap. 31. certaine bookes of the Prophetes and Apostles, quos omnino iudicare non au∣deamus, the which in any case wee may not dare to iudge. And this is the reason, there may be no iudge of truth, where no daunger of error is: And of the Scriptures S. Austine saith,Idem Epist. 19. ad Hieronym. Quod omni errore careant dubitare nefarium est, It is a wickednes to make a doubt whether there be any error in them or no: therefore there may be no iudges of them: but the whole church must be subiect to them, and with all humilitie beleeue them. Phi. The Bishops be no iudges of the Scriptures whether they bee true or no; that as you proue is no doubt, and therefore needeth no iudge: But in this they be iudges, whether the Scriptures be mistaken of others or no. Theo. Then bee they no iudges of truth, which is the thing that I first affirmed, but of them selues and others which be subiect to errour and ignoraunce. Phi. Yet they be iudges of errour,Iudging taken for discerning though not of trueth. Theo. If you take iudging for discerning, as the worde doeth often signifie, they can not bee tea∣chers of trueth,Onely God must limit what is truth, & what error. vnlesse they can discerne trueth from errour: But onelie God is to limit and appoint by his word, what shall stand for truth & what for errour. With that Bishops haue nothing to do, they must heare and beleeue the
voice of the great Sheepeheard Christ Iesus, as well as the meanest sheepe in his fould. Phi. Wee grant you that, so you grant vs this, that only Bishops bee discerners of truth. Theo. A liberall offer: You will graunt vs a knowen truth vpon condition that we shall grant you a manifest vntruth. Make earth and ashes, if you dare, to bee iudges of their Lord and maister which is in heauen, or deny Bishops when they be at the highest, to be the seruants of Christ; yea happie be they if they be so much: In these things we neither stande at your almes, nor aske your consents, we be right sure and dare not deny them, & there∣fore our assertion is without contradiction: yours is vtterly false, that only Bi∣shops be discerners of truth.To discerne truth belon∣geth to all. God willeth all men to trie spirites. 1. Iohn. 4. For as Bishops ought to discern which is truth be∣fore they teach, so must the people discern who teacheth right before they beleeue. Phi. Shal the people iudge their Pastors? you be so new fangled that you say you know not what. Theo. We haue the words and warrant of the holy Ghost for that which we say. Beleeue not euery Spirit, but trie the Spirits whether they be of god: for many false prophets are gone out into the world. Prophets be teachers, & if they must be tried before they be trusted, ergo Pastours must be discerned before they be beleeued, & by whom trow you; but by those that should beleeue them, that is by their hearers? The same precept our Sauiour gaue to the multitudes that followed him.Matth. 7. And to dis∣cerne false teachers. Beware of false Prophets (or teachers) which come to you in sheepes clothing, but inwardly they bee rauening wolues. By their fruites you shall know them. If all must beware them, and are taught how to knowe them, ergo they may lawfully trie them, before they beleeue them. This wisdome the Lord himselfe commendeth in his sheep.Iohn. 10. My sheepe heare my voice, and they follow me. A stranger they will not follow but flie from him. Phi. Yet they be no Iudges of Doctrine.The people must discerne teachers by their doctrine 1. Corinth. 10. 1. Corinth. 11. Theo. If you take iudgeing for discerning, as it is often vsed, the people must be discerners and iudges of that which is taught: S. Paul himselfe alloweth them that leaue. I speake as vnto them that haue vnderstanding; iudge ye what I say. And againe, Iudge with your selues, is it seemely that a woman pray vnto God vncouered? And to that end belongeth this exhortation of the Lord which is often found in the scrip∣tures:Matth. 24. Colos. 8. Ephes. 5. 1. Iohn 3. Looke that no man seduce you. For the people of God should haue their senses Heb. 5. 1. Corinth. 14. Orig in Je  Naue. hom. 2. The Fathers referred them selues to the iudgement of the hearers. exercised in the word of trueth, to discerne both good and bad, and in that respect the Apostle sticketh not to say: Let the Prophets speake two or three and let the rest iudge. Origē in teaching the people, submitteth himself to the Apostles Rle in these words: Vos facite quod scriptū est, vt vno dicente, omnes examinent. Me ergo dicente quod sentio, vos discernite & examinate si quid rectū est, aut min{us} rectū. Do you that which is written; one speaking, al (the rest) examine. Whiles thē I say what I think, try & iudge you what is right & what is not. Ambrose when Auxen. of∣fered to dispute before some that were heathen men & not christned, thus tradu∣ceth him to the people of Millā.Ambros. Epi. li. 5. orat. in Aux. Auxentius knowing you not to be ignorant of the faith, hath shunned your iudgemēt & chosen foure or fiue heathen men.
Then in that he hath chosen infidels, he is worthy to be condemned (of chri∣stians) because he hath reiected the Apostles precept, where he saith, Dare any of you hauing ought against another, be iudged vnder the vniust & not rather vnder the Saints? You see then that which hee hath offered is against the Apostles authority. But what speak I of the Apostle, when the Lord him selfe proclaimeth by his Prophet, Heare me my people that know (what be∣longeth to) iudgement, in whose hart my law is? God saith, heare me my people that know iudgement: Auxentius saith, You know not how to iudge: you see that he contemneth God in you, which refuteth the sense of (this) heauenly oracle. For the people, in whose hart the law of God is doth iudge. Who then doth you wrong, he that refuseth or he that referreth himselfe to your audience? Phi. The people must depend on their teachers mouthes & not be iudges ouer them. He that heareth you, heareth me, saith our sauior to his Apostles & their successors,Luke. 10. & he that despiseth you, despiseth me. And whosoeuer shal not re∣ceiue you, nor heare your words going forth out of the house or citie, shake off the dust from your feet. Amen, I say to you, it shalbe more tolerable for the land of the Sodomits & Gomorrheās in the day of iudgemēt than for that city.Matt. 10. Theo. As the Pastors haue authority from Christ to preach the truth, & wo be to them that resist the Preachers of truth;The people haue libertie to discerne, and charge to beware sedu∣cers. so haue all hearers both liberty to dis∣cerne & a charge to beware seducers, giuen them by the same Lord, & wo bee to them that do it not. Take heed, saith our Sauior, that no man seduce you. For many shal come in my name, saying: I am Christ, & shal deceiue many. Then if any shal say to you,Matth. 24. Lo here is Christ, or there, beleeue it not. For there shal arise false Christs & false Prophets, & shal shew great signes & wōders. Behold I haue told you before. Wherefore if they shal say vnto you, beholde he is in the desart, go not forth: behold he is in the secret places, beleeue it not. He that requireth al men to receiue such as he sendeth, chargeth al men to auoide such as pretend his name when they are not sent: and how can the peo∣ple do either if they haue not skill & leaue to discerne them both? Phi. Our Lord gaue that honour to his very enemies, that the people should obey them,Matth. 23. in regard of Moses chaire. Vpon the chaire of Moses haue fitten the Scribes and the Pharisees. All thinges therfore, whatsoeuer they shall say to you, obserue ye and do ye, but according to their workes do ye not for they say & do not. Theo. Thinke you that Christ cōmanded the people to be∣leeue the Pharisees,The people not bound to beleeue the Pharisees do∣ctrine, except it accorded to the law of God. whatsoeuer they taught, or that he affirmed the Pharisees could not teach amisse, because they sate in Moses chaire? Phi. He willed the people to beleeue thē for that they succeeded Moses. The. Though the pharisees were wicked hipocrits, yet because it was their functiō to teach ye people in their Synagogues, he willeth thē to be obeied so lōg as they said nothing but yt which the hearers knew to be agreeable to the law of God, but if they speak any thing of their own besides the law, that the people were to reiect & detest. And so S. Aust. expoundeth the place,Aug. in Iohan. tractat. 46. Sua verò si velint docere, nolite audire, nolite facere: But
if they will teach their owne (deuises besides the law,) neither heare (them) nor doe (as they did you.) Which is plainly commaunded by Christ him∣selfe in the Gospell,Matth. 16. Ibidem vers. 11 Take heede and beware of the leauen of the Pharisees and Saduces, that is (as the holie Ghost doth interprete in the same chapter) of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Saduces. This then is euident. The law of God the people were to receiue and obey at the Pharisees mouthes, though they were hypocrites, because they were ap∣pointed by God for the time to be teachers: But the leauen of the Pharisees, that is their mixtures wherewith they tempered and infected the lawe of God, the people were to beware and auoide: Ergo the people were required to dis∣cerne between the law of God and the leauen of the Pharisees, and charged to follow the first and forsake the last. And why impugne you that which the holy Ghost so often commaundeth and therefore permitteth?1. Iohn. 4. Trie the spirites whether they be of God, as you heard before.1. Thes. 5. Trie all thinges and holde fast that which is good. Be not vnwise but vnderstand what the wil of the Lord is. Be renewed in your minde that you may discerne what the good and acceptable and perfect will of God is.Rom. 12. Philip. 1. 1. Corinth. 2. The whole Scriptures giue the peo∣ple leaue to discerne the truth and re∣quire them so to do. This I pray that your loue may abound yet more and more in knowledge & in all iudgement, that you may discerne the thinges which are best. He that is spirituall discerneth all thinges. You may haue a thowsand like both places & proofes that the faithfull should looke and take heede that they be not seduced. And except you will excuse the people before God, if you misleade them, why should you bar them al trial & vnderstanding whether they folow faith vnto sal∣uation, or withdraw thēselues vnto perdition? Whē the blind leadeth the blind and they fall both into the pit of destruction, is not hee that followeth as sure to perish as he that leadeth? Phi. We be content they shall bee discerners but no iudges of their Pastors. Theo. And Bishops themselues be no iudges but discerners of truth.Princes haue the same li∣bertie to dis∣cerne & trie spirites that priuate men haue. The former precepts com∣prise the Prince aswell as the people. Heb. 13. Phi. We be frō the matter that we began with: we were speaking of Princes. The. We bee right enough. Princes haue the same charge to obey the trueth & beware false Prophets that priuate men haue; ergo they must haue the same freedome to discerne spirites, and refuse straunge doctrines, that all the faithfull haue. Christ hath not appointed one way for Princes & an other for their people to come by the knowledge of his wil, but the same way for both: Ergo the precepts, which I last alleadged & also the former, pertaine to Magistrates as well as to subiects; & to make the rule more generall, in discerning, beleeuing and obeying the truth, there is no distinctions of persons with God. Phi. We receiue your rule, & infer vpon it, that these words of S. Paul, Obey your rulers,Vers. 7. No man boūd to the Prea∣cher farther than he spea∣keth truth. bind as well Princes as priuate men to be subiect to Bishops. The. Take with you this limitation, (which haue spoken to you the word of God) which S. Paul giueth euen in the same chap. & infer what you can. To Bishops speaking the worde of God, Princes as wel as others must yeeld obediēce: but if Bishops passe their commission and speake besides the worde of God, what
they list, both Prince and people may despise them. With this limitation our Sauiour sent his Apostles into the worlde: Go, teach all Nations:The Apostles tied to that condition. but what? To obserue all things whatsoeuer I haue com∣maunded you. And this the Apostles them-selues do not conceale in doing their message. The word of the Lord, saith Peter, indureth for euer, and this is the word which is preached among you.1. Pet. 1. That which we haue seene, saith Iohn, & heard, that declare we to you, that ye may haue felloship with vs. Let a 1. Iohn. 1. 1. Corinth. 4. man, saith Paul, so think of vs as of the ministers of Christ & stewards of the mysteries of God. And as for the rest it is requisite in stewardes that euery man be found faithful. And to the Galat.Galat. 1. The Angels themselues li∣mited to that rule. Though we (our selues) or an Angel from heauen preach vnto you otherwise than that we haue preached vnto you, let him be accursed. Preach I now man or God? I certifie you, bre∣thren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, was not after mā: for I nei¦ther receiued it of man, neither was I taught it (by mā) but by the reuelatiō of Iesus Christ. And this maketh him so diligētly distinguish the precepts of Christ from his own counsels,1. Corinth. 7. To the maried I command, not I, but the Lord: to the rest I speake, and not the Lord: Yea hee requireth of them no more but that they follow him, so far forth as he followeth Christ: Be ye followers of me, euē as I am of Christ,1. Corinth. 17. that is no longer nor farther than I ollow Christ. Chrysostom alleadging the words of S. Paul, Obey your ouerseeers, doth thus limit them,Chrysost. in 1. cap. 2. Epist. ad Timoth. hom. 2. Si quidem fidei dogma peruertat, etiamsi Angelus sit, obedire noli: But if hee peruert any point of faith, though hee be an Angell, obey him not. And streight after, Ne Paulo quidem obedire oportet si quid dixerit proprium, si quid hymanū, sed Apostolo Christū in se loquentē circumferenti We must not obey Paul himself, if he speak any thing of his own, or as a mā, but (we must obey) the Apostle bearing Christ about that speaketh in him. Tertul. de prae∣script. advers. haeretics. Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere licet: It is not lawful for vs, saith Tertulliā, to deuise any thing of our selues nor to follow that which others haue deuised. We haue the A∣postles of the Lord for our authors who deuised nothing of their own heads, but deliuered faithfully to the nations, the doctrine which they receiued of Christ. Therfore though an Angel frō heauen should preach otherwise, we should coūt him accursed. Chrysost. operis imperfect. hom. 20. in 7. ca. Mat. Much more teachers that are but ser∣uantes of the law: and therfore boūd vnto the law. Euery teacher is a seruant of the law, because he may neither ad of his own sense vnto the law, nor according to his own cō∣ceit take any thing frō the law, but preach that onely which is founde in the law. If Apostles and Angels bee tied to this condition, much more others, & our first addition (which speake vnto you the worde of God) is euerywhere intended in the Bishops function though it be not expressed. Phi. If Bishops then speake the word of God, Princes must obey them. The. If princes resist the word of truth in the Preachers mouth they resist not the messenger, but the master that sent him. Phi. Hence we conclude that Bishops be superiour to Princes. Theo. By what Logicke? Phi. Princes must obey Bishops speaking the word of God, ergo Bishops be superiour to Princes. Theo. If Bishops spake to Princes in their
owne names,Princes must obey Bishops because they speak in Gods name and not in their owne. your argument were somwhat; but since they speak to them as ser∣uants in their masters name, which is Lord of all and ouer all, your consequent is very foolish. For let any Prince send his seruāt in a message to the Nobles of his Realm: wil you reason thus? The seruant speaking in the princes name that which is cōmanded him, must be obeied of the Nobles, ergo the seruāt is superi∣our to the Nobles. I thinke you will not, or if you do, you reason very loosely. Phi. If the seruant haue commission from the Prince though he be neuer so meane and the Nobles haue none, well they may excell him in Nobilitie, but sure he excelleth them in authoritie. Theo. He doth in those thinges which his Commission reacheth vnto. Phi. But Bishops haue commission from God to rule y• church, ergo they be superior to princes in the regiment of the church. Our assumptiō we proue by S. Paul: Take heed to your selues & to the whol flock, wherin the holy Ghost hath placed you Bishops to rule the church of God.Act. 20. Theo. Your lucke is euil to light on such vnperfect proofes.Bishops haue commission to feede, not to rule their flocks. 1. Pet. 5. I told you before,  did signifie to feed the church or flocke of Christ, & not to rule, You now catch hold of the same corruption againe, & make it the ground of your conclu∣sion. If you trust not vs, your selues in your Rhemish Testament haue so tran∣slated the word in S. Peter. Feed the flock of God which is amōg you, which is in the Greeke, . The very children knowe that these three wordes , A sheepeheard, (his) flocke, and to feede, haue one and the same deriuation, and therefore one and the same sig∣nification.Iohn. 21. The holy Ghost himselfe vseth  as Synonima, that is words of the same power & force. For when Christ repeated this charge, feed my sheep, thrise to Peter in the Gospel of S. Iohn, his words are the secōd time : & the third time, . Now draw your assumptiō from S. Pauls wordes rightly translated & what conclude you? Bishops haue commission from God to feede the Church (or flocke of Christ) which Prin∣ces haue not, ergo Bishops by their calling may preach and Princes may not. This is al you can infer, and this is nothing against vs. Phi. They be superiors to Princes in feeding the flock of Christ: ergo they be their superiors.They be su∣periour in teaching, not in power to commaund and punish. Their functiō is more per∣fect & excel∣lent because God worketh by their hands and mouthes. Theo. That sequele is not good. In building Masons be superiour to Princes, in sayling Mariners, in fighting, Souldiers; be these men ergo simplie superiour to Princes? I trow not. Phi. Preaching the word, dispensing the Sacraments & pardoning the sinnes or men, which are the Bishops charge, be things far greater & higher than any that Princes haue. Theo. The perfection & operation of these things which you name, depend not on the wils of men, but on the power of God, & therefore the honor & estimation of them must serue for the praise of Gods glorie & not for the increase of mans pride: The Ghostly worke is Gods, the bodilie seruice is the Priests: wherein Iudas the thiefe, Simon the sorcerer, and Demas the renegate may chalenge as much as Iames the iust, Peter the zealous and Iohn the faith∣full, the three pillers of Christs church. Per ministros dispares Dei munu equale est, quia non illorum, sed eius est.Aug. contra Crescon. lib. 4. cap. 6. By
ministers (far) vnlike, the gift of God, saith Augustine, is the same, because it is not theirs but his.Aug. in. Psa. 10 Christ sent him that betraied him, with the rest of his Disciples to preach the kingdom of heauē, to shew that the gifts & (graces) of God are bestowed on thē, which receiue the same with faith, though he that deliuereth them be as bad as Iudas. The things which God giueth, saith Chrysostom,In 1. cap. 2. epist. ad. Tim. hom. 2. cā not be made perfect by the holines of the Priest: for all is done by his heauenly grace. Only the Priests office is to open his mouth, but it is God that worketh all the Priest doth only accomplish the (external signe or act.) Men, saith Ambrose,De spiritu san. lib. 3. cap. 19. in the remission of sinnes ministerium suum exhibēt, non ius alicuius potestatis exercent, do their seruice, but exercise no right of au∣thority. They pray, God giueth; the seruice is by man, the gift is frō the hea∣uenly power. Preaching the word, is a worthier part of Apostolike dignity, thā ministring the sacraments, by the witnes of S. Paul himself saying,1. Corin. 1. Christ sent me not to baptise, but, to preach the gospel. And yet of preachers the scripture saith,1. Corin. 3 Nei∣ther he that planteth is any thing nor he that watereth, but God that giueth the increase. So that neither in the word, nor sacraments, you may chalenge a∣ny thing to man, but only the corporal seruice which is common to the godly wt heretiks & hypocrits: the rest is proper to God, & may not be ascribed to men, without iniurie to him that is the true author of them & mighty worker in thē. And therefore the reason which you draw from the perfection of Gods graces in the Church,The word & sacramentes serue not to aduaunce the Preachers person. to the preferring & aduauncing of the Bishops person before the Princes, is very vitious, because the subiection & reuēge due to the sword is im∣parted to the Princes person, the dignitie & vertue of the word & sacraments is not to the Bishops. Phi. The Priests commission is higher than the Princes, & why should not the priests person be aboue the Princes? The. The priest hath his cōmission as a ser∣uant to cal for subiection & obedience,The Prea∣chers cal for subiection & reuerence to their master, not to them∣selues. not vnto himself but vnto his Lord & Ma∣ster that sent him. And this subiection, because it is giuen to God, infinitely ex∣ceedeth that which Princes may looke for. But what is this to the Priests per∣son, who must preach himself to be The 2. Corinth. 4. seruant of meaner men thā Princes, & make himself The Mark. 10. . Corint. 9. seruant of al men, if he note wel the words of his commis∣sion, and not striue with Princes for superioritie? Phi. For their persons I wil not greatly stād wt you, but certainly their power is aboue ye princes. The. You un so fast that you forget where you should be. We were debating who should direct princes in matters of faith: you be slipt from yt, & entring a new questiō who shal correct thē, where the former is yet vnfinished. Phi. You did cōfesse that princes must obey Bishops so long as they speak truth. The. And you would not deny but princes might refuse bishops if they swarued frō faith. Phi. But who shalbe iudge whether they swarue frō faith or no? Theo. That is the question which I said was not yet resolued. If Bishops teach truth, surely princes must obey thē, I mean the word of truth in their mouthes. If they go frō truth, thē princes must auoide thē. To this we both consent, but the doubt
is whether trueth bee tyed to some certaine Persons or places where Princes may find it & whence Princes must fet it;The trueth of God is tied to no certaine persons nor places. or else whether Princes as all others must vse the best meanes they can to discerne true Preachers from false, and so be directed by such as they thinke to be sent from God. Phi. You would haue Princes and others leane to their owne iudgements and follow their owne fansies. We would haue them sticke to the Church, and looke to those Pastours whose faith can not faile. Theo. Such Pastours bee worth the following if you can point vs to them. Phi. Peters fayth can not fayle: follow that faith and you can not misse the trueth.Peters fayth is trueth in deede, but that must be taken out of his owne wri∣tings, not other mens reports. Theo. He that keepeth Peters fayth in deede can not want the trueth, because Peter beleeued the truth: but we bee nothing the nearer for this. Pauls fayth was likewise trueth, and so was the faith of Matthew, Iames, Iohn, Iude, and others: but who must be cre∣dited what fayth Peter and the rest preached? Shall we take that at your hands by report, or at their owne mouthes by writing? Phi. If their writings were not darke or might not bee wrested, the Scrip∣tures were the best witnesses of their doctrine:No successour may be tru∣sted against or besides the Apostles wri∣tings. but now their successours must rather be trusted than euery man suffered to take what fayth he list out of their writings. Theo. Rather so than worse, doth not answere my question, but must we trust their successours in matters of faith against or besides their writings? Phi. Against their writings we must not, besides their writings we must. For many things are beleeued which are not expressed in the scriptures. The. With you, but not with the Church of God. Phi. The church we say beleeueth ma∣ny things which shee receiued by tradition and not by writing. Theo. Your Church I know doth, but the Church of Christ I say neuer did, not doth. Phi. Had the Church of Christ no traditions that were not written? Theo. Rites and ceremonies she had, but no points of fayth that were not written. Phi. This is the ground of all your errors: vppon this pretence you reiect the vnwritten verities of the church. Theo. If this bee an error S. Paul himselfe was the first author of it,No poynt of fayth vnwrit∣ten. and all the fathers of Christes Church with one consent auouch the same. Phi. Ne∣uer tell vs that tale. Theo. Yeas we will tell it and proue it to you. Phi. You can not. Theo. We can and will. S. Paul is short but sure.Rom. 10. Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: Whence wee collect, ergo faith is by the word of God and not without it nor besdes it. You heard S. Basils opinion before,Basil. in sermo∣ne de fide. It is an euident slyding from the faith & a point of the greatest pride (that may be) either to depart from that which is written, or to receiue that which is not written. To that you may ioyne this conclusion of his,Idem in Ethici defini. 8. If euery thing that is not of fayth be sinne, as S. Paul affirmeth, and fayth come by hearing, and hearing by the woorde of God, ergo whatsoeuer is without (or besides) the diuine Scriptures, because it is not of fayth, it is sinne. Seekest thou for faith Emperour? sayth Hilarie to Constantius.Hilar. ad Con∣stantium Au∣gust. Heare it not out of the late scroles, but out of Gods bookes. Heare I beseech thee that which is written of Christ, lest vnder pretēce ther∣of
of, things not written bee preached. And in an other place pressing his aduer∣sarie, Thou,Idem de Trinit. lib. 9. sayth he, which denyest things written, what remaineth but that thou beleeue things vnwritten: counting that for a passing absurditie which you now would establish as the surest way to discerne the trueth. Euen so doth Hierom against Heluidius. As wee denie not those thinges that are written,Hieron. aduer∣sus Helnidium. Idē in Psal. 86. so wee reiect vtterly those thinges which are not written. For Our Lord & sauiour speaketh to vs in the Scriptures of his Princes: that is of his Apostles and Euangelists which were, not which are (in the church) to this end that his Apostles excepted whatsoeuer thing besides should af∣terward bee sayd, might bee cut off and not haue authoritie. Tertullian spea∣king in the person of all christians,Tertul. de prae∣script. aduers. haeretico. We neede no farther search after the Gos∣pel. When once we beleeue wee desire nothing else to beleeue: for this wee first beleeue that there is nothing, besides (the Gospel) which wee ought to beleeue.Idem aduersus Hermogenē. And refelling ye heretike Hermogenes, I adore, saith he, the fulnes of the scriptures. Let Hermogenes shew me where this (that he teacheth) is writ∣ten. If it be not writtē, let him feare the curse prouided for adders & dimini∣shers. Yea saith Ambrose,Ambros. de virginibus, li. 3. We iustly cōdemn al new things which Christ did not teach, because to the faithful Christ is the way. So then if Christ did not teach that which we teach, euē we our selues do iudge it to be detestable. Ireneus, lib. 3. cap. 1.The rest are of the same mind. The disposition of our saluation, sayth Iri∣neus, we knew by none other, than by those, by whom the Gospel came vn∣to vs: the which at first they preached by mouth, but afterward by Gods ap∣pointmēt they did deliuer it to vs in writing, that it should be the foundatiō and pillour of our faith.Cyril. de recta fide ad Reginas lib. 2. August. de Pas∣toribus, cap. 11. Idem contra literas Petilia∣ni lib. 3. cap. 6. Caus. 11. quaest. 3. § si is qui preaest. It is necessary for vs, saith Cyril, to folow the diuine Scriptures, & in nothing to go from their prescription. The mountaines of Is∣rael, (whereon God promised to feede his flocke) are, saith Augustine, the wri∣ters of the diuine Scriptures. Feeding there you feede safely: whatsoeuer you learne thence, count it sauorie, whatsoeuer is besides thē refuse it. Therefore whether it be touching Christ or his Church, or any matters els which con∣cerneth our faith & life, I say not if we, but as followeth (in Paul) if an angel from heauen teach any thing besides that which you haue receiued in the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, hold him accursed. Isidorus, as your owne Lawe produceth him,No person nor place may be trusted in matters of faith besides and without the scriptures. The best di∣rection for Princes is the word of God. Psal. 118. saith, A Prelate, if he teach or bid any thing be∣sides that which is euidently commaunded in the holy scriptures, let him be taken for a false witnes to God & a cōmitter of sacrilege. Neither Prelate, Pope, Councel nor Angel, may be receiued or trusted in matters of fayth, I say, not against the Scriptures, but not without or besides the scriptures. If there∣fore you seeke to leade Princes vnto trueth you must guyde them thereto by the word of trueth, otherwise you doe but deceiue them, you doe not direct them. King Dauid will teach you, by what meanes himself was, and all other god∣ly Princes ought to be directed. Thy word is a lanterne to my feete & a light vnto my paths. I haue sworne and wil performe it, that I wil keepe thy righ∣teous iudgements. And God by Moses appointing his law to be the directiō of
Princes, cōmaundeth a copie thereof to be deliuered vnto the king sitting on his throne,Deut. 17. that he should reade therein all the daies of his life and learne to feare the Lord his God & to keepe al the words of that lawe. This charge which God giueth bindeth princes as well as others.Deut. 12. Whatsoeuer I commaund, that shal you do; thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought there from. And Esay speaketh not of priuate persons only but of common-wealths also, when he saith,Esai. 8. Shoulde not a people consult their God? And shewing immediatly which way they might consult and aske counsell of God, from the liuing, sayth he, to the dead? to the law (rather) and the testimonie: & if they speak not ac∣cording to this word (it is) because there is no light in them.Luk. 16. They haue Mo∣ses and the Prophets, let them heare them, is the surest way to saue Prince & people frō the place of torment, & consequently the best direction for thē both. Phi. The word of God is, we doubt not, the best direction for Princes & pri∣uate men,Hieron. Cap. 1. in epist. ad Galatas. Tertullian. de praescriptionib. if it be rightly vnderstood, but Al heresies patch thence the pillowes which they lay vnder the elbowes of all flesh, as S. Hierom sayth, and They talke of scriptures & perswade by Scriptures as Tertullian noteth: And there∣fore the Scriptures being but dumble recordes that may be diuersly construed and easily wrested, there must needes bee some iudge on earth that may bee personally, pronounce which is the true meaning and right sense of the Scrip∣tures before Princes may trust that direction. Otherwise men may brech what blasphemies they will and pretend Scripture when they haue done as the Ar∣rians, Sabellians, Macedonians and al other heretikes did and do. Theo. That heretikes couet a shew of scriptures is a case so cleare that it needeth no words.Tertullian. v supra. Heretikes therfore co∣uet a shew of scriptures because they be the groūds of all trueth. No tribunall on earth to the which trueth is fastned. Where trueth is in doubt the Church is in more doubt. For howe coulde they treate of matters of faith, except it were out of the bookes of faith, or who would trust them in diuine causes without some colour of diuine Scriptures? But what meanes the Lord hath left his sheepe to distin∣guish true shepheards from wolues dissembling their habite, and theeues pre∣tending his name, this is the question that now we bee in. Phi. It is. And there must, wee say, bee some certaine Tribunall on earth, where truth may be found at all times and of all men that bee willing to seeke for it; otherwise there should be no stay for religion nor end of contention, euery man pretending his faith to be trueth, and no man hauing authoritie to decide which is trueth; which were most absurd. Theo. A Tribunal in earth to decide which is trueth? Whose Tribunal shall that be? Phi. The Churches. Theo. We be now as neere as we were before. If the truth be douted of, the church must needes be much more doubted of, because the church is the number of men professing the truth. And howe can the professours of trueth be seuered from others so long as the trueth by which they should bee knowen, is in question? You doe but wast your breath, if you goe not more di∣rectly to worke. Phi. You would fayne call the Church in question but that you can not. Theo. Away with these follies. Where fayth faileth, the church fayleth; and hee that affirmeth your doctrine to bee false, denyeth your assem∣blies and multitudes to bee the Church. The supposing your selues to bee the
Church when your fayth shoulde bee tried, is a fonde and vaine delay. Shall that be trueth which you professe, though Christ say nay? Phi. We say not so. Theo. Then suffer those to bee his sheepe, that heare his voyce, and clayme not his fold, vntill you be his sheepe. Phi. We do not. Theo. The shep∣heards voice is not knowē by the sheepe, but the sheep by hearing the sheep∣heards voice.Wee must be first resolued which is his voyce before we can agree who are his sheepe. Phi. I know that: and yet which is the sheepheards voyce the sheepe must iudge, and not the wolues. The. In deed our sauiour saith, Iohn 10. The sheepe follow (the shepheard) for they know his voyce. A stranger they will not follow but flee from him, for they knew not the voyce of strangers: & ap∣plying this to himself, My sheep, saith he, heare my voyce and follow me. The reason went before, for they know the voyce of their shepheard. So that by the position of our Sauiour his sheepe must be able to discerne his voyce from a strangers. Phi. What else? Theo. His voyce is his woord, his sheepe are the faithfull, his folde is his church. If the Lorde himselfe referre his sheepe to their exact knowledge of his voyce, for their perfect direction, why woulde you force the flocke of Christ to the court of Rome, there to learne at your handes and vppon your only credite the voyce of their shepheard? Phi. We would haue them followe the direction of Christes church in dis∣cerning the sound of Christes voyce. Theo. And the church of Christ neuer directed any man by prescribing certaine places or persons where trueth could not fayle but only by the generall and constant profession of the same faith from the Apostles downe-ward in all ages and countries. Phi. The church com∣mendeth succession, councels, and Apostolicall Seates, as good helpes to hit the right sense of the Scriptures. Theo. But neuer as infallible notes to discerne the trueth. Phi. Apolog. Cap. 4. sect. 28. Succession is no sure dire∣ction vnto trueth. Ireneus, lib. 4. Cap. 43.The Bishops of the vniuersall Church haue (as S. Ireneus sayth) receiued with their Episcopal succession the grace and gift of vnderstanding the trueth. Theo. You do that auncient father wrong in the place which you bring. Ireneus limiteth succession after the same maner that we do, noting successiō to be nothing worth vnlesse sound doctrine and holy conuersation be thereunto ioyned. His woordes be: Wee must therfore obey those Priests which are in the Church, I meane those which haue their succession from the Apostles, which together with their succession in office, haue receiued charisma veritatis certum, the sure (doctrine or) gift of trueth. The rest we must suspect either as heretikes or as authors of schismes and pleasers of themselues, or else as hypocrites vayne glorious and couetous.Cap. 44. From all such we must abstaine and cleaue to them as I said which keepe the doctrine of the Apostles & with the order of their priestly calling yeeld wholesome doctrine & conuersation without offence. And shewing what hee meaneth by charisma,Cap. 45. he sayth, Vbi igitur charismata Do∣mini posita sunt, ibi dicere oportet veritatem: Where (these) blessings and gifts of God are, there must we learne the trueth, with whome is that succession of the Church which is from the Apostles, and also sounde and irreproueable Doctrine. So that orderly succession, sound doctrine, and conuersation without
blame, are the giftes and graces of God which he meaneth, and the one hee will not haue to bee regarded or trusted without the other. Phi. Make you no more accompt of succession? Theo. We cōmend succession to exclude ambition and dissention in the Church of Christ, and in that respect we detest such as inuade the Pastorall function without lawfull vocation and election, but that succession in place should be taken for a warrant of true Doc∣trine is an error of yours and so palpable that euery Child can refell it. For who knoweth not that an infinite number of bishops & those orderly succeeding, if you looke to their dignitie and not to their doctrine, haue beene heretiks? And that S. Paul thus forewarned the Bishops of Ephesus,Act. 20. Out of your selues shall rise men speaking peruerse things to draw disciples after them. And the Lord when he saith,Mat. 7. Beware of false prophets, noteth, there shall bee prophets by their calling, which shal be foūd false in their teaching; as S. Peter also wit∣nesseth,2. Pet. 2. There were false prophets among the people (of the Iewes) euen as there shall be false teachers amongst you, distinguished from Godly teachers not by office but by Doctrine.2. Cor. 11. S. Paul graunteth many to be the ministers of Christ in outward profession and shew which in workes and deeds be the mi∣nisters of Sathan.2. Cor. 11. Such false Apostles, saith hee, are deceitful workers and transforme them selues into the Apostles of Christ. The Prince of darke∣nesse that can conuaie his agents to be Teachers, Prophets and Apostles, in the Church of Christ, can place them in Bishoprikes at his pleasure, and there∣fore the chaire is no sure defence against error. Phi. Wee know some Bishops haue beene heretikes, but not all. Theo. Neither do we say that all were: God forbid. But by this that some were; we proue succession to bee no sure direction vnto trueth.Bishops haue beene here∣tikes. If Berillus, Paulus, Sa∣mosatenus, Photinus, Nestorius, Dioscorus, Petrus, Apameus, Sergius, Cyrus, Theodorus, Macarius, and infinit others canonically succeeding in Seates and Churches of no small account fell afterward into pestilent heresies; that which was often & easie then, is contingent & possible still, & succession which saued not them from erring, can not defend others from the like danger. Phi. Succession alone is not sufficient to keepe men in the right faith. Theo. If you ioyne trueth and holines with it as Ireneus doth, no doubt they bee markes of faithfull and Godly Pastours, but succession of it selfe, doth neither priuilege the Teachers from error, nor conduct their hearers vnto trueth, because there haue beene thousands in the Church whose opinions you may not alow, though you cannot disproue their elections. Phi. Admit that,Bishops assē∣bled may erre as wel as Bi∣shops seuered. Mat. 18. and how then? Theo. If Bishops singled may erre; why not Bishops assembled, which you call Councels? What assurance hath their meeting to keepe them from erring? Phi. The promise of our Lord where there be two or three gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Theo. Doth our Sauiour speake only of Bishops and Councels, or els of all faythful persons & resorts gathered to prayer, preaching or any other good intent? Phi. The wordes be general and therefore belong as wel to councels as other con∣uents.
Theo. Indeed the words be generall and therefore belong no more to Councels than to any other Christian Conuents. And did they specially pertain to Councels, as they do not, a Councell of two or three by the purport of the ve∣ry wordes hath as much assurance of trueth as a Councel of three hundered.Two or three haue the same promise of assistance that two or three hūdred haue. It is not the number but the name in which they be gathered, that guydeth and directeth them vnto trueth. Phi. If our Lord haue promised to assist three ga∣thered in his name, howe much more will hee assist three hundered? Theo. And yet three may see the trueth, when three hundred may misse it. Which I speake not to deface religious and Godly Councels, but to stay the mul∣titude from presuming their fansies to bee true religion when they bee nothing neere. Phi. Councels may erre.May Councels erre? Theo. Why not? Phi. What Councels? Theo. Yea Councels. Rebaptising of heretikes was defended by Cyprian and a Councel of Bishops with him,Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 5. and as Eusebius reporteth out of Dionysius de∣creed In maximis Episcoporum Synodis, in very great Councels of Bishops. The Arrians in twentie sixe yeres gathered and framed sundrie Councels for their purpose at Tyrus, Ierusalem, Philippi, Sirmium, Ariminum, Seleucia, Cōstan∣tinople, and two at Antioch. In the Councel of Millan Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 9. Aboue three hunde∣red of the west Bishoppes consented that Athanasius should be thrust from his Bishoprike, and only fiue sayd nay. To the wicked edict of Basiliscus against the Councel of Chalcedon subscribed Euag. li. 3. ca. 4. fiue hundred Bishops. Gregorie Nazi∣anzene was so out of loue with the Councels of his time,Epist. 55 ad Proropium. that when he was sent for, he praied Proropius to haue excused to the Emperour for sicknes, and addeth, I, to write you the trueth, am determined to forbeare all Councels of Bishops, because I haue not seene any good euent of any Councel, but ra∣ther an encrease than a redresse of (our) euils. So that a number of badde Bi∣shops may doe much hurt euen in Councels, and the better part is not alwaies sure to be the greater. Phi. A generall Councel doth not differ frō a particular but only in number of persons and places. Vide distinct. 16 § sexta § primo.Particular Councels haue erred, but neuer generall. Theo. If parti∣cular councels may erre, why may not general? what differēce find you between Prouinciall and general Councels but only the number of Persons that bee called, and places whence they bee called? Now what warrant I pray you haue three hundered Bishops more than two hundered, or the Bishops of some coun∣tries more than the Bishops of other Countries, that they cannot erre? If trueth goe by tale, particular Councels haue often matched and passed many generall for number of Bishops. The second and sixt generall Councels, had present at either but one hundered fiftie Bishops, the third had but one hundered, as Beda writeth, and as it appeareth by their Tomo concil. primo. subscriptions, not aboue one hundered fiftie, whereas the Councel of Sardica had Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 2. three hundred, and so had the councel of Millan, and the fourth & sixt Councels of Carthage had aboue two hundered Bishops in either of them.Idem li. 2. c. 36. Tomo concilior. primo. If it goe by countries, then shew vs which Coun∣tries haue this priuiledge, that their Bishops can not erre, and which haue it not: For as yet we see no cause why trueth should be tied to some numbers
or nations and not to others; and before we may grant them that progatiue, we must see great cause and good proofe. Phi. Wee doe not hold that generall Councels are defended from error by reason of any number or nations there gathered, but it is wee say more likelie, that many men assembled out of diuers nations shoulde light on trueth, than a fewe out of one. Theo. You come with likelyhoodes when wee seeke for certaineties. Can you shew forth any graunt from God that generall Councels shall not erre? Phi. If generall Councels might erre,A generall Councel er∣ring the Church doth not erre. the church might erre, which is not possible. Theo. As though none were of or in the Church but onely Bishope? or all the Bishops of Christendome without exception were euer present at any Councel? or the greater part of those that are present might not strike ye stroake without the rest? When 300. are assembled in Councel, and 149. take one part, and 151. the other, is this your profound learning that the odde voyces which make vp the greater part can neuer erre? or doth the whole Church erre, when falsehood hath for her selfe tenne or twelue Bishops more than trueth hath? Phi. If a Councel once geue iudgement in matters of fayth, who can re∣uerse it? Theo. The rest present or absent may lawfully contradict the Councel if it wade besides trueth or against the faith.A Councell may be re∣uersed by the rest that be present or absent. Sozo. li. 1. ca. 23. When the fathers in the great Councel of Nice were about to decree that Bishops, Priestes and Deacons should not vse their wiues, Paphnutius alone rose vp in the midst of their Councel and freely contradicted it. The same Paphnutius, when se∣crete enemies laboured in the Councel of Tyrus wrongfully to depose Atha∣nasius caught Maximus the Bishop of Ierusalem by the hand, and willed him to rise and forsake that conuenticle of euill men.Sozo. li. 2. ca. 25. In the Councel of Millan when 300. had consented to the deposition of Athanasius, Dionysius, Euse∣bius, Paulinus, Lucifer and Rhodamus (but fiue against fifteene skore) openly and plainly withstood it.Sozo. li. 4. ca. 9. The second Councell of Ephesus was reiec∣ted by many godly Bishoppes that were not present as iniurious and wicked, and Leo himselfe writeth of the famous and generall councell of Chalcedon,Leo epist. 52. ad Anatholium. Tanquam refutari nequeat quod illicite voluerit multitudo; as though that might not bee refused, which a multitude hath vnlawfully decreed. And making there no more account of their number, though there were aboue sixe hundred fathers in that Councel,Ibidem. he saith, Nulla sibimet de multiplicatione congregationis Concilia blandiantur. Let no councels flatter themselues with the great num∣ber of persons assembled. Phi. You are the first that euer were of this opinion that generall Coun∣cels might erre. Theo. Your owne fellowes haue beene of that opinion be∣fore vs. Panormitane the best of your canonists,Their own fel∣lowes haue consessed that general coun∣cels might er. Panor. de elect. & electi potesta∣te ¶ signifi∣casti. and Proctour for Pope Euge∣nius against the Councell of Basil, affirmeth plainely, Concilium potest errare, sicut alias errauit super matrimonium contrahendum inter raptorem & rap∣tam, & dictum Hieronymi melius sentientis postea fuit praelatum statuto Concilij.
A Councell may erre, as otherwise a Councel hath erred about marriage to bee contracted betweene the rauisher and the rauished, and the saying of Hierom as being of the sounder opinion was after preferred before the sta∣tute of the Councell. And your argument, that the church should fayle in fayth if councels should erre;Panorm. Ibidē. he reiecteth as friuolous. Nec obstat si dicatur quod Concili∣um non potest errare quia Christus orauit pro ecclesia sua vt non deficeret. It hinde∣reth vs litle, if it be sayde that a Councell can not erre, because Christ prayed for his Church that it shoulde not fayle. For though a generall Councell re∣present the whole vniuersall Church,A generall councel is not the Church. yet to speake trueth the vniuersall Church is not there precisely, but by representation; because the vniuersall Church consisteth of all the faithfull. And this is the Church which can not erre. Wherby it is not vnpossible but the true faith of Christ may continue in onely one person. Therefore, (the Church) is not sayd to faile nor to erre, if the true faith remaine in any one. If you woulde bee farther taught that a generall councell is neither the vniuersall church, nor representeth the vniuer∣sal church, and that it hath erred and may erre, we can send you to a marchant of the same stampe that your selues are of, where you shall see as much as I say, de∣bated and commended with no small brauerie. Pigh. hierarch. ecclesiast. lib. 6. cap. 5 & 4. Pighius is earnest that general Coū∣cels haue er∣red in decisiō of faithes. Lib. 6. Cap. 7.Certum est Concilia non esse vniuersalem Ecclesiam. In nullo vniuersalium Conci∣liorum omnium hoc sibi praesumpsisse Patres inuenient vt dicerent Catholicam se re∣praesentare ecclesiam praeterquam in hijs quae nunc impugnamus, Constantiensi & Ba∣siliensi nouissimis. It is certaine that Councels are not the vniuersall Church. In none of all the general Councels shal you find the fathers to haue arroga∣ted thus much to themselues as to say they represented the catholike church besides these two last councels of Constance and Basil which wee nowe im∣pugne. And that general councels may erre no man more resolute than Pighius. Neque enim haec sola quae nunc impugnamus, Concilia, turpiter grauiterque errasse certum est, sed & alia plurima: It is certaine that not onely these Councels (of Constance and Basill) which we now disproue haue shamefully and absurdly erred but also many others.Lib. 6. Cap. 13. And againe, In fidei definitionibus errasse, etiam vni∣uersalia etiam sanctorum Patrum Concilia comperimus. Testimonio sunt de vni∣uersalibus Concilijs, inprimus Ariminense, vniuersale haud dubie: &c. Insuper Ephe∣sanum secundum & ipsum vniuersale, &c. testimonio inquam haec sunt errare posse e∣tiam vniuersalia Concilia, etiam legitimè congregata. We find that generall coun∣cels euen of holy fathers haue erred in decrees of fayth. For example of ge∣nerall Councels, the Councell of Ariminum, vniuersall no doubt, and also the second councel of Ephesus, and that likewise vniuersall, these I say are witnesses that euen generall Councels and those lawfully gathered may erre. August. de bap∣tist. lib. 2 cap. 3. S. Augustine confesseth that councels may erre.If Panormitane and Pighius might happily bee ouerseen in empayring the credite of councels: S. Augustine was not when he sayde, Who can be igno∣rant that Prouinciall and National Councels yeelde without any stay to the authoritie of generall Councels gathered out of the whole Christian world,
and that general Councels themselues are often amended the former by the later, with Catholike peace and Christian charitie. Phi. He saith, Plenary councels are amended but not from errors. Theo. What needeth amending where no fault is? The condition which S. Augustine repeateth in the first,Ibidem. indureth to the last Si quid forte a veritate deuiatum est, If in ought they swarue from trueth. And except that be vnderstood, he answereth not the thing which was obiected by the Donatists. They opposed Cyprians letters, Cyprians iudgement, Cyprians Councel in a matter of Doctrine not of Discipline. S. Augustine replieth, Bishops might be deceiued and so might Councels. In what now but in matters of Doctrine? Phi. Can you name vs any general coūcel that erred in matters of doctrine? Theo. Your owne fellow nameth the Councell of Ariminum and of Ephesus the second,The second Councell of Ephesus was generall. besides the Councels of Constance and Basill. Phi. I doubt not whether that of Ephesus were a wicked Councell, but whether it were general or no. Theo. The Patriarks of Rome, Antioch, Alexandria, Hierusalem, & Constantinople were called vnto it and present at it, with the Bishops of di∣uerse and sundrie Prouinces, as their subscriptions declare, which are extant in the Councel of Chalcedon: TheAstio. 1. Bishop of Rome by his Legates as his wont was in other Councels, the Euagrius li. 1. Cap. 10. Reperitur chal∣cedonens. con∣cil. actio. 1. rest in person, and therefore out of question it was no Prouinciall Councel. Againe the Emperour that called the Councell in his epistle to the same saith, We thinking it not safe that this question of faith should be handled without your sacred Synod and the Bishops of the holy Churches of all places, thought it needful that your sanctities should assem∣ble. Phi. The Bishops that were present at Ephesus complained after in the Councel of Chalcedon that they were threatned and forced.Chalced. concil. actio. 1. Theo. The greater ye disorder that was cōmitted in the Councel, the stronger is our argu∣ment, that Councels may bee miscaried; if Bishoppes may be forced, they may likewise bee circumuented, as they were in the Councell of Ariminum, or deceiued in opinion as they were in the Councels of Carthage, Constance and Basil, by the confession of your deerest friends. If all these wayes they may be peruerted when they are assembled, ergo they may make both an erroni∣ous and iniurious conclusion. And for this cause S. Augustine teacheth that ecclesiasticall Iudges may be deceiued,Ecclesiasticall iudges are of∣ten deceiued. Contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 21. in that they be but men, and calleth their councels Humane iudge∣ments which may be circumuented and beguiled. His wordes be, Non igitur debet ecclesia se Christo praeponere: cum ille semper veraciter iudicet, ecclesiastici autē iudices sicut homines plerumque falluntur. The Church may not prefere herselfe before Christ, forsomuch as hee alwaies iudgeth rightly, and ecclesiasticall iudges as being but men are often deceiued. And rehearsing two Episcopall iudgements that passed against the Donatists in the Councels at Rome and Arle, hee addeth,August. epist. 167. Sed haec humana iudicia deputentur, & circumuenire, ac falli, vel etiam corrumpi potuisse dicantur. But let these bee counted the iudge∣ments of men, and let it bee said they might either deceiue or be deceiued;
and perhaps corrupted. August. contra Maximinum lib. 3. cap. 14.The like hee sayth of the Councell of Ariminum. This is that which the Catholike fathers in the Councell of Nice had established against the Arrian heretikes by authoritie of the trueth, and which afterward in the Councel of Ariminum, hereticall impietie vnder an hereticall Emperour assaied to ouerthrowe, multis paucorum fraude deceptis, the multitude (there) being de∣ceiued by the subtiltie of a fewe.Ibidem lib. 3 cap. 14. The Arrians not bound to the authori∣tie of the Ni∣cene councel. And therefore hee concludeth, Sed nunc ne ego Nicenum nec tu debes Ariminense tanquam praeiudicaturus proferre Concili∣um: nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. But nowe (since there be contrarie Councels) neither ought I to produce the Councell of Nice, nor you the Councel of Ariminum for a preiudice (to either part:) for nei∣ther am I bound to the authoritie of this (later Councell of Ariminum) nor you to the authoritie of that (former Nicene Councell:) Confessing not on∣ly that councels might erre, but that his aduersarie was not tied to the autho∣ritie of the great Nicene councell, comparable to the which, no Councell euer was or shall bee in the Church of Christ. Phi. There was great difference betweene the Councell of Ariminum and the Councell of Nice. Theo. In the syncere profession of the true fayth there was difference betwixt them, but in the manner of calling those Councels and number of the persons present Saint Augustine founde no great aduantage for his side. The Arrians had a councell as great and as general for that which they refused as the Catholiques had for that which they professed, and therefore this learned father sawe no remedie but hee must yeelde vppe the Nicene Councell as no sufficient conuiction of their he∣resie. Phi. The Councell of Ariminum was generall.The councell of Ariminum was not generall. Theo. The coun∣cell was farre greater, as it should seeme, than the councell of Nice, though the Storie of the church doe not lay downe the certaine number of the Bi∣shoppes that mette. Phi. What reason leadeth you to thinke it was grea∣ter? Theo. It is euident by the Storie that the Emperour assembled all the Bishoppes both of the East and of the West church, of purpose if it were possible, to bring them to some concord: and the Bishoppes of either church, no doubt, farre exceeded the number of three hundred. Phi. They were not all at Ariminum. Theo. The number was so great and the iourney so long that the Emperour made them sit in two seuerall places, the East Bishoppes at Nicomedia, the West at Ariminum: but that all the Bishoppes of both Churches were gathered in these two places Socrates doeth wit∣nesse. Socrat. lib. 2. Cap. 37.(Imperator) vniuersale Concilium congregare voluit vt cunctos Orientis Epis∣copos in Occidentem accersitos, concordes, si posset, redderet. The Emperour intended to gather an vniuersall Councell, that all the Bishoppes of the East comming into the West parts, he might get thē to agree, if it might be. And when the length of the iourney appeared ouer tedious, he cōmanded
the councel to be diuided, & willed the west to assemble at Ariminum, the East to resort at Nicomedia. What a companie there were of the west bishops, their own words to Constantius will declare. Ariminū ex cunctis Occidentis Ciuitati∣bus omnes Episcopi conuenimus.Ibidem epistol Synodi Arimin. ad Constant. We assembled at Ariminum euen all the Bi∣shops out of all the west Cities. S. Hierom writing of this very Councell saith, Illo tempore nihil tam pium, nihil tam conueniens seruo Dei videbatur quam vnitatem sequi, & a totius mundi communione non scindi.Hierom. aduers. Luciferanos. At that time nothing seemed so religious, nothing so conuenient for the seruant of God as to follow vnitie and not to cut himselfe from the Communion of the whole world. The communion of the whole world was in the Councell of Arimi∣num:In the Coun∣cell of Arimi∣num was the communion of the whole worlde. no Councell therefore could be more generall than that was. And this no doubt Saint Augustine sawe when hee gaue ouer the Councell of Nice, as no greater preiudice to his aduersaries than the Councel of Ariminum was to himselfe and the fayth which he defended. Phi. The Councell of Ariminum condemned the error of Arius,The Councell of Ariminum erred. as their Epistle to Constantius declareth. Theo. The Bishoppes assembled at A∣riminum were religious and Catholike, but not sounding the drift of some craftie heretikes amongest them, and ledde with a coulour of concord and peace which the Emperour vrged, they relented from the Nicene creede vppon pretence made that the worde  was new and offensiue, and consented the worde should bee abolished,Hioron. aduers. Luciferanos. and subscribed to an other Creede that professed the sonne of GOD to bee like to his father, according to the Scriptures. Phi. Wherein then did that Councell erre? Theo. Not in decreeing any falsehood, but in exacting lesse to bee belee∣ued than the Christian faith required, and reiecting that worde, which the Nicene Councell had established for the righter expressing of the christi∣an faith. In this Councell saith Saint Hierom,Hieron. aduers. Luciferano Nomine vnitatis & fi∣dei infidelitas scripta est, In the name of vnitie and faith infidelity was (decreed and) written: and vppon the conclusion of the Councell,Ibidem. Ingemu∣it totus orbis, & Arrianum se esse miratus est, The whole worlde groned and wondered to see it selfe in Arrianisme. Phi. The fathers made more accompt of Councels than you doe. Theo. No father euer saide that Councels could not erre. Phi. S. Augustine saith,Epist. 118. their authoritie is most wholesome in the Church. Theo. But hee neuer said they were free from all error. That is the perfection and reuerence which S. Augustine reserueth to the Scriptures only, to be without all suspition of error.Epist. 119. Solis eis Scripturarum libris qui iam Canonici appellantur didici hunc timo∣rem honoremque deferre,Onely the scriptures ca not erre. vt nullum eorum authorem scribendo aliquid errasse firmis∣sime credam. I haue learned to yeeld this feare and honor to the Canonical Scriptures only that I firmely beleeue none of the Authors of them to haue any thing erred in penning them. If this honor to be free from error, be due to the Canonical Scriptures only, then may you not impart it either to successi∣on, Councels or Sees Apostolike. It must stand for a perpetuall difference
betweene the preceptes of God and decrees of men that God is true and all men lyars.Rom 3. Epist. 112. ad Paulin. If (ought) sayth Austen, bee prooued by the manifest authoritie of the diuine Scriptures which in the Church are called Canonicall, it must bee beleeued without any doubting: Other witnesses or testimonies, thou mayst beleeue or not beleeue, according as thou shalt see cause to trust thē. And distinguishing the Canon of the Scriptures from the writings and re∣solutions of all that followed; were they fathers, Councels or whatsoeuer, hee sayth,August. contra Faustum Ma∣nicheum, li. 11. cap. 5. In that Canonicall preeminence of the sacred Scriptures if it appeare that but one Prophet, Apostle or Euangelist set downe any thing in his wri∣tings, it is not lawfull to doubt of the trueth of it. In the works of those that came after them, comprised in bookes that bee infinite, in which soeuer of them the same truth is sound, yet the authoritie is farre inferior. Therfore in thē, if happily some things be thought to dissent from truth because they be not vnderstood as they were spoken,In all other writings the reader is free and not bound to be∣leeue them. August. de na∣tura & gratia contra Pelag. cap. 61. Ibidem. tamen liberum ibi habet lector auditorue iu∣dicium, quo vel approbet quod placuerit, vel improbet quod offenderit, yet hath the reader or hearer in those writings his iudgement free to allow what hee li∣keth, and reiect what he misliketh: So that in all such except they be fortifi∣ed by euident reason, or by that Canonical authoritie, if a man mislike or wil not beleeue he is not reprooued. Which libertie S. Augustine elsewhere cha∣lengeth vnto himselfe In quorumlibet hominum scriptis, in the writings of al mē whatsoeuer, and addeth this reason, Quia solis Canonicis debeo sine vlla recu∣satione consensum, because I owe consent without any stay to the Canonical Scriptures only. We may iudge freely of Councels. Contra Faustū lib. 11. cap. 5.The authoritie to bee beleeued without any refusing is proper onely to the Scriptures, because the certainetie, not to erre, is annexed only to them and to no writings else. The rest must bee read, as S. Augustine teacheth, non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum iudicandi libertate, not with a necessitie to beleeue them, but a libertie to iudge of them, and must bee distinguished from the authoritie of the Canon, for that epist. 48. the authoritie of the sacred Scriptures can neither deceiue nor be deceiued, and byDe pecca. me∣ritis & remiss. lib. 1. Cap. 22. those bookes, de ceteris literis fideliū vel infidelium libere iudicemus, we may freely iudge of (all) other writings both of Christians and Infidels.Contra Cresco. lib. 2. Cap. 3.3. If wee must iudge, then they may erre. Where no danger of error is, there is no freedom of iudgement left vs to receiue what we see cause, and reiect what we thinke good. The Scriptures we may not iudge of, because they can not erre: All other writings wee must examine before wee beleeue, Ergo they be not free from erring. S. Augustine refused coun∣cels both with him and against him. De vnitate ec∣clesiae, Cap. 16.This made S. Augustine disputing with the Donatists to reiect the Coun∣cels that were against him and resigne the Councels that were with him as he did before refuting the Arrians and to tie both himselfe and his aduersaries to the Scriptures. Let (the Donatists) if they can, sayth hee, shewe their Church, not in rumors and speaches of the men of Africa, not in the coūcels of their Bishops, not in the discourses of any writers whosoeuer, not in signes and miracles that may be forged; but in the prescript of the law, in
the predictions of the Prophetes in the verses of the Psalmes, in the voyces of the shepheard himselfe, in the preachings and workes of the Euangelists, that is in all the canonical authorities of the sacred Scriptures. And binding himselfe to the same condition, he saith,Ibidem. Quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credi oportere quòd in ecclesia Christi sumus &c. Because we our selues do not say wee must therfore be beleeued, for that we are in the Church of Christ, or else for that Optatus, Ambrose and infinite other Bishops of our communion haue cōmended the church, which we hold, or because our church hath bin pub∣lished in the Councels of our Collegues.Hilar. contra Auxentium & Arrianos. S. Hilarie was nothing afrayd to be condemned in many Councels. Now let him gather what Councels hee will against me, sayth he, and openly proscribe me for an heretike, as he hath of∣ten done. Phi. By whom then shal princes be directed if neither by bishops nor coun∣cels?Princes are not bound to Councels. Theo. I do not say that princes should not be directed by them, but onely that princes & others are not bound vnto them with like subiection, as they bee to the word of God. For that can not erre, & may command, because God is the author of it. Councels may erre, & can not cōmand, because they consist of men, which be not alwaies assured of trueth, and owe subiection to the princes sword. Phi. Were this exception good against councels,Christ hath a vicar on earth that cā not er, which is the holy Ghost. against Christes Uicar it is not good. He may command, as Christ might if he were present, and hath a pro∣mise that his fayth shall not fayle. Theo. In deede Christ hath a Uicar on earth that may commaund, and can direct vnto trueth, but I thinke you meane not him. Phi. I meane the Uicar generall which Christ left behinde him to guyde the church after his ascending. Theo. And so doe I, and yet I doubt wee bee of two mynds. Phi. What Uicar hath Christ left but Peter and his successors in the Romane See, which can not erre, and may commaund as well Princes as others? Theo. His holy Spirite, which hath better right to commaund and skill to direct than either Peter or Peters successours. Phi. Call you the holy Ghost his Uicar? Theo. Why shoulde I not? Tertullian did so before mee. The rule of faith is, sayth hee,Tertul. de prae∣scriptio. aduers. haereticos. Idem de virgi∣nibus velan∣dis. that Christ was taken vp into heauen, and sate down at the right hand of his father and sent, Vicarian vim spi∣ritus sancti qui credentes agat, the power of the holy Ghost to bee his Vicar and to leade the faithfull. And in an other place hee giueth him the same tytle. Vicarius Domini Spiritus sanctus, the holy Ghost the Lordes Vicar: But what auncient father euer called the Bishoppe of Rome Christes Uicar?The Pope neuer called Christs vicar but by his own flatte∣rers. Phi. If Peter were, no doubt he is. Theo. Wee aske not now for ifs, shewe one that euer called him so. Phi. What if that very word be not found in them? Theo. Then forbeare it till you find it, and goe on with some other name. Phi. Call him as you list, but this wee bee sure that hee can not erre, and may commaunde both Prince and people.The Pope may erre and can cōmaund neither Prince nor people. Theo. Hee neuer biteth that barketh much, you make your selfe sure of these thinges, which when wee come to triall will be most vnsure. How proue you either of these points which you affirme?
Phi. The Gospel prooueth the first,The Rhemish Testament vpon the 22. of Luke. I prayed for thee that thy fayth fayle not: and thou once conuerted, confirme thy brethren, which is to say, that Pe∣ter is that man, whom hee woulde make Superiour ouer them and the whole Church. Theo. Which is to say, that you belie the words of the Gospel. For who but Iesuites would make this collection, Confirme thy brethren, that is, be Supe∣riour ouer them and the whole Church? Phi. None may confirme but a Su∣periour. Theo. One brother may confirme an other.Why so good Syr? May not one brother comfort and encou∣rage an other? Phi. Yeas, but Peter must confirme his brethren. Theo. And what was confirming in this place but recalling them from the feare they were in, whē they fled from their master, and leading them by his example to be more constant? Phi. It was his charge so to doe. Theo. So is it euery Christian mans, in the like case to do no lesse. Dauid after the defiling of Berseba and murdering of Vriah promiseth to do that which Peter is here appointed to do.Psal. 51. Restore mee to the ioy of thy saluation, and establish mee with thy free Spi∣rit; then wil I teach thy wayes vnto the wicked, and sinners shal be couer∣ted vnto thee. Will you therefore inferre that Dauid was supreme Pastor ouer al the wicked? Are you not profound men, of a christian duetie and commō charitie prescribed to Peter in respect of them that were fallen into the same temptatiō with him, to conclude a singularitie and superioritie for him ouer his fellow disciples and ouer the whole church besides? Phi. The Rhemish Testament vpon the 22. of S. Luke. Christ praied for Peter not that he should not erre, but that he shuld not vtterly perish. Chrysost. in Ioh. homil. 72. Idem in Mat. homil. 83.By this, We learne that it was thought fit in the prouidence of God, that he who should be the head of the church, shuld haue a special priuilege by Christs praier & promise neuer to fayle in faith, and that none other either Apostle, Bishop or Priest may chalenge any such singular or speciall prerogatiue either of her office or person other∣wise than by ioyning with Peter and by holding of him. Theo. By this we learne that you abuse both the prouidence of God and the promise of our Sauiour to serue your wicked fansies. For Christ did not promise that Peters iudgement shoulde neuer erre, but that in this tentation nowe at hande, his fayth shall not vtterly fayle. Ego pro te oraui ne deficeret fides tua: Hoc est ne in fine pereas. I haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth shall not fayle, that is, sayth Chryso∣stome, that thou finally perish not. And againe, Non dixit quippe, non negabis, sed vt non deficiat fides tua. Cura enim ipsius & fauore factum est ne omnino Petri fi∣des euanesceret. (Christ) did not say, thou shalt not deny me, but thy faith shall not (wholy) fayle. For by his care and fauour it came to passe that Peters faith should not vtterly bee extinguished. And so Bede,Beda in cap. 2. Luce. Our Sauiour prai∣ed for Peter, not that hee shoulde not be tempted, but that his faith should not fayle, that is, that after he was fallen by denying him, hee might rise a∣gaine by repentance to his former state. Now frame your reason, as in deede you must, and marke your illation howe absurd it is. I haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth shall not vtterly vanish, though thou shalt thrise denie mee and shamefully forsweare mee; Ergo neither Peter neither his successours can erre in any matter of Religion. I aske not what boy, but what bedlem would thus dispute?
Phi. Peter denied not the faith but the person of Christ. Theo. And he that denieth the Person of Christ, denieth not a part, but the whole faith of Christ.To deny Christ is worse than to be decei∣ued in some point of saith. It is a sorer and a more dangerous fal to deny the Lord himselfe, than to be decei∣ued in opinion of faith, euen by the very confession of Peter. For thus he pla∣ceth them in the second Epistle,2. Peter 2. There shalbe false teachers amongst you, which shall priuily bring in damnable sects, yea, denying the Lorde that hath bought them. Our Sauiour in his admonition to the seuen Churches of Asia,Reuelat. 2. sheweth that hee which denyeth his name denyeth his fayth. Thou holdest fast my name, sayth hee, and hast not denyed my fayth. Where∣fore not to hold fast the name of Christ is to deny the fayth of Christ. And how can you doubt of this, since the missing of any point of fayth, is but heresie, and the denying of Christes name which Peter fell into, is Apostasie, farre worse than the former? See then howe lewdly you peruert the words of our Saui∣our. Where Peter is forewarned of his fall, you make the woordes a war∣rant that hee shall not fall. And where the Lorde promised him repentance, you turne the text as if Peter weree free from all such offences. Phi. Hee offended, but not in fayth. Theo. Could he deny Christ and not denie his faith and hope in Christ? Or can there bee greater infidelitie than to deny the sonne of God? And yet Peter not onely denyed him thrise, but with an othe and a curse ratified his deniall. Phi. Peter denied that hee knewe him. Theo. And hee that knoweth not Christ, what fayth or hope hath he in Christ?Peter lost his faith when he denied christ. S. Ambrose giuing the cause why Peter did not speake but weepe after his fall, sayth,Ambros. sermo. 46. Petrus iam non vtitur sermo∣ne quo fefellerat, quo peccauerat, quo fidem amiserat. Peter nowe doeth not vse speach by the which hee had lyed, by the which he had sinned, by the which hee had lost his fayth. And againe,Idem. sermo. 47. Fidelior factus est post quam fidem se perdidisse defleuit. Peter became more faythfull, after hee bewayled the losse of his fayth. Phi. The danger (sayth S. Leo) was common to all the Apostles, but our Lorde tooke special care of Peter,The Rhemish Testament vpon the 22. of S. Luke. that the state of al the rest might bee the more sure, if the head were inuincible. Theo. Leo may be borne with in shewing himselfe some∣what fauourable to Peter, the founder of his Church; but what reason wee shoulde beare with you when you corrupt and falsifie that which Leo sayth? His woordes are,Leo. sermo. 3. in anniuersari die assumptio∣nis ad Pontifi∣catum. Leo corrup∣ted by the Rhemists. Pro fide Petri propriè supplicatur tanquam aliorum status cer∣tior sit futurus, simens Principis victa non fuerit. Prayer is made particularly for Peters fayth, as though the state of others woulde bee the surer, if the minde of the chiefe were not conquered. For aliorum, you say (all the rest;) for mens Principis, you say (the head;) for victa non fuerit, you say (were inuincible;) that is at no time after able to bee conquered. These bee your forgeries, they bee not Leoes woordes. Hee speaketh somewhat partially for Peter, but nothing hurtfull vnto vs. That Peter was the chiefe of the Apostles in order, in age, in zeale, in courage, and such like vertues and dignities, and that the rest are weakened when the chiefe is conquered,
which is all that Leo sayth, we can admit: But yet S. Chrysostome,Chrysost. in Mat. homil. 83. Why Christ praied for Peter by name. Ibidem paulo ante. by your leaue, giueth a truer cause way Christ did mention Peter and not the rest. If (Satan) desired (to resist) them all, why did not (Christ) pray for all? It is eui∣dent, as I sayd before, that to touch him the more deepely and to shewe his fall to bee farre more grieuous than any of the rest, Christ turneth his speech to him in particular. And so hee sayde before, I prayed for thee (par∣ticularly) that thy fayth should not fayle. This (Christ) spake to touch (Pe∣ter) the more vehemently, signifying that his fall woulde bee much fou∣ler than the fall of his fellowes, and therefore that hee needed the more helpe. Christ praied for all. August. quaest. ex nouo Testa∣mēto, quaest. 75.S. Augustine maketh it a plaine case that in praying for Peter hee prayed for all. Quid ambigitur? Pro Petro rogabat, & pro Iacobo & Iohanne non roga∣bat, vt ceteros taceam? Manifestum est in Petro omnes contineri, quia & in alio loco dicit, Ego pro hijs rogo quos mihi dedisti Pater. Why doubt wee of it? Did hee pray for Peter, and did hee not pray for Iames and Iohn, to say nothing of the rest? It is manifest that in Peter all are contained, because in an o∣ther place hee sayth: I pray for them whom thou hast giuen mee, O father. The wordes Pro Iacobo & Iohanne non rogabat, must bee interrogatiue, vnlesse you will haue S. Augustine to contradict that which he goeth about to proue; though the Print or the Scribe haue made there two pointes, yet your owne felowes the Louanists in their late Plantine edition haue mended the points, & made thē interrogatiue for very shame. But how so euer you set the points, cer∣taine it is the Lorde prayed ioyntly for them all, and that at this very supper as the 17. of S. Iohn witnesseth, & in as ample manner for all as for one.Iohn 17. I pray for them, I pray not for the world. Holy father preserue them in thy name whō thou hast giuen me; keepe them from euill & sanctifie them in thy trueth. It is a greater grace to bee kept from euill and to bee sanctified in the trueth, which Christ requested for all, than to haue their fayth not fayle and to bee conuerted, which hee promised vnto Peter. You doe therefore very wic∣kedly to teach the people that None other Apostle might chalenge any such speciall prerogatiue either of his office or Person,The Rhemish Testament vpon the 22. of Luke. as to bee stedfast in trueth without error. The prayer was generall for them all by the iudgement of S. Augustine, and were it not, the prayer which our Sauiour made for them all, and the promise which hee made vnto them all euen the same night that hee spake this, are more effectual than this. The prayer you haue heard: the promise is,Iohn. 16. Christs pro∣mise to al his Apostles. If I depart not, the comforter shall not come vnto you: but if I depart, I will send him vn∣to you. And when that Spirit of trueth commeth hee shall leade you into all trueth. To bee led into all trueth is a better assurance against error, than to fall first and after to bee conuerted, which is all that is promised vnto Peter in this place. Phi. The Rhemish Testament in the 22. of Luke. Lib. q. noui Testa. quaest. 75. tomo 4.Saint Augustine also: Christ praying for Peter, prayed for the rest, be∣cause in the Pastor and Prelate the people is corrected or commended. Saint Ambrose writeth that Peter after his tentation was made Pastor of the Church,
because it was said to him, thou being conuerted confirme thy brethren. Theo. You might haue spared these authorities, but that you must needes haue the Fa∣thers names in your mouthes, though they make nothing for you. The words of S. Augustine, which you cite, are not found in the olde Printes nor in their copies,The wordes are inclosed with two lines in Erasmus e∣dition, & not found in the old printes. but crept into some written bookes by the negligence and vnskilfulnesse of scribes; and yet were they S. Augustines, I see not what you gaine by them. Peter is there called Praepositus,Praepositus & Praelatus com¦mon names to all Bishops. that is, preferred before the rest, as also Prae∣latus doeth signifie, both which wordes in the Fathers bee commonly applied to all Bishops, & import no singular prerogatiue that Peter should claime, but the common charge which all Pastours haue. And though the words which you quote be neither many nor materiall, yet you mistake them. For you say the people is corrected or commended, where the Latine is Semper in praeposito populus aut corripitur aut laudatur, the people is alwayes reproued or praised in their (leader or) Prelate. S. Ambrose saith no more but that,Ambros. in Psal. 43. Petrus Ecclesiae praeponitur, post quam à Di∣abolo tentatus est, Peter receiueth charge of the church, after he was tempted of the Diuell. And by these wordes, thou being conuerted confirme thy bre∣thrē, he saith,Ibidem. The Lord doth signifie what it meaneth that he did after chose him to be sheepehearde of the Lordes flocke: to wit, that hee and all other sheepeheardes by his example, should learne to beare with their weake bre∣thren and vse that kindinesse and patience in restoring and confirming others, which their Lord and master first shewed in suffering & conuerting them. And this Sainct Ambrose did well to make the chiefest point of a christian sheepe∣heard. Phi. But S. Ambrose saith in the singular number, Petrus ecclesiae praeponi∣tur: & eum elegit Pastorem Dominici gregis. Peter is set ouer the Church, and Christ chose him to be Pastor of his flocke. Sure you be singular men to quote such places and make such conclusions. Peter was set ouer the Church, or made Pastour of the Lordes flocke, ergo none but Peter. Euen so you may reason:1. Tim. 1. The Gospell of the glorie of the blessed God is committed to mee, saith Paul, ergo to none but to Paul. And againe,1. Tim. 2. I am the teacher of the Gen∣tiles in faith and truth, ergo none but he. Or when he saith to the Philippians,Philip. 1. It is giuen vnto you, not onely to beleeue in (Christ) but also to suffer for (Christ): ergo it is giuen to none but to them. If you play thus with Scrip∣tures and fathers you may make mad worke in them both. Phi. Peter was made Pastour of the flock. Theo. And so were others as you heard out of Ambrose before:Ambros. de dig. Sacer. cap. 2. The (Lords) flocke not only Peter receiued, but we al with him. Phi. He was set ouer the church. The. And so are al Pastors. Our Sauiour saith of teachers in generall:Mat. 24. Who then is a faithfull seruant & wise, whom his master hath set ouer his household to giue them meate in season? S. Cyprian speaking of himselfe saith,Lib. 1. Epist. 3. Ob hoc ecclesiae praepositum persequitur: For this he persueth the ruler or ouerseer of the church. S. Au∣gustine saith,Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 20. ca. 9 Praepositi intelligendi sunt per quos ecclesia nunc gubernatur. They
must be taken for ouerseers (of the church) by whom the church is nowe gouerned.Idem in Iohan. tract. 46. And againe, Sunt quidam Ecclesiae praepositi, de quibus Paulus dicit. sua quaerentes, There are some ouerseers of the church of whom Paul saith, they seeke their owne. So that Praepositus and Pastor Ecclesiae bee not titles proper to Peter but stiles common to all Bishops, and therefore by them you can inferre nothing. But where all this while are your proofes, that Peter could not erre, which is the frame that you would fasten on these wordes?This is the Rhemists cō∣mon vse in their Testa∣mēt tothwack in a number of Fathers names to no purpose. Why proue you thinges superfluous, and skip that which is most in question betwixt vs? What father euer saide that these wordes of our Sauiour made Peter free from falling or er∣ring? From desperation & irrepentance, the Lords praier saued him, & recouered him when he was ready to perish: from falling or erring hee was defended no more than the rest, nay not so much. They fled & forsooke their master, he presu∣ming farther, sped worse, as the Lord fortold him, & the Gospel reporteth of him. And were that proued, which you neither offer nor are able to proue, yet doth it not belong to the Bishop of Rome, which is it that we sticke at. For touching Peters person and office we can soone be intreated to thinke and speake the best. And though we do not say as you do, that truth was tied to his sleeue only: yet are we of opinion, that he and his fellow Disciples were guided into all truth as by whom the church was first to bee planted, and from whome the faithfull were to receiue the word of truth & the foundation of their faith. And therefore we nothing doubt but as the writings of Peter, Paul, Iames, Iohn, Iude & Mat∣thew bee canonical Scriptures, so the preaching not of Peter onely but of all the rest after they were indued with the power of the holy Ghost from aboue,We confesse the prea∣chinges and writinges of Peter and all the rest after the receiuing of the holie Ghost, were free from er∣ror: will they claime that for the Pope? was assured truth & void of all error: the same spirit ruling their tongues that guided their pens: But this priuilege to teach and write trueth without error was annexed to Peters person, not conueied along to his successors no more thā their writings are canonicall because his were. Phi. This was not the priuilege of S. Peters person but of his office, that he should not faile in faith.The Rhemish Test. 22. Lucae. The. If you ment that other Apostles which were of the same of∣fice wt him, were to haue the same priuilege as well as he, you saide right: for the churches of Christ in all places where Peter neuer preached needed the same assurance of faith & the same direction vnto trueth that the churches did which were planted by Peter: But you will haue this priuilege remaine to some suc∣cessor after Peters death, and for that you shew vs no authority besides your owne, which God knoweth is very simple. Phi. The Rhemish Test. 22. Lucae.Al the fathers applie this priuilege of not failing in faith to the Romane church & Peters successours in the same. Theo. You belie all the Fathers with one breath; & but that you haue a priuilege to say what you list,A noble lie of the Rhemists forced on all the Fathers with one breath. in other men this were an arrogant & an impudent lie. What fathers, I praie you, applie this promise of not failing in faith to the Romane Church? You say al: for discharge of your credit let vs heare some. Phi. Epist. 190.S. Barnard writing to Pope Innocentius saith, To what other See was
it euer said, I haue praied for thee Peter that thy faith do not faile? Theo. Could you find no father for the space of 1100. yeres that euer applied these wordes to the church of Rome before Bernard? To be plaine with you masters,They say all the fathers applied this to the Pope, & produce none but poore Bernard. Bernard is too yōg to cary the name of antiquitie, & too single to haue the credit of al the fathers: But wt thē that haue no mo, one must go for all. Indeed all the fathers that euer applied this priuilege to the church of Rome are poore Bernard more than a 1000. yeres after Christ, in the midst of corruption: but in this case wee require some grauer and elder father than Bernard. Phi. To the which (saith S. Cyprian) infidelity or false saith can not come.Cyprian fou∣ly wrested to make for the Pope. Theo. To which what? church or successors? Phi. Which you wil. And where you require fathers that the church of Rome can not er, Cypriās words be very plaine. Post ista nauigare audent & ad Petri cathedram at{que} ecclesiam Principalem,The Rhemish Test. 22. Lucae. Cyp. Epi. 55. vnde vmtas Sacerdotalis exorta est a schismaticis & profanis literas ferre nec cogitare eos esse Ro∣manos, quorū fides Apostolo praedicante laudata est, ad quos persidia habere non possit accessum. After al this they dare saile & cary letters frō schismatiks & profane persons to the chaire of Peter & the principal church, whence priestly vnity had her beginning, & do not remēber the Romanes to be those whose faith was praised by the Apostles mouth, to whom infidelity cā not come. Theo. You do wel to repeate the place at large, it wil ease me of some paines. What conclude you of these words? Phi. That the Bishop of Rome can not er. Theo. How fet you that about? Phi. To Peters chaire infidelitie can not come. Theo. Those be not Cypriās words. Phi. To the Romanes,The Romanes import the people, and not the Pope. he saith, infidelity cā not come. Theo. He addeth somwhat more, whose faith was praised by the Apo∣stles mouth. Phi. All the better. For if S. Paul praised their faith, it was the truer. Theo. But whose faith did Paul praise? the Bishops or the peoples? Phi. Why aske you that? Theo. Because that directeth the sense of Cyprians words. Phi. Whose say you? Theo. I aske you & you returne it to me: Well then let S. Paul speake for vs both. I thanke my God, through Iesus Christ for you all, because your faith is re∣noumed throughout the whole world.Rom. 1. You al containeth as well the people that receiued the faith,Cypriā spake of all the Ro∣manes, & not of the Bishop of Rome. as the Preachers that taught it: and of the twaine ra∣ther the people than the Preachers, because the preaching of the faith was as true elsewhere, as in Rome: but either the zeale & deuotion of the people in re∣ceiuing the faith was greater at Rome than elsewhere as S. Hierom noteth, & that S. Paul commendeth; or else because their citie was imperiall, the fame of their receiuing ye gospel was bruted farther abroad thā of other smaler cities, & did incourage others to go forward wt the more boldnes, for the which Paul thāketh God. Take which you wil, the peoples faith is it that S. Paul praiseth, as his own words witnesse,Rom. 1. To you all that are at Rome: I thanke my God for you all, because your faith is made manifest to al the world. Now if Cyprian say that infidelity can not come to the Romanes whose saith was praised by the Apostles mouth, then can none of the people of Rome erre because the faith of them all was praised by the Apostles mouth.
Phi. The church of Rome can not erre, nor the people neither so long as they follow the faith of that church. Theo. But if you build this on Cyprians words you must say, that the church of Rome can not erre so long as shee followeth the people of Rome, for their faith was praised by the Apostle. And therefore choose whether you will impart this priuiledge to euery Citizen and Artisant in Rome, that they can not erre, as well as to the Pope, that hee can not erre; or else seeke for an other meaning of Cyprians saying. Phi. What other mea∣ning should we seeke for? be not the wordes plaine enough? Theo. You neither translate them right, nor applie them right.The true mea∣ning of Cy∣prian. For Cy∣prian doth not discourse in that epistle whether the Romanes them-selues may fall from the faith, but whether wicked persons reiected in other places from the communion should haue any refuge or find any fauour at Rome: & that he largely dissuadeth, bringing this amongst others for a reason, that where the Apostle praised the people of Rome in his time for their zealous imbracing the faith of Christ: and incouraging others to doe the like, it would nowe bee a great shame, if wicked disturbers of the faith should bee succoured by them: which he thought good to expresse in these words,Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 3 May not, or ought not haue accesse. Neither doe they remember the Romanes to bee those whose faith was praised by the Apostles mouth, to whom (wickednes or) vnfaithfulnesse may not haue accesse. Phi. Out vpon you: what a gloze haue you brought vs here? Theo. None but such as the whole Epistle shal iustifie. Phi. You translate, non possit may not.What non po∣est doth signi∣fie. Theo. A foule ouersight I assure you; as though the very children in Grammer scholes did not learne that posse doth signifie to may or can, or your law it selfe did not allow vs that exposition when it saith,De regulis iuris 68. In glossa. Id dicimur posse quod de iure possumus, we can doe that which by right we can? And Cyprian him∣selfe did not vse the word in that sense when he saide of a Bishop,In senten. Conc. Carth. sentent. 1. Cyprianus. Iudicari ab alio non possit, cum nec ipse possit alterum iudicare, hee may not bee iudged of an o∣ther, since himselfe may not iudge an other? And euen in his Epistle, Lib. 1. Epist. 3. Nequ potest illis esse frons ad nos accedendi. They can not haue the face to come vn∣to vs. Phi. You may thus shift out any thing. Theo. It is no shift to tell you that non potest doth not euer signifie an absolute impossibilitie. Nothing is more vsuall neither in sacred or prophane writers, no nor in common speech than that construction of the word which we bring you.De orat. ad Att. Non possum quin exclamem: I can not but crie out saith Cicero: and facere non possum vt nihil ad te dem litera∣rum: I can not but write vnto you. Where is no simple necessitie in either, but an vrgent occasion only. The Scriptures euerie where vse the word in like sort. God saith, Non po∣tero celare Abraham quae gesturus sum.Gen. 18. Can I hide from Abraham that which I am about to doe?Gen. 34. Iacobs sonnes answere Sichem and his father, Nō possumus facere quod petitis:Gen. 37. We may not do that which you request. Of Io∣sephes brethren the text saith, Nec poterant ei quicquā pacificè loqui: they could not giue him a faire word.Gen. 44. Iudas speaking of his brother Beniamin, Non po∣test
puer relinquere patrem suum: and after, Non possum redire adpatrem absente puero: The lad can not leaue his father: I can not returne to my father with∣out him. So Iephta saide to his daughter:Iudic. 11. I haue opened my mouth to the Lord, & aliud facere non potero, and I can not otherwise doe. When Asaell persued Abner and would not leaue him, Abner said,2. Reg. 2. depart least I be driuen to kill thee, and then can not shew my face to Ioab thy brother.3. Reg. 2. Adonias to Bethsaba the mother of Salomon, Speake I pray thee to king Salomon, ne∣que enim negare tibi quicquam potest, for he can denie thee nothing. The man of Iudah saide to the Prophet that dwelt in Bethell,3. Reg. 13. Non possum reuerti, I can not go backe with thee, though presently he did it. Infinite are the places both of the olde and new Testament where the word is so vsed. In the Gospell he that was in his bed when his friend spake to him, said,Luke. 11. Non possum surgere, I can not rise, and yet he did. The ghst that maried a wife answered, Luke 14. Non possum venire: I can not come: and yet he might. The master saide to his seruant, Luke 16. Thou canst be steward no longer, when he ment he should not. The Iewes aid of Christ: ThisIoan. 6. is an hard speech, who can in∣dure it: which yet his Apostles did. And Christ himselfe saide to his kinsmen, Non Ioan. 7. potest mundus odisse vos, The world can not hate you: meaning it hath no cause to hate you: Non 1. Corinth. 12. potest oculus dicere manui, The eie can not say to the hand I haue no neede of thee; S. Paul meaneth if the eye will say truth. So himselfe saith, Non 2. Corinth. 13. possumus aliquid aduersus veritatem, We can do nothing against the truth, that is we may or will not: So saide the Sonne of God to the church of Ephesus, Scio Reuel. 2. quia non potes sustinere malos: I know thou canst not abide them that are euill. A thowsande like there are in euery part of the Scripture, but these are enough to perswade any sober mind, that we bring no new nor strange interpretation of Cyprians words but such as is familiar and frequent in the bookes of God and mouthes of men. Phi. The words perhaps may be so taken if that were proued to be Cypri∣ans meaning in this place. Theo. The wordes standing indifferent to both constructions, yours and ours; wee shall quickly see, which of them commeth neerest to Cyprians meaning. The sense, which you make, besides that it is absurde in it selfe, it neither serueth the worde, nor matcheth the circumstan∣ces of this Epistle, nor agreeth with the maine iudgement of Cyprian in his other writinges, and that which is most of all, it flatly dissenteth from S. Paul, who would neither warne the Romanes to feare without cause, nor threaten thē with thinges impossible. Phi. Proue this, and expounde the place how you list. Theo. Both Cypriā & Paul name generally the Romanes,Cyprians wordes haue no agreement with the Ie∣suites sense. & not seuerally the Bishop of Rome from the rest. Next, habere accessum noteth not any corruptiō springing, or not springing within thēselues, but only resort of others vnto thē. Thirdly Cyprian complaineth that this was done, and toucheth the vnshame∣fastnesse of heretikes for doing it, which you would presse as impossible to bee done. Fourthly the thing which those perfidious persons sought at Rome
was not any mutation of the faith, but letters of fellowshippe and communion, which the Bishops of Africa denied them for their sundry disorders. Last of al, repeating and commending the warines of the Romanes in shunning the poy∣son of heretiks, he shutteth vp his letter with wordes very like the former and declareth the true meaning of that he spake before. Cyp. lib. 1. Epi. 3.Let our most beloued brethren hereafter stoutly decline and forbeare (all) speach and talk with such men. Though I know our brotherhood there (at Rome) garded with your foresight,These be plai∣ner words for the people than the for∣mer be for the Pope. and watchfull enough of themselues, nec capi haereticorum venenis posse nec decipi, can neither be taken, nor deceiued with the venemous deuises of heretikes. The right cause then why the Ro∣manes in Cyprians time could not be caught with the baites of heretikes, was not Peters priuilege, or impossibilitie to er, as you fondly dreame, but the wise∣dome of Cornelius directing them, and the peoples care neither to speake nor eate with any such men: And this diligence remaining, it was not possible that the impietie or infidelitie of others should haue accesse vnto them. Cyprian affir∣meth of the Bishop of Rome, that he did erre.Other opinion of the Romanes Cyprian neuer had, and as for the Bishop of Rome, that he might and did erre, if the wordes of Cyprian to Pompeius against the letters of Stephanus Bishop of Rome be not plaine enough in the iudgement of any reasonable man, wee yeelde you the whole. In reading the letters (of the Bishop of Rome) you may more and more perceiue, saith Cyprian,Cypr. ad Pom. contr. Epi. Steph Ibidem. his errour, which defendeth the cause of heretikes against the church of God. And so likewise he saith of Stephanus, haeresin contra Ecclesia vindicat, he bolstereth heresie against the church: Sua praua & falsa defendit, defendeth his euill and false assertion. I respect not which of the twaine had the better side, Stephanus or Cyprian, but onely whether Cyprian had that opinion of Stephanus and other Bishops of Rome that they coulde not erre; and if you haue but common sense you must say no. Much lesse did Cy∣prian euer meane to saie that the people of Rome coulde not erre, which your selues dare not saie, and yet you woulde wring it out of Cyprians wordes. But God be thanked, Sainct Paul hath preuented your wicked in∣terprise. Writing to the whole church of Rome, and giuing them their due praise for their deuotion and zeale,S. Paul assu∣reth the Ro∣mane church that it might erre. Rom. 11. and entering at last into the reiection of the Iewes for their vnbeliefe, hee warneth expresly the Romanes in these wordes: Boast not thy selfe against the braunches: and if thou boast thy selfe thou bearest not the roote but the roote thee. Thou wilt say the braunches are broken off, that I might bee graft in. Well, through infidelitie they are broken off, & thou standest by faith: Be not high minded but feare. For, if God spa∣red not the naturall braunches, (take heed) lest he spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodnes and seuerity of God: toward them which haue fallen, seueritie; but towards thee, goodnes, if thou continue in his goodnes, other∣wise thou also shalt be cut off. Whether the Apostle spake generally to the Gentiles, and inclusiuely to
the Romanes: or namely to the Romanes and proportionablie to the rest, it is all one to vs:Origen. lib. 8. in cap. 11. ad Rom. one of the twaine, hee must needes. Origen saith vppon these wordes of Paul, I say to you Gentiles: Now he plainely turneth his speech to the Gentiles, but chiefly to those of the citie of Rome, that belee∣ued. S. Paul speaking to the Romanes, no man may except the Romanes; and they being included, his admonition to them, feare and beware least, was vtterly superfluous if there coulde bee no daunger in them of swaruing from the faith; and the condition implied, otherwise (if thou continue not) and the commination annexed, thou also shalt be cut off: were both ridiculous and o∣dious if it were not possible for them to fal or to be cut off. Fight not therefore against the holy Ghost with broken reedes caught here and there out of the Fa∣thers works:The Apostle threatneth not things im∣possible. Looke rather in time to this watchword which the apostle giueth you, feare and take heede, otherwise thou also shalt be cut off. And marke his reason, If the naturall braunches may be broken off, much more the wild which were planted but in their steedes. Phi. If that had beene the Apostles meaning, doe you thinke the Fathers would haue gainesaide it?Hierom wre∣sted by the Iesuites as Cy¦prian was be∣fore. The Rhemish Testament vp on the 1. to the Romanes. Theo. I thinke they would not, and I see they doe not: and that maketh mee to interprete Cyprian in such sort as hee may agree with himselfe, and not confront S. Paul. Phi. His wordes do surely leane on our side. Theo. They fit your humor, and in that respect you be eger on them: O∣therwise I haue cleared Cyprian both of that speech & of that intent. And were you not vnshamefast wranglers you would perceiue that the ordinary vse of the phrase both in diuine and humane writinges doth acquite him of that opinion, which you inforce vpon him: But such is your profession you must go on as you haue begun. Phi. If one alone had saide it, we would not vrge it so often; but S. Hierom hath likewise testified the same. Know you that the Romane faith commended by the Apostles mouth will receiue no such deceites, nor can be possibly changed, though an Angell from heauen taught otherwise being fensed by S. Pauls authority. Tom. 2. Apolog. aduers. Ruff. lib. 3. cap. 4. Theo. If S. Hierom say the same that Cyprian did, he must be taken and vnderstood as Cyprian was; and so you ease me of that labour. Phi. He saith the same in effect, but his words are more forcible. Theo. That is, your wilfulnesse in peruerting and racking the words of S. Hierom is more sensible. For S. Hierom speaketh not one word of the persons, that they shall neuer fall from the faith, but auoucheth only that the doctrine which was first preached at Rome, and then continued, was so exact and perfect that an Angell from heauen might not bee heard against it. And to this ende hee saide,Hieron. Apo aduers. Ruff. 3. Scito Romanam fidem, Apostolica voce laudatam istiusmodi praestigias non recipere: etiamsi Angelus de coelo ater annunciet quam semel praedicatum est Pauli authoritate munitā, nō posse mutari. Know you that the Romane faith commē∣ded by the Apostles voice receiueth no such delusions, and that being armed with Pauls authority it may not bee changed, if an Angell from hauen doe preach otherwise, than once was preached.
Phi. You run againe to your former interpretation: Non posse mutari, it may not be changed, in steede of it can not be changed. Theo. Use which you will, so you grant, which I fully proued before, that non posse doth vsually sig∣nifie as well that which is vnlawfull, as that which is vnpossible. Phi. I know non possum, is vsed diuersely, but how doth that answere S. Hierom? Theo. You take hlde of a word in Hierom, which in all mens speech and writinges hath diuerse and sundrie significations by your owne confession, and then you maruell why we doe not receiue the vntruest and vnlikeliest of them all for your pleasures without any farther proofe. Non possum doth import that which is ei∣ther vnpossible, vnlawfull, inconuenient or any waie impugnant to the ful persuasion and determination of our mindes,The places of Scripture before allead∣ged if you weigh them, proue al these significations. as the places before alleadged doe manfestly declare, and in all those accidentes, our common speech is & may be non possum, I can not. You would now by a text of Hieroms, where he saith, Romanam fidem non posse mutari, etiam si Angelus de caelo, &c. The Romane faith may not, or can not be charged though an Angel (came) from heauen, infer that the Romanes vntill the worldes end can not possibly choose but abide in the same faith which was first deliuered them; and that doe what they will to the contrarie, they must be preserued in Christes trueth. This is wee say a shamefull violence offered to Hieroms wordes against all learning, against his meaning, and against the spirit of God speaking in S. Paul. First the wordes non posse mutari, receiue both constructions a like, that is either a change of the faith can neuer happen in the Romanes, which is your sense, or else their faith can not possibly bee changed without in∣curring infidelitie,The true in∣tent of Hie∣roms wordes. which is ours. For it ceaseth to bee faith when once it is changed. Next S. Hierom speaketh not of the persons but of the thing: hee doth not say the Romanes can not change their mindes, but the faith which was deliuered them, in no wise may be chaunged. And why? Because it is the truth of God which neuer changeth. Againe the authoritie of Paul writing to the Galathians which Hierom citeth, doth not warrant that the Romanes shal not fall, but onely that the faith once preached may not be changed though an An∣gell from heauen should attempt it, especially since the Apostle commended the doctrine which they reserued to be the true christian faith. What reason then haue you besides your parcial affectiō to the See of Rome, to draw these words from their natiue sense, which is good and religious, to your priuate conceit, which sauoreth altogither of mere vanitie and open flattery? Phi. What S. Hierom meant, God doth know, you do not. Theo. No more do you; but y• hee meant not this which you would father on him, we haue his owne witnes which you must beleeue vnlesse you can shewe better. Thus hee complaineth of the Romanes both Pristes & people in the epitaph of Mar∣cella. Haeretica in hijs Prouincijs exorta tempestas, nauemplenam blasphemiarum Romano intulit portu,Hiero. ad Prin∣cipiam Marc. Epitapha. tom. 1. &c. & Romanae fidei purissimum fontem caeno lutosa permis∣cuere vestigia. Tunc sancta Marcella postquam sensit fidem Apostolico ore lauda∣tam in plerisque violari, ita vt sacerdotes quoque ac nonnullos Monachorum maxi∣me{que}
seculi homines in assensum sui traheret, ac simplicitati illuderet episcopi, publice restitit. An hereticall tempest rising in these Countries (of the East) caried full saile into the hauen of Rome; &c. & vncleane feete did trouble with mud the most pure fountaine of the Romane faith. Then holy Marcella, when shee sawe the faith praised by the Apostles mouth violated in most thinges, so that (this heresie) drew the Priestes and some Monkes and specially lai∣men into the consent of it selfe, and deluded the simplicitie of the Bishop (of Rome,That come to passe in Hie∣roms time which the Ie∣suites would proue to be impossible.) shee began to resist openly. Note Sir that come to passe in Hieroms age and knowledge, which you would proue by Hieroms words to be in all ages impossible. The fountaine of the Romane faith defiled with mud, the faith praised by the Apostles violated in most things, the Priests, the people drawen into the same consent, & the seely Bishop of Rome abused by them, and the first that openly resisted a poore widow. Go then and blaze to the world,The Rhemish. Testament is an heape of Fathers abu∣sed & wrested to depraue the text of the holy Ghost. as you haue done, in your magistrall annota∣tions or rather deprauations of the new Testament (which as you haue dres∣sed it with your deuises and glozes, is now nothing lesse than the Testament of Christ) proclaime I say that infidelity can not come to the Romanes, nor their faith be possibly changed, & that vpon the credits of Cyprian & Hierom, when they themselues did see, and say the contrary. Phi. We take no such care for the people of Rome, whether they may straie from the faith or no: Peters successour is he that our eyes are and ought to bee rather bent on; and touching his holines, we be resolued that he can not erre in faith. Theo. His holinesse hath very good lucke then and better than all his neighbours besides:The Iesuites reasons to make the Pope free frō error. The Rhemish Test. 22. Lucae. but how shall wee knowe that hee can not erre? Your worde is too weake to be taken for a matter of such weight: fathers you bring none, Scriptures you haue none, which way will you make it appeare that his holinesse can not be stained with error? Phi. No maruell that our Master would haue his vicars Consistorie and seate in∣fallible, seeing euen in the olde law, the high Priesthood and chaire of Moses wanted not great priuilege in this case, though nothing like the churches and Peters preroga∣tiue. Theo. But we maruell where you finde that Christ would haue any vicar, or that his vicars Seat is infallible, or that the Bishop is that vicar which you speake of, and we most maruell that you auouch al this vpon your single report without script or scrole to confirme the same. The chaire of Moses had no such priuilege as you chalenge.Moses chaire had no such priuilege that it could not erre. The people were to learne the law of God at the Priestes handes, and hee that presumptu∣ouslie despised the Priest or Magistrate giuing iudgement according to the tenour of Gods law, died the death. But this doth not proue that either the Priest or the Magistrate coulde not erre: or that the Prophetes did not iust∣ly reproue the Priestes when they sate to iudge according to the lawe,Deut. 17. for their manifest contempts & breaches of the Law. God by the mouth o Malachy both describeth what the Priestes should do, & declareth what the Priests had done. The Priestes lippes should preserue knowledge,Malach. 2. and they shoulde seeke the
law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hostes. But yee are gone out of the way (O ye Priests,Moses chaire did erre.) ye haue caused many to fall by the lawe: ye haue broken the couenant of Leui, saith the Lord of hostes. This proude priuilege which you mention, was claimed by the wicked Priestes in Ieremies time. Come, say they, let vs imagine some deuise against Ieremie:Ierem. 18. for the law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsell from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet. But God assureth them by his Pro∣phet for this their arrogant presumption, that the law should perish from the Priest,Ezech. 7. 4. Kings 16. and counsell from the auncient. What grosse idolatrie Vriah the Priest committed to please king Ahaz, the Scripture will tell you. And were there no speciall examples, the serious inuectiues of the Prophets against them and the whole land as well for false religion, as corrupt manners, are euident testimonies that Priestes from the lowest to the highest might erre. Esaie saith,Esai. 28. Would you haue clearer wordes that Moses chaire did erre? Matth. 16. Matth. 15. Mark. 7. The Priest and the Prophet haue erred, they haue gone awaie, they faile in vision, they stumble in iudgement. Our Sauiour charged his Dis∣ciples, to beware of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadduces, which nee∣ded not vnlesse it were erronious. And think you these were no errours which the Sonne of God reproued in the Pharisees? You haue made the cōmaun∣dement of God of no authoritie by your tradition: & many such like things you do: teaching (for) doctrines the commandements of men. The Sad∣duces errour denying both the resurrection of the bodie and immortality of the soule,Matth. 22. is often mentioned in the Scriptures, and openly refuted by our Sauior. And yet the high Priestes were often Sadduces, and in the chiefe councels & consistories of Ierusalem, where the greatest causes of religion and matters of weight were determined, sate Act. 23. halfe Sadduces, halfe Pharisees, & sometimes Act. 5.only Sadduces which were plaine Atheiss and wicked heretikes. Phi. That ouerthroweth not Peters priuilege. Theo. Much lesse doth it establish Peters priuilege, for the which cause you allege it; but if Moses suc∣cessour might erre, why not Peters? Phi. Our assertion is they can not erre: you say they can. Reason is that you proue your affirmatiue. Theo. The Scri∣pture proueth the generall,Rom. 3. It is presump∣tion against God to make any man free from errour without suffi∣cient proofe. Christs pro∣mise to Peter pertaineth not to the Pope: & if it did, it maketh him not free from errour. that God is true and all men lyars, you ex∣cept the Bishoppe of Rome as not subiect to errour and ignoraunce: rea∣son is you proue your exception and that strongly, least you bee conuicted of insolent presumption to fasten the spirite of truth to the Popes chaire without great and good assurance from him that is the fountaine of truth and the giuer of the holy Ghost. Phi. We hold by Christes promise. Theo. Shew that and you be dischar∣ged. Phi. Thy faith shall not faile. Theo. Proue that to bee spoken to the Bishoppe of Rome. Phi. It was spoken to Peter. Theo. But not to the Pope. Phi. That which Peter had, his successour must haue. Theo. The charge which Christ gaue Peter to feede his sheepe is common to all Pastours: But with the mercy which Christ shewed him in conuerting him and restoring him after his fall, what haue his successors to do? Christ promised Peter repentance:
will you therefore inferre that all Popes haue the like promises? Or had they, as they haue not, doeth this let but they may forsweare their master and loose their faith, as Peter did, notwithstanding this praier, and promise of Christ made vnto him? Phi. But they shall also repent as Peter did. Theo. If you could proue that promise to pertaine vnto them, as you can not, yet might their errour be publike and their conuersion secret as Peters was; and since they bee subiect to Peters fall, namely to denie both their faith and their master, though they were promised repentance with him, as they bee not; yet howe can you knowe what thinges proceeded from the Popes mouth erring and which from the Popes hart repenting? Which vnlesse you doe, you may erre with him, to your eternall confusion, and not repent with him, for that you haue not the like promise. Phi. I will bee with you to the worldes ende saith Christ,Matth. 28. Christ is with euerie of the faithfull to the worldes end, & yet the faithfull may erre. and hee forsa∣keth those that erre. So that if the church should erre, this promise of his were not kept, which God forbid. Theo. You shew the goodnesse of your cause when you reele thus from the Pope to the church and from the church to the Pope, and yet finde nothing to fitte you. Christ is with euery one of his, and not onely with the Pope, as you would haue the place to sound; and yet I thinke you will not affirm that no christian can erre. Many good men haue erred, euen in matters of faith, and yet not beene forsaken of Christ. The longer you rea∣son, the farther you bee from prouing that the Pope can not erre. For this pro∣mise concerneth him no more than it doth any other christian, and perhaps not so much; or if it did, yet doth it not free him from errour. Phi. The promise which is generall to euery member of the church,They euer dreame and neuer proue that the Pope is head of the church. concer∣neth him chiefly that is head of the church. Theo. Keepe this head of yours till the body need it; the church of Christ hath a surer and better head thā the Pope, or else it were ill with her. Phi. Christ we know is the head of his church and the onely head in such soueraigne and principall manner as no earthly man is or can be, yet the Pope may be the ministeriall head. Theo. When you proue it, then say it; in the meane while abuse not the word of God to serue your follies.Ephes. 3. Christ dwelleth in the hartes (of all that bee his) by faith; with them he remaineth vntill the worldes end. What is this to the Pope, or how doth this fense him from errour? Phi. If he be Christs he can not erre. Theo. This text doth not proue him to be one of Christs: but if he bee, then Christ is with him as hee is with all other his members. Phi. And they can not erre with whom Christ is. Theo. Bee these your demonstrations that the Pope can not erre, to shewe for him no better, nor other priui∣lege, than that which is common to him with women & children, if they be mē∣bers of Christ? And were he a mēber of Christ, which as yet for ought that I see you can hardly proue, hee might be deceiued in some cases of religion, as well as Lactantius, Irineus, Cyprian and others, men of great learning and good account in the church of God. Phi. Our Sauiour saieth it is not possible that the electe shoulde
be seduced.The elect may erre, but not perish in their error. Theo. Not possible they should bee seduced to fall from God as the wicked are: Yet as they may sinne but not vnto death, euen so may they erre but not vnto destruction. Their errour shall either be not finall, or not mor∣tall. Phi. May they that erre, bee saued? Theo. If they holde fast the foundation which is Christ, and erre not of wilfull obstinacie, but of humane frailtie, why may they not bee saued? S. Cyprian said of those that were be∣fore him:Cyp. lib. 2. Ep. 3. If any of our predecessours either ignorantly or simply did not ob∣serue and keepe that which the Lord by his example and authoritie willed, his simplicitie may be pardoned by the goodnesse of God. And S. Augustin said of him,Aug. Epist. 48. when an errour of his was alleadged by the Donatistes for their defence: Cyprian either was not all of this opinion, or he after corrected it by the rule of truth, or this blemish in his most beautifull brest he couered with the teates of charity. And farther alleadgeth and alloweth this saying of Cyprians:De Baptis. lib. 4. cap. 5. Ignosci potest simpliciter erranti, he that erreth of simplicity may be pardoned. Of himselfe and all others S. Augustine saith:Aug. de Baptis. lib. 2. cap. 5. Homines sumus vnde aliquid aliter sapere quàm se res habet humana tentatio est. In nullo autem aliter sapere quā se res habet Angelica perfectio est.All men may erre. We are men, and therefore to thinke other∣wise than the truth is, is (humane infirmitie or) a tentation common to man. To be deceiued in nothing is Angelicall perfection. And therefore writing to S. Hierom, and of S. Hierom, he saith:Aug. Epist. 19. Prorsus non te arbitror sic legi libros tuos velle tanquam Prophetarum aut Apostolorum, de quorum scriptis quòd omni errore careant, dubitare nefarium. Absit hoc à pia humilitate & veraci de temetipso cogi∣tatione. I am fully of opinion that you would not haue your books to be read in such sort as wee do the Prophetes and Apostles, of whose writinges to doubt whether they be free from all errour is wickednesse. Be this far from godly humilitie and the true perswasion of your selfe. So that set the Apo∣stles aside and their writinges,It is vngodly pride to think any man free from error. no man ought to thinke of himselfe that hee can not erre, neither can you haue that opinion of any man without a proude & false perswasion aboue mans state and against Gods truth. Phi. What shall wee then saie to the promise which our Lorde made to his?Iohn. 16. When hee, the spirite of trueth commeth, hee shall teach you all trueth. Theo. If it bee referred to the Apostles then present with him,Ibidem. The Apostles were guided by a speciall gift of Gods spirit, that in preaching and writing they should not erre. as the wordes next before doe specifie, I haue yet many things to saie vnto you, but you can not beare them nowe; wee graunt those witnesses chosen by Christ to teach all Nations, were to bee furnished with all trueth and to bee established in the same; but if it bee extended to all the faithfull, they also shall bee ledde into all trueth needefull and requi∣site to saluation, I meane the substantiall groundes of faith, though in some questions of Religion happilie they shall not all bee like minded. Phi. And what for the Churche, shall shee haue no parte in this promise? Theoph. If the faythfull haue, the Church, which is the number and collection of the faythfull, must needes haue: But that the greater part
of those which professe christianitie or some speciall places or persons must for euer be directed vnto all truth and preserued from all error, this can not be con∣cluded by these wordes. Phi. To teach all truth and preserue in truth and from errour the holy Ghost is promised and perfourmed onely to the church and the chiefe gouernour and generall councels thereof.The Rhemish Test. 16. Iohn. Theo. In deede you take vpon you like Gouernors to appoint what the son of God shal meane & who must haue the holy Ghost,How hand∣somely the Iesuites plaie with Scrip∣tures. as if the mat∣ter were in your hands & not in his. Phi. Do we take vpon vs to limit the holy Ghost? Theo. What else do you when of your owne heades you restraine the words of our Sauior as you lit? Phi. As we list? Theo. Our Sauiours words are, When that spirit of truth commeth he shal teach you al truth.Iohn. 16. This say you is promised & perfourmed only to the church, & the chiefe Gouernor (the Pope) and generall Councels thereof. As if You in S. Iohns Gospel did signifie none but the Pope, the chiefe Gouernor, and such Bishops as the Pope will admit to his conferences, which you call the generall councels of the church; and what is this else but to diuide the holy Ghost as you thinke good? Phi. The rulers of the church must needs haue the holy Ghost. Theo. Meane you all or some? Phi. The most part of them. Theo. How proue you that to be Christes meaning, that the most part of them which can procure them∣selues miters,A miter is no buckler a∣gainst error. or rather catch vp Bishoprickes shall be sure of the holy Ghost in such measure that they shall neuer mistake the saith, nor any parte thereof? Phi. If they should erre, the church should erre. Theo. You run from bad to worse. Your own law wil shew you the falsenes & peruersnes of your Rhe∣mish obseruations and expositions:Caus. 24. quaest. 1. §. A recta in gloss. ¶ Nouitae∣tibus. Quaero de qua Ecclesia intelligas quod hic di∣citur quod non possit errare. Side ipso Papa, certum est quod Papa errare potest. Respondeo, Ipsa congregatio fidelium hic dicitur Ecclesia, & talis Ecclesia non po∣test non esse. I demaund of what church it is ment when it is saide, as here, that the church can not erre.What church can not erre. If of the Pope himselfe, it is certaine that the Pope may erre. I answere the congregatiō of the faithfull is here called the church, and that church can not chose but continue. The spirit of truth is not promised to the Pope, nor to his councels, but to the faithfull whether they be seuered or assembled, and they shall not erre, that is they shall not perish in errour as the wicked do; but shall either be recouered from their errour, or find mercy for their ignorance. Phi. May the whole church erre? Theo. If wee shoulde graunt you that the whole church can not erre,That the whole church can not erre, is no helpe for the Pope and his Car∣dinales. to wit that all the faithfull on the earth at one time can not bee deceiued in any necessarie point of faith, but that Christ for his promise sake will preserue truth amongest them, what is this to the Pope, or his Cardinals, or Conuenticles, to whom you conuey the holy Ghost by inheritance? Phi. Neuer delude vs with ifs, but tell vs whether you think the whole church may erre or no. Theo. In matters of faith wee thinke it can not. Phi. If the church can not er, the Gouernors of the church can not. The. Leaue
trifling and fall to reasoning: The whole church can not erre; ergo what? Phi. Ergo the Pastors, & Preachers can not erre. Theo. Conclude you all or none? Phi. To say no Pastour can erre, were apparent madnesse. Theo. And ye next which is, all Pastours can not erre, doeth you no pleasure. For the Bishop of Rome may erre & so may the rest of his mitred and twiforked creatures; & yet many good Pastours and Preachers keepe fast to the faith. Howbeit this con∣clusion doth not follow vpon my confession.Councels and Popes may erre though the whole church do not erre. The whole church (I graunt) can not er, that, is all and euery the faithful can not er, therefore all Pastours can not er, this is no kind of consequēt. For some of the faithful may be directed vn∣to truth, & they no pastors nor preachers; & many preachers may be preserued from errour, & they no Bishops; & many Bishops may be kept in the faith, and they not assembled; & a great number of those that be assembled may bee right∣ly affected, and yet not the most part of them; and the greater side may be wel disposed, and yet not the Bishop of Rome, whom you make to be the moderator and guider of all councels: And therefore your argument is very childish: The whole church can not erre, ergo generall councels can not erre, and specially the Pope: which later part your best friendes haue not onely refuted as false, but also detested for incredible and shamefull flatterie. Phi. So say you. Theo. So say they. Alfonsus that wrote bitterly against Luther,Alfon. aduers. haereses lib. 1. cap. 4. when he came to this point, dealt plainely in these wordes. Non credo aliquem esse adeo impudentem Papae assentatorem, vt ei tribuere ho velit vt nec er∣rare possit: I can not thinke any man to be so impudent a flatterer of the Pope, as to attribute this vnto him that he can not er.The wiser sort of Papists cō∣demne them for flatterers that say the Pope can not erre. Phi. Alfonsus hath no such words. Theo. You say truth, Alfonsus now hath not, but Alfonsus had those wordes in his former editions. And this commendeth your cunning that you can curtaile the writinges of your fellowes & leaue out what you list when you new print them. Phi. It was his owne correcting in his seconde edition. Theo. Whether it was his doing or yours we care not:Sub prel As∣censiano, anno Dom. 1534. the wordes remaine in the olde Printes to the manifest condemnation of your follie and flatterie in this behalfe: And in his new copies though he qualifie his termes, hee holdeth flatly the same opinion. Omnis homo errare potest in fide, etiam sipapa sit. Euerie man may erre in faith,Alfon. li. 1. ca. 4. Cas. 24. quaest. 1. ¶. A recta. in gloss. euen the Pope himselfe. And so you heard your owne gloze before affirme, It is certaine, the Pope may erre. The same is confessed by the best of your side both canonistes and diuines. Panormitane saith,De electio. ¶ significasti. Concilium potest condemnare Papam de haeresi, vt in cap. Si Papa. Distinct. 40. vbi dicitur quod Papa potest esse haereticus & de haeresi iudica∣ri. A councell may condemne the Pope of heresie, as appeareth in the 40. Distinct. cap. Si Papa. Where it is saide that the Pope may be an here∣tik, & iudged of heresie. Lyra saith, Lyra in ca. 16. Matth. Multi summi Pontifices inuenti sunt aposta∣tasse à side: Many Popes haue proued apostataes. Augustinus de Ancona: Aug. de Anco. de potestat. Ec∣clesiast. quaest. 1. Papa est deponendus pro haeresi: ad Cōciliū spectat Papā in haeresi deprehensum condēnare, vel deponere. The Pope may be deposed for heresie: A coūcel may condemn or depose the Pope deprehended in heresie. Antonius Archbishop of Flo∣rence,
Anton. part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 3 ¶. 3 Pro haeresi (Papa) congruè ipso facto deponitur. For heresie the Pope is ipso facto deposed, and no inconuenience. And to that ende hee alleadgeth Petrus de Palude, saying, In lib. de Pote∣stat. Papae cita∣tur ab Anton. Papa quando labitur in haeresin tunc o ipso est praecisus ab Ecclesia, & desinit esse caput. The Pope when hee fal∣leth into an heresie, is presently cutte off from the Church and ceaseth to bee the heade of it. So Gerson the Chauncellour of Paris: Gerson in trac. An liceat in cas. fidei à Pō∣tifice appellare.Tam Pa∣pa quam Episcopus deuiabiles à fide. The Pope may swarue from the fayth as well as an other Bishop. The generall councell of Basill saith,Concil. Basilien. epist. Synodalis 3. de authorita∣te Concil. supra Papam. Saepe experti sumus & legimus Pa∣pam errasse. Wee haue often both found out by experience and reade that the Pope hath erred. And againe, Cum certum sit Papam errare posse. For so much as it is certaine the Pope may erre. Aeneas Syluius afterwarde Pius the seconde inueying against them that woulde not haue councels gathe∣red without the Popes consent, saith:Aen. Sylu. de gestis Conc. Ba∣sil. lib. 1. What remedie shall there bee if a sinnefull Pope trouble the Church, if hee destroie soules, if hee peruert the people with his euill example? Si denique contraria fidei praedicet, haereticis{que} dogmatibus imbuat subditos: If he teach against the faith and infect those that be vnder him with hereticall opinions. Cardinall Caietane and Pope Innocentius the fourth though they had good cause to fauour the See of Rome,Caiet. de au∣thoritate Papae & Conc. cap. 26. & 27. yet were they clearely resolued, the Pope might erre, and so were all the writers of your owne religion before this our age that euer I hearde of, and euen at this day the sincerest of them dislike the vnshamefastnesse of your assertion.Alfon. lib. 1. ca. 2. Papa in fide errare potest, vt melius sen∣tientes tenent, etiam ex hijs qui Papatui plurimum fauent. Inter quos est Innocen∣tius eius nominis quartus Pontifex in cap. 1. De summa Trinitate. The Pope may erre in fayth as the truer opinion is euen of them that fauour the pope∣dome verie much. Amongest whome is Innocentius the fourth of that name Bishoppe of Rome,Theosoph. lib. 4. cap. 32. writing vppon the first chapter De summa Tri∣nitate. Arboreus a Doctor of Paris and one of your chiefe Sorbonistes: Papa in fide errare Potest. Et tota mihi aberrare via videtur qui aliter sentit. Assentantur sane Romano Pontifici qui faciunt cum immunem à lapsu haereseos & schismatis. The Pope may erre in fayth.Then surely masters you do but flatter when you make the Pope free frō errour. And he seemeth to mee to bee in foule errour that thinketh otherwise. Surely they doe but flatter the Bishoppe of Rome, that make him free from falling into heresie and schisme. Erasmus pithily impugneth your inconsiderate follie,Erasmus annot. in 1. Cor. ex cap. 7. If it bee true which some say, that the Bishop of Rome can neuer erre iudicially, what neede ge∣nerall councels? Why are men skilled in the lawes and learned in diuini∣tie sent for to councels, if hee pronouncing can not erre? To what purpose are so many Vniuersities troubled with handling questions of faith, when truth may be had from his mouth? Nay how commeth it to passe that the decrees of one Pope are repugnāt to the decrees of an other? This perswa∣sion of yours must needes be naught which so many of your owne side haue
condemned before our dayes, and the sobrest of your selues that haue written since our time doe vtterly disclaime. And therefore aduise you, whether you will faierly resigne this fansie, or be conuinced by the verdict of your fellowes, for men-pleasers and flatterers. It is farre from a Catholike position which your owne church in the midst of darkenesse would neuer acknowledge, and at this daie none defende,And yet the Iesuites make it an high point of their faith. The Iesuites reuse Coun∣cels and Fa∣thers, because they will not acknowledge the Pope hath erred. Clements er∣ronious de∣cree. Caus. 12. quaest. 1. § lectissimus. but such hungrie ghestes as you be that gape for thankes, and seeke to please. Phi. You falsely charge vs with vnhonest res∣pectes. Theo. It is not my iudgement of you, but theirs that otherwise haue no cause to thinke euill of you. Phi. The reason that moueth vs so to say is for that we finde no Pope that euer erred. Theo. You refuse Councels, Fathers, Stories and all that come in your way, because you will not finde it. Phi. We refuse not that is ancient or indifferent: but onely such as we thinke partiall. Theo. Then if there bee no cause why they should be partiall; you will admit them for credible. Phi. We will. Theo. We expect no more. What say you then to Clemens the first of that name as you make your ac∣count, though wee thinke it a leude forgerie in his name? Doe not your own Decrees report out of his decretall epistles, that amongest christians al things ought to be common, euen wiues and all? Communis vita omnibus fratres ne∣cessaria est: Communis enim vsus omnium, quae sunt in hoc mundo omnibus esse ho∣minibus debuit. In omnibus autem sunt sine dubio & coniuges. A common life is necessarie for all men, brethren: the vse of all thinges that are in this world ought to be common to all men. And in al things no doubt are wiues contained. Phi. He meaneth not the carnall vse of women, but their domestical seruice ought to be common. Theo. So your gloze would make vp the breach, but all in vaine. For Socrates in Platoes common wealth (whom your Cle∣mens in this place citeth and calleth Graecorum sapientissimum, the wisest of the Graecians) rehearsing the prouerbe which Clemens here vseth,Plato dialog. 4. de Repub. inferreth that the coniunction of men & women, and procreation of children ought to bee common,That althings ought to be common a∣mong chri∣stians is a grosse error. which is a monstruous and heinous errour. And were that excused, the the rest is a shamefull absurditie that all other thinges ought of necessitie to bee common amongst christians. For the Scriptures do not exact that no mā should possesse any thing, but onely that charitie should gladly distribute & supply the wantes of such as neede. Phi. Your selfe thinke this to be forged in Cle∣mentes name. Theo. We do, but you do not, and therefore against you the in∣stance is good. The next is Tertullians testimonie who saith of the Bishop of Rome that he agnised the prophesies of Montanus and sent (letters of communion) and peace to the churches in Asia and Phrygia that were of that sect.The Bishop of Rome a Mon∣tanist. Phi. But hee reuoked those letters, and ceased from that purpose, as Tertul∣lian also confesseth. Theo. Hee reuoked them after they were sent, and ceased from that which he first acknowledged. Episcopum Romanum tunc ag∣noscentem prophetias Montani,Tertul. aduer. Praxeam. & ex ea cognitione pacem Ecclesiis Asia
& Phrygiae inferentem, falsa de ipsis prophetis adseuerando coegit, & literas pacis re∣uocare tam emissas, & a proposito recipiendorum schismatum concessare: (Praxeas the heretike) forced the Bishoppe of Rome then agnising the Prophesies of Montanus, and vppon good liking (of them) giuing peace to their Chur∣ches in Asia and Phrygia to reuoke his letters of cōmunion when they were sent, and to cease from his purpose of embracing their doctrine. Phi. Tertullian was of that sect himselfe, and therefore no indifferent wit∣nes. Theo. Indifferent enough to report the fact, though not to iudge of the cause: and we bring Tertullian not to commend Montanus error, but to shewe what the Bishoppe of Rome did. Phi. He beganne to like them, but it tooke not effect. Theo. Hee wrate letters of peace to the Montanists, and sent them away, which is enough to conuince that he erred, though hee after relented from his former enterprise. How Mercellinus Bishoppe of Rome sacrificed vnto Idols and denyed it when it was obiected to him,The Bishop of Rome an Ido∣later. Marcellini Pa∣pae condemnatio tomo concil. 1. and was after reproued by sufficient witnesse and condemned for it, the Synod extant in your first booke of councels doth declare, and Damasus writing the liues of his predecessours doth testifie the same. Phi. Hee fell in persecution, but he repented after and suffered for Christ, as Peter did. Theo. And therefore the Bishoppe of Rome may fall from the faith, for so did Peter and Marcellinus: but whether he shal be renewed by repentance as they were, that is neither knowne to you, nor beleeued of vs. Phi. We care not if they fall, so they rise againe. Theo. We proue they may fal: Proue you they shall not choose but rise againe. Phi. They haue all done so that yet are mentioned,The Bishop of Rome an Arrian. and so did Liberius whō I knowe you will name next; although wee may worthily doubt, whether euer hee fell or no. Theo. You and your fellowes make a doubt of it, but I see no reason why you should. For it is confirmed by many sounde and sufficient wit∣nesses, who both for the time when, and place where they liued, did and might best know the trueth of that matter. Phi. Ruffinus doubteth of it, Theodoretus denyeth it, and Socrates in∣clineth rather to vs,Ruff. li. 1. ca. 27. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 37. Theodoret. lib. 2 cap. 17. than otherwise. Theo. Ruffinus sayth, whether it were so or no pro certo compertum non habeo, I know not for a certaintie. Socrates ma∣keth neither with it, nor against it: but passeth it ouer with silence. And so doth Theodorete, onely hee sayth the Emperour at the supplication of the Gentle∣women of Rome, Flecti se passus iussit optimum quidem Liberium de exilio reuocari. Suffering him self to be intreated, commaunded the good bishop Liberius to bee called from banishment. But this excludeth not his subscription before hee receiued his place, which Sozomene writeth. The Emperour at the intercession of the West Bishoppes recalleth Libe∣rius from Beroea (whither hee was banished) and assembling the Bishoppes that were in his tents compelleth him to confesse the sonne (of God) not to bee of the same substance with his father.Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 17. Basilius, Eustathius, and Eleusius induced Liberius to consent by this meanes that some vnder the colour
of , did labour secretly to confirme heresie. When this was done the Emperour gaue him leaue to go to his Bishopricke. Phi. Will you beleeue Sozomene before the rest that report no such thing? Theo. Their silence doth not preiudice his Storie. And yet Sozomene is not the first author of this report. Athanasius who liued in the same age with Libe∣rius, and for whose cause Liberius was banished & therefore woulde say no more than truth by him, witnesseth no lesse.Athanas. epist. ad solitar. vitā agentes. Liberius post exactum in exilio biennium in∣flexus est, minisque mortis ad subscriptionem inductus est. Liberius after two yeres spent in banishment inclined, & by feare of death was induced to subscribe. Damasus that was Bishoppe of Rome, next after Liberius, and therfore could not be ignorant of the trueth, and woulde not belie his owne See, saith of him, Ingressus Liberius in vrbem Roman 4. nonas Augusti consensit Constantio haeretico.Ex pontificali Damasi in vita Liberij. Non tamen rebaptizatus est, sed consensum praebuit. Liberius entering the citie of Rome the 4. of the nones of August consented to Constantius the heretike. He was not rebaptized, but hee gaue his consent. Hierom brought vp at Rome in the time of Liberius and after so neere Damasus that hee was his right hand in answering all Synodal consultations, and in that respect had often and easie accesse to the Recordes and monuments of the Church of Rome, writeth of Fortunatianus Bishoppe of Aquileia.Hieron. de ecclesiast script. in Fortuna∣tiano. The Iesuites neglect al this to saue the Pope frō error. Hieron. ad chronicon Euse. adiectio. In hoc habetur detestabilis quod Liberium Romanae vrbis Episcopum pro fide ad exilium pergentē primus solicitauit ac fregit, & ad subscriptionem hareseos compulit: In this he is coūted detestable, that he first attempted Liberius the Bishoppe of Rome going into banishment for the fayth, and preuayled with him and gate him to subscribe to the (Arrian) he∣resie. In his addition to Eusebius Chronicle hee saith as much: Liberius taedi victus exilij & in haereticam prauitatem subscribens Romā quasi victor intrauerat. Liberius wearied with his banishment and subscribing to hereticall prauitie had entered Rome as a conquerour. We aske not what authoritie you haue to counteruaile these; wee knowe you haue none: but what reason haue you to resist these? Phi. The rest agree not with them.Omission in one writer is no disproofe in an other. Theo. Omission in one writer is no good argument against an o∣ther: foure affirme it, and euery one of thē elder and likelier to come by ye trueth than Theodorete: & yet Theodorete doth not gainsay, but only ouerskip ye fact. If therefore to claw the Bishoppe of Rome, you refuse the consent of Athana∣sius, Hierom, Damasus and Sozomene, you doe but discouer your follie to the wiser sort, and hazard your credite with the simple: If you receiue their testimo∣nie touching this fact, then is there no doubt, but the Bishop of Rome subscri∣bed vnto Arianisme: and whether hee repented or no, wee may worthily doubt, since your owne Stories auouch the contrarie. Phi. Martin. Polon. in Liberi. Vincentius specul. histor. lib. 15. Cap. 11. & 12.Which of our Stories? Theo. Martinus Polonus, Vincentius and others. Martinus saith, Constantius recalled Liberius from banishment, be∣cause he had agreed to him and to the Arians, and placed him againe in his Seate, and so vnhappie Liberius held the Church of Peter sixe yeeres by vio∣lence: then was the persecution great in the citie, in so much that the Cler∣gie
men which were against Liberius, were Martyred: then also Eusebius a Priest suffered death, for declaring Liberius to be an heretike. And Damasus when he came to the Bishoppe of Rome next after Liberius,Idē in Damaso. Beleeue none but your selfe, & then you may be sure the Pope shall not erre. with open voyce condemned Liberius and all his acts. Phi. I beleeue neither Vincentius nor Martinus in this case. Theo. Your not beleeuing them sheweth your selfe to be partial, not their report to be false. Phi. Liberius surely continued not an Arri∣an. Theo. That he subscribed to the Arrians we proue: that he recanted his sub∣scription you can not proue. Phi. No doubt he did it, though it bee not written. Theo. So you presume, though you want all proofe for it. Phi. Neuer Bishoppe of Rome died an heretike. Theo. What did Hono∣rius,Honorius died an he∣retike. whom the sixt generall Councell condemned, and accursed after his death for heresie? Phi. That Councel is shamefully corrupted by the Grecians. Theo. If the Grecians copies did differ from yours, you had some reason to charge thē with corruption: but since your copies confesse the same, howe could the Greci∣ans inuade your libraries without your knowledge and raze the Recordes that lay at Rome in your own keeping, and the thing not spied? Phi. A name is soone thrust in. Theo. But whole sentences and whole leaues can not bee thrust in, without stealing away the original & laying a counterfeit in place thereof, which was easie to be discerned.6. Synod. actio. ti. 12.13.16.17.18. Honorius cause is mentioned & discussed in 26 seueral places of ye councell, & two of his epistles repeated at large, one ofActio. 12. 9. skore & 12. lines, the other of Actio. 13. threeskore and sixteene lynes, which argue the whole councel to be forged, or these branches concerning Honorius to be as sincere as the rest. Phi. One Councell is soone corrupted. Theo. But may you reiect your owne Recordes as forged, and bring neither reason, suspition, nor probabilitie, when, by whom or how this was or could bee done? Giue vs leaue to doe the like to the rest of your Romish Records where good cause leadeth vs, and see what wil become of your Religion.And for no cause but or that it condē∣neth the pope as an here∣tike. Phi. In deede this one we thinke to be forged. Theo. A generall Councell repeating the matter which you sticke at more than twentie times, and lying safe in your owne custodie, you suspect to bee forged and vpon no ground but onely because it condemneth a Bishoppe of Rome for an heretike, and yet you can not denie that but you must denie more. Leo the second 6. Synod. actio. 18. habet haec epist. Leon. 2. ad Constant. Au∣gustum. accursed Honorius his predecessour for the same here∣sie. The seconde Councell of Nice which you greatly reuerence and call the seuenth generall Councell,Nicen. Synod. 2. Actio. 3. confesseth Honorius was condemned in the sixt generall Councell, and Nice. Synod. 2. actio. 7. themselues reiect him by name for an heretike, where∣to the Legates of Adrian then Bishoppe of Rome there present consented and subscribed. Adrian the seconde in a Councell at Rome confessed that Honorius once Bishoppe of Rome was accused of heresie and condemned af∣ter his death by the consent of the Romane See; and this his confession was read and allowed in the eight generall Councell of Constantinople.8. Synod. acti. 7. If al these be forged, & that at Rome, where your selues were the keepers, how good cause haue we to suspect the rest of your euidēce, which tend chiefly to vphold ye Popes pride & to encrease his gaine, & agree neither with thēselues, nor with ye state of
those times wherein they should be written, nor with the best and approued sto∣ries of the Church. Phi. If you would forge against your selues, how much more for your selues?Synce three generall Councels recken Honorius as condemned of he∣resie, and specially the Decretall of Leo the second, which the Bishoppes of Rome woulde soone haue disclaimed, if it had beene suspected, I dare not say that all these are forged, for feare lest I ouerthrowe the credite of all Ro∣mane Recordes: and therefore I thinke rather the Councell that first con∣demned him, mistooke his meaning, or that the letters which they sawe, were written in his name by some euill willers of his, both which cases are possible. Theo. You mend this gappe, and make a bigger. You saue the Romane Libraries from corrupt Recordes, and vpbrayde a generall councel with rash iudgement, and lacke of vnderstanding; for if they condemned Honorius not onely their brother, but also their better as you take him, and the head of the Church for an heretike, and that after his death, and either conceiued not the sense of his woordes, or tooke not heede to the seale and subscription of his let∣ters, that those were Authentike, they deserud not to bee counted Christians, much lesse to goe for a lawfull and generall Councell: And the Bishoppes of Rome that came after and confirmed the same, when they might and should haue reprooued the Councell of indiscretion or malice, and defended the inno∣cencie of Honorius, were not successours to him but conspiratours against him: and so none of your shiftes are either sound or likely. Though Ho∣norius were innocent, yet three general Councels confesse the Pope might erre.Howsoeuer you wrangle with the fact, yet this is euident and without con∣tradiction, that three generall Councels, eche after other were of opinion the Pope might liue and die an heritike, and Agatho, Leo, Adrian the first and second, all Bishoppes of Rome confessed thus much by their Decretals, and yeelded thereto by their subscriptions: Which if you graunt, condemne or ac∣quite Honorius of heresie at your pleasures. Wee haue the full consent of the East and West Churches that the Bishoppe of Rome may erre, which you at this present so stifly deny. Phi. If one did er, others may.If one did erre, the number is not so great. Theo. If one did, o∣thers may, yet I haue named three that were condemned for heresie and A∣postasie, Marcellinus, Liberius, Honorius: and moe I might that erred in like manner, as Vigilius, Anastatius, Celestinus and others: but I see you are determined to beleeue none that make against you in this point: and there∣fore I were as good saue my labour as spend longer time with one that is past all sense. Phi. If you prooue they erred, I will not defende them. Theo. What reason we should be∣leeue late Papists speak∣ing in fauour of the Pope against the ancient stories▪But in reporting their sayings and doings, you giue credite to none, bee they neuer so indifferent and auncient. Phi. Wee credite them, if a grea∣ter number of writers doe not contradict them. Theo. If certaine late fauourers of the Pope without trueth or shame doe gainesay the Stories that went before them, thinke you the partiall and corrupt writinges of such men woorthie to bee taken against others that bee both elder and syncerer?
Phi. I euer goe with antiquitie and vniuersalitie. Theo. But when you come to the push,How Papists esteeme an∣tiquitie and vniuersalitie whē the Pope is touched. you care neither for fathers nor Councels Prouinciall nor ge∣nerall if they crosse your affections, or touch the Popes ambition. There anci∣ent writers liuing in the same time with Liberius affirme that he subscribed to the Arrians, and Sozomene that wrate within 40. yeres of the deed doing saith no lesse: you beleeue neither them nor your owne stories which with one consent followed that report, till some in our age, to make the Popes Tribunal infallible, began not only to doubt but also to deny Liberius fact. Two general Councels condemne Honorius for an heretike, and the third auouheth him to haue been condemned not without the knowledge of his successours, the bishops of Rome that came after him. You regard neither Popes nor Synods, where they say that Honorius erred; in other things where you thinke they make with you, they shall be sacred and auncient fathers & Councels, as though you were not bound to yeeld vnto trueth, but that onely were trueth which liked you. Phi. Liberius was forced and Honorius deceiued with a likelyhood of trueth; this is all you can get of these sacred and ancient fathers and Councels, Theo. We need no more. No man falleth from the faith but he is either forced or deceiued; and yet this wee get besides, which we most esteeme, that these fa∣thers and Councels were of opinion, and saw by experience the Bishop of Rome did and might erre: Yeeld to this, and wee remit you the rest. Phi. Not till I see what else you will bring. You talke of Vigilius and Anastasius, but I thinke more than you can proue. Theo. Of Vigillius,Vigilius an heretike. that hee secretly fauored such as were condemned here∣tikes, & refused the faith established in the great councel of Chalcedon, Libera∣tus who liued in ye same time with him, beareth manifest record.Liberati breui∣arium, cap. 22. Vigilius implens promissionē suam quam Augstae fecerat, talē scripsit epistolam &c. Eam fidē quam tenetis, & tenuiss & tenere significo. Oportet vt haec quae scribo vobis nullus agnoscat, sed magis tanquam suspectum hic me ante alios sapientia vestra existimet habere, quo facilius possum haec, quae caepi, operari & perficere. Haec Vigilius scribens ad haereticos occulte permansit sedens. Vigilius fulfilling his promise which he had made to the Empresse (which was to write to Seuerus and Anthemius, & by his letters to cōfirme their faith) wrate this epistle &c. I signifie to you that I haue held and doe hold the very same faith which you also doe hold. No man must know that I write these things vnto you, but your wisdome must thinke it best, to haue me in suspition before all others, that I may with more ease worke and bring that to passe which I haue begunne. This Vigilius wrate priuily to heretikes, and continued Bishop (of Rome). Phi. The Pontificall faith that he promised so to doe:Ex libro Pon∣tificali in vi Vigilij. but after when it was exacted at his hands, he answered: Absit hoc a me domina Augusta. Prius locu∣tus sum male & incipienter, modó autem nullo modo tibi consentio vt reuocem hominē haereticum & anathematizatum. Be this farre from me Lady and Empresse. I spake at first not well and like a foole. I can now by no meanes consent to restore a man that is an heretike and condemned. Theo. Your Pontificall in
this place would faine couer Vigilius leudnes with some remorse of conscience. He falsely accused Syluerius his predecessour, & not only thrust him frō his seat but also famished him in exile.Vigilius a lewd Pope. He promised the Empresse to restore Anthemius & others that were condemned and deposed, & gaue it vnder his hand. He slue his Notarie & likewise his Nephew. The people cast stones at him and cursed him whē he was sent for to the Emperour. Al this your Pontifical confesseth of him. Now to leaue some good thing in him it maketh him repent the wicked promise which he gaue the Empresse for ioyning with those heretikes, but Liberatus denieth that, and so doth Syluerius his predecessour in his decretall Epistle or rather excommunication against him, where he chargeth him not only with murder, ambition, and Symonie, but also with heresie.Epist. Syluerij Papae ad vigil. omo Concil. 2. Nouum scelus erroris in Apostolica Sede rursus niteris inducere. Thou labourest to bring into the A∣postolike See a new wickednesse of error. Whether now think you reason we beleeue your Pontificall, a collection of Popes liues wee know not by whome, or Liberatus a writer of that time alleaging his owne epistle, & his predecessor Syluerius affirming the same? Phi. Pontificale in vita Vigilij. Vigilius draw∣en by the neck round about Con∣stantinople.It seemeth by his punishment that hee neuer consented to accomplish the Emperours desire. For the Prince very cruelly caused him to be drawen by the neck round about the Citie of Constantinople and cast into prison where hee was fed with bread and water. Theo. Hee well deserued that and more: & it may bee the Empresse when shee saw he would not stand to his word, did help forward the matter, and assisted the Romanes in their complaint to the Emperour against him, and by that meanes hee came to suffer his desertes; but this is no reason to refell that which Liberatus and Syluerius report of him. Phi. His heresie was not open but secret, and therefore it hurt himselfe and not others. Theo. Hee concealed his heresie till hee sawe oportunitie. This doth not diminish but rather aggrauate his error. For our question is not whether the Pope may infect others, but whether he himself may erre in faith; so did Vigilius, though for feare to loose his Popedome he dissembled a season that he might doe the more mischiefe. Distinct. 19. § Anastasius.And so did Anastasius the second, whom many of the Clergie forsooke, be∣cause he did communicate with heretikes and went about priuily to restore Acatius alreadie condemned by some of his predecessors for heresie. Phi. This was a fault, but no error. Theo. He that ioyneth with an heretik, as if he were a Catholike, doth hee not account heresie for trueth? And call you that no error? Your own glose giuing ye cause why his clergie might forsake him saith, Incide∣rat in haere sim iam damnatā,Ibidem glossa ¶ abegerunt. Dist. 19. § A∣nastasius. Ibidem glossa ¶ diuino. he was fallen into an heresie alreadie condēned. Phi. The booke saith, Voluit, & non potuit, he would haue doone it, but he could not. For he was stroken by the hand of God as Arius was, and so ne∣uer brought it to passe. Theo. Then may the Bishop of Rome die an heretike as Arius did, and the likenesse of their plagues noteth the lothsomnes of both their errors. Phi. But the See of Rome did not erre al this while. Theo. That is most
true. The See neuer erreth,The See was not free from error, when the men did erre, that sate in the See. it is made of tymber or metall, which is voyde of sense and free from error: but the men haue erred that were the lawfull occupi∣ers of that See. Phi. You iest at your speach, but you shall find it true, that the See of Rome neuer erred. Theo. I may iest at it wel enough, except you giue vs some better vnderstanding what you meane by the See of Rome. Phi. I meane the Pope neuer erred. Theo. Of whom spake wee all this while but of the men that were Popes? And they haue erred, as I haue shewed. Phi. They did erre but not as Popes. Theo. No more doth any Christian man or woman. They erre not as Christians, but as they forsake the faith, and in that point are not christians, or at least shrinke from the christian faith so farre forth as they be entangled with error. These be childish toyes, you were best take su∣rer handfast, you may chaunce else to marre all. Phi. Let me first heare what you can say, and I will answere it all with a word. Theo. That were quick woorke, but I reade it your best way first to disburden your selfe of these examples, and after you shall sooner passe through the rest. Phi. Liberius in persecution might yeeld;The Rhemish Testament 22. Luke. Marcellinus for feare might commit Idolatrie; Honorius might fall to heresie, and more then all this, some Iudas might creepe into the office, and yet all this without preiudice of the office and Seate. Theo. Uery well. If they might fall to heresie and idolatrie, Ergo others may doe the like. Phi. They may, but without preiudice to the office and Seate. Theo. Who doubteth that?The office i not the worse though the mā be naught The office and scepter of Princes is not the worse though some be Tyrants: The art and vse of Phisike is not dispraised though some doe kill and not recouer their Pacients: The vices and ouersights of men are incident to all degrees, States and professions, and yet no man so madde to mislike the one for the other. Why then shoulde the loose life or false doctrine of some Bi∣shops preiudice others either in the same office with them, or in the same place before and after them, since the things bee needefull, though the men be sinull? The chaire is not the worse though the Bishoppe may erre: But you stande in contention with vs that the Bishoppe of Rome can not erre: and nowe you say hee may erre without preiudice to his office and Seate: which wee graunt. For his charge to teach, and power to bind common to him with all Bishoppes, is not abolished nor abated, though some did or hereafter should abuse it. In the meane time this shaketh the Popes Tribunall which you giue him ouer the whole Church.He that may erre cannot be supreme iudge ouer the whole Church. For if he may erre in fayth, which you confesse, then can he not be supreme iudge of all others in matters of fayth: lest the whole church should bee bound to forsake her faith, which shee may not, vppon one erroneous iudgement of his, which is possible, and easte to happen. Phi. Not possible.The Rhemish Testament vpon the 22. of S. Luke. Popes may erre personally but not iudicially, that is, they may erre in person, vnderstanding, priuate doctrine or writings, but they neither can, nor euer shall iudicially conclude or giue definitiue sentence for falshoode or heresie a∣gainst the Catholike faith, in their Consistories, Courts, Councels, Decrees, Delibera∣tions or consultations kept for decision and determination of such controuersies, douts or
questions of fayth as shall bee proposed vnto them, because Christes prayer and promise protecteth them therein for confirmation of their brethren. Theo. What prayer or promise of Christ is it that you speake of? Phi. I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not. Theo. Are you in your fiue wittes to make such constructi∣ons of Christes wordes? Phi. Why so? Theo. Where lyeth faith? in a mans heart, mouth or hands? Phi. What a wise question that is; aske it not for very shame. Theo. Nay answere it with shame enough. Or if you will not, S. Paul will:Rom. 10. Corde creditur, we beleeue with the heart, sayth he, and confesse with the mouth. So that if faith be not in our lippes, much lesse in our fingers. Phi. Who euer doubted of that? Theo. Then is there no doubt but your deprauing the prayer and promise of Christ will soone bee perceiued of al men. For if Christ prayed for Peter, and as you racke it for his successours,Faith faileth where the hart erreth. that their fayth shoulde not fayle: Ergo, the true faith of Christ must alwayes be kept in their hearts, though their mouthes faile as Peters did when hee denyed his master with his lippes, whom in hart he knewe to bee the sonne of the liuing God. Now you turne it cleane contrarie. You graunt the Popes heart may fall from faith to infidelitie and heresie, but his mouth you de∣fend shal be kept from pronouncing it, as if Christ had prayed not for Peters hart where his faith remained, but for Peters mouth which failed thrise before the cocke crewe, notwithstanding his masters prayer and promise that very night. The Pope may erre with hart & mouth: but his Court, the Iesuits say can not erre. Luke. 22. Oraui pro te: what place doth te signifie?This is absurd enough, and yet the rest is more absurd when you graunt the Pope may erre in person, that is both with heart and mouth: but if hee once get on his robes and ascend his Tribunall, he can not erre. As if Christ had prayed not for the men but for the walles, neither for the Persons but for the Places, which is direct against ye words of our sauiour. For he sayth not, I haue prayed for thy Tribunals, Courtes, and Consistories, that they shall not erre, but I haue prayed for thee, noting his person, that thy faith, that is the perswa∣sion of thine heart beleeuing and trusting in me, shall not vtterly faile, but the sparkles of my grace remaining in thee shall renue thee by repentance. Christ prayed for the person & not for the place. How then can you say that the Person may erre,This is rather a plague vpon Peter & his successours, than a praier for them. but not the place? Phi. The Person shall bee stroken with feare as was Vigilius, or pre∣uented by death as was Anastasius, that hee shall not be able to accomplish his wicked intent in open place. Theo. Call you that the prayer of Christ for the Popes fayth, or the plague of God vpon him for his infidelitie? Phi. Cal it what you will. God will not suffer him to giue definitiue sentence for heresie against the faith. Theo. Shew vs the warrant that God will not suffer it, and wee are answered. Phi. The promise of our sauiour that Peters faith should not fale. Theo. Then this you make to be the effect of Christes woordes,How the Iesu∣ites constr Christs wordes. I haue prayed for thee that thy fayth shall not fayle, that is, notwithstanding my prayer for thee, thy successours may be heretikes, idolaters, Apostataes and rū∣negates from me, but I wil strike them with feare or peruert them with death, that they shall not in open Court by definitiue sentence iniect y Church. Are
you not religious interpreters of the Scriptures, when you delude them and interlace them with such commentaries? Phi. Caiphas by priuilege of his office prophesied right of Christ,The Rhemish Testament vpon the 22. of S. Luke. though according to his own knowledge and faith he knew not Christ. And why may not the Pope haue the like priuilege? Theo. Balaams Asse reproued the madnes of his master: Why should not the Popes Asse haue the like priuilege? Phi. You scoffe at our reasons, you refell them not. Theo. They neede no better refuta∣tion. For out of a particular fact,Of a particu∣lar & extraor∣dinarie fact, no generall rule can be gathered. that is rare and vncertaine, you conclude a generall and constant Rule. God vsed the mouth of Caiphas the high Priest without his meaning to declare the necessitie and vtilitie of Christes death. Hence you would inferre that no high Priest could erre in iudgement, and con∣sequently not the Pope as being belike successour to Caiphas that put Christ to death. By the same cūning you may conclude, God vsed Balaams mouth against Balaams will, to blesse Israel, therefore no false Prophet can haue a lying spi∣rit in his mouth: Or God stirred vp the spirit of Daniel when he was a very child to cōuince the two iudges of their vnrighteous proceeding against Susan∣na; therefore children cannot want the spirit of direction in iudgement: Or Pi∣lats wife perceaued by her dreames that Christ was innocent, therefore weo∣mens dreames are alwayes true. Phi. These illations be very foolish. Theo. Yours is scant so good. For in your example,God ruled Caiphas mouth a∣gainst his hart. God ouerruled the hie-Priests mouth in such sort that in giuing the Iewes wicked and haynous counsel to kill the sonne of God, his words receaued a double sense. One cruel & bloudie perswading them to murder the author of that new doctrine for feare least the Romanes should take it as an occasion to destroy the whole nation; which was Caiphas mind and purpose: The other confessing that his death should saue the people from destruction; which declareth the vertue and force of his Passion. Which he neither ment, nor knew; but God so tempered his tongue that in writing his furious malice against Christ, his wordes stood indifferent for both constructions. Thus S. Cyril largely sheweth,Cyril in Iohan. lib. 8. cap. 3. In the proposition of Caiphas there is contained a double sense, one which Caiphas himselfe ment, that it was expedient Christ should die by the hands of the Iewes, lest the whole Nation should bee destroyed by the Romanes: This was a false and wicked meaning, comming from the lewd intention of Caiphas. An other sense of the same proposition was intended by the holy Ghost, that it was needfull that only Christ should die, for the saluation of the whole world. This Caiphas neither vnderstood nor ment, yet his wordes were such as might fitly serue this sense of the holy Ghost.Ibidē li. 8. ca. 2. For Caiphas himself as cruel∣ler, readier to wickednes, and bloodier than the rest, encourageth others staggering at it, by saying, you perceaue nothing, neither vnderstād you that it is expediēt the life of one man should be neglected for the whole coūtrie.The diuel possessed Cai∣phas hart, but God ordered his wordes. Phi. He spake this by the holy Ghost. Theo. The diuell possessed his hart, but the power of God restrained and ordered his speach. Phi. Had he not the Spirit of Prophesie? Theo. No more than Saul the bloudsucker had when
he praied for Dauid whom hee sought to kill:1. Kings. 24. Mat. 27. than Iudas the traytor had, when he iustified his master and hanged himselfe: yea than the Dyuell had, when hee confessed and intreated the Sonne of God not to torment him before his time. Phi. Luke. 8. . Iohn. 11.Why then doth S. Iohn giue this note of him that he was hie Priest for that yere? Theo. S. Iohn noteth this that it pleased God so to temper the hie Priests wordes, that where hee spake to hasten the death of our Sauiour, his wordes sounded, that the people should vtterly perish without the death of Christ, which was most true, but not his meaning. Phi. His tongue spake trueth, though his hart did erre. Theo. Satan poisoned his hart, but GOD bridled his mouth. Phi. Can not God doe the like to the Bishop of Rome? Theo. No doubt he can: but you must proue that he will. Phi. If he did so to Caiphas, much more will hee do it to the head of his Church.God can doe the like when he will. Theo. How hangeth this geare together? Hee did once so to Caiphas, ergo hee will always doe the like, where you list to haue it. Phi. Not where we list, but where he will. Theo. That helpeth you litle. God can do the like where & whē he wil. What is that to the Bishop of Rome? We doubt not of Gods power; but smile at your folly which conclude this to be ordinarie in the Pope, which was extraordinarie in Caiphas. Phi. It was ordi∣narie in Caiphas by reason of his office, and so saith S. Iohn. The. S. Iohn doth not say it was ordinarie either in al hie priests, or in Caiphas; for Caiphas him∣self the very same yere,Caiphas con∣demned our Sauiour for a blasphemer. Matth. 26. as S. Matt. witnesseth, iudicially pronounced our Sa∣uiour to be a blasphemer, which I hope you will not say came from the direc∣tion of the holy Ghost. The hie Priest therefore did erre, and that most hai∣nously in iudgement: and if this be al your hold, the Pope may doe the like. Phi. What may be, is hard to determine: But this we know, the Pope did neuer yet erre sitting in his Tribunal to giue iudgement. Theo. As though the place and not the Pope had assurance of trueth annexed vnto it? What ho∣lines hath the Consistorie to safegard the iudge from error? The promise of Christ was made to the person and not to the place. Phi. To the person but sitting in iudgement. Theo. Did Peter sitte in iudgement at that time when he denied his master?Christs pro∣mise was not made to peter sitting in udgement. Phi. Wee say not so. Theo But that night was the promise made vnto him, and that night performed in him, when Peter poore man stoode warming himselfe amongst the manye, and durst not answer the first interrogatorie that a silly wenche proposed to him. And therefore Christ neuer spake of your Courtes nor Consistories: but promised Peter to pardon his fault and to strengthen his faith, lest hee should perseuere in that his Apostasie. Phi. Had we no warrant for the Bishop of Rome that his faith shall not faile, yet experience proueth this which we say to be true: that he neuer erred iudicially, that is sitting in his Consistorie. Theo. What need we care where he sate so long as we bee sure he did erre? What wrangling is this to aske for the place where; and the time when the Pope spake the wordes? Hee that may erre at home, may likewise erre abroade; If the Pope bee an heretike
in his chamber, hee can be no Catholike in his Consistorie. Phi. Definitiue sentence he neuer gaue any against the faith. Theo. What are his decretals but definitiue sentences? And in those he hath erred.Erronious Decretals. Phi. Ne∣uer. Theo. The Decretal of Clemens which I before alleaged is altogether erronious. They were two Decretall Epistles, for the which Honorius was condemned. The decretal of Vigilius, which Liberatus remembreth, is expres∣ly against the faith. Celestinus erred iudicially as your owne friendes confesse, but you haue pared that Decretall as you haue done many others, and left out the later part, lest we should spie the fault.The decretals of Celestinus lately pared and his error left out. Phi. Who told you so? Theo. They that had no cause to belie you. Alfonsus a great Patrone of your side sayth,Alfons. aduers. haereses, li. . cap. 4. It is a thing manifest to al men that Pope Celestinus erred touching the mariage of the faithful when either part falleth into heresie. Neither was this error of Celestinus such as ought to be imputed only to negligence, so that we may say he erred as a priuate per∣son, and not as Pope, because this decision of Celestinus was in the auncient Decratals which I my selfe haue seene and read.Decretal. lib. 4. de diuortiis § quanto .Ibidem ¶ praedecessor. Innocentius the third when he decided the case, confessed that one of his predecessours had decreed other∣wise, which saith the gloze was Celestinus: whose resolution was in the olde De∣cretals and it was euil that Celestinus sayd. Alexander the 3. in a matter of great importance said,Decretal. lib. 4. de sponsa duorū § licet praeter. To decide of marriage a∣gainst the truth is an er∣ror in faith. Sixti Decretae. lib. 5. tit. 12. § exijt. Extrauag. Ioh. 22. tit. 14. § cū inter nōnullos. Ibidem. He should haue told vs what right they might haue besides the propriety. Christ and his Apostles renounced the proprietie and reserued the vse: Is not this good diuini∣tie Quamuis aliter a qui∣busdam praedecessoribus nostris sit aliquando iudicatum, though some of our pre∣decessours haue heretofore otherwise giuen iudgement. Phi. These were matters of mariage, and not of faith. Theo. As though the seuering of those, whom God hath ioyned, did not touch the faith; and so did some of these Popes and that iudicially, by their contrarie Decrees. Againe Nicolas the fourth sayth in his Decretal that To renounce the pro∣prietie of all thinges not in special only but in common also is meritorious and holy, which Christ taught by word and confirmed by example, and the first foūders of the militant church deriued to others by the paterne of their doctrine & life. Iohn the 22. sayth it is hereticall to affirme that Christ & his Apostles had nothing in speciall nor in common. Phi. The next extrauagant reconcileth them both. Theo. The Pope labou∣reth for life to shift off the matter, & at last commeth with a very iest, De sola ab∣dicatione proprietatis, non iuris alterius in praefata declaratione mentio habetur. In the said declaration (of Pope Nicolas) there is mention made of renouncing the proprietie only but none other right. And so Ius aliud a proprietate habuisse potuerunt; they might haue some other right besides the proprietie. Phi. So they might. Theo. As if Christ and his Apostles had been cunning in the ciuill Lawes to renounce the proprietie for a fashion, and yet to reserue an interest in those thinges which they seemed to renounce, so that they might both keepe and vse them at their willes. This exposition that Christ taught men to re∣nounce the proprietie of their goods and reserue the vse, is as false and hereticall as the former assertion of Pope Nicolas, that Christ and his
Apostles renounced their right in al earthly things both in special and common,Extra. § cum inter nonnullos gloss. ¶ declara∣mus. and taught others to do the like. Your gloze tumbleth a long while in the myre after he hath confessed the one to beExpressè contrarium inuit. expresly contrarie to the other, & at length submitteth himselfe to the Church of Rome though hee see not howe to loose the knot. De consec. dist. 2. § Ego Beren.Nicolaus the second in a Councel of 114. Bishoppes appointed Berengari∣us to confesse that The very body of Christ is in trueth and sensually broken and brused in pieces with the teeth of the faithful; & this confession the Pope receiued, allowed and sent to the Bishoppes of Italie, Germanie and Fraunce as catholike,Ibidem ¶ den∣tibus. which your owne gloze saith is a greater heresie than euer Beren∣garius held. Phi. Hee saith it is, vnlesse you vnderstand it soberly. Lheo. And that sober vnderstanding hee graunteth must bee cleane against the text.A sober vn∣derstāding to expound the wordes clean contrarie to the text. For where the text affirmeth this of y• very body of Christ, & excludeth the outward sacrament as the words declare, your gloze sayth that vnlesse you vnderstand this of the outward formes of bread and wine and not of the bodie of Christ, it is a greater heresie than that of Berengarius; and so is it in deede a very palpable & a brutish error, and can no way bee salued, except you take the woords cleane contrarie to themselues, which conuinceth the Pope and his whole Councell of a monsterous error. Phi. This was Berengarius fault in his confession, but not the Popes iudge∣ment or resolution. Theo. You would faine wind out if the text it selfe did not hold you fast;Ibidē ¶ quā Do∣minus Nicolaus & haec sexta Synodus tenēdā tradidit, mihi∣que firmauit. but there it is sayde that Pope Nicolas and the Synode deliuered this faith and assured it to be Apostolike and Euangelike. And therefore if Be∣rengarius erred in subscribing this fourme of confession, the Pope & his Coun∣cell erred in prescribing the same. Phi. You take nice aduantages of words, which men may soone misse. Theo. The heresie of Arius differed but one letter from the truth, and yet his doctrine wa very blasphemous. One word may containe a whole kingdome of impietie. Phi. They print no more than they list and mind to de∣fend, & then they aske vs what errors we find in the Popes decres. You might as well say: the Pope may er in his shoes, but not in his slippers: or in the shade, but not in the sun¦shine.The best is, you find not many such ouersightes in the Popes decrees. Theo. You print and publish none but such as you thinke your selues able to defend, suppressing the rest that might bee chalenged, and then you aske vs howe wee prooue that euer the Bishoppe of Rome gaue definitiue sentence against the fayth, in open Court or Councel; which refuge of yours is very ridi∣culous. For what hath Christes prayer for Peter to doe with definitiue senten∣ces and open Consistories? If the Pope may beleeue, defende and preach an er∣ror, what neede wee care whether his sentence bee conclusiue, or perswasiue, definitiue or interlocutorie? And so for the place what skilleth it where and in whose presence the words be written or spoken if they be certainely his? And where you thinke it maketh much for the Bishoppe of Rome, that wee can not proue these errors of Popes to haue beene definitiuely pronounced in their publike Consistories, if that were true, as it is not, you shew your selues to be but wranglers. For wee can name an infinite number of Bishoppes and Churches, that neuer erred in this speciall & precise maner which you propose.
Howe prooue you that euer the Bishops of Yorke or Durham in England,We cā propose thē a thousād Sees, which they shal ne∣uer proue to haue erred in open Consi∣stories by defi∣nitiue sentēce. Heretiks euer condemned for their writ∣ings & preach¦ings, not for their defini∣tiue sentēces. of Poycters or Lions in Fraunce, of Valeria or Carduba in Spaine, of Rauennas or Rhegium in Italie, of Corinth or Athens in Greece, of Miletus or Sardis in Asia, gaue definitiue sentence against the faith in their publike consistories? A thousande others I coulde obiect on whom that thing shall neuer bee fastened, which you crake can not be proued by the Bishop of Rome. Heretikes haue been euer conuinced by their confessions & writings, not by their definitiue senten∣ces, or iudiciall proceedings. And therefore if Popes haue erred in writing and teaching, they were as right heretikes as euer were Arius, Sabellius, Nestori∣us, Eutiches and such like which neuer gaue definitiue sentēce against the faith in Courts and Consistories, but onely taught or wrate against the truth. Phi. Though one or two Bishops of Rome were deceiued, they erred not so often there as in other places. Theo. Set Constantinople aside, and in no one See did the bishops erre oftener than in Rome, but this is not our marke. If one or two haue erred, why may not others?Though no Pope had er∣red, yet they may erre, and so long they can be no iudges of faith. Yea though none of them had erred heretofore, yet that which is possible may happen hereafter, and so long they can be no absolute iudges of trueth. Phi. If they might erre, they were no fit iudges of faith; but because their Tribunall is the highest, that is in the Church, they must therfore be free from error. Theo. You euer proue that which we doubt of, by y• which is more doubtful. We denie the Popes Tribunal to bee the highest, that is in the church. Prouinciall and generall Councels by the Canons are a∣boue him. And in matters of faith the highest Court that is in earth may misse:The highest court in earth may misse the trueth. & therfore no man is bound to Pastor, Prelate or councel farther than their de∣crees be coherēt & agreeable with the faith. For against God we owe neither au∣dience nor obedience vnto the perswasions or precepts of any men. Phi. No question we must as well in faith as in manners obey rather God than man; and therefore if the iudgements of bishops and conclusions of Coun∣cels might be repugnant to the word of God, duetie bindeth vs to preferre the preceptes of God before the pleasures of men; but it is not possible that God should leaue his Church without direction, and directed shee can not bee but by iudgement, and in giuing iudgement the head must be highest and so the soun∣dest, left that peruert the rest, and endanger the whole bodie. Theo. The church of Christ neuer was nor euer shall bee without direction: but that direction proceedeth from the word and spirit of Christ,The Church is directed by the word and spirit of christ not by the Popes con∣sistorie. not from the courts and Consi∣stories of Popes. Assemblees of learned Bishoppes voyd of pride and strife, are good helpes to trie the faith and moderate the discipline of the Church, and the greater, the better: yet the direction of Gods holy Spirite, and infallible deter∣mination of trueth is not annexed to any certaine places, Persons or numbers; neither can you of a promise which is common to all, establish a priuate Tribu∣nall for one man from the which the spirit of trueth shal not depart, as you pro∣fesse of the Popes Consistorie. Phi. If he may erre how can he be iudge of al others? Theo. You say wel: & since by the consent and confession of your own church foureteene hundred yeres
after Christ he may erre, we conclude he can not bee supreme iudge of faith; nor Soueraigne directer of Princes in those cases. Phi. Their owne Church 1400. yeres after Christ stoutly auoucheth the Pope might erre.Was our whole Church of that opinion so lately? Theo. Shew euer any learned man of your side, that sayde or helde otherwise. Phi. Nay shewe you they held so. Theo. I haue already shewed so much. Phi. You haue na∣med some priuate men that wrate so. Theo. The strongest pillours of your Church. Phi. But you say this opinion was generall. Theo. If you con∣sider how earnestly and openly this was asserted by the best, and neuer contra∣dicted by any, no not by those that tooke vpon them to bee the chiefe Proctours and Patrones for the Pope, your selfe will say it was generall, and confessed on all sides. Distinct. 40. § Si Papa.Your owne Decrees that will not haue the Pope reprooued for any fault, adde this exception, Nisi deprehendatur a fide deuius, vnlesse hee bee founde to swarue from the fayth. The Bishoppes of Fraunce and Germanie ga∣thered at Brixia and Mogunce against Gregorie the seuenth,Abba Vrsper∣gēs. anno 1080. condemned him as, The auncient disciple of the heretike Berengarius, & a vera fide exorbitan∣tem, and swaruing from the true fayth. His owne Cardinals and Bishoppes that were at Rome made this profession against him.Fasciculus rerū sciendarum in vita & gestis Hildebrandi. Ibidem. Ad destruendas haereses nouiter ab Hildebrando inuentas consedimus. We assembled to destroy the here∣sies lately deuised by (Pope) Hildebrand. And in special wordes, Hoc est decre∣tum Hildebrandi in quo a Doctrina & fide Catholica aberrauit. This is Hildebrands decree, in which hee erred from the Catholike doctrine and fayth. Robert Grosseteste Bishoppe of Lincolne reuerenced of your Church for a Saint, lying on his death proued the Pope not onely might bee, but was an he∣retike by sundry reasons, and by the very definition of heresie, and for the possibi∣litie of the matter alleageth the Popes owne testimonie.Matth. Paris. in Henrico 3. sub anno 1253. Item dicit Decretalis quod super tali vitio, videlicet haeresi, potest & debet Papa accusari. The Decretall sayth that for heresie the Pope may and ought to be accused. Massei Chronic. in anno 1409.But what speake I of one Bishop? Six hundred Prelates, an hundred foure and twentie Diuines, and almost three hundred Lawyers, with the whole Colledge of Cardinals in your generall Councell of Pisa deposed two Popes, Gregorie the twelfth and Benedict the thirteenth, as Naucler. Chro∣nograph. gene∣ratio. 47. anno 1409. schismatikes and here∣tikes. Your Councell of Constance, where as you say were Genbrard. li. 2 Chronograph. anno 1414. 4. Patriarkes, 29. Cardinals, 47. Archbishoppes, 270. Bishops, 564. Abbats and Doctours, in all aboue nine hundred deposed the same Benedict, (persisting in his Popedom notwithstanding the former sentence) as beingConcil. Cōstan. sessio. 37. schismaticum & haereticum, ac a fide deuium, & articuli fidei Vnam sanctam Catholicam Ecclesiam, violatorem perti∣nacem, notorium & manifestum; a schismatike and an heretike, swaruing from the faith, and a wilfull, notorious & manifest subuerter of the Article of (our) faith, one holy Catholike Church.Concil. Constan. sessio. 11. And in the same Councel it was obiected to Iohn the 23. Quod dictus Iohannes Papa 23. saepe & saepius coram diuersis Prelatis & alijs honestis & probis viris, pertinaciter Diabolo suadente, dixit, asseruit, dogmati∣zauit & astruxit, vitam eternam non esse, quin imo dixit & pertinaciter credidit
animam hominis cum corpore humano mori & extingui ad instar animalium bruto∣rum, dixít que mortuum semel, esse in nouissimo die minimè resurrecturum, contra articulum de resurrectione mortuorum. That often and very often before di∣uers Prelates and other honest and approoued men, hee sayd, auouched, vt∣tered as his iudgement & egerly defended, that there is no life euerlasting: yea moreouer hee sayde and resolutely beleeued that the soule of man dieth and perisheth with the bodie after the maner of other beasts, and that hee which was once dead should not rise in the last day; contrarie to the article of the resurrection of the dead. Your generall councell of Basil, which Germanie, Fraunce, Englande, the Dukedome of Millan and many other Countries so greatly esteemed gaue the like iudgement not yet seuen skore & seuen yeres agoe against Eugenius the 4. and iudicially pronounced him to bee,Concil. Basil. sessio. 34. anno 1439. Articuli Pari∣sienses. schismaticum, a fide deuium pertinacem hae∣reticum, a schismatike, erring from the fayth, and a stubburne heretike▪ Last∣ly your diuines of Paris but last day resolued that Peter erred in faith when Paul reprooued him; and if Peter did, there can bee no question but his suc∣cessours may, since they claime from him, and not before him. If this bee not the generall consent of your owne Church, I knowe not what is: If it bee, then by the full and cleare confession of your selues for 1400. yeeres the Pope might stray from the faith and become an heretike. Phi. There is not one of your examples but may be replied to. Theo. Graunt they might, yet this is most sure which I conclude, that they were al of this opinion, the Pope coulde erre. Phi. What if that opinion were not true? Theo. That must you proue. It is enough for mee to shewe that not onely the church of Christ in former ages, but your owne Church euen vntil our age, held this opinion of Popes that they could erre. What reason you haue, or can haue to impugne their opinion, let the world iudge. We thinke you within the com∣passe of Alfonsus censure; if ye be not worse. Phi. What if wee should graunt the Pope may erre, as al men may?A Iudge must haue skill to discerne and power to cō∣maund. That doeth not diminish his power. Theo. A iudge must haue two thinges before hee bee competent: namely skill to discerne, that hee misse not the trueth; and power to commaund, that his iudgement may take place. If he want either, hee is no fit iudge. Phi. You say right, and both these the Pope hath in most ample maner. Theo. He hath neither.The Pope hath neither. Erre he may:Erre he may. and therefore no man is bound to his iudgement farther than it standeth with the word of truth, and so farre the greatest Princes in the world are bound to the meanest man that God doth send. For God is truth, & they that resist the truth, resist God; and the end of them al that resist, is damnation, which Princes shal not auoyde, vnlesse they submit themselues to the hearing, embra∣cing and obeying of the truth. And as hee may erre, so hath hee no power to commaund Princes or others,Power to cō∣maund or compel he hath none. but only to propose the commandements of God vnto them, as euery Bishop must & may by vertue of his vocation. Farther authority, by violence to compel,
or by corporal and external meanes to punish, no Prelate, nor Pope hath by the lawe of God, since that belongeth to the sworde which the Prince and not the Priest beareth in Gods behalfe to force refusers, and chastie malefactours, as I before at large haue proued. And so by consequent Princes are neither bound to the Popes hest for direction, nor in daunger of the Popes court for correcti∣on; but that they may by the aduise and instruction of such as bee learned and godly pastors about them, vse their swords for the receiuing & setling of trueth, and perfect establishing of Christs wil & testament, within their owne realmes, without expectng or regarding what the bishops of Rome and his adherentes like or allow. Phi. But all this while you resolue not, who shall be iudge which is the true will and Testament of Christ. Theo. He that wil be iudge of truth must proue his claime.Let him that maketh the claime, vnder∣take the proofe. We find no place nor person to whom the sonne of God hath re∣ferred vs for the right vnderstanding of his wil but only to himselfe. Phi. You bind the people to followe the Prince; which of all others is the worst way to come by truth. Theo. We bind no man to prince, nor Pope for matters of faith. Only we say subiects must endure their princes with patience,All that we giue vnto prin¦ces is either to be obeyed or indured. when they com∣mand for error, & obey them with diligence when they maintaine the truth. Far∣ther or other seruitude in causes of conscience wee lay on no man: and that bur∣den the church of Christ neuer refused neither vnder heretikes, Apostataes nor infidels; til the Pope growing great by the ruine of the Empire and encreasing as fast in pride as he did in wealth, would needs giue the aduenture to rule king∣domes & depose Princes though by Gods lawe hee haue no more power nor iu∣risdiction ouer them than any other Bishop hath: which is so farre from that he claimeth and vsurpeth, that he, as well as other Bishops, should be subiect to the sword, and obedient to the lawes of the Romane Emperour: and so was hee as I haue plainely shewed, to the time that forsaking the Grecians and reuolting from the Germanes hee learned to chaunge Lords so often that at length, what with sedition of subiects, dissention of princes, & superstition of al sorts, the my∣sterie of iniquitie working, he made himselfe Lord and master of all. Phi. You bee lothe I see to yeeld the bishop of Rome any right to force prin∣ces to their dueties. Theo. And you be as willing he should not only take their crownes, but tread on their neckes, though hee haue no right to superuise their doings or censure their persons. Phi. If it be not his right we aske it not. Theo. If it be his right we resist it not. Phi. Will you admit it, if we proue it? Theo. Will you not claime it, except you proue it? Phi. We will not. Theo. Then say what you will or can for the confirmation of it.
THE THIRD PART REFELLETH THE IESVITES REASONS AND authorities for the Popes depriuing of Princes and the bearing of armes by subiectes against their Soueraignes vpon his censures: declareth the tyrannies & iniuries of Antichrist seeking to exalt himselfe aboue kings and Princes; and conuinceth that no deposition was offered by the Pope for a thowsande yeares after Christ, and none agnised by any Christian Prince vntill this present daie. Phi. THE Pope may reproue Princes, excommunicate them, and if neede bee depose them, which other Bishoppes can not doe. Theo. Seuer these thinges which you ioyne to∣gither, and the truth will the sooner appeare. Reproue them he may, when they violate the precepts of God, and so may any other Bishop or teacher. For God hath placed them in his church to teach,2. Timoth. 3. Ierem. 26. Preachers may reproue Princes. reproue, instruct & reforme as wel Princes as others, & charged them not to conceale one word of that he hath spoken neither for fauour nor terrour of any Prince. The will of God must be declared to all, and sinne reproued in all without dissembling, or flattering with any sort, or State of men: and that is most expedient for all, euen for Princes themselues, rather to heare with humilitie what God hath decreed for their saluation, than to run to their owne destruction without recalling, or warning. So Samuel reproued king Saul, Ahias king Ieroboam, Elias king Achab, Elizeus king Iehoram,1. Kings 15. 3. Kings 14. 3. Kings 21. 4. Kings 3. Mark. 6. 2. Kings 12. 2. Chron. 19. 4. Kings 20. The Prophets reproued as well good kings as euill. Iohn Baptist king Herod. Neither were wicked Princes onely, but also the good and vertuous kinges of Iudah reproued by the Prophets, as namely king Dauid by Nathan, king Iehosaphat by Iehu, and E∣zechias by the Prophet Esaie; but this reproofe reached no farther than to put them in minde of Gods graces and mercies towardes them, and their dueties againe towardes him. They neuer offered violence to their Persons, nor pre∣iudice to their States; onely they did Gods message vnto them, without hal∣ting or doubling: and so should euery Preacher, and Bishop not feare with meekenesse and reuerence to laye before Princes the sacred and righteous will of God, without respect whether Princes tooke it in good or euill part: But farther or other attemptes against Princes, than in wordes to declare the will and precepts of God, God hath not permitted vnto Preachers, Prophets, Prelats, nor Popes. Phi. Yes they may repell them from the Sacramentes,Preachers must not ad∣mit Princes to the Sacra∣ments but on those condi∣tions which god requirth which is more than reprouing them in words. Theo. If you meane, they may not minister the Sa∣cramentes vnto Princes, without faith and repentance, which God requireth of men that shall be baptized or haue accesse to his table, we graunt they must rather hazard their liues, than baptize Princes which beleeue not, or distri∣bute the Lordes mysteries to them that repent not, but giue wilful and open
signification of impietie, to the dishonoring of his name, that is authour of those thinges; and the prophaning of the thinges them-selues which bee holie and vndefiled.If Princes will be partakers of Gods gra∣ces, they must receiue them as he doeth propose them. For if Princes will bee partakers of Gods aboun∣daunt blessinges proposed in Christ his Sonne to all that beleeue and con∣uert, they must not looke to commaund God and his Sacramentes, but with lowlines of hart, assuraunce of fayth, and amendment of life, submit them∣selues vnder the mighty hand of God, to receiue his graces in such sort as hee hath prescribed; otherwise they prouoke God to their vtter and eternall o∣uerthrowe, and the minister that ioyned with them in their sinnes, shall not bee seuered from them in their plagues, God hating and punishing the pride and presumption of Princes against him-selfe, as much as the vices of meaner men,Chryso. in Mat. hom. 83. Ibidem ad popu¦lum Antioch. hom. 60. or rather more. No small vengeance, sayth Chrysostom, han∣geth ouer your heades (which be ministers) if you suffer any heynous offen∣dour to be partaker of this table: His blood shall be required at your hands. Whether he be Captaine, Lieutenant, or crowned king, if hee come vn∣worthily, forbid him; (in this case) thy power is greater than his. Phi. This is newe Romish diui∣nitie, which in deed is meere impietie.If they may be excommunicated, ergo they may be deposed. Theo. How doth that follow? Phi. Well enough. When a Prince is excommunicated, hee looseth all right to rule, and his subiectes are streight-wayes free from yeel∣ding any obedience to him. Theo. Who tould you so? Phi. No catholike Di∣uine of any age euer saide the contrarie. Theo. Name any catholike Diuine for a thowsand yeares after Christ that euer saide so. In deede some popish pre∣lats and writers of late yeares finding that a compendious waie to strengthen the Popes kingdom, & to make a speedy dispatch of such as should molest them, haue not by diuinitie, but by conspiracie concluded, that Princes may be depo∣sed, & resisted euen by their owne subiects, contrary to the law of God, the do∣ctrine of the Apostles, and the perpetuall patience of Christs church. Phi. D. ALLENS DEFENCE OF ENG∣LISH CA∣THOLIKES cap. 4. LATELY SET FOORTH A∣GAINST THE EXE∣CVTION OF IVSTICE.I wil set you downe some catholike writers about this matter, albeit but fewe for breuity sake, yet of such excellent credit, as shalbe able to instruct and satisfie any rea∣sonable conscience in this case: as also to be our brethrens defence against all those that charge them so deadly with these treasonable propositions. Theo. The simplest christian that is, except you take a rebellious hart for a reasonable conscience, wil looke for some better authority to saue himselfe from damnatiō, which God threatneth to all that resist powers, than your own school∣men & companions, linked in the same faction with you, & liuing not long be∣fore you: And this seely defence of your brethren by the corrupt verdict of your confederates, is rather a discredit to your whole cause, than a clearing of them from traiterous deuises, or as you speake, from treasonable propositions. Phi. The defence of the English Catholikes, cap. 4. S. Thomas.Thomas Aquin; that glorious Saint & Clerke whose only sentence weigheth more, thā al the Protestāts wits & words in the world; saith thus, Postquā Princeps est denūciatus apostata, omnes inferiores & subditi absoluūtur a praestito turamēto & obe¦dientia illi debita: that is to say, after a Prince is once denounced to bee an Apostata, all his inferiours & subiects are assoiled of their oth made vnto him, and of their obedi∣ence
vnto him. This case is plainely resolued vpon by the greatest of all the schoole Do∣ctors, and therefore can be no reasonable assertion, or opinion. Theo. We are now neither to sift your saints, nor examine your clerks; much lesse to debate whether the resolution of a popish Monk drown the wits & pains of them al, that God hath since called to the knowledge of his truth: your passing pride.Thomas A∣quine a late & corrupt writer & a great fa∣ctor for the Pope. I leaue to the iudgmēt of the wise. The credit of Thomas is not so excellēt as you make it, nor his saintship so glorious. He wrot more thā 1200. yeres after Christ, & was both ouerwhelmed with the corruption of his time, & wholy wed∣ded to the See of Rome. Scripture or father he bringeth none, but barely stan∣deth on the example of Gregory the 7. who first practised this wicked presump∣tion against Henry the 4. a 1000. yeares after Christ: this is a simple securitie for subiects to resist the sword which God hath autorized, & the church of Christ for a 1000. yeares obeyed, to heare Thomas Aquin a late Summist in y• midst of blindnes & error affirme they may; & pretēd no better author than Hildebrād, a furious & seditious monster, as his owne Cardinales & companions report of him. You were best bring some other proofe, they must else be very large consci∣ences that will be satisfied with such censures. Phi. The famous professor of our time,The defence of English Catholikes, Cap. 4. Toledoes opi∣nion of a Prince excom¦municate. Francis Toledo writeth farther vpō the words of S. Thomas. Nota (saith he) quod eadem est ratio de excommunicato; quia cū primū quis est denunciat us excōmunicatus, omnes subdits absoluuntur ab eius obedi∣entia. Note that albeit S. Thomas name only an apostata, yet the reason is al one in the Princes case that is excommunicated. For as soone as one is denounced or declared an excōmunicate, al his subiects be discharged of their obediēce. For though the crime of a Prince be notorious, yet before declaration thereof made by the church, the vassals are not assoiled frō obedience as Caietanus wel holdeth: which declaration being made by the church, they are not only discharged of their loialtie, but are bound not to obey him any more;The case of K. Henrie the 8. except it be for feare of their liues, or losse of their temporal goods, as it was in England in the time of Henry the 8. Thus doth this notable schoolemā write; nei∣ther do we know any Catholike diuine of any age to say the contrarie. Theo. Cal you these satisfactiōs for reasonable cōsciences,What care we for Thole∣does opinion? in purgatiō of your selues, that you do not cōspire with Popes against Princes, to bring men aliue at this day, that be either hired, or bewitched, as you are, to take part with Anti∣christ against God, & his truth; & think you their surly conclusions to be sufficiēt instructions for all mens consciences? Shall Ambrose, Austen, & others looke on, & Caietane, Toledo, & such like sworne chaplaines to the Pope, & our proses∣sed enemies to bee iudges in this cause?Preachers must not ad∣mit Princes to the Sacra∣ments but on those conditions which God requireth. What else is this but aske my fellow whether I be a thiefe? And yet Thomas Aquinas had this moderation, that Princes should not loose their Dominion for heresie, or any other crime, but on∣ly for Apostasie, which is a generall & final renouncing of Christs name, to be∣come an heathē, or a Turk. Toledo wt lesse learning & more vnshamefastnes tel∣leth vs vpon his credit Eadem est ratio de excommunicato, The same reason hol∣deth in any Prince whom the Pope list to excommunicate for what cause soe∣uer. Be not these dowtie demonstrations in so weighty questions?
Phi. Tell vs what warrant and not what fel∣lowes they haue to resist the ordinance o God.We bring them not as our chiefe groundes in this cause; but onely to shewe that others haue beene of the same iudgement with vs. Theo. You meane that your fellowes of late dayes haue beene as dutifull to their Prin∣ces, as you are now to ours. We aske not what companie, but what autho∣ritie you haue to resist, and depose the powers which God hath appointed to bee serued and honoured. Let Aquinas, Caietane, and Toledo go. You may not displace them whom God hath exalted, annointed, and set to be obeyed, without higher, and better warrant than fiue thowsand Thomases, tenne Thowsande Caietanes, and twentie thowsande Toledoes can giue you. Phi. Thowsandes we could bring you, if that would content you; namely The famous generall Councell of Laterane celebrated aboue 300. yeares since, where∣in there were Patriarkes and Archbishops 70. Bishops 412. and other Prelates 800. in all,THE DE∣FENCE OF ENGLISH CATHO∣LIKES. The sentence and defini∣tion of the great learned and generall councell of Laterane. Cap. 3. de haeret. of the most chosen learned men of all Nations 1282. with the Embassa∣dours of the Romane Emperour, of the king of Ierusalem, of England, of Fraunce, of Spaine and of Cypres, as also of other Christian States; than which there can bee no surer iudgement vpon earth: which assemblie representing the whole christian world, would neuer agree vpon any assertion traiterous. These thē are the words of their most renoumed Decree. If any Lord temporall, required and admonished by the church, neglect to purge his State from hereticall filth, let him bee excommunicated by the Metropolitane, and Conprouinciall Bishops: But if he contemne to come to order within one yeares space, let relation be made to the supreme Bishop: that from thence foorth he may declare all his subiectes to be discharged of their fealtie towardes him, and giue vp his Land to be possessed by Catholiks,This was the next way to make all safe on their side. which catholiks without all contradiction (when they haue driuen out the heretiks) shall haue and hold the same, and so preserue it in puritie of faith: (the interest and right of the chiefe Lord euer remaining safe & whole, so that himselfe giue no impediment to the execution of this Decree) And the same law to take place in such also, as be Soueraigne Lords and haue no superiours. Theo. Our question is not what numbers the Pope hath gathered, nor what Decrees hee hath made to settle and assure his kingdom; the iudgementes of God are righteous and meruelous, as well against Princes as priuate men. But we demaund what commission the Pope and his Prelates (whom God appointed to be subiect to Princes) had to determine thus against Princes, & to take both their crownes and Realmes from them, when they listed to excom∣municate them? The number of Persons was aboue twelue hundred, as you crake, Bishops and other Prelates,Platin. in In∣nocent. 3.800. Hungrie friers brought into the coun∣cell to ouer∣rule the Bi∣shops. but will it please you to remember that eight hundred of them were no Bishops, but Priors conuentuall & their substitutes euen drea∣ming Monkes, and begging Friers, that then began to pester the world, and had no right to sit in Councels. By such creatures of his owne making, and at his sole disposing, it was easie for your Father to ouerrule all the Bishops of the worlde, if they would haue saide nay; such cunning deuises the Bishop of Rome hath to call and frame councels to his purpose.
And what if no such thing were there decreed,A fine strata∣geme of the Pope to set out thinges consulted as if they had bin concluded. Platina in vita Innocentij 3. Nothing con∣cluded in the Councel of Lateran. but onely proposed and consulted on, and your skill nowe serueth you to alleage it as a most renow∣med decree, and your adherentes deceiue the people with these thinges, as fully concluded in that Councell? Looke to the verie same place whence you tooke the number of them that were present, and the very next wordes; and see whether it be not so. Venere, saith Platina, multa tum quidem in consultatio∣nem, nec decerni tamen quicquam apertè potuit: Many thinges were debated (in that councell) but nothing coulde plainely bee decided, by reason the Pope suddainly departing to compose some tumults then suddainly risen, died by the way. And so your famous generall councell of Laterane is come to a swarme of hungrie Friers, consulting how to defeate Princes of their temporall Do∣minions and lay them open to the spoile, but not concluding as being preuen∣ted by the Popes hastned and inopined death. Phi. We can declare and plainely deduce all that hath beene saide in the premises from holy Scriptures,THE DE∣FENCE OF ENGLISH CATHO∣LIKES. Cap. 4. Matth. 19. By Gods lawe you may not resist, much lesse displace the Prince. The woord of God binding you to obedi∣ence, neither Pope nor coū∣cel can assoile you from it. This is it which Master Allen profes∣seth to prooue in the 5. chap. of his Defēce. What subie∣ction & honor God alloweth vnto Princes. 1. Peter 2. Rom. 13. Prouerb. 8. & warrant of antiquitie. The. So had you need. For if no No man may sunder that which God hath ioyned togither, much lesse may you displace that which God hath ordained, or so much as resist the sword which he hath commaunded to be honoured and obeyed. To discharge your selues from the ordinance of God, from the preceptes of Christ, and doctrine of his holie spirit, you must not bring vs Popes, Schoolemen and Fiers, the eldest of thē a 1000. yeares after Christ; children will not be deceiued with such ables, you must proue your selues assoiled frō obedience to Princes (when the Pope list to giue you leaue,) by the selfe same heauenly records, by which we proue Popes and all others to be subiect to them. The worde of God bindeth you to obey them: the wordes of men can not loose you. Goe therefore directly and sound∣ly to worke, or else you do but increase your sinne. Phi. I will, and you shall see it apparantly proued by the olde and new Te∣stament, and by the examples of the primatiue church that Princes for heresie, and such like crimes may be lawfully deposed by Priests. Theo. This is it which we require you to proue: but first you confesse that Princes haue their power from God, and that they may chalenge honour, sub∣iection, and tribute of all that be within their Realmes, not onely by the con∣sent of men, but by Gods institution and ordinance. Phi. They be but humane creatures. Theo. How shoulde men be more then humane creatures; but their power is of God. S. Paul speaking of them saith: There is no power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God. So before him saide the wisedom of God: By me kinges raigne. Wisdom. 6.Rule therefore is giuen (them) of the Lord and power by the most high. Rom. 13.They be Gods ministers, for the wealth of him that doeth well, and to take vengeance on him that doeth euil. As their power is from God, so the commaundemnt of God is verie plaine that we should honour them. Feare God, honour the king, saith S. Peter: and Solomon expressing the same with a more effectual worde:1. Peter 2. Feare, saith hee,
the Lord and the king.Prouer. 24. We may not dishonor prin∣ces in word, deede or thought. Exod. 22. Yea such is the honour that God hath allowed them, that we may neither open our lips, bende our heats, nor lift vp our handes a∣gainst them: Thou shalt not speake euil of the Ruler of thy people, & Eccle. 10. Rom. 13. 1. Pet. 2. Iudgement threatned chiefly to thē that despise Magistrates. 2. Pet. 2. Iude.curse not the king, no not in thy thought; much lesse then may we resist them. Let euerie soule be subiect saith the Apostle to the higher powers. Whosoeuer resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist, shal receiue to themselues iudgement. You must be subiect not onely because of wrath, but also for conscience sake. And so S. Peter, Submit your selues vnto euery humane creature (or ordinance) vnto the king as surpassing the rest. For so is the will of God. And threatning an heauie iudgement, hee sayth chiefly to them that despise gouermēt, and feare not to speake euil of such as are in authoritie. S. Iude noteth wicked and fleshly teachers for the same fault with the very same wordes. They despise gouernment, and speake e∣uill of them that are in authority. Of this subiection due vnto Princes, the tribute which we paie them, is by S. Pauls iudgement the very signe and earnest.Rom. 13. You must be subiect. For, for this cause pay ye also tribute.Luk. 20. Honor, subie∣ction & tri∣bute by Gods law due to Princes. And therefore the Lord himselfe, when he char∣ged all men to giue vnto Caesar that which was Cesars, ment that honour, sub∣iection, and tribute which by Gods law is due vnto Caesar. For that is Caesars, which God by his word hath allotted vnto Caesar, & that no mortall man may withhold from Caesar, since the Sonne of God hath allowed it vnto Caesar. Phi. All this we knowe. Theo. All this if you keepe as well as know, you shall offend the lesse.By the Iesuits doctrine Cae∣sar shal haue that which God alloweth him, so long as pleaseth the Pope. You may not resist them or despise them▪ ergo much lesse displace them. Phi. Honour, subiection, and tribute must be giuen to Caesar, so long as Caesar is Caesar; but if Caesar bee no longer Caesar, then these thinges are not due to him. Theo. What meane you by this, so long as Caesar is Caesar? Phi. That is, vntil he be lawfully depriued of his Empire. Theo. Then Caesar shall haue these thinges so long as you list to suffer him to be Caesar; but if you once denounce him excommunicate, then Caesar, who by Gods law should haue honour, subiection and tribute, by your law shal haue nei∣ther land, libertie nor life. Is not this worse than despising, or resisting go∣uernment, to depriue and bereaue the gouernour of imperie, safety, and life, if you list? Phi. Wee take no such thing on vs; but Christ hath giuen that power and authoritie to his Uicar generall that he may doe it, if Princes deserue it. Theo. Christ neuer gaue any man power to breake the preceptes which he bounde his Disciples vnto,Iohn. 8. but rather he plainly professed; If yee continue in my word ye are verily my Disciples. If Christ commaunde subiection to Magistrates, and your holy father licence the people to rebel against their Gouernours, is hee a Uicar or an aduersarie vnto Christ? Phi. Hee first deposeth the Prince, and then the subiectes are no longer bound to those that be no Gouernours.Deposition is an authentike rebellion vn∣der the Popes scale. Theo. That is, hee displaceth them whom God hath annoynted, and wresteth the sworde out of their handes to whom God committed it, and then hee saith you may resist them by reason hee first deposed them: but how proue you that
he may depose Princes, or what warrant can you shew for his so doing? Phi. That is the point which I am comming to. Theo. And that is the thing which we haue all this while looked for. Phi. Saul the first temporall king that euer the Iewes (being then Gods peculiar) had;The defence of English ca∣tholikes, cap. 5. 1. Reg. 10.15.16. Saul deposed for vsurping spirituall fun∣ction. though chosen and inspired by God, was for all that led, and directed by Samu∣el so long as he was in order. But afterward for aspiring to spirituall function, and o∣ther disobedience; was by Gods appointment and sentence (pronounced by the said Sa∣muel) deposed of his kingdom, and an other named Dauid annointed by him. Which Saul now after his depriuation, or after, as it were, his excommunication by Samuel, was inuaded by an euill spirit, that prouoked him to kill not onely Dauid, that was now made the rightfull owner of his crowne: but also to seeke for Samuels death: yea and to commaund all the holy Priestes of Nobe (fourescore and fiue in number,1. Reg. 22. as holie Scripture recounteth) to be slaine and murdered in most pitifull wise, as traitours to him, and fauorers of Dauid the competitor of his kingdom. And so it was done at last; though at the beginning his garde refused to execute so vile and horrible an act; and in this sort he remained enemie many yeares against God and Samuell, and kept the kingdom by tyrannicall force notwithstanding his deposition. Theo. What needeth this long repetition of matters impertinent? A short conclusion and more direct to the question,The Prophets denounced both the tem∣porall & eter∣nall iudge∣mentes of God: but they inflicted neither. were farre better. Phi. That you shall haue. Samuel deposed Saul, ergo the Priest may depose the Prince. Theo. The Prophetes were chosen by God to denounce to the wicked both his temporall and eternall iudgementes: will you thence conclude the Pro∣phets were the workers or authours of Gods iudgements? Noah denounced the floud; did Noah therefore drowne the worlde? Ieremie denounced the bondage of Babylon; did Ieremie therefore deliuer the whole kingdome into captiuitie? Daniel denounced Nabucadnezers fall: did Daniel therfore take Nabuchadnezers hart and vnderstanding from him, or make him ate grasse like an oxe? Phi. They were the denouncers of these things from Gods mouth, but not the doers. Theo. Keepe that rule, and you haue answered your owne examples of Samuel, of the man of Iudah that threatned Ieroboam, of Elias, Elizeus, Peter and Paul; in which the strength of your discourse consisteth. Samuel annointed Dauid, whiles Saul liued, Elias called for fire from hea∣uen to consume the kinges messengers;By these exā∣ples Priestes may kill men, set their hou∣ses on fire, or pull out their eyes, as wel as displace Prin∣ces: if the Ie∣suites colle∣ctions bee good. Elizeus annointed Iehu to execute the wrath of God on Achabs house: Peter strake Ananias and his wife dead with a word for lying vnto God: & Paul by the same power of the holy Ghost strake Elimas the Sorcerer blind. Doth this proue that Bishops and Preachers may pick out mens eyes, or kil whom they can, or appoint kingdomes at their plea∣sures? Phi. No, but that these things are not vnlawful for Prophetes & prea∣chers when God commaundeth. Theo. If God commaund the case is cleare, not onely for Popes, but also for the poorest Priest & meanest creature that is. Phi. We aske no more. Theo. And so much wee grant; but hath your holy father any reuelation from heauen to depose the Queene of England? Phi. A commission he hath though no reuelation to depose Princes▪ Theo.
The Popes commission to depose Princes they promised to proue by scri∣pture, & nowe vainly suppose it without Scripture. Samuel, Elias, and Elizeus had speciall & extraordinary commaunde∣ment from God to doe as they did.The Popes commission to depose Princes, is the thing which we striue for, & which you seeke to deduce by the Scriptures; and now we come to the purpose, you vainely suppose that without proofe, which wee required to see, and you promised to shew by the very word of God himselfe. Phi. Wee proue by the Scriptures that Prophetes haue deposed Princes. Theo. Belie not the Scri∣ptures. You shew where God reiected kinges for their wickednesse, and sent his Prophetes to tell them so much, and annoint others in their places. But in this case the Prophetes were messengers, not iudges; denouncers, not depo∣sers: & that which they did, they did not in the right of their Propheticall vo∣cation, but by peculiar and special direction from God, which was priuate to them, not common to others that were Prophetes, as well as they. Nowe what consequent is this? Samuel annointed Dauid; Elias, Hazaell; Eliseus Iehu; when God expreslie willed them; ergo Prophetes may dispose kingdoms at their pleasures: and Popes may depose Princes, though God expresly will them not. Phi. Yes God willeth them so to doe. Theo. Proue that, and weare the crowne. Phi. He willed others before them. Theo. And therefore they might lawfully doe that which God commaunded them;The Pope may not doe that which the Prophetes did, till hee haue the same precept which they had. To put down kings is an honour speci∣ally reserued vnto God him selfe. Luc. 1. Dan. 2. Dan. 4. and you may not doe the like, till you haue that speciall precept from God which they had. So that in these cases which you pretend, first God was the doer and not the Prophetes: they were but seruauntes to doe their message. Next they tooke no such thing vppon them by their generall calling as Prophetes, nor in their owne names as superiours to kinges, but onely then, when they were precise∣ly charged by God himselfe, and the person that shoulde succeede likewise na∣med vnto them by Gods owne mouth. What is this to the Pope? Or how doth this inferre that he may iudicially conuent Princes and depriue them of their crownes when he thinketh good? Yea rather if you were not more than blinde, you would perceiue this illation of yours is not erronious onely but al∣so blasphemous, in that you chalēge for the pope the same right to depose kings, which God hath specially reserued to himself. It is he that deposeth the migh∣ty from their seat, and exalteth the base: it is he that putteth downe kinges, and setteth vp kinges, and giueth (the kingdome) to whomsoeuer hee will. This power I saie you can not attribute to the Pope without apparant blas∣phemie. Phi. The Pope will depose Prin∣ces, as well as God.We giue him no such power, but onely to remoue such from the king∣dom as be vnworthy of it. Theo. And think you that God remoueth such as be worthie? Phi. No. Theo. Then do you giue the same power to the Pope, which God claimeth to him-selfe, to displace the wicked from their thrones. Phi. But vnder God. Theo. If your holy father do this without a particular and pre∣cise warrant from God, hee doth it not vnder God, but as well as God, & that which is in this case done without God, is against God. The example of Saul.But on with your example of Samuel. Saul was deposed of his kingdome by Gods appointment and sentence, which Samuel pronounced vnto Saul from the
mouth of God. Ergo what? Phi. Ergo king Saul was deposed. Theo. Grant he were; by whom was it done? by God or by Samuel? Phi. God prescribed the sentence,God prescri∣bed Samuel what he shuld say to Saul, ful sore for against the will of Sa∣muel. 1. Kings 16. All Israell and Dauid obeied and honoured Saul as the Lords annoin¦ted to his dy∣ing day. The defence Cap. 5. Aug. contra Adamant. 1. Kings 24. but Samuel pronounced it. Theo. In whose name did Samuel speake? in Gods or his own? Phi. In Gods. Theo. Said he more than God com∣maunded him? Phi. I thinke not. Theo. Then God spake the worde, and God gaue the iudgement against Saul; only Samuel was sent to tell Saul so much, & that was sore against Samuels will, as appeareth by his mourning for Saul, which God reproued in him. And now to turn your own exāple on your own head, I trust God hath as much right to depose Princes as the Pope. Phi. What then? The. Did all Israel & Iudah sinne in obeying Saul so many yeares after hee was deposed by God, and an other annointed in his place? Phi. They did it for feare, because Saul kept the kingdom by tyrannical force, notwithstanding his deposition. Theo. Did Dauid sinne in seruing Saul long after himselfe was annointed? Phi. He durst not doe otherwise. Theo. When Dauid had Saul alone in the caue, and might haue slain him, did he well to spare him? Phi. He might lawfully haue killed him, as S. Augu∣stine deduceth, but he would not. Theo. Of that anon: in the meane time was it a lie in Dauid to call him his master and the Lords annointed after his deposition? Phi. He called him so in respect he had bin so, though presently he were not so. Theo. Nay, Dauid affir∣med y• at that present,1. Kings 24. he was so. The Lord, saith Dauid, keepe me from laying mine hand on him. For he is the Lords annointed. And after shewing that this was his dutie and not his curtesie, when he founde him asleepe & one of his Captaines would haue slain him, he said,1. Kings. 26. Destroy him not: for who can lay his hand on the Lords annointed, & be giltles? Where Dauid maketh it no fauor to spare him, but a sin to touch him. And to the messenger that brought him news of Sauls death:2. Kings 1. How wast thou not afraide, saith Dauid, to put foorth thine hand to destroy the annointed of the Lord? And commaunding the fellow to bee thrust through,Ibidem. Thy blood, saith hee, bee vpon thine owne head, for thine own mouth hath witnessed against thee, saying, I haue slaine the Lords annointed. If all Israel obeyed Saul, notwithstanding the sentence of God pronounced against him; if Dauid himselfe after his annointing serued & honored Saul as his master, & called & counted him the Lords annointed to the houre of his death; abhorring it as a sinne in himselfe to lay hands on him, & seuerely punishing it in an other that did it: How can you warrant rebellion against Princes, or make it a meritorious act to murder them, whom the Pope without all authoritie frō God presumeth to displace? Phi. Dauid might lawfully haue killed Saul,Cap. 17. as S. Austen sheweth against A∣damātius, but he would not.1. Kings 26. Dauid confes∣seth he might not kill Saul without sinne. The. The words of Dauid are plain to the cōtrary, speaking of Saul & himselfe, Who can lay his hand, saith he, on the Lordes an∣nointed, & be guiltles? He could not be guilty, but of a sinne: it had bin therfore no lawful, but a sinful deed for any man, Dauid himselfe not excepted, to haue
killed Saul, in respect he then was, & so continued till he died, The Lordes an∣nointed. Phi. S. Augustine saith, Dauid might haue killed Saul without feare. His words be,Contra Adi∣mantum ca. 17. Dauid had his enemie & persecutour king Saul in his power to do with him what hee woulde, and hee chose rather to spare him, than to kill him. Hee was not commaunded to kill him, neither was hee prohibited; Imo etiam diuinitus audierat se impunè facere quicquid vellet i∣nimico, Yea rather hee had hearde at Gods mouth that hee might freelie handle an enemie how he would, and yet so great authoritie hee con∣uerted to curtesie. Theo. Adimantus helde opinion that the olde Te∣stament was contrarie to the newe, because the Lawe as hee thought per∣mitted reuenge, and allowed men to kill their enimies, where the Gos∣pell commaundeth vs to praie for our enimies, and to loue them as the wordes of our Sauiour doe witnesse. This obiection Sainct Augu∣stine refelleth, by shewing that the killing of the Nations which God commaunded, proceeded of loue, not of hatred: and that the iust of the olde Testament loued and fauoured their enimies when it was expedi∣ent for them so to do; as namely Dauid that spared king Saul his enimie and persecutour, though he might easilie haue slaine him. Philand. Sainct Augustines worde is, impunè, hee might freely haue doone what hee woulde to him.The words be grounded ra∣ther on Adi∣mantus asser∣tion than S. Austens per∣swasion. S. Aug. spea∣keth not of Sauls deposi∣tion, but of reuenge per∣mitted by Mo∣ses law, which the Maniches did obiect. Theoph. Whether that were Sainct Augustines perswasion, or an aduauntage taken vppon Adiman∣tus assertion, the place it selfe doeth not expresse; of the twaine I thinke the later to bee the truer. For this was Adimantus erronious position, that the Lawe licenced the Iewes to kill their enimies: and you may not well charge Sainct Augustine there-with least, you bring him againe within the compasse of the Manichees errour. Sure it is Sainct Augu∣stine doeth not grounde his speech on this that Saul was deposed, and there∣fore might haue iustly beene destroyed, which is our case; but on the per∣mission of reuenge, which the Lawe of Moses seemed to graunt Dauid towarde his enimie as well as all others towardes their enimies; marie that was no right exposition, but a misconstruction of the Lawe sufficient to refute Adimantus because it was his owne but not rashly to bee fathered on Sainct Augustine in respect of his learning and credit otherwise in the church of God. For the lawe of God gaue no man leaue to kill his eni∣mie, but that precept was to bee referred to the Magistrate to whome God gaue the sworde lawfully to kill such as were by his Lawe adiudged to die; which our Sauiour doth not prohibite in the new Testament, but reproueth the Iewes for hauing this false conceit of Gods lawe, that euery priuate person might hate his enimies and loue his neighbours, (they corruptly expounding neighbours for friendes and acquaintance) and assureth them that to loue their enimies and pray for their persecutors, which hee then prescribed them, was no new addition, but the ancient and true intention of Gods law.
These wordes then, Dauid had heard by the Lawe of God (for speciall reuelation from God to Dauid Sainct Augustine knewe none) that hee might doe freely what hee would to an enimie, are assumed against Adi∣mantus as part of his owne confession and former obiection:Adimantus antecedent returned on his own head. and conclude that either Adimantus mistooke the meaning of the law, as in deede hee did; or that Dauid perfourming the precept of Christ when hee spared his enimie, gaue example that others vnder the Lawe shoulde doe the like, and so the Law neither waie repugnant to the Gospell; as his conclusion imported. And if any thinke it much Sainct Augustine should pitch himselfe on other mens wordes as they were apparant truethes, hee must remember hee dealt with the Manichees that receiued no Scriptures but such as they listed: and there∣fore to presse them with their owne position, was a neerer waie to confounde them, than to loade them with Scriptures which they regarded not; and that maketh Sainct Augustine giue sometimes not the soundest solution hee coulde, but the readiest to stoppe their mouthes with their owne assertions. Otherwise Sainct Augustine was plainely resolued that Dauid so much esteemed in Saul the holinesse of his regall inunction euen vnto his death, that hee trembled at heart for cutting the lappe of Sauls garment. Quaero si non habebat Saul sacramenti sanctitatem,Aug. Centra lit. Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 48. quid in eo Dauid venerabatur? nam eum propter sacrosanctam vnctionem & honorauit viuum, & vindicauit occisum. Et quia vel panniculum ex eius veste praescidit, percusso corde trepidauit. Ecce Saul non habebat innocentiam, & tamen habebat sanctitatem, non vitae, sed vn∣ctionis. If Saul had not the holinesse of the sacrament, I demand what it was that Dauid reuerenced in him?S. Aug. hol∣deth that Saul had the holi∣nesse of his princely inun∣ction to the houre of his death. For the sacred and holy vnction (of a king) hee honoured Saul liuing, and reuenged his death (on him that saide hee slue him.) And because himselfe had cut but the lap of Saules coate, hee was strooken and trembled at heart (for the fact.) Behold, Saul was not innocent, yet had hee the holinesse not of life but of his an∣nointing. Phi. If Dauid might not lawfully haue slaine Saul, Dauid might not beare armes against Saul: for the putting himselfe in armes proueth hee was either lawfull king, or a manifest rebel against the king, which I thinke you will not affirme. Theo. Dauid was neither king as yet when hee did this,Dauid put himselfe in armes to saue his life & not to seeke the Crowne. nor rebell against the king. Hee put him-selfe in armes not to seeke the kingdome nor to subdue the vsurper as you vainly suppose: hee fledde to saue his life, as euery subiect may, by your doctrine & doinges, yea though life be not sought. Phi. Howe coulde Dauid bee annointed, if Saul were not first deposed? Theoph. You misconster Samuels wordes.Saul reiected from hauing the kingdome to him & his seede. For by them the Scepter was not taken out of Saules handes, but his seede reiected from inheri∣ting the kingdome. Philand. Nay Samuel sayde vnto him; 1. Kings 15. God hath cast thee awaie from being king. And againe, The Lord hath rent the kingdome of Israel from thee this day & hath giuen it to thy neighbor.
What can this import but he was personallie deposed from the gouernment? Theophi. The present possession of the kingdome was not denyed him, but the inheritaunce of it to him and his issue.The children of Israell re∣quired a king after the ma∣ner of other Nations, that is a setled suc∣cession in the kingdom. 1. Reg. 13. By a king Samuel ment, not one that shoulde gouerne during his life: for so did the Iudges of Is∣rael before Saul, that were no kinges; but one that should haue the king∣dome to him, and his after him by waye of inheritaunce. For that was it which the children of Israel respected when they required a King, which was not a Gouernour for the time, but a setled succession in the re∣giment, as other Nations had. This was it that Samuell saide vnto Saul when he first reproued him: Thou hast doone foolishly, thou hast not kept the commaundement of the Lord: for (haddest thou kept it) the Lord had now established thy kingdom vpon IsraellTo thee and thine for euer. for euer. But now thy kingdom shal not continue. This was it that Samuel ment the seconde time when he more sharpely rebuked Sauls disobedience. Because thou hast cast a∣waye the worde of the Lord,1. Kings 15. therefore hath he cast away thee from being king. And againe, The Lord hath rent the kingdome of Israel from thee this daie, and hath giuen it to thy neighbour, not meaning his person shoulde bee degraded, but the kingdom remoued both from his line and from his tribe. Phi. This is your priuate sense: for the wordes sound, that he should not bee king ouer Israell. Theo. Aug. de ciuit. Dei, li. 17. ca. 7.Sainct Augustine him-selfe expoundeth these verie wordes as I do. Iste cui dicitur: spernit te Dominus ne sis Rex super Israel, & dirupit Dominus Regnum ab Israel de manu tua hodie, quadragin∣ta annos regnauit super Israell, tanto scilicet spacio temporis quanto & ipse Dauid, & audiuit hoc primo tempore regni sui: vt intelligamus ideo dictum quia nullus de stirpe eius fuerat regnaturus.S. Augustine expoundeth Saules reiecti∣on as we do. Saul, to whome it was sayde the Lorde will cast thee away, that thou shalt not bee king ouer Israell, and the Lorde hath rent the kingdome from Israell, out of thine hand this daie: euen hee raigned fourtie yeares as long as Dauid him-selfe, and this hee hearde in the verie beginning of his raigne, that wee shoulde vnderstand it therefore to be spoken, because none of his stocke should raigne after him. And hadde not Sainct Augustine goone cleare with vs, the circum∣staunces of the Scriptures doe thus lymitte the wordes of Samuel. For Dauid was then a verie young boie, or as the text sayeth a The Scripture is cleare for the same sense. 1. Kings 16. Dauid aduan∣ced when hee was but a boy keeping sheep Dauid neuer claimed the Crowne from Saul. 1. Kinges 20. little one, keeping sheepe when hee was annointed, hauing neither age, experience, nor strength fit for the present vndertaking of the kingdome. Next, Da∣uid neither claymed nor pretended any right to the Crowne during Saules life, but serued and obeyed Saul as his liege Lorde and Master whiles hee lyued, and so confessed him to bee. Thirdly, Saul him-selfe neuer obiected this vnto Dauid that he sought the kingdome from him, but from his sonnes; for so he said to Ionathan, As long as the sonne of Ishai liueth vpon the earth, thou shalt not be established nor thy kingdō. And the priests that were char∣ged
with treason for helping Dauid,The Priestes protested that Dauid was a faithfull ser∣uant to Saul. 1. King. 22. All Israel al∣leadged Sa∣muels fact that Dauid ought to suc∣ceede. 2. Kings 5. 1. Chron. 11. did not answere as you do that Saul was an vsurper & Dauid the right king, but Who is so faithful among all thy seruants as Dauid, & goeth at thy commandement: witnessing for Dauid that he beha∣ued himselfe as a faithfull subiect vnto Saul, not as a claimer of the crown from Saul. Thus al the Tribes of Israel conceiued & constred the wordes of Samuel. For when they came to make Dauid king after Sauls death, they said, In time past, when Saul was our king, thou leddest Israel in & out: & the Lorde saide vnto thee: thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be captaine ouer my people Israel. So came all the elders of Israel and annoynted Dauid king ouer Israel, according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Samuel. The text it self alleadgeth Gods own words, & Samuels act not for the present posses∣sion, but for the rightfull succession of the crowne, that after Sauls death it did belong to Dauid. Phi. The annointing of a second king is it not the deposing of the former? Theo. God often times annointed him that should succeede:God annoin∣ted such as should suc∣ceede. as when hee willed Elias to annoint Hazael king of Syria, Benhadad his master yet liuing, & like∣wise to annoint Elizeus the Prophet in his own roome: whereby neither Ben∣hadad was deposed from his kingdom, nor Elias depriued of his ministerie, but uccessours appointed to them both. Phi. You see in what sort also Ieroboam king of Israel,The Defence cap. 5. 3. Reg. 13.14. The example of Ieroboam a wicked schis¦matik, denoū∣ced by a priest had a special Prophet sent to him to denounce the intended iudgementes of God against him & his Posterity, for his schisme and separation of his people, from the old ancient true worship of God in Ie∣rusalem; & for erecting a new altar in Bethel (in which al schisme and diuision from the Apostolike See is properly prefigured) & for creating of a wicked clergie out of Aarōs order: I meane, new, hungrie, base, & inordered Priests, (the patern of heretical ministers) thrust vp, out of the aray & orderly succession & creation of Apostolike priest¦hood: a crime so highly afterward both in him and his stock (according to Gods former denunciation) reuenged, that none of his house was left to pisse against a wal. Yet hee fondly sought to apprehend the man of God, & to kil him, for bringing this newes which he accounted high treason against his Regalty. Theo. You promised to proue that Princes might bee lawfully deposed by Priests:Prophets may threaten wic∣ked Princes in Gods name but not de∣priue them of their crownes & now slipping cleane from the question, you shew that God threatned destruction to wicked princes, & charged his Prophets to go to them & tel them so much from him to their faces. Who euer doubted of this? or which way draw you this to make for your purpose? If God may iustly reuenge the sinnes of all men, euen of Princes themselues, and oftentimes doth; wil you thence inferre that Priests or Prophets may depriue Princes of their kingdoms? Phi. A priest denounced Ieroboam to be a wicked schismatike. Theo. He was a Prophet,The Prophet that cried out against Iero∣boams Altar spake not a worde of his schisme. & no Priest that cried out against the Altar of Bethel in Ieroboams presence, & spake not one worde of Ieroboams schisme or deposition, but onely that king Iosiah should sacrifice the Idolatrous Priests & burne their bones on that Altar: which came to passe 300. yeares after Ieroboam was dead. Such mighty reasons you bring to iustifie the deposing & displacing of Princes by the
Bishop of Rome: that when all is saide, your own glosing & interlacing besides ye text is the best ground of your argumēt. That Ieroboams erecting a new Altar in Bethel properly prefigured our diuision frō the Apostolike See (so you call Rome) & that his new,It is easie for any side to applie figures as thy list. Reuel. 17. Reuel. 19. hungrie, base, & inordered priests are a paterne of our ministers, these be the blasts of your spirit & cākers of your mouth, they touch not vs; but in your deceiued & exaspered fansie. We haue forsaken the strūpet that made drunk the inhabitants of the earth with the wine of her fornication, & are gone out of her lest we should be partakers in her sins & receiue of her plagues: otherwise we haue diuided ouer selues neither from God, nor his church. That the clergie of England is vpthrust, hungrie & base, is but the vnloding of your disdainful sto∣makes; in deed your boy-priests haue a brauer fashion to ruffle in their silks and colors, & think themselues no cast ware, as if the sight of Rhemes, or Rome did by & by make them Iosephs betters in dignity, & Abrahās equals in grauity: for our part wee are that wee are by the grace of God, & wee hope in his mercy, his grace in vs shal not be in vaine. But what is this to the question whether the Pope may depose princes or no; you began with a matter which you neuer came neere, & now you be clean besides. For what doth Gods threatning or punishing of Ieroboam concern the Popes deposing & degrading of princes? God repaied the wickednes which Ieroboam committed with fearful plagues on him, & his whole house after him:Gods threat∣ning Ieroboā is nothing to the doposing of Princes by priestes & Ahias the prophet did not spare to tel Ieroboams wife, that God would do it, & not leaue one of his line to 3. Kinges. 14. wet a wal. Euery preacher may do the like; that is, they may protest & assure princes, that Godwil not leaue their sins vnpunished both with temporall & eternall plagues: & yet euery prea∣cher may not depose princes. Yea the preacher of God may do the like to ye pope himselfe, and yet you thinke it no reason: that euery preacher should depose the Pope. Much lesse wil it follow that your holy father may thrust princes from their seates, because the Prophets of God in old time reproued princes for their Idolatries. Ph. The Defence cap. 5. The example of proud Ozi∣as that would take vnto him the authoritie of priests.Ozias also, or Vsia king of Iuda puffed vp with intolerable pride (as the scripture saith) & not cōtented with his kingly souerainty, but presuming to execute spiritual & priestly function; was valiantly by Azarias & 80. priests with him, assailed, & thrust out of the temple by force. At what time for that he threatned the priests of God & re∣sisted them with violēce; he was stroken with a filthy leprosie: & so not only thrust out of the tēple, but by their authoritie, seuered also from al companie of men (a special figure of the priests power to excōmunicate for heresie, as wel princes as others, in the new law) & finally the regiment of his kingdom was committed to his sonne. A cleare example that priests may vse armes, & represse impietie by forcible waies, where it may serue to the preseruation of religion and honor of God. Theo. Vzziah presuming to burn incense on the Altar of God, which was the priests office,Vzziah strikē with a lepro∣sie but not de∣posed. was stroken with a leprosie & liued as a leper in an house apart frō mē to the day of his death: A faire warning for princes not to wax proud against God, nor to vsurpe thinges interdicted them by the law of God: But that Aza∣rias the priest and 80. of his brethren valiantly assailed the kinges person and
thrust him out by force, or that the regiment of his kingdom passed from him, as depriued of his right, and descended to his sonne: these be your additions and i∣maginations, the text hath no such things. Azarias,The high Priest with∣stood the king with wordes, not with wea∣pons. The Iesuites delight in martial terms & his brethren withstood the king: but in wordes, rebuking him for the breach of Gods law, which they might, not manfully assailing the Magi∣strate, nor laying violent hands on him to thrust him out of the temple, as your martial termes do import. If the scripture it selfe do not content you, repeating the words, wherewith Azarias resisted the king: heare Chrysost. conclusion vpō this place. After the Priest had reproued (the attēpt) & the king would not yeeld, but offered armes, shilds, & speares, & vsed his power, then the priest (turning himselfe) to God,2. Chron. 26. De verbis Esai. Vidi Dominū. I haue done, saith he, my duty (to warn him,) I can go no farther. Nam Sacerdotis est tātum arguere; for it is the priests part only to reproue & freely to admonish (with words:) not to assaile with armes, not to vse targets, not to handle speares, not to bend bowes, not to cast dartes, but only to reproue and freely to warne. This therefore is no cleare example that Priests may vse armes & represse im∣pietie by forcible wayes, as you infer,The Iesuits ga∣ther cōclusiōs cleane against the Scriptures and their own canons. but a wicked abusing & drawing of the scrip∣tures to serue your warlike dispositions. For Gods, & mans law wil assure you that priests & bishops may be no warriers in their owne persons; & if you regard not that, your own law will teach you that Caus. 23. quaest. 8. ¶ 1. no clergie man may put himselfe in armes, no not at the commaundement of the Bishop of Rome. Pope Iohn saith,Ibidem. ¶ 2. Tractare de armis terrenae potescatis est: To meddle with armes, pertay∣neth to the ciuill power. Pope Innocentius saith: Christ,Ibidem. ¶ 3. who was the paterne of al priests forbad carnal weapons to be taken in hand for him. A councel at Toledo in Spain, Ibidem. ¶ Cleri¦ci. Clergie men that in any factiō whatsoeuer, wittingly take armes, shal loose their degree & be thrust in some Abbay for euer. An other at Meaux in Fraunce, Ibidem. ¶ qui∣cunque. Whatsoeuer they be that be of the clergy, let thē take no warlike weapons in hand, nor go with armes. If they doe, let them loose their degree, as contemners of the sacred canōs, & prophaners of ecclesiasti∣call dignity. The full resolution of all these canons by the confession of your law is this: Hijs ita respondetur, Sacerdotes propria manu arma arripere non debent.Ibidem dict. ¶ quicunque § hijs ita. The meaning of these places is, that priests themselues in their own persons should not take weapon. You heard before how often S. Paul charged that a Bishop should be 1. Tim. 3. 2. Tim. 2. Tit. 1. no fighter nor striker, and that 2. Cor. 10. the weapons of (their) war∣fare were not carnall, and by the Lordes owne voice, that he which Mat. 24. stri∣keth his fellowe seruauntes shall haue his portion with hypocrites. What a desperate conclusion then haue you wrested out of this example a∣gainst your own canons, & against the sacred Scriptures, that priestes may not onely vse armes and represse impietie by forcible waies:The Princes person no Priest may vi∣olate, or so much as touch. Psal. 105. but assayle the person of their Soueraigne with open violence, which, if it were lawfull for them to vse armes as it is for others, they might not so much as touch? The precept of God is plaine. Touch not mine annointed; which reacheth to others but chiefly to Princes. You may not speake euill of them, & can it be lawful for you
to doe euill? To resist them is damnation: what is it then with armed vio∣lence to oppresse them?1. Kings. 24. Dauid was touched in his hart for cutting off the lap of Sauls garmēt: & you boldly conclude that priests with their own hands may vi∣olate the Princes person. And where a cursing thought against them is a sinne before God, a murdering hand vpon them is a merit by your doctrine. Phi. We take our light from this example. For here the Priests, as the text saith,They might not vse vio∣lence, & what needed any when the King hastned of himselfe to goe forth? not only resisted, but when they saw the king become a leper they expel∣led him out of the Sāctuarie. Theo. The word2. Chro. 26.  signifieth, they cau∣sed or gat him to hasten thence, but not with violence: for the next words shew that he was forced of himself to go foorth because the Lord had strokē him. And so the word  doth signifie, & the common translation which you call S. Hieroms hath for it, 2. Chro. 26. Ipse accelerauit egredi: he made hast of himselfe to go forth, as terrified with the plague which he felt. Phi. The Priests seuered him from al companie of men (a special figure of the priests power to excommunicate for heresie as wel Princes as others in the new law) & the re∣giment of his kingdom was cōmitted to his son. The. You promised ful proofes out of the word of God that priests might depose Princes, & now you come with empty figures of your own applying without truth or coherence.4. Kings. 15. Vzziah dwelt apart in an house from others, because of his leprosie: for so the law of God cōmanded, & the danger of that disease required; but that the Priests seuered him frō al com∣pany, this is your own making without the booke, the text hath no such wordes; much lesse do you find in the scriptures that he was depriued of his kingdom.2. Chron. 26. 4. King. 15. Oziah was king of Iudah to the day of his death. The Priestes were to dis∣cerne lepers, but the Magi∣strate to see them kept a∣part from o∣thers. Numb. 5. The leprosie of the soule no cause of de∣priuation vn∣to Princes. In Luc. lib. 5. de leproso munda∣to. Chrysost. in Mat hom. 16. & oper. imperfect. hom. 10. Io∣than his son gouerned his house, & iudged the people of the Land; because the king himselfe might not be conuersant among men by reason of his sicknes, but the crowne still continued in the father though a leper, & Iothan began not his raign, til his father was dead, whom the scripture calleth the king of Iudah in the twentie fifth yeare of his raigne and last yere of his life. Ph. Whose dutie was it to separate Lepers from sound Persons, but only the Priests? Theo. The Priests were to discerne who were lepers, but the Ma∣gistrate was to see thē put apart & to keepe them from infecting others. The putting lepers asunder from others was first cōmanded to the childrē of Israel, & by them first executed; though the pronoūcing them to be lepers was alwaies reserued to the Priest. Phi. And the leprosie of the body resembleth ye leprosie of the soule. Ergo Priests may separate Princes from the church for heresie & apo∣stasie, which be the sores of the inward mā, as ye leprosie is of the outward. The. You must proue first, before your cōclusion wil follow, that lepers by the law of God lost their inheritance, which is not true. Next that euery Prince sinning must be deposed, which is as false. For leprosy resembleth not only heresie, or apo¦stasie, but al kind of iniquitie. Ambrose saith, Contemptus verbi est lepra mentis, the cōtempt of the word is the leprosie of the mind. And so Chrysostom: The leprosie of the soule, which is sinne, is onely to be feared. And likewise the rest: Intelligimus omnes auaros, & cupidos intus in anima peccati lepra esse perfusos. We vnderstād al couetous & greedy persōs to be inwardly infected with the
leprosie of sinne. If the leprosie of the soule be a cause sufficient to remoue prin∣ces from their Seates, what Prince shal keepe his kingdome, or what Bishop his chaire? Bee they not all sinners, as well Bishops as Princes? If you take vpon you the moderation of the matter, that all sinnes shall not depriue them of their Crownes but onely heresie: then you decide the case like a lord, as you list; and checke your owne conclusion as pernitious to Popes no lesse than to Prin∣ces; and wee may iustly reiect it as a figure of your owne framing, without pro∣babilitie in the antecedent, or necessitie in the consequent. Phi. Note the cause, why king Vzziah was smitten with the leprosie: for presuming to execute the spiritual and Priestly function, whereof now you make thē supreme Gouernours. Theo. I note it well; and when we defend that Princes may preach, baptize, forgiue sinnes, or minister the Lords supper, then threaten vs with Vzziahs pride and plague, on Gods name:To beare the sword in mat∣ters of religiō is the Princes and not the priests charge In the meane time learne that to beare the sworde is the Princes, and not the Priests function: and that the kings of Iudah which most vsed their temporall sword for the restoaring of trueth and purging of error, wanne most fauour with God and honor with men, as I shewed before in Dauid, Iehosaphat, Ezechias and Iosias. Phi. To iudge of trueth, is the Priests charge; and that you referre to the Prince. Theo. To know what must bee taught, is the Pastours care: to take heede what they be∣leeue, or whom they follow, God hath referred that to the hearers, at their peril, and more than that we giue no Prince. Phi. The office and zeale of good Priests is notably recommended vnto vs,The defence, cap. 5. 4. Reg. 11. The example of the deposi∣tion & death of Queene Athalia by Ioida the hie-Priest. in the deposition of the wicked Queene Athalia. She, to obtaine the Crowne after Ochasias, killed all his children: onely one, which by a certaine good womans pietie was secretly withdrawen from the massacre, saued and brought vppe within the Temple for seuen yeres space; al which time the said Queene vsurped the kingdome: till at length Ioida the high Priest, by opportunitie called to him forces both of the Priestes and people; proclaimed the right heire that was in his custodie; annointed and crowned him king; and caused immediatly the pretensed Queene, (notwithstanding shee cried Treason, Treason, as not onely iust possessors but wicked vsurpers vse to doe) to bee slaine with her fautors at her owne Court gate. Thus doe Priests deale and iudge for the innocent and lawfull Princes (when tyme requireth) much to their honour, and agreeable to their holy calling.Athalia an vsurper, and slaine by the Kings autho∣ritie. Theo. Egernesse blindeth your vnderstanding, when to prooue that a lawfull Prince may bee depriued of State and life, which you seeke to defend, you bring an example of a wicked woman vsurping the crowne and playing the tyrant that was suppressed and punished by the rightfull in∣heritour of the Scepter, first proclaimed and Crowned by the consent of his whole Realme. Phi. Ioida the high Priest commaunded her to bee slaine,Ioidaes war∣rant to com∣maund Atha∣lia to be put to death in the Kings name. and not the king. For he was a child of seuen yeeres age and had no such discretion. Theo. Ioida had good warrant by the Lawes of God and man to do that hee did. First hee saued the yong king aliue, and hyding him from the furie of Athalia, secret∣ly nourced him in the house of God: and in that respect might lawfully protect
him, and execute iustice for him. Againe he was the Prince of his Tribe, as wel as others were of their Tribes: and therefore might take vpon him as much as any other of the Princes, in the minoritie of the king to pacifie the Realme, and punish the vsurper. Thirdly his wife was the kinges aunt, and himselfe the neerest allye that the king had, and for that cause by the Lawe of nature and nations, bound to see the Princes right, age and innocencie defended. Last∣ly that he did was by the common consent of al the Nobles and Captaines. For the scripture sayth,2. Chr. 23. 4. Kings. 11. that before he ventered to proclaine king Ioash, He caused the captaines, & the chiefe fathers of Israel to come vnto him into the house of the Lorde, and made a couenant with them, and tooke an othe of them in the house of the Lord, and shewed them the kinges sonne. So that Ioida had very good and sufficient authoritie without and besides his Priesthoode to doe that hee did, which you dissemble and make a florish as if hee had done this only by vertue of his vocation, which is most false. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. 3. Reg. 18.19. The executiō done by Eli∣as the Pro∣phet vpon many with deposition of Princes. 4. Reg. 1.No man can be ignorant howe stoutly Elias (being sought to death by A∣chab and his Queene Iezabel that ouerthrewe holy Altars, and murthered all the true religions that coulde bee founde in their lande) tolde them to their face; that not hee or other men of God whome they persecuted, but they and their house were the disturbers of Israel: And slewe in his zeale all the said Iezabels false Pro∣phetes, fostered at her Table, euen foure hundred at one time; and so set vppe holy Altars againe. Howe hee handled the Idolatrous king Ochozias his Cap∣taines and messengers, wasting them and an hundred of their traine,, by fire from heauen; till the third Captaine was forced to humble himselfe vppon his knees vnto him. Howe hee had commission to annoint Hazael, king of Syria; Eliseus a Prophet for himselfe;3. Reg. 19. 4. Reg. 9. and Iehu king of Israel, and so to put downe the sonne and whole house of A∣chab: which thereby lost all the tytle and right to the kingdome for euer. Theo. Elias zeale. 3. Kings. 18.Elias zeale wee knowe: and his stoue answere to Achab in saying, I haue not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house in that yee haue forsaken the commandements of the Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim: Yet haue you but a colde sute of his stout speach. For if Prophetes may re∣proue kings, may they therefore depose them? you bring your fiue wittes in que∣stion, if you stand to this collection. Phi. Elias caused the Prophets of Baal to be slaine by the publike autho¦ritie of the King and his people.He slew in his zeale at one tyme foure hundred of Iezabels false Prophets fostered at her Table. Theo. The famine which the land felt, and the wonder which Elias did, were the cause why king Achab deliuered the Prophetes of Baal into Elias handes to bee slaine by the people according to the Lawe of God. Phi. Nay Elias slewe them. Theo. Thinke you that Elias with his owne handes murdered so many? Phi. The Scripture sayth Elias slue them, interprete that howe you can. Theo. I tooke Elias all this while for a Prophet and not for an executioner.Elias was a Prophet and not an execu∣tioner. Phi. Though it were not his act to kill them; it was his authoritie that they were killed. Theo. His direction you might haue sayde, but not his authoritie. For Elias was a priuate man and
no magistrate. Phi. King Achab was farre enough from killing them, had it not beene for Elias. Theo. Elias might induce the king to doe it, compell him hee coulde not. Phi. Howe could Elias induce the King to doe that deede? Theo. The famine was so great in Israel for lacke of raine that man and beast were ready to perish:How Elias gate Achab & the whole Realm to de∣cree the slaughter of Baals pro∣phets. and raine they coulde haue none, but at Elias 3. Kings. 17. Vers. 1.woord as Elias had tolde the king before the drought beganne. Meeting therefore with Achab and being chalenged by him as the author of this fa∣mine, and troubler of Israel: hee discharged himselfe, and protessed before the King that GOD plagued the whole lande because hee, 3. Kings. 18. Vers. 23. Vers. 24. and his fa∣thers house had forsaken the commaundements of the Lorde, & follow∣ed other Gods. And to iustifie his speach, hee offered to prooue before all Is∣rael on the daunger of his owne heade that the King and the lande were but seduced and abused by the Prophetes of Baal, and that hee would proue by no woorse meanes, than by miraculous fire from heauen which should shewe them whose sacrifice GOD accepted: assuring them of raine abun∣dant after their conuersion to the true GOD,Vers. 1.Vers. 24. for which cause hee was at this tyme sent vnto them. To this the king, and the rest gaue their con∣sents: and when by the signe which Elias wrought, the Prophetes of Baal were conuicted to bee but false deceiuers, and the whole assemblie fell on their faces,Vers. 39. and gaue the glorie to GOD, and submitted themselues to followe his trueth:Vers. 40. Elias willed them to take Baals Prophetes, and giue them the rewarde that deceiuers by Gods Lawe shoulde haue, which was death. Phi. This is your enlarging of the text. Theo. The bookes of kinges are but short gatherings out of the larger Chronicles that were extant a∣mong the Iewes, and the manner of the holy Ghost is briefly to touche the chiefest thinges, and yet is there none of these partes, but may bee plaine∣ly prooued by the circumstaunces of the text. Phi. Howe prooue you the King consented? Theo. The particular speach of no one is reported but the generall consent of the whole compa∣nie.Vers. 24. The King and the people consented to Elias offer. Vers. 20. Where also the king was present, is expressed: and yet before the multitude was assembled, the Kinges consent to Elias offer appeareth in that the king sent vnto all the children of Israel, and gathered the Pro∣phetes together for that purpose, who woulde otherwise haue despised the message and woorde of Elias. Againe the Prophetes of Baal woulde neuer haue ventered their liues vpon a needlesse miracle at Elias plea∣sure, but the King and the whole Realme tied them to that condition, vp∣pon daunger else to reiect both them and their profession. And lastly howe was it possible for one poore Prophet to catch and kill foure hundred and fiftie, so that not a man of them escaped: the king and the whole State standing with them? Or howe was it lawfull for Elias to spill their bloud in the kinges presence, without the kings consent? Elias therefore made
the motion, which the king and the whole Realme there assembled, did accept and ratifie with this answere,Vers. 24. It is well spoken: and as hee should haue lost his life, if hee had failed; so when they fayled, hee required iustice to bee done by the king and the Realme on them, for that they were clearly conuicted to bee tea∣chers of strange and false Gods. Phi. 3. Kings. 19.Achab when he came home told Iezabel his wife how Elias had slaine all the Prophets with the sword. Theo. Achab, wee doubt not, excused him selfe, and cast the fault as much as hee coulde on Elias, that Iezabels Prophets were slaine; but this doth not shew that Achab did not consent. His woords im∣port that Elias was the procurer & causer of their destruction,Elias is said in the Scripture to haue doon the deede, be∣cause he was the procu∣rer and au∣thor of it. Acts. 7. Iosu. 10. 3. Kings. 14. but not the iudge nor officer that put them to death. Phi. The Scripture sayth hee slew them. Theo. So the Scripture sayth that Solomon buylt GOD an house: thinke you therefore that Solomon was a Mason or Carpenter? And Ioshua smote the fiue kinges of the Amorites, and hanged them on fiue trees: did Ioshua therefore play the hangman? And king Roboam made shildes of brasse: was Roboam therefore a brasse-smith? Phi. No: they commaunded or caused these thinges to bee done. Theo. And so did Elias procure, or cause them to bee slaine: for in the Scripture the causer, procurer and director are sayd to doe the deede, though they bee but meanes and helpes to haue it done. But what is this to the deposing of Princes? Will you reason thus? False Prophets may bee put to death my magistrates; ergo Princes may bee deposed by priests. I thinke you will not for very shame make such childish conclusions. Phi. He himselfe slue king Ochasias his Captaines, and messengers, wasting them and an hundreth of their trayne by fire from heauen. Theo. Elias was the speaker of the woorde, but God was the doer of the deede: and in that case God himselfe slue them, and not Elias. Phi. God sent er from heauen, & not Elias.Hee called for fire from heauen. Theo. Fire from heauen was not in Elias power but in Gods will. Neither might E∣lias, had he not been guyded by the speciall instinct of Gods Spirit: haue presu∣med to call for that, or any other kinde of reuenge from heauen: for that is the manifest tempting of God, as our Sauiour warned his Apostles when hee re∣buked them for offering to imitate Elias,Luke. 9. and to call for fire from heauen as he did. And sure it is, as these thinges were not ordinarie, so can you driue them to no conclusion for your purpose; nor lay them forth for imitation to any; no more than you may warrant men to steale, because Israel Exod. 12. robbed Egypt by Gods appointment; or to perswade any to murder themselues, because Iudges. 16. Sam∣son did the like; or teach them to curse & kil children, because Elizeus handled 4. Kings. 2.two and fourtie so that mocked him at Bethel. And yet all this while you shew not that Elias so much as touched the king, much lesse deposed him, which you professe to proue.THE DE∣FENCE OF ENGLISH CATHO∣LIKES. The annoint∣ing of Hazael. Phi. Elias had commission to annoynt Hazael king of Syria and Iehu king of Israel, and so to put downe the sonne and whole house of Achab; which thereby lost all the tytle and right to the kingdome for euer. Theo. Neither of them was annointed by Elias, neither Hazael, nor Iehu. Elizeus only foretold Hazael,
that he should be king in Benhadads place: His wordes were, The Lord hath shewed me that thou shalt be king of Aram;4. Kings. 8. This Elizeus spake the day be∣fore Benhadad died; and other annointing Hazael had none. Iehu was indeed annointed by one of the Children of the Prophets (whom Elizeus sent) and charged by message from God to smite & destroy the whole house of Achab his master;Iehu willed by God to take the sword and root out A∣chabs house 4. Kings. 9. Ibidem. vers. 7. & 8. 4. Kings. 11. and so he did. For hee slew Ioram the King, trod Iesabel vnder his horse feete, and caused the seuentie sonnes of Achab that were nourced in Samaria to be slaine; and slew all that remained of the house of Achab in Izrael, and all that were great with him, and his familiars, and his Priests, so that he let none of his remaine. Phi. Then yet here was one king deposed. Theo. Here was no king deposed by any Prophet, but one slaine by Iehu, to whom God gaue the Kingdome of Achab for this intent,God might giue Iehu the kingdome & appoint him to reuēge his masters sinnes. that he should roote out the whole house and offspring of Achab. Phi. Did Iehu well to kill his master and to take the kingdome from him and his heires? Theo. Being expresly commanded thereto by God him∣selfe, he did but his dutie. For God may take and giue Kingdomes as hee will, though man may not. Phi. Authoritie so to doe Iehu receaued from Eliseus. Theo. Unsay that, for feare least you fal into a malicious and wicked vntruth. The Prophet that annointed Iehu beganne his message with, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel; and not thus saith Elizeus. Phi. But Elizeus sent him and gaue him instructions what to doe and what to say. Theo. Let that bee so. Then Elizeus taught him to doe this errand in Gods name, and not in his own, and consequently Iehu receiued authoritie from God,Iehu authori∣sed by God, and not by Elizeus. and not from man. Now view your argument. God may giue kingdomes to whom he will, and appoint ye subiect to be the reuenger of his masters sinne; ergo the Pope may do the like. Be you not the right members of Antichrist, when you make such reasons to flatter the Bishop of Rome? Phi. The Scripture saith of Elias: He cast downe Kings, destroied them and plucked the honorable from their Seates:Eccle. 48. and of Eliseus in the same place he neuer feared Prince, nor could be ouercome by any. Theo. If the Scrip∣ture will not serue your turnes, you wil make it I perceaue by one meanes or o∣ther. The wordes as they lie in the Greeke are :Eccle. 48. Hee brought Kinges to destruction, and the mightie from their beddes: you to help the matter put in termes of your owne and say he cast downe Kings, destroied them and plucked them from their Seats,Elias & Elise∣us were no deposers. as if Elias had beene some Iustie swash-buckler to plucke them out by the eares, and not a zealous and sincere Prophet to denounce the will of God vnto them with the perill of his owne life, for the which he is commended. And so of Eli∣zeus, the wise man saith, He was shaken (that is driuen from the doing of his dutie or afearde to doe that which God willed him) for any ruler. These and such like praises,Eccle. 48. if you take them as in Prophets and Preachers they may and ought to be taken: (which is not to shrinke from declaring the will of God for any Prince, & to aduertise them as well as others of the danger and destruction
that hangeth ouer their heads) they be great vertues; and shined in Elias and E∣liseus very brightly: But if you aggrauate words to persuade men that Elias or Eliseus did depose princes as superiour iudges, or layd violent hands on them to pul them from their thrones; you make them Rebellious disturbers of states, which was farre from them: and not religious seruants to God, as in deede they were. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. Ilarions and conse∣quents vpon the former examples.By these examples of holy Scriptures we see: first, that annointed and law∣fully created Kings may be deposed: secondly, for what causes they were depriued: thirdly, that as in the creation and consecration of Kings▪ so also in their depriuation, God vsed the ministerie of Priests and Prophets, as either ordinarie or extraordinarie Iudges or executors of his wil towards them. Theo. Your examples haue beene throughly considered; and howsoeuer you correct and qualifie your conclusion, the precedents no way fitte your purpose. That annointed and lawfully created Kings may be chased from the gouern∣ment;The former examples inferre no iudiciall de∣position of Princes by Priests. All sauing one were either not lawfully created or not els depo∣sed. the example of Iehu will iustifie: if you adde these two prouisoes, that the warrant be special from Gods own mouth, & the fact be done by the Magistrate whom God hath authorized to take the sword; for so doth Iehues example re∣quire: the rest intend no such thing. The Princes which you name were either not deposed, or not lawfully created. Saul was presently reiected from Gods fauour and spirit, from the possession of the Kingdome hee was not, but only cutte off from the succession. Ieroboam was sorely threatned, and Vzziah sharply punished, but yet neither of them deposed. Achab was twise rebuked by Elias, but not depriued: And Athalia whom the hie-Priest in the young Kings name commaunded to bee slaine, vsurped, and was neuer lawfully created. The causes for which they were depriued, wee neede not dispute of, vn∣lesse you first shew that they were depriued.Athalia slaine for vsurping: Vzziah smittē for his pride: & Iorams re∣ligiō no worse than his fathers. 4. King 1.9. Verse. 22. Verse. 7. 3. Kings. 21. God vsed the ministerie of the Prophets to declare his will, but not their autho∣ritie to depose Princes. Athalia was slaine neither for Apo∣stasie, nor heresie, but for vsurping the Crowne against the right heire. Vzziahs actes were commended, but his pride detested by God. Ioram was of no worse religion than Achab his Father, and others before him, and after him, which yet were not deposed: But God reuenged on him, the whor∣domes, and witchcraftes of his mother Iesabel, which hee suffered, and the bloud of all his seruantes the Prophets, which hee spilt in the raigne both of Achab and Ioram. That cause the Prophet vttered to Iehu: and Iehu to Ioram when hee slew by Israel: And this plague vppon Achabs wife and house Elias threatned after the killing of Naboth. Phi. Was not Ioram an Idolater? Theo. Yeas, that encreased his sinne, but it was not the cause that he lost his kingdome. Your third obseruation halteth downe right, and doubleth so many times either, and or, that in effect you resolue nothing. You say God vsed the ministe∣rie of Priests and Prophets in the depriuation of Kings. He vsed their mouthes to foretell, and declare the plagues that he would send on Princes: and some∣times their hands to annoint such as he would haue succeede: But he vsed
them, neither as ordinarie, nor extraordinarie Iudges, nor executors to depose Princes. Messengers they were, to deliuer by worde of mouth that which God had determined, to such as did, or shoulde inherite the kingdome; other exe∣cution, or authoritie to depriue Princes they had none: And this is farre from that which you claime for the Pope: whome you make the superuisour of Princes, and an ordinarie Iudge to compell them and displace them if hee see cause. Phi. For so much as these Princes helde their dignities and Soueraigne authorities of God,The defence, cap. 5. and were bound to occupie and vse the same, with what forces soeuer they had, to the aduauncement of his Religion, and to the true worshippe and honour of their supreme Lord and Master: as also to the beneite and preserua∣tion of his people in fayth and feare of him: the Priestes and Prophetes (that then had the principall and direct charge of mens soules and Religion, and were in spi∣rituall matters superiours to their owne Princes) rightly opposed themselues in all such actions as tended to the dishonour of GOD, destruction of Religion, and to the notorious domage of the soules of them ouer whome they did raigne: and in the behalfe of GOD executed iustice vpon such, as contrarie to their obligation and first institution, abused their soueraigne power, to the destructi∣on of true religion and aduauncement of Idolatrie, Heresie, or such like abho∣mination. Theo. Neuer giue vs a reason why Princes may bee deposed by Priests,The Iesuites giue a reason why Priests may depose Princes be∣fore they proue the fact to be lawfull. and Prophets, so long as the fact it selfe is in doubt, & not yet proued to be law∣ful. That kings holde their soueraigne authorities of God, and are bound to vse the same to the aduauncement of his true worship and honour; as also to the preseruation of his people in the faith and feare of him; this is a point alwayes vrged by vs, and lately confessed by you before you were ware: for you were wont to tell vs that Princes might not meddle with spirituall things or causes: and now you pro∣fesse that Princes are bound to vse their authorities and forces whatsoeuer to the aduauncement of Gods religion, and to the true worship and honour of God and pre∣seruation of his people in the fayth and feare of him. This then is a sound and an e∣uident trueth alleaged by vs, and allowed by you. But when you grow from this to conclude, that if Princes vse not their swordes and forces as they shoulde and are bounde, Priestes may take their dignities and authorities from them: you put Iron feete to a golden head, and thinke the metals wil agree. But you bee owly, deceiued. Your consequent is as false, as your antecedent is true. That Princes shoulde vse their swordes for the seruice of GOD, is a cleare and vndoubted principle: but that Prophetes, Priests, or Popes may take their Scepters from them, if they vse them otherwise than they ought, this is a false presumption of yours, and not a consequent ei∣ther of your former examples, or your later excurrents, where you f∣rish about with many pretences, and prefaces to shew the reason of your wic∣ked assertion. Phi. Our conclusion is, that the Priests and Prophets rightly opposed them∣selues
in all such actions as tended to the dishonour of God, and destruction of religion, and in the behalfe of God executed iustice vpon such as contrarie to their obligation, and first institution abused their soueraigne power to the aduancement of Idolatrie, & heresie. Theo. What wordes you list to colour and cloake your conclusion with, wee care not.The question is not whe∣ther the pro∣phets might oppose them to reprooue wicked Kings, but whether they might by their pro∣pheticall vo∣cation depose them. The matter in question betwixt vs, is not, whether Prophetes might oppose themselues by way of reproofe, or do that which God commaunded them to the terror of Idolatrous Princes: which you call executing of iustice in Gods behalfe vpon such as abused their power. But in plaine termes whether euer any Priest or Prophet by vertue of their vocation as superiour Iudges, did vio∣lently withstand, or iudicially depose Idolatrous or hereticall Princes? You take vppon you to proue by holy Scripture they did: we say they did not. They reproued them and threatned them by special direction and message from God: they neuer deposed any. Onely God sent one of them to will Iehu to take the sword in hand, and as a lawfull magistrate nominated and elected by God him∣selfe, to take vengeance on Achabs house and race. Whence it will not follow that other Priests and Prophets by their ordinarie calling might do the like, or giue Crownes and kingdomes as they sawe cause. This was and is specially reserued vnto God.Til God spake no Priest may depose king∣domes. When hee speaketh the worde, Princes shall loose not only Scepter and State, but life and soule: and vntill hee speake, neither Apostles, nor Prophets, Priests, nor Popes, may presume to dispose kingdomes, or name successours to the Crownes of earthly Princes. Phi. The defence cap. 5.In these cases, and all other doubtes and differences betwixt one man and an other, or betwixt Prince and people; that Priestes and namely the high Priest shoulde bee the Arbiter and Iudge, & the interpreter of Gods wil towards his people; is most consonant both to nature, reason, the vse of all nations, and to the expresse Scriptures. Deut. 17.For in Gods sacred Law thus we read: Si difficile & ambiguum apud te iudicium esse prospexeris inter sanguinem & sanguinem, causam & causam, lepram & non le∣pram &c.The subiectiō of al men to the iudgemēt of Priests. If thou foresee the iudgement to be hard and ambiguous, betwixt bloud and bloud, cause and cause, leprosie or no leprosie; and find varietie of sentences among the iudges at home: rise and goe vp to the place, which the Lorde thy God shall chuse, and thou shalt come to the Priests of Leuies stocke, and to the iudge that shall be for the time; thou shalt aske of them, & they will iudge according to the trueth of iudgement: and thou shalt doe whatsoeuer they say that haue the rule of the place which God shall chuse, and shall teache thee according to his lawe: thou shalt not decline neither to the right hand nor left. And if any shall bee so proude as not to obey the commandement of the Priest that shall for that time minister vnto the Lord thy God, by the sentence of the iudge let that man die; and so thou shalt re∣moue euil from Israel: and al the people hearing shall feare and take heede, that hereafter they waxe not proude. Thus farre in the holy text generally with out all exception: subiecting in cases of such doubtes as are recited, all degrees of faithfull men, no lesse kinges than others, to the Priests resolution.
Theo. What will you doe to help your cause, that will thus both corrupt & wrest the Scriptures to make them serue your fansies? You wilfully peruert the words of the holy Ghost to bring them to your beck: and as if that were not corruption enough, you wrench & force the sense of the Scripture against reasō, against trueth, against the whole course of the Iewes common wealth, & against the very partes, and branches of the text it selfe. Phi. First what corruption haue wee committed in the wordes?This place of Scripture is corrupted by the Papists. Deut. 17. Theo. That where the wordes are, If any through pride will not obay the com∣maundement of the Priest, which shall for the time minister vnto the Lord thy God, or (disobay) the Decree of the Iudge, that man shall die: you change them and say, If any man will not obay the commaundement of the Priest by the Decree of the Iudge, that man shall die. Phi. So the latine is, Ex decreto udicis morietur homo ille, By the decree of the Iudge shal that man die. Theo. But the Greeke and Hebrue are cleane against it. The words of the Septua∣gint are The Greeke and Hebrew, are against the Latine. Deut. 17. , The man whosoeuer he be, that shal in pride not obay the Priest, (that is appointed to minister vnto ye name of ye Lord:) or (els shal not obay) the iudge which shalbe in those daies, that man shal die, & thou shalt take the euil one from Israel. The Hebrew is answerable to the Greeke, The man that shal doe in pride, Lebilthi shemóahh el-haccohèn hahhomèd Lesháreth shàm eth-Iehouà elohéca, ò el-hasshophèt: umeth haïsh hahù, not to heare the Priest or the Iudge, that man shall die. And so did Cyprian Lib. 1. epist. 3.8.11. lib. 3. epist. 9. lib. 4. epist. 9. repete this text, Et homo quicunque fecerit in superbia, vt non exaudiat Sacerdotem aut Iudicem, quicunque fuerit in diebus illis, morietur homo ille, & omnis populus cum audierit, timebit. And the man, whosoeuer shall in pride not heare the Priest OR THE IVDGE, which shal be in those dayes, that man shal die, and al the people when they heare of it, shall feare. Phi. But S. Hierom read it otherwise, as you see by his translation. Theo. You haue corrupted the translation which you call S. Hieroms,The Latine text of the Bible depra∣ued. and now you would bolster out your forgeries with his name: Howbeit knowe you that the very same translatiō not long since was not Ex decreto iudicis, but & decreto iu∣dicis: He that obeyeth not the cōmandement of the Priest,That reading is yet found in sixe writ∣ten Bibles in the new Col∣lege in Ox∣ford. Nicol. de Lyrae in cap. 17. Deut cronomij. and the decree of the iudge, that man shall die. This was the text of the Bible which you cal S. Hierome not much more than 200 yeres since, when Nicolaus de Lyra & your ordinarie Glosse did cōment vpon it. And so they read to this day as also many written copies that I haue seene. Hereupon Lyra saith, In these & such cases they must haue recourse to the superiour Iudges, that is to the high Priest, and the Iudge of the people. And sometimes it fell out that both offices did concurre in one person, as in Heli who was both Iudge and high-Priest: but commonly both the Persons were distinct and the offices. And hence grew the custome, from inferiour ecclesiastical Iudges to appeale to the High-Priest, and from inferiour Princes & secular Iudges to appeale
to the King or Emperour. You haue turned & into ex, and not only de∣barred the Prince of all his right, but subiected him to the Priest In al doubts and differences betwixt Prince and people, euen to the losse of his Crowne if the Priest say the word.The commō wealth of the Iewes and the Scriptures themselues impugne the Iesuites sense of that place. Exod. 18. Inferiour iudges (which afterward heard smaller matters in the gates of ech Citie,) first apointed by the counsel of Iethro. Numbers. 11. Phi. We follow the latine text as wee found it. Theo. You might easi∣ly follow that which your selues had framed to your liking, but the order of the Iewes common wealth and the circumstances of the text it selfe admitte no such meaning, as you make of it. For it is more than euident, and testified not in a few places of the scriptures, that al causes neither were, nor might bee referred to the Priest. Moses at the counsell of Iethro chose men of courage out of all Israel & made them heads ouer the people, Rulers ouer thousands, Rulers ouer hun∣dreds, Rulers ouer fifties, Rulers ouer tens. And they iudged the people at all seasons, but brought the hard causes vnto Moses: for they iudged al small (or easie) matters themselues. And though Moses by them was eased of all sauing hard and importing causes, yet finding that burden too heauie for one man alone, he complained vnto God and saide, I am not able to beare all this people alone, for it is too heauie for me. To whom God made answere, Ga∣ther me seuentie men of the Elders of Israel, and bring them vnto the Ta∣bernacle of the Congregation, and I will come downe, and talke with them there, and take off the spirit that is vpon thee and put it vpon them, and they shal beare the burden of the people with thee: so thou shalt not beare it alone.The same or∣der of inferi∣our and supe∣riour iudges established by Gods law for euer a∣mong the Iewes. Deut. 16. This distinction of inferiour and superiour iudges God after by his law established in that common wealth for euer. In the next chapter before this which you alledge, order is taken for inferiour iudge in euery Citie throughout the Land. Iudges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates (that is in al thy Cities) which the Lord thy God giueth thee through∣out thy Tribes, and they shall iudge the people with righteous Iudge∣ment. In this Chapter and these very wordes which here you cite, Superiour iudges are prescribed,Deut. 17. The superiour iudgement consisted both of priests to direct, and magistrates to correct. The chiefe magistrates before kings were ordained in Israel nuer called Iudges. to whom harder causes and matters of greater difficultie were to be referred. And so the wordes precisely sound. If there fall out an hard matter for thee to iudge, betwene blood and blood, strife and strife, sore and sore, that be matters of iudgement in thy gates, thou shalt rise and go vp to the place which the Lord thy God shall chose there (in the land of promise.) And goe to the Priests of Leui, and to the Iudge which shall be in those dayes, and aske them, and they shall shew thee the matter of iudge∣ment. The iudge of which he speaketh was ye tēporal Magistrate, for so the co∣pulatiue leadeth vs, and by that name were the chiefe Rulers of Gods People called, before Kings were ordayned as the Booke of Iudges witnesseth; neither was the iudge subiect to the Priest, but had his charge besides and aboue the Priest, which was to see the law of God exactly kept and obserued in all points
of all men,This Court was after assistant and subiect to the King. Iehosaphat renued these two formes of iudgement. 2. Chro. 19. The King cō∣manded thē, ergo they were not to com∣mand him. and to take vengeance on the breaker of any part thereof, when as yet there were no kinges, and after the creation of kinges both Priest and Iudge were subiect to the king. This fourme of regiment by lower and higher Iudges and those both eccle∣siasticall and cyuill, king Iehosaphat renewed after he returned safe from the battell wherein Achab was slaine. For hee set Iudges in the Lande in all the fensed Cities of Iudah, Citie by Citie. Also in Ierusalem hee appointed of the Leuites and of the Priestes and of the heades of the houses of Israel for the iudgement of the Lorde and for matters of doubt, and they dwelt at Hierusalem. And hee commaunded them saying, thus shall yee doe in the feare of the Lorde, in trueth, and in a perfect heart euery cause that shall come before you from your brethren remayning in their Cities, be∣tweene blood and blood, betweene Lawe and precept, statutes and iudge∣ments, you shall instruct them therein, and they shall not trespasse against the Lorde. And beholde Amariah the Priest (shall bee) chiefe ouer you in euery matter of the Lordes;All matters were not re∣ferred to the priest, and the kings matters are namely excepted frō them. and Zebadiah the captaine of the house of Iudah (shall bee chiefe ouer you) in euery matter of the kinges, and the Leuites shalbee Rulers (or ouerseers) in your presence (or vnder you.) Ieho∣saphat put that in execution which GOD prescribed by Moses for the de∣bating and determining of greater and weightier causes among the chil∣dren of Israel placing a Councell of Priestes, and secular Magistrates at Hierusalem to consider of those doubtes of the Lawe, and offences against GOD and the king, which passed the reache of inferiour Iudges in eue∣ry Citie. Marke then howe many errors you haue committed in alleaging this one place.How the Iesu∣ites abuse the sense of this place in Deut▪ The King not subiect to their Court. The gouernement which God setled in their common wealth to supply the want of kinges, the defence might both ouer-rule kinges and depose kinges, and yet when this was ordained, there was no king created, nor intended in Israel, much lesse included, or subiected to this consistorie. A∣gaine where obedience in these wordes is commaunded as well towardes the ciuil magistrate as towards the Priest,The magi∣strate cleane stroken out by the Iesuites, & al his interest conueighed to the Priest. you strike out the magistrate cleane, and bring both Prince and people in subiection to the Priest in things and cau∣ses that be not spiritual, but temporal. For the deposing of Princes is a meere temporal act, and you haue lesse to doe with Princes Crownes, than with pri∣uate mens inheritances which yet the priest may not dispose. Thirdly the mat∣ters which belonged to them, and the iudgements which they should giue; were precisely limited to the lawe of God: in other thinges they might not pre∣sume. Nowe resisting,This Court limited to the law of God & that speaketh no∣thing of de∣posing Prin∣ces. and deposing of Princes bee things cleane besides the Lawe which Moses deliuered, and therefore not determinable by those that sate to iudge according to that Law. Fourthly what question can this bee betweene the Prince and the people whether the Magistrate shalbee deposed since GOD hath expressely commaunded the people to bee subiect to the sworde and not to resist: against the which precept no earthly Court
may deliberate, much lesse determine to breake his lawe, or licence the people to frustrate his heauenly wil. It is one thing to disburden the cōscience from obey∣ing the euill that a Prince commaundeth, which a Priest may doe: and an other thing to take the Princes sworde out of his hand for abusing his authori∣tie, which the Priest may not doe.Neuer high priest deposed Kings, but Kings haue deposed high Priests. 3. Kings. 2. Adoniahs right to the Crowne was better than Salomons, by the hie priests iudgement: and yet the king remoued the hie Priest frō his office and put the competitor to death. Neuer King of Israell or Iudah remo∣ued from the Crown by any Priest: & yet the causes then as vrgēt as now. How can you excuse the hie Priests of Iuda for not doing their dutie: if by Gods law they had beene the Princes supe∣riours? The Priests & Prophets lost their liues for reprouing Princes: and more it could not cost to de∣pose them. Lastly you force the whole text against the manifest experience of those times. For it is euident that kinges commaunded and displaced high Priestes: but that euer high Priest iudicially displaced a Prince, you shall neuer shewe. Omitte Abimelech whom Saul slewe for fauou∣ring Dauid, and Zachariah whom king Ioash commaunded to bee stoned, not remembring the kindnes of Ioida his father, that saued him aliue, and set him in his kingdome: Did not Salomon cast out Abiathar from being (high) Priest, because hee tooke part with Adoniah his elder brother? Where by your conclusion Salomon shoulde haue beene deposed because the high Priest thought Adoniahs right to the Crowne to bee better than Salo∣mons. Wee shewe you where the Prince remoued the Priest from his honour and primacie, but you can not shewe vs that euer Priest remooued Prince in that Common wealth from his royal dignitie, and yet was there then as vr∣gent, and as euident cause to do it, as you can nowe, or doe pretend. For all the kings of Israel were open Idolaters, Iehu himselfe not excepted, and yet not one of them deposed by Priest, or Prophet, so long as their kingdome stoode, which was 253. yeeres. The greater part of the kinges of Iudah, euen foure∣teene of them were likewise plaine Idolaters: as Salomon, Roboam, Abi∣am, Ioram, Ahaziah, Ioash, Amazias, Ahaz, Manasses, Amon, Ioachaz, Eli∣akim, Ioacim, Zedechias: and not a Priest, or Prophete in Iudah so much as offered to displace, or resist one of them. If by Gods Lawe, as you sup∣pose, the Priestes were superiour Iudges to punish such offences euen in prin∣ces, howe can you excuse the high Priest, and the rest to whom that charge was committed for not executing that power which God gaue them vpon these wic∣ked and Idolatrous Princes? Phi. The kinges were too mightie for them to remoue. Theo. That happilie might hinder the effect, but not the attempt of their iudgement. We doe not obiect that they were vnable, but that they neuer made the onset or offer to doe it. Phi. The crueltie of those kinges caused them to forbeare. Theo. That is not true. Many Priests and Prophetes gaue their liues for reproouing them: and more it coulde not cost to depose them. Againe, Manasses was caried captiue out of his Realme in the midst of his furious I∣dolatrie: and yet in his absence and miserie no man stirred against him, but his kingdome was reserued for him till hee was released out of prison, and sent backe from Babylon. It was therefore not for feare of death, but for re∣gard of duetie that the zealous Priests and Prophetes submitted their per∣sons to those wicked Princes, whose Idolatrie they reproued with the losse of their liues.
Phi. This codition was afterwarde to bee imlied in the receiuing of any king ouer the people of God and true beleeuers for euer:The Defence cap. 5. A condition implied in the creation of al Princes. videlicet that they should not re∣duce their people by force or otherwise from the faith of their forefathers, and the reli∣gion and holy ceremonies thereof, receiued at the hands of Gods Priests and none other: Insinuating, that obseuing these precepts and conditions, hee and his sonne after him might long reigne: Otherwise, as by the practise of their deposition in the bookes and tyme of the kinges it afterward ppeareth (whereof we haue set downe some examples before) the Prophets and Pristes that annointed them, of no other condition but to keepe and maintaine the honour of God and his worshippe, depriued them againe, when they brake with their Lorde, and fell to straunge Gods, and forced their people to doe the like. Theo. God would haue the more care to be taken in choosing a king,God required many things in a Prince, the breach of which is not deposition. Deut. 17. be∣cause it was too late to refuse him when he was once chosen: But I trust your selfe will not say that all those conditions which God requireth in a king, are forfeitures of his Crowne if he transgresse in any of them. GOD in expresse woordes and in the very same place, chargeth that the king shall not haue many wiues, nor many horses, nor abundaunce of golde, nor siluer, nor lift his heart vp aboue his brethren; and thinke you that if a king did offend in any of these, he was to bee deposed? The precept which your selfe alleage doth not onely concerne the publike sufferance of true religion, but the perfect ob∣seruance of euery point that was contained in the lawe of God.Deut. 17. Hee shall read in the booke of the Lawe all the dayes of his life, that hee may learne to feare the Lorde his God, and to obserue all the woordes of this Lawe and these statutes to doe them. And trowe you the breach of any point of Gods Lawe was depriuation to the king? You must bee voyde of all sense if you de∣fend these thinges, and yet these bee conditions, or as you delight to call them, couenants which God exacteth in him that shall bee king ouer his elect and pe∣culiar people. The knitting vppe of your matter is like the rest of your discourse. The Prophetes and Priestes (you say) that annointed them,Princes brake couenants with God, and yet were not deposed. of no other coditi∣on but to keepe and maintaine the honour of God, and his true worshippe, depri∣ued them againe when they brake with their Lorde and fell to straunge Gods, and forced their people to doe the like. It is vtterly vntrue that euer Priest or Prophete deposed Prince in the common wealthes of Israel, or Iu∣dah. There were, as the Scripture testifieth, of the kinges of Israel nine∣teene, and fourteene of the kinges of Iuda that brake with their Lorde, and sell to straunge Gods, and forced their people to doe the like. Shewe that one of them was depriued by any Priest, or Prophete, and take the whole: if you can not,The defence, cap. 5. The authori∣ty of Priest∣hood in the new Testa∣ment. leaue false supposing, and vaine craking, and tell on your tale. Phi. And this it was in the old law. But now in the new Testament and in the time of Christs spirituall kingdome in the Church, Priests haue much more soueraigne au∣thoritie, and Princes farre more strict charge, to obay, loue and cherish the Church.
Theo. What was in the olde Lawe you haue sayd and wee haue seene: and ex∣cept I bee deceiued you found there very litle for your purpose: In the newe Testament I can assure you, you will find lesse. Where you say that Priests now in the Church,Lesse in the newe testa∣ment for the deposition of Princes than in the old. haue much more soueraigne authoritie than Priests had in the law of Moses: the comparing of their authorities is very superfluous. Haue they more or lesse, it is nothing to this question; Authoritie to depose Princes they neither then had, nor nowe haue, which is it that you seeke for. In what sort Princes are bound to loue, cherish, and obey the Church, was declared before, and neede not nowe bee repeated: But the Church is neither charged nor licen∣ced by Christ to take Princes Crownes from them. Subiection is rather enioyned her in earthly thinges vnto Princes, which can not stand with your thrusting them from their thrones, vnlesse you take rebellion to be subiection, which were very strange. And depriuing them of their right, is worse than re∣belling against thē to defend your right, which yet is not tolerable. For he that Rom. 13. The defence, cap. 5. Psal. 2. Ieremi. 1. Mat. 16.resisteth them, shall receiue iudgement. Phi. In the Church without fayle is the supereminent power of Christes Priest∣hoode, who with his Iron rodde bruseth the pride of Princes, that rebell against his Spouse and kingdome in earth, like a potters poshard: and hath right in his Church o∣uer all kingdomes, to plant and plucke vp, to buyld and destroy, afore whom al kings shall fall downe, and all Nations do him seruice. Theo. That the Sonne of God will bruse the pride of those Princes with an Iron rodde which rebell against his Spouse and kingdome in earth,The superemi¦nent power of Christs priest∣hoode is no∣thing to the Pope. like a potters shard, and that he hath right both within (and without) his Church ouer all kingdomes, to plant and plucke vp, to buyld and destroy, afore whom all kings on earth (and Angels in heauen) shall fall downe, and doe him seruice: these thinges are vndoubted with vs, and brought in by you but onely for a windlace to make the reader cast his eyes on Christ and his kingdome, while you closely conuey the Princes Scep∣ter vnder the Popes feete. Accursed bee hee that doeth not confesse the supere∣minent power which the Sonne of God hath ouer all kingdomes, ouer all crea∣tures, ouer the States and liues, bodies and soules of all men. Wil you thence inferre the Pope hath the like? In sooth masters you must make hard shift be∣fore these reasons will bee good. Phi. Christs Priestly prerogatiue, passing his owne regall dignitie (much more ex∣celling all other humane power of the worlde) in most ample and exact termes is cō∣municated to the chiefe Priest and Pastor of our soules,The defence, cap. 5. Mat. 18. and secondarily to the rest of the gouernours of the Church; in other manner of clauses than any earthly Prin∣ces can shewe for their pretensed spirituall regiment. Fie on that secular pride & wil∣full blind heresie, so repugning against Gods expresse ordinaunce; and yet is of wic∣ked Sect-masters and flatterers vpholden to the eternall calamitie of themselues, and of millions of others. Theo. This is stale Rhetorike to come with an outcrie, when you should make your conclusion. Conclude first and rayle after: otherwise you shewe your selues to trust more to the slippernes of your tongues than to the sound∣nes
of your cause. Phi. Our illation is euident. Christ as a Priest bruseth the pride of Princes with his Iron rodde, and hath right ouer all kingdomes to plant and plucke vppe, buyld and destroy. But Christs Priestly prerogatiue in most ample and exact termes is com∣municated to the chiefe Priest and Pastor of our soules. The chiefe Pastor there∣fore hath the like right ouer all kingdomes to plant, plucke vp, buyld, and de∣stroy. Theo. The power which you mention in your first proposition, is at∣tributed to Christ not as a Priest, but as a king. The wordes of the Psalme are very plaine to that end.Psal. 2. I haue set my king vpon my holy hill of Sion. Aske of mee and I will giue thee the heathen for thine inheritaunce, and the endes of the earth for a possession to thee. Thou shalt crush them with a scepter of Iron, and breake them in pieces like a potters vessell. S. Iohn ap∣plieth the same place to the royal and not to the Priestly power of Christ.Reuel. 19. I saw the heauen open, and beholde a white horse, and hee that sate vpon him was called faithful and true, and hee iudgeth and fighteth in righteousnes. On his head were many Crownes, and out of his mouth went a sharpe sword, that with it he should smite the heathen, and hee shal rule them with a rod of Iron.Christ bru∣seth his eni∣mies as a king & not as a Priest. And hee hath on his garment and on his thigh a name writ∣ten, the King of Kings and Lord of Lordes. Howe thinke you? His horse, his Crowne, his robe, his traine, his sworde, his stile described in this place, expresse they his Priestly or Princely prerogatiue? As a Priest hee sacrificed himselfe on the crosse▪ and had his owne blood shed, for the remission of sinnes: As a King, hee subdueth his enemies and maketh them like dust vn∣der his feete, bee they Princes or others. Your Maior is therefore false, that to bruse kings with an Iron rod, and to breake them in pieces like a potters shard is a priuilege of Christs Priesthoode and not of his Princehoode. Your Minor, that Christs Priestly prerogatiue is communicated in most ample & exact termes to the chiefe Priest and Pastor of the Church, hath farre lesse trueth in it than your Maior. For al the prerogatiue of Christs Priesthood is not com∣municated to any other.Hebr. 7. Such an high Priest, saith S. Paul, it became vs to haue, which shoulde be, holy, vndefiled separated from sinners, made higher than the heauens: Hebr. 9. who in the end of the world appeared once to put away sinne by the offering vp of himselfe, and after that Hebr. 10. one sacrifice for sinne is set down for euer at the right hand of God, hauing Hebr. 9. obtained eternal redēp∣tion (for vs) and being Hebr. 7. All Christes dignitie may not be impar∣ted to the Pope. able perfectly to saue them that come to God by him, seeing he euer lyueth to make intercession for them. These and many such prerogatiues of his Priesthood I hope you will not empart to the Pope, lest wee crie, fie on your blasphemous hearts and mouthes, which set the man of sinne equall with the sonne of God. If you restraine your Minor by confessing that not all, but some of the prerogatiues of Christes Priesthoode are com∣municated to others; then your conclusion hath no force, both your premisses being meere particulars. For though Christ gaue some part of his power & ho∣nour to his Apostles; yet this hee gaue not, and therefore his gift to them
can doe you no good, vnlesse you prooue that hee gaue them this prerogatiue a∣mongst the rest which he bestowed on them. Phi. Mat. 16.Hee sayd to Peter and his successours; Whatsoeuer thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heauen, and whatsoeuer thou losest in earth shall bee loosed in heauen: Can you require a more ample graunt? Theo. Peter and the rest were to bind and lose the sinnes and soules of men by the woord and sa∣craments, not the Scepters and swords of Princes. And so Christ himselfe ex∣poundeth his graunt vnto them.Iohn. 20. Whose sinnes soeuer you remit, they are re∣mitted vnto them: and whose sinnes soeuer yee retaine, they are retayned. And in this place you leaue out the first part of the graunt which should direct the whole.Mat. 16. I will giue thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, not of the kingdomes on earth. Bernard though he were but of late yeeres, yet was he not afraid to tel Pope Eugenius:De considerat. ad Eugen. lib. 2. ergo in criminibus, non in possessionibus potestas vestra, quoniam propter illa & non propter has accepistis claues regni caelorum. Your power concerneth sinnes and not possessions, because yee receiued the keyes of the kingdome of heauen for those thinges, and not for these. And so Theophilact,Theophilact. in 16. cap. Matth. Vnderstand the keyes which bind and lose, to bee the pardo∣ning, or punishing of sinnes. Ambros. de poe∣nitēt. li. 1. ca. 2. August. de doc∣trina christiana lib. 1. cap. 18.And so S. Ambrose: The right of the holy Ghost consisteth in bynding and losing of sinnes. As also Saint Augustine, The keyes (Christ) gaue to his Church, that what she loosed in earth, should be loosed in heauen: and what she did bind in earth, shoulde bee bound in heauen: to witte, that whosoeuer would not beleeue his sinnes might bee forgiuen in the Church, should not haue them forgiuen: and whosoeuer would beleeue it and depart from his sinnes, by amending his life in the bosome of the same Church, shoulde by that faith and conuersion be healed. And neuer writer since Christs time did euer extend the power of the keyes vnto any thing, saue vnto the forgiuing and retayning of sinnes. Phi. No more doe wee: this onely we adde, that when Princes are bounde in earth for their sinnes, they loose that interest which they had in their king∣domes. Theo. That position you vndertooke to proue by the holy Scriptures, but as yet you be wide: you still suppose it, and doe not proue it. Phi. The defence. cap. 5. Iohn. 21. Mat. 16.Now (in the newe Testament) all Christes sheepe, without exception, bee they Princes, be they poore, (if they be Christian men) are put to Peters feeding & go∣uernement. Now the keyes of heauen be deliuered to Christs Vicar in earth; to let in, to locke out; to bind, to loose; to punish, to pardon. Now we be cōmanded euery one, (be we kings,Hebr. 13. 1. Cor. 4.5. 2. Iohn. be we Caesars) to obey our Prelats and Pastors, and to bee subiect to them, as to those that must make accompt to God for our soules: wherein what Christian Prince may except himselfe? Theo. You role from text to text abusing the woordes and peruerting the sense as you goe; and when all is saide you bee euen as neere as you were at first before you began. For what if al these places do concerne Princes, as well as others: wil you thence inferre, that princes may be deposed? Then these must
be your argumentes.Out of these places none other argu∣ments can be made than these. Princes must bee taught, ergo Princes may bee depo∣sed. Prietes may exclude them from the kingdom of heauen: ergo likewise from their kingdomes on earth. Princes must obey sounde doctrine comming from their Pastours mouthes; ergo if they refuse, they may be deposed, Sure∣ly such reasons set not them besides their seates, but you rather besides your wittes; for what apparance of trueth haue these ridiculous and impious moc∣keries? Feede my sheepe,Iohn. 21. that is, depose Princes. I will giue thee the keyes of the kingdom of heauen, that is, I will giue thee the thrones of earth∣ly kinges.Mat. 16. Be aduised by your leaders, and yeeld (to their good perswasions,) for they watch ouer your soules:Heb. 13, that is, obey the Pope when he thrusteth you from your goods, landes and liues. Had you but one dramme of shame or sense in you, you woulde neuer sende vs such sottish and vnsauorie sequeles. Phi. They be of your framing, we sent them not. Theo. We annexe the conclusion, which you must, and would infer to the places which you alleadge: and in so doing we can not abuse you. Out of the 21. of S. Iohn what woulde you cite but this charge to Peter, feed my sheepe? In the 16. of S. Matthew; what finde you there but the promise of our Sauiour, I wil giue thee the keies of the kingdom of heauē: whatsoeuer thou bindest (or losest) in earth, shalbe bound (and losed) in heauen? All the wordes which the 13. to the Hebrewes hath for your purpose, are  y• is be perswaded (by their words) and giue place to their admonitions, which watch ouer your soules. Nowe what your conclusion is and must be, neither can any man doubt, nor do your selues dissemble. For the fift chapter of your immodest and vntrue defence of English Catholikes as you call them, proposeth & purposely handleth the de∣priuation of Princes for heresie, and falling from the faith. So that helpe the matter how you can with your glozes and phrases: these be your antecedēts, and this is your consequent. Phi. Well, if Peter must feede Princes, why may not Peter depose Prin∣ces?Pastours may feede, but not depriue. Theo. Taking their Crownes from them, is not preaching the Gospell vnto them, which Christ ment by feeding. Phi. But Peter may correct them as well as feede them, and depriuation is but correction. Theo. Any Pastor may reproue them, & if they withstand the trueth, that bindeth them in earth & shutteth heauen against them. But other correction on the goodes, landes or bodies of priuate men preachers may not exercise, much lesse intermeddle with the Seates and Scepters of Princes. Phi. Be we kinges, be we Caesars, we are commaunded to obey our Prelates and Pa∣stours, and to be subiect to them. Theo. Princes, and all other christians must be reuerent and obedient to the word and Sacramentes which God hath put in the mouthes, and handes of his messengers: other subiection to Prelates, or Pastors is none due. Phi. And if they refuse to be subiect to the word or Sacra∣mentes, shall not Pastors punish them, though they be Princes?Pastors may threaten, but God must pu∣nish Princes. Theo. Let them sinke in their sinnes, and leaue them to God; that is punishment enough. Phi. Shal they goe no farther? Theo. Externall, or corporall meanes by
losse of life, landes, or goodes, God hath not allowed any Pastour to compell, or punish his sheepe withall. Phi. Then may Princes freely despise both the word and the Preacher. Theo. If you call that freedome,Heb. 10. to fall into the handes of the liuing God, which S. Paul saith is a fearefull thing. Mat. 16. Whosoeuer shall not receiue you, nor heare your wordes, when you depart out of that house, or that citie, shake off the dust of your feete. Truely I say vnto you it shall bee easier for them of the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of iudgement,God is the re∣uenger of such as contemne his word. than for that citie. Is not this reuenge sufficient for Princes that turne from the truth, vnlesse you also must be fingering of their crownes, and treadding on their necks? Phi. That would terrifie them more, than the threatning of helfire. Theo. It may be that contenteth your appetites better, but God hath reserued the pu∣nishment of Princes to himselfe, and not assigned it ouer vnto you. Howbeit why doe you wander thus from the question? You should proue by the worde of God that Princes may be deposed. Why then doe you linger and make so many profers before you come to your purpose? Phi. Will you haue a plaine proofe out of the new Testament that Princes may be deposed?The defence, cap. 5. Ad Tit. 3. Theo. That is it wee looked for all this while. Phi. Pa∣stours haue full authoritie to forbid vs the companie of heretikes, blasphemers and idolaters, and such like: and not so much as to salute them, much more not to obey them. Theo. Is this your best discretion? We must not be companions with idolaters,No companie with heretiks and idolaters. ergo we must not be subiects to Princes? Phi. If they be conuicted of heresie or idolatrie. Theo. Put you no difference betwixt familiars and sub∣iectes. Phi. If we may not be familiar with them, much lesse subiect vnder them. Theo. Are you not low drawen, when you come with such dregges? Phi. Iest not at it, but answere it. Theo. Be earnest in any case. It is a very profound and substantiall reason. Phi. Substantial or superficial it skilleth not: refel it, or receiue it. Theo. Marke the strength of your argument. Needlesse companie with ido∣latrous & wicked persons is prohibited: ergo the necessarie subiection to Prin∣ces which God commandeth,Companie not duetie prohibited by S. Paul. may be refused. Phi. We say not needelesse com∣panie, but all companie. Theo. S. Paul by that worde excludeth not charity, much lesse duetie: but barreth only that familiaritie, which may be relinqui∣shed without breach of either. Phi. That is your paraphrase, not S. Pauls. Theo. Weigh the wordes of S. Paul better, and your selfe will bee of the same minde with me. Thus he saith, I wrote vnto you by letters, that ye should not keepe com∣panie with fornicatours: and (I ment) not simplie with the fornica∣tours of this worlde, or with the couetous, or with extorsioners, or with idolatours; for then must you goe out of the world.1. Cor. 5. But now haue I written to you that you shoulde not bee companions (with such.) If anie man that is called a brother be a Whoore-master, or couetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extorter: eate not with such an one.
To eate with a man, is familiaritie: that may be forborne without contempt of Christian Charitie, or dutie: and that the Apostle willeth them to refraine, tea∣ching the Thessalonians to what end, and in what sort he would haue it doone: If any man obay not our sayings,2. Thes. 3. note him by a letter, and haue no com∣panie with him, that he may be ashamed: yet count him not as an enimie, but admonish him as a brother. When as yet there were no Christian ma∣gistates to keepe men by feare from offending, S. Paul chargeth the Christians to shew their zeale in shunning the companie of vnruly persons at meate, and other familiar meetinges; thereby the rather to make them ashamed, and to reduce them to Christian and comly behauiour. Which precept was general for all disorders. We commaund you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ,2. Thes. 3. that you withdraw your selues frō euery brother that walketh inordinately, & not after the institution which you receiued of vs. Phi. For smaller offences this might be,Tit. 3. but for heresie S. Paul saith, A man that is an hertike after the first and second admonition auoide. And so doth S. Iohn.2. Iohn. 10. If any man come to you and bring not this doctrine, re∣ceiue him not into your house, nor say God saue you, vnto him. If we may not so much as salute them, doe you thinke we may serue them, or obey them? Theo Were you in debt to an heretike,Ech man must haue his due, whether he be Turk, heretike or Infidel. would you not pay him his own, be∣cause you must not salute him? Phi. Debt is dew whether he be Turke, Infi∣del, or heretike; & therefore reason he haue his owne, but I must not do that which I neede not. Theo. And whether thinke you the truer debt that which groweth by our act and consent, or that which is imposed vppon vs by the will and commaundement of God? As when S. Paul saith,Rom. 13. Owe nothing to any man: but giue to all men their due: Do you not think this as good debt as if it were in coyne? Phi. If it be their due. Theo. We owe it not if it be not due: but if it be, must we not render that which is due to all men, be they Turks, in∣fidels and heretikes? Phi. To heretiks nothing is due.Seruauntes by gods law may not forsake their masters for heresie. Cod. lib. 1. tit. 5. de haeret. § Man. in fin. Theo. Doth not the seruant owe faithful dili∣gence to his master, notwithstanding his master be an infidel or an heretik? Phi. If the master become an heretik, the seruant is ipso facto made free. Theo. By whose law? Gods or mans? Phi. By the ciuill lawes of auncient Emperours. Theo. But before those lawes were made by Princes, might seruants by Gods law refuse their masters for idolatry or heresie? Phi. For idolatrie he might not, whatsoeuer for heresie. The. If God wil haue christiā seruāts Colos. 3. obediēt & subiect to their masters in al things & Tit. 2. to please thē though they be infidels & enimies to the faith;The wife may not forsake her husband for idolatrie or heresie. why not likewise to them that are deceiued in some points of faith? The like we aske of man and wife. Might the husband forsake his wife, or the woman her husband for these causes? Phi. For infidelitie they might. Theo. And what for heresie? Ph. The case is not ruled. Theo. Yeas that it is. Our Sauiour forbiddeth all men to put awaie their wiues except it bee for Mat. 5. & 19. adulte∣rie. Now adulterie is not heresie. And this was Pope Caelestinus his errour which Innocentius the 3. Decretal. lib. 4. de diuortiis ¶ quanto. cōdemneth. Therfore the case is ruled both by Gods
Law, and by your own Decretals. Phi. They may not bee diuorced. Theo. Then must she continue still his wife, and is by Gods lawe bounde to 1. Peter 3. Tit. 2. Ephes. 5. bee subiect vnto him, and to loue him, though he be an heretike, or an infidel. And so are the children bound to Mark▪ 7. cherish Ephes. 6. honor and Colos. 3. obey their Parentes by the Lawe of God, notwithstanding they be Ethnikes, or aliens from the faith▪ And therefore these prohibitions: 1. Cor. 5. Eate not with them, 2. Thes. 3. keepe them not compa∣nie, 2. Iohn. 10. salute them not, discharge not seruants, children, nor wiues for yeelding that duetie to their masters, parentes and husbandes which God hath com∣maunded, but cut off onely that familiar and friendly greeting, saluting & con∣uersing, which amongest brethren is requisite, but to wicked and vngodly per∣sons may without sinne be denied. Phi. What then is your answere? Theo. What S. Paul and S. Iohn prohibite.S. Paul forbiddeth volunta∣rie companie, not necessarie duetie: S. Iohn those familar and friendly sa∣lutations which argue good liking and fauour to the parties, and may bee for∣borne, not that publike subiection to Magistrats which God hath inioyned vs, whether we will or no. Phi. Ought we to flatter Princes, if they be heretik? Theo. We may flatter no man in that which is euill, yet must we giue euill mē that which God hath allowed them. The places which you bring, barre no kinde of duetie prescribed by the law of God, neither of seruauntes to their ma∣sters nor of children to their parentes,Least of all may the sub∣iect forsake his Prince, though he bee an idolater or an heretike. Rom. 13. nor of wiues to their husbandes, though their masters, parentes, and husbands be heretikes: much lesse doe they prohi∣bite submission to Princes, which God exacteth before these domestical duties; and commaundeth all men, Apostles and Bishops not excepted, to giue feare, honour, subiection and tribute, to Princes, as their due; when Princes as yet were pernicious idolaters, and barbarous persecutors of the faith & faith∣full. And who that hath any regard of trueth will preferre your crooked & shape∣lesse consequēts before the manifest doctrine of Christ and his Apostles?Mat. 22. Giue to Caesar the things that be Caesars. Rom. 13. You must bee subiect: whosoeuer resi∣steth power, resisteth the ordinance of God. 1. Pet. 2. Honour the king and submit your selues, whether it be to the king as (the chiefe &) excelling, or vnto the Gouernors as sent by him. For so is the wil of God. These be flat & plaine pre∣cepts which you can not ouerthrow, but with an euident, direct, and speciall release. The directions which the Apostles gaue to shame the disordered and shunne the wicked,The flat and firm precepts of the Scrip∣ture must not be ouerthrowē by generall & indirect colle∣ctions. when as yet there were no Christian Magistrates, to re∣presse them or punish them, may not rashly be stretched to the Magistrates per∣son or function, neither must you so force generall and indirect speeches of the Scripture, that they shall euert the speciall and expresse commaundements of God. But God hath expressely prescribed subiection and tribute to vitious, ty∣rannous, and Idolatrous Princes: for such they were of whom Christ and his Apostles spake, as no man can denie: Therefore no consequent of Scripture may be wrested against it, least you make the wil of God changeable or repug∣nant to it selfe, which is heinous impietie to perswade, or beleeue.
Phi. To tyrants and idolaters we must he subiect,Subiection is due as well to heretical, as to idolatrous and tyranni∣call Princes. Rom. 13. but not to heretikes al∣though they bee Princes. Theo. Confessing the former which you can not chose but admit, by what meanes auoide you the later? Heretiks may be Prin∣ces as well as idolaters; and to Princes in respect of their power not of their vertues God will haue vs subiect. S. Paul doeth not say Let euerie soule bee subiect to christian and vertuous powers; but, vnto supreme powers, euen whē they were worshippers of diuels, and spillers of christian blood. Let vs there∣fore heare what ground you haue out of Gods law why this precept, you must be subiect, shall hold in blasphemous and Idoolatrous Princes, but not in he∣reticall or excommunicate persons. Phi. I told you before, S. Iohn saith:2 Iohn 10. If any man bring not this doctrine, salute him not. Theo. Did those Tyrants and idolaters that were Prnces whiles S. Iohn liued, bring the doctrine of Christ with them? Phi. No: but this is ment of heretikes. Theo. It was spoken of all as well impugners, as betraiers of the faith: and why then do you restraine it to heretikes? Phi. Christians might eate with Infidels but not with heretikes.1. Cor. 10. ver. 27 With what sort of Infi∣dels Christi∣ans might be conuersant. 2. Cor. 6. Theo. They might, with those that were ignorant of the faith with purpose no winne them, but not with those that impugned the faith; for that could haue none o∣ther intent but feare or flatterie. And with such S. Paul forbiddeth the chri∣stians all concord, communion and fellowship. Draw not the yoke with in∣fidels. For what fellowship hath righteousnes with vnrighteousnesse? what communion hath light with darknesse? what concord hath Christ with Be∣lial? or what part hath the beleeuer with the infidel? Wherefore come out from among them and separate your selues saith the Lord. Separate your selues from them, is as much as salute them not, or eate not with them: and yet were Christians bound to obey such with all submission if they were Magi∣strates. Againe, they might not eate with adulterers, raylers, drunkards, ex∣torsioners nor with any couetous persons: might they therefore disobey the ma∣gistrate that was spotted with any of these or the like vices? Phi. Not, except hee were excommunicated for those vices. Theo. Then neither Apostasie nor heresie depriue Princes of their authoritie, but excommu∣nication only, which you may inflict as well for any disorder, as for heresie. Phi. What fault finde you with that?The Pope res∣pecteth excō∣munication, because hee would excom∣municate whom he list. Theo. You make excommunication but a limetwigge to intangle the persons, and indaunger the states of Princes by maintaining rebellion against them vnder the name of religion, when they wil not be ruled as you would haue them, or not suffer their Realmes to ly open to the pray and pride of the Bishop of Rome. For then hee must take vppon him to be the whole church which he is not, & excommunicate them whom hee should not: and after that excommunication denounced, you teach the people to refuse subiection, & to beare armes against their lawfull Magistrates, vppon this pretence that you haue deposed them, and disinherited them of their king∣doms: which is a wicked and false presumption of yours resistant to the lawes of God and man.
The perill of excommuni∣cation by Gods law is not depositiō. Mat. 18. Barthol. sumus in verbo, excom∣municat. nume∣ro 45 & Mar∣garita decret. in eodem verbo: Vile, lex, hu∣mile es ignora∣ta, necesse; haec anathem qui∣dem faciunt, ne possit obesse.For graunt hee might excommunicate them, which yet is not proued: the vttermost perill of excommunication before men, is that which our Sauiour expresseth in Sainct Matthewes Gospel. If he neglect to heare the church, let him bee to thee as an Ethnike and a Publicane. But Ethnikes by your confession may not bee depriued of their kingdomes, ergo neither per∣sons excommunicate. Againe your owne lawe graunteth that excommuni∣cation dischargeth neither seruauntes, children nor wiues from the duetie which they owe to the father of the familie: and shall it set free subiectes from a stronger and higher bonde of duetie, which God hath more strait∣ly prescribed, and inioyned them to the father of their Countrie? What wilfull and obstinate blindnesse is this in you, that where excommunica∣tion is a meere spirituall punishment, and reacheth no farther by Gods Lawe, than to take from offenders the remission of their sinnes, by wan∣ting the worde and Sacramentes vntill they repent; you to gratifie the founder of your Rhemish and Romish hospitales, stretch it vnto the states, Crownes, lymmes, and liues of Princes, and deriue thence not onely the de∣posing, but also the murdering of Christian kinges and Queenes, and that by their owne subiectes, if hee saie the worde? And this you assaie to per∣swade by corrupting, and maintaining the Scriptures, bolstering the con∣spiracies, and impieties of your holy father against Princes, with an vnshame∣fast prophaning, and adulterating of the worde of truth: which is not the least of your irreligious attemptes. Resist your places, and shewe vs but one halfe worde out of the holie Scripture that Princes may be iudicially depo∣sed by Priestes, or that you haue authoritie from Christ to punish such as you excommunicate with externall, and temporal paines and losses, which is it that you now would faine inferre: and for the rest, though wee neede not you shall haue our assents. Phi. The defence, cap. 5.Least any man should thinke this power to bee so meerely spirituall, that it might not in any wise be extended to temporall or corporall domage or chastisement of the faithfull in their goods, liues, possessions, or bodies, being meere secular thinges, and therefore not subiect to their Pastours spirituall or Priestly function: it is to bee mar∣ked in the holy Apostles first execution of their commissions & authority,Spirituall P∣stors haue power to pu∣nish corporal∣ly. that though their spirituall power immediatly & directly concerneth not our temporall affaires; yet indirectly (and as by accident) it doth not only concerne our soules but our bo∣dies & goods, so farre as is requisite to our soules health, and expedient for the good regiment thereof, and the churches vtility being subiect to their spirituall Gouer∣nours. Theo. It is to be marked that if you may be suffered, you will soone chalenge not only spirituall things as your peculiar,Pastous haue no power o∣uer the goods or bodies of christians. but euen the goods, liues, possessions and bodies of the faithfull, and as well of Princes as others to be subiect to your tri∣bunals, if not directly yet indirectly, that is, if not by one means, yet by an other: so far as you thinke it expedient for the regiment & health of the soule, & vtility of the church: & that shall be far enough I dare vndertake; If you affirme this vpon
your own credite, we little esteeme it; your opinion is common, but not currant with vs: If you meane to proue it, you shall haue the longer and stiller audiēce. Phi. S. Peter, being but a meere spiritual officer and Pastor of mens soules;The defence. Cap. 5. Act. 13. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor 5. 1. Tim. 1. 2. Cor. 10. yet for sacrilege and simulation, stroke dead both man and wife. S. Paul stroke blind E∣lymas the Magician. So did he threaten to come to his contemners, in rod of disci∣pline. So did be excōmunicate a Principal person in Corinth, for incest: not only by spiri∣tual punishment, but also by bodily vexation, giuing him vp to Satans chastisement. As he corporally also corrected and molested with an euill spirit Himeneus and Alexan∣der for blasphemie and heresie. Finally he boldly auoucheth, that his power in God is to reuenge al disobedience, and to bring vnder all loftie hearts to the loialtie of christ, and of the Apostles and Sainctes in this life.1. Cor. 6. Nescitis (quoth he) quoniam Angelos iudicabimus, quanto magis secularia? knowe you not that wee shall iudge Angels, how much more secular matters? Theo. Such dissolute mariners were neuer like but to make such desperate aduentures.They shoulde proue that Priestes may iudicially tor∣ment the bo∣dies of the wicked, and they proue that God did miraculouslie reuenge im∣pietie. You shoulde proue that spirituall Pastours haue power to sease the goods and possessions, and chastise the bodies of such as they excommu∣nicate: and you shewe where God afflicted those for their sinnes, which the Apostles cast out of the Church either with euill spirites. or some corpo∣rall plague, or death, as hee sawe cause; which is not pertinent to your purpose. Can you not distinguish the finger of God, from the factes of men? Or see you no difference between miraculous vengeance from heauen, and iudicial processe on earth? God strake Ananias dead for tempting him in Peter, and Elymas for resisting him in Paul. May Preachers therefore putte out mens eyes, and murther such as beleeue them not? In deede you practise this new kinde of preaching, but not by warrant from Christ or his A∣postles. Philand. Did not Peter kill Ananias and Sapphira with his worde?Peter slue A∣nanias not with his hāds but with his mouth, which was the work of God. Theo. And since you can not do the like with your words, you will take helpe of your handes. Phi. With wordes or handes, so they bee slaine, all is one. Theo. Not so. The one is a miracle wrought by God: the other is a murder committed by man, which God prohibiteth; and of all other thinges ought to bee farthest from the Preachers of peace. Phi. Peter did so. Theo. Peter reproued them, for tempting the holie Ghost: but the hande of God, and not of Peter, inflicted the punishment. Reade the place: Then saide Peter:Act. 5. Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart that thou shouldest he vnto the holie Ghost? Thou hast not lied vnto men, but vnto God. Nowe when Ananias hearde these words (saith the Scrp∣ture) hee fell downe and gaue vppe the Ghost. I aske not, what fat of Peters you finde that shoulde hasten the death of Ananias: but what one worde purporting any such thing can you shewe vs in all that Peter saide to Ananias? Phi. In his wordes to Sapphira wee can. For hee saide to her:Act. 5. The feete of them that haue buried thine husband, are at the doore and shall carrie thee out. Theo. Did Peter by these words kill her, or
foretell her that God would doe to her as hee had doone to her husbande? Phi. Which say you? Theo. Peter, we say, neither desired nor inflicted that iudge∣ment on them, but onely signified what God would doe. The like we saie for Paul, when Elymas was stroken blind. He warned that Sorcerer what should befall him from God, but himselfe did neither enuie, nor iniurie the Sorcerers eyes. His wordes were, Wilt thou not cease to per∣uert the streight waies of the Lord? Now therefore behold the hand of the Lord is vpon thee;Act. 13. and thou shalt be blind not seeing the Sunne for a time.The hand of the Lord and not of Paul was vppon Elymas. Paul denounced, Paul imposed not that corporall chastisement on him: The deede was Gods, who may iustly take from his enemies not onely their eies, but their breathes, and spirits when he wil, and in what sort it pleaseth best his righteous, and sacred wisedome. Phi. But Paul himselfe,The defence, cap. 5. corporallie corrected and molested with an euill spirite Himineus and Alexander for blasphemie and heresie. So did he excommunicate a Principal Person in Corinth for incest, not onely by spiritual punishment, but also by bodilie vexation giuing him vp to Satans chastisement. Theo. You drawe the word of God to your fansies by turning doubtes into certaineties, antecedentes into consequentes, mans actions into Gods iudge∣mentes. That the Apostle deliuered Himineus and Alexander vnto Satan, and so the incestuous Corinthian (whom you of your owne head without any wit∣nesse call a Principal Person in Corinth, because the slide you saw was easie from Principall to Princes) is a matter out of question; but that he corporally corrected and molested them with euil spirites, these be your additamentes wherewith you thought to lengthen the text to your own liking. Phi. S. Paul gaue iudgement of the Corinthian that he should bee deliue∣red vnto Satan,The incestu∣ous Corinthiā deliuered vn∣to Satan. 1. Corin 5. Ambros. in 1. Cor. cap. 5. for the destruction of the flesh. And how could the flesh be de∣stroied without bodily vexation & affliction? The. This phrase, for the destru∣ction of the flesh: hath diuerse expositions: & therefore vpon a doubtful kinde of speech you can not build an vndouted conclusion. S. Ambrose expoundeth the place thus. The Apostle decreed, that by the consent & in the presence of all men he should be cast out of the Church. Cum eijcitur, traditur Satanae in in∣teritum carnis. Et anima enim & corpus intereunt. His casting him out of the Church, is the deliuering of him to Satan to the destruction of (the whole man which is nothing but) flesh. For both soule and bodie perish. And lest you shoul thinke it much that the soule is called fleshe, he giueth this reason, Ibidem. Victa anima libidine carnis, fit caro: the soule once ouercome by the lustes of the flesh, becommeth flesh: and is in the Scripture so commonly called, Ibidem. & the lusts of the flesh deliuereth the soule defiled with it, and also the body to hell. Phi. But S. Paul addeth, that the spirite may bee saued in the day of our Lord Iesus Christ,1. Cor. 5. which can not stand with this exposition, that both fleshe & spirit were deliuered vnto perdition. Theo. The same father will tell you that the spirit may be referred not to him that was excluded,In cap. 5. Epist. ad Cor. but to the rest that
remained in the church, as if S. Paul should haue saide: I haue decreed to cast this vncleane person out from among you to his iust condemnation, that the grace of Gods spirit may be preserued in the rest of you to the day of iudge∣ment. The same Sainct Augustine followeth.Aug. quaest. vet. & noui Test. quaest. 49. What spirite doeth the A∣postle affirme shoulde bee preserued, when he saieth, I haue deliuered that man to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, &c. The destruction of the flesh (ment in this place) is, a man addicted to pleasures and fleshly delightes pur∣chaseth hell to himselfe. For by such (sinnes) the whole man becommeth flesh, in so much that the flesh is heere called the soule. Such a man when the church casteth from her, shee keepeth the spirit safe: to wit the holie spirite (of God) which is the guider of the church. For if they suffer any such one to bee amongest them, hee defileth all, and the holie spirite de∣parteth. Phi. S. Hierom taketh it otherwise.Hieron. in 1. Cor. cap. 5. To deliuer him vnto Satan for the destruction of the flesh (saith he) vt arripiendi illum corporaliter habeat potesta∣tem; that the diuell may haue power corporally to possesse him: & so Saint Chrysostom,Chrysost. in 1. Cor. hom. 15. For the destruction of the flesh, that the diuell may strike him with some grieuous sore or other disease. Theo. This I told you before, was a doubtfull speech, and therefore woulde yeelde you no certaine conclusion. For besides Sainct Augustine and Sainct Ambrose, Sainct Hierom in those bookes which are assuredly his, vseth these wordes, To deliuer vnto Satan to the destruction of the fleshe, for a perpetuall consequent to excommu∣nication in all ages, and not for corporall vexation permitted onely to the Apostles.Hieron. ad He∣liodorum. Illi si peccauero licet tradere me Satanae in interitum carnis, vt spiri∣tus saluus sit. A clergie man (sayth hee) may deliuer mee to Satan, if I sinne, for the destruction of the fleshe, that the spirite may bee safe. And inueighing against Vigilantius,Idem ad Ripa∣rium aduers. Vigilantium. I maruaile, sayth hee, the Bishop vn∣der whome hee is, doeth not crush this vnprofitable vessell with the A∣postolike rodde, euen a rodde of yron, and deliuer him into the destru∣ction of the fleshe, that the spirite may bee safe: Noting by these wordes the right force of excommunication which doeth and shall indure to the ende, & not any corporall punishment or plague, wherewith God sometimes touched such as would not otherwise be reformed. A thirde interpretation of these wordes you shall finde in Sainct Augu∣stine, writing against Parmenian. What did the Apostle, sayth hee,Aug. contra ep▪ Parm. li. 3. ca. 2▪ but prouide for the health of the soule by the destruction of the fleshe, whe∣ther it were by some corporall punishment or death, as in Ananias and his wife, which fell down at Peters feete: or else that the partie by repen∣tance, because he was giuen ouer vnto Satan, should kil in himself the wic∣ked concupiscence of the fleshe. This later exposition cutteth off cleane your bodilie punishmentes, and sheweth the ende of Apostolike excommuni∣cation to be this, that the offendour by repentaunce should destroy the lustes of his flesh, and not that an euill spirit should corporally correct and molest him,
which you conclude out of these wordes, with as great confidence, as if it were some maine principle of faith. Phi. S. Augustine repeateth both expositions & disliketh neither. Theo. His accepting of both dischargeth your illation which is wholy grounded on the first: But admit that also which Chrysostom seemeth to follow; what shall your conclusion be? Phi. That the Apostles punished the bodies of such as were christians.The Diuell & not the Apo∣stles tormen∣ted such as were excom∣municated. Theo. Did they lay violent handes on them or vse any externall meanes? Phi. They needed not: the diuell did it at their word. Theo. And because the diuell will not doe the like for you, you will supplie the di∣uels roome, and intermedle with his office. Are you not wise Diuines that to chalenge the correction of other mens bodies, make your selues the Di∣uels substitutes? Phi. Wee make our selues the Apostles substitutes. Theo. Then deliuer them to the Diuell as they did, and offer them no farther vi∣olence, nor torment with your owne handes, and see what power you haue to chastise the bodies of such as you reiect from the church, for so did the Apostles. Mary if you content not your selues with speaking the word as they did, but be∣cause the Diuell fayleth you, you take helpe of your handes to punish the bodies of men, beware least you be now not Pauls associats in deliuering, but Satans in tormenting the carkasses of offendors. Phi. The Magi∣strate is Gods minister to punish the body. Rom. 13.Is euerie one that punisheth the bodie, Satans associate? Theo. They that beare the sworde with lawfull power from God to represse the wicked, & if cause require, to kill the bodie, they bee Gods ministers seruing for that intent: but they that without this sworde claime to bee the correctors, and punishers of mens bodies by violent meanes, are the Diuels vicegerentes, and not Gods. For they bee murderers, and the right members of Satan. Phi. But wee appoint the Magistrate to doe it. Theo. Doe you appoint Magi∣strates to lay violent handes on themselues? Phi. No: but on others. Theo. And we be disputing of Princes whether they may bee defeated of their crowns and chastised in their bodies vpon your excommunications. Phi. Excommunicate persons may bee corporally chastised, whosoeuer bee the deede doer, and that S. Chrysostoms exposition fully proueth. For if it were lawfull then, whiles the Apostles did excommunicate, why not as well after, and in other ages? Theo. But if you relent from this that your selues may bee the deed doers, then you misse the marke which you shot at. The Ma∣gistrate wee knowe may corporally punish these and all other offendours, but what is that to your position, which hold that spirituall Pastors may punish the bodies of the faithful? And therfore look to your footing least you faile in your leaping: and backe with this legge that a meere spirituall officer may touch the liues, and take the goods of heretiks, and other excommunicate persons. It is a wicked intrusion of Antichrist, seeking indirectly and, as you call it, by acci∣dent, that is by hooke or by crooke to bring the world and worldly things in sub∣iection to his appetite. The Apostles did nothing but separate sinners from the church and house of
God:When & why God suffered the Diuell to afflict offen∣dors. & because in those dayes there were no christian Princes with ordinarie power to reuenge the disorders committed in and against the church of Christ, it pleased God that whom the Apostles and their after-commers for a season cast out of the church as intangled with great and haynous offences, the Diuell shoulde afflict them vnto death, or otherwise with some grieuous disease as the fault deserued, that the rest might feare, and not bee bolde to sinne, because there was no magistrate to punish them: yea many times God visited the sinnes of hypocrites and such as remained in the church in like maner; as Paul himselfe testifieth to those of Corinth.1. Cor. 11. For this cause many amongest you are stroken with infirmities and diseases, and many are dead. For if we would iudge our selues, we should not bee iudged: but when wee are iudged, we are chastened of the Lord, that wee should not bee condemned with the world.Chrysost. in 1. Tim. hom. 5. And Chrysostom alleadging this place, Many such things fall out (in the church) at this day. Because the priest knoweth them not, that loden with sinne receiue the reuerend mysteries vnworthily, therefore God himselfe of∣ten times culleth them out, and deliuereth them to Satan. And that the Apostles did nothing but cast them out of the church when they deliuered anie to Satan,Ibidem. the same Father will teach you. Marke howe (Paul) deliuered the man (of Corinth) to Satan. Eijciebatur nempe a com∣muni fidelium caetu; hee was cast out of the congregation of the faythfull, hee was cutte off from the flocke (of Christ) and left naked, and being so destitute (of Gods helpe) hee lay open to the Wolfe, and subiect to euerie assault.Theodoret. in 1. Cor. cap. 5. So sayth Theodorete. By this place, (where Paul deliuered the in∣cestuous Corinthian to Satan) we are taught that the diuell inuadeth them which are seuered & cut off from the bodie of the church, finding them de∣stitute of Gods grace. Keepe your selues therefore within your limites. Pastors haue their charge, which is as S. Paul noteth, to watch ouer soules,Heb. 13. they haue not to doe with the goods or bodies of the faithfull. Their goods are Caesars, by the plaine re∣solution of our Sauiour. Giue vnto Caesar, the thinges which are Caesars. Which God willed Samuel to aduertise the people of,Mat. 22. when they first demaun∣ded a king.1. King. 8. Shew them the right (or law) of the king that shall raigne ouer them.Ibidem. And so Samuel did, saying: This shall be the law of your king. He shall take your sonnes and appoint them for his charets and to be his horsemen: & shal make thē captaines ouer thowsandes & captaines ouer fiftyes, & set them to eare his grounds & to reape his haruest, & to make his instruments of war & things to serue for his charets. And he wil take your fields, & vines & best olyues, & giue them to his seruants. And he wil take the tenth of your corn & wine, & giue it to his Princes & seruitors.Only Prince are to com∣maund the goods & bo∣dies of their sbiects. And he wil take your men seruāts & maideseruants, & the choice of your yong mē, & your asses, & vse thē to his work. The tenth of your sheep wil he take, & ye shal be his seruāts. Phi. Make you the king Lord of al without exception? Theo. Though God neuer ment, that Princes inordinate & priuate pleasures should wast & consume
the wealth of their Realmes, yet may they iustly commaunde the goods and bodies of all their Subiects in time both of warre and peace, for any pub∣like necessitie or vtilitie. Whereby God declareth Princes and not Pa∣stours to bee the right ouerseers of temporall and earthlie matters: and con∣sequentlie that the power of the keyes extendeth not to those thinges which are committed to the Princes charge, I meane neither to the goods, nor to the bodies of christian men. To a king, sayth Chrysostom, are the bodies of men committed: to the Priest their soules.Chrysost. de ver∣bis Esaiae, Vidi Dominum hom. 4. The king pardoneth corporall offences, the Priest remitteth the guiltinesse of sinne. The king compelleth, the Priest exhor∣teth: the one with force, the other with aduise: the kings weapons are sen∣sible, the Pristes are Ghostly. The like distinction betweene them doth S. Hierom make:Hieron. ad He∣liodor. in epitap. Nepotiani. Rex nolentibus praest, Episcopus volentibus: ille timore subijcit, hic seruituti donatur: ille corpora custodit ad mortem, hic animas seruat ad vitam. The king ruleth men vnwilling: the Priest none, saue the willing: the king hath his in subiection with terrour: the Priest is appointed for the seruice of his: the king mastereth their bodies with death, but the Priest preserueth their soules to life. This power of the sword, our Sauiour precisely prohibi∣ted his Apostles as I haue shewed: and therefore you may not indirectly nor by accident chalenge it. Phi. 1. Cor. 6. S. Paul abused by the Iesuits to make the Pope iudge of temporal matters.Why then did Paul saie: Knowe you not that wee shall iudge the Angels, howe much more secular matters? Theo. If this bee the best hold you haue in the new Testament for secular matters: you must take the paynes to light from your horse and goe on your feete as well as your neighbours. For the Apostle speaketh that of all Christians which you restraine to Priests; and moueth the parties striuing, rather to make their brethren arbiters of their quarrelles, than to persue one an other before Infidels. What grant is this to you in your owne right to bee iudges ouer your brethren in all secular affaires, and not onely without their consents to determine their griefes, but also to bereaue them of their goods, and lands, and afflict their bodies: yea to pull the sword out of Princes handes, & take their Crownes from their heades; when the rulers are beleeuers as well as the Preachers? Do you not know, saith S. Paul,1. Cor. 6. that the Saincts, & not onely Priests, shal iudge the world? If the world then shalbe iudged by you (speaking to all that were of the church at Corinth) are ye vnworthy to iudge the smalest matters? He saith not, it was their right to iudge secular matters, but they were worthy to bee trusted with them, whom God would trust with greater: and shewing that hee spake this of the people, & not of the Priests, he saith: If then you haue any iudgementes concerning the thinges of this life,. Cor. 6. make euen the contemptible in the church your iudges. Hee saith not God hath made them your iudges: but rather thā your contending & brabling about earthly things which you professe to contemn, should be knowen to Ethniks, & such as hate & deride both Christ & you, your selues make the meanest of your brethren (whom you will)
your iudges. Nowe ioyne your conclusion: ergo the Pope hath authority to dispose the goods, lands and liues of all the faithul, euen of Princes thēselues, be they neuer so iust or religious Magistrates; and see what a non sequitur you conclude out of S. Pauls wordes. Phi. The Primatiue church vnderstood this place of Priests and Bishops: as appeareth by Sainct Augustine complaining of the tumultuous perplexi∣ties of other mens causes in secular matters:De opere Mo∣nachorum ca. 29 to the which troubles, sayth he, the Apostle hath fastened vs. 1. Corinth. 5. The like hee witnesseth of S. Cōfes. li. 6. ca 3. Ambrose at Millan. And S. Gregory reporteth the same of Praefat. in lib. Dialogorum. himselfe at Rome. Theo. Trueth it is, the Bishoppes of the Primatiue church were greatly troubled with those matters; not as ordinarie iudges of those causes, but as arbiters elected by the consent of both parties. And I coulde requite you with Gregories owne wordes of the same matter in the same place: Ibidem. The Bishops might not re∣fuse to heare and end the griefs of their brethren by charitable perswasion but not by iu∣diciall com∣pulsion, with∣out the Prin∣ces warrant. Quod certum est nos non debere, which it is certaine we ought not to do, but yet I thinke, so long as it did not hinder their vocation & function, though it were troublesome vnto them, they might neither in charitie, nor in dutie refuse it because it tended to the preseruing of peace & loue amongest mē. And the Apo∣stle had licenced all men to choose whom they woulde in the church for their iudges: no doubt meaning that they which were chosen shoulde take the paynes to heare the cause and make an ende of the strife. But it is one thing to make peace between brethren, as they did, by heaping their griefes with consent of both sides, and an other thing to claime a iudiciall in∣terest in those causes, in spite of mens heartes. Which wrong you shoulde not offer the least of your brethren: much lesse may you depriue Princes of their Crownes and take their Scepters from them, because the Apostle willed the christians to be tried rather by their brethrē, than by their enemies, which were Infidels. Phi. In all which there is no difference betwixt kinges that bee faithfull,The defence, Cap. 5. and o∣ther Christian men: who all in that they haue submitted themselues and their Sce∣pters to the sweete yoke of Christ, are subiect to discipline and to their Pastors au∣thority no lesse than other sheepe of his fold. Theo. In beleeuing the word, receiuing the Sacraments, and obeying the Lawes of God, there is no difference betweene the Ruler and the Subiect; but the temporall states and possessions of priuate men you may not meddle with, by no color of ecclesiastical power or discipline: much lesse may you touch the bodies, or take the Crownes of Princes into your handes by your acciden∣tall & indirect authoritie: which is nothing else but a sillie shift of yours to crosse the commaundements of God.The defence, Cap. 5. The ciuil Go∣uernor subiect to the spiritu∣all amongst christians. Phi. Though the state, regiment, policie and power temporall, be in it selfe alwaies of distinct nature, qualitie and condition from the gouernment ecclesiasticall, and spi∣rituall common wealth called the church or bodie mysticall of Christ; and the Magi∣strate spirituall and ciuill diuerse and distinct; and sometimes so farre that the one hath no dependance of the other, nor subalteration to the other in respect of them∣selues:
(as it is in the Churches of God residing in heathen kingdoms, and was in the Apostles times vnder the Pagan Emperours): yet now where the lawes of Christ are receiued, and the bodies politike and mysticall, the Church and ciuill state, the Mgistrate Ecclesiasticall and Temporall, concurre in their kinds togither; (though euer of distinct regimentes, natures and endes) there is such a concurrence and sub∣alternation betwixt both, that the inferiour of the two (which is the ciuill state) must needs (in matters pertayning any way either directly or indirectly to the honor of God and benefit of the soule) be subiect to the spirituall, and take direction from the same. Theo. This is tossing of termes, as men doe tenez-balles to make pastime with. The state, regiment, policie and power temporall, is in it selfe, you saie, alwaies of distinct nature, qualitie, and condition from the gouernment ecclesiasticall and spirituall Common-wealth, called the Church or bodie mysticall of Christ. You seeke to confound that which you would seeme to distinguish, and when you haue spent much breath to no ende, you conclude, that though the church and the Common-wealth be distinct states, as you can not denie, yet you will rule both:Though the spirituall and temporall bee distinct states, yet the Pope will be sure to rule thē both. by reason the Common-wealth, as the inferiour of the two, dependeth on the Church, and hath subalternation to the church as to the superiour. But, Sir, in plaine termes: and more trueth, to the Sonne of God ruling in his Church by the might of his worde and spirite, all kingdomes and Princes must be subiect, their swordes, Scep∣ters, soules and bodies: mary to the Pope, attyring himselfe with the spoiles of Christ and his church, no such thing is due. The watch-men and sheepeheardes that serue Christ in his church, haue their kinde of regiment distinct from the temporall power and state:Pastours haue their regimēt but ouer the soules, not o∣uer the bodies or goods of men. but that regiment of theirs is by counsell and perswasion, not by terrour or com∣pulsion, and reacheth neither to the goods nor to the bodies of any men; much lesse to the crownes and liues of Princes: and therefore your shifting of wordes, and shrinking from the Popes Consistorie to the Church, the spiri∣tuall Common wealth, the mysticall bodie of Christ, and such like houering and vncertaine speaches, is but a trade that you haue gotten to make the Reader beleeue wee derogate from Christ, and would haue Princes superiours to the worde and Sacramentes, which Christ hath left to gather and gouerne the church withall. Howbeit this course is so common with you, that now it doth but shame you. A christian king must take direction not from the Popes person or pleasure, but from the Lawes and commaundementes of Christ;Howe the Prince is sub∣iect to the Priest: & like∣wise the priest to the Prince. to whome alone hee oweth subiection: And as for the Bishoppes and Pastours of his Realme, (whome you falsly call the spirituall Common-wealth and the mysticall bodie of Christ, because they bee but partes thereof, and not so much, except withall they bee teachers of truth) those he must and should consult,, in respect they be Gods messengers sent to him and his people, but with great care to trie them, and free libertie to refuse them, if they be found not faithfull. And when the
Prince learning by their instruction what is acceptable to God in doctrine and discipline, shall receiue and publish the same, the Bishoppes themselues are bounde to obey, and if they will not, the Magistrate may lawfully see the rigour of his lawes executed vpon them. On the other side, if the Prince wil not submit himselfe to the rules and preceptes of Christ, but wilfully main∣taine heresie and open impietie, the Bishops are without flatterie to reproue and admonish the Prince of the daunger that is imminent from God: and if he persist, they must cease to communicate with him in diuine prayers and myste∣ries: but still they must serue him, honour him, and pray for him, teaching the people to doe the like, and with meekenesse induring what the wrath of the Prince shal lay on them, without annoying his person, resisting his power, dis∣charging his subiectes, or remouing him from his throne, which is your maner of censuring Princes. Phi. The ciuill Gouernour is SVBIECT to the spirituall amongest christians. Theo. I haue often tolde you howe. The ciuill Gouernour must heare, be∣leeue, and obey the meanest seruaunt that God sendeth, if hee speake no more than his Masters will. That subiection Princes owe to the sender, and not to the speaker. But were they simplie subiect to the messengers of God, as they are not, will you reason thus: Princes should obey the Preachers of God: ergo if they doe not, they may bee deposed? This is the argument which wee so of∣ten haue denied; why then labour you so much about the antecedent, when we denie the consequent? That Princes shoulde obey God and his worde,The Prince is absolutely subiect vnto God: and yet if he refuse his dutie to God, he may not be depo∣sed by the mi∣nister. The defence, cap. 5. In orat. ad po∣pul▪ trepidanē & Impera. com∣moum. Nazians simi∣litude to ex∣presse the sub∣ordination of ciuil and of spirituall go∣uernment. is a clearer case, than that they shoulde obey the Pope. For of that no man doubteth, and this wee not onely doubt, but denie. Take therefore that which is con∣fessed on both sides, and set your conclusion to it, that the force of your rea∣son may the better appeare. Princes without all question are bounde to obey God: ergo if they doe not their dueties to God they may be deposed by Priestes. This is the sequele which we alwaies denied: and this is the point which you first assumed to proue. Phi. The condition of these two powers (as S. Gregorie Nazianzen most ex∣cellently resmbleth it) is like vnto the distinct state of the same spirit and body, or flesh in a man: where either of them hauing their proper and peculiar operations, endes and obiectes, which in other natures may be seuered: (as in Brutes, where flesh is & not spirit: in Angels, where spirit is but not flesh:) are yet in man conioyned in per∣son; and neuerthelesse so distinct in faculties and operations; that the flesh hath her actions peculiar, and the soule hers; but not without all subalteration or depen∣daunce. Where we see euidently, that in case the operations of the bodie be contrarie to the ende, weale and iust desires of the soule; the spirite may and must commaunde, ouerrule and chastice the bodie: and as superiour appointeth fasting and other afli∣ctions, though with some detriment to the flesh commaunding the eyes not to see, the tongue not to speake; and so foorth. So likewise; the power politicall, hath her Prin∣ces, Lawes, Tribunalles; and the spiritual her Prelats, Canons, Councels, iudgements
(and these when the Princes are Pagans) wholy separate, but in christian Com∣mon-wealthes ioyned, though not confounded; nor yet the spirituall turned into the temporall, or subiect by peruerse order (as it is now in England) to the same; but the ciuil (which in deede is the inferiour) subordinate, and in some cases subiect to the ecclesiasticall: though so long as the temporall State is no hinderaunce to eternall feli∣citie, and the glorie of Christs kingdome, the other intermedleth not with her acti∣ons; but alloweth, defendeth, honoureth, and in particular Common-wealthes o∣beyeth the same. Theo. For you to flie soaring about with comparisons and applications of your owne making is to small purpose: Similitudes haue no force farther than the Author, that first vsed them, doth direct them and vrge them. Nazianzenes wordes to the Emperour.S. Gregorie Bishop of Nazianzun hauing occasion in a Sermon that hee made before the Emperour, to intreate the Prince to pardon a fault commit∣ted by the people, after hee had taught the subiectes their duetie to the Magi∣strate, turned his speech to the Prince with these wordes amongest other: Will you admit then my free speech?Nazian. oratio. 18. ad ciues Na¦zianzenos gra∣ui timore per∣culsos, & prin∣cipem irascent. The law of Christ hath committed (or sub∣iected) you to my power and to my pulpit: for we rule also, and that which is a more excellent and perfect regiment. Or should the spirit (in perfection and excellencie) giue place to the flesh, and heauenly thinges to earthly? You will I know take my freedom of speech in good part. You are a sheepe of my fould, & a (lambe or) weanling of the great sheepheardes. Nazian∣zene maketh not your comparison, that the Priest hath the same power ouer the prince, which the soule hath ouer the body: It is your owne, it is not his: hee calleth the things which are committed to the Preachers charge, spirituall and heauenly: and consequently more excellent and perfect than the bodilie & earth∣ly things which Princes haue in their power: farther he vrgeth not this com∣parison, and this we confesse to be most true. Phi. Nazian. Ibidem.But S. Gregorie sayth to the Emperour: The law of Christ hath subiected you to my power, and to my Tribunall. Theo. I might re∣fuse that translation: the wordes are, , doeth signifie not onely to subiect, but also to commit as a pledge to bee kept by an other man: and in that respect I might well defende this to bee the right interpretation of S. Gregories wordes, The lawe of Christ hath committed you to my charge: but because the worde hath both significations I receiue either, and affirme neither to make for your corporall correcting of Princes. Sainct Gregorie doeth plainely lay foorth his owne meaning,Ibidem. The Bishop claimeth free speeches in Gods behalfe to intreate the Prince for the people. first by the finall intent, for the which hee vsed all this preface, next by the rest of the wordes which he addeth to expounde and expresse his minde. His requeste to the Emperour was , to beare with the bouldnesse of his speeche, in making requeste for his brethren. And to shewe the Emperour that heerein hee didde no more than Christ hadde licenced euerie Preacher to doe, hee bringeth this reason. The
Lawe of Christ hath bounde Princes, bee they neuer so great to heare the Preacher, and to submit them-selues to this place, where I stand: which was the pulpitte and not the Consistorie. For  in the Church did precisely signifie the place where the Preacher stoode when he taught. And to that ende hee addeth,Ibidem.  You are a sheepe of my flocke: that is sacred and so are you, and a wean∣ling of the great sheepheards: and therefore bound to heare my voyce, whom the great shepheard hath charged with the feeding of his flocke. And so he pro∣ceedeth very fatherly and pithily not to commaund or require, but to perswade and intreat the Prince to be gratious to his subiects and to imitate the example of God the greatest and mightiest Prince that is. These be Christian directions, and lawfull meanes to put Princes in minde of their dueties: which we allow and receiue. Your deposing them, and arming their subiects vnder a colour of your Episcopall authoritie to rebel against thē, and to take their scepters from them, was farre from Nazianzenes mynde and mouth: you doe but abuse his eloquent similitudes to beautifie your pestilent conspiracies: and that you may see by the very wordes following, where he saith to the Emperour,Nazian. Ibidē. Thou raignest together with Christ, thou rulest together with him; thy sword is from him, thou art the image of God: Hee that con∣fessed the Prince to hold his sworde from Christ and with Christ, neuer cra∣ked as you conceiue, that hee had power to take the Princes sword from him: yea rather hee acknowledged himselfe amongst the rest to bee subiect to the Prince, though he were a Bishoppe. Let vs sayth he submit our selues to God,Ibidem. to eche other, and to the Rulers of the earth. To God in all thinges, eche to other in brotherly loue, to Princes for the conseruation of good order. For this is one of the Lawes amongs vs (that be Christians) and the same prayse worthie and most excellently ordered by the holy Ghost, that as seruaunts obey their masters,We; that is as wel Pastors as people. and women their husbands, and the Church Christ, and the Disciples their Pastors and Teachers, so wee should bee subiect to all superiour Powers, not onely for feare of wrath, but also for consci∣ence sake. Phi. You will not denie but S. Gregorie sayth, Wee haue Orati. 18. ad ciues Nazian. The preach∣ers function excelleth the Princes im∣perfection. a greater and perfecter regiment than yours, speaking euen to the Prince himselfe. Theo. So Preachers haue. They gouerne the soules of men and dispence the myste∣ries of God, where as Princes are set to rule the bodies of their subiects, and to dispose the things of this life. And therefore if the fruites and effects of their callings be compared, the Preachers passeth the Princes by many degrees of perfection and excellencie: God giuing earthly foode and peace by the prince, but heauenly grace and life by the woorde and sacraments which wee receiue from the mouthes and handes of his messengers. Mary if you compare their persons or powers to commaunde and compell by corporall punishments,Wherin prin∣ces excell Preachers. of which wee dispute: Preachers are seruants to their brethren, Princes are Lordes ouer them: Preachers may reprooue and threaten, Princes may
sease the goods, and chastise the bodies of such as offende: Preachers may shut the gates of heauen against non-repentants, Princes may roote them from the face of the earth, and let them feele the iust vengeaunce of their sinnes in this worlde. This is the power of Princes which wee say must bee directed by Bi∣shoppes, but is not subiected to their willes or Tribunals; and though the Preachers charge concerne thinges which bee more perfect and excellent, yet that is no reason why Bishoppes should corporally correct or depose Princes, no more than if Philosophers or schoolemasters shoulde take vpon them to doe the like, because they professe to trayne vp others in wisedome and ver∣tue, which farre exceede the feeding or clothing of the bodie; which seeme to bee the Princes care. And yet may you not rashly exclude the Princes function from caring for religion and vertue: It is euident that God first ordained and authorized the sworde to punish error and vice,The princes & the preachers functions cō∣curre in the same things, though in diuerse sortes. and to maintaine trueth and integritie a∣mongst men: and therefore the Princes and the Preachers functions by Gods institution shoulde concurre euen in those Ghostly and heauenly thinges, which you would chalenge to your selues, the Preacher declaring, the Prince esta∣blishing the word of trueth; the Preacher deliuering, the Prince defending the Sacraments of grace; the Preacher reproouing, the Prince punishing the sinnes and offences of all Degrees and States. Howbeit wee must confesse the Preachers seruice in these cases excelleth the Princes; for that the woorde in the Preachers mouth engendreth faith and winneth the soule vnto God to serue him with a willing mind: whereas the sword in the Princes hand striketh onely a terror into men to refraine the outwarde act, but refourmeth not the se∣crets of the heart. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. When the spirituall go∣uernment is to correct the temporall.When the temporall power resisteth God or hindereth the proceeding of the people to saluation; there the spirituall hath right to correct the temporall, and to procure by all meanes possible, that the terrene kingdome giue no annoyance to the state of the Church. Theo. What you want in proofes, you make out in woordes. Wee haue heard you I know not how often full solemnly affirme that the Spiritual power hath right to correct the temporal, whereby you meane that the Pope may depose the Prince: but as yet we see you not prooue it. Your exquisite and affected vtte∣rance which is the chiefest furniture of your booke, and the best support of your cause, can not turne hard into soft, nor sower into sweete: men must haue some better euidence for the depriuation of Princes before they beleeue it, than your meretricious and deintie speach. Pastoures must procure the welfare of of the church, but by lawfull and Godly meanes.Pastours are, you say, to procure by all meanes possible, that the terrene kingdome giue no annoyance to the state of the Church: you shoulde haue ad∣ded by all meanes possible and lawful: for by periurie, rebellion, and slaughter of Princes, though it bee possible, yet is it not lawfull to procure the welfare of Christes Church. If you receiue that addition, and auouche it lawfull for Bishoppes to depese Princes, you runne to the point which wee first be∣ganne
with, absurdly presuming and neuer proouing the thing which is called in question. Phi. The Church excelleth the terrene state and Domination as farre as the Sunne passeth the Moone,The Defence, cap. 5. the soule the bodie, and heauen the earth. By reason of which excellencie and preeminence aboue all states and men, without exception of Prince or other, our Lorde proclaimeth in his Gospel:Mat. 18. that whosoeuer obeyeth not or heareth not the Church, must bee taken and vsed no otherwise than as an heathen. Theo. You must needes bee cunning in counting howe many degrees a Priest excelleth a Prince.The Pride of Popes prefer∣ring thēselues before Prin∣ces. Decretal. lib. 1. tit. 33. de maio∣rirat. & obediē∣tia cap. 6. ¶ praeterea. Innocentius the third, twelue hundred yeeres after Christ beganne this comparison and proueth it out of the Scripture full like a Pope. Thou shouldest haue knowen, sayth hee to the Emperour, that GOD made two great lights in the firmament of heauen, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night. Whereby is meant, that GOD made two great lightes, that is, two great dignities which are the Priest and the Prince, for the firmament of heauen, that is of his vniuersall Church. But that which ruleth the day to witte spirituall thinges is the greater, that which ruleth carnall thinges is the lesser, that wee should acknowledge as great difference to bee betweene Bishops and Princes, as there is betweene the sunne and the moone. Your gloze setteth downe and casteth by plaine Arythmetike howe much that amounteth to.Ibidem glossa in ver. Inter Solem & Lu∣nam. Passing good Arythmetike ⅞ is 56. not 47. The Iesuites rake the verie filth of their schoole mē & Canonists, & set a new flo∣rish vpon it. Therefore, sayth hee, since the earth is seuen tymes big∣ger than the Moone, and the Sunne eyght tymes bigger than the earth, it resteth that the Bishoppe bee fourtie seuen tymes greater than the Prince. And yet aduising himselfe better for that his totall summe rose no faster, hee sheweth out of Ptolomie that the sunne contayneth the bignes of the moone, seuen thousande, seuen hundred, fourtie foure tymes, and so many degrees iumpe is euery Bishoppe aboue euery Prince. These pa∣ringes and offscouringes of your Decretals you haue swept together, and vsing the name of the Church to make the matter more saleable, though by the Church you vnderstande as they did, the Bishoppe of Rome and his Colledge of Cardinals, you perfume their follies with a fewe words of your owne, and newe proclaime them for some precious wares: but take backe the filth and slime of your vnlearned and ill aduised Cano∣nistes, wee looke for grauer and better authorities than either your, or their flatteries. Phi. Whosoeuer obeyeth not or heareth not the Church, must bee taken and v∣sed no otherwise than as an heathen. Theo. I coulde answere you that this place toucheth onely wronges and iniuries done by men to their brethren,If thy brother sinne against thee, that is, doe thee pri∣uate wrong. when as yet there were no Christi∣an Princes. And that in these woordes our Sauiour charged his Disciples not to breake the bonde of peace and vnitie with any bro∣ther that offered wrong, vntill they had first secretly warned them,
then with witnesses, and last of all publikely before the whole multitude of the faithfull where hee and they liued: and if after so many lawfull warnings hee ceased not to afflict and vexe his brother, the partie grieued should no farther be bound to communicate with him in brotherly loue and charitie, no more than hee was with an Ethnike or a Publicane. Ambros. in Lucam. lib. 8. cap. 17.S. Ambrose giueth this note vpon the wordes, In te, Against thee; Pulchrè posuit, si peccauerit in te. Non enim aequa conditio in deum hominemque peccare. The Lorde very well added, if hee sinne against thee: for the same rule doeth not serue when hee sinneth against God, that doeth when hee trespasseth man. Saint Hierom likewise,Hieron. n Matthaei 16. If our brother sinne against vs, and in any thing doe vs wrong, wee haue power to forgiue it, yea wee must forgiue it: but if a man sinne against God, the matter is out of our handes. Lest therefore in priuate quarrels and offences men should at their listes forsake the communion and felowshippe of their brethren, our Sauiour will haue three admonitions and the last publike, after the which, if that take not place, we shalbe excused before God, if we no longer accept him that did vs wrong in the number of our brethren. August. de verbis Domini, sermo. 16. Let him be to thee as an Ethnicke: that is, compt him no longer to bee thy brother.Let him be to thee as an Ethnike and a Publicane, that is sayth S. Augu∣stine, Noli illum deputare iam in numero fratrum tuorum, nec ideo tamen salus eius negligenda: Do not accompt him in the number of thy brethren, and yet his saluation must not bee neglected. For the Ethnikes themselues, that is hea∣then men and Pagans, wee doe not recken to bee our brethren, and yet we seeke to saue them. By this you may doe well to erect a Court where euery subiect may sewe his Prince for priuate iniuries, and to make your selues Iudges of all such matters, that if the Prince refuse your order you may take his Crowne from him. Is not this thinke you good diuinitie for a Christian Common-wealth? Phi. If hee, that will not heare the Church in priuate offences betweene man and man, must bee taken and vsed as an heathen, how much more he that will not heare nor obey the Church in publike and haynous sinnes against God? Theo. Take the place howe you will of priuate, or publike iniuries, or sinnes against man,Let him be to thee as an Ethnike, ma∣keth nothing for the depo∣sition of Prin∣ces. They were Ethnickes to whom Christ and his Apo∣stles commā∣ded all men to be subiect. Iohn. 19. or against God, no such thing is consequent as you would seeme to inferre. If hee heare not the Church, whosoeuer, whensoeuer, in what cause soeuer (graunt all this that your antecedent may bee the freer from checke or chaunce,) what will you conclude? Phi. He must bee to vs as an heathen. Theo. And what then? must heathen Princes bee depriued of their Crownes and Scepters? Was not Caesar an heathen when our Sauiour willed all men to giue to Caesar the thinges which were Caesars? Was hee not an hea∣then Magistrate before whome Christ stoode when hee sayde, Thou couldest haue no power ouer mee vnlesse it were giuen thee from a∣boue? Were they not heathen Princes to whome Peter and Paul requi∣red and charged all Christian Princes to bee subiect without all resistance? Did not the Church of Christ, taught by them so to doe, submit her selfe
for the space of three hundered yeeres to heathen Princes and those terrible and most bloudie tyrants. Phi. We deny not this. Theo. You can not. If then disobayers of the Church must be vsed no worse than heathens and publi∣canes, ergo they must neither bee spoiled of their goodes, nor afflicted in their bodies, nor remoued from their seates, if they be Princes. For these things by Gods Law the Church might not offer to Pagans nor Publicans. Phi. This that Christ saith, if he heare not the Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnicke, and a Publicane, is (by the iudgement of S. Augustine) more grieuous than if he were slaine with the sword, consumed with fier, or torne with wilde beastes. Theo. And why? because the iudgement of God,August. contra aduersar. legis & Prophet lib. 1. cap. 17. To be left to the iudgemēt of god is more grieuous than any humane torment can be. Ibidem. to the which he is reserued, shall bee more heauie to him, than any humane torments can be. And this maketh rather against you, than with you. For if the neglecter of the Church shal be so grieuously punished at Gods hands, why doe you challenge to your selues the corporal correcting and chastising of such as disobay the Church? And so Saint Augustine expoundeth himselfe. It is by and by added, saith he, by our Sauiour, Amen I say vnto you: What you bind on earth shall bee bound in heauen, that we should vnderstand how grieuous a punishment it is to bee left vnpunished by man, and to be re∣serued to the iudgement of God. Phi. The Church hath decreed that heretikes shall not beare rule ouer Catholikes: and this voice of the Church all men are bound to heare, vnlesse they will be counted for Pagans and Infidels. Theo. First the Church can make no such decree: next the Church of Christ neuer made any such Decree. Phi. May not the Church make that Decree?The Church can not de∣cree that Princes shall be deposed. Theo. Shee may not. Her power concerneth the soules of men and not their bodies, and neuer goeth be∣yond the word and Sacraments. Shee may not intermeddle with the tem∣poral states and inheritances of Priuate men against their willes, much lesse with the thrones and swords of Princes. The Church cannot giue leaue, that children shall disobay their Parents, nor seruants their Masters, nor weomen their husbandes: because God hath already commanded they shall obay:The Church may not break the least of Gods com∣mandements. whose precepts the Church is with al re∣uerence to receiue, and with all diligence to obserue, and not to frustrate or hinder the least iote of his heauenly will and Testament: If any particular places, or persons attempt the contrarie, they cease to be the Church of GOD in that they wilfully reiect and change the worde of God. S. Augustine saith well,August. contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 21. Chrysost. opere imperfect. in Mat. homil. 49. Non debet ecclesia se Christo praeponere: The Church may not preferre her selfe before Christ. Neither may we beleeue the (true Churches) them selues vnlesse they say and doe those things that are consonant to the Scrip∣tures. Yea we mustGal. 1. accurse the Angels in heauen if they should do otherwise. The whole Church oweth the same dutie to all and euery the precepts of God that ech priuate person doth. And therfore shee may not dissolue nor disappoint the least of them. Now the Church her selfe is commanded by the mouth of Christ and his Apostles to honor and obay Princes. For these precepts be gene∣ral
& touch ye whole church:Luk. 20. Giue to Caesar the things that be Caesars. Rom. 13. Let euery soule be subiect to the higher powers. 1. Peter 2. Submit your selues to the king as the chiefest. For so is the will of God; neither Monke, Priest, Prelate, Pope, Euangelist, or Apostle exempted as in the place where I haue already shewed. Ergo shee hath no right to dishonour or depose Princes, nor to licence their subiects to resist them at her will and on her warrant, which is the grounde that you build on. Phi. The defence, Cap. 5. Deceitfull perswasions of Politikes vnto Princes for their ruineThey be but flatterers of Princes that so say: or heretikes that so thinke that the ministers of Christes most deare spouse, of his very mysticall bodie, his kingdome & house on earth (whom at his dparture hence, he did indowe with most ample commissiō, and sent foorth with that authoritie, that his father before gaue vnto him) haue no power ouer Princes, to denounce or declare them to be violators of Gods and the Churches Lawes: nor to punish them either spiritually or temporally: not to excommu∣nicate them, nor to discharge the people of their oth and obedience towards such, as nei∣ther by Gods Law nor mans, a true Christian may obay. Theo. If we knewe not your accustomed brauerie, you might somwhat trouble vs with your insolent vanities: but now we haue so good experience of your fierce lookes and faint harts, that we neede not feare your force. Bring somwhat besides your own conceit that the Pope may depose Princes, and then call vs flatterers and heretikes at your pleasure. If not, take heede you proue not presumpteous and stately rebels against God and man. I winne you be the ministers of Christs spouse and kingdom, no more than his Apostles were,The Apostles, whose com∣mission was largest, had no power to depose prin∣ces. if so much: and your commission is no larger than theirs, if it be so large: and yet the Apostles themselues had no power to depose Princes, but submitted their bodies and liues to the powers which God had ordained, and taught (Christes most deare spouse & his very bodie mystical) to do the like, and shee did so, not offering any example of resisting and deposing Princes for a thousand yeres, after shee first receiued at her husbands mouth a charge to ho∣nour them and in earthly things to obay them. Episcopal iu∣risdiction standeth not in the deposi∣tiō of princes.As for your Episcopall power ouer Princes, if that be it you seeke for, and not to take their kingdomes from them, I tolde you before, if they breake the Law of God, you may reproue them; if they heare you not, you may leaue them in their sinnes and shut heauen against them: if they fall to open heresie or wilfull impietie, you may refuse to communicate with them in prayers and other diuine duties, yea you must rather yeeld your liues with submission into their hands, than deliuer them the word and sacraments otherwise than God hath appointed: farther than this if you will go to the temporall punishing and finall displacing of them from their thrones (and to the discharging of the people from the oth and obedience towards such Princes) which is the right intent of your Romish censures, as your owne woordes import, though your cause were neuer so good, as yours is starke naught, you then turne religion into rebellion, patience into violence, wordes into weapons, preaching into fighting, fidelitie into periurie, subiection into sedition, and in steede
of the seruantes of GOD, which you might bee by enduring, you be∣come the Souldiers of Satan by resisting the powers which GOD hath ordayned. Phi. Your threates were somewhat, if the Church had not first deposed them. Theo. Pull not out your owne eyes with your owne handes. The Church hath no such Commission from Christ. Shee can not dis∣charge smaller dueties, as of children to their Parents, and wiues to their husbandes: much lesse greater, as subiection, othe, and loyaltie to Prin∣ces. Say if you dare that the Preceptes of subiection and submission vn∣to Princes in the sacred Scriptures doe not binde Bishoppes as well as others.The precepts of God for obedience to Princes bind Bishops as well as o∣thers. If they doe, then marke what mockeries you make of the woorde of God. Rom. 13. What mocke∣ries the Iesu∣its must make of the Scrip∣tures before they can de∣pose Princes by the word of God. Let euery soule (and therefore euery Bishoppe) bee subiect to the higher Powers, that you will haue to stande vntill the Bishoppes de∣pose them, and take their power from them. Rom. 13. You must bee subiect, the Bishoppes you meane as long as they list. For if they like not their Prince, by your Doctrine they may displace him. 1. Pet. 2.Submit your selues to the king as excelling (all others:) but you will bee sure to excell him, and when you see your time to make him the meanest amongest the people. Luke. 20. Giue vnto Caesar the thinges that bee Caesars, but if Caesar anger you, you take from him goods, Landes, Scepter, sworde, life and all. O worthie interpre∣ters of Gods heauenly will! A fewe such glozes will helpe Christ himselfe out of his kingdome, such cunning you haue to defeate the commaunde∣mentes of the holy Ghost, and to spoyle innocent and Christian Princes of their Crownes, when you lyst to displace them. Phi. They bee your foolish additions, and not ours. Theo. Auoyde the textes which wee bring without these or the like constructions, and take the whole cause for your labour. Well you may florish with the name of the Church, where I say, the Bishoppes; and require some causes be∣fore Princes shoulde bee deposed,The Iesuites pretend that lawe, order & iudgement shuld be obser∣ued in the de∣posing of prin¦ces, but the Pope wilbe tied no farder than to one of these. which I referre to the discretion of the deposer: but in effect your answeres must bee as I report them. For what if the Pope offer open wrong to Princes of his owne Religion, as hee did to Philippe the Faire, King of Fraunce, to Frederike the second Germane Emperour, and to many others? Who shall reuerse his definitiue sentence by your doctrine, but himselfe, that either for shame may not, or for pride will not relent from his error? Phi. Therefore wee referre the right of deposing Princes to the Church because wee woulde bee sure to (haue it done by Lawe, order, and iudgement.) Theo. And that solemne pro∣ces of Lawe, order and iudgement in your Church, which you crake of, when all is done, is nothing els but the Popes pleasure: for hee will bee tied nei∣ther to Councell, nor Canon, farther than standeth with his liking; his Decrees be Canons, and a reason of his fact may no man aske him by your Lawes, and therefore Princes haue a warme sute to depend on such Lawes, or∣ders, and iudgements.
As for the Church of Christ she neuer tooke any such thing vpon her, neither did shee euer make any Decree that Prelats might depose Princes. She endu∣red as well heretikes and Apostataes, as Pagans and persecutours, many hundred yeeres to the glorious triall of her fayth, and eternall reward of her patience. Onely Gregorie the 7. Bishop of Rome more than a thousande yeres after Christ, in the heighth of his pride and furie, gaue the first onset to depose his Lord and master, and others after him were easily led to followe his exam∣ple: but to this day neuer christian king, nor Realme acknowledged or obey∣ed that power in the Pope, which yet he doth wickedly chalenge, as you do wil∣fully defend. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. The exāples of disobediēt Princes to the Church and of their punishment or confusion.It may please the gentle readers to enforme their consciences partly by that is sayde before, and specially by that which followeth. Where they shall finde that streight vppon the first conuersion of kinges to the faith, as the good and godly haue e∣uer obeyed the Church, and submitted themselues to ecclesiasticall censures and discipline: so the euill and obstinate could neuer orderly discharge themselues from the same, without euident note of iniustice, tyrannie, and irreligiositie; and were ei∣ther in fine brought to order & penance, or else to confusion both temporal and eternal. Theo. Hee must be very gentle that will enforme his conscience with your bare surmises; other enformations you giue none. That which is said before, is to small purpose, that which followeth is to smaller. Neuer good, nor god∣ly king obeyed the Popes sentence of deposition, and besides the Pope, neuer Church, Councell, nor Pastour offered any such wrong to Christian or hea∣then Princes. Some late Princes haue beene wearie with the Popes practi∣ses, but neuer anie obayed his sentence of deposition.What you call orderly discharging of themselues, I knowe not; the wisest and worthiest Princes that those dayes bred, neither dissenting in fayth from the Bishop of Rome, nor then doubting of his Pastoral headship ouer the Church, (such was the blindnes of their times:) yet openly despised and vtterly resisted, his arrogant censures in depriuing Princes: and howsoeuer by warres, conspi∣racies and treasons hee tyred some of them, (God giuing Princes for the neg∣lect of his trueth and number of their sinnes, into the handes and power of Antichrist) yet others bridled and kirbed your holy father himself in such sort that he had small ioy of his enterprise. The Pope in greater dāger with God for abusing his keyes, than Princes for resisting his attempts.Of their eternall confusion, neither you nor I be fit iudges: wee must leaue that to the sonne of God: howbeit I see no cause but the Pope is in farre more daunger before God for his impious abusing the keyes to warrant periurie, se∣dition, murder and treason against Magistrates, than any Prince can bee for the necessarie defending of his person and Realme, against such violence. The keyes are to bee feared if they be rightly vsed; but if you wrenche them to serue your rages, you bind your selues, not others, whom your vngodly dealings can not hurt. Your owne Lawe sayth, Apud deum & eius ecclesiam neminem graua∣re potest iniqua sententia.Caus. 11. quaest. 3. ¶ cui est. Ibidem ¶ tem∣rarium. With God & his Church, an vniust sentence can bur∣den no man: & rash iudgement, saith S. Augustine, hurteth him that iudgeth rashly.
Phi. About 13. hundered yeres agoe Babylas Bishop of Antioch excommunica∣ted the only Christian King or Emperour that then was (as some count Numerius, as others Philippe) for executing a Prince,The defence. cap. 5. Chrysost. in vitae Babyl. The example of Bishop Babylas. that was put to him, for an hostage. Whereupon, as euill Kings sometimes doe, he martyred his Bishoppe; whom S. Chryso∣stome & others reckon for the most famous martyr of that time: because he gaue by his constancie and courage is God, a notable example to all Bishops of their behaui∣our towardes their Princes; and how they ought to vse the Ecclesiasticall rodde of correction towardes them, whatsoeuer befall to their persons for the same. After the said Prince had murthered his owne Pastor;Nicep. li. 5. c. 25. then holie Pope Fabian for that he was the general sheepheard of Christendome (or as some thinke Fabian the successour of Babylas) pursued the said Emperour by like excommunication, and other meanes, till at length hee brought him to order and repentance. Afterward Saint Ambrose Bishop of Millan excommunicated the elder The∣odosius the Emperour;Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 24. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 17. Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 28. Aug. de ciuitate Dei, li. 5. ca. 26. put him to publike penance among the rest of the people; commaunded him to put off his Kingly robes; to leaue his Emperiall throne in the Chauncel, and to keepe his place among the Laitte: and prescribed him after eight monethes penance, to make a temporall Law for prouiso, against the occasi∣ons of such crimes as the saide Emperour had committed, and for which he was excommunicated. This was an other world than we now are in:Our shameles age. marueilous courage and zeale in Bishops for Gods cause: much humilitie and obedience in Princes. Then was there no flatterer so shamefull, nor heretique on earth so impudent as to make the temporal King aboue all correction of Gods Church and their owne Pastours: nothing being more common in the histories of all ages than that Princes haue receiued discipline. As when Anastasius the Emperour was excommunicated by Symmachus, Lo∣tharius, and Micheal Emperours, by Nicolas the first, and particular Princes by their prouinciall Bishops:Diuers prin∣ces excom∣municated by their Pastors. as we see in the records of all Nations. Therefore we will stand only vpon more famous and auncient examples. Innocentius the first,Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 34. Georg. Patriar. in vita. chrysos. excommunicated Archadius the Emperour and his wife Queene Eudoxia, for that they disobayed and persecuted their Bishoppe S. Chryso∣stome. We will report the iudiciall sentence briefly, because it is much to the purpose and full of Maiestie. O Emperour (said Pope Innocentius well neare 1200 yeres agoe) the blood of my brother Iohn Chrysostome crieth to God against thee,The sentence of excommu∣nication gi∣uen by In∣nocentius Bi∣shop of Rome against the Emperour. thou hast cast out of his chaire the great Doctor of the world; and in him, by thy wiues (that delicate Dalida) persuasion hast persecuted Christ. Therfore I (though a poore sinful soule) to whom the throne of the great Apostle Saint Peter is committed, doe excommunicate thee and her, and do separate you both from the holy Sacraments: commaunding that no Priest, nor Bishop, vnder paine of depriuation, after this my sentence come to their knowledge, giue or minister the said Sacraments vnto you. Theo. Fairely shot, but quite besides the marke. Phi. Why so? Theo.
Excommuni∣cation doth not infer de∣position. The Iesuits proue that some Princes were excom∣municated, when they should proue they were de∣posed. With Idola∣ters and Infi∣deles we may communicate in earthly, but not in heauēly things.Our question is whether Prelates may depriue Princes of their Crownes, and you proue Bishops may deny them the word and Sacraments, if the cause so require. Phi. Is not that to the purpose? Theo. Not a whit. You saw we confessed so much before without vrging. What need you then spend time to proue it? Phi. If you graunt that, the rest will soone follow. Theo. We did and doe graunt, that with heretikes & Apostataes, be they princes or priuate men, no Christian Pastor or people may communicate. Phi. Wee desire no more. Theo. Inferre then. Phi. Ergo no Christian pastour nor people may obay them. Theo. This consequent hath beene often framed, and often denied, and now you beginne with a long discourse to proue the antecedent. Phi. The sequele is sure. If we may not communicate with them, wee may not obay them. Theo. What els haue we doone all this while but re∣fell that sequele? We may not communicate likewise with Idolaters and Infi∣dels. May we therefore not obay them? Phi. With Idolaters and Infidels we may not communicate in spirituall and heauenly things, but in temporal and earthly we may, and for that cause must obay them if they beare the sword. Theo. We say the like for Apostataes and heretikes. We may not commu∣nicate with them in diuine things, but in terrene things we may, and therefore we must obay them if they beare the sword. Phi. Heretikes be excommunicated, and so be not Infidels. Theo. Infi∣dels be without the Church of their owne accord, and heretikes be put out:Infidels of their owne accord be out of the church, heretikes be thrust out. this is all the difference betwixt them. Againe, your own Law saith, and true it is that excommunication doth not hinder any priuate Vt suprà pag. 350. vtilitie, necessitie or duty, how much lesse doth it barre the publike vtilitie, necessitie and dutie that sub∣iects owe their Souereignes? But these reasons were euen now opposed against you, and you retired from the Scriptures to the vse and practise of of Christs Church; promising as we tooke you, to bring vs not the selfe same weake and lame sequele, which we refuted before, but some plaine and apparant example, where the Church of Christ deposed Princes from their seats, and discharged the subiects from their alleageance. This if you doe, we be readie to giue you the hearing: If you runne bragging and vaunting of an other match, we knowe your mishap, a rotten tree will neuer yeeld sounde tym∣ber, you would if you could, and because you do not, wee conclude you can not. Phi. Yet answere that we bring, and of the sequele we will talke farther anon. Theo. That I will, what bring you? Phi. Numerius or Philip, it skilleth not whether, Theodosius, Arcadius, Anastasius, Lotharius, & Micha∣el, the yongest of them 700 yeres olde, though they were great and mightie Princes and Emperours, yet were they excommunicated by Bishops. Theo. Princes in the primatiue Church were excommuni∣cated, & yet honored and obayed, ergo depositiō is no point of excōmuni∣cation. The Princes were heretiks & yet obaied & serued, ergo heresie then was no depri∣uation from their Crowns. The Iesuites examples are flat against the depriuati∣on of Princes.Your owne conclusion you haue suspended till anon, in the mean season heare ours and that out of your owne words. These Princes were excommunica∣ted, as you say, but they were also serued, honoured and obayed by all their Christian subiects, Bishops and others, as wee say and you can not
denie it: ergo we may serue, honour and obey Princes notwithstanding they bee persons excōmunicate; and consequently, your applying of scriptures that wee may not salute them, nor keepe companie with them, is a violent deprauing of these textes, and refuted by the manifest practise of Christes Church. And because wee bee come so farre, I will adde somewhat touching the rest of your wise pretences; Constantius, Valens, Valentinian the youn∣ger, Anastasius, Iustinian, Heraclius, Constantine the 4. and others were hereticall Princes, Iulian an open Apostata: and yet the Church of Christ endured, serued and obeyed them, not in temporall things only, but in ecclesia∣sticall also, so farre as their Lawes did not impugne the faith, or corrupt good manners. Phi. You inferre vpon our examples, which we can auoyde when wee wil, but you answere them not. Theo. Our illation, which you shall neuer auoyd, proueth your examples to conclude for vs, and not against vs. You shewe that Princes were remoued from the Sacraments, which we graunt: but that they were remoued from their kingdomes, which we denie, that you shewe not: and so by your silence you confesse that to bee most true, which wee affirme, that hereticall and excommunicate Princes must haue their due subiection, honour and tribute as they had before they fell to such impieties, because they bee perils to their soules, not forfeytures of their Crownes: Other an∣swere we neede not make you since this will suffice. And yet if wee would examine your examples by the pole, I coulde take many of them tardie.Chrysost. contrae. gentiles, liber continens vit Babylae Mar∣tyris. This report of Babylas can not stand with the Church storie. A booke written in Chrysostomes name witnesseth that Babylas Bishoppe of Antioche excluded a Christian Emperour out of the Church, for murdering a young Prince committed to him for an ho∣stage: and was martyred by the same tyrant for his constancie: but this can not stand with the stories of the Church, nor with your owne Author whom you alleage for the repentance and submission that you say this Em∣perour was after brought to by Fabian the generall sheephearde of Chri∣stendome. Eusebius who wrate an hundreth yeeres before Chrysostome, sayth, that Babylas Bishoppe of Antioche died in prison vnder Decius an heathen Ty∣rant. After Philip succeeded Decius,Euseb. li. 6. ca. 39. who for hatred of Philip persecuted the Church: in the which persecution Fabianus Bishoppe of Rome was martyred: and Babylas Bishoppe of Antioche died in prison after the (constant) confession of his fayth.Niceph. lib. 5. cap. 26. Babylas died in prison vn∣der Decius, & not slaine by Numerius or Philip. Chrysost. contra gentiles. With him agreeth Nicephorus, Baby∣las sub Decio post confessionem fortiter obitam in vinculis discessit. Babylas after hee had made a stout confession of his fayth dyed in Prison vnder Deci∣us. If hee died vnder Decius, howe coulde hee bee slaine by Philippus or Numerius that were before Decius? If hee deceased in Prison, how can your Chrysostome say, that hee was caried out of Prison to his death and slaine? Can you reconcile these thinges and not giue one of your Authors the lie? If that declamation were Chrysostomes, hee wrate it when
he came fresh from the Philosophers schooles, as both the stile & matter argue, and before he was Bishoppe, as his owne woordes declare. For speaking of the place where Babylas was Bishoppe: he sayth, Nostri huius gregis curam gerebat, he was Pastor of this our flocke: and Chrysostome was Bishop of Constan∣tinople,Chrysost. contra Gentil. not of Antioche. Who pursued the saide Emperour by like excommunication for killing his Pa∣stor, since the Pastor was aliue after the Emperour was dead, and died in prison without any violence, neither can you tell, neither neede wee care. Of Philip, Nicephorus sayth no such thing in the place which you quote: hee repeateth on∣ly that which Eusebius long before reported in these words:Niceph. lib. cap. 25. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 34. The Prince instructed to aske pardon at gods hands for al his for∣mer sinnes, & not depriued of his Crown. Of Philip the fame is, that fauouring Christ, and willing the night before Easter to ioyne with the multitude of Christians in their prayers, hee was not suffered so to doe by the Bishoppe that then was vnlesse hee would first acknowledge his sinnes, and keepe his place with the repentants. Otherwise he could not be admitted, because his sinnes were many. And they say that hee gladly hear∣kened (to the Bishop) and shewed his syncere and religious mynde to God∣ward by his deedes. The ground of the whole, in him that first wrate it, is but hearesay: the prin∣cipall matter, whether the Prince were remooued from the communion, or ne∣uer before admitted to the Lordes table, very doubtfull. The thing required at his handes, was no more but to humble himselfe in the sight of God, to whome all Princes must stoope with as great deuotion and submission as the poo∣rest woormes that are on earth. The conclusion may bee, that Princes then were trayned to Godlinesse; but that they were depriued of their kingdomes, is a wicked and vngodly suggestion of yours. Wee may with as good reason say, a Frier many tymes doeth shriue the Pope: Ergo a Frier may depose the Pope, which I thinke your holy Father will not like of. S. Ambrose is the only exā∣ple in al anti∣quitie (iustly proued) that a Bishop did excōmunicat a Prince. Theodoret. li. 5. cap. 17. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 18. The maner of S. Ambrose his excommuni∣cation.Saint Ambrose is the onely example in all antiquitie, which fully proueth that a Bishoppe did prohibite a Prince to enter the Church and to bee parta∣ker of the Lordes table: which wee neither deny, nor dispraise, considering the cause and the manner of the fact. The Prince, for a tumult raysed by some of the inhabitants of Thessalonica, caused his souldiers, without finding or searching the doers, to murder the people; were they straungers or Citizens, faultlesse or faultie, to the number of seuen thousand. After this execution at his next com∣ming to the Church, S. Ambrose stepped to the Church dore, and sayd, Thou seemest, O Prince, not to vnderstand what a monsterous slaughter of people is committed by thee, neither doth rage suffer thee to weigh with thy selfe what thou hast done: yet must thou know that from dust we came, & to dust we shal. Let not therfore the brightnes of thy robes hide frō thee the weak∣nes of flesh that is vnder them. Thy subiects are of the same metall which thou art, & serue the same Lord that thou doest. With what eyes therefore wilt thou behold the house of this cōmon Lord, & with what feete wilt thou
tread on his holy pauements? Wilt thou reach these hāds dropping yet with the blood of innocents to receiue the most sacred bodie of the Lorde? Wilt thou put that precious blood of his to thy mouth, which in a rage hast spilt so much Christian blood? Depart rather, and heape not one sinne on an other, neither refuse this bond, which the Lord of all doeth ratifie in heauen. It is not much, and it will restoare thee the health of thy soule. This strake the Christian Prince to the heart, and turning about hee went home with teares:Sozome. lib. 7. cap. 24. The Iesuites helpe this storie with their admix∣tions. and all the tyme that hee was kept out of the Church, as a man in mourning hee woulde not put on his Imperiall robes: but that Am∣brose commaunded him to put off his kingly robes, and to leaue his Imperiall throne in the Chauncel, this is your venemous admixtion; the storie sayth no such thing. You falsely father it on S. Ambrose, to make men beleeue, that the Bishoppe might as well haue taken the princes scepter and sworde from him, as his robes and his throne. Phi. Did not S. Ambrose send him woorde that he should goe out of the Chauncell,Theodoret. li. 5. cap. 18. and stande among the people? Theo. After his reconciliation, when they approched to the diuine mysteries, the Prince came within the barres which were prouided for those that shoulde helpe the Bishop to minister the Lordes supper,Theod. Ibidem. as his manner was at Constantinople, to whom the Bishoppe sent word, being himselfe at the Lords table, that those Rayles were prepared for the Priestes, and that it was not lawfull for any man else to come within them. And so Sozomene confesseth.Sozome. li. 7. Cap. 24. S. Ambrose would not that the prin∣ces presence should hinder the seruice of God. The Emperours, sayth he, were wont for an excellencie aboue the people to sit in the same place where the Priestes were. Ambrose seeing this to fauour of flatterie assigned the Emperours a place in the Church next to the Chauncel, before the people, but after the Priestes. This order Theodosius and other Princes that succeeded him, great∣ly praysed, and we see it obserued from that day to this. So that Saint Am∣brose neither ment to take their seates from them within the Church, nor their robes without the Church; but thought it reason that the Princes precepts should not trouble the Priestes in the seruice of God. And therefore take flatte∣rie and heresie to your selues againe, we like and commend both the pietie of the Prince and the grauitie of the Bishop: but your malitious deprauing of the sto∣rie and mischieuous abusing the zeale of S. Ambrose to warrant rebellions & insurrections against Princes,Princes may be penitent for their sins, & yet keepe their Crowns. whiles they repent them of their sinnes, wee doe not like; the more honourable his act, that sought to saue the Princes soule with the hazard of his owne life, the more detestable is yours, that fish for Princes Crownes vnder a shewe of penance, as if earthly kings might not bewaile their sinnes, and keepe their seales, which you are loth they should. If Anastasius had beene excommunicated by Simachus, it hurteth not vs, deposed he was not;Anastasius excommuni∣cation is not certainly proued. by him or any other: and with an hereticall Prince, neither Simachus, neither any other christian Bishop might communicate: yet euen thē was the East Church subiect to a Prince that fauoured Eutiches heresie, and Italie to a follower of Arius; and the contention, which of the two shoulde bee
Bishop of Rome,Liber Pontifi. in vita Symmach. Symmachus or Laurentius, was referred to the iudgement of king Theodoricus an Arian heretike: but that Symmachus did excōmunicate Anastasius I find it in no authentike writer. Euagrius sayth that some condē∣ned Anastasius as an aduersarie to the Councell of Chalcedon,Euag. lib. 3. cap. 34. and reckened him out of the number of christian Emperours. Yea they of Hierusalem ac∣cursed (or excommunicated) him. Niceph. lib. 16. cap. 35. Sabel. Aenead. 8. lib. 2. Platina in Gelasio 1. Martinus in Anastasio. Ioh. Marius de schismat. & concil. cap. 6.Nicephorus rehearsing the wordes of Euagrius, addeth that they of Hieru∣salem excommunicated Anastasius yet liuing, which was more than Euagrius said. Sabellicus and Platina your very friends say this Emperour was excom∣municated by Gelasius, the second bishop before Symmachus: Martinus Polo∣nus and Iohannes Marius affirme it was done by Anastasius the next before Symmachus: you say Symmachus did it: which of these reports is ye truest, can you tell? A witnes is not trusted if he be taken with two tales, we finde you in three, and that touching matters done a thousand yeeres before your time: (the wiser & elder Historiographers whence you should fetch it, as Regino, Sigiber∣tus, Vrspergensis, Frisingensis, Marianus, Scotus and others affirming no such thing; the later and most partiall faintly comming in with, Platina in Gelas. 1. sunt qui scribunt, Sabellicus lib. 2. vt tradunt quidam, there bee that write so: as some say,) shal we beleeue you? Your Canon Lawe, the very hart and life of al your recordes at Rome, hath a very miraculous letter of the Pope Gelasius to this Anastasius, where Ge∣lasius telleth the Emperour howe Zacharie Bishoppe of Rome deposed the king of Fraunce and put Pipine the father of Charles the Emperour in his place,Caus. 15. quaest. 6. ¶ Alius. and discharged all the Frenchmen from their othe and allegeance: Whereas Zacharie was Bishoppe of Rome two hundreth and fourtie yeeres after Gelasius was dead, and Charles beganne not his Empire till eight hun∣dreth after Christ, Gelasius dying within fiue hundreth. Thus Hilderike king of Fraunce was deposed two hundreth yeres before hee was borne:A strange kind of depo∣sing Princes. and Gela∣sius wrate newes of Charles three hundreth yeeres after Gelasius was deade and buried. By such deuises you may soone depose Princes, if not by mutinies, yet at least by prophesies. Phi. The gloze warneth you that some take these to bee Gratians, and not Gelasius words. Theo. But Gratian himselfe warned you before that they were Gelasius wordes to Anastasius the Emperour: for so he prefixeth the title. Vnde Gelasius Papa Anastasio Imperatori.Ibidem. In which sense Pope Gelasius wrate thus to the Emperour Anastasius. Then followe these woordes summed in red letters before, as his manner of alleaging is throughout the whole bodie of your Canon Law. And therfore vnlesse you will say the collectour of your De∣crees & Decretals wrate the title waking, and the text sleeping; you can not choose but see what morter hath been vsed at Rome to plaister your holy fathers rotten right to depose Princes.Michaels ex∣cōmunicatiō witnessed in no auncient writer. Lotharius and Michael Emperours, you say, were excōmunicated by Nicho∣las the first. If we should aske you how you prooue it, perhaps it woulde trouble
you more than you think. Late writers in this case we trust not, & auncient wee finde none that report any such thing of Michael.Platina in Nicolao 1. Zonaras in Mi∣chaele filio Theophili. Platina saith, that Nicholas the first entertained the Embassadours of this Michael with great curtesie & sent them home with presents (to their master.) Zonaras a Grecian confesseth that the legates of the Bishop of Rome in a Councell assembled at Constanti∣nople, deposed Ignatius and confirmed Photius. And though you haue shuffled into your Decretals a flaunting Epistle vnder the name of Nicholas the first to this Michael to frustrate the iudgement of those corrupt Legates, and to re∣proue the Prince for his ouer-lustie letters,Epist. Nicolai 1. ad Michael. Imperatorem, tomo. concil. 2. yet knowe you that no good storie maketh mention of any such strife betweene them; and that in the letter it selfe, notwithstanding it be a perfect image of your shyfting and forging to make the Popes pride somewhat auncient, yet is there no word nor signe of excommuni∣cation denounced or threatned against Michael. Lotharius you grossely mistake; it was not the Emperour, whom Nicho∣las the first offered to excommunicate, but a king of Lorraine named Lotharius and brother to Lodouike the second,Regino in anno 855. & Otho rising. lib. 6. cap. 2. Regino in anno 866. that held the Empire both during the life of Nicholas the first, & after his death. Neither did the Pope excommunicate that king as you auouche; but hee willed the king to beware lest he fell within the compas of that sentence which was giuen against his harlot, and lest him selfe were forced to publish that his wilfulnes to the Church, and so the King should become as an Ethnike and Publicane to all Christians. And that the deed was not done you may perceiue by Pope Adrians behauiour & speach to Regino in anno 869. Otho Frisingen. lib. 6. cap. 3.Lotharius, and the rest, when he ministred the Lords Supper to them at their cōming to Rome: yet the attempt was so strange, that Otho Frisingensis saith, See the kingdome decreasing, and the Church aspiring to that authoritie, that she will iudge kings. The famous, and as you say maiesticall excommunication of Arcadius and Eudoxia by Innocentius,This excom∣munication is proued to be a mere for∣gerie before. well neere 1200. yeres agoe, is a ridiculous and pee∣uish corruption deuised by some practiser at Rome, and embraced ouer greedi∣ly by Nicephorus, and other later Grecians in fauour of Chrysostome. Which insolent fansie wide from the matter we striue for, and full of forgerie, because it is refuted before, I may well ouerskippe. If it were true, as it is apparently false, it remoueth Princes from the Sacraments, but not from their Scepters. Thus of seuen examples pretended, that Princes were excōmunicated in the auncient times of the Church, only one is duely proued, and no mo within 860. yeres after Christ: & that not by the Bishop of Rome, but by S. Ambrose Bi∣shop of Millan.Of seuen ex∣amples but one proued, and that of no Bishop of Rome. The rest are either enforced against the stories of the Church, or boldly presumed by you besides the stories. And yet were they all prooued and confessed, they make nothing for your purpose. The question is not whether bi∣shops shall receiue kinges with open and obstinate vices to the Lordes table, but whether they may chase them from their kingdomes or no. We mislike not repentance in Princes, but resistance in subiects; bind their sinnes as fast as you can, but pul them not downe from their Seates.
The cause why the Church of Christ did so rarely ex∣communicate Princes. August. contra Parmenian. lib. 3. cap. 2. Excommuni∣cations of whole realms then be much more proude, pernitious & sacrilegious. August. contra epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2.And yet least you should thinke that Princes then had no faultes, or that learned and godly Bishops did in those dayes forbeare to excommunicate Prin∣ces rather for feare or flatterie, than for any Religion or duetie: marke what care S. Augustine will haue obserued, howe and when discipline shoulde bee v∣sed. If contagion of sinne haue inuaded a multitude, the mercifull seueritie of correction from God himselfe is necessarie; nam consilia separationis & ina∣nia sunt, & perniciosa, atque sacrilega, quia & impia, & superba fiunt, & plus pertur∣bant infirmos bonos, quàm corrigant animosos malos: For (then) the attempt to ex∣communicate is frustrate, and pernicious, yea sacrilegious: because it be∣commeth both impious and arrogant, and more troubleth the good that be weake, than correcteth the euill that be carelesse. Neither was this the iudgement of S. Augustine alone: but the generall wisedome of Christes church, as himselfe professeth when he entereth into this question. In hac velut angustia quaestionis non aliquid nouum aut insolitum dicam, sed quod sanitas obseruat ecclesiae, vt cum quisque fratrum, id est Christianorum intus in ecclesiae societate constitutorum, in aliquo tali peccato fuerit deprehensus, vt anathe∣mate dignus habeatur, fiat hoc vbi periculum schismatis nullum est, atque id cum ea dilectione de qua ipse alibi praecepit dicens, vt inimicum non eum existimetis, sed corripite vt fratrew. Non enim estis ad eradicandum, sed ad corrigendum. In the straitnes of this question I will say nothing that is newe or vnwonted, but that which the soundnes of the church obserueth:The whole Church ob∣serued this moderation which Austen speaketh of. that when any of our bre∣thren, I meane Christians within the Church is deprehended in any such fault that hee deserueth excommunication, let that be done, where there is no daunger of any schisme: and with such loue as the Apostle commanded saying, Esteeme him not as an enemie, but rebuke him as a brother. For you are not to roote vp but to amend. And to this ende S. Augustine largely disputeth throughout that chapter, shewing that excommunication is not to be vsed, where a schisme is iustly fea∣red.August. Ibidem. lib. 3. cap. 2. It can not bee an healthful reproouing by many, but when hee that is reproued hath no number to take his part. But if the same disease hath pos∣sessed many, the good haue nothing left for them to do but to sorrowe and mourne. And therefore the same Apostle finding many defiled with forni∣cation and vncleannes, in his seconde epistle to the same Corinthians, doeth not commaund them not to eate meate with such. Hee that calleth excom∣munication, a proude, pernicious and sacrilegious attempt, where any number is linked together, that a schisme may follow, what would he haue sayd to you, that excommunicate Princes and whole Realmes, whence not onely daunge∣rous schismes, but also cruell persecutions easily may, & commonly doe arise? 2. Thesalo. 3. The subiect neither may nor cā flie the Princes com∣panie.Againe, the ende of excommunication which Saint Paul toucheth, and the meane which he prescribeth do cease in Princes. If any man obey not our say∣ings, haue no cōpanie with him that hee may be ashamed. Now the princes companie the subiects may not flie, both in respect of the necessitie, that al men haue to deale with the magistrate, & duetie that must be yeelded to the Princes
person and preceptes. And how should the people make their Prince ashamed, whom by Gods Law they must honour and obey in all thinges, and by whom they must iustly bee punished if they offer default in any thing? And this the church of God wisely considering neuer vrged any Subiectes to dishonour their Princes, neither did Sainct Ambrose separate Theodosius from the companie of men: but hee charged him in Gods name to refraine the church and Sacramentes vntill hee appeased the wrath of God by repentaunce. Hee charged not the people to disgrace or shunne their Prince, but he burdened the Princes owne conscience,Theodoret. lib. 5 cap. 18. knowing full well his religious disposition, and of∣fering his life into the Princes handes, if he misliked the fact. Your selues prouide for this mischiefe, but, as your maner is, by wicked & craftie dissembling,The Iesuites prouide for this mischiefe by wilie dis∣sembling with Princes, till they be strong enough to take their crownes from them. not by christian and sober forbearing the thing which you should not aduenture. The Pope who is farre enough off and free from al ha∣zardes, hee must first pronounce the sentence, you will stande by and watch your time, when you may safely without losse of life or goods put his sen∣tence in execution: till that pinch come, you may sweare and stare, you bee lo∣uing and obedient Subiects: but then in any case you must shew your selues, or else you be accursed for euer. Toledo teacheth you, that if there be danger of life or goods, you may finely iuggle with excommunicate Princes, and serue thē, and honour them with al circumstances, till you be strong enough to take their Crownes from their heades in spite of their heartes, and then you must spare them Tum demum, obliget Catholi∣cos, quando pub∣lica eiusdē bul∣lae executio fieri poterit. facultas concessa Roberto Parsonio & Ed∣mundo Campia∣no, 14. April. 1480. 8. Tim. 2. Ierem. 19. no longer: and so much the dispensation which Campion and Parsons obtayned of his holinesse, when they came into this Realme, importeth. Phi. Woulde you that men shoulde communicate with hereticall Princes? Theo. Condemne their errours but praie for their persons: for so the Apostle willeth you. I exhort you therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers and intercessions bee made for kinges and for al that are in authoritie: when kinges were Infidels and Idolaters. So God commaunded his people, whē they were caried to Babylon. Seek the prosperitie of the citie, whether I haue caused you to bee caried awaie captiues, and pray to the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof shall you haue peace. Which Tertullian witnesseth the christians did in all their publike assemblies.Tertul. in Apo∣loget. The christiās praied not on∣ly for their conuersion, but also for their health and welfare. Wee call vpon the euerlasting God for the health of our Emperours, alwaies beseeching God to sende e∣uerie of them long life, happie raigne, trustie seruantes, valiant souldiers, faithfull counsellours, orderly subiectes, and the worlde quiet: and what soeuer people or Prince can wish for. Examine your selues how farre you be from the innocencie and integritie of Christes church. They wished all hap∣pinesse to heathen Princes, and praied for the securitie of their liues, and pro∣speritie of their states. You curse and ban christian Princes, and lay plots not onely for enimies to inuade them, but for subiectes to shake off the yoke, and shorten the daies of their naturall and lawfull Princes. Phi. The church of Christ praied for her Princes if they were Pagans,The church praied for the prosperitie of hereticall Princes. but not if they were heretikes. Theo. What was Constantius; a Pagan or
an heretike. Phi. An Arian. Theo. For him the church praied. Phi. For his con∣uersion. Theo. For his health, raigne, and welfare. Phi. Heretikes perhaps, like himselfe, did. Theo. I say Catholiks. Phi. It was then at the beginning of his raigne before his impietie was notorious. Theo. About you fetch, and all will not serue. This testimonie that the church praied for Constantius, though an heretike, was giuen by a Councell of catholike Bishoppes in the 21. yeare of his raigne not long before his death. Phi. Where finde you that the church praied for him? Theo. Reade the two letters, which the West Bishops sent from Ariminum to Constantius; and see whether it be not cleare.Socra. li. 2. ca. 37 Sozom. lib. 4.cap. 18. In the first thus they say, Wee beseech you that you cause vs not to staie from our cures, but that the bishops togither with the people seruing God in peace, may humblie praie for your health, king∣dome and safetie, in which the diuine Maiestie long preserue you. The con∣clusion of their second letter is this,Socrat. Ibidem. Accustomed praiers al∣waies made, in the church for Constātius the Arian; & the West Bi∣shops desirous to continue the same. Hil. ad Constan. lib. 2. Athan. Apolog. ad Constan. For this cause we beseech your clemen∣cie the second time, most religious Lord and Emperour, that you command vs to depart to our churches, if it so please your godlines, before the sharpnes of winter come, that wee may make our accustomed praiers togither with the people to the almightie God, and our Lord and Sauiour Christ, for your imperie, as we haue alwaies purposed, and now wish to continue. The writings of Hilarie and Athanasius to this verie Prince confirme the same. We beseech your clemencie to permit, saith Hilarie, that the peo∣ple may haue such teachers as they like, such as they thinke well of, such as they choose, & let them solemnize the diuine mysteries and make prayers for your safetie & prosperitie. Athanasius by his prayers made for this prince in the open assemblie of the people cleareth himselfe from hauing intelligence with Magnentius the murtherer of his brother. With what eyes could I be∣hold that bloodie homicide? or howe coulde I but cal to minde your bro∣thers face, whiles I made my praiers for your health? Howe coulde I in∣dure to thinke euill of your brother, or sende letters to his enimie, and not rather pray and beseech God for your welfare, which verily I did? A wit∣nesse hereof is first the Lord, which hath giuen you the whole Empire, that was left by your Fathers. There can witnesse also with me Felicissimus the captaine of Aegypt, Asternis the Earle, Paladius the master of your Pa∣lace, and others.The zealous praier of A∣tha. and the people for their Prince though an heretike. Athan. Ibidem. My wordes were, Let vs pray for the welfare of the most religious Emperour Constantius: and presently the whole people with one voice cryed; O Christ bee fauorable to Constantius, and this crie they continued a long time. And appealing to the Emperours owne conscience & knowledge: You haue good triall that all (the christians) make their pray∣ers and supplications to God that you may liue in safetie and continuallie raigne in peace. And God graunt you, O most gracious Prince, to liue ma∣ny yeares. Heare you deaffe of yeares, and dul of hartes; the church of Christ praied for hereticall Princes in the middest of their impietie and tyrannie: And when
it was but obiected to Athanasius, that hee and others wrote letters to one that rebelled and tooke armes against the Prince:Athan. eadem Apol. ad Constā. Rebellion & depriuation of Princes not so much as thought on by christians, and specially by Bishops. hee made answere, Vincat quaeso apud the veritas, & ne relinquas suspicionem contra vniuer sam Ecclesiam, quasi talia aut cogitentur aut scribantur à christianis & potissimum Episcopis. I beseech you, let truth take place with you, and leaue not this suspition vp∣on the catholike church, as though any such things were written or thought on by Christians, and especially by Bishoppes. Howe farre then were these men from your humours, which professe to depose Princes, and not on∣lie licence Subiectes to rebell, but incite them to kill their Soueraignes, as you did lately Parry with pardon, praise, and recompence both here and in heauen? Phi. They might do this in the beginning of his raigne before hee discoue∣red his heresie. Theo. These bee senslesse shiftes. Hilarius wrote his booke after the Councell kept at Millan by Constantius, and Athanasius his, after Liberius was banished. For those pointes be mentioned in their writinges, and fell out the one immediatly before the other after the Councel of Arimi∣num. And therefore the rathest of these defences came seuenteene yeares after the beginning of Constantius raigne and in the hoatest of his tyrannicall and hereticall persecution, as the bookes themselues declare: And yet they not onely indured but also obeyed him as their liege Lord, and detested all re∣sistance in deede and thought as vnlawfull for Christians, and chiefly for Bi∣shops Phi. But when in processe of time some Princes,The defence, Cap. 5. When & vpō what occasi∣ons spirituall Pastors began to vse the tem¦porall sworde. through Gods iust iudgement & the peoples sinne, were fallen to such contempt of religion (as it lightly happeneth by heresie and Apostasie) that excommunication, being onely but a spirituall penal∣tie, or other ordinarie Ecclesiasticall discipline would not serue: then as well Bishops as other godlie persons, their owne Subiectes, did craue aide and armes of other Princes for their chastisement; as most holie and auncient Popes (euen in the olde dayes when the Protestants confesse them to haue beene godlie Bishoppes) did incite catholike kinges to the same: that those whom the spirituall rodde coulde not fruit∣fullie chastise, they might by externe or temporall force bring them to order and repentaunce; or at least defende their innocent Catholike Subiectes from vniust vexation. Theo. You begin nowe to shewe your selues in your right kinde. From the church you leape to the fielde; meaning belike, as Iulius the seconde did, that since Peters keyes wil not pleasure you, Paules sworde shall better steede you. The side of your booke seemeth to direct vs when, and vppon what occasion spirituall Pastours beganne to vse the temporall sword,Spirituall Pa∣stours neuer v∣sed the tem∣porall sworde till the Pope beganne to rule all at his pleasure. but the text it selfe runneth quite awrie. Wee finde there neither time prefixed nor spirituall Pa∣stour named that euer vsed the temporall sworde. Are rebellions such trifles with you, that you thinke to proue them with a Marginall note? Phi. There is no warre in the world so iust or honorable,The defence, Cap. 5. be it ciuill or forraigne,
as that which is waged for religion,Warre for the Catholike re∣ligion both lawfull and honorable. we say for the true, auncient, Catholike, Romane religion; which by the lawes of holy church and all christian Nations, is adiudged to bee the only true worship of God; and vnto the obedience of which all Princes & peo∣ple haue yeelded themselues, either by oth, vow, or sacramentes, or euerie of these waies. For this, it is goodly and honorable to fight in such order and times, as wee bee warranted in conscience and law, by our supreme Pastours and Priestes; and not for wild condemned heresies, against most lawfull christian catholikes, kinges & Priests; as the rebellious Protestantes and Caluinistes of this time doe, without all order, law, or warrant of God or man. As the armes taken for defence of godlie honour and in∣heritāce in such sort & difference from heretical tumults, as is said, are so much more commendable and glorious; for that no crime in the world deserueth more sharpe and zealous pursuite of extreme reuenge, (whether it be in superiours or subiects) than re∣uolting from the faith to strange religions. Theo. Bee you not maruelous sharpe and sounde disputers, which alwaies proue that you neede not, and euer inferre that you should not? Phi. Wee proue directly that which wee vndertooke. Theo. What vndertooke you? Phi. That Princes might be depriued. Theo. By sentence, meane you, or by vi∣olence? Phi. By sentence if that will serue: but if they yeelde not thereto, then by violence. Theo. Your iudiciall power to giue sentence of depriuation a∣gainst them, you would faine haue established by the Scriptures and examples of the Primatiue church: howe short you came of that reckoning, I leaue the wise to consider: You proceede nowe to the violent expelling them from their Princely seates, wherein it is a world to see how idlely you hunt about, or ra∣ther purposely pursue the wrong foote, because in the right you finde no reliefe. The Iesuites should proue that sub∣iectes may rebell against their Princes for religion, and they shew that one Prince may warre vpon another.Warre for the Catholike Religion is both lawfull and honorable, you saie: you must adde of the subiectes against their Prince, or else you range cleane be∣sides our question. Wee striue not what causes may leade christian Princes to make warre on their neighbors, but whether it be lawfull or tolerable for the subiect to beare armes against his naturall and absolute Prince. You proue, which is nothing to your purpose, that princes haue waged warres for religion: & when you come to make your conclusion, you secretly conuey this vnder hand which is most in doubtt betwixt vs, and in generall termes you proclaime that warres for religion are iust and honorable. But Sir in this interprise the per∣son must be respected as well as the cause.In all warres the person must be war∣rāted to draw the sword, as well as the cause good that they fight for. Be the cause neuer so iust, if the person be not authorized by God to draw the sworde, they bee no iust nor law∣full warres but barbarous and theenish vprores. For say your selfe, when malefactours deserue to die, may priuate men put them to death without the Magistrate? Phi. No. Theo. And if they do, be they not murderers, though the crime which they reuenge, be worthy of death? Phi. They bee. Theo. Then if in priuate punishmentes men may not presume without his authoritie that beareth the sworde, much lesse may they venter on open warres (which are wilfull and furious executions by plaine force without all order of iustice)
vnlesse they be directly warranted by him that hath the sword from God to take vengeance of the wicked. Phi. We be warranted in conscience and law. Theo. Wee talke nowe of your conclusion, not of your commission. If Princes who beare the sword may lawfully wage warre for religion, is it consequent, I aske you, that priuate men which haue not the sword may doe the same? Phi. Priuate men may not beare armes without authoritie.Priuate men can giue no warrant to vse the sword. Theo. And if they doe, bee they not plaine theeues and murtherers? Phi. If they be not warranted to fight. Theo. To rifle and slea one is theft and murther by the lawes of God and man, what then are they that spoile Realmes and kill thowsandes with armed violence, but grand theeues and murtherers?They be but theeues and murtherers that vse the sword without the magistrats authoritie. Phi. If they be not lawfully authorized there∣to, they be no better than robbers and slaughterers. Theo. Then Princes may mage warre if the cause bee good, because God hath giuen them the sworde to maintaine iustice: and, if that bee refused, to offer force both at home and abroade; priuate persons may not doe the like, bee the cause ne∣uer so iust, for so much as they bee not licenced by God to beare or vse the sword. Phi. I tolde you before,Pastours can authorize no man to vse the sworde. They that beare it by Gods ordi∣nance, must li∣cence others to vse it. Pastors be no superiour iudges for bearing armes that we bee warranted. Theo. So had you neede. Your warres else for religion bee no lawfull & iust armes, but desperate and wicked tumults. But by whom are you warranted? Phi. By our supreme Pastors and Priestes. Theo. Doe Pastours and Priestes beare the sworde? Phi. I say not so, but they warrant vs to take the sworde. Theo. Can they warrant you to take the sword, that haue no autoritie to beare the sword? Phi. They be superiour iudges to these that beare the sworde. Theo. What? In temporall causes? Phi. No, but in spirituall, Theo. Fighting and killing are martiall, not spirituall affaires. Phi. Yet to be directed by spiritual Pa∣stors. Theo. We striue not for directing, but for authorizing of armes. Prea∣chers may be consulted whether the quarrell be iust, but onely the Magistrate that hath from heauen supreme power of goods, lands, life and death can war∣rant the subiect to vse the sword. Phi. The cause maketh the warre lawfull or otherwise.The defence. It is godly and honorable to fight for religion, we say: for the true, ancient, catholike, Romane religion, in such order and time as we be warranted in conscience and lawe by our supreme Pastours & Priestes: and not for vile condemned heresies against most lawfull christian catholike kinges and Priestes as the rebellious Protestants and Caluinistes of this time do, with∣out all order, law, warrant of God or man. Theo. If Nabals sheepe be not all shorne, I dare warrant you better inter∣tainement there, than euer Dauid had. Spoiles, massacres, conspiracies and treasons euen to the destruction and murther of Princes by their own seruāts,How fauora∣ble the Pa∣pistes bee to their owne tumults. if a Priest say the word, you count in your selues to be iust, honorable and godlie warres: If others doe but stand on their gard to keepe their liues and families from the bloodie rage of their enimies, seeking to put whole townes and Pro∣uinces of them to the sworde against all lawe and reason, and to disturbe the
kingdomes in the minoritie of the right Gouernours: or if they defend their an∣cient and christian liberties couenanted and agreed on by those Princes to whō they first submitted themselues, and euer since confirmed and allowed by the kinges that haue succeeded. If in either of these two cases the godly require their right and offer no wrong, impugne not their Princes, but onely saue their owne liues, you crie, rebellious heretikes, rebellious Caluinistes, furie, phrensie, mutinie,Lawes of their owne making do not excuse them from rebellion. The Iesuites take armes to depose Prin∣ces, that is, to subuert their states & liues, whom by Gods lawe they should honor and obey. & I know not what. You may pursue, depose & murther Prin∣ces, when the Bishop of Rome biddeth you & that without breach of dutie, law, or cōscience to God or man, as you vaunt, though neither life nor limme of yours be touched: wee may not so much as beseech Princes that we may be vsed like subiects not like slaues, like men not like beasts, that we may bee conuented by lawes before iudges, not murthered in corners by inquisitours: wee may not so much as hide our heades, nor pull our neckes out of the greedie iawes of that Romish wolfe, but the fome of your vncleane mouth is ready to call vs by al the names you can deuise. Howbeit looke well to your selues: it is not enough for you to haue lawes of your owne making to licence you to beare armes against your Prince, you must haue Gods law for your warrant: or else you come within the compasse of heinous and horrible rebellion. For you doe not defend your selues, but im∣pugne your Prince: you seeke not the freedom of your religion, but the sub∣uersion of other mens estates: you do not take armes that your condition may be tolerable, but that her highnes shoulde be no Prince: you saue not your own liues, but intend her death. These shamefull and manifest treasons, against the law of God, nature and nations you smooth with a few faint colours, and pub∣lish them to the whole world for iust, honorable, and godly warres. But deceiue not your selues: the breath of your mouthes may not ouerbeare the lawes of God & states of men. You must shew some better warrant than the Popes decrees, or else your rising in armes against your Prince, though the Bishoppe of Rome back and abet you with all his Buls and Decretals, is an vnlawful, irreligious and wicked rebellion. Phi. The defence. cap. 15. 2. Paral. cap. 15.Whosoeuer seeketh not after the Lord God of Israell, let him bee slaine (saide king Asa admonished by Azaria the Prophet) from the highest to the lowest without exception. And all the people and many that followed him and fled to him out of Israel from the schisme there, did sweare and vowe them-selues in the quarrell of the God of their forefathers. And they prospered and deposed Queene Maáchah Mother to Asa for Apostasie, and for worshipping the venereous God called Priapus. Theo. Doth the example of king Asa, forcing his Subiectes with an othe and vnder paine of death to seeke after the Lorde God of Israel,A king forcing his people is no proofe for subiectes op∣pressing their Prince. serue you to proue that Subiectes may assault their king and oppresse him with armes? Will this goe for a reason with you? The Magistrate may vse the sworde and put offendours to death, ergo the Subiect may vse the same and that against his Prince. Sure if you make such collections, wee shall mi∣strust
rebellion hath so possessed your braynes, that reason hath no place in you. Phi. This example proueth that heretikes may be deposed, and put to death. Theo. But by whom? By the Prince, or the people? Phi. The king I grant was the doer. Theo. Then seeke farther for your conspiracies against kinges; this ex∣ample will do you no good. Phi. The people that fledde to him out of Israel from the schisme there, did sweare and vowe themselues in the same quarrell with the king of Iudah.These straun∣gers did take an oth to serue God, but not to impugne their Prince. Theo. The straungers that fledde out of Israell for their conscience sake, tooke an oth to serue the same God, but not to beare armes against their owne countrie. Phi. They prospered and deposed Queene Maáchah mother to Asa for Apostasie and for worshipping the venereous God Priapus. Theo. You inlarge the number where you should not: which by your leaue is a plaine corruption of the Scrip∣ture. The text is,2. Chron. 15. 3. Kings 15. The mother could haue no right to the Scepter her sonne being in full posses∣sion of the crowne. And king Asa deposed Maáchah his mother from her regē∣cie, because she had made an idoll. And againe, not (they) but he deposed Ma∣áchah his mother from her estate because she had made an idol. The Queene mother was remoued from her honor & dignitie by the king her sonne for her i∣dolatrie: but Asa did not put her to death though that were the summe of the oth which the king and the rest tooke: and he that did this deede, was the true king of Iudah, and in full possession of the crowne many yeares before, and suf∣fered his mother not in her owne right but of reuerence & curtesie towards her, to inioy some part of her former degree and dignitie: from the which he lawful∣ly might and worthily did put her when shee fell to erecting and worshipping Idols. Phi. The text noteth not howe long hee was king, before hee deposed his mother.2. Chron. 15. Theo. After the death of Abiah, Asa his sonne (saieth the Scrip∣ture) raigned in his steede, in whose dayes the Land was quiet tenne yeares. Then came the AEthiopians out against him with an huge hie host, & those hee ouerthrew. And at his returne the Prophet Azariah met him and in∣couraged him to goe forwarde in the reformation of the Lande, which hee perfourmed in all the Cities of Iudah and Beniamin; and gathered all the people of the Lande togither, in the fifteenth yeare of his raigne,Asa had been king 15. yeares & aboue, be∣fore he remo∣ued his mo∣ther from her dignitie. Asaes mother lost the digni∣ty which shee had, but not the crowne, which she had not. The defence, cap. 5. Deut. cap. 13. where this oth was taken and paine appointed, before his mother was deposed. So that he, not shee was rightfull Gouernour of Iudah; and that which shee lost was either the honour and dignitie which otherwise did appertaine to so great a State as the kinges mother: or else that portion of the Lande which was assigned to her to rule vnder the king in respect of her dowrie. Howso∣euer, the kingdome shee had not: and therefore the crowne she lost not, neither finde you here a Prince deposed by his subiectes, but a Prince remouing her that in nature was his mother, in condition his subiect, from that authoritie or dignitie (choose you whether) which before of fauor not of duety he suffered her to haue. Phi. For that case also in Deuteronomie expresse charge was giuen to slea all
false Prophetes, and whosoeuer should auert the people from the true worship of God, & induce them to receiue straunge Gods and newe religions; and to destroie all their followers, were they neuer so neere vs by nature. And in the same place; that if anie Citie shoulde reuolt from the receiued and prescribed worship of God, & be∣gin to admit new religions; it should be vtterly wasted by fire and sword. Theo. Death by Gods law pro∣uided not for heretiks, but for Apostates.The commaundement in Deuteronomie toucheth not heretiks, but manifest Apostataes, such as cleane forsooke the verie name and outward pro∣fession of God, and serued straunge and new gods: and the rigour of this pre∣cept, I meane the punishment doeth not binde vs that are vnder the Gospell by the iudgement of the best learned that euer taught in the church of Christ. For by the same law of God blasphemers,Leuit. 24.20. Exod. 22.21. The penalties of Moses lawe stand not in force vnder the Gospell. Aug. contra Cresc. li. 3. ca. 50 nullis bonis in catholica hoc placet, si vs{que} ad mortem in quē∣quam, licet hae∣reticum saeuia∣tur. Deut. 13. adulterers, witches, strikers and cursers of Parentes should die: Which penalties your owne church did neuer execute, nor any christian Magistrate that euer wee reade of. Touching heretikes you heard Sainct Augustines opinion before, that it neuer pleased any good man in the catholike church that heretikes shoulde bee put to death. And there∣fore the ancient Fathers did not extend these preceptes to heresie as you doe, or else they thought them-selues and the church of Christ not bounde to the iu∣diciall part of Moses lawe, which properly concerned the Iewes Common-wealth and expired at the comming of our Sauiour. But admit this place were ment of heresie, which is not so; when God saith, that Prophetes shalbe slaine: and thou shalt slea the inhabitants of that citie with the edge of the sworde and destroie it vtterly: doeth he speake to priuate or publike persons? To priuate men he saide, Exod. 20. thou shalt not kill; ergo this precept, hee shall bee slaine, is directed to the Magistrate to whome God gaue the sworde for this purpose, that hee should take vengeance of the wicked in his name and accor∣ding to his law. Phi. What if the Magistrate him-selfe bee the partie that so sinneth, and should be put to death: shall he escape? Theo. That is the case which you take in hande to proue, that the people may punish the Prince offending as wel as the Prince may the people. Phi. Either the people, or none must do it. Theo. And since the people may not doe it, it is euident that God hath reserued the ma∣gistrate to be punished by himselfe, and not giuen the people power ouer their Prince.The Prince is to punish o∣thers, and not to be punished by others. Dauid committed adulterie, Salomon eected Idolatrie; both of∣fences being death by Gods lawe. Might the people therefore haue put Dauid & Salomon to death? In many christian common-wealthes, rapes, thestes, mur∣thers, be capitall crimes and punished by death: shall the people therefore take their Princes if they be culpable in any of these, and by their owne lawes chop off their heads? I think you be not so mad to put the sword in euerie mans hand that first will vse it. Phi. Princes when they sin must be left to the righteous iudgement of God.Then Princes haue impunitie to doe what they list without feare of Lawes. Theo. Princes appoint penalties for others, not for themselues. They beare the sworde ouer others, not others ouer them. Subiectes must be pu∣nished by them, and they by none, but by God whose place they supplie. Saint
Cyrill saith rightly, Nemo leges Regum impunè reprobat nisi Reges ipsi, in quibus praeuaricationis crimen locum non habet. Prudenter enim dictum est, impium esse qui regi dixerit, iniquè agis. No man may breake the lawes of Princes with∣out punishment but the Princes themselues, who may not be charged with the transgression (of their owne Lawes.) For it was wisely spoken, he is wic∣ked that sayeth to a king thou art an offendour. And if it bee a monster in nature and policie to suffer the children to chastise the father,Children may not chastise their parentes though faulty: much lesse sub¦iects their So∣ueraignes. Deut. 25. Execution done vpon Princes. and the ser∣uantes to punish the Master, what a barbarous and impious deuise of yours is this to giue the Subiectes power of life and death ouer their Princes? Sticke not to these thinges, if you bee wise; least Children and Ser∣uauntes thinke it more neede, you bee purged for Phrensie, than answered by Diuinitie. Phi. Neither pertaineth this to poore men onely, but to the Gouernours and Leaders of the people most of all. As wee see in the booke of Numbers, where Moses by the commaundement of God caused all the Princes of the people to bee hanged vppon Gibbettes against the Sunne, for communication in sacrifice with the Moabites; and the rest of the people euerie one by the hande of his neighbour to bee put to the sworde for the same fault: wherein Phinees the Priest of God by sleaing a chiefe Captaine with his owne handes deserued eternall prayse and the perpetuitie of his Priesthood.You would slay 3000. By Moses also his appointment the faithfull Leuites slue 3300. of their neighbours, brethren, and friendes, for committing idolatrie and forsaking the true God. Mary in all this (as you see by the examples alleadged) the Prophet and Priestes must direct them for the cause and action, that they erre not of phantasie, partialitie, pride, and pretence of Religion, as heretikes and rebels do, but the quarrel must be for the olde faith, seruice and Priesthood, against innouation; and directed and allowed by those which by order and function haue charge of our soules. Theo. Can you see no difference betweene Nobles that bee Subiectes, and the Prince that beareth the sworde?Numb. 25.4. Vers. 1. 2. This fact had the comman∣dement of God and the magistrate for a warrant, rebellion a∣gainst Prince hath neither. Moses the chiefe Magistrate was commaunded by God to hang vp the heades and captaines of the people for committing whoordome with the daughters of Moab and bowing down to their gods; and so hee did. Your conclusion is; ergo the people may doe the like to their Magistrates. You may hang this reason on a hedge for the goodnesse of it. Your antecedent hath two sufficient warrantes, which your conclusion lacketh. First God precisely commaunded that kinde of reuenge to bee taken: and secondly the Magistrate was the reuenger. Howe can you then vpon this infer that Subiectes may do the same, since Subiectes be no ma∣gistrates, and haue a streit commandement from God not to laie hands on his annointed? Phi. Phinees the Priest of God slue Zimri the Prince of the house of Simeon, with his owne hands, and thereby gat the perpetuitie of his Priesthood. Theo. Phinees had for his warrant afore he did the deede the voice both of God and the Magistrate. For Moses had charged the Iudges of Israell before Zimri
came with the woman of Midian into the tentes:Numb. 25.5. Euery one slaie his men that ioyned vnto Baal Peor. And the Magistrate commaunding, as in this case you see he did, it was lawful for Phinees or any other priuate person to execute that sentence. Phi. Why then was Phinees so highly commended and recompen∣ced at Gods handes?God imbraced the zeale of Phinees not for vsing the sword without authoritie, but for neglecting his owne dig∣nitie, whiles he did execute the precept of God & the magistrate. Theo. Not for attempting to kill without commission as you imagine, but for his readinesse to accomplish the will of God, and worde of Moses with his owne handes in the sight of them all, and hastning in his own person to do that execution though he were the chiefe Prince of the tribe of Le∣uie, and sonne to Eleazar the high Priest: whose zeale for his seruice God so imbraced, that he willed the office of the high Priest, after his fathers death to remaine to him and his line for euer. Phi. The Leuites, before that, slue 3300. of their neighbours, brethren and friends for committing idolatrie and forsaking the true God. Theo. Why shoulde they not, when as God and the Magistrate appointed them so to doe? Moses gaue them the charge in these words:Exod. 32. The Leuites were charged by God & the Magistrate to do this execu∣tion. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, put euerie man his sworde by his side, and goe to and fro, from gate to gate through the host, and slea euery man his brother, and euery man his com∣panion, and euery man his neighbor. And the children of Leui did as Mo∣ses had commanded, and there fell of the people that day about three thow∣sand men. What fact can be more lawfull than where God prescribeth what shall be done, and he that beareth the sword authoriseth others to do it? Phi. The Priestes you see made this slaughter of the people. Theo. The Leuites were not all Priestes, though they were to attend on the Arke, and the rest of the seruice of God: Aaron and his sonnes had the Priesthood and not the whole Tribe of Leui. The Scripture it selfe will giue you that distinction. The Leuites were appointed vnto all the seruice of the Tabrnacle of the house of God.1. Chron. 6. But Aaron and his sonnes burnt incense vpon the Altar of burnt offering. And what shoulde let the Leuites to beare armes at Moses commaundement, who afterward in defence of king Ioash at his coronation, in the Temple, did compasse him,. Chron. 23. Euerie man with his weapon in his hand? Against the Magistrate they did not bend their swords as you do, but rather for obedience to the Magistrate, and therefore their example wil not warrant your displaying of banners against your Prince. Phi. Was Moses a Magistrate? Theo. Howe thinke you, was he not? Phi. Moses was a Magistrate. Gen. 14. Priests and Prophetes a∣mong the Iewes were sometimes magistrates. Psalm. 99.The Scripture sayeth hee was a Priest and a Prophet, not a Prince. Theo. Those bee no reasons to exclude him from bearing the sword. Melchi∣zedec was a Priest of the most high God and king of Salem. Ely was a Priest and Samuel a Prophet, and yet both were Soueraigne Rulers ouer Israell. Moses might annoynt Aaron at the first erection of the Priest∣hoode, and deliuer the lawe of God vnto the people, and yet keepe the Ciuil re∣giment. Phi. Why then doth Dauid number Moses and Aaron among the Priests of God? Theo. The worde which Dauid vseth doeth signifie those that be
chiefe in any seruice as well as Priestes: as in the second of Samuel the eight chapter where it is saide that 2. Sam. 8. Zadoc and Abimelec (the Sonnes of Phinees) were the Priests, it is presently added, and the sonnes of Dauid chanìm haìu were (no Priestes, but) chiefe Princes or Rulers: And yet the worde is the very same that was vsed before to Zadoc and Abimelec the sonnes of Aaron. So in the 20. of the same booke 2. Sam. 20. The word cohē signifieth as well a Prince as a Priest. Zadoc and Abiathar were Pristes and Ira the Iairite was cohen ledauid, not a Priest to Dauid, for that had beene wicked∣nesse against the law of God to make a mere strāger that was no Leuite a priest, but a chiefe Prince about Dauid. And so Dauid ioyneth Moses and Aaron as the Principall seruitours about God, and chiefe Rulers of the people: Moses for regiment, Aaron for sacrifices. And did the worde exactly signifie Priestes, the letter beth which goeth before it, importeth either in the number of the Priests or togither with the Priests: so that Moses and Aaron with the Priests called on the name of the Lorde. But that Moses was a Priest after Aaron and his sonnes were annointed, is a manifest vntrueth against the Scriptures. God sayde to Moses,Exod. 40. Aaron & his sonnes onely had the priest∣hood Thou shalt put vppon Aaron the holie garmentes and shalt annoynt him. And sanctifie him that hee may serue mee in the Priestes office. Thou shalt also bring his sonnes, and cloath them with garmentes. And shalt annoynt them, as thou diddest annoynt their Father, that they may serue me in the Priests office: so shall this their annoynting bee to them for an euerlasting Priest-hoode in their generations.Numb. 3. Moses was Aarons bro∣ther and not his sonne. And againe, Thou shalt appoynt Aaron and his sonnes to execute the Priestes office, and the straunger that commeth neere shall die. Which precept excluded not onelie the rest of the Tribes, but euen the Leuites them-selues, that were not the sonnes of Aaron, from being Prestes or medling with the sacrifices, that shoulde be offered vnto God. To Aaron God sayde:Num. 18. Thou and thy sonnes with thee shall beare the iniquitie (or burden) of the Priestes office. Thy brethren of the Tribe of Leui shalt thou take to minister vnto thee: but thou and thy sonnes with thee shall minister before the Tabernacle of the Testimonie.Aarons bre∣thren might not come neer the Altar. They shall keepe the charge of all the Tabernacle, but they shall not come neere the instrumentes of the Sanctuarie, nor to the Altar, least they die, both they & you. Where you see the Priestes office so tied vnto Aaron and his sonnes, that the Leuites his brethren, and of his fathers familie, might watch and ward about the Tabernacle and minister vnto him and his sonnes that were priests, but not come neere the Altar nor any instruments of the Sanctuarie. How then could Moses be a Priest after Aaron was annointed, when the Priesthood was deliuered and confirmed to Aaron onely and his sonnes? Phi. Moses was a Leuite. Theo. Hee was Aarons brother,Moses might annoint Aa∣ron, & yet be no Priest. but the Priesthood was giuen to Aaron and his sonnes. Phi. He annointed Aaron and his sonnes. Theo. Not by his ordinarie function as a Priest, but by speciall
direction from God as a Prophet. For Aaron was called to that office, not by Moses but by God himselfe,Heb. 5. as the Apostle testifieth, though hee were annointed by Moses handes. Phi. Moses might bee a Priest before Aaron was called. Theo. If Moses were a Priest, what needed an other to bee chosen? Why shoulde Moses bee depriued of his Priesthoode, hee no way displeasing nor offending God? Reason you shewe both his calling and his annoynting, before you chalenge the Priesthood for him. Phi. Da∣uid sayeth hee was. Theo. What Dauid sayeth, wee sawe before. The worde by Sainct Hieroms owne obseruation signifieth a Master or Ruler.Hieron. traditi∣ones Hebraicae in libros Regum tomo 3. Ira Iairites erat sacerdos Dauid, id est magister: sicut alibi scriptum est: filij au∣tem Dauid erant sacerdotes, id est magistri fratrum suorum. Ira the Iairite was a Priest of Dauids, that is a Ruler as it is elswhere written, the sonnes of Dauid were Priestes that is Rulers of their brethren. Phi. Hieron. in Psal. 98. S. Hierom & S. Aug. take the woord Priest largely, for him that tea∣cheth as well as for him that offereth: and in that sense Moses may be called a Priest, not∣withstanding he were also a Magistrate. August. in Psalm. 98.Sainct Hierom and Sainct Augustine writing vppon this Psalme of Dauid affirme that Moses was a Priest. Theo. All that Sainct Hierom sayth is this: that Moses had the rule of the Lawe, and Aaron of the Priest-hoode, and that either of them did fore-shewe the comming of Christ, with a Priestlie kinde of proclamation: (Moses) with the sounde of the lawe, and (Aaron) with the belles of his garmentes. Where S. Hierom calleth the Propheticall function of Moses to teach the people the Lawes of God a Priestly kinde of proclaiming, and foreshewing that the Sonne of God should come in flesh to teach vs the will of his Father. Saint Augustine vseth the worde in like sense for that sacred seruice which Moses yeelded vnto God in reporting his Lawes and preceptes to the people. And therefore in the same place hee sayeth of Samuel, hee was made high Priest, which is expreslie against the Scriptures, if you take the worde Priest for him that was annoynted to offer sacrifices vnto God. For Samuel was but a Leuite and no Priest, much lesse high Priest. The sonnes of Samuel are reckened in the Scripture it selfe among the 1. Chron. 6.33.34. Le∣uites apart from the Priestes office and linage, and the high Priesthoode was long before Num. 25.13. giuen to Phinees and his house by couenant from Gods owne mouth, and in the dayes of Samuel was helde by 1. Sam. 14. Abiah the sonne of Abicub, who was directly of the discent of 1. Chron. 6. Phinees. Sainct Augustine else-where debating this question of Moses and Aa∣ron, resolueth in doubtfull manner.Aug. quaest. su∣per Leuit. lib. 3. cap. 23. Moses and Aaron were both high Priestes, or rather Moses (the chiefe) and Aaron vnder him: or else Aaron chiefe for the pontificall attyre, and Moses for a more ex∣cellent ministerie. And in that sense Moses may bee called a Priest, if you meane as Saint Augustine doeth, an interpreter of Gods will to Aa∣ron and others; which is the right vocation of all Prophetes that were no Priestes, and common to them all; saue that by a more excellent pre∣rogatiue than anie other Prophete of the olde Testament had: God spake to Moses Numb. 12. mouth to mouth, and Exod. 33. face to face, as a man speaketh vnto
his friend. But this doth not hinder his ciuill power which was to bee chiefe iudge and soueraigne executor of iustice among thm, and by vertue thereof to put them to death that were offend ors against the law of God. And in his steede succeeded not Eleazar or Phinees the sonnes of Aaron, but Numb. 27. Deut. 31. Ioshua, and Iudg. 1. Iudah the captaines and leaders of Israel. Phi. Your collection of Samuel is not true.1. Sam. 16. Samuel no Priest. For God sent him to do sacrifice when he annointed Dauid, and therefore Samuel was a Priest. Theo. My col∣lection is grounded vpon the law of God. Samuel was none of the sonnes of Aa∣ron, ergo Samuel was no Priest, nor might not come neere the Altar to offer a∣nie sacrifice in his owne person. Phi. The Scripture syeth, 1. Sam. 7. He tooke a sucking Lambe and offered it for a burnt offering vnto the Lorde. Theo. You mistake the speech of the holy Ghost. So Iephtah saide, Iudg. 11. That thing which commeth first out of the doores of myne house to meete mee, I will offer it for a burnt offering: & yet Iephtah was neither Priest nor Leuite. So the Angell saide to Manoah, Iudg. 13. If thou wilt make a burnt offering offer it to the Lorde: and yet Manoah was of the tribe of Iudg. 13.2. Dan. Of Dauid that was no Priest the Scripture saith, 2. Sam. 6. Then Dauid offered burnt offeringes & peace offeringes before the Lorde. And againe, 2. Sam. 24. Dauid built there an Altar vnto the Lorde, and offered burnt offeringes and peace offe∣ringes: and the Lorde was appeased towarde the Lande. And like∣wise of Salomon, The 1. Kings 3. king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; a thow∣sande burnt offeringes did Salomon offer vppon that Altar. 1. Kings 9. Thrise a yeare did Salomon offer burnt offeringes and peace offeringes vppon the Altar which hee built to the Lorde, and hee burnt incense vppon the Altar that was before the Lorde.What the scri∣pture mea∣neth when it saith that they which were no Priests of∣fered. Nothing is oftener in the Scrip∣tures than these kindes of speeches: by the which no more is ment, but that either they brought these things to be offered, or else they caused the priests to offer them. For in their own persons they coulde not sacrifice them, because they were no Priests. In that sense the Scripture saieth of Saul, that 1. Sam. 13. He offered a burnt of∣fering at Gilgall before Samuel came, not that Saul offered it with his owne handes, as you before did fondely imagine, and sayde hee was de∣posed for aspiring to the spirituall function: but hee commaunded the Priest to doe it, who was then present in the host with the Arke of GOD, as the next chapter doth witnesse in two seuerall places. Phi. Then was Saul free from sinne when Samuel reproued him.1. Sam. 14. vers. 3. & 18. Theo. Sa∣muel reproued him for distrusting and disobeying God.Sauls offence was distrust & impatience: & not sacrificing in his owne person. For when God first aduanced Saul to the kingdom, he charged him by the mouth of Samuel to go to Gilgal and there to 1. Sam. 10. staie seuen daies (before he ventered to do any sacrifice) til the Prophet were sent to shewe him what hee shoulde doe: but he seeing his enimies 1. Sam. 13. gathered to fight against him on the one side, and his people shrin∣king from him on the other side, because Samuel came not; beganne to sus∣pecte that Samuel had beguiled him, and therefore vppon his owne
head against the commaundement of God, willed the Priest to goe forwarde with his sacrifices, and to consult GOD what hee shoulde doe. This secrete distrust and presumption against the charge which God had giuen him, was the thing that GOD tooke in so euill part: and since hee woulde not submitte him-selfe to bee ruled by GOD and expect his lea∣sure, God reiected him as vnfitte to gouerne his people. Neither did Sa∣muel chalenge him for inuading the Priestes office, but for not staying the time that God prefixed him, before the Prophet should come. Philand. The defence, Cap. 5. Numb. 27. The punish∣ment of Prin∣ces for schism and reuolt. 2. Paral. 13. 1. Paral. 21. 4. Reg. 8.Wee reade in the booke of Numbers that the Captaine and all the people, were commaunded to goe in and out, that is to proceede in warres accor∣ding to the order of Eleazarus the Priest. Such were the warres of Abia & other kinges of Iudah, that fought most iustly and prosperouslie against the schis∣maticall Israelites, and iustly possessed the Cities which they conquered in those warres. As also Edom and Libuah reuolted from king Ioram for Religion; euen because hee forsooke the God of their forefathers, and coulde neuer bee re∣couered to the same againe. Wherein also the example and zeale of the children of Israell was verie notable; that they woulde haue denounced warre against the Tribe of Ruben and Gad, onely for erecting (as they tooke it) a schismaticall al∣tar out of the only place where our Lord appointed that sacrifice should be doone vnto his honor. Theo. Yee bee tried men to interprete Scriptures. The words which you applie to Eleazar the Priest, stande in the text Numb. 27.21. indifferent to be re∣ferred either to God or to Ieboshuah, or to Eleazar: and you lustilie leaue out both GOD and the Magistrate, and will haue the Priest to bee the Master of the Musters.The Priest was to consult God for the kinges warres but not to ap∣point the king what he thought good And did the wordes pertaine to Eleazar, no such power as you conceiue is thereby giuen to the Priest, to caulme and kindle warres when hee list, but onely to consult the Lord before his Arke, and to reporte backe to the Captaine and leader of the people, what the Lorde saide: that no warres might bee vndertaken without expresse war∣rant from God. This kinde of asking counsell at Gods mouth in their warres, you should finde exemplyfied in sundrie places of the olde Testament, as Iudges Ver. 18.28. twentie, Ver. 18. first Samuel fourteene, Ver. 2.4.11.12. first Samuel twentie-three, Ver. 8.first Samuel thirtie. But in this case the Priest had no farther authority than to inquire at Gods mouth, and that hee did when the king commaunded him, which is far from licencing subiectes to rebell against their king, as you woulde haue it. The warres of 2. Chron. 13. The warres of Abiah were of one Prince a∣gainst an o∣ther. Abia the king of Iudah against Israell, were not of Subiectes against their Soueraignes, but of a lawfull Prince bearing the sworde, and thinking to recouer the kingdome of Israell, which Ro∣boam his father lost; from his enimies. Where you iustifie the warres of Abia against Israell more bouldly than wisely: GOD him-selfe pro∣hibiting the children of Iudah and Beniamin in the dayes of Roboam his Father to 2. Chron. 11. fight against the children of Israell their brethren, and
professing the diuision of the Kingdome to come from God and not from man. If you saie that Abia sought not for the kingdome but for Religion, though his owne wordes 2. Chron. 13.5. And not so much for reli∣gion as for renting the kingdom of Israell from Iudah.sound to the contrarie, knowe you that as Iero∣boam was starke naught, so Abia for all his crakes and your praises was little better. The holie Ghost, whose report wee must beleeue be∣fore yours, saieth, that hee walked in all the sinnes of his Father, which hee had doone before him, and that his heart was not right with the Lorde his God. And the sinnes of his Father are thus described in the Scripture:3. Kings 15. 3 Kings. 14.22. Iudah wrought wickednesse in the sight of the Lorde, and they prouoked him more with their sinnes, which they committed, than all that which their Fathers had doone. For they also made them high places, and images, and groues on euerie high hill and vnder euerie greene tree. There were also Sodomites in the Land that did according to all the a∣bominations of the people which the Lord had cast out before the chil∣dren of Israel. This was in the time of Roboam, & Abia walked in al his waies,Abia was as bad as Iero∣boam. and therefore lacked not much of Ieroboans wickednesse, though you make him a victorious & religious conquerour. That Edom and Libuah reuolted from king Ioram, is verie true:4. Kings 8. The men of Edom were prophane infi∣dels, and had no respect to religion when they reuol∣ted. but that their reuolt was either lawfull or for religion, that you proue not. Edom had no such respect; they were prophane persons and Infidels, and as soone as they sawe their time, they cast off the yoke which the kinges of Iudah had laide vpon them. But not long after in the raigne of Amaziah, they were meetely wel plagued by the king of Iudah for their reuolting, he smiting tenne thowsand of them with the sworde, and taking other tenne thowsand aliue, and casting them down from the top of a rocke that they burst al to peeces,2. Chron. 25. thereby to giue them a iust recompence for their former rebellion. The Scripture saith that Libuah, a citie of the Priests as appeareth by the first allotment made in the 21. of the booke of Ioshua,Ioshua 21. 4▪ Kings 8. rebelled at the same time, but it commendeth their rebellion no more than it doeth the rebellion of Edom.Euerie thing reported in the Scripture is not by & by commended. It will be as hard for you to proue either of them did well, as that your selues may do the like. Leude deedes are reported in the Scripture as will as good: but not commended. No more are these. Phi. The text saith they did it, 2. Chron. 21. They did euill to rebell, or else al the rest that obeied, did not well. because (the king of Iudah) had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers. Theo. The Scripture doth not set down the cause why they might lawfully doe it, but addeth this as a reason, why God suffered these troubles to fall on king Ioram. As if it should haue said, no maruell to see these rebell against him, for he had forsaken the God of his fathers. And if this were a fault in king Ioram to forsake the God of his fathers, as in truth it was, how can the priests of Libuah be excused for seuering themselues from the line of Dauid without warrant from God, &, that which was worse, from the temple & seruice of God established by expresse commandement at Ierusalem? If that be true which you say, that Libuah could neuer be recouered again to the king¦dom
of Iudah,This defectiō of Libuah from the king¦dom of Iudah and temple of God, was di∣rectly against the law of God. your selfe conuince them of a pestilēt & wicked reuolt. For though they might pretend religion against king Ioram, yet against the godly kings of Iudah which followed, as Ezechia, Iosias & others, they could pretend none: & therfore by your own confession it was no defection from Iorams idolatrie, but a plaine rebellion against the kingdom of Iudah, & an vtter renouncing the Al∣tar, Temple, & seruice of God at Ierusalē. Which, how it might stand with their duties to God & his law, we yet conceiue not: neither wil you euer be able to iu∣stifie that fact of theirs with all your cunning and eloquence. The ten tribes Ioshua 22. The ten tribes had sufficient authoritie to fight with twaine. Iudg. 20. assembled to sight with Ruben & Gad for building an Altar by Iordan against the commandement of God: and therein they did but their du∣ties. If you aske by what authority they did it, the answere is easie. Their com∣monwealth cōsisting of 12. tribes, & al indued with like soueraignty, ten might lawfully represse two without any farther warrāt, as after they did the Benia∣mits for that filthy fact of the men of Gibeah. But yet at this time Ioshua liued whom God himselfe had appointed captaine & ruler of the 12. tribes, & therfore besides that authority which the whole had ouer a part, & that in common regi∣mēt is sufficēt, there was a superior magistrate at the denoūcing of these wars: and though they had fought togither as equals, yet will not that example ratiie the rebelling of subiectes against their Princes, which is your purpose. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. But what fights can you shew of sub∣iects against their Princes? The warres of prince against prince are no∣thing to this purpose.Since Christs law & religion was establshed, diuerse great & honorable fights haue bin made for the faith against princes and prouinces that vniustly withstood and annoied the same. Theo. What warres haue bin for religion since the comming of Christ, if you meane between Prince & Prince, Realme & Realme, is bootles for you to seeke & needlesse for vs to answere. We dispute not what causes may iustly be pursued with battel, but what what persons are permitted to take the sword, & against whom. And vnto the time of Gregory the 1. (which compasse you take to bring vs some presidents of your doings) you can not shew that euer christian subiects did beare armes against their Princes for any quarrell of re∣gilion, & were allowed. Rebellions were rife in those ages as well as now: but we deny that the Church of Christ, or the godly Bishops of those times did euer consent, allow or like those tumults: much lesse procure them, or vse them for the safegard of their Sees, as you beare men in hand they did. Phi. The defence, Cap. 5. Euseb. li. 9. ca. 6.In old times of the primatiue church the christian Armenians lawfully defen∣ded themselues by armes against their Emperor Maximinus. Theo. You that feare not to depraue the scriptures, wil make no bones to corrupt & vitiate other Sto∣ries at your pleasures.The Armeni∣ans were no subiects but consederates. The Armenians, being no subiects but confederats, whē Maximinus would haue compelled them to worship idols, & to that ende offered them force, resisted; as they lawfully might, & of fellowes & friends became strā∣gers & aduersaries. The words of Eusebius are very plaine for that purpose. Maximinus had also warre with the Armenians,Euseb. li. 9. ca. 7. who of long time before that had bin friendes & confederates with the Romanes. That people being christians & very deuoute, this hatefull tyrant attempting to force to the sa∣crifices of idols & diuels, made them of friends foes, & of collegues enimies.
Phi. The Catholike people of diuers Prouinces haue often by force defended and kept their Bishoppes in their seates,The defence, Cap. 5. Warres made for religion. against the Infidels; but specially against the com∣maundements of heretical Emperors: yea and resisted them in defence of their Chur∣ches, and the sacred goods of the same. As the Citizens of Antioche defended their Church, against the Emperour Galerius his officers. Theo. Your generall and voluntarie reportes wee may hardly trust,It is not e∣nough to proue that some rebelled but this also must be shew∣ed that their rebellion was allowed. since your speciall instaunces be so corrupted and wrested. And could you shewe that which you speake of, as you can not, you must also proue it well done, or at let to haue beene liked and allowed of the Church of Christ before we can receiue it. The Apostles rule is strong against it:Rom. 13. Well they might shut the Church dores against Ethnickes whiles they were at the diuine myste∣ries, but they neuer rebel∣led nor refu∣sed to suffer any punish∣mēt that Ga∣lerius or o∣thers would inflict on thē. You must bee subiect not onely for wrath: but for conscience sake. Many thousand Martyrs, Bishoppes & others submitted themselues and endured the vilest torments that coulde bee deuised against them, as the ten persecutions of Christes Church vnder heathen Prin∣ces most clearly witnesse: that euer any of their subiects rebelled against those bloody persecutors in respect of religion, must be your care to shewe: Wee rea∣ding all the monumentes of those tymes verily find none, and by your silence it should appeare your selues know none: otherwise we do not thinke you woulde disfurnish your cause, and trouble the reader with impertinent matters. That the Citizens of Antioch defended their Church with armes against the Emperour Galerius his officers, I find it writtē in no good Author, neither do you quote the place: that Storie you may put in your Legende as taken thence by most likelyhood. The temples of their bodies which were farre more precious, they did not defend from the furious and insatiable rage of Diocletian, & Maxi∣minus, but as well at Antioche, as in all other places subiect to the Romane Empire; the christian men & women mildly & gladly suffered those Euseb. li. 8. ca. 7.9.10.12. torments, deaths and Euseb. li. 8. ca. 7.9.10.12. shames, which in our eyes neither flesh could beare, nor nature brooke: so that wee haue cause rather to maruaile at their patience, than to mi∣strust their disobedience. Phi. S. Basil and S. Ambrose people, defended them against the inuasions of Heretikes.The defence, cap. 5. Nazian▪ de lande Basil. Ambros. lib. 5. epist. Theo. After Valens the Emperour had twise decreed to banish S. Basil, and was the first tyme stopped of his course by the suddaine sicknes of his sonne and terror of his wife, and the second time by a straunge Theod. lib. 4. cap. 19. trembling of hande and heart as he was subscribing the sentence of deportation against him, hee neuer after offered to meddle with Saint Basill,S. Basil would not suffer the people to grow to a tumult for his defēce. See Nazian∣zenes funeral oration in the praier of S. Basil. but suffered him quietly to enioy his Bishopricke. Yet fell there out after this a contention betweene the Lieutenaunt of Pontus and Saint Basill, about the liberties of the sanctu∣arie for a Noble woman, that had taken the Church for her refuge, to saue her selfe from one that woulde haue forced her to mariage against her will. The Deputie required the woman to bee deliuered: the Bishoppe replied that hee might not violate the Lawes of GOD and man. The Deputie stomacking Saint Basill, and the more for his stout defence o∣therwise of the Christian faith, sent for the Bishoppe to his Tribunall, and
commaunding him to bee stript, threatned to whippe him, and to teare his flesh with Iron hookes.The people offered to saue their Bi∣shop frō the priuate and intemperate rage of a de∣putie, but not from the Em∣perour. Nazian. in lau∣dem Basilij ora∣tio funebr. This indignitie the people could no longer abide, but seeing their Pastor thus shamefully handled without the Emperours commandemēt or knowledge, vpon the priuate displeasure of a Deputie for the liberties of the Church established by the Romane Lawes, the whole citie, men and women fell to an vprore, and were like enough to haue done the Deputie some mis∣chiefe, but that Saint Basil with much adoe repressing the people, deliue∣red his persecutor from that perill. This is the true report of Saint Ba∣sils case euen out of the same author which you auouche, Gregorie Nazi∣anzene. Their griefe you see was not against the Emperours power or fact, but a∣gainst the malice of a Lieutenant presuming vpon a priuate grudge without a∣ny warrant from the Prince, not onely to doe that which the Emperour in his owne person had refrained,This tumult seemed tolle∣rable, and yet S. Basill would not allow it. but in most spitefull and seruile manner to abuse their Bishop against all order of Lawe: And this tumult S. Basil neither pro∣cured nor praised, but asswaged with his presence, and offered himselfe to the Deputies pleasure. Of S. Ambrose wee spake before by occasion, and thither we send you. It is most vntrue that the people of Millan either did, or might take armes against the Emperour;S. Ambrose would not suf∣fer the peo∣ple of Millan to defēd him against the Emperour. Ambros. epist. lib. 5. epist. ad Marcel. 33. though hee were then but a child, and therefore might make no Lawes for Religion, or otherwise, without Theodosius ioynt Emperour with him, & in possession of the scepter before him. Which exception, neither S. Am∣brose, nor other godly bishops vsed against him, but submitted themselues with al meekenes, when in reason they might haue taken this aduantage. Of the peo∣ple S. Ambrose himselfe giueth this testimonie. In singulis vobis Iob reuixit, in singulis sancti illius patientia & virtus refulsit. Quid enim praesentis dici potuit a vi∣ris Christianis, quàm quod odie in vobis locutus est Spiritus sanctus? Rogamus Au∣guste, non pugnamus, non timemus, sed rogamus. Hoc Christianos decet. In euery one of you Iob is aliue againe; in eche of you his patience and vertue shined. What coulde bee sayde fitter by Christian men than that which the holy Ghost this day spake in you? We beseech, O Emperour, we offer not armes. Wee feare not (to die,) but we intreate (thy clemencie.) This beseemeth Chri∣stians to desire tranquillitie of peace & faith, but to bee constant in the truth euen vnto death. And for his part, when hee heard that his Church was taken vp by the (Emperours) souldiers,Ibidem. he fet only somewhat the deeper sighes & sayd to such as exhorted him to goe thither, deliuer vp my Church I may not, but sight I ought not.Pugnare non debeo. Phi. But the people were in a commotion: which appeareth by that S. Ambrose answered when they willed him to asswage their furie, It lay in him not to incite them, but hee had no meanes to represse them. Theo. Truth it is that the people flocked to their Churches, and chose rather to bee slaine in the place, than to leaue them vnto Arians. But that they offered armes, or at∣tempted any force either for S. Ambrose or against Valentinian, is a manifest
vntrueth. The merchaunts were amerced and emprisoned:See the fifth booke and 33. epistle of S. Ambrose for this whole action. This casuall disorder was much a∣gainst the Bishops will: & yet nothing neere a rebel∣lion. Lib. 5. epist 33. the Nobles were hardly threatned, and S. Ambrose himselfe charged as with a sedition, and yet all the violence that was offered was this. The people passing from one Church to an other met a Chapleine of the Arrians, and some vnruly persons, as in such heates it can not otherwise be chosen, beganne to illude and abuse the man; but the Bishop presently sent his Priestes and Deacons, and rescued him from that iniurie: which yet the Emperour tooke so grieuously that hee layd a num∣ber of them in Irons and imposed a great mulet vpon the whole Citie to bee paide within three dayes. Farther force was none offered by the people of Mil∣lan, and yet of that small disorder Saint Ambrose saith, If they thought him to bee the inciter (or stirrer) of the people they should straightway reuenge it on him, or banish him into what wildernesse they would. And to that end, Ibidem. he departed home to bed to his owne house, that if any man woulde haue him into exile, he should find him readie.Had the Iesu∣ites been in S. Ambrose place they would haue tolde the Emperor an other tale. Had you beene there, you would not onely haue set the people against the Prince, but encouraged the subiect to pul the yong boy by the eares, and to teach him better manner against an other time to meddle with Bishoppes: and it grieueth you to see Ambrose so faint hearted as you take it, that when so fit opportunitie serued him and the rest, they would giue no president to rebel against Princes: which is the thing you seeke to proue, and long to doe. Phi. Not the people only, which may doe things of headynes without counsel or con∣sultation:The Defence, cap. 5. but the bishops of Countries so persecuted by heretical Princes haue iustly re∣quired helpe of other Christian kings. Theo. If the multitude of Christians in the primatiue Church for all their rashnes and headynes were afraid in respect of the Apostles doctrine to rebell against Powers,If the people were afraid to rebell in the primatiue Church, what thinke you were the Bi∣shops? whom shall you perswade that their religious and godly Pa∣stours were firebrands of sedition? If they taught others to obey, with what conscience could they themselues resist? Or rather with what face do you slaun∣der them with that they neuer did? Phi. Holy Athanasius:The defence, cap. 5. Theodoret. li. 2. cap. 13. The example of Athanasius. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 13. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 7. Dama. in Pon∣tific. Athanasius no rebell. (who knewe his duetie to his soueraigne wel enough & in what case he might resist him) asked ayde against Constantius the Arrian the first heretical Emperour (whom Pope Felix declared to be an heretike) of his owne brother Constance Catholike Emperour of the West. For feare of whose armes the said Ar∣rian restored Athanasius and other Catholike Bishops to their Churches and honours againe, though after this Catholike Emperours death the other more furiously persecu∣ted Athanasius than before. Theo. Hee that neuer sounded the fidelitie and honestie of Iesuites afore this time may take hence his light howe to trust them in other cases. Did Athanasius aske ayde (of armes) against Constantius the Arrian? Phi. For feare of armes the saide Arrian restored Athanasius and other Catholike Bishoppes to their Churches and honours againe. Theo. But did Athanasius moue Con∣stans so to doe? Phi. Hee asked ayde of Constans against his brother Con∣stantius. Theo. But did hee aske that ayde, to bee restored by armes? For of
that ayde we now dispute, & that aide must you meane, if you wil say ought to the purpose. Phi. He accepted it, and therfore it is likely he requested it. Theo. You would proue by this example that Athanasius (who knew his dutie to his soueraigne well enough, and in what case he might resist him) not only vsed but asked (forcile) ayde against Constantius of his owne brother. Phi. So he did. Theo. Be you well in your wittes to auouch it with such confidence?Athanasius horribly be∣led by the Iesuits. Phi. Why should wee not? Theo. Why should you not? Athanasius himselfe, when that very point was ob∣iected to him, not only abiured it as false, but detested it vnto Constantius as a wicked and vngodly part for himselfe to haue stirred brother against brother. What extreme boldnes was it then for you to fasten that on him which hee defieth and forsweareth? Phi. Where doth he so? Theo. Where you might soone haue found it, but that you thought to haue brought the matter frō words to blowes before this tyme. Athanasius cleareth him∣selfe of that which the Ie∣suits father on him. Athanas. ad Imperator. Con∣stantiū Apolog. Did this man stirre Con∣stans against Constantius?It was layd in his dish by Constantius amongst other things after the death of Constans, that he prouoked and incited his brother against him, and that hee resisted the Princes precepts. To this Athanasius answereth in his Apologie to Constantius: I am not mad, I am not besides my selfe, O Emperour, that thou shouldest suspect, I had euer any such thought. And that made mee say nothing to it, when others questioned with me about it, lest whiles I la∣boured to cleare my selfe, some perhaps would make a doubt of it. But to your highnesse I answere with a loude and plaine voyce, and with my hand held out, as I learned of the Apostle, I cal God to witnes against my soule, & as it is written in the book of kings, I sweare, the Lord can beare me record, and his annointed, (your brother:) (suffer me I beseech you so to say) I neuer made mention of you for any euill before your brother of blessed memorie, I meane that religions Emperour Constans; neither did I euer stirre him vp against you as these And Iesuits. (Arrians) do slaunder me; but contrariwise whensoeuer I had accesse vnto him, he himselfe recounted your gratious inclination; and God knoweth what mention I made of your godly disposition. Suffer me and pardon me most curteous Prince. That seruant of God Constans (your brother) was not so open nor so lent his eares to any man, neither was I in such credite with him, that I durst speake a woorde of any such matter, or derogate from one brother before an other, or finde fault with a Prince, in the hearing of a Prince.Athanasius saith it had been madnes to haue done that which the Iesuits say he did. I am not (so) mad, neither haue I forgotten the voyce of God, which sayth, Curse not the king in thine heart, nor backbite the mightie in the secretes of thy chamber. For the birdes of the aire shall tell it, and the fowles which flie shall betraie thee. If the thinges which be spoken in secrete touching you Princes can not bee hid; what likelyhoode, that I in the presence of a Prince, and so many standing by, would say any thing of you otherwise than well? And shewing how oftē he spake wt the Emperor Cōstans & in whose presēce, & to what effect, which were to lōg to repeat, he concludeth:Athanas. Ibidē. I beseech your high∣nes (for I know well the force of your memorie) call to mind my behauiour
when it pleased you to admit me to your presence, first at Vimimachum, then at Caesarea, and thirdly at Antioch, whether I did so much as offer an euil word of Eusebius my bitter enimie, or gaue a displeasaunt speach of any my pur∣suers. If then I refrained my tongue when I was to plead against them in mine own defence, what madnes had that beene for me to traduce an Emperor before an Emperour, and to stirre vp one brother against an other? What thinke you? Doth not Athanasius reiect that which you would father on him, as a manifest vntrueth; nay as a villanous and frantike attempt to set brethren together by the eares, and to stirre warres betweene Princes? Why then doe you burthen a godly Bishop with that which he neuer thought; and which he was farthest from? Why make you Athanasius your rest for rebelli∣on against Princes, whereas hee thought it vnlawfull in hart to curse a cruel & hereticall Prince? How farre he did, & said he was bound to obay Constantius, his owne wordes wil testifie, and therefore no reason we beleeue your vaunting and facing that he procured warre against Constantius, when he himselfe affir∣meth the contrarie.Ibidem. They lay to my charge, saith he to the same Prince, that I obayed not your precepts, by the which it was enioyned me that I should depart from Alexandria.How farre the was he from rebelling? I neuer resisted the commandements of your high∣nesse: no no: God forbid I should. I am not he that will withstand the Go∣uernour of any Citie: much lesse so great a Prince. Truly I prepared to de∣part: for so Montanus (your messenger) knoweth, that vpon the receit of your letters, if your grace vouchsafed but to write, I might presently bee gone, & with my readines to obay preuent your rescript.Be they sober or wel in their wits that not only thinke but openly af∣firm they may resist and de∣priue the prince? The people of Alexandria were verie seditious. Socra. li. 7. c. 13. For I am not so madde as to thinke I may contradict such preceptes. With what forehead then can they say, I obaied not powers? Neuer recken this man for a resistant that so many wayes protesteth and confirmeth his obedience to Princes: learne you ra∣ther to follow his submission, and draw him not against his own both deeds and wordes, to be of your faction. Phi. The people of Alexandria were twise or thrise in an vprore about him: first vnder Constantius, and after vnder Valens. Theo. The people of Alex∣andria were very tumultuous, and raised many horrible garboyles both in the Church and common wealth. Socrates saith of them, Populus Alexandrinus prae alijs populis seditionibus delectatur, & si quando occasionem seditionis fuerit nactus ad intolerabilia mala prorumpit, nec sine sanguine sedatur. The people of Alex∣andria delight in sedition more than other Cities, and if at any time they catch any occasion to make a tumult, they runne headlong to foule out∣rages, and neuer end but with blood. The selfe same report Euagrius gi∣ueth of them:Euag. li. 2. ca. 8. The people are soone stirred and easilie incited to a tumult, most of all others they of Alexandria: who by reason of their great number, & those obscure persons, and of all sortes, are insolent, rash, bold, and in furie will venter on any thing.Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 2. & lib. 5. cap. 16. & li. 7. cap. 13. Euag. lib. 2. cap. 5. & 8. Lamentable examples whereof you may reade in the stories of the church, describing the horrible fights and slaughters that were between the Iewes, Gentiles, and Christians of that Citie, as wel against the
trueth as with it. And therefore in these populous and tumultuous Cities, if you did shew some insurrections of the people for their pastors, it would doe you no great good. Men haue raised tumults in al ages, and that doth iustifie re∣bellion in you,Theeues and murtherers far more tole∣rable than de∣posers of Princes. no more than Cains sword dipt in his brothers bloud at the first beginning of the world, and neuer since drie, doth warrant theeues to take mens liues by the high waies side; yea rather lesse: for they kill to supplie their needes, you to reuenge your grifes: they vnhorse priuate men, you vn∣throwe Princes: they rifle howses, you spoile kingdomes: they fly vpon the fact, you stand to the defence of it before the whole world. Farre from this affection were S. Basil and S. Ambrose, as euen now wee saw: and Athanasius as farre, if you dare trust him on his oth: if not, you shall shift him neerer by his acts.Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 9. When he saw the people of his Church grudge (at the Emperours precept to remoue him from his seat) and readie to take weapon in hand, hee departed the citie. Under Valens the people of that citie likewise resisted and would not suffer any violence to be offered Atha∣nasius by the Captaines,Sozom. lib. 6. Cap. 13. Athanas. euer submitted him selfe, when he saw the peo∣ple inclined to any tumult for his cause. vntill the Emperours pleasure were precisely knowen touching Athanasius. In so much that the multitude flocking together, and a great hurlie burlie rising in the Citie, a sedition was feared. When the people some daies after was appeased Athanasius by night closely con∣ueigheth himselfe out of the Citie. Others saie that foreseeing the rashnes of the multitude, and fearing least he should seeme to be the author of that euill which might ensue, he hid him selfe all that time in his fathers tumbe. Thus when hee might haue beene defended by the people, hee would not: and because they suffered him not to depart from them by day, hee frale from them by night, and left his Bishopricke to be disposed by the prince. Sozom. lib. 8. cap. 18. And so did Chrysostome.The like did Chrysostome in his troubles. For when the people knew (of his deposition) they brake out into an vprore, and would not suffer those that had it in charge from the Emperour to carrie him into banishment. Chrysostom fearing least any other crime should bee fastned on him, either that he did not obay the Emperour, or that he stirred the people to sedition, the third day after his depriuation priuilie leaueth his Church and yeeldeth himselfe to be caried into exile. So that by S. Chrysostomes iudgement it is first a fault in a Bishop,The Defence, cap. 5. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 17. 30. Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 19. not to obay the Prince, next it is an other fault to stirre the people to sedition, be the cause neuer so good, as Chrysostomes was not badde. Phi. Likewise against Valens the Arrian Emperour; Petrus successour to Atha∣nasius and brother to S. Basil, did seeke to the Pope of Rome for succour, as al other afflicted Bishoppes and Catholikes euer did.Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 37. Theo. The Bishop of Rome in those daies was neither so mightie that he could, nor wicked that he would assist subiects with armes against their Soue∣raignes. Peter Bishop of Alexandria brought letters from Damasus Bishop of Rome,The tumult at Alexandria for the recei∣uing of Peter and reiecting of Lucius. allowing his election and Confirming the same: the people vpon that spying their time, displaced Lucius an Arrian, and receiued Peter their right
Bishoppe. Phi. And what was this but resistance to the Prince? Theo. Resist they might and did, but not with armes. Phi. Which way then? Theo. By refusing his communion, disobeying his iurisdiction, and withdrawing their duties from him, & yeelding the same to Peter as to their lawful and true Bishop. Phi. Socrates sayth the people taking courage expelled Lucius, and set Peter in his place.Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 37. Theo. They might driue him away, and make him forsake the Citie though not with armes. But whatsoeuer the people did against Luci∣us in their heate,The people draue Lucius from his See: but not with armes. hauing, as I noted before vnto you out of the same writer, a very sharp and seditious humour, and being miserably handled by Lucius, as scourged with whippes, their flesh torne with hookes, and diuersly tormen∣ted with fire vnto death: the letters of Damasus incited them to no such thing, but onely approued the election of Peter. Phi. But Peter, it shoulde seeme, allowed the people in their enterprise, for by their tumult he recouered his Bishopricke. Theo. You must not imagine rebellions, where none are written. The people draue Lucius from the See, being an intruder, an heretike, and a murderer, other tumult the Storie doth not mention. Phi. The Prince had placed Lucius there. Theo. The election of Bishops in these dayes belonged to the people and not to the Prince, and though Valens by plaine force placed him there,The people might cleaue to their true pastor, though the Prince by force had placed an o∣ther in his steede. yet might the people lawfully reiect him as no Bishoppe, and cleaue to Peter their right Pastor. Phi. Might they reiect him with armes? Theo. I said not so. Phi. But so they did. Theo. That must you proue: we find no such thing in the Storie, neither of Socrates nor Sozomene. Phi. Socrates sayth they expelled him. Theo. But not with armes. Phi. Do you thinke hee would yeeld without force? Theo. Do you thinke any great force needed for a whole Citie to expell one man? But why come you with thoughts when you should bring vs proofes? That hee was expelled, wee graunt:That Lucius was expelled from his Bi∣shopricke is confessed, but the meane how it was done is not expressed. but whether it were done by forsaking, threatning, compelling, or inuading him; the Storie doeth not expresse, neither may you suppose what you list without any proofe: Had they assaulted him with armes, it had beene as easie to haue slaine him there; as to haue driuen him thence: but no doubt Peter their Bishoppe, kept them from that, which Mo∣ses a conuert of the Saracenes, not long before bitterly reprooued in Lucius. Phi. You meane Moses the Moncke that Mauia the Queene of the Sara∣cens required to haue for the Bishopppe of her Nation, whose fayth the Bishoppe of Rome confirmed in the same letters with Peters election. Theo. I doe. Phil. What of him? Theo. When hee was brought to Lucius to bee made Bishoppe; hee sayde,Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 36. I thinke my selfe vnworthie of this function: but if it bee profitable for my Countrie that I take it, Lu∣cius shall neuer lay handes on mee (to make mee Bishoppe:) for his right hand is embrued with blood. Lucius answering that he should not raile, but
first learne what religion he taught. I aske not a reason, sayth Moses, of thy religion, thy doings against thy brethren conuince what religion thou hast. A christian doeth not strike,Lucius dete∣sted for shed∣ing of blood by one that was a conuert of the Sara∣cens. doeth not slaunder, doeth not fight. The ser∣uant of God may not fight. But thy woorkes openly shewe themselues by those whome thou hast banished, whom thou hast cast to bee deuoured of beasts and consumed with fire. If Moses thus abhorred Lucius for fighting and striking, what would hee haue sayd to Peter for bearing armes and rebel∣ling, if he had beene so good a warrier as you make him? Phi. The defence, cap. 5.So did Atticus Bishop of Constantinople craue ayde of Theodosius the yonger against the king of the Persians that persecuted his Catholike subiects,Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 18. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 21. and was thereby forcibly depriued, and his innocent subiects deliuered. Theo. The christians of Persia being barbarously persecuted by Bararanes an Infidel, and put as Theodorete sheweth to straunge and Theodoret. li. 5. cap. 39. vnusuall tor∣ments, fled their Countrie, and sauing themselues within the Romane Domi∣nion, besought the Christian Emperour they might bee harboured within his land and not bee yeelded vnto the furie of their king. The Persian presently sent Legates to haue them backe that were departed his Realme.How the Per∣sians were harboured by Theodosius the yonger. Atticus the Bi∣shoppe of Constantinople Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 18. opened their cause to the Emperour, and labou∣red what he could for them. Theodosius the Emperour woulde not deliuer them, as being suppliants to him, and no offendours against their king, but only that they professed the Christian Religion: and hauing besides iust Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 18. cause to make warre vpon the Persians for that they spoiled his merchants and woulde not restore his Goldminers, which they hired of him, bid open battell to them, and caused the king to be glad with peace, and to Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 20. cease his persecution against the Christians. Can the Iesu∣its find no difference betweene de∣posing prin∣ces, by their owne subiects & harboring of strangers by other prin∣ces?Here is nothing for your purpose; vnlesse you say that subiects may rebel for Religion because straungers may bee harboured for religion, which were a mad kind of conclusion. The Persians asked not armes against their King though a Tyrant, but refuge for themselues; neither did they assault their Prince on the one side when the Romanes inuaded on the other, but with praier expected what end God would giue. Atticus was no subiect to the king of Persia: and therefore whatsoeuer hee did against a straunger and an enemie, is no president for subiects to do the like to their Princes; and yet all that he did was this;Atticus no subiect to the persian, can be no president for subiects. Atticus Episcopus supplicantes cupidé suscepit, & totus in eo erat, vt pro viribus, ipsis succurreret, & Imperatori Theodosio, quae gererentur significauit: Atticus the Bishoppe embraced their re∣quest (for themselues) with great good will, and laboured what hee could to helpe them, and signified their state to Theodosius the Emperour. Theodosius the Emperor had other good causes to warre vpon the Persian.Theodosius was a lawfull magistrate, and had other, and those iust causes to warre vpon the Persian, and in that hee refused to deliuer the profugient and innocent Christians to the slaughter, hee had the Lawe of nature and nati∣ons for his defence. And lastly the king of Persia was neither depriued of his kingdome, as you falsely report, nor his subiects discharged frō their obedience:
but a peace concluded wherin the King was contended to cease from pursuing the Christians.Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 20. All this you shall find, not in the second booke as you quote, but in the seuenth where Cap. 18. & 20. Socrates describeth the occasion and conclusion of this Persian warre. From him Nicephorus taketh his light, and more than Socrates said before he neither doth nor could affirme. Phi. So did holy Pope Leo the first,The defence, cap. 5. perswade the Emperour, called Leo also, to take armes against the Tyraunt of Alexandria for the deliuerie of the oppressed Catholiques from him and the heretiques Eutichians:The example of Pope Leo the first. who then threw downe Churches, and Monasteries, and did other great sacrileges. Whose wordes for examples sake I will set downe.Leo. epist. 75. Euag. li. 2. ca. 8. O Emperour (saith Sainct Leo) if it be laudable for thee to inuade the heathens, how much more glo∣rious shall it bee to deliuer the Church of Alexandria from the heauie yoke of outragious heretiques, by the calamitie of which Church all the Christians in the world are iniuried? Theo. Leo was so holy that hee neuer taught any man to beare armes a∣gainst his Prince:Leo requested the Prince to punish his sub∣iects, what is that to the depriuation of Princes? Euag. li. 2. ca. 8. and yet it did nothing hurt his holynes to pray the Empe∣rour to pursue with due punishment the wicked vprore that was made in A∣lexandria by Timotheus an heretike, that placing himselfe in the Bishoprike, and killing Proterius the true Bishoppe at the font in the Church: caused the carkas by some of his faction to bee drawen along the streetes in a rope, and to bee so cutte and mangled that the very intrayles drayled vpon the stones, and the rest of the bodie to bee burnt and the ashes scattered into the ayre. That villanous and diuelish fact, Leo the Bishoppe of Rome beseecheth Leo the Emperour with all seueritie to reuenge, assuring him that it is as glorious a conquest before Christ to punish such outragious heretikes,It is a glorious thing for a Prince to pu∣nish heretikes but not for subiects to re∣bell against their Prince. as to represse miscreantes and Infidels. But howe this shoulde serue your turnes wee can not imagine. Will you reason thus? Leo the Bishoppe of Rome perswaded the Emperour to chastise some of his subiects that were heretikes and murderers, Ergo the people may assault their Prince with armes. Take heede left Timotheus heresie and furie reuiue in you again, if you fal to liking such consequents. Phi. In briefe;The defence, cap. 5. so did S. Gregorie the great moue Genadius the Exarch, to make warres specially against heretikes as a very glorious thing. Theo. You speake truer than you are ware of.Gregorie made the like request to the Emperours deputie. In deede Gregorie the great wrate to Genadius the Exarch in the selfe same sense that Leo before did to Leo the Emperour, which is that Magistrates ought to resist and pu∣nish the aduersaries of Christes Church, as well as the troublers and distur∣bers of the Common-wealth; neither is there any difference in their writings or meanings, saue that Leo wrate to the Prince himselfe, and Gregorie to his Deputie. And since you be come to Gregorie,For 600. yeres after Christ, no subiect tooke armes against his prince for any matter of re∣ligion. it is high tyme you begin to awake and remember your selfe that for sixe hundreth yeeres you haue not, nor can
not shew vs any one example, where heretical Prince, was deposed, or subiect allowed to beare armes against his Soueraigne. Which is a sufficient con∣uiction that Pagans and heretikes were all this while honoured, obeyed and endured by the Church of Christ, if they were Princes. Or if that collec∣tion bee not good, heare Saint Augustines confession of him that was the ve∣ry worst of them, I meane Iulian the Apostata: and learne that they which suf∣fered and obeyed him,Aug. in Psal. 124. woulde neuer resist nor rebell against any. Iulianus exti∣tit infidelis Imperator, nonne extitit, Apostata iniquus, Idolatra? Milites Christiani seruierunt Imperatori infidels. Vbi veniebatur ad causam Christi, non agnoscebant nisi illum qui in caelo erat. Quando volebat vt idola colerent, vt thurificarent, prae∣ponebant illi Deum. Quando autem dicebat producite aciem, ite contra illam gen∣tem, statim obtemperabant. Distinguebant Dominum aeternum a Domino tempo∣rali, & tamen subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum, etiam Domino temporali. Iulian was an vnbeleeuing Emperour:If Apostataes were serued & obaied by Christians, what Princes should be de∣posed? was hee not an Apostata, an oppres∣sour and an Idolater? Christian souldiers serued that vnbeleeuing Emperor. When they came to the cause of Christ, they would acknowledge no Lord but him that is heauen. When hee woulde haue them to worshippe Idoles and to sacrifice, they preferred God before their Prince. But when he said, goe foorth to fight, inuade such a nation, they presently obeyed. They distinguished their eternall Lorde from their temporall, and yet were they subiect euen vnto their temporal Lorde, for his sake that was their eternall Lord and master.Caus. 11. quaest. 13. §. Iulianus. The like testimonie your Law bringeth out of S. Ambrose. Iulian the Emperour though hee were an Idolater, had yet vnder him Christian souldiers: to whom when hee sayd, goe, fight for the defence of the common-wealth, they did obey him: but when hee sayde, goe fight a∣gainst the Christians, then they regarded the Emperour in heauen (be∣fore him.) Phi. The defence, cap. 5. What Princes may be excō∣municated & when.The holy Bishoppes might most lawfully (and so sometymes they did) excom∣municate the Arrian Emperours, and haue warranted their Catholike subiects to de∣fend themselues by armes against them: But they alwayes did not so; because they had no meanes by reason of the greater forces of the persecutours. As there no que∣stion but the Emperours, Constantius, Valens, Iulian, and others might haue beene by the Bishoppes excommunicated and deposed, and all their people released from their obedience, if the Church or Catholiques had had competent forces to haue resisted. Theo. The Iesuites finding no ex∣ample in the Primatiue church where a prince was vrged with armes by his own subiects, come to this shift, that they might haue doone it, though they did it not.Uayne shiftes you haue brought vs many, but none vayner than that which here you broche. You vndertooke to shewe vs auncient exam∣ples that Princes were iudicially deposed by Priestes, and impugned with armes by their owne subiectes: You bee nowe come to the vttermost pitch of Antiquitie, and finding your selfe not able to bee as good as your worde, you tell vs that though Bishoppes did it not, yet they might most lawfully haue warranted their Catholike subiectes to defend themselues by armes, against (the Arrian Emperours.) But sir, you were to bring vs their examples what
they did, not your vants what they might haue done. The point we began with, was; what Bishops in this case might doe. You to shew what they might doe, pro∣mised vs the particulars of auncient ages what they had doone: and hauing perused six hundered yeeres after Christ, and perceauing no such deede doone, you come with a returne at the last, that though they did it not, yet they might haue doone it, whereas we rather collect they might not doe it, because they did it not. For had it beene most lawful, as you say; we can proue it most need∣full they should haue doone it.If the Bishops might haue deposed prin∣ces and did not, thē were they permit∣ters & increa∣sers of their heresie and tyrannie. The blaspheming of Christ, the murdering of his saincts, the seducing of many thousand soules, (which things were not only committed by their meanes, but also maintained by their power, that were suffered to beare and vse the sword for the strengthning and establishing of their error;) were causes sufficient to moue the Bishops to doe▪ what they lawfully might to preuent these mischifes, and saue the Bishops you cannot from the blemish of permitting and increasing the pestilent heresies of Arius and others, if they did not what they might in dewtie to withstand, and depose those Princes that were the chiefe Patrones of those impieties. Phi. There is no question but the Emperours Constantius,The defence, Cap. 5. Valens, Iulian, and others might haue beene deposed by the Bishops and all their people released from their obedience, if the Church or Catholiques had had competent forces to haue resisted. Theo. You falsely and wickedly slaunder the Martyrs of Christs church,The Iesuits slaunder the aunciēt mar∣tyrs of christs Church, as if they had been willing but not able to resist their Princes. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 22. What opor∣tunities the christians had to distresse Constantius. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 25. when you auouch they wanted not will, but power to resist their Princes. The Christians had forces sufficient and many fit opportunities offered them to set those hereticall Emperours besides their Seates, and woulde not. Constans the West Emperour was of power sufficient to haue repressed Constantius his brother, for feare of whom Athanasius was restored to his Bishoprike by Con∣stantius, and with whom if the Catholikes of the East would haue but ioyned themselues, it had beene most easie for them to haue taken the Scepter from Constantius. When Constans was slaine, Magnentius the Tyrant surprised all Italie, subdued Affrica and Lybia, and had Fraunce in subiection: and the souldiers of Illyricum erected Betranion against Constantius; in which distresse if the Christians would but haue forsaken Constantius and not ventered their liues for him, he must haue beene depriued of the West Empire, if not of the East also. Athanasius being charged that he with others secretly by letters incited this Magnentius, to take armes against the Emperour, answered as I shewed you before:Athanas. apolog ad Constant. Cast not this suspition, O Emperour, vpon the whole Church as though such things were written or thought on by Christian men, and specially by Bishopes. The like occasion was offered the Christians to dis∣place Constantius when Gallus,Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 34. who was both Cesar and next to the Crowne beganne to aduance himselfe to the Empire; but they tooke it, as you see by Athanasius wordes, to be no Christian mans part to thinke on bearing armes against their Emperour though an hereticke.
And Iulian.Of the Christian souldiers vnder Iulian you hearde S. Augustine say they In Psal. 124. serued their temporall Lorde (though an Idolater and an Apostata) not for lacke of force to resist, but for respect of their euerlasting Lorde in heauen. Otherwise the Christian souldiers had Iulian in his voyage against the Persi∣ans farre from home and from helpe, and might haue done with him what they woulde; and yet they chose rather to spend their liues for him, than to lift vp their handes against him; and the Christian worlde in his absence stirred not a∣gainst him, but with patience endured his oppression and with silence expected his returne. Phi. They were heathen souldiers that were with Iulian in the Persian warres. Theo. Their owne words testifie they were christians, for when Ioui∣nian the next day after Iulians death was chosen Emperour by them, & refused the place, because he thought the most part of the souldiers to be Gentiles, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 22. they cried al with one common voyce and confessed themselues to be christians. And valens.Against Valens, the church of Christ had forces abundant, if shee would haue sounded or vsed them. For all the tyme of his raigne not onely the West Em∣perours were Catholikes, first Valentinian and after him Gratian, but Pro∣copius at Constantinople taking armes against Valens, and the Gothes de∣tayning all Thracia from him,Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 3. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 35. gaue the Christians great aduantage to haue shaken him cleane out of the East Empire: if their willes had beene answerable vnto their strength. And Valen∣tinian. Paulus Diaco∣nus de gest. Ro∣manor. lib. 1.Valentinian the yonger infected with Arianisme, Maximus a rebell of this land thrust quite from the West Empire & made him flie into the East partes, and had not Theodosius a Catholike Prince, conquered that Tyrant and re∣stoared the yong Prince to his Scepter againe, he had lost his Crowne for euer. Where you see not only what forces the Catholikes had, but howe farre they were from deposing hereticall gouernours, that woulde hazard their liues to restoare them. And Anasta∣sius. Euag. li. 3. ca. 44 Anastasius an heretike offe∣red to resigne his Crowne & the people would not suffer him. Regard of du∣tie and the Apostles do∣ctrine kept the primatiue Church from resisting here∣ticall princes.And what thinke you was the force of all the christians in the worlde, when the people of one Citie falling into a sedition for matter of Religion so pre∣uayled and passed all the power of resisting, that Anastasius the Empe∣rour was faine to come to an open place without his Crowne, and by heraults to signifie to the people that he was readie with a very good will to resigne the Empire into their handes? At the sight of whom, the people moued with that spectacle chaunged their mindes, and besought Anastasius to keep the Crowne, and promised for their partes to be quiet. Yet was Anastasius both an heretike and an excommunicate person, if your owne words before, or stories otherwise may be trusted. Not therefore disabilitie but dutie, not lacke of competent forces, but a re∣uerent regarde of the Apostles Doctrine kept the Primatiue Church of Christ from resisting her Princes. Shee neuer determined, shee neuer at∣tempted any such thing: shee might often tymes haue repelled them from their Seates and woulde not, but taught all men to submitte themselues,
and rather to bee crowned as martyrs for enduring, than to bee punished as re∣bels for inuading their Princes. For Rom. 13. they that resist, shall receiue iudge∣ment, which not onely the auncient Christians but the very Barbarians did confesse. Athanaricus king of the Gothes, when hee came to visite Theo∣dosius,Paulus Diaco∣nus de gest. Ro∣manor. lib. 1. Sine dubio, inquit, Deus terrenus est Imperator, contra quem quicunque manus leuare nisus fuerit, ipse su sanguinis reus existit. No doubt, sayth hee, the Emperour is the God of the earth, against whom, whosoeuer will offer to lift vp his hand, is guiltie of his owne blood. Phi. Yea the quarel of Religion and defence of innocencie is so iust that heathen Princes not at all subiect to the Churches Lawes and discipline may in that case by the Christians armes bee resisted,The defence, cap. 5. Se. S. Thomas 2.2. quaest. 10. artic. 10. and ight lawfully haue beene repressed in tymes of the Pagans and first great persecutions, when they vexed and oppressed the faithful; but not otherwise (as most men thinke) if they would not annoy the Christians, nor vio∣lently hinder or seeke to extirpate the true fayth and course of the Gospel. Though S. Thomas seemeth also to say that any heathen king may be lawfully depriued of his su∣perioritie ouer Christians. Theo. What S. Thomas seemeth to say wee care not, so long as we know what S. Paul sayth:Rom. 13. and that is, You must bee subiect, not onely for feare of wrath, or lacke of force, when you can not choose, but euen for conscience sake, though you were able to resist. If your schooles haue gotten any other doctrine than this, looke you to that: wee bee the disciples of Christ, and not of Occam, Scotus, or Thomas; men may by this perceiue what your schoolemen would ad∣uenture in other pointes of Religion, that in so cleare a case of conscience and o∣bedience, they woulde flatly contradict the holy Ghost.Their scroles resolue direct∣ly against S. Paul. Rom. 13. Luke. 20. Heathen Princes may not bee resisted by their Christian subiects: of them Saint Paul wrate when hee sayde, Whosoeuer resisteth power, resisteth the ordinance of God; and of them Christ spake, when hee charged vs to giue vnto Caesar, the things which are Caesars. They might not therefore lawfully haue beene repressed in the tymes of the Pagans and first great persecutions when they vexed and oppressed the faithfull, because sufferance made their subiects martyrs before God, whome resistance would haue doubbed for rebels against God and man. If your meaning bee, that by Christian Princes, (had there been any such in those dayes,This is nether pertinent to our question nor any part of their mea∣ning.) they might lawfully haue beene repressed and pursued with armes, you alter the question, and touch not our case: Wee reason not what Christian Princes may doe to heathen Tyrants, but what duetie Christian sub∣iects must yeelde to their Princes, bee they Pagans or others that beare the swoorde. And for that wee haue the manifest voyce of Gods spirite which I haue often repeated, and against the which wee giue eare to no creature, man nor Angel. That voyce the church of Christ diligently remembred, and constantly fol∣lowed, as Tertullian witnesseth. Tertullian. ad Scapulam. Neuer rebels were christiās in the prima∣tiue Church. Wee are disfamed, sayth hee, concerning the Emperours maiestie, but neuer yet Albinians, Nigrians nor Cassians, (Albinus, Niger, and Cassius being rebels in his tyme) could bee found to be
Christians. A Christian is enemie to no man, much lesse to the Prince: whom he knoweth to be appointed of God▪ & so of necessitie must loue, reuerence, and honour him, and wish him safe with the whole Romane Empire. There∣fore wee sacrifice for the health of the Emperour, but vnto our God and his God, and with chast prayer, as GOD hath commaunded.The reasons why Christiās would not re∣sist, taken out of their own confessions. So that wee pray for the Emperours health more than you, asking it of him that is able to giue it. And God forbid we should take those thinges which we suffer, in euill part, since wee desire to suffer them, or imagine any reuenge against you, which wee waite for at Gods leasure. Yet needefull it is wee lament your case, since not a citie of yours shall escape at Gods hande for the shed∣ding of our blood. Tertul. in apolo∣getico.And againe in his Apologie for all Christians: Thou that thinkest we haue no care of the welfare of our Princes, looke vppon the woordes of GOD, I meane our bookes, which neither wee suppresse, and many chaunces bring to your eyes. Knowe, that there wee are commaunded for the plentifull en∣crease of our charitie to pray to God for our enemies, and to wish wel to our persecutours.Ibidem. Christians commanded by God to pray for their Princes though they were perse∣cutors. Ibidem. Yea namely and plainely he sayth, Pray for kings, for Princes, and powers, that all things may bee peaceable (vnto them.) For the Em∣pire can not bee shaken but wee also must bee partakers of the fall. And after some woordes, But what speake I more of the religion and pietie of Christians towardes the Emperour? Whome wee must needes reuerence as one that our Lorde and master hath chosen. And to speake the trueth, Caesar is rather ours (than yours) as being ordained by our God. And giuing a better reason for their obeying than you can for your warring: We are saith hee, the same men to our Princes that wee are to our neighbours. To wish euill, to doe euill, to speake euill, to thinke euill, is indifferently forbidden vs towardes all men. Wee may do that to no man, which (we say) we may not to our Prince: and if to no man, so much the lesse to him that is so highly aduanced by (our) God. This is sounder and seemelier doctrine for Christians than that which you bring vs out of Thomas Aquinas. And where you will vs by the note in your margin to See S. Thomas a Saint of your making, wee will you to See S. Paul and S. Peter Saints past all doubting.See S. Paul & S. Peter for obedience to heathen Princes. You see the continuall obedience of Christes Church, so long as Pagan and heathen Princes had the sworde. Shee taught that all men, and most of all Christians, shoulde loue, reuerence and honour heathen Princes as ordayned by God, to beare the swoorde, euen by the God of Christians, and that they might neither wish euill, doe e∣uill, speake euill or thinke euill of any such Powers, much lesse resist them with armes and depriue them of their superioritie ouer Christians, as your new saint seemeth to say. And lest you thinke the Christians of those times serued and honoured hea∣then Princes rather for feare than for conscience, (which is an open slaunder to them, and a lewde shift of yours, directly thwarting the woordes of Saint
Paul,Rom. 13. You must be subiect not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake.) You shall heare Tertullians report in the same place what forces the christians had, if they had thought it lawfull or godly to resist when they were cruelly vexed and oppressed.Tertul. in apolo∣getico. One night, saith he, with a few fierbrands, would yeeld vs reuenge sufficient, if it were lawfull with vs to requite euill with euill. But God forbid, that either they, which take part with GOD, shoulde reuenge themselues with humane fier, or be greeued to suffer, wherein they be tried. If we would not practise secrete reuenge, but pro∣fesse open enmitie,Mark what faces the Christians had 200. yeres after Christ. could we lacke nūber of men, or force of armes? Are the Moores think you, or the Parthians, or any one nation whatsoeuer, mo in nū∣ber than wee, that are spred ouer the whole world? We are not of you, & yet we haue filled al the places & roomes which you haue; your Cities, Ilands, Castles, townes, assēblies, your tents, tribes and wardes, yea the very Palace, Senate, & iudgement seates. For what warre were wee not able and readie, though wee were fewer in number than you that goe to our deathes so gladly, if it were not more lawfull in our religion to be slaine than to slea? We could without armes neuer rebelling, but only diuiding our selues from you haue doone you spite enough with that separation. For if so great a multitude as we are should haue broken from you, into some corner of the world, the losse of so many Citizens woulde haue both shamed you, & puni∣shed you. Beleeue me you would haue bin afraid to see your selues left alone and amazed, as amongst the dead, to see silence & desolation euery where. You woulde haue had moe enemies,Desolation would haue followed if the Christiās should haue but forsaken the Pagans. The Citizens almost all Christians. than inhabitauntes, where nowe you haue fewer enemies by reason of the multitude of your Citizens that are almost all Christians. Within two hundreth yeeres after Christ, the beeleeuers, as you heare by Tertullian, wanted neither number, strength nor courage to resist or reuenge their persecutours. What numbers and forces then had they foure, fiue, sixe hundreth yeeres after Christ, when they were backed by Princes, defended by Lawes, and prouoked with fauours and honours to professe Religion? and yet all that while, neither vnder Pagans, nor Arrians, did they, or woulde they resist with armes, but yeelded their liues with all submission, though they wanted neither meanes, nor multitude con∣uenient for any warres. Phi. Howsoeuer that bee;The defence, cap. 5. plaine it is that kinges that haue professed the fayth of Christ and the defence of his Church and Gospell, may bee and haue beene iustly both excommunicated and deposed for iniuries done to Gods Church and reuolt from the same; as sometimes also for other great crimes tending to the pernition of the whole people subiect vnto them. Theo. You presume more in seuen lynes than you are able to prooue in seuen yeres. That Popes haue attempted to depose Princes, and for the per∣fourming of their enterprise haue shaken the Church with horrible schismes and wearied the worlde with slaughter and bloodshed wee knowe full wel, you neede not vrge it. But that they iustly did, or might depose Princes which is
the point we striue for, though you affirme it to bee plaine, wee denie it to bee true: and therein the paune of your bare credit, if you knew not so much before, we take for no good euidence in this cause. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. Princes excō∣municated & depriued for defects in re∣ligion.To speake specially of matter of religion, and the crimes therevnto belonging: Leo the third was excommunicated and depriued of all his temporalities in Italie by Gregorie the second. For defect also in Religion and of the Churches defence, were the Greeke Emperours discharged, and the Empire translated to the Germanes by Pope Leo the third. As afterward diuers German Emperors for notable iniuries doone to Gods Church, for sacrilege, and for heresie; by godly discipline of the Church, and by the diligence of sundrie Popes, haue beene brought to order, or in fine deposed; or els where they would not obay Christs Vicar, either in themselues, or in their posteri∣tie haue beene notoriously by God confounded. As Frederick the first, Fredericke the second, Otho the first, Lewes, the third, Lewes the fourth, and whom we name last (because we must say some thing more of him) Henry the third (or as some call him) the fourth, by Gregorie the seuenth; which example the Libeller and other heretiques most mention; for that the saide Henry so obstinatly resisted (though other∣wise by the inuincible courage and constancie of the Pope often brought to penance and extremitie) that in fine by armes he draue the saide Pope out of his Sea; and pla∣ced an Antipape:An Anti pape. that is to say, one so opposite to Christs Vicar as Antichrist shall be against Christ▪ which by armes and Patronage of this wicked Emperour, vsurped and occupied the Apostolical throne against the true Pope Gregorie the seuenth, whom the Libeller (after the vulgar vaine of rebellious heretiques) voutsafeth not the name of Gregorie the seuenth, but calleth him commonly Hilde∣brand: as the heretiques when they were in armes in Germanie against their Emperour,Heretical malice. would not name him Charles the fifth, nor Emperour, but Charles of Gaunt. Theo. No president for the depri∣uatiō of prin∣ces within a 1000. yeres af∣ter Christ.Finding no president for the Depriuation of Princes within the first sixe hundred yeeres after Christ, you goe lower to get somewhat for your purpose: and within the next foure hundreth yeeres you name vs one that was not depriued of his Empire, but denyed his reuenues in Italie by the re∣bellion of the souldiers and Citizens of Rome, Rauenna, Venice, & other pla∣ces against him. Phi. Zonar. annal. to. 3. in imperio Leon. Isari.The Greeke and Latine writers doe consent that this was Gregories act. Zonaras sayth, Gregorie which then ruled the church of olde Rome refu∣sing the fellowship of the Bishoppe of newe Rome, & of all that were of his opinion, wrapped them together with the Emperour in a Synodical excō∣munication, and stayed the tribute which til that time was paied to the Em∣pire: and made a league with the Germanes.Vrspergens. in anno 718. Vrspergensis sayth, Gregorie the Pope of Rome prohibited any tribute to bee giuen to the Emperour out of the Citie of Rome or out of Italie.Otho Frisingen. lib. 5. cap. 18. Frisingensis hath the like, Gregorie the Pope warning the Emperour often tymes by letters, and finding him incorrigible perswaded Italie to reuolt from his Empire. And so Sigebert,Sigebert. in anno 731. Gregorie reprooued Leo the Emperour for his error, and turned both the
people of Rome and the tribute of the West partes from him. Moe I coulde bring you, but these are enough. Theo. You speake truer than you are ware of. The rebellion of the Italiās against Leo the thirde was like enough to be Pope Gregories act.The rebellion of the Italiās against Leo might be the Popes secret practise, but he durst not appeare in the matter. For the Bi∣shops of Rome were then Malcontentes, to see the Bishops of Constantino∣ple liue in such wealth, ease, and honor, and themselues neglected by the Greeke Emperours and afflicted dayly by the Lumbardes. And therefore I thinke they were forwarde enough to kindle the people against their Prince vppon the least occasion that might fall out. And that may be the meaning of those Greeke and Germane writers which you bring, that the Bishop of Rome occasioned or secretly incouraged the rebellion of Italie against Leo: But that he tooke vpon him in those dayes to be the deposer of Princes, as now he doeth, or that he openly shewed or pleaded his vniuersall and supreme power to dispose king∣domes, which is the thing that you shoulde proue, that I denie: and therein your owne stories, as well the elder as the later sort of them, that otherwise be very partial, will iustifie my speech. Diaconus aliue in those dayes, saieth: Leo the Emperour tooke the ima∣ges of Sainctes at Constantinople and burnt them,Paulus Diaco∣nus de gestis Rom. li. 8. in Leo. The Bishop of Rome depri∣ued not Leo the thirde of his tempora∣lities. and commaunded the Bi∣shop of Rome, if euer he looked to haue his fauour, to do the like. But the Bishop refused to doe it, and all the souldiers of Rauenna and Venice resisted this precept with one consent, and but that the Bishop of Rome prohibited them so to doe, they had attempted to make an other Emperour ouer them. Regino, that liued 200. yeres before Sigebert, Frisingēsis, Vrspergensis or Zo∣naras, saith the same. Blondus a diligent searcher and reporter of antiquities,Regino in anno Dom. 655. Blondus decadis 1. lib. 10. This was a re∣bellion of the souldiers, and not a depriua∣tion of the Popes. where partiall affe∣ction doth not blinde him, saith: The Emperour dealt by faire meanes at first with the Bishop of Rome, if hee woulde haue his fauour, to pull downe and burne the images in all places of Italy as he had done in the East. Upon this precept of the Emperour, first the citizens of Reuenna, then the people and souldiers of Venice brake into an open rebellion against the Emperour and (his deputie) the exarch, and laboured to the Bishop of Rome, and to other cities of Italie to abrogate the Empire of Constantinople and to chose one of Italy or Rome for their Emperour: and the rebellion went so farre, that re∣iecting Magistrates which the exarch had appointed,The Pope durst not opē∣ly be seene to take their partes howso∣euer he pri∣uatly incen∣sed or fauored this tumult. Naucleus ge∣nerat. 25. euerie citie and euery towne beganne then first since the inclination of the Romane Empire to create and elect Magistrates of their owne, which they called Dukes. But Stephen the Bishop of Rome repressed that attempt of the Italians to choose a new Emperour because he hoped Leo would vppon better aduise hereafter forbeare such enormities. Yet the rebellion of the people of Rome, and of o∣ther persons in Italie went forwarde, and euerie day increased against the Emperour. Nauclerus agreeth with Blondus, saue that hee maketh Gregorie the seconde then Bishoppe of Rome, when Blondus nameth Stephen.
Platina in Gre∣gorie 2.Platina telleth his tale this way. Leo the Emperour, the thirde of that name, when hee coulde not haue his will at the Bishop of (Rome) proposed an edict that all men vnder the Romane Empire, shoulde take out of their Temples the images of all the holie Martyres, and Angels, for auoiding of idolatrie as hee sayde: and who so did not, hee woulde accompt him for an open enimie. Gregorie (the seconde) not onely obeyed not, but also warned all the Catholikes, (so your adherentes call themselues, though they be nothing lesse than Catholikes) that they shoulde not fall into that errour for any feare or precept of Prince.This made the Germanes and Graecians impute this rebellion to the Bishop of Rome: & per∣happes not without cause if all his pri∣uate packing had bin know∣en. Sabel Ennead. 8. lib. 7. By the which exhortation the people of Italie were so animated, that they lacked verie little of chosing themselues an other Emperour: but Gregorie interposed himselfe to staie them by his au∣thoritie from doing it. Sabellicus adding a thirde cause why the people of Rome and Italie were sore greeued with the Emperour, and with-helde their tribute, and not long after diuided the Empire, which was the continuall impugning of them and preuailing against them by the Lombardes without any helpe from the Graecians. Leo, sayth he, prayed (the Bishop of Rome) friendly that following his example, he would raze the images of Saints out of al the temples (in Italie.) Wherin the Bishop not only would not gratifie the Prince, but wrote vnto al the churches that they should continue their most ancient custome. That procured Leo passing hatred amongst other Nations but chiefly among the Italiās,The Italians were many waies greeued with the Grae∣cians and that made them take light oc∣casions to re∣uolt. insomuch that the people of Rome began to consult of the choise of a new Emperour within Italie, and the heartes of all Italie were ioyned with them in that attempt, and that consent of theirs had broken foorth into an open defection, had not the Bishop of Rome enterposed his authoritie, and restrained the fiercenesse of his citizens by mollifieng them and admonish∣ing them to persist in their former duetie to the Emperour, when as that cō∣spiracie had alreadie so preuailed; that Marinus the ruler of the citie & his son the president of Campania being slain by the people, & the Exarch like∣wise murdered at Rauenna, the cities & commons had chosen for themselues new Magistrates. Aeneas Sylu. in Decad. Blōd. lib. 10. Decad. 1.Aeneas Syluius, euen when hee was Pope Pius the seconde speaking oft his vprore made against Leo the thirde saieth: To this rebellion the Bishoppe of Rome did not consent, hoping that Leo would be better ad∣uised. The Pope cal∣leth Leo most religious Lord the last yeare of his life.If the report of other Writers be not sufficient, the letters of Gregory the 2. & Gregory the 3. wil witnesse no lesse: the one writing in the 7. yeare of Leo, the other, in the 23. which was the last yeare of the raigne and life of Leo the 3. where they call him not onely Emperour but most religious Lord: which could not bee▪ if for his impietie they long before had forsaken his obedience as Zona∣ras the Monke imagineth.Auen. lib. 3. an∣nalium fol. 289. Gregorie the 2. endeth his letters with, Imperante Domino pijssimo Augusto Leone, à Deo coronato, magno Imperatore, imperij eiu
anno septimo. In the 7. yeare of the raigne of the great Prince crowned by God,Ibidē fol. 291. Leo the Emperor (our) most gracious Lord. Gregorie the thirde writeth, Im∣perante Domino pijssimo Augusto Leone, Imperij eius anno vicesimo tertio. In the 23. yeare of the raigne of (our) most religious Lord Leo the Emperor.Marianus in annis 727. & 741. Both which letters Marianus Scotus remembreth with their dates in his accompt of times and yeares. If Leo the last yeare of his life were called religious Lorde and Emperour by the Bishop of Rome: how can it be true, that either of the Gregories forsooke his obedience and depriued him of all his dominions in Ita∣lie, long before his death? Who stirred this rebellion against Leo the thirde, I will not dispute: The Graecians had good cause to suspect the Bishop of Rome, and to thinke him to bee the verie author and contriuer of it, as Zonaras doeth: but that which hee did was closely doone vnder hand, by conspiring priuily with other places and inciting the people by secret meanes to reuolt from the Empire.The Bishop of Rome did not then take vpō him to be the deposer of Princes. This proueth rebellion of the people against their Prince if the Iesuites will, but it concer∣neth not the Popes cen∣sures. The Defence, cap. 5. As for a∣nie open and apparant act, hee was so farre from taking vppon him to de∣priue the Emperour by iudiciall sentence in his Consistorie, that hee durst not bee knowen in this tumult to stande with the people, or fauour their doinges by any publike aide or consent, but seemed rather to staie them by his persuasion, and to labour against that defection of theirs in the sight of others as your owne Stories doe confesse. And therefore you may proue, if you will by this example a rebellion of the Romanes against their Prince, which the Bishoppe of Rome neither did, nor durst auouch; but deposition of Princes by the Popes censures, which is the point that we demaunde, you can not proue by this or any other president in the West partes for a thowsande yeares after Christ. Phi. You can not deny but that for defect in religion and of the churches defence the Greeke Emperors were discharged and the Empire translated to the Germanes by Pope Leo the thirde. Theoph. That the Empire was deuided I doe not denie,The diuisiō of the Empire. but that it was doone for defect in religion, or that the Pope alone of his abso∣lute authoritie did it, both these I denie: and therein though certaine Monkes and Friers of yours do slubber vppe the matter, and attibute the do∣ing thereof to the Popes sole and soueraigne power: yet the truer and ex∣acter writers of your owne side do witnesse the contrary. And that first it was not doone for any defect in Religion,The Empire was not de∣uided for any defect in reli∣gion. Synod. Nicenae 2. actio. 2. the time, when it was doone, will declare. The seconde Councell of Nice was celebrated in the eight yeare of Constantine and Irene, as the first ses∣sion of the Councell doth specifie: Where not only the Legates of Adri∣an Bishoppe of Rome say of them-selues, Nos postquam ab Apostoli∣co Patre nostro Adriano litteras accepissemus, eas ad pios nostros Impe∣ratores pertulimus, The letters which wee brought from our Aposto∣like Father Adrian wee deliuered to the handes of our religious Empe∣rours, (Constantine and Irene.) But Adrian him-selfe writing to them
by name,Ibidem epist. Adrian. ad Con∣stant. Imperat. & Iren. matrem eius. saith: Being lately by your godly cōmandemēt aduertised of your pleasure, we offred praiers & thanks to almightie God for your Empire. And growing to an end, Haec sunt serenissimi & pijssimi Imperatores: These are the things most gratious & godly Emperors, which we haue gathered out of the Scriptures, &c. the which by our Apostolike relation we present to the good affection of your Maiesties with all humilitie and sinceritie: beseeching your clemencie and as it were kneeling in your presence, and prostrate before your feete, I with my brethren make supplication & request to you in the sight of God,The Pope cō∣fesseth the church of Rome to be the Greeke Emperours: in the seconde Nicene Sy∣node: and af∣ter that coun∣cel was no change of re∣ligion in Greece. The Empire was diuided by the publike decree of the Romane state and not by the Popes keyes. that keeping the tradition of this your most holy & blessed church, you wil detest the wicked rage of heretikes that you may imbrace this catholike and Apostolike church of Rome which is yours, without dis∣solution. At this Synode Constantine and Irene were acknowledged by A∣drian and his Legates for Emperours of Rome: and after this Synode til the diuision of the Empire, there was no change of religion in Greece, but the af∣fayres of the church stoode in the same state in which they were at the time of this Synode. And sure it is that Irene was wholy addicted to images, for by her helpe this councel was kept & images restored: and yet in her raigne, when she alone had the rule of all, the Empire was diuided. So that religion can not be pretended for the translation of the Romane Empire from the Greekes to the Germanes. Againe the maine consent of your Stories is; that the Senate and people of Rome did concur with the Bishop in this action, & their decree that he should, and request that he would crowne Charles for their Emperour, are expressely remēbred in the most of your writers, otherwise deriuing al the power they can in these and such like cases to the Bishop of Rome. Platina and Blondus saie it was done, Populi Romani scito ac precibus: by the decree and request of the people of Rome:Platina in Le∣one 3. Blondus Deca∣dis 2. lib. 1. Naul. volum. 3 generatio. 27. in anno 800. Sabel ennead. 8. lib. 8. Auen. annal. boior. lib. 4. fol. 344. Nauclerus saith it was done, populi Romani consensu: with the consent of the people of Rome: Sabellicus saith, Scito rogatu{que} populi Romani. The Pope did it by the determination and petition of the people of Rome. Auentinus sayth, Pontifex, Senatus, populus{que} Romanus, imperum transferre, iure suo in Germanos Carolum{que} tacito Senatus consulto, plebiscito{que} decernunt. The Bi∣shop, Senate, and people of Rome, conclude by a decree of the Senate and people secrete among them-selues, to remoue the (Romane) Em∣pire, and in their owne right to deriue it vnto the Germanes and vnto Charles. Sigeber. in ann. 801. The Romanes pretended the wickednes of Irene to be the cause why they forsooke the Graecians.Sigebert shewing the time, and adding the cause, sayth: Romani qui ab Im∣peratore Constantinopolitano iam diu animo disciuerant, nunc accepta occasionis op∣portunitate, quia milier excaecato Imperatore Constantino filio suo eis imperabat, vno omnium consensu Carolo Regi Imperatorias laudes acclamant, eum{que} per manus Le∣onis Papae coronant, Caesarem & Augustum appellant: The Romanes, which in heart were long before fallen from the Emperour of Constantinople, taking this occasion and opportunitie that a woman, which had pulled out the eyes of her owne sonne the Emperor, had gotten the Dominion ouer thē,
with one generall consent proclaime king Charles for their Emperour and crowne him by the handes of Pope Leo, and salute him as Caesar and Empe∣rour (of Rome.) Frisingensis saith of her:Otho Frisingen. lib. 5. cap. 29. Digna cuius diebus orbis imperium quod in manus faeminae non dignè deuenerat, ad Francos transferretur. She well de∣serued that in her dayes the Empire of the world, which came into the handes of a woman by so vile meanes, shoulde be translated to the Ger∣manes. Aeneas Syluius giueth an other cause that moued them no lesse, than this.Aeneas Syluius de authoritate Romani Impe∣rij, cap. 9. Demum verò negligentibus Romam Graecis, eam{que} nunc Barbarorum, nunc aliorum direptions relinquentibus, populus ille Romanus, qui suo sanguine tantum pararat im∣perium, qui suis virtutibus Monarchiam fundauerat orbis, venientem in auxilium eis Carolum magnum Francorum Regem, qui vrbem sacra{que} loca ab omni hostium incursione defendit, concurrente summi consensu Pontificis Caesarem salutauit: The Princes of Greece beginning to neglect the citie of Rome,A second cause pre∣tended for the diuision of the Empire. and to leaue it to the spoile of Barbarians and others, the people of Rome which with their blood had gotten so great an Empire, and with their vertues established the Monarchie of the world, saluted Charles the great king of Germanes (as he came to helpe them, and had defended the citie and temples from all in∣uasiōs of enemies) for their Emperor, not without the consent of the Bishop of Rome. So that the wiser sort euen of your owne fellowes do neither pretende reli∣gion, nor the Popes supereminēt power ouer al kingdoms, for the translation of the Empire as you do, but set it down as an Act done by the general consent and authoritie of the Bishop, Senate and people of Rome for meere ciuill res∣pectes. And at the time of their defection from the Grecians, they neither de∣priued Prince,The indignity which the Ro∣mans concei∣ued against I∣renes vsurpa∣tion & cruel∣tie. nor pretended any Papall censure for the matter; but abhor∣ring to see a wicked woman (that had thrust the right heire and her own sonne from his throne, and pulled out his eyes) to inuade and holde the Monarchie of the world by iniurie and tyrannie, they reiected her as an vsurper and disposed otherwise of their owne state by electing a new Emperour. Phi. They would neuer after bee vnited againe to the Grecians. Theo. You range without your bondes. The diuision of the Empire so long as it was nei∣ther for matter of religion,The diuision of the Empire maketh no∣thing for the Popes depri∣uing of Prin∣ces. as I haue proued, nor doone by the Popes Aposto∣like power, as your owne companions graunt, but by the consent of the whole state of Rome, either for displeasure to see themselues neglected in their miseries by the Grecians, or for disdaine that a wicked Tygresse vsurped the Empire without all right, is nothing to your question; and therefore whether it were lawfull or vnlawfull for the Romanes so to doe, can doe you no more good, thā it can doe vs,Manie realms fell from the Greeke Em∣pire before the Romanes. to proue that the Queene of England, or the king of Fraunce may depose Princes, because either Realme had long before that seuered and disioyned themselues from the Romane Empire, and had by this time, when the Romanes fell awaie, peaceable and absolute regimentes of their owne.
Phi. These Countries were conquered, and so by the Lawe of armes diui∣ded from the Empire. Theo. So could we say that Italie was conquered first by the Lombards, and after by Charles, who tooke their king captiue, and by the lawe of armes inherited his crowne. But wee stand not on that as being without our compasse: it sufficeth to confute you that the Empire was diuided by the Romanes for earthly respectes, as appeareth by the confession of your owne fellowes, & not any Prince deposed by the Popes authoritie for default in matter of religion. You heard before what Aeneas Syluius said: Blōdus, Sa∣bellicus, Nauclerus and others report the like occasion and reason for the Ro∣manes diuiding the Empire. Bloud. Decad. 1. lib. 10. Vppon what occasion the Empire was diuided, by the report of their owne stories.Aistulfus king of the Lombards, sayth Blondus: inuaded and spoyled the partes of Italie that belonged to the Romanes. The Bishop of Rome did his best with giftes and intreaties to pacifie the wicked king; and when hee perceiued it did not auaile him, hee wrote to Constantine the Empe∣rour, and shewed him in what state the Citie of Rome and all Ita∣lie stoode, assuring him that vnlesse hee did ende helpe, the Citie and the whole Countrie would bee subdued by Aistulfus: The Em∣perour moued with the earnest petition of Gregorie▪ (the thirde) wrote to Aistulfus, but his Legates brought nothing backe from Aistul∣fus but wordes, and those sharpe enough. The Bishoppe hearing this and seeing no good doone, called an assemblie of the whole people of Rome,The Pope him-selfe pretendeth not religion in this consul∣tation. and there at their earnest motion and request resolued to deale thus with the Emperour, that vnlesse hee woulde succour the Citie and Countrie in this extremitie with his presence and armie, they woulde seeke some other waie to saue and defende themselues. The messengers were skant gone, but Aistulfus sent Heraultes to menace the Bishoppe and people of Rome, that vnlesse they woulde yeelde them∣selues and the Citie, hee woulde come and take them by force, and kill man, woman, and childe. The Pope did not cease with presents and promises to winne Aistulfus to continue the league which hee had begunne with the Romanes.Helpe sought from the king of France by the common assent of the people of Rome. Sabel. ennead. 8. lib. 8. And when hee laboured in vaine, and the messenger which was ent to the Emperour neither returned, nor gaue them any hope of ayde (from the Empire) TOGITHER WITH THE PEOPLE OF ROME HEE DETERMINED to desire the helpe of the king of France. Sabellicus putting Stephen where Blondus doeth Gregorie, sayeth: Not long after Aistulfus tooke Rauenna, which when the Bishoppe of Rome by Legates required to haue restored, the Lombarde not one∣lie refused, but with great threates willed them to tell the Bishoppe and people of Rome, that except they did render their citie and whole Dominion into his handes, hee woulde shortly come and subdue them with armes, and kill them euerie one. Stephen amazed with these terrours of warre gaue counsell to sende to Constantinople, whence they
which were sent signified by letters that there was no looking for helpe from Constantine, either for that hee would not or coulde not, and there∣fore they must seeke some other waie.Nauel. volum. 3. generat. 26. anno 753. Blond. Decad. 1. lib. 1. The Bishoppe appalled with these letters, dealt with the people that some might be sent into Fraunce to king Pipine. Nauclerus and others saie the same, insomuch that when Aistulfus streitly besieged Rome three monethes and wasted all that was rounde about it with fire and sword, Blondus saith, Dum tantis fluctuat angitur{que} vel detri∣mentis velpericulis Roma & Italia, Constantinus Imperator nullam subueniendi cu∣ram suscepit. Whiles Rome and Italie tottered and was ready to sinke vn∣der these ruines and hazards, Constantine the Emperor had no maner of care to relieue them. This neglect of their calamities, not religion, made the Romanes seeke and take all opportunities to forsake the Grecians. I speake of the people, not of the Pope:The Pope had his secrete purposes in labouring the diuision of the Empire. for hee had deeper reaches and other purposes in laying this plotte, and those were the bettering his state and inriching him-selfe with the spoyles of the Empire, and aspiring to bee free from the Prin∣ces checke, to whom till that time hee was wholy subiect: which were the chiefe intentes of his first ioyning with the Germanes. And therfore when he was once sette at libertie from the yoke of the Grecians and indued with a good part of the Emperours reuenues in Italie, hee neuer left practi∣sing till hee brought the Romane Scepter to nothing, and himselfe to this height that we now see him in, by the finall ruine and subuersion of the East & West Empire. Phi. Might the people of Rome forsake the Grecians that bare the sworde? Theo. Looke you to that. You may proue them rebelles,The Iesuites by this may proue the Romanes to be rebels if they lift, they can not proue the Pope to be the dispo∣ser of king∣doms. See Zonaras an∣nalium, lib. 3. if you bee so disposed; you can not proue the Bishoppe of Rome to be the deposer of Princes. That which was done had the common consent, & was the publike Act of the Romane state, when there was no disagreement in religion between them & Irene; but a dislike for lacke of conuenient aide in their distresses as some affirme, or else a discontentment to see that furious woman vsurpe the imperial dignitie, and no lawfull successour left to vindicate the same out of her hand, as others seeme to saie. What-soeuer the cause was that mooued the Romanes; the Empire a∣mongest the Grecians at that time went neither by succession nor election, but they were fallen to cutting of throates, and hee that was mightiest tooke the sworde. Iustinian the yonger was depriued of the Empire and banished,The Grecians were fallen to catching and fighting for the Scepter, before the Romanes shranke from them. and his nose cutte off by Leo the seconde: and Leo the seconde thrust from the throne and imprisoned by Tiberius the thirde. Against them both when Iustinian had preuailed and recouered his crowne and put them to death, Philippicus in open fielde slue Iustinian, and gat his place: but kept it not long. For Arthemius the next yeare after tooke from him the Scep∣ter, and both his eyes. Theodosius sawe that, and hee sette Arthemi∣us besides the stoole, and with maine force of armes made him of a Prince a
poore Priest, and was him-selfe within one yeare serued of the same sauce by Leo the thirde. This wretched tumbling for the Empire by rebellion and murder might prouoke the Romanes to giue eare to the Popes priuate whis∣perings: and when they saw Constantine the sixt the last of Leoes line depriued both of his kingdome and eyesight by his owne mother, to forsake her as well as the Grecians did after depriue her,The Grecians depriued I∣rene as vsur∣ping the scep∣ter. and close her in an Abbay; but that I e∣steeme not, so long as the Pope by the power of his keyes did not diuide the em∣pire, for defect in religion, as you vainlie auouch. Phi. Many writers witnesse with vs that the Bishop of Rome translated the Empire.The Pope by right of his keyes had naught to doe with the Ro∣mane Empire Theo. Wee doe not denie but the Bishop as a principall part of the citie and policie of Rome had a stroke therein, and gained well thereby: but that he did it by his Priestly power as Peters successour, and not rather the people and the Bishop ioyning togither with their common aduise and authori∣tie as a politike state, that you shall neuer proue. Phi. What had the people to doe with translating the Empire? Theo. Nay what had the Pope to do with disposing the temporall sworde?The people had more to do with trans∣lating the Em¦pire than the Pope. The Romane state and Common-wealth had as good right to dispose the Romane Empire, as all other christian & heathen kingdoms and countries had to settle the sword and scepter that raigned ouer them. And since all other nations, once members of the Romane Empire, were suffered to plant those seuerall formes of regi∣ment which they best liked, and when the right heires failed, to elect their own Gouernours, I see no cause why the Romanes might not prouide for them∣selues, as well as other Realmes had done before them, specially if the pur∣portes of your Stories be true, that they were neglected by the Grecians whē they were besieged by the Lombardes, and the scepter at Constantinople wēt not by discent or succession, but by violent and wicked inuasion and sedition; but that the Bishop of Rome by his Priestly keyes, or Apostolike power did or might dispose the Empire, that we denie: And if any of your side to flatter the Pope, make report that he did it of his absolute power, and iudiciall authori∣tie, wee little esteeme such stragglers: as hauing the generall consent of your best authours and chiefest pillours for the contrarie. Phi. The chiefest of our side are against the most of your assertions. You holde opinion that Leo the thirde was not depriued of all his temporalities within Italie by Gregorie the second:Platina foul∣ly ouerseen in the translatiō of the empire. Plat. in Greg. 3. Nau. volum. 2. generatio 25. anno 725. Volum. 2. gene∣ratio. 25. and yet Platina and Nauclerus say, that Gregorie put him Imperio simul & communione fidelium, both from his Empire & from the communion of the faithful. Theo. This they say of Gregorie the thirde, not of Gregorie the 2. as you do: but it can be true of neither. Naucle∣rus by and by reciteth Epistle of Gregorie the thirde written the same yeare that Leo the Emperor died, where he calleth him Dominū pijssimum, Augustū Leonē: most religious Lord, Leo the Emperour. Sabellicus leaueth out the word (imperio) as vnlikely to be true, & saith that Gregorie the thirde magno Cleri, populi{que} consensu piorum communione priuat:Sabel. ennead. 8. lib. 8. put the Emperour (Leo) frō the communion with the consent and liking of the clergie and laitie. Blon∣dus
holdeth hardly that Gregorie the third was not Bishop of Rome, whiles Leo the thirde had the Empire. Againe the Empire could not be translated in the time of Leo, but Constan∣tine his sonne must likewise lose the same; his father taking him into the socie∣tie of the crowne the fourth yeare of his empire, and writing seuen where Con∣stantine wrote foure, as appeareth by the letter of Gregorie the seconde to the Germanes, and Bonifacius Habetur Auen∣tin. li. 3. fol. 888. Blondus Decad. othe and contestation before the same Gregory. Now to Constantine 1. lib. 10. & Sa∣bellic. ennead. 8. lib. 8. the sonne of Leo did the Bishop of Rome sende both Platina in Gre∣gorio 3. letters and Legates for helpe against Aistulphus when he besieged Rome, as to the right owner, protectour, and Emperour of that citie. And therefore it must needs be false that Platina saith, the tutele of the church was remoued from the Emperors of Cōstantinople to others by this Gregorie in the raign of Leo: for so much as Suprà fol. 414. Blondus, Sabellicus and Nauclerus witnesse the de∣fence of the citie against the Lombardes was craued at Constantines handes by those whom Platina placeth after Gregorie. And the chiefest reason which hee giueth of this transferring the defence of the church is most false. Gregorie deriued it to others, sayeth hee,Plat. in Greg. 3. Platina con∣tradicteth all other stories. maximè quod vrbem regiā aegrè Leo à Saracenis tutaretur: chiefly because Leo was hard∣lie able to defende his owne citie (of Constantinople) from Saracens: where∣as the Saracens besieged not Constantinople but the Sigebertus, Zo∣nar. & Cus∣pinian. first yeare of Leo, before his edict against Images came foorth: and Luitprandus besieged Rome not (Interim) as Platina sayeth, but a long time after: and the Bishoppe of Rome sent first for helpe into Fraunce not when Luitprandus, but when Ai∣stulphus besieged him: and then hee sent not vnto Charles as Platina woulde haue it, but to Pipine the father of Charles, with many such errours which conuince Platina to bee a verie indiligent and insufficient writer in this point. Nauclerus contented him-selfe with the wordes of Platina,Sabel. ennead. 8. lib 8. Much shuf∣fling in popish writers about the diuision of the empire. & searched no farther: which Sabellicus perceiued to bee so repugnaunt to the course of o∣ther Stories, that hee sayeth, Neque tempora legentibus, neque rerum ordo constare liquid potest. It is hard for the reader to distinguish either the times or the order of those thinges which were doone, by reason Platina in these wordes runneth so on heade against the rest. And therefore you shall pardon vs for receiuing a man of meane iudgement, and one that writeth verie negligently of these affaires, before the rest, that purposely and largely trea∣ted of those matters as neere as they coulde get the knowledge or come by the likelihood of those actions. These bee your presidentes for the depriuing of Princes betweene sixe-hundreth and a thowsande yeares after Christ. Other or better you haue not, and these you see, bee verie slender. Phi. Wee coulde alleadge more, but you will shift them, as you doe these. Theo. Wee shift not, when wee reproue the partiall and corrupt reportes of your owne fel∣lowes by better and elder testimonies. Moe if you haue, you neede not spare.
Philand. Philippicus was depriued of the Empire by the Bishoppe of Rome: and so was Childerike of the kingdome of Fraunce. Theoph. Your Law doeth not sticke to boast that Philip & Chil∣derike depri∣ued. Caus. 15. quaest. 6. ¶ alius. Plat. in Zach. 1.Zacharias deposed Childerike King of Fraunce, and placed Pipine in his roome. Philand. So hee did. Theo. Who sayth so besides you? Philand. Platina sayeth; Eius autho∣ritate regnum Franciae Pipino adiudicatur. By Zacharies authoritie the kingdom of Fraunce was adiudged vnto Ppine. And Frisingensis affirmeth that Pipine was absolued by Pope Steuen from the othe of allegeance,Frisingen. lib. 5. cap. 22. which he had giuen to Childerike, and so were the rest of the Nobles of Fraunce; and then the king being shauen and thrust into a Monasterie, Pipine was an∣noynted king: which you thinke much the Pope shoulde doe in our dayes. Theoph. Sette aside your helping and interlacing the Storie, and I see no cause why Zacharie shoulde bee thought by his Apostolike power to haue deposed Childerike.Wel the Pope might make a packe, for the deposition of Childerike: but his keyes were then of no such pow∣er as to de∣pose Princes. Caus. 15. quaest. 6. ¶ alius. Philand. Deposed hee was. Theoph. But neither for religion, nor by the Popes Consistorie. Philand. For the cause of his deposition I will not greatly striue. Our Lawe sayeth hee was deposed, Pro eo quod tantae potestati inutilis erat, for that hee was vnfitte for the kingdome, but sure Pope Zacharie deposed him. Theoph. Sure you bee deceiued. Pope Zacharie was then of no such accompt that hee coulde depose Princes. Hee was consulted whether it might lawfully bee doone or no, but farther than so the Bishoppe of Rome did not in open sight intermedle with the matter, what∣soeuer his priuie practises were: though many of your Monkes and Bishops to grace the Pope, doe make it his onely Act. Philand. In all these cases our Stories are against you; and no reason wee credite you, to discre∣dite them. Theoph. I desire you not to credite mee: and giue me leaue to doe as much for you: but if your owne Stories make with vs, I see no cause you shoulde discredite them. Philand. We doe not. Theoph. You may not. Then touching the persons which did the deede: Sabellicus sayth, Proceres Regni & populi amplexi Pipini virtutem,Sabell. enead. 8. lib. 8. The germans consulted the Pope, whe∣ther it were lawfull for thē to depose the Prince or not. Blondus Decad. 1. lib. 10. pertes{que} regis amentiam, Zacharia Ro∣mano Pontifice prius consulto, regis appellatione Childerico adempta, vt spes etiam regni adimeretur in clerum detondent, Pipinum regem creant. The Nobles & Commons (of Fraunce or Germanie) imbracing the valour of Pipine and ha∣ting the foolishnesse of their king, hauing first consulted Zacharie Bishop of Rome, tooke from Childerike the name of a king, and to cutte him from all hope of aspiring to the crowne, they sheere him a Monke, and elect Pi∣pine for their king. Blondus saieth, I finde in Alcuinus, Paulus, and diuerse others, which wrote the Actes of the Francks, that the Nobles and Commōs of that Nation duly considering the worthines of Pipine, & sottishnes of Chil∣derike, consulted Zacharie the Bishop of Rome, whether they should tolerate so folish a king any lōger,The whole nation depo∣sed Childerik. & defraud Pipin of his deserued princely honor; & when the Bishop made answere, that he was (best worthy) to be king which could best discharge the dutie of a king: the Frākes with the publike consent
of the whole Nation pronounced Pipine for their king; and Childerike was shorne and made a Monke.Nauc. generat. 26. Nauclerus saieth: The Franckes elected Pipine for their king by the publike consent of the whole Nation: which is all one with that Blondus sayeth,Caus. 15. quaest. 6. ¶ Alius & gloss. ibidem in ver. Deposuit. They declared or pronounced him for their king. And this is the reason that your owne gloze limiteth your Lawe in this sort, Deposuit, id est deponentibus consensit: Zacharie deposed Childerike, that is he consented to those which deposed him. Phi. The most of our Stories saie,The deposing of Childerike to make Pipin king of Frāce had a further reach than e∣uerie man saw. The Pope and Pipin diuided the west parts of the worlde betweene them. hee did it. Theoph. Your Stories are very forwarde to attribute euerie thing to the Pope that may any waie in∣crease his power. And it may be the Pope had an oare in that boate more than euerie bodie well perceiued. For Pipine was the man on whome the Pope wholy relied, and whose power hee afterwarde vsed to quaile the Lombards, and defeate the Grecians; that the Pope and Pipine▪ might diuide the spoyles of the West betweene them. And therefore I can bee soone induced to thinke that a maine plotte was layde, first to make Pipine king of France: and then by his helpe to turne the Greeke Emperour out of Italie that the Pope might haue share of the reuenues of the Empire, as not long after it came to passe: but that the Pope then claymed any power to de∣pose Princes and giue kingdomes; or that the better sore of your owne stories staie on any such pretences, you shall neuer shewe. Zacharie being consulted made answere, what the Germanes by Gods Lawe, as he thought might doe: but he did not appoint them by sentence or censure, what they should doe. Philand. Howe shall wee knowe that in this diuersitie of reportes? Theoph. You shall heare Zacharies answere to the Legates that were sent about this matter:Auen. lib. p. 299 Zacharies an∣swere to the German Le∣gates. and that you may safely trust. Philand. I mistrust not his owne wordes. Theop. You neede not, hee woulde fauour himselfe as much as hee might with any good coulour. When Volorade and Burcharde were sent to Zacharie to vnderstand his iudgement, his answere was, I finde in the sacred storie of the Diuine Scriptures that the people fell awaie from their wretchlesse and lasciuious king, that despised the counsell of the wise men of his Realme, and created a sufficient man, one of them∣selues, king, God him selfe allowing their doinges. All power and rule belong to God, Princes are his ministers in their kingdomes. And rulers are therefore chosen for the people, that they shoulde follow the will of (God) the chiefe ruler in all thinges,This Pope claimeth no power to de∣pose Princes, but supposeth it to be lawfull for any realm to prouide themselues of a fit king. and not to doe what they list. Hee is a true king that guideth the people committed to his charge ac∣cording to the prescript and line of Gods Lawe. All that hee hath, as power, glorie, riches, honour and dignitie, he receiueth of the people. The people create their king, and the people may (when the cause so requireth) forsake their king. It is therefore lawfull for the Franckes and Germanes refusing this vnkindely monster (Childerike) to choose some such as shall bee able in warre and peace by his wisedome
to protest and keepe in safetie their wiues, children, parentes, goodes and liues. I will not examine the Popes diuinitie, in that hee sayth, Princes haue their powers of the people: which the Scripture sayeth they haue of God:Rom. 13. Ieroboam & the ten tribes had Gods war¦rant for their reuolt, and so had not the Germanes when they chose Pipine. When princes are vnfit for the regiment of their peo∣ple, their own Realmes and not the Pope must haue care of that defect. Extreeme fol∣lie and frensie be iust causes to remoue Princes from bearing the sworde. this is plaine, hee claimeth no power to depose Princes, but al∣leadgeth an example that the people may chaunge their king when hee is not able (for frensie or follie) to do the duetie of a king. And by that con∣cludeth it lawfull for the Germanes to refuse that simple idiote, which had the Scepter by succession, and elect an other. Phi. Though you holde the Pope may not, yet you confesse the people may depose their Prince. Theo. I tell you not what I thinke, but what Pope Zacharie sayde to the Germanes. Phila. Doe you like or dislike that hee sayde? Theo. I shoulde haue asked you that question: but be∣cause you preuent mee, you shall heare what I saie. Zcharie toucheth not the causes for which Princes may be deposed, but the persons by whom it must bee doone, if it bee needefull to doe it: and that is by their owne Realmes, and not by tribunalles abroade, as you suppose. Phi. Then it may bee doone. Theo. When it shoulde bee doone, the whole Realme must doe it, and not the Pope. Phi. But neither hee, nor they can doe it, except you first assent that it may be doone. There can bee no deposers, if Princes bee not deposeable. Theo. There may fall extremities: when Prin∣ces are not able to guide themselues, much lesse their Realmes. Phi. What be those? Theo. I named them before, frensie & follie. As if the right heire to any Crowne be a naturall foole; or he that is inuested in the Crowne, waxe mad, and run besides him selfe. In either of these two cases any Realme by publike con∣sent and aduise may choose an other. Phi. What vnlikely cases you bring vs which neuer yet fell out in proofe? Theo. Yeas that they haue. Childerike, of whom we spake euen now, was deposed by the Germanes for a foole.The last of Pi∣pines race de∣posed for a bedlem. Regino lib. 2. anno 887. Euag. lib. 5. c. 11 And Charles the 3. the last Emperour of Pipines line (Gods iustice requiting his children with the verie same measure that he met before vnto his master) was deposed by the same people for *a bed∣lem. As also when Iustinus the yonger was *distract of his wits, Tiberius was placed in the Empire. Philand. You make Childerike a foole, because you woulde auoide the Popes power to depriue Princes. Theophil. If you made him not a foole, when you putte him from his right vnder that pretence, I doe him no wrong: Your Stories blaze him for a frantike foole. Blon∣dus and Nauclerus saie they did it Blond. Decad. 1. lib. 10. Naucl. volum. 3. gener. 26. Pensantes Regis amentiam: considering the madnes of the king: Sabellicus addeth thereunto, Sabel. ennead. 8. lib. 8. *Regis deliria & ineptias, the follie and frensie of the king. Gaguinus saith he was Gag. li. 3. in Ca∣rolo Martel. *homo vecors & bellua: a verie sotte and a beast: and for that cause his title in your Stories is Childeri∣cus stupidus, Childerike the foole: whether hee were or no, God knoweth: but this wee see, they handled him like a foole, and the Pope had infor∣mation
against him that hee was Deneger monstrum, a monster and not a man; and therefore were the causes which they alleadged for this depo∣sition true or no, wee greatly care not. They pretended a cause sufficient, if it were true; and the Pope confessed it lawefull for the whole Realme to displace such a Prince, as was both vn-fitte and vn-able to beare the sworde. Philand. But Stephen absolued Pipine from the othe of alleageaunce which hee had giuen vnto Childerike.Vrss ergens. in anno 753. Theoph. High time to absolue Pi∣pine from his othe three yeares after Childerike was deposed, and hee pla∣ced in the kingdome.Regino, lib. 2. anno 753. Regino, whence that fable first came of Stephens sick∣nesse at Paris and his recouerie by a vision of Sainct Denis, saieth not a worde of any such absolution, but onely that Stephen confirmed Pipine and his two sonnes as lawfull kinges of France,The Iesuites must proue that the Pope may dispence with a lawful oth. The stagge∣ring of their stories make many men thinke that Childerike was no foole. and adiured the Nobles not to choose them a king of any other line so long as Pipines race indured. The rest is added by Monks and Friers in fauor of the Pope as infinite other thinges are in the ac∣cidentes of euerie Age. Howbeit absoluing from others if they be lawfull and good, is a greater matter than we yet beleeue your holy father may deale with. The wauering of your Stories in the cause of Childerikes deposition, (for sometimes they vrge a defect in Childerike, sometimes they pleade a right in Pipine without the king, and aboue the king, as hauing the regiment of that Realme and all publike affaires committed to him and his, for the space of fourscore yeares by way of inheritaunce before hee sought the crowne:) this wauering in the cause, and curious seeking for absolutions, and confir∣mations maketh many men suspect that your pretences against Childerike were not all true. But whether Pipine had better interest to the Crowne of Fraunce than Childerike: by reason the Auent. lib. 3. fol. 293. & Nau volum. 3. gene∣ratio. 26. anno 750. & Frising. lib. 5. cap. 13. This power of the Mar∣shal ouer the King made Pipin aspire to the crown. Mareschal of the Palace was become the kinges master, in so much that the king coulde not commaunde his owne diet but at the Marshals pleasure; and was gouerned and ouerruled in al things by him as a boy by his tutor, which is the constant report of all your witers tou∣ching the state of the Germane kinges, when Pipine aspired to the crowne: or whether Childerike were an idiote and the last of his house, as for the better strength of Pipines title your stories auouch, I will be no iudge. Childerik I say was deposed by the Nobles and commons of his nation, and the Pope be∣ing consulted whether it were lawfull for them so to doe, made answere, they might, but added no word of his diuine power to dispose kingdoms to his liking. And this for Childerik may suffice. For Philippicus the answere is easier.Beda de sex ae∣tatibus mundi. Regino lib. 1. in anno 648. Marianus in Philippico. Frisingens. lib. 5. cap. 15. Vrspergens. in anno 713. Hee was a rebell and slue his Ma∣ster in the fielde, and therefore without any farther cause the Romanes might refuse both his name & his reigne. To this vsurpation when hee added as they thought impietie, it was no maruel to see them so earnest against him: But in this as in many other things your later Stories stray from the former. The elder sort of Historiographers as Beda, Regino, Marianus, Frisingensis, & Vr∣spergensis say: The people of Rome decreed that neither his name, nor
letters,Blondus decadis 1. lib. 10. Nauc. volum. 2. gener. 23. Sabel. enne∣ad. 8. lib. 7. Sigebert. in anno 712. nor coyne shoulde be receiued: the later, as Blondus, Sabellicus and Nauclerus haue chaunged their tune, and say: The Bishop of Rome did it at the clamor and petition of the people. Sigebert as indifferent betweene them saith, the Bishop and the people ioyntly did it. So handsomly you can hammer thinges when they come to your fingering, and such credit your Stories deserue when the case concerneth your holy Fathers authoritie. Mo examples than these they haue not for a 1000. yeares after Christ.These bee all the examples you doe or can bring for the space of a thowsand yeares after Christ, where Princes were depriued of their crownes by the Bi∣shop of Rome: and these how litle they make for your purpose, I leaue to the iudgement of the christian Reader. Your catalogue of the Germane Emperours, that insueth: As of Frederike the first,The eldest of the Germane Emperours that were of∣fered depriua∣tion by the Pope, was Henrie the 4. Lewes the 3. was not depo∣sed. Frederike the second, Otho the fift, Lewes the thirde, Lewes the fourth, and Henrie the thirde (or as some call him the fourth) maketh shew to the simple, but doth you no good. The eldest of these that were offered depriuation by the Pope, is Henrie the fourth whom Gregorie the seuenth a thowsand, threescore and six yeares after Christ prouoked with that iniurie, but to his owne & vtter o∣uerthrow. You recken Lewes the thirde, and Lewes the fourth for Princes depriued of their Empires by the Bishoppe of Rome, but reason were you did first tell vs whom you meane, and how you proue it. Marianus Scotus and they that follow him make▪ Lewes the third to be Lodouicus Balbus to whom Pope Iohn fled & annointed him king of the Romanes,Marian. in Lo∣douic. 3. Sabel. ennead. 9. lib. 1. This Lewes was not depo∣sed. when the Nobles of Rome inclined rather to Charles the thirde, and gaue him possession of the citie, who was after annointed by Pope Iohn at his returne; Lodouike the thirde liuing skant two yeares after his coronation. Martinus Polonus numbreth him for Lewes the third that was next after Arnulphus: but whether it were Lodo∣uike the sonne of Arnulphus,Marian. in Lo∣douic. 3. Blondus Decad. 2. lib. 2 Marian. in Lo∣douic. filio Ar∣nulph. Platina in Be∣nedict. 4. Martinus in Arnulph. Plat. in Formos. This Lewes was neuer crowned. or an other of that name the sonne of Boso, he doth not determine, onely he saith Berengarius caught him at Verona and recoue∣red the Empire: which Blondus and Marianus report of Lodouike the sonne of Boso, and not of Lodouike the sonne of Arnulphus, as Platina doth. In this vncertaintie of your Stories you might haue done wel to haue distinguished the person, & pointed out your author: you now driue vs to suspect that you go about to haue them deposed that were neuer crowned. Of Lodouike the sonne of Arnulphus, Martinus saith: Hee succeeded his father, sed ad coronam Imperij non peruenit, but hee neuer was crowned Empe∣rour. And Platina confesseth the same: In the place (of Arnulphus) we read that Lodouike was made Emperour, quem tamen nusquam habuisse imperij Co∣ronam accepimus: of whom we do not finde that euer hee had the Crowne of the Empire. If hee neuer receiued the Crowne, how could hee bee de∣posed from the Crowne? Phi. Perhappes the Pope kept him from it. Theo. Perhappes you can not tell: but thinke you that Princes will loose their Crownes for your perhappes? Phi. He neuer had it. Theo. But had he any wrong to bee kept from it? Phi. Howe thinke you of that? Theo. Your
proofes bee verie mightie that must depende on my thoughtes. Phi. Wee brought in these instances as it were by the way, to let you see what stoare of examples wee had. Theo. Then take them out of the way, for they do but hin∣der your cause. When Charles the thirde, otherwise called Carolus Crassus, grewe both sicke and lunatike, the Nobles of Germanie cleane forsooke him, and choose Arnulphus which as some say was the sonne of Charlemaine, but as Blondus affirmeth, was The last of Pi∣pines line de∣posed for a mad man. obscurissimo natus loco, a man very basely borne, and not of Charles line: by reason whereof Blond. decad. 2. lib. 2. the kingdomes which before were subiect to Charles, now as destitute of a right heire, beganne to fall in sunder on e∣uerie side, & to choose kinges of themselues. Then Fraunce Regino lib. 2. anno 888.tooke Charles the childe, cognamed Simple, and when his simplicitie displeased them, they Blond. vt supra. set Otho the sonne of Robert Duke of Saxonie, in his place. At the same time the people of Italy meaning to haue a king of their own, could not agree on the matter, but chose some Berengarius; and others Guido, and so had two kinges in Italy both calling and bearing them-selues as Emperours. Be∣sides these defections, Arnulphus had long and sharpe warres with Italy forsooke the Germans & choose to themselues two kinges of their owne. Rodolph that proclaimed him-selfe king of Prouince, and with the Regino lib. . anno 888. Nortmanes that ranged in many partes of Fraunce and Germanie. So that the Pope did not depose Lewes the thirde, as you would insinuate: but Italie seeing the line of Charles to bee expired, thought to make an Emperour of their owne bow∣els, and to keepe off straungers that before had the rule ouer them: and so they did for threescore yeares, till barbarous inuasions, and domesticall se∣ditions, and disorders made them glad to send to Otho the great,Seditions and inuasions made the Ro∣manes glad af¦ter 60. yeares to submit thē∣selues againe to the Ger∣manes. and to re∣ceiue him for their Emperor, and to yeelde to a forme of electing to the Em∣pire by certaine Bishops and Princes of Germanie, which hath indured vntil this present. This your own Stories abundantly confirme, saue that some write of Ar∣nulphus that he marched with his armie through the middest of Italy and tooke Rome, and caused him-selfe to bee crowned Emperour, (as Regino sayth who then liued) by Formosus the Bishoppe of Rome: which Regino lib. 2. anno 896. Decad. 2. lib. 2 Blond. Decad.  lib 2.Blon∣dus doth skant beleeue. Howsoeuer that were, they all agree that Berenga∣rius and Guido were chosen kinges of Italie when Arnulphus was first ad∣uaunced to Charles his place. Blondus saieth, Arnulpho apud Francos in Im∣peratorem creato Romani & caeteri Itali nullum ab imperatore nouo dissidijs Regni Franciae implicito auxilium aduersus rebelles Longobardos affuturum intelligentes, Berengarium Foronliensem Ducem Roma oriundum crearunt Imperatorem.An other change of the Empire, but not by the Popes keyes. Ar∣nulphus being chosen Emperour by the Germanes, the Romanes and Italians perceiuing they might looke for no helpe against the rebellious Lombards from that new Emperor, hauing his hands ful of the dissentiōs of his own kingdom, created Berengarius the duke of Frioli a Romane their em∣peror. Neither yet did they so wel agree in that electiō but that other chose Guido the Duke of Spoletum to be king of Italie. Otho Frisingensis maketh the
same report.Otho Frisingen. li. 6. ca. 9. & 10. Charles the next yeare after hee was deposed, died. From that time to Otho wee finde the regiment at Rome verie confused. For af∣ter the death of Charles, which raigned sixe yeares and ledde a priuate life, the seuenth yeare the Empire was rent in many partes, euery Prouince de∣sirous to haue a seuerall king: onely Arnolfus had the greatest share. There∣fore the Italians make themselues two kinges: Berengarius Duke of Friault, and Guido Duke of Spoletum. Of the which Berengarius chased out of his coū∣try by Guido led for succour to Arnolfus. You can not proue hence that Arnulphus or Lewes his sonne were depriued by the Pope, but only that the Romanes made an other defection from the Em∣pire: who after they had once tasted the sweetnesse that came by cutting the em∣pire in peeces (for where before they were suppliāts & subiects,The Romanes were no losers by often cut∣ting the Em∣pire in peeces now by the lar∣ges of Pipine they were Lords of halfe Italie) by their willes could neuer haue rested. And though the Germanes and Italians differ in their reckonings; the Germanes accounting Berengarius and those that succeeded him vntil Otho the great, for vsurpers, and contrary-wise the Italians accepting them for their naturall and true Emperours;The Germans and Italians differ in their reckonings. Yet that is no cause for you to auouch that the Pope deposed any of them. For put the case either way, that the Germanes were lawfully excluded as hauing no right, or wrongfully debarred of their right, you may conclude hence a iust allegation, or a ciuill sedition in the Ro∣manes, but no depriuation of Princes by the Pope. Lewes the son of Boso was not depriued by the Pope.If by Lewes the thirde you meane Lewes the sonne of Boso, (for him you may meane, and by your indistinct speaking, you driue vs to ghesse at your mea∣ning;) he with violence gate some dominion in Italie, putting Berengarius to the worst; and by negligence lost not onely that hee gate, but his eyes also, which hee might haue saued with staying at home: mary the doers of it were Berenga∣rius his enimie, and the citizens of Verona which betraied him: mention of the Pope there is none, except you thinke it vnfitte for his holinesse that anie treason shoulde bee wrought without him, for that his See is so well prac∣tised in them. Of this Lewes,Otho Frisingēs. lib. 6. cap. 15. Otho sayth: In the yeare of our Lord 905. Lodouike the sonne of Boso getting the Empire expelled Berengarius: and ha∣uing the whole kingdome of Italie at his becke, dismissing his armie, went to Verona with a small traine, where being betrayed by the citizens (that sent for Berengarius from the place where hee was in exile) hee was caught and his eyes pulled out.Three Lodo∣uikes, & not one of them deposed by the Pope. And after that Berengarius helde the kingdom of I∣talie togither with the Romane Empire. So haue wee three Lodouikes, ech of them in sundrie writers surnamed Lewes the thirde, and not one of them de∣posed by the Bishop of Rome. Henry the fourth was the first, that euer was offe∣red dopositiō by any Pope.Henrie the fourth was the first that was troubled with the Popes presump∣tion to depose Princes: but hee was so farre from taking it, that hee put the Pope besides his cushinne, and had him deposed from his triple Crowne, not onelie by force, but also by iudgement and sentence as good or better than that which the Pope pronounced against him. Respect whether you will,
the cause, or the manner of their proceeding eche against other. Phi. You crake of this Emperour:The defence, cap. 5. For that in fine by armes hee droue the saide Pope out of his Sea, and placed an Antipape, that is to say, one so opposite to Christes Vicar, as Antichrist shall bee against Christ: which by armes and patronage of this wicked Emperour vsurped and occupied the Apostolike throne against the true Pope Gregorie the seuenth. Theo. We crake not of Princes as you doe of Popes, neither do we defend them in open wickednes as you doe Popes in their pestilent disorders and out∣rages: only we say neither your holy father with his proude claime, nor you with your smoothe tongues may take from Princes their Crownes, without war∣rant from God, of whome they haue their power, and by whome they are exal∣ted to their Royall dignitie. And therefore if you will play the proctour for Pope Hildebrande in that attempt of his to depriue Henry the fourth, leaue wastful woords, and spiteful speach, and go to the matter. Scoffes and taunts are soone cast and recast without any paynes or praise. Phi. Because this good and notable Pope,The defence, cap. 5. was not able in fine to resist the Empe∣rours forces (the which Emperour, as all the histories of that tyme recorde, was a most wicked, sacrilegious, simoniacal and hereticall person) the aduersaries of Gods Church doe triumph (as the Libeller here doth) ouer the blessed man: as Herode might haue done ouer Iohn Baptist, whose admonition was taken in so euill grè, that it cost him his life: as also the executing of the Churches sentence, which is Gods, hath doone to many a Prophet and Bishop in the worlde. Theo. If to call Gregorie the seuenth,It is no sinne nor wrong, to call Gregorie the seuenth Hildebrand. The Iesuites mannerly speeches of the Emperor. Hildebrand, which was his proper name, and whereof neither hee nor you shoulde in reason bee ashamed, be a note of rebellious heretiques as you terme them: what is it for you to call a Prince (on whom by Gods Lawe you are forbidden to rayle) a most wicked, sacrilegious, simoniacall and hereticall person? What is it to say that al the stories of that time re∣cord the same, and to produce none? As for Iohn Baptise you may vse his name when you follow his workes. Herode was an incestuous Tyrant, yet did not Iohn Baptist take the scepter from him nor arme his subiects against him, but warned him of the breach of Gods Lawe, which hee wilfully committed, and the punishment which would ensue at Gods handes: farther practices against Herode Iohn Baptist had none, and therefore you might as well haue yoked Belial with Christ,Acts. 12. vers. 22. as Hildebrand with Iohn Baptist. But you must be suffe∣red, when other things faile you, to haue glorious words: which is a right He∣rodian affection. Phi. By the euent of things, whosoeuer measureth the right of cause;The defence, cap. 5. will make a good religion and a good defence of the execution of iustice. For so most tyrants might bee iustified for a tyme,The contētiō between Pope Gregorie the seuenth and Henry the third Empe∣rour. against all the Saintes of God. This Gregorie say they was in fine banished by the Emperour: And so was Saint Chrysostome by Arcadius and Eudoxia, and dyed in banishment as Gregorie the seuenth did: yet they were but homely Christians that woulde iustifie the Emperours, and condemne. S. Chry∣sostome.
Theo. Proue the Popes right to depose Princes & we remit the successe.Wee measure not the right of causes neither by the sequele nor suc∣cesse of thinges, for then the Saintes of GOD from the first beginning of the worlde shoulde haue had an euill cause, since their successe hath alwayes beene to loose their liues for bearing witnes vnto the trueth. Wee make it no reason that Hildebrandes cause was euill, because in the ende hee was banished: Wee all this while haue stoode with you on this point, that neither Hilde∣brand nor any other Pope had or hath right to depose Princes. Your commen∣dation of Hildebrand, and accusation of Henry the fourth, if both were true, are litle to this purpose, vnlesse you will reason thus, the Pope was a good man and the Prince an euill, Ergo the Pope might depose the Prince, which were a very rediculous conclusion. Phi. That right is yet vnproued.The Popes right to depose Princes wee haue prooued before. Theo. Not yet that wee see. Your authorities came very short of it, your examples shorter. Some shiftes and sophismes you haue here and there offered vs, but so weake that children woulde hardly bee deceiued by them. Those you thought, being destitute of other helpes, to strengthen with examples: and ha∣uing searched all the corners you coulde for a thousande yeeres after Christ, you finde not one, till you come to Gregorie the seuenth: who did attempt it but coulde not effect it, and lost his Popedome for enter∣prising it. And here you slip from the right of the cause to the praise of the Person, which is vtterly impertinent to this purpose.The praise of the person is nothing to the right of the cause. For what trowe you, is eue∣ry thing good that good men doe? May you not so commende any vice? What sinne is there but some good man otherwise hath fallen into? If to mea∣sure thinges by their euents, bee no sure way to iudge rightly of them, what is it to alleage no better grounde for the Deposition of Princes than the bolde attempt of the Bishoppe of Rome? Were the Person commended not by the assentation of his adherents, but by the confession of his aduersa∣ries: that proueth not his fact to bee good, or his enterprise lawfull. We must balance thinges by the Lawes of God, and not by the fansies and affections of men: and yet touching the Person, if the syncerest of your own side may bee tru∣sted, I see no such cause to commend him. Phi. The defence, Cap. 5.This Pope, whome they specially hate, because (as it may be thought) he was the first man that authentically condemned the Berengarians heresie, and in open disputation refuted it; though certaine of the said Emperours flatterers and enemies of the Sea Apostolike (as the fashion of our heretiques is at this day) wrote slaunderous libels against him;Pope Hilde∣brand a good man. yet was hee a very notable good man and learned, and did suffer whatsoeuer hee did suffer, for meere iustice: in that hee did godly, honorably and by the dutie of his Pastorship, whatsoeuer hee did against the said Emperour: whereof we could alleage all the best writers of those dayes, or neere that tyme, but that wee should be tedious. Theo. Hildebrand might well be a dealer in Be∣rengarius re∣cantation for the goodnes of it. The Iesuits should con∣demne them selues if they should not cō∣mend Hilde∣brand.Whatsoeuer Berengarius heresie was, the recantation which your holy Father with his learned aduise prescribed him, is a very wicked
and palpable error. If Hildebrand were the author of that condemnation, we enuie not his praise. A lewder or grosser follie, was neuer vttered with tongue. No maruaile to see you so forward in affirming that Gregorie the 7. was a very notable good man, and learned, and did suffer, whatsoeuer he did suffer, for meere iustice, and did Godly and honourablie, and by the dewtie of his Pastorship whatsoeuer hee did against the Emperour: he was the first Pope that euer serued or fitted your rebelling humour: Your case and his are all one, and therefore vnlesse you should praise him, you must dispraise your owne doings, which you will not, you be so farre entered into these Italian policies, and perceiue them to bee so profitable for your Rhemish monarchie. But Sirs, if you were asked vnder benedicite whether S. Peter did better in submitting him selfe to Nero,Which like they better, Peter endu∣ring or Hilde∣brand displa∣cing Princes. and charging al others to do the like, or Pope Hildebrand in taking the crown from Henry the fourth, and dischargeing his subiects, which would you pre∣ferre? The mild and Christian submission of Peter suffering death at Neroes hands, or the disdainful and arrogant stomacke of Gregorie the seuenth, ma∣king the Emperour with his Queene and young Prince in extreme frost and snowe, waite his leisure three dayes barefoted, and in woollen,Lambert. Schaf. Abbas Vrsperg. at the gates of Canusium, whiles himselfe was warme in a Ladies chamber: and (not∣withstanding this rare example of humilitie in a Prince) practising a generall reuolt of his Nobles and people from him, and causing an other to be chosen in his place, and licencing his owne subiects,The mildnes of Pope Hil∣debrand. seruants and sonnes to beare armes against him, and filling the Christian world with vnnaturall, and parri∣cidial warres and bloudshed? I knowe you dare not in plaine termes dis∣grace Sainct Peter, but in deedes euident to the eyes of all men you take part with Pope Hildebrand against Sainct Peter: extolling and praising him for a very notable good Pope, that first gaue this detestable and damnable aduenture. He did suffer, you say, whatsoeuer he did suffer for meere Iustice. It was madde meere Iustice that the Church of Christ for a thousand yeres would not bee so much as acquainted with;What iustice call you that which the Church of Christ for 1000. yeres counted wic∣kednes? and a madder imagination of yours that all that refused to bee partakers of Hildebrands wickednesse, were flatterers to the Emperour, and enimies to the See Apostolike: farre better cause haue wee to say, that they which conspired with the Pope against their Prince, vppon so great submission as Christendome hath not seene the like, wereIude epist. DESPISERS OF GOVERNMENT, Rom. 23. RESISTERS OF POWER, and consequently disobeiers of Christ, and woorse than hier∣lings of Antichrist. And if you may shake them off that liued in the same age, and wrate of things they sawe with their eyes, and heard with their eares, who smoothed not the vices of men, but defended the or∣dinance of GOD: What should bind vs to regard the corrupt and partiall iudgementes of those that came some hundreds after and knew no more of the certaintie of those actions, than we do at this instant; and were
withall so wedded to the Sea of Rome, that in respect thereof they did resist, as you doe now both the power of man, and the trueth of God? Phi. The defence, cap. 5. Lib. 3. cap. vlt. factorum me∣morabilium. We haue for Gregorie the seuenth the graue testimonie of Baptista Ful∣gosius a noble and learned man, that was Duke of Genua aboue an hundred yeeres past, which wee shall not let to set downe as wee find it in the Latine. Constantissimus habitus est Gregorius septimus Pontifex, qui quòd Henricum tertium Imperatorem propter aperta nimis Symoniae crimina, pro Pastorali officio reprehendebat, grauibus ab eo iniurijs affectus est. Itaque iniuriarum magnitudine compulsus, Henricum Gre∣gorius vt haereticum Imperij honore priuauit. Cum autem Henricus solut ecclesiasti∣ca censura non emendatione vitae, sed armis quaereret, alium creari Pontificem enixus capta vrbe obsidere Gregorium caepit. Quae mala cum Gregorius pateretur nunquā tamen a iusto proposito dimoueri potuit. That is,The testimo∣nie of the Duke of Ge∣nu for Pope Hildebrand. Gregorie the seuenth was no∣table for his constancie; who for that according to his Pastorall charge, hee had admonished Henrie the third Emperour to leaue his knowen impietie of Symonie, was by manifold intolerable iniuries vexed by the same Empe∣rour; and by the greatnes of his wickednes was compelled to depriue him as an heretique, of his Imperiall dignitie. But Henry seeking not by amend∣ment of his life but by armes to bee absolued from the censure; hee went a∣bout to set vp a newe Pope, and beseeged the Citie of Rome and brought the Pope into great distresse. In all which miseries Gregorie coulde neuer bee remoued from his iust purpose.See Vrsperpen. lib. 5. annalium. So hee writeth of the parties both. And of the horrible crimes for which the Emperour was most iustly in the sight of all good men deposed. Theo. How knew Baptista Ful∣gosius the goodnes of Hildebrand that liued 400 yeres before him?Truth dependeth not vpon nobilitie but sinceritie. Noble men haue their affections and ouersightes in writing as well as others. Baptista Ful∣gosius liued foure hundreth yeeres after Gregorie the seuenth, and had no bet∣ter intelligence of the cause than wee haue at this day. In his banishment hee collected certaine examples out of such bookes as came to his handes, to spend the tyme, & ease his miserie: but hee tooke not vppon him to iudge between your stories which were credible and which not. All that hee sayth of Gregorie the seuenth, is (Constantissimus habitus est) he was counted very constant, & could neuer be remoued from the purpose,Lib. 3. cap. 8. de Constant. which he thought to be iust: the rest is a report of the fact, no debating of the cause. A noble mans fansie is no fit balance for this cause.And had this exiled Person giuen greater commendation to Gregorie than hee doeth, euery Noble mans fansie that is or hath beene these fiue hundreth yeeres in Christendome, must not appoint what power the Pope shal haue ouer Princes. And if Nobilitie might preiudice trueth, as in deede it can not, why should the iudgement of Baptista Fulgosius in this case bee preferred before a thousand others of greater Nobilitie that haue taken part with their Princes against the Pope?No reason that Princes rightes should be tried by Italian Dukes. Meaner states than Princes will not lose their liberties for the Duke of Genua; and therefore if you seeke for the right of the cause, it must be tried neither by Dukes, Popes nor Princes. The word of God doeth not goe by the verdicts of men: If you stand not on that, but on the vices of Henrie
and vertues of Gregorie: Your Italian Duke is too yong to pronounce exact∣ly what they were that died some hundreds before he was borne. Phi. Trithemius reporteth in briefe thus,The defence, cap. 5. of the wickednes of this Emperour: Episcopatus, Constantiensem &c. He sold the Bishopriks of Constance, Bamburgh, Mentz and diuers others for money: those of Ausbourg, & Straisbourgh for a sword:Trithem. in Chron. that of Munster for Sodomie: and the Abbacie of Fuld for adulterie: Heauen and earth witnes and crie out on these: and for the same abhomina∣tions he standeth excommunicated, and depriued, and therfore hath no po∣wer, nor iust title to raigne ouer vs Catholikes. Theo. This is the next way to build the Tower of Babel,If Baptista knew little of Hildebrand Trithemius knew lesse of Henry the fourth. to descend from a Duke to an Abbat: from one that liued fiueskore yeeres agoe to one that died not much more than threeskore yeeres since; and to thinke by men of your own faction, that were aliue in this our age, to make proofe of thinges that were done fiue hundreth yeeres before. Trithemius an Abbate of late dayes, hath no credite in this case: you must shewe vs some elder writer and nearer the time wherein these things were done, or else wee shall passe it ouer as a peeuish and pestilent slaunder. Phi. Wee haue elder if you list to beleeue them: but you will discredite them, as you doe Trithemius. Theo. I discredite not Trithe∣mius:Trithemius a man of their side & our age is no good witnes in this case. but leue him his due commendation: onely I say there is no reason that a man of your side, and our age, shoulde bee the first and sole depo∣nent of matters many hundreth yeeres elder than himselfe. Phi. Wee haue long before him that did witnesse the same. Theo. Produce them. Phi. Dodechinus, who liued within an hundreth yeeres of that time, hath the same report woorde for woorde of Henry the fourth that Trithemius hath. Theo. Wee find that repeated by Dodechinus,Dodechinus in anno 1090. but not of his owne know∣ledge or iudgement. Valtrame Bishop of Megburg wrate a sober and seeme∣ly letter to Countie Lodouike to perswade him to submit himselfe to the king and not to resist the powers which God had ordayned.This pestilēt slaunder of Henry the 4. came first frō the mouth of a rebell that sought to sup∣plant him. Lodouike puffed with pride and filled with disdaine wrate backe to Valtrame a furious and spiteful libell both against the Bishoppe and the king: wherein these thinges are ob∣iected to the Prince without farther triall or testimonie. Both their letters Abbate Dodechine inserteth in his storie. So that the first author of this tale was Lodouike, in fauour of himselfe, disfaming the Prince which hee sought to subuert: and what credite that can haue in the eares of indifferent men, let the wise consider. Where hee sayth the Emperour sold the Bishopriks of Ratisbon,Three bishop∣rickes for one sword is no such hainous Symony. Ausbourg, and Straisbourgh for a sword, his malice was so great that he could not dissem∣ble his follie. For hee that tooke but a swoorde for three Bishoprikes, was no great Symonist: your holy father would haue made a better bargaine for him selfe, if hee had had the sale of them. Sure swordes were very deare, or Bi∣shoprikes very good cheape, when the Prince let goe three Bishoprikes for a sword. Such toyes you seeke to deface Princes, and so quickly you giue credite to him that wil say any thing against them.
How Henry the fourth behaued himselfe, in giuing the Abbaie of Fulde and Bishopricke of Mounster, I know not, neither doe I find it credibly reported in any good writer. The rebellious heart, and conuicious mouth of Frede∣ricke first raised this vncleane suspition vpon the Emperour: and you now are as earnest to proclaime your Abbasses for Whores,The Iesuits are content to make their abbasses whoores, and their Bishops Sodomites, to deface this Emperour. and your Bishops for Sodomites, rather than you wil distrust the bare accusation of a Malcontent against his Prince; you bee so linked with him in cause and condition: But for our partes as wee detest the vices, so wee beleeue not euerie crime, that an enimie and a rebell in excuse of himselfe list to vpbraide his Prince with: wee require some surer proofe for so hainous a crimination as this is be∣fore wee trust the vnbridled tongue of a seditious subiect against his So∣ueraigne. The greatest fautors of Hildebrand aliue at the same time with him, ne∣uer charged him with these vnclean surmises. Dodechinus in anno 1106. Marianus in anno 1075. He that will rebell against his Prince must be a slan∣derer of his Prince, or els he shal seeme to rebell with∣out cause. Vita Henrici 4. habetur in fas∣ciculo rerum sciendarum Co∣lonie impresso. He toucheth the very crimes that the Iesuites obiect. Vrsperges. in anno 1071.Marianus Scotus and Lambertus Scafnaburgensis, which liued, both of them, at the same time with Henry the fourth, and were to flatterers of his, but fautours of Hildebrand, and of the Saxones that rebelled against him, neuer charged him with those enormities. Dodechinus him selfe, when he commeth to the final censure of Henries faults and offences, omitteth these as vnlikely; or at least, as vnproued; and saith, He sold all spiritual liuings, and was inobedient to the Sea Apostolike, by setting Wigbert in Gregories place, by exceeding the order of Christianitie towarde his lawfull wife, and by neglecting the sentence of the Apostolike See. These bee the crimes for the which Dodechinus saith he was iustly cast out of the Church. And Marianus, saith he, was excommunicated, maximè propter Symoniam, chiefly for Symonie, not for Sodomitrie. He that wrate the life of Henry the fourth presently vpon his death, a modest, auncient, and Christian reporter of such things as hapned vnto that Emperour, saith of the Saxons and others that sought to palliate their ciuile sedition with a faire shew, Confictis, conscriptisque super eo criminibus, quae pessima & immundissima potuit odium & liuor excogitare, & quae mihi scribenti tibique legenti nauseam parerent, si ea ponerem, vera falsis miscentes apud Romanum Pontificem Gregorium septimum, eum deferebant: Faining and articulating crimes against him, the worst and most vncleanest that hatred and enuie could imagine, which are lothsome for me to write and thee to reade, if I should name them, and mingling some trueth amongst their lies, they complained of him to Gregorie the seuenth the Bishop of Rome. Vr∣spergensis saith: The Saxons, making a generall coniuration against the King, put vppe against him to the See Apostolike, accusationes blasphe∣mas & inauditas; blasphemous accusations, and neuer heard of before. These blasphemous and fained accusations you rake vp againe, and pub∣lish them to the worlde with great sooth vppon the credit of an Abbate that liued in this our age; such is your discretion and grauitie that you patrone not onlie the violent and armed rage of rebels against their Prince, but euen their vnhonest and lothsome suspitions.
If we would bring against Gregorie the seuenth not laymen but Bishops,It were easie to paint out Hildebrand in his coulors, if that were to this purpose. not one but many, not straungers but his owne Italians, Romanes and Cardinals, that knewe him and were conuersant with him, hee woulde lacke a great deale of that praise which you, and other such Pharisaicall Friers as you bee, giue him. The Councell of Woormes, where were present Vniuersi pené Teutonici Episcopi, almost all the Bishoppes of Germa∣nie, condemned him of great periuries, newfangled abuses, and manifolde infamies of life:Vrspergens. in anno 1076. after that thirtie Bishoppes of Italie gathered together at Brixia, hauing there the Legates and letters of nineteene Bishoppes assem∣bled at Mentz with the Nobles of Italie and Germanie,Vrsperg. in anno 1080. not onely auouched of him; that hee most impudently intruded himselfe into the See of Rome by fraud and monie, subuerted the ecclesiasticall order, troubled the regiment of the Christian Empire, sought destruction of bodie and soule vppon their Catholike and peaceable king, and maintained a periure against him, but in fine they adiudge,Vrsperg. Ibidē. the saide Hildebrand a most shamelesse person, breathing out sacrilege and spoile, defending periuries and homicides, calling in que∣stion the Catholike and Apostolike fayth of the bodie and blood of Christ, the auncient scholer of the heretique Berengarius, an obseruer of dreames & diuinations, a manifest coniurer, and a worker with a familiar spirit; & there∣fore fallen from the true fayth to be canonically deposed, and expelled from his Bishopricke. Phi. These bee the slaunderous libels,The Iesuites beleeue one rebel against his Prince without prs: but they will not beleeue the Bishops & Nobles of Ita∣lie & Germa∣ny iudicially pronouncing against the Pope. which I tolde you some of the Em∣perours flatterers and his enemies wrote against him. Theo. You beleeue not the report of so many Bishoppes and Nobles iudicially proceeding, and in∣ding him culpable in these thinges, and affirming so much to his face: and euen nowe you when you heard the malitious and slaunderous accusation of one pri∣uate man against his Prince, neither discussed, nor prooued, but obiected on∣ly in defence of his rebellion, you beleeued that and put it in print to the view of all men, with no lesse leuitie than partialitie; as if al were true that liketh you be it neuer so vnlikelie or vntrue: and againe all false that fitteth not your fansie bee there neuer so many deponents for it, and iudges with it, both Bishoppes and nobles. Such indifferencie wel becommeth such writers as you are, which seeke nothing but that your tales may take place, bee they neuer so vnchristian or vncredible. Phi. Will you beleeue men in a faction one against another? Theo. If the Princes faction may not bee credited against the Pope, why should the Popes faction be receiued against the Prince? And yet the Princes faction against Hildebrand,Italy displea∣sed with Hen∣ry for submit∣ting himself to Hildebrand. if it were a faction, was very generall. Fraunce, Germanie and Italie were of that faction, in so much that when the Emperour had reconciled him-selfe to the Pope at Canusium, and Legates were sent to absolue such as were excommuni∣cate, the Princes and people of Italie fell to an vproare against the Emperour for submitting him-selfe, and ment to haue set his sonne in his place, as Schafnaburgensis confesseth in these woordes: When the
Legate came,Lambert. Scaf∣naburgens. in anno 1077. and shewed to the people of Italie the cause of his comming, a vehement offence and dislike was conceiued against him. Fremere omnes, & saeuire verbis ac manibus caeperunt, Apostolicae Legationi irrisorijs exclamationi∣bus obstrepere, conuicia & maledicta vtcunque turpissima furor suggessisset, irrogare, se excommunicationem illius nihili estimare, quem ipsum omnes Italiae episcopi iustis de causis iam pridem excommunicassent, qui sedem Apostolicam per Symoniacam haeresim occupasset, homicidijs cruentasset, adulterijs alysque capitalibus criminibus polluisset, regem secus ac deceat egisse, crimenque gloriae suae intulisse nunquam abo∣lendum, quod homini haeretico & probis omnibus infamato maiestatem regiam sub∣miserit, &c. They all began to mutter, and to manifest their griefe of mynde with woordes and handes, and to deride and interrupt the Popes Lagate, & to taunt him and raile on him euen as their rage lead them, saying, that they esteemed not (Hildebrands) excommunication, whom all the Bishoppes of Italie long before had excommunicated, for that hee gate the Apostolike Seate by Symonie,Al the bishops of Italie had condemned Hildebrand for capitall crimes. Hildebrand infamous for all vices. and had embrued it with blood, and defiled it with adul∣teries, and other capitall crimes: and that the king had done otherwise than became him, and had vtterly blemished his glorie in submitting his royall maiestie to an heretike, and one that was infamous for all vices. This sedi∣tion growing ripe, they were all of one minde and determination to refuse the father, who had made himselfe vnworthie of the scepter, and to choose his sonne to be their king, though very yong and vnfit for the affaires of the Realme:Hildebrand an Apostati∣call Pope. and to goe to Rome with him, and elect them an other Pope, by whom both he should be crowned, and al the actes of this Apostatical Pope should bee reuersed. This opinion his owne people had of him, how learned and godly a man soe∣uer hee seemeth in your eyes: and these were not procured by the Prince, but readie to forsake the Prince, for humbling himselfe to so infamous an heretike as Hildebrand was, whome you call a very notable good Pope. The rest of his goodnes if I should lay foorth as Beno the Cardinall,He that will see the rest of Hildebrāds vertues, let him read Be∣no the Cardi∣nall of his life and acts. The fact and not the life of Hildebrand is the thing which we striue for. The pope had his flatterers as well as the Prince. that liued with him, de∣scribeth him; all other the vitious and infamous Popes which the whoore of Babylon hath bred vs, would seeme punees to him: but thither I refer the rea∣der that list to behold the man of sinne exalting himselfe in the Church of God: I seeke to examine the fact and not the life of Gregorie the seuenth: if that were good, though he were badde, I will vse no aduantage. Phi. These were his enemies. Theo. To an euill man howe could they bee but enemies, if that they said were true? Phi. True? not a word of it. Theo. So say you: but what if wee beleeue them before you: haue we not good cause so to doe? Phi. These were such as helde against him, and therefore hardly would speake well: But others and the best of that age greatly cōmend him. Theo. Were they not such as tooke his part? Phi. Yes: but yet they would not lie for him. Theo. Might not the Pope haue flatterers as well as the Prince? Phi. Hee might, but these were none. Theo. Howe shall we know that? Phi. They were godly Monkes and Bishoppes, that woulde
not flatter. Theo. They might be godly, and yet be deceiued in iudging of o∣ther mens persons. The best men are hardest to beleeue euill reportes concer∣ning others, though perhaps true if they were perfectly knowen: and yet there were other causes which wanne him the fauour of many Monkes and Bishops in those dayes, and of many Romish writers since that time: and those were, the suppressing of maried Priestes, and aduauncing of Monkes, and the exemp∣ting of Bishoppes from their Princes: which things the Church of Rome af∣ter him greedily embraced, and holdeth vnto this day as the glorious, acts of Hildebrand. Phi. Doe you dispraise them? Theo. The Church of Christ til that time suffered the mariage of Priests,Mariage in Priests and obedience to Princes im∣pugned by the names of fornication & Symonie. and expected the Princes consent in the choice of her Bishoppes: both which Hildebrand impugned at one tyme. Phi. Hee impugned Concubinaries and Symonists. Theo. So your Cloysterers cal∣led such as were maried, and preferred by the Prince, and for that cause they tooke stitch with the Pope against the Prince, and highly commended Hilde∣brand as the first begynner of ecclesiasticall puritie and libertie. But in deede it was but a quarrell sought out by the Pope vnder a faire pretence to tread downe Princes, and exalt himselfe.Hildebrandes griefe against the Emperor. He could beare no such sway as he woulde in the Church so long as the Bishops did depend on the Prince, and not on the Pope. For by their helpe the Prince often tymes not only crossed, but depriued the Pope, if hee waxed vnruly, or ouer lustie. This was it, that Hildebrande could not digest. Lighting therefore on a Prince that was young and somewhat lasciuious,Hildebrandes policie to quell the Em∣peo. These aduan∣tages the Pope had a∣gainst the Prince. Lambert. scaf∣naburg. in anno 1077. and perceiuing the Nobles of his Realme to dislike and disdaine one an other: and seeing the Normanes in Italie able to withstande the Emperours force, and the Saxons in Germanie willing to cast off the Yoke, as they thought of bondage: and getting into such fauour with Mathilda, a great & mightie Ladie of Italie, that shee should not bee out of his sight, but as a very friend of Grego∣ries sayth, Pontificis Lateri comes indiuidua adhaerebat, eumque miro colebat af∣fectu, shee cleaued to the Popes side as his continuall companion, and lo∣ued him exceedingly. Hildebrande hauing these oportunities, gaue the ad∣uenture both to pull all spirituall liuings out of the Princes gift, that the Cler∣gie might depend on him and not on their Prince, and to shewe him-selfe the censurer and deposer of Kinges and Emperours if they withstoode him.Hildebrands first attempt was to pull the Clergie from the king. And for that cause hee first decreed it to bee Symonie to take any spirituall lyuing at a lay mans handes, and in the same Synode did excommunicate as well the giuers as the takers, were they Dukes, Princes, or Kinges which hee knewe the Emperour neither coulde nor woulde endure. Not long after hee receiued diuers and sundrie suggestions against the King from the Saxons, who sought by armes what they coulde to preuaile against the Prince,The next was to make him self the corre∣ctor & master of Princes. and when that succeeded not, fell to slaundering and accusing their king: for an∣swere whereto the Pope summoned the King to appeare at Rome, and pre∣fixed him a day to cleare him-selfe of those crimes. And when the king neither
would loose his right in bestowing his Bishoprickes and Benefices as he sawe cause, and as his progenitours before him had doone: and refused to come in Person to answere the complaints of rebels against him, but sent his Agents to refell their obiections: the Pope discouering the malice and pride which till that tyme hee concealed,The mysterie of iniquitie sheweth it selfe. tooke the Princes messengers and cast them in Prison, and caused them to bee caried about the Citie as gazing stockes; and in his Synode depriued the Emperour both of the communion of the fayth∣full, and of his Crowne and kingdome also, and to his dying day would not bee remoued from his purpose. Philand. Men of their own religion haue obser∣ued in Hilde∣brād as much as I report.These bee your vaine collections which wee regarde not. Theo. I looke not you shoulde regarde mine: but if your owne writers which haue laboured in this matter, finde the report which I make to bee true, you may not so lightly neglect them. Auentinus a man addicted to your religi∣on, not to ours, exactly and vprightly weighing the partes and proofes of this cause, obserueth the same that I doe, and a great deale more. Philand. Auentinus was too fauourable to the Germanes his Countriemen.Auent. annal. lib. 5. fol. 562.569. & sequēt. Theop. Any writer may bee touched in that sort with fauour or affection. If you re∣iect men of the same profession with you, because they differ in iudgement from you: much more is it lawfull for vs in this contention betweene the Prince and the Pope, to refuse such as were altogether inclined and deuoted to the See of Rome. If you trust not Auentine because hee was a Germane, why should we trust those Monkes and Bishoppes that were ioyned in faction with Hildebrand against the king? Philand. The Iesuites trust none but Italians, & such as flatter the Pope as fast as them∣selues.Will you trust none but your seluee? Theoph. You doe not so much as trust your selues: wee alleage none but your owne men in this case, and you trust them not. Philand. Wee giue you some cause why wee trust them not. Theoph. None, but this that you like them not: your other exceptions bee very friuolous. If some were Germanes and fauou∣red the Prince, others were Italians and flattered the Pope. You trust not the one, nor wee the other; let therefore the sticklers of both sides alone▪ and examine the doers them-selues. I hope you will beleeue Gregories woordes, and not distrust him, as you doe the rest. Philand. He wil not belie him-selfe. Theo. Then touching the causes of Henries excommunication, the Pope himselfe maketh this report to the Princes of Germanie.Vrspergens. in anno 1076. Hildebrands owne confes∣sion for what causes he did excommunicate the Em∣peror. Pro hijs illum causis, primum videlicet quod ab eorum communione qui pro sacrilegio & reatu simoniaca haeresis excommuni∣cati sunt se abstiuere noluit: deinde quod pro criminosis actibus pae∣nitentiam non dico suscipere, sed nec promittere voluit, Synodali iudicio eum excom∣municauimus. For these causes, to witte first for that he would not forbeare their companie which were excommunicated for the sacrilegious and he∣reticall guylt of Symonie, next for that hee was so farre from taking any pe∣nance (at our handes) for his criminall actes, that he would promise none, we by a Synodal sentence did excommunicate him. Here bee the two causes
which the Pope pretended for his excommunicatiō and deposition of the prince: partaking with Symonists, and refusall of iudgement & penance at his hands. Philand. Were not Symonie and obstinacie two great crimes? Theoph. Your holy father did call that Symonie which was none. Philand. The Prince did sell Bishoprickes and Benefices. Theoph. So your Monkes affirme, but they lie the more. The Pope him-selfe you see doeth not charge him with selling Bishoprickes or benefices, but with retaining their societie that did. Lambertus that lyued in that tyme,Henry the 4. free from Sy∣mony by the report of his verie ene∣mies. Lambert. Scafn. in anno 1075. and wholy fauoured Gregorie, confes∣seth that by many examples the Prince shewed, howe much hee detested the corruption and ambition of Prelates and Abbates seeking preferment by mo∣ney and flatterie. When the Abbay of Fulde was voide, and the King with his Nobles conferring about the choice of a newe, the Abbates and Monkes, sayth Lambertus, as it had beene at a solemne game, began to of∣fer some golden mountains, other great booties out of the lands of the Ab∣bay; and some, more seruices to the common-wealth than accustomed, and in offering they kept neither meane nor modestie, horum impudentiam rex vehementissimé, vt dignum erat, detestatus,Did not this prince vehe∣mently detest Symonists? the king most vehemently de∣testing their impudencie as it became him, when hee was importu∣ned with their prayers and offers, on the suddaine ledde with a diuine spirite as men thought, called one Ruzelin a Monke that stoode before him, which came to the court about the busines of his house at the com∣maundement of the Abbate, and neuer dreampt of any such thing: and putting the Pastorall staffe in his handes first himselfe named him Ab∣bate, and prayed the rest both souldiers and Monkes to consent to his election. Likewise when the Abbate of Loressan was dead,Lambert. Scafn. Ibidem. and the Monkes and souldiers (hee meaneth the Clergie and the people of the place) had elected the Prior with one accord to succeede and came to the Court, (for the kings consent) neither was it thought that the king woulde dissent,No prince freer in his elections thā Henry the 4. If the Pope had cōmitted no worse Sy∣mony than hēry the 4. did the Church had beene in better case than it is. The Monkes of purpose diffame the prince to flat∣ter the Pope. for that the Prior was in some grace and fauour with the king by reason of his dili∣gent seruice afore that tyme, the king caught an other of the Monkes of the same house by the hand, which came with the rest of his brethren, thin∣king on no such thing, and drewe him into the midst of the companie a∣mazed at the matter, and to the great admiration of all men gaue him the Pastorall staffe. This report the very mislikers of Henry the fourth doe giue him touching his hatred and detestation of Symonie and his Prince∣ly disposition to make free choice of Bishoppes and Abbattes. If some tymes hee were ledde with affection and fansie, I knowe neither Pope, people, nor Prince that may not bee often affected, intreated and decei∣ued in their gyftes and elections, bee they neuer so wise, and other∣wise neuer so syncere. But your Monkes, as Marianus, Dodechinus, and others did the Prince great wrong to diffame him with all posteritie
for one that solde all spirituall lyuinges: especially where the Pope himselfe charged him with no such thing in his Synodall sentence against him. Phi. All Stories crie out on Henry the fourth for Symonie. Theoph. Neither doe I thinke that his tyme was free from it, though his person were. The writer of his life seemeth to complaine of those that were about him and had the gouerning of him in his nonage. After the yong king was taken from his mothers lappe,Vita Henrici 4. in fasciculo re∣rūsciendarum. and lighted into the handes of his Nobles to bee brought vp by them: whatsoeuer they prescribed him, as a child hee did it: hee exalted whom they would, and deposed whome they willed him, in so much that they did not serue him but raigne ouer him.Henry the 4. abused by his tutors in his minoritie. When mat∣ters of the kingdome were handled, they regarded not the common-wealth but their priuate respects, and in all thinges which they went about, the first and chiefest marke they aymed at, was their owne This fault of other men is imputed to the Prince by the Moncks. gaine. But when hee came to that stay of age and witte that hee coulde discerne what was honest and profitable (for him selfe and his Realme) what not; retracting those thinges which hee had doone at the suggestion of the Nobles hee condemned many of his owne factes, and becomming as it were a iudge of himselfe, hee chaunged thinges where neede so required. I will therefore neither excuse him for licentiousnes of life, when hee was young, nor those that were about him from bri∣berie: but the Symonie which your holie Father shot at was an other matter. The tru cause why Hilde∣brand was of∣fended that the Prince should giue spirituall li∣uings.Hee sawe the Clergie did relie too much, as hee thought, vppon their Prince, by reason all Bishoprickes, Abbayes, and Benefices were in the Kinges gift: and none placed in them but such as loued and honoured the King, which was not for the Popes purpose, the whole Clergie by their example and doctrine leading the people to reuerence and obey the magi∣strate. The first steppe therefore to weaken the king not by sedition on the suddaine, but by defection in continuance, was to get the Clergie to bee neither promoted by the King, nor beholding vnto the king: but to ex∣mp first their lyuings,This was the way to pull first the cler∣gie & after the people from the Prince. and after their persons from the Kinges power, that thereby they might the more freely take part with the Pope against the King without all daunger, and drawe the people after them vnder pre∣tence of Religion, when tyme shoulde serue. Which at first was not spied of Princes, till all too late they founde by proofe that when the Pope be∣ganne to quarrell with them and excommunicate them for very trifling and earthly causes: the Bishoppes, Priestes and Monkes presently syded with the Pope against the Prince,Princes were neuer weake∣ned till their clergie tooke part with the Pope against them. and taught the people that it was damnable, to ayde, maintaine or assist any Person or Prince excommuni∣cate against the Church, (so they called the Pope and his Cardinals) and this terror of conscience made subiectes euen by heapes abandour their Princes, and aggregate them-selues to the Popes faction, which
otherwise they woulde not haue done, had they not beene rightly instructed by their Pastours to obey their Princes, and not to feare friuolous and rash ex∣communications from Rome, whiles Popes will rule all, and bee resisted by none. The first layer of this corner stone in the kingdome of Antichrist was Hilde∣brand with his skilfull exposition of Symonie,Hildebrand made it Sy∣monie for a lay man to present to a spiritual liuing. Platina in Gregor. 7. Vide caus. 16. quaesi. 7. ¶ Si quis deincept. who resolued in his Councels at Rome, that to accept any spirituall lyuing from a layman, were hee King or Caesar that gaue it, must bee taken for Symonie: and as well the giuer as the taker bee cursed and excommunicated. These bee his woordes: Fol∣lowing the steppes of our holy fathers, as wee haue doone in former Coun∣cels, so in this by the authoritie of almightie GOD wee decree and pro∣nounce, that he which hereafter accepteth any Bishoprike, Abbay or other ecclesiasticall Benefice, at a lay mans hand, shall in no wise bee counted a Bishoppe, Abbate or Clerke, and that he shall not dare approch to Rome vn∣der paine of the greatest curse, vntill repenting him of his fact, hee hath re∣fused the place gotten by such ambition and contumacie, which is al one with Idolatrie.Lustily saide and like a Pope. Ibidem. To the same censures wee will haue Kinges, Dukes, and Princes tied and subiected, which shall presume to giue Bishoprickes or o∣ther ecclesiastical dignities, a thing neither fit nor lawfull. This, sayth Plati∣na, he decreed, lest the Church of Rome should receiue any hurt by briberie and Symonie. Gregorie decided it to bee Symonie for a layman to present to a Benefice, or for a Bishoppe to expect the Princes consent, whereas in the Primatiue Church,This was ne∣uer counted Symony be∣fore Hilde∣brands time. the people, which were laymen, chose their Pastours, and for a long tyme the Bishoppes of Rome them-selues were not chosen without the Princes consent, and that which Hildebrande affirmeth here to be Symonie, the Bishoppes of the same See before him confessed to bee godly, and the Em∣perours were possessed of it as of their right euer since the dayes of Charles, which was very neere three hundreth yeres. That stood good (sayth Platina sixe hundreth and eightie yeres after Christ) in the election of the Bishoppe of Rome which the Emperour or his Depu∣tie in Italie confirmed.Platina in Benedict. 2. The Bishop of Rome could not be chosen without the Princes con∣sent. Lambert. Schaf. in anno 1073. This was in force a thousande yeeres after Christ e∣uen when Hildebrande came to the Popedome, as appeareth by the message which Henrie the fourth sent to the Romanes vpon the choise of Hildebrand, and his answere backe againe to the Emperour. For when the Romanes after the death of Alexander had elected Hildebrand without expecting the Princes pleasure, the King sent Eberhardus an Earle to the States of Rome to knowe the cause, quare praeter consuetudinem maiorum Rege inconsulto Ro∣manae ecclesiae Pontificem ordinassent, ipsumque, si non idoneè satisfaceret, illicité ac∣cepta dignitate abdicare se praeciperet: Why they had created a Bishoppe of Rome without the kinges consent against the auncient vse of their fathers, and to commaund him that was chosen, if hee made not due satisfacti∣on, to forbeare the dignitie which hee had vnlawfully taken. To this
Hildebrand answered, that hee was chosen of the Romanes, and violently constrained to take the place,Hildebrand whē he came to be Pope durst not be ordered with∣out the Prin∣ces pleasure. and yet by no meanes coulde be brought to permit himselfe to bee ordered Bishoppe (of Rome) vntill hee certainely knewe that the king and the Nobles of Germanie had consented to his e∣lection: and for that cause hee had hitherto differred his consecration, and surely woulde differ it, vntill hee were aduertised of the Kinges plea∣sure by some trusty messenger. That which Hildebrand condemned was long be∣fore cōfirmed to the Prince by the former Bishops of Rome. Distinct. 63. ¶ Adrianus.The like Custome and priuilege the Prince had to consent to the electi∣ons of all other Bishoppes within his Empire, before they coulde bee or∣dered as your owne Lawe confesseth, and hee that withstoode it was ac∣cursed by the Popes owne mouth long afore Hildebrande was borne. A∣drian the Pope, with a whole Synode (of an hundreth fiftie-three Bi∣shoppes) yeelded vnto Charles (the great) right and power to choose the Bishoppe of Rome and to dispose the See Apostolike. Also Adrian de∣fined that the Archbishoppes and Bishoppes of euery Prouince shoulde receiue inuestiture of Charles, so that vnlesse a Bishoppe were first liked and inuested by the King, hee might not bee consecrated by any man. And whosoeuer did against this Decree, hee accursed. In an other ncell helde at Rome Leo the eighth of that name,Hildebrand accursed by his prede∣cessours. Distinct. 63. ¶ In Synod. after the example of Adrian confirmeth this custome to Otho the first, King of the Ger∣manes, and Emperour of the Romanes. I Leo with the whole Clergie and people of Rome doe settle, confirme and establish, and by our A∣postolike authoritie we graunt and giue vnto our Lord Otho the first, and his successours, power for euer to appoint a Bishoppe of (this) chiefe Apostolique See: and likewise Archbishoppes and Bishoppes, that they shall receiue inuestiture of him: in so much that no man of what dignitie or profession soeuer hee bee,This was the yoke which Hildebrand could not indure. shall haue power to choose a Bi∣shoppe of this chiefe Apostolike Seate, or to consecrate any other Bi∣shoppe without consent of the Emperour. If therefore a Bishop bee cho∣sen by the Clergie and people, let him not bee consecrated, vnlesse he be first allowed and inuested by the foresaid king. And if any man attempt a∣ny thing against this our Apostolike sentence, wee determine him to stand excommunicate. Martin. Polon. in Adriano & Leone 9. Plat. in Pasc. 1. & Leon. 8. Sigebert. in anno 1111.These grauntes and confirmations, your owne Stories doe witnesse, though Blondus seeme to doubt of them, as vnlikely. Sigebert sayth, From Charles the great, for the space of three hundreth yeeres and a∣boue, during the liues of threeskore and three Bishoppes of Rome, they that were Emperours of Rome gaue Bishoprickes and Abbayes by the deliuerie of a ring and a staffe, & that then was counted lawful. Now in the dayes of Hildebrand,This was the chiefe quarel between Hil∣debrand and Henry the 4. against the Decrees of their fathers, the Popes in their Synodes haue determined, that no Bishoprike nor ecclesiastical inuestiture can or should be giuen by a lay man with a staffe and a ring: and they which so receiued Bishoprikes or other ecclesiasticall preferments, were
excommunicated. Thus Hildebrand pretended to follow the steppes of his fathers when hee forsooke them; and concluded that to bee Symonie which was none, and made it a cause of depriuation for the Prince to hold that right which two Bi∣shops of Rome with their Synodes expresly confirmed to Charles and Otho,Was not this a wise cause to depriue a Prince of his Crowne? and sixtie three Bishops had suffered and approued in the Germane Empe∣rours, and himselfe had protested to the Princes Legates at his first entrance to the Bishoprike. If this were not a mere quarell vniustlie sought by the Pope vpon the Prince against all order and equitie, your nearest frindes shall be my iudges. The seconde cause of Hildebrandes presumption against the Prince is like the first.The Prince was not boūd to appeare in the popes consistorie. Refusing the Popes penal∣tie is no de∣priuation in a Prince. Any Pastor may remit the Princes sinnes as wel as the Pope. Marke the stately pro∣ceedings of Hildebrand against the Emperour. For what Lawe, diuine or humane, forced the Prince to goe to Rome at the Popes call? Howe proue you, that for sinne committed against God the Pope may enioyne what penance hee list? And the Prince must abay? Or that if the Prince refuse the Popes newe founde and needlesse penances, hee must bee deposed? Philand. Woulde you not that Princes shoulde repent their wicked liues? Theoph. Yeas, and amende them with all Christian care and speede: But what power hath the Pope by Gods Lawe to pardon the sinnes of Princes more than an other Bishoppe hath? Or why shoulde Princes repenting not bee forgiuen, without perfourming such penance as the Bishoppe of Rome list to deuise for them? Had Gregorie delt with Henry the fourth to correct those thinges which were amisse, and to returne to GOD with earnest and heartie repentaunce, wee woulde not haue misliked that fatherly monition, both to giue eare to the sinister and slaunderous infor∣mations of subiectes and Rebelles, against their Prince; to cite him in person to appeare at Rome that was his Soueraigne Lord and master; to repell his messengers with reproche and infamie that came to cleare him; to depriue him of his kingdome, for not consenting to such penaunces as the Pope in pride and rage should impose; to make him stand three daies in the colde frost barefooted before hee could bee admitted to pre∣sence:The diuell himselfe may minister as good Iustice as Hildebrād did. The popes arbitrarie pe∣nances are no parts of our conuersion vnto God. and after his submission and absolution giuen by the Pope him selfe to set vppe his seruantes and sonnes to take his Crowne from him: If this bee Iustice, the dyuell himselfe may suffer for Iustice as wel as Pope Hildebrand. Phi. Are Princes too good to do penance for their sinnes? Theoph. Prooue first that such penances as you list to enioyne, are necessarie partes of our conuersion vnto GOD, and then wee will say, Princes may be blamed for refusing them: otherwise you wickedly abuse the keyes in that you make them serue your lustes to compasse your purposes, and to bee reuenged of your enemies, vnder colour of repenting and reconciling vn∣to God. Phi. Must not the Church also bee satisfied? Theo. If Popes vnder
the name of the Church play the Tyrants, and content not them-selues with those signes of inwarde sorrowe,The Pope abuseth the keies to in∣crease his gaine and power. which God accepteth, they bee nowe not forgiuers of sinnes, nor watchmen ouer soules, but cunning huntsmen after ge and peruerters of trueth with their prophane policie, which turne the kes and Cannons of Christes Church to enrich them-selues, and to get a Lordly Dominion ouer all persons and places by restraining the Sacra∣ments and enioyning penaunces, such as they see make most for their aduan∣tage. And this hath beene the manner of all your late Popes, vpon pri∣uate and earthly displeasures and quarrels to curse and banne both Prince and people, till amendes were made them euen in their owne liking, as if Christ had ordayned the Sacramentes to bee, not seales of his grace and helpes of our fayth, but baites to catch kingdomes, and roddes to reuenge such Princes as will not, or can not procure the Popes fauour. For so the Bishoppes of Rome haue vsed their excommunications against Princes and others, as the examples that followe, will fully declare. How Hilde∣brand sped with his en∣terprise.To make an ende first with Hildebrand, if either the successe that GOD gaue him in his furious attempt, or the iudgements of your best and synce∣rest Stories neere that tyme, bee woorthie to bee regarded, they con∣demne this act of Hildebrande as vniust and vngodly. Rodolf, whome the Pope and the Saxons set vp against his master, lost his right hand in the fielde as hee sought to get the Crowne from him,The iust re∣ward of a re∣bel, shewed in Rodolph. Vrspergens. in anno 1080. and when by reason of that and other woundes hee was readie to giue vp the ghost, Vrspergensis reporteth of him, that looking on the stumpe of his arme, and fetching a deepe sigh hee sayde to the Bishoppes that were about him, beholde this is the hande wherewith I sware alleagance to my Soueraigne Lorde Henrie: and nowe I leaue you see, both his kingdome and this present life: you that made me aspire to his throne, take you heede that you lead me right, I followed your aduise. Sigebets. in anno 1080. Hildebrand Prophesieth against him∣selfe.The same yeere that Rodolf was slaine, Hildebrand by reuelation from heauen, as hee sayde, foretolde that that very yeere the false king should die, but his coniecture of the false King which hee interpreted to bee Henry, deceiued him, sayth Sigebert. For Henry fighting a set battell with the Saxons: Rodolf the false king and many of the Nobles of Saxonie were slaine. If this were a reuelation from God, as Gregorie pretended, then by the foretelling and perfourming of this accident, GOD himselfe pronounced him the false King, whom the Pope erected and maintained a∣gainst Henry the fourth: If it were no reuelation from aboue, but a con∣sortion with spirites from beneath, then was Gregorie no such Saint as you make him, that had felowshippe with Diuels, and his owne ma∣ster betrayed and beguyled the frantike humour of his infernall disci∣ple. Hildebrand himselfe tur∣ned out of his Popedome.Foure yeares after, Hildebrande him-selfe was forsaken of his owne people, and by their consent depriued of his Popedome, and hee faine to flie to
the barbarous Normanes for refuge, and there in banishment died. Romani Imperatorem Henricum recipiunt in vrbe, & eorum iudicio Hildebrandus Papatu abdicatur.Sigeber. in anno 1084. The Romanes receiue Henrie Emperour into their citie: and by their iudgement Hildebrand is depriued of the Popedome. Vrspergensis confirmeth the same.Vrspergen. in anno 1083. Vnde Romani commoti, manus Regidederunt, Hildebran∣dum vero Papam vnanimeter abdicarunt: whereupon the Romanes being mo∣ued, (that the Pope would not come in the kings presence to haue the matter hearde) submitted themselues to the king, and with one consent abando∣ned Pope Hildebrand. Who lying at the point of death, as Sigebert founde written of him, called vnto him of the twelue Cardinals whom hee lo∣ued aboue the rest, and confessed to God,Siger. in anno 1085. S. Peter, and the whole church, that hee had greatly sinned in the Pastorall charge which was committed vnto him, and that at the instinct of the diuell he had stirred hatred & hart-burning amongest men. Beno the Cardinall testifieth the same,In vita & ge∣stis Hildebrand. though some of your Romish writers stoutly auouch the contrary. This was the successe of Hildebrande and his newe made king; the one vp∣pon the losse of his hande and ende of his life remembring his oth, and repen∣ting his treason; the other seeking to displace the Prince, was displaced him selfe, and lost his Popedome, whiles he laboured to set the Prince besides his throne. As touching the fact, Frisingensis saith this was the first onset that euer Bi∣shop of Rome gaue to depriue the Emperour. I reade and ouerreade, saieth he, the gestes of the Romane kings and Emperors,Otho Prisingens. li. 6. cap. 35. Depriuation of Princes ne∣uer offered by any before Hildebrande Sigeb. in anno 1088. This is right the Iesuites cause. and I neuer find any of them before this man excommunicated by the Bishop of Rome, or depriued of his kingdom. Sigebert wisely and truly giueth his iudgement of this and the like interprise. To speake with the leaue of all good men, this only no∣uelty, I will not say heresie, was not crept into the worlde (before the daies of Hildebrand) that Priestes should teach the people they owe no subie∣ction to euil kinges, and that although they haue sworne fidelitie vnto him, yet they must yeelde him none, neither may they bee counted periures for holding against the king; but rather he that obeyeth the king is excom∣municated, & he that rebelleth against the king is absolued frō the blemish of disloyalty & periurie. Gerochus a great champiō of Gregories, is fain to say of him:Apud Auent. lib. 5. fol. 563. The Romanes vsurp to themselues a diuine honor, they wil yeeld no reason of their doinges, neither can they abide that any man should say vn∣to them, why doe you so. They answere as the Poete writeth: so I will, and commande. Let my will stand for reason. Vrspergensis sayeth of the Sy∣node at Mentz, where in the presence of the Romane Legates the Bishops that rebelled (with Hildebrand) against the Emperour were deposed;Vrspergen. in anno 1085. Ibi communi consensu & consilio constituta est pax Dei, There by common consent and counsell the peace of God was established: which concludeth Gregorie to be the author of a diuelish dissention against the Emperour. Phi. Wee care for none of these that speake euill of Gregories doing, so
long as we haue a greater number of stories to commend him. Theo. And wee hauing the true reportes of these that liued in the same age with him, which neither you nor the rest of your Romish faction can disproue,The later wri∣ters of the Ro¦mish faction, to please the Pope, cōmend Hildebrand to the heauens. litle regard what men that came after; and were more desirous to please the Pope than to write the truth, haue published in their stories. You nor all the writers you haue shall euer be able to refell the assertions of Sigebert & Frisingensis, that Hildebrād was the first Bishoppe of Rome which attempted to depriue Princes of their Crownes, and that this noueltie or rather heresie was neuer hearde of before. Howe lawfull then it was, which for a thowsande yeares the church of Rome neuer durst aduenture, till Gregorie the seuenth first presumed to doe it, lea∣ning rather to wicked and seditious policie, than to christian and confessed au∣thoritie, the simple may soone discerne, or if they looke to the end, they shall see the reward that is consequent to all rebellions. Vita Henrici 4. in Fasciculo re∣rion sciendarū.A good instruction (sayeth that auncient reporter of Henries life) was giuen to the worlde that no man shoulde rise against his master. The right hand of Rodolph cut off, shewed a most iust punishment of periurie, in that he feared not to violate his fidelitie sworne to the king his Soueraigne: and as though other woundes had not beene sufficient to bring him to his death,That part pu∣nished which offended. that part also was punished, that by the plague the fault might bee perceiued. Phi. If you stand on successe, Henrie him-selfe was lifted at last out of his kingdome by his owne sonne. Theo. Was it not wickednesse enough to arme the subiectes against their Prince, & to set the sonne to impugne the father, but you must also crake of it?What Hilde∣brand began, the pope that came after would neuer leaue off. Three erect against Henry the 4. and all slaine. The way that Hildebrand beganne, his succes∣sours woulde not leaue, as being the onely meane to make them Lordes of al. And therefore when Rodolf was slaine, Hermānus was speedily erected against Henrie: and had his rewarde as speedily at a womans hande, which with a mightie stone, as hee was comming in sport to trie the force of his souldiers, beat out his braines from the toppe of a castle in earnest. Ecbertus was the thirde, that ascended to his masters seate: and hee not long after was caught in a windmill, and paid his life for his ransome. The two sons of Hen. the 4. set vp in arms against their father. For this whole storie see Cus∣pinian in Hēr. 4. Auent in Annalibus: & the life of Henrie the 4. in fasciculo re¦rū sciendarū.Subiectes hauing so euill successe against their Prince, the Pope and his confederates thought to trie what the sonne woulde doe against the father: and first they perswade Conradus, the eldest sonne of Henrie, whom his father left in Italie to represse the force of Mathilda, to ioyne with her against his owne father and to with-drawe the whole kingdome of Italie from obedience to the Emperour. Which vnnaturall dealing of Conradus forced the father to dis∣herite him and to make choise of his yonger sonne Henrie the fift to succeed him in the Empire; taking an oth of him, least hee shoulde runne his brothers course, that during his owne life, the sonne shoulde not medle with the fathers kingdom, or countries but by the fathers consent. The elder bro∣ther not long after departed this life: which occasioned the Pope and his ad∣herentes to temper with Henrie the fift, though by nature and oth bounde to
the contrarie, that hee shoulde take the Scepter in hande, and rather beare him-selfe as king, than suffer a straunger to rise vppe and put both the father and the sonne in hazarde to haue the kingdome from them. This feare ioyned with a youthly desire to raigne, brought the sonne to take armes against the fa∣ther, and to meete him in open field, with a periured and wicked purpose to de∣feate him of his crowne. The matter had come to dint of sword but that the chiefe on both sides ab∣horring those vnnaturall warres,The Nobles shrinking frō the father to the sonne. pretended to parle as if they would compose the strife without blood; in which conference of theirs, the father found the Nobles that were with him, incline rather to the sonne rising than set∣ting, and to faynt from the possessour of the Crowne, for dreade of him that shoulde bee successour:Henrie the 4. aided by his mortall ene∣mies when he was forsaken of his friends. and for that cause secretely conueyed him-selfe from the campe and fledde to the Duke of Bohemia and to the Saxons who before were his mortall enimies and the first attempters of his depo∣sition, but nowe, seeing that vngratefull and parricidiall attempt of his bowelles against him, honoured and assisted the father to the vttermost of their power. The Popes Legates and the rest of that faction fearing the friendes, and doubting the valour and former successe of Henrie the fourth turned them-selues to their Romish artes, and perswaded the sonne to faine a kinde of submission and reconciliation to his father, vppon this condition if hee woulde but retaine peace with the See of Rome. To that the father accorded, referring him-selfe and his cause to the indifferent iudgement of his Nobles and Princes, and receiuing of his sonne for the safetie of his life and honour, promises, teares, and othes; all which not∣withstanding hee was with a faire pretence ledde to a castle by the waie as they trauelled, and being receiued in as an Emperour, he was kept there as a prisoner,A right patern of the Romish institution. and this offer made him either to loose his heade, or to resigne his Empire: By these detestable periuries & practises the son gat the father to relinquish the Crowne: and this if you thinke to bee good successe you may say that Iudas had as good in betraying his master, as Henrie the fift in displa∣cing his father. Phi. The same Gregorie the seuenth did the like commendable iustice vppon the king of Pole,The defence, cap. 5. Chron. hist. Pol. lib. 4. Kings of la∣ter times ex∣communica∣ted. Cuspin. in Hen. 4. Bolislaus the 2. as wel excommunicating as depriuing him for murde∣ring of his Bishop S. Stanislaie at the verie altar. Against which sentence though hee stood by force and contempt for a time, yet at length hee was forsaken and resisted wholy by his subiects, fled, and in fine slue himselfe. Theoph. The iustice doone vppon Henrie the fourth was not verie commendable. One of your owne friendes confesseth the Prince was con∣demned Absens & inauditus; both in his absence and not so much as hearde wha he could say for himselfe. The Bishops of Italie & Germany thought it not verie commendable when they deposed the Pope,Cuspin. ibidem. Quod Regem nullo ex∣emplo, anathemate praeter omnem causam perculisset: for that hee had accursed & depriued the king which was neuer seen before, & that without al iust cause.
And surely to restore the Prince to the communion as Gregorie did at Canu∣sium, and yet to defeate him of his Crown, and to set vp his seruaunt to rebell against him: this had no shewe of iustice. And if you commende it, you haue your consciences seared with an hoat Iron, and will speake nothing that may displease the Pope, be it neuer so iust or true. Bishop Stani∣slaie murde∣red by king Boleslaus.The murdering of Bishop Stanislay by Boleslaus the second, king of Polo∣nia, we mislike as well as you: but the depriuing him of his Crowne and al∣lowing his subiectes to conspire his death, that was to requite sinne with sinne and to reuenge murther with a more hainous and impious murder. It was not lawfull for the king to kill a Bishop that admonished him of his vicius life; much lesse was it lawfull for subiectes to conspire the death of their Prince. Neither act was good,This kings ct was euill,  the Popes was worse. It is a greater sinne for a sub¦iect to kill his Prince, than for a king to kill a Bishop. Cromerus de rebus Polon. lib. 4. in Boleslao. but of the twaine the Popes was the leuder. For in steede of reducing the king to repentance, which should haue beene his only pur∣pose, he interdicted the whole Realme from the seruice of God, which is rather the subuerting of innocents, than the punishing of offendurs, & vsed the kings sinne as a pretence to incite the subiects to greater sinne, and to settle his vsur∣ped power ouer the Princes of Polonia that should succeede; by charging the Bishoppes to annoynt or crowne no king after that without his consent. Your own author confesseth no lesse. When these thinges, saith he, which Boleslaus had done, were reported at Rome, Gregorie the seuenth then Bishop moued with the haynousnesse of the fact, interdicted the whole Realme from diuine seruice, accursed Boleslaus to the deepe pit of hell, and in solemne manner depriued him of his king∣dome, and commanded the bishops that they should annoint & crwone no king after that without his licence. Notwithstanding this depriuation Bo∣leslaus raigned a yeare and more after that, but hated of all (at home) and contemned abroade;Rebellion and murder are the fruites of the Popes deposing Princes. in so much that the Nobles of Ruscia, which he had cōquered refused their subiection, and certaine of his Nobles and states at home conspired his death; which conspiracie being detected, he fearing lest moe were of their counsell, fled to (Ladislaus king of) Hungarie, who re∣ceiued him very curteously and honorably. We defende not the vices of Princes but examine the Popes power to depriue thē of their crownes.He fled fearing his owne subiectes, whom he had tyrannously oppressed not long before with shamefull crueltie, as the same writer witnesseth; who also bringeth three reportes of his death: one that hee fell mad and slue himselfe; an other that in hunting he was cast off his horse and torne of dogges; the thirde that wandering into a straunge Countrie he became a skullin in a certaine mo∣nasterie, and there in repentance ended his life. Phi. If his ende were so straunge, his life coulde not bee good. Theo. I commend not his life, if it be true that Cromerus writeth of him; I rather ac∣knowledge the iust iudgement of God in taking vengeance of his sinnes. Phi. Why doe you not acknowledge the like in his deposition? Theoph. Because the Pope is not God, to whom the punishing of Princes sinnes doeth rightly belong. Phi. Would you that Princes should kill Bishops at the verie Altar
for doing their duties, and yet goe free? Theo. As if God were not both as sincere and seuere a iudge as the Pope? Phi. Who doubteth of that? Theo. Then shall they not goe free, that sinne against his lawe, bee they Princes or others. Phi. I speake of the meane time, before that day come wherein hee shall iudge. Theo. And in the meane time which you speake of,God puni∣sheth Princes, though not by the Pope. God mighti∣ly punisheth all sortes and states, though not by the Pope. Phi. He punisheth by diseases and straunge kinde of deathes, as hee seeth cause; but yet good Lawes must be made and maintained by men for the repressing of vice amongst men. Theo. Uerie true: but those lawes must bee made by Princes and not by Popes. Bishops haue not to do with the sworde which God hath giuen vn∣to Princes for the punishment of euill doers. Phi. And what if Princes them-selues be the doers of euill, who shall punish them?And what if the Pope be a malefactour, who shall pu∣nish him? Theo. Euerie soule must bee subiected to them, and they to God. They beare the sworde ouer others: not others ouer them. Be∣sides them or aboue them no man beareth the sworde by Gods appointment. Phi. The keyes are aboue the sworde. Theo. The keyes open and shutte the kingdome of God:The keyes do not touch the crownes of Princes. they touch not the bodies nor inheritances of priuate men, much lesse of Princes. Onely the sworde is corporally to compell and punish, which is not the Priestes but the Princes charge, as I haue often shewed. Phi. To let Princes doe what they will,Tyrants were neuer yet re∣pressed by Priestes. 1. Sam. 22. without feare of punishment, is the next way to ouerthrow common-wealthes. Theo. What kingdom can you shewe wherein it hath beene otherwise? Saul willed Doeg in his presence to lea fourescore and fiue of the Lordes Priestes, and hee smote their citie with the edge of the sworde, both men, women, children and sucklinges. Did Abiathar the high Priestes sonne, that fledde and escaped, depriue Saul of his kingdome? or did Dauid, for whose cause they were slain, when shortly after hee had Saul in his power to doe with him as hee woulde, seeke the kings life, or suffer his men to take it, that were readie to doe it? Dauid when he was king defloured Bethsabe and caused her husbande to be murdered. Did therefore any Priest or Prophet in all his Realme offer to depose him? or did Absolon well to conspire against him? Achab ioyned with Iesabel in putting 2. Sam. 11. Naboth to death, and 3. Reg. 21. & 18killing the Lords Prophets. Did Elias depriue him? or incite his subiectes to forsake him? Herod Mat. 14.beheaded Iohn Baptist, and likewise Act. 12. Iames, and apprehended Peter with a purpose to sende him after, but that hee was deliuered by an Angell: did Peter therefore take vengeance on Herode, which hee might haue done with a worde as well as on Ananias; or did he leaue him to the iudgement of God, which shortly after insued with an horrible plague? The tyrantes of all ages and vices of all princes both before the comming of our Sauiour and since, haue they beene punished by Priestes as you woulde haue it? or else haue they beene reserued to Gods tribu∣nals as we affirme? Phi. Some haue beene punished by Priestes, though not all. Theoph.
Many Princes haue beene deposed by their owne Realmes, but not by Priestes.Shew but one prince for fiue thowsand yeares since the first foundation of the earth that was iudicially cited, examined & corrected by a priest til Hildebrand began this new president. If any princes were during all that time repressed, it was done by their own states & realms, & that for their extreme tyranny; priests alwaies refrained those attempts, and neuer thought it any part of their vocatiō to medle with the changing and altering of kingdoms. Phi. It is a better & readier way to reforme princes, to subiect them to the tribunall of one godly Bishop as we do, than to leaue them in thraldome to po∣pular tumults and mutinies as you do. Theo. We leaue them in thraldom to none but only to God,Princes were better to refer themselues to their realmes, if they were to choose their iudges, than to endure the Popes pride. and to serue him is no thraldome, but an honorable and princely liberty. Yet if princes were to choose their iudges among men, they were farre better referre themselues to the generall consent of their Nobles & commons at home, than hold their scepters at the pleasures of disdainful & sediti∣ous Popes which seeke to dishonor their persons, & impouerish their Realmes. Phi. You speake this of spite. Theo. Your own examples wil proue it a truth. How dealt Adrian the fourth, and Alexander the third with Frederike the first,How Frede∣rike the first was handled. a wise, valiaunt and vertuous prince? Did not Adrian receiue a great summe of mony to excommunicate the Emperor? & the stomack which the pope tooke against the prince, grew it not vpon these causes, for that the Emperor in his letters put his own name before the Popes, and required homage & fealty of the Bishops for their temporalities, and would not suffer the Cardinals to pray vpon the churches of Germany? Did not the Cardinals conspire & bind them∣selues with an oth that they would neuer choose any to be Pope,By these artes the Pope hath growen great, & by these he yet standeth. but one that should be an opposite to this Emperor? And when Alexāder the third was shuf∣fled in by that faction against Victor, did he not twise refuse to haue the matter discussed by councel, and stirred vp the kings of Scicily & France, and the states of Venice against the Emperour, and caused all the cities & countries of Italie to rebell against him, and hauing taken his thirde sonne prisoner, would hee re∣store him or make peace with the father til in presence of al the people at the dore of S. Marks church in Venice the prince had cast his body flat on the ground, & the pope setting his foote on the Emperors neck, had auanced himself with that part of the Psalme which saith, Thou shalt walke vpō the aspe & the basilisk, and shalt tread the lion and dragon vnder thy feete?Psalm. 91. The parts that were plaied by the Bishops of Rome with Frederike the se∣cond, Lodouik of Bauaria, king Iohn of this Lande, and Lewes the 12. of that name, king of France (which are your own examples) if I should largely pursue thē,The tyrānies & iniuries of Popes against Princes were infinite. a whole volume would not suffice them: I wil therfore rip vp so much only as shal let the reader see with what cunning these princes were wearied & with what pride they were despised, when they trauelled for peace. Phi. But say no more than you wil proue. Theo. Your owne friends shal heare me recorde that I doe not faine. The griefe that Adrian the fourth conceiued again Frederike the first, & the occasious therof, though I might report out of Radeuicus that th liued,
yet had I rather take them out of Adrians owne words,Radeuius de gestis Frederici, lib. 10. Apud Naucler. volum. 3. gener. 39. anno 1156. The Popes letter to the Emperour. in his epistle to Frede∣rik, which are these, By the word of truth we are taught, that euery one which exalteth himself shalbe brought low. Wherfore we maruel not a litle at your discretion that you giue not S. Peter & the holy Church of Rome that reue∣rence which you ought. For in your letters directed vnto vs you set A foule sinne for the prince to set his name before the Popes. The Pope woulde not haue the cler∣gie sweare fe∣altie to their Prince. The popes gaine must not be impai∣red. Nauel. ibidem. The mildnes of Frederikes answere to the Popes letter. Bishops owe fidelitie to Princes not only in res∣pect of their temporalities but of their duties to gods ordinance. your name before ours, which is a note of presumption, I will not say, arrogancie. What shal I speak of the fidelitie which you promised & confirmed with an oth to S. Peter & to vs, in what sort you perform it, when as you require ho∣mage & exact fealty of them which be gods, & the sons of the most high e∣uery one of them, I meane the Bishops closing their hāds within yours (whē you receiue it) & setting your self against vs, you shut not only the churches but the cities of your kingdom against the Cardinals that came frō our side? Repent therefore, repent we aduise you, lest whiles you couet the thinges which you should not, you loose that which you haue. For the better discerning of the Popes ambitious & enuious spirit, you shall hear with what mildnes & lenitie the prince made his answere. Whatsoeuer re∣gality your Popedō hath, you gat it by the gift of princes. Whereupō when we write to the Bishop of Rome, by right & by ancient vse we set our name first. Looke your records, & if before you did not marke this which we say, there you shall find it. Of them, whom you call gods, I winne by adoption; since they hold part of our regalities, why should we not exact both homage, and an oth of fealtie, whereas our master & yours, holding nothing of any earth∣ly king, but bestowing all good things on all men paied tribute to Caesar for himselfe & for Peter, & gaue you an example so to do, saying: Learne of me for I am meeke and humble in hart. Let therefore your Bishops either re∣store vs our temporalities, or if they finde them so profitable (that they will not) let them giue to God that which is Gods, and to Cesar that which is Ce∣sars due. To your Cardinals our churches are shut & our cities not open, be∣cause we see them to be no Preachers but spoilers, no makers of peace, but snatchers of mony, no reformers of mē, but insatiable scrapers of gold. Whē we shal see them to be such as the church needeth, that is bringing peace, lightning countries, assisting the humble in equity, we our selues wil not fail to appoint for them necessary prouisiō & maintenāce. And (to tel you truth) you giue vs cause to suspect your humility & meekenes which is the nource of (al) vertues, when you quarel with temporall persons about these matters which make nothing to religiō. We cā not choose but send you this answere when we see the detestable beast of pride to haue crept vnto Peters seate.The detesta∣ble beast of prid crpt lōg since vnto Pe∣ters seate. Antichrist practising for life to make him selfe strong. This reply, though groūded on nothing but manifest reason & trueth, did so sting the Pope & his Cardinals that they ioyned in a generall conspiracy with Williā king of Scicily, & verie neere all the cities of Italy, to crosse the Empe∣rour to the vtmost of their powers, and when the Pope died to choose none but one of the same faction that should continually pursue the Prince both with se∣dition and excommunication till they gate the vpper hande of him. Iohannis
Cremonensis a writer of that time saieth:Abbas Vrsper∣gens. in anno 1152. & Nauc. genera. 39. anno 1158. The Pope cō∣triueth a mighty cōspi∣racie to resist the prince & to driue him cleane out of Italie. Vrsperg. in anno 1152. Naucler. generat. 39. Cu∣spinian. in Fre∣derico. Adrian cho∣ked with a fly. In this conspiracie the greater part of the Cardinals, William king of Scicilie, and almost all the cities of I∣talie bounde them-selues with many Barons and other greater men: and a mighty masse of monie was giuen to Pope Adrian that hee shoulde ex∣communicate the Emperour. And farther hee saieth, hee learned of cre∣dible men of Millan and Brixia that were parties in this action, that the conspiracie with Pope Adrian was so fastned with othes that none of them might leaue the rest, or seeke the Emperours fauour without the consent of all, and if the Pope departed this life, they should choose a Cardinall of the same confederacie. The reward which Adrian receiued at Gods hand as that writer sayth was this, that A few daies after he had denounced his excommunication against the Emperor at Anagnia, as he walked abroad to refresh himself, & came to a spring to tast of the water a flie by report entred his mouth, and stucke so fast to his throate, that by no helpe of Physitions it could be remoued, til hee gaue vp the ghost. Phi. Nauclerus, you knowe, doubteth of this storie because the Italian writers make no mention of it. Theo. That is no reason to disproue the wri∣ter:Cuspian. in Fri∣derico 1. Cuspinian. in Frederico 2. You know what Cuspinian a man of your owne side saith of your Italian stories in the liues of both the Frederikes. Merula (an Italian) not know∣ing the thinges which Emperour Frederike did, but as following Blondus or Platina, doth fouly erre many times. And againe,The Italian stories wholie bent to iustifie the Popes do∣inges and to belie the Ger∣mane Princes The Italians as Blondus & Platina both of one age, complaine of the want of stories. They disdayned to reade the chronicles of the Germanes, the which, because they sauored not of the Romane eloquence, they reiected, and missing in many pointes they affirm very often lies for truth. Some of them offended with the whole Nation of Germanie, call all the Germane Princes (that were Emperors) barbarians. And to flatter their Popes, they charge (the Germane Princes) with many moe vices (than they had.) Want of other writers before them, hatred of the Germans whose Princes often wasted Italie with fire and sword, and a naturall desire to magnifie the Pope, made the Italians disdaine to seeke the truth, or to dissemble it when they saw it. Phi. Did not the Germanes thinke you beare affection towardes their Princes,In these cases I alleadge no writers but men of their own religion. and spite the Pope for accursing and impugning their Emperours? Theo. I alleadge none but Priests, Monks, & Abbats that were in the Popes danger, and not in the Princes: and such as otherwise did honour the Pope, & depend vppon his See, saue when he offered so open wrong and violence that no Prince coulde indure it. But we wade further than we neede. Nauclerus doubteth whether Adriā were choked with a flie: but of the conspiracie, which is the thing that I pur∣posed, neither hee, nor you can doubt. It was Radeuicus de gestis Frideric. 1. lib. 2. cap. 52. cap. 69. cap. 67. cap. 69. & 71. complained of by the Cardinals that refused their societie, it was Radeuicus de gestis Frideric. 1. lib. 2. cap. 52. cap. 69. cap. 67. cap. 69. & 71. confessed by the citizens of Millan, it was Radeuicus de gestis Frideric. 1. lib. 2. cap. 52. cap. 69. cap. 67. cap. 69. & 71. pro∣ued in the Councell of Pauia, it was reported by letters both from Radeuicus de gestis Frideric. 1. lib. 2. cap. 52. cap. 69. cap. 67. cap. 69. & 71. the Prince
& from the * Bishop of Babenberge to Eberhard the Archbishop of Saltzburge; it was verified by ye sequele, I mean by the wilful resistāces which the cōfederat cities of Italie doubled & tripled to their vtter ouerthrow, and by inciting the kinges of Fraunce, England, Spaine, and Scicily to ioine against Frederike, which thing Alexander the third a Cardinall of the same conspiracie with A∣drian, laboured for life to compasse. Phi. Could you blame him? Did not Frederik set vp Victor an Antipape a∣gainst him, & chase Alexander frō his See? Theo. Frederike did not set him vp:This conspi∣racy was made whiles Adrian li∣ued: before Alexanders election came in question. but when two were chosen in a tumult, the councel of Papia discussing the cause pronounced for Victor against Alexander, & their iudgement did the Emperor follow. Phi. He might wel folow it, for himself did procure it. Theo. It is not true. The Bishops of Italie, Germany, and other Countries were assembled by him, and the matter committed as in the sight of God to their integrities and consciences. The Princes words in the councell were.The councell of Papia pro∣nounced Vi∣ctor to bee lawfully cho∣sen. Radeuicus de de gestis Fride∣ric. 1. lib. 2. c. 64 Bishops had skill in the canons of the of church, which princes had not. Radeuic. lib. 2. cap. 67.68.70. Though I see the power to cal councels is ours by the office & dignitie of our empire, espe∣cially in so great dangers of the Church (for so Constantine, Theodosius, Iusti∣nian, and of later memory Charles the great and Otho are knowen to haue done) yet authority to define this weightie and chiefe matter I leaue to your wisedoms and iudgements. For God hath made you Priestes, and giuen you power to iudge of vs. And because in thinges which pertaine to God, it is not for vs to iudge of you: we exhort you to behaue your selues in this cause, as those that looke for none other iudge ouer you but God. This when he had saide, he withdrew himselfe from the councell, committing the whole examination of the matter to the church and to the persons Ecclesiasticall there assembled, which were infinite. There were fiftie Arch∣bishops, & Bishops, & Abbats and Priors innumerable. There were also the Embassadors of diuers nations promising whatsoeuer the Synod decreed, should vndoubtedly bee receiued of their Realmes. See their proofes and proceedinges of this councell in the chapters that follow, and shew vs howe you can infringe them. Phi. Alexander had the greater part of the Cardinals. Theo. The greater part of the Cardinals had conspired to choose none,The greater part of the cardinals had conspired a∣gainst the Prince. but one that was and would be an enimie to the Prince, & to that intent had they taken an othe, Adrian yet liuing. After his death when they came to choose a successour, the people & the Clergie were as earnest to haue none, but one that shoulde keepe the citie at peace with the Prince. Whereupon the conspirators not daring to vtter them∣selues for feare of some vproare, nine of the Cardinals, the rest seeing and not contradicting, at the importunate clamour of the people and clergie, put the Popes mantle or cope vpon Octauian the Cardinall, and placed him in S. Pe∣ters chaire,The choice of Victor. and perfourmed all other solemnities of his inthronization with the great ioy of the whole citie, the conspiratours which were 14 in number be∣holding al this and not gainsaying it, or any part of it, though they were present. Twelue daies after Victor was immantled,Alexander se vp by the cō∣spiratours a∣gainst Victo. and possessed of the Pope∣dom,
& had receiued the obediences of the clergie throughout Rome, the conspi∣rators secretly departing the citie, & not so much as calling the rest of the Car∣dinals to their election, by them-selues without the presence or allowance of the people, or clergie, set vp Rowland the chief man of their faction to be Pope, & named him Alexander. This garboyle being brought to the Prince by the complaint of both partes, he by letters & messengers warned both sides to come to the councell that should be kept at Papia, and there to heare the iudgement of the Bishoppes for the determining of this strife, which Alexander and his ad∣herentes vtterly refused. These thinges were iustly proued before the Bi∣shoppes assembled at Papia, and sentence pronounced with Victor against A∣lexander. Frederike did but the dutie of a christian Prince, and much lesse their ancient Emperors did in the like case. Victors ele∣ction was faultie, but A∣lexanders was worse. Alexanders e∣lection was vtterly voide. What did Frederike in this case that a Christian Prince might not lawfully do in the like? How could he do lesse than cal both parts to the Synod, and com∣mit the matter to the iudgement of the Bishops? Or how could he but fauour & and defend that ide which was now cleared and confirmed by the councell? Phi. Victors election was faultie from the beginning. Theo. If there were any fault in Victors election, it was theirs that should haue presently protested against his ordering: but in Alexanders there was neither right, nor forme of any election. They were ioyned in a wicked compact, & had thereto bound them selues by oth, which by law was sufficient to forfeit their voices. Againe their own silence drowned their interest, when they would not, or durst not speake their minds at the time & place appointed for the choice. Thirdly to their electiō they called not those who had right to be present, & to choose as wel as thēselues, & therefore all that they did was vtterly voide. Fourthly they had neither the consent of the clergy, nor laity, which by order & duty they ought to aske. Lastly they disdained the summōs both of the Emperor, & y• councel, which by the canōs they should haue obeied: and therefore might be depriued of the right which they had: much more discharged from that which they neuer had. Phi. The councell was not indifferent. The. No more is any iudge to him that offendeth. Phi. The Prince had no power to call the councel, much lesse to summon the Pope. Theo. You speake like your selfe. Who called the ancient councels, & summoned the Popes to be present at them,Councels be∣fore and after did as much as this came to. but Princes? And why might not this councell cite & depriue Alexander for his contempt, as wel as the coūcels of Pisa, Constāce, & Basil, did other Popes, that came after, for the like contumacie, specially whē as Alexander was yet no Pope, but in strife with an other for the Popedome? Phi. Platina saith, Alexander had 22. Cardinals, & Victor but 3. Theo. So Alexander himselfe craketh whom Platina followeth, but the contrary part testified that there were nine on the one side & fourteene on the other. Howbeit I stande not on these minutes of elections,Apud Rudeuic. lib. 2. cap. 51. ca. 52. The causes of this conspira∣cy. I note first the causes that prouoked the Pope & his Cardinals to conspire against Frederike: next the meanes they vsed to persue him and wearie him. The causes were, the setting of the Princes name in his letters before the Popes: the requiring of homage of the Bishops: & stopping the Cardinals from
spoiling his churches vnder a colour of visiting them. Of these pretences, and Frederiks answeres let the worlde iudge. The meanes were:The meanes which the Pope vsed to tire the Emperour. Naucl. gener. 39. & 40. Cuspi¦nian. in Fred. 1. the Pope did excommunicate the Prince & his fautors, gate Crema, Placentia, Verona, Millan & Brixia to rebel, linked fifteene ci∣ties of Italie in a league with the king of Scicilie not long before his mor∣tall enimie, of purpose to withstand Frederike: procured Henrie Duke of Sax∣onie to forsake his master in the fielde: stirred the Princes of Fraunce, Eng∣land, Spainei, and the Venetians what they coulde, to annoy him. With these policies he began: and with these he continueth euen at this present. Thus your holy father with warres, rebellions and conspiracies sought to shake this Emperour out of his cloathes:Frederike ta∣med those counties that rebelled a∣gainst him. Vide Naucl. gener. 40. anno 1177. but God so assisted him, that he razed and destroyed the cities that rebelled, and turned the Duke that betrayed him out of his Dukedome, and electorship, and made the Pope glad to leaue his Palace, and flie to Venice in a cookes attire: and had not indulgence of nature wonne him to accept the peace, which the Pope offered, and his captiue sonne in∣treated, hee was like enough to haue taught the Bishoppe of Rome a newe lesson:The time for Antichrist to be exalted. but the time was then for Antichrist to be exalted, and therefore it plea∣sed the wisedome of God to suffer this worthy Prince to be wearid, and con∣tent to imbrace peace for the safety of his sonne that was prisoner at Venice. Where, if it be true, that is written of Pope Alexander euen by your owne fel∣lowes, he shewed himselfe in his right colours.Naucl. gen. 40. anno 1177▪ For willing the Emperour before all the people to lie flat on the ground, he set his foote on the princes necke and said, it is written, thou shalt, walke vpon the aspe and Basiliske, & tread the Lion and Dragon vnder thy feete. And the prince answereth, I do it not to thee, but to Peter whose successor thou art: the pope replied, (it must be done) to me as wel as to Peter.The Pope is where hee would be. The Pope is now where he would be, not on meane mens shoulders, but on Princes necks: and that aduancement hath he gotten, not by religion or vertue, but by breaking othes, bearing armes, shed∣ding blood, and such like turkish and diuelish stirres.Can you tell where S. Pe∣ter did wage warre vpon a∣ny priuate mā or Prince. Naucl. gen. 39. anno 1158. The Pope fighteth with Princes for earthly gaines & griefs. What qua∣rels the Pope hath pursued these 500. yeares. Phi. Would you not he should defend himselfe? Theo. If hee be Peters suc∣cessour, hee must feede, not fight, teach obedience, not authorize rebellion, praie for his enimies, not persue them with force and furie. Else he succeedeth Romulus in murdering, not Peter in feeding. Phi. What if wordes will not serue, shall the chiefest Pastour of our soules see the keyes and the church con∣temned, and oppressed, and not draw the sword? Theo. That is in effect, if men will not beleeue your Preaching, may you not take boytels and knock them on their heades? Nay the case goeth not so well with you: You wage warres with earthly states, if they dislike your pride, or auert your gaine, you pretende Sainct Peter and the Church, when you meane nothing but your tempo∣rall commodities and superfluities: it suffiseth you not to bee free from Prin∣ces Lawes & swords, or to be their equalles, you striue with them to be their superiours, & to displace thē if they displease you. These be the quarels which your holy father and his adherentes haue professed, & persued for the space of
fiue hundreth yeares with all their might and maine: for these things haue you spilt more Christian blood than euer Turke, or Tyrant did: & at this daie you take it in euill gree that you may not still continue that course. First clergie mens liuings & then their persons must be exempted from the Prince.With Frederik the first you fel out, for that hee durst place his owne name be∣fore the Popes, which all Emperours euer did: and as you fought with Hen∣rie the fourth to get clergie mens liuings of his hands, so you tumbled with this Frederik to exempt their persons: least they should either for commodity or duty leane to the Prince: & when he beganne but to looke to your fingers, that you should not decay his Realme & inrich your selues, you conceiued such immortal hatred against him, that you tooke an othe to reuenge him not onely by conspi∣ration, but euen by succession. With Frederike the seconde you delt much after the same sort, whom you did excommunicate twise, thrise, foure times for no cause, without all order of law & iustice,How Frederik the second was handled. as if princes had bin footbals for popes to play with, & not powers for christian Bishops, to reuerence. Phi. Was not Frederik the 2. excommuni∣cated for verie good causes? Theo. They were very good I promise you. Vr∣spergensis an Abbate then liuing saith of them,Vrsper. in anno 1227. Blond. dec. 2. lib. 7. The pope of very pride the first yeare of his Popedom began to excōmunicate Frederik the Emperor for fri∣uolous & false pretences without al order of iudgement. Phi. But Blondus & Platina tel you an other tale. Blondus saith, The first yeare of his coronation, making light account of his oth he attēpted many enormous things against the Pope: who warned him to forebeare these Al that wic∣kednesse was the lawfull defence of his owne right. wicked, perfidious and re∣bellious interprises, but he euery day more & more despised his admonitiō, which made the Pope to terrifie him with an excōmunication, if he did not relent & make restitutiō. And when the Emperor set light by the first curse, the second time the Pope added a depriuation from his Empire & crowne, & third time when the Emperor stood still out, the Pope very much offen∣ded therat absolued al his subiects from their othes,Platina in Ho∣norio 3. wherby they were boūd to yeeld him alleageance. And so saith Platina, Honorius the third did excō∣municate & depriue Frederik the second, for molesting the Popes dominion against right & law. Theo. Your Italians perceiuing their Popes to haue bin very waspish & eger against the Emperors that liked them not,The Italians cannot de∣fend the Pope but by infor∣cing hainous crimes against the Emperors though they know none. & knowing what a shame it would be in the eies of al posterity for them to haue proceeded in such rage wtout vrgēt & euident matter, in general words do charge those Emperors with many grieuous crimes. But we trust neither the Popes discretion, nor the reporters construction, vnlesse we see the particular facts that were commit∣ted. They may think those things to be hainous, which indeede are friuolous: and if the quarell were for lands and territories lying in question betweene the Empire and the See of Rome, the Pope did wickedly in his owne cause to a∣buse the keies for earthly mammon. Phi. The causes of the Popes e∣gernes against Frederik the Who made you the Popes iudge? Theo. I iudge him not, there is one that shall iudge both him and his actes: yet I may ask you the causes for which Frederike was accursed & depriued. Phi. You haue heard them out of Blondus
and Platina.In Henrico 3. Theo. Platina sayth, Contra ius fas{que} ditionē Pontificiam vexabat: he molested the Popes inheritaunces against all right:Decad. 2. lib. 7. that Blondus calleth wickednesse, rebellion, and periurie: These bee high wordes, but I see no deedes. And if we credite them which wrote that verie present, when these thinges were doone, the Pope did the Emperour open wrong in receiuing and succouring his rebels against him. Vrspergensis sayth, the first yeare after Fre∣derike was crowned Emperour,Vrspergens. in anno 1221. hee began to warre vppon two Earles of Thuscan, Matthew and Thomas, which had surprised certaine fortes, and peeces of his territorie within Apulia: and cleane put them from all they had; who flying to Rome sought helpe at the Popes hand; whereof the Em∣perour often complained that the See Apostolike fostered his publike ad∣uersaries and enimies. This was the falling out betweene the Prince and the Pope which your Italian Stories do mention.The Pope did the Prince wrong though the Italians say nay. Platina sayth, it was the Popes right: Vrspergensis two hundreth yeares before him, and a writer in the midst of these actions, saith it was the Princes right: and that hee did but recuer his own out of their handes: for the which Blondus chargeth him with rebel∣lion and periurie. Cuspinian therefore a man of your Religion verie truely noteth him & other Italian writers in this case for mere flatterers. Hauing re∣peated the same fact that Vrspergensis before did testifie,Cuspinian. in Frederico 2. Cuspinians admonition of the Italian stories. Thence, sayth hee, sprang the first occasion of enmitie betweene (the Prince and the Pope). Although the Italian writers doe say that Frederike the Emperour after the death of his mother Constantia, which kept him in tune, and would not suf∣fer to growe to these passions, did the worst hee coulde against Honorius the third, Gregorie the ninth, and Innocentius the fourth, & handled Rome, which had nourced him vp,It was no smal point of Anti∣christs policie to get some that should make all ma∣ner of lies for him & his See. as if she had beene his stepmother. But those flatte∣rers of the Bishop of Rome wil haue al thinges lawful for the Pope, inuesting him with both swordes, and making all Emperours but his seruauntes. This was Frederikes wicked rebellion against Honorius, that Blondus expresseth in so great wordes to winne his owne by force of armes out of their handes that inuaded him, and to requite them with the like; and such quarels can your holy father pick to Princes, when he is disposed to spit his venyme against Princes. Gregorie the nynth,Gregories fu∣rie against this Emperor. vpon lesse cause shewed more furie. Hee did excom∣municate Frederike the seconde, for that hee staied his expedition against the Turke till hee had recouered his health, and when the Prince sent his Em∣bassadours to make faith thereof, he would not so much as heare them, or see them. And after in the absence of the Prince whiles he was fighting against the Turke,Note the pie∣tie of Popes. the Pope inuaded his Land, and caused the souldiers that shoulde haue aided him against the Turke, to be spoyled and stopped of their iourneie, & a fame to be spred that the Emperor was dead, & the Almanes that returned frō Ierusalem to be slaine, least they shoulde notifie the Princes life and welfare. Phi. These be horrible lies,So had you neede to say; for if you grāt them to bee ru, the pope could be litle lesse than a diuell incar∣nate. deuised by such as would haue the Pope in ha∣tred with all men. Theo. They bee true tales, and truer than those which some of your side haue coigned to claw the Pope with. Your own fellowes con∣fesse
as much as I say. Phi. Germanes perhaps in fauor of their Emperors. Th. If you refuse the Germanes of your own religion as welwillers to their Prin∣ces, how shall we receiue your Italians that were more than partiall to their Popes? Yet this aduantage we haue ouer you: the elder and sincerer Stories euen of your Romish profession and deuotion make with vs in these matters. Naucler. gener. 41 anno 1229. The Italians would faine pretēd other causes to saue the Popes hone∣stie: thse be so shameful, that they blush to hear them.Nauclerus discussing the causes of Frederikes excommunication, & repeating what Antoninus a Florentin writeth in the soothing of Gregories fact, addeth But surely by the epistle of Gregorie, which hee wrote to the king of France with this beginning, Out of the Sea is the beast ascēded, it is conuinced that Gregory at this time did not excōmunicate Frederike for these causes (which Antoninus pretendeth) but for that Frederik staied longer with his souldiers from succouring the holy land than the terme which he had vowed by oth, and was enioyned by the Pope vnder the paine of his curse. To the which the Emperor answered that he was vniustly excōmunicated for so much as he entred the iourney within the terme, & besides the death of the Lant-graue (one of the chiefest that should aid him) a dangerous sicknes constrai∣ned him to take lād again, & so by his euident infirmity ought to be excused. Phi. The Emperor fained himselfe sicke, & that the Pope vnderstood by the letters of Bishops that were in his traine.Naucler. Ibidē. The Pope would not ad∣mit the Prin∣ces embassa∣dors to proue their masters sicknesse. This was no pride. Theo. That was the Popes replie to salue his doings: but why did he not voutsafe to heare or see the Archbishop of Brundusiū & others whom the Prince sent to make faith of his sicknes? why did he not expect the Princes purgatiō by oth or otherwise that his excuse was not fained? What seruant was euer so disdayned by his master if he were honest, but his reasonable defence was heard? And our holy father forsooth wil not expect, no not admit the Emperour of Christendome to make faith of his corporall infir∣mitie. Phi. We tell you he was not cke. Theo. We tell you that was harde for you to know, & harder to proue. You should haue called his messengers to their othes or haue sent some to feele his pulse if you had suspected him, for a moi∣cher. In the meane time the worlde seeth the frantike pride of that wicked Pope,Vrstergen. in anno 1227. who not only denied audience to the Archbishop & other the kinges messengers, & would not so much as admit thē to his sight, but condemned & accursed the sick Emperor for not passing the seas to sight against the Turke. And here see, the right vaine of your Romish iustice. Your holy father did hin∣der the prince secretly what he could by rebellions & vprores frō going against the Turk:The Pope did hinder the Prince from going, & yet excommuni∣cated him for not going. Naucler. gener. 1. anno 1226. & yet did excommunicate him for not going. Phi. Did the pope hinder him? Theo. Look your own stories. The yeare before, which was 1226. The Lombards, saith Nauclerus (as it was thought) at the suggestion of Honoriu the Pope entred a league amōgst themselues, & with the cities nere adioy∣ning against Frederike the 2. which continued many yeares, by the name of the Lombards league, a verie great annoiance to the Romane empire, and a manifest impediment of the iourney to Ierusalem, because the expedition which Frederike had promised to make into Syria, was kept off a long time by this occasion.
Phi. This was but a thought. Theo. The league was apparent, the instigation was secrete. This confederacie if the Pope had not fauored, he should haue assi∣sted the Emperor with his keyes & cursinges,The Popes keies were euer ready a∣gainst the Prince, but neuer against those that molested the Prince. Vrspergen. in anno 1228. which were euer ready against Princes, but neuer against those that troubled them; yet if you thinke the Pope was no dealer in this conspiracie, read what Vrspergensis writeth of them the next yeare after his sicknes when the Prince was taking his voiage to Ierusa∣lem. In the yeare of our Lord, 1228. The Emperor minding to accōplish his vow, and appease the Pope, sailed to the Land of Iurie, and that yeare before his going he had indicted a generall meeting of his Princes at Rauenna, from the which he was hindered by the messengers & Legates of the Pope. For they of Verona & Millā suffred none to passe through their coasts, but spoiled the very souldiers that were to go against the Turk, & that, as they affirmed, by the authority of the Pope, which alas, is a shameful thing to speake of. After Frederiks departure, as if the former wronges had not bin spitefull e∣nough, the Pope taking occasion of the Emperours absence,Vrsper. odem anno The Pope in∣uadeth the Emperours dominions whiles he was fighting a∣gainst the Turke. What was this but to betraie the christians to the Turke Vrspergen. in anno 1229. The Pope is angry that the prince retur∣neth with peace and vi∣ctory. addressed a maine armie into Apulia, and tooke the Emperours countries from him who was then in the seruice of Christ (a most horrible thing to speake) & sub¦dued them to his own vse, & hindered the souldiers that were going against the Turke,Nau. l. genera. 41. anno 1228. The pope stir¦reth the prin∣ces souldiers to rebell a∣gainst him when he was incamped a∣gainst the Turke. the most he could, from passing the Seas, as wel in Apulia as Lom∣bardy. Who rightly considering these attempts, will not lament them, & de∣test them as the foresignes & prognosticatiōs of the ruine of the church? And when the composition was made between the Emperor & the Suldane, that Hi∣erusalem with certaine places neere bordering should be restored to the christi∣ans, & truce remaine for ten yeares: & the Emperor by letters aduertised the Pope & the rest of christendom of this ioyfull newes, The Pope cast away the letters & would not receiue them, & with his fautors, as men affirmed, made a rumor to be spred in Apulia that the emperor was dead. Wherupon the ci∣ties, that yet stood for the emperour, inclined to render themselues into the popes hands, & to kil the Almanes that returned from the holy land or were commorant in Apulia; a most barbarous and wicked purpose. And lest there should want any thing to the vttermost of al wickednes, when Frederik (after his arriuing in the holy land) sent messengers to Rome to re∣quire absolution & reconciliation, because he had now perfourmed his pro∣mise, the Pope repelled his petition, & inioyned the soldiers in Asia to with∣draw their help frō Frederik, as frō a publike enimie. It was not enough to fil the Princes hands with ciuill warres when he should prepare against the Turk to stop and spoile his souldiers that should accompanie him, to inuade his lande, & sollicite his townes in his absence, your holy father must set the Christians, when they should fight against the Turke, togither by the eares, & wil them not only to forsake, but also to impugne their Emperor. What could the diuel him∣selfe haue done more, if he had bin couched in the Popes chaire, than Gregorie did? Phi. These things Gregorie himselfe denied, & the Italians that since haue
written,Though this Prince suffe∣red al these wrongs at the Popes hands, yet the Italiās raile mightily on him and magnifie the Pope in al his doings. reiect them as false. Theo. So had they need. For if they should con∣fesse them, they must yeeld the Pope in so doing to be rather the foreman of Sa∣tan, than the Uicar of Christ. And therefore your Italian Stories presuming all that the Pope saide in defence of himselfe to bee true, and all that hee clay∣med from the Empire to bee his, raile on Frederike in great choler, as on a wicked, and faithlesse Prince, and acquite the Pope as doing his dutie in all these counterplots: But Italian wittes are too well knowen to be trusted when they are offended, and in Blondus a man may soone perceiue an intempe∣rate heate against those Princes that withstoode the Pope. Phi. You dislike our stories, and we dislike yours. Theo. May you dislike your owne, and such as then liued and honoured the See of Rome, hauing no iust exception against them but only that they could not apparel the Popes pride with some smoth de∣uises, as the Italians do? Phi. Blondus in fa∣uor of the Pope dealeth very spitefully with Frederik the second.Not long since you praised Blondus: haue you now cast him out of con∣ceite? Theo. I did commend Blondus for his diligence where affection did not interpeale him: But in this case, drawing all thinges to his appetite, the more diligēt the more dāgerous. He not only taketh euery word that Gregory spake for a Gospel, but addeth of his own head such things as Gregory neuer obiected to Frederike; & that with no small spite. For where Frederik complained to the Princes of Almanie, how iniuriouslie and deceitfully the Pope had dealt with him, amongest other thinges, whiles hee was in the seruice of Christ against the Turke,Naucl. gene. 41. anno 1229. how the Pope had surprised a part of his kingdom with armes: Ge∣gory in his letters replied, that because Raynold Frederiks captaine inuaded the kingdome of Scicily, the speciall patrimonie of the church, least the See Apostolike should thereby be impugned, his Legates entred Frederiks king∣dom, & found many ready to submit themselues. This is all that Gregory pre∣tended who woulde not spare to speake any thing, that with any colour he might, in his owne excuse and against Frederike. Blondus finding this to be but a simple cause for the Pope to inuade the Em∣perors dominion in his absence,Blondus hel∣peth Pope Gregories tale. & in that seruice, first for so much as the right of Scicily was in strife between the Empire & the church of Rome, & secondly for that if Scicily were held in fee of the church of Rome, yet Frederike was right heire vnto it by the mother side; & in ful possessiō of that kingdom before he was made Emperor: & therfore wel Raynold his captaine might put ouer souldiers into Scicily to man the forts for al occasions, & to containe them in their duties whatsoeuer should happē to his master in that voiage against the Turk: But o∣ther inuasō, preiudicial to the church of Rome the princes captaine neither nee∣ded, nor coulde make any; Bondus, I say, perceiuing that Gregories pretence woulde seeme but a quarel sought of purpose to make a rebellion against the Emperour whiles he was from home,londus Decad. 2. lib. 7. helpeth the matter with certaine addi∣tions which are both odious and slaunderous. Blondus false srmise of Fre∣derike.Frederik, saith he, ready to take ship & saile frō Italie, was so far frō asking the Popes absolution & benediction, that making one Rainold the gouernor
of the kingdome of Scicilie, in plaine words willed him to oppresse the Pope and Clergie by all meanes. Blondus might haue doone well to tell vs who stoode by and heard these wordes; which Gregorie would neuer haue omitted if he had knowen them. And if the Pope that sifted his words and deedes with all diligence knew no such thing, how shoulde Blondus so many yeres after come by the knowledge of them? The other obiection, that he despised the Popes absolution, is as foolish. For as soone as he was landed on the other side, and began to march towardes the Turke, Platina confesseth that he What wil not Italian wittes doe when they be dis∣pleased? Platina in Gregorio 9. was very earnest both by letters and mes∣sengers to be absolued by the Pope (from his excommunication) and could not obtaine it. To haue delt therefore with the Pope before his going to be ab∣solued, had beene in vaine, the Pope doubting that he would not goe, and refu∣sing, as your selues confesse, to absolue him when he was there arriued and en∣camped against the Turke. Phi. The Pope would not absolue him, because he went about to make peace with the Turke.Frederike re∣couered the kingdome of Ierusalem frō the Turke. The. The Pope would euer haue some cause to molest him; o∣therwise I see no reason to mislike the peace. For whether the Turke stood in feare of him, or was to be distracted & emploied about other wars, I know not; the Emperor had not bin there a yere, but the Turke was glad to yeeld him the kingdome of Ierusalē, sauing the Temple & a few Castles; & to hold peace with him and Christendom for ten yeres. Which conclusion as it was honorable in it selfe,The Pope grieued with the Princes returne, be∣cause his pre∣sence would hinder the Popes pra∣ctises. so was it acceptable to all Christian states, saue only to the Pope; mary he of meere malice against Frederike when the letters were brought, that should aduertise him of the Emperours good successe, threw them away, and shewed him-selfe much agreeued with the matter, as one that did abode, the Princes speedie returne would disappoint him of his hope. And he missed not his coniec∣ture. For within short space the Emperour recouered his townes that were lost, and staied those that were shrinking from him to the Popes no small regreet. Phi. He was offended with Fredericke for that the Temple was left in the Turkes handes.The Prince had been well occupied to stand fighting for Christes sepulcher, whiles the Pope spoiled him in the meane time of his king∣dome at home. The holy land did the Pope good seruice. Theo. The Prince perceiuing the Pope to enforce his countries at home & to irritate his souldiers against him, what els should he stay for, when he was once reuested with the kingdome of Ierusalem? Phi. Our Lordes sepulcher and the Temple were the chiefest things that the Pope re∣garded. Theo. And good cause why. They gate him more mony, and ridde him of moe enimies than any places in the world besides. Phi. Which way trow? Theo. The Pope no sooner lacked mony but he must haue a collection through Christendome for the succourse of the holy land as you call it, and if he fell out with any Prince or Emperour, or saw him likely to stand in his way that he could not rise so high as he would, he would neuer cease, what with excommunications to feare him, what with indulgences to allure him, till he had gotten his consent either to bestowe his owne person on the seruice, or at least to employ his treasures and forces to recouer the land of Iurie from
the hands of Saracens; and in their absence he ruled the roast as pleased him, and grew great by their decayes. Phi. Would you not haue the Turke resisted? Theo. Your holy father neuer tooke the way to haue that doone. He suffered the Turke to deuoure the Greeke Empire, and set the Princes of the West, not to helpe them, but to fight for the place where Christ was crucified by the Iewes,The Pope rather en∣creased than resisted the Turks power. whiles the Turke in the meane time ouerthrewe many thousand Christian Churches, and Cities, else where & and nearer home. And the supplies of men and money were so stragling and interrupted with dissentions and discords at home, that the Turk reconque∣red more in three yeeres, than the Christians wanne in threeskore yeeres before. Phi. Yet the Popes good will is to bee commended: the fault was in them that woulde not agree.The Pope himselfe spoi∣led the west Empire & betraied the East to the Turke. Italy shaken into shiuers by the Pope. And so like∣wise Germa∣ny. Theo. And who was the cause of that, but onely the Pope? Phi. You speake of spite. Theo. Who filled the Emperours hands with rebellions and dissentions more than the Bishoppe of Rome did? Who brought the Empire to a bare title, and the Emperour to bee skant able to de∣fend his owne, but onely the Pope? Who cut Italie into so many seuerall Marquesdomes and Dukedomes as wee nowe see, but your holy father, see∣king to exclude the Germane Prince cleane out of Italie, and to hedge vp his way to Rome with many particular states, and regiments interiected, and all linked in one league to repell him from passing or entring their Countries? Neither was it enough to straighten him abroade, vnlesse hee did also wea∣ken him at home, for feare least some valiant Prince occasioned by so popu∣lous and stout a nation as the Germanes are, shoulde attempt with force of armes to recouer Italie. And therefore you were neuer quiet till Germanie was shaken into as many shiuers as Italie, and the Emperour able to command none of them, but by their common consent, and according to their owne liking. Which is the state of the Empire in our dayes.The Emperor dieted lest he should get strength to wrastle with the Pope. The holy lād vsed as a cōti∣nuall issue to weakē christi∣an Princes left they shuld stirre against the Pope at home. The Pope would neuer asist the Gre∣cians against the Turke. This was not the way to make the Emperour strong against the Turke, for the regetting of Ierusalem out of his handes, but to diet the Emperour, and to take him so low, that he should not bee able to wraffle with the Bishoppe of Rome, without a present foile and instaunt daunger of loosing all. And thus weake though hee were, yet to make him weaker the holy lande was euer vrged by the Pope as a perpe∣tuall Lottarie, to make him, and other Christian Princes spende their peo∣ple and wealth with so small successe, and mightie losse, that no one thing did wast and weaken Christendome more than this. Philand. Is this the thankes you giue the Pope for staying the Turke from inuading Europe? Were it but for that respect, you shoulde thinke better of him than you doe. Theo. To keepe the Turke from subduing Chri∣stendome is a good and godly enterprise: but from that the Pope was fardest off. He woulde neuer assist the Christians of Grecia, continually figh∣ting with the Turk six hundred and fiftie yeres after the diuision of the Empire vnder Charles the great, before their Empire was ouerthrowen; but rather
held the Princes of Christendome from succouring them, vnlesse they would submit them-selues to the See of Rome, which they would neuer doe; though some of their Princes do now and then in hope of aide inclined to a kind of con∣cord. And suffering the Turke still to preuaile against them,The Grecians were deliue∣red as a pray to the Turke by the Pope and his adhe∣rents. and at length to swallow them vp, to the great shame of the Christiā princes that next adioined, but most of himself, who was well willing because they were not his obedients, to leaue them and theirs as a pray for the Turke, he would needes goe fish for for Christs sepulcher, as if that had beene the next way to safegared Chri∣stendome from the Turke; to keepe the place where Christ was buried; and to let him in the meane while conquere halfe Christendome. And that made your holy father storme so much at Frederikes peace concluded with the Turke, wherein the Sepulcher was left out that hee would not absolue him after his returne but vpon the paiment of six skore thousande ounces of gold. Which after three pounds an ounce, as it is valued in our dayes, is The price of one dinner at the Popes table, and yet Blondus thinketh it was to good cheape. three hundered and three skore thousand pounds. And though the Prince for all this monie had but one dinner at the Popes table, yet Blondus is so farre out of charitie with Frederike, that hee saith the Pope was easier (in receiuing so small a recompence) than hee ought or was fit hee should.Blondu decad. 2. lib. 7. Phi. That monie was paied for the dammages doone to the Church by the Princes souldiers in their late warres,The Princes deputie did but defend his masters right & inhe∣ritance while he was in his voiage a∣gainst the Turke. The Pope after the re∣ceit of so much mony persued the Emperour worse than before. not for his dinner as you gibe. Theo. Blondus and Platina doe presuppose that Frederike by his Agents in his absence did spoile and sack S. Peters Patrimonie: but Gregory that receiued the monie, saith the Princes deputy inuaded Sicilie and no more, which was Frederikes right and inheritance, though the Pope claimed thence a yeerely custome. And therefore since Frederikes captaine did the Pope no wrong to inuade Sicilie, being his masters dominion, when the cities perhaps vppon the Popes censures beganne to slide from Fredericke: no reason the Prince should performe the losses and dammages of the warre, which beganne by the Popes egernes: and consequently no cause for the Pope to exact so much mony of ye prince, but either for his dinner which was too deare; or for his keies which should not be sold, or for his fauor which dured not long. For within short space after they fell at worse variance than before, and the same Pope the second time accursed and deposed Frederike, and the matter grew to such heate that your holy father crossigned souldiers against the Emperor, as if he had bin a Turke or a Saracene. Philand. Did not Frederike rather play the Turke with such as fought against him,They came into the field against him as if he had been a Turk why should not he recō∣pence them as rebels? when he cut their heades in fower parts, and laide them crossewise on their shoulders, and with hoat Irons burnt a crosse in their foreheads whose liues he spared, and caused the Clergie mens crownes to bee cut square to ye ve∣ry sculles? What Turke or Saracene euer shewed like crueltie? The. Al execu∣tions not in warre onely, but in peace also seeme cruell, if you looke to the pu∣nishments, and not to the offences.
Phi. What was their offence? Theo. They rebelled against him for the Popes pleasure, whom by Gods Lawe they shoulde haue honoured and obeyed, as their Soueraigne Lord and lawfull Prince: and not therwith content, they take vp the crosse against him in their badges and banners, as if it had beene a∣gainst a Turke or an Infidel. If subiects so farre forget their dueties, as to vse their Princes like Infidels, because the Pope disfauoureth thē: why should not princes forget their clemencie, & reward rebels and enemies according to their deserts? It was therefore more enormous for the Pope to proclaime the crosse against a Christian Prince, (though his aduersarie for some priuate respectes) as hee doeth against the Turke; than for the Prince to inflict some such punish∣ment as should make them repent their follies. Phi. The crosse first vsed a∣gainst infidels for Christs glorie, the Pope turneth against Chri∣stiā Princes to reuenge his priuate en∣mitie. The cause of the second quarel be∣tweene the Pope & this Emperour.Frederike impugning the Pope with all his might, why shoulde not the Pope such him-selfe the best way hee coulde? Theo. And the Pope brin∣ging rebels into the fielde against the Prince as it had beene against an Infidel, why shoulde not the Prince teach them to beware howe they vsed the crosse a∣gainst Christian Magistrates, which was deuised against Turkes and Sa∣racenes? Phi. The Prince himselfe was in all the fault. Theo. Because he woulde not suffer the Pope to ride on his necke, as hee had done on his graundfathers, and the rebellious Cities of Lombardie to shut him cleane out of Italie. For what other cause had Gregorie the ninth againe to excommunicate and depose Frederike after hee had shewed himselfe so desirous of peace, that hee paide a huge heape of golde to content the Popes ambitious spirite? What one iniurie done to the Church of Rome can your Italian Sories iustly charge him with after his first absolution? If you thinke your holy father may turne and wynd Princes like dishcloutes, and curse them, and depose them for what causes he lyst,The pope first armed the subiectes a∣gainst their Prince & thē deposed him for seeking to subdue them with force of armes that rebelled a∣gainst him. then Frederike was in some fault, for that hee would not graunt peace to the Cities of Italie which rebelled against him at the Popes motion: but if that bee madde diuinitie, as in deede it is; the Pope himselfe was not wel aduised, first to set the subiects vp in rebellion against their Prince, and next to depriue the Prince for offering to represse them that resisted him. Shewe vs therfore what offence it was against the Popes holynes for the prince to compel his subiects to obedience by force of armes: or else wee must conclude your holy father did the prince open & wicked wrong to thunder his censures against him, for seeking his own by those meanes, which God hath allowed vnto magistrats. Phi. The Emperour hired some to rebel in Rome against the Pope. Theo. Your Italian writers would faine find holes in Frederiks coate if they could tel howe; but their tales hang not together. Platina runneth one way, Blondus an other, and Antoninus a thirde. Platina sayth that Peter Fregepanes taking part with the Emperour,Platina in Gregor. 9. kept the Pope out of Rome, and made him decline to Viterbium, as hee was going with an armie against the Emperour, whome hee vnderstoode to bee within Italie; and to oppugne the confederate Ci∣ties. So that by Platinaes confession the Pope was in armes against the Em∣perour
afore the fautors of Frederike offered him any violence. Blondus a deadly persuer of Frederike with his pen reporteth this resistance made by Peter Fregepanes,Blondus decad. 25. lib. 7. before the Emperor entered Italie: addeth, as his maner is of meere spite, that the Prince had hired him with mony so to doe. Antoninus as Nauclerus alleageth him, writeth that Frederike hearing the cities of Lombardie, Millan, Bononia, and many others of Romandiola Naucl. generat. 42. anno 1238. The originall of this second war betweene the Prince & the Pope. The Popes legates were in the field against Fre∣derike, when the Prince came to reco∣uer his own. to bee fallen from him, and turned to the deuotion of the Church, went against them with a great armie. And the Citizens of Millan with al their strength, and the Popes Legates and the whole confederacie of Lombardie, which did cleaue to the Church, fought a fielde with the Emperour in a place called New court, and the Millanoes with their adherents, after a sore conflict were ouerthrowen, many of thē being slaine, & many taken prisoners with their Carroch, where the Ruler of Millan being the sonne of the Duke of Venice and sundrie other Noble men of Lombardie were taken and sent into Apulia; the Prince causing the Dukes sonne to bee hanged on a tower by the Seas side, & the rest to be executed some one way, some an other. This Floren∣tine conesseth the Popes Legates were in the battayle that was fought with Frederike, at his first entrance into Italie: and that the very original of ye warre, was the defection of the Lombardes from the Empire to ioyne with the Pope, or as he speaketh,Gregory nou∣rished the cō∣spiracy which Adrian made to keepe the Emperor out of Italie. with the Church: which in deede was the only strife betweene the Pope and the Prince, whatsoeuer Blondus & others in hatred of Frederike do surmise. Uiew now this quarrell, & tel vs whether Frederike did more than a Christian Prince might doe: or whether the Pope rather did not wickedly nourish the conspiracie that the Lombardes made with Adrian the fourth a∣gainst Frederike the first, to driue the Emperour cleane out of Italie: which was the point that the Pope pushed at all this while. Phi. The Pope required nothing at his hands,The Popes peace was this, that the Emperor should loose all his right in Italie. Naucler. gener. 40. anno 1183. The Prince perceiuing the Popes purpose, would make no such peace. How needfull it was for the Prince not to giue ouer his right in Italie. but the preseruation of that league, which his graund-father made at Constans, and his father during his life had kept inuiolable. Theo. That peace included none but Frederike the first, and Henrie his sonne: it extended not to their heires and aftercommers, as appeareth by the othe of fidelitie which the confederate cities tooke to Frede∣rike then Emperour, and king Henrie his sonne, & no farther; and therfore that peace being expired by the death of his father, the Prince was at libertie to doe as he sawe cause. Phi. But the Pope sought the continuance of that peace. Theo. And the Prince perceiuing the Popes fetch in time to exclude the Emperour cleane out of Italie by the renuing of that peace, would not assent to it, but came with a mind resolued to bring the Lombardes to their former subiectiō. What wrong was this in Frederike? Phi. It was hard dealing. Theo. None at all. And considering the Popes drift, to be free from the Emperors force, that he might with more safetie quarrel with him when he lysted, and depriue him at his plea∣sure without daunger: it was necessarie for the Prince to settle his state & keepe his right in Italie: it should otherwise not be possible for him, and the Princes
that succeeded him to represse the Popes insolencie which beganne to increase apace. This was the true cause why Gregorie the 9. set himselfe against Fre∣derike the second after his first absolution, which cost so many thousands; what soeuer the Italian writers do imagine in hatred of Frederike whom they misli∣ked as well for persuing the Pope,The Italians hate the Ger∣mane Empe∣rours. as for spoyling and wasting their natiue Countrie. Phi. Did hee not well deserue their hatred, that ranged ouer all Italie with incredible cruelty? sacked their cities, filled euery towne, village & familie with mortal discord and dissention, banished and murdered Bishoppes, imprisoned the Cardinals & Prelats as they were comming to the Councel, & so pursued & inclosed the Pope that he died for very griefe of heart as Platina writeth?Platina in Gregorio 9. Theo. Will you kindle a fire and then looke it should not burne? What other fruits of warre coulde you expect but these or worse?What pranks were plaid with Frede∣ricke before he ought reuenge. You made leagues to bereaue him of his right; you caused his subiects to meete him in the field, you accursed his person, and depriued him of his Empire, you came out in armes against him, as you would against a Turk or an Infidel: you did what you could to requite him & his with like rage and violence, & when you could not be euen with him, you thought it best to complaine of his crueltie. But you loose your labour: For warres are iudged by their causes,The Princes cause being good, his re∣uēge was both lawfull and needfull. and not by their consequents. If Frederikes cause were good, as the persuite of his right & demand of obedience, within the Territories of his Empire could not be euil, thē your rebellions, confederatiōs, excōmunications, depriuations & such like actions to resist him, defraud him, or oppresse him, were al wrongful & wicked: and his reuenge of your conspiracies, & treacheries (though sharp and seuere) was lawful, & as the cause stood, needful. Phi. No Prince euer delt so badlie with the Church of Rome as Frederike did. Theo. No Prince was euer prouoked with halfe the iniuries wt the which he was. He was foure seueral times solemnly deposed by the bishops of Rome, once by Honorius, twise by Gregorie, & lastly by Innocentius the 4. his This Prince of all others most wicked∣ly abused by Popes. Naucler. gener. 42. anno 1242. good friend, whiles he was a Cardinal, but his capital enimie when hee came to bee Pope. Phi. It skilleth not how often it was done, so long as it was done for cau∣ses vrgent & important. Theo. If the Pope had any such power as he hath not, the causes must be iust and true, which these were not. Phi. Yes that they were. And though the rest did not so plainely expresse thē, which maketh you to carp at them, yet Innocentius the 4. layeth his downe in writing which are extant to this day.Sexti Decretal. lib. 2. de senten. & reiudicat. ¶ ad Apostolice § & vt ad. Theo. You say trueth. The censure of Innocentius against Frede∣rike the second is extant in your Decretals: and foure causes of his deposition there remembred. Phi. And those no lesse than periurie, sacrilege, heresie, iniu∣rie, and oppression of the Church of Rome. The. If it be enough for you to ob∣iect what you list, you may soone condemne whom you please. Fredericke charged with periurie. Sext. Decret. li. 2. vt supra.We heare your holy father in his magnificence charge the Emperour with these foure things, but I winne it woulde trouble him, or you to prooue them. Hee committed periurie, the Pope sayth in his iudiciall sentence, by rashly breaking the peace that was made betweene the Church and the Empire.
If the trueth were well tried,The Pope chargeth the Prince with periurie for repressing that rebellion which the Pope fauored. With Sacri∣lege. this periurie lighteth on the Pope, and not on the Prince. For Howe coulde the Popes Legates be in the field against the Prince to assist his rebels, and not breake the peace that was made betweene the Church and the Empire? Is the Popes power so infinite that he can make right in the Prince to be periurie, and warre in him-selfe to bee peace? The taking and deteyning of Cardinals and Prelates was the sacrilege which in this place is obiected to the Prince; but when you proue that Prelats and Cardinals be no subiectes, and that they may lawfully take armes against Princes, and yet no Prince must lay handes on them, then you may chaunce to haue an action of wrongful detynue against the Emperour, but not of sacrilege. It is a point of your popish pride,The Pope maketh it Sa∣crilege for a Prince to im∣prisō a rebel∣lious priest. to make it sacrilege for a lawfull magistrate to restraine your parish Priestes of Rome from their seditious intens & practi∣ses. What are your Cardinals by Gods Law more than other Clergie men? or why may not the Prince both represse them, and punish them, if they disturbe his state? Phi. They were not his subiects. Theo. Then were they his enemies, & since they came armed,Naucler. gener. 42. anno 1240. and presumed with their shippes to encounter his, why should he not sease them as his prisoners? Phi. They came to keepe a Councel, being thereto called by the Popes authoritie. Theo. To call Councels was the Emperours right, and not the Popes: and this conuenticle was called to oppresse the Emperour. Why therefore might hee not preuent it, and disperse it? especially when straungers offered to passe his dominion by plain force with∣out his leaue. Heresie was the third crime,With heresie. for which the Pope suspected him. Wherin if a mortall enemie may be both accursed and iudge, and proceede vpon no better ground than suspition,The Pope proceedeth against the Emperour v∣pon suspition. With iniurie. Frederik offe∣red no wrong in defending his owne. Sexti Decret. li. 2. vt supra. you may quickly condemne any man of heresie. Princes haue warme offices, if they shal lose their Crownes as soone as the Pope lysteth to suspect them of heresie. The fourth cause is more foolish than any of the former. The prince forsoothe forced his subiects in Sicilie to aguise him, and obey him as their lawful prince, notwithstanding the Bishoppe of Rome had deposed him, and the persons that would not, hee banished and diuersly punished. This in deede was not for your profite, but this was nothing against his dutie. Ph. He forced them to impugne the Church of Rome, whose vassalles they were. Theo. The Church of Rome had a yeerely pension out of Sicilie which is here specified, more the Pope could not claim, and that pensiō was first yeelded by those that vsurped the kingdome of Sicilie against the Empire. For Roger of Normanie, whē Lotharius ye Emperor had chased himNaucler. gener. 38. anno 1137. out of Apu∣lia, & Campania, & taken those countries from him, (& Naucler. gener. 38. anno 1138. intended the like for Ca∣labria & Sicilie, but that he was called away by suddain occasions, & died before he could returne) grew to a secret compact with the bishop of Rome, to hold the kingdome of Sicilie (which the Emperour claymed,) as from the Church of Rome by a yeerely recognisance. After the death of Lotharius, Conradus
the next Emperour was so troubled first with rebellion at home, & then with an expedition into Syria,The King of Sicilie con∣spireth a∣gainst the Em¦peror to keep him from re∣couering his right in Si∣cilie. that he had no leasure to thinke of Sicilie. Against Fre∣derike the first, who succeeded Conrade in the Empire, did William of Sicilie nephew to this Roger, (for his sonne raigned not long) conspire with the cities of Lombardie and the Bishoppe of Rome, to keepe the Germane Emperour aloofe from Italie, and so long they striued (hauing the Popes ayde) with excō∣munications, and rebellions, that Frederike beganne to hearken to a peace, and William of Sicilie hauing no children maried his sister to the Emperours sonne called afterward Henrie the sixt, and father to this Frederike, that wee speake of,Naucler. gener. 40. anno 1186. as willing the kingdome shoulde returne to the Emperours line: who otherwise layd a chalenge to it. When William of Sicilie was dead, Hen∣rie the sixt by maine force of armes subdued Sicilie,Naucler. gener. 40. anno 1193. & 1194. and was receiued into Fa∣lernum the chiefe towne of Sicilie as a conquerour. So that Frederike the second had a double right to the kingdome of Sicilie, either as heire to his vncle,Fredericke the second had a double right to Si∣cilie. Vide Naucler. anno 1138. & 1210. The Pope had only a pēsion out of Sicilie. in which case the Popes pension was not extingui∣shed; or els as Emperour, by reason his Father did recouer it by conquest, & reunite it to the Empire. Either of these tytles is sufficient to defend his do∣ings in Sicilie. As Emperour hee might claime it afore the Pope, & from the Pope, for so did Conrade the third, and Otho the fourth. As king of Sicilie, hee was to pay but a pension, not to be the Popes Uasal; and if the Pope should offer him any wrong, he might lawfully repell force by force, and punish the people of the land that would not obey him as their king, & assist him to hold his owne. The Popes allegation therefore against Frederike for compelling the sub∣iects of Sicilie to continue their obedience, notwithstanding the Popes inter∣dict, is very friuolous. Frederike herein did no more than any Prince might, and would doe in the like state.The soūdnes of the Popes cēsure against the Prince. And graunt he had somewhat abused the king∣dome of Sicilie, which he did not, is that a cause to remoue him from the Em∣pire? Phi. The other three be the principall causes. Theo. Two of them, namely heresie and periurie, be starke false: the thirde was arrogance in the Pope to make it sacrilege to touch a Cardinall: not wickednes in the Prince to take them as enemies, that labored to defeat him of his Crowne. Phi. You woulde take the Princes part, wee see, were his cause neuer so euill. Theo. You doe take the Popes part, wee see, though the sentence hee gaue bee neither agreeable to Gods Law, nor mans Lawe, nor his owne Ca∣nons. Phi. Howe proue you that? Theo. Nay it is hie tyme for you to come forth with your proofes, or els wise men wil discerne in Innocentius the image of Antichrist, proudly iudging in his Consistorie without regarde of God, or man.What iustice Princes may looke for in the Popes consistorie. A professed aduersarie to sit iudge alone in his owne quarrel, and for cau∣ses apparently false, or friuolous, to proceede to the depriuation of a Prince, yea the greatest Prince in Christendome, and in right his Soueraigne Lord and master; neither admitting his proxie, nor hearing what exceptions he could take to his accusers, but appointing him to come in Person out of his owne Realme into an other princes Dominion, and to pronounce him guiltie of all
that was obiected, being neither present, nor heard, for that he refused to put his life into his enemies handes; If this bee iustice, the wild Irish, and Sauage Indians that know not what belongeth to cyuil societie, or humane reason, may be iudges as well as the Pope. Phi. If the crimes were notorious, and the Prince refused iudgement, why should not the Pope proceede against him in his wilful absence? Theo. The prince sent to shew the reason of his absence, & his atturnees to deale for him, as farre as should be needful, but that the Pope would not expect their cōming, no not the space of three daies, at the The Pope, a verie patent & discreet Iudge. Naxl. gener. 42. anno 1246. petition of most of the Nobles, & Prelates that were in his councel. The crunes pretended to be notorious were conceiued in great words, as periurie, sacrilege, heresie, & tyrannie: but the facts cōmitted by Frederike, as breaking peace with the Pope that tooke part in the field with his rebels against him, deteyning the Cardinals that went to work his deposi∣tion, and fought with his fleete constraining his subiects in Sicilie to acknow∣ledge him for their king, were temporal & priuate quarrels directly concerning the Popes attēpts against the Prince, and the Princes right to defend himself, which your holy father of his accustomed presumptiō,Would it not doe Princes good to haue such a ioylie Iudge? called periury, sacrilege, & tyrannie, & being the aduerse part, gaue iudgement in his own cause as liked best his own displeased & greeued stomack. Now how this could stand with the prescription of diuine, or moderation of humane lawes we would gladly learn. Phi. Your refuge wil be to impugne the Popes power which was thē confessed; though the hastynes of his censure were somwhat misliked. The. By whom was it confessed? Phi. By al men, euen by Frederike himselfe. Theo. You must make truer reports, before you giue true iudgements. Frederike in his epistle to the king of Fraunce, shewing this sentence by all lawes to be voide,Naucler. gener. 42. anno 1242. The Popes power to de∣pose Princes vttrly deni∣ed in those daies. What a fier the popes pro∣ceeding sdled in Italie. Naucler. gener. 42. anno 1240. alleageth that though the Bishop of Rome had full power in spiritual things, so as he might bind or loose sinners whatsoeuer, yet it is no where read, that the Pope by the warrant of gods or mans law, may remoue the Empire when he list, or iudge temporally of kings & princes to depriue them of their crownes. The cities & people of Italie by that opē & eger faction of Guelfs & Gibelines, which dured euen to our age, shewed how many there were that tooke with the Prince against the Pope, notwithstanding the Popes excommunications & de∣priuations, which you would so faine vphold at this day. This faction (of Guelfs ayding the Pope against the prince, and Gibelines standing with the prince a∣gainst the Pope) grew so general, sayth Nauclerus, that no citie, no towne, no people remained free from that infection Citie hath waged warre with Ci∣tie, prouince with prouince. One halfe of the people with the other, from that time to this our age for no cause else but for this faction; some helping their prince against the Pope,Blondus decad. 2. lib. 7. & some the Pope against their prince. For 200. yeres & vpward, saith Blondus, euen to these our times they pursued eche o∣ther with such rage vnder these vnluckie names, that the Italians wrought greater mischief among thēselues, than before they suffered at the hands of
barbarous nations.Horrible tu∣mults ensued this depositiō of Frederike. Towne against towne, Countrie against Countrie, the people of eche place diuided among them-selues, fought together for no cause but for this dissention; and their victories had no ende nor meane but bloodshed and vtter subuersion: neither onely neighbours and cohabitants, but those that dwelt fiue hundreth miles asunder, euen the poorer sort and beggars, as wel as rich and mightie men, when they met eche other, cōmit∣ted al crueltie one side on the other. This flame your holy father kindled in his owne Contrie with his rash proceeding against the Emperour, so wide it skattered, so lōg it endured, so fiercely it raged, amōgst your own Deuotionists, and yet you would make the worlde beleeue the Popes power to depriue prin∣ces was neuer doubted of but in these our dayes, and by men of our side. Germanie re∣iecteth the Popes pro∣ceedings against Fride∣rike.What Germanie thought of this tragical intemperance of the Bishoppe of Rome, I speake for the most part of them, their manifest neglect of the Popes factours & bulles, & plaine speach in their Synodes and assemblees wil testifie. Which Auentinus, a man of the same religion that you are, thus reporteth. Albertus (the Popes agent in Germanie) sent the Popes bulles to al the Ger∣mane Bishoppes;Auent. annal. boior. lib. 7. fol. 675. for the publishing of Frederikes excommunication, not one of them obeyeth him. He commaunded the Abbats to accurse the Bishops: they regarded him not. He chargeth the Clergie to choose them newe Bi∣shops, and the Monkes to elect other Abbates, if they continued in this con∣tempt. Euery one began to maruaile at the straungenes of this example ne∣uer offered, much lesse vrged before his time▪ In no one place was this mes∣sage quietly heard. Al men stormed, disdained and raged: detesting the rash∣nes of the Popes Nuntio, whose life and manners they were well acquainted with.What germa∣nie thought of the Popes enterprise. Germanie was ful of tumults, men saying plainely that the Bishoppe of Rome commenced a most shamefull enterprise against right and equitie. Euen so when Rauerius an other of the Popes Agents deliuered Sigefride Bishop of Rentzburge a bull from Rome against the Prince, Al men derided the impudencie of the man,Auent. lib. 7. fol. 674. & demanded what that light and superstitious Frenchman,What inter∣tainment the Popes nunci∣oes had in Germanie. or what the Bishoppe of Rome himselfe had to doe in Germanie without the consent of the Germane Bishoppes his collegues. They were of∣fended and displeased to see such tumults raised, and discord sowed, they proclaimed with open mouth that the libertie of Christians was oppressed, and the flocke redeemed with the blood of Christ, brought into bondage by false Pastors.Auent. lib. 7. fol. 677. And when Albert woulde not cease, The Bishops of Germanie not onely made light of his mandates, but accursed him in euery Church, & Abbay, as an enemie of Christian concord, and a most pestilent Arch-here∣tike:The Popes agent accur∣sed in euery Church as a pestilēt arch-heretike. decreeing him to be worse than any Turke, Iew, Saracene or Tartare: & openly blaming the Bishoppe of Rome for attempting those thinges among Christians, contrarie to right and reason, contrarie to the Lawe of Na∣tions, and Doctrine of Christ, which were not vsed among the most cruel Tartares. In the midst of these sturres, the Nobles & Prelates of Germanie meeting
to consult for the state of their common wealth, Eberhardus the Archbishop of Saltzburge a graue and woorthie father; one that sate primate of that place fourty sixe yeres, and had experience of ten Bishops of Rome, vnder Frederike the first, Henry the sixt, and nowe this Frederike: hauing long tried, and well marked the driftes and cunning of the Romish Prelates, in the eares of the whole assemblie displaied your holie fathers armes with these wordes. Our Lord and Sauiour Christ,Auent. annal. lib. 7. fol. 683. did earnestly warne (vs) that we shoulde take heede of false Christ, and false Prophets, which couered with sheepes clothing, that is with the names of Christians and titles of Bishops, woulde tyrannize ouer vs and illude vs: and they as hee taught, must be discerned by their workes, to witte, their auarice, luxurie, contention, hatred, emulati∣on, warres, discordes, and ambitious desire to raigne. To whome did our heauenly king by these wordes more plainely point than to the Scribes & Pharisees of Babylon? Vnder the tytle of chiefe Bishoppe,The Pope liuelie descri∣bed in his colours. The Romish warfare. if wee bee not blinde, wee see a most cruell wolfe in a shepheardes cloake. The Bishoppes of Rome haue their waies, and weapons for all sortes of Christian men. By presuming, circumuenting, kindling warre vppon warre, they are become great, and nowe thy kill and slea the sheepe, they dispell peace & concord from the face of the earth, they raise ciuill warres, and domesticall seditions from the pit of hell: euery day more and more they consume the strength of all men,Ibidem, fol. 684. that they may ride on the neckes of all men. Christ forbiddeth vs to hate our enemies, chargeth vs to loue them, and deserue well at their handes: to keepe sayth with them and doe good for their euill. But the Prelates of Rome commaund vs, and that vnder a ioly countenance of pie∣tie, to violate that which is holy, to abuse the sacred name of god to beguile men with, to be vngratefull to those that haue delt well with vs, and to re∣quite good turnes with euill: yea to fight, striue, deceiue, betray and cou∣sen: they wil haue vs set nought by the maiestie and prouidence of GOD, withstande nature, and resist the supreme power that is ordained of GOD. Hildebrand was the first that eight skore and tenne yeeres agoe,Hildebrand the first layer of this plot. layde the foundation of Antichrists kingdome vnder colour of religion. This wic∣ked warre (with Princes) hee first began, which his successours haue pursu∣ed to this day. Beleeue me that haue looked in to their doings,Ibidem. (almost these fiftie yeres) they will not cease till bringing the Emperour on his knees, and dissoluing the honour of the Romane Empire, and also oppressing the true Pastors which feede, and dogges that are able to barke, they quench all, or kill al after this manner which you now behold. The highest God tooke the shape of a seruaunt that hee might minister to his Disciples,What the Pope seeketh for, by war∣ring with Pinces. and wash their feete: but those Bishoppes of Babylon will raigne all alone, they can abide no equall, they will not giue ouer, till they haue trodden all vnder their feete, and sitte in the temple of GOD aduauncing them-selues a∣boue all that is worshipped: their thirst for riches and honour can not be satisfied. Hee that is the seruaunt of seruauntes, affecteth to bee the
Lorde of Lordes,The seruant of seruaunts affecteth to be Lord of Lords. as if hee were a God. The Sacred Synodes and Councels of his brethren, nay of his Soueraigne Lordes hee despiseth. Hee feareth lest he shall be forced to giue accompt of those things which he daily doth against all law and order. He speaketh proud things as if he were some God, he laieth new plottes to establish him selfe a kingdome, he chaungeth and maketh what lawes he list,The right portraiture of the Pope. he sacketh, spoileth, deceiueth, killeth, being that sonne of perdition, which they call Antichrist, in whose forehead is written, a name of blasphemie, I AM A GOD, I CAN NOT ERRE, in the temple of God he sitteth and raigneth farre and wide. He was ele∣cted 1200.I thinke you vnderstand him, he speaketh so plaine. Phi. He speaketh so odiously that I litle regard him. Theo. Yet an archbishop and in great credit with Fredericke the first, aboue 380. yeres agoe. Phi. We care neither for Fredericke, nor his schismatical Archbishop. The. Lesse care we for the wicked and Pharisaicall attempts of your Romish Anti∣christ: whose immoderat ambition,The Bishops of their owne religiō haue detested the Popes pride in deposing Princes. and intollerable presumption the Kings & Bishops of your owne religin haue alwayes detested and resisted; and that wt vehement and sharpe speache, as you see by this example. Phi. What strange thing is it to see some withstand him? Theo. Lesse maruaile is it to see some obay him. The name of the Church, the power of the keyes, the dumbnes of Bi∣shops, & discord of Princes made many men yeeld, that otherwise would not. Phi. The Princes of Germanie choose an other in his place as soone as the Pope by his letters willed them. Theo. The one halfe of the electours were Bishops, that neither durst nor would abide the Popes furie: in the other halfe it was easie to finde one that would be seduced, displeased, or some way corrupted to go to the choice of a new,Naucler. gener. 42. anno 1247. but that the elect of theirs was slaine the same yere in the siege of Vlme, & William of Holland that was chosē next after him had as short a dispatche by those that tooke part with Fredericke.The new elect against Fre∣dericke had smal ioy of their promo∣tion. And had you not beene more actiue with your poisons, than lucklie with your electi∣ons: Fredericke had sped them faster than you had named them. Phi. His own bastard stisled him. Theo. But his Antagonists first dren∣ched him; & so Cuspinian sayth, The Popes hatred against the Prince ceased not,Cuspinian. in Frideric. 2. whom he night and day deuised how to destroy: & after the conspiracie of Theobaldus, Franciscus, Gulielmus of San Seuerine, and Pandulphus was dete∣cted, who cōfessed they were set on by the Pope, as Peter de Vines witnesseth in his second booke & tenth, & thirtieth epistle: Yet at last the prince could not be so watchful, but when he returned to Apulia, hee was poysoned. And lying very sicke of the potion which he tooke, and beginning at length to recouer, he was stifled of Manfrede his base sonne with a pillow as he lay in his bed. Thus you made away that worthie Emperour Frederike the second: and these bee the weapons of your Romish warfare against Princes,The Popes weapons against Princes. excommu∣nications, rebellions, poysons. Phi. You raie without all reason. Theo. I speake no more than trueth. Your owne examples shall iustifie the same. Omitte Henry the seuenth,
called Henrie of Lucenburg, whome a Dominican FrierNaucler. gener. 44. anno 1313.poysoned in the chalice: Lodouike of Bauaria and king Iohn of this lande,Lodouike deposed with∣out all cause. were they not thus persued and thus dispatched? Beginne with Lodouike the fourth. What cause had Iohn the 22. to curse and banne him, and to condemne him for an heretike? Phi. Platina telleth you,Platina in Clemente 5. he called himselfe Emperour without the authoritie of the See of Rome, and ayded the deputies of Italie to get the citie of Millan, and to be Lords ouer it. Theo. Two shamefull sinnes I assure you. He had Be not these weighty cau∣ses to depose a Prince? foure voyces, when he was first chosen in contentiō with Frederike of Austria. Auentinus saith he had fiue: after in the field he tooke the other elect prisoner, and so ended the strife:Naucler. gener. 44. anno 1314. Auent. lib. 7. fol. 748. why then should he not take himselfe to be lawful Emperour? Phi. The fourth voice which did the deede was cunningly stollen. For where the Marquesse of Bran∣denburge then absent wrate his letters for Frederike,Lodouickes election. his name was rased out and Lodouikes conuaied in. Theo. Sir, by your leaue, that is a legend. The marquesse of Brandenburge sent his substitute with a general cōmission to choose as hee sawe cause,Naucler. Ibid. though as some said, his meaning were that Frederike should haue his voyce: and that instruction hee had giuen priuatly to the partie that was sent: who deceiued his expectation, and named Lodouike. The second obiection is more absurd.The Pope de∣posed the prince becaus he would not looke on, whiles the Popes factiō did ransacke the Empire. For Lodouike aided those that stoode for the safetie of the Empire against the Popes incourses & practises. And that, since he was chosen Emperour, in honour and equitie he was bound to do. Phi. He ayded them against the Church. Theo. The Church of Christ hath nought to do with the warlike & wilful tumults of Popes. Phi. He made a new Pope against Iohn the 22. and set him vp as an Idole in Peters chaire. Theo. The Pope before that had done ye worst he could against Lodouike; openly excōmu∣nicating him and all his fauourers,Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1324. and appointing him three monethes to renounce the election to the Empire that was made of him, and come per∣sonally to excuse himselfe of his fact in giuing ayde to heretiques, schisma∣tikes, and such as were rebels againstThe Pope calleth his furious factiō the Church.the Church He also depriued al Cler∣gie men, that yeelded the Prince any counsell, helpe or fauour. And when Lodouike appeared not, the Pope accursed him, and condemned him of heresie. These be the sober and graue proceedings of your holy father, which he and his flatterers called the defence and exaltation of the church. But the soun∣der and sincerer of his owne Canonists and schoolemen abhorred, as the confu∣sion and desolation of all Godlines. Hermannus, then lyuing, sayth,Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1324. These proceedings (against Lodouike) were curiously obserued by some, but very many reputed them litle worth, because as men said they were examined by the Doctours of both Lawes & pronounced by them to bee vtterly voyde.Pope Iohns doings misli∣ked both of lawiers and diuines. Yea many famous diuines well commended for their learning and life concluded the Pope to bee an here∣tike for certaine errors, which hee coldly recanted at the houre of his death, and Benedictus his successor, is reported to haue publikely condemned those erronious opinions. Phi. Nothing is so well done that all men like it. Theo.
It must needes bee euill that so many of your owne side mislike; yea which the Pope that came next, most of all others misliked. For when the kinges of Fraunce and Apulia by their Legates defaced the person of Lodouike and rehearsed what thinges hee did against the Church,Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1335. the Pope replied, nay wee did against him. Hee would haue come to the feete of my predecessor, if hee might haue beene receiued to fauour:And by his own successor. and that he did, hee did it pro∣uoked. The Prelates and Princes of Germanie being assembled at Franckforde, with their common consent reiected all the Popes iudicial processe against this Emperour as wholy voide,Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1338. and of no validitie; the Prince declaring so much by his Imperial decree. By the counsell and consent of all the prelats & prin∣ces of Alemannie assembled at our towne of Francford wee denounce & de∣termine these processes (of Pope Iohn against vs) to bee none in Law,Al the prelats and Prin∣ces of Ger∣manie tooke with Lodo∣uike against the Pope. and of no strength or force. And wee straitly charge and commaund all and eue∣ry within the limittes of our Empire, of what condition & state soeuer, that no singular person, nor societie presume to obserue the sayde sentences of excommunication and interdiction. Where also you may see the protestations and allegations of that Prince a∣gainst the doings of Pope Iohn, taken out of the groundes of your owne Ca∣nons and the very same that are defended of vs at this day as warrantable by the sacred Scriptures and auncient order of Christes Church:Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1338. Thes princi∣ples were de∣fended by the Emperor & al his adherēts. namely these, The Prince hath his (sword or) dominion not from the Pope, but only from God. The sacred Canons, and the Church of Christ prohibite and doe not graunt to the Pope the right of the Empire, and power in temporall things. The sentence is ipso iure none, which is erroneous: as when it commandeth the subiect not to obey his superiour, or prescribeth any thing against God, or the Scripture. But it is manifest that Pope Iohn hath cōmaunded that our subiectes shall not obey vs, to whome all that are in our Empire ought to yeeld alleagance and reuerence by the Lawes of God and man. Auent. lib. 7. fol. 761.This hee did vppon conference had with the best learned that were in his age. When it was knowen in Germanie, what Pope Iohn had decreed, Ludo∣uike, sayth Auentine, consulted the best Lawyers and skilfullest diuines that were in Italie, Germanie or France: especially the doctors of both lawes, and diuines of Bononia and Paris. They all wrote back that the actes and de∣crees of pope Iohn against the Emperour,Pope Iohns proceedings repugnant to the Lawes of God. were repugnant to Christian simplicitie, and the heauenly Scriptures. The men of note and such as wrote against the Pope for this inordinate presumption were Marsilius Patauinus, Iohannes Gandauus, Andreas Laudensis, Vlricus Haugenor, Luitpoldus de Babenburg, Dantes Alligerius, Occam, Bergomensis, Mi∣chael Caesenas. Phi. What, Recken you these? The most of them were condemned by the Church of Rome for heretiks. Theo. They were condemned by the Pope for speaking truth. Marsilius booke is extant intituled, Defensor pacis Marsil. Patin. The defender of peace:
What error can you charge him with,The Pope maketh it he∣resie to speake against his pride. but this that hee wrote against the in∣sufferable pride and ambition of the Pope? Dants error, for the which he was condemned, your friendes affirme to be this, for that in his booke of the Mo∣narchie, he saide: The Romane Empire had no dependance of the Pope (in temporall things) but only of God.Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1338. Naucler. Ibid. Occam the Minorite pursued that argument so farre, that he brought the Popes power and his Prelates touching their tēporal dominiō, to nothing.Heesie to denie the Popes tempo∣ral dominion. These were their errors for y• which the Church of Rome otherwise called the Pope and his Cardinals, condemned these lear∣ned and innocent men. With as good reason you might haue condemned christ and his Apostles, for the same causes. S. Paul auoucheth the one: There is no power but of God: and Christ himselfe commaunded the other,Rom. 13. Luke. 2. Kings of na∣tions beare (temporall) rule. You shall not doe so. Phi. They held other errors. Theo. Euen such an other.And so was it to speake a∣gainst his wastful and excessiue wealth. For this was against the state and pride of Prelates: and that touched their cofers and treasures; which indeede were their Goddes. The Poore Franciscanes beganne to dis∣pute that it was a signe of more perfection, and a neerer resemblance to the life which Christ and his Apostles ledde on earth for clergie men to renounce the world, and possesse nothing of their owne, rather than to nestle themselues i the sweetest and richest seates of christendome, and t heape vp mammon and wealth, in such abundance, that they were able not only to beard Princes in their Palaces, but also shoulder them in the field.Caus. 12. quaet. 1. ¶ dilectissi. Sexti Decretal. lib. 5. de verb. significat. cap. 3. The ground of their opini∣on they tooke from your canon Law, and your holy father himselfe in erecting the Rule of Frier Frauncis could confesse as much: mary when the Emperour in hatred of the Popes hauftines and greedines cast some fauour to the Francis∣canes: the Pope to match the Prince, gaue forth an edict, and made it heresie to say that Christ & his Apostles possessed nothing in this world: which because the Friers impugned in their schooles and sermons, the Pope cōdemned them and all their aiders and abetters, whereof Lodouike was one, for heretikes. This is that other heresie for the which Micheal Cesenas, Occam and other Franciscanes, and Lodouike the Emperour, as a Patrone of theirs were im∣peached: which Platina thinketh was scant aduisedly doone by the Pope and his counsellers.Platina in Ioan. 23. Pope Iohn, saith he, set foorth a Decree, wherein he decla∣red them to be rebels (to the Church of Rome) & heretikes, which affirmed that Christ and his Disciples had nothing of their owne.Platina liketh not pope Iohns decre∣tal against the Franciscanes. This decree doth scant accord with the sacred Scripture, which testifieth in many places that Christ and his Disciples had nothing of their owne. Thus your holy father to spite the prince, and to reuenge such as opened their mouthes at his sumpte∣ousnes and furiousnes, made it heresie to commend humilitie and pouertie. Philand. That Christ and his Disciples did possesse nothing neither in priuate nor in common, this was their error; and not as you report it. Theo. In deede it is worth the noting,What the Franciscanes ment by their assertion. howe finely your Holie Father did circumuent them. For where they ment that Christ and his Apo∣stles lefte the worlde to follow their vocation, and woulde after possesse
nothing superfluous neither in priuate, nor common, but helde themselues satisfied with apparell, and foode, such as the goodnesse of GOD by the almes of other, or by their owne industrie, not slacking their function, did prouide for them: the Bishope of Rome hauing alreadie gotten a good part of the Empire into his hands, and daily deuising newe quarels to get more: and besides oppressing al Christian Realmes with intollerable taxes and pai∣ments for the maintaining of his warres,Why the Pope could not digest their doctrine and furnishing of his other expences, which were both needeles and excessiue: and knowing by this vrging of christs and his Apostles pouertie, which the friers began euerie where to publish, how vnlike he should appeare to S. Peter, whose successour hee would seem to be: peruerted the wordes and sense of the poore friers; as if they had taught that the diete and raiment, which Christ and his Apostles vsed, had not beene their own,The Pope peruerted the meaning of the wretched Friers. but wrongfully taken and vniustly withheld from others that were the right owners; and with this shifte made it heresie and blasphemie to say that Christ had nothing of his own: where the friers were neuer so madde to defend that Christ and his Apostles had no right nor proprietie to the clothes which they ware, and meates which they vsed, but they rather detested the monstruous wealth and riote of Monckes and Bishops which pretending to forsake the worlde and followe Christ, heaped greater riches and wallowed in oftner pleasures than any secular persons: which soare when the wretched friers began to touch,The Pope would no peace with Lodouicke but on such conditions as no Swine-heard would accept. they were condemned and burned for heretikes. These were the principal grifes against Lodouike, which the Pope and the Cardinals could neuer digest, I meane his resisting their pride, and misliking their wealth for these causes, when he offered reconciliation and satisfaction, that the Christian world might haue rest from those domesticall warres and miseries, the Pope would receiue none, but on these conditions: that the Prince shoulde confesse him selfe guiltie of al those errors and heresies that were laide to his charge: that he should resigne the Empire, and not resume it without the Popes leaue:Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1343. that he should put himselfe, his Children and his goods into the Popes hands,Where he should be sure to be well vsed. to be done withal as should please the Pope. Such was the mildnesse of this Romish Sainct, that his hart could not be satisfied but with the vtter destruction of the Emperour and his children: which when the Princes and Bishops of Germanie perceiued, they signified their generall determination to Lodouicke in these wordes:Naucler. gener. 45. anno 1344. Most gratious Lord and Emperour, the Princes electours and other the faithfull of your Empire, perusing the articles of your submission, which the Pope requireth and resteth on,The Germans would suffer no such sub∣mission. with one consent haue decreed them to be conceiued to the subuersion and ouerthrow of the Empire, so that neither you, nor they by reason of the othe you haue taken to the Empeire, can yeeld to them: and they intend to send oratours to the Pope, and to the Colledge of Cardinals to request them to cease from this course. If they refuse, your Princes are resolued to meete at Rens vpon Rhene, there to deliberate with you for the farther resisting of these practises.
Phi. If these electors were so earnest for Lodouik, how hapned they choose Charles the fourth against him? Theo. The Pope wan the Duke of Saxonie with monie as A pact made by the Pope to choose an other Empe∣rour.Conrade of Maidenburge craketh: and so with a newe Arch∣bishoppe of Cullen whome the Pope intruded, the former incumbent yet liuing, Charles sonne to the king of Bohemia, and nephew to the Archbishop of Treuers, was chosen; who were easily induced to consent to the election of one so neere them in blood: but neither would the Princes of Germanie receiue him, nor durst hee medle with the Empire so long as Lodouike liued.Auēt. lib. 7. fol. 785. For when Ludouik called the Nobles togither vpō the choice of Charles, & asked thē whe∣ther of the twaine they would haue to beare rule ouer them, The whole assem∣blie without any staie cried out that Lodouike was their Soueraigne,The germans sweare afresh to Lodouike after the pope had deposed him. and their Emperour appointed by God, and that they woulde continue in his o∣bediēce. And there detesting the persidiousnes of those few (that made this new choise) & defieng Charls in the worst words they could giue, with great zeale: they renewed their oth to Lodouike and promised him their helpe to reuenge that wickednes. And so Charles hated of all (the Germanes) for the breach of his oth (to Lodouike) and no where receiued as Emperour,Auent. lib 7. fol 787. Naucler. gener. 45. an. 1346. was conueied into Bohemia. Neither durst he come out of his hoale, or take the gouernment vpon him so long as Ludouike liued. Nauclerus likewise confesseth that, Ludouike gathe∣ring the imperiall cities togither at Spires foūd them very earnest on his side, so that none of the cities of Rhene, Sueuia, or Franconia any whit esteemed the new election of Charles, or the Popes processe. In this state they stood,Fredericke drenched. defending their Prince and neglecting the Pope till the death of Ludouike, who being well in health and verie pleasaunt at a feast where he met the Dutchesse of Austria,Naucler. gener. 45. an. 1347. as soone as he drank of the cuppe which the Dutchesse reached him, presently felt himselfe sicke: & as Cuspi∣nian sayeth Cuspinian in Friderico. 2. feeling a griping at his hart, suspected himselfe to be poisoned: and getting on his horse to ride abroade, Naucler. anno 1347. was stroken with a palsie, and fell from his horse and gaue vp the Ghost. After his death, the Bishop of Mentz, the Marquesse of Brandenburge,Naucler. anno 1348 the Palatine of Rhene, with the Duke of Saxonie that newly succeded, cōcluding the choice of Charles to be voide, sent a solemn message to Edward the third, king of England, inuiting him to take the Empire. But hee with thankes re∣fused it. Not long after they choose Gunter:Naucler. anno 1350. who the same yeare was poysoned with a potion, his Physition also dying within three dayes, whom the king com∣maunded to drinke before him. Phi. This was not the Popes doing.An other elect poi∣soned. Theo. Whose doing it was we know not, but thus they were made awaie that with∣stood the Pope. And so was king Iohn of his Land: vppon whom your holy father, and his religious adherēts shewed the fulnes of your Romish deuises. You forced a dis∣ordered election vpon him, and when he would not like it, you depriued him of
his crowne and offered the same to the king of France and to his heyres for euer with full remission of his and all their sinnes that would take weapon in hande to driue king Iohn from his Realme.King Iohns cause. And after you had assembled a mightie force against him, you counselled him rather to resigne his crowne into y Popes handes, and to take it againe of him in farme, than with fire and sword to be cha∣sed out of his land, and loose both his kingdom and his life. And by this cunning when you had gotten the kings graunt to subiect himselfe and his crowne to the church of Rome, you restrained him, & cursed the Frenche kinges sonne & soul∣diers (whom your selues had incited to this pray) for not leauing off, when you willed them: and loosing all their labour and charges, when you were once sea∣sed of that you sought for. In the end when you saw him so much in the Popes fauour, that he preuailed against his Barons and Bishops as he would him∣selfe, you sent him packing with poyson, which a Monk tempered for him in the Abbeie of Swinesteade not farre from Lincolne. Phi. That he was poysoned is not true; as also that Stephen Langhtōs ele∣ction to the See of Canterburie was disordered: and as for the rest, I see no cause why you should mislike.Fructus tem∣porum, lib. 7. Gualterus, He∣mingfordus, Gi∣sburnens. The monkes turne this poyson to a surfeit. Polydor. lib. 15. Anglicae histo∣rie in Iohanne. Theo. That he was poysoned is witnessed by Caxton, Hemingfoord and others: Matthew Paris and Matthew of West∣minster in fauour of the Monk that did it, themselues being Monkes, say he sur∣fited with eating Peaches and drinking sweet wine: which also the rest affirm: but those they auouch were poisoned. Polydor bringeth both reportes as fin∣ding them both written. There are, saith hee, which write that a Monke (of Swinestead) prouoked with certaine wordes (which king Iohn spake) tem∣pered poyson with wine and dranke thereof himselfe before the king to get him to doe the like, and so they both departed this life almost at one instāt. Of Stephen Langhtons election to the See of Canterburie, we need no bet∣ter witnes than y• Monke of S. Albons that was then aliue,Stephen Langhtons election. & had no fansie to king Iohn, as may e seene by his writings. Phi. Will you stand to his opinion in this cause? Theo. Historiographers vse to declare what was doone, not to de∣cide what was wel or euill done. I take the fact as he reporteth it: let the reader be iudge of the cause. Some of the Monks of Canterburie choose their Subprior to be Archbishop, in the night without any solemne forme,Matth. Paris. anno 1207. without the kinges consent, and without the greater part of the conuent; the rest choose the Bishoppe of Nor∣wich, in the day time, the king being there and consenting to their ele∣ction which was celebrated before sufficiēt witnesses. Both parts presenting their electes to the Bishop of Rome, after long discussing, the Pope pronoun∣ced either election to bee voide,The Pope dis∣anulled both, because he would place a Cardinall of his owne. Matth. Paris. anno 1207. and disabled both the contendours to bee chosen to that See. And knowing what good an Archbishop might doe him in furthering his collections & exactions in this Land, he commanded the Monks there present vpon paine of excommunication to make choice of Stephen Lāgh∣ton before they departed the place. And when the Monks answered they could not celebrate an electiō that would be canonical without the kings cōsent,
& the rest of their couent, the Pope catching the word out of their mouthes, said, know ye that in elections made here with vs the assent of Princes is not wont to be expected. Wherfore in vertue of your obedience, & vnder the dā∣ger of our curse,The monkes forced for feare to chose Stephen Langhton at Rome. we cōmand you to choose him, whom we appoint you to be the father & pastor of your soules. So the Monks for fear of excōmunication, though against their willes & not without grudging gaue their voices, and choose Stephen Langhton to be Primate of England. Let go the wrong, which the Bishop of Norwich receiued, in that the Pope of his mere pleasure did frustrate his election to gratifie one of his own. What Law permitteth the Pope to force men in their elections to choose whom he list to prescribe?The goodnes of this electi∣on must hang on the Popes infinite power otherwise it had neither lawe nor con∣science. How could that election be good which was plainly wrested from a few Monks beyond the Seas with threats & excommunications, the rest that were at home, being neither called, nor boūd to go out of the Land for the choice of their Archbishop? Why should not the king refuse that violent and shamefull packing of the Pope to plant his Cardinals in this Realm? Or what should the king looke to haue of him that was deuoted to the court of Rome, & obtruded on him in this violent maner, but a deadly enimie to his state, as it after fel out, and a continuall practiser against his person? Phi. That is your suspition.This prelate became after a pestilent e∣nimie to king Iohn. The. It proued too true for the kings auaile. For this prelat not only incēsed the Pope against the king that he might be receiued to his See, but after the king was reconciled, and himselfe quietly possessed of his church, he Matth. Paris in anno 1215. saith, coniurati Steph. Archiep. capital. consent. habuerunt. set all the Barons of this realme in an open rebellion against the king, that neuer ceased till the king was poysoned. Phi. You charge him vntru∣ly. Theo. His owne actes will not belie him. The next yeare after his vntoward election, the Pope interdicted the whole Land, for that the king would not admit Steuen Langhton into his Realme, (no point of godlie discipline to chaftise the king, but a tricke of your Romish policie to get the subiects to murmur at the Magistrate) And foure yeares after when the Pope staied somwhat long as they thought in contriuing his matters against king Iohn: your Canterbury Cardinall with the Bishops of London and Flie went to Rome, & cōplained to the pope of the manifold rebelliōs & enormities,Matt. Paris anno 1212. The Bishops of England incense the Pope against their king. which king Iohn had cōtinued frō the time of the interdict to that present day, increasing his cruelty & tyrāny (so these ambitious hirelings ter∣med their soueraignes doings) against God & his holy church without inter∣missiō. Wherupō they made supplicatiō to the pope, that he would voutsafe of his godly cōpassion to helpe the church of England in this extremity. So nice your clergie was y• whē they were but a litle defalked of their abundāces & superfluities, they could no longer abide it, but desired to haue the king deposed. Phi. The king seased on all their goods, caused them to redeeme their immu∣nities & liberties, & raised a grieuous persecutiō against ye whole clergy through out England. Theo. We doubt not, but your Monkes in this freight wil make great flames of smal sparks. The king of Englād did, as any prince in this like case would. The clergy of this realm, was at that time a richer and wealthier
state than the Laitie, discharged from all burdens and taxes to the crowne by the fauor of the Princes his progenitors. If therefore when the Pope beganne to quarrell with the king about the chiefest church in his Realme, and offered him so open wrong, the cleargie were readie with their wealth and strength to assist the Pope against the king, why should not the king both sease their goods into his handes, & make them redeeme their priuileges which they were wel a∣ble to doe, for the maintenaunce of his crowne and kingdome against a wicked and iniurious oppressour? And sure for ought that I see the king did but iustice. For where the clergie refused to doe their duties,Why shoulde the clergy haue their li∣uinges, if they would not dis∣charge their duties? and would not so much as say him or his people anie diuine seruice, why shoulde the Prince suffer them to inioy those liuinges that were prouided for such as would? Phi. The fault was not theirs; they were restrained by the Popes interdict. Theo. Were the fault in them or the Pope, this is euident, the clergie might better lacke their liuinges, than the Realme diuine seruice. Phi. Was it not tyrannie to famish so many thowsand Monkes & Priests as were in this Land?Matt. Paris in anno 1208. The king al∣lowed his cler¦gy food and raiment, so that hee bar∣red them on∣ly of their a∣bundance. Interdicting of whole realmes wrap peth innocēts as well as nocents. Theo. The king allowed them victum & vestitum parce ex rebus proprijs: meate, drink and raiment out of their liuings, though spare∣fully, in respect of their former and vsuall excesse, the rest hee kept in his hands, till they discharged that function, for which they were indowed with so liberal recompence. Pi. You can not blame them. Theo. Hee that perfourmeth a wicked interdict is to be blamed as well as he that commaundeth it. Phi. This was not wicked. Theo. There could be no wickeder. The prohibition of publike praier, and restrainct of the worde and Sacra∣ments throughout the Realme is rather a dishonour to God, and an iniurie to the faith, than a seemely sentence for a christian Bishop. You can neither shew vs warrant for it in the Scriptures, nor example of it in the church of God for a thowsand yeares. They did excommunicate persons not places: they thrust not the innocent into the same extremitie with the nocent as you do: much lesse did they prohibite God to be serued in the church, his Sacraments to be mini∣stred, his word to bee preached: which the Turkes do not offer where they con∣quere:Interdicting God to bee publikely ser∣ued, is the high waie to increase the kingdom of Satan. and Satan himselfe can wish no better increase of his kingdome than this horrible desolation of all those meanes that God hath appointed to saue the soules of men. Phi. Then let them be obedient to their Bishops. Theo. You can not say the people were disobedient, but onely the king: why then shoulde they be restrained from seruing God, and stand in danger of euerlasting de∣struction which transgressed not? Phi. Let them bee earnest with their king to yeelde. Theo. And what if hee will not, though they be neuer so earnest? Phi. Let them be ready to compell him,The right meaning of their Romish interdicts. when they be required so to doe by their Bishops. Theo. You hit the nayle right on the head. Your generall debarring of diuine seruice throughout a Realme, was nothing else but an Antichristian Policie to set the people in a discontent, and to make them the readier to rebell against
their Princes, for whose sakes they be thus put in the high way to perish. And therefore the clergie men that did execute, and fulfill such an interdict were par∣takers of the same wickednesse with the pronouncers:The execu∣tors of such interdicts as bad as the pronouncers. and by no reason can it bee counted cruelty in the king to take from them their ecclesiasticall promoti∣ons; so long as they wickedly ceased from their ecclesiasticall functions, by this or any other like interdict. This was all the persecution and rebellion that king Iohn might iustly bee charged with; and yet the Pope by the counsell of his cardinals and Bishops,Matth. Paris. anno 1212. By this bait the Pope drue many ambiti∣ous princes to serue his turne. Not so much as the Popes pride & fury, but it must be shrewded with the name of the Catholike Church. Matth. 3. sententially defined that he should be deposed from his throne, and an o∣ther placed by the Popes procurement that should bee worthier. And for the execution of this sentence, the Pope wrote to Philip the most mightie king of Fraunce, that in the remission of all his sinnes, hee should vndertake this matter, and after the expulsion of king Iohn, hee and his heires for euer should bee rightfull  owners of the kingdom of England. He wrote likewise to al the Nobles, Captaines, & soldiers of diuerse Nations, that they should crossigne themselues to the deposing of the king of England, and following the king of Fraunce their leader in this viage, reuenge the iniurie of the vni∣uersall church. Thus your holy father set kinges togither by the eares for the remisson of their sinnes; and turned the warfare that was prouided against the Turke, o pursue his priuate quarels with christian Princes, & like the Prince of darkenesse giueth kingdoms, that bee none of his, to them and their heires foreuer. And your blessed Bishops of Canterburie, London, and Elie, that first made sute at Rome to haue this impietie decreed against their Prince in their owne persons,Romish deuo∣tion the very mother of di∣uelish rebelliō to shew their christian and obedient dispositions, plied the king of France & other Potentates to hasten them with al hostilitie towards this land; and would needes be both the messengers and ringleaders in that action. The next yeare Stephen of Canterburie, William of London and Elias of Elie,Matth. Paris. anno 1213. returned from the court of Rome, & gathering a Councel on the other side of the Sea, solemnly published the iudgement that was giuen against the king of England in the presence of the French king, and his Bishops, and his clergie,Were nor these good subiectes? and communaltie. That done, they inioyned the king of France and all the rest on the behalfe of the Pope, for the remission of their sinnes, that they all ioyning togither shoulde inuade the Realme of England in ho∣stile manner, and thrust king Iohn from his throne, and substitute a wor∣thier by the Apostolike authoritie. It was not enough for them vnnatural∣ly to procure this pestilent inuasion against their prince: but they themselues must assist it with all their might, and be the chiefe doers in it; least ages after them should be ignorant how zealous they were for their * backes and bellies a∣gainst their lawful and soueraigne Magistrate. Phi. Being deposed, he was no Magistrate. Theo. When you *proue the Pope may depose Princes, then pronounce king Iohn no Magistrate: till you so doe, giue vs leaue to tell you, that this was a cursed presumption in
the Pope, and a more cursed rebellion in the Bishops. Phi. The Realme of France you see, tooke the offer, and thereby confessed the Pope might dispose Princes. Theo. A kingdome will make men doe much.The King of France would fain haue had the Crowne of England, & in that respect tooke the Popes offer. fol. 95. The king of Fraunce was led thereto not with religion, but with am∣bition to get the crowne of England for Lodouike his sonne. Where you see the desire which Princes had to inlarge their dominions made them regard the Popes censures against their neighbours, which otherwise in themselues they did mightily despise, as appeareth by that which fel out not long after betweene Philip the Faire and Boniface the eight. Where the king of Fraunce resolute∣ly withstood the Pope with all his interdictions and depositions, and vsed his person in the end very coursely, as I before haue touched in place where vppon occasion. Princes to serue their turnes, and to be reuenged of their enimies, haue oftentimes backed and inforced the Popes iudiciall sentence against o∣thers: which corrupt affection, to man the Popes processe, when it made for their purpose, god hath punished in them, by making him their master, whom for lucre they serued as long as they gained.By the dissen∣tion & ambi∣tiō of Princes the Pope grew to be Lord ouer them. By the enuie and enmity of Princes one against an other, not by the lawes of God, or examples of Christs church, hath the Pope gotten the mastery of all Princes: and so long as they wil inuade ech other at his teasing, they shall neuer be free from his yoke. By their helpe he became of a Bishop vnder them to be a Prince with them, and by their dissenti∣ons, of a Prince with them, he is now Lord ouer them. Take king Iohn for a paterne. Had not the French king in hatred of king Iohn,Feare of the French King draue King Iohn to put his necke vn∣der the popes grdle. and hope of the crowne bin willing to heare of this match, and wagered his men and mony for that prize, the king of England had easily forced the Pope to some reasonable order. But nowe, seeing the whole Realme of Fraunce was in armes against him, and his owne Lande likely to bee diuided within it selfe, what maruell if he accepted rather any conditions at the Popes hands, thā he would suffer strangers that gaped after his kingdom to deuoure it? Phi. Hee did wisely to submit himselfe; hee had otherwise lost both rule & life. Theo. The Pope did as wickedly not to content himselfe with the kings submission, and restitution of all that was detained, but with a fine deuise to circumuent both parts,The Pope gate the king∣dome of Eng∣land for him¦selfe. Mat. paris. in anno 1213. § hijs ita gestis. and to get the kingdom for himselfe and his successors, which was promised before to the French king and his heires. Such cunning your holy father hath to set others to beat the bushe, whiles hee doeth catch the birdes. The king of Fraunce was led in a string to muster his men, to rigge his shippes, to bestow aboue threescore thowsande poundes for the preparation of the warre, and was tolde hee shoulde haue for his labour, pardon of all his sinnes, forsooth and the crowne of England to him and to his for euer without faile: & when al was in readinesse, and they waited nothing now but the French kings comming to go with the armie: the Popes Legate stepped ouer before and shewed king Iohn what a power was leuied against him:The Pope a skilfull fisher for kingdoms. and how many of his own Nobles had purposed to forsake him: and wanne him rather to holde his kingdome in fee farme of the Bishop of Rome for an easie rent, than to leaue
it a pray to the French king & his people, who would egerly spoile him of al. Up∣on which aduise the king consented to receiue the Archbishop and the rest of the exiles in peace; to restore that to them which hee had seased of their liuinges to his vse; to resigne his Crowne into the Popes handes, and to take it againe as his liege man & Secundary for a thowsand marke sterling by the yeare.King Iohn famed his crowne of the Pope by a yerely rent. This done the Legate sayled back, sent home the Bishops, discharged the armie, pro∣hibited the French king to proceede any farther, for so much as the king of England was newely become a tenant to the church of Rome. With this sleight the Pope caught the crowne of England: neither as I thinke was there euer any kingdome purchased with lesse charge and more speede thā this was by the Pope. Philand. If the King woulde resigne it, why shoulde not the Pope receiue it? And in my conceit, it was safer for the King to fall into the Popes handes to be rented, than into the French Kinges to be spoiled. Theo. That conceit, which you speake of, made the King of England content to be the Popes va∣sall. Phi. Better so,The Pope shewed fauor to King Iohn, but most of al to himselfe. than worse. Better farmer to the Pope, than prisoner to the French: and in that offer to my iudgement the Pope shewed fauour to king Iohn. Theo. Such fauour a thiefe sheweth when he cutteth off both hands, and letteth the head stand. Phi. Compare you the Pope to a theefe? Theo. I did him no wrng, if I shoulde; except you thinke it lesse sinne to robbe a King of his Crowne, than an other man of his goods. Phi. The King was content, and so long it could be no robbery. Theo. So is any man by ye high wayes side content rather to yeelde his purse,The pope had as much right to the crowne of England, as a thiefe hath by the high waies side to an other mans purse. Mat. Paris. in anno 1213. § rebus, vt iam dictum est. than loose his life, and yet that is fellonie. Phi. What right hath a theefe to an other mans purse? Theo. As much as the Pope had to the Crowne of England, when he forced King Iohn to yeeld it. Phi. Of that we will not dispute. Theo. You should but shame your selues, if you did. Phi. But since that surrender he hath better title to this Realme. Theo. No more than he had before King Iohn was borne, and that was none at all. Phi. The whole Realme of England with that of Ireland, with all their right and appertinentes were giuen to Innocentius and his Catholike succes∣sours: and the king bound his heires and after commers for euer to doe ho∣mage and fealtie to the Bishop of Rome. Theo. A faire paire of indentures, but somewhat too short to conuey a Kingdom. The King by an oth might make himselfe thrall during his life, as perhaps he did, but tie his Realme & crowne to that perpetuall bondage,The king might binde himselfe, but not his suc∣cessors to these condi∣tions. The Barons of this realme detested the kings act. by his single deede or chart hee could not. It is wel knowen the Kinges of this Realme can not doe lesse thinges than the selling or giuing of their crownes away without the consent of their nobles & commons. Phi. He had the consent of his Barons. Theo. That is not true. The deed saith, with cōmon counsel (or aduise) of our Barons, meaning such as were then by chaunce about him at Douer; but the most part of his Barons detested that act, and the Kinges that came after him neuer tooke them-selues bound in honour, law, nor conscience, to respect that priuate submission of their predecessour. Phi. May not a King subiect his Realme to whome hee will? Theo. I
thinke Lawyers will say no, as well as diuines: sure I am the Barons of this Realme thought no. For, when the Popes Legate spake to the French king, that his sonne might not disquiet king Iohn being now fendarie to the church of Rome: the king of Fraunce answered, The kingdom of England neither was,Matth. Paris. anno 1216. § sub hiis diebu. is, nor shall be S. Peters patrimonie. No king nor Prince can make a∣way his Realme without the assent of his Barons, that are bound to defende the Realme; and if the Pope goe on to vphold this errour, he giueth a most pernicious example to all kingdomes. Then all the Nobles (of England) (for to Fraunce were they fled, to accompanie their new king whome they had chosen in king Iohns place) with one voice cried they would stand to main∣taine this article euen with the losse of their liues, that a king or prince cānot at his pleasure giue or subiect his kingdome to any other, to make the No∣bles of his Realm Much lesse successours. seruants. So that his Barons neither consented he should, nor liked that he did subiect his realm to the Bishop of Rome; & so far were they from consenting, that in words they reuiled, & in deedes resisted both the king & the Pope: and vtterly despicing the curses and comminations that came from Rome, they brought in Lodouike the French kings sonne to take the crown of England from the Popes lease. For when the Pope had sent first a generall and after a speciall excommuni∣cation to curse them by name that went about to take the kingdom from his va∣sal: They said euery one of them,Matth. Paris. anno 1216. § Cum{que} omnes. The cōplaint of the Barons against the Pope and the king. Marcidi ribal∣di. that those buls were of no force, chiefly for that the ordering of temporall affaires did not appertaine to the pope, since the Lord gaue Peter & his successors no power but to dispose Church mat∣ters. Why thē, said they, doth the insatiable greedines of Romanes encroach vpon vs? What haue the Bishops of Rome to do with our wars? Behold (they wil be) the successours of Constantine, & not of Peter. And in somwhat homely termes, out vpon such shriueled ribalds, as are neither valiant nor liberal, & yet will rule the whole world by their excommunications, like ignoble vsu∣rers and Simonistes as they are. Euen so the Barons, Wo be to thee, the out∣cast of kings,Matth. Paris. anno 1216. § Circa hos dies▪ the abomination of English princes, & cōfusion of English no∣bilitie. Alas England, England, til this time the Queene of Prouinces, but now in subiection and vnder the rule of base seruants and strangers: where as no∣thing is viler than to be in seruitude to a seruant. We reade that other kinges and princes haue striued euen vnto death for the libertie of their Landes, but thou Iohn (of mourneful memorie to al ages) hast deuised and contriued, that thy Realme being anciently free should become bound: and thy selfe of a most free king a seruile tributary, farmour & vassall. And of thee, O Pope, what shall we say, which shouldest shine to the world as the father of holy∣nes, the myrror of godlines,The end of all the Popes de∣uises. the tutor of righteousnes & keeper of truth, that thou consentest, commēdest & defendest such an one? But for this cause do∣est thou maintaine, the waster of English wealth, and extinguisher of Eng∣lish nobilitie depending on thee, that all may be plunged into the gulfe of Romish auarice.
This was the Barons complaint against king Iohn for intiteling the Pope to the crown of England:No King of England euer acknowleged this subiectiō to the Pope. The Kings of England most of all others kept the Pope shortest from infringing the liberties of their Crowne. The pope had a 1000. marks land giuen him by King Iohn, part whereof the Pope solde after to Williā wickham. & though they added other things as occasions to the warres called the Barons warres I meane the lawes & liberties of king Ed∣ward, yet this was the ground of their grief, as you may collect by their words: & this respect made them refuse their king, and elect an other: and neuer leaue pursuing him till they brought him to his end. And as for the kings that came after him (set his own sonne aside, who to make himselfe strong against Lodouike that possessed halfe this Realme, did homage to the church of Rome for his kingdome and tooke an oth for the pay∣ment of the thowsand markes granted by his father, thereby to continue the Popes censures against all those that affected his crown, or molested his Land) not one of them euer recognised this subiection, or represented this yearly pen∣sion to the Bishop of Rome; but kept him off at slaues end, from infringing the roialties of the crowne, & oppressing the liberties of the Lande more than any Realme christian of the West parts that we read. Insomuch that Polydore, no meane aduocate of your side, concludeth this subiection and pension touched personally king Iohn, and not his successours that should raigne after him. By reason of king Iohns deliuering his Crowne into the Legates handes & receiuing it againe as his gift, It is a fame, saith Polydore, that king Iohn desi∣rous to eternise the memorie of this good turne,Polidor. Angli. hist. lib. 15. in Ioan. King Iohn burdened him selfe & not the Prin∣ces after him. made himselfe beneficiarie to the Bishop of Rome with this prouiso, that the kings of England after that, should receiue the right of their crowne only from the Pope. But the kings that followed neuer obserued this forme, neither do the Chronicles of Eng∣land report any such submission. Wherfore it is certain that all those burdens were laid on the person of king Iohn that offended, and not on his successors. Phi. For heresie George king of Boemland was excommunicated, and thereupon by the forces of the king of Hungarie at length actually depriued.The defence cap. 5. George died King of Bohe∣mia, notwith∣standing the Popes practi∣ses and Ma∣thias forces. Cromer. de gestis Polonor. li. 27. Theo. For the mislike of your Romane vanities; your holy father plaied his part with George king of Boemland 1466. yeares after Christ, as he had done with other Princes before, deiecting him from his kingdome by presumptuous iudgement at Rome, and inticing the Princes that were neighbours, in hope of his kingdom, to inuade him with armes: & to ioine with the Bohemians that rebelled against him. Which offer Mathias king of Hungary first imbraced, a proud, vnthankfull, crafty, fraudulent, & ambitious man, as Frederike the 3. then Emperor of Rome complained of him in his embassage to Cazimire king of Pole: & might well appeare by his behauior to king George, who had him in hold, when he was chosen king of Hungarie, & might haue depriued him both of kingdom & life,Cromer. eodem libro. & would not: but yet that inhumane & aspiring head of his did not preuaile. For George persisted & died king of Bohemia, notwtstanding the Popes curses & Mathias forces, and after his death was Vladislaus Cazimires sonne chosen to the kingdome: and not onely helde it in spite of Mathias and the Popes grant to him & none else, but also succeeded Mathias in the kingdom of Hungarie.
Phi. The Pope verie liberal in giuing king¦doms that be none of his.Yet the Pope gaue the kingdom of Bohemia to Mathias. Theo. Hee might haue giuen him the kingdom of Constantinople or Persia with as much right as he did this: but howe that gift was esteemed euen by those that other∣wise depended on the church of Rome, the choice of a new and the next king did declare. Phi. The defence, cap. 5.Also Iohn Albert had halfe his kingdom of Nauarre taken from him by Fer∣dinandus surnamed Catholicus, of Aragon; for that he gaue aid to Lewes the 12. being excommunicated by Iulius the second. Theo. The driftes of Princes, intertaining the Popes Buls, and admitting his keyes so farre as they make for their profit,The King of Nauarre. Princes con∣tent to take part with the Pope so long as it maketh for their pro∣fit. do not proue the Popes power to be good, or their persons & states to be subiect to his censures by Gods Law. Philip the 2. king of Fraunce, was earnest to execute the Popes Bull against king Iohn: & spared no cost for the preparation of the warre. The cause was, he hoped to get the Crowne of England for his paines: but Lodouike his sonne, Philip the 4. & this Lewes whom you name, neither reuerenced nor regarded the Popes Buls which made against them: but shewed a manifest contempt of his censures, & with open Edicts seuered themselues & their people from his o∣bedience. So Ferdinand king of Spaine, when by violent & suddain inuasion he had gotten that part of Nauarre which bordered vpon him, was content for the keeping of it, to pretend the Popes Bul against Lewes the 12. but Charles the fift, the next king of Spaine could let his soldiers surprise Rome and desposse it in most cruel maner, abusing & illuding the Priests, Nonnes, Bishops & Cardi∣nals with all military despites & furies,Guicciard. hist. lib. 18. & keepe the Pope fast lockt in prison till he paied 400000. pounds for his ransome, and consented to such other con∣ditions as they listed to prescribe. Phi. It was not Charles wil,Charles loked through his fingers and saide he saw nothing. that Rome should be sacked, or the Pope thus handled: it was the Germanes rage for want of pay. Theo. Charles coulde doe litle, if he could not dissemble. He neither rebuked his armie, nor inlarged the Pope, nor recompensed any part of the Pillage which his soldiers as well Spa∣niards as Germanes had committed in Rome, leauing nothing behinde them that was worthy the taking. And so long though his consent did not appeare, yet he made his aduantage of their act and secretly supported them by his protrac∣tion to take the whole spoile of the citie. Phi. The variance betweene the Pope & Charles was for temporal matters. Theo. So Lewes the 12. contended with Iulius the 2. for temporall dominion: & therefore the king of Nauarre ayding the French king in a ciuill quarell,Guicci. li. 11. Ferdinand lacking a bet∣ter title pretē∣ded the popes Bull for that part of Na∣uarre which lay so neere him. was nothing so much to be blamed as Charles: but the trueth is, Ferdinand had cast his eyes on that kingdom confining so neere & lying so commodious (the anci∣ent desire of the kings of Spaine to be Lords of Nauarre being wel knowen, as Guicciardin confesseth) & for that cause when he could deuise no better title he took hold of the Popes Bul, colouring his iniurious ambitiō with a semblāce of Romish deuotion. Phi. It is holden at this day by the same right. Theo. This was no right: & other I knowe none the king of Spaine hath to it besides the
sword, by the which it was gotten, not yet 73. yeares since. Phi. Wil you dispute his title? Theo. I am not so curious in an other mans common wealth:Right & force do not alwaies meete. let the Princes whom it concerneth trie their own titles: yet this is certaine, that neither the kings of England, France nor Spaine would suffer the Pope to dispose their kingdoms or any part of their dominions against their likings. Phi. For like causes, and namely for that he was vehemently suspected of the mur∣ther of the blessed Bishop S. Thomas of Canterbury, was Henrie the second driuen by Alexander the third to order and penance.The defence, cap. 5. Theo. The strife betweene the king & Thomas Becket then Archbishop of Cāterburie,Henry the 2 & Tho. Becket. is reported before; & not now to be iterated. The lawes & liberties of the church, for the which he resisted the king, were nothing else but the rescuing of malefactors, if they were Clerkes, from due punishmēt; & exempting themselues from the kings subiection: which be quarels of their own nature wicked & irreligious: & therefore well you may call him BLESSED, because you be consorted in the same quarell with him a∣gainst God & your Prince: otherwise his pride was intolerable, his contention with the king detestable, his end miserable. Phi. Are you not ashamed to staine the glory of that worthy Martyr? Theo. First proue him an innocent,Beckets qua∣rell must be good before he can be blessed. before you make him a Martyr. Phi. Who euer charged him with any crime? Theo. The very cause he stood in, was crime enough: besides his resisting the prince, which S. Paul pronounceth to be damnable. Phi. Do you make it damnable to defende the liberties of the church? Theo. To dreame, that the statelines of Popes,Appeales to the Pope, & immunitie of wicked Priests were the qua∣rel that Bec∣ket stoode in. and licentiousnes of Priests was the perfection & happines of Christs church, and in that lede conceit to neglect your othes, & resist the powers, which God hath e∣stablished is a triple damnation. Phi. That we do not. Theo. That he did, whom you cal a blessed bishop for his labor: & your selues do worse. For you be not cō∣tent to resist as he did by wilfull departing the Realm, you take weapon in hand to depose the Prince, & terme it iust & honorable warre to rebell against a law∣full Magistrate, which impiety he did not declare in act, though in heart per∣haps he did not abhor it. But omit that he ment and come to that hee did,Beckets fact damnable for these three respects vnlesse the Ie∣suites proue those lawes which he with stood, to be repugnant to the word of God. Such proude prelates are likeliest to be of your Ro∣mish relgion. except you shew what one thing in those ancient lawes of the crowne (to which the Archbishop had expres∣ly sworne) was repugnant to the word of God, or office of a christian Prince: we conclude your blessed Bishop and Canterburie Saint, to be a shameful de∣fender of wickednesse, an open breaker of his oth, and a proude impugner of the sword which God hath authorized as the Scripture teacheth. And albeit wee like not the maner of his death, that priuate men shoulde vse the sword, which is deliuered vnto princes: yet the cause for which he withstood the king, was enor∣mous & impious: & dying in that, though his death were violent, he could be no martyr. Phi. You be loth to haue him a martyr, he was so far both frō your opi∣nion in this point, & religion otherwise: but yet he died in the defence of the Ca∣tholike church, & therefore we iustly count him blessed. Theo. Hee died not in de∣fence of the church: he stoode stifly for the Popes pride and gaine, and for the impunitie of malefactours among the Clergie, which thinges no way touch
the true lawes or liberties of Christes church. And therefore you must either proue that clergie men are not subiect to the Princes sword for heinous offen∣ces, which is most false: and that appeales from all places must bee made to the Bishop of Rome, which you shall neuer do: or else it is euident that Thomas Becket deserued rather the reward of a traytor,Becket farre from a martyr than the honour of a Martyr: these two being the principall causes for which he resisted the king, whiles hee liued, and was canonized after he was murdered. Phi. The church of Rome liked and allowed of his doings, though you doe not. Theo. She had good reason so to do. He gaue his life for the maintenance of her wealth and ease:The Church of Rome were to be blamed if she did not honor Becket and therefore if shee shoulde not esteeme him, shee were to blame: but this was no quarell for a christian Bishop to spend his blood in. The due correction of offenders by the temporal sworde, though they were clergie∣men: and diligent execution of iustice at home without running to Rome, when either part was disposed to vexe the other; were lawfull and wholesome pre∣ceptes of the kinges of this Realme: and so long as the resistance made by the Archbishop against the king was sinfull and seditious; & consequently the state he stood in, damnable; though the death he suffered were wrongfull, as not pro∣ceeding orderly from a magistrate, but furiously inflicted by some that were offended to see a Bishop brest a king in so vile a cause. Phi. The king himselfe in the end was driuen to order and penance. Theo. It was easie for you, when not only his neighbours, but his owne son rose in armes against him to winne his consent to any thing.The popes practise to subdue Prin∣ces. By warres and inuasions of Realme vpon Realme, by defection of subiects from their soueraignes, & by the rebellion of children against their parentes, your cunning hath beene to driue Princes to order and keepe them in awe; but that doth not iustifie your vnnatu∣rall and vnchristian tumults to force them to your bent. We dispute not whe∣ther of late you haue so done, but whether of right you may so doe; wee see the meanes which Antichrist hath vsed to aduance his kingdom: but those we say be neither agreeable to the sacred scriptures, nor to the course of Christs church in former ages, they be late deuises & practises of Popes to exalt themselues aboue the highest: the iustice of God, preparing that plague for the sinnes of men, and dissention of Princes,Princes puni∣shed for the neglect of trueth & dis∣cord that rai∣gned amōgest them. which should haue ioyned togither to succour his truth, & safegard his church, by repressing the Popes pride, & driuing him to Christian integritie and modesty, and would not. Wherefore God gaue them ouer into his hands, that he should tread on their necks, & play with their crownes, as pleased himselfe: and they thinke it some great honor and preferment to kisse his feete, & hold his bridle, whiles he gets to horsebacke. Phi. A number of the like examples mo we might recite, of our Country & of the christian world,The defence, cap. 5. whereby not only the practise of the church in al ages may be seene; but also catholike men warranted that they be no traitors, nor hold assertions treasonable, false, or vndutiful; in answering or beleeuing that for heresie or such like notorious wic∣kednesse, a Prince (otherwise lawfull and annointed) may be excommunicated, deposed, forsaken or resisted by the warrant of holy churches iudgement and censure.
Theo. From the conquest to King Henrie the eight there was no Prince of this Land deposed by the Pope but only King Iohn.No King of England de∣posed by the Pope but only King Iohn. The Kings of Fraunce were too good for the Pope. Philip King of Fraunce. Deposition was offered to Philip the fourth and Lewes the twelfth, Kinges of Fraunce: but they were so farre from taking it, that they withdrewe their whole Realme from the Popes obedience, and ouerreached your holy Father with his owne practise. Philip by the general consent of his Nobles and Bishoppes not onely des∣pised the Popes sentence of depriuation against him, but requited him with the like: and Nauel. gener. 44. anno 1300. to tame his pride, tooke him prisoner and made him end his life for very griefe of hart within sixe weekes after. Thus, sayth Platina, died Bonifa∣cius, hee that went about rather to strike a terrour into Emperours, kings, Princes and Nations, than to plant religion in them: and chalenged to giue and take kingdomes, and to aduaunce and debase men at his plasure. And so saith Gaguinus. This ende of his life had Bonifacius the contemner of all men, who not remembring the precepts Gagu. in Phil. pulchro. Platina in Bonifacio 8. Platina Ibidē. Gaguin. lib. 7. in Phil. pulchr. How Philip of France hand∣led Bonifaci∣us, see part 1. fol. 95 of Christ, tooke vpon him to dis∣pose crownes and depriue kinges as hee sawe cause: whereas hee supplieth his roome on earth whose kingdō is not of this world, nor in earthly things but in heauenly: and gate the Popedome by deceit and vngodly meanes, and kept his predecessour in prison so long as he liued, from whom he wre∣sted that dignity. This example you would not alleadge, because you sawe the whole Realme of Fraunce stoode with Philip against Bonifacius, that the Pope had no right to depose Princes. Lewes the twelft in a Councel at Tours had the resolution of al the French Bishops,Lewes King of France. Massaed. in an. 1510. The Realme of France in this our age despised the Popes cēsure against their King. Velleij ad Gag. agge. in Lodou. 12. The Pope will be tried by the sword and not by the word. that he might surcease from the Popes obedience, and contemne his vniust censures: and had not Maximilian somwhat slacked and Iulius in the meane time died, the Pope himselfe had bin depriued of his triple crowne in the Councell of Pisa, which was indicted by the Prelates of Germanie and Frāce at the instaunce and pursuite of Lodouike. The Bishops of Nations assem∣bled and decreed Iulius to be cited. Vpon the citation he refused to come, & knowing his own wickednes, sought to defend himself with armes. Alas, saith this writer being one of your owne friendes, whither is that auncient sanctitie of the Romane Bishoppes vanished? whither is that clearnesse of conscience gone, which neglecting the threats of Princes, built the church not with armes, but with the beames of their vertues? They refused not Councels, but rather frequenting them, cleared themselues from such things as they were charged with, in full assemblies of their mother the church. Behold, Iulius, who is taken to be the sheepheard, giueth no eare to the cō∣plaint of his sheepe, but killeth the weake ones, and hee that with his owne blood should purchase them peace, doeth what hee can with his curses to increase their trouble.The Pope no pastor but a warrier. And getting the Spaniardes and Venecians to vp∣holde him, sheddeth not teares with Ambrose, but displaieth his banners with Iulian, whose name he beareth against the church. All the Germane Emperours, that were depriued by the Pope, you haue re∣cited:
Others perhaps were blasted with his excommunications,All the Ger∣mane Empe∣rours that were offered depriuation by the Pope, are alreadie recited. as Henrie the fifth: or not agnised by him for some dislike in their elections, as Philip of Sueuia, and at his first entraunce Albert of Austria: or busied with continuall warres, (in which the Pope had an oare,) as Conrade the thirde: but iudi∣cially deposed they were not. Phi. Philip of Sueuia & Otho the fourth, that was chosen against him, were both deposed by the Pope.Philip of Sue∣uia and Otho the 5. Theo. Otho the 4. the same which you cal Otho the fifth, was rashly aduaunced by the Pope against Philip, and as rashly displa∣ced after the death of Philip; the right of the Empire being al that while in Fri∣derike the seconde:Vrspergens. in anno 1197. whom the Princes of Almanie by the procurement of Henrie the sixt had chosen to bee their king lying in his cradle and sworne fealtie vnto him, and testieth so much vnder their handes and seales to the Emperour, his father.The Pope would not ac∣knowledge this Philip for Emperor. After whose death, when the Princes forgetting their act and oth began to treate of a new election, Philip Frederikes vncle fearing least a straunger should be thrust in, to the ruine of him-selfe and his nephewe, sought to keepe the Empire in his handes during his life, or till Frederik came to age.Idē in an. 1198. This Innocentius the 3. would not suffer: but vpbraiding him with the crueltie which his brother & father had shewed, & heaping many absurd & some false things against him, in his Epistle to Berthold Duke of Zaringia: stood on friuolous exceptions to hinder him, & obiected that he was excō∣municated by Celestinus his predecessor whiles he was gouernour in Tuscia: yea so great was his malice that he protesteth, he wold either take the empe¦rial diademe from Philip: or Philip should take the triple crown from him. Naucler. gener. 44 anno 1195. Otho erected against Philip.In this rage the Pope caused first Berthold of Zaringia to be chosen king of the Germanes: and when he was too weake to incounter Philip, he gate Otho the fifth to bee set vp against him: whom Philip so long as he liued, draue to the wall: but being Cuspinian. in Phil. Caesar. Frederikes election ratifi∣ed to spite Otho. traiterously slaine in his chamber by one that would haue maried his daughter, he left Otho in full possession of the Empire, in which he continued no long time. For two yeares after the Pope fell into sorer hatred of him than euer he had of Philip: and after excommunication and depriuation, to spite him delt with the Princes of Germany to remember their choice made of Frederike the second when he was but yong, and their oth past vnder their seales to Henrie the sixt for the ratifieng of that election: and so by the helpe of the French king gate the Germanes to forsake Otho and sticke to Frederike,Fredericke in greater ha∣tred with the Pope than either of the former. their right and naturall Prince: whome in the ende hee pursued with greater disdaine than any of the former, in so much that in three and twentie yeares after Frideriks death, the Empire was not setled in any lawfull successour. The fruites of these stirres, as your owne friendes confesse, were im∣pietie and all kinde of iniquitie, in the Priestes and people; flatterie, per∣iurie and conspiracie in the Nobles;What follow∣ed of these garboiles. briberie, diuision and vnconstancie in the electours: onely the Pope vsed them as meanes to increase his wealth, augment his pride, and procure his ease. Then, sayeth Vrspergensis, be∣ganne euils to bee multiplied on the earth. For there sprang discordes, de∣ceites,
treacheries, treasons to the destroying and murdering of ech o∣ther.Vrspergens. in anno 1198. §. audiui to tem∣pore. The spoyling, sacking, wasting and burning of Countries, sediti∣ons, warres, and rapines were openly allowed, in so much that euerie man now breaketh his oth, and giueth himselfe to these sinnefull mischiefs: yea the Priestes are as bad as the people.Ibidem § pro∣perant electi. Dispencing with othes is the Diuels art. The Princes and Barons of the Land learning the Diuels Art, care for no othes, violate their faith, and con∣founde all right, sometimes forsaking Philip and cleaing to Otho, somtimes contrarie. Vpon these tumultes it came to passe that Ibidem ¶ iam tunc Colon. The Pope gained by al this. there was skant anie Bishoprike, ecclesiasticall dignitie, or parish Church which was not litigi∣ous and the cause caried to Rome, but not with an emptie hande. Which made the Abbate then liuing and seeing the whole order of their doinges to crie out, Reioyce our mother Rome, because the windowes of earthly treasures are opened, that euen streames and heapes of mony in great abundaunce may flow vnto thee. Be glad for the wickednes of the sons of men, thou art well recompensed for their foule enormities. Take delight in discord thy best assistant, which is issued from the bottomlesse pit to increase thy gaine. Thou hast that which thou didst alwaies thirst for:As true a song as any the Hunnal hath. sing this song, that by the malice of men, not any religion of thine, thou hast conquered the worlde. Neither deuotion nor good conscience draw men to thee, but manifold sins and strifes wherein mony beareth the sway. And because the Pope would be sure the Emperour should not trouble,Blondus decad. 2. lib. 10. nor interrupt his excessiue gaine nor pride: he would not suffer Charles the fourth to be crowned, but on this condition, that he neither stay at Rome, nor in Ita∣lie; which Petrarke a man of that time pretily gibeth at.Blondus Ibidē & Naucl. gene∣rat. 46. an. 1355 The Pope would not suffer the Em∣perour to come neere Italy. All power is impa∣cient to beare an equall: whereof if we had not ancient presidents enough, I feare our age hath giuen vs a late example, and that the Bishop of Rome hath forbidden the Emperour of Rome to abide at Rome: which as they say he hath done, and not only looketh but commandeth the prince should be content with the (bare) crowne and title of the Empire: and whome hee permitteth to be called Ruler: by no meanes will he suffer him to rule. And writing to the Emperour him-selfe:Blondus & Naucler. vt supra. With a promise I knowe not how, and with an oth as it were with a strong wall or high hill, you are prohi∣bited to haue accesse to the citie of Rome.The Emperor as glad to be gone as the Pope to haue him goe. What pride is this, that the Ro∣mane prince, the author of publike libertie, should be depriued of al liberty, and that he should not be his owne, whose by right all thinges should be? Mary the Pope & the prince were wel met: for the Pope was not as earnest to haue him gone, but he was as glad to go, & as willing neuer to returne. And therfore to take his farewel, he sould all the right & title that the Emperour had throughout Italy:Blondus decad. 2. lib. 10. & as Blondus saith,The Prince sold all the Emperour had both in Italie & Ger∣manie. omia vbi{que} concessit ex quibus pecunia abra di potuit: passed away euery thing in euerie place, by the which he might get any mony. And as he did in Italy so did he in germany. For laboring to haue his son Vēcelaus chosen his successor in ye Empire, whē the electors wold not agree to it, because ye child had nothing in him fit for so great a calling, ye Emperor of∣fered
euery of the Electours a hundred thowsande poundes to goe through with the choice,The price of a voice in the election of the Emperor. and so they did. And not hauing mony sufficient to defraie such an infinite summe, hee pawned the Landes and reuenues of the Empire into their handes,Aeneas Siluius histor. Bohem. cap. 32. till they were paied, and so they remaine to this day. Hence the Romane Empire came to naught, neither was it euer after able to stand vpright, the Princes Electors keeping al in their handes, and swearing the Emperour,The Romane Empire come vtterly to no∣thing. (when he is first chosen) that he shall not claime such things as they haue of the Empire in morgage. Vencelaus,Vēcelaus put from the Em∣pire as vnfit to rule. for whom his father paied 600000. pounds to haue him Em∣perour, proued so vnprofitable for the place, that the electours, when Charles was deade, of their authoritieCuspinian in Vencelao. put him from the crowne, and set an other in his steede. Some Princes of other countries you might repeate which I omit: no man doubteth but your holy Fathers pride and arrogance serued him to venter on meaner Princes, as well as on Emperours:For a 1000. yeares no such thing offered: to this present day no such thing acknow∣ledged. this is it that wee stand on; for a thowsande yeares there was no such thing vsed nor offered in the church of Christ: and since that time though Popes haue beene very forwarde to de∣pose Princes, you shall neuer shewe any Prince that acknowledged or o∣beyed that sentence; yea none of their people vnder them, nor of the bor∣derers about them, embraced those iudgementes, but such as had se∣crete quarelles against them, or sought to gaine some part of their king∣doms from them. The rest of their subiects & neighbours honoured them as Princes,In all these examples infi¦nite numbers of their own religion haue stoode with Princes a∣gainst the Pope. notwithstanding your furious lightning and thundering from Rome, as I haue shewed by many specialties from the time of Henrie the fourth to these our dayes: and an infinite number of your owne side haue by deedes and wordes boldly and sharpely reproued that insolent presumption. And there∣fore if you doe any good in this cause, you must goe higher; and bring vs elder examples that Bishops of Rome haue deposed Princes, than these violent and tragicall vproares of later Popes blinded with errour, and puffed with pride, who to compasse their vngodly desires haue ouerwhelmed the earth with fraude and force, with periurie and iniquity, with battaile & bloodshed, like furies of hel, not like teachers of truth, or Pastors of mens soules.We may not leaue the pre∣cepts of the holy Ghost and the anci∣ent obediēce of Christs Church to follow these fierbrands of hell. The defence, cap. 5. Could you proue tenne thowsand such attempts, it would relieue you litle: we may not leaue the mani∣fest commaundements of God, & constant obedience of Christes church for so many hundreths, and allow of those hatefull and heathenish deuises which the sonne of perdition hath lately broched. Phi. Will you yeeld to an elder example, if it be brought you? Theo. Reason we know the man, before we reuerence his act. Phi. It shalbe Gregorie the great & first of that name, whome you confesse to haue beene both learned and holy. He being many hundreth yeares before Gregorie the seuenth and our speciall Apostle, pra∣ctised the poinct we now stand on, and therefore likely to be beleeued of all reasonable men. Theo. Did Gregorie the great euer depose Princes? Phi. That he did.
Theo. Name the Prince which he deposed, and winne the field.Gregorie the first nuer dreampt of deposing Princes. Phi. He deposed them before hand whatsoeuer they were that shoulde at any time after to the worlds end impugne his priuilege. Theo. Then he deposed princes not only be∣fore they were Crowned, but also before they were conceiued of their mothers. Phi. He adiudged they should be deposed, that so offended, though actually he deposed none.The defnce, cap. 5. An excōmu∣cation of S. Gregorie vpō Kings and Prices. In fine libri 12. epist. In the forme of his priuilege graunted to S. Medardes Monaste∣rie thus he decreeth, Si quis Regum, Antistitum, Iudicum, vel quarumcunque personarum secularium huius Apostolicae authoritatis & nostrae praeceptionis decreta violauerit, cuiuscunque dignitatis vel sublimitatis sit, honore suo priuetur. If any King, Prelate, Iudge, or what other secular person soeuer shall transgresse this decree of our authoritie and commaundement, of what preeminence of highth soeuer he be, let him be depriued of his dignitie. Theo. Why stoppe you there, and goe no farther? Phi. I neede not; here is enough for my purpose.In fine 12. lib epist. ibidem. Theo. Yet reade on the rest, or if you will not, I will. Cum Iuda traditore Domini in inferno inferiori damnetur, and let him be damned with Iudas the traytour in the nethermost hell. Phi. There is nothing in this against vs. Theo. You might the better haue rehearsed it. But think you that Gregorie did damne men to hel,Gregorie had no more pow∣er to depose Princes than he had to damne thē. or reserue you that power only to Christ? Phi. None can cast body and soule into hell fire but only God. Theo. Doth Gregorie take Gods office from him? Phi. No, but he meaneth to terrifie them with this kinde of curse, and praieth it may fal on their heades, if they infringe his godly actes. Theo. Then as Gregrie had no power to condemne Princes to hel though he threaten it to them, no more had he right to depose Princes, though he wish their ouerthrow,Gregories wordes are a curse, & not a iudicial sen∣tence. if they frustrate his decrees. It is therefore AN IMPRECA∣TION, or curse which in the like case the meanest founder that is may lay on the greatest Prince that shall be borne without any iudiciall authoritie: It is no depriuation neither prosecuted, nor purposed by the Bishop of Rome. Phi. He saith, Let him be depriued of his dignitie. Theo. And know you not, that is the optatiue mode, by the which Gregorie wisheth and praieth it may come to passe: but neither pronounceth nor perfixeth any such iudgement? Phi. If it may come to passe, then Princes may be deposed. Theo. God hath ma∣ny wayes to displace the mightie from their seats, (to whom Gregorie praieth for vengeance,) though the Pope be not the doer. Phi. If this bee but a wish, euerie doner may doe as much.Euerie doner hath the like wordes in his graunt. Ibidem. Theo. They be the verie woordes wherewith euerie doner doth strengthen his endowment: And euen in this place Gregorie is not alone. Thirtie Bishops of diuers cities subscribed to this graunt and curse in the selfe same wordes that Gre∣gorie did; Theodoricus the King, and Brunichildis the Queene vsed the same manner of subscription that the Bishop of Rome did, and the generall comprisement that presently followeth, sheweth the wordes that went before to be but curses. Omnium maledictionum anathemate,Ibidem. let him be loden with al those heauie curses wherewith Infidels and heretiks from the beginning
of the world to this day haue beene hampered. So that your eye sight was not vp, when you tooke a prayer for a iudgement, a fourme of imprecation for a sentence of depriuation, a curse precedent for an execution that should be subse∣quent. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. This was the right and power of S. Gregorie, and this hath been the fayth of christian men euer sith our Countrie was conuerted; and neuer subiect called in questi∣on, much lesse accused of treason for it, til this time; and lest of al, made or found treason by the old lawes in K. Edward the thirds raigne, as is pretended; howsoeuer by their new Lawes they may and do make what they list a crime capitall. Theo. Gregorie cursed them and prayed against them that should disorder, or alter his grant made at the Princes motion,In eodem priui∣legio. with the consent of al the pre∣lates in Italie, with the good will of the Romane Senate, and the fauourable iudgement of al the Bishops of France. This is not it, that is called in question. You beare armes against your naturall prince, and encourage her subiects that by Gods law should obey her,Gregories act nothing like the Iesuites. to take her crowne from her, when the Pope wil∣leth them. This Gregorie neuer spake of; neither did England at any time frō the first receiuing of the faith to this day, euer acknowledge any such right or power in ye Pope to depose princes. Much lesse then was this the faith of christi∣an men euer sith our Countrie was conuerted, as you brauely but falsely boast. Phi. In K. Iohns time, the Prince & realme were of this opinion, which wee are now. Theo. They were not. Some bishops & Monks, offended with ye King for the losse of their goods, fled the realm: & tooke part with the Pope against ye King, & the Barons for other causes loued not their King as appeared by their King Iohn lost the harts of his Nobles before these troubles be∣ganne. Matth. Paris. anno 1203.departure frō him in Normandie before this trouble began, & by their general rebellion against him when the Pope had not only released him, but also did vp∣hold him to the vttermost of his power. And though he had lost the hearts of his Nobilitie before, & now of his Clergie, by turning them out of al their liuings, yet was there no conspiring against him in those fiue yeres in which hee stoode excommunicate. And to him for defence of himself & his land, came Matth. Paris in anno 1213. threeskore thousand able men of his own subiects wel furnished: besides an infinite num∣ber that were sent home againe for want of armour, and a King Iohn thought it ea∣sier to loose a 1000. markes by the yeare than to fight for his Crown and state. fleete greater than that which the King of Fraunce had against him. Phi. If his armie were so great and his people so sure, why would he not trie the field with the king of France? Theo. He saw the strife was but for the admit∣tance of a bishop: & better to slip his right in so small an iniurie than to put his owne state and welfare to the doubtful successe of battaile. Phi. The storie saith Matt. Paris. Ibidem ¶ Rex denique Iohan.he was afraid lest he should bee left alone in the field, & bee forsaken of his own nation & nobles. Theo. So Pandulfus Ibidē. ¶ Dum autem Rex. told him, to afreight him & make him yeelde the sooner: but ye Pope himself cōplaineth of the contrarie, yt the Ba∣rons of Englād by a peruerse order did rise in armes against their king after hee was conuerted and had satisfied the Church,Matth. Paris. anno 1215. who assisted him when hee did offend the Church. ins epist. And yet I am of opinion they would easily haue for∣saken him: not for respect of your Romish censures, but for their extreme dete∣station
of his odious and tyrannous gouernement,The Nobles pursued King Iohn after his reconciliation to the Pope, wose than before. which they shewed after his reconciliation to the See of Rome, more than they did before: and obeyed nei∣ther King nor Pope so long as he liued and enioyed the Crowne. This realme therfore in the time of King Iohn assisted their Prince against the Pope: and when the king had submitted himselfe, and rented his Crowne at the Popes handes, they resisted both Prince and Pope, and elected an other. Afore that and since that this realm neuer confessed or beleeued any right or power in the pope to depose Princes. Phi. They neuer made it treason to be of that beliefe til this miserable time, in which wee lyue.Anno 13. Richardi 2. King Ri∣chard made it death to bring any processe from Rome to im∣pugne the lawes of his realme, for benefices and patronages. Theo. Richard the second very neere two hundreth yeres agoe made it death for any man to bring or sende within this realme any summons, sentence or excommunication, (from Rome) against any person: for the cause of making motion, assent or execution of the statute of proui∣sours: which barred the bishoppe of Rome from giuing, reseruing or disposing Bishopricks and benefices in this land. To impeach the Kings lawes, or to de∣feate him of his smaller inheritances, as aduousons & Patronages, by censures from Rome, was death in those dayes: what thinke you would they haue sayd to him that shoulde haue brought a bull to depriue the Prince of his crowne, or a warrant to rebel against him, & to take his life from him as you doe in our dayes? And because you stand so much on the word treason, why should not the sta∣tute of Edward the thirde recensing Treasons extend directly to your doings? It is there numbred among treasons,25. Edwardi 3. to compasse or imagine the death of the King, to leuy warre against him in his Realme, or to bee adhe∣rent to the Kinges enemies in his Realme, or to giue them ayde and comfort within the realme or else where.To warre a∣gainst the King is treasō in subiects, though it be for religion. If al wars waged against y• prince within the Realme (that is by subiects) are treasonable: howe shoulde your warres for religion against your soueraigne be iust and honourable? If to ayde or comfort the kinges enemies within the realme, or else where, be trayterous conspiracie; how can you stirre vp forraine power to assault the realme, & per∣swade the people of this land with armes to displace the prince and not incurre that crime? Phi. Doe wee set straungers to inuade, or subiects to rebell? Theo. You be adherents and instruments to him that doth. Phi. You meane wee bee of the same faith with the Church of Rome: If that bee treason, then wee are traytours. Theo. We talke not of your fayth, but of your woorkes. Beleeue what you list, so you meddle not with ayding nor comforting inuasion nor rebellion. Phi. We doe not. Theo. You commend them and allowe them that wil doe either, yourselfe in this place defende their enterprise to be godly, iust and hono∣rable;Is not this giuing cōfort to the Queenes enimies? Your fellowes before you in their printed bookes openly did celebrate them as Martyrs that lost their liues in the North for bearing armes against the Queene. What greater comfort can you giue to rebels and enemies, than to
animate and encourage them with praises, promises, defences, and honors, both in this worlde and the next? It is more pernicious to fire the heart, than to warme the hand: to minister courage, than to giue drinke to them that shal fight against the Prince. In all actions the perswaders and enducers are equal with the doers and executours.The perswa∣ders be trai∣tours as well as the doers. Why then should you not bee within the compasse of king Edward the thirdes statute, for ayding and comforting the Queenes e∣nemies within the realme or elsewhere? Phi. You must vnderstand that wee neuer will any man to take armes, but for the catholique fayth,And yet your adherents bare armes against King Iohn and the Germane Princes for meere priuate and earthly quarels. and at the commaundement of the supreme magistrate against one that was, but is no Prince, as being iustly deposed. Theo. And you must vnderstand that the statute of Edward the third doeth neither allowe the Pope to depose the Prince, nor licence the subiect to beare armes for reli∣gion against his soueraigne: and therefore your warres for religion be trayte∣rous insurrections against the Prince by the Lawes of Edward the third, not∣withstanding your newe found glozes that you first depose them, and after re∣sist them, and pursue them with armes by the warrant of holy Churches iudgement and censure. Phi. Edward the third neuer ment, that to obey the Pope aboue the prince should bee treason.Edward the 3. neuer ment to be deposed by the Pope, why therefore should not warre to de∣pose him, be treasō against him? Theo. It is not for you now to appoint his meaning. His woordes are, that to giue ayde or comfort to the Kings enemies and such as leuied warres against him in his realme, (were it the Pope, the French King, or whom ye will,) shoulde bee treason. Hee had before his eyes the example of King Iohn, vpon whome the Pope set the King of France with all his power for not obeying his censures from Rome: he knew hee could not bee defeated of his Crowne without warre: and so long as his owne subiects were trustie to him hee feared not the French, nor any other that should inuade him. To make himselfe therefore assured of his owne people against all men, Spanish, Scot∣tish, French,It was wise∣dome in king Edward not to name the Pope, and yet the quarell includeth the Pope. Romish or any by whome the deede might bee doone, and yet to decline the enuie of naming the Pope: hee with his whole realme by their pub∣lique lawe without exception of Person, or cause, made it treason to giue ayde or comfort within the realme, or else where to any (whatsoeuer) that should warre vpon the king: perceiuing the generall would include the Pope or any other that hee shoulde incite against the King, as well as if they were distinct∣ly named. Phi. You suppose the Prince and the people did secretly conspire against the Pope:The King and the commons in opē parlia∣ment ioyne to defend the lawes and li∣berties of the realm against the Pope by name. where as in those dayes they did honour him as the Soueraigne father and Pastour of their soules. Theo. Howsoeuer they embraced the reli∣gion which hee professed, it is euident the King and the whole realme in open Parliament made a generall consociation to repell prouisions and impetrati∣ons of ecclesiasticall dignities and offices from Rome: and bound them-selues eche to other with all their might in common to withstande citations, suspenci∣ons, excommunications and censures comming from that Consistorie for mat∣ters decided in the Kings Courts, or pertinent to the Lawes and royall liber∣ties
of this Realme: and the commons did not sticke in parliament likewise to promise King Richarde the second to stand with him in all cases attemp∣ted by the Bishop of Rome against him, his Crowne and his Regalitie in all points to liue and die. The consociation against the procurers, bringers, and executours of prohi∣bited processe from Rome was this:28. Edwardi 3. The consoci∣ation of King Edward a∣gainst the Pope. The King, the Prelates, Dukes, Earles, Barons, Nobles and other Commons, Clerks, and Lay people, be bound by this present ordinance to aide, comfort, and counsel the one and the other, as often as shall neede: and by all the best meanes that may bee made of word and of deede to impeach such offendours, and to resist their enter∣prises, and without suffering them to inhabite, abide or passe by their Seig∣nories, possessions, landes, iurisdictions or places: and be bound to keep & defend the one and the other from al damage, villanie, and reproofe, as they should do their owne persons and for their deed and businesse: and by such manner and as farreforth as such prosecutions or processe were made or attempted against them in especiall, generall, or in common. The complainct and offer of the Commons to king Richard was this: Of late diuers processes be made by our holy father the Bishop of Rome,16. Richardi 2. The people offer to defēd their Prince against the Pope. and censures of excommunication vpon certaine Bishops of England because they haue made execution of the kings commandements (notwithstanding processe from the Court of Rome for the contrarie) to the open disherison of the Crowne and destruction of our Soueraigne Lord the King his Law & all his Realme: so as the Crowne of England, which hath beene so free at al times that it hath beene in subiection to no realme,The Crowne of England not subiect to the Bishop of Rome. The commōs will be with their king in all cases at∣tēpted against him, his crown, and re∣galitie: could they then suffer him to be deposed? but immediately sub∣iect to God and to none other in all things touching the regalitie of the same Crowne, should be submitted to the Bishop of Rome and the Lawes and statutes of the realme by him defeated and destroied at his will, in per∣petual destruction of the king our soueraigne Lord his Crown and regali∣tie, and of al his realme, which God defend: Wherefore they, & al the liege commons of the same realme will be with our sayd Soueraigne Lorde the King and his saide Crown and his regalitie in the cases aforesaide, and in all other cases attempted against him, his crowne, and his regalitie in al points to liue and to die. This was the auncient loue and faith of the Commons of this Land toward their Princes, against the Bishop of Rome euen by name: and this if you were true English or good Christian men, you would rather exhort the people vnto, than as you doe, wish them to take weapon in hand to pull the Prince from her throne, because the Bishop of Rome hath sent out his calues to disclaime her. Phi. Euer sith the said S. Gregories time,The defence, cap. 5. The oth of the Kings of England at their corona∣tion. or thereabout, all Kings in Chri∣stendome, speciállie those of Spaine, Fraunce, Pole and England take an oth vppon the holy Euangelistes at their Coronation, to keepe and defend the Catholike faith: and ours of England expresly, to maintaine also the priuileges and liberties of the Church and Clergie, giuen by King Edward the confessour and other faithful Kings
their auncestors. Theo. Kings sweare to defend the faith & assist the Church.That Kinges should take an othe to defende the Catholique fayth & assist the Church of Christ wee doe not repine: onely your collection is foolish, if you thinke, that by Catholique fayth is by and by ment your late Romish fayth: or that the church can haue no priuileges nor liberties, except the Pope may deale and distribute kingdomes to his liking. The Princes othe in the Lawes of King Edwarde the confessour,Leges Edwardi Regis, cap. 17. The Prince sworne to go∣uern the church of her Kingdome. was to keepe, nourish, main∣taine and gouerne the holy Church of his kingdome with all integritie and libertie according to the constitutions of his Fathers and prede∣cessours. But in our dayes you will not suffer the Prince to gouerne the Church of her kingdome: and the Church libertie which you seeke for, is a wicked impunitie for sinne, and a plaine contempt of all Christian au∣thoritie. Phi. S. Thomas of Canterburie putteth his Soueraigne Henry the seconde in memorie thereof both often in speach and expressely in an epistle written to him in these woordes:The defence, cap. 5. Memores sitis confessionis qam fecistis & posuistis super altare a∣pud Westmonasterium,In vita S. Thomae. de seruanda Ecclesiae libertate, quando consecrati fuistis & vncti in regema predecessore nostro Theobaldo. Keepe in memorie the confessi∣on which you made and layd vpon the altar at Westminster, touching the keeping of holy churches liberties, when you were consecrated & annoin∣ted king by my predecessour Theobald. Theoph. Your Canterburie Saint was very carefull to put the King in mynd of Church-mens libertie:Thomas of Canterburie put others in mind of their promises & forgot his own oth. but hee was neuer so religious as to remember what was Church-mens duetie to God and the magistrate. Hee could call on others to keepe touche, but him-selfe procured a dispensation, that his othe shoulde not tye him, though it were neuer so lawfull and honest. And sure∣ly this was a seemely sight, for a subiect that had violated his owne fayth and trueth to importune his Soueraigne to obserue couenaunts: but such is your store, for want of better, you must bring periures to talke of pro∣mises. Phi. The Patriarkes of Constantinople tooke an instrument of such as were to be crowned Emperours (specially in the times of heresie) wherein they made the like promise and profession,The defence, cap. 5. to keepe and defend the fayth and decrees of holy Councels. So did the Patriarch Euphemius, in the coronation of Athanasius; Nicepho∣rus, in the inuesting of Michael: and others in the creation of other Emperours of the East.Zonar. tomo 3. & Cuspinian. in Anast. & in Zimisce. And Zonaras writeth that the Patriarche of Constantinople plain∣ly tolde Isaac Commenus the Emperour: that as by his handes hee receiued the Empire: so if hee gouerned not well, by him it shoulde bee taken from him a∣gaine. Theo. The Patriach once or twise required of him that should be crowned a confession of his faith. Euthemius & Anastasius. From Popes you come to Patriarches, from Rome to Constan∣tinople, and there in steede of deposing them after their coronation, you shew what was exacted at their handes before they were crowned: and that not e∣uer, nor by any superiour calling, but the Bishop of that citie offering once or
twise rather to loose his life, than to crowne one that he feared would innouate the fayth or afflict the Church. Euphemius was the first that gaue this onset, and the first that repented it. When Ariadna the Empresse that buried her husbande aliue, being fallen into a traunce, would needes exalt Anastasius a man of no great reckoning before, and bestowe both the scepter and her selfe vppon him, Euphemius the Patriarch, whether it were that hee claymed a consent in that election as wel as others, or suspected Anastasius inclination, and so thought it ea∣sier to exact a confession of his fayth before than after his coronation: requi∣red him vnder his handewriting to promise that hee woulde alter no poynt of Religion established in the Church. Which Anastasius then yeelded to doe:Zonar. in Anast. Dicoro. The Prince banished the patriarch. but as soone as hee was crowned, the first thing almost that hee did, he banished Euphemius for his bolde aduenture. What you would conclude out of this fact for the deposition of Princes, I knowe not: well I wotte the Prince depriued the Patriarche, and not the Patriarch the Prince, though hee fell from the faith which he professed, and promised at his coronati∣on to continue. Phi. Hee did, that hee did, by violence. Theo. I commend not his do∣ings, onely I woulde haue you marke that though he ioyned tyrannie with he∣resie, neither Patriarch nor Pope did depose him.Anastasius not deposed though he brake the pro∣mise made at his coronatiō Philand. The Pope did excommunicate him. Theo. So you sayd before, but you prooued it by no sufficient testimonie: yet graunt hee were, I thence inferre, the teachers & peo∣ple of the Primatiue Church endured and obeyed an hereticall and excom∣municate person as their lawfull Emperour: which cleane euerteth all your platfourme. Phi. Nicephorus required the like writing of Michael.Niceph. and Michaell. Theo. Michael was chosen to the Empire, Stauracius yet liuing and not allowing their act: and when hee came the next day to the Church to bee Crowned,Zonar. in Mi∣chael. Rangab. the Patri∣arch required his writing, that hee woulde neither spill Christian blood, nor chaunge the fayth of the Church, which Michael willingly graunted. Philand. The Patriarch then prescribed conditions to the Prince. Theo. When the Empire went by election, the people might prescribe needefull and honest conditions, to which their princes should subscribe before they were crowned. Phi. But I talke of the Patriarch. Theo. The Patriarch did it not often. There were fourtie Christian Emperours from Constantine to Michael, and this writing neuer required but of two: and those not suc∣ceeding, but elected. Whose coronation the people might tie to those Christian and godly conditions. And though the Church were the meetest place, and the Patriarch the fittest person in matters of fayth,The patriarks fact had the peoples consent. to take the Princes sub∣scription, yet was it doone in the presence of the whole people, and not with∣out their consents, and then onely, when some feare of alteration vrged them vnto it. The Patriarch of himselfe had neither right, nor power to draw the Prince to such couenants as hee would limit; and therefore it was necessary the
people should ioyne their authoritie with his in that action. Philand. The Patriarch would not crowne him, vnlesse he would subscribe. Theo. If he would not, an other might. The ceremonie of setting the Crowne on the Princes head,He that crow∣neth is not superiour to him that is crowned. is a seruice due to him that is chosen, not any superioritie in him that doth it; and if it bee refused by him, that of order is bound to doe it, any Christian Bishoppe may perfite it, and the other bee punished for his recu∣sance. Phi. Polieuctus & Zimisces.The Patriarch by your leaue had more interest to the crowning of the Emperour than you mention. For Polyeuctus the Patriarch would not suf∣fer Ioannes Zimisces so much as Zonar. in Ioh. Zimisce. to enter the Church, till he had banished the murderers of the former Emperour, and thrust the Empresse out of the Court, and torne the booke which the Bishoppes were in trouble for: and giuen all his goods to the poore. Theo. The Empire of Constantinople was nowe 970. yeres after Christ caried along neither by lawfull succession nor election, but become a very pray for him that woulde murder his master, and defile his mi∣stresse: without all respect of dutie or honestie. Zimisces not content secretly to keepe Nicephorus wife, with her helpe most villanously flew the Emperour in his bed, Zonar. in Ni∣ceph. Phoca. commaunding his men, besides the wounds they gaue him in the head and elsewhere, with the hilts of their swordes to dash out his teeth, & breake his iaw-bones. Upon this horrible and diuelish slaughter, when he came to the Church intending to haue the crowne, the Patriarch Zonar. in Zi∣misce. The Patri∣arch would not suffer a murderer that aspired to the crowne to enter the Church be∣fore some re∣compence were made. would not suffer him being polluted with blood to come within the Church. Where he confessing that others did it by instigation of the Empresse, the Patriarch required, that she might bee foorthwith banished, and they pursued, and the booke torne that entangled the Bishoppes, and that he would thinke on some punishment for himselfe. Zimisces yeelded to all that the Patriarch asked: and for himselfe promised to giue the goods which he had gotten whiles hee was a priuate man, to the poore. How this serueth your turne, I see not. The Patriarch kept him, not from the Crowne, but from the Church; and hee that was kept off, was no Prince either by discent, or by choice: but one that aspired to the crowne by killing the king, and abusing the Queene in most haynous manner.Zimisces kil∣led the King and defiled the Queene. In which case, if the Patriarch had offered his life, rather than suffered such an one to approch to the Lords table, he had done but his dutie. Phi. Would you now haue bishops rebell? Theo. You thinke so much on it, you can not choose but talke of it, I said no such thing: the common wealth had to doe with the crowne, and not the Bishoppe: that if they gaue, hee might not denie: but as for diuine seruice and Sacraments, the Bishoppe might well dme them to that infamous adulterer and murderer. Phi. You may perceiue by that which the Patriarch of Constantinople sayd to Isaac Commenus,Isaac Comme∣nus. what sway the Bishop of that citie bare in crowning the Emperour. He told the Prince plainely that as by his handes hee receiued the Empire, so if he gouerned not well, by him it should be taken from him againe.
Theo. We may perceiue by that which you bring, both the pride of the Pa∣triarch, and the falshood of your dealing. This Bishoppe was a ringleader in the rebellion wherein Michaell Stratiotes the former Emperour was displa∣ced,Zonar. in Mich. Stratio. and Isaac Commenus exalted in his steade: and when the newe Prince happened to denie the prowde and seditious Patriarch a request which hee made, hee brast out in great rage and tolde him, that as hee had holpen him (by his wicked conspiracie) to the Crowne, so would he (by like meanes) helpe him from it.A fit presidēt for the Ies. An example as fit for your doinges as you coulde possibly light on, that a Priest should tel his Prince, he would thrust him out of his seate by the head and shoulders. Philand. If hee gouerned not well, hee woulde take the Crowne from him. Theo. If hee gouerned not well, is your addition and misconstruction of your Author:Zonar. in Isaac. Commeno. the storie lieth as I report it. The woordes of Zonaras are: Neque verò Patriarcha superbia illi cedebat, sed imperare illi volebat, a si quando non im∣petrasset quae petierat, egrè ferebat, increpabat, minabatur denique, quemadmodum imperium illi contulisset ita se idem illi orepturum. The Patriarch yeelded not a iote in pride to the prince, and if at any time hee missed of the requestes which hee made, hee disdayned, and cast it in the princes teeth & threat∣ned, that as hee had promoted him to the kingdome, so hee woulde take it from him. Nowe in what sort hee with others conspired for Isaac Com∣menus against Michael, Zonaras sheweth in this page before. And in trueth hee was ledde with the same spirite that Hildebrande was,An other Hil∣debrand. liuing at the same time with him and sitting at Constantinople, whiles the other raigned in Rome: and had the very same euent of his pride which Hildebrande had; the Greeke Prince being not able to beare the Patriarches insolencie, and therefore banishing him, where for spite and anger hee shortly af∣ter dyed. Philand. Likewise when kinges,The defence, cap. 5. In what caes subiects may breake with their Princes. that before were infidels, doe enter by Bap∣tisme into the Church, they submitte their scepters to Christ, and consequently make them-selues subiect and punishable if they reuolt from their fayth and pro∣mis. Theoph. When Kinges by Baptisme put on Christ they submitte their scepters and soules to the woorde and will of Christ,Baptisme ma∣keth not prin∣ces depriuea∣ble by the Pope. but what this auay∣leth the Pope I see not: except you assume that your Holy Father is Christ, and so the subiection professed by Kinges vnto Christ must be yeel∣ded to your Romish Antichrist; which were very farre fet, and skant worth the cariage. Phi. If they reuolt from their fayth,Reuolt frō the faith is punish¦able in Prin∣ces, but not by man. they bee punishable by reason of their for∣mer subiection vnto Christ. Theo. Yea verily: and that not onely in this worlde if it please him, but in the next also with euerlasting paines if they repent not. Philand. If they bee punishable in this world, then may they be depriued. Theo. Doth Christ vse no punishmt but depriuation? or euer read you that in this life Christ sententially deposed any Prince, though hee
might haue punished many? Phi. I meane they may bee depriued by men, if they reuolt from their promise made to Christ. Theoph. Your owne mea∣nings bee your best argumentes: otherwise I see no strength in this reason. Princes are punishable, if they breake their fayth giuen to Christ: Ergo by men: and if by any man, ergo by the Pope. This is leaping logike, of all that e∣uer I heard. Philand. Baptism bind∣eth no mā to corporall or temporall losses of land or life.They submitted them-selues in Baptisme to bee punished by depriuation, if they kept not fayth and trueth with Christ. Theo. If you shoulde not eate, till you prooue that assertion, you shoulde fast a lent not of dayes but of yeeres. It is a wicked error to say, that any priuate man in Baptisme must or doeth submitte him-selfe to the violent and corporall cor∣rection of his flesh: or to the temporall losses of land or life: which you would fasten on Christian Princes by vertue of their Baptisme. Philand. Vppon these conditions and none other, Kinges bee receiued of the Bishoppe that in Gods behalfe annoynteth them:The defence, cap. 5. which othe and promise being not ob∣serued, they breake with GOD and their people; and their people may and by order of Christ his supreme minister their chiefe Pastor in earth, must needes breake with them: heresie and infidelitie in the Prince tending directly to the perdition of the common-wealth and the soules of their subiectes, and notoriously to the annoy∣ance of the Church and true religion, for the defence of which kinges by GOD are giuen. Theoph. Againe you leape from the baptising to the crowning of Prin∣ces, and because at their admission into the Church they promised to re∣nounce the Dyuell and his woorkes, but not their swoordes and scepters which are of GOD: you range to their coronations and tell vs in great state that the Bishoppes which annoynted them in Gods behalfe did not receiue them to bee kinges but on these conditions; as though it were in the handes of Bishops to receiue and reiect Kinges,Bishops haue nothing to doe with the Crownes of Princes. and to prescribe them conditions of taking and leauing the Crowne. Faine you woulde encroche vpon Kinges by the Bishoppes act and oyle, that in the ende you might possesse the Pope with a full interest to dispose their Crownes at his pleasure: but such as bee wise will looke to your fingers and keepe you short of that de∣sire. The solemne rites of coronations haue their ende and vtilitie, but no di∣rect force nor necessitie.Inunction maketh not the Prince subiect to the Priest. Annointing is a seruice, not a superioritie to the prince. They bee good admonishmentes to put Princes in mynde of their duetie: but no increasements of their dignitie. For they be Gods annointed: not in respect of the materiall oyle which the Bishoppe vseth, but in consideration of their power, which is ordayned: of the sword, which is authorized: of their Persons, which are elected by GOD and endu∣ed with the giftes of his spirite for the better guyding of his people: If oyle be added, it is but a ceremonie representing that to their eyes, which all the godly beleeue with their heartes: If oyle bee wanting, they bee perfect Magistrates notwithstanding, and Gods annointed as well as if they were
inoyled. And so for the person of the Bishoppe, that doeth annoynt them. It is fittest, it be done by the highest: but yet if they can not or will not, any Bishoppe may perfourme it. Authoritie to condition with Princes at the tyme of their coronation,The Bishop is to declare gods will and not his owne vnto Princes at their coro∣nation. the Bishoppe hath none: hee is faythfully to declare what GOD requireth at the handes of Princes: not in religion onely, but in rewarding vertue, re∣uenging sinne, relieuing the poore and innocent, repressing the violent, pro∣curing peace and doing iustice throughout their Realmes: and that if they faile in any of these, God will not faile seuerely to visite the breach of his Lawe, and contempt of their callings: but yet hee hath no commission to de∣nounce them depriued,The Iesuites would haue Princes hold their crownes by Indenture. if they misse in some or all of these dueties: much lesse to drawe Indentures betweene God and Princes conteyning the forfeiture of their crownes, with a clause for the Pope and no man else to reenter, if they keepe not couenants. Phi. You graunt they bee bounde to God: to defend the Church and true Re∣ligion. Theo. Euen so bee they bound to doe those other thinges which I be∣fore rehearsed. The couenaunt which God made with the Prince of his peo∣ple, was to feare the Lorde his God and to keepe (not some but) all the wordes of his Law.Deut. 17. The othe which the Kinges of Englande take, hath ma∣ny thinges besides the defence of the fayth and the Church.Edwardi Lege cap. 17. The King shall feare God and loue him aboue all things, and keepe gods precepts through his whole kingdome. Hee shall aduance good Lawes and approoued cu∣stomes, and banish all euill Lawes from his kingdome. Hee shal doe right iudgement in his realme, and maintaine iustice by the counsell of his No∣bles: with many other points there specified: All these thinges the King in his owne person shall sweare beholding and touching the holy Gospel, in the presence of the people, the Priestes and the Clergie, before hee bee crowned by the Archbishoppes and Bishoppes of his Realme.The breach of couenants is no depriua∣tion. The defence, cap. 5. Shal a king bee deposed, if hee reuolt as you call it from his promise and othe in any of these points? Phi. Heresie and infidelitie tend directly to the perdition of the common-wealth and the soules of their subiects, and notoriously to the annoyance of the Church & true Religion. Theoph. Wee compare not vices,The people may not breake with their Princes though Prin∣ces breake with God. but discusse the vitiousnes of your con∣clusion. Kinges you say couenant with GOD at their annointing. That othe and promise if they breake with God, the people (you adde) may, and by order of Christs supreme minister, their chiefe Pastor in earth, must needes breake with them. If by BREAKING you ment not obeying them in those particular cases which tend to the defacing of Gods trueth, your illation were not much amisse: for in all things wee must obey God rather than man: but by BREAKING you vnder∣stand an vtter refusing of obedience, in all other cases, and a violent re∣moouing them from their crownes: which we say is not lawfull for Pastor nor people to attēpt against princes though they answere not their duties to God in
euerie point.If two sweare to do any thing, and one breake his th, shall the other be excu∣ed before God if he fol∣low that ex∣ample? They couenant at the same time, and with the same oth the keeping and obseruing of the whole lawe of God: and yet was there neuer any man so brainsicke as to defend that Princes for euerie neglect and offence against the Law, should be deposed. Phi. Heresie is one of the greatest breaches of Gods Law. Theo. To hold the truth of God in manifest and knowen vnrighteousnes, without repentance, is a greater impietie than ignorantly to be deceiued in some points of religion: but we stand not on the degrees of sinnes, which God will reuenge from the greatest to the smallest as much as on the person which may do it, and the war∣rant whereby it must be done. We deny that Princes haue any superiour and ordinarie Iudge to heare and determine the right of their Crownes. Wee deny that God hath licenced any man to depose them, and pronounce them no Princes. The sonne cannot desherit his father, nor the seruant countermaund his master by the lawes of God and nature;It is against the Law of God & nature for subiects to punish their Princes. be the father and master neuer so wicked. Princes haue farre greater honour and power ouer subiects than any man can haue ouer sonnes and seruantes. They haue power ouer goods, lands, bodies and liues: which no priuat man may chalenge. They be fathers of our Countries, to the which we be nearer bound by the very con∣fession of Ethnikes, than to the fathers of our flesh. Howe then by Gods law should subiects depose their Princes to whom in most euident woords they must bee subiect for conscience sake though they bee tyrauntes and Infidels?Rom. 13. And strangers haue lesse to do with their Crownes. And if the subiects them-selues haue no such power, what haue strangers to meddle or make with their Crownes? Phi. Doe you count the Pope a straunger to Christian Princes? Theo. Would God he were not woorse; euen a mortall and cruell enimie to al that bee Godlie. He was a subiect vnder them eight hundreth yeares and vpwarde: he after by sedition and vsurpation grewe to bee a sate amongest them: a Superiour ouer them in causes concerning their Crownes and states you shall neuer prooue him to bee. For a thousand yeares he durst offer no such thing:Depoition of late yeres attempted, but not agni∣sed to this present day. these last fiue hundreth hee often assayed it, and was as often re∣pelled from it: by factions, conspiracies, excommunications and rebellions hee molested and grieued some of them, as I haue shewed: but from the as∣cention of our Lorde and Sauiour to this present day neuer Prince Christian did yeeld and acknowledge any such power in the Pope: and those that see∣med in their neighbours harmes somewhat to regard his doings for an ad∣uauntage: when the case concerned them-selues most boldlie reiected his iudgements. Phi. The defence, cap. 5.By the fall of the King from the faith, the danger is so euident, and ineuitable, that GOD had not sufficientlie prouided for our saluation and the preseruation of his Church and holie Lawes, if there were no way to depriue or restraine Apostata Princes. Theo. You make vs many worthy reasons for the depriuation of Princes, but of all others this is the cheifest. If there were no way to depriue Princes,
God hath not, say you, sufficiently prouided for our saluation and the preseruation of his Church.Extra. commu. de maioritat. & obedient. ¶ vnā sanct in addi. Petri Bern. § respon∣deo & di. Euen so one of your owne fellowes saide before you of the verie same poine: Non vidertur Dominus discretus fuisse (vt cum reuerentia ius loquar) &c. The Lorde (by his leaue) should haue seemed scant discreete, except hee had left one such Vicar behind him as might doe all things (to witte) depose Emperours and all other Princes. Unlesse your rebellious humours may take place, you stick not to charge the sonne of God with lack of discretion & negligence: but looke better about you, ye blasphemous mouths, & you shall see that the Church of God is purest when she is tried in the fornace, cleanest when she is vanned, whitest when she is scoured, and safest when she is iudged in the world that she be not condemned with the world. The Church of Christ hath alwaies prospered in miserie, and decaied in prosperitie: Israel increased whiles they were oppressed by Pharaoh: and when they came to be fed with Manna vnder Moses, they were consumed. The bloud of the Mar∣tyrs is the very nourcerie of the Church, and the first poison of Religion was the wealth and pride of Bishops.2. Cor. 22. The grace of God is made perfect through weakenesse:2. Cor. 4. and when our outward man perisheth, our inward is daily renewed. Phi. Why rage you thus?If Iesuits may not rebell, their saluatiō is vnsufficiēt in their iudge∣ments. What haue we said? Theo. That which neuer learned or Christian man sayde before: you say your saluation is vnsufficient if you may not rebell against Princes, when they oppresse you. Phi. If there were no way to depriue or restraine Apostata Princes. Theo. Then was not the Primatiue Church sufficiently prouided for by the sonne of God, for they lacked compotent forces as your selfe did confesse to restraine those heretiks, Apostataes and tyrants that afflicted them. Then were the Apostles vnfurni∣shed for their saluation, for they had nothing besides hope to beare the brunt of those continuall and bloudie persecutions which they suffered. Then is God carelesse of his Saincts, (for so much your religious wordes import) since they shall haue none other refuge in all assaults but Relat. 13. faith and patience. Wo worth your worldly mindes, that cannot so much as say with the Apostle, what∣soeuer you thinke,2. Cor. 1. I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproches, in necesities, in persecutions, in anguish for Christ: for when I am weake, then am I strong. Phi We haue giuen better experience thereof than you: we haue these 27. yeres endured al sorts of afflictions & calamities that might befal men in exile; and therefore neuer charge vs to be worldly minded: our long and hard banish∣ment doth clearely quite vs from that slaunder. Theo. You haue beene long absent, but much against your wils: had any of your practises well suc∣ceeded, you had many yeres since returned with fier and sword,The Iesuites impatient to see thēselues disappointed. but God of his mercie toward this realm, hath wearied their heads and filled their hands that should be your leaders: and now waxing sharp through impatience, & much dis∣pleased to see your selues so often disappointed, you not onely by your booke blowe the trump to rebellion; but shew the very ground and persuasion of your
hearts to be this: that except you may depriue the Prince with dint of swoord, God hath not sufficiently prouided for your saluation; as though life to come woulde doe you litle good, except in the meane time you might abounde and not feele want: liue in honour, and not thus wander: raigne ouer Princes, and not obey them, or endure them. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. The example of a Prince most dange∣rous.Wee see howè the whole worlde did runne from Christ after Iulian, to plaine Paganisme: after Valens to Arianisme: after Edward the sixt with vs, into Zwing∣lianisme: and would doe into Turcisme, if any powerable Prince will lead his subiects that way. If our fayth or perdition shoulde on this sort passe by the pleasure of euery secular Prince, and no remedie for it in the state of the newe Testament, but men must holde and obey him to what infidelitie so euer he fall: then wee were in worse case than heathens, and all other humane common wealthes; which both before Christ and after, haue had meanes to deliuer them-selues from such tyrants as were in∣tolerable, and euidently pernicious to humane societie, and the good of the people: for whose peace and preseruation, they were created by man, or ordayned by God. Theo. You finde that multitudes ranne from Christ, to Paganisme after Iulian: to Arianisme after Valens: but doe you finde that the godly did re∣bell against them, because a number ranne after them? What presumption is this in you to controle the wisedome and goodnes of God, sifting his Church by the rage and furie of wicked Princes,God hath prouided pa∣tience for his saints, not vi∣olence to cō∣quere tyrants. and crowning those that bee his as patient in triall, and constant in trueth? Were you throughly perswaded that the heartes of Kinges are in the handes of GOD, and that the haires of our heades are numbred, so that no persecution can apprehend his, which hee disposeth not toward them for experience of their fayth, or recompence of their sinnes: you woulde as well honour the iustice of God in erecting tyrants that our vnrighteousnes may bee iudged and punished in this worlde: as em∣brace his mercie in giuing rest to his Church by the fauour of good and vertu∣ous Princes. And therefore I appeale to the consciences of all good men, whether this reason of yours (if there were no way to depriue Princes, and to take their Crownes from them, wee were in worse case than heathens) bee not a prophane despising the Counsell of God towarde his Church, and an open betraying of your vnquiet stomackes when you bee in trouble. Our Saui∣our foreteaching his that they shoulde bee Mat. 10. brought before Kinges and Ru∣lers, and put to death, and hated of all men for (his) names sake: addeth not as you would haue it, and hee that first rebelleth, but Mat. 10. hee that endureth to the end shall bee saued; and againe, not with violence restraine them, but Luke. 21. in patience possesse your owne soules. This is the way for all Christian subiects to conquerre tyraunts, and this is the remedie prouided in the newe Testament against all persecutions, not Rom. 13. to resist powers, which GOD hath ordayned, lest wee damned: but with all meekenes to suffer, that we may bee crowned. Phi. The defence, cap. 5.The heathens before Christ and after had meanes to deliuer them-selues
from such tyrants as were intolerable, and euidently pernicious to humane societie and the good of the people, for whose peace and preseruation they were created by man or ordayned by God. Theo. A meane they had to dispatch such as they counted tyrants, and that was to kill them,The Iesuites would fain be heathens. which Christians may not imitate: and yet did your Holy Father of late in Cardinall Comos letter promise earthly and heauen∣ly recompence to Parry for offering his seruice to kill her maiestie. The letter is extant, the purpose confessed, the partie executed.The Pope encourageth subiects to kill their princes. Looke there, you shall see the Bishoppe of Rome and his Cardinals to bee right heathens, and to carrie the same myndes that they did, if not worse. For they know∣ing no GOD besides the ghesse of their owne heartes, and hauing no rule to leade them but onely reason, and buylding a felicitie to them-selues in this life: sawe no cause why one man shoulde bee suffered to afflict and disease a number: and supposing any thing to bee lawfull that relieued the Common wealth, they decreed him to bee no murtherer, but a delyuerer of his coun∣trie that woulde kill a tyrant: You hauing the manifest voyce of GOD thou shalt not kill, which you ought to preferre afore your owne lyues: and being prohibited by the holy Ghost Exod. 20. Rom. 3. to doe euill that good may come thereof, with what faces can you, not onely acquite them, and praise them, that kill Magistrates, but also assure them of rewarde in heauen that wilfully destroy their Princes: and where GOD threatneth Rom. 13. dam∣nation to all that resist them, make it meritorious to murther them, and en∣courage subiects to the slaughter of their Princes, as to an holy and honoura∣ble exployte? Lest you denie it,Cardinal Co∣mos letter for the mur∣dering of her Maiestie. or Posteritie not beleeue it, thus sayth the Cardinall in his letter to William Parry: Mon signore la Santita de N.S. ha veduto le let∣tere di V.S. del primo con la fede inclusa, & not puo se non laudare la buona disposit∣tione & risolutione, che scriue di tenere verso il seruitio & beneficio publico, nel che la Santita sua lessorta diperseuerare, con farne riuscire li effetti che V.S. promette: Et accioche tanto maggiormente V.S. sia aiutata da quel buon spirito che lhamosso, le concede sua Beneditione, plenariae Indulgenza & remissione di tutti li peccati, secon∣do che V.S. ha hiesto, assicurandossi che oltre il merito, che n'hauera in cielo vuo, le anco sua Santita constituirsi debitore a riconoscere li meriti di V.S. in ogni miglior modo che potra, & cio tanto piu, quanto che V.S. vsa maggior modestia in non pre∣tender mente. Metta dunque ad effetto li suoì santi & honorati pensieri, & attenda a star sano. Che per fine io me le offero di core, & le desidero ogni buono & felice succes∣s▪ Di Roma a 30. di Gennaro. M.D.Lxxxiiii. Al piacer di V.S. N. Cardinale di Como. Al Sig. Guglielmo Parri. Sir, the holynes of our Lord (the Pope) hath seene your letter with the credence inclosed, & cannot but praise your good disposition & That resoluti∣on was to kill the Queene, as PARRY himselfe con∣fessed. A passing good spirite that leadeth subiects to murder their Princes. Holinesse fit for your holy father. resolution
which, you write, holdeth to the seruice and benefite publike. Wherein his holynes exhorteth you to continue and to bring to passe that which you promise. And to the end you may be the more ayded by that good spirite which hath enduced you to this, his blessednes graunteth you full pardon & forgiuenes of all your sinnes, as you requested; assuring you that besides the merite which you shall receiue in heauen, his holines wil make himselfe a farther debtour, to acknowledge your deseruings in the best maner that he may: and so much the more, because you vse so great modestie in not pre∣tending any thing. Put therefore in act your holy and honorable thoughts, and looke to your safetie. And so I present my selfe hartily to you, and wish you all good and happie successe. From Rome the 30. of Ianuary, 1584. Yours to dispose, N. Cardinal of Como. Cicero neuer sayd so much in the praise of Brutus and Cassius that slew Cae∣sar in the Senate house: as Como doth to incite this Traitour to murder the Queene of England. You did wel therefore to take the heathens for your Pat∣terne: it is right an heathenish tricke to kill Princes vpon any colour of tyran∣nie or heresie:The holy ghost abhor∣reth the mur∣der of Prin∣ces. 1. Sam. 26. Rom. 13. but if you lysten to the spirit of God speaking by the mouthes of his Prophets and Apostles, hee will teach you an other lesson. Who can lay his hand on the Lords annoynted, and be guiltlesse? saith Dauid of Saul: whē yet Saul in all mens sight was a tyrant and by your opinion deposed. Whosoe∣uer resist, purchase to themselues damnation, sayth Paul, when none were Princes but such as were manifest and mightie bloodsuckers: what then shall become of such as pursue them to death or lay violent hands on them? 1. Peter. 2. Submit your selues, sayth Peter, that is murder them not: though you suffer as in∣nocents. Phi. The Iesuits allow that Princes shuld be murdered. Williā Chrei∣ctons letter to sir FRANCIS WALSING∣HAM. PARRYES confession vn∣der his own handwriting to the prince. The murde∣ring of Prin∣es allowed by their de∣fence of Ca∣tholikes. As for murdering of Princes I will not meddle with it. If Parry did attempt it, reason he should answere it, & not wee. Theo. Your holy Father did cōmend him, & exhort him to continue the mynd with promise to reward him. Phi. These be secrets to vs. The. In deed they be the mysteries of Antichrist: but some of your fellowes were well acquainted with the case & consulted in plain speach, if it were leason to kill the Queeene, as William Chreicton confes∣seth hee was. Phi. There you see hee answered no. Theo. But you resolue yea. Phi. You heare me say no such worde. Theo. Parry himselfe collected no lesse out of your owne writings. DOCTOR ALLENS booke, sayth hee, was sent mee out of Fraunce: It redoubled my former conceits, euery word in it was a warrant to a prepared mynde. It taught that kinges may bee excōmu∣nicated, depriued and violently handled: It proueth that all warre cyuill or forraine vndertaken for religion is honorable. Phi. By his patience and yours to, no such thing may iustly bee collected out of my woordes, that Princes may lawfully bee murdered by their owne subiectes. Theoph. May there not? Go no farther than the very sentence
which Parrie citeth. There is no warre in the world so iust or honorable, be it ciuill or forraine,The defence▪ cap. 5. as that which is waged for religion. Be not these your owne wordes? Phi. They be. Theo. Ciuill warre, is of subiectes against their Prince.He that may fight, may kill. Phi. It is. Theo. And in warre, he that may lawfully fight, may he not lawfully kill? Phi. You fetch about otherwise than I ment. Theo. Murdering and killing of Princes, be grosse and vnmannerly speaches: but ob∣seruing your dainty stile,War against the Prince & murthering of the prince are ineuitable consequents you could not speake it in exacter termes. The issue of warre is death, as euery baby knoweth. If then Subiects may leuie warre against their Princes for religion, which is the maine scope of your fift chap∣ter: Ergo your doctrine is, they may kill their Princes: vnlesse you can com∣mand their swordes that they shall not cut, and their bullets that they shall not enter, when they fight. Phi. They may saue the Princes life,The Prince directly im∣pugned by the Iesuits arms. though they winne the fielde. Theo They may, if they lift; but I pray you Sir, when you fight for religion, whom doe you directly impugne? the people or the Prince? Phi. Thats an other matter. Theo. And when you must place an other in the steede of the prince posed, whose life do you chiefly seeke for? Not the Princes? Phi. If the Prince will not otherwise yeelde. Theo. And if the Prince doe yeelde, are not your lawes such, that you may put him to death for an heretike? Phi. Except he reuolt from his heresie. Theo. Then neuer dissemble, the principal person that you shoote at in your ciuill warre for religion is the Prince: whose crown you reach at as being depriued by your censures, and whose life by your lawes you can not spare:The Pharisies did but cēsure Christ when they put him to death. Acts. 7. except her highnesse will forsake Christ, and stand at the Popes mercy: which God defend. Phi. That is no murdering but censuring of Princes, by the iudgement of holy Church. Theo. So the Pharisees did not murder Christ, they did but censure him as worthy to die: and then deliuered him to the secular power: but yet S. Stephen saide vnto them: you betrayed & murdered that iust one. Phi. We haue the iudgement of holy Church for our doinges. Theo. Neuer talke of your censures,As though the church could be holie that contradicteth the holy Ghost. as if they were the iudgementes of holy church, so long as they ende in murders; they bee the wicked, iniurious and mischeeuous at∣temptes of Antichrist, incensing subiectes to rebell against the powers which God hath ordained, to their owne damnation: and you be the blazers and abet∣tours of that his impietie: and for lacke of better proofes, you bring the Pagās and Heathens which knew not God, to fortifie your doinges. Phi. They had meanes to deliuer themselues from tyrantes: shal wee haue none? They had murdering of tyrants, which God hath prohibited to all christiās to∣ward priuate men, much more toward Princes. Deliueraunce if you woulde haue, obtaine it by praier, and expect it in peace: those be weapons for Christiās: Somerfields Vnfit weapō for Christian men, but fit for Iesuites & heathens.dagge, and Parries Rom. 12.dagger be diuelish meanes to dispatch prin∣ces, vsed by Heathens to reuenge their pursuers, but to their sharpe and heauie punishment before God, who hath taught his an other way to deliuer thēselues from tyrantes: that is, to repay no man (therefore not Magistrates) euill
for euill▪ to be pacient in tribulation, to reioice in hope, not to auenge thē selues but to blesse their persecutors, to blesse them I say and not to curse them: much lesse to kill them. These be the manifest precepts of Christ: If you be of God, you will heare them: If not, in truth you bee heathen: and then may you well follow your forefathers the heathens, in murdering, or as you cal it, in depriuing and restraining of Princes. Phi. The defence, cap. 5. Our bond to Christ more than to our Prince.The bond and obligation we haue entered into for the seruice of Christ and the Church, farre exceedeth all other dutie, which wee owe to anie humane creature: and therefore where the obedience to the inferiour hindereth the seruice of the other which is superiour, wee must by Lawe and order discharge our-selues of the in∣feriour. Theo. You say you haue heapes of learning: sure you shew litle. There is no doubt, but the dutie which we owe to Christ and his church, farre exceedeth the seruice that we can owe,We may yeeld God his due with out re∣belling a∣gainst the Prince: marry that is by suf∣fering the Princes plea∣sure which the Iesuites cannot brook. or must yeelde to any humane creature: and also against the superiour wee must yeelde no obedience to the inferiour: and thence you may rightly conclude, that we must not obey man aboue, or against God: but when you inferre that if Princes commaund some thinges against Go, you must therefore obey them in nothing: this is wicked and most absurde so∣phistrie. Wee must not obey them in those pointes which they commaund a∣gainst God: in all other thinges we must; because God hath so prescribed vs to doe. Take an example of the Tyrantes that were in the Apostles time. Did they not directly commaunde against God, not in one or two, but in all mat∣ters of religion? It is euident they did. Did the Apostles thence conclude that the christians should take them for no Princes; but by law and order be dischar∣ged of all other seruice due vnto them as you doe. It is euident they did not. Yea rather they earnestly adiured all christians to be subiect to them in all other things, and euen in those thinges which were commaunded against God, to The Iesuites in no wise can away with this submissiō to the swordes of Princes: & therfore they imagine Prin∣ces may be deposed: & by that coulor also resisted. submitte them-selues with meekenesse and reuerence, to indure the Magistrates pleasure, though not to obeie his will. Why then in mat∣ters of so great moment bring you so light and vaine delusions? Why repeate you so often the same antecedent, and neuer attende the fault of your conse∣quent? Phi. The defence, cap. 5. How man and wife may de∣part for Christ. Theod. L. Man. de haere.The wife if shee cannot liue with her owne husband (beeing an Infidel or an heretike) without iniurie and dishonour to God; shee may depart from him, or con∣trariwise hee from her, for the like cause: neither oweth the innocent partie, nor the other can lawefullie claime any coniugall duetie or debt in this case. The very bondslaue, which is in an other kinde no lesse bound to his Lorde and master, than the subiect to his Soueraigne: may also by auncient Imperiall Lawes depart and refuse to obey or serue him, if he become an heretike, yea ipso facto hee is made free. Cap. in. Ex. de haere.Finally the parents that become heretikes lose the superioritie and dominion they haue by Lawe or nature ouer their owne children.
Therefore let no man maruel that in case of heresie the Soueraigne loseth his supe∣rioritie and right ouer his people and kingdome. Theophil. If wee shoulde graunt you these three precedentes, euen as your selfe set them downe,Husbands, Parents and Masters loose not their right by Gods Law though they be he∣retikes. they woulde nothing further your conclusi∣on. That hereticall Husbandes, Masters and Parentes loose their right and interest which they otherwise haue in their wiues, seruantes and chil∣dren: is no position of Gods Lawe, but a terrour deuised and established by the Princes power to fraie men from Heresie. Nowe Princes ap∣point punishmentes for their Subiectes, not for them-selues: therefore no good consequent can bee framed from these paternes to the depriua∣tion of Princes.The Iesuits would punish Princes in the same sort that princes pu∣nish their subiects. It is ouer much bouldnesse in you, Masters, with∣out authoritie to require to punishe your Superiours in such sorte, as they with authoritie punish their subiectes. They bee Princes, you bee not: they beare the sworde to reuenge wickednesse, you doe not: they may dis∣pose of their people bee they Masters or Parentes, you may not dispose of them being Magistrates: Much lesse may you turne the Lawes, which they made to punish subiectes, against themselues: That were to make them not Princes ouer others, but Subiectes vnder you; which I trust they bee not. You see the disparison of your examples: and so the disiuncture of your argument:Heresie dissol∣ueth not ma∣trimonie. 1. Cor. 7. and yet your supposementes bee not simplie true. Neither infidelitie nor heresie by Gods Lawe doeth dissolue matrimonie. The A∣postle willeth the beleeuing wife to staie with the vnbeleeuing husbande: if hee bee so content: and our Sauiour will haue no man putte away his wife for heresie,Mat. 19. but onelie for incontinencie. Where daunger of life is feared, or bodily wrong offered; the Magistrate may permit the wife to dwell asunder from her husbande till hee bee reclaimed:The subiects more bound to the Prince than the ser∣uant is to his master. but in no case to bee diuorced. The Seruaunt is not so surely bounde to his Master as the Subiect is to the Prince: power of life and death the Master hath none: the Prince hath; refuge against the Master the Seruaunt hath to the common gouer∣nour of them both,The Prince may discharge the seruant; but no man cā discharge the subiect. 1. Pet. 2. which is the Magistrate: the Subiect hath no re∣fuge against his Soueraigne, but onely to God by prayer and patience: and therefore the Prince may demise the Seruaunt, if the Master bee like to corrupt him: but no man can discharge the Subiecte, though the Prince goe about to oppresse him, and that your owne example will conclude.The Apostles neither did nor could set seruants free from their ma¦sters for any cause. For who set free the Seruaunt from his Maister, the Apostles or Princes? You knowe the Apostles neither did nor might attempt anie such thing. Peter in Gods behalfe requireth all Seruaunts with feare to obey their Masters (excepting neither infideles nor heretikes) not only if they were good & curteous, but though they were froward. For that is thanksworthie if a man for conscience towards God (that is chiefly for religion) indure grief
and suffer wrong vndeserued. If then Peter, whom you make the Pillor of your Popedome, neither would, nor could depriue a poore crafts-man (though an infidell or an heretike) of his seruaunt or prentize: what right can your ho∣ly Father now haue to depriue Princes of their crownes for those or any other causes: and to absolue their subiectes from all obedience, though they woulde yeeld it and haue sworne it? That Parentes should loose the regiment and authority which by nature & law they haue ouer their children; is a late Popes decree, which we litle regard: & not found in the extrauagants, as you quote it, Cap. in. but in the Decretals of Sixtus,No law giueth the sonne leaue to disho¦nor or dishe∣rite his fa∣ther. lib. 5. de haereticis, cap. 2. and were it to bee founde in ancient imperiall Lawes that heretikes should not bring vp their children, for feare of infecting them, which we greatly mislike not: yet no Law, Gods, nor mans doth licence the sonne to dishonour, relinquish, forsweare and murder his father, though a Turke or a Saracene, as you teach subiectes to vse their Princes. Phi. Thus much may (as we trust) suffice with all reasonable indifferent persons,The defence, cap. 5. for defence of our brethren. Theo. Thus much sufficeth to conuince you of that wherewith you were charged: that is with liking, labouring, perswading, and expecting the de∣priuation and destruction of your naturall and lawfull Soueraigne:If Princes may not be deposed, ergo ciuill warre to displace them is a wicked & wilful rebelliō against God & his ordi∣nance. And since the foundation of your doinges hath neither warrant in the worde of God, nor example in the church of Christ for a thowsande yeares, as we trust the rea∣der by this time perceiueth, but onely dependeth on the late violent and wicked treacheries of Popes, swelling with earthly pride, and sauoring of filthy gaine, who for the readier atchiuing of their interprise, began with cursing, & alwayes ended in sowing seditions, menaging rebellions, kindling warres, allowing periuries, vpholding treasons, and shaking the frame of the earth with horrible tumults: I hope no Christian subiect wil be so vnwise as to beleeue you, or so wicked as to follow you: seeing you pretend religion, & defend rebellion, & come now to the publike patrocination of that which al this while you secretly cloked with cunning and suttle euasions: knowing that God is the ordainer of Prin∣ces, and will be the reuenger of all that presume to displace them or resist thē: he hauing expresly commanded them to be serued, obeyed, and honoured. Phi. It shall not be amisse perhaps to set downe the iudgement and practize of Pro∣testantes in (this very) case:The defence, cap. 4. The Prote∣stants opiniō & practise for deposition of Princes in case of false Religion. which though it weigh litle or nothing with vs, as being altogither both done and spoken of seditious and partiall affection to their heresie, and against the lawfull Magistrate of God: yet you seeing (your) own masters against (you) shall well perceiue that the resisting of Princes and Magistrates in cause of religion, as also the subiectes taking armes for their defence in such a case, is no way to be accoun∣ted treason: but most lawfull according to (your) new Gospell. Theo. As for the newnesse of our Gospell, we say with Tertullian: If Christ were euer and afore all,Tertul. de Virg. velandis. the truth (of his Gospell) is as auncient and euerla∣sting. Let them therefore looke to themselues, to whome that is newe, which in it selfe is olde. Masters we haue none, but Christ, neither binde we
our selues to the will of any but only of God.The Iesuits abuse the names of pro∣testants for the colouing of their con∣spiracies. And though by your owne con∣fession in the next Section before, we neede not busie our selues to defende euerie priuate mans writing or action concerning (this) matter: yet least by deprauing the sense and abusing the words of some that neuer spake of the case in question betweene vs, you should commend rebellion to the common people as allowed of either side, yours and ours, in cause of religion: I will not be grieued to sitt their sayinges, and to consider how far they make with you or against you. Phi. First (your) grand-master Iohn Caluine putteth downe his oracle as a con∣clusion approued of (your) whole sect and confraternity in these wordes:The defence. cap. 5. In Dan. cap. 6. vers. 22.25. Abdicant se potestate, terreni Principes, dum insurgunt contra Deum: immo indigni sunt qui censeantur in hominum numero. Potius ergo conspuere oportet in illorum capita, quam illis parere, vbi sic proteruiunt vt velint spoliare Deum suo iure, &c. Which in eng∣lish is thus:The doctrine of Father CALVINE. Earthly Princes do bereaue themselues of al authoritie when they do erect themselues against God, yea they are vnworthy to be accounted in the number of men: and therefore wee must rather spit vppon their heades, than obey them; when they become so proude, or peruerse, that they will spoile God of his right; and to the same place I further referre the Reader for his instruction. Theo. Caluine is so well knowen to those that bee learned or wise for his great paines and good labours in the church of God: that a few snarling Fri∣ers can not impeach his name, though you neuer so wretchedly peruert his wordes.Caluine wre∣sted by the Iesuites. Phi. Wee peruert them not, we alleadge them as they lie. Theo. Caluine in that place speaketh not one word of depriuing of Princes of their Crownes, or resisting them with armes: but onely sheweth that Daniell did rightly defend himself for not obeying the kinges wicked edict, because it was ioyned with the manifest dishonor of God and restraint of his seruice, which no king can prohibite. By Abdicant se potestate, he meaneth not they forfeite their Crownes, but that they loose their power to commaunde in those thinges,Caluine saith Princes haue no power to commaund a∣gainst God, but he doth not say that subiects may displace them with armes. which in other cases, that be lawfull, they notwithstanding retaine. And though the phrase, to spit vpon their heades seeme somewhat harde: yet the comparison so stan∣ding as he maketh it: that is, whether we were better vtterly to contemne their impious edictes, and to defie such sinneful actes to their faces, which is ment by spitting at them, or else obey them spoyling God of his right, and as it were pulling him out of heauen; I say we must no way consent to yeelde any re∣gard or reuerence to their idolatrous rage and pride against God. This is all that Caluine in vehement wordes, as his maner is, vrgeth; and this is farre from rebelling & pursuing Princes with armes, as you would haue his wordes to sound. Phi. Let the Reader view the place & see whether your construction be true or no. Theo. With a good will.Not a word of vsing weapon or violence in all that place of Caluine. If you finde one word there of taking or v∣sing weapon or violence against the king, I yeelde the whole. For how could any such thing be grounded vpon Daniels example? He submitted himselfe to bee cast to the Lions for the breach of the kinges commaundement. And when
he was mightily deliuered from their iawes by the hand of God, all that he said to the king, was, against thee O king I did no euill, meaning in that he ser∣ued GOD, though the king by his Lawe had prohibited him so to doe for thir∣tie dayes. Upon that Caluine saith: Daniell coulde not obey the kinges e∣dict, but hee should deny God. Hee sinned not against the king, when he constantly went forward in the exercise of prayer to God. Daniel therefore, doeth rightly Dan. 6. Caluin. in 6. Dan. vers. 22. He defended his Innocen∣cie with reue∣rent words, as euerie subiect may, not with violent wea∣pons. defend himself that he did no wickednesse against the king, in that, being bound to obey the preceptes of God he neglected the kinges commaundement to the contrary. Then follow your wordes: that Princes loose their right to be obeyed, when they presume to commaund against God: and that wee were better defie their edictes to their faces, than obey them when they waxe so froward that they will put God from his right and sit in his throne. Phi. For declaration of (this) text and for cutting off all cauillation about the interpretation of his wordes, (your) brother Beza shall speake next,The defence, cap. 4. The doctrine of brother Beza. who alloweth and highly commendeth in writing, the fighting in Fraunce for religion, against the lawes and lawfull king of that countrie, saying in his Epistle dedicatorie of his new Testamēt to the Queene of England her selfe: That the Nobility of France, (vnder the noble Prince of Condy) laide the first foundation of restoring true Christian religion in France,In editione anno 1564. The opinion of the congre∣gation art. 39. by consecrating most happily their blood to God in the battel of Druze. Where of also the Ministers of the reformed French Churches (as their phrase is) do giue their common verdict in the confession of their faith, thus: We affirme that subiects must obey the Lawes, pay tribute, beare all burdens imposed, and sustaine the yoke e∣uen of infidel Magistrates: so for all that, that the supreme dominion and due of God bee not violated. Theo. You haue already belied Caluine, and nowe you take the like course with Beza and the French churches. Their speach can bee no declaration of Caluines words; if they did leane that way which you make them, as they doe not: & therefore this is but a Friers tricke to abuse both writers & Readers. Phi. Beza highly commendeth the fighting in Fraunce for religion, against the Lawes, and lawfull king of that countrie. Theo. The battell, which Beza spea∣keth of,The battaile of Druze. was neither against the Lawes, nor the king of that countrie. That olde fore the Duke of Guise, hating the Nobles of Fraunce as being himselfe a straunger,The Nobles of France re∣pressed the furie of the Guise, the king being vnder age. and seeking to tredde them downe, whom he knew inclined to re∣ligion, that he might strengthen him selfe and his house to take the crowne, if ought shoulde befall the kinges line: as his sonne the yong Duke at this pre∣sent in armes for that cause doth not sticke to professe watching his oportunitie, whiles the king of Fraunce was yet vnder yeares, armed him-selfe to the field, as his sonne now doth, and against all Lawe with open force murdered many hundreth subiectes, as they were making their prayers to God in their assemblies: vpon pretence that their seruice was not permitted by the Lawes of that Realme. The Nobles and Princes of Fraunce perceiuing his ma∣lice & seeing his iniustice, that being a subiect as they were, he would with pri∣uate and armed violence murder innocents, neither conuented nor condemned,
which the king himselfe, if he had beene of age, by the lawes of their Countrie could not doe, gathered togither to keepe their owne liues from the fury of that violent bloodsucker: and in that case if they did repell force, what haue you to say against it, or why should not Beza praise the Prince of Condy and others for defending the Lawes of God and that Realme against the Guises open in∣iurie with the consecrating of their blood most happily to God? Phi. The Duke did nothing without the king and the Queene mother: and therefore impugning the one they impugne the other. Theo. The king was yong and in the Guises hands: & therefore his consent with the Peeres & states of his Realme, that a subiect should doe execution vpon his people by the sword without all order of iustice, could bee nothing worth. The king had neither age to discerne it, nor freedome to denie it, nor law to decree it.The King had neither age nor Lawe to licence the Guise to murder his people. Lx Salica. Phi. The Queene mother had her sonne in custodie and not the Duke: and with her con∣sent were these thinges done. Theo. Of the Queene mother of Fraunce, I will say no more, but that the auncient lawe of that Realme did barre her from the Crowne: and therefore her consenting with the Guise might sharpen the doer, but not authorize the deede. Phi. Defend you then their bearing armes against the king? Theo. To depriue the king or annoy the Realme they bare none; but to saue themselues from the violent and wrongfull oppression, of one that abused the kinges youth to the destruction of his lawes, Nobles and com∣mons. Phi. As you say. Theo. And you shall neuer proue the contrary. But these thinges are without our limites. Wee be scholers not souldiers, diuines not lawyers, English not French. The circumstances of their warres no man exactly knoweth besides themselues: as also we knowe not the lawes of that Land.Bezaes iudge∣ment of bea∣ring armes against the Prince out of his own works. We wil therefore not enter these actes which haue so many parts, precedentes, causes, concurrents, and those to vs vnknowen, and yet all to bee discussed and proued before Beza may be charged with this opinion by his cō∣mending the battel of Druze: but will rather giue you his vndoubted iudge∣ment out of his owne workes quite against that which you slaunder him with. Purposely treating of the obedience which is due to Magistrates, thus hee resolueth:Beza in confessi∣one fidei Christi∣anae & eiusdem cum Papisticis erroribus Colla∣tione, cap. 5. sect. 45. Quod autem attinet ad priuatos homines, tenere illos oportet plu∣rimum inter se differre, iniuriam inferre & iniuriam pati: Iniuriam enim pati no∣strum est, sic praecipiente Domino, & suo exemplo nobis praeeunte, quum nobis il∣lam vi arcere non licet ex nostrae vocationis praescripto; extra quam nefas est no∣bis vel pedem ponere: neque aliud vllum remedium hic proponitur priuatis hominibus tyranno subiectis, praeter vitae emendationem▪ & preces & lacrymas. As touching priuate men, they must holde great difference betweene doing and suffering wrong. It is our part to suffer iniurie: the Lord so com∣maunding and teaching vs by his owne example, for so much as it is not lawfull for vs to repell it with force, by the prescript of our calling, from the which we may not step one foote: neither is there here proposed any other remedy for priuate men that are vnder a tyrant, but the amending of their liues, and therewithall prayers and teares.
And making a plaine distinction betweene not obeying and taking armes, whē the Magistrate commaundeth against God, hee saith:Ibidem, cap. 5. sectio. 45. This rule is firme and sure, that we must obey God rather than man, so often as we can not obey the preceptes of men, but wee must violate the authoritie of that supreme King of Kinges and Lord of Lordes: yet so that wee remember it is one thing not to obey them, and an other thing to resist, or take armes, which God hath not permitted thee.Priuatmē may disobay a wic∣ked pince but not bear arms against him. To you Sir slanderer. So the midwiues are praised that o∣beyed not Pharaoh: and the Apostles and all the Prophetes and Martyrs could by no tyrants bee brought to betray the truth with their silence. What then we thinke of the subiectes dutie to the Magistrate, you shall far more certainly and truly learne by this our doctrine, than by their slanders which are not ashamed to ioyne vs with the frantike Anabaptistes subuerting the Magistrates authority. The warres of the Frēch mi∣nisters lewdly peruerted by the Iesuites.How the confession of the reformed churches in Fraunce should allow rebel∣lion, I see no coniecture in their words, vnlesse a rebel may haue them to mis∣take and depraue at his pleasure. Subiectes must obey the lawes, pay tribute, beare al burdens imposed, and sustaine the yoke euen of infidel Magistrates: so for all that, that the supreme dominion & due of God be not violated. What mislike you in these words? Would you that Infidels should bee serued afore, or aboue God? Phi. Their meaning is that if Gods due be once vi∣olated, we must no longer pay tribute, nor obey the Lawes of any Prince. Theo. How gather you that out of this place? Their wordes sound other∣wise. Subiectes must obey the lawes,If the supreme dominion of God be viola∣ted by the cō∣maundement of any prince, that precept may bee well disobeied but not the prince displaced. and sustaine the yoke euen of Infi∣dels, so that the supreme dominion of God be not violated. Phi. If that be violated, they must obey no longer, but elect an other Prince. Theo. That is your rebellious inclination, not their position: They say subiectes must o∣bey Princes (so) farre foorth (as the supreme dominion of God bee not violated). In any matter if the choice come betweene God and the Prince, which of the twaine shalbe serued and obeied, God must euer be preferred. Phi. Surely they meane, that if once the Magistrate violate the supreme dominion of God, we must account him no longer a magistrate. Theo. The diuell himselfe can shew no greater malice than to peruert that which is well spoken: and to force a leude sense of his owne on an other mans wordes. It is euident they neuer ment that if the Magistrate once violate Gods due, the pe∣ple might reiect him, for then were it not needeful at al to sustaine the yoke of a infidel, as their owne wordes import;Infidels must be obaied so farre forth as their precepts tend not to the dishonour of Gods holie name. because he can not be an Infidell, except he first violate the supreme dominion of God by commanding against his truth in matters of religion; and therefore they ment as their wordes lie; that euen Infidels if they bee Princes must be obeyed, but so that Gods due bee euer for∣prised. If they presume to violate the dominion which God hath reserued to himselfe, we may not rebel (that is your Iesuitical doctrine) but disobey them, in that or any point that is prescribed by man against the will of God, and sub∣mit our selues to indure persecution for Mat. 5. righteousnesse sake: which, as our
Sauiour assureth vs, is not without great and happy recompence. Phi. Zuinglius likewise a cater-cosen to the Caluinistes in religion, writeth thus:The defence, cap. 4. The defence of Zuing. lib. 4. epist. Zuing. & Ocol. fol. 186. 4. Reg. 21. If the Empire of Rome, or what other soueraigne soeuer, should oppresse the sincere Re∣ligion and we negligently suffer the same, wee shalbe charged with contempt, no lesse than the oppressors thereof themselues: whereof we haue an example in the fifteenth of Ieremy, where the destruction of the people is prophecied; for that they suffered their king Manasses, being impious and vngodly, to be vnpunished. And more plaine in an other place.Art. 42. explan. fol. 84. When kinges (saith he) rule vnfaithfully, and otherwise than the rule of the Gospell prescribeth, they may, with God, be deposed: as, when they punish not wicked persons, but specially when they aduance the vngodly, as idle Priests, &c. Such may be depriued of their dignity, as Saul was. Theo. I vndertake not to discusse or defend ech seueral mans opiniō or speech.The manifest fores of cō∣mon wealthes make diuerse men speake diuersly of the magistrates sword. The Romanes we know could neuer abide in their citie ye name of a king. The commonwealthes of Venice, Millan, Florence & Genua are of the same minde. Many states haue gouernors for life or for yeares as they best liked that first e∣rected their policies: & yet a soueraignty still remaning somwhere in the people, somewhere in the Senate, somwhere in the Prelates & Nobles that elect or as∣sist the Magistrate: who hath his iurisdictiō allotted and prefixed vnto him, thus far and no further, and may be resisted & recalled from any tyrannous excesse, by the generall and publike consent of the whole state where hee gouerneth. In Germanie the Emperour him-selfe hath his boundes appointed him which he may not passe by the lawes of the Empire:Germanie a free state, and the Emperors authoritie li∣mited by the Lawes of the Empire. & the Princes, Dukes & cities that are vnder him, haue power to gouerne & vse the sworde, as Gods ministers in their own charges. And though for the maintenance of the Empire, they be sub∣iect to such orders as shall bee decreed in the conuent of all their States, and according to that direction are to furnish the Emperour with men and monie for his necessarie warres and defences: yet if he touch their policies, infringe their liberties, or violate the specialties which hee by oth and order of the Em∣pire is bound to keepe: they may lawfully resist him, and by force reduce him to the ancient and receiued fourme of Gouernment, or else repell him as a ty∣rant, and set an other in his place by the right and freedome of their Country.The germans proportion their speaches according to the state of their country. Therefore the Germanes doinges or writinges can helpe you litle in this que∣stion. They speake according to the lawes and rights of the Empire: thēselues being a verie free state and bearing the sworde as lawfull Magistrates to de∣fend their liberties and prohibite iniurie, against all oppressours, the Empe∣rour himselfe not excepted. In this sense, Zuinglius may say that if the Empire of Rome,Zuinglius mēt this of Prin∣ces elected & limited. or any other Soueraigne should oppresse the truth & they (that haue rightful power by the lawes of their country to withstand) should negligently suffer the same, they shalbe charged with contempt no lesse than the oppressors themselues: but that subiectes and such as are onely bounde to obey, and not by the Lawes of the Lande authorised to vse the sworde, shoulde take weapon in hande to displace the Prince and change the state, that Zuinglius neuer sayde nor
much lesse that the Pope might warrant such priuate violence. Phi. For his example he bringeth the men of Iuda and Ierusalem whom God by Ieremie threatned to destroy for that they suffered their king Manasses, being impious and vngodly, to be vnpunished, & yet the people of Israel had no such Soue∣raingty ouer their king. Theo. What Soueraignty the whole people of Is∣rael had ouer their kinges is a question amongst the learned, & Zuinglius might be of opinion they had. When Saul would haue put Ionathan his son to death: the people would not suffer him so to do,1. Sam. 14. but deliuered Ionathan that hee died not. When Dauid purposed the reducing of the Arke, his speech to the people was:1. Chron. 13. 1. Kings. 12. If it please you we will send to the rest of our brethren, that they may assemble themselues vnto vs. After Salomons death all the congregation of Israell came and said to Roboam, make thy fathers yoke, which he put vpon vs, lighter, and we wil serue thee: as if it had lien in their choice to be subiect or free from the kinges power. The people likewise tooke Ieremy, when hee had prophesied against them and said, thou shalt die the death.Ierem. 26. These places haue perswaded some and might leade Zuinglius to think, that the people of Israell, notwithstanding they called for a king, yet reserued to themselues sufficient authority to ouerrule their king in those thinges which seemed expedient & needfull for the publike welfare: else God would not punish the people for the kings impietie which they must suffer & might not redresse. But yet in the 15. of Ieremie there is no such cause pretended: their consent rather and zeale to please Manasses in his wickednesse,God neuer required the people to dis∣place their King, but not to consent to his wickednes & their generall shrin∣king back from truth so lately professed vnder Ezechias, for feare of his cruelty that did next succeede: were the causes why God would punish both the king and the Realme. For God neuer required of the people to displace their Prince that we can reade, but onely that they should rather yeeld their liues than forsake his truth, when any tyrant offered to deface his glory. Phi. By Zuinglius decision, the people may depose the Prince. Theo. Zuin∣glius doth shew the causes for which magistrats may be iustly deplaced by those that haue authoritie to doe it: but hee giueth no priuate man leaue to take the sword or offer violence to any Prince, though he be a tyrant: againe, he speaketh of Rulers elected and limited, not succeeding and absolute: In which ease by the Lawes of sundrie Realmes, much is permitted, which otherwise may not bee presumed. Phi. Nay hee speaketh of all sortes of Princes whether they bee made by succession, election or vsurpation. Theo. In that Article hee mentioneth them, but hee neither resolueth any certainetie of them, or al∣loweth any force to bee vsed against them. Of hereditarie succession these be his wordes:Explanat. ar∣ticulo 42. Mihi ergo compertum non est vnde hoc sit, vt regna per successio∣nes & quasi per manus posteris tradantur. I confesse I haue no skill in this how kingdomes should be deriued to posterity by succession & as it were by hād. If then a tyrant chosen by no man get a kingdom by inheritance: which hath his foundation I know not how:Ibidem. A tyrant in∣heriting may not be displa∣ced by Zuing∣lius opinion. ferre hunc oportet: sed quomodo imperitabit? he must be indured, but how shall he gouern? His answere is: Regnum aliquo sapi∣ente
administrandū erit, the kingdom must be gouerned by some wise mā: that shal assist him. If a tyrant succeeding may not be repelled from his inheritance, but suffered and asssted, then by this confession may he not be deposed. And that no violence may be vsed to any Prince promoted by succession or e∣lection, his words are plaine.Ibidem. Princes may neither be murdered nor assaulted with any tumult by Zuinglius iudgement. Disputing quo pacto mouendus sit officio by what means a magistrat may be displaced, he saith: Non est vt eum trucides, nec vt bel∣lū & tumultis quis exitet, quia in pace vocauit nos Deus. Thou maist not kil him, nor leauie warre or any tumult against him: because God hath called vs in peace. Phi. How then shal he be displaced since no Prince will yeeld his crown with∣out force? Theo. He answereth, hic iam labor est: this is the difficulty: but his cō∣ceit is, that they which chose him, should denoūce him vnfit to weare the crown: & if he yeeld, it is wel; if not, they must offer their liues in so good a cause as to dy for iustice & truth.Ibidem. Phi. In faith that were folly, first to prouoke a tyrāt with de∣priuatiō, & after to lay down their necks to his furie. The. Yet that is his resolu∣tion:Ibidem. for he addeth, Qui hoc ferre nō possunt, ferant insolentē tyrannū, They that cā not abide (to die for the defence of iustice) let thē tolerate the pride of the tyrāt. Phi. Are you of that minde? Theo. You are not to seeke after al our reasoning what I thinke; I haue meetely well repeated it. And as for Zuinglius though he measure all Nations by the Germanes, & proportion other kingdomes to the Empire: & in that respect speake somwhat strangely; yet he iustifieth no tumult against a tyrant, much lesse rebellion against lawfull and absolute Princes: which is the case at this instant in question betwixt vs. That touching rebellion: now for succession, as I muse at his wordes, so I like not his iudgement, when he saith, he can not tell whence it is that kingdoms should go by successiō.Succession most vsual in christian king∣domes and allowed by God himselfe. The Romane Empire it self from Constantine the great and before till the time of Otho the third, that is 700. yeares and vpward, went by successiō; saue where the right lines failed, or seditiō disturbed the heire. The greatest kingdomes of the West partes, as Fraunce, England, Spaine, Scot∣land and others haue alwayes gone by succession since they were diuided from the Empire, and neuer by election. The like I might say almost of all prophane kingdoms and Monarchies: where not election but successiō hath preuailed. But omit them: God him selfe gaue this to Dauid as a great blessing, of the fruit of thy body will I set vpon thy throne:Psal. 132. & this was it which was denied to Saull for reuenge of his disobedience: Thou hast done foolishly: for the Lord had now established thy kingdom vpon Israel for euer. All the recompence which Iehu had for his zealous seruice was this,1. Sam. 13. Because thou hast deligently execu∣ted that which was right in mine eies,2. Kings. 10. (therefore) shall thy sonnes vnto the fourth generation sit on the throne of Israell. So that succession in kingdoms hath not only the consent of al ages & Nations: but the manifest subscription of God himself, that it is his speciall fauor & blessing to continue the successions of godly Princes. Phi. And what our english Protestantes write or thinke of this matter,The defence, cap. 4. you shal well
perceiue, by their opinion and high approbation of Wiats rebellion in Queene Maries dayes: wherof one of your chiefe Ministers called Goodmā thus speaketh in his trea∣tise intituled;Goodmans opinion. Cap. 14. à pag. 204. ad pag. 212. Goodmans priuate opini∣on long since corrected by him selfe, can∣not preiudice the whole realme. Goodmā did not hold that lawful Prin∣ces might be thrust frō ther Crownes, but that Queene MARY was no lawful ma∣gistrate. How superiour Magistrates ought to be obeyed. Wiat did but his duty, and it was the duty of all others that professe the Gospell, to haue risen with him, maintenance of the same. His cause was iust, and they all were traytours that tooke not part with him. O noble Wyat, thou art nowe with God, and those worthy men that died for that happie interprise. Theo. It is much that you measure the whole Realme by one mans mouth: and more that you drawe the wordes which he spake, from the meaning which he had, to warrant your rebellions. The partie which you name at the time whē he wrote tooke Queene Mary for no lawful Prince: which particular and false supposal beguiled him & made him thinke the better of Wyats war; but our que∣stion is of lawful Princes not of violent intruders. And therefore Goodmans opinion which himselfe hath long since disliked, is no way seruice-able for your seditions. Ph. Hold you Queene Mary for an intruder? Theo. Not I, but he then did whē he spake these wordes: and so the case doth not concord. Phi. Wee take Prin∣ces deposed if they stand out, to be intruders: and so by your owne rule may de∣bell them with armes. Theo. Proue first you may depose them; and then if they yeeld not, vse your right. Phi. Wee take them for deposed. Theo. So did the Iewes take Christ for a blasphemer of God, and deceiuer of the people, and yet that nothing impeached his sanctitie or sinceritie. The Princes right may not goe by your thoughtes. You may quickly perswade yourselues, what you list, as you teach the boyes & girles with vs to pretend conscience, when in deede they should blush at their shamefull ignorance. Phi. What the Scottish Ministerie defineth in this question, is plaine, by the ver∣dict of Iohn Knokes their mightiest Prophet:The defence, cap. 5. The iudge∣mēt of the Scottish mi∣nisterie. Iohn Knokes Ibidē pag. 77. the argument of a treatise of this mat∣ter being set downe by himselfe thus: If the people haue either rashly promoted any ma∣nifest wicked person, or else ignorantly chosen such an one, as after declareth himselfe vnworthy of regiment aboue the people of God (& such be all idolaters & cruel persecu∣tors) most iustly may the same men depose and punish him. Theo. Were it in a point of doctrine, or part of faith, it had yet some shew to charge the rest with one mans verdict: but in a singular & superfluous assertion it hath no more ground, than if we should pronounce al Popes, to be coniurers & Atheistes, because Iohn the twelfth, and Syluester the second were such: or sus∣pect al Spaniardes to be as louing to their brethren as Alfonsus was to Sleid. lib. 17. Ioan∣nes Diazius, whose head he claue a sunder with an hatchet, and the Romanistes to be as vertuously disposed as euer were Sleid. lib. 19. Petrus Aloisius the son, a famous ci∣tizen of Sodom, or lib. 21. Paulus the third his father a fit bishop for Gomorra, which ywis would offend you. Knokes booke I haue not seene, and therefore the circumstances I doe not knowe: yet the verie wordes which you bring, proue that hee spake not of Princes entering by inheritance, but of Magistrates promoted by electiō: & that
not a part of the people but the very same States that elected, by their common cōsent may forsake their Gouernor; if he shew himself vnworthy of the regimēt: but whether he meane they may do this by the law of God in all kingdoms or by the lawes of the Lande in some places, these wordes doe not expresse, only hee sayth they that promoted any, may iustly for these causes depose them: which we grant to be true, if the lawes of the Realme warrant the promoters in that action as in some places they doe. If his meaning be otherwise, as we see not his reasons, so we receiue not his speaches, though by his owne wordes he bee cleane out of our question: for he saith not that men may beare armes against inheritours, but that they which choose one Gouernour, haue the same right to choose another if hee be vnfit: which is nothing to Princes that inherite, nor to subiectes that are absolutely bound to obey: as in this Realme and some others they bee. Phi. So Luther also the Protestantes Elias being asked his opinion of the Al∣manes confederacie,The defence, cap. 4. The opinion and definitiō of Luther. Sled. hist. li. 8. made at Smalcalde against Charles the fift their lawfull and noble Emperour, answered: that in deede hee was in doubt for a time, whether they might take armes against their supreme Magistrate, or no: but afterward seeing the extremity of things, and that religion could not otherwise be defended, nor themselues: he made no conscience of the matter, but either Caesar, or any, waging warres in his name, might be resisted. Sleidan also recordeth that the Duke of Saxonie and the Lantzgraue, gaue this reason of their taking armes against their supreme Magistrate:Lib. 21. For asmuch (say they) as Caesar intendeth to destroye the true religion and our ancient libertie, he gi∣ueth vs cause enough, why we may with good conscience resist him, as both by prophane & sacred histories may be proued. The same writer reporteth the like of the Ministers of Magdeburge,Lib. 22. declaring how the inferiour may defend himselfe against the superiour, compelling him to doe a∣gainst the truth and rule of Christs lawes. Theo. It was skill not to report these places as you found them; least you should open their meaning which maketh nothing for you: and bewray your malice in omitting the limitation of their wordes to serue the licenciousnes of your weapons. Luther as a diuine taught constantly and truely that no Ma∣gistrate should be resisted, exception to that doctrine hee sawe none in the word of God, as at this day we doe not, but that subiection was due to the Magi∣strate were hee tyrant, heretike or infidell:What Luther taught of obe∣dience to magistrates. subiection he ment to obey the prin∣ces will if it were agreeable with Gods, or else to indure the sword if the Prince opposed himselfe against God: Yet when Charles the fift determined to warre with the Princes and cities that had renounced the Pope, and the Germane Lawyers made euident demonstration, that the free States by the lawes of the Empire might defend their liberty against Caesar him selfe if hee would im∣pugne it, to whom they were not subiect but with that condition: & no libertie more vrgent or necessarie than libertie of conscience, Luther not reuersing his former opinion, but expoūding himself with an other position which he alwayes
held, that the Gospel doth not bar nor abolish any politik lawes,Sleid. lib. 8. The Gospel doth not bar the politike lawes of any countrie. resolued that in such extremity, hauing the lawes of ye empire for their warrāt, which he knew not before, they might enter a league, not to displace Caesar as you do, but to de∣fend themselues and their ancient freedom against Caesar or any that would di∣sturbe them in Caesars name. This is the right intent o Luthers wordes: and this I weene you will hardly refute or conuert to your purpose. Sleid. lib. 8.Luther, saith Sleidā, had alwaies taught that the Magistrate should not be resisted: & his book of that matter was extāt. Yet whē the lawiers in that cō∣sultatiō had proued that the lawes (of the Empire) permitted resistāce in som cases,The Lawes of the Empire permit resi∣stance. & that this was one of those cases which the lawes did mention, Lu∣ther plainly cōfessed he was ignorant therof before, that any such thing was permitted (by the lawes of the empire) & because the gospel doth not repeal nor abolish the lawes of any cōmonwealth, & the time was now so doutfull & dangerous that not only the lawes themselues, but the very force of cōsci∣ence & necessity did leade thē to armes: he said they might make a league to defēd thēselues, though Caesar or any in is name, wold wage war against thē. The Duke of Saxony & the Lātzgraue made the same reply to the Emperor when they were proscribed by him,Sleid. lib. 18. not the 21. as you quote. The states of Germany not subiect to the Emperour but with conditiō. If the Emperor, say they, had kept his bōds & couenants, we would haue done our duties: but because he began first to make the breach, the fault is his. For since he attempteth to roote out religi∣on & subuert our liberty: he giueth vs cause enough to resist him with good conscience. The matter standing as it doth, we may resist, as may be shew∣ed both by sacred and profane stories. Vniust violence is not Gods ordināce, neither are we bound to him by any other reason, than if he keep the condi∣tions, on which he was created Emperour. Sleid. 22.The same defence was alleaged not by the ministers but by the magistrats of Magdeburg. So our religiō & liberty left vs by our forefathers may be permit¦ted we refuse no kind of duty that ought to be yelded to Caesar or the empire. Now by the lawes thēselues it is prouided that the inferior Magistrate shall not infringe the right of the superior: & so likewise, if the magistrate exceed the limittes of his power & cōmmaund that which is wicked,This is true in free States but not in ab∣solute sub∣iectes. not onely wee neede not obey him, but if he offer force wee may resist him. I aske not what fault you can find with their answere: but what propinqui∣ty or neernes hath your fact to theirs? They were magistrates and bare the sword in their own dominions:The differēce betwene the Ies. & the Ger∣manes resi∣stance. you are priuat men, & wāt lawful autority to vse the sword. Their states be free & may resist any wrōg by the lawes of ye Empire: you be subiects & simply bound by the lawes of your coūtry to obey the prince, or abide the pain, which the publike state of this realm hath prefixed. The germane Emperor is elected, & his power abated by the liberties & prerogatiues of his princes that ow not many seruices, & those cōdicional. The Queene of England inheriteth & hath one & the same right ouer all her subiects, be they Nobles or o∣thers. And that which is most to be detested in you: they hauing so good warrāt for their interprise did but ioin togither to saue thēselues, & their coūtries from
seruitude & subuersion: you hauing nor one of those reasōs to iustify your doings, take arms to pul the prince frō her throne & to shorten her dayes with violence. Phi. We haue better reason for our doings, than the Germans had for theirs. We haue the lawes of holy church & ye iudgemēt of Christs vicar to bear vs out. Theo. The church of christ hath not to do with deliuering or drawing ye tēporal sword. She cānot make lawes for princes crowns:No law per∣mitteth the Pope to de∣pose Princes, but that which is of his owne ma∣king. neither cā she licence priuate men to stād in armes against a Magistrat: much lesse cā the Pope, whose presum¦ptuus & proud medling wt the swords & scepters of earthly princes, no law, gods nor mans, but of his own making, did euer alow. If this be al the warrant you haue for bearing arms against your prince, ye Germans for ought y• I see may be commēded for retaining their liberty:The defence, cap. 4. & you not excused for impugning autority. Phi. The Protestantes of al sects do both hold & practise it, England it selfe specially alowing of the same. And therfore there is no treason in this case, if we folow the present diuinity of Englād, nor new exāple if we respect the furious attēpts & rebelliōs of Scot∣land, Flāders, Frāce, & Germany, against their superiors, for maintenāce of their here∣sie, & al wel alowed by the ministery of euery prouince. And vpō these exāples you shold look (my masters of Englād) whē you make so much adoe for one poore cōmotion, made in defence of the catholiks, in 26. yeares space of the greatest persecution & tribulatiō that euer was since Gothes & Vādals times. Where if the Q. had holden her ancestors faith & had ruled ouer so many protestāts but a quarter of the time, afflicting thē, as she hath done catholiks (though perhaps not her selfe so much as her vnmerciful Ministers) her Maiestie should haue seene other maner of attempts against her state and quietnesse, than haue fallen by Catholikes either in England or Ireland in this her raigne. Theo. A boulde face, & a bitter tongue bee your best obiections throughout your booke. The Protestants, you say, of al sects do both hold & practise it, England it selfe, specially allowing of the same. How loud a ly the first is, we haue already seen: now to the rest. The tumults of any subiects against their soueraignes as we do not alow: so may we not cōdemn the poore afflicted christians, our neighbors, before we heare them what they can say for their defence.The rage of popish perse∣cutors is able to set good men besides their byas. Admit thē to their an∣swere, & then if their attempts be like yours, or themselues of the same minde that you are, we reiect their doings, as hateful before God & man, no lesse than yours. Your Spanish inquisitions & French massacres, where you murdered men, women & children by 1000. & 10000. against the very grounds of al equi∣ty, piety, charity & humanity, without cōuicting, accusing, or so much as calling them before any iudge to heare what was misliked in them, are able to set graue men & good men at their wits ends: & to make them iustly dout, since you refuse the course of all diuine & humane lawes with them, whether by the law of na∣ture they may not defend themselues against such barbarous bloodsuckers: yet we stand not on that: if the lawes of the land, where they conuerse do not permit thē to gard their liues, when they are assaulted wt vniust force against law: or if they take arms as you do to depose princes, we wil neuer excuse thē frō rebelliō. Phi. Then they may resist, but we may not. Theo. Your liues are not hunted after for religiō as theirs be: nothing is attēpted against you wtout due course
and triall of law: towardes them no law is obserued; no punishment is laide on you,There is great diuersi∣tie in bearing armes, though we allow none if the lawes of the Land do not warrant the same. but by the full consent of the Nobles and Commons of this realme: & that openly decreed in Parliament. The Friers presume to put them to death vp∣on his sole authority that hath naught to doe with other mens subiectes: you meane to depriue Princes, they seeke no farther but to defende themselues: not denying to their princes any tribute, subiectiō or honor which the lawes of their Countrie require: onely they will not haue the Pope ouerrule Princes as his maner is, and tease them on to all kinde of tyrannyes. These bee differences e∣nough betweene your warres and theirs: and yet for my part I must confesse, that except the lawes of those Realmes doe permit the people to stand on their right if the Prince would offer that wrong, I dare not allow their armes. Phi. What their Lawes permit, I know not; I am sure in the meane time they resist. Theo. And wee, because wee doe not exactly know what their Lawes permit, see no reason to condemne their doinges without hearing their answere. Phi. Thinke you their Lawes permit them to rebell? Theo. I bu∣sie not my selfe in other mens common-wealthes as you doe, neither will I rashly pronounce all that resist to bee rebels: cases may fall out euen in christian kingdoms where the people may plead their right against the Prince, and not bee charged with rebellion.In some cases the nobles & cōmons may stand for the publike regi∣ment & lawes of their Coū∣trie. Phi. As when for example? Theo. If a Prince shoulde goe about to subiect his kingdome to a forraine Realme, or change the forme of the common wealth, from imperie to tyrannie: or neg∣lect the Lawes established by common consent of Prince and people, to execute his owne pleasure: In these and other cases, which might be named, if the No∣bles & commons ioyne togither to defend their auncient & accustomed libertie, regiment and lawes, they may not well be counted rebels. Phi. You denied that euen now, when I did vrge it. Theo. I denied that Bi∣shops had authoritie to prescribe conditions to kinges when they crowned thē: but I neuer denied that the people might preserue ye sundation, freedom & form of their common-wealth, which they forprised when they first consented to haue a king.Christian Kingdomes may settle their States with common consent of Prince and people, which the Prince alone cānot alter. Phi. I remember you were resolute that subiectes might not resist their Princes for any respectes, and now I see you slake. Theo. As I sayde then, so I say now, the Law of God giueth no man leaue to resist his Prince: but I neuer said that kingdoms and common-wealthes might not proportion their States as they thought best by their publike lawes, which afterward the princes thēselues may not violate. By superior powers ordained of God we vn∣derstād not only princes, but al politike states & regimēts, somwhere the people, somwhere the Nobles, hauing the same interest to the sword, y Princes haue in their kingdoms: & in kingdoms where princes beare rule, by ye sword we do not meane the princes priuate wil against his lawes: but his precept deriued frō his lawes, & agreeing wt his lawes: which, though it be wicked, yet may it not be re∣sisted of any subiect with armed violence. Mary when Princes offer their subiects not iustice, but force: and despise all Lawes to practise their lustes:The Princes sword is his law & not his lust. not euery, nor any priuate man may take the sword to redresse the Prince: but
if the lawes of the land appoint the nobles as next to the king to assist him in do∣ing right, & withhold him from doing wrong, thē be they licensed by mans law, & so not prohibited by Gods to interpose themselues for the safegard of equitie & innocencie:Princes may be staied frō tyranny by their owne realms, though not deposed. and by all lawfull and needefull meanes to procure the Prince to bee refourmed, but in no case depriued where the scepter is inherited. Phi. If I should assent to this, how doth it acquite your fellowes in Germa∣nie, Flaunders, France, and Scotland, that resist their Catholike Princes for maintenance of their heresies? Theo. Not vnlesse they proue their states to be such as I speake of. Phi. That they shall neuer. Theo. You be deeper in policie than in diuinitie: that belike fitteth your affection better: and yet therein you shew but what a malicious conceit and a slipperie tongue may soone suspect and vtter. It is easie for a running and rayling head to sit at home in his chamber and call all men rebelles, himselfe being the rankest; otherwise I see neither trueth in reporting, nor sense in debating the matters that are so often in your mouth. Why should the Germanes,Germanie. submitting themselues to the Emperour at his election but on conditiō, not enioy the same liberties & securities of their publik State which their fathers did before them? Why should they be counted rebels for preseruing their ciuill policie, more than Italians which cut them-selues vtterly from the Empire, by no consent nor allowance, but only by force and disturbance? The like we say for the Flemmings.Flaunders. What reason the King of Spaine should alter their State, and euert their auncient Lawes, his stile declaring him not to be King but Earle of Flaunders? And being admitted for a pro∣tectour if hee wil needes become an oppressour, why should they not defend the freedome of their countrie? The Scottes what haue they doone besides the placing the right heire and her own sonne when the mother fledde and forsooke the realme?Scotland. Be these those (furious attempts and rebellions) you talke of? In France the King of Nauarre and the Prince of Condey might lawfully defend themselues from iniustice and violence,Fraunce▪ and be ayded by other Princes their neighbours, if the King as too mightie for them sought to oppresse them, to whom they owe not simple subiection but respectiue homage as Scotland did to England, and Normandie vnto Fraunce when the Kings notwithstand∣ing had bitter warres ech with other. The rest of the Nobles that did assist them: if it were the Kings act that did oppresse them and not the Guises: ex∣cept the Lawes of the land doe permit them meanes to saue the State from open tyranny: I will not excuse: and yet the circumstances must be fully knowen, before the fact can bee rightly discerned, with which I confesse I am not so exactly acquainted. But graunt you could find vs where PROTESTANTS haue taken armes in some one place or other for religion: their armes were defenciue: not inua∣siue, as yours are; they resisted the Popes inquisitions, not the lawes of their
Countries,The Iesuites forget how often the Ita∣lians haue rebelled both against the Emperour & against the pope himself, & in euery nation what dissentions & rebellions haue beene before our time. as you doe: they rescued their wiues and children from horrible butcherie; they depriued not Princes as you would. And yet all these impa∣rities considered, if I doe not shew by your owne stories an hundreth outra∣ges of your side for one of ours, I am content to lose the cause. Looke backe therefore, Sir Auditor, to your owne accompts, and view with shame enough how many rebellions your fellowes haue made within these last fiue hundreth yeres, how many Princes they haue displaced, poisoned, and murdered: and make no such tragicall exclamations at others for sauing them selues, and their innocent families from your cruell and incredible furies. Phi. We put you in mind of the Protestants in other Countries, because you make so much adoe, for one poore commotion in England made in defence of the Catholikes, in twentie six yeres of the greatest persecution and tribulation that euer was since the Gothes and the Vandals times. Theophi. That we had but one commotion in this realme, wee may thanke God and not you: you did your best by procuring inuasion abroade, and ripening rebellion at home, to multiplie that one to twentie six, twise tolde, but that the mightie hand of GOD did alwaies vnioint your deuises. The practises of the Iesuits wherewith this land is greeued and displeased.Neither make we not so much adoe that you did once rebell: but that you still seeke to continue the same by comforting forraine powers to enter the land, by disposing the heartes of all Catholikes, as you call them, within the realme to waite for that day, by maintaining and auouching the Popes wicked claime to depose Princes for a point of Christian faith, by canonising the Northerne rebels in your open writings for Martyrs; by proclaiming as you doe in this booke, such warres against the Prince to be Godlie, iust and honorable: and last of all by resoluing, directing, and encouraging Parry, So∣merfield, & other that with violent hands sought to attempt your soueraignes life.These be no pointes of re∣ligion, but flat treason. These be the things for which we make so much adoe, and which if there be but one iote of true religion or obedience in you, my masters of Rhemes, you would not so freshly approue and practise. The correction that is here laide on you, you euery where amplifie, with wordes of the highest and hoattest degree: as if it were tyranny to touche the hemmes of your garmentes, notwithstanding you seeke to pull the Crowne from the Princes head, and teach others to treadde the same path by your example;This easie pu∣nishment for twentie yeres sheweth the goodnesse of her dispositiō and the mild∣nesse of her regiment. but such is your daintinesse that you offering others fier and sword, neuer thinke it sharp enough: And tasting no quicker disci∣pline with vs for twentie yeres than the losse of two shillings by the weeke, or some restraint of libertie, crie out of the greatest persecution and tribulation that euer was since the Gothes and Vandals times. We speake of things that are in the eyes and eares of al men, what punishment did the Lawes of this realme the first twenty yeres of her maiesties raigne inflict to any recusant for religion but either imprisonment or amercement? Which was as easie as you coulde wish, till within these sixe or seuen yeeres, by the facilitie of the Lawe
which you despised, your attempts grewe so daungerous, that the Prince was forced for the repressing of your audacious aduenture, to temper her Lawes with more seueritie.This later se∣ueritie the Ies. haue prouo∣ked by their wilfulnesse. You must thanke your selues therefore if this latter affliction seeme some-what heauier: till you gaue the onset to put the bull in execution which depriued her highnes of the crowne, you were vsed with as much mercy and clemencie as was possible for a Christian prince to afford vn∣ruly subiects: whatsoeuer hath since fallen out must bee imputed not to her maiesties inclination, whereof you had so good proofe for twenty yeeres: but to your wicked and vndutifull affection, that were perplexed to see her liue and gouerne in so long happynesse, and therefore assayed to shorten her reigne. Philand. You neuer founde that affection in any Catholike. Theoph. Wee neede not search your affections for it: you haue made it an open point of your fayth which no Catholique as you teach must denie, though the affir∣ming of it shoulde cost him his life.The Iesuites make rebelli∣on a point of their Catho∣like faith, be∣cause they would the soo∣ner infect the people with it Philand. What doe wee teach? Theo. That if the Pope say the woorde, none of your Catholiques within this Realme must obey or accompt her Maiestie for Queene of Englande. And because you woulde bee sure to roote this perswasion in the heartes of your adherentes, you deliuer it them as a part of their fayth, which they must a∣uouche and much more execute, notwithstanding any daunger of death that may bee offered. Philand. Where doe wee teach so? Theoph. In the cases of conscience, wherewith you furnished the Iesuites that came into Englande. There to the 55. article when you bee asked whether, notwithstanding the bull (of Pius the fifth) that was giuen out,Casus conscien∣tiae qui hodie in Anglia occur∣runt sacerdoti∣bus comissis: artic. 55. And if you be asked, do you beleeue that the Bishop of Rome may licence you to beare armes against the Queene of England, and to kill her if you can, what must you an∣swere by this resolution of your but, I be∣leeue he may. or any bull that the Bishoppe of Rome can hereafter giue foorth, all Catholikes bee bounde to yeelde obedi∣ence, fayth and loyaltie to Queene Elizabeth as to their lawfull Prince and Soueraigne: you make this resolution, Qui hoc modo interrogat, illud quae∣rit, an id potuerit S. Pontifex facere? Cui quaestioni quid debeat Catholicus responde∣re, clarius est quàm vt a me hic explicetur. Sirogatur ergo Catholicus, credis Ro∣manum Pontificem Elizabetham potuisse exauthorare: respondebit non obstante quouis metu mortis, credo. Quaestio enim haec ad fidem spectat & exigit confessionem fidei. Hee that demaundeth this question, asketh (in effect) whether the Pope might do it or no. To the which demand what a catholik ought to an∣swere, it is plainer than that I need here to explicate. If therfore a catholike be asked, do you beleeue the Bishoppe of Rome may depriue Queene Eliza∣beth of her crowne? He must answere, not regarding any danger of death, I beleeue hee may. For this question is a point of fayth, and requireth the confession of (our) fayth. And your selfe in your defence of English Ca∣tholiks say: This was the right and power of Saint Gregorie (to depriue Princes) and this hath beene the fayth of Christian men euer sith our Countrie was conuerted. Why then are you so angrie that Iesuites should bee counted traytours, since you make treason to be a point of your fayth and religion? And howe iust cause
hath the Prince to banish you her land vnder payne of death, when you doe with this cunning inueighle her subiects to rebell against her? Phi. It is no treason to say the Pope may depose Princes. Theo. Much lesse is it a poynt of Christian fayth that the Pope may depriue the Queene of her Crowne;Till this posi∣tion be recan∣ted by the Ies. a traitour & a Iesuite cānot be sundered. as you falsly, absurdly and traiterously teach. Phi. The Pope receiued that power from Christ. Theo. If you did prooue it, you had some colour to beleeue it: but nowe you require all Catholikes boldly to put that into their Creede, which the Pope himselfe for a thousand yeeres was ashamed to professe. Phi. Hath hee not the keyes of the kingdome of heauen? Theo. But you must prooue hee hath the keyes of all earthly kingdomes. Phi. Hee may binde and loose. Theo. Sinnes hee may where hee hath charge: but no where Scepters. Phi. If Princes persist in sinne, hee may take their Scep∣ters from them. Theo. That is it, which all this while you were to prooue; you teach that for religion, which the woorde of GOD reiecteth for re∣bellion: you imbrace it as pietie, which the Church of Christ abhorred as iniquitie. Mat. 22. Princes not depriueable by any mortal man.Giue to Caesar, sayth the sonne of God, the thinges which are Caesars. The swoorde and scepter are Caesars: this therefore is a plaine precept to Peter him-selfe and all other Christians to suffer Caesar to enioy his owne. Nowe shewe you an other, that you may take from Caesar that which is Caesars. When one sayde,Luke. 12. Master, bid my brother diuide the inheritance with mee: the Lorde answered, man, who made mee iudge or diuider ouer you? If Christ would not meddle with priuate mens inheritances, as being without the compasse of his vocation, I pray you who could make the Pope iudge and dispo∣ser of Princes crownes? Our Sauiour being asked of Pilate what kingdome hee claymed, openly auouched my kingdome is not of this world;Iohn. 18. and you by one turne of the keies which he gaue to Peter and the rest of his Apostles, would bring all the kingdomes of the woorlde to bee at the Popes appointing. S. Augustine assureth Princes by force of these words,August. in Psal 47. that they shall not need to feare depriuation of their earthly kingdoms at Christs hands. Why enuy you, sayth he, ye kings? Marke & enuie not. (Christ) is a king, but farre otherwise (than you are) which sayd my kingdome is not of this world. Feare not ther∣fore lest the kingdome of this worlde bee taken from you; (rather) an other kingdome shall bee giuen you and that of heauen where hee is king.Ibidem. And so expressely resolueth: Kinges ought not to feare lest they loose their king∣dome, or that their kingdome bee taken from them, as wretched Herode feared. Which is vtterly against you, that make it a point of your fayth, for the Pope to take not onely their kingdomes from them but also their liues. Phi. That wee meane when they will not otherwise obey. Theo. By your construction & meaning the world is well amended with you. For where the holy Ghost commandeth Prelates, Popes and all others to bee subiect to Princes, you with the cunning of your keyes giue the Spirit of God the plaine lip, and chalenge not onely right to rule them, but power to depriue them at
your pleasures. And this haynous impietie, lest the simple should distrust it,The Iesuites make the Popes pride a poinct of Christian faith. you ouer-spred with a couer of the Catholike fayth, as if the Popes ambition, and your sedition, were lately become parts of Christes doctrine. Phi. In obedience to the keyes wee put no difference betweene princes and priuate persons. Theo. Proue that of priuate persons, which you presume touching Princes, and we will agnise the rest, though wee neede not. Philand. What shall wee proue? Theo. That the Popes keyes by Gods Lawe reach vnto the goods or landes of the meanest subiect in this Realme.The Popes keyes extēd not to the goods or lāds of the poorest subiect in this realme. Phi. I pro∣ued that before, by the dealing of Peter with Ananias, and of Paul with Elimas. Theo. And I answered you before, that from Gods miraculous woorking by their mouthes, to your ordinarie calling and attempting the like with your handes, is no good argument. And therefore they might pronounce the woord, and not bee murderers, because the fact was Gods and not theirs: you can not execute the Popes censures, without actuall conspiring and rebelling against your Prince, which God hath prohibited. If then you may not offer the poo∣rest crafts-man that is, that wrong, by the word of God; what groūd of christian religion can this be, that the Pope may take the sword and Scepter from the Prince, and commaund you to bee his helpers and coadiutours in that wic∣ked enterprise, whom the Apostle chargeth to giue tribute, custome, feare and honour to superiour powers that haue the swoorde in Gods steede to rewarde good, and reuenge euill? Phi. May not the shepheard reclaime the sheepe, if they will not bee ruled? Theo. But no good sheepheard lameth or killeth his sheepe though they will not bee folded; and yet similitudes bee no syllogismes. I trust you will not claime that same dominion ouer Princes, which owners haue ouer their sheepe and oxen. Phi. No, but I shewe you by this example that correction is per∣mitted, where direction is refused. Theo. Pastours haue their kind of correc∣tion euen ouer Princes,Pastours haue their kind of correction ouer Princes, but that is far from depri∣uation. but such as by Gods law may stand with the Pastors vocation, and tend to the Princes saluation; and that exceedeth not the worde and Sacraments: other correction ouer any priuate man, Pastours haue none, much lesse ouer Princes. Phi. Yeas they may force them to repentance if they can not perswade them.The Pastor cannot force his flock. Theo. Princes may force their subiects, by the temporall sworde which they beare: bishoppes may not force their flocke with any corporall or externall vio∣lence. Chrysostome largely debateth and fully concludeth this matter with vs.Chrysost. de sacerdot. lib. 2. If any sheepe, sayth he, goe out of the right way, & leauing the plentifull pa∣stours graze on barren and steepe-places, the sheephearde somewhat exal∣teth his voyce to reduce the dispersed and stragling sheepe,Pastours may not cōstraine but only per∣swade. and to compell them to the flocke. But if any man wander from the right pathe of the chri∣stian fayth, the Pastor must vse great paynes, care, and patience. Neque enim vis illi inferenda, neque terrore ille cogendus, verùm suadendus tantum, vt de inte∣gro ad veritatem redeat. For hee may not be forced, nor constrayned with ter∣ror, but only perswaded to returne againe to the truth. And again, A (Bishop)
can not cure men with such authoritie, as a sheepheard doeth his sheep. For a sheepeheard hath his choyce,Ibidem. to bynde his sheepe, to diet them, to seare them, and cut them: but in the other case the facilitie of the cure consisteth not in him that giueth but onely in him that taketh the medicine. This that admirable teacher perceiuing sayd to the Corinthians: not that wee haue a∣ny dominion ouer you vnder the name of fayth, but that wee are helpers of your ioy. For of all men Christian (Bishoppes) may least correct the faults of men by force.Bishops least of al men may correct with force. Iudges that are without (the Church) when they take any transgressing the Lawes, they shewe them-selues to bee endued with great authoritie and power, and compell them in spite of their heartes to chaunge their manners. But here (in the Church) wee may not offer any violence,Compulsion neither lawful nor expedient in Bishops. but only perswade. Wee haue not so great authoritie giuen vs by the Lawes, as to represse offendours: and if it were lawfull for vs so to doe, wee haue no vse of any such violent power, for that Christ crowneth them which abstaine from sinne, not of a forced, but of a willing minde and pur∣pose. Hilar. ad Const. lib. 2. imperfect.Hilarie teacheth the same lesson. If this violence were vsed for the true fayth, the Doctrine of Bishoppes woulde bee against it. God needeth no forced seruice,Bishops may not meddle but with those that be wil∣ling. hee requireth no constrained confession. I can not receiue any man, but him that is willing: I cannot giue eare, but to him that intrea∣teth, I cannot signe any but him that (gladly) professeth. Origen agreeth with them both. See the wisedome of the holy Ghost. Because that other faults are iudged by the Lawes of Princes,Orig. in cap. 13. epist. ad Rom. and it seemed superfluous nowe to prohibite those thinges by Gods Lawe, which are sufficiently reuenged by mans,God will not haue crimes reuenged by the Rulers of the Church, but by the Iudges of the world. he repeateth those and none else as fit for religion, of which mans Lawe sayde nothing. Whereby it appeareth that the Iudges of this world, doe meddle with the greatest part of Gods lawe. For all the crimes which God woulde haue reuenged, hee would haue them reuenged not by the Bi∣shoppes and rulers of the Church, but by the Iudges of the worlde: & that Paul knowing rightly calleth (the Prince) Gods minister and iudge of him that doeth euill. Phi. Bishoppes may not offer force with their owne handes, but they may command others to doe it for them. Theoph. A grosse shift. As though tem∣porall Princes or Iudges did execute malefactours with their owne handes.Bishops by vertue of their calling cannot authorize vi∣olence or armes. Bishoppes by vertue of their vocation can not claime the swoorde: and conse∣quently they cannot commaunde or authorize any man to take the goodes or touche the bodies of Christians or Infidels. Which being a cleare conclusion, it is most euident they can much lesse licence you to take the Crownes, and touch the liues of Princes, to whome God hath deliuered the swoorde to iudge the earth,Rom. 13. and made them seruants only to himselfe, since all other soules must bee subiect to them by the tenor of his own prescription and their first erection, as the Scripture witnesseth. Phi. Say what you will, it is religion, it is no treason to defende that the
Pope may lawfully depose Princes for tyrannie and heresie. Theoph. It is easie for you to multiplie woordes: you haue stoare of them as appeareth by your Apologie and defence of English Catholikes which consist of nothing else: but the Popes power to depriue princes,Defendor of the Popes power to de∣pose princes are no Mar∣tyrs but hai∣nous traitors. is a matter of more dependence than may bee ouer-ruled with a fewe piked and well couched tearmes. You must therefore exactly and directly prooue the Popes authoritie to depose Prin∣ces (which you shall neuer bee able to doe) or else hee for attempting it is the man of sinne exalting him-selfe in the Church of GOD, and you for defending and executing the same, lacke not many degrees of high and hay∣nous treason. The carying of this in your owne heartes,The maintai∣ners & abet∣tours of this power put to death, and none els. and reconciling of others with∣in the realme that they might bee readie to receiue this impression at your mouthes, when tyme should serue, were the very causes why some of your fel∣lowes tasted of her maiesties iust and prouoked indignation: and if it be tyran∣nie for the Prince to put them to death, that lay plottes to haue her crowne, and her life, and write bookes to auouch it lawful for themselues, and all others so to doe, when the Pope sayth the word: then her highnes hath done you some wrong: but if by diuine and humane recordes it bee damnable in the subiect to attempt or abet any such thing: and most laudable in the Prince to reuenge the consenter and encourager as well as the doer: then, for religion hath none of your side beene martyred in England, as your shamelesse eloquence would en∣force, onely some were executed for affirming, publishing, and furdering the Popes Antichristian power to rule realmes and depriue Princes: which you call religion, because you would plant it in the peoples hearts with lesse labour, and more liking, though in deede it be pestilent pride in him, and a plaine con∣tempt of God and the Prince in you that should obey. Phi. M. Iohn Slade and M. Iohn Body, two famous confessours,The defence, cap. 1. An. 1583. M. Slade. M. Bodie. were they not condemned to death in publike iudgement for confessing their fayth of the Popes spiri∣tual soueraigntie, and for denying the Queene to bee head of the Church of England, or to haue any spirituall regiment▪ and that twise at two diuers sessions (a rare case in our countrie) the later sentence being to refourme the former, (as we may gesse in such strange proceedings) which they perceiued to bee erroneous and vnsufficient in their owne Lawes? Theo. Promotions are rife at Rome: you would not else so soone aduance two frowarde and rude companions for masters & martyrs. Their iudge∣ment was twise giuen, not, (as you peruersly, yet after your manner, in∣terprete) the later to reforme the former as erroneous and vnsufficient, but for that they complayned they were drawen afore they were ware and against their wils, to vtter speaches against the Princes sworde, for which they were condemned: the grace & mercie of the Prince was such, that her highnesse was content they should bee tried the seconde tyme, (to see whether those words were vnaduisedly and vnwillingly spoken as they pretended, or of set mischiefe & malice) and warned by the Iudge to take good heede, and looke wel about thē
before they rashly offered themselues to the danger of the Lawes. Where, if they fell againe openly and lustily to auouch that the Pope was supreme head of the Church of England, and consequently the Queene had no right to make lawes as shee had doone, but was subiect to the Popes Decrees and censures, which is the maine ground of all your rebellion, and his presumption: who be∣sides you that are yoked in the same cause with them, will say they died for re∣ligion, and not rather for their wilful charging the Prince with vsurpation, & yeelding the Pope that dominion which hee claimeth ouer kingdomes, and you would faine establish with your vntrue surmises? Phi. The question of Peters keyes is it not a matter of meere religion?The question of Peters keyes as the Iesuites ex∣pound thē is no religion. Theo. If you draw Princes crownes and swordes within the limits of Peters keyes, you leaue religion, and hatch rebellion. Phi. Yet is it a question, whereof di∣uines do doubt. Theo. You may doubt what you list, to flatter the Pope, but your doubting may not stoppe Princes from defending that which is their owne, against the Popes vniust claime and vnlawfull force. The Prince stri∣ueth not with the Pope neither for the dignitie which hee taketh aboue all Bi∣shoppes, nor for the power which hee seeketh to bind and loose sinnes in heauen, (though therein hee doeth the Church of Christ great wrong and oppresseth his brethren:To subiect the Princes sword or Crowne to the Popes courtes and Buls is treasō by our Lawes▪ the rest of his vsurped pow∣er is heresie, not treason.) but onely for her right to commaund and punish within her own Realme in ecclesiasticall causes and crimes, (as well as in temporall, which I haue largely prooued euery Prince may within his owne Dominion) and for the wrong that her maiestie receiued, when shee was depriued of her crowne by him that had no warrant from Christ to disquiet her state or dispose her crown. These bee the pointes comprised in her highnes Lawes. Against these if your rash and ill aduised brethren woulde runne headlong to their owne perdition, when they were admonished by the magistrate to haue better regarde to their wordes; they haue the iust rewarde of their vnfaythfull and disloyall heartes, and my assertion is true that these two ignorant, yet obstinate persons, with some others which came not to any particular mention of the Popes bull a∣gainst the Prince, but generally stoode in defence of that power to be good and lawfull, from whence the bull proceeded, died in the same quarell with the rest that purposely promoted, defended and assisted the bull; and so can bee no wit∣nesses of Christes trueth and glory, which woulde needes cast away their liues for the Popes pride and tyrannie. Phi. These treasōs be no trifles.It is hard dealing to make such trifles treasons. Theo. Call you those trifles, when Princes shall lose their kingdomes, and their people free∣ly rebell, and you defende the warres of their owne subiects against them to be iust and honourable, by vertue of that power which you attribute to the Pope, when you make him head of the Church? Had you liued in Saint Augustines dayes, you would haue sayde it had beene harder dealing that one word against the Christian Emperours although they were dead shoulde be counted treason.August. contra literas Petil. lib. 2. cap. 92. Thou doest promise, sayth Augustine to Petilian, that thou wilt reckon ma∣ny of our Emperours and iudges, WHICH BY PERSECVTING YOV,
PERISHED: and concealing the Emperours thou meanest two Iudges or Deputies. Why didst thou not name the Emperours of our cōmunion? were thou afraid to bee accused as guiltie OF TREASON? where is your courage which feare not to kill your selues? To say that Emperours PERISHED FOR PERSECVTING, was Treason in his tyme: In our age you thinke it much that reproching of Princes as tyrants and heretikes, & ayding the Pope with your perswasions, absolutions, & rebellions to take their crownes from them, should be punished, or adiudged Treason. Phi. There is no law so rigorous but your diuinitie wil serue you to defend it. Theo. What is against your duetie to God and your Prince, in that I am a diuine, I may iustly debate: what punishment the Prince will appoint for such offences as be committed against her, neither you, nor I haue to doe with it. We may do better to learne obedience, than sawcely to check the magistrate for allotting such penalties as we do not like, yet this I wil say, there is no con∣spiracie so pernicious and dangerous to the State, as that which is secretly crept into the hart vpon a sense of deuotion,No cōspiracie so dangerous as that which possesseth the heart vnder a shew of religi∣on. and outwardly couered with a shew of religion. If therfore the Prince seuerely reuenge both your pretences in opi∣nion, & practises in execution, absurdly grounded on Peters keyes, and wicked∣ly deriued thence for the remouing of her crowne, defacing of her person, and diminishing of her right, that rigor may wel be defended as comming from iust and lawfull authoritie not without sufficient and euidet necessitie:Peters keyes wickedly wre∣sted to com∣maund the swordes and dispose the crownes of Princes. neither can you bring ought against it, but onely that you professe it, as a point of your Catholique religion: not of any sinister or direct intention to hurt her maiestie or any other Christian Prince, which is most friuolous & false. For the Popes authoritie, iurisdiction and power, lately claymed by him, and vsurped within this Realme, and since maintained, extolled and defended by you and such your adherents as haue suffered death, to prescribe Lawes as hee list, to commaund Princes, and interdict their Realmes, yea to depriue them of their crownes, absolue their subiects, licence rebellions, and dispence with the murdering of heretikes as you call them,A lewd deceit of the Iesuites to call that religiō which is none. euen of Princes themselues. This authoritie, iuris∣diction and power, we deny to bee any doctrine or doubt of Christian religion, or to bee so much as once spoken or thought of, I say not by the Scriptures (which put no difference betweene the Pope and an other Bishoppe,) but by a∣ny father or Councell for a thousande yeeres in the Church of God. It was the meere deuise and drift of Antichrist to make himselfe mightie, when it was first attempted by Hildebrand, and it is nowe coloured by you with the name of re∣ligion, because you would poyson the people the sooner with that perswasion, & haue somewhat to say for your selues when you be charged with rebellion and disobedience to the temporall magistrate. Phi. Your owne masters and leaders,Apol. cap. 4. sect. 21. Magdebur. in praefat. Cent. 7. Cal. in 7. cap. Amos. whom I trust you will not condemne for Traytours, haue detested the title of Supreme head of the Church, in princes, as well as wee, the Lutherans flatly controling it in generall, and Caluin himselfe with all the Puritants much misliking and reprehending the first grant therof
to king Henry. Why then put you poore men to death for that which your owne side abhorreth? Theo. Your brethren were not put to death, for denying her ma∣iestie to bee supreme head of Christes Church in Englande in causes ecclesiasticall, though Bodie said so at Andeuer, but he lied the more. one of them for want of trueth or wit, did so report at his end: and you for lacke of better proofe haue brought his owne woordes spoken in fauour and excuse of himselfe, as some worthie witnes. No man is compelled by the lawes of this Realme to confesse any such title in the Prince, much lesse punishable by death for denying it; and therefore your martyr was a Lyer at the houre of his death, and either of malice inuerted, or of ignorance misdeemed the cause for which he dyed. Phi. It is all one to bee head of the Church and to bee chiefe Gouernour in causes ecclesiasticall.Apol. cap. 4. sect. 21. Theo. They suffered neither for the one, nor for the other; but for 1. Elizabethae: The statute vpō the which they were cō∣demned. maintaining and defending the iurisdiction and power of the Bishop of Rome heretofore claymed and vsurped in this Realme: which generall in∣cludeth all your erroneous and trayterous assertions of the Popes power ten∣ding no way to religion, but only sauouring of the Popes pride to be ruler and displacer of Princes. And therfore either proue that claime to pertaine to faith, or leaue your vayne presuming, and fond discoursing that a number of your bre∣thren haue beene condemned and executed for meere matter of religion. Though you list to take that for spirituall which is temporall, and cal it religion, which in deede is sedition, yet your idle multiplying of words, and changing of names, doeth not conuince your quarrel to bee righteous, or the Lawes of this Land to bee tyrannous. Shewe that power, iurisdiction and authorite, which your holy father hath heretofore claymed and vsed in this realme, to bee consonant to the lawes of God, or church of Christ for a thousand yeres, and wee will yeeld your friends and familiars haue dyed for religion: otherwise you do but face out the matter with fierie words, to keepe deceiued and simple sules from suspecting the secrets of your profession. Popish Bi∣shops were the first that consented to haue the king called su∣preme head.As for supreme head of the church: it is certaine that title was first transfer∣red from the Pope to king Henry the eight by the Bishops of yor side, not of ours: & though the pastors in King Edwards time, might not wel dislike, much lesse disswade the stile of the crowne, by reason the king was vnder yeres and so remained vntil he died, yet as soone as it pleased God to place her maiestie in her fathers throne, the Nobles & preachers perceiuing the words, head of the church, (which is Christs proper and peculiar honour,) to be offensiue to many that had vehemently refelled the same in the Pope, besought her highnesse the meaning of that word which her father had vsed might be expressed in some ap∣ter & plainer termes,A plainer stile receiued to a∣uoide offence and so was the Prince called Supreme gouernour of her Realme, that is ruler and bearer of the sworde with lawfull authoritie to com∣mand and punish answerably to the word of God in all spirituall, or ecclesiasti∣call thinges, and causes, as well as in temporall. And no forraine Prince or pre∣late to haue any iurisdiction, superiority, preeminence, or authority, to establish, prohibite, correct, and chastice with publike lawes or temporall paynes, any
crimes or causes ecclesiasticall or spirituall within her Realme. This Caluin and they of Magdeburge neuer misliked: howsoeuer you would seeme to take aduantage of their words. Phi. Caluin sayth it is sacrilege and blasphemie. Looke you therefore with what consciences you take that othe,Supreme head no more blasphemous in the Prince than in the Pope to whō the Iesuites giue that stile. which your owne master so mightily dete∣steth. Theo. Nay looke you with what faces you alleage Caluin, who maketh that stile to be sacrilegious and blasphemous as well in the Pope, as in the Prince: Reason therefore, you receiue or refuse his iudgement in both. If it derogate from Christ in the Prince, so doeth it in the Pope; if it doe not in the Pope, as you defend, no more doeth it in the Prince. Yet we graunt the sense of the word supreme, as Caluin conceiued it by Steuen Gardiners answere, and behauiour,Caluin mi∣stook supreme by Gardiners wily suggestiō, is very blasphemous and iniurious to Christ, and his word, whether it bee Prince or Pope that so shall vse it. For by supreme Caluin vnderstoode a power to do what the Prince woulde in all matters of religion without respect to the will, or precepts of God: which is a thing most impious. Phi. His woordes are,Caluin. in 7. Amos. Cal. Ibidem. They were blasphemers in calling him supreme head of the Church vnder Christ. Theo. They are so: but that which goeth before & followeth after, sheweth in what sense he tooke the word supreme. At this day, sayth he, where Poperie continueth, howe many are there which lode the king with all the right and power they can, that there should be no disputing of religion, but this authoritie should rest in the king alone, to ap∣point at his pleasure what hee list, and that to stande good without contra∣diction. They that first so highly aduanced king Henry of England, were in∣considerate, they gaue him supreme power of all thinges, and that was it which alway wounded me.Steuen Gar∣diner expoun∣ded supreme as if the prince might doe what he would in mat∣ters of religiō without re∣gard of God o his word. Then succeede your wordes; and withall a parti∣cular exemplication howe Steuen Gardiner alleaged and constred the Kings stile in Germanie. That Iuggler, which after was Chauncelour, I meane the Bishop of Winchester, when hee was at Rentzburge, neither would stande to reason the matter nor greatly cared for any testimonies of the scriptures, but said it was at the kinges discretion to abrogate that which was in vse, & ap∣point new. (He said) the king might forbid priests mariage, the king might barre the people from the cup in the Lordes supper, the king might deter∣mine this or that in his kingdome. And why? Forsooth the king had supreme power. This sacrilege hath taken hold on vs (in Germanie) whiles Princes think they cannot raign,How Caluine vnderstoode Supreme head. except they abolish al the authoritie of the church, & be thēselues supreme Iudges as wel in doctrin, as in al spirituall regiment. This was the sense, which Caluin affirmed to bee sacrilegious and blas∣phemous, for Princes to professe them-selues supreme Iudges of Doctrine and discipline, and in deede it is the blasphemie which all godly heartes re∣iect and abomine in the Bishoppe of Rome. Neither did King Henry take any such thing on him for ought that wee can learne: But this was Gardiners Stratageme to conuey the reproche and shame of the sixe articles from him∣selfe, and his fellowes that were the authors of them, and to cast it on the
kings supreme power.Supreme must be refer∣red to pesōs and not to things. Had Caluin been told that supreme was first receiued to declare the Prince to be superior to the Prelats (which exempted themselues from the Kings authoritie by their Church liberties and immunities) as well as to the Lay men of this realme, and not to bee subiect to the Pope; who clay∣med a iurisdiction ouer all Princes and Countries: the woorde woulde neuer haue offended him; but as this wylye foxe framed his answere, when the Ger∣manes communed with him about the matter, wee blame not Caluin for mi∣staking, but the Bishop of Winchester for peruerting the kings stile, & wresting it to that sense which all good men abhorre. Phi. Do not you at this day make the Queene supreme Gouernour of al ec∣clesiasticall doctrine and discipline? And what discrepance I pray you between Iudge and Gouernour? Theo. You may be Steuen Gardiners scholer, you bee so wel trained in his methode, and maximes. Wee told you long since and often enough, if that will serue, the prince by her stile doth not chalenge, neither do we by our othe giue her highnes power, to debate, decide, or determine any point of fayth or matter of religion, much lesse to bee supreme iudge or gouernour of all doctrine and discipline: But if in her realme, you will haue the assistance of the magistrates swoord to settle the trueth,We giue the Prince no right to bee iudge of religion, but power to re∣ceiue & settle in her realme that which is good both in doctrine & discipline. and prohibite error, and by wholesome punishments to preuent the disorders of all degrees, that authoritie lieth nei∣ther in Prelate nor Pope, but onely in the Prince: and therefore in her Domi∣nions you can neither establish doctrine nor discipline by publike Lawes with∣out her consent. This neither Caluin, nor the compilers of the Centuries, nor a∣ny other of sound religion euer did, or iustly can mislike: onely, Iesuites & their adherents would faine reserue this power to the Pope in al Christian realmes, because they be sure he will allowe and suffer no religion but his owne: and so long their profession shall not miscarie. Phi. The Centurists say: Princes may not bee heads of the Church, that primacie is not fit for them. Theo. That word if they mislike, wee stand not for it. The holy Ghost hath inuested the sonne of God with it, and therefore rea∣son princes euen for reuerence to him should forbeare the stile which hee first v∣sed, & most esteemeth. And though some defence might be brought for the word, as that which Samuel said to Saul,1. Sam. 15. When thou wast litle in thine own sight, wast thou not made HEAD of the tribes of Israel? For the Lorde annoynted thee king ouer Israel: and that which Dauid sayth of himself,2. Sam. 22.Thou hast made me HEAD of the heathen: and that which Esai saith of the king of Syria, Esai. 7.THE HEAD of Aram is Damascus, and the HEAD of Damascus, is Rezni: and again, Esai. 9.the honorable mā he is the HEAD; as also S. Paul:1. Cor. 11. the man is the womans HEAD: & Chrysostom not sticking to call certaine women that laboured in the Gospel,Chrysost. in ca. 4. ad Philip. homil. 13.HEAD OF THE CHVRCH at Philippi: and saying of Theodosius the Emperor, Idem homil. 1. ad Papil. Anti∣och.Summitas & caput omnium super terram hominum, SVPREME AND HEAD of all mortall men: Though these and many like places might bee brought to auouche the worde, HEAD; yet because that title, HEAD OF THE CHVRCH, rightly and properly belongeth onely to Christ, & not to Princes
without many mitigations and cautions:Head of the Church be∣longeth pro∣perly to Christ. and head as it is applied to Prin∣ces is al one with Supreme, for it importeth but the chiefest or highest person of the Church on earth: and with the regiment of the Church whereof Christ is head, I meane his mysticall bodie, Princes haue nothing to doe, yea many times they be scant members of it: and the Church in each countrie may stand without Princes as in persecution it doth, and yet they not headlesse; we thinke not good to contend with our brethren for wordes, and to greeue their eares with titles first abused by the pope, and first reproued in him, so long as in mat∣ter and meaning there is no discord betwixt vs. Phi. Will you make vs beleeue, they mislike nothing but the wordes head of the Church? Theo. Yeas they mislike, that Princes should mingle trueth with falsehood, and temper religion with corruption as their priuate fancies lead them, which we mislike no lesse than they. This is the scope (of our speach) say they, that it is not lawful for ciuill Magistrates to deuise formes of reli∣gion in destruction of the truth:Praefat. 7. Centuriae. Princes may not be deui∣sers of new religions. and so to reconcile truth and error that they may both be lulled asleepe. They may not prescribe religions alone, they must not ingender new articles of the faith; they must not strangle the trueth with errors, and shackle it when it is reueiled, that they may let loose the bridle to corruption. These be the points which they dislike, and we be as farre from approuing any such thing in Princes, as you or they. Phi. If the Prince establish any religion,We may by our oth serue God & not men, if their lawes dissent from his. whatsoeuer it be, you must by your oth obey it. Theo. We must not rebel and take armes against the prince, as you affirme, you may: but with reuerence and humilitie serue God before the Prince, and that is nothing against our oth. Phi. Then is not the Prince supreme. Theo. Why so? Phi. Your selues are superiour, when you will serue whom you list. Theo. As though to serue God according to his will were to serue whom we list, and not whom Princes and all others ought to serue. Phi. But you will be iudges, when God is well serued and when not. Theo. If you can excuse vs before God, when you mislead vs, we wil serue him, as you shall appoint vs:We be subiect to Princes in that we must suffer, not in that we must obay whatso∣euer they cō∣maund. otherwise if euerie man shal answere for himselfe, good reason he be master of his owne conscience in that which toucheth him so neere, and no man shall excuse him for. Phi. This is to make euery priuate man supreme iudge of religion. Theo. The poorest wretch that is may be supreme Gouer∣nour of his owne hart: Princes rule the publike and external actions of their Countries, but not the consciences of men: and therefure this thwartling is to no purpose. Phi. By what authoritie then in the first Parliament of the Queenes highnesse raigne,Apol. c. 4. sect. 6. was the determination, decision and definition of truethes or of heresies and errors; of the true worship of God and the false, attributed to that Court of the states no lesse or rather more than to the foure first or any other general Councel: to which the deciding of such things is there granted with this limitation, so far as they can warrant their doings by the expresse wordes of Canonical Scriptures, and no farther: but to the Parliament absolutely, decreeing at the same time, that nothing there
determined should be counted heresie, errour or schisme, what order, decree, sentence, constitution, or law so euer were to the contrarie, the holy Scriptures themselues not excepted. Theo. The Iesuites as bold with the Parliamēt as they bee with the Prince.It is no wonder to see you quarel with the court of the Sates, that are so busie with the Princes Crowne. And therein, as in the former, your beha∣uiour doth not change. For entring with a manifest vntrueth, and keeping on a course of emptie and haughtie wordes, which is your glorie, you tell vs at length with pride enough, that our Lawes be strange and vnnatural dealings, proceedings dishonourable to her MAIESTIE and the Realme,Apol. cap. 4. sect. 10. against Gods expresse commaundement lymiting his constant and permanent trueth, to mortall mens willes and fancies, violent disorders, which to all our posteritie must needes breede shame and rebuke, vniust, and therefore bind not in conscience; repugnant to the dignitie and priuiledges of the Church, against the oth of the makers, and in deed no Lawes at all, the makers lacking competent power, authoritie and iurisdiction to proceed iudicially and authentically to heare, determine and define  giue sentence in any such things as be meere ecclesiasticall, with a number of those bold and state∣ly bragges, hauing neither proofe of your part, nor reproofe of ours, but only pretending certain legalities, quiddities & solemnities of humane iudgements, which in Gods cause be very ridiculous, and in matters of faith more than su∣perfluous.God will not be tied to the forme of hu∣mane iudge∣ments. For God will not haue his trueth depend either on the numbers or qualities of persons; and when his word is offered, we may not stand stagge∣ring till the Pope and his Cardinals please to assemble, and there iudicially and authentically heare and determine what they thinke good, which I winne they wil neuer against themselues. The Church planted with∣out any iudi∣cial processe.Christ sent not iudges with iudicial processe, but a few disciples with the sound of their voices to conuert the world; the Prophetes that taught the peo∣ple of God, and reproued both Priests and Princes, vsed no legall nor authen∣ticall proceedings, but a bare proposing the will of God to such as woulde be∣leeue. The Kings and Princes before Christ that subuerted Idols and re∣fourmed religion in their realmes relyed on their Princely Power and zeale, for the doing of that seruice, and not on the ceremoniall and sententiall acts and decrees of Priests or Prophets. The Christian Princes, take which you will, that first receiued and after restored the faith in their Empires and kingdomes, tied not them selues to the voices and suffrages of the Clergie that were in present possession of their Churches: but often times remoued them without Councel or common consultation. You may do well to correct S. Paul, where he saith,Apol. cap. 4. faith commeth by hearing and hearing by the word of God: and to adde, faith commeth by sect. 19. iudiciall cognition, andsect. 12. competent iurisdiction of such as haue sect. 19. legall meanes to deliberate and pronounce of God and his trueth. Phi. Would you haue such disorder and confusion suffered in the Church, that euery man should follow what he list?Christ wil not be subiect to the voices of men. Theo. I would not haue such pre∣sumption or wickednesse brought into the Church, that Christ, or his worde should be subiected to the wils or voices of mortall men: for though the whole
world pronounce against him, or it, God wil be true and all men shall be liars. Phi. No more would wee. Theo. Why then restraine you trueth to the as∣semblees and sentences of Popes and Prelats, as though they must bee gently entreated and fayrely offered by Christ, before he might attempt or shoulde ex∣pect to recouer his owne. Phi. Wee would haue things done orderly. Theo. Call you that order, where Christ shall stand without doores till your Clergie consent t bring him in? Phi. God is not (the author) of confusion but of peace.He hath au∣thority enough that hath God on his side. Theo. It is no confusion for one familie, yea for one man to serue God though all the families and men of the same realme besides will not. Ioshua sayd to the whole people: Ios. 24.If it seeme euill vnto you to serue the Lorde, choose you this day whome you will serue, but I and myne house will serue the Lorde. Elias was 3. Kings. 19. left a∣lone for any that he sawe willing to serue God in Israel, and yet that abated not his zeale. Micheas alone 3. Kings. 22. opposed him-selfe against foure hundreth Pro∣phetes, with what iudiciall authoritie can you tell? Ieremie assured the Priests and Prophetes of Ierusalem that God would Ierem. 23. forsake them; and that hee did without any legall meanes that wee can read. Amos spared neither Amos. 7. Ieroboam the King, nor Amaziah the Priest, and yet he was but a simple heardman, and not so much as the sonne of a Prophet. Iohn Baptist had no competent iuris∣diction ouer the Scribes and Pharisees that sate in Moses chayre, and yet hee condemned them for Mat. 3.a generation of vipers. The Councels where Acts. 5. Peter, 6.Steuen, 23.Paul, and other of the Disciples were conuented, accused and puni∣shed, lacked none of your iudiciall formalities, and solemnities, and yet the A∣postles stoutly resisted and vtterly contemned both their deliberatiue, and their definitiue sentences. In deede your forefathers assaulted our Sauiour him-selfe with that very question;The wicked alwaies asked the godly for their authority. as also they did Iohn before him, and the Apostles after him. When the Lord was teaching in the temple, the chiefe Priestes and the elders of the people came vnto him and sayde,Mat. 21. by what authoritie doest thou these thinges? and who gaue thee this authoritie? When Iohn began to baptize, Ioh. 1.the Iewes sent priestes and Leuites from Ierusalem to aske him, WHO ART THOV? And when hee denyed him-selfe to bee either Elias, or the Prophete that was looked for, they inferred,Ioh. 1.Why Baptizest thou then, if thou bee neither Christ, nor Elias, nor the Prophete? And euen so they asked the Apostles,Acts. 4. by what power, or in what name haue you done this? Philand. The Apostles commission wee knowe, but yours wee know not.He that prea∣cheth the same doctrine which the A∣postles did, hath the same cōmissiō which they had. Theo. You can not bee ignorant of ours, if you knowe theirs. So long as wee teache the same Doctrine which they did, wee haue the same power and authoritie to preach, which they had. Keepe your competent iurisdictions, iudici∣all cognitions and legal decisions, to your selfe; the sonne of GOD first foun∣ded and still gathereth his church by the mouthes of Preachers, not by the summons of Consistories: and hee that is sent to preach may not holde his tongue and tarie, til my Lorde the Pope, and his mytred fathers can intende
to meete, and list to consent, to the ruine as they thinke, of their dignities and liberties. Phi. Despise you Councels? Theo. By no meanes, so long as they bee Councels, that is sober and free conferences of learned and godly teachers: but if they waxe wanton against Christ, and will not haue trueth receiued, vntil they haue consented, wee reiect them as conspiracies of the wicked, which no Christian ought to reuerence. Phi. One man preaching trueth hath warrant e∣nough against the whole worlde.Had you trueth on your side you sayd somewhat, but you hue it not. Theo. Then should that be the question betwixt vs: & not whether the Prince might make Lawes for Christ without your consents, or whether the Realme had competent power and authoritie to debate and determine without a Coun∣cell what religion they woulde professe. For though the Prince and the realme haue doone nothing herein, that Gods and mans Lawe doth not warrant, yet may wee not suffer you to stande on these quirks to delude God and his tueth:Tertul. de virg. velandis. against the which, as Tertullian sayth, no man may prescribe, not space of tymes, not patronage of persons, not priuilege of places. He therefore that defendeth trueth,The whole world drow∣ned for resi∣sting the prea¦ching of one man. is armed with authoritie sufficient though all the world were against him, as it was against Noah, when GOD saued him and drowned them, for a monument of his iustice, to quaile the route, and paire the pride of such as after shoulde resist the meanest seruaunt that hee woulde sende. Phi. Still you ground your selues, as if you had the trueth. Theo. If we haue,Whether side hath trueth must be the question, the rest is super∣fluous quare∣ling. the poorest Preacher in this Realme, hath lawfull power enough to pronounce the Pope and all his Cardinals to be heretikes: and therefore whe∣ther we haue or no must be the question. Phi. Wee say you haue not: and yet if you had, your proceedings in it are disorderly. Theoph. You must shew vs some reason. Phi. The Prince and Court of Parliament hath no more lawfull meanes to giue order to the Church and Clergie in these things, than they haue to make Lawes for the hierarches of Angels in heauen.Apol. cap. 4. sect. 21. Theo. Will you suffer God himselfe to make Lawes for his Church? Phi. What else? Theo. And may not euery pri∣uate man for his owne person embrace those Lawes,God must be obaied, when he cōmaun∣deth, whosoe∣uer dissent. which God hath made, whosoeuer say nay? Phi. Hee must. Theo. May not the Prince and the peo∣ple doe the like? Phi. They may no doubt embrace the Lawes of God. Theo. What if some Bishoppes will not agree they shall? must the Prince and the people cease to serue God till the Clergie bee better mynded? Phi. That is odiously spoken. Theo. But truely. The case betweene the Clergie and the Laytie in the first Parliament of her Maiesties raigne, was whether God shoulde bee serued according to his woorde, or according to the deuises and abuses of the Romish Church.The Iesuites cal it a disor∣der to obey God before the Bishops. The prince, as also the Nobles and cōmons submitted their consents to the word of God: the Bishops refused. The foundation of all the Lawes of our Countrie being this, that what the Prince and the most part of her Barons and Burgesses shall confirme, that shall stande for good, there was no disorder nor violence offered in that Parliament,
as you lewdly complaine, but that to publike protection which the Prince and most part had agreed on. Phi. In matters of faith the Prince and the laie Lords had no voices. Theo. In making lawes they had. Phi. True, but lawes for religion they might not prescribe. Theo. No more might Bishops: It is only Gods office to appoint how he wil be serued. Phi. Gods wil must be learned at the mouthes of Bishops. Theo. They must teach, leauing alwayes this libertie to the Prince and people, to examine their doctrine, and auoide their errours; and if they teach not truth, the Prince and people may repell them, as the Parliament did which you speake of. Phi. The decision of truth or heresie pertained not to that Court.Apol. cap. 4. sect. 6. Theo. They tooke it not vpon them. Phi. Yeas. The determination, decision and definition of truthes and errours,The Prince and the Par∣liament tooke not vpon thē the decision but the per∣mission & pro¦tection of trueth. of the true worshippe of God and the false is attributed to that Court no lesse or rather more than to the foure first, or any other generall councell. Theo. The simple Rustikes of our Countrie doe not so grossely conceiue of their actes and decrees as you doe that woulde seeme great maisters in Israell. For who knoweth not, that in diuers realms haue beene diuerse positiue lawes, and in this kingdome within our age cleane contrary Parliamentes? No man is therefore so foolish as to thinke it, neither is any besides you so malicious as to report it, that the temporall States of this Realme tooke vpon them the absolute deciding of truthes and errours aboue the four first generall Councels,Queene Mary by Parliamēt receiued the Pope, why might not Queene Eli∣zabeth doe as much for Christ? yea the holy scriptures themselues not excepted. Phi. What did they then? Theo. They submitted themselues and the publike state of this Realme, to the word of God, which by law they might, as well as the same Court six yeares before in the first of Queene Mary subiected this Realme to the Popes decrees and fansies. Phi. The Parliament of Queene Marie can not be misliked for admitting the faith of their fathers. Theo. Much lesse can the Parliament of Queene E∣lizabeth be reproued for receiuing the faith of Christ. Phi. The faith of Christ is in question: the faith of our fathers is not. Theo. The faith of Christ we bee bound to keepe,We be bound to the faith of Christ, not of our fathers. Deut. 32. the faith of our fathers we be not. Phi. Keeping the faith of our fathers we can not misse the faith of Christ. Theo. What priuilege had our fa∣thers more than we that they could not erre? Phi. Aske thy father, saith Moses, and he will shew thee; thine elders, and they will tell thee. Theo. Shall not we be fathers to our posteritie, as well as our ancestors were to vs? Phil. Yeas. Theo. Then must our children aske of vs, as we must of those that were before vs. If therefore we may erre, why might not our fathers as well erre in their generations before vs? Phi. They kept the steppes of their fathers,They be gone from the faith of their first fathers and egerly follow the blindnesse of their later fathers. which if you doe, you shall not erre. Theo. This is the next way round about to come to the wood. For how will you proue that euery generation which hath beene these 1500. yeares since Christ, hath precisely kept the rules and limites of their forefathers? Phi. You can not shew when or where they swarued. Theo. If wee could not, our igno∣rance in that point, is no great securitie for your faith. The defection of euerie
age from their fathers might be either not marked, or not recorded, or since oblitered; and therefore reason you proue your faith to haue descended from age to age without alteration, before we beleeue it to be the faith of your fathers. God hath not referred vs frō his word, to our fa∣thers.But what meaneth this that you prescribe that way to iudge of religion and the seruice of God, which God himselfe prohibiteth? Phi. Doth God forbid vs to follow our fathers? Theo. In as plaine wordes as can be spoken with a tongue: by the mouth of Ezechiel he saith, Walke ye not in the preceptes of your fathers,Ezech. 20. neither obserue their manners, nor defile your selues with their idols. I am the Lord your God, walke in my statutes, and keepe my iudgementes.Psal. 78. By Dauid he saith, Let them not be as their fathers were, a disobedient and rebellious generation: a generation that set not their heart aright, & whose spirit was not faithful vnto God. And dehorting them from their fathers steps:Psal. 95. To day, saith Dauid, if you wil heare (Gods) voice, harden not your harts, as in the day of cōtention, & as in the day of temptation in the wildernes, where your fathers tempted & proued me though they had seen my workes. Fourtie yeares did I contend with that generation, and saide, they are a people that erre in heart, they haue not knowen my wayes. By Zacharie he saith,Zach. 1. Be ye not, as your fathers, vnto whome the former Pro∣phetes haue cried saying, Thus saith the Lord of host, turne you now from your euill waies and from your wicked workes, but they would not heare nor harken vnto me saith the Lord. And what you count deuotion & humilitie for the people to follow their fathers, that God himself calleth defection & con∣spiracie.Ierem. 11. I haue protested vnto your fathers, euer since I brought them out of the land of Aegypt to this day, saying, obey my voice. Neuertheles they wold not obey, nor incline their eare, but euerie one walked in the stubbernesse of his wicked heart. And of the children doing as their fathers did he saith, A cō∣spiracie is found among the men of Iudah and among the inhabitants of Ie∣rusalem.Ibidem vers. 9. They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers that refu∣sed to heare my wordes. With what face then can you deale so earnestly with the simple subiectes of this Land, to regard neither God nor his word, but only to runne the race of their Elders, seeing God so straitly commaunded the chil∣dren of Israel to beware the pathes and presidentes of their forefathers? Phi. We must beware their wickednesse. Theo. Then may they be wicked and so no paterns for vs or any others to follow.Our fathers may erre, though his elect can not. Phi. The Iewes were wic∣ked. Theo. What charter can you shew, that christians shall not be the like? Phi. Hell gates shall not preuaile against the church of Christ. Theo. No more did they preuaile against the chosen and elect of Israel: but the greatest number and gaiest men are not alwaies the church of God.2. Tim. 2. The foundation of God standeth sure, and hath this zeale, the Lord knoweth who are his. Of his elect which are his true church our Sauiour hath pronounced it is not possible they Mat. 24. should bee deceiued: the rest haue no such priuilege; yea rather the ho∣ly Ghost forewarneth that all besides the elect shall bee deceiued.Mark. 13. Our Saui∣our
our saith, Mat. 24.There shal arise false Christes and false Prophetes, and shal shew great signes and wonders, so that, if it were possible, they should deceiue the verie elect. The rest then, which are not elect, they shall deceiue. And so S. Paul speaking of the verie same deceiuers,2. Thes. 2. addeth, whose comming is by the working of Satan with all power, and in all deceiueablenesse of vnrigh∣teousnesse among them that perish, because they receiued not the law of the truth, that they might be saued. And therefore God shall sende them strong delusion, that they should beleeue lies, that al they might be damned, which beleeued not the truth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. And S. Iohn speaking of the beast that made warre with the Saintes & had power ouer euerie kindred,Reue 13. All shall erre sauing the elect. and tongue, and nation, saith, Therefore all that dwell vpon the earth, shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life. So that the visible church, consisting of good & bad, elect and reprobate, hath no such promise, but she may erre: only the chosen of Christ which are the true members of his body,The elect can∣not be discer∣ned of men. properly called his church, they shall not erre vnto perdition: and those if you could point them out with your finger, the people might safely follow: otherwise if you set men to follow the rest of their fathers, be they neuer so many, neuer so graue, neuer so godly to your seeming: you bid them take the wide gate and broade way that leadeth to destruction,Mat. 7. be∣cause there were many that entered it before them. Phi. Will you make vs beleeue that our fathers are perished?To follow the greatest num∣ber is most dangerous. Theo. Who are perished, is not for vs to pronounce. They were his seruants that iudgeth iustly: neither haue we to medle with their doome, but to looke to our owne: yet this we can assure you,Mat. 22. that many be called and few chosen, And there∣fore if you aduise the people to imitate the multitude of their fathers, you teach them the right way to hell. And though wee may not iudge of your fa∣thers, yet knowe you for a certainty that God is not afraide to iudge them and condemne them, if they refused his truth, as you do. Neither is it any such daungerous doctrine to say that our forefathers haue sinned and displeased God,Our Fathers sinned and re∣belled against God. as you woulde make it: the godly haue alwaies confessed it of their fathers: and not spared to tell the wicked so much to their fates. Dauid slandered not his forefathers when he said:Psal. 106. We haue sinned with our fathers, we haue done wickedly. Our fathers vnderstood not thy won∣ders in Aegypt, neither remembred they the multitude of thy mercies, but rebelled at the Sea, euen at the red Sea. Daniell knewe what he pronounced when hee confessed:Dan. 9. O Lord to vs (belongeth) open shame, to our kinges, to our Princes, and to our fathers, because wee haue sinned against thee. Ezechiah was not ashamed to say:2. Chron. 29. Our fathers haue trespassed and done e∣uill in the eyes of the Lord our God, and haue forsaken him, and turned their backes. And loe, our fathers are fallen by the sword. Iohn told the Pharisees to their faces, their fathers were vipers, and them-selues vene∣mous, in saying,Mat. 3. 'Ye vipers brood; and Steuen ful of the holy Ghost rated the Iewes on this wise,Acts. 7. Ye stifnecked and of vncircumcised harts and eares, yee
haue alwaies resisted the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so doe you. It is therefore a straunge course that you take to make the people disobey God to fol∣low their fathers: and a stranger, that you freely permit all kinde of Infidelity and tyranny to your selues vnder the names of your fathers, as if the men that were before you could neither erre, nor shed innocent blood. Phi. What they could, we dispute not: wee say they did not. Theo. That must be proued, before you may propose their actes for your imitation. Their doings may bee doubted & disliked as well as yours, & so the labor is all one to iustifie theirs and yours.Our fathers cannot pre∣udice the trueth of God. Luke. 16. Times and persons do not preiudice the truth of God. It is permanent in all ages, & eminent aboue all things. If your fathers dis∣dained and pursued the truth as you doe, they were enimies to God as you are, notwithstāding their earthly dignities and other excellencies, which may seem precious in your eies, but are abominable in the sight of God, when men are voide of truth. Phi. We are not. Theo. Leaue then your fathers and other idle fansies, & go directly to that question. For if her Maiestie receiued & established nothing but the truth of Christ in her Parliament,A parliament taking part with trueth hath the warrant of God & the Magistrate. in vaine do you barke against God and the Magistrate, for lacke of competent Courts, ecclesiasticall iudges, and legal meanes to debate and decide matters of religion. When God commaundeth, all humane barres and Lawes do cease. If they ioyne with God, they may bee v∣sed: if they impugne the trueth, they must be despised. And yet in our case the scepter vnited and adioyned it selfe to the worde of God: and therefore if Princes may commaund for truth in their owne domini∣ons, as I haue largely proued they may: why should not the Prince hauing the full consent of her Nobles and Commons restoare and settle the truth of God within her Realme? Phi. Lay men may not pronounce of faith. Theo. But lay men may choose what faith they will professe,Lay men may make their choise what faith they will professe. and Princes may dis∣pose of their kingdoms, though Priests and Bishops would say nay. Phi. Religion they may not dispose without a Councell. Theo. Not if God commaund? Phi. Howe shall they know what God commaundeth vnlesse they haue a councell? Theo. This is childish wrangling. I aske, if God command whether the Prince shall refuse to obey till the clergie confirme the same? Phi. You may be sure a wise and sober Clergie wil not dissent from Gods precepts. Theo. What they will doe, is out of our matter: but in case they doe; to which shall the Prince hearken, to God or those that beare themselues for Priestes? Phi. In case they do so, you neede not doubt, but God must be regarded, and not men. Theo. And hath the Prince sufficient authoritie to put that in e which God commaundeth,The Prince is authorized from God to execute his commaunde∣ment. though the Priests continue their wilfulnes? Phi. There is no councell nor consent of men good against God. Theo. Holde you there. Then when christian Princes are instructed and resolued by learned and faithfull teachers what God requireth at their hands, what neede they care for the backward dispositiō of such false Prophets as are turned from the truth and preach lies?
Phi. In England when her Maiestie came to the Crowne, it was not so. The Bishops that dissented, were graue, vertuous and honorable Pastours, stan∣ding in defence of the catholike and auncient faith of their fathers. Theo. You say so: we say no. Phi. Those be but wordes. Theo. You say very right; and therefore the more to blame you, that in both your bookes do plaie on that string with your Rhetoricall and Thrasonicall fluence,The Iesuites presume that al is thes. and neuer enter any point or prooe, that may profit your Reader. You presume your selues to haue such ap∣parent right and rule ouer the faith, ouer the church, ouer christian Princes & Realmes, that without your consent they shall neither conclude, nor consult what religion they will professe: Their actes shall be disorders, their lawes in∣iuries, their correction tyranny, if you mislike them. This dominion and iuris∣diction ouer all kingdoms and countries, if your holy father and you may haue for the speaking, you were not wise if you would not claime it; but before we be∣leeue you, you must bring some better ground of your title than such magnifical and maiesticall florishes.The Prince may com∣maund for trueth, though the bishops would say no. The Prince and the Parliament, you say, had no power to determine or de∣liberate of those matters. And why so? You did dissent. May not the Prince commaund for truth within her Realme, except your consentes be first required and had? May not her highnesse serue Christ in making Lawes for Christ, without your liking? Claime you that interest and prerogatiue, that without you nothing shal be done in matters of religiō, by the lawes of God,The Iesuites haue neither Gods law nor mans to make that which the Prince and the Parli∣ament did, to be voide for lacke of the Bishops assents. or by the liberties of this realm? By the lawes of the Land you haue no such priuilege. Parliamentes haue bin kept by the king and his Barons, the clergie wholy excluded, and yet their actes and statutes good. And when the Bishops were present, their voices frō the conquest to this day were neuer negatiue. By Gody law, you haue nothing to do with making lawes for kingdoms and commonwealthes. You may teach, you may not command: Perswasion is your part, compulsion is the Princes. If Princes imbrace the truth, you must obey them: If they pursue truth, you must abide them. By what authority then claime you this dominion ouer Princes, that their lawes for religion shalbe voide vnlesse you consent? Phi. They be no iudges of faith. Theo. No more are you. It is lawfull for any Christian to reiect your doctrine, if he perceiue it to be false, though you teach it in your churches and pronounce it in your councels, to be neuer so true. Phi. That proueth not euery priuat mans opinion to be true. The. Nor yet to be false; the greater number is not euer a sure warrant for truth. And Iudges of faith, though Princes be not, yet are they maintainers, establishers and vphol∣ders of faith with publike power, & positiue lawes, which is the pointe you now withstand. Phi. That they may doe when a councell is precedent to guide them. Theo. What councell had Asa the king of Iudah when The Kings of Iudah did cō∣maund for trueth with∣out Councels. hee commaunded his people to doe according to the law, and the commaundement, and made 2. Chron. 14. Cap. 15. Cap. 15. a couenant that whosoeuer would not seeke the Lord God of Israell should be
laine? Phi. He had Cap. 15. Azariah the Prophet. Theo. One man is no Councel; and he did but encourage and commend the King, and that long after he had established religion in his realme. What Councel had Ezechiah to lead him when he restored the true worship of God throughout his land,2. Chron. 29. and was faine to send for the Priestes and Leuites and to put them in minde of their duties? What councell had Iosiah, when ten yeares after his comming to the crown he was forced to send for direction to Huldath the Prophetesse,4. Kings. 22. not finding a man in Iudah that did, or could vndertake the charge? Phi. These were kinges of the olde Testament: and they had the Lawe of God to guide them. Theo. Then since christian Princes haue the same Scri∣ptures which they had,Christian Princes may doe the like. and also the Gospell of Christ and Apostolike writings to guide them, which they had not, why should they not in their kingdomes re∣taine the same power, which you see the kings of Iudah had & vsed to their im∣mortall praise and ioy? Phi. Constātine authorized Christian re∣ligion without any Councel.The christian Emperours euer called Councels, before they would at∣tempt any thing in Ecclesiasticall matters. Theo. What councell had Con∣stantine, when with his Princely power he publikely receiued and setled chri∣stian religion throughout the world, Euseb. de vita Constant. lib. 2. Iustinian had no Councell for the ma∣king of his constitutions. twentie yeares before the fathers met at Nice? What councels had Iustinian for all those ecclesiasticall constitutions and orders, which he decreed and I haue often repeated? What councels had Charles for the church lawes and chapters which he proposed and inioyned as wel to the Pastors as to the people of his Empire? Phil. They had instruction by some godly Bishops that were about them. Theo. Conference with some Bishops, suh as they liked, they might haue: but councels for these causes they had none. In 480. yeares after christian religion was established by christian Lawes, I meane from Constantine the first, to Constantine the seuenth, there were very neere fourtie christian Emperours, whose Lawes and actes for ecclesiasti∣call affaires were infinite:But 6. general Councels in 790. yeres. and yet in all that time they neuer called but sixe ge∣nerall Councels, and those for the Godhead of the Sonne and the holy Ghost, & for the two distinct natures and willes in Christ: All other pointes of christian doctrine and discipline they receiued, established and maintained without ecu∣menicall councels, vpon the priuate instruction of such Bishops and Clerkes as they fauored or trusted. Sc. lib. 5. ca. 10. Theodosius made his own choise what religion he would esta∣blish, & when the second general coun∣cell could not get him to receiue the Arians from their church∣es, Amphilo∣chius did win him to it. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 16.Theodosius, as I shewed before, made his owne choice what faith he would follow, and had no man, nor meanes to direct him vnto truth, but his own pray∣ers vnto God, and priuate reading of those sundry confessions that were offered him. And when neither Bishops nor Councels could get him to remoue the A∣rians from their churches, Amphilochius alone with his witty behauior, & aun∣swere wan him to it. For entering the Palace, and finding Arcadius the eldest sonne of Theodosius lately designed Emperor and sitting with his father, Am∣philochius did his dutie to the father and made no account of his son that sate by
him. Theodosius thinking the Bishop had forgotten himselfe, willed him to salute his sonne: to whom the Bishoppe replied, that which he had done to the father was sufficient for both. Whereat when the Emperour began to rage, & to coner the contempt of his sonne for his dishonour, the wise Bishoppe infer∣red wih a loude voice, Art thou so grieued, O Emperour, to see thy sonne neglected, and so much out of pacience with those that reproach him? As∣sure thy selfe then that almighty God hateth the blasphemers of his Sonne, and is offended with them as with vngratefull wretches against their Saui∣our and deliuerer. Had you beene in the primatiue church of Christ you woulde haue gallantly disdained these and other examples of christian kings and Countries conuerted & instructed somtimes by Marchaunts,Realmes haue bin Christe∣ned vpon the perswasions of Lay men & wemen. sometimes by women, most times by the single perswasiō of one man without al legal means or iudicial proceedings: the poore soules of very zeale imbracing the word of life whē it was first offered them, and neglecting your number of voices, consent of Priestes, & competent courts, as friuolous exceptiōs against God, & dangerous lets to their saluation. Frumentius a christian child, taken prisoner in India the farther, and brought at length by Gods good prouidence to beare some sway in the Realme in the no∣nage of the king, India conuer∣ted by Mer∣chants. carefully sought for such as were christians among the Ro∣mane Merchants, and gaue them Ruffin. l. 1. ca. 9 most free power to haue assemblies in eue∣ry place yeelding them whatsoeuer was requisite, and exhorting And neuer asked the Priestes leaue so to doe. them in sundry places to vse the christian praiers. And within short time he built a Church & brought it to passe that some of the Indians were instructed in the faith, and ioyned with them. The king of Iberia neere Pontus, when he saw his wife restoared to health by the prayers of a christian captiue, and himselfe deliuered out of the suddaine danger that he was in, only by thinking and calling on Christ, whom the captiue woman named so often to his wife, sent for the woman, and desired to learne the manner of her religion, and promised after that neuer to worship any o∣ther God but Christ. The captiue woman taught him as much as a woman might: & admonished him to build a church and described the forme (how it must be done). Whereupon the Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 19. Iberia cōuer∣ted by a wo∣man. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 10. The Iesuites would haue beene eloquēt against this King, that yeelded his Realme to Christ at the direction of a seee wenche. king calling the people of the whole na∣tion together told them what had befallen the Queene and him, and taught them the faith, and became as it were the Apostle of his nation, though hee were not yet baptized. The examples of England, France & other coūtries, are innumerable, where kings & cōmonwealths at the preaching of one man, haue submitted themselues to the faith of Christ, without councels or any Synodal or iudicial proceedings. And therefore ech Prince & people without these meanes haue lawful power to serue God & Christ his Son, notwithstanding twentie Bishops, as in our case: or if you will,Any man may serue Christ whosoeuer say nay. twentie thowsand Bishops, should take exceptious to the Gospell of truth, which is nothing else but to waxe mad against God, by pretence of hu∣mane reason and order.
Phi. Their examples and yours are not like. They receiued the same faith that the church of Christ professed,Many Coun∣tries receiued the faith be∣fore they knew what the Church nt. you doe not. Theo. They know not what the church of christ ment, when they submitted themselues to the faith of Chri; they respected not the countenaunces of men, but the promises of God when they first beleeued. And were you not so wedded to the Popes tribunals & de∣crees that you thinke the God of heauen shoulde not preuaile nor commaunde without your allowance, you would remember that the church her sel was first collected and after increased by Christes Apostles, maugre the councelles of Priestes and Courtes of Princes that derided the basenesse, and accused the boldnesse of such as would preach Christ without their permission. Phi. The A∣postles had a iust and lawfull defence for their doinges.Act. 5. Theo. What was it?If trueth were  ufficient charge for fishermen to withstand both Priests and Princes, much more may Princes vpon that war¦rant neglect the con∣sent of their own subiects, though they be Priests. Iohn. 7. Phi. We ought rather to obey God than men. Theo. Was that authori∣tie sufficient for them to withstand the Synodes of Priestes and swordes of Princes? Phi. Most sufficient. Theo. And the truth of God chaungeth not, neither doth his right to commaund against the powers and lawes of al mortal men decay at any time. Phi. By no means. Theo. Then this must only be the question betwixt vs, whether the Prince or the Prelates stoode for that which God commaundeth. If the Prince tooke part with God, then your clergy were but Antichristes Atturnies, and all your Apologies, Defences, Replications and Demonstrations are but prophane brables and quarels, such as Iulian or Porphyrie might and did obiect against Christ, for that his faith came first into the worlde, by the disordered rashnesse, as they thought, and tumultuous headinesse of the common people; euen as the Iewes also disdained Christ him∣selfe, and said of his followers; Doth any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees be∣leeue in him? but this people, that know not the law, are cursed. If your Bishops held the faith, then had you wrong before God, but no violence before men sith euerie Realme may dispose them-selues, their Landes, and liuinges, as they see cause, and make choice of their religion and teachers, though they take not vpon them to decide and define which is truth and which errour, as you falsly and scornefully report. Phi. Thy make it treason to call their proceedinges heresie. Theo. To call the Prince tyrant or heretike, is no point of Religion, but plaine rayling on powers,Railing on Princes is prohibited by the Law of God. which all christians are prohibited: That law represseth the filthines of your tongues, it forceth not the perswasions of your hearts, it is no decision of heresie, but a prohibition of cursed and intemperate speech▪ which of duty you should forbeare, and the Prince may iustly punish. Phi. Shall it be death for a man to speake what he thinketh? Theo. If the speach be slaunderous or op∣probrious, why should it not?Exod. 21. He that curseth his father or mother, shal dy the death by the law of God: and the selfe same reuerence is due to the magistrat, Leuit. 20. thou shalt not raile vppon the iudge, nor Exod. 22. speake euill of the ruler of the people: yea saith SalomonEccle. 10. Curse not the king, no not in thy thought: and though Dauid himself in respect of his oth spared Shimei that railed on him, yet he charged Salomon his sonne to giue him  his deserts.3. Kings. 2. Thou shalt not count
him innocent, for thou art wise, and knowest what thou oughtest to do vnto him, therefore thou shalt cause his hoare head to goe downe to the graue with Dauid iudged Shimei wor∣thie to die for railing on him. blood. Therefore you must either leaue railing with Shimei, or not thinke it much to suffer at Salomons handes as Shimei did. Phi. The Princes person we will spare, but that shal neuer driue vs to think well of your proceedinges. Theo. If this Realme haue receiued or established any other faith than that which Christ commaunded, the Apostles preached, the catholike church imbraced, then let all our proceedings bee violent, disordered and reprochfull: but if we haue not, then looke to your selues. For the Prince and the Parliament had Gods and mans authoritie to do as they did. Phi. If, doth not hurt vs: our faith is catholik. Theo. No one point of your faith which we reiect, is catholike: And the reformation which is now setled, by the lawes of this Realme in matters of religion, is warranted by the word of God, and auncient iudgement of Christes church. Phi. Nay our faith is grounded on the sacred Scriptures & the generall consent of the catholike church. Theo. Proue that and we require no more. Phi. Will that content you? Theo. Yea veri∣ly. But you were best, beginning a fresh matter, to spit in your hand and take better hold than heretofore you haue done. Phi. My handfast is so sure that you shall not shake it off. Theo. Your heart serueth you, what soeuer your handfast doth. Proceeding with the next part wee shall see how sure you holde. The end of the third part.
THE FOVRTH PART SHEWETH THE REFORMATION OF THIS Realme to be warranted by the word of God and the ancient faith of Christes Church, and the Iesuites for all their crakes to be nothing lesse than Catholikes. Phi. WHAT one point of our religion is not catholike? Theo. No one point of that, which this Realme hath refused, is truely catholike. Your hauing and adoring of images in the church: your publike seruice in a oung not vnderstood of the people: your gazing on the Priest whiles he alone eateth & drin∣keth at the Lordes table: your barring the people from the Lordes cup: your sacrificing the sonne of God to his father for the sinnes of the worlde: your adoring the elementes of bread and wine with diuine honour in stead of Christ: your seuen Sacramentes: your Shrift: your releasing soules out of Purga∣torie by prayers and pardons: your compelling Priestes to liue single: your me∣ritorious vowing and perfourming Pilgrimages: your inuocation of Saincts departed: your rules of perfection for Monkes and Friers: your relying on the Pope as head of the church, and Uicar generall vnto Christ: these with in∣finite other superstitions in action, and errors in doctrine wee deny to haue any foundation in the Scriptures, or confirmation in the generall consent or vse of the catholike church. Phi. We sticke not on your words, which you vtter to your most aduantage: but be not these things as we defend them, and you reiect them, Catholike? The. Nothing lesse. Phi. What count you catholike? Theo. You were best define that:Vincentius Lirinens▪ ad∣uers. haeres. it toucheth you neerest. Phi I meane catholike, as Vincentius doth, that wrote more than 1100. yeares ago. Theo. So do I. And in that sense no point of your religion, which this Realme hath refused, is catholike. Phi. All. Theo. None. Phi. These are but bragges. Theo. Indeede they are so. Nothing is more common in your mouthes than catholike: and in your faith nothing lesse. Phi. Who proueth that? Theo. Your selues, who after you haue made great surre for catholike, catholike, and all catholike, when you come to issue you returne it with a non est inuentus. Phi. Will you lie a litle? Theo. I might vse that some∣times, which is so often with you: but in this I do not. Phi. I say you do. Theo. That will appeare, if you take any of those points which I haue rehearsed. Phi. Which you will. Theo. Nay the choice shall be yours, because the proofe must be yours. Phi. Take them as they lie. Hauing and worshipping of Images in the church, is it not catholike? Theo. It is not. Phi. Eight hundred yeares agoe the generall councell of Nice, the second, decreed it lawfull and euer since it hath beene vsed. Theo. Catholike should haue foure conditions by Vincentius rule, &
this hath not one of them.How Vincen∣tius defineth Catholikes. There can nothing be catholike, vnlesse it be confir∣med two wayes: first by the authoritie of Gods law, and next by the traditiō of the catholike Church, not Vincēs. aduers. haeres. that the canon of the Scripture is not perfect & sufficient enough for all pointes of faith, but because many men drawe and stretch the Scriptures to their fansies, Vincent. Ibidē. therefore it is verie needefull that the line of the Propheticall and Apostolicall interpretation should bee directed by the rule of the ecclsiasticall and catholike sense.Ibidem. Quod semper, vbique & ab omnibus credi∣tum est. Now in the catholike Church her selfe we must take heede wee hold that, which hath beene be∣leeued, at all times, in all places, of all persons, for that is truely and proper∣ly catholike. By this rule your erecting & adoring of images in the church is not catholike.Worshipping of Images is against the Scriptures. For first it is prohibited by gods law: & where ye text goeth against you, the gloze cānot hel you. If there be no precept for it in ye word of god, in vaine do you seek in the church for the catholike sense and interpretation of that which is no where found in the Scriptures. If it bee not Propheticall nor Apostolical, it cannot be catholike nor ecclesiasticall. Againe,It hath not been belee∣ued at all times. how hath this beene alwaies in the church, which was first decreed 780. yeares after Christ? It is too yong to bee catholike that began so late, you must go neerer Christ & his Apostles, if you wil haue it catholike or ancient. Thirdly al places & persons did not admit the decrees of that coūcell. For be∣sides Africa & Asia the greater,Neither in all places nor of all persons. which neuer receiued them, the churches of Eng¦land, France & Germanie did contradict & refute both their actions & reasons. And in Greece it selfe not long before, a Synod ofSigebert. in anno 755. 330. Bishops at Constan∣tinople condemned aswel the suffering as reuerencing of images. Phi. The most part of this that you say is false: the rest we litle regard, so lōg as we be sure the church of Rome stood fast wt vs. Theo. Al that I said is true: & as for the church of Rome, she can make nothing catholike. That the church of England detested that 2. councell of Nice: Roger Houeden, that liued 400. yeares agoe, witnesseth. Charles the king of France sent ouer into England, the Actes of a Synod sent him from Constantinople: Where, out alas, are found ma∣ny vnseemely things & contrary to the true faith, specially for that it is there confirmed with the general assent of all the East teachers,Continuationes Bedae anno 792. The Church of England against Ima∣ges. to wit, of 300. Bi∣shops & moe, that images ought to be adored, the which the church of God vtterly detesteth. Against the which Albinus wrote an epistle maruelously groūded on the autority of the diuine scriptures, & caried it with the said Sy∣nodical acts in the name of our (english) Bishops & princes to the K. of France. Charles two yeares after called a great Synod of the Bishops of Fraunce,The churches of Fraunce, Italie & Ger∣manie, condē∣ned the se∣cond councell of Nice. Italie and Germanie, at Franckford: where the 2. councell of Nice was reie∣cted and refuted. Phi. Nay the councell of Constantinople against images was there reuersed and explosed. Theo. Your friendes haue done what they could, to make that seeme likely, and many of your stories run that way for life, but the worst is, the men that liued and wrate in that verie age doe marre your plaie. Regino saith:Regino, lib. 2. anno 794. Pseudo synodus Graecorum, quam pro adorandis imaginibus fecerant,
à Pontificibus reiecta est. The false Synode of the Graecians which they made for defence of the worshipping of images, was reiected by the Bishops (as∣sembled at Franckford vnder Charles.) Hincmarus Archbishop of Remes, then lyuing when these thinges were in freshe memorie, saieth thus of Charles his Councell:Hinmar. Re∣mens. contra Hincmar. Ian∣dunensem epist. cap. 20. The Councel of Nice the second refu∣ted by a gene∣rall Synode of Germanie. A whole book written in the refutation of the 2. Nicene Councell by Charles and his Bishops. The Monkes haue razed our Nice, and put in Con∣stantinople. Vrspergens. in anno 793. That Councel was assem∣bled at Nice and not at Constantino∣ple. The seuenth general councell so called by the Graecians (in deed a wicked councell) touching images, which some would haue to be broken in peeces, & some to be worshipped, was kept not long before my time by a number of Bishops gathered togither at Nice and sent to Rome, which al∣so the Bishop of Rome directed into France. Wherfore in the raigne of Charls the great, (the Sea Apostolike willing it so to bee) a generall Synode was kept in Germany by the conuocation of the said Emperour, and there by the rule of the Scriptures & doctrine of the fathers the false councel of the Grae∣cians was confuted, & vtterly reiected. Of whose confutation tere was a good big booke sent to Rome by certaine Bishops from Charles, which in my yong yeares I read in the Palace. Vrspergensis hath bin vnder the file of some monkish deprauer, as many o∣ther writers & fathers haue bin. For in him you haue razed out the name of the citie of Nice & put in Cōstantinople, to make men beleeue the Synod of Frāck∣ford condemned, not the 2. Nicene councel that setled adoration of images, but an other of Constantinople that banished images. Vrspergensis saieth, The Synod, which not long before was assembled vnder Irene & Constantine her sonne in Constantinople called by them the seuenth generall councell, was there (in the councell of Franckford) reiected by them all as void, and not to be named the 7. or any thing else. Here some foolish forgerer hath added these words (in Constantinople) whereas it is euident, the councel vnder Irene and Constantine her sonne, was kept at Nice, & not at Constantinople, & Hincma∣rus that liued in the time of Charles and read the booke it selfe of the Synode of Frāckford, when it was first made, saith the Bishops assembled in Germany by Charles vtterly reiected & refuted the councel of Nice, called the seuenth ge∣nerall councell. The very same words (at Constantinople) are in the actes of the councell of Frākford, as Laurētius Surius Tomo Concil. 3. admonit. Su∣rij ad lector. de Synod. Francof. ol. 226. saith, though very falsly; for though that I find in the booke it selfe, & contrary to the plaine words, in many places and namely in the 4. booke, 13. chapter, where they are refelled from comparing themselues with the 1. Nicene councell, because they were assembled in the same city, & so li. 4. ca. 24. But if the words had bin conueied in, as they are not, (except Surius copie be framed by Surius himself to verifie his own saying) what proofe is this that the Synod of Franckford neuer dereed against adoration of Images, but rather with it, as that mouthie Frier obserueth, where the reasons and authori∣ties of the 2. Nicene councell for adoring images, are truely and fully refuted throughout those foure bookes? And his conclusion, that wee haue forged those bookes, & conueied them into the Popes library, where they ly written in aun∣cient characters, as the Augu. Steuch. de Donat. Con∣stant. lib. 2. numero 60. keeper of the Popes library confesseth, is like the
rest and not vnlike himselfe, who careth not what he writeth, so it serue his hu∣mour, and helpe his cause. For otherwise who that were master of himselfe, would suppose it easier for vs to forge foure whole bookes in Charles name, and to write them in auncient handes, and thrust them into the Popes librarie and into many other churches and Abbaies, and no man spie it, than for you hauing the bookes so many hun∣dreth yeares in your keeping to put in this one word (Constantinople?) And if our lucke were so good, to forge so neere the Popes nose, and not be descried, who forged Hinmarus, Regino, Houeden, Vrspergensis, Adon, Auentine and others that testifie the Councell of Frankford refuted the false Synode which the Graecians kept Adon. aetase 6. Auent. lib. 4. saith, Scitae Graecoum de adorandis Ima∣ginibus rescissa sunt. Pro odorandis imaginibus, For the adoring of images? If you were so negligent, as to suffer so many to be forged against you and laide in your libraries, & you not find it: how iust cause haue wee to perswade our selues that you would winke with both eies, when others should be corrupted to make for your purpose? Phi. Many,Their Monks and Friers be∣ing worship∣ers of Image themselues, would not be∣leeue that the 2. Nicen Coū∣cel was con∣demned for decreeing Images to b worshipped. you know, report for vs, that Charles and his councell condem∣ned the breakers of images; and a number of your owne side confesse the same. Theo. In stories we must not respect the number & vehemencie, but the antiqui∣tie and sinceritie of the authors. Two hundreth, that liued long after, & were not acquainted with the deedes themselues: can not counteruaile two that li∣ued in the same age, and had the full perusing of their actes. Againe your later writers were all addicted to images, and therefore they would not acknowlege that euer the councell of Franckford condemned the councell of Nice for ado∣ring images. Lastly it is not altogether a lie when they say the councell of Franckford refused the councell of Constantinople. For where the councell of Constantinople said it was idolatrie to haue them, and the councell of Nice defined it lawfull to worship them,The booke extāt agreeth with this re∣port of Hinc∣marus. the councell of Franckford, as Hincmarus confesseth, liked neither, but held it a thing indifferent to haue them, & adiudged it a meere impiety to worship them. Phi Then hauing of images,The west Church 800. yeares after Christ suffred stories to be painted and carued in the Church, but not to be wor∣shipped, as the seconde Councell of Nice conclu∣ded. you graunt, was catholike, though the wor∣shipping of them, in some places were not so taken. Theo. The hauing of ima∣ges was neuer catholike, and the worshipping of them was euer wicked, by the iudgement of Christes church. Phi. At this time the West church did not gainesay the hauing of them Theo. The West church at this time vsed them on∣ly as ornamentes, and monumentes for the ruder sort to learne the liues and deathes of ancient & vndoubted Martyrs: but if you forget not your selfe, you bee 800. yeres too short of catholik; & euen then by the churches of Englād, France, Spaine, and Germanie, was the worshipping of images detested and refuted as contrary to the christian faith. Phi. By worshipping and adoring of images, we doe not meane, that god∣ly honor should be giuen to them, but only a kinde of external dutie & reuerence with the gesture of the body, as kneeling, kissing, censing, religious holding vp of eyes and handes before them, with such like signes of outwarde submission.
Theo. The Grecians were not so brutish as to decree diuine honour to stockes.Neither do I thinke that Adrian the Bishop of Rome, or the Grecians were so blashemous & brutish idolaters, that they decreed diuine honor to dead & sensles stocks: though your Schoolemē not long before our age came to that grosse & ilhy doctrine, & salued it with a vaine translatiō of the honor that was done to the image, as passing from the image to the principall it selfe represen∣ted by the image: But the Grecians I thinke ment an externall regard & reue∣rence, such as is giuen to the sacred vessels, bookes, & elementes that are vsed in baptisme & at the Lords Supper.The west Church refu∣sed to giue any externall honor to images. For those be their owne comparisons though their words be adoration & veneration: & yet that externall & corporall honor giuen to images the West Bishops abhorred as neither catholike, nor christiā, and the church of Christ long before them condemned as hereticall. Gregory the first, 200. yeares before Charles called the councel of Frāckford, thought it not amisse to haue painted histories suffred in ye church, but in no wise the pictures to be worshipped.Greg. lib. 7. epist. 109. Your brotherhood, saith he to Serenus Bishop of Massilia; seeing certaine worshippers of images, brake the said images and cast thē out of the church. The zeale which you had that nothing made with hands should be worshipped, we praise: but we thinke you should not haue broken those images.Stories pain∣ted in the Church, but no picture worshipped. For painting is therefore vsed in churches, that they which are vnlearned may by sight read that in the walles, which in bookes they cānot. Your brotherhood should therefore haue spared the breaking of thē, & yet restrained the people frō worshipping them, that the rude might haue had, how to come by the knowledge of the story, & yet the people not Sinne to wor∣hip pictures. sinne in worshipping the picture. Painted stories, Gregory thought might be tolerated in the church, for the simple to learne the deathes and martyrdoms of many Saints, which in bookes they could not: but as for worshipping them, he confesseth the people should sinne in doing it, and the Bishop did well in kee∣ping them from it.Gregor. lib. 9 epist. 9. The scriptures prohibite the worhipping of pictures. Ambros. de obi∣ Theodos. Error & wic∣kednes to worship the Crosse that Christ died on. Aug. de mori∣bus ecclesiae Ca∣tholicae. lib. . cap. 34. And treating in an other place of the same matter, he saith: The children of the church now disperced are to be called togither, and taught by the testi∣monies of the sacred scriptures, that nothing made with hands may be wor∣shipped. And so concludeth, adoration of images by all meanes auoide. S. Ambrose speaking of that crosse, on which Christ was crucified, saith: He∣lena found the title, & worshipped the king, not the wood surely: for that is the error of the Gentiles, and vanitie of the wicked. S. Augustine requiring the Mnichees to shew what one thing they could mislike in ye catholik church: Bring me not, saith he, such christians as either knowe not or keepe not the force of their profession. Rake not after the rude sort, which euen in true reli∣gion are intangled with superstition. My selfe know many that are worship∣pers of tombes and pictures. I warne you that you cease to speake euill of the catholike church, by carping (these) mens maners, whome the church her selfe condemneth, and seeketh euery day to correct thē as vngracious chil∣dren. Marcellina is reckoned and detested as an heretike by Ireneus, Epiphanius
and Augustine,Bowing and burning in∣cense to the Image of Christ obiect∣ed to heretik as Idolatrie. August. de hae∣resib. haeres. 7. Epipha. in 80. haeres. anaceph Epipha. lib. 1. om. 2. haeres. 27. for hauing the images of Christ and Paul in her closet, and set∣ting garlandes on their heades and burning incense to them. Marcellina, sayth Austen, was of Carpocrates sect, and worshipped the images of Iesu, Paul, Homere and Pythagoras with bowing her selfe & burning incense. So sayth Epiphanius. Of this sect was Marcillina of Rome. Shee made secretly the i∣mages of Iesu and Paul, and Homere and Pithagoras, and burned incense to thē & worshipped thē. And charging the whole sect of Carpocrates, with the same fault, he saith: The heretikes called Gnostici, Besides all this, haue ima∣ges painted with colours, and some of gold and siluer, which they say are the images of Iesu, and made in the time of Pontius Pilate, when (Christ) was conuersant amongst men. These they keepe closely. And so doth Ireneus al∣so witnesse,Iren. li. 1. ca. 24. they all restrayning and adiudging it to be heresie and idolatry to cense & bow to the image of Christ or Paul, as wel as to the image of Homer or Aristotle. Phil. Not so neither. Theo. Yeas euen so. This in manifest wordes is recko∣ned by these three fathers for a speciall point & part of their wickednes as well as the worshipping of other Philosophers images.The worship∣ing of Christs Image is ido∣latrie. Phi. Put you no distin∣ction betweene the images of Christ, & other prophane persons? Theo. The worshipping of either, is heathenisme & idolatry. Phi. Call you the image of Christ an Idole? Theo. Not vnlesse it be worshipped: but if it be, then is it an I∣doll, & incense burnt vnto it, is idolatrie. Phi. How proue you that? Theo. If the iudgement of christes church in accompting them heretikes for that act do not weigh heauie enough with you, the law of God cōfirmeth the same. Phi. Where? The. You be not I trust to seek of that which euery child with vs cā say:Exod. 20. Deut. 5. Thou shalt make thee no grauen image, nor the likenes of any thing that is in hea∣uen aboue, or the earth beneath, or in the waters vnder the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them. Phi. Doth this precept touch the image of Christ? Theo. It toucheth any thing made with handes, that is worshipped, be it the image of God, of Christ, or of whō you wil. Phi. No Sir, it toucheth the images of false Gods, but not of the true God: for they be Idols, that are nothing. Theo. Wee speake not of the thinges them-selues but of their images made with handes. A false God is an idole in the heart of man, and so are all thinges in heauen and earth, to the which wee giue any such ghostlie or bodilie honour as God hath prohi∣bited. Sainct Paul calleth the Ephes. 5. couetous man a worshipper of idols: of o∣thers hee saieth, Phil 3. whose God is their bellie, teaching vs, that, whatsoeuer we loue,Bodily or ghostly honor giuen to any thing which God prohibi∣teth is Idola∣trie. serue or obey against the commaundement of God, we make it our God by preferring it before the wil and precepts of the true God: & in that it is our god, which of it selfe is not God, it is an idoll, & the loue, seruice, and honour, that is so yeelded to it, is idolatrie by the lawe of god. For this cause, the bowing our knees, and holding vp our hands to an image, though it bee not all the honour we ow and yeeld to god, yet is it such honor as he hath prohibited to be giuen to any thing made with handes, and in that respect our aduised and determined do∣ing
it against his commaundement is idolatrie, For his precept is resolute: Thou shalt not make thee the likenes of any thing in heauen or earth,Exod. 20. thou shalt not bow thy selfe before them, nor serue them. Phi. This may not bee vnderstood of the image of the true God. For if the i∣mages of Princes may be reuerenced, & idolatry not committed, much more the image of God. Theo. Earthly similitudes of your making, may not controule the heauenly precepts of Gods owne giuing. The images of Princes may not wel be despited or abused, least it be taken as a signe of a malicious hart against the Prince, but bowing the knee or lifting vp the hand to the image of a Prince is flat & ineuitable idolatrie. Phi. The image of God deserueth more honor thā the images of mē in respect of the person that is resembled. The. You heard the plaine precept of God commaunding no such honor to bee giuen to any image made with handes, no not to the image of himselfe. Phi. God prohibi∣teth the wor∣shipping of his own Image.I heare you so interprete, but I heare not him so command. Theo. You may when you wil, the scripture in that point is very cleare. Moses the reporter of the law from Gods owne mouth, laying foorth the ground of the second pre∣cept, saith:Deut. 4. The Lord spake vnto thee out of the midst of the fire: and yee heard the voice of the words, but sawe no similitude. Take therefore good heede to your selues, for you saw no image (of God) in the day that the Lord spake vnto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire: that ye corrupt not your selues, and make you a grauen image (of God) or likenes of any figure whe∣ther it be of male or female, or of any beast that is on earth: And so along pur∣suing the seuerall branches of the second commandement. They saw no shape of God, least they should make them any image of God, contrary to that which hee had commaunded them. Esai. 40.By this precept Esaie proueth that God should not be figured. To whome then will you liken God? or what similitude will you set vp vnto him? And sharply rebuking the people for not remembring that part of the law, wherein they were charged to make no likenesse nor similitude vnto God,Ibidem. he saith; Know ye nothing? Haue ye not heard it? hath it not beene told you from the be∣ginning? Not meaning any secret or priuate instruction of man, but the open & written law of God, which was then deliuered them, when they first became the people of God.Moses & Esay referre the secōd precept to any Image made with hands and erected vnto God. So that aswell the writer, as the interpreter of the law yeeld this to be the sense of the second precept, that no similitude or likenes should be made vnto God because no such image cā resemble the brightnes of his glory, but on∣ly demonstrate the basenesse of our fansie. Phi. We talke not of making similitudes vnto God that be vnlike him, but of worshipping those that be like him. Theo. And since none can be made, that is like him, the bowing to any is not the honoring of him, but the seruing of idols, which he ahhorreth. Againe, the first part of this precept, Thou shalt not make thee any grauen image,The later part of the 2. pre∣cept forbid∣th to worship that which the first did forbid to make. nor the likenes of any thing, directly concerning the shapes and images that any man would or could make vnto God, as Moses and Esaie doe witnesse, the rest of the same precept: Thou shalt not bowe
downe to them, nor serue them, must needes be referred to the selfesame simi∣litudes and figures which before were prohibited to be made. Thirdly if any grauen Image of God might be worshipped, why might it not be made, since it cannot be worshiped vntill it be made? God therefore prohibiting it to be made, instructeth vs that though it were made, it should not be worshiped. And to that end God himselfe protesteth,Esa. 42. My glorie will I not giue to an other, nor my praise to grauen Images; meaning no part of the honor and seruice that is due vnto him, whether it bee spirituall, as feare, loue, faith, obe∣dience, praiers and thankes: or corporall; as bowing the knee, lifting vp the hand, burning incense, and such like, which are Idolatries when they are done to Images as wel as the former kindes of inward and Ghostly worship. Phi. Idolatries they be, when they be doone to the Images of false Gods which are Idols; not otherwise. Theo. False Gods by nature there are none:1. Cor. . We know, saith the Apostle, that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but one, and he is wholy trueth: But the shape or figure made with hands, to resemble the true God, whatsoeuer it be, is an Idoll, prohibited by Gods Law, as I haue proued; and therefore bowing the knee, or holding vp the hand to it, is Idolatry condemned by that precept which I last repeated, Thou shalt not bow thy selfe to them, nor serue them. Phi. What? not to the Image of the true God? Theo. The Image of the true God,An Image made by man vnto God, is but a disho∣nour vnto God. Deut. 27. made with hands, is a false God, and no likenesse of his, but a lewd imagi∣nation of yours, set vp to feede your eyes with the contempt of his sacred wil, dishonour of his holy name, and open iniurie to his diuine nature. For what resemblance hath a dead and dombe stocke, shapened like a man, to the glorious, inuisible and infinite Maiestie of the liuing and euerlasting God? Howe are you not afraide to defend the worshipper, when God accurseth the maker of any such carued or molten Image; as being an abomination in his sight? Doth your cunning or conscience serue you to gaine-say the manifest voice of God himselfe speaking by his Prophet?Esa. 40. To whom now will you liken me, that I should be like (him) saith the holy one? Phi. We be not so foolish as to thinke the shape of a mortal man resembleth the incomprehensible substance of the deitie. Theo God graunt you be not. Doe you then acknowledge, that euery likenesse made with hands to represent the God of heauen,Euery Image erected vnto God is an Idol. is an Idole? Phi. Euerie likenes: what meane you by that? Theo. I meane the likenes of man, woman, or of any other creature in heauen or earth. Phi. It is somwhat hard to call the Image of God an Idol. Theo. To call that an Idol which man maketh for an Image vnto God, since God himselfe refuseth euery such likenes, and pronounceth itDeut. 27. Sapient. 14. Esa. 44. accursed and abo∣minable, is no hardnes at al. Yea rather to giue it a better name, were to make God a liar, and in spite of his spirite to saue the Iewes and Gentils from that Idolatrie, wherewith they were charged, and for the which they be con∣demned in the scriptures. For the things which they worshipped, they thought to be the Images of God, and in that respect did they honour not them so much
as God by them, supposing them to be his Images. Phi. The Gentils and Iewes that were Idolaters, worshipped false Gods and not the Image of the true God. Theo. Their false Gods were the workes of mens hands made to resemble in their conceit the true God.The Idola∣trous Iewes pretended to worship the Image of God when they set vp the calfe. The children of Israell did not thinke their golden Calfe to bee a God, but minding to haue some monument of God alwaies in their sight to stirre them to deuoti∣on, they made choice of a calfe, because they had seene such Images set vp to God in Egypt, where the people seruing God in that visible shape were weal∣thie and mightie, by which blessings they coniectured God was wel pleased with the seruice of Egypt; and therfore to testifie their thankefulnesse for their deliurance, they erected an Image vnto god their deliuerer, and proclaimed Exod. 32. vers. .an holy day, (not to the calfe but) vnto the Lord. The mother of Micheala Iudic. 17.vowed siluer vnto the Lord, to make a grauen and molten Image. Which she after perfected and named Teraphim, building a chapel and entertaining a Leuite for it, in the honor no doubt of him to whom the siluer was first dedicated. The Iewes in all their generations knewe there was no god but one, and yet seeing the Gentils that serued god in the shape of a man or likenes of other creatures, to prosper and liue at hearts ease, and oftentimes to be Lordes ouer them that were the people of god,Iudic. 2. they fell to the manners of the nations round about them, and honored as they thought the true god of Israell with bodily shapes and figures, whereas god by his prophets notwithstanding their good intentions reiected and reproued that their seruice as doone to strange gods and Idols.Baal was set vp, for the Image of god. Yea Baal it selfe, which the Scripture detesteth as a most infa∣mous Idole, was nothing els but a corporall Image erected vnto god: by which the people dreampt they serued and pleased god, as may be gathered by Osee where god promiseth to receiue Israell vnto fauour and to cause them to cease from their Idolatrous dishonouring him with the name of Baal. Ose. 2. At that day saith the Lord, thou shalt call me no more Baal: and by Esay where god denieth the Images that were set vppe for him, to bee Esa. 40.46. like vnto him. The very heathens were not so blind as to beleeue the things which they made with their hands were gods, neither did they set them vp as gods, but rather as Images vnto god, whom they thought to bee delighted with that kinde of visible and voluntarie seruice.Ambr. in Psal. 118. sermo. 10. Sainct Ambrose saith of them: Gentes lignum adorant, quia Dei Imaginem putant: The heathen worship their (peeces of) wood, because they thinke them to bee the Images of God. Themselues could answere the Christians in that sort, as Celsus in Origen:Origen. contra Celsum, lib. 7. The Heathen did not take their Images for Goddes. Quod si vel lapidem negent, vel lignum, vel aes, vel aurum Deum esse, ridiculum profecto erit id sapere. Quis enim eà nisi stolidus quispiam pro Dijs ha∣buerit? Sed Deorum sunt ista vel sacra vel effigies quaedam. If the (Christians) denie things made of wood▪ stone, brasse or gold to be God, we graunt that were a ridiculous opinion. Who but a starke foole did euer account them
for Gods? Yet these are seruices vnto the Goddes, or else certain resemblan∣ces of the Goddes.Lactant. de fals. religione, lib. 2. cap. 20. So Lactantius witnesseth of them: Non ipsa, inquiunt, time∣mus, sed eos ad quorum Imaginem ficta & quorum nominibus consecrata sunt. (The heathen) vse to say, we stand not in awe of these (Images) but of them after whose likenes they be figured, & in whose names they be dedicated. Their wordes in Clemens are:Clemen. recogni∣tio. ad Iac. lib. 5. Aug. in Psal. 113. concione 2. Nos ad honorem inuisibilis Dei visibiles Imagines adora∣mus: Wee worship the images which we may see, in the honour of that God which can not be seene: And in S. Austen, Nec simulachrum, nec Daemonium colo, sed per effigiem corporalem eius rei signum intueor quam colere debeo. I wor∣ship neither the Image,Marke well this shi, and tel me what the Papistes lacke of it. Rom. 1 nor the Diuel: but by a corporal figure I behold the signe of that which I ought to worshippe. Saint Paul chargeth all the Gen∣tiles not with hauing new Goddes, or other Goddes, but for turning the trueth of God vnto a lie (to witte,) the glorie of the incorruptible GOD to the similitude of the Image of a corruptible man, which they made and honoured as the Images of the true GOD. Grosser idolatrie than the which can not bee committed.It is wickeder Idolatrie to worship an Image than to worship a creature. For if to worship the creatures them-selues which are the workes of Gods handes, and wherein his eternall power and diuinitie doe appeare, were palpable Idolatrie: howe inexcusable is it to serue the woorkes of our owne handes and the shadowes of those creatures prepared by art and applied by our vaine conceite to resemble the creator? you must therefore either graunt euery likenes made with handes, and set vp for an image vnto God, to be an idole, or else excuse both Iewes and Gentiles from idolatrie; which I trust you will not. Phi. The gentiles knew not God,A greater sin for those that know God, to set vp an Image vnto him than for those that knew him not. and for that cause could set vp no Image vnto God, but vnto their owne ignorant imagination of God. Theo. And you that presume to knowe god, if you set vp such images vnto god as the gentiles did, which knewe him not; you bee ranker Idolaters than they were. The more knowledge you haue of god, the more sure you bee that those thinges made with handes bee no way like vnto god, and that hee vtterly detesteth and expressely forbiddeth both the making and the reuerencing of all such Images as woorkemen coulde deuise for him, were they Pagans, Iewes or Christians. Phi. What if we grant you that god should not be figured?The figure of a man set vp vnto God is an Idole as well as the figure of a beast. Deut. 4. Rom. 1. Theo. Then you must also grant that euery image erected vnto god is an idole. Phi. The figures of beastes, birds, woormes and other vnreasonable creatures made to resemble god are idoles. Theo. And so is the figure of a man: Moses teaching the children of Israel so much in precise termes: Take heede that you corrupt not your selues & make you a grauen image or representation of any figure, whether it be of man or woman: And S. Paul affirming of the gentiles, that whē they knew God, they did not glorifie him as God, but became vaine by their dis∣courses (of reason) & their foolish hart was ful of darknes, in that they turned the glory of the incorruptible god to the likenes of the image of a corrup∣tible man. The same you may see in Psal. 115. Esa. 44. Dauid & Esay: where ye shape of man set vp
for an Image vnto God, is directly condemned for an Idole; as well in the Iewes that knew God, as in the Gentiles that knew him not. Whether it bee therefore the likenes of man, beast, bird, worme, fish, or whatsoeuer creature in heauen or earth, if it be made or vsed as an image vnto God, it is an Idole: & the submission of the knee, & deuotion of the hands, that is, any reuerent and religi∣ous gesture vnto it, is Idolatrie. Phi. Al this yet toucheth not vs. Theo. Doth it not? first what answere can you make for figuring the Image of the most blessed & glorious Trinitie, some∣tymes with three faces, as in your common An horrible picture of the Trinitie with three faces in the popish praier bookes. prayer bookes printed in the late raign of Queene Mary, & sometime like Horae Mariae Impressae per Iohan. le Prest. impens. Rob. Valen. 1555. an old man hauing a long gray beard and his sonne sitting by him with a doue betweene them: as in most of your Churches and Oratories: what answere I say can you make for these notori∣ous and enormous impieties? Not onely the adoring, but the very making of such pictures is abominable, and the selfesame frensie that GOD reuenged in Iewes and Gentiles with horrible plagues. Secondly if to worship the image of God made by art, with kneeling, censing, or holding vp the hands be against the law of God, and condemned in the Scriptures for the seruice of Idols, how can your adoration of Images not only with corporall gestures, but with spi∣rituall prayers and vowes be Catholike, or that Councel bee Christian, which first decreed,Nicen. Synod. 2. actione 2. the Images of all Saintes, men and weomen, might perfectly & openly bee adored? Phi. We were not the makers of those pictures of the Trinitie. Theo. We know you be neither Printers nor Caruers: but you were the sufferers, allow∣ers, proposers and commenders of these pictures vnto the people: and in that respect your sinne is farre greater than theirs that were only the painters and grauers of them,Sapien. 14. though there lye a curse euen on thē for their wicked labour & trauel, to haue God dishonoured by their art and industrie. Phi. The Images of the Trinitie wee will not You doe de∣fend them in your Rhemish Testament, fol. 345. defend, because your tongues are so bent against them: and yet the Catholikes did not sinne in doing their deuotions to God by those or any other occasions. Theo. The people are in good case to haue such teachers as you be. The figuring of the trinitie the most of you dare not defende (though your Rhemish obseruers haue the faces to defend any thing) because the Law of God is direct against it, pronouncing all such resemblances of God to bee Esa. 44. Deut. 27. an abomination vnto him: and yet you closely encourage your Catho∣likes to continue their former liking of those pictures, and by some smoothe wordes would faine make them beleeue they serue God, when they honour that which God openly reiecteth as an Idole. Phi. The artifici∣all figure of Christs hu∣mane flesh may not be worshipped.Against the Images of Christ and his saints you haue no such excep∣tion; why then mislike you that those should bee worshipped? Theo. If the I∣mage of Christes diuine nature may not bee worshipped, much lesse may the figure of his humane flesh framed of wood or stone be so highly reuerenced. Se∣condly man himselfe is a perfecter and truer Image of Christ than any can bee made with hands, and yet for all that you neither doe, nor may offer to worship
any mortal man. Thirdly if ought should be worshipped in the painted and car∣ued Images of Christ, it must be the matter, or the forme. The matter is wood, stone, brasse, siluer or some other metal: in which is no religion. The forme is nothing but the skill and draught of the crafts-man, proportioning a shape not like vnto Christ whom he neuer sawe, but as his owne fansie leadeth him: and in that case you worshippe not the similitude of our Sauiour, but the conceite of the maker.Lactant. de fals. religio. lib. 2. cap. 2. Fourthly the workeman is euer better than the woorke; for so much as there is no grace in the Image which came not from the Caruer. And since no man boweth to the workman, why should you kneele to the work of his handes? Lastly see you not howe absurd it is, that Lactant. Ibidē. men which haue reason, sense and life should worship thinges that are voyde of reason, senselesse & deade? Lactant. li. 2. cap. 19. Wherefore doubt you not but there is no religion (or deuotion) wheresoeuer there is an Image. Religion consisteth of diuine things, and no∣thing is diuine, but that which is heauenly: Images ergo are farre from (de∣uotion and) religion, since there is nothing in them that is heauenly, they consisting of earth. Phi. You reason as though wee worshipped the earthly matter or shape, and not rather the thinges represented by them. Theo. If you talke of worship∣ping Christ and not his image,Christ must be worshipped with al humi∣litie, but not his Image, be∣cause that is not Christ. we yeeld to you without any farther speach that you must worship him with all humilitie as the naturall, true and onely sonne of God: but what is that to the adoration of his image made with hands, which you defend to be Catholique? Phi. May wee not giue some reuerence to the Image of Christ, though he be in heauen: as well as you doe to the thrones and letters of Princes, when themselues be not present? Theo. Haue you no su∣rer ground of your catholike doctrine for adoring images, than a single simili∣tude taken from the ciuill and externall reuerence that is yeelded to Princes seates and Seales? Phi. Yeas we haue surer: but first answere this. Theo. This is not so sure as you thinke. Phi. Sure or vnsure, what say you to it? Theo. First that pain∣ted and carued Images,Earthly simi∣litudes are al the proofes that Papists haue for ado∣ration of Images. be neither the Seates nor Seales of Christ, and so no sequele from those to these. Next that the ciuill honour which is due to Princes can bee no president for any religious honour to bee giuen to Images: Espe∣cially the same God, which commaundeth eche man to honour the King, for∣biddeth all men to bowe them-selues to any Similitude of his made with handes. Phi. Let them haue some reuerence yet, either religious or ciuill for his sake whome they represent. Theo. If a man shoulde make a seale like the Princes, or nayle vp cloth of Tissue where the Prince is not, and say it is a chayre of state, would you bee so foolish as to regard either of them, or shoulde you not dishonour the king if you did reuerence them, since they bee not such thinges as the Prince accepteth or vseth for his, but other mens counterfaites? Phi. I speake of that Chaire where the Prince did sit, and of that Seale which the Prince did send. Theo. I knowe you did, and therefore I refused your
similitude as vnlike the matter in question betwixt vs: because images are nei∣ther places of Christes presence,The Seates & seales of prin∣ces make no∣thing, for ado∣raton of Images. nor witnesses of his will, as Seates and seales are vnto Princes: no nor ordayned, allowed or admitted by Christ to haue any credite or vse about his heauenly person or pleasure; but only proposed by men of a naturall and kind affection as they thought towards Christ: though cleane without warrant, and so without thankes from him. For hee of purpose tooke his bodily presence from the eyes of men that hee might dwell in their heartes by fayth,An Image can teach vs no∣thing of that we should beholde in Christ. and to teach vs to honour him not by that proportion of face which the painter would drawe, but by that abundance of loue, grace and mercie, which hee hath extended on vs and layde in stoare for vs, and which no corpo∣rall eyes can behold, nor colours expresse, but onely the hearing of his woorde and woorking of his spirite can lighten and perswade the heart of man to con∣ceiue and beleeue. Phi. Is it not thankes woorthie with God to haue alwayes the shape of his sonne before our eyes, that wee may honour him with our hearts? Theo. To honour him with your heartes, and to haue him at all times in your mindes is religious and requisite:Christ hath left better & safer meanes to remember him, than by an Image: which papists leaue & pre∣ferre their own deuises before his. but to make light of those meanes which hee hath pre∣scribed to nourish your fayth and continue the memorie of him-selfe, & to seeke out others of your owne fit to please your senses, not to resemble his greatnes or goodnes, this is neither acceptable vnto God, nor profitable for your selues. Phi. To remember Christ cannot bee euill. Theo. Not to remember him till you looke on a picture can not bee good. Your heartes ought alwayes to bee lifted vp vnto him, that 1. Cor. 10. whether you eate or drinke, wake or sleepe, or Colos. 3.whatsoeuer you doe in woorde or deede, (you may) doe all in the name of the Lord Iesu, Ephes. 5. giuing thankes alwayes for all thinges vnto God the father in the name of our Lorde Iesus Christ. You must not tary for the execution of this precept till you see an Image. But all your actions, woordes and thoughtes must bee directed to the prayse of his glory and honour of his name. By what meanes and waies the holy Ghost occasioneth vs to remem∣ber the sonne of God.This if you put in bre you shall neede no painted nor carued Image to bring you in mynde of his mercies. The benefites and blessings within you, with∣out you, and on euery side of you (which GOD for Christes sake bestoweth on you) are so many that you can hardly forget him: vnlesse you also forget the earth that beareth you, the heauen that couereth you, the day that guydeth your feete, the night that giueth you rest, the meates that you feede on, and the breath that you liue by: yea your owne bodies which hee woonderful∣ly made, and soules which hee preciously bought: All these thinges and all other thinges in heauen and earth you must drowne in vtter obliuion, be∣fore you can inferre that Images bee needefull to put vs in mynde of our dueties to GOD.He hath a dull heart that re∣mēbreth not Christ till he see an Image. And since without Images you can and must remem∣ber the Father that created, and the Holy Ghost that anctified you, why shoulde you forget the sonne that redeemed you more than the other, except you haue Images at your elbowes to kindle you appetites?
But this is nothing to the worshipping of Images, which you should proue to bee Catholike. Though there were an historicall vse in painting the shape of our Sauiour, yet is it no pietie to worshippe the picture. Graunt it might be vsed for remembrance, for religion it may not; and therefore you are all this while besides the marke. Philand. You denie both the hauing and woorshipping of Images to bee Catholique. Wee prooue the hauing of them to bee necessarie by the fruite and profite that commeth from them:What com∣modities the Papists say they sucke out of Images. namely the instruction of the ignorant in the storie of their saluation, the putting vs in often remem∣braunce of our Sauiour, and the stirring vp our deuotion with more fer∣uencie. The worshipping of them wee proue with more facilitie: for if hee that ho∣noureth the Image honour the person himselfe thereby represented, as All these fa∣thers are wre∣sted by papists from their right mea∣ning. S. A∣thanasius, S. Basil, S. Chrysostome and S. Ambrose doe affirme: then the worship which is done to the Image of Christ, passeth vnto Christ himselfe: and by consequent if it bee lawfull to adore and honour Christ, it is not vn∣lawfull to doe the like to his Image. Besides wee can prooue that adora∣tion of Images is a tradition deliuered from the Apostles, and obserued in all Churches: and that the Scripture it selfe supporteth vs in this point, as the learned epistle of Adrian the Bishoppe of Rome to Constantine and Irene doeth largely shewe: and for the credite of the cause wee haue a general Coun∣cell eight hundreth yeres old to say as much in euery point as I affirme, and more. Theo. Wee maruell not to see you so deepely deceiued and strongly delu∣ded as you bee:2. Thes. 2. such is the iust iudgement of God on all that admit not the loue of the trueth, but haue pleasure in vnrighteousnes. You rest on the vanities & forgeries of such as were enclined to the same error before you,The Papists greedily em∣brace other mens forge∣ries & many of their own for adoration of Images. not exami∣ning their proofes, nor considering their reportes; but presuming their eui∣dent follies to bee pregnant authorities for you, whith is euer the next way to seduce others, and to bee seduced your selues. As touching the shew which you make of Scriptures, Apostolike Tradition, Churches, Fathers & Coun∣cels, it is a childish and friuolous vaunt. The fathers which you quote, are a∣bused, the Apostles and their Churches belied, the Scriptures depra∣ued and wrested, the Councell, which you call generall, reiected as wic∣ked, and diligently refuted in the same age by the West Bishoppes. Of these emptie and vnluckie Maskes, the more you bring, the lesse you wynne. Phi. Wee loose nothing so long as you lode vs onely with words. Theo. If your proofes bee vaine, my woordes be true: Looke you therefore to the soundnesse of that which you alleage: otherwise your owne burden will ouer∣presse you. Philand. The collection which I made out of Saint Basill and others is very sure. Saint Basill sayth: Honos Imaginis in ipsum prototypum redit.
The honour doone to the Image redoundeth to the principall that is there∣by represented.Nice. Concil. 2. act. 6. Ibidem. S. Athanasius, Qui Imaginem adorat, in ipsa Imperatorem ado∣rat. He that reuerenceth the Image, honoureth therein the Emperour. And S. Chrysostome▪ Knowest thou not, that hee which hurteth the Emperours Image,Ibidem. Ambros. in Psal. 118 Con∣cio. 2. defaceth the Imperiall dignitie it selfe? And so S. Ambrose, Hee that crowneth the Emperours Image, honoureth surely him, whose Image he honoured: and he that despiseth the Emperours Image, doeth the iniurie to the Emperour whose Image hee did spit at. Theo. Wee doubt not of this similitude. Phi. Then wee inferre: ergo hee that worshippeth the Image of Christ worshippeth Christ himselfe: and so the adoration of Christes Image is not Idolatrie, but pietie. Theo. You meane that Image of Christ which is made with hands. Phi. I doe. Theo. Then wee deny the consequent. Phi. Why so? Betweene the resemblances of Christ and others the proportion is good.Great diffe∣rēce between the seruices & Images of God & men. Theo. Yea, but betweene the seruices of God and men, and also betweene their Images, the distinction is great. Princes can expect no more but a sober reuerence due to their states, expressed by some decent gestures of the bodie, that others may behold it; and that to be yeelded chiefly to their persons, and secondly to their de∣puties, vicegerents and messengers, yea to their ensignes, armes and recogni∣sances, such as they shall vse or allow to represent their power or to notifie their pleasures. In which case they that honour the Princes throne, Scepter, Seale, swoord, token or Image, honour not the thinges which they see, but the power that sent them. Thus farre your similitude is currant, marie from hence to adoring the car∣ued and painted images of Christ can you draw no consequent. The Simili∣tude of ho∣noring the original by the Image answered.First because Christ hath neither appointed nor allowed them to represent his person, as Princes haue. Next for that our sauiour as the sonne of God must haue a diuine honour in spirit and trueth, fit for the creator whereof neither images nor any other crea∣tures are capabl: and is so ielous of it that he wil part it with none, and name∣ly not with grauen or molten images,No Creature, nor Image capable of Christs honor because it is diuine. Thirdly the image of any Prince is then to bee honoured when the Person is absent: but in the presence of the Emperour him-selfe to turne to his image were Lib. de falsa religio. cap. 2. apparant madnes as Lactantius teacheth. Synce then the Lorde Iesu is by his diuine maiestie present in all places at all tymes to receiue that honor and adoration of all men that is done vnto him: it is no pietie but frensie to ho∣nour his image when hee himselfe is not absent:The Fathers make Christ the Image of God, and not a peece of wood to bee the Imgae of Christ. and requireth as well the re∣ligious behauiour of the body as the inward motions of the mynd to be yeelded vnto him. Lastly these fathers do not bring this similitude to prooue that wee shoulde worshippe the image of Christ made with handes, but that wee shoulde adore Christ him-selfe as being the expresse image of his father, proposed by God to haue one and the same honour with him, and in that respect the honour doone to
him passeth vnto God the father whose Image hee is, euen as the reuerence gi∣uen to the officers, armes or Images which Princes sende to set vp, vnto them selues, is accepted as rendred to their owne persons, when they can not other∣wise be present in the place to receiue it but by a Substitute, or a signe that shal represent their state. Phi. You may quarrell with any conclusion if you bee once mynded to bee froward. Theo. Call you that quarelling, when you can not be suffered by a similitude stretched whither you list your selues,If an Image must haue Christs honor, ergo it must be God. to subuert the very ground∣worke of all religion and godlynes? for if this sequele bee sure, that the honour done to the painted or carued Image of Christ is transfrred to Christ himselfe; then must you giue to the Image of Christ no baser, nor other honor than Christ is willing and worthie to receiue:Mar. 4. Luke 4. and that is the highest and diuinest kinde of adoration that may be, which the Scriptures reserue only vnto God. And what is this but to set your selues against heauen, and to crie defiance vnto God,Images may haue no di∣uine honor, & Christ will hau no ciuill salutations nor friendly greetings. by giuing his honour vnto others: yea to the vilest and ignoblest things of all others; and to serue most abicet creatures in equall degree of glo∣ry with the most mightie creator and quickner of all? If you giue them no reli∣gious nor diuine honour but a louing aspect or a reuerent behauiour, that single salutation or mannerly submission may not passe vnto Christ, lest you seeme to vse him as your good familiar and old acquaintance, or else as some earthly Po∣tentate rather than as the God of grace and second person in the blessed trinitie. Lesse than diuine honour Christ will not haue: hee that otherwise honoureth him, defaceth him, & that honour you can not empart to his Image without sa∣crilegious and damnable Idolatrie: your conclusion therefore is not only vaine but also wicked, if you referre it to the Image of Christ made with handes: and other acceptions of Christes Image can do you no good. Phi. S. Ambrose vttering the words which I last rehearsed, addeth far∣ther, Vides quod inter multas Christi Imagines ambulamus:In Psal. 118. sermo. 10. Thou seest we walke among many Images of Christ: and therefore all sortes of Images which per∣taine vnto Christ must haue their conuenient honour. Theo. But S. Am∣brose the next woordes before vtterly excludeth your woodden Images as not within the limits of his speach, and reproueth the Gentiles for thinking a peece of wood could be an image vnto god: and then addeth as you say,Christ ac∣knowledgeth the poore to bee his I∣mage, and yet it were wic∣kednes to wor∣shippe them. that the church had many images of Christ: not, many kindes of Images, but many in num∣ber that Christ accepteth and reputeth for his Images; and those hee ma∣keth to bee the poore and afflicted in whom Christ is relieued or despised, as hee sheweth by the woordes of Christ speaking of them as of him-selfe in the twenty fiue of Saint Matthewes Gospel. And this rather hurteth than helpeth your conclusion. For if the honour which is due to Christ may not bee giuen to men who are the liuing Images of Christ made by the woorkemanshippe of GOD him-selfe,Men are the liuing Images of christ made by the handes of GOD himselfe. much lesse may the same bee deriued to wood or stone fa∣shioned by mans hande, and in no point answerable to the true proportion of Christ, but in this onely that they bee shaped like men. For which cause they
resemble the sonne of God no more than they doe any other of the iust or vniust that did or doe liue, and cannot truely bee called the Images of Christ, but on∣ly by the Painters purpose,The Image which is made for Christ, is no more like him than it is to any other of the saintes or wicked. and the peoples error, which haue no power to ap∣point what Image shall stand for Christ, much lesse to prescribe what honour he shall bee content to excommunicate to that Image, which they list to erect vn∣to him. These bee sufficient causes to stop your conclusion, if your antecedent were generall as it is not, and similitudes you may not wrest farther than they, that made them, did intend them. Phi. Making and worshiping of Images fally fathered on the Apostles.You said somewhat if the worshipping of Images were not deliuered vs by Tradition from the Apostles. Theo. Were the Apostles makers or woorshippers of Images? Philand. Neuer read you that? Theoph. Yeas I haue read it often, but I was neuer so wise as to beleeue it. Phi. Then I perceiue you would hardly beleeue that Christ him-selfe made the first likenes of his owne face, and sent to king Abagarus, as Damascene and Nicephorus witnesse.Damasc. lib. 4. cap. 17. & Nice∣pho. lib. 2. cap. 7. Theoph. You may well sweare, I will neither beleeue you, nor Damascene, Damascene sayth, Fertur quaedam historia: there is such a storie spread abroad,A fable of Christ pain∣ting his own face. but hee neither telleth by whom it was made, nor of what cre∣dite it is, and Eusebius that first tooke this storie of Abagarus, and that at large out of the monuments of the Citie Edessa, reporteth no such thing: yea the Church of Rome her selfe some hundreths before Damascene,Euseb. lib. 1. cap. 13. repelled that Distint. 15. § S. Roana.Epistle of Christ to Abagarus then extant by name as Apocryphall. And ther∣fore you bolster an error, and abuse the people of God with forgeries long be∣fore condemned, though since receiued by Nicephorus and other fablers a∣mong the Grecians, who wrate all they found without iudgement, or with∣out all shame fayned that they neuer found, except it were in some wicked and witlesse legend,Of such legēds the Church of Rome hath plentie. such as your Church of late dayes had good stoare. Philand. And so the image of our Ladie made by Saint Luke, you will say is a fable; and yet Simeon Methaphrastes doeth confirme it. Theoph. Leaue these late and obscure Lyars, and bring some-what woorth the answe∣ring. Philand. Saint Basil sayth the painting and adoring of Images is a tra∣dition of the Apostles: and so doethDamasc. lib. 4. cap. 17. Citatur ab A∣driano in epist. sua Nicen Synod. 2. act. 2. Damascene. The woordes of S. Basil are, Quam ob causam & historias Imaginum illorum honoro & palam adoro. Hoc enim nobis traditum a sanctis Apostolis non est prohibendum, sed in omnibus eccleijs nostris eorum historias erigimus. For which cause I honour and What shame haue they left that make such places in the fathers names? openly a∣dore the stories of their Images. And this being What shame haue they left that make such places in the fathers names? deliuered vs from the Apostles is not prohibited, but in What shame haue they left that make such places in the fathers names? all our Churches wee erect their hi∣stories. Theoph. Can you turne vs to the place in SaintThis place is not found in all S. Basils Epistles, & yet there are ex∣tant of his 180; and many of them not fouer lines a peece, so that all were preserued, sauing this that was neuer wrin. Basill? Phi. The epistle is not extant, but Adrian the Bishoppe of Rome, whose credite is sufficient for a greater matter than this, doeth alleage i ut of his writings against Iulian the Apostata. Theo. Adrian and you bth shall pardon vs for beleeuing you,
when wee find no such woordes in all S. Basill. Phi. They might be then in Saint Basil, though they be not now. Theo. If the woordes did agree with the spirit of Saint Basil, or with the sae of those tymes, or with the rest of the fathers and auncient teachers in Christes Church, wee woulde not so much dislike them, though they were not found in Saint Basils woorkes: but nowe seeing the woordes to be sensibly false, if not vtterly wicked, and to haue no conuenience with the doctrine of those that taught in the same time or neere a∣bout his age: and knowing in the contention of the Grecians for images some∣what before Adrian,If that were Adrians Epi∣stle he might soone be de∣ceiued: but it seemeth to be rather a late forgerie in Adriās name. what framing and ling of fathers there was to beare out either side: wee thinke it easier for the Bishoppe of Rome to bee deceiued in a Greeke writer, that liued 450. yeeres before him, by some false reporter, lewd translator, or cunning forgeer, than for Basil to bee so great a straunger in the Church of Christ and so manifest a despiser of Gods precepts, that hee would openly defend, and himselfe vse, adoration of Saintes Images without any scruple; as deliuered from the Apostles; who were farre from hauing, & far∣ther from teaching the godly to worship the Images of Prophetes, Apostles or Martyrs, as this deluder dreameth. And therefore either shewe vs the Epistle where this is written, or else leaue loding the learned fathers names with such vnlearned corruptions. Philand. Were there not many thinges written by the Catholique Fa∣thers that nowe are perished? Theoph. And as many thinges forged in their names that were neuer written by them, as appeareth in all their woorkes to this day by the iudgement of your very friendes.Infinite forge∣geries haue beene cōmit∣ted in the fa∣thers names, as appeareth at this day in al their works. The west Bi∣shops that re∣futed the 2. Nicene coun∣cel & al autho∣rities one af∣ter an other, neuer mentio∣ned this place: & therefore it hath beene put in since their time. Phil. This is the next way to call all their writinges, and so the whole Christian sayth in question. Theoph. You woulde faine haue vs swallowe your monkish im∣pieties vnder the colour of their authorities: but the wisedome of God hath better prouided for his church than so. The rule of our fayth is the voyce of our Shepheard. By that we iudge of the writings of all others be they fithll or Infidels. If this were written in Basil, wee would not receiue it vntill wee had tried it by that touchstone: finding no such thing in all his woorkes, why should wee regard it? Philand. There it was, though nowe it bee not. Theophi. There it is not, wheresoeuer it was; and your alleager hath no suh credite with vs that wee should trust him. Philand. Trust no man I praie you, that is against you. Theo. Wee trust not you to be your owne caruers. Phi. This authoritie was alleaged and allowed to be S. Basils in a general Coun∣cell 800. yeres agoe. Theo. That Councell was neuer receiued nor confessed to be general by the west Churches, but reiected and condemned as a wicked coniuration against the faith: and theThe Epistle hath neither trueth, lear∣ning, reason nor sense. letter there framed in Adrians name, besides that it sauoreth altogether of your late forge at Rome, is a pestilent and shamelesse depriuation both of fathers and Scriptures. Phi. You bee very choice that can like nothing, except it be exquisite. The. You be worse than grosse, if you take such palpable lies to be the fortresses of your faith. Omit
that fond and false report of Constantines Seuen notori∣ous lies repug∣nant to al the Church sto∣ries, touched in one corner of this Epistle. leprosie purposing to bee washed in a bath of infants Seuen notori∣ous lies repug∣nant to al the Church sto∣ries, touched in one corner of this Epistle. blood, and dehorted from it in the night as hee slept by some that appeared to him, whome hee afterwarde Seuen notori∣ous lies repug∣nant to al the Church sto∣ries, touched in one corner of this Epistle. knewe to bee Peter and Paul by their Seuen notori∣ous lies repug∣nant to al the Church sto∣ries, touched in one corner of this Epistle. Images which Siluester Bishoppe of Rome shewed him: and that thereupon Constantine being first a Seuen notori∣ous lies repug∣nant to al the Church sto∣ries, touched in one corner of this Epistle. persecuter of the Christians, was con∣uerted, and Seuen notori∣ous lies repug∣nant to al the Church sto∣ries, touched in one corner of this Epistle. baptized by Syluester, and beganne to buylde Churches and Seuen notori∣ous lies repug∣nant to al the Church sto∣ries, touched in one corner of this Epistle. decked them with Images in euery place; (lewder and viler fables than which your legend hath none:) the rest of Adrians allegations out of the scrip∣tures and Fathers, what are they but open iniuries and mockeries of GOD and man? The scriptures alleaged in Adrians Epist.The Scriptures which hee bringeth to proue the making and adoring of I∣mages bee these: God made man of the slime of the earth after his owne I∣mage. Adam of his owne free will Genes. 1. called all the beastes of the fielde and foules of the ayre by their proper names. Genes. 2. Abel of his owne accord presen∣ted a sacrifice vnto God of the firstlings of his flocke.Genes. 4. Noe after the flood of his owne head buylt an altar vnto the Lorde and offered thereon. So Abra∣ham of himselfe erected an altar in the honour and glorie of God. Genes. 8. Iacob al∣so,Genes. 28. when hee had in his sleepe seene the Angels of GOD ascending & des∣cending by the ladder, after hee rose of his owne motion set vp a stone on the ground, where his head lay, and powred oyle on it, and named the place Bethel, and wee doe not reade that God for this cause was angrie with him. Againe the same Iacob worshipped in the toppe of his staffe. Not that hee woorshipped the staffe, but him that helde it in a signe of loue. If the scripturs be not horri∣bly abused, let Images on Gods name be adored.Then alleaging the brasen Serpent, and the Cherubins made by Moses & Salomon, hee descendeth to other testimones of Esay and Dauid, as sitte for his purpose as salt for sore eyes. Esai sayth, Esa. 19. In those dayes there shal be an al∣tar vnto the Lorde in the mydst of the Lande of Egypt, and a pillour tou∣ching the ends therof, and it shall be for a signe and a testimonie to the Lord in the land of Egypt. And Dauid the tuner of Psalmes sayth Psal. 95. confession and beautie before him. And againe:Psal. 25. Lord, I haue loued the comlynes of thine house. And againe: Psal. 26. Thy face Lord wil I seeke. And againe: Psal. 44. the rich among the people shall bowe themselues before thy face. And againe: Psal. 4.the light of thy countenance is signed vpon vs. These bee the best proofes which Adrian or hee that framed this letter in Adrians name could finde in all the Scriptures for the making and adoring of images,Children would not thus play with Scrip∣tures. and these you see bee very miserable. For what fellowship hath Adams act, Abels sacrifice, Noahs or Abrahams altar, Iacobs stone and staffe, Esaies title or pillour with images: or when Dauid spake of the face and countenance of God, did he so much as dreame of the grauen and woodden figures, which you would erect vnto God against his heauenly will and trueth? Phi. In deed these places be not altogether so pertinent as we could wish thē: but the brasen serpent & the two Cherubins which Moses set vp, directly make
for Images.The brasen serpent made by Moses. Theo. They doe not warrant your erecting of Images: and your adoring of Images they vtterly ouerthrow. For the Brasen serpent was a figure of Christ, as we find confirmed by his owne wordes in the Iohn 3. gos∣pell of S. Iohn: and yet though God Numb. 21. commaunded Moses to make it, and healed the dreadfull plague of the people by it, and the Iewes had kept it aboue 700. yeres as a monument of Gods mercie toward them in the desert, when they beganne but 1. King. 18. to burne incense to it, Ezechiah the religious King of Iudah brake it in peeces and is commanded by the holie Ghost, namely for that act. This example wee would haue you aduisedly to marke.And broken in peeces by by Ezechias when it was abused. A figure of Christ erected by Gods owne commaundement, and seruing to put al Israels posteritie in minde of the wonders which their fathers saw in the wildernesse, when it was abused was defaced, and the fact allowed by Gods owne mouth. Hence we conclude; that the painted and carued Images of Christ himselfe may not be adored, and if they be, they may be remoued, though they were deli∣uered euen by the Apostles, as yours were not. The Cherubines were made by Gods appointment, but not set in any place for the people to adore them, or so much as to see them: nay the Priests them∣selues were kept from the sight of them; Hebr. 9. only the high-Priest, once euery yere, went into the second Tabernacle where they stoode, the vaile being closely drawen betweene that and the first Tabernacle, where the rest of the Priests serued. And since Gods care was so great that they should not be seene; wee inferre, his will was as cleare that they should not be worshipped, for so much as they could not be worshipped vnlesse they were seene. Phi. Yet this sheweth that God would haue them made.The Cheru∣bins not seen much lesse worshipped. Tertul. de Idolatria. Theo. But not seen, much lesse worshipped. And as for the making of them, Gods act aboue his Law is no warrant for you to breake his Law. By his Law he re∣straineth you, not himselfe from the making of any such similitudes. And therefore though he might for causes to him knowen goe against his Law, you may not. This rule Tertullian will teach you. It is no hurt that the same God by his Law forbade a similitude to be made, and by an extraordinary precept commaunded the similitude of the brasen serpent to be made. If thou wilt obay God thou hast his law, make thee no similitude. If thou looke to the precept that was giuen after for making a similitude, then see thou imitate Moses. Make no Image against the law, vnlesse God bid thee (as he did Moses.) Phi. The fathers who knew the Scriptures as well as you, were of an other minde, as you may see by Adrians letters,Fathers abu∣sed by Adrian, as well as scriptures. auouching many and good authorities out of them. Theo. Adrian dealeth with the fathers as hee did with the Scriptures. Eight of them he alleageth and abuseth euerie one of them. Augustine saith, Nicen. Synod. 2. act. 2.The Image of God what is it but the face of God in which the people of God are signed? And Ambrose; Eight fathers peruerted in this one E∣istle. when we worship in Christ the diuine Image and Crosse, do we part him in sunder? The diuine
Image and countenance, which these fathers speake of, is the brightnes of Christes diuine nature and glorie: his crosse is his death and humilitie: those Adrian grossely supposeth to be such as grauers & caruers doe make with their hands. And where Cyril saith, Faith painteth (or liuely describeth vnto vs) the worde which was in the forme of God:The fathers draw simili∣tudes from prophane things, and Adrian wre∣steth them vn∣to diuine things. that euidence & clearenes of the Gospell setting the sonne of God in his diuine maiestie before our eyes, your holy father lewdly misconstereth for painting with pencils and coulours. Athanasius, Chrysostome and Basil, drawing similitudes from the painters art, and Emperours Image, to other purposes, are violently wrested to make for that they neuer ment nor thought. Gregory Nissene confesseth he had often seen the storie of the passion pictured, but he neither saith in Churches, nor alloweth it any worshippe. Hierom is brought in last and made to say that which not only no learned father euer vttered,Hierom made to speake opē Impietie. but no sober nor Christian man euer imagined. As (God) gaue leaue to the Gentils to worshippe things made with hands, and to the Iewes (to worshippe) the carued workes and two golden cherubins which Moses made, so hath hee giuen to vs Christians the Crosse, and to paint and reuerence the Images of good workes, and so to get him to like of our labour. The two first pointes, that God gaue leaue to the Gentils to worshippe things made with hands, and licenced the Iewes to adore the woorkes and shapes of Cherubins which Moses made, are so directly against the trueth of the Scriptures, and rule of our faith, that nothing can be more: the last may well bee written by him that wrate the first, and as soone true as the rest.No such thing in al Hieroms workes. And were it found in Hieroms workes, as it is not, it would but argue that other mens hands had beene in Hieroms bookes as well as his: which is no newes in the most of the Fathers Greeke and Latine that you haue left vs at this day: But of that paines Adrian himselfe hath eased vs by al∣leaging that which is not in all S. Hieromes volumes. The place of Basill is set amidst these deprauations of Scriptures and fathers. The same place other∣wise repeated in the same Councell, and therefore the first or the last must needes be forged. Nicen Synod. act. 4 ex ep. Basil. ad Iulian. Impe∣rator.Amidst the route of these follies and forgeries, commeth in that Bastard place of Basil, no where found in all his writings; which, besides the apparant slander there fastned on the Apostles and Churches of Christ against al trueth, the legates of Adrian in this very Synode conuince of a manifest and mightie corruption in the wordes that be most materiall for your purpose. Phi. Did the legates of Adrian contradict their masters allegation? Theo. The same place being rehearsed by Demetrius a Notarie out of the booke it selfe, which the legates of Rome offered in the councel, sounded farre otherwise than Adri∣an had cited it. For where Adrian in his letters alleaged, Hoc enim traditum nobis ab Apostolis non est prohibendum: This being deliuered vs by the Apostles must not be prohibited: the booke which they read, had Hoc enim nobis a sanctis Apostolis non est prohibitum: this is not forbidden vs by the Apostles. It is one thing to say The Apostles did deliuer it, & an other to say The Apostles did not prohibite it. Betweene these two reports, if you weigh them wll, you shall finde good difference.
Phi. If you like not the former reading,The Apostles did not prohi∣bite the ma∣king of Ima∣ges in spe∣cil wordes, because God had done it sufficiently before. take the latter, and that in sight is true. For the Apostles in particular woordes did not prohibite the making and worshipping of holy Images. Theo. They needed not. God by his Lawe long before had doone it very sufficiently: and that standing in full force, there needed no newe prohibition, since no authoritie coulde bee grea∣ter than his, who had already forbidden it. And yet by your leaue the Apo∣stles did not onely propose the whole Lawe of God, as Rom. 7. holy, iust, and good, but they namely touch the seconde precept, which wee reason of; Saint Paul confessing the Iewes did well according to the Lawe Rom. 2. to abhorre Idoles, and that the Gentiles Rom. 1. were giuen ouer to their vile affections for turning the glorie of God to the Image of a man; and S. Iohn requiring all christi∣ans to beware the like,1. Ioh. 5. in sayng, Babes, keepe your selues from Idoles. Phi. Frō idoles: but not from images. Theo. An Image made with hands if it be set vp to God himselfe, & worshipped, is an idole, as I haue proued; & therfore you must either renoūce your adoring of images, which your forged Basil would establish, or else suffer thē to stand for Idoles, from which S. Iohn deterreth vs. Phi. S. Augustine saith it is not an Idole except it b Dei falsi & alieni simu∣lachrum,August. quaest. super Iudic. li. 7. p. 41. the image of a false & strange God. And in that respect you do the I∣mages of Christ & his Saints great wrong, to call them idoles. Theo. S. Au∣gustine in that place disputeth how Gedeons Ephod should be said in the scrip∣ture to be fornication in the people, & the destruction of Gedeons house since it was (as he thought,) no likenes of any thing against the lawe, but an imitation of the Priests apparell prescribed in the Law.Gedeons E∣phod was an Idol, though it were not the Image, of a false God. August. Ibidem. And albeit to interprete himself, what he ment, when he said it was no idole, he addeth by way of explicatiō, (that is no shape of any false or strange God) yet doth he not limit the word to that continual vse: but rather granteth, as his conclusiō sheweth, that there were mo kindes of Idoles, & that this, though it were a garment in the law, & not an I∣mage against the law, yet was it in sort an Idole, & so his words import: Factū est Gedeon & domini eius in scandolum, quia & hoc quoddā genus Idoli quodāmodo e∣rat. This was the ruine of Gedeon & his house, because it was in some sense a kind of idole. Tertullian wil tel you the word is general,Tertul. de Idolae∣tria. & noteth the likenes or shape of any thing.  graecè, formam sonat, ab oper diminutionem , aequé apud nos formu∣lam fecit: Igitur omnis forma vel formula Idolum se dici exposcit, This word  in greeke signifieth a shape, whence  is deriued as a diminutiue, and with vs signifieth any likenes: therefore euery shape or likenes may wel bee cal∣led an Idole. Isidor repeating Tertullians words as worth the noting, addeth of his owne;Isido. Originū lib. 5. Idolum est simulachrum quod humana effigie factum & consecratum est. An Idole is an Image made after the shape of a man and dedicated (vnto some religious vse.) Philand. Nay dedicated vnto some false God, and then it is rightly an Idole. Theoph. But Isidore sayth generally that an image consecrated is an idole: and consecration is the addicting of any thing to holy and diuine vses.
Phi. That is not Isidores meaning. Theo. Those be Isidores words. Phi. You heard S. Augustine say, it must bee the Image of a false GOD. Theo. S. Augustine doth not tie the word to that signification as you heard by his owne confession:An Image worshipped is a false God, & consequēt∣ly an Idole. and yet if you take false and straunge Gods, as S. Augu∣stine doeth, your adoration of painted and carued Images will prooue them to bee false Christes, and your selues to bee worshippers of false Goddes. For if you worshippe Christ not after his will, but after your conceite, you woor∣shippe nowe not Christ, but the fiction and imagination of your own heartes; and that is a false Christ as Saint Augustine learnedly and truely teacheth.Quaest. super Iosua. lib. 6. cap. 29. Quisquis talem cogitat Deum, qualis non est Deus, alienum Deum vtique & fal∣sum in cogitatione portat. Whosoeuer supposeth God to bee that hee is not, beareth a straunge and false GOD in his cogitation. This else-where hee calleth the Idole of the heart,The Idole of the heart. not onely in Pagans but also in Christi∣ans. Of the false fansies that Pagans, had of GOD hee sayth: August. de verbis Dom. secundum Mat. sermo. 6. Prius id agimus vt Idola in eorum cordibus confringamus. The first thing that wee la∣bour is to breake downe those Idoles in their heartes. Of the wrong ima∣ginations of christians hee saith, Idem in Ioan. tract. 19. Quae omnia Idola cordis sunt: all which are Idoles of the heart. Phi. A false opinion of his essence is an Idole in the heart of man. Theo. And so is a wrong perswasion of his will or woorship.Hieron. in Iere. cap. 32. Hierom sayth, Vsque ho∣die in domo Dei, quae interpretatur ecclesia, siue in corde animaque credentium poni∣tur Idolum, quando nouum dogma constituitur. Euen to this present day, an Idole is set vp in the house of God,Euery false opinion of God is an Idoll. Hieron. in Esaiae cap. 2. which is interpreted to be the Church, or else in the hearts and soules of the beleeuers when a newe point of Doctrine is deuised. And therefore generally resolueth of all errors, Quod omne dogma con∣trarium veritati adoret opera manuum suarum, & constituat Idola in terra sua: that euery opinion repugnant to truth worshippeth the works of his own hands, and erecteth an Idole in the land where it is. By the workes of their owne hands hee meaneth the deuises of their hearts, as else where he sheweth.Hieron. in Ose. cap. 4. Haeretici perdito mentis iudicio adorant Idola quae de cor∣de suo finxerunt. Heretikes with their wicked resolution of mynd, (or else void of sense and feeling of mynde) adore the Idoles which they haue framed in their owne heartes. S. Augustine citeth and commendeth the saying of So∣crates. August. de consens. Euan∣gelist. li. 1. ca. 18. To serue God as we list and not as he will, is idolatrie. Why the ser∣uing of God otherwise thā he willeth is Idolatrie.Vnumquemque Deum sic coli oportere, quomodo ipse se colendum esse prae∣ceperit. Euery God must bee worshipped in such sort as hee hath commaun∣ded himselfe to bee worshipped. And thereupon inferreth, that if any would worshippe (the God of the Hebrewes) otherwise than he him-selfe had wil∣led, non vtique illum colerent, sed quod ipsi finxissent, they shoulde not haue wor∣shipped him, but their owne fiction. In this consisteth the chiefest ground of all religion. For God hath not char∣ged vs to bee curious in searching his essence, but to be carefull in obseruing his will. Hee neither taketh nor requireth any thing at our handes besides his woorship. That if wee yeelde him according to his will, we honour him as our
God: if we alter that which he hath appointed for himselfe, or adde any thing vn∣to it, hee reiecteth all our seruice as done not vnto him but to the conceit of our harts: which by nature is no God, & therefore an idole. For this cause God is e∣uery where so earnest with vs that we should serue him not after our fansies, nor with our deuises, but answerable to his will reueiled in his word. You shal not do, euery man what seemeth him good in his owne eies: whatsoeuer I com∣maund you,Deut. 12. that take heed you do that (and nothing else). Thou shalt put no∣thing thereto, nor take ought there from. And when the Iewes thought to be very forward in deseruing God with their deuotions and oblations, they were repelled with this demaund, Esa. 1.who requireth this of your handes? Our Saui∣our himselfe assureth you that Mat. 15.you worship God in vaine, if your feare (or ser∣uice) towards him be taught (you) Esa. 29. by the precept of men. Phi. All this we admit. Theo. Then when we serue God besides his will, we serue not him, but the presumption of our owne hearts which is an idoll: & this deuotion of ours, though we wholy intend it to him and earnestly vrge it on him, yet is it the worship of idols, and not of God, since hee vtterly renounceth it as none of his, and being refused by him as iniurious to his truth, though it be ap∣pointed for him as most t in our fansies, it must of necessitie be counted ido∣latrie. Phi. What is this to the image of Christ, whereof we were reasoning? The. Unlesse you can proue that Christ will be serued with materiall and artificiall images, and is content to accept that honor as done to himselfe, which is yeelded vnto them, your adoring them maketh them idols and your selues Idolaters. For they be thinges made with handes, which you cannot worship without ap∣parent idolatrie. Phi. We worship not them, but him that is represented by them. Theo. It lyeth not in your power to diuide adoration betwixt Christ and his image,The worship∣ing of Christ by an Image except himself commaund it, is Idolatrie. or with your intenion to assigne that honour vnto him, which you do to the workes of your own handes without his warrant. You must know whether hee will ac∣cept it as done to himselfe, before you may venter to conuey it vnto him by dead and dumbe creatures. Phi. We doubt not of that. Theo. Your confidence wil not helpe the matter till his commaundement be shewed. Phi. All men,They must shew where Christ com∣maunded him selfe to be worshipped by an Image. you knowe, thinke that done to themselues, which is done to their image. Theo. But Christ, that is God as well as man, is not so content. Phi. How proue you that? Theo. Nay the proofe must be yours, since the fact is yours. You must shew that Christ alloweth of the honour done to a painted or carued image as done to himselfe. If you cannot, you conuince your selues of sa∣crilege, presumption and impietie when you giue that honour which is due to Christ, vnto a stocke or a stone set vp in his steed without his leaue or liking. For this precept, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serue, excludeth as well images as creatures from being partakers of his diuine honor: & the image which you make, be not so good as the creatures which God made: which yet in no wise may be worshipped.
Phi. You reason as And so you doe, as shal appeare by the confession of your fel∣lowes. if wee gaue diuine honour vnto images, which wee doe not. Theo. Your schooles with one consent do giue the same honour vnto the i∣mage which is due to the originall: that is diuine honour to the image of Christ. If you be ashamed of that errour, you ridde your selues of some danger, but you leaue your church in the briars; which hath all this while professed and practi∣sed that idolatrous doctrine. Phi. Our church neuer gaue images any diuine honour. Theo. The fortresse of your faith is direct against you: Tortalicium sidei contra Iudaes, Sarace∣nos &c. lib. 3. Considerat. 4. argumen. 24. Diuine ho∣nor giuen to Images by the Church of Rome. Crux Christi & eius imago venerari debent a∣doratione latriae. Et haec est opinio Thomae in 3. sententiarum distinctione 2. The crosse and image of Christ ought to woshipped with such honor as is due vnto God. And of this opinion is Thomas vpon the thirde of the sentences, the seconde distinction. Phi. Holcot was not of that minde as you find it te∣stified in the same place. Theo. But Holcots reward was to be repelled with his contradiction, because your church tooke part with Thomas. And so your fortresse sayth, Fortalicium fidei Ibidem. Iacob. Nanctan. in 1. cap. ad Roma. Licet hoc rationabiliter videatur dictum, tamen loquendum est, vt plures & communis opinio tenet oppositum. Though this saying (of Holcot) seeme reasonable, yet we must goe with the multitude: and the common opinion holdeth the contrary. One of your Italian Bishoppes, who knewe better than you what the church of Rome holdeth, saith: Ergo fatendum est fi∣deles in Ecclesia adorare imaginem sine quo volueris scrupulo: qum & eo illam vene∣rari cultu quo & prototypon eius. Propter quod, si illum habet adorari latria, & illa habet adorari latria. Wee must therefore confesse, that the faithfull in the church do without any qualification ADORE THE IMAGE (which they see) yea with the same kinde of worship that is due to the original. Where∣fore if that haue diuine honour, the image MVST HAVE THE LIKE DI∣VINE HONOR. Phi. Wee giue not this honour to the image, but rather to the originall. Theo. They giue Christs honor to an Image, and then they say they doe it in respect of Christ.Your church in plaine wordes giueth the same honour to the image that is due to the originall, which in Christ must bee diuine honour: and when you bee charged with it, you say you giue it not to the image, but rather to the Originall: and so by your later euasion you subuert your former assertion. For why dare you not giue diuine honour to the image of Christ, but onely because it were manifest and apparent idolatrie so to doe? And if that bee true, why then doe you teach all men to giue the same honour to the image of Christ that is due to Christ him selfe? You conclude it must bee done: and yet you confesse it can not bee doone without a sacrilegious iniurie to Christ, if his diuine honour bee giuen to an image made of earth and framed by Art. Phi. The Papists thinke to shift off the art of Idolatrie with a logicall re∣spect.You vnderstand vs not. When wee giue diuine honour to the image in respect of Christ, we giue it to Christ and not to the image. Theo. God graunt you vnderstand your selues. You first dishonour the Sonne of God, by exhibiting the heauenly seruice, that is due to him, to an Image made with handes: and then with a shift of wordes you thinke to delude him in tel∣ling
that hee may not choose but like of your doinges, because you ment it vnto him, when you did it to a dumbe creature for his sake. But awake out of your frensie, God will not thus be mocked by your relations or intentions. Hee is zealous of his honour, he will not resigne it to any other, and namely not to grauen (or carued) images.Esa. 42. God respe∣cteth the act if it bee against his law, and not the intētion. If against his worde, against his will, a∣gainst his truth and glorie, you impart it to anie other, or take vpon you to conueie it to him by creatures or images, as if hee were not present in all places with might and maiesty to receiue the seruice that is done vnto him; you not onely make new Gods, but you reiect him as no GOD, who alone is the true GOD, and will be serued without mate or meane of your de∣uising. Phi. Our Lord shewing what account he maketh of such as represent his per∣son, sayth:Mat. 25. Christ wil haue charitie shew∣ed to others for his sake, but not diuine honour to any creature or Image. In as much as you haue doone it to one of the least of these, you haue doone it vnto me. Theo. Did Christ speake that of images? Phi. No but thereby you see, it passeth to Christ, whatsoeuer is done in his name or for his sake to others. Theo. If you meane such charitable reliefe as Christ hath commaunded vs to yeeld to our brethren, in respect of his will, their neede, and our dutie: you say well: wee haue for that the manifest precept and pro∣mise of our Sauiour accepting it as done to himselfe whatsoeuer is done to a∣ny of his brethren or seruauntes: but if you leape from men to images, & from humane comfort to diuine honour, you leape too farre to haue the sequele good. Philand. If diuine adoration may not bee giuen to Images, yet hu∣mane reuerence may with-out anie daunger.Whether ci∣uil reuerence may be giuen to Images, cā be no questiō of religion. Theo. Religious honour may not: and as for externall and ciuill reuerence, whether that may bee giuen to images, can bee no doubt of Doctrine, nor point of fayth. The one is impious to bee defended, the other superfluous to bee discus∣sed. Philand. So you giue them either wee care not. Theophil. If you flie from adoration to saluation, and stande not on pietie but on ciui∣litie: then is it a question for Philosophers and not for Diuines, and to bee decided rather in the Schooles than in the Churche: neyther can any manne bee praysed or preiudiced for vsing or omitting that kinde of cur∣tesie, which neyther the Gospell nor good manners conuince to bee ne∣cessary. Philand. Shoulde wee not Yeas, but you honour not him when you honour an Image. honour Christ and his Sainctes by all the meanes wee can? Theophil. Christ you must honour with all power, and all your strength, as being the Sonne of the liuing GOD: but you may not fasten his honour to any Image or creature, since hee is alwayes present to beholde, and willing to receiue as well the religions submis∣sion of knees, handes and eyes, as the inwarde sighes and grones of the heart, neither can you bestowe the least of these gestures on an image in your prayers without open and euident wrong to him to whome you shoulde yeeld them.
Phi. For adoring of images I am not so earnest, as for hauing them in the Church, that they may put vs in remembraunce of the bitter paines and death, which it peased our Lord to suffer for our sakes: and that I am sure is catho∣like, though adoration be not. Theo. We doe not gainesay, the remembring or honouring the death and bloodshedding of our Sauiour: hee is not onely dull but wicked that intermitteth either: but this is the doubt betwixt vs, whether wee shoulde content our selues with such meanes as hee hath deuised for vs and commended vnto vs;Christ hath appointed vs beter meanes than an I∣mage to remé¦ber his death, & those the papists despise & preferre their owne deuises before them. thereby dayly to renue the memorie of our redemption, or else inuent others of our owne heades fitte perhappes to prouoke vs to a na∣turall and humane affection, but not fitte to instruct our fayth. The hearing of his worde and partaking of his mysteries were appointed by him to leade vs and vse vs to the continuall meditation of his death and passion, a crucifixe was not: hee knowing that images, though they did intertaine the eies with some delight, yet might they snare the soules of many simple and sillie persons: and preferring the least seede of sounde faith beholding and adoring him in spirit and truth, before all the dumbe shewes and imagery that mans wit could furnish to winne the eye and moue the heart with a carrall kind of commiseration and pitie, such as wee finde in our selues, when wee beholde the tormentes and pangues of any miscreant or malefactour punished amon∣gest vs. Phi. All If they bee not dange∣us & withall superfluous. meanes are good that bring vs in minde of his death. Theo. By sight you may learn the maner of his death, but neither the cause, nor the fruits, which are the chiefest thinges that the sonne of god would haue vs remember in his death: and you very peruersely and wickedly keeping the people from those meanes which Christ ordained, as the hearing of the word, and right vse of the sacraments (which you drowned in a strange tongue that the people vnderstood not) set them to gaze on a Roode & taught them to giue all possible honour both bodily and ghostly to that which they sawe with their eyes, bearing them in hand it passed from the image, to the originall: that is from a dead and sense∣lesse stocke to the glorious and euerlyuing Sonne of God: which in effect was nothing else but to worship and serue the creature,Rom. 1. before the Creator which is blessed for euer. Phi. You are now besides the matter. We speake of hauing images for remē∣braunce, not of adoring them for religion: and that is catholike, if this be not. Theo. Since the hauing of images being neither deliuered nor allowed by Christ nor his Apostles,Neither Christ nor his Apostles de∣liuered or al∣lowed Ima∣ges. is superfluous, and the abusing of them is so daunge∣rous and yet so frequent and often that in all ages and places it hath intrap∣ped many Gentiles, Iewes and Christians, I see no reason why for a curious delight of the eyes, which the Apostles neglected and the primatiue Church of Christ wanted, we shoulde scandalize the ignorant and exercise the learned, as for a necessarie point of catholike doctrine. Phi. Had the Apostles and their scholers no images? Theo. Had they thinke you? Phi. Remember you not the image which Nicodemus that came to Christ
by night, made with his owne handes and left to Gamaliel S. Pauls master: & he to Iames, and Iames to Simeon and Zacheus. This report you shall finde written by Libell. Athan. de passion. Ima∣ginis Christi. Athanasius 1300. yeares since: and besides that it is amongest his workes at this day, it was repeated 800. yeares agoe in the Nicen. Synod. 2. act. .4. second Nicene councell as Athanasius writing. Theo. By this let the world iudge both of your cause and cunning. A thing bone by the confession of your owne stories aboue 760. yeares after Christ,Sigber. in anno 765. vnder Constantine the 5. not long before the seconde Nicene councell, is coloured with Athanasius name, as written by him, that was deade 400. yeares before the matter happened,Fortaliium fidei, lib. 3. con∣sid. 10. mirab. 5. and not onely published with his writinges, but inserted into the second Nicene councell as his worke, whereas the Bishops then assembled were all aliue when this outrage was at∣tempted by the Iewes not 24. yeares before the calling of that Synode.Vincent▪ specu∣li histor. lib. 24. cap. 160. Such fables and forgeries doe well become the quarell you haue in hand, but they wil neuer proue your hauing of images to be catholike or Apostolike. Phi. In deed they doe; & there∣fore looke to your 2. Nicene Councell what grosse forgeries are in it. In deede our stories doe mention such an accident at the time which you name: but if it be true, though it be not so old as Athanasius, we care not. Theo. He that wil forge must not stick to ly: lying is the very ground of forging: and of a lyar we looke for no truth. And yet this tale of Nicodemus, Gama∣liel, Iames, Simeon and Zacheus, deliuering an image from hand to hand, is not the assrtiō of the author, but the rude report of a poore ignorant man fathe∣ring his image on them that neuer were christians, as Gamaliel was not, and that 700. yeares after their deathes without any proofe saue onely by hearesay. By such legends you may soone proue what you will: but he that hath any spark of christian courage or wisedom, will vtterly abhor these lies as feeling the gros∣nesse of them with his fingers. Phi. Since you so much dislike our proofes that the Apostles and the Prima∣tiue church had images,The Apostles & the Church succeeding for 400. yeres had no images & al that was suffered in the Church for 600. yeres, was the pain∣ting of stories. can you proue they had none? Theo. Doth your dis∣cretion serue you to put vs to proue the negatiue? Ph. You affirm they had none: our demaund is how you know that. Theo. You can not proue they had: and that is cause sufficient for vs to auouch they had not. Phi. Is that all you can say? Theo. If it were, you can not voide it: but we haue euident proofes that the church of Christ succeeding the Apostles had none, and thence we conclude the Apostles deliuered none: otherwise the church would not so soone haue reie∣cted the tradition of the Apostles. Phi. You may be sure they would not. Theo. And since they did reiect I∣mages,The Gentils obicted this to the first Christins that they had no Images. Arnob. aduers. gentes lib. 8. Origen. contra Celsum lib. 7. ergo it was no Apostolike tradition. Phil. Howe proue you they did re∣iect them? Theo. The christians were charged by the Pagans for hauing no images, and they not onely confessed so much, but also defended it, as most a∣greeable with the law of God. In Arnobius the heathen say of the christians, Cur nullas aras habent, nulla tenepla, nulla nota simulachra? why haue they no altars, no temples, no (open or) knowen images? In Origen Celsus sayth, Hij non patiuntur vel templa, vel aras, vel simlachra & statuas intueri. The christians can not abide to beholde temples, or altars, or images.
What the Christians answered. Clemens Ale∣xand. orati exhortatoria ad gentes.In making their answere the Christians agnised they had none, and allead∣ged the law of God to proue they should haue none. Clemēs sayth, Nobis non est imago sensilis de materia sensili, sed quae percipitur intelligentia. We haue no image that is materiall and seene with eyes, but (onely) such as is conceiued with vnderstanding. And addeth this reason, Ibidem. We are plainely forbidden to vse that deceitfull art (of making images.) Thou shalt not make, saith the Pro∣phet, the likenesse of any thing. The Origes ta Celsum lib. 7. Christians and Iewes, saith Origen, when they heare (the lawe of God) thou shalt not make to thy sele a∣ny grauen image nor the likenesse of any thing: neither shalt thou bowe downe to them nor serue them, not only refuse these tēples, Altars & images of God, but if neede be, choose rather to dy. And extending this as well to the image of the true God, as of those that were no gods, he sayth, Ibidem. Nec simula∣chra quidem nos veneramur, quippe qui Dei vt inuisibilis ita & incorporei formam nullam effigiamus. We reuerence not images, as making no figure to God who is inuisible and without all bodily shape.Arnob. contra gentes. lib. 8. Lib. 2. cap. 19. So Arnobius, What image shall I make to God, whose image, if you rightfully iudge, man himselfe is? And Lactantius as you hearde before affirmed There coulde bee no religion, wheresoeuer there was an image. Phi. These spake not of the christian images, but of the Pagans: such as in deede we may neither worship, nor haue. Theo. They speake namely of them∣selues which were christians: confessing they neither had nor might haue any image of God. Phi. Not of the Godhead, but of Christ & his Saincts they might notwithstanding these words; & it is euident by Eusebius they had. For the wo∣man that was cured by Christ of the bloody issue, erected an The woman that was cu∣red of the bloodie flixe by Christ ere∣cted an Image vnto him as vnto her be∣nefactour, her selfe being an heathen. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 18. image of brasse vnto him in Cesaria where she dwelt, vnder the feete of which image grewe a strange herbe healing all diseases as soone as it touched the brasen skirt of his garmēt. This image remained togither with the herbe to the time of Eusebius, & after till Iulian the Apostata in spite of Christ brake it in peeces & set vppe his own image in place thereof, which God strake with fire from heauen in reuenge of his sonne so dishonored by Iulian, & threw the head of Iulians image from the body, & pitching it with the face downward into the earth, & blasting the rest wt lightning for a terror to all that euer after should offer the image of his Sonne any reproach or misuse:Sozomen. lib. 5. cap. 21. as you may read in Sozomene. And this example is a faire warning for you that haue beheaded & burned so many images of Christ & his Sainctes within this Realme. Theo. This image the woman that was healed, erected in the citie where she dwelt as a monument of the mighty power which our Sauiour had shewed on her: she being then an heathen & not instructed in religion, & thinking thereby to prouoke others to harken after him & seek for his help as she had done. And when many trusted not her words, it pleased God, not only to ratify her report as true, but to shewe the Gentiles by the wonderfull euent of the herbe there growing what vertue was in his sonne to cure all their griefs thereby to lead them the rather to beleeue in him, that they might be saued by him. In this wee dispraise
not the womans purpose minding to celebrate the benefit which shee receiued at our Sauiours handes, the best way that she then knew: & we honor the goodnes of God in preparing the hearts of vnbeleeuers by meanes of this miracle to bee ready to imbrace his Sonne:Iulian ouer∣threw this image in dete∣station of Christ his person and doctrine. detesting the wickednes of Iulian that to disco∣uer his contempt of Christ and malice against Christ (whose faith he had open∣ly reounced) amongst other villanies, which hee offered, caused the Pagans in a triumph to draw this image about the streetes, & breaking it in peeces to set vp the image of himselfe: which God ouerthrew with fire frō heauen, not in defence of the brasen shape: but of his holy name prophaned and illuded by this Apostata. Phi. This image the Apostles sawe and suffered. Theo. A memoriall of their masters act not abused by the people,Eusebius iudgment of the womans making this Image. and erected before they came to preach the Gospell to that place, they might suffer: but they neuer taught men to make the like, nor allowed any to worshippe that. Phi. Wee thinke they learned the setting vppe of this image from the Apostles. Theo. Eusebius sayth, they did it of an heathenish custome, and not of an Apostolike instruction. His wordes are,Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 18. This setting vp of an image vnto Christ is counted by Eusebius an heathenish custome. And no maruell, that the Heathens which were healed of our Sa∣uiour did him this (honour,) for so much as wee haue seene the images of his Apostles Paul and Peter and of Christ himselfe drawen in colours and kept in tables, which kinde of honour, antiquitie of a custome which they vsed when they were heathens, was wont to yeelde to such as they coun∣ted (Benefactors &) Sauiors. Phi. By that you see the images of Christ & his Apostles were expressed in colours and reserued by the auncient christians long before Eusebius. Theo. Eusebius doeth not report it as a thing either openly receiued in Churches, or generally vsed of all christians; but as a secrete and seldome mat∣ter, rising from the perswasion and affection of some which whiles they were heathen, had yeelded that honour to other of their friendes & fautors, to whom they were most beholding. For had the Apostles deliuered any such tradition, or the Primatiue church of Christ vsed any publike erection of images,Images reie∣cted in Spaine Concil. Eliber. canon. 36. as you suppose, would the coun∣cell of Eliberis in Spaine assembled about the time of Constantine the great, in plaine words haue banished them out of their churches? Placuit picturas in ec∣clesiis esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus d pingatur. We haue decreed that pictures ought not to be in the churches, lest that which is wor¦shipped or adored be painted on walles.August. de con∣sent. Euangelist, lib. 1. cap. 20. Images reiect∣ed in Africa. Woulde S. Augustine, thinke you, haue pronounced them worthy to erre which sought Christ & his Apostles in pictures & paintings, if the people had bin taught that way to seeke him? Sic om∣nino errare meuerunt qui Christum & Apostolos eius non in sanctis codicibus sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt. So they deserued to erre, which sought Christ and his Apostles not in the sacred Scriptures but in paynted walles. Or would Epiphanius haue rent the image, which he found hanging in the church by Ierusalem, and pronounced such painted imagery, notwithstanding
it represented Christ or one of his Sainctes to be contrary to the Scriptures, & to the religion of Christ.Epiph. in epist. ad Iohan. Hiero∣solymitan. Images ere∣cted as con∣trarie to the Scriptures. His words are, (When I entered the church to pray,) I found hanging there in the enterance of the saide church, a stained and a painted cloath hauing the image as it were of Christ or one of the Sainctes. When I sawe this, that against the authoritie of the Scriptures the image of a man was hanged vp in the church, I did teare it in sunder. And I pray you hereafter to command, that such cloathes repugnant to our religion, be not hanged in the church of Christ. It becommeth your fatherhood rather to haue this care to banish this superstition vnfit for Christes church, and for the people committed to your charge. By this you may see that images were not receiued, much lesse adored in the church of Christ, whiles these anciēt fathers liued: and that to remoue them and keepe them out of the church was then adiudged a seemely care for Christian Bishoppes, agreeable with the Ca∣tholike profession, and publike vse of the church of Christ in those dayes. Phi. Gregorie the first, you know, was of an other minde: that images should be suffered and not defaced in the church.Gregorie disli∣ked not pain∣ting of stories in the church, but he condē∣ned adoratiō of Images. Theo. Gregorie liued 300. yeares after the councell of Eliberis, and 200. after Epiphanius, in which time the painting of stories was crept into the church, as an ornament for the naked walles, and a meane to set before the peoples eyes the liues and labours of the Sainctes and Martyrs: but that pictures or images in the church shoulde bee worshipped or adored, Gregorie did in most manifest words abhorre, alleadging the law of God which we do that nothing made with hands should be adored (or serued).Greg. lib. 9. epi. 9 Phi. Not with diuine honor. Theo. You meane with no part of that honor, which God requireth of vs. Phi. What else? They must not haue diuine honour in whole, or in part. Theo. Then must they haue none at all. For God requi∣reth bodily honor no lesse than ghostly, as due to him: and by his law excludeth all thinges made with handes from hauing either in saying, Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor serue them.Exod. 20. Phi. Bowing the knee, is not diuine honour, but such as wee yeeld to Pa∣rents & Magistrates. Theo. Bowing the knee is a part of Gods honor, as also holding vp the handes,Submission of knees, hands & eyes are parts of gods honor. and lifting vp the eyes: Esa. 45. To me, saith God, shall euery knee bow. Ephes. 3.For this cause, saith Paul, doe I know my knees vnto the father of our Lord Iesus Christ: shewing that the bowing of our knees is an ho∣nour due to God, euen as the lifting vppe of our handes and eyes belon∣geth likewise vnto him. Psal. 63. As long as I liue, sayeth Dauid, I will ma∣gnifie thee on this maner, and lift vp my handes in thy name: 1. Tim. 2.I will, sayeth the Apostle, that the men pray euerie where, lifting vp pure handes. And so for the rest. Psal. 123.Vnto thee, saith Dauid, do I lift vp mine eyes, thou that dwel∣lest in the heauens. And againe,Psal. 25. Mine eyes are euer vnto the Lord. And so of our Sauiour when he praied, S. Iohn reporteth, Iohn 17. He lift vp his eyes to hea∣uen and saide. The outward honor therefore of eyes, handes, & knes God re∣quireth of vs as his due, though chiefly and principally the heart, which he will
not suffer any man to haue besides himselfe,Magistrates & Parents haue pat of Gods externall ho∣nor, because they present his person in iudging and blessing. God hath pro∣hibited that Images should haue any part of his corpo∣rall honor. howsoeuer he allow those that pre∣sent his goodnesse and glorie in blessing and iudging, as Parents and Magi∣strates, to haue some part of his corporall, but in no wise of his spirituall ho∣nour. Phi. And so many images haue part of his external, though not of his inter∣nal honour, which is the higher of the twaine, and meeter for the diuine ma∣iesty. Theo. It is not in your handes to make allowance of Gods honour to whome you list; and againe God himselfe hath made a plaine prohibition in this case that images shall haue no part of his externall honour. The wordes are as cleare as day light; thou shalt not bow downe to them. Phi. Not to the images of false Gods. Theo. It is but lost labor, to reason with such wrang∣lars. Haue not I mainly proued that this precept expressely forbiddeth the I∣mage of the true God to be made or bowed vnto? Why then take you vp those shifts againe, which be false and refuted? Phi. If we may not bow to holy images as vnto thinges that be superiour and better than man,We must not bowe but to that which is better than our selues. yet we may imbrace and loue them, as thinges which we like, and that both by the vse of the Greeke tongue and speech of the scripture is called adoration, as Tharasius the Patriarke of Constantinople in his Habetur Nicen. Synod. 2. act. 7. What cūning was vsed in the 2. Nicene Councel to haue Images adored. e∣pistle to Irene the Empresse and her sonne doth largely confirme. Theo. You put me in minde, what cunning was vsed in the second Nicene councell to saue your poppets vpright, and to set a colour on their vngodly decree that images should be worshipped. When they saw themselues not able to proue by Scrip∣ture or father that images should be reuerenced and adored, and they had pro∣nounced him Tharasius Ibidem. accursed that doubted of the adoration of images, your wise & worthy Bishops thought it safest to shroude their wicked resolution vnder the doubtfull & equiuocate sense of the word adoration: because , in greeke did signifie not onely to bowe for deuotion and religion, but also to imbrace for loue and affection, as friendes and familyars when they happen to meete. So Tharasius and the whole Synod defend the conclusion which they made in that councel.Nicen Synod. 2. act. 7. epist. Tharas. & toti∣us Synodi ad Constant. & Irenem. For shewing whose images they would haue to be receiued: they adde, Sunt hae adorandae etiam, id est exosculandae & amandae. Idem enim haec signifi∣cant iuxta antiquam Graeciae dialecton. Nam , &  &  significat. quod quis , id etiam : & quod , id omnino . These images (of Christ and his Sainctes) are also to bee adored, that is to kissed and loued. These wordes are all of one force. To adore doth signifie both to imbrace & to loue. For that which a man A mā by this shift may ad∣ore his horse, and be no Ido∣later. loueth, that he adoreth: & that which he adoreth, that he earnestly loueth. The naturall affection and loue which wee beare toward our friendes doe witnes this. For so two (friendes) when they meete (embrace & salute ech other.) And ing some places of the scripture where adoration is taken for a reuerent and louely salutation: as when Genes. 33. Iacob bowed himselfe before Esau, and Genes. 23. Abraham before the people of Heth, & 1. Reg. 20. Dauid before Luke. 14. Ionathan and the Pharisees were noted by our Sauiour for * louing
such magistrall obeisance, they inferre; Has quoque adorandas & salutandas puta∣mus. We thinke images are (in like maner) to be adored and saluted: preten∣ding it to be a matter of faith & christian pietie to adore images: and when they come to the vpshot concluding nothing but an externall and ciuill kinde of im∣bracing or kissing,Were not these bishops well occupied to make this conclusion? such as a man may giue to the coate which he weareth, to the meat which he eateth, to euery thing that he loueth, without respect of religion or thought of deuotion. Phi. Then you should the sooner graunt, that images may be adored, since they mean that kind of adoration which is without al danger of idolatry. Theo. A right Stra∣tagem of Sa∣tan first to bring in ado∣ratiō of Ima∣ges with an ambiguitie of wordes, then to set the peo∣ple to adore them in plain deeds.Then you be wise diuines, to make adoration of images a point of catholike do∣ctrine, since the Bishops of Nice, whose actes you would seeme to follow, in∣terprete adoration to be but a familiar and friendly kissing or saluting: such as men might yeeld to the manger where Christ laye swathed: to the howsen which he entered: to the waters on which hee walked: to the hilles, deserts, highwayes, and cities where he prayed, preached, iournied or suffered: the adoration of which things and places I trust you will not make a part of the Catholike faith. Phi. Compare you an image with a manger? Theo. It is the comparison of your owne councell in the very same epistle:Nicenae Synodi 2. act. 7. epist. Tharasij & oius Concilij. alleadging these words of Gre∣gory the diuine, iustifie their adoration of images: Worshippe Bethleem, a∣dore the manger. If the stable & manger where Christ lay must haue the same adoration that images haue; yea that the crosse hath whereon Christ died: howe shamefully is your church fallen not onely from God, but euen from her owne councels, in allowing the very same honor to images, that is due to Christ him∣selfe? Phi. The crosse they did flatly adore: as their own words witnes, which pre∣sently insue.Ibidem. Crucem tuam adoramus Domine. We adore thy crosse O Lord. And that,Ibidem. as it should seeme, was a part of the church seruice. For they say, Cūvinifi∣cam crucem salutamus, conuenienter canimus: when we salute the crosse that procured vs life,Ibidem. we doe well to sing: thy crosse, Lord, do we adore. Theo. Ibidem.So did they the speare which pearced his side. The next wordes are, The speare,To kisse was a signe of fa∣uor and loue: to bowe a signe of subiection. The popish Doctrine tou∣ching Images agreeth not with the Councell which they would seeme to followe. which opened thy sacred and lifegiuing side, wee adore. But what they ment, by that adoratiō they straightway expound: which adoration is no∣thing else but a salutation, or an imbracing, if you so rather like to cal it, as is hereby declared, for that we touch those things with our lips. Phi. Yet this is a kinde of adoration. Theo. But not such as your church and schooles after∣ward defended and yeelded vnto material images, & crosses. For you in plaine words require , that is diuine honor for the wodden crosse and image of Christ; whereas the second Nicene councel in this epistle doth wholy renounce that, as a manifest and wicked errour. And therfore you do nothing lesse than accord with that Councell which is so much in your mouthes, they decreeing but a reuerent salutation, and you giuing diuine adoration to the image & crosse of Christ: which be doctrines mightily repugning ech to other, if you note them
well, though the word adoration be vsed in both. And did you consent with thē as you do not, neither their resolution, nor yours is catholike:Two sensible chaunges in the adoration of Images. they ventering farther than either scriptures or fathers before did lead them, and that vpon the doubtfull accepcion of the word adoring, and blind presumption that external reuerence (which they ment therby) might be giuen for loue, feare, fauor or curtesie without impairing the honour due to God: and you being deceiued by the heat of their speech, and taking adoration for a reli∣gious and deuoute submission of body and soule, such as belonged to the person himselfe represented by the image: and that in our Sauiour is diuine and hea∣uenly honor. Phi. Should not the crosse of Christ haue diuine honour? Theo. The crosse being taken for his death and passion, as the scriptures vse the word,Christes Crosse, that is his death must be ado∣red, but not the wood on which he hung. must bee adored as the true and onely meane of our redemption and saluation: but the wood, on which hee hung, may not, much lesse the signe of it, as you nowe abuse it. You hearde Sainct Ambrose say, that to adore the wood, on which the Lorde died, was an heathenish errour, and vanitie of the wicked: And before him Arnobius made this answere for all Christians: Cruces nec columus,Ambros. de obi∣tu Theodosij. Arnob. advers∣gentes, lib. 8. nec optamus: vos plane, qui ligneos Deos consecratis, cruces ligneas vt Deorum vestrorum partes, forsitan adoratis: Crosses wee neyther worship, nor wish for: you that dedicate woodden Gods, you happily adore wood∣den crosses, as partes of your Gods. But what neede I farther refell that councell as not catholike which was presently reiected and pithily confuted by the Bishoppes and churches of the West: whose labours are extant at this day, brought to light by men of your owne religion, and saued from the moothes which you ment should consume them? Thither wee sende you, there you shall finde both your adoration of images disclaimed as vncatholike, and the reasons and authorities of your second Nicene councell, throughly skanned and scatte∣red, almost 800. yeares before our time. Phi. That booke we receiue not; as thinking it to be rather some late forgerie of yours than a monument of that antiquitie. Theo. If you receiue not the books that were safe in your own keeping,You reiect the bookes that were in your own keeping, and will haue vs receiue what you list at your hands though it bee neuer so false. and published by your neerest friends, howe should we trust the corruptions that are framed to your purposes and no where foūd but in your own libraries? Phi. Since you distrust our writtē records, why do you not beleeue the faithful report of the church, which is the pillour of truth, & can not be corrupted? The. Nay since forgeries be so rise, that no father is free from them, & so grosse that euery child may discerne thē, why do not you beleeue the report of God himselfe, the founder and builder of the church; and that wit∣nessed in his word, of which there is no suspition, and against the which there is no exception? Phi. As though we did not. Theo. Then for adoration of images, which you defend, shew what presidēt you haue in the word of God. Phi. We neede not. Theo. We know you cannot. Phi. And I reply that we neede not. The. Doth it concerne the christian faith and Catholike religion which the godly must professe, or no? Phi. It doeth.
Theo. It can be no point of faith that may not be proued by the scriptures.Then must you shew some authority for it in the sacred scriptures, or else they must repel it as impious. Phi. We haue it by tradition from the Apo∣stles. Theo. You would haue wrested so much out of S. Basill, but that your cunning failed you. Phi. From them we had it. Theo. Wee say you had no such thing from them: and further we adde, that if it be a matter of doctrine & beliefe, as you make it, you must haue it testified in their writinges, and not concealed a∣mong their traditions Phi. They may soone be Ca∣tholike if they forge as fast as they haue doone, & then measure Ca∣tholicisme by those forge∣ries.No Sir, we beleeue many thinges (whereof this is one) that are not written, but were deliuered vs by secrete succession. Theo. The greater is your sinne, and the vnsounder is your Creede. In matters of faith you should beleeue nothing but that which is expressely warranted by the scriptures. And therefore in this and other points of your Romish deuotion now brought to tri∣all, if you want the foundation of true faith and religion, in vaine do you seeke to make a shew of catholicisme with such patches & pamslets, as Monks & Friers haue forged & colored with the names of fathers. The catholike church of Christ neuer receiued nor beleeued any point of faith vppon tradition without the Scriptures. Phi. The Rhemish Testament v∣pon the 2. Thes. 2.We haue to the contrary plaine Scriptures, al the fathers, most euident reasons, that we must either beleeue traditions, or nothing at all. Theo. Wee knowe you can bragge; but you haue neither Scripture, father nor reason to impugne that which we affirme.How largely the word Tra∣dition is takē amongest the fathers. Phi. For traditions we haue. Theo. Tradition is any thing that hath beene deliuered or taught, by word or mouth or by writing, touching the groundes of faith, or circumstances and ceremonies of christian Religion. And therefore when you muster the fathers to disproue the scriptures, and to e∣stablish an vnwritten faith vnder the credit of traditions, you corrupt the wri∣ters, and abuse the readers. Phi. How can we doe that, when wee bring you the very words of the Authors themselues? Theo. Hw can you choose but doe it, when you force the fathers to speake against themselues? Phi. Do wee? Theo. The Rhemish Test. fol. 559.Your Rhemish translators, perceiuing the weight of their whole cause to lie on this, haue marshalled nine fathers in a ranke, namely: S. Chrysostom, S. Basill, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, S. Epiphanius, S. Ireneus, S. Ter∣tullian, S. Cyprian, and Origen; but to what purpose, can you tell? Phi. To proue that we must either beleeue traditions or nothing. Theo. Beleeue them, as articles of our faith, or exercises of our profession? Phi. Why make you that distinction? Theo. Because the very same fathers, that say traditi∣ons must bee receiued besides the Scriptures, auouch likewise, as I before haue shewed, that no matter of faith or of any moment to saluation must be re∣ceiued or beleeued without scriptures.This is their maner of alea∣ging fathers throughout their Rhemish Testament. Now choose whether you will graunt a flat contradiction in them, or conclude with vs, ergo the traditions which they meane, bee no partes nor pointes of the christian faith. And so these nine fa∣thers, on whose credits you thought to plant your late found faith, hold nothing with you, but rather against you. Phi. How make you that appeare? Theo. Uiew them once more. Wee haue
their plaine confession that all things necessary to saluation are comprised in the scriptures. You produce them to witnes that your traditions bee not comprised in the scriptures: Ergo by your own deponents we conclude that your traditiōs be neither necessary to saluation, nor points of the catholik faith, without which we can not be saued. Looke well to this issue they must either dissent from your religion, or from themselues. Phi. Your maior is not yet proued. Theo. Yes, with firm & surer authorities, than those be which you bring; let the places be skanned, which I before rehear∣sed, & the matter left to the iudgement of the reader; Or if you be loath to looke so far back, examine shortly thse that follow. Athanas. con∣tra gentes. The holy Scriptures inspired from heauen, are sufficient for all instruction of truth, sayth Athanasius. Chrysost. homil. 1. ad Titum.The Gospell, saith Chrysostom, containeth al things: Idem opera im∣perfect in Mat. homil. 41. whatsoeuer is requisite for saluation, al that is fully laid downe in the Scriptures. In the two Testa∣ments, sayth Cyril, Cyril. in Leuit. lib. 5. euery word (or thing) that pertaineth to God may be re∣quired & discussed. Ambros. Hexa∣mer. lib. 1. ca. 6. Sufficiēt to vs for saluatiō is the truth of (Gods) precepts saith Ambrose. And Augustin, August in Ioan. tract. 44. There were chosen to be written, such things as seemed (to the holy ghost) sufficient for the saluation of the faithfull. Vin∣centius Lirinensis; whō you greatly boast of, but without all cause, agreeth wt the rest, that Vincent, aduers haeret. The Canon of the Scripture is perfect & sufficient & more thā sufficient, to al things. And againe, Not that, saith he,Ibidem. The canon alone is not sufficient for al things; as it were taking great heed least he should seeme to de∣ny the fulnes of the scriptures which you purposely impugne vnder a colour of catholicisme by his writings. Now cite not only nine,Al that the Iesuites can inferre out of these fathers is this, that their own tra∣ditions be not necessarie to saluation. but nines kore fathers if you wil, for traditions, & the more you stirre, the worse you speed. For the traditions which they mention bee either points of faith or not. If they be, then by the general confession of all anti∣quity, they must be warrāted by the scriptures, or els we must reiect thē▪ If they be no parts nor consequents of the christian faith, then do not those fathers wea∣ken our assertion, whē we say that all points of faith must be proued by the scri∣ptures, & this we gaine besides, that the traditiōs which you make ye groūdwork of al your religion, as they be not written, so be they not necessary to saluation. Phi. The faith it selfe is proued by tradition.Tradition is good if it con∣sent with the scriptures. Theo. That doctrine which the Apostles deliuered by word of mouth, the very same they put afterward in wri∣ting yt it might be the touchstone & triall of truth in times to come: but this is nothing to such vnwritten verities as be different from the scriptures. Teach what you wil by tradition, so it accord with the written word of God; we bée not against it: but you may not build any point of faith vpon tradition, except the scriptures confirme the same. Phi. This is an error of yours, which you seeke to bolster against the church. The. You giue vs words, we giue you proofs;The Iesuites doctrine de∣pendeth on tradition of their owne making. this which you cal an error of ours was taught & receiued in the primatiue church for a catholik truth; & except you cā shew some points of faith which the fathers beleeued vpō traditiō wtout scrip∣tures, the world wil suspect yt you make traditiōs but a cloake for your heresies.
Phi. The Rhemish Testament. 2. Thes. 2.S▪ Augustin often writeth that many of the articles of our religion & points of highest importance, are not so much to be proued by scriptures, as by traditiō. The. You bely so many, that it is no newes for you to bely S. Austen. Where saith he so? Phi. The Rhemish Test. Ibidem.Namely auouching, that in no wise we could beleeue that children in their in∣fancy should be baptised, if it were not an Apostolik tradition. De gen. ad lit. lib. 10 cap. 23. Theo. But where doth S. Austen write this often & that of many arti∣cles of religion & points of highest importance?The Rhemish Test. Ibidem. Of so many high points you should haue shewed two at least. Phi. Tradition caused him to beleeue, that the baptized of heretiks should not be rebaptized, notwithstanding S. Cryprians autority & the mani∣fold scriptures aleaged by him, though they seemed neuer so pregnāt. de bap. lib. 2. cap. 7. Theo. Your heades bee so ful of traditions, that you can not report a father without corruptions.S. Augustine refuteth re∣baptization by Scripture. Aug. epi. 203. It is not true that Tradition (& nothing else) caused him to beleeue this against Cypriās authority: he was armed with scriptures & reasons inuincible as himselfe both sheweth and saieth. Prouoking a Donatist to con∣ferre with him about this errour, Ratione agamus, diinarum scripturarum authoritatibus agamus, Let vs discusse this matter, saith he, by argumēt, by the authorities of the diuine scriptures. And repeating a reason yt was expressed in the Princes edict forbidding rebaptizatiō, he maketh the rebaptizers this offer: Faciant mille Concilia Episcopi vestri,Aug. epi. 166. huic vni sententiae respondeant, & ad quod vo∣lueritis consentimus vobis. Let your Bishops assemble a thowsand councels, & answere but this one sentence, we yeeld to you at your pleasures. And there∣fore he doubted not to say of Cyprian,Contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 31. though otherwise he did honour him very much, Aliter sapit quam veritas diligentius considerata patefecit. He was of an other opinion than that which the truth vpon more diligent consideration reueiled And when Cypriās epistle in this case was obiected, he replied:Contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 32. Augustine re∣fused Cyp. authoritie as dissident frō the Scrip∣tures. Cypri∣ans epistles I esteeme not as canonicall but I cōsider them by the canonical (scriptures:) & that which in them agreeth with the authority of the diuine scriptures I receiue with his praise: that which doth not agree, by his leaue I refuse. The general custom of the cuch reuoked him from following Cypris authority, though it were great, and brought him to the deeper debating of the question, but he which sayth that S. Augustine in all his conferences and writinges aleadgeth nothing against rebaptization but tradition, may be reba∣ptized, if his christianity be no more than his cunning. Phi. Aug. de Genes. ad literam, lib. 10. cap. 23. Al the shew the Ies. haue for this mat∣ter is one, t, too much in S. Austen.For baptizing of infants his words be plaine. It were not at al to be be∣leeued, if it were not an Apostolike tradition. Theo. I see the words wel e∣nough; but the meaning of the speaker in this place, and the likenesse of the same speach in other places, make me to thinke, that a letter too much is crept into these wordes, as through the iniuries of times, and varietie of scribes ma∣ny thowsand deprauations and diuerse lections were and are yet in the workes of S. Augustine, and other fathers not onely by the iudgement of the learned but by the very sight of their margins. Phi. A letter to much? which is it? Theo. You read Nec omnino credenda nisi Apostolica esset traditio: I thinke it shoulde bee Nec omnino credenda nisi Apostolica esse traditio.Esset for Esse. Esset for esse is a scope in wri∣ting
soone committed, but a matter of some moment in altering the sense. Phi. And therefore you may not correct it without apparent proofe. Theo. I may suspect it, though I take not vpō me to correct it, but leaue it to the indif∣ferent reader. Phi. You must be led thereunto with very good reason. Theo. First the very course of the sentence leadeth mee so to thinke.Aug. de Genes. ad literam, lib. 10. cap. 23. Sainct Augustine in these three distunctiues, Nequaquam spernenda, neque vllo mo∣do superflua deputanda, nec omnino credenda, The custome of (our) mother the Church in baptizing (her) infantes is neither to be despised,There is no Gradation in these wordes except you read Esse which Sainct Augustment to make. nor anie waie to bee counted superfluous, nor at all to bee beleeued, did not meane to contradict him-sele, but by steppes to increase the credit of this custome: and the third part, Nec omnino credenda, Not at all to be beleeued doeth ra∣ther euert all that went before, than giue you any farther commendation to that Tradition. For Not at all to be beleeued, is as much as to be despi∣sed and counted superfluous, which is repugnant to the wordes precedent. But reading Esse or Esset, the partes are consequent ech after other in bet∣ter order, and the last is the same that Sainct Augustine in other places doth often vtter in the very like manner and kinde of speech that here is vsed. The custome of (our) mother the church in baptizing (her) infants, is nei∣ther to bee despised, nor by any meanes to bee accompted superfluous, nec omnino credenda nisi Apostolica esse traditio, nor at all to bee thought to be any other than an Apostolike tradition. So speaking elsewhere of the very same matter, he sayth, De Bapt. cōtrae Dont. li. 4. cap. 24. The very same phrase in the very same matter is here vsed Non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissimè creditur. It is most rightly beleeued to bee none other than a tradition of the Apostles. Where wee finde not onely the same purpose, but the verie same phrase and force of speech that were vsed before. And so againe of that and such like: De Bapt. cōtra Donat. lib. 2. cap. 7. Many thinges are not founde in the (Apostles) writinges nor in the Councels of those that came after them, and yet because they be obserued of the vniuersall Church, Non nisi ab ipsis tradita & commen∣data creduntur, they are thought to haue bin deliuered and commended by none but by them. Phi. This sense is not amisse,If the Iesuites read Esset, it is both a∣gainst them∣selues & also against S. Austen. The Iesuites tradition, be not all Apo∣stolicall. if the words would beare it, but the text is Esset as we translate it. Theo. The sense which you vrge is first against your selues, next against S. Austen himselfe in other places, and lastly (which is it that you shoote at) it ouerthroweth not our assertion. Phi. It requireth some paines to proue all this. Theo. Not so much perhappes as you thinke. For will you confesse that no custome of the church must be receiued or beleeued, except it be Apostolike? Admit this, and see whether we will not presently cast off the most part of the preceptes and customes of your Church, as not descen∣ding from the Apostles, and therefore not at all to bee beleeued by your owne verdict. And as for Sainct Augustine, if you thinke hee woulde saie that The custome of the (vniuersall) Church is not at all to be beleeued, except it bee Apostolik, reade this resolution better & you wil leaue that misconstruction of his wordes.
August. epist. 118.Those things which we keep, saith he, not written but deliuered by traditiō, the which the whole world obserueth, must be conceiued to haue bin com∣mended & ordained, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenarijs concilijs quorum est in eccle∣sia saluberrima authoritas, either by the Apostles themselues, or else by general councels, whose autority in the church is most wholsom. The custom of the church he saith must be retained, though it be not Apostolike, but decreed by o∣thers of later age & meanr credit than the Apostles, if their assemblies & synods were general. And againe,August. epist. 86. In hijs rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura diuina mos populi Dei, vel instituta Maiorum pro lege tenenda sunt. In those things where the diuine scripture appointeth no certainty, the custome of the people of God & ordinances of forefathers must bee helde for a law.Esset, maketh S. Augustine contrarie to himselfe. If the custome of Gods people & the ordināces of elders must be kept for a law, then the custom of the church in baptizing her infants might not be reiected though it were not A∣postolike, & so S. Austen with your esset cleane crosseth himselfe. This place maketh least of all against vs. A tradition may be writ∣ten.Lastly where you thinke to giue vs the foile with pressing this place, we easily grant you that The custom of the church in baptizing her infantes were not to be be∣leeued, if it were not in Apostolike tradition. You haue your own reading, what are you the better? Phi. Ergo some points of faith are beleeued without the scrip∣tures & besides the scriptures. The. Sir, I deny your argument. Phi. This is be∣leeued by tradition, ergo not by scripture. Theo. A tradition it may be & yet writ∣ten in the scriptures. S. Paul calleth the Lords supper a traditiō, & yet it is writ∣ten,1. Cor. 11. Ego accepi à Domino quod & tradidi vobis, I receiued of the Lord, that which I deliuered vnto you. The death and resurrection of Christ he likewise caled a tradition confirmed by the Scriptures.1. Cor. 15. Tradidi vobis inprimis, quod & accepi: I deliuered vnto you first of all which I also receiued, that Christ died for our sinnes according to the Scriptures, and was buried and rose the thirde daie according to the Scriptures. And in plainer, words to the Thessalonians.2. Thes. 2. Holde fast, sayeth hee, the traditions which you haue learned, either by speeche or Epistle of ours, calling those thinges that be written in his epistles his traditions. Phi. But the fathers vse the word otherwise, for that which is not written. Theo. Sometimes they do, somtimes they do not. S. Cyprian sayth, Whence is this tradition?Cyp. ad Pompei∣m contra epist. Stephani. Whether doeth it descend from the Lordes authority and the Gospell, or commeth it from the precepts and epistles of the Apostles? If it be commaunded in the Gospell, or contained in the Epistles or Actes of the Apostles, let this holy tradition be obserued. And so S. Basill, Our ba∣ptisme is according to the tradition of the Lord,Basil. contra Enomium. li. 3. in the name of the father▪ the Sonne and the holy Ghost. Ireneus, Tertullian, Hierom, Augustine and others call the short rehearsal of the christian faith, which is our common Creede, an old & Apostolik traditiō, & yet no part of the creede is without or be∣sides the warrant of the Scriptures. Phi. I know it may be a tradition, and yet reuokeable to the Scriptures and proueable by the Scriptures, but the baptisme of infantes Sainct Augustine
saith hath no witnes in the scriptures. Theo. Where saith he so? Phi. In many places.August. de Bap. contra Donat. lib. 5. cap. 23. Theo. Name but one. Phi. There be many things which the vniuersal Church obserueth, and for that cause they be well thought to haue beene commaunded by the Apostles, though they be not found writ∣ten. Theo. How proue you this to be one of those many? Phi. Because wee finde it not written, but only deliuered by tradition. Theo. You say so: but where doth S. Augustine say so? Phi. In the wordes which we first alleaged It were not to be beleeued if it were not an Apostolike tradition. If it were writ∣ten it must be beleeued though it were no Tradition. Theo. You deale with the fathers, as you doe with the scriptures. S. Austen doth not say the bap∣tisme of infants were not to be beleeued,The custome of the church in baptizing her infants were not suffi∣cient if the tradition were not Aposto∣like. but, The custome of the Church in (a matter of so great weight as) the baptizing of infants were not to be tru∣sted if the tradition were not Apostolike. The church might not haue presu∣med to baptize infants if the Apostles had not begunne it: what gaine you by that? Thereby you may proue that the Apostles did it, and that the Church of her selfe and her own authoritie might not doe it, more you cannot proue. Phi. But doth S. Austen any where say that the baptisme of Children is contained in the scriptures? Theo. What if he went not so farre in wordes, be∣cause the matter was not in question whiles he liued, is that any ground for you to conclude that it is not allowed by the Scriptures? Phi. If he keepe si∣lence,S. Augustine proueth it needfull for infants to be baptized: whether it were lawfull was neuer doubted in his time. it is a shrewde signe that it is not. Theo. So long as no man did im∣pugne it, there was no need he should defend it; the question in his time was not whether it were lawful for infants to be baptized, but whether it were needfull for thē or no. The Pelagians held it to be superfluous, for y• infantes were void of original sinne: which was their error. That he mightily reproueth by mani∣fest Scriptures and sheweth that infants as well as others bee excluded from the kingdome of God, if they be not baptized. Farther hee waded not, as be∣ing not farther vrged, and troubled enough besides with refuting other here∣sies; and yet as occasion serued hee brought more than Tradition for the bapti∣zing of children.August. de bap∣tism. contra D∣nt. li. 4. ca. 24. If any man, sayth he, seke for diuine authoritie in this mat∣ter, we may truely coniecture by circūcision, what effect the Sacrament of baptisme hath in infants, vsing a very forcible argumēt in this case, that if chil∣dren might receiue the seale of the former couenant vnder Moses, why not of the later established in the blood of Christ? Phi. He saith we may coniecture it, but he doth not say we may proue it. Theo. He repeateth the reason with Veraciter conijcere possumus, We may very truly coniecture, and a true coniecture is no vntrue persuasion: but as I said it was not then in doubt, and therefore no maruaile if that Learned father la∣boured not that question to the depth. Had it beene denyed, as in our dayes it is, he woulde haue founde the same scriptures to confirme it that we doe. And to say the trueth his euident illations out of the Scriptures that baptisme is needfull for Infants, make sufficient demonstration that baptisme is lawfull for Infants, els it would follow that no child might be saued; which is an
hainous and monsterous error, directly fighting with the manifest scriptures. For where without baptisme they cannot be saued, by reason original sin is not remitted but in baptisme as S. Austen concludeth out of the wordes of our Sauiour S Augustine vrgeth Bap∣tisme to be needfull a∣gainst the Pe∣lagians, who thought it superfluous, not against those that were preuen∣ted with ine∣uitable ne∣cessitie. Except a man be borne of water and of the spirite he cannot en∣ter the kingdome of God; If children be excluded from baptism, they be con∣sequently excluded from the kingdome of God; which is flatly repugnant to the word of God. Phi. It is no meaning of ours to exclude children from baptisme, but to let you vnderstand that you cannot shew by the Scriptures that children were baptized. Theo. I graunt we cannot, and adde, we neede not. The Scrip∣tures we say containe al matters of faith, not of fact. That children were bap∣tized we proue by the practise of Christes Church and not by the scriptures.Iohn 3. The fact is not expressed in the Scrip∣tures, the cause is. That children may bee baptized we proue not only by the Tradition of the Apostles, but also by the sequele of the Scriptures themselues. Our Sauiour saith of Children, Mat. 18. It is not the will of your father, which is in heauen, that one of these litle ones should perishe. Now choose you whether they shall be saued without baptisme, or perishe for lacke of baptisme. Againe the Lord saith, Mat. 19. Suffer the litle children and forbid them not to come vnto me: for the kingdome of heauen belongeth vnto such. They must en∣ter the kingdome of God before they can possesse it, and Iohn 3. enter it they cannot vntill they be new borne of water and the holy Ghost. Now say, wil you ex∣clude them from that which God hath prouided for them: or will admitte them to be heires with Christ before they bee engraffed into Christ by Baptisme? The Apostle saith to the great comforte of all Christian Parents; The 1. Cor. 7. vn∣beleeuing husband is sanctified by the wife (that beleeueth,) and the vn∣beleeuing wife is sanctified by the husband (that beleeueth:) els were your children vncleane, but nowe are they holy. This is spoken not of the secret election of the faithfull, which is neither common to all nor knowen to any, but of their Christian profession whereby they be 1. Cor. 1. 2. Tim. 1. called to be Sainctes, that is an 1. Peter 2.holy & peculiar people vnto God. For al things be holy that be dedicated to his vse, & this kinde of holines S. Paul deriueth from the roote to the branches, Rom. 11. If Children be holy be∣cause their parents are holie, then they haue no better holi∣nes than their parents: and in all Christiā parents there is not inward sanctification.If the roote be holy so are the branches. If then Infants be partakers of the same vocation & holynes with their parents, & without baptisme (which is the seale of Gods couenāt with vs, in the blood of his sonne) neither we nor our chil∣dren can be holy, surely the children of Sainctes if they be excluded from bap∣tisme, are as vnholy and vncleane as the children of Infidels which vtterly subuerteth sainct Pauls Doctrine. If to auoide this place you suppose holinesse to bee meant of the inward satisfaction of Gods spirite; besides that children drawe inward corruption not holinesse from their Christian Parents, yet this way wee also conclude that Children must bee Baptized: for where the spirite of God is precedent, the seruice of man must bee consequent, as sainct Peter teacheth. Act. 8. Can any man forbid water that these shoulde not bee baptized, which haue receiued the holy Ghost? So
that, take which you will and say what you can, our conclusion is vnmoue∣able. And since children bee defiled by Adam, if they may not bee washed by Christ, the disobedience of man shal bee mightier vnto condemnation, than the grace of God and obedience of Christ vnto iustification, which the Rom. 5. vers. 15.17.21. Scrip∣tures reiect as a wicked absurditie. Wherefore the church absolutely and flatly may not assure saluation to chil∣dren vnbaptized, lest they seeme naturally innocent or generally sanctified with∣out baptisme: albeit their Parents desiring and seeking it, if they bee preuented by mortall necessitie wee must leaue them to the goodnes,August. de bap∣tis. lib. 4 cap. and secret election of God not without hope: because in their Parents 22. there wanted no wil, but an extremitie disappointed them: and in the children the let was 23. weaknes of age, not wickednes of heart: and so the sacramēt omitted, not for 24. any con∣tempt of religion: but by strictnes of time: in which cases S. Augustine con∣fesseth the want of baptisme may be supplied, if it so please God: mary they may not chalenge it, nor we promise it. Much more might bee sayde, but I content my selfe with the former rea∣sons till you refute them. And hauing the certaine practise of the Apostles in baptizing Infants witnessed by the Church of Chist, and deliuered vn∣to the Church for the confirmation of those thinges which we alleage,The scripture proueth that Childrē may be baptized & must be, if we wil haue them to be sa∣ued, tradition proueth they were Bapti∣zed. wee count them irrefutable. Philand. Neither doe I mislike the thing, but I muse why Saint Augustine claymed wholy by Tradition, if so much Scrip∣ture might bee brought for the matter. Theoph. Expresse precept to bap∣tize infantes or plaine example where they were baptized, the scripture hath none: and therefore Saint Augustine did well to reuerence the Tradition which hee sawe was Apostolike, and if any man vrge vs to prooue that children were baptized wee must flee to the same Tradition with him: But if it bee im∣pugned as a thing vnlawfull and dissonant from the Scriptures, we must then lift the ground of that Tradition by the scriptures, because it toucheth the sal∣uation or condemnation of Christian Infants: And so would S. Austen haue exactly and learnedly doone, wee doubt not, if that point had beene controuer∣sed in his time. Philand. Hee woulde you say: but hee did not wee knowe, and that cau∣seth vs to take it for an vnwritten Tradition. Theoph. A tradition we grant, but agreeable to the Scriptures. And though Saint Austen doe not say so, that is no reason for you to conclude it is not so; silence is no proofe. Nay if hee had called it an vnwritten Tradition, as hee doeth not, that were no let but it might be confirmed by the scriptures, as it is: for the precept is not writ∣ten, though the causes and consequents may bee iustified by that which is written.One and the same traditiō both vnwrittē and yet war∣ranted by the Scriptures. And this is not straunge with Saint Austen to call that an vn∣written Tradition, which him-selfe confesseth may be warranted by the scrip∣tures. Phi. What haue wee here? One and the same Tradition confessed by saint Augustine to bee both written and vnwritten? Theoph. One and the same Tradition, I say confessed to bee written, and yet warranted
by the Scriptures. Phi. That were newes. Theo. None at all. Goe no farther than your second example of rebaptizing, and you shall see it to be true. S. Augustine calleth it an vnwritten Tradition or Custome of the church in many places.De baptis. cōtra Donat. li. 2. c. 7. Hee sayth expressely of it, Quam consuetudinem credo ex Apo∣stolica Traditione venientem, sicut multa non inueniuntur in Literis eorum &c. Which custome I think came from the apostles, as many (other) things (that) are not found in their writings.De baptis. cōtra Dnat. li. 5. . 23. And againe of the very same, Apostoli nihil qui∣dem exinde praeceperunt. The Apostles in deede commaunded nothing in that case: as also there bee many thinges which the whole Church obserueth though they be not found written. Phi. That we knowe to be true, neuer spend more time about it, but let vs heare where S. Austen saith this Custome is also warranted by the scriptures. Theo. You can not misse it, if you read the very same bookes where the other is witnessed. De baptis. li. 1. cap. 7. Rebaptizatiō against the Scriptures.Now, saith he, lest I seeme to dispute this matter by humane reasons, be∣cause the darkenes of this question draue great men, and men endued with great charitie, the bishops that were in former ages of the church before the schisme of Donatus to doubt and striue, but without breach of vnitie, ex e∣uangelio profero certa Documenta quibus Domino adiuuante demonstro: Out of the Gospel I bring sure groundes by Gods helpe to make proofe (thereof.) And hauing disputed it a while, We De baptis. lib. 4. cap. 7.follow that, saith he, which the custome of the church hath alwaies obserued, & a plenarie councel cōfirmed. And the rea∣sons and testimonies of scriptures on both sides being throughly weighed I may say, we follow that which trueth hath declared.De baptis. lib. 5. cap. 4. And repeating the e∣uidence of his side, he saith it may be vnderstood by the former custome of the Church, by the strength of a generall councell that followed by so many & so weightie testimonies of the holy scriptures, by manifolde instructions out of Cyprians owne workes and very plaine arguments of trueth. And therefore drawing to an end he saith,De baptis. lib. 6. cap. 1. It might perhaps suffice that (our) reasons being so oft repeated and diuersly debated and handled in disputing, and the Do∣cuments of the holy Scriptures being added, and so many testimonies of Cy∣prian him-selfe concurring, iam etiam corde tardiores quantum existimo intelli∣gunt, by this time the weaker and duller sort of men as I thinke vnderstande that the baptisme of Christ can not bee violated, by no peruersenesse of the partie that giueth it or taketh it, and therefore must not bee iterated. Thus in one and the selfesame worke you see S. Austen auouching it to be a Tradition not written, and yet confirmed by manifest scriptures. Phi. I heare him say so, but I see not how it can be. Theo. You will not, for feare you shoulde see your selues conuinced of an error, it is otherwise plaine e∣nough. The thing it selfe is not written, but receiued by Tradition, mary the grounds of it be so layd in the scriptures, that it may thence bee rightly conclu∣ded. The like we say for the baptisme of infants,How the same thing may be written & yet vnwritten. the precept it selfe is not writ∣ten, nor any example of it in the scriptures, but it was deliuered vnto the church by tradition from the Apostles: mary it so dependeth on those principles of faith,
which bee written, that it may bee fairely deduced from them and fully proued by them. Phi. By Tradition onely, hee and other condemned Heluidius the heretike for deny∣ing the perpetual virginitie of our Lady.The Rhemish Testament 2. Thes. 2. Theo. Your stoare fayleth you when you flee from fayth and hope in GOD to examine Ioseph and Marie that you may picke out somewhat betweene them to impeache the perfection of the Scrip∣tures. That Christ was borne of a virgine vndefiled, is an high point of fayth and plainely testified in the Scriptures. That after the birth of her Sonne she was not knowen of her husband, is a reuerend and seemely truth preserued in the Church by witnesses woorthie to bee trusted, but no part of fayth neede∣full to bee recorded in the Scriptures. Phi. Saint Augustine sayth it is. That Mary was not know∣en of her hus∣band after the birth of our Sauiour is a reuerēd truth but no point of faith. De Eccl. dogma∣tibus cap. 69.Integra fide credendum est, With an vpright fayth we must beleeue that bles∣sed Mary the mother of God and Christ was a virgin in conceiuing, a vir∣gin when she was deliuered, and remained a virgin after the birth of her sonne. And we must beware the blasphemie of Heluidius which sayde, shee was a virgin before, but not after the birth (of Christ.) Theo. Grate not on these thinges which were better to bee honoured with silence, than discussed with diligence. The booke which you bring is not S. Au∣gustines. It was found Vide Erasmi censuram in eundem librum.vnder Tertullians name as wel as vnder Augustines, though Tertullian himselfe bee Cap. 4. Ibidem, cap. 69. twise there noted for an heretike, and chalen∣ged the first time for that very error which S. Augustine in his true booke of heresies doeth acquite him from. And yet these wordes, Credendum est Mariam virginem concepisse, virginem genuisse, & post partum virginem permansisse, Wee must beleeue that the mother of Christ was a pure virgin when she concei∣ued, when shee brought forth his sonne, and after she was deliuered, do not touch your question as they are defended by S. Augustine in his vndoubted woorkes to bee part of our fayth, but onely that shee was a pure virgin after his birth,Enchirid. ad Laurens. ca. 34. notwithstanding his birth. And therefore hee sayth, Quisi velper nascen∣tem corrumperetur eius integritas, iam non ille de virgine nasceretur. If Christes birth euen when hee was borne shoulde haue violated the virginitie of his mother,Christes mo∣ther was a Virgine as wel after his birth as after his conception. then had hee not beene borne of a virgin. So that as shee concei∣ued the Lorde, and was still a virgin, so shee was deliuered of him, and her selfe yet a virgin, that is, not onely without the knowledge of man, but also with∣out all hurt of her body: she remaining after shee was deliuered of her childe as perfect a virgin in body, as shee was before she conceiued him. And this to be the right meaning of those wordes, Post partum virgo permansit, shee remay∣ned a virgin after the birth of her child, when her virginitie must bee vrged for a poynt of fayth, the sermons extant vnder the name of S. Augustine do clearly confesse. De Tempore sermo. 123. How she for∣bare the com∣pany of her husband is no matter incō∣prehensible. Ibidem sermo. 10.15.17.18.25. Nec dubites Mariam virginem mansisse post partum, quia qualiter hoc factum sit, non humanus sermo, neque sensus potest comprehendere. Neuer doubt but Marie remained a virgin after the birth of her childe, although neither mans speach nor witte can comprehende howe it was done. And againe, Virgo cum parturit, virgo post partum. Vacuatur vterus, infans excipitur, nec tamen
virginitas violatur. Shee was a virgin when shee was deliuered, and a virgin after. She was deliuered, her child borne, and If you list to conclude, and so remained to her death, you may for vs; but that is no point of faith, whatso∣euer the for∣mer be. shee for all that a virgin. The like we find in sundry other of those sermons. Phi. But Heluidius was noted as an heretike by S. Augustine and others for saying that our Lady was knowen of Ioseph her husband after the birth of our Sauiour. Theo. The Fathers might reiect him as an heretike for his impudent abusing the Scriptures to build a falshoode vpon them which was not contained in them; and if they detested it as a rash and wicked slaunder for him against manifest trueth to blemish that chosen vessell which the holy Ghost had ouershadowed, and the son of God sanctified with his presence, we neither blame them, nor mislike their doings. But yet they neuer charged the Scrip∣tures with imperfection as you doe. S. Hierome purposely writing against Heluidius vseth the fulnes of the Scriptures as his best argument to defend her virginitie. Vt haec quae scripta sunt non negamus,Hieron. aduers. Heluidium. ita ea quae non sunt scripta renuimus. Natum esse Deum de Vir∣gine, credimus, quia legimus. Mariam Nupsisse post partum non credimus, quia non legimus. As we deny not those things which are written, so we reiect those things which are not written. That God was borne of a Virgine, wee beleeue, because we read. That (the same virgine) Mary became a wife after the birth of her son, we beleeue it not, because we read it not. S. Augustine alleageth Scripture for it,August. de S. Virginit. cap 4. with what successe I will not iudge. If neither of these quiet your contentious spirits; our answer shalbe that when you make iust proofe that this is a poinct, not of trueth, which we graunt; but of faith, which you vrge; then will wee not faile to shewe it consequent to that which is written. The Papists would haue the holy ghost holde his diuiniie by tradition.You were wont to obiect other pointes of Religion as proued by traditi∣on and not by Scripture: amongest which you set the Godhead of the holy Ghost and his proceeding from the Father and the Sonne: But I trust by this time you be either stilled in them or ashamed of them. Phi. Not so neither. For Harding against the Apologie of the English Church, part. 2. cap. 1.As we acknowledge this article to be most true, so we are sure you haue no expresse Scripture for it. Theo. Are you well aduised, when to spite vs, you teach the people, that the highest mysteries of their faith cannot be warranted by the Scriptures? Perceaue you not what a wrong it is to the spirite of GOD to holde his Diuinitie by Tradition, and not by the word of God? What ignorance is this, if it be no worse, to say thatAthanas. de communi essen∣tia Patris, Filij. & Siritus sancti. Dydi∣mus de spiritu sancto. Basil. contra Eunomium & de spiritu sancto. Nazianzen. orat. 5. de Theolog. Ambros. de spiritu sancto. Cyril. de Trini∣tate, lib. 7. & lib. de spiritu sancto. August. de Trinitate. Athanasius, Dydimus, Basil, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Cyril and Augustine in their special Treaties of this very point haue alleaged no Scriptures to confirme the Godhead of the Holy Ghost? Phi. We speake not of them but of you. Theo. As if in a common case of faith the Scriptures were not common to vs with them. If they had Scriptures for it, we haue; if we haue none, than had they none. Phi. Expresse Scripture they had none. Theo. Doe you plaie with idle
wordes in so weightie matters of Christian faith?The fathers assured them∣selues they had expresse Scripture for the godhead of the holy Ghost. Euident and plaine scrip∣tures they had where the holy Ghost was called God: what is expresse Scrip∣ture if that be not? Phi. They had no such scripture. Theo. Had they not? Turne your booke a little better, you shall find they had. August. epist. 66. Glorificate Deum & portate in corpore vestro. Quem Deum nisi spiritum sanctum cuius corpora nostra dixerat esse Templum? Glorifie God, saith the Apostle, and beare him in your bodie. What God but the Holy ghost whose Temple before he called our bodies? And againe, Idem. qu. est. supra Exod. lib. 2. quaest. 59. When (Peter) had said, durst thou make a lie to the holy Ghost? (Ananias) thinking he had lied vnto men, Peter sheweth the Holy Ghost to be God by and by adding, thou hast not lied vnto men but vnto God. These two places the same father vrgeth against the Arrians as very plain scriptures. Contra Max. lib. 3. cap. 21.Glorificate ergo Deum in corpore vestro. Vbi What is Di∣lucide, but plain Scrip∣ture? dilucidè ostendit Deum esse spiri∣tum sanctum, glorificandum scilicet in corpore nostro. Et quod Ananiae dixit Petrus Apostolus: Ausus es mentiri spiritui sancto? Atque ostendens Deum esse spiritum sanctum, non es, inquit, hominibus mentitus, sed Deo. Glorifie there∣fore God in your body, saieth Paul. Where very manifestly hee sheweth the holy Ghost to bee God which must be glorified in our body as in his Temple. And that which Peter the Apostle saide to Ananias: Durst thou lie vnto the holy Ghost? And declaring the holy Ghost to be God, thou hast not lied vnto men, saith he, but vnto God. Ambrose taketh them for euident scriptures.Ambros. de Spiritus Sancto, lib. 3. cap. 10. Quod praemiserit Spiritum & addiderit, non es mentitus hominibus sed Deo, necesse est in spiritu sancto vt vnitatem diuinitatis esse intelligas. Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 11. Is not euidēter euident Scrip∣ture? Nec solum in hoc loco euidenter sancti spiri∣tus , id est, diuinitatem Scriptura testatur, sed etiam ipse Dominus dixit in Euangelio quod Deus spiritus est. In that (Peter) first named the Spirite, and pre∣sently saide, thou hast lied not vnto men but vnto God, wee can not choose but vnderstand the holy Ghost to be God. Neither in this place only doth the Scripture euidently witnesse the Godhead of the holy Ghost, but also in the Gospel the Lord himselfe saith that the spirite is God. Nazianzen saith these and such like be expresse scriptures, and that if you doubt thereof, you be very grosse headed.Nazian. de Theolog. orat. 5. They which knewe the only blasphemie which is vttered against the Spirite to be irremissible, and gaue Ananias and Saphira that horrible reproche for lying vnto the holy Ghost,The spirite openly pro∣fessed in the Scriptures to be God, and expresly so recorded. what doe they seeme to thee, openly to professe the Spirite to be God or no? How dull headed art thou, and without al sense of the spirite, if thou doubt thereof or needest farther teaching? By so many names, so forcible and expresly recorded in the Scriptures the holy Ghost is called: Amongst those expresse names numbring this for one of the chiefest and clearest, that the holy Ghost was called God, as the words before directly witnesse. Phi. His proceeding from the Father and the sonne cannot bee proued by scripture, though his Godhead may. Theo. How then came it first to be beleeued, by Tradition or by scripture? Phi. Certeinly not by scripture. Theo. Your tongues be so vsed to vntruthes, that your certainties be litle worth: the
Church of Christ receiued her faith concerning the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the father and the sonne, not by Tradition, but by scripture. Saint Augustine saith, De fide ad Petrum, cap. 11.Firmely beleeue and no whit doubt the same holy Ghost which is one Spirit of the Father and the Sonne, to proceede both from the Father and the Sonne. For the Sonne saith, when the spirit of trueth cōmeth which proceedeth from the father. Where he teacheth vs the spirit to be his also because himselfe is trueth. And that the holy ghost proceedeth likewise from the sonne, the Is this no Scripture? doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles doeth deliuer vnto vs. For Esay sayth of the sonne, Hee shall strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the spirit of his lippes, he shal slea the wicked. Of whom the Apostle also sayth, Whom the Lord Iesus shall slea with the spirit of his mouth. Whome the onely Sonne of God, declaring to bee the Spirite of his mouth, breathing on his Disciples after his resurrection sayth; receiue ye the holy Ghost. And Iohn in his Reuelation sayth that out of the mouth of the Lorde Iesu him-selfe there proceeded a sharpe two edged swoorde. Hee therefore is the Spirit of his mouth, hee is the sword which proceedeth out of his mouth. Idem de Trinit. lib. 15. cap. 26.And againe: By many testimonies of the diuine Scriptures it is prooued that he is the spirite of the father and the sonne, which is properly called in the Trinitie the holy ghost. And that he proceedeth from both it is thus pro∣ued: because the sonne himselfe saith (the spirit of trueth) proceedeth from the father. And when he was risen from death and appeared to his disciples, he breathed on them and sayd, Receiue ye the holy ghost, to shewe that the spirit proceeded from him also. And that (spirit) is the vertue which came from him, as we read in the gospel, and healed all men. What you thinke of these places we know not, but sure we are S. Augustine himselfe sayth of these & the like,Idem de Trinit. lib. 15. cap. 27. Cum per Scripturarum sanctarum testimonia docuissem, de vtroque proce∣dere Spiritum sanctum: When I had shewed by the testimonies of the Holy scriptures that the holy ghost proceedeth frō both, (the father & the sonne.) And if it bee the naturall and distinct proprietie of the Spirite to proceede, as it is of the sonne to bee begotten, which I winne you will not denie, then is it as euident by the Scriptures that the holy Ghost proceedeth from the Father and the sonne,This reason may suffice any Christian man. as it is that the sonne was begotten of the father. For as the se∣cond person in Trinitie was begotten of him whose sonne hee is, so the thirde Person proceeded from them whose spirite hee is, but hee is the Spirite of them both as the Scriptures expressely witnes, Ergo hee proceeded from them both. Phi. The doctrine is true, but the scripture is not expresse. Theo. What meane you by your expresse scripture? Phi. Those very woordes, He procee∣deth from them both are not found in the scriptures. Theo. Alas good Sirs, is that your quarrell? Doe the scriptures, I pray you, consist in spelling or in vnderstanding? Neuer read you what S. Hierom sayth? Hierom. in epist. ad Gal. cap. 1. Nec putemus in ver∣bis Scripturarū Euangelium esse, sed in sensu: non in superficie, sed in medulla: non in
sermonum folijs, sed in radice rationis.The sense and consequents are scriptures as well as the wordes. Let vs not thinke the Gospell to lie in the words of the scriptures▪ but in the sense: not in the rind, but in the pith: not in the leaues of speech, but in the ground of reason (& truth.) If by expresse scrip∣ture you meane the plaine &  sense of the word of God, we haue euident & infallible proofes thence for the proceeding of the holy ghost from the father & the sonne: But if you sticke on the syllables & letters which we speake, you doe but wrangle with vs, as the Arias did with the Nicene fathers, Expostulating why the Bishops that met at Nice vsed these words, substance & consubstā∣tial, which were nowhere found in the Scriptures Athanas. in tract. quòd Ni∣cen. Synod. con∣gruis & pijs verbis vsa sit. & our answere to you shalbe the same that theirs was to them. Ibidem.These words though they be not found in the Scriptures, yet haue they the same meaning and sense which the Scrip∣tures containe. And that we count to be expresse scripture. For otherwise as Hi∣larie saith, Hilar. ad Con∣stant. Al (heretiks) speake Scriptures without sense & Hierom aduer. Luciferianos. the diuell himself, as Hierom noeth, hath spoken some things out of the scriptures, but that as they both witnes in the very next words, Ibiem. The scriptures cōsist, not in reading, but in vnderstanding. And yet I see no cause why this point should be denied to be expresse Scrip∣ture, for so much as S. Iohn describing the son of God with a sharpe two edged word Reuelt. 1. proceeding out of his mouth (which is the See Esa. 11. & 2. Thes. 2. Reuelat. 1. & 19. The spirit proceedeth from the sonne. rod of his mouth where∣with he shal smite the earth, & the spirit of his lips wherewith hee shall slea the wicked as Esay prophesied hee should, and Paul declareth hee would) vseth the very same word  twise, which our Sauior before spake of his father , the spirit, which proceedeth frō the father. So that you were fouly ouerseene, when you obiected this point of our christian faith as wan∣ting expresse scripture. Phi. If you take not only the words but also the sense or scripture, we will not greatly gainesay but all points of faith may be deriued out of these words,The Iesuites can shewe no poynt of fayth tht the fathers beleeued without scrip∣ture. or out of the sense of that which is written. The. Deriued as you do pardōs, pilgri∣mages, penāces & purgatory? But we say that al points of faith must be plainly concluded, or necessarily collected by that which is writtē. And for our so saying we haue not only the scriptures & fathers, but also your selues, which being so often required & vrged to shewe what one point of faith the primatiue church of Christ beleeued wtout the scriptures, could neuer shew any. Phi. We could shew many if that needed & we wer disposed. The. I know not what accōpt you make of it; but to our simple conceiuing it is the groundwork of al religiō, & crazeth ye very heart of your vnwritten verities. And if to satisfie the people of God & dis∣burden your selues of an errour, you be not all this while disposed to doe what you can, we must leaue you for curious and daintie men, and thinke you can not. Phi. Tertullian was of that minde that we are, when he willed the christians not to appeale to the scriptures for the triall of their faith. His words are, Ergo non est ad scripturas prouocandum nec in ijs constituendum certamen,Tertul. de prae∣scrips. aduers. haeret. in quibus aut nulla aut incerta victoria est. We must therefore not appeale to the Scriptures,
nor place the trial of our cause in those (writings) in which the victorie is ei∣ther none or not sure. Theo. You do both the truth and Tertullian wrong. Ter∣tulliā doth not say that in matters of faith some things should be beleeued wtout the Scriptures;In vaine to conuince them by the scriptures, which receiue not the scri∣ptures. no man is flatter against that than Tertullian in this very booke which you bring: but he would not haue the heretikes of his time chalen∣ged nor brought to the Scriptures, because they receiued not the books as they lay, but with such additions, alterations & expositions as they listed. And this he maketh to be the very reason of his Rule, in the wordes that go next before it. The conference with them in the Scriptures can doe no good: but either to stirre a mans stomacke,Tertull. de prae∣scriptic. aduers. haereticos. Tertullian speaketh of those sects which were in his time, as Valenti∣nus, Martion and others, who either denied the scriptures or turned them all to monste∣rous alegories or disquiet his braine. This brood (of heretikes) receiue not certaine Scriptures, and if they receaue any, they frame them to their purpose with adding and taking from them: & those that they receiue, they receaue them not whole, and if they suffer them to stand whole they marre them with their forged expositions. Their adulterating of the sense hurteth the trueth as much as their mayming of the sentences. Diuers pre∣sumptions holde them from acknowledging the (places) by which they be conuinced: they rest on those which they haue falsely corrupted, & ambigu∣ously wrested. Thou shalt loose nothing but thy voice in striuing with them, thou shalt gaine nothing but the mouing of thy choler to heare them blaspheme. And shewing that the hearers get lesse by such contentions, he in∣ferreth, Ergo non ad scripturas prouocandum est, we must therefore not prouoke (them) to the scriptures nor appoint there the conflict (with them) where the victory is none, or not sure, or skant sure enough. Ireneus not long before him gaue the like report of thē, for they both had to do with the selfsame sorts & routs of heretiks.Iren. ib. 3. ap. 2. Whē they are reproued by the scri∣ptures, they find fault with the scriptures thēselues, as though many things were amis in them, & the books of no autoritie & doutfully written, & truth could not be had out of them if a man be ignorant of Tradition. And a∣gaine when we vrge them to come to that Tradition which is kept in the Churches down from the Apostles by the successions of Bishops, they vse to say, that they, as wiser not only than the Priests, but also than the Apostles, haue found out the sincere trueth, and that the Apostles did mingle certaine points of the law with the wordes of our Sauiour,Of these men spake Tertullian. & not the Apostles alone but Christ himselfe speak (somtimes earthly, somtimes heauenly, somtimes mixely) but they vndoubtedly, in defiledly & sincerely know the hidden my∣sterie. The which is nothing els but most impudently to blaspheme their maker. And so it commeth to passe that they acknowledge neither the Scriptures, nor Tradition. Such they be with whom we deale. What maruell then if Tertullian gaue counsell that such heretikes should not be prouoked to the Scriptures,The reasons of Tertullians speach. not that the Scriptures be defectiue in matters of faith, but for that the sectaries of his time denied, corrupted and maimed the Scriptures: and in deede no victorie can be hoped out of Scrip∣tures where they be neither receiued nor reuerenced as scriptures. And there∣fore
Tetrullian had good cause to speake these words, in respect of the persons yt were thus impudent, not in respect of the scriptures, as if they were vnsufficiēt. That error of all others Tertullian was farthest from, & no where farther than in this very place which you quote. Aliunde scilicet loqui possent de rebus fidei nisi ex literis fidei.Tertull. de praescriptio. aduers. Haere∣tices. As though they could speake touching matters of faith out of any other than out of the books of faith. And obiecting to thē this very point which we now striue for: Sed credant sine scripturis, vt credant aduersus scripturas, Let (heretiks,) saith he,Ibidem. beleeue without Scriptures, that they may beleeue a∣gainst the scriptures. To beleeue without scriptures, is heretical as well as to beleeue against the scriptures,Basill. de spiritu sanct. cap. 27. Basils place for traditi∣ons exami∣ned. & the next step vnto it as Tertul. here placeth thē: & therefore defend not the 1. lest you fal to the 2. which is the ruine of all religiō. Phil. S. Basill is plaine with vs if Tertul. be not: Of the doctrines which are taught in the Church, we haue some laid down in writing, some againe we haue receaued by traditiō frō the Apostles in a mystery, that is in secret. Whereof either hath like force to godlines, neither doth any man contradict them that is but meanly acquainted with the lawes of the church. For if we goe about to reiect those customes which are not written as of no moment, before we be ware we shal condemn those things which This verie place graun∣teth things necessarie to saluation to be in the Gospell. Ibidem, cap. 29 are in the Gospel necessarie to saluation, yea rather we shal bring the preaching of faith to a naked name. And not long after in the same booke, If nothing els hath beene receiued without scriptures, neither let this be receiued: but if we haue re∣ceiued many secrets without writing,Many things receiued with out scriptures but no mat∣ters of faith. The booke shamefully corrupted. Erasmus cen∣sure vpon this booke. Epist. Erasm. dedicatoria ad episc. Culmens. praefixa. cap. 17. Erasm. cal∣leth them Patches and dregges. This place of all others crieth cor∣ruption. Basill. de spiritu sanct. cap. 27. let vs also receiue this amongst those many. I thinke it Apostolike to cleaue to traditions not written. Theo. The booke which you alleage hath S. Basils name to it, but the later part thereof whence those patches are taken, haue neither S. Basils stile, lear∣ning, spirite, nor age; which Erasmus perceiued and confessed when he transla∣ted the book. After I was past halfe the work, saith he, without wearines, the phrase seemed to declare an other writer and to sauour of an other spirite: somtimes the stile swelled as vnto the loftines of a trageie, somtimes it cal∣med euen vnto a common kind of speach. Many times there appeared some vanitie in the author, as it were shewing that he had learned Aristotles predi∣camēts & Porphiries 5. predicables. Besides he digressed very oftē frō the pur∣pose & returned vnhandsomly. Last of al many things seemed to be here & ther added, which made litle to the matter in questiō. And some things, such as by their face shew their father, to wit, the same that hath interlaced the most lerned books of Athan. cōcerning the holy ghost, with his babling but trifling cōceits. Phi. We care not for Erasm. iudgemēt. The. You must care for Erasmus reasons, vnles you cā disproue thē. Phi. How proue you these places to be those that Erasm. meaneth? The. If Erasmus had said nothing these places betray themselues. Looke to the beginning & ending of your first allegation, & you shall see that the middle fitteth them as well as atemeale doeth oysters. The wordes next before are these, It remaineth that we speake of the syllable, with, whence it came, what force it hath, and how farre it agreeth with
the Scriptures.Marke the co∣herēce of this place. Then your forger as a man suddainly rauished & vtterly forget∣ting what he purposed, entereth a vaine discourse of threskore & fifteene lines cleane besides the matter, not so much as once mentioning that which hee first promised; and endeth in a worse maze than be beganne, with a conclusion more dissident from the middle, than the middle was from the preface: Dictum est igitur eādem esse vim vtrius{que} proloquij.Ibidem, cap. 27. So then we haue shewed that both pro∣positions haue the same sense: wherof he spake not one word in all that large discourse that went before. And so he solemnly proposeth one thing, digresseth abruptly to an other, and concludeth absurdly with a third, which ouersight in any bore were not sufferable.A verie lear∣ned and wit∣tie discourse forsooth. cap. 29.Your later allegation is groūded on the former, & conuinceth your author to be but a yong father in respect of S. Basil. For where S. Basil died before Me∣letius, your bastard Basil rehearseth Meletius as a Bishop of ancient memorie dead long before his time.Basil. de spiritu. sanct, cap. 29. This place maketh Basill aliue some ages after hee was dead. In super & Meletiū illū admirandū in eadē fuisse senten∣tia narrant qui cū illo vixerunt. Sed quid opus est vetera cōmemorare? Immo nūc qui sunt Orientales, Moreouer Meletius that admirable (Bishop) was of the same opinion, as they that liued with him report. But what neede I repeate aun∣cient times? The East Bishops which are at this day, &c. Now the true S. Basill not onely liued at the same time with Meletius, but was Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26.made Deacon by him, and wrate Basilij epist. 56 57.58.89. many letters to him, and departed this life before him, as the church storie witnesseth, affirming that Helladius, S. Basils successour and Meletius were both present at the second general councell at Constantinople vnder Theodosius,Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 8. and that must needes be when S. Basill was dead. Phi. You did wel to discredit the place: it were otherwise able to ouerthrowe all your new doctrine.This place, if it were Ba∣sils, doth the Iesuits no good. Theo. Then you do not well to build the antiquitie of your religion on this and such other apparent forgeries; but were the places not forged, they could do you no such seruice as you spake of, in the question which we now handle: yea rather they confirme that which we affirme, that Things necessary to saluation are (comprised) in the Gospell. Phi. Many traditions were receiued from the Apostles without writing, which are not in the Gospel. Theo. You must also proue those traditions to be necessary to saluation before you can conclude out of this place any thing against our assertiō. Phi. As though the Apostles deliuered thinges which were not necessary to saluation. Theo. The christian faith they deliuered in writing: the rest they left vnwritten, be∣cause those things which were no parts of faith, were deliuered to the church of Christ for decency, not for necessity.Their forged Basill spea∣keth of the ceremonies not of Do∣ctrine. I hope these traditions bee no points of fayth. Phi. For decency? what a cauill that is? Theo. The Traditions which your counterfet Basill here rehearseth as descending from the Apostles are no such deepe mysteries of religion as he pretendeth. That the people should euery sun∣day and likewise betweene Easter and Whitsuntide pray standing, is that any point of faith or help to saue their soules? The words of inuocatiō at the Lords supper, & the praiers before & after, which the Greeke church vsed, haue you not long since left them, or to say the trueth, did you euer accept them
for catholike? Singing with the crosse, turning to the East, thrise dipping him that is baptized, and annointing him after with oyle, bee these essentiall parts of Baptisme, or rather externall Rites declaring the power and vertue of that Sacrament? Your author himselfe will tell you, they be not within the compasse of that faith which is common to all Christiās, and must be rightly beleeued of all that will be saued. For shewing the cause why they might not be written,Basil. de spirit. santi. cap. 27. Ibidem. What things, saith he, such as were not baptized might not behold, how could it be fit they should be publikely caried about in writing? And againe, The Apostles and fathers which prescribed certaine rites in the first beginning of the church, reserued to these mysteries their dignitie by si∣lence and secrecie. For it is This ergo was no Doctrine nor point of fayth, which must be open to all the peo∣ple. no mysterie, which is open to the eares of the people and vulgar sort. Now things necessary to saluatiō must openly be prea∣ched to the people and be fully conceiued of them, and stedfastly proessed by thē before they can be saued. These things therefore be not of that sort, but are ra∣ther excluded from necessitie, because they were deliuered vnder secrecie. Phi. But S. Basil or whosoeuer he be that wrote that booke, saith, vtraque parem vim habent ad pietatem:Ibidem, cap. 27. Things vnwritten haue equal force to godlines with things written.And prayers of the Church and the creed haue force to godlines: which are here recko∣ned amongst traditions. Theo. He saith not that all things vnwritten, but, vtra∣que both sortes haue like force to godlines, not that dumbe ceremonies or out∣ward gestures haue equall force with the word of God to lighten the minde, con∣uert the soule, and clense the heart, it were arrogant blasphemie so to say: but a∣mongst things vnwritten he numbreth the praiers of the church proportioned by the word▪ and hauing in them the very contents of the worde, and also the Creede and profession of the faith it selfe, whereby wee beleeue in the Father, the Sonne and the holy ghost, in truth & godlinesse equiualent with the scrip∣tures and in substaunce the very same that is witnessed by the scriptures: Both these your Author in that place counteth for things vnwritten, and these wee graunt haue equall force to godlinesse with those things that are written.The papists when they wāt Scripture to proue any poynt of their Doctrine, runne by and by to tradi∣tion: and tra∣dition they proue by cer∣tayne forge∣ries of their owne. Our fayth must depend on no mans word, but only on gods. Phi. In effect they be all one with those things that are writte. Theo. That maketh his spech the truer, which otherwise were absurd and vngodly. Phi. Is it not a wlie shift, that sometimes you will admit no traditions, and at other times when you bee hardly pressed, fayth, scriptures and all shall bee traditions with you? Theo. Is it not a wilier, that hauing framed to your selues a religion without the scriptures, you woulde nowe fortifie the same by tradition against the scriptures? But, you may not so preuaile. Wee haue the warrant of Saint Paul and the catholike consent of Christes Church, that our faith shoulde depende on the word of God: and since God speaketh not now but in his scriptures, it is euident that our fayth in all pointes must bee dire∣cted and ruled by the scriptures. Stand not brabling with vs about the worde Tradition which is very doubtfull, and diuersely taken amongest the fathers: Bring some faire and true demonstration for that which you holde, as reason is you should, to counterpie so many proofes in a matter of such importance, or else admit our assertion to be true.
Philand. Yf they could not boudly call thēselues Catholiks, they could do le.That wee can doe, and yet not hurte our cause. Theophil. Wee knowe you can doe much. You can bouldly call your selues catho∣likes, though you bee vnshamefast heretikes: and tell the people you teach nothing but antiquitie, when the chiefest pointes of your religion bee meere nouelties and barbarous absurdityes. Philand. You can exemplifie a lye the best that euer I hearde. Theophil. Keepe that praise as proper to your selfe, I will not disturbe your profession. Tou∣ching the matter in question whether I speake ought that is vntrue, let the reader iudge. You will haue your religion and doctrine to bee Catholike: that is, confirmed by the Scriptures, and professed in all places, of all per∣sons, at all tymes, euen from the first beginning wheresoeuer the Church of Christ hath beene receiued. And when wee come to see the specia∣lities, wee finde you to swarue not onely from the sacred Scriptures and auncient Fathers, but euen from those later ages and Churches which you woulde seeme to followe; and to haue gotten you a religion of your owne without Councell, Canon; antiquitie, or Authoritie to witnesse the same. For example; the worshipping and adoring of Christes Image with diuine honour,Their adora∣tion of Ima∣ges neuer taught in the Church, but by themselues concluded in your Schooles and practised in your churches, is it not a wicked and blasphemous inuention of your owne, against all Synodes and Fathers, Greeke and Latine, olde and newe, that euer as∣sembled or taught in the church of God, besides your selues? The seconde Nicene Councell, which first beganne that pernicious pastime of saluting and kissing Images, did they not in plaine wordes condemne this errour of yours, when they saide: Epist. Tha∣rasij & Concilij ad Cōstantinum act. 7.  vni Deo tribuimus: diuine honour wee giue to God alone, and not to images? And againe, Eiusdem Con∣cilij, act. 3. Constantinus Constant. Episc. Ionas Aurelia∣nens. episc. de eultu Imagi∣num, lib. 1. Adoration of Images open∣ly detested in the west Church by such as tooke vpon them the defence of Images. I receiue and imbrace reuerent images: but the adoration which is doone with di∣uine honor, called , I reserue to the supersubstantiall and quick∣ning Trinity onely, and to no image. Ionas Bishop of Orleans that wrote a∣gainst Claudius Bishop of Turin in the defence of images 50. yeares after the second Nicene councell, did hee not mightily detest your adoration of images, as a most heinous errour, and was not the whole church of Fraunce by his re∣port, of the same minde with him? Suffer, saith he, the images of the Sainctes & the histories of holy actions to be painted in the church, not that they shold be worshipped, but that they may be an ornament (to the place) and bring the simple to the remembraunce of thinges past. Creaturam verò adorari, etque aliquid diuinae seruitutis impendi, pro nefas ducimus, huiúsque scelris patratorem detestandum & anathematizandum libera voce proclamamus. But that any creature (or Image) should be adored, or haue any part of diuine honour wee count it a wickednesse, and with open voice pro∣claime the committer of that impiety (worthy) to bee detested and ac∣cursed.
And prouing by manifold authorities of scriptures and fathers that neither image neither any thing made with handes should be adored,Ibidem. he addeth: That which you say the worshippers of images answered you for the maintenāce of their error; (we think no diuinity to be in the image which we adore, but only in honor of the person whose image it is, we worship it with such vene∣ration:) that (answere of theirs) we reproue & detest as wel as you: & because they do know, there is no diuine thing in the image, they be the more blame worthie for bestowing diuine honor on a weake & beggarly Image, the self same answere many of the East (church) entangled with this hainous error giue to such as rebuke thē:Infrmo & egeno simula∣chro. the Lord of his mercy grāt, that yet at lēgth both these and those may bee drawen from this superstition (of theirs.) Fraunce See leratissimo mancipantio error. hath Images and suffereth them to stand for the causes which I before rehearsed: but they count it a Ibidem. great detestation & abomination to haue them adored.This was af∣ter your Ni∣cene Councel 50. yeres. The schoole∣men kept the words of the 2. Nicene councell and refelled their meaning with a farre wickeder re∣solution then the former. In this opinion stoode the west Churches a long time, till your schoolemen started vp, and ouer-ruled Religion with their sophisticall distinctions and so∣lutions: and they keeping the wordes of the later Nicene Councell, and not marking their drift, controled that which they concluded and brought in a lewd∣er and wickeder kind of adoring of Images with the same honor that is due to the Principall. The chiefe actor in this was your glorious Sainct and Clerke, as you cal him, Thomas Aquin, who reiecting all that was decreed at Nice inferred against them, that no reuerence could be exhibited to the Image of Christ, in that it was a thing grauen or painted, because reuerence is due to none but to a reasonable creature: and alleaging Aristotles authoritie, that the motion to the Image and originall is all one, he resolueth in these wordes, Cum Christus adoretur adoratione latriae,Thomas part. 3. quaest. 25. ari. 3▪ consequens est quod eius imago sit adoratione latriae ado∣randa. Since then Christ is adored with diuine honour, it followeth that his Image must likewise be adored with the self-same Here the Di∣uell shewed himselfe in his likenesse. diuine honour. Bonauenture an other of your Romish Sainctes, canonized by Sixtus the fourth, goeth after Thomas with full saile. Quin Imago Christi introducta est ad repraesentandum eum,Bonauen. in. 3. lib. senten. dist. 9. quaest. 2. qui pro nobis Crucifixus est, nec affert se nobis pro se sed pro illo, ideo omnis reuerentia, quae ei offertur exhibitur Christo: & propterea Imagini Christi debet cultus latriae exhiberi. Whereas the Image of Christ repre∣senteth him that was crucified for vs, and offereth it selfe vnto vs, not for it self, but for him; in that respect all the reuerence which is giuen to it is done to Christ: and therefore the Image of Christ must be honored with diuine adoration. Holcot. in lib. Sapientiae lect. 58.Holcote and Gerson. de pro∣batione spirit. parte operum 1Gerson somwhat disliked this assertion and dispu∣ted against it, but the pronesse of the people to follow such fancies, & the gree∣dines of Priestes and other religious persons to keepe and increase their offe∣rings, and the credite of Thomas, his learning, Sainctship and sectaries bare such a sway in the Church of Rome, that the rest coulde not bee regarded nor heard; and so the common opinion and resolution of your Churches and
schooles,They say they make not Images their goddes: but to whatsoe∣uer they giue diuine honor, that they make their God. To giue Christs honor to an Image in respect of the O∣riginall is a seelie shift. as the fortresse of your faith confesseth, was that the image of Christ should be worshipped with diuine honor, whch you would faine shrinke from in our dayes, the doctrine being both strange and wicked, if you could tell howe, but that the wordes are so plaine that no pretence can colour them. Your schoole doctrine therefore of adoring images with diuine honour, not onely prohibited by the law of God, and abhorred of all ancient and Catholike fathers; but euen renounced in the second Nicene councell, as repugnant to truth, and shunned in the West church for a thowsande yeares after Christ and vpwarde as a most wicked errour, howe coulde it on the suddaine with a sillie distinction of sundrie respectes become catholike? what greater wickednes can there be than to giue the honor of God to stockes and stones, and to say you do it not in regard of the matter, but of the resemblance which the image hath to the originall? as though it could be an image vnlesse it had some resemblance, ei∣ther in deed or in our opinion, to the thing it selfe? or man were not a truer & better image of God, and yet in no respect to be adored with diuine honor? or as if God prohibiting all images made with hands to be adored,To adore the Image in re∣spect of the Originall, is in summe the very same an∣swere that al the Pagans gaue when they were re∣proued for their Idola∣trie. had not included as well their resemblance as their matter? Why may not any Pagan by this e∣uasion worship what creature he will, & say he beholdeth & honoreth in it not the matter, but the wisedome & power of the Creator? And what other conceit is this, than that which the Iewish & heathenish Idolaters, when they were repro∣ued, answered; that they adored not the thinges, which they saw but conueied their adoration by the image to him that was inuisible? If such prophane specu∣lations may be suffered in Gods cause, wee may soone delude all that GOD hath commanded with one respect or other. The determination of the second Nicene councell that images were louing∣ly to be saluted, imbraced & kissed (for so thēselues expound the word Adoratiō which they vse) was lesse pernicious than the former, as tending rather to super∣stitious follie,Adoration of Images neuer hard of in the church before the 2. Nicen Councell, which was 790. yeres af∣ter Christ. than to that sacrilegious impietie which after raigned in your schooles: and yet that decision of theirs was nothing lesse than catholike; no councell or father before them for the space of 790. yeares euer decreeing or de∣fending any such thing in the church of God: and the Bishops of England, Ger∣many, France and Spaine forthwith contradicting & confuting their presum∣ption as vncatholike: and your own schooles reuersing their assertion as voide of all truth, for that no reasonlesse creature is capable of reuerence, which yet that councell had allowed vnto images. Painting of stories in the church is somwhat ancient,Painting of stories in the Church is a matter som∣what ancient, but yet not ca¦tholike. but neither Apostlik, nor catholike. It was receiued in some places, vpon priuate mens affections, as an ornament for their churches, but vsed as altogither indifferent, that is, vr∣ged on no man as a matter of religiō: & not only the whole church some hūdreth yeares after Christ (which yet was catholike) wanted all such pictures: but learned and godly Bishops without any suspition of erour or innouation tra∣duced and repelled such paintings, as things either superfluous or dangerous, or both.
What accompt the councel of Eliberis, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and Augu∣stine made of pictures,These fathers were Catho∣like, & yet re∣pelled pain∣ting in Chur∣ches. Nicenae Synodi 2. actio 6. The 2. Coun∣cell of Nice deluded the fathers that were alleaged against them. Epiphanius pretended, to be forged, but without all cause. Ibidem. you heard before: how Chrysostom, Amphilochius, Asterius, and others esteemed them, you may read in your owne books of Coun∣cels: where the wicked & superstitious vpholders of Images refute the Coūcel of Constantinople, but with shyfting & lying most fit for the cause they tooke in hand. To Epiphanius exhorting the Emperour not to bring Images into the Church, no nor to tolerate them in priuate howsen, & adding this reason, non enim fas est Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per occupationem mentis, it is not lawful for a Christiā to stād gazing with his eies, but to haue his mind occupied; they answer that this epistle was forged in Epiphanius name, and that Epiphanius himself would neuer haue beene so bitter against Images. The first is easilie sayd, & the second is falsely supposed without any proofe; this epistle was auouched to be his in a Synod of 330. Bishops not lōg before: and Epiphanius is sharper against Images in his epistle to Iohn of Hierusalē which S. Hierom translated, than he was in this, which they disliked. Eusebius dissuading the Empresse from regarding the painted Image of Christ with these words,Eusebius con∣demned by them for an heretike, but falsely. Quis igitur gloriae eiusmodi & dignitatis splendores lucen∣tes & fulgurantes, effigiare mortuis & inanimatis coloribus & vmbratili pictura posset? who can resemble in deed and lifelesse colours, & with the shadow of a picture the shyning & glittering brightnes (of Christes) glorie and digni∣tie, is reiected as an heretike and condemned by those that liued many hundred yeres after him,Nicenae Synodi 2. act. 6. and were in credite or learning no way comparable to him. Chrysostomes assertion, Nos per scripta sanctorum fruimur praesentia, non sane corporū ipsorū sed animarū Imagines habentes; we by writing enioy the presence of the sainctes, not hauing any Images of their bodies, but of their mindes: Amphilochius protestation, Non enim nobis sanctorum corporales vultus in tabulis coloribus effigiare curae est,Ibidem. quoniam hijs opus non habemus: we haue no care to re∣semble in colours the bodilie visages of the saincts, because we haue no neede of them: and Asterius admonition, Ne pingas Christum in vestibus, sed magis sumptu illo & impensis pauperibus subueni: paint not Christ in clothes (or colours) but rather relieue the poore with that expēce & charge:Ibidem. Chrysost. Am∣philochius & Asterius plain∣ly shifted off by the Coun∣cel of Nice. Contra Celsum, lib. 7. they auoide as spoken by way of comparison, & not of illation, as if mē in their comparisons did not speake truth, & affirme both partes as well as in their conclusions. This was the skill & esming of your late Nicene Synod to crie corruption on others when they themselues were most corrupt, and with a shyft of words to decree that as Catholike which was repugnāt to the plaine precepts of God & general iudgement of their forefathers in all ages and places before them. For our parts we say with Origen,Bowing to Images con∣demned. Non igitur fieri id poterit vt & Deum quis nouerit & simulachris vt supplicet. It can not be that a man should knowe God and bow him self to images: and with Austen, August. de vera Religio. cap. 55. Let it be no Religion of ours to worship the workes of mens hands; because the workmen that make them are the better (of the twaine) whom yet we may not worship.
The Law of God is so direct, forbidding vs to bow to any Image, similitude or likenes of any thing, that no distinction can help you.Hieron. in 6. cap. Daniel. Notāda proprietas: Deos co∣li, Imaginē adorari; quorum vtrūque, seruis Dei non conuenit. Note sayth S. Hie∣rom the proprietie (of the speach,) Gods are worshipped, Images are ado∣red (or bowed vnto:) whereof neither is fit for the seruants of God. If you trust not the ancient fathers, one of your own friends will tell you the same.Gerson. in compendio Theolog. de 10. praeceptis. Some of their owne church haue con∣demned bow∣ing to Images as contrarie to the lawe of God. Non adorabis, neque coles. Inter quae distingue. Non adorabis scilicet veneratio ne corporis, vt inclinando eis, vel genuslectendo. Non coles, scilicet affectione mentis. Ad adorandum igitur & colendum prohibitur Imagines fiers. Thou shalt not adore them, nor worship them. Which are thus to be distiguished. Thou shalt not adore them, that is with any bodilie reuerence, as bowing or kneeling to them. Thou shalt not worship them with any deuotion of mind. Images therefore are prohibited to bee either adored or worshipped. Thus your owne fellowes were not so blind but they perceiued the strength and force of Gods commaundement to be such, as we defend at this present against you. And though he labor to shift off the matter with a rule of S. Augustine, that the honor passeth from the signe to the thing signified: yet he both missed himself,Saint August. abused to make for Images. and misconstred his author. For S. Augustine in that place putteth a manifest bar against Images, and precisely & purposely excludeth them out of the number of signes which he meant to treat of, when he gaue this rule. His wordes are, Qui veneratur vtile signum diuinitus institutum, cuius vim significa∣tionem{que} intelligit,August. de doctrin. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 9. non hoc veneratur quod videtur, sed illud potius quo talia cuncta referenda sunt. He that reuerenceth a profitable signe ordayned by God, the force and signification whereof he well vnderstandeth, doth not renerence that which he seeth but rather that to which al such signes are to be referred. Things ordai∣ned by God must haue their reue∣rence though they be but creatures, marie adora∣tion they must not haue.This rule reacheth to no signes, but to such as are ordained by Gods own in∣stitution, which Images are not, & therefore are cleane without the cōpas of S. Augustines speach. Again the veneration here touched, is not any worshipping or adoring the creatures which God vseth for signes, but a reuerent estimation & regard of them that they be not despised or abused although they be but signes. So that water in baptism and the creatures of breade and wine in the Lordes supper (which are the two examples here August. lib. eodem, cap. 9. de doctina. chri∣stian. lib. 3. c. 5. mentioned) are to be reuerenced as things that be sacred by the word and ordināce of God, but not to be adored and honored for the things themselues, whose signes they are; that were a miserable seruitude, or rather the right death of the soule, as Austen noteth. And that the first teachers of truth remoued al Images as vnprofitable signes to serue God with, the words before do plainly shew. For speaking of the difference between the Iewes and the Gentils when they should be conuerted vnto Christ, he saith, cap. 8.Christiā liberty finding the Iewes vnder profitable signes (to wit the rites & Ceremonies of the Lawe) did interprete the meaning of them, and so by dire∣cting the people to the things themselues, deliuered them from the seruitude of the signes; but finding the Gentiles vnder Images vn∣profitable signes and not ordeined of God.vnprofitable signes, (for that they cap. 7. worshipped Images either as Gods, or as the signes and resemblaunces
of Gods) cap. 8.ipsa signa frutrauit remouitque omnia, shee wholy remoued and frustrated the signes themselues, that is shee would not suffer them to serue the true God with any such signes as bodily shapes and Images were. Your honouring of Images is reproued as you see and not releeued by S. Augustines Rule.The lawe of god condem∣neth bowing vnto Images, which pre∣cept the Church must obey without all shifts or other respects And since the Lawe of God expressely and treitly char∣geth you not so much as to bowe your bodies or knees to the likenesse of any thing in heauen or earth, which is made with handes, consult your owne con∣sciences, whether you may with your respects frustrate, or with your routes ouerbeare the distinct and direct voice of God himselfe in his own Church. And if you be not giuen ouer into a reprobate sense, you wil say no. Now that which is against the Law of God can neither be Christian, nor Catholike: Your Doctrine therefore of bowing and kneeling to Images is repugnant both to the precepts of God, and to the generall & auncient resolution of Christs church: your adoring them with diuine honour is a sacrilegious and flagitious, as well noueltie as impietie. Phi. You must not looke that we should defend the sayings & doings of all that haue takē part with the church of Rome. If Thomas waded too far in wor∣shipping Images, if Gerson mistooke S. Augustine, if the later Councell of Nice denied or strained some of the ancient Fathers, you must not chalenge vs for their ouerightes. The. We chalenge you for vaunting your selues to be Ca∣tholikes when in deede you doe nothing but smooth and sleike the corruptions and inuentions of later ages against the right & ancient faith of Christs church. The discent of Images with their adoration, how late it began, how often it varied, how far at length it swarued frō the Primatiue & original profession of the christiā & catholik faith; we haue spent somtime to examine. Let vs now ap∣proch to your praiers in a strāge toung,Praying in a straunge tongue. which haue a great deal lesse shew of ca∣tholicism thā images had, & yet are as egerly defended by you as images were. Phi. In the Latine toung we haue praiers, in a strange toung we haue none: you rather that haue turned scriptures, church seruice & secretes for your plea∣sures into the English tongue, make your praiers in a strange and vnwonted speach to catholik eares The. To English mē the English toung is not strange. Phi. I know they vnderstand it, but I call it strange because they were not woont to haue the publike praiers of the Church in their mother toung. Theo. In cases of religion,Custome without truth is the rotten∣nes of errour. we must respect, not what men haue, but what they should haue beene vsed to. Cyprian saith well, Cypr. ad Pom∣pei. contra epist Stephan. Consuetudo sine veritate, vetustas erroris est. Custome without trueth, is but the long continuance of error: & so Tertullian, Tertull. de virgin. veland. Quodcunque aduersus veritatem sapit hoc erit haeresis, etiam vetus consuetudo. Whatsoeuer is against the trueth, it must bee counted heresie, though it be an old Custom. The Councell of Carthage where Cy∣prian was, resolued thu: Ex sentent. Concil. Car∣thag. inter pa Cyprian. The Lord saith in the Gospel, I am trueth, he said not I am custom. Trueth therefore appearing let custom yeeld to truth. Phi. That councel erred in neglecting the old custom which the church obser∣ued. Theo. But yet their generall assertion, which I alleage, was so strong, that
S. Augustine saith to those very wordes:August. debap. contra Donat. lib. 3. cap. 6. Plane respondeo, quis dubitet verita∣tis manifestae debere consuetudinem cedere? I plainly answere, who doubteth but that custom must yeeld to the trueth appearing? Phi. Neither doe we doubt of that, but how proue you this to be a manifest trueth, that the people of this Land must haue their diuine seruice in the English tongue? Theo. It is the manifest precept of him that said, I am trueth and witnessed in the Scripture which is the worde of trueth.Iohn. 14. Ephes. 1. Philan. In what place there? Theo. Make not your selfe so great a stranger in the Scriptures, as if you knew not the place. Phi. You meane the 14. Chapter of the first epistle which S, Paul wrote to the Church of Corinth. Theo. I doe; what say you to it? Phi. Mary this we say,The Rhemish Test. vpon the 1. Cor. 14. The reader may take a tast in this one point of your deceitfull dealing, abusing the simplicitie of the popular by peruerse application of Gods holy word, vpon some smale similitude & equiuocatiō of certaine termes, against the approued godly vse and trueth of the vniuersall Church, for the seruice in the Latine or Greeke tongue: which you ignorantly or rather wilfully pretend to be against this discourse of S. Paul touching strange tongues. Theo. And hee that marketh your shifting and facing in this one point, shall need no farther tast of your dea∣ling. Phi. If you like not that which we say, refel it. Theo. Can your selues tell what you say? Phi. You shall well find that when we come to the matter. Theo. First then heare what the Apostle saith, and after you shal haue leaue to say what you will. 1. Cor. 14. The place of S. Paul to the Corinthians against pray∣ing in a strange tongue.Instructing the Church of Corinth thus he saith, And now brethren if I come to you speaking with (strange) tongues what shall I profite you? If a trūpet giue an vncertaine sound, who wil prepare himself to the battel? So likewise you by the tongue except you vtter words of easie vnderstanding, how shal it be knowē what is spoken? For you shal speake in the aire. There are for example so many kindes of tongues in the worlde and none of them is without sound. Except I know the power (and signification) of the speach, I shall be to him that speaketh barbarous, and he that speaketh shall be bar∣barous to me. Wherefore let him that speaketh a (strange) tongue pray tht he may interpret. For if I pray in a tongue (not vnderstood) my spirite prai∣eth, but mine vnderstanding is without fruit. What is it then? I wil pray with the spirit, but I wil pray with the vnderstanding also: I wil sing with the spi∣rit, but I will sing with the vnderstanding also. Els when thou blessest with the spirit, how shal he that occupieth the roume of the vnlearned say Amen, at thy giuing of thāks, seeing he knoweth not what thou saiest? Thou verilie giuest thanks wel but the other is not edified. I had rather in the Church to speak fiue words with mine vnderstanding tha I might also instruct others, thā ten thousand words in an vnknown toung. When ye come together, let al things be done to edification. If any man speake in an (vnknowen) tongue, let one interprete: but if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the church: God is not the author of confusion but of peace: so (I teach) in al the Churches of the saintes. If any man seeme to be a Prophet or to be spiritu∣al,
let him vnderstand that the things which I write vnto you are the com∣maundemēts of the Lord. Thus farre S. Paul: which I rehearse at large, that it may lie for the ground of the whole dispute that shall follow. What answer you to this commaundement of God and doctrine of his Apostle? Phi. No one place of scripture, is more diuersly or easilie answered than this. First you & your trāslatiōs corrupt this chapter by putting your own words to y Apostles text. For where he sayth tōgue, you ad (strange, vnknowen, not vnder∣stood) which are not in S. Paul. Secōdly you The Iesuites labour toothe and nayle to shift off this place. misconster ye whole passage of S. Paul: for by edifying y• church, & vnderstanding the power of ye voice, he meaneth not y bare significatiō of y• words only, but the This is the summe of all their decla∣ration vpon the 1. Cor. 14. in their Re∣mish Testa∣ment. increase of fayth, true knowledge & goodlife: & in that sense we say, Our forefathers were as much edified wt the latine seruice that is, as wse, as faythful, as deuout, as fearful to breake Gods Lawes, & as likely to be saued as we are (with) all our tongues, translations and English praiers. Thirdly by strange tongues the Apostle meaneth not the Latin, Greeke, or Hebrew. Fourthly that he speaketh not of the Churches seruice is proued by inuincible argu∣ments. Fifthly the Catholike people are taught the contents of their praiers, and vn∣derstand euerie Ceremonie, & can behaue them selues accordingly. Sixtly it is not necessarie to vnderstand our prayers. Lastly the seruice hath been alwaies in Latin throughout the west Church. And to dispute thereof, as though it were not to be done, since the whole Church doth practise & obserue it throughout the wordle, is most in∣solent madnes, as S. Augustine saith in 118. epistle. I sawe by your lookes, you thought we could not answer it. Theo. I knew you had stoare of answers, such as they be: but from such interpreters God defend vs and all that be his. Phi. Speake to the matter, let the men alone. Theoph. Then to the matter; this is a right paterne of your Rhemish annotations stuffed with The two ver∣tues of their Rhemish an∣notations. impertinent allegations and The two ver∣tues of their Rhemish an∣notations. impudent sophistications, of purpose to defeate & frustrate the scriptures that are against you. Phi. You fall to railing, when you faint in reasoning. Theo. How can we but kindle whē we see you fray the people of God from the sweete & wholesom foode of their soules, and delude them with your huskes and hogwash? Phi. First discharge your selues of your shameful adding to the Scriptures,The words strange or vnknowne put into the text in an o∣ther print for the opening of Sainct. Pauls minde. and then you may the better examine our answers. Theoph. To the text of the holie Ghost we adde not: onely for the better conceauing of the sense, in an other print we enterpose that speciall limitation of the word, tongue, which the drift of the whole chapter necessarily enforceth, which the Apostle himself directly expresseth, and the learned and anciēt fathers expounding this place doe euerywhere insert as the right construction of the scripture. S. Paul did not speake either of tongues in generall, or of such tongues as were knowen and well vnderstoode of the Corinthians;Sainct Paules words are most absurd, if they be vn∣derstood of knowne toungs nothing can be more absurd nor more against sense and nature thā so to applie the Apostles reasons, but of such tongues as were vnknowen and not vnderstood of the hearers, and in that case his assertions are verie true and his illations very strong, which otherwise are ridiculous, if not monsterous. For who well in his wits
will make the Apostle speake so falsly and absurdly as to say, He that speaketh a (knowne) tongue, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God: If I come to you, speaking with (knowne) tongues, what shall I profite you? He that speaketh a (knowne) language edifieth (but) himselfe: when thou blessest with the spirit (and in a knowne tongue) howe shall hee that is vnlearned say, Amen?The text can∣not stand, ex∣cept you adde the worde (vnknowne) to it. These speaches haue neither ryme nor reason in them; but turne them to the cō∣trary and limit them to an vnknowne tongue, and then they be very substantiall and sensible assertions. And so S. Paul in that chapter very often expoundeth himselfe.Sainct Paul so expoun∣deth him∣self. For these be his owne additions, Vers. 9. Howe shal it be vnderstoode what is spoken? 11. Except I knowe the power of the speach I shal bee barbarous to him that speaketh. 16. He knoweth not what thou saiest. And citing a place of the Prophet Esay to confirme his intent he saith, by men of other tongues and of other languages will I speake to this people. What is an other tongue and another language but in manifest termes, a strange tongue and a strange language? An other tongue is a strange toung which is all one with an vnknowne tongue. Chrysost. in 1. Corinth. 14.Chrysostom and Ambrose commenting vpon this chapter deliuer S. Pauls minde in those very words which we do. Si peregrina lingua gratias agas: If thou giue thanks in a STRANGE tongue, saith Chrysostome, the common man can not answere Amen. And speaking in S. Pauls person, The fathers interpreting Sainct Paul, adde those wordes which we doe. Linguas inutiles esse dico, quantisper sint ignotae: I say tongues are vnprofitable so long as they are VNKNOWNE. Ibidem. Nam quae vtilitas ex voce non intellecta potest esse? For what pro∣fit can there come by a speach that is NOT VNDERSTOOD? Ambrose like wise, Hoc est quod dicit, qui loquitur incognita lingua, Deo loquitur. This is it the A∣postle saith, he that speaketh in AN VNKNOWNE TOVNG, speaketh vnto God and not vnto men. And againe, Ibidem Ambros. in 1. Corinth. 14. Docere nemo poterit, nisi intelligatur. No man can instruct, except he be vnderstood. And therefore the Apostle Ibidem. war∣neth, saith he, that they should not seeme barbarous ech to other by AN VN∣KNOWN TOVNG. Ibidem. Non competit fidelibus audire linguas quas non intelligunt, sed infidelibus. It is not for the faithful to heare tongues which they vnderstand not, but for infidels. Qui loquitur linqua] subaudis incognita & peregrina. He that speaketh with a tongue) thou must vnderstand, saith Haymo, an vnknowne and strange tongue. And againe, Ibidem. Haymo in 1. Cor. 14. Si orem lingua] subaudis incognita. If I pray with a tongue) to wit, an vnknowne tongue, the vnderstanding of my soule is without any profit, because I vnderstand not what I speake. And so S. Au∣gustin disputing of this place saith, Ibidem. August. de Genes. ad li∣teram, lib. 12. cap. 8. Quia lingua, id est membro corporis quod mo∣nemus in ore cum loquimur, signa vti{que} rerum dantur, non res ipsae proferuntur, propte∣rea translato verbo linguam appellauit quālibet signorum prolationem priusquā intel∣ligantur. Because by the toung, I mean that part of the body which we moue in our mouthes when we speak, the signes of things are deliuered & not the things themselues, therefore (the Apostle to the Corinthes) by a kind of tran∣slation calleth any vttering of signes (or words) Mark what a tongue is by Saint Austens interpreta∣tion. before they be vnderstood, a toungue Phi. In deed S. Paul speaketh of tongues not vnderstood when he saith they
neither profite nor edifie: but hee that thinketh S. Paul speaking of edification of mans mind or vnderstanding,The Rhemish Test. 1. Corinth 14. meaneth the vnderstanding of the words onely, is fouly deceiued. For what is a child of fiue or six yeres old edified or increased in knowledge by his Pater noster in english? It is the sense therefore which euery man can not haue nei∣ther in English nor latin, the knowledge whereof properly and rightly edifieth to instru∣ction: and the knowledge of the words only often edifieth neuer a whit, & somtimes buil∣deth to error & destructiō: as it is plain in al heretikes & many curious pesons besides. Phi. As we should shewe our selues to be mad, if we should say that Eng∣lish prayers doe edifie children before they come to the yeares of discretion,He that knoweth not the sense is not edified, but he that knoweth not one worde, as in a strange tongue is a thousand tymes lsse edified. or that the very hearing of their mother tongue doth sufficiently instruct English men, though the sense of that which is spoken be neuer so darke, obscure, para∣bolicall, and mysticall: for then we shoulde crosse the very Principles of nature and the whole discourse of the Apostle (who mainely teacheth, that no man is edified, except he vnderstande: and meaneth by vnderstanding both the knowe∣ledge of the words that enter our eares, & of the sense that affecteth our hearts: so are you woorse than mad to defend that men may be edified by speach where∣of they vnderstand not so much as one word, to confute so shamefull an absurdi∣tie, we neede neither Scriptures nor Fathers:Speake to children in a strange tongue, and they will ei∣ther fly from you for feare or laugh you to skorne. Children of sixe yeares old wil tell you, they bee no whit the better for all your paines, if they vnderstand not your wordes. What will you not say, that wil say this? And when you that be masters in Israel, are so blinde, how great must the blindnesse of others be, that take their light from you? You resist not onely God, and his trueth, but you force your owne tongues to speake against your owne heartes. For say your selues; if a man speake Welch or Irish to you, that vnderstand it not, what will it profit you, or which way can you be edified by it? Phi. Welch or Irish would do vs no good, but Greeke or Hebrewe would.Hebrew doth edify no more than Irish if a man vnder∣stand neither. Theo. What difference between Hebrew and Irish to him that vnderstandeth a word of neither? When the heart conceiueth not the sense of the words, nor so much as distinguisheth the tongue, whether it be Hebrewe or Irish, for lack of knowledge, howe can the Hebrewe or greeke tongue, though the one bee sacred and the other learned, instruct the hearer, or helpe his vnderstanding more than Welch or Irish can? The Apostles Rule,De Gen. ad lit. lib. 12. cap. 8. If I come to you speaking with tongues (not vnder∣stood) what shall I profit you? s generally true of all tongues. Nemo edificatur audiendo quod non intelligit: No man,Chrysost. in 1. Cor. 14. saith Augustine, is edified with hearing that which he vnderstandeth not. Ambros. in. 1. Cor. 14. Linguas loquens seipsum edificat, quod quidē fieri non potest, nisi quae loquatur norit: He that speaketh with tongues edifieth himselfe: which is not possible, except he knowe what hee saith, as Chryso∣stome noteth. And Ambrose, Si vtique ad edificandum Ecclesiam conuenitis, ea dici debent, quae intelligant audientes; If you come together to edifie the Church, those thinges must bee spoken which the hearers may vnder∣stand. If then there bee no edification, where nothing is vnderstood;Nothing doth edifie except it bee vnder∣stood. a strange tongue, bee it Hebrewe, Greeke, Welche or Irish, cannot edifie the hearer
that is ignorant of them; by reason the heart perceiueth not the words, much lesse the sense of that which is spoken. Phi. We say, the simple people, and many one that thinke themselues some body, vnderstand as litle of the sense of diuers Psalmes, lessons and Oraisons in the vulgar toung as if they were in Latine.The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinth. 14. Theo. And we say you do nothing now but cauill,A wretched cauill of the Iesuits be∣cause the peo∣ple vnder∣stand not euerie myste∣rie of the Psalm or lessons, to say they were as good not vnder∣stād a word. which in matters of trueth is not tolerable. For what if the vulgar sort vnder∣stand not the perfect sense of euery verse or worde that is read in the Church, will you thence inferre; that the diuine seruice in a knowen tongue doth not edi∣fi? Your selues, steppe out the prowdest of you, vnderstand not euery line & letter that is written in the old & New Testament; Do the Scriptures there∣fore not edifie; or blame you the holy Ghost for writing them, because you doe not euery where reach to the depth of them? What teacher can be so plaine; but in debating matters of faith and saluation he shall be many times forced to passe the capacity of rude & ignorant men? Wil you therefore conclude against S. Paul, that neither Prophets, nor Preachers edifie? In the epistles (and so no doubt sermons) of Paul himselfe there are (and were) some things hard to be vnderstoode.2. Peter 3. Were the Preachings and writings therefore o the Apostle vnprofitable? Phi. If the Psalmes and lessons do not edifie, the worde of god doth not edi∣fie.We reason against your seruice, not against the Scriptures. Theo. As though the Psalmes and lessons in our seruice, were not partes of the sacred Scriptures. If therfore our diuine seruice do not edifie in respect of the psalms and lessons there song and read, then the Scriptures themselues do not edifie, and consequently S. Paul was ouershot when hee saide, whatsoeuer things are written, were written for Rom. 15. our instruction; and the Holy Ghost deceiued when he witnessed, that the whole Scripture is 2 Timoth. 3. The rest of our prayers are so plaine that no man can pretend lack of vnder∣standing them except he be a natu∣rall. profitable to teach, correct and instruct. Or if the spirite of God be trueth, as there is no question he is, then are you voide both of his spirite and of trueth also to say that diuers psalms and lessons do not edifie. Phi. You be very snappish: we speak of your praiers, as well as of the Psalmes and lessons: Neither doe we say the Psalmes and lessons do not edi∣fie, but y• the simple vnderstand not diuers of them no more than if they were in Latine. Theo. They must be very simple that vnderstand not our praiers. They containe nothing besides the confession of our sinnes to god, the rendring of thankes for his graces and mercies bestowed on vs in Christ his sonne,They be mad Christians and of your making, that vnderstand not these things. and the asking of such things at his hands as his wisedome seeth to be needfull and his goodnesse thinketh expedient for vs and all mankind. And these things if any man vnderstand not, being distinctly and daily pronounced in his mother tongue, you may begge him for a naturall and doe him no wrong. As for the Psalmes and Lessons, since they be Gods not ours, the question must not be whether euerie ladde or lasse, prentise and ploughman exactly vn∣derstand euery word that is written,This is a wise iest of the Ie∣suits because the people vnderstande but whether they edifie the church of Christ or no; that is, whether they haue in them many thinges fruitfull to be knowen, and easie to bee learned if the hearers will be diligent and delight in the law of
God as they ought, & are bound to doe. And in this case masters, you be not only snappish but very saucy with God himself, that wil not suffer him to speak in his Church by the mouthes of his Prophetes and Apostles, if you finde any sot or simle idiote in the company that happily vnderstandeth not euery word which the holy Ghost vttereth. Were you Surgions of the body, and had some in cure, that could not see with one eye, to remedy that imperfection, would you put out both, and make them starke blind? Phi. A wise similitude.Compare this simili∣tude with the Iesuits obie∣ction, and tell me what they differ. Theo. As wise as your illation a∣gainst our diuine seruice. For where some be so dull and ignorant, that they conceiue not diuerse thinges in the Psalmes, Lessons and prayers, to helpe that, you would take from them the rest which they doe vnderstand, and so fill their eares with the strangenesse of an vnknowen tongue, that their hearts perceiue iust asmuch of your prayers, as blind men o of colours. And see you not that your assertion strangleth it selfe, and clearly conuinceth the vnfruitfulnesse of your latine prayers? For if the people bee so simple that they vnderstande not the sense of many thinges in their mother tongue,Yf seruice in  known toung do not difie, what doth ser∣uice in an vn∣knowne? how many thinke you among them vnderstand the same or any thing else in the la∣tine tongue? If the Scriptures must be inioyned silence in the Church because they speake some thinges which the ruder sort can not easily attain, what place can be left for your latine Masse, Mattines and seruice, of which the people vn∣derstand not one word: and the knowledge of so much, as one sentence thereof, before they can get, they must be not only Diuines, which you say they are not, but good Grammarians, which in their education is not possible?The Iesuits waie to edifie is to let the people not vnderstand a word of their praiers. What else is this but to put out both their eyes, & where before they vnderstood many things that were both fruitfull and needefull for them, so to mure vp their eares and choke vp their harts with a barbarous sound of vnknowen speech, that neither the simpler, nor wiser sort of them perceiued any line or letter of your seruice? Phi. Call you the latine tongue barbarous? Theo. Not in it selfe, but in respect of the hearer, which is not acquainted with it. And so S. Paul calleth any language that is not vnderstood, barbarous to him,Euerie toung barbarous to him that vn∣derstandeth it not. that vnderstandeth it not. 1 Corinth. 14. The Rhemish Testament 1 Corinth. 14. Act. 2. If I know not the power (or signification) of the speech, I shall bee barbarous to him that speaketh, and hee that speaketh shall be barbarous to me (that vnderstand him not.) Phi. You are deceiued. There is here no worde written or ment of any other tongues but such as men spake in the primatiue Church by miracle. Theo. Did not the twelue Apostles, that were Hebrewes borne, speake Greeke and Latine by the miraculous gift of the holy Ghost, descending on them in the likenes of clouen and firie tongues, as it is specified in the se∣cond of the Actes? Phi. I thinke they did: because the Romanes are there na∣med amongest those that hearde, euery man their owne language at the Apo∣stles mouthes:The Rhemish Testament 1. Corinth. 14. Mary though the Hebrew, Greeke and Latine might bee giuen by miracle and without study, it being knowen to the Iewes, Romanes or Greekes, in eue∣ry place, they be not counted among the differences of barbarous and straunge tongues here spoken of.
Theo. Barbarous, that is, which is not vnder∣stood, what tongue so∣euer it be.S. Paul doth not here like a Rhetorician, as you would haue him, distinguish the tongues which bee most eloquent and oratoricall in themselues: that was farre from the Apostles minde or purpose: but onely sheweth that eue∣ry tongue not vnderstood, bee it Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, Persike, Arabike, or what language you list, seemeth not without iust cause to bee barbarous to him that knoweth not the force and signification of the speech. And so he limi∣teth the word barbarous; when hee saith: If I knowe not the power of the voice,1. Cor. 14. I shall bee barbarous to him that speaketh (and hee likewise to mee.) Hieron. inOmnis sermo qui non intelligitur barbarus iudicatur. Euery tongue that is not vnderstood, is deemed, saith Hierom, to be barbarous.1. Cor. 14. And Chrysostom, Chrysost. in 1. cor. 14. hom. 35.He shalbe barbarous to me, and I to him. Non vtique ob naturam vocis sed ob imperitiam, not by the nature of the toung, but by the vnskilfulnes (of the hea∣rer.) Ibidem. Non enim barbarus, inquit, ero: sed loquenti barbarus. Et rursus, non qui loqui∣tur barbarus est, inquits sed mihi barbarous. For (S. Paul) saith not, I shal (sim∣plie be a barbarian, but barbarous to him that speaketh. And againe, hee that speaketh shall not be (absolutely) a barbarian, but barbarous vnto me, saith the Apostle. Phi. This we say was not ment of any of the three learned toungs, namely not of the Latine, Greeke nor Hebrew. The. That is one of your oracles in your Rhemish obseruatiōs, but we would heare your reasons & not your fansies, why the Latine toung, if it be not vnderstood, may not bee counted barbarous to the hearer. Phi. The Rhemish Testament 1. Corinth. 14.Know you that nothing (in this chapter) is ment of those toungs which were the common languages of the world, or of the faithfull, vnderstood of the learned and ciuill people in euery great citie, and in which the scriptures of the old and new Testament were written. Theo. This is pride, to affirme what you will your selues it is no reason to confirme that which is now in question betwixt vs: And yet that which you af∣firme is either not true, or not much to the matter. For first in latine no Scrip∣tures were written; but the Apostle writing to the Romans wrate in the Greek toung & not in latine,Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine, were not vnder∣stoode of the ciuil people in euery great Citie. which argueth that the laine toung was nothing so much esteemed, or so generally dispersed as the Greeke. Next that the learned & ciuile people in euery great city had the knowledge of the Hebrew, Greeke & latine, is an other of your Iesuitical truthes, auouched by no man but by your selues, & no way possible to be proued, but by your magistrall surmises. The Hebrew was hard & neglected of all men sauing of the Iewes, whose peculiar tongue it was; the greater cities despising as well the Nation as their language, til Christ was ascended; & between that & the preaching of the Gospel in the greater cities the people though they were ciuil had neither time, capacity nor meanes to learne a newe tongue, and so difficult a tongue both to pronounce and vnderstand as the Hebrew is. The Greeke tongue was in high price and farther spred, before the birth of our Sauiour, not only by reason of the Monarchie which was amongest the
Grecians before it came to the Romanes, but specially for that all liberall studies, artes and exercises were handled and perfited either wholy or chiefely by the Grecians, the Romanes affecting rather the inlarging of their Empire with armes and triumphes than the furnishing of their citie with scholasticall & academicall ornamentes. The Latine tongue came in last, and though in the West partes be∣tweene this and Rome it some-what preuailed by reason of the Empire, and no better tongue neerer; yet in the East it was little regarded and sel∣dome vsed, yea the Grecians in comparison of their tongue neglected it as bar∣barous. Phi. Barbarous?The Gretians accounteth the Latine tongue to be barbarous in respect of then own. Plautus in prolog. Asina∣riae. Strabo Geogra∣phiae lib. 1. Rom. 1. who euer called the Romanes Barbarians, or the La∣tine tongue barbarous? Theo. The Grecians disdained the Romane tongue as barbarous in respect of their own, and did not sticke to number the Ro∣manes amongst the barbarians. Plautus the father of the latine toung transla∣ting a Comedie out of the Greeke into Latine, sayeth: Marcus vertit barbare: Plautus translated it into the barbarous tongue (of the Romanes.) Strabo confesseth that many diuiding the whole world into Greekes and Barbarians put the Romanes in the second rancke amongest the Barbarians; which parti∣tion dured to the Apostles time, and is inserted in the first beginning of his Epi∣stle to the Romanes. I am debter to the Greekes and to the Barbarians, and therefore am readie to preach the Gospell to you also, that are at Rome. He is a debter to both and by that meanes to the Romanes: the Romanes there∣fore by S. Pauls own mouth (since they were not Grecians) are numbred a∣mongst the Barbarians. Mary this is not materiall to our purpose,We despise not these tongues as barbarous in themselues; but shew what Saint Paul meaneth by this word. the Grecians in their proud con∣ceit thought euery Nation barbarous that wanted any thing of the datinesse of their speech, & delicatenes of their life; where in deede no Nation may iustly be counted barbarous, except it bee voide of all humane ciuilitie and societie, which the Romanes then were not, and infinite Nations nowe are not. But S. Paul in this place, which we reason of, vseth barbarous for that which is not vnderstood of the hearer, though the tongue in it selfe be neuer so learned, or e∣loquēt. Those are his very words in this chapter vttered for the better declara∣tion of his meaning: and the word beareth this sense euen among prophane wri∣ters as when the Poete that was a Romane, and vanished into Pontus, saide,Tristium lib. 5. elegia. 11. Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor vlli. I am here a barbarian, because no man vnderstandeth what I speake.And you shall neuer proue he spake not of them; in the meane time the Apostles words he in∣differētly for all tongues. Euen so the Grecians and Hebricians by Sainct Pauls resolution are barbariās to him that knoweth not what they say. Phi. You shall neuer induce mee to thinke that S. Paul spake of any of those three tongues, which were after a sort sanctifd in our Sauiours crosse. Theo. What you will bee ledde to wee greatly passe not, the Scriptures de∣pend not on your dreames, wee search for the sense of Sainct Paules wordes, which being generall may not be restrained to what you list without some surer authoritie than your owne. There are, saith the Apostle, for example sake, so
many kindes of tongues In the world) and none of them be ge∣nerall spea∣ches exten∣ding to all the toungs that are. in the world, and Chrysost. in 1. Corinth. 14. none of them is without sounde (or signification.) Yet if I know not the vertue of the voice, I shal bee barba∣rous to him that speaketh (in any of them) and he that speaketh shall be bar∣barous to me. In all toungs he that is not vnderstood, is barbarous to the hearer.There are so many kinds of voices in the world. That is, saith Chrysostom, so many tongues & languages; to wit, the Scythian, Thracian, Romane, Persian, Mauritanian, Indian, Egyptian, and of thowsand other na∣tions besides these. Therefore if I know not the power of the voice, I shall be barbarous to him that speaketh. Neither would I haue you thinke it to come to passe in vs onely, you may see the like in Chrysost. Ibidem all. And concluding him that praied in latine, if he vnderstood not his owne speech, to bee barbarous to himselfe by this very rule of the Scripture, he saith: If a man should presently speake in the Persian tongue, or in any other strange tongue, and not vnder∣stand what he speaketh, he shall be barbarous euen to himselfe, not only to an other that knew not the power of the language. There were at the first many that praied and gaue a sound with the voice, vsing the Persian or Ro∣mane tongue, which vnderstood not what they said. The Apostle therefore hence teacheth that our tongue ought to speake, and our minde withal vn∣derstand the wordes. Which except we do, there must ofChrysostom exemplifieth Sainct Paules woords twise together by the latine tongue. necessity follow a confusion. Though wee praie in latine or what toung whatsoeuer.S. Ambrose exemplifieth the Apostles discourse in none other tongues but in the Greeke and Hebrew.Ambros. in 1. Corinth. 14. If I pray with the tongue, my spirite praieth, but mine vnderstanding is without fruite. It is manifest that the mind of man is ignorant, when he speaketh with a toung which he vnderstandeth not, as latine men vse to sing Greeke, delighted with the sound of the wordes, but not knowing what they say. And shewing who they were that the Apostle re∣proueth in this whole chapter, he saith: Ibidem. Hij ex Hebraeis erant, qui aliquando Syra lingua, plerumque Hebraea intractatibus aut oblationibus vtebantur ad com∣mendationē: They were Hebrewes who to commend thēselues vsed somtimes the Syrike,By Saint Am∣brose iudge∣ment, the Apostles spake princi∣pally of those that vsed the hebrew toung in their Ser∣mons and praiers, when the people vnderstood hem not. most times the Hebrew tongue in their Sermons and (prayers) at the oblation. Haymo likewise bringeth the Greeke & Hebrew tongues to declare the Apo∣stles meaning. If I know not the power] or vnderstāding, [of the voice] which I heare [I shalbe barbarous to him that speaketh: & he that speaketh shal be barbarous to me]. For example, I am a Grecian, thou an Hebrew: if I speak to thee in Greeke, I shall seeme barbarous: Likewise if thou speake to mee in Hebrew, thou shalt seeme barbarous. And, that as well in praying as preaching. Haymo. in 1. Corinth. 14. Haymo. Ibidem An idiot is hee that knoweth that onely tongue where∣in he was borne and bred. If such an one therefore stand by thee, whiles thou dost solemnly celebrate the mysterie of the Masse, or make a sermon, or giue a blessing▪ how shall he say Amen at thy blessing, whē he knoweth not what thou sayest? for so much as he vnderstanding none but his mother tongue, can not tell what thou speakest in that (strange and) barbarous tongue (bar∣barous not in it selfe, but in respect of him that vnderstandeth it not.)
You say the Apostle by strange tongues meaneth not the latin, Greeke or Hebrue: S. Chrysostom and S. Ambrose do verifie the Apostles words of those toungs namelie and chiefly: yea S. Ambrose saith the occasion of all this offence, were certain Iewes that in their prayers at the Lords table, and exhortations to the people, (to shewe them selues) vsed for the most part the Hebrew tongue. They affirme that which you denie: and they deny that which you affirme. Surely you or they must needs be fouly deceiued. Phi. That S. Paul speaketh not of the Church seruice,The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinth. 14. is prooued by inuincible ar∣guments. It is euident that the Corinthians had their seruice in Greeke at this same time, and it was not done in these miraculous tongues. Nothing is meant then of the Church seruice. Againe, the publike Seruice had but one language: in this exercise they spake in many tongues.That he spea∣keth not of Church ser∣uice, is pro∣ued by inui∣cible argu∣ments. In the the publike Seruice euery man had not his owne spe∣cial tongue, his special interpretation, speciall Reuelation, proper Psalmes: but in this they had. Againe, the publike Seruice had in it the ministration of the holy Sacrament principally: which was not done in this time of conference. For into this exercise were admitted Catechumens and Infidels and whosoeuer would: in this women, before S. Pauls order, did speake and prophesie: so did they neuer in the ministration of the Sa∣crament. With many other plaine differences, that by no meanes the Apostles wordes can be rightly and truely applied to the Corinthians Seruice then, or ours now. There∣fore it is either great ignorance of the Protestants, or great guilefulnesse, so vntruely and peruersly to apply them. Theo. Before I reply, let me aske you a question. Phi. With a good will. Theo. Are you not a Priest? Phi. I am, or I should be. Theo. I will not oppose you after what order, Aarons being abolished, & Melchizedecks not imparted to any mortal man: But by vertue of your priesthood are you not bound to cate∣chise as wel as to baptize, that is, to preach the word as wel as to minister the sacraments? Phi. So we do, as time and place require. Theo. If I should vrge you, that you & your felowes neuer preach, because euery holyday & sunday you say Masse, & massing is apparently no preaching, what would you answer? Phi. I would answer that you made a very childish & foolish argument. For though the one be not the other, yet we may do both at one time & in one place successiue∣ly before wee depart. And if you doubt of this, the meanest parish clarke in Christendome may be your master. Theo. You pul not me,Sainct Paule by preaching doth not ex∣clude praying but seuerally mentioneth them both. but your self by the nose, Philander, and mark it not. Your inuincible arguments, wherby you would proue, that S. Paul in this whole Chapter spake nothing of the Church seruice in Corinth, are such ridiculous toyes of all the worlde, as this, which I brought for example to trie your pa∣tience with. Phi. You shall not defeate the force of our reasons with such a iest. Theo. Neither shall you delude the Apostles doctrine with such a shift.The Church in her diuine seruice must haue both preaching and praying. Roma. 10 The Church of Corinth had then, as al other Churches nowe haue, (or should haue) both praying & preaching annexed and adioyned to the ministration of the Lords supper. Both these yet are, & euer were the meanes which God ordained to prepare vs to be fit ghests for that Table. Howe shal they, saith the Apostle,
call on him in whom they haue not beleeued? and how shall they beleeue in him of whom they haue not heard? & how shall they heare without a Prea∣cher? Hearing is the nurce of faith, and faith is the fountaine of praier: & with∣out praier wee may not approach to God, nor to the Sacrament of thankesgi∣uing, which by the very name it beareth, putteth vs in mind what duty we must yeeld to God when we are partakers of it. The worde engendreth faith, and faith produ∣ceth praier. Act 2.By this it is euident that teaching in the church of God doth not exclude prai∣ing, but is rather the mean that God hath appointed to direct & incite the minds of the faithfull to make their praiers vnto him in such sort as they ought when they are gathered togither in Christs name, to serue God the father in the spirit of his sonne. And so the holy Ghost describeth the church that was at Ierusalem vpon the first spredding of the Gospel: from whence we must take the forme of Apostolik churches. They continued, saith the Scripture, in the Apostles do∣ctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and praiers; noting These three were the pub∣like exercises of Christes Church vn∣der the Apo∣stles. doctrine, prayers, & brotherly communion at the Lords table to be the publike exercises of christians in their assemblies where the Apostles themselues were present in their persons to guide & gouerne those meetings. Phi. If the Church seruice con∣sisted of these three, then were they all three parts of the church seruice.You come not yet to the point. Theo. I will not long be from it. These praiers, exhortations and instructions which the faithfull had in their assem∣blies, were they not partes of the seruice which they yeelded to God? Phi. Yees, but not of the church seruice. Theo. What seruice was there in the church be∣sides this that I mention? Phi. The ministration of the Sacrament. Theo. If you meane the order and fashion of administring the Sacrament, Saint Paul receiued that of the Lord and deliuered it to the church of Corinth in such man∣ner and forme as we finde expressed not many leaues before in the 11. of this Epistle. But there is no church seruice prescribed or named; onely the elemēts and actions of the Lordes supper are particularly remembred and commit∣ted to the church as her chiefest iewell, in her husbandes absence, vntill hee come. Phi. The Church in the Apo∣stles time had no set order of publike praier as the Iesuites dreame.Thinke you they had no set Rites, Collectes, nor praiers deliuered them from the Apostles for that holy action? Theo. You presume they had: and vppon that false imagination you ground the most part of your headlesse argumentes, that the Apostle speaketh not of the Church seruice. Phi. Had they no speciall forme of prayer prescribed in their churches whiles the Apo∣stles liued? Theo. Had they say you? Phi. Else they had nothing but confu∣sion in their churches.In the prima∣tiue Church the pastours and ministers praied and gaue thanks at the spirit directed their hearts & lips. Theo. Blaspheme not so fast. The power of the holy Ghost miraculously supplying all wantes, and inspiring the Pastours and Elders in euery Church howe to pray, was no confusion. Phi. Do you thinke they changed their prayers in euery place and at euery meeting as pleased the minister? Theo. You may well perceiue by the Apostles wordes that they had neither Sermons nor Seruice prefixed nor limited in his time: but when the Church came togither, the Elders and Ministers instructed the people and made their prayers by inspiration. Phi. I knowe they did so, but this
was not the Church Seruice. Theo. This was all the church Seruice they had: to which they added the celebration of the Lordes supper, but with∣out any setled or prefined order of praier, except it were he Lords praier which they obserued in all places as comming from the mouth of Christ himselfe, their Soueraigne Lord and Master. Phi. Mary Sir that were euen such seruice as you haue at this day, where e∣uery blind Minister bableth what he listeth. Theo. Iest not at God, except you wil be Iulian. Phi. I iest at your disorder, which you would seeme to deriue frō the Primatiue Church of the Apostles. Theo. In deede wee haue not so ma∣ny turnes and touches, bowtes and becks as you haue in your Masses: other disorder in our Seruice I know none, vnlesse it bee that wee doe not God regar∣deth not these solem∣nities of the Iesuits which they suppose to be the highest points of godlines. swinge the Censers, rince the chalice, tosse the Masse-booke, plaie with the host, and sleepe at Memento, as you doe, with a number of like toyes throughout your seruice. Phi. Doe not you nowe iest at our Seruice? Theo. At your stage-like gestures I may without offence, but you iested at the miraculous gift of the holy Ghost guiding the Pastours and prophetes of the primatiue church in their publike praiers and exhortations, and called it a confusion, and resem∣bled it to our babling in the church at this day, which you thinke to be very dis∣ordered. Phi. I see no proofe that the Pastours of the Church in the Apostles time made their publike prayers as you say,All things were doone in the first Church by the miracu∣lous working of the holy Ghost. by miraculous instinct of the spirite. Theoph. Doe but open your eyes when you reade this chapter, and you can not choose but see it. Both this and the twelfth chapter treate wholy of the gifts of the spirite. Where you finde that to one (was) giuen by the spirit the word of wisedome, to an other the word of knowledge: to an other fayth: to an other giftes of healing by the same spirite:1. Corinth. 12. The gifts of gods spirit at the first erection of the Church. to an other operation of wonders: to an other, prophesie: to an other, discerning of spirites: to an other, diuersities of toungs: to an other interpretation of toungs. Phi. Here is not the gift of praier numbred amongest them. Theo. But in the fourteenth it is, where shewing them how they should behaue themselues in the Church, when the congregation was assembled, he laieth this downe as a rule for them to follow.1. Corinth. 14. I will pray with thee spirite, but I will pray with the vnder∣standing also: I will sing with the spirite, but I will sing with the vnder∣standing also. Else when thou blessest with the spirite, how shal he that oc∣cupieth the room of the simple (or common) person say Amen at the giuing of thanks, seeing he knoweth not what thou saiest? To pray, sing and blesse, With the spi∣rit] is with the miraculous gift of the spirit. The presence and consent of the people maketh the praier pub∣like. with the spirite in this place, can bee nothing else but to be guided and led by the spirit in their praiers, Psalmes & thanks as they were in their doctrines, interpretations & exhortations: which was by mi∣racle on the suddain, not by learning or study. This was done in the church whē al ye faithful were present, & to these praiers, psalms, & thāksgiuings, the people were to say Amen as the Apostle sheweth, which is the ende signe and proofe of publike prayer, among christians. What is church seruice, if this be not?
or what other Seruice could the Church haue besides hearing the word and offering their common supplications vnto God by the mouth of one man, the rest vnderstanding what he said, and confirming his praier with saying Amen? Phi. Howe shall the simple man say A∣men, that is, any simple man?The Apostle speaketh of one man (supplying the place of the vulgar) and you stretch it to the whole people. Theo. If the praiers of the Church concerned some of the people, and not all, you might make that obiection with some shew: but now it hath no color, when S. Paul asketh1. Corinth. 14. Rom. 4. How shal the sim∣ple man say Amen: he meaneth not this or that man, but any or euery. And so the indefinite signifieth generally, throughout the Scripture. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth no sinne: that is, Blessed is euery man to whom the Lord imputeth no sin. Deutero. 27.Cursed be the man that obserueth not all the workes of the Law, to doe them, that is, by S. Pauls owne exposition, Cursed is Galat. 3. Chrysost. in 1. Corinth. 14. By the com∣mon or vul∣gare person Sainct Paule meaneth the people. euery man that continueth not in all things which are written in the booke of the Lawe, to doe them. The whole Scripture is full of the like. And therefore Chrysostome noteth, Indoctum, promiscuam plebem vocat, monstratque non leue incommodum esse, si Amen dicere non possit. The vnlearned he calleth the vulgar people, and declareth it to be no smale inconuenience if they cannot say Amen. Phi. I see they did praie, sing and blesse with the spirite, and that the people said Amen;The forme of the Lords institution was certaine, but the prai∣ers made and thanks giuen at the Lords table, were left to the discretion of the minister. but had they no speciall nor vsuall praiers reserued for the ministration of the Sacrament, which might not be varied? Theo. You think belike they had your Introite, Grail, Tract, Sequēce, Offertorie, Secrets, Postcommunion, Pax, and Ite missa est. Phi. Sure they had some precise forme of seruice, though we know it not. Theo. And since you knowe it not, why should you make it the anker hold of all your exposition vpon S. Paul? Phi. Had they no order for their seruice? Theo. What a stirre here is for that which the Apostles neuer did? Had they set an order for the seruice of the Church, durst any man after haue broken it? Phi. S. Iames masse is yet extant. Theo. And so are a number of other foolish forgeries as wel as that.Masse forged in the Apo∣stles names. Iacobi Missa. Iacobi Missa. Phi. Do you think it forged? Theo. Which of S. Iames masses do you meane? Phi. There are not so many that you should aske which. Theo. Two there are vnder his name, the one nothing like the other, & yet both fathered vpō him. Phi. We haue but one, and that set in order of church seruice, with mutual praiers and answers for Priest and People very perfectly. Theo. And the other you shall find in the Constitut. Apost. lib. 8. a cap. 15. ad cap. 24. eight booke of Cle∣mens Apostolike constitutions, where vide Constitut. Apost. lib. 6. cap. 14. lib. 8. cap. 15 the fourteene Apostles (for so you haue increased their number as well as their constitutions) take precise order what praiers, answers and actions shal be vsed at the mysticall sacrifice; their first prescription being this, that Two Deacons shal be on both sides of the altar, with tuffs of pecocks tails in their hands to driue away gnats, left they light in the Chalice: a graue consideration for Christs Apostles to meete together to make flappes to catch flies. Phi. That I graunt, is a matter of smal respect, but yet not enough to re∣fute
the booke. Theo. It is sufficiently refuted in that neither the Church of Christ nor your selues euer esteemed it.Clemens booke of Apostolike constitutions neuer recei∣ued in the Church. Had this book beene Authentik it must needs haue beene taken into the canon of the Scriptures. For if that which any one Apostle wrate be Canonical, much more that which al the Apostles, with common consent decreed and ordered. Againe had the Apostles prescribed an exact fourme of diuine seruice for the Lords table, what man would haue, altered it, or what Church refused it? How would either Basill or Chrysostome haue presumed to make newe formes of Church seruice, if those liturgies be theirs, & not rather forced on thē, as this is on the first & chiefe Apostles of Christ? Why did the Latine Church and the Church of Rome her selfe neglect that seruice if it were Apostolike, and preferre the praiers of one Grego. lib. 7. epi. 63. Scholasticus as worthier to be said ouer the deuine mysteries, the maker being so obscure a man, that his name is not knowen in the church of god? why were the Bishops of Rome 600. yeares & vpward patching & piecing the masse before they brought it to any set∣led forme, as your own fellowes Polidor. de in∣uent. rerum lib. 5. cap. 10. confesse, and yet then Rome had one forme of seruice, Polidor. de in∣uent. rerum lib. 5. cap. 10. Millan an other which they keepe at this day, Fraunce a thirde? Why did Gregorie when he was consulted by Augustine the monke, what forme of diuine seruice he should commēd to the Saxons, wil him to bind himselfe neither Gregorij re∣sponsio ad 3. interrogat. Au∣gustini. to Rome nor to any church els, but to take from euery place that which he liked best, and deliuer that vnto the English? To cut off al ambiguities we haue the plaine testimonie of Gregorie the great,Gregor. lib. 7. epist. 63. that the Church of Rome 600. yeres after Christ knew nothing of those constitutions and Church seruices which are now obtruded vnder the Apostles names.No praiers vsed by the Apostles at the Lords table but only the Lords praier. Mos Apostolorum fuit, vt ad ipsam solummodo orationem (Dommicam) oblationis hostiam consecraret. This was, saith he, the maner of the Apostles to consecrate the sacrifice, with saying no moe praiers but the Lords praier. In vaine therefore doe you dreame of a settled forme of praier for the Lords supper, where as the Apostles haue none, but left that to the direction and dispo∣sition of the holy Ghost inspiring the ministers and elders in euery Church, when the faithful were assembled, to make their praiers vnto god with the peo∣ple; and to render him thankes for all his mercies, as the spirite gaue them vtterance. This Chrysostome calleth In 1. Cor. 14. Tertul. in apologet.Precandi domum, the (miraculous) gift of praiers whereof S. Paul speaketh in this place, and Tertul. seemeth to mē∣tion the same in his Apologie for the Christians as during in the Church vnto his time.To pray by hart dured a while a∣mongst the Christians. We, saith he, looking vp to heauen with our hands stretched out as being innocent, bareheaded, as not ashamed, sine monitore, quia de pectore, oramus, make our praiers without any prompter as comming from the (free) motion of our own harts. Phi. Our arguments conuince that S. Paul spake not of the Churches seruice: and till those be answered, we cannot change our minds.The Iesuits will haue the ordering of S. Pauls words whether he will or no. Theo. That which I haue alreadie saide, openeth your error, in mistaking or els peruerting the wordes of S. Paul, choose you whether: if that content you not, repeate your reasons as they stand in rew, that we may see their force.
Phi. It is euident the Corinthians had their Seruice in Greeke at this same time, and t was not done in these miraculous toungs. Nothing is ment then of the church seruice. Theo. If Sainct Paule in this place did not speake of the Church ser∣uice, howe can the Iesu∣ites proue the Corinthi∣ans had their seruice at this tyme in Greeke?To vs it is out of question that the Corinthians had their publike pray∣ers and exhortations in the Greeke tongue: because the common people of that City vnderstood none other: and the tongue which they vnderstoode not, might not be vsed in the Church by S. Pauls rule: but you that denie S. Paul to speak of the Church seruice in this place, howe prooue you the Corinthians had their Seruice in the Greeke tongue? Phi. Doe you thinke they had not? Theo. For our parts, as I tolde you, we are resolued: because S. Paul would neither haue preaching nor praying in the Church but such as might edifie: & addeth, that an vnknown tongue profiteth nothing to edificatiō: mary you are otherwise min∣ded, and therefore I see not howe you can proue that they had their seruice in the Greeke tongue, which you affirme to be euident. Phi. Had they their Seruice, trow you, in an vnknowne tongue? Theo. In your opinion, that is no such absurdity.The Iesuites thwarted with their owne princi∣ples. Phi. They could not vnderstand it, ex∣cept it were in Greeke. Theo. This is contrary to your owne Principles. For the Hebrewe, Greeke and Latine as you told vs euen nowe were vnderstoode of the cyuill people in euery great Citie: and were that vntrue, as I know it is, though you auouched it for an aduantage, yet is it not necessarie to vnderstand our prayers, as your selues defend in this your declaration vpon S. Paul, and following the path that you leade vs in your Rhemish obseruations,Except they take hold of Sainct Paules reasons here vsed in this chapter, they shall neuer proue the seruice at Co∣rinth in Saint Paules time was in Greeke. It is true they had their ser∣uice in greek, but the esuits cannot proue it but by ouer∣throwing their owne conclusion which they woulde infer: and so their ancedent choketh their consequent. wee say you can not prooue the Corinthians had their seruice in the Greeke tongue. Philand. In what tongue else coulde they haue it? Theoph. Rather in Hebrewe than in Greeke, for that tongue was sacred, and naturall to the Iewes who first spred the Gospel, and planted the Churches. Phi. The Apostle requireth the people shoulde vnderstande the prayers of the Church, otherwise they reape no profite by them; and to speake Hebrewe in the Church to them that vnderstood nothing but Greeke, were no reason. Theo. Are you there at host now? Can you plea thus on both sides when you be vrged? You are making inuincible arguments, that the Apostle speaketh nothing in this place of the Churches seruice, & before you can iustifie the first proposition which you bring, you bee faine to take hold of this very place to prooue, the Co∣rinthians had their Church seruice in Greeke. Phi. Nay without this place it is euident they had their seruice in greeke. The. Set this chapter aside, and if you prooue the Corinthians had their seruice in Greeke at this very time when the Apostle wrate, wee giue you the cause. Phi. You be resolued they had, and yet you put vs to prooue it, as if it were in doubt. Theo. I tel the reason. It is euident they had their seruice in a knowen tongue by that which the Apostle here writeth, otherwise it is not euident by any other proofe that you can make. And since you will haue the Apostle to speake no∣thing of the Church Seruice in this chapter, why shoulde wee not put you to prooue that which you lay for the ground of your misconstring Saint Pauls text?
Phi. A trueth it is,Their antece∣dent being granted their cōsequēt doth not followe. A wise reason, because Saint Paul had set an order to haue their seruice in the tongue which they knewe, there∣fore some might not inuert that order. what proofe soeuer may, or may not be brought for it. Theo. Let it stand for trueth, what will you conclude? Phi. Nothing is meant then of their Church Seruice. Theo. Why so? Phi. That was in Greeke, and well vnderstood of all the people. Theo. A worthy sequele. As if it were not possible for some vaine men to disturbe the Church of Corinth notwith∣standing the Apostle had left generall direction that al things should be doone in the church vnto edification. The Lordes supper was rightly deliuered them: was it therefore not abused by some amongst them? The like say we for their praiers in the church. No doubt Paul ordained at Corinth as he did in al other churches of the Saincts, that the people should say Amen to euery blessing and thankesgiuing that was vsed in the Church. Might not therfore some of their Elders and ministers, to venditate themselues and the gift which they had of God, sometimes blesse and make their praiers at the Lords table in a tongue not vnderstoode of the whole multitude? Phi. Were they strangers or inhabitants? Theo. It skilleth not whe∣ther; they might bee either. Phi. Inhabitants there would vse none other toung than their owne, and strangers might not minister Sacramentes in other mens Churches.This disorder might come either by straungers, or by such as were fastned to their cures. Theo. Some of their own might be so vain glorious, as in making their praiers at the Lordes table, (which was then doone by hart and not after any prescribed order or form) to shew the gift of tongues, which they receiued of the holy Ghost, to an other end, and not to commend them-selues without edifiing the hearer. Strangers also if they were in place were suffered both to teach and blesse in the Church, as well as others that were tied to their Cures by reason that many were sent by the Apostles and by the holy Ghost to visite the Churches and comfort the Christians as they traueled, and such were, according to their knowledge and gift, not only permitted, but also desired to exhort the people and giue thanks to God in other mens charges. Philand. This might be: but how proue you this was the fault which the Apostle reproued? Theo. I need not proue that. If this which I speake might easilie come to passe, then your inuincible arguments be sensible follies, & corelude vtterly Yet was it some cunning to set a good face on the matter. no such thing as you imagine. Your argumēt cannot be impregnable til your consequent be ineuitable: & since so many cases may be put, though your antecedent be admitted to repel your consequēt, what wisedome was it to make such vaunt of your forces not onely before the victory, but when you see your selues so voide of al good artillerie?The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinth. 14. Neither ante∣cedent nor consequent true. Phi. Againe the publike seruice had but one language: in this exercise they speak with many tongues. Theo. Againe you can neither verifie your antecedent, nor iustifie your consequent. Set order of publike seruice they had none in the Apostles time; the Pastors and ministers praied by heart, as the spirite of God guided them. This gift of praier some turned to their owne prayse and ostentation, when they were admitted to giue thanks to God in the congregation of the faithfull,
and made their prayers in such tongues as they preferred, or would seeme en∣dewed with, though the people vnderstood them not, for which attempt the A∣postle controlleth them. Phi. These are your conceiuements. Theo. Were they no mans but mine, your reasons are weake and euen contemptible, which you proclaimed for inuincible: but as you heard, S. Ambrose did informe you,Ambros. in 1. Corinth. 14. that these men, whom S. Paul here toucheth, vsed sometimes the Syrian, and most times the Hebrew tongue, in tractatibus aut oblationibus, in their dis∣courses (to the people) or ministration of the Sacrament, as they pleased. Phi. The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinth. 14.In the publike seruice euery man had not his owne speciall tongue, his speciall interpretation, special reuelation, proper Psalmes: but in this they had. Theophil. In the publike seruice of the church, the ministers and Elders which were many both trauelers and there dwellers,And why might not euerie pastour and minister haue his Psalmes, his thankes gi∣uing as wel in praying as in preaching? had euery man his Psalme, his instruction, his tongue, reuelation, or interpretation as the spirite of grace thought it most expedient, for the setting foorth of Gods glory and the edifieng of their faithes that were present, and other order of di∣uine seruice in the Apostolike and primatiue church wee reade for certaintie of none, besides the action of the Lordes supper, which the Apostles, and so no doubt their churches alwaies vsed in the end of their publik meetings, but with not set prayers saue onely the Lordes prayer as Gregorie confesseth; the rest of their prayers, blessinges and thanksgiuinges were in euery place made by the gift of the holy Ghost inspiring such, as were set to teach and gouerne the church. And though you haue long since their time framed a Liturgie in Iames name, wheron you seeme to ground all the cauils, that here are vrged as inuincible arguments: yet for so much as the church of Christ did not acknow∣ledge it, and the words of Gregory directly impugne it: we return that home to the forge whence it came, & your arguments back to you as wanting both truth & strength to beare out your cause. Phi. The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinth. 14. Why maie not doctrine, praier, and the Lordes supper follow ech other in one continual action though they be things different in themselues?The publike seruice had in it the administration of the holy Sacrament princi∣pally, which was not done in the time of this conference. Theo. Though the Lordes supper was not ministred at that instant when the Pastors & people were intending for doctrine, yet did it follow immediatly vpon this exercise finished, and due thankes offered to God by the whole church for the redemption of the world in the blood of his sonne: neither besides your bold and bare negatiue do we see any cause why the singing, blessing, and thanks∣giuing which S. Paul speaketh of, should not be vnderstood, to be the prayers and Psalmes that were vsed before, after, and at the Lordes table: this I am sure, S. Paul willeth Cor. 14. All must be done to edifi∣cation, ego Church ser∣uice. all thinges to be done to edification, and all must con∣taine the church seruice & ministration of the Sacrament, as wel as Psalms or any other exercises of the church. So that if the special discourse did not touch the ministration of the Lords supper, the general direction doeth comprise it: & so much the more, because the whole church as wel the people as the Preachers, as well women as men haue equall interest in the Lords supper, to be thereat fed, and thereby stirred to giue thanks to God for the richesse of his mercie in the
death of Christ. And if you thinke that vnderstanding and consenting is more needful for the people in any other prayers than in those, that are made at the Lordes Table, you erre not of ignorance, but of wilfulnesse; and care not what you say, so you may entertaine the simple with somewhat for the sauing of your credite. Phi Into this exercise were admitted the Catechmens and Infidels,The Rhemish Testament 1 Corinth. 14. and who∣soeuer would: in this weomen, before S. Pauls order, did speake and prophesie: so did they neuer in the ministration of the Sacrament. With manie other plaine differences, that by no meanes the Apostles wordes can be rightly and truely applied to the Corin∣thians Seruice then, or ours nowe. Theo. You should close vppe the matter with the strongest argument you haue;Sainct Paule in this chap∣ter speaketh both of the sermons where Infidels might be, and of the praiers and blessings where they might not be. and this is the weakest. At their prophesies that was at their sermons and exhortations Infidels and nouices not yet baptized might bee; at their myste∣ries they might not be, but were sent away, and the doores shut, when the faith∣full approached to the Lordes Table. Hence you may conclude that euery hea∣rer of the woorde may not bee partaker of the diuine mysteries; but that the one did not presently followe the other in the Seruice of the Church, or that S. Paul did not meane them both, you shall neuer conclude: yea rather the sending them away that might not bee present, argueth that the rest which were left did foorthwith addresse them-selues to the participation of the Lordes Table, and that all which was doone in the Church before, both exhorting and pray∣ing, was referred to this end, to make them meete commers to that heauenlie banquet. Phi. That may bee: but S. Paul speaketh of the one, and not of the o∣ther. Theo. That you should prooue, if you coulde tell howe. Phi. We haue alreadie prooued it by inuincible argumentes. Theo. Marie that you haue; if blinde surmises and loose sequeles may stand for argumentes; other∣wise what haue you saide, that hath any shewe of proofe, I will not saie, of in∣uincible proofe? Your maine foundation is a dreame of your owne,The Iesuits inuincible arguments are grounded vpon nothing but their own false surmises. that the Church of Co∣rinth had a prescribed number and order of prayers pronounced by some one Chaplin, that sayde his lesson within booke, and might not goe one line be∣sides his Missale for any good. This you imagine was their Church Seruice; all other prayers, Psalmes, blessings, and thankes-giuings though they were vsed openly in the congregation, and the whole people bound to say Amen, you will not haue to bee called Church Seruice. And where S. Paul by pre∣cept from God commaunded all things in the Church, both praying and prea∣ching to be doone in such sort as the people might vnderstand, say Amen, and be edified thereby: you conster that of certaine voluntary prayers which some priuate men made in the Church without commission; and of the publike and necessary prayers of the Church you holde opinion, the people neede not vnder∣stand them, nor say Amen, nor looke to bee edified by them. And because S. Paul speaketh of preaching as well as of praying, you vse the one as an ar∣gument
to exclude the other, which is very bad logike, and worse diuinitie. You were as good make this for a reason as I warned you in the beginning; Chri∣stians in their Churches haue sermons, ergo they haue neither prayers, nor Sa∣craments, which your selfe censured for a very childish and foolish argument.The loosnes of their last argument. Phi. That is no conclusion of ours. Theo. Weigh it well and you shall find it the very same that you make. For where the Christians vnder the Apostles had in their assemblies, first prophesying, that is the declaring of Gods wil and reuealing of his word, at the which Infidels, and newe conuerts not yt bapti∣zed might be present, and next prayers and Psalmes to celebrate the goodnes and kindnes of God, and to prepare their mindes for the Lordes table, to the which all the faithfull came with one consent of heart and voyce, giung thanks to God for their redemption in Christ, and blessing his holy name for al the rest of his graces, mercies and compassions on them; and this was doone by the mouthes of such Pastours and ministers as it pleased the holy ghost to direct & inspire for that function and action:One part of the churches exercise doth not exclude but rather employ the other. Church praier is Church ser∣uice; and that Saint Paul speaketh of. Saint Paul speaketh of al the words that were to be vsed in the Church, either at the Lords table or otherwise, but not of the actions be∣cause they are not per∣formed with the tongue. Diuine ser∣uice is po∣perly that which is done with the mouth, and not hnds or gestures. the people hearing, vnderstanding and con∣firming their prayers and thankes with saying Amen, and other diuine Ser∣uice than this they had none: you take one part of the Churches exercise where∣at Infidels might be, which was preaching and declaring the word of God; as a strong inference that Saint Paul in that whole chapter, though he expressely name the publike praiers, psalmes, blessings & thankesgiuings of the Church, meaneth no part of the Church seruice: which if you well consider, you shall perceiue to bee captious, if not ridiculous sophistrie. Philand. Though Saint Paul speake of many things, yet he speaketh not one woorde of Church-seruice, which is the point that wee stand on. Theo. I pray you what is Church-seruice but Church prayers, Psalmes and lessons: which because Saint Paul so distinctly reciteth, hee can not choose we say, but meane the Church-seruice, vnlesse you can shewe, what seruice the church had or hath, besides these which hee nameth. Phi. The ministration of the sacraments is none of these which you speci∣fie, and yet the chiefest part of the church-seruice: and so are other rites which you omit. Theo. In the Church-seruice actions may bee necessarie, and Rites may bee seemely: of which Saint Paul speaketh not, because the a∣buse, which hee reprooued, was in their tongues and not in their handes: but the Church-seruice is properly that which is doone with the mouth; for GOD is not serued with moouing or vsing the handes, but our lippes shewe forth his prayse, and with our voyces wee cal vpon him, and this is more rightly termed diuine seruice, which is all one with Church-seruice, than any corporall acions or outwarde gestures though they bee lawfull, and some of them needeull, as those for example which Christ commanded. And euen in the ministration of the Lordes supper, woordes are essentiall as well as elements or actions, and without words it is both a dumbe action, and a dead element. In all sacramentes the word that is spoken, is farre superiour to the creature that is seene: and in this Sacrament by the first institution of
our sauiour,Wordes in the Lords supper as essential as elements; or actions, and those the people must vnderstand. Al things must come to edification and therfore Church seruice. thankesgiuing is as requisite, as eating or drinking. Wherefore if S. Paul tooke order for the praiers, psalms, blessings, and thankesgiuing vsed in the Church, that they should be vnderstoode of the people, as wel as the Doc∣trines, Reuelations, and expositions of scriptures, which were an other and a necessarie part of the Churches exercise. S. Paul, we conclude, required that all Church seruice should be pronounced in such ort and with such speach, as the hearers might bee edified and say Amen, which they can not to a tongue that they know not. Or if that illation seeme not strong enough, S. Paul in plain words commaundeth as authorized from God, that all things, and there∣fore Church seruice, shoulde bee doone to edification: and no man is edified by that he vnderstandeth not, which is the fault that we find with your Latine Seruice in our Churches, where the people vnderstand no tongue but English. Phi. Yeas sir,The Rhemish Tst. . Cor. 14. O miserable vnderstan∣ding. the pople in euery Countrie vnderstandeth our seruice. For by the diligence of parents, Masters and Curats, euery Catholike of age al∣most, can tell the sense of euery Ceremonie of the Masse, what to answere, when to say Amen at the Priests Benediction, when to confesse, when to adore, when to stand, when to kneele, when to receiue, what to receiue, when to come, when to depart, and all other duties of praying and seruing, sufficient to saluation. Theo. He that hath no better stay must leaue to a broken staffe,The Iesuites as men in a maze defend sometimes that the peo∣ple neede not vnderstand their praiers: sometimes that they doe vnderstand them though they can nei∣ther spel nor speake one word of La∣tine. or lie in the ground. You feared to be conuinced as withstanders of S. Pauls Doctrine, and therefore you bethought your selues of an other shift, which is as bad as the former. The Apostle proueth the praiers of the Church must be vnder∣stood of the people, because they must say Amen: thereby teaching vs, that no man may say Amen, except he both perceiue what is saide, and also confesse it to be true: for otherwise Amen is both a mocke and a lie, to no worse person than to God himselfe. He that sweareth or affirmeth any mans speach to bee true, when he knoweth not what he said, is a liar: And he that giueth a sound with his mouth, his hart not knowing what he asketh, maketh a iest of praier, and forgetteth himselfe to be a man. And for that cause S. Paul vrgeth it as a manifest absurditie for the people to say Amen to that, which they vnder∣stand not, though the ministers speach in it selfe be neuer so good and godly. This you saw was so apparent, that though you cauiled about Church ser∣uice, and craked of your inuincible arguments: Yet the clearnes of saint Pauls wordes would reach home to the vnfruitfulnes of your Latin seruice in this Realme. For his wordes are, How shal (the vulgar man) say,1. Cor. 14. Nothing so absurd which the Iesuites will not de∣fend. Amen at thy thankesgiuing (in the Church) seeing hee knoweth not what thou sayest? And therefore you resolued since you were ouer the shoes in absurdities, to goe vp to the shoulders, and southastly to say that in euery Countrie euery Catho∣like, of age, (almost) can tell the sense of euery ceremonie of the Masse, what to answere, where to say Amen at the Priests benediction, and all other duties of praying and ser∣uing sufficient to saluation.
Your memory did not serue you to ioyn Mattins, Euensong and Dirges to your Masse,A new kinde of Grammar for the simple to vnderstand the latin toūg in one halfe houre. (which you might haue doone with as good reason and as much trueth:) otherwise, we had had al the Papists in Christendom promoted by one sentence of your Testament, to so suddaine and perfect knowledge, that they were able to vnderstand al your Latine seruice. That you found would seeme a wonder in the eyes of all men learned and vnlearned: and therefore you re∣straine the vnderstanding, first to the Masse, then to the ceremonies of the masse, then to the sense of these ceremonies, This is per∣fect ware. as when to stand, when to kneele, when to confesse, when to adore, when to come, when to depart; and all this no farther than may suffice for saluation, and not in al of them, but almost, in euery Catholike; or to say the trueth, you know not in whom. Surely this is a deepe insight that al your Catholik (if they be not learned) haue in your masse: to confesse (if they could tell what) when they see the Clerk kneele by the Priests side; to adore, when they see the host and chalice ouer the Priests head; to stand, when the Priest chaungeth his deske from one end of the altar to an other (if they chaūce too see him,) to kneele,A noble kind of vnderstan∣ding how vn∣wise was Sainct Paule not to foresee this method to edifie with all. Is this all the vnderstan∣ding that priest or clark for the most part had? 1. Corinth. 14. when the saūce bel ringeth; once a yeare to come to receiue, when masse is done and the priest in his Albe: & at other tunes to depart, when he whippeth off his vestiment. This is the best cunning that your formallest and forwardest Catholikes haue, if they be not learned in the Latine tongue: The rude & simple people of your side, they do as they see their neighbours, and that is all the skil they haue in your ceremonies; as for answering and saying Amen, they must pray for those that can, your pa∣rish Clerke can keepe his kewe by often vse, otherwise neither he, nor the most of your Priests vnderstand what they say. This is all the edification, your masse bringeth to the vnlearned hearers, & if this suffice for saluation, S. Paul was out of the way to prefer fiue words spoken in the church with vnderstan∣ding before ten thousand in a (strange and vnknowen) language. Phi. If the people say Amen, it is enough, Theo. If they know not what is said, they may not say Amen. Phi. That is your error. Theo. We are content to hold that error,1. Corinth. 14. Amen to the sauncebl, is euen as good as to that they vn∣derstand not. so long as we haue the precise words of S. Paul for it. How shal he that supplieth the room of the vnlearned, say Amē, seeing he know∣eth not what thou saist? It is not enough to mark the gestures of him that saith masse, nor to heare the saunce bel ring, nor to follow the Quire when they sing Amen, the people must know what is said, before they may giue their consents; and therfore, except they vnderstand the praiers of the Church, well they may kneele, and stand, come and goe as often as they lit, but Amen by S. Pauls Rule they may not answere. Phi. They could not in those daies answere Amen so wel as our hearers can, for that they had no such rites to direct them,The heart must vnder∣stand and consent be∣fore the lips saie Amen when to say Amen; as we haue. Theo. As though it had beene an hard matter for the Apostle to haue willed the speaker to hold vp his finger, or giue some other signe at the end of his prai∣er, and all the people to say Amen: saue that the holy Ghost would prescribe not gestures for men to gaze at, as on stages; but words for them to heare, and
vnderstand, that the heart might be ioyned with the lips in praying vnto God, and perceiue the trueth of that which was spoken afore the tongue pronounced Amen. Phi. I tell you, A position of the Iesuits which I think the Turk thē selues would be ashamed to defend. it is not necessarie to vnderstand our praiers. Theo. I tell you, that if Satan himselfe were clothed in a friers weede, he could not lay a fairer foundation for impietie and Apostasie than this is. Phi. Neuer think to fray vs with words, we be no children, nor fooles. Theo. If you were, your sinne were the lesse, but nowe you are without excuse. It is the com∣maundement of God, it is the Apostles Doctrine, it is our Christian dutie; without it, the praiers, which we make, be fruitlesse, vaine and barbarous; and yet you say; it is not necessarie. S. Paul hauing prescribed this Rule to the Churches of Corinth that no∣thing should be doone at their meetings,The heart doth not pray without vn∣derstanding 1. Cor. 14. Ephes. 5. neither in preaching, nor praying, but that which might profite & edifie euen the vulgar and simpler sort, addeth, If any man think himselfe to be spirituall, let him acknowledge, that the things which I write vnto you, are the commandements of the Lord. The Ephe∣sians he teacheth to be filled with the spirit, and to sing and tune Psalmes in (their) harts to the Lord. Now the heart doth not sing, except it vnderstand. For the sound (or voice) of the hart is vnderstanding as S. Augustine very wel obserueth cōmenting vpon the psalmes of Dauid.Aug. in Psal. 99. Beatus populus qui intelli∣git iubilationem, Curramus ergo ad hanc beàtitudinem, intelligamus iubilationē, non eam sine intellectu fundamus. Blessed is the people that vnderstand what they sing. Let vs hasten to this blessednes, let vs vnderstand what we sing, let vs not poure forth songs that we vnderstand not. To To great purpose the Iesuits say. what purpose is it, to sing and not to vnderstand what we sing; that our voice should chant it, & not our heart? Sonus enim cordis est intellectus. The sounde (or tune) of the heart is vnderstanding. And shewing that this is not only a Christian dutie, which is a sufficient ne∣cessitie, but euen the plain condition of our Creation,Aug. in Psal. 18. exposis. 1. that wee bee not like the beasts which sing they know not what, he saith:And there∣fore dutie. The Iesuits praier is like the chatte∣ing of bird in S Austen iudgement. Hauing besought the Lord (by this Psalm) that he would clense vs from our secret (faults,) We ought to vnderstand what this meaneth, Vt humana ratione, non quasi auium voce cante∣mus; that we may sing with reason as men, and not chatter, like birdes. For Owsels, Parrets, Crowes, Pies, and such other birds are often taught by men to sound that they know not marie to know what they sing, is by Gods wil giuen not to birds but vnto men. Therefore deere brethren that which we haue soung with one consent of voice, we ought to know & perceiue with a cleare heart. So Chrysostome,Chrysot. in 1. Corinth. 14 I will pray with the spirit saith (Paul) but I will pray also with vnderstanding; I wil sing with the spirite, but I wil sing also with vnderstanding. Heereby the Apostle Is that neces∣sarie or no? teacheth that we ought (in our praiers) to speake with our tongue, and with all to haue our minds vn∣derstand what is spoken. And Ambrose, If (the end of) your meaning be to edifie the Church, such things Ambros. in 1. Corinth. 14. ought to be spoken (in your prayers and
blessings) as the hearers may vnderstand. For what profite commeth by this that any man should speak in a language which he alone vnderstandeth,Ought and must do not set vs at li∣bertie. and he that heareth, is no whit the better for it? Therefore such an one must keepe silence in the church, and let them speake, that may profite the hea∣rers. Cassiodor. in Psal. 46.Idlely is that spoken, which is not vnderstoode, saith Cassiodorus. Non so∣lum cantantes, sed etiam intelligentes Psallere debemus, Nemo enim Sapienter quic∣quam facit quod non intelligit. We ought to sing the psalms not only with tune of voice, but also with vnderstanding (of heart▪). For no man doth any thing wifely, which he vnderstandeth not. The Bishops of Fraunce and Germanie assembled in Councel at Aquisgraine 816 yeres after Christ vnder Ludouike the Godly confesse the wordes of S. Paul bind vs to vnderstand the Psalmes which we sing in the Church.Concil. Aquis∣granens sub Ludouico pio cap. 123. Those that sing to the Lorde in (his) Church ought to haue their vnderstanding goe with their voice, that the words of the Apostle may be verified, I will sing with the spirit, but I will also sing with vnderstanding. And, Ibide, ca. 133. Let such be appointed in the Church to read & sing, that with the sweetnes of their reading and singing can affect the lear∣ned, and instruct the vnlearned; and let them seeke rather the edification of the people, than the popular and vaine ostentation (of their voices.) If they ought thē had they need so to doe.These Catholike fathers affirme the people ought to vnderstand the psalms and praiers of the church, you say they need not. Betweene these two doctrines there is asmuch difference as betweene daylight and darknes, and yet you will be Catholiks whosoeuer say nay: yea God himselfe commaundeth that neither exhortation nor supplication be made in the church, but such as may edifie the hearers, and bee vnderstood of the people: you both doe and teach the contrary, and yet you would be christians. Phi. The Rhemish Testament 1 Corinth. 14.The simple sort can not vnderstand all Psalmes, nor scarce the learned, no though they be translated or read in knowen tongues men must not cease to vse them for all that, when they are knowen to containe Gods holy praises. Theo. Are you hi∣red to betray your own follie, or is the force of trueth so great, that minding to conuince vs,The Iesuits ouerthrow their own po∣sitions. you confute your selues? The simple vnderstand not all Psalmes, nor scarce the learned: wee thinke you speake right: yet must not men cease to vse thē, since they containe the prayses of God; as true as the Gospell; but now Sirs, if the learned must vse them, whē they scarce vnderstand them, why may not the sim∣ple heare them, though they conceiue not al the mysteries of them? Phi. As good not heare them, as not vnderstand them. Theo. All parts of the Psalmes they doe not vnderstand; yet some they doe. Why then doe you barre them from all, since you dare not uouch them to bee ignorant of all? A∣gaine by continuall hearing them read,The people barred by the Iesuits from that they know, & from the means to . alleaged and expounded in the Church, they that are willing may easily increase their knowledge: why then doe you cut the people not onely from that they knowe, but also from that they might knowe, & from the meanes whereby to learne which is the high way to keepe them in ignorance, the mother of all errors?
Phi. They will learne but litle,Were they not better let the fault be in others and not in themselues as now it is? God knoweth. Theo. Graunt they would learne nothing▪ yet are you bound to follow that meanes which God hath left to instruct them if their dulnes and peruersenes of heart be such that they will not learne, the fault is theirs; not yours, their blood shal be on their own heads, you are discharged: where nowe by taking the comfort and instruction of their prayers from them, you force them to neglect al as neuer likely to come by the knowledge of any one word, and confirme them in their blindnes to your owne destruction, and their imminent daunger, if God bee not the more graious to them. Phi. Prayers are not made to teache,The Rhemish Testament 1. Corinth. 14. How doe our mouths offer our hearts to God when we vnderstand not what we say? or increase knowledge, but their speciall vse is to offer our heartes, desires and wants to God and this euery catholike doeth for his condition, whether hee vnderstande the woordes of his prayers or no. Theoph. Who tolde you that praiers are not made to teach, or increase our knowledge? The Psalmes of Dauid, what are they but prayers and prayses offered vn∣to God, and yet what Christian was euer so voyde of sense as to say, they doe not teach nor increase knowledge, or that they were not left vs to this ende and purpose, that they shoulde teach and instruct vs in thinges pertaining to our saluation? The prayers of the Godly throughout the scriptures, though they were vttered in their wants and necessities, yet were they Praiers are very needful instructions especially for the simple that cannot direct them∣selues in ma∣king their prai¦ers to God. written for our instruction. And if you were not as destitute of grace, as you be of truth, you woulde soone perceiue that religious and Godly prayers doe mightily teach both learned & vnlearned their dueties to God, and his mercies to them. Phi. In our prayers wee speake to God and not to men: and that leadeth vs to ay they were not made to teach or increase knowledge. Theo. The end of prayer in him that maketh it, is to aske at Gods handes that he lacketh, and to render thankes vnto God, Rom. 15. Do not the Fathers often draw their ar∣guments to perswade the people from the very prai∣ers of the Church? See S. Aug. ad Bo∣nifac. li. 4. ca. 9. They be no prayers when the tongue speaketh with out the hart and the voice of the hart is vnderstan∣ding. for that hee hath receiued; but that the publike prayers of the Church do not first teach vs howe to pray, and next instruct vs in many and most points of truth, what to beleeue and confesse vnto God, were meeter for Turkes and Infidels to defend, than for such as you would seeme to be, I meane both learned and Christian men. Howbeit the pitch of our question is this, whether they may be called prayers which wee make with our mouthes and not with our heartes: and if they may not, whether our heartes can pray without vnderstanding. These be the mat∣ters that here we striue for; and of these, the first is prooued by the whole course of the Scriptures: the seconde as well by the nature of man, as by the word of God. That God reiecteth the mouth without the heart, as hypocrisie and no pietie, our Sauiour telleth you when he saith: Mat. 25. Mark. 7. O hypocrites Esay prophesied well of you in saying, this people draweth neere to me with their mouth, and ho∣noureth me with the lippes, but their heart is farre from me. That our heart ioyneth not with our mouth, when our vnderstanding wan∣teth is euident, not onely by the scriptures which take the heart of man for his vnderstanding, but by the education of our nature Dauid resembling those mē,
that haue not vnderstanding, (what they say or doe,) to the Psal. 31. horse and Mule: and usten allowing them, when they pray they knowe not what, no better place than among Aug. in Psal. 18. Where vnder∣standing wan∣teth mā diffe∣reth not from a beast. parrets and pies, which is no place for men, much lesse for those that would seeme to serue and honour God. And what can be plainer than that vnderstanding is the proper action and first motion of mans heart, which wanting in any thing that he doeth or sayeth, his heart is also wanting, since not an heart but an vnderstanding heart doeth make the difference betwixt man and beast. Philand. That is if they vnderstande not their owne woordes when they pray; but they may bee ignorant of the Priestes woordes, and not be parrets. Theo. You defende both; as well the priuate prayers of rude and simple men in the Latin tongue, as the publike prayers of the Church in the same language, though the people vnderstande not a worde, either what themselues, or what the Priest speaketh. Philand. The Rhemish Testament, 1. Corinth. 14. It skilleth not in what toung the seruice of the Church was, so the people vnder∣stood it. The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 14. Gregor. moral. lib. 27. cap. 6.The West Church hath alwayes had her seruice in the latin tongue. Theo. It forceth not in what tongue shee had or haue her seruice, so the peo∣ple vnderstand it. Philand. In Latin, wee bee sure, shee had it. Theo. Then may you bee sure, the people vnderstood it. Phi. The one wee can prooue, and so can not you the other. Theo. Proue you the one, and wee will not misse much of the other. Phi. It is well neere a thousand yeeres, that our people which coulde nothing else, but barbarum frendere, did sing Alleluia, and not praise yee the Lorde. And longer agoe since the poore husbandman sang the same at the plough in other Countries. Hieron. tom. 1. epist. 58. And Sursumcorda, and kyrie eleyson, and the Psalmes of Dauid sung in Latin in the seruice of the primatiue Church haue the auncient and flat testimonies of Saint Cyprian, Saint Augustine, Saint Hierome, and others. Gregor. lib. 7. cap. 63. Cyprian. exposit. oratio. Dominica, num. 13. August. ca. 13. de bono perseuerant. & de bono viduitat. cap. 16. and epistola. 178. Hieron. praefat. in Psalm. ad Sophron. August. de Catechiz. rud. cap. 9. de Doctrin. Christia. lib. 2. cap. 13. See epist. 10. August of Saint Hieroms Latin translation read in the Churches of Africa. Theo. Are you not out of breath with alleaging so much? Phi. Not a whit. You buzze in the peoples eares that our seruice in Latin is not aun∣cient: and that in the primatiue Church the people alwayes vnderstoode the tongue, wherein the Priest spake: looke heere to your vtter shame, howe wee reprooue you, and conuince you for lyars. Theo. Will you not sit downe with vs, and take such part as you bring? Phi. Keepe your curtesie till we need it. Theo. You well deserue it, though you will not haue it, as shall appeare be∣fore you depart. You bring vs eleuen fathers to prooue that diuine Seruice hath been alwaies in the latin tongue throughout the West Church:Eleuē fathers abused by the Iesuits at one clappe. if not one of them all proue any such thing, are you not woorthie to haue the whetstone? Phi. I say they doe. Theo. I say they doe not: and did they proue it, as they do not, the greatest
doubt is yet behind, & that is, the people might vnderstande the Latin tongue, and if that were true, you are farther off, for al these allegations, than euer you were. Phi. To saue your selues you will imagine any thing, bee it neuer so vnlikely or incredible.Nine of those fathers speake of such coun∣tris as vnder¦stoode the latine tongue and the other two speake not one word of the latine seruice. For trowe you that all the West partes vnderstood the Latin tongue? Theoph. In those places, where the Fathers whome you name, lyued and preached, the people vnderstoode the Latin tongue very wel. Philand. Some perhaps, that were trauelers or merchants. Theo. The common people of those Countries I say vnderstoode it. Philand. The ciuiler sort might haue a tast of it. Theoph. The basest and rudest that were amongst them vnderstoode the Latin tongue as well as their owne, if not better. Phi. I thought you woulde haue some such miraculous if not monsterous refuge. Theo. It is neither miracle nor monster, but a plaine and certain trueth. In Italie where Hierom and Gregorie were you doubt not but the vulgar people spake Latin, as wee doe English. Phi. It was their mother tongue. Theoph. Then might plough-men, crafts-men, yea weomen and children well sing the Psalmes, and heare the Scriptures reade in the Latin tongue because it was their natiue tongue, which they coulde not choose but vnderstand. Philand. But Africa, where Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine were, had an other tongue of their owne, and therefore they coulde not doe the like. Theo. It was the Romanes policie to bring the barbarous Countries which they subdued, and were neere them, as much as was possible to vse the same Lawes and speake the same tongue which them-selues did, that they might the better like of their regiment.The latine tōgue was vn∣derstood in Africa where Cyprian and Augustine preached. And so had they doone in Africa before S. Austen was borne: and the people of those partes about Carthage and Hippo, where Cyprian and Augustine were Bishoppes, though they were not so ex∣quisite in accents, declinations and constructions, as the Italians were, yet vnderstood they the Latin tongue better than they did their owne, by reason their owne was litle vsed, and the other wholy taken vp to bee spoken, as well as vnderstoode, by the meanest and yongest, amongst them, yea to bee taught their Infants euen in the Nources armes. Of him-selfe, Saint Augustine confesseth that hee learned the Latin tongue in Africa where hee was borne,August. cofess. lib. 1. cap. 14. when hee was dandled of his nource, and among the pastimes of those that plaied with him, and laugh∣ed at him, whiles as yet hee was learning to speake: and that the common people which neuer went to schoole to learne, perfectly vnderstoode Latin, not only his sermons made to them,Aug. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 20. The rudest among the people in Africa vnder∣stood the La∣tine tongue. and his Psalmes made for them against the Donatists in the Latin tongue do clearely conuince, but very often in teaching the people hee giueth testimonie that they all vnderstoode the Latin better than the Punike tongue. Minding, saith hee, to haue the cause of the Donatists knowen to the basest, most ignorant, and the simplest among the people and by our meanes to sticke in their memories I made a Psalme, according
to the number and order of the Latin letters to be sung by them, beginning thus, Omnes qui gaudetis. And shewing that they vnderstood Latin better than their owne Countrie speach, which was Punike, he sayth: There is a knowen prouerbe in the Punike tongue, which I will vtter to you in Latine, be∣cause you doe not all vnderstande Punike,August. de verbis Apost. sermo. 26. thereby noting that they all vn∣derstoode the Latin, but not the Punike, which yet was their Countrie lan∣guage. Phi. Wee will deale liberally with you for once: we graunt you this; what gaine you by it? Theo. Wee gaine nothing, but you loose more than you thinke,The Iesuits heap vp fa∣thers in their Rhemish Testament to no purpose but only to amaze the simple. and as much as wee would wish. Phi. The losse is so great that I feele it not. Theo. You will tyme enough. Your Rhemish Testament to astonish the simple citeth nine authorities in a cluster that the seruice was alwaies in La∣tin throughout the West Church. Gregorie, li. 7. epi. 63. Cyprian. exposit. oratio. Dom. Hieron. praefat. in Psalm. ad Sophro. and sixe places of Augustine. Will it please you to take these nyne backe againe, as no way materiall or pertinent to that purpose, for which you bring them. Phi. You cast them backe in heapes, which is no course to answere them. Theo. In heapes they came, and in heapes let them goe: they neede no farther answering. Gregorie speaketh of the Citie of Rome, Hierom of the Linguae meae hominibus.men of his tongue, Cyprian and Austen of the seruice in Africa where the people perfectly vnderstoode the Latin tongue: or else of those places and Churches where the Latin tongue was vnderstoode, not na∣ming any nor including all the West partes, as you misreport them: but indefinitely speaking of such as vsed and vnderstoode the Romane lan∣guage. Phi. None of these Fathers which they alleage speak of all the west Countries or Churches.That is it which wee say, the Romane language was vsed throughout the West Church. Theoph. But none of these Fathers say so besides you. They doe not specifie in what Countries or partes of the West it was vsed: but speake indistinctly of such as vsed it. Phi. That, wee say, was throughout the West Church. Theo. If you were as able to prooue it as you bee to say it, you might doe your selues some good. Phi. Wee are. Theoph. You are not. Phi. Gregorie sayde ofGreg. moral. in Iob lib. 27. cap. 6. our people which coulde nothing else but barba∣rum frendere, that a thousand yeres afore out daies, they did sing Alleluia, and not prayse ye the Lord. And longer agoe the poore husbandmen Hieron. to. 1. epist. 58. sang the same at the plough in other Countries. Theoph. Is Alleluia latin? Philand. No, it is Hebrewe, and signifieth in English as much as, Praise yee the Lorde: but yet in this Realme at that tyme they sang Alleluia,Alleluia is no proofe for the Latin seruice. Alleluia is a better argu∣ment for the Hebrew than for the La∣tine seruice. and not Prayse ye the Lord. Theo. That hath some shewe of an argument for the Hebrewe seruice, to haue beene then vsed in this, and other Countries, but not for the Latin. Phi. As though the Saxons vnder∣stoode Hebrewe. Theo. Euen as well as they did Latin, and in Gregories woordes there is some appearance of proofe for the Hebrewe, for the Latin there is none; except you will reason thus, they sang Alleluia, ergo all the rest of their seruice was in Latin. Phi. Alleluia is no English: ergo they had not
their Seruice in the English tongue. Theo. And Alleluia is no Latin, ergo, by your owne logike, they had not their seruice in Latin. Phi. You erre of ignorance. The Latin Church retayned Amen, and Alle∣luia, notwithstanding they were Hebrewe, in her diuine seruice. Theo. God graunt you erre not of malice. Did no Church else besides the Latin retaine those Hebrewe woordes in their publike Psalmes and seruice? Phi. None but Greeke and Latine. And since those whome Gregorie sent to conuert the Sa∣xons could themselues no Greek, we conclude they deliuered the Saxons their Church-seruice in Latin. Theo. Your conclusion is like your antecedent, that is not one true woord in either. Did not all Nations in their diuine seruice keepe those two woords Amen, and Alleluia? Phil. They did; for so Saint Epist. 178. Augustine auoucheth, but all nations besides the Hebrewes had their Church-seruice in Greeke or in Latin. Theoph. Doeth Saint Augustine auouche that? Phi. That is ap∣parent without any proofe. Theoph. It is apparent follie, to presume that which you shoulde prooue, to bee manifest without any proofe. Phi. Can you shew the contrary? Theo. Who taught you that order of reasoning, when you fale in prouing your premisses, to cast the burden vpon others to disproue that, which you should prooue? And yet goe no farther than this very place of Saint Augustine which your selues alleage;August. epist. 178. The Barbari∣ans in their tongues vsed Alleluia, as wel as the Romanes or Grecians. and you shall see that all other Nations preserued these two woordes in their barbarous languages, as well as the Romanes did in theirs. Saint Austens report is this, Sciendum est, Amen & Alleluia, quod nec latino, nec barbaro licet in suam linguam transferre, Hebraeo cunctas gentes vocabu∣lo decantare. Wee must vnderstande that all Nations doe sing Amen and Alleluia in the Hebrewe tongue, which (woordes) neither the Latin, nor the Barbarian may chaunge into their tongues, If the Barbarians might haue no part nor woorde of the diuine Seruice in their seuerall tongues, as you say, what needed a speciall exemption of these two woordes (and no more) as vnlawfull to bee translated into their languages? In that these might not, it importeth the rest might and were: and also that eche Countrie, (in what tongue so euer, Romane, or barbarous, they had their Seruice,) kept these two Hebrewe woordes Amen and Alleluia vntouched & Why these two words were not trāslated into any tongue. See Hieron. Macel. epist. 137.vntranslated for a certaine significance in the words them-selues, and a reue∣rence to the tongue whence they were taken. Philand. That the Saxons sang Alleluia wee bee sure by this report of Gregorie, but that they had their seruice in the Saxon tongue, you shall ne∣uer prooue.Alleluia vsed in this land by the Saxons that could no Latine. Grego. moral. in Iob lib. 27. cap. 8. Theoph. Much lesse can you prooue by this place of Gregorie, which is your intent, that they had their Seruice in the La∣tin tongue: for thus hee sayth, not in the sixt chapter as you note, but in the eighth of his seuen and twentieth booke vpon Iob. Ecce lingua Britanniae quae nihil aliud nouerat quam barbarum frendere, amdudum in diuinis laudibus He∣raeum caepit Alleluia resonare. Beholde the tongue of Britannie, which
could do nothing but ye all out a barbarous noyse, now of late hath begun in the prayses of God to sing the Hebrewe Halleluia. If you take the tongue of Britanie for the speach of the Saxons, then inha∣biting this land, as it may well signifie, since there is good difference between the tongue of Britannie,The Britans that could speake no La∣tine, sung the praises of god: in what toūg then if not in their own? and the tongues of the Britanes; and lingua Britan∣niae is very hard latin for linguae Britannorum: then it is cleare by Gregories cō∣fession that the Brittish tongue was vsed of the people euen at that tyme to sing the prayses of God in their Churches: the Hebrewe Hallelu ia (and not the Latin seruice) being preserued amongst them in their barbarous language, as it was amongst all other Nations by Saint Augustines te∣stimonie, were they Grecians, Romanes, or Barbarians. If you will haue it stand not for the speach of the countrie but for the mouthes and lippes of the men them-selues, Hallelu ia, they learned, because it might not be chaun∣ged; the rest of the Latine seruice, neither they coulde learne, as knowing no tongue but their owne: nor the Romanes could teach, as hauing no skil in the Saxon tongue: and therefore if the people sang any prayses at all vnto God, as Gregorie sayth they did, they must sing them in their mother tongue, for o∣ther tongue they had none. Philand. Coulde they not learne Latin, as well as Hebrewe? Theoph. Both a like; but that one woorde, as Amen, or Hallelu ia, is soone learned, the Latin Psalmes and seruice are no way possible for them to learne or remem∣ber.Hieron. tom. 1. epist. 58. Hierom mis∣constered by the Iesuites. Philand. Saint Hierom sayth the poore husbandmen sang it at the plough in other Countries. Theoph. What are his woordes? Philand. Quocunque te verteris, arator stiuam tenens Allelu ia decantat. Whither soeuer thou turne thy selfe, the husbandman holding his plough, singeth Allelu ia. Why did you doubt of them? Theo. Because I find them not tom. 1. epi. 58. as you quote them, except you haue quotations, as you haue religions, by your selues. Philand. Well, these bee Saint Hieroms woordes. Theoph. I knowe they are, but you are as wide from the true constering as you were from the true quoting of them, if you bee not wider. Phi. Howe can that bee? Theoph. What Countries spake Saint Hierom of when hee sayde, Quocunque te verteris, whither soeuer thou turne thy selfe? Philand. Of other Countries. Theoph. Of what other Countries? Philand. Of all o∣ther Countries, and specially of the West partes, where the latin seruice was. Theoph. So you woulde enforce his woordes, but you doe him the more wrong. Philand. Are not his woordes plaine, Quocunque te verteris, turne whither thou wilt, the husbandman holding his plough, singeth Allelu ia? Theoph. In deede his woordes are plainely peruerted by you. For Hierom speaketh not of the West, but of the East; not of Countries, but of a poore village; not of Latinists, but of such as were borne and bred in Iurie, where the natural speach of the place was Hebrewe. Phi. Proue that to bee S. Hieroms meaning. Theoph. They bee his woordes both before and after, and those so plaine, that I maruaile you
could misse them.Hieron. in 1. Epist. 17 ad Marcel. Hierom spea∣keth of the plough men in Bethleem where Christ was borne. In Christi vero (vt supra diximus) villula, tota rusticitas, & ex∣tra Psalmos silentium est. Quocunque te veteris arator stiuam tenens decantat Aal∣lelu ia. Sudans messor Psalmis se auocat, & curua attondens vite falce vinitor ali∣quid Dauidicum canit. Haec sunt in hac prouincia carmina. In the village of Christ (as we haue said before) there is nothing but rusticitie, & silence, except it be in singing of psalmes. Turne whither you wil (in this village) the husband∣man holding his plough (continually) singeth Allelu ia. The mower when he sweateth (and is wearie) refresheth himselfe with psalmes. The Gardi∣ner as he dresseth his vine with his hooke, hath some peece of Dauid in his mouth. These are the songes of this prouince (or place.) What word or title is here for the seruice in the latine toung, except you thinke that as the Pope claimeth to bee Lord of the whole worlde, so euery Countrie throughout the worlde spake then nothing but Latine; which were a merrie conceite to make sporte with, if there were nothing looked for at your handes but laughter. Phi. In sifting our authorities you take hold of euery nice and curious point, which with good conscience we did and may despise. Theo. Call you that a good conscience to muster out eleuen authorities (as ancient and flat testimo∣nies) for defence of your errour against the woordr of God, and the church of Christ, and not one of them any way respecting that which you should & would seeme to proue? That no Nation in the Primatiue church, East, West, North nor South, had their diuine seruice in a tongue not vnderstood of themselues, is our assertion.It is easie to alleage nine skore fathers in any matter to no pur∣pose. You shew that in Italie and Africa (where the people perfectly vnderstood the Romane tongue) they had their seruice in Latine, and that the barbarous of this Realme, and husbandmen of Bethleem sang Allelu ia, which S. Augustine saith, all nations did, yea the Barbarians as well as the Ro∣manes, without translating that, or Amen, into their barbarous languages. Hence you collect, the seruice alwaies in Latine throughout the West church, and paint that note by the side of your booke to make the simple beleeue, those places which are found in your text to proue it to be true, though not one of thē whom you cite, affirm or mention any such thing.God grant it be but ig∣norance in the Iesuits to cite fathers in this sort. Whether this be (to vse your owne wordes) great ignorance (of Iesuites) or greater guilefulnes, so vntruly and peruersly to wrest the fathers, and whether you can be catholikes, that haue no better ground for your Latine and vnknowen seruice within this Reame, let the Reader iudge. Phi. Augustine our Apostle brought into (this Realme) the seruice in the La∣tine tongue:The Rhemish Testament 1 Corinth. 14. and there are well neere a thowsand yeares past since he came. And therefore S. Bede saith, (lib. 1. hist. Ang. cap. 1.) that being foure diuerse vulgar languages in our Countrie, the Latine was made common to them all. Theo. You thought it long belike before you made vp the ful dozen of per∣uerted and misconstered authorities. You abuse Bede as you doe the rest, and no maruell to see you so bold with him when you haue ventered on so many. Phi. Doth he not say this Iland had foure diuerse languages of their owne, and the
Latine (which was the fift) was made common to them all?The Latine tongue was common not to all, but to such as could meditate the Scriptures in this Lande. Theo. Not by hauing their seruice in Latine, but by meditating, and searching the Scri∣ptures, a number in euery of those foure Nations had gotten the knowledge of the Latine tongue. Phi. Then the Scriptures were not in any of those lan∣guages, and consequently neither the Psalmes, nor Lessons which are ne∣cessary partes of the Church Seruice. Theo. Reason better or hold your peace, you doe but wast time about trifles. Bedes wordes are:Beda. Histor. Angl. li. 1. ca. 1. Haec in prae∣senti, quinque gentium linguis vnam eandemque summae vertatis, & verae subli∣mitatis scientiam scrutatur & confitetur, Anglorum videlicet, Britonum, Scoto∣rum, Pictorum & Latinorum, quae meditatione Scripturarum caeteris omnibus est facta communis: This Iland at this present searcheth and confesseth one and the verie same knowledge of the hiest veritie and truest sublimitie with the tongues of fiue Nations, to wit, the Saxons, Britons, Scots, Picts, and Latines, whose tongue by the meditation of the scriptures, is become com∣mon to all the rest. Meditation of Scriptures doth not sig∣nifie the prai∣ers of the Church.Meditation of the scriptures in all mens eares saue yours, is the diligent and often perusing of them to get the right vnderstanding of them, and not the Church Seruice as you would secretly inferre: neither doth Bede deny that the Scriptures were hearde or reade in the other foure tongues, which were proper to the foure Nations of this Iland, but rather affirmeth it when he saith this Countrie searched and confessed one and the very same knowledge of the highest truth, with the tongues of fiue Nations: foure of them being the British, Saxon, Scottish and Pitish tongue,If they sear∣ched the trueth with fiue tongues, then did they read or heare the scriptures in four toungs besides the Latine. in which also they searched & confessed the knowledge of the true God, though the deeper and better lear∣ned of them in euery of those Nations, for an exacter kinde of meditating and studying the Scriptures, gate them some skill in the Latine tongue: wherein the Scriptures were more sincerely written, and more substantially hand∣led than they coulde bee in any of the other tongues amongest the Sa∣xons, Scots or Britons in that raw and rude worlde, so soone vppon their con∣uersion to the faith, and long desolation before of learning, religion and good manners. Phi. The Latine tongue was common to them all.The Latine tongue was common to those that were learned in those foure Nations. Let them take Bede how they wil, he maketh nothing for their Latine seruice in the words which they bring. The Italian Monks, which vnderstood not the Saxō toung, might haue the La∣tine seruice in their Abbey, but that the people had it in their parish Churches cā∣not be proued by any place of Bede. Theo. Not to euery parti∣cular man amongest them, but to some speciall men in those foure Nations that were willing and able to meditate the Scriptures. And had it beene com∣mon to them al, that is to euery one of them, as you would presse it, that con∣struction helpeth you nothing at al. For then the people of this land, being able to meditate the Scriptures in the latine toung, might verie well haue their sr∣uice in the latine tongue, because it was a knowen tongue and such as they rea∣dily vnderstood: but I thinke the other of the twaine the more likely, and ther∣fore I rest on it as on the truer, though neither damnifie vs, as touching this question, the worth of a dodkin. Phi. It were absurd to thinke that euery of the vulgar sort vnderstoode the Latine tongue. Theo. Then is it more absurde, when Bede saith The Latine
tongue was made common to all the other (foure) tongues (of this Land) by the meditation of the Scriptures: to interprete that of the vulgar sort, and to refer it to the church seruice as you do. Phi. You haue skanned our proofes at your pleasure: but where all this while are yours, that any christian Nation had their publike Seruice in a bar∣barous tongue? I count all tongues barbarous besides the three learned toungs, which are Latine, Greeke, and Hebrew. Theo. In what toung ech Nation had their Seruice, is nowe harde to bee knowen so many hundrethes yeares after, and needlesse to bee discussed. For when wee once founde it a rule laide downe by Sainct Paul that All thinges (in the Church) should be done to edification, as well praying, singing, and thankesgiuing, as preaching & expounding the word, which he calleth prophesieng; and that no man is edified by that hee vnderstandeth not:Hauing Saint Pauls Rule that the peo∣ple should vnderstand the praiers that are made in the church we neede not search in what tongue eche Nation had their seruic. and also that the seruice in those two places and churches, whereof we haue any records left, was common to Priest and peo∣ple, and parted betweene them, by verses and respondes, the whole people, men, women, and children, singing the Psalmes, answering to euery part of the ser∣uice, and saying Amen to the prayers that were made in all their names: & lastly that the catholike fathers in their seuerall times and cures taught the people should, and witnes the people did vnderstande the publike prayers of the church; what neede wee seeke further for barbarous Nations and tongues, whereof we haue no monumen, & wherein no famous or learned men wrote, whose labors are come to our age or knowledge? Phi. I thought you would shrinke when wee came to the quicke: you loue to picke holes in other mens coates, but not to shew your owne. Belike it is so rot∣ten it will not indure the handling. Theo. Let the coate alone and come to the case. Wee haue the flatte commaundement of God that all thinges (in the Church) shoulde bee doone to edification: and the Apostles inferment that the simple man is not edified, when hee vnderstandeth not what is said. Your shiftes were, that S. Paul spake not of the church prayers, nor of the lear∣ned tongues. Those wee haue refelled, and are nowe come to the practise of Christes church: which taking her direction from S. Pauls doctrine in this place,These shifs of the Iesuits being refelled Saint Pauls text is clear for vs. framed her publike prayers in such order that the Pastour and people with ioyntlie and interchangeably blessed and praied eche with other and either for other: not houlding it enough for the simple to say Amen they knewe not to what, but requiring and appointing their deuoute, di∣stinct and intelligent answeres, confessions, blessinges and thankesgiuinges as well in the ministration of the Lordes supper, as in other partes of their publike seruice.The seruice of the prima∣tiue Church manifestly confirmeth our constru∣ction of Saint Paul. The manner of their seruice, where the whole church did with one heart and one voice, sing praises to God, and make their common supplications vnto him, is the best exposition that may bee brought for the true construction of Sainct Pauls wordes: and therein the auncient and Catholike church of Christ, go∣eth expressely with vs and directly against you, as appeareth by all the
fathers that euer wrate of these thinges, by the very sight and view of their li∣turgies, by your owne authorities which here you abuse, yea by the partes and prayers of your Masse-booke prescribed for the people to requie the priest with, and yet remaining in force and dayly vse amongest you. In your Apostolike constitutions, written by no worse man, as you say, than by Clemens successour to Peter and fellow labourer in the Gospell with hm;What order the Apostles tooke for Church ser∣uice, as the bookes which they most esteeme, doe testifie. Constit. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 16. The Church seruice diui∣ded between the bishop & the whole congregatiō. this order of seruice at the Lords table was prefixed to the whole Church, were they Hebrewes, Greekes, Romanes, Barbarians or whatsoeuer if they were Christians. The Bishop shall say, the grace of almighty God, the loue of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the communion of the holy spirit be with you al. And all (the people) shall answere with one voice, And with the spirit. A∣gain let the Bishop say, Lift vp your harts, & all let answere, We lift them vp vnto the Lord. And againe the Bishop: Let vs giue thankes vnto the Lord, and all shall answere, It is meete and right so to doe. And at the ende of that praier it followeth, Et omnis populus simul dicat, and let all the people with one voice say, holy, holy, holy, Lord of hostes: The heauen and earth are full of thy glory: blessed art thou for euer, Amen. And Cap. 18. so after. Let the Bishop say, the peace of God be with you all. Let all the people answere, and with the spirite. Cap. 20. The people could not make these answers ex∣cept they vn∣derstood the tongue that the Bishop spake in. Let the Bishop admonish the people with these wordes, holy thinges for holy persons. And let the people answere, one holy, one Lord, one Christ be blessed for euer to the glory of God the father. Osanna to the sonne of Dauid. Blessed is hee that commeth in the name of the Lord: the Lord (our) God & hath appeared vnto vs. Osanna in the hiest. If in euerie Church the people were to know when and what to answere in their diuine ser∣uice, and with many full and whole sentences to confirme and requite the Bi∣shops prayers and blessinges: it is euident they were to vnderstand their owne and the Bishoppes speech: which in a straunge and vnknowen tongue, such as is vsed in your churches, it is not possible for simple men and women to doe. Phi. You impugned these constitutiōs but euen now, as none of the Apostles. Theo. But you receiue them & vrge them as Apostolike, and therefore against you such proofes are pregnant. The liturgies of Iames, Ba∣sil, and Chry∣sostome pre∣scribe like aunswers for the peo∣ple in the praiers of the Church. That which we alleadge out of these liturgies hath the true and vndoubted testimoies of the Fathers.And so are the Liturgies, that is, the church prayers which are vnder the names of Iames, Basill, and Chrysostom: in which the like order of praying and blessing, by course is appointed both for Prieste and people. Let the places be seene; if they be not obuious to euery mans eyes, let me be rebuked of a bould vntrueth. Phi. Your selues admit not those Liturgies. Theo. Wee doe not thinke that either Basil or Chrysostom would take vpon them to make a new forme of church seruice, if S. Iames the Apostle had doone it before them: neither was the Greeke church to seeke of her seruice till their times, or to change it at their pleasures: yet the thinges which wee alleage out of these Liturgies haue the manifest testimonies as well of Basill and Chrysostom, as of other catholike
Fathers, both Greeke and Latine in their vnforged & vndistrusted writinges. Chrysostom,Chrysost. in 2. Cor. in hm. 18. Marke the forme of pub∣like praier in Chrysostom time. expressing the maner of the church in his time, sayth: Euen in the prayers (of the church) a man may see the people (helpe or) offer much togither (with the priest) for those that are possessed with wicked spi∣rits & for the repētants. Cōmunes enim preces à sacerdote & ab illis fiunt, & omnes vnam dicunt orationem. For the priest and the people make their praiers in common, and they all vtter the same wordes in their petitions to God. A∣gaine when we haue excluded them out of the church that may not be par∣takers of the holy table and fall a fresh to prayer, we all prostrate our selues togither, and all rise vp togither. When peace is to be imparted wee all sa∣lute one an other. In the very same dreadfull mysteries the priest prayeth for the people, and the people pray for the priest. For their answere, And with the spirit, hath none other meaning. Ea quae sunt Eucharistia, id est, gra∣tiarum actionis communia sunt omnia. The prayers of the Eucharist, that is of the thankesgiuing (at the Lordes table) Can they haue plainer words? Basil. hexam. homil. 4. Men, weomē & children singing and praying in the Church seruice. Iustin. Martyr. Apol. pro Chri∣stianis. 2. are all common. For the priest doeth not onely giue thankes, but Can they haue plaine words? Basil. hexam. homil. 4. Men, weomē & children singing and praying in the Church seruice. Iustin. Martyr. Apol. pro Chri∣stianis. 2.all the people. Out of the which num∣ber were none excepted neither men, women, nor children, as Basill shortly but fully decribeth the sound of the whole church praying togither. If the sea bee good and beautifull in the sight of God, how much more beawtifull is such an assemblie of the church as we haue here, in which the mingled soūd of men, women, and children making their (common) prayers ascendeth vnto our God, as the noise of waues beating against the bankes. The Latine church obserued the same, as Iustinus reporting the order of the christian assemblies in his time witnesseth. On the day which is cal∣led sunday, all that are in townes or villages meete togither in one place where the writinges of the Apostles and Prophetes are read, as the hower permitteth vs: when the reader ceaseth the pastour warneth and exhorteth vs to imitate the good thinges that haue beene read vnto vs: Then rise wee all and iointly make our prayers: after the which ended, bread and wine with water are brought (to the place) & he that is chiefe among vs maketh his prayers and giueth thankes in the best manner hee can. Ibidem. Perfectis preci∣bus & gratiarum actione, populus omnis qui adest benedicit, dicens, Amen; At the end of his prayers and thankes, all the people that are present, do blesse and say Amen: Amen in Hebrew signifieth as much as God graunt it may be so. S. Augustine noting the vse of the church in his dayes, saith: Aug. in. Psal. 54. We cal vpon one God, we heare one Gospel (read,) we sing one psalme, we answere one Amen, wee sound out one Hallelu ia. Ambros. hex∣am. lib. 3. cap. 5.The Church, sayeth Sainct Am∣brose, is often very fitly compared to the Sea: which at first rusheth in the praiers of the whole people, as it were in the flowing of hir waues, and then soundeth with the respondes of psalmes, and with the singing of men, women, maydens and young boyes, much after the roaring of (mighty) waters.
The reason of this general ioyning in praier among the christiās Leo wel de∣clareth in these words, Leo. sermo. 3. de ieiunio. 7. mensis The publike praier of the whole people more auailea∣ble with God than the prai∣er of the pries alone. Most ful forgiuenes of sins is obtained, whē the whol church pronounceth (euery man) the same praier, & the same confession. For if the Lord haue promised to performe that which two or three of the godly consenting togither shal aske, what shall bee denied to an assembly of many thowsands beseeching in one spirit with one accord? which was Tertul mea¦ning lōg before, whē he said of al christiās: We meet in cōpanies & assemblies, that comming Tertul. in Apologet. as it were an army (or in troups) vnto god, we may eē vrge him with our praiers. Haec vis Deo grata est: this force is acceptable vnto God. In this sort it cōtinued 600. yeares as appeareth by Isidore. Oportet vt quando psallitur, psallatur ab omnibis; cū oratur, oetur ab omnibus: quādo lectio legitur, facto silētio aequè audiatur ab omnibus. Ideo & diaconus clara voce silentiū admonet, vt siue dū psallitur siue dum lectio pronunciatur, ab omnibus vnitas cōseruetur, vt quod om∣nibus praedicatur, ab omnibus equaliter audiatur. This must of necessty be kept (in the church seruice) that whē they sing, al sing: whē they pray, al pray: whē the lessō is read with silēce, it be heard alike Quasi manu facta. Isidor. de eccle. officiis lib. 1. ca. 10. de lection. That al shuld pray & sing in the church is a dutie and therefore a necessitie. Legum Francie lib. 1. cap. 66. De eccles. diuer. capitulis Const. 123. of al. For therfore the deacō cōman∣deth silēce that whether they sing  read, al may do the like, & that which is spokē to al should equally be heard of al. Yea Charls ye great 800. yeres after christ took order by his lawes not only that ye people shold say certain parts of y• seruice wt the priest, but that the pastors should preach it to bee necessary for the simple to vnderstād their praiers, y• euery man might know what he demāded a the haudes of God. Glory be to the father, (& to the son & to the holy ghost, &c.) shalbe sung of al mē with al honor; & the priest with the people of God shal sing with one voice, as the angels do, holy, holy, holy.Lyra saith if the people vnderstād the priestes prai∣er & benedicti¦on they be bt∣er affected to god ward, and answere Amen with more deuotiō. (Lord God of sa∣both) The bishops shal diligētly look that the priests throughly perceiue the praiers of their masse, & both thēselues vnderstād the Lords praier & preach that al must vnderstand it, that euery man may know what he asketh of god. So Iustiniā before him could cōmand that al Bishops & priests (within the Romane Monarchy) shold celebrate the sacred oblatiō (of the Lords supper) and the praiers vsed in baptisme; not in secret but with a (loude and) cleare voice, that the minds of the hearers might be stirred vp with more deuotion to expresse the praises of the Lord God. For so saith he, the Apostle teacheth 1. Corinth.1 Corinth. 14▪ Iustinian ap∣plieth S. pauls place to proue that the peo∣ple should bee edified & stir∣red by the priests words to cōfesse with their mouthes the praise of God in his church. If thou blesse with the spirit, how shal he that keepeth the place of the priuat (or lay) mā, say Amen at thy thanksgiuing vnto God: because he wotteth not what thou saiest? Thou giuest thanks wel, but the other is not e∣dified. And in his epist. to the Rom. With the hart we beleeue vnto righteous¦nes, & with the mouth we confesse vnto saluation. For which respects it is fit, that those praiers which are vsed in the sacred oblatiō, as wel as others, shold be pronoūced by the bishops & priests with a clear voice: & let the religious bishops & priests know that if they neglect so to do, they should yeeld an ac∣count in the dreadful iudgement of the great God for it, and wee hauing in∣formation of them will not leaue them vnpunished. But what need we elder or other testimonies? your Masse-book, which at this
day you depend so much on,The piaers & speaches of their Masse booke at this day proue the people should vnderstand & answere the Priest in the chiefest parts of their Church ser∣uice. cōuinceth that the people at first did, & stil should vn∣derstād the praiers which y• priest maketh euē at the very altar & sacrifice it self, those being thinges of the greatest secrecy & most sublimity that you haue. Phi. Can you persuade vs that our Masse-book maketh wt you? The. Choose whether you wil be perswaded or no: but you must needes be abashed to see the wordes of your own booke fight against your error. Phi. Faith then our luck is bad. Theo. It is euen so bad if it be not worse: that is, if your harts do not bark against you for vpholding this vnfruitfull praier. Phi. I am glad you come nowe to holde by the Missale. Theo. We hold by the precept of the liuing & euerlasting God, & yet we may proue by your own footsteps that you tread awry. Phi. We wil be∣leeue it, whē we see it. The. You shal soone see it: if that wil suffice you. Whē you speake to men do you not wast your words in vaine, if they vnderstand not what you say?He that spea∣keth to men that which they cannot vnderstand, mocketh and deludeth thē. August. de Doct. christia. li. 4. cap. 10. Phi. In our prayers we speake to God, & not to men, & therefore wee see no reason why euery mā should looke to vnderstand that we say. Theo. But whē you speak to men, & not to God, do you not both abase your toūgs & delude their ears if they vnderstand you not? Phi. If we speake to them, I grant they should vnderstād vs, or else we loose our labor, & they no whit the wiser. The. S. Austē wil tel you, There is no cause at al why (you) should speake, if they vnderstād not what (you) say, for whose sakes (you) speake. The end of your speaking vn∣to mē, is to let them vnderstand what you would aduise or aduertise thē of: that if they do not, you speake in the aire,1. Corin. 14. as S. Paul saith, & do them no good. Phi. I thinke so. Theo. Your priest is appointed by the canon of your Masse, to say before hee ascend to the altar, Ordinarium Missae secūdum vsum Sarum.I confesse to God almighty, to blessed Mary, to al Saints & to you (brethren) that I haue sinned very much in thought, deed & word. Ideo precorvos fratres orate pro me.Therefore I beseech holy Mary, al Saints of God, & Orate fratres & sorores pro me. you (brethren) to pray for me. When he commeth to his sacrifice he is likewise to say, Pray ye brethrē & sistren for me, that my sacrifice & yours may bee acceptable to the Lord our God: & euery where when he prayeth he must say, Dominus ne∣biscū. Oremus. The Lord with you, let vs pray. To ech of these the people haue their answers prescribed them what they must say, which euen at this day are parts of your seruice, to the confession they must answere, Ordinarium Missae secundi vsum Sarum. Almighty God be merciful vnto thee, & forgiue thee all thy sinnes, deliuer thee from al euil, preserue & confirme thee in that which is good, & bring thee to life euerlasting. To the oblation they must reply, The grace of the holy ghost lighten thine hart & thy lips, & the Lord receiue in good part this sacrifice of praise at thine handes for our sinnes and offences. Before consecration, when he biddeth them, Lift vp their harts, their answere must be▪ we lift them vp vnto the Lord:Sursum corda habemus ad Dominum. & when he saith, Let vs giue thanks to the Lord our God, they must pronoūce, it is meet & right so to do. The priest blessing, the Lord be with you, the people must requite with the like, in answe∣ring, and with thy spirit.Et cum spiritu tuo. And though you haue excluded the people and set a Parish Clerke to
make these answers, and willed the Priest for verie shame to say some of them Sacrd. se ver∣ens ad popu∣lum tacita vo∣ce dicat, Orate fratres & soro∣res prome. O mockerie to desire the people to pray for him: and yet so to speake it, that no man shal heare it.closely: yet know you that these wordes remaining yet in your Masse-bookes are manifest witnesses against you before God and man, that the prayers of the church shoulde bee common to Priest and people, and so were, when your Masse was first ordained: and that not onely the prayers made by the whole Congregation are more auaileable with God, than the priuate deuotion of any Priest (which of a certaine pride in your selues you will not now acknowledge) but that you mocke the people of God, & with your own toungs condemne your own doings, when in your Seruice you will them euery where to pray with you and for you, and yet vtter it in such a tongue, as they can neither vnderstand what you or themselues do say. Phi. By the gestures and actions which wee vse, the people vnderstand our meaning.The Papists haue turned edification into gesticu∣lation. It is the peo∣ple and not God that needeth the Priestes voice in the church praiers. Theo. Then should your Masse haue consisted of nothing, but of actions and gestures: where nowe your speaking vnto them, when they vnder∣stood you not, is very ridiculous. Phi. We speake to them but seldome; and if they doe not, as wee will them, for lacke of vnderstanding vs, the rest of our seruice may not bee misliked, for so much as therein wee speake to God and not to men. Theo. The whole is superfluous, if not iniurious to God and man. Phi. Why so? Theo. In all your publike prayers, though you direct your wordes vnto God, yet you vtter them for their sakes that be your hearers. God needeth not your voice, hee searcheth, and therefore vnderstandeth the very se∣cretes of your heartes, and you pray most effectually to him, when your hearts Psal. 27. speake, and your lippes keepe silence. God, sayth Augustine, Aug. de magi∣ro. cap. 1. seeketh not to be instructed or remembred by our speach, to giue vs that which wee de∣sire. Where thinkest thou is offered the sacrifice of righteousnesse, but in the temple of the minde, and chambers of the heart? Phi. That is true, but yet we may vse our mouth in praying as well as our heart. Theo. You may if you will, but you neede not, except you list. Phi. Yeas, the Priest is the mouth of the church: and therefore hee must speake.Speach neces∣sary in respect of the people: which if they vnderstand not, silence would doe thē as much good. Theo. The church needeth neither mouth, nor speech to God. He knoweth euerie mans heart as well as ones: but in respect of themselues, speech is necessary that they may be kindled, directed and confirmed, ech by others voice in their common prayers and supplications vnto God. Phi. The Priest offereth their prayers vnto God for them. Theo. God will not haue vs beleeue or pray by a substitute, but in our persons, we are not too good to do him that seruice. Phi. If it be need∣ful for the Priest to speak in the Church ser∣uice, it is as needeful for the people to vnderstand what he saith.The people pray, but by the Priests mouth. Theo. Then must he speak: or else he can not be their mouth. Phi. He must: otherwise how shall they know whether he pray or no? Theo. And when they vnderstand him not, they bee no surer what hee doeth, than if hee kept silence. Phi. When they heare his voice they suppose he prayeth, though they know not what he sayeth. Theo. They may wel suppose it, for they know it not, and so may they doe, when the Priest keepeth silence. Supposals are soone made, if God required no more at our handes.
But by your confession that the Priest must speak in the prayers of the Church, wee proue, the people must vnderstand what is spoken. For GOD needeth not any mans speech:The end of speaking is that others maie vnder∣stand: if ther∣ore that want, the first is superfluous August. de ma∣gistro. cap. 1. the end why the Priest speaketh, is to guide the peoples heartes in their petitions to God, and to haue their consentes that the praiers of the church may proceede from them all. If that ende want, as in a tongue not vnderstood it doth, in vaine doeth the Priest speake, and the people hearken vnto that which they no way conceiue, or haue knowledge of. What needeth speech, that is, the sound of words, saith Augustine, when we pray, vnlesse perhaps, as the priests do for the signification of their minds: not that God, but that men should heare, and through (their) rehearsall by consen∣ting (to their wordes) be stirred (or moued) to depend on God. The Priest therefore in his church seruice,The Priest at his Masse vt∣tereth euerie word, as if the people did vn¦derstand him and ioyne with him in prayer. though he direct his heart to God, yet doeth hee open his mouth for their sakes that are present, that they may be both kindled and guided by the sounde and sense of his wordes to ioyne with him, in offering to GOD one agreement of heart and voice, which is the cause why publike prayer was ordained. And euen at this day in your Masse the Priest speaketh not one worde in his owne person, but in euery praier both warneth the people to pray with him, and speaketh in their persons as well as in his own.Oremus. Gratias aga∣mus. Quaesumus. Offerimus. Laudamus. Benedicamus. Adoramus. For example: Let vs praie, let vs giue thanks, we be∣seech, we offer, we praise, we blesse, we adore, which argueth that at the first institution of your owne seruice the people did, & were bound to marke and vnderstand the Priests wordes, & with answering Amen to acknowledge and confm his prayers to be their desires and requestes vnto God, though now you shut vp their eares & mouthes that they can neither vnderstand you, nor knowe what to answere you, but only open their eyes to beholde your gestures, as if it were not a place for praier, but a stage for dumbe shewes, to delight the senses. Phi. You make certain petite reasons against vs for the seruice in the vulgar tongue: but had they beene sufficient, do you thinke the church of Christ would haue taken vp the contrary custome for these fifteene hundreth yeares? Theo. I thinke shee would not, & by her church seruice, I proue shee did not. Phi. You proue the people vnderstood the seruice, & by course answered, and consented to that which was sayde in the church, but this doth not proue that the prayers were in any other tongue besides the Latine, Greeke or Hebrewe, which is our assertion. Theo. This is it which I tolde you before, that finding the people did vnderstand the diuine seruice in the Primatiue church:Al toungs are alike to God. and that no praiers were counted publike, vnlesse they had the consent & answere of the whole mul∣titude: we neede not care in what toungs this was done: The Hebrew, Greeke Latine,God no re∣specter of per¦sons, much lesse of toungs. Armenian, Indian, Persian, Syrian, Gothian tonges, are they not all alike to God? Must not barbarous Nations be edified by their praiers as well as the ciuiler or learneder sort of men? There is no respect of persons with God, is there of tongues? Phi. The three learned tongues were dedicated in our Sauiours crosse, the
rest were not. Theo. Pilates act is not so good a reason for the latine seruice; as Caiphas prophesie was for the Popes infal∣lible iudge∣ment: and yet either is verie foolish.Who set vp those titles on the crosse: the Lord which suf∣fered, or Pilate which condemned him vniustly to death? Philan. What though Pilate set them vp? Theo. If Pilate were a wicked Pagan and his fact wic∣kedder in proclaming the Sonne of God for a Traitour and an aspirer to the Crowne of Iurie, in Hebrewe, Greeke and Latine letters, what reason can this be why God will not, or shoulde not bee serued in any other tongue, but in one of these? Haue you no better examples than Caiphas to vphold the Popes Tribunall; and Pilate to commend your Latine seruice? Phi. Yeas, we haue the church of God. Theo. Then why conceale you that, and bring foorth Pi∣lates impietie to prescribe a rule in the church of God against the Apostle? Phi. The tongues were good, though his fact were euill. Theo. And dare you say that any tongue in the world is not good? Phi. Good they bee all, but not so good as any of these to serue God in. Theo. Recoile you back againe to that errour, that God is an accepter of tongues? Phi. You call it an errour. Theo. So is it: and that a verie grosse errour. For God accepteth the zeale of the heart, not the sound of the mouth: and though to vs there is some difference in the perfection and pleasantnesse of the speech; to God in deuotion of praier there is none.Origen. contra Celsum. lib. 8. He, saith Origen, that is Lord of all tongues, heareth those that praie in any tongue. For God the gouernour of the whole world is not as one, that hath chosen the Greeke, or some o∣ther barbarous tongue,All tongues are fitte for praier. and is ignorant of the rest, or neglecteth those that speake vnto him in any other tongue. And since he hath made all tongues, & requireth not the sounde of our mouthes for himselfe, but for our selues, it is wilfull folly to say that prayers bee sanctified or accepted to God in one toung, and not in all tongues alike. Phi. Still I say The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 14.the Church of God hath no such custome: which Saint Paul himselfe laieth downe for a sure direction in all church matters. Theo. Take you the negligent abuse of late yeares in some places for the custome of Gods church? Or doe you thinke it pietie to pretende any custome of your owne a∣gainst the commaundement of God? Phi. Any thing which the whole Church doeth practise and obserue throughout the world,The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 14. to dispute thereof, as though it were not to bee doone, is most insolent madnesse, as S. Augustine verie notably saith in his 118. epi. Theo. S. Augustin doth not say, that you may prefer custom before the Scriptures: or change the auncient custome of Christes church in making her praiers in a vulgar and knowen tongue, with a newer order of your owne in tying the people to a strange and vnknowen language: either of those by the verdict of Augustine in this verie place is that most insolent madnes which you would seeme to fasten on others. And yet you miserably racke this place of Augustine. For of two parts, you dissemble the first,S. Augustine rackt by the Iesuites from his right mea¦ning. that you may pull the second to your purpose: and in the se∣conde you leaue out two conditions which your Author addeth: and were the text truely cited, your application is so false in the sight of all men, that none but mad men would venter on so desperate an assertion, as you haue doone. For
that the whole church of God throughout the world euer had, or at this day hath her seruice in an vnknowen tongue, or in Latine, well you might vtter it in a dreame: but neuer sober man said it being broad awaked, & well aduised. The wordes of S. Augustine, being consulted of the rites and ceremonies of the Church,August. epist. 118. cap. 5. not of the doctrine or faith of the church, are these: If the autho∣ritie of the Diuine Scripture prescribe in any of these (rites and ceremonies) what is to bee doone, I answere there may bee no doubt, but that we must doe as we reade. Similiter si quid horum, tota The worde should be ho∣die. die per orbem obseruat Ecclesia. The like I say if any of these (rites) bee obserued of the whole church tho∣roughout the whole world (at this present day), for to dispute that we should do otherwise:It is madnes to breake the custome of the vniuersall Church in thinges in∣different. The Iesuites defend a new custome a∣gainst the auncient and generall or∣der of Christs Church: are they not mad by S. Augu∣stines rule? Lyra. in 1. Cor. 14. Iohan. Eckins in locis commu∣nibus. The south In∣diās euer had and yet haue their seruice in their mo∣ther tongue. is most insolent madnesse. The scripture is first to be respected & obeied: if that prescribe no certainty, the custom of the vniuersall church is to be folowed, in those rites which are neither against the faith, nor good maners, for that is his maine restriction: and not euery custome which in time to come might, or should happily bee newly deuised by some partes or members of the church, but such as the whole church far & neere without contradiction retained then, when he spake, as descending from the Apostles or Apostolike men. And so the word (hodie) doth import, though your Monkes haue left out the first sylla∣ble, & written (die) for (hodie) as the course of the sentence doth plainly declare. If then to dispute whether the ancient custome of the vniuersall church may be altered, be madnes, yea most insolent madnes, what degree of phrensie wil fal to your lot, that erect & desend a particular & late growen custome, against the plaine precept of God himselfe, against the Apostles prescription, against the ge∣nerall & ancient vsage of Christs church, yea against the nature of man, & true intent of your own seruice which you would seeme to make most account of? Phi. All this is vntrue. Theo. Bethinke your selfe better, and you shall finde it truer than you would wish. Phi. Had euer any Nation their church-seruice in a barbarous tongue before our time? Theo. Make you that such a wonder, which your own friends confesse was so common in the primatiue church? Lyra saith, In primatiua ecclesia bene∣dictiones & caetera coīa (or else leauing out the c, which seemeth to be added by the negligence of the Printer) oīa siebant in vulgari. In the primatiue church blessings, and (al other or) other common (praiers) were made in the vulgar toung (which the people vnderstood.) Eckius saith, Non negamus tamen Indis Australibus permissum, vt in lingua sua rem diuinam facerent, quod clerus eorum ho∣die obseruat. We deny not but the south Indians were suffered (in the prima∣tiue church) to haue their diuine seruice in their mother toung (which is nei∣ther Greeke, Hebrew, nor Latine) which also their clergy at this day obser∣ueth. An Sigismund. li∣ber in rerum Moscouit arum Commentariis, cap. de dcimis. So haue the Moscouites and Armeni∣ans. other of your friends saith of the Moscouits, Totū sacrū seu Missa Gētili ac vernacula lingua apudillos peragi solet. The whole seruice or masse is said with thē in their natiue & mother toūg. The epi. also & the Gospel of the daie are read to the people with a loud voice out of the chācel, for their better vnder∣stāding. Pet. Belloni saith. As Petrus. Bello. de moribus Armeniorum. many as are presēt with the priest singing masse
Armenia, answere him in the Armenian tongue. For all, that stand by, vn∣derstand the Armenian tongue which the Priest vseth (in his seruice.) Phi. All Africa, A∣sia, and the North parts of  nd bararous tongues.These bee schismaticall and disordered Churches. Theo. In deede they know no part of your holy Fathers religion nor dominion: Yet are they Christians, and neerer the truth by many degrees than the church of Rome. It is no schisme to bee free from him, to whom they were neuer subiect, and some obseruances though they haue, which are both superstitious and erronious: yet that is no reason to dispraise them in that wherein they followe the example of the true and sincere church of Christ, and retaine that custome which they re∣ceiued from the beginning. Phi. Wee may dislike them for this aswell as you may for other thinges. Theo. Whether you like them or no, so they doe and so haue they doone euer since they were planted in Christ, euen to this our age. And this their constancie you can not dislike, but you must also dislike the Apostle that first taught it, the primatiue church that continued it and adiudged it to bee necessary; yea your holy Father himselfe, that not onely would permit it, when he was requested: but strictly commaunde it when it was not asked. Cyrillus that conuerted the people of Russia and Morauia,Aeneas Sylui∣us hi. ohem. cap. 13. God from heauen de∣cided that the Russians and Moraui∣ans should haue their ser∣uice in their natiue tongue though it were barba∣rous. made request to the Bishop of Rome, as Pope Pius the second reporteth, that hee might vse the Sclauon tongue in saying diuine Seruice to them, whom hee had baptized. And when the matter came to bee handled in the sacred Senate (or coun∣cell chamber) a number contradicting it, he saith there was heard a voice, as it were from heauen, speaking these wordes: Let euerie spirite praise the Lord, and euerie tongue confesse him: and that vpon the hearing thereof, Cyrillus had his petition. The blindnes of your holy father and his Cardinals was reproued by a voice from heauen for hauing their Seruice in an vnknowen tongue: and yet you beare men in hand, to dislike the late custome of your Ro∣mish Synagogue: or so much as to dispute thereof, as if it were not to be done, is in∣solent madnesse. Innocentius though hee were the first that brought Transubstantiation, Au∣ricular confession, and deposition of Princes to bee confirmed in open councell 1215. yeares after Christ, yet durst he not binde the West church to the La∣tine seruice, throughout, as you doe: but gaue streit charge rather to the con∣trary, that such as were of diuerse languages, shoulde haue the praiers and sa∣cramentes of the church in their seuerall and sundry rites and tongues: as ap∣peareth in the councell of Lateran assembled vnder Innocentius the thirde of that name. Because Concil. Latera∣nens. sub In∣nocent. 3. ca. 9. in many places within the same citie & Diocese there be mingled in plerisque partibus. Populi diuer∣sar. linguarū. people of diuerse toungs, hauing vnder one faith sundry rites & customes: we straitly commaund that the Bishops of such cities & Dioceses prouide fit men which may celebrate diuine seruice, and minister the church Sacramēts vnto them, Secundum di∣uersitates lin∣guarum. according to the diuersities of their rites & lāguages. Phi. In diuerse toūgs he saith they shal haue their seruice, but not in any bar∣barous tongue. Theo. And he that saith they shal haue their seruice in diuerse
tongues confesseth there were more tongues vsed in the West church than one: and taking order that seruice should be said vnto them according to the diuersi∣ties of their tongues,Mo tongues vsed in the west Church than the La∣tine tongue. he saw some cause why the people should vnderstand what was said in the church: and if that be needfull or expedient for one nation, why not for other in like manner? And yet I see no restraint in the wordes, but that the Moscouites, Morauians, & others were prouided for by this Canon, to haue the church seruice in their proper and natiue tongue, as well as the Gre∣cians. Phi. If it were so: we account it lawful, for that the church of Rome did permit it. Theo. Then do we account our seruice in the English tongue much more lawful,The general vse of the primatiue Church con∣fimeth the seruice in the English tongue. chiefly for that it is warrāted by the word of God, as I haue shew∣ed; and secondly for that it wanteth not the generall vse and order of Christes church in her sincerest and purest state to confirme the same. Phi. Haue you the generall and ancient custom of Christes church to insure your seruice in the english tongue? Theo. Wee haue, for that tongue which the people vnder∣stand, be it English, Scottish, or what other speech you will. Phi. That any Nation praied in a barbarous tongue, you haue no president in the Primatiue church. Theo. This is not the first time that your teeth could not rule your tongue: The Primatiue church of Christ vsed and allowed all tongues, as well barbarous as learned, for the people to make their praiers in.All tongues allowed in the primatiue Church for men to make their publike prayers in. Phi. You say not trueth. Theo. If I doe, you knowe your reward. You must be catholikes of the second edition, when men began to fall from trueth to Apostasie. For with the right and ancient faith of Christs church, your Romish errours haue no fellowship. Phi. And what haue yours, that were neuer heard of before Luthers time? Theo. Howe chaunceth then, our doctrine is con∣firmed by the scriptures, and witnessed in all the Fathers, where yours is not? Phi. Not ours? Theo. Not yours. Your praying in a tongue not vnderstood of the hearers: your single and so∣litarie Masses, where no man eateth besides the Priest: your decurted commu∣nions, where wanteth one halfe of Christes institution,The Iesuits are so Catho∣like that they haue not so much as one Father for the greatest points of their religion. I aske not howe you proue these points to bee catholike, that would trouble your braines too much: but what one Father haue you for them, lest you seeme to deriue your religion you know not from whom? Catholike should haue al the Fathers, we demaund you but one: If you come short of that, what hope cā you haue to recouer the rest? Phi. The doubt is not of our faith, but of yours: you must shewe, by what ti∣tle you claime your church, which was in our possession before you were borne. Theo. The walles you had: for those we striue not: The faith which is the foū∣dation of the church you neuer had: for that wee stand.The walles of the Church were theirs, but not the faith of the Church. Phi. But who standeth with you besides your selues? Theo. I haue told you: the word of God, and cleare consent of that church, which you dare not deny to bee both ancient and catholike. Phi. First then where is your antiquitie for praying in a barbarous tongue? Theo. That, which I haue saide, might seeme sufficient, you bringing against
it neither reason nor authoritie but onely Pilates that put Christ to death.Pilates autho∣ritie is all the holde the Ie∣suites haue for their latin seruice. Phi. That the people did vnderstand the prayers which were made in the church you shew some proofe: but those we say were in Hebrew, Greeke or Latine. Marie that the primatiue church permitted any Nation to make their praiers in a bar∣barous tongue, for that as yet I see no proofe. Theo. Reuiew that which is al∣ready sayd, and you shall find, that not onely the people did sing the Psalmes and answere the praiers that were made in the church, but also they were taught,The praier is not publike except the people vnder∣stand it and confirme it. it was a point of their christian dutie so to do, and that neither the Priests voice was needefull, nor the prayer publike, except the whole multitude did both cō∣ceiue the meaning, and confirme the blessing of their Pastour and Reader: which in a strange tongue they can not: & therefore the conclusion is infallible, that in the Primatiue church no tongue was vsed but such as the people vnder∣stood, and in a barbarous nation of necessitie that must be a barbarous tongue. Phi. But wee require some testimonie that a barbarous tongue was vsed in prayer: for it may be that all the nations in the worlde vnderstood Hebrewe, Greeke or Latine;Pilate wrate the superscri∣ption of the crosse not for al the persons in the worlde but for all the strangers that wre at Ieru∣salem. else why did Pilate set the title on our Sauiours crosse in those three tongues, but that al nations might read it: and that they could not, except they vnderstood one of those three tongues, which I coniecture they did. Theo. A coniecture fit for the cause you haue in hand. Pilate did not set vp the title for all the men, women and children in the world to see or read as you sup∣pose: but for those that were gathered out of all Countries to Ierusalem at the time of his execution: and that strangers as well as Iewes might knowe the cause why Christ was adiudged to dy, the superscription was writtē in Hebrew, Greeke and Latine,Al the worlde vnderstoode not the three learned tongues. without the knowledge of one of the which tongues no stranger vsed to frequent those countries, least he should be forced as dombe mē are, to worke with signes, which in trauellers or ligers, that haue any busines, is meere madnes without some interpreter. Had all men vnderstood one of those three toungs as you imagine, what nee∣ded the holy Ghost to haue bestowed any moe tongues on the Apostles, when they were sent to preach to al nations, but the Hebrewe, Greeke and Latine?What needed the gift of mo tongues, and where was the diuision of tongues which God inflicted for building the tower of Babel, if the whole earth had gotten to be of three tongues? for the whole worlde as you say, spake and vnderstood those three. You may do well to controle the holy Ghost, and with your monsterous and false surmise to say the gift of moe tongues than these three, was not needefull. And where is then the diuision of toungs which God inflicted on the Sonnes of men, if the whole earth had recouered her selfe to be of three tongues? Or how could any Nation bee barbarous, if ech coulde naturally speake some one of the learned tongues? Yea why might not the ofspring of Adam haue gotten from three tongues to one with more easie and quicker speede, than from an infinite varie∣ty of tongues to three, and so frustrate the iudgement and wisedome of God in confounding their speech?The prima∣tiue Church praied in bar∣barous tongues. Philand. I doe not auouch it for a certaintie. Theophil. Looke better vn∣to it, and you will reiect it not onely for an impossibilitie, but euen for an im∣piety. And yet were you so absurdly and wickedly bent, you hurt not our
assertion. For wee can proue that the primatiue church allowed and vsed praiers by precise ermes in barbarous tongues. Origen saieth, Origen. con∣tra Cesum. lib. 8. Euerie nation praied in th natiue and mother tongue.The Gre∣cians name God in the Greeke tongue, the Romanes in the Latine: & sin∣gulitem natiua & vernacula lingua Deum precantur, & laudibus pro se quisque extollt, and euery (Nation) in their natiue and mother tongue make their praiers to God and yeeld him his due praises. S. Hierom describing the so∣lemne funerall of Paula, that died at Bethleem in Iurie saith: Hier. in epita∣phi Paul. ad Eustchium. Praier in the Syrian tongueHebraeo, Graeco, Latino, Syróque sermone psalmi in ordine personabant, non solum triduo donec sb∣ter Ecclesiam, & iuxta specum Domini conderetur, sed per omnem hebdoma∣dam. The Psalmes were sung by order in the Hebrewe, Greeke, Latine and Syrian tongue, not onely those three dayes, til shee was laid in earth within the church, and neere to the sepulchre of our Sauior, but that whole weeke. And least you should thinke this order of singing in diuerse tongues was vsed but once, commending the very same place for the great concourse of Nations farre and neere, thither resorting and there leading their liues, he maketh Pau∣la then aliue giue this report to Marcella. Paula & Eu∣stochium ad Marcellam vt commigret Bethleem. Hier. tom. 1. epist. 17. Praiers in as many tongues al-most as there were na¦tions in Beth∣leem. Euerie one of these nations had not suffi∣cient to make a quier, or els some of these nations spake the one the same tongue that the other did as diuers of these spake the greeke tongue.Quicunque in Gallia fuerit primus huc properat: diuisus ab orbe nostro Britannus, si in religione processerit, dimisso sole occiduo quaerit locum fama tantum & Scripturarum relatione notum. Quid refe∣ramus Armenios, quid Persas, quid Indiae, quid Aethiopum populos, ipsam{que} iuxta Aegyptum fertilem Monachorum, Pontum, Cappadociam, Syriam Caelen, Mesopotamiam, cunctáque orientis examina? Vox quidem dissona, sed vna religio: tot pene Psallentium Chori, quot Gentium diuersitates. Whosoeuer is the chief∣est in Fraunce, hither he hasteneth. The Britane diuided from our world, when he commeth to any forwardnesse in Religion, seeketh for (this) place which he knoweth only by hearesay, and by relation of the Scriptures: what shall I speake of the Armenians, Persians, Indians, Ethiopians: of Egypt, that is hard by, and hath such stoare of Monkes: or of Pontus, Cappado∣cia, Caelesyria, Mesopotamia, and all the swarmes of the East? They haue diuerse languages, but one religion. There are (here) almost as many Quires that sing the Psalmes (in their seueral tongues) as there be diuersities of nations. Sainct Augustine vrgeth this which you defende (that GOD shoulde not bee praised in a barbarous tongue) as a manifest inconuenience against them, that woulde not haue the word  vsed to expresse the nature and sub∣staunce of the Trinitie. August. epist. 178. S. August. ta∣keth it for a thing confes∣sed that prai∣ers should be vsed in barba∣rous tongues.If one substaunce of the Father, the Sonne and the holie Ghost may not bee vttered in the Greeke tongue: ergo neither is it fitte that God shoulde bee praised in a barbarous (tongue:) but if the later be vsed, why not the former? And that the later was vsed hee sheweth in these wordes, August. Ibidē. What is this but praying in barbarous tongues?Vna rogatur vt misereatur à cunctis Latinis & Barbaris v∣nius Dei natura, vt à laudibus Dei vnius, nec ipsa lingua barbara sit, vt Latinis aliena. The one nature of one God is praied vnto by all the La∣tines and Barbarians to bee mercifull (to them,) in so much that the
verie barbarous tongue is not excluded from the praises of one God, as be∣longing to the Latines (more than to the Barbarians.) In Latine we saie, Domine miserere. Then belike this mercie ought to bee asked of that one God the father, the Sonne and the holy Ghost, but onely in the Hebrewe or Greeke tongue, or at least in the Latine tongue, and not in any barba∣rous tongue. Marie if it bee lawfull not onely for the Barbarians in their language, but for the Romanes (conquered and compelled by the Goahes to learn their speech) to say sihoraarmem:The seruice in the Gothiā tongue. which is as much as, Lord haue mercy (on vs,) why should it not be lawfull for the councels of the Fa∣thers that were assembled in the Land of Grecia to cal one substance of the Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghost, in their owne tongue homousion? Thus much S. Augustine confessing that God was and might bee praised and prayed vnto in a barbarous language, as well as in Hebrew, Greeke or La∣tine: and repeating a peece of the church seruice in the Gothian tongue, which not onely them-selues vsed, but the Romanes were forced to receiue in steede of Domine miserere, when their citie was taken and surprised by the Gothes, for Kyerie eleison,Kyrie eleison was not vsed in the church of Rome in S. Augustines time. which Gregorie two hundred yeres after borowed of the Grecians, was not as yet in Sainct Augustines time vsed in the Church of Rome. The very sauage people that offered vnto Diuels, when they were conuerted vnto Christ, were not denied to haue their Psalmes and prayers in their rude and vnpolished tongues, as S. Hierom reporteth of the Bessians and others. Hieron. ad Heliodorum in pita. Nepotiā.The passion and resurrection of Christ, the tongues and letters of all Nati∣ons doe sound. I speake not of the Hebrewes, Greekes and Latines, which Nations the Lord did dedicate in the title of his crosse: that the soule is im∣mortall, and hath his being after the dissolution of the body, the Indian, the Persian, the Goth, the Aegyptian can largely discourse. The wild Besians and they which goe cloathed in beastes skinnes (for lacke of other apparel) sacrifised men to the Ghostes departed,The barbarus Bessians had the melodie of the Crosse in their own tongue. stridorem suum in dulce crucis frege∣runt melos, haue turned their barbarous and fearefull noise into the sweete melodie of the crosse. Other particulars might be brought, but the report of Sainct Basill shall suffice for the generall order of praying and singing, obserued, as hee saieth, in all the churches of God, and therefore in those Nations and Countries where the common people coulde no Latine, Greeke nor Hebrew: but of force were driuen to vse their naturall language, though it were barbarous, before they could either vtter their own minds or vnderstand what others sayd. Basil. epist. 63. ad Cleri. Neo. This order of seruice was vsed in all Churches where the people vnder∣stoode nei∣ther Hebrew, Greeke, nor Latine. The people with vs rising in the night goe to the house of prayer, and with continuall teares making their confession to God, and at length rising from prayers, they sette them-selues in order to sing Psalmes. Where being diuided into two partes they sing by courses (eche side after other) and so with varietie of Psalmes, and prayers interser∣ted, they spende the night: as soone as the daie breaketh all of them
in common, as it were with one mouth and one heart, offer to the Lord a psalme of confession, euery one of them making the woordes of re∣pentance proper to him-selfe. In respect of this (order) then if you refuse vs, you must also refuse the Egyptians, the people of either  Lybia,The south  Indians the  Arabiās, the  Syrians, the  Armenians and  Babylo∣nians speake neither He∣brew, Greeke nor Latine. Basil. Ibidem. This order was obserued in al Churches, ergo amongst the Barbari∣ans which could none of the lear∣ned tongues. Thebais, Pa∣lestine, the  Arabians, Phoenicyans,  Syrians, the (Armenians, Babylonians & other)  borderers on Euphrates, & generally al with whome vigils, prayers and common psalmodies are esteemed. And that this order of singing the Psalmes was generall throughout the whole Church of Christ, were the people Iewes, Grecians, Romanes, or Bar∣barians, the woordes immediatly before doe witnesse. To that accusation wherein we are blamed for the psalmodies, I haue this to answere, that the maner and fashion (of singing Psalmes) which is here with vs, is agreeable and consonant to all the Churches of God. If these words be true: then not only the Egyptians, South Indians, Arabians and Syrians, whom this Fa∣ther nameth; but the Persians, East Indians, Armenians, Iberians, Scithi∣ans and all other Nations had the same order of praying and singing in their Churches by the mouthes and voyces of the simple and vnlearned people. And consequently either all the Christian men, weomen and children in the world could speake and vnderstand one of the three learned tongues, which is a ridi∣culous, false, and impious imagination, or else eche nation had their publique prayers and Psalmes in their seuerall and barbarous tongues: which is the point you would needes haue prooued, before we passed any farther. Phi. That was then the manner of the Church, but since this which we vse,The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 14. hath beene thought by the wisest and godliest to bee most expedient, and it is certaine∣ly seene to bee nothing repugnant to S. Paul. Theo. You lacke good neighbours to helpe you, that you bee forced so shamefully with your own mouthes in god∣linesse and wisedome to preferre yourselues before the learned and Catholike fathers of all antiquitie.Mark this pride of the Iesuits where they make themselues wiser and godlier than the prima∣tiue church. Wee shewe you the auncient and vniuersall custome of Christs Church proportioning her prayers by the rule of S. Paul, and direc∣ting them wholy to edifie the vulgar and simple people, as much as might bee, by plaine precept from God himselfe, as they conceiued the Apostles speach: you tell vs that you haue not onely chaunged that order of your owne authorities: but that you haue conferred with some godlier and wiser personages than those famous and woorthie Pastours that obserued this course in the Church of Christ many hundreths before you were borne: and find it most expedient to con∣tinue your vnfruitfull manner of praying in a tongue not vnderstoode, though the precept of God, the Doctrine of the Apostle, and the practise of the prima∣tiue Church bee expressely against it. O mouthes prepared to sticke at nothing that may any way serue to hoodwinke your hearers! In this and many other points of your Religion you runne headlong against the cleare testimonies of the sacred Scriptures, and generall consent of the Catholike fathers, and yet you will be Catholikes. Phi. You be very rife with your reproches. Theo. I might iustly giue
you some oftener remembrances, but that I more respect the seemelynes of the cause, which is Gods, than the sinnefulnesse of your attempts, who neglect Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, Canons, Church and all, that is to fol∣lowe the decrees you knowe not of whome: and yet will haue it insolencie and madnes in vs to dispute of your actions. Philand. You doe but slaunder vs. Theoph. Wee haue hitherto slaundered you with matters of trueth, if the rest prooue like, wee shall doe you no wrong, though wee fawne on you lesse. Their Masse not Catholik.Your Masse, which this Realme hath nowe reiected, what hath it in it, ei∣ther Catholike or Apostolike, or any way concordable with Christes insitu∣tion? Philand. You coulde neuer light on a woorse match. Of all the rites, obseruances, and Sacraments which we haue, none is more Apostolike, more Catholike, more conformable to Christes order and example than our Masse;The Rhemish Testament, fol. and your prophane Supper44. hath nothing agreeable to the Apostles or Christs insti∣tution, but all cleane contrary: yea your448. communion is the very table and cup of di∣uels, and your228. Caluins bread and wine, like at length to come to the sacrifice of Ce∣res and Bacchus. Theo. Tie vp your doggish, if not diuelish eloquence: you shall haue no praise,The Friers haue serued Ceres and Bacchus so long, that now they can not chuse but talke of them. though you take some pride in broching these blasphe∣mies. Your poysonfull tongues and vnblushing faces may iniurie the ordinance of God, but you can not ouerthrow his trueth. If wee had deuised any thing of our owne braines as you haue done the most part of your Religion, you would haue kindled I see to some choler that spare vs such speaches for following the very samplar & original which Christ did institute, as exactly, as we possibly might. Phi. You follow no part of Christes institution. Theo. It is easie for your side to say what you list: you were no right Friers, if you coulde not speake for your selues: but leaue your scoffes & vaunts at home, & bring forth your proofs. Phi. The Rhemish Testament fol. 451. nu. 20.I wil beginne with the name, and so proceede to the rest of the circum∣stances. You haue smal reason to name the holy sacrament rather the Supper of the Lord, than after the maner of the primatiue Church, the Eucharist, Masse, or Litur∣gie. But belike you would bring it to the supper againe, or Euening seruice, when men be not fasting, the rather to take away the olde estimation of the holynes thereof. The. The Iesuites cannot abide the name of the Lordes supper.If you leaue not so much as the name vntouched, I hope you will not conceale any weightie matter of more importance. Phi. You may sweare for that, and keepe your othe. Theo. Then if all your quarrels being discussed, you bee found to haue vttered nothing against vs but your sharpe and eger stomackes, and notwithstanding your vagaries and resaliries to and fro, your Masse bee neither Catholike nor Apostolike, deserue you not to beare backe your owne burden, and to haue Bacchus, Ceres and the rest of your infernall saints to the shrines whence you brought them? Phi. When that falleth out, which wil be neuer. But you delay the time, for feare you take the foyle. Theo. If your argu∣ments be as quicke, as your appetites, we shall soone dispatch; but bring vs not drippings, and say they be deinties.
Phi. S. Ambrose in hunc locum,The Rhemish Testament, 1. Cor. 11. and most good authors nowe thinke this which (the Apostle) calleth Dominicam Caenam, is not ment of the blessed Sacrament, as the circumstances also of the text do giue, namelie the reiecting of the poore, the riche mens priuate deuouring of all, not exspecting one an other, gluttonie and drunkennes in the same, which cannot agree to the holie Sacrament. And therefore you haue You haue smaller to re∣sist that name. small reason (as I saide) to name the saide holie Sacrament rather the Supper of the Lorde, than after the manner of the primatiue Church, the Eucharist, Masse, or Liturgie. Theo. Malice bursteth out at your tongues endes,What names the Lords sup∣per is called by in the Scripture. when you cannot abide the woordes which wee vse, though the Scriptures did first authorize them, and the fathers for their partes continue them. The Sacrament which the Lorde ordained at his last maundie hath sundrie names that wee finde authen∣ticallie written in the worde of God: as the 1. Cor. 10. Lordes table, the breaking of bread, and cup of thanksgiuing, the Communion of the bodie and blood of Christ, and as we thought till this time, 1. Cor. 11. the Lordes Supper. You be∣ginne to tell vs S. Ambrose is of an other minde; and bcase your holde in him was verie small, you adde that the most of your selues also doe nowe so thinke. A worshipful catch, that fifteene hundreth yeres after Christ you come in with your owne verdict, in your owne cause, and looke to haue it currant. Phi. We meane not our selues. Theo. You can meane none,The Iesuites aledge them∣selues & their fellowes for good authors to discredite the fathers. but your selues, or your fellowes. For you saie, most good Authors now thinke so; of our side I am sure you will not agnise that anie be good authors, as you call them, or that the most of vs are of that opinion; and therefore you meane your selues and your owne adherents: who, were you not partial, yet are you too young to bid Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostome, Theodorete, and others, rise from their chaiers, and giue you place. Augustine repeating the verie woordes of S. Paul, when you come togi∣ther, this is not to eate the Lords supper, saith August. epist. 118. The fathers expound the Lordes supper in S. Paul to be the Sacra∣ment. hanc ipsam acceptionem Eucha∣ristiae Dominicam Caenam vocat; the Apostle calleth this verie receiuing of the Eucharist the Lords Supper. Hierome commenting vpon the same wordes: when you come togither this is not to eate the Lords Supper, addeth:Hier. in 1. Corinth. 11. Now is it not the Lordes Supper (as you vse it) but mans, in as much as you seeme to meete rather to fill your bellies, than for the mysterie. For the Lordes Supper ought to be common to all, because he deliuered the Sacramentes equallie to all his Disciples that were present. And a Supper therefore it is called, for that the Lord at Supper deliuered the Sacraments. Chrysostome affirmeth the same. Chrysost. in 1. Cor. 11. hom. 27 The Apostle toucheth them more dreadfullie with these wordes, This is not to eate the Lordes Supper, sending them to that night in which Christ deliuered the wonderfull mysteries. Therefore he calleth it a Supper; for that Supper had all (that were present) sitting togi∣ther in common; (that is at one time and in one place) * As Ibidem. often as you shal eate, you shall shewe forth the Lordes death; this is that supper. And in an other place. Chrysost. in illiud Paul, o∣portet esse hae∣reses. tom. 4. This is not to eate the Lordes Supper. He meaneth that Supper which Christ deliuered (before his passion) when all his Disciples
were with him. For in that Supper the Lorde and all his Seruants sate togi∣ther. Theodorete Likewise,Theodor. in 1. Cor. 11. The Lords Supper he calleth the Lords Sacra∣ment. And so Photius, He Citatur ab Oc∣cumen. in 1. Cor. 11. calleth it the Lords (Supper) after the imitati∣on of that dreadfull and mysticall (Supper) when the Lorde sate togither with the disciples, as if he shoulde haue saide the (Supper) which the Lord disposed and ordained. Bede to expound this place citeth the wordes of Augustine that went before. Beda. in 1. Cor. 11.The verie receiuing of the Eucharist he calleth the Lords Supper. Haymo mentioneth both opinions, but concludeth plainlie with vs. Haimo. in 1. Cor. 11.Sacramentum igitur corporis Christi à communione Caena appellatur. The Sacrament then of Christes bodie is called a Supper by reason of the com∣munion: Or if you will haue one place insteede of all,S. Aug. in one short sermon calleth the Sacrament the Lordes Supper twen∣tie times. reade S. Augustine de verbis Domini secundum Lucam: Sermo. 33. and you shall finde him not onely call the Sacrament a Supper and the Lords Supper twentie times in one short Sermon, but also bring you the authoritie of Christ himselfe for it, when hee saide in the fourteenth of Luke, a Luk. 14. certaine man made a great Supper. And therefore you were more angrie than wise, to check that terme as ha∣uing smal reason,The Iesuites will not heare of the Lordes Supper which is the vsuall speach of the fathers, but of the Masse which in 600. yeres they find but six times, and that neither in the fathers nor to this purpose. which had so good testimonie both of Scriptures and fathers; and in lue of it to offer vs the name of the Masse, a word that the greeke Church neuer vsed, as your selues knowe, and is found in the workes of all the Latine fathers that be theirs, but six times in six hundreth yeares, (set Gregorie aside who liued about that time and vseth the worde somewhat oftner than anie of the rest) and yet not in that sense, nor for that thing which you intend. For neuer father called the Sacrament or Eucharist the Masse: And in that point if wee haue but small reason to speake as wee doe; you haue vtterlie no reason great nor small to call the Sacrament the Masse as you doe: but that rage in you ma∣nie times ouer ruleth reason, and then you pushe out your violent and vnmaste∣red passions. Phi. Wee haue S. Ambrose for our Author, when wee denied the blessed Sacrament to be called a Supper, and for the name of the Masse in plaine wordes we haue notAmbros. epist. 33. The Rhemish Testament fol. 447. him only, but also August. sermo. 251.91. Concil. Carthag. 2. cap. 3.4. cap. 84. Mileuit. ca. 12. Leo epist. 88.81. cap. 2. Grego. lib. 2. epist. 9.93. &c. Theo. S. Ambrose doth not saie, that the ministration of the Sa∣crament may not be called the Lordes Supper; but he woulde not haue vs thinke it to be a Supper prouided to fill our bellies. And in that sense he saith, Ostendit Ambros. in 1. Cor. 11. illis mysterium Eucharistiae inter caenandum celebratum non caenam esse. The Apostle sheweth them, that the mysterie of the Eucharist was celebra∣ted as the (disciples) were at Supper, and not to be the (whole) Supper (which they had:) and thereuppon groundeth that which he noted before, that in the Church, Ambros. Ibidem. vnitatis & mysterij causa conuenitur, non dissentionis & ventris, they must assemble for the celebration of the mysterie and obseruation of vnitie, not for dissention and the bellie.The Rhemish Testament, fol. 451. Phi. The circumstances of the text, namelie the reiecting of the poore the riche
mens deuouring of all, not expecting one an other, gluttony and drunkennesse in the same can not agree to the holy Sacrament. Theo. The worlde wanteth such skil∣full interpreters of Scriptures as you are; you would easily proue if you were let alone, that a man hath no head, because hee hath two feete, or two armes, and those are not his head.The Iesuites demonstrati∣ons be mre delusions. Phil. Would you make vs so foolish as to thinke a man may not haue feete, armes and head: though the partes in themselues be diffe∣rent in proportion, position and action? Theo. But in boulting S. Pauls text, you reason as if hee could not. For of two thinges, that were vsed both toge∣ther, you vrge the one to exclude the other; and as if that were some mightie collection, you say that we and al the fathers who tooke it otherwise haue smal reason for our doings. Phi. We speake of you, not of the fathers. Theo. You thrust them to the heartes through our sides. For if we following their ful con∣sent in expounding this place, haue small reason, they had as litle, who began it vnto vs, and went that way before vs; we tredding but their steppes after them. Phi. We meant not to disgrace them. Theo. The sequele of your words doth, whatsoeuer your purpose was. Phi. Wee giue you the reasons of our ex∣position, and those in our iudgement very cleare. Theo. As cleare follies as any can bee. Phi. Disprooue them then. Theo. The christians you graunt had their common feasts in the Church at that tyme for their relieuing of the poore,The Church in S. Paules time had the Lords supper and their bro∣therlie feasts one at the end of the o∣ther. & retaining of brotherly vnitie. Phi. They had as wee note vnto you out of Tertullian, Apolog. ca. 39. Clemens Alexand. S. Iustine, S. Augustine contra Fau∣stum lib. 20. cap. 20. Theo. And that they had therewithall the Lords Supper, (for so I must call it, till you bring some better reason against it) I thinke you doubt not. Phi. At or about the same time they had; but whether before or after I know not. Theo. To this purpose it shall not skil. The faults for which S. Paul reproued them were these; the diuiding them∣selues into factiōs,These faultes n the Corin∣thians either immediatlie before or af∣ter the Lords supper made them vnfit ghests for the Lordes table. inso much that they would not expect one an other, (no not at the Lords table) their shaming the poore (with whom (as it seemed) they tooke skorne to sit at the same table,) & abusing the church of God to excesse of eating & drinking. The two later enormities might be committed at their ordinarie feastes in the Church: and so might also the first; yet because those brotherly repastes did either end or beginne with the Lords Supper, they coulde not di∣uide themselues eche from other, and disdaine the poore at their cōmon meats, but they must offer the same abuse at the Lordes supper, which was ministred to them as they sate at their tables immediatly before, or after their vsuall and corporall refreshings. By S. Pauls wordes,It shold seeme by Saint Paul, their feasts were before the ministring of the Sacra∣ment. 1. Cor. 11. it shoulde appeare the Communion was distributed to them after meales, for so the Apostles receiued it at their masters hands the night that he was betrayed, and S. Paul not onely noteth the time when Christ did it , after they had supped, but to cut off dissention, drunken∣nesse and contempt of their poore brethren in the Church, (which were the vi∣ces then growen amongst them) he requireth a precedent examination before they did eate, not an answerable conuersation after they had eaten. Hee saith
not, let euery man remember at whose table he hath eaten, & whose cup hee hath been partaker,1. Corint. 11. but, let a man examine himself, and so eate of this bread and drinke of this cup; that is before hee eate of this breade and drinke of this cup, and he shall find that contentious and riotous persons, (such as they were in their feastes,) bee no sit ghestes for that heauenly Supper. And yet to vs it is all one whether it were before or after: at their bankers and feastes, it was mi∣nistred and euē serued at their tables, as S. Augustine noteth in these words. (Non debent fratres) mensis suis ista miscere,August. ep. 118. sicut faciebant quos Apostolus argu∣it & emendat. (The brethren ought not) to haue these (mysteries) serued at their tables, as they did whome the Apostle reprooueth and refour∣meth. The rehearsal of Christes institution needed not if it had not bin first abu∣sed with vn∣worthy com∣ming to it.And had not the Lordes Supper beene abused among them, what needed the rehearsall of the first institution: to the which because the Apostle recal∣leth them, it is euident they were fallen from it. Nowe abuses in this place S. Paul mentioneth none but drunkennesse, dissention and defrauding the poore: and since drunkennesse and deceiuing the poore, as you auouche, can not agree to the Sacrament, it followeth that dissention was the thing which defaced the Lordes Supper among them, in that they would neither at cōmon meats nor at the Lordes Supper sit al together, but sort them selues in factions and companies, as they fauoured and friended eche other. This was the fault which S. Paul first rebuked, when hee beganne to re∣dresse the thinges that troubled the Church of Corinth. They contended about Baptisme,1. Cor. 1. saying, I am Pauls and I am Apollos, and I am Cephaes; and their dissention so increased, and came to that sharpnes, that they woulde haue their tables in the Church and euen the Lordes Supper also eche company by them selues.Ambros. in 1. Cor. 11. The false Apostles, sayth Ambrose, had sowen such discorde among them, that they stood striuing for their oblations. Hierom saith,Hiero. in 1. Cor. 11. In ecclesia conueniētes oblationes suas separatim offerebant. Meeting in the church they de∣liuered their oblations to seueral companies (according as euery man fansied the parties.) And againe,Ibidem. Nemo alium expectabat vt communiter offeretur: No man expected one an other, that the oblation might be common. And S. Paul, as Chrysostom thinketh, brought the Table & Supper where the Lord himselfe was, and at which sate all his Disciples, euen Iudas the Traytour, for an example, to shew them: that, that is rightly iudged to be Chrysost. in illud Pauli, o∣portet esse hae∣reses. The Lordes Sup∣per, quae omnibus simul conuocatis concorditer & communiter sumitur, which is receiued in common, and with one consent of all assembled together. Yea S. Augustine affirmeth that August. epist. 118. The Apostle speaking of this Sacrament saith, for which cause brethren when you assemble together to eate, expect one an other. The circum∣stances of the text maie a∣gree to the Lords supper.Your obseruations therefore are first false, when you say, these circumstan∣ces can not agree to the holy Sacrament. For euen these which you name, as most vnlikeliest, are applied by the fathers to the Lordes Supper. Expecting one an other, you heard S. Augustine referre directly to this Sacrament. Deuouring
of all by the rich, and drunkennesse S. Hierom expoundeth likewise of the verie same mysterie. (The Apostle)Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11. sayth one is drunke, and an other hungrie: for this reason. Quia superuenientibus mediocribus, & volentibus sumere Sacra∣menta deerant, quoniam ab illis qui obtulerant oblationes, in communi conuiuio fue∣rant cuncta consumpta. Because the meaner sort comming after (the rich) & mynding to receiue the Sacraments, there was nothing left, (to minister the Sacrament withall;) they that brought the oblations deuouring all in their common banket. Haymo sayth, Haymo in 1. Cor. 11.One is hungrie, that is hee which for pouertie is not able to bring wheaten bread and wyne to bee consecra∣ted for the Communion: [an other] to witte the riche and wealthie man [is drunken] and surfeyteth as well with other meates, as with the sacraments of the body and blood of the Lord. Next did some of them not agree to the sacraments of the Lordes table,Some circum∣stances maie well agree though o∣thers did not. as surfeyting, deuouring and drunkennesse: yet other circumstaunces, as schismes, not expecting one an other, may and doe very fitly serue for the Lordes Supper, as you see by the iudgement of those Fathers whom I haue named. Thirdly did no circumstaunces of their disorders agree to the right institu∣tion of the Sacrament,Saint Paul re∣prooued thē because their disorders did not agree to the right in∣stitution of the Sacra∣ment. yet so long as Saint Paul refelleth their doinges in the Church as vnseemely for the sacred mysteries there prepared and receiued: what reason haue you to deny that Saint Paul meaneth the sacrament, where hee sayth, when you come together (if you fall to filling your bellies, and des∣pising the poore, as you doe in your feastes) , You can not, (or this is not the right way to) eate the Lordes Supper. For this is plaine to him that hath but halfe an eye, that Saint Paul checketh them as vn∣woorthie partakers (by these their abuses of the mysteries of Christ,S. Paul check∣eth them for their vnwor∣thy comming to the Lordes table, ergo his words belong to the Sacra∣ment.) and interpreteth the plagues which some of them felt, to bee Gods scourges for their loosenes in that behalfe, and therefore with great reasons might hee beginne to reprehend them as vnit approchers to the Sacrament, and vtter so much in these woordes, when you come together, this is not (the way) to eate the Lordes Supper, or to haue accesse to his table, to make schismes at your feastes in the Church with excesse in your selues, and reproche to others. Phi. If you will needes haue the Sacrament called the Lordes Supper,The name of the Masse is no waie Ca∣tholike. keepe you that name, and wee will keepe ours, as more auncient and Catho∣like by the testimonie of Saint Augustine, S. Ambrose and the rest whome I cited before for the antiquitie of the blessed Masse. Theo. Hee that wil bold∣ly deny a trueth, will easily affirme a falsehood. S. Augustine in all the works that be vndoubtedly his, neuer so much as once named the Masse.S. Augustine neuer vsed the worde Masse. The Ser∣mons de tempore, which you produce, are collected out of other mens writings as well as his, and many of themEras. censura in tomum deci∣mum August. & in sermo. de tempore. found vnder the names of other authors, and fauour litle either of Austens learning or phrase, as Erasmus confessed when he first surueyed them.
S. Ambrose hath but one in all his wri∣tinges, and that is missam facere, which is not to saie Masse.S. Ambrose hath the woorde once, and so haue two Prouinciall Councels of Africa; Leo hath it twise; which is all that you can finde in sixe hundreth yeres till Gregorie the first came, and vsed the woorde somewhat oftener: yet none of these cal the Sacrament or Sacrifice by that name, as you would haue it, but rather expresse by that word the auncient order of the primatiue church, in sending away such as might not be partakers of the Lords table, as in place where I noted before.Missa in the fathers is the sending a∣waie of those that might not be parta∣kers of the Lords table. And that Missa with the fathers doeth signifie not the Masse, but leaue to depart before or after the communion, your owne fellowes wil instruct you, whom you may not wel distrust as being with you, though you trust not vs that are against you. Polydore repeateth and alloweth the same with these woordes: Polyd. de in∣uent. rerum, lib. 5. cap. 11.Mihiverò prior ratio probatur vt magis apposita. The former diriuation (of the word Mssa) pleaseth me better, as the likelier: and not that it should signifie a sacrifice and be deriued from the Hebrew word Missà as Reuchline woulde deduce it. And therefore he sayth,Polidor. Ibi∣dem. Idem igitur mos a nostris etiam seruatur, vt peractis sacris, per Diaconum pronuncietur,Missà Ite, missa est: quod idem est, ac ilicet, id est ire licet. The same maner is obserued of our men, that at the ende of diuine seruice, the Deacon should say, ITE, MISSA EST, which is as if he sayd, YOV MAY DE∣PART. And that missa was vsual for missio, he sheweth out of Cyprians epistles, where he sayth remissa for remissio. Rhenanus another of your friends giueth the like obseruation in his notes vppon the 4. booke of Tertullian against Marcion.Beati Rhena∣ni annotatio∣nes in 4. lib. contra Marcio∣nem. Missa in the fathers doth as much sig∣nifie the Masse as ex∣communica∣tion doth sig∣nifie the cō∣munion. Hodie in fine Sacri Leuita pronunciat, Ite, missa est, id est, missio est, quod olim in initio dicebatur, antequam in∣ciperentur videlicet ipsa mysteria. Hinc iuxta vulgi consuetudinem, Ambrosius mis∣sas facere dixit. Propriè missa erat tempore Sacrificij quando Cathecumeni foras mittebantur. At this day the Priest pronounceth at the end of his seruice, Ite, missa est, that is, go, you haue leaue to depart, which in the primatiue church was sayd in the beginning, before they came to the celebration of the Sa∣craments. Thence Ambrose vsed the word missam facere, according to the vulgar custome (of those tymes.) For properly missa was when the conuerts not yet baptized, were sent away in the time of the sacrifice, that is at what time the rest addressed themselues to be partakers of the Lords table. And that missa was common for missio; hee proueth by Tertullian and Cyprian in his booke de bono patientiae, and epist. 14. And lest you shoulde thinke this to bee a phantasticall assertion of his with∣out all ground or authoritie, such as the most of your obseruations are, hee tel∣leth you that, this mysterie of antiquitie is related in Isidores Lexicon. And in deede so it is. For Isidore sayth,Isidor. Origi∣num, lib. 6. de officiis. Missa in the fathers dire∣ctlie opposite to the sacri∣fice: are not the Iesuites then wise mē by these auto∣rities to proue it to be the name of their sacrifice? Missa tempore Sacrificij est, quando Cathecu∣meni foras mittuntur, clamāte Leuita, si quis cathecumenus remansit, exeat foras, & inde missa, quia sacramētis altaris interesse non possunt qui nondū regenerati nascun∣tur. Missa was about the tyme of the sacrifice, when the learners and such as were not yet baptized were sent out of the Church, the Leuite crying, if any Cathecumene bee heere, let him depart, and thence is the word missa,
because they can not be present at the Sacrament of the Altar, which are not yet regenerate. And I thinke for very shame you would not séeme to be so foolish as to take Concil. Carth. 4. cap. 84. missam Cathecumenorum, which the fourth councell of Carthage doth mention in the place alleaged by your selues, and likewise S. Austen in those very sermons, which you cite as his, for your Masse or Sacrifice. For how can, Serm. de tem∣pore. 237. fit missa Cathecumenis, stand either for the sacra∣ment or sacrifice, since the persons named were not baptized, and conse∣quently not to be admitted to any of the Church mysteries? So that graunt the word missa were found oftner in the Fathers than it is, you can thence conclude nothing for your Masse: which you rudely and vnaduisedly thinke to be all one with their missa,This is a right paterne of the rest of their religion wherein they haue kept the words of the ancient fa∣thers, and quite peruer∣ted their meaning. or missarum solemnia, where in déede it is as contrarie to that which they spake of, as poyson to an whole∣some potion. For missa with them did signifie the sending away of such as might not communicate with the rest at the Lords table: the masse with you is the reall and actuall sacrificing of the sonne of God to his father; and the setting of the people to gaze on the Priest whiles he alone deuoureth all, and falsifieth the very words and actions of Christes institution. Phil. Nay you falsifie both the words and déedes of Christes institution: and though you gather out of Isidore and others that Missa in the ancient Fathers was the demising of such as might not be present at the Sacrifice; and missa Cathecumenorum by no meanes can be our Masse, yet touching our Sauiours institution of the blessed Sacrament, we come néerer to this ex∣ample than you do; you missing it in most points that be essentiall, and we following all his actions, that are imitable. Theop. What essentiall points do we misse? Phil. Almost all. Theop. Reason you named some. Phil. You do not imitate Christ in blessing the bread and wyne,The Rhemish Testament. 1. Cor. 11. nor in vnleauened bread, and mingling water with wine, nor in saying the words of consecration ouer the bread and wine; you vse no confession before, nor adoration of the blessed Sa∣crament at the receiuing of it. A number of like defects there are in your com∣munion, which cause it to be no sacrament, but common bread and wine. Ther∣fore Though they curse, yet thou wilt blesse, saith Dauid to God in his 109. Psalme. imperet vobis Deus, and confound you, for not discerning his holy body, and for conculcating the blood of the new Testament. Theop. Kéepe your burning and cursing deuotion for your selues; your manquelling and masse-mongring rage hath as much affinitie with Iud. epist. He that cur∣seth vs for keeping Christs insti∣tution, cur∣seth Christ that ordai∣ned it, and God that commanded vs to obserue it. Michaels praier beséeching God ye diuell might be restrained, as fiercenes and furie hath to patience and pietie. If we haue altered any part of Christes institution, curse on in Gods name, and let your curses take effect. But if the celebration of our mysteries be answerable to his will and word that first ordained them, you curse not vs, whome you would hurt, but him, that your cursed toongs can not hurt, which is God to be blessed for euer; and whose euerlasting curse will take hold of you, if you re∣lent not the sooner, for your proude defiance and stately contempt of his truth in respect of your massing reuels and mummeries. Philand. Nay you are contemners of his true body and blood in this
Alhaile ma∣ster quoth Iu∣das when he gaue him a kisse, and had sold his life for earthlie gaine. reuerent, blessed and holy sacrament, and breakers of his institution, and therefore his curse will light on you. Theop. Uaine spéech doth but spend time, shew first wherein we breake Christes institution, and for the truth of his presence in this Sacrament, if we teach otherwise than the Scrip∣tures and Fathers do warrant vs, we are content to heare and beare the curse, which blind zeale hath wrested from you. Philand. We shewed you euen now what things they were wherein you swarued from Christes in∣stitution. Theoph. You must both repeate them, and diuide them, that we may the better discusse them. Phil. I will. Christ tooke bread into his hands, applying this ceremonie, action and benediction to it, and did blesse the very element, vsed power and actiue words The Rhemish Test. 1. Cor. 11. Vpon it and ouer it, are the chiefest points the Iesuits can picke out of Christs insti∣tution. O, this is a terrible nar∣ration. vpon it, as he did ouer the bread and fishes which he multiplied: and so doeth the Church of God: and so do not (you) if (you) followe (your) owne booke and Doctrine, but (you) let the bread and cup stand aloofe, and occupie Christes words by way of re∣port and narration, applying them not at all to the matter proposed to be occupied: and therefore howsoeuer the simple people be deluded by the rehearsall of the same words which Christ vsed, yet consecration, benediction or sanctification of bread and wine (you) professe (you) make none at all. Theoph. Christ, you say, tooke bread into his hands, and did blesse the very e∣lement: What meane you by blessing? Philand. He vsed power and actiue words vpon it, as he did ouer the bread and fishes which he multiplied. Theoph. Why walke you thus in cloudes? Blessing with vs is the giuing of thanks vnto God: with you it is the making of a crosse in the aire with your two forefingers.What kind of blessing Christ did vse. Which of these twaine do you meane? Philand. That Christ blessed the bread; we be very sure: that he gaue thanks to the bread, you dare not say. Theo. Thanks he gaue to God, and not to the bread. Phil. But he blessed the bread: and therefore blessing is not taken in Christes institu∣tion for thankes-giuing as you misconster it. Theoph. If a man should put you to the new Testament in Gréeke, can you spell it? Philand. Yea Sir, and conster it as well as you. Theoph. Then I trust your cunning will serue you to know Matth. 26. Mark. 14. Luk. 22. 1. Corinth. 11. , (which word the holy Ghost vseth to expresse the Lords action and benediction at his last Supper) doth inferre that our Sauiour gaue thanks to God, and made no crosse with his hand ouer the bread. Philand. Mark. 14.1. Cor. 10. The Gospels do not differ, and therfore they must all agree in this, that Christ gaue thanks to God his fa∣ther.But S. Marke saith that our Lord brake the bread, , ha∣uing first blessed it, and Saint Paul doeth not sticke to referre that word to the cup it selfe, and not to God. , the chalice of benediction, which we blesse, is it not the communication of the blood of Christ? Theo. Do you think S. Marke reproueth S. Luke, & S. Matthew; or that S. Paul is contrarie to himselfe? Phil. No: I thinke the one expoun∣deth the other, and all their reportes méete full in one congruence. Theoph. And otherwise to say or thinke, is apparent blasphemie against the spirit of God, who neuer halteth in his tale, nor dissenteth from him-selfe in any
thing, much lesse in a matter of so weightie moment as this is. Philand. He can be no Christian that doubteth thereof. Theop. Then  is all one with , & since children in Grammer schooles do know that  is to giue thanks with words,These two words be e∣quiualent. and not to crosse with fingers, we conclude that this is a childish error of yours to thinke that Christ gaue not thanks to God, but blessed the very element. Yea, no word plainer conuinceth your pue∣rilitie than that which you haue brought to relieue your selfe.Of the twaine  is the plainer to re∣prooue the Iesuits cros∣sing. The Rhemish Test. vs supra. For  doth more euidently refell your crossing with fingers than : as be∣ing compounded of , which in Gréeke importeth speach vttered by month, and by no meanes drawing or crossing the fingers. Phil. Let the word signifie what you will: that which Christ did, were it with hand or mouth, he did it ouer the bread, and vpon the bread, and so do not (you) but let the bread and cup stand aloofe and occupie Christs words by way of re∣port and narration, applying them not at all to the matter proposed to be occupied. Theop. This is the right behauiour of your Rhemish translatours, to wrangle and trifle about phrases and ambiguities, as if they were the pre∣cepts and commandements of God. Our Sauiour you affirme blessed the very element, that is, vsed power and actiue words vpon it or ouer it. Blessing is a word that is diuersly vsed in the scriptures.What it is to blesse God. To blesse God, is to praise him, and to giue honor to his name: and for that cause you shall find both those words ioyned together as words of like force, as whē S. Luke saith, the disciples Luk. 24. continued in the temple praising and blessing God. To blesse men,What it is for one man to blesse an o∣ther. if it be done by men, (for of their blessings we speake, and not of Gods) is to pray for them: and to beséech God that he will blesse them, that is, defend them, prosper them, and be mercifull vnto them. So Gen. 27. Isaac blessed Iacob, and Gen. 48. Iacob the sonnes of Ioseph, and so were the Priests ap∣pointed by God himselfe to Num. 6. blesse the children of Israel: and a forme of praier for that purpose prescribed them. We may also blesse the time,What it is to blesse time and place. place and meanes, in which, or by which God sheweth his fauour towards vs: that is, we may pronounce them blessed for our sakes, and our selues bound to blesse God for them. So Dauid sayd to A∣bigail, 1. Samuel. 25. Blessed be God that sent thee this day to meete me: Blessed be thy speach (or counsell) and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from going to (shed) blood: where he blesseth God, as the author, the wo∣man as the meanes, her words as the perswasions and occasions, that kept him from vsing the bloody reuenge, which he determined against Nabal and his familie. And so said Salomon, Sapient. 14. blessed is the tree whereby righteous∣nes commeth. So on the contrary Iob. 3. Iob and Ierem. 20. Ieremie What it is to blesse the meates and things which we vse. cursed the dayes wherein they were borne, & would not haue them to What it is to blesse the meates and things which we vse. be blessed. We must likewise blesse the meates which we eate, & the things which we vse for the maintenance of this mortall life: that is, praier must be made vnto God, that they may be healthfull for vs, & we thankfull for them: by which meanes our food, & al other succors of this life are sanctified, to his pleasure & our comfort.
Since then the Scriptures not onely permit, but also command that we should blesse one another,How we are said to blesse the elements at the Lords table. and so the creatures which nourish our bodies, we make no doubt but it is both lawfull & néedfull for vs to blesse the sacraments which are the seales of Gods euerlasting promises, & therfore we readily re∣ceiue S. Pauls adiection, when he saith, the cup of blessing, WHICH WE BLESSE, is it not the cōmunion of Christs blood? Mary blessing in that place we take not for How the Ie∣suits blesse the cup. How we blesse it. crossing or charming the cup with a How the Ie∣suits blesse the cup. How we blesse it. set number & or∣der of signs & profers as you vse at your masse, but for theHow the Ie∣suits blesse the cup. How we blesse it. making of our er∣nest & hūble praiers to God, that our vnworthines do not hinder the working of his sacraments, but that by his goodnes & mercy, they may take their due effects in vs according o his sonnes institutiō for the pardoning of our sins, the incresing of his grace & our faith, the quikning of our inward man, & pre∣seruing both body & soul to eternal life. And this the force of the word , the maner of blessing all other things & persons directed by the scriptures,Our blessing is consonant to the words and rules of the scripture, theirs is not. Their mas∣sing gestures ouer the cup. the very principles of praier & pietie do approue & cōfirm, wheras your houering & blowing ouer the Chalice, your crossing & hiding it, your rubbing of fin∣gers for feare of crums, your first thwarting, and then lifting of armes, your ioining and vnioining of thumbe and forefinger, with twenty such nicefini∣ties & curiosities, haue neither foundation nor relation to Christs action nor institution, nor to his Apostles doctrine nor doings, who knew their masters meaning, and continued their masters example with words & gestures re∣uerent & sufficient to satisfie his heauenly will and precept for this matter. Phi. You doe not so much as vse any words vpon the elements, but let the bread and the wine stand aloofe, as if you were afraid to touch them. Theo. In déede we blesse with our hearts and voices,Praier bles∣seth the cup, and not our fingering or breathing on it. not with our fingers; and there∣fore we make our account that our praiers are as forceable and as effectuall at sixe féete length as at six haires bredth. And to deal friendly with you, that blessing with mouth taketh no place, except the hand be also winding & tur∣ning the patene and chalice after your maner, we can not beléeue it afore we sée some reason for it: sorcerers and coniurers haue such circumstances, but we hope you be not of their Seminaries. Phi. Did not Christ take the bread & likewise the cup into his hands? Theo. Christ tooke bread to giue it, and gaue it out of his hand before he spake the words of con∣secration.Yes verily. He could not BREAK it with his hand, vnles it were in his hand, neither could he GIVE it out of his hand, afore he TOOKE it into his hand. Phil. Then Christ TOOKE the bread & so the cup into his hands before he did consecrate, & so you do not. Theo. You would say before he did distribute. For breking & giuing which wer the ends of his taking, are parts of distributiō not of cōsecration. Phi. What blasphemy haue we heer? did Christ distribute, before he did cōsecrate the bread? Theo. You be so busie about blessing the host and the chalice, that you charge the sonne of God in his doings, and the euan∣gelists in their writings with blasphemy. Phi. Nay we charge you with blas∣phemie for saying, that Christ gaue vnconsecrated bread and wine to his dis∣ciples. Theoph. Doth not the Scripture say the same?Matth. 26. Iesus taking bread
and giuing thanks brake (it) and gaue (it) to (his) Disciples and saide, take ye, eate ye, this is my bodie. And taking the cup and giuing thanks, he gaue (it) to them saying, drink ye all of this: for this is my blood of the new Testament,Christ did consecrate when the bread was in his disciples hands: what did he then ouer or vpon the bread can you tell? &c. He tooke bread, brake it and gaue it to his disciples, bidding them take it and eate it before he said this is my body. Now if these words, this is my bodie, be the words of Consecration, ergo distribution went before Consecration, and when Christ did consecrate, the bread was in his disciples, and not in his owne hands. Phil. But he blessed, as we call it, or as you terme it, he gaue thanks, be∣fore he brake it. Theop. That thanksgiuing or benediction, was not conse∣cration, as your selues confesse, and would séem to prooue by an whole Fol. 452. Num. 24. [This is. heape of fathers: and therfore in spite of all that you do or can say, Christ did conse∣crate by word of mouth whē the disciples had the bread & cup in their hands. Phi. Would you haue the priest then not at al to touch the elements? Theo. When we diuide them, we cannot choose but touch them, as Christ did: Ma∣ry they may be sanctified by prayer and made Sacraments by repeating the words of Christ though at that instant we touch them not. And therfore your vnsound quidities that Christ blessed the very element,Consecratiō taketh effect from Christs words, not from our fin∣gers or ge∣stures. The Rhemish Test. pag. 452. These wordes this is my bo∣die, must be applied by way of re∣hearsall what Christ said. and vsed power & actiue words vpon the bread and ouer the bread, which (we) doe not, but let the bread and wine stand a loofe, and occupie the words of Christ by way of report and narration, ap∣plying them not at all to the matter proposed, these nice and new found quddities I say be méere fooleries; since the words of Consecration take their effect not from our fingers or gestures, but from Christs mouth and commandement that we should do the like. Phil. You neuer apply these words (this is my body) more than the whole nar∣ration of the institution, nor recite the whole otherwise than in historical maner, and for that cause you make it no Sacrament at al. Theo. Can you tell what you say? Phil. Why doubt you that? Theo. Because it is a wicked and blasphe∣mous lie for the priest to say, this is my bodie, otherwise than by way of re∣hearsall what Christ said. And therefore your braines be more than distem∣pered if you would haue vs or any other Christian ministers to say it other∣wise than by report, what Christ saide, and commanded vs to do in remem∣brance of him. Phil. Doe you thinke we meane the priest should say of his owne person,If the priest say of him∣selfe, this is my bodie, he blasphemeth most horibly: and therefore he must speak them by way of report what Christ saide. this is my bodie? Theo. If you do meane it, Bedlem is a fitter place for you than either Rhemes or Rome. Phil. You may be sure we do not. Theo. Why then reprooue you vs for repeating the words of Christ by way of re∣hearsall what he did and saide? Phil. You should apply them to the matter proposed. Theo. How? By praier precedent and consequent, or by glozing and interlacing Christs wordes with ours? Phil. You should actiuely and pre∣sently apply them to the elements of bread and wine. Theo. I must aske you the same question that I did before. The wordes were spoken by Christ in his own person, and cannot actiuely and presently be pronounced by any priest, but
by way of report what Christ saide, without apparent and horrible blasphe∣mie. And therefore the application of them in our words must either go be∣fore them or after them,Here is much adoe with actiuely and presently, and yet the cun∣ning sophists neuer tell what is requi∣red to actiue and present application. This applica∣tion the Iesu∣ites may do well to tell vs which way it must be made. The words of their Masse booke are di∣stinctè, secretè, & attentè. If they take breath in pro∣nouncing Christs words their applica∣tion is quite marred: for they must do it vno spiritu, nulla pausatio∣ne interposita. A wise obie∣ction when both the ele∣ments and our praiers witnes for vs in the eies of God and the whole church why we re∣peate the woordes of Christ, you Ie∣suits cannot tell whether we iest or no. and not exactly with them, much lesse to be compri∣sed in them. Phil. We tell you, you doe not apply them actiuely and presently. Theo. We tell you, you knowe not what you say. The words of Christ (this is my body, this is my blood) mauger all the diuels in hell must be pronounced in no mans person, but only by way of repetition what Christ at his last supper said in his owne person; and your Iesuitical nouelties of actiuely and present∣ly be so far from the soundnes of faith and substance of truth, that your selues are not able to expound what you speake. Phil. Yes that we are. Theo. So it should séeme by the readinesse of your answere. What then is the present and actiue application, which you striue for, or which way is it made? By word of mouth, or intention of hart? The Priest when he saith, this is my body, cannot iointly with those words vtter any other words of his owne to apply them. Intention of heart cannot alter the sense of the spéech, but only direct before God the purpose of the speaker. And vnlesse the meaning of the Priest be to recite the words of Christ by way of repetition, I sée not how you can excuse either the Priests hart or mouth from outragious and monstrous impietie. Phil. We haue a present and actiue application of the words, which you haue not. Theo. What is it? Phil. The Priest intendeth to doe as Christ did, and therefore vttereth the words distinctly and aduisedly ouer the ele∣ments that are in his hands and vnder his eies, which you doe not. Theo. What you list to do is no care of ours; if you can shew vs any thing in Christs institution, which we haue not, we wil giue you the hearing: otherwise to ad your ceremonies to his commandements, we mind it not. We knowe you crosse the creatures at benedixit, and hold your noses o néere the bread when you say, hoc est corpus meum, that the breath of your mouthes euen warmeth the host, but our beliefe is, that his mightie word, not your vnpausing spéech or intentiue lookes performeth the Sacrament. And therfore your blowing Christs words vpon the bread is rather a magicall incantation, than any ef∣fectuall application of them to the elements; and if you hold that his word is too weake to endue the visible signe with inuisible grace, except it be backed by your blowing and crossing, we say you be proud disciples, no right appli∣ers of his heauenly word and power. Phil. We do not help his words as if they were of themselues weake: but we apply them to the elements in this present and actiue maner, which you do not: for when you recite the words, a man cannot tell whether you speake them, to trie your memories, or to cōsecrate the mysteries, you be so far from vsing any gestures or action that should import application. Theop. The purpose of our hearts wel knowen vnto God, and made open vnto men whē we call them to the Lords table; the praiers which we make before we come
to the words of Christ, directly and plainely tending to that end; the placing of the bread and the cup in our and their sight; the mentioning of Christes institution and commandement that we should follow his example, and continue that remembrance of him; the duetifull and reuerent rehearsing the words which he spake, as the holy Ghost did penne them; this demon∣stration and supplication that we receiuing THESE THY creatures of bread and wine according to thy Sonne our Sauiour Iesus Christes insti∣tution in remembrance of his death and passion may be partakers of his most blessed bodie and blood, vsed immediatly before we repeate the words of Christ; the breaking and giuing of the bread, and so likewise the cup, immediatly after they be sanctified, and offering them to each commu∣nicant in remembrance of Christes bodie that was broken, and blood that was shed, to purchase the remission of their sinnes, thereby to preserue them body and soule to euerlasting life;If this be not application, we would gladly know what it is. the praiers I say precedent, the prepara∣tion euident, the direction adherent, the distribution consequent are signes enough to hym that hath but eares or eyes, that we presently, purposely, publikely execute Christes institution; and other hooking and haling of Christes words to the elements by crossing, crouching, gaping and blowing on them, as your manner is, we acknowledge none to be required or expres∣sed in the Lords Supper. Philand. It is no Sacrament, but (as Saint Augustine saith) when the words come, that is to say, actiuely and presently be applied to the elements. Theoph. We know that to be most true which S. Augustine saith,The Rhemish Testament pag. 452. nu. 24. [this is. Tract. 80. in Iohan. Accedit verbum ad e∣lementum, & fit Sacramentum, when the word commeth to the element, the Sacrament is perfite: but what haue your termes (actiuely and pre∣sently) to do with Saint Austens speach? yea what place could you choose more repugnant to your fansies than this which you bring? The element without the word, is a weake and corruptible creature: put the word to it, and then it becommeth a Sacrament. Philand. You marke not the force of the verbe Accedit:The word commeth to the element when it is se∣riouslie pro∣nounced, and religiouslie beleeued. which signifieth the word must come so néere, that it must euen touch the element. Theoph. Can you tell vs how words may touch elements? Philand. What else? By actiue and present applica∣tion. Theoph. This is your old song, which we would haue you turne to some plainer note. What kind of application meane you? with the breath of your mouths, motion of your hands, or cogitation of your hearts? You may blowe vppon the bread and wyne, but there is some difference be∣twéene the sounde of your voyce,Application is made with hart and not with breath or fingers. and the breath of your loongs, if you looke a little but to Aristotles Predicamentes, and therefore your breath may touche the elements, your woords can not. Much lesse can your fin∣gers apply your speach either actiuely or presently to the elements: you must runne to the inward intention of the mynd, and that may direct your purpose in speaking, as it dooth ours, but not actiuely apply your spéech to come néerer the elements in your masse than in our communion.
And so the comming of the word to the element in Saint Austen, to perfite a Sacrament, helpeth you to prooue your reall and manuall application of Christs words in your Masse as much as chaulke doth to make chéese, when curds are wanting. Yea rather if you reade on but foure lines, you shall find your follies flatly refuted by Saint Augustine, and a cleare resolution for vs that not vttering but beleeuing the words of Christ giueth force to the Sacraments. In the water (of Baptisme) saith he,August. in Io∣han. tracta. 80. it is the word that clenseth. Take away the word, and what is water but water? Then commeth that which you cite, Accedit verbum ad elementum, & fit Sacramentum. Put the word to the ele∣ment and then is it a Sacrament. Vnde ista tanta virtus aquae vt corpus tangat & cor abluat, nisi faciente verbo? non quia dicitur, sed quia creditur. Nam & in ipso verbo aliud est sonus transiens, aliud virtus manens:The rehear∣sing of the word is neces∣sary to groūd our faith on his promise, but faith ma∣keth applica∣tion. This nega∣tiue ouer∣throweth the Iesuits actiue application. Whence hath the wa∣ter this vertue to touch the body, and wash the soule, but by the power of the word? not in that it is spoken, but in that it is beleeued: for in the word it selfe the sound passing is one thing, (and that little woorth) the vertue remaining is another thing. If the word of Christ do not worke in that it is spoken, much lesse in that it is actiuely or exquisitely spoken with square conueiance and nimble gestures, the lacke of which is the grea∣test fault you can find with our Sacraments. Philand. This is no small fault, but yet not the greatest. Theoph. You should haue laid foorth in writing what circumstances are required to your actiue application of Christes words, and then you might haue béene answe∣red with more perspicuitie. Wheras now your obiecting vnto vs the breach of Christes institution in certaine metaphysicall and supermysticall termes,The Iesuits knowing that we would charge them with the breach of Christs insti∣tution which they cannot answeare, thought best to charge vs with the like, though the points be nei∣ther material nor prooued by them to haue been v∣sed by Christ. The Rhemish Test. fol. 452. nu. 23. [bread. neither opened by your selues, nor vnderstood of others, is but a Iesuiticall deuise to make a brable about words, and to get the simple in the meane time to mistrust some-what in our doctrine and doings, though they nor you sée no iust cause to mislike: But to be short with you, if the repelling of your actiue and slipper gestures and hauiours that we might embrace the will and commandement of the high and mightie God, be a fault, we haue com∣mitted many foule faults in this and all other parts of our profession; other∣wise in pride and presumption you mingle your fansies with the precepts of Christ: and when we reiect the one, as we lawfully may, you charge vs with contempt of the other, which we exactly follow, and this you vtter in such darke and doubtfull speach, that it is harder for vs to vnderstand you than refute you. Philand. Do we not speake plaine enough, when we say you imitate not Christ neither in vnleauened bread, nor in mingling water with wine: as he did? Theoph. You deale now plainely, if you dealt also truly, but that you do not. In what bread Christ ministred the Sacrament, may perchance be coniec∣tured; but no such thing is expressed in the Gospell, much lesse prescribed for vs to follow. Since the Scripture saith, he tooke bread, and maketh
no distinction what bread he tooke, nor limiteth what bread we should take, we be left at libertie, so we take bread, to take either leauened or vnleaue∣ned, as occasion serueth vs. This conclusion Gregorie the first confesseth to be most true.Greg. in Regist. Tam azimum quàm fermentatum dum sumimus, vnum corpus Do∣mini saluatoris efficimur: Whether it be leauened or vnleauened bread that we take, we are made one body of (our) Lord and Sauiour. The whole Church of Rome not yet an. 150. yéeres ago cōfessed as much in the councell of Florence.Concil. Florent. sess. vltima in literis vnionis. Their words are: Item in azimo siue fermētato pane triticeo corpus Christi veraciter confici, Sacerdotés{que} in altero ipsum Domini corpus conficere debe∣re, vnumquem{que} scilicet iuxta suae ecclesiae siue Occidentalis, siue Orientalis consue∣tudinem. We define the body of Christ to be truly consecrated in wheaten bread, whether it be vnleauened or leauened, and that the Priests are bound to consecrate the Lords bodie in either of the twaine, euery man according to the custome of his Church, be it West or East. Phil. That custome you breake. For where the west Church did alwaies consecrate in vnleauened bread, and the East Church in leauened, you re∣nounce the order of the west Church in which you liue, and to spite the su∣preme Pastor of the west parts,We professe our selues to be at libertie for vsing ei∣ther, and th rather be∣cause he would tie vs of his autho∣ritie to the one. The Rhemish Test. fol. 452. nu. 23. [bread. yea rather of the whole world, you follow the manner of that Church, which is many thousand miles distant from you. Theoph. We are reasoning of Christs institution, not of customes or Churches: and your holy Father himselfe affirmeth that to be no breach of Christs ordinance, which you haue noted against vs in your Rhemish obser∣uations as a transgression of the first and originall institution of the Lords supper. And so whiles you egarly and rashly persue vs, to trippe vs in some∣what, your owne Churches and Councels condemne you for wranglers. Phil. In the other part of the Sacrament you contemne Christ and his Church much more impudently and damnably. For Christ and all the Apostles and all Ca∣tholike churches in the world haue euer mixed their wine with water, for great my∣sterie and signification, specially for that water gushed togither with blood out of our Lords side. This our Lord did (saith S. Cyprian epist. 63. ad Cecilium, nu. 4.7.) and none rightly offereth, that followeth not him therein. Thus Irenaeus (lib. 5. cap. 1.) Iustine (Apol. 2. in fine) and all the fathers testifie the Primatiue church did, and in this sort it is done in all the Masses of the Greekes, S. Iames, S. Basils, S. Chrysostomes: and yet (you) pretending to reduce all to Christ, will not do as he did, and all the Apostles and churches that euer were. Theo. Their faces must be well stéeled that are harder than yours; the whore of Babylon that hatched both your frierly profession and religion, hath taught you long since to leaue off blushing, and fall to bragging. We mingle not water with the wine which we consecrate: this is impu∣dently and damnably done say you. You néede more water with your wine, your toongs burne so hoat with your impudent lies and damnable lies, that an whole streame will skant coole them. Phi. Christ and all the apostles, & all catho∣like churches in the world haue euer mixed their wine with water: you will not of
very frowardnes: do you not deserue to haue hoate words? Theop. The delaying of the wine with water in the Lords cup began first for so∣brietie, not for any my∣sterie.We forbid no man to temper his wine with water, if he find ei∣ther himselfe annoied with the vse of méere wine, or the wine of it selfe to be headie and strong: yea we rather wish all men, if the wine prouided for the Lords table be hoat and fuming, to delay it, that it may be mild and tem∣perate, least that which is taken to sanctifie the soule, happen to distemper and hurt the body: and we greatly commend the wisedome of Christes Church in former ages, where the wines were fierie, and communions dai∣ly (as in the noblest and chiefest partes of christendome in those daies) for de∣laying her wine with water,It cannot be prooued that either Christ or his Apo∣stles vsed wa∣ter with their wine, by any good record. that the very element might serue for sobrie∣tie, as well as ye word for increasing of sanctity: But ye Christ, or his Apostles vsed water with the wine which they hallowed, or commanded others to mingle both wine and water in this mysterie, or that the Church of Christ euer taught it to be a necessary part of this Sacrament, that we deny: That if you proue, we will acknowledge & amend our error, which as yet we take to be none, by reason we find it a thing lawfull, but not néedefull to be done, and estéeme it in them as a matter rather of temperance, than of conscience. Phil. They did it for great mystery and signification, as Cyprian in an whole epistle teacheth you: and they tooke their paterne from Christ himselfe, of whom Cyprian saith.Cypr. epist. 63. ad Caecil. This our Lord did, and none offereth rightly that followeth not him therein. Theop. You peruert Cyprian, as you do all things else that come through your hands.Cyprian doth not alleadge Christs insti∣tution for wa∣ter, but for wine. Cyprian intendeth not in that epistle to prooue that Christ had water in the cup, when he deliuered the same to his disciples, but he refuteth the Aquarij, that ministred the com∣munion in water alone; and against them he prooueth that Christ had wine and not water for the Sacrament of his blood: and then inferreth, to that ef∣fect which you alleadge, This the Lord did (that is he tooke wine to resemble his blood) and none offereth rightly that followeth not him therein. Phil. Nay Cyprian hath plaine words, that Christ mingled wine and water both together. His words are, At enim non manè sed post coenam mixtum calicem obtulit Dominus.Cypr. epist. 63. ad Caecil. Ibidem. Our Lord offered (his) chalice mingled (with wa∣ter and wine) not in the morning but after supper. And againe, Qua in parte inuenimus calicem mixtum fuisse, quem Dominus obtulit. By which part (of Christes speech) we find the chalice that our Lord offered, was ming∣led (with wine and water.) Theop. Cyprian pro∣ueth that the Lords cup must be mix∣ed with wine.We doubt not that Cyprian calleth the cup, which Christ offered, mixtus calix, but his meaning, we say, was to ex∣presse that Christ had wine, in the cup which he gaue, and therefore if any man minister the Lords cup not mingled with wine, he followeth not the Lords steps. Phil. Cyprian saith there must be water as well as wine. Theo. But whē he alleadgeth Christes example that the cup must be mingled, he meaneth the mixture of wine & not of water. And so he expoundeth himself very often in that epistle.Cypr. li. 2. epi. 3. d Caecil. Calix, qui inebriat, vtique vino mixtus est: the cup which
maketh drunke no doubt is mixed with wine. And againe, Ibidem. A Domino admoniti & instructi sumus, vt calicem Dominicum vino mixtum, secundum quod Dominus obtulit, offeramus. We be taught and instructed by the Lord that we should offer the Lords cup mingled with wine according as the Lord did offer it.Cyprian vr∣geth Christs example for wine: which he calleth a mixture by reason it was both lawfull and then vsed to temper it with water. So that the commistion which Cyprian requireth by vertue of Christs institution, is not of water which at that present was not in questi∣on, but of wine, which by the olde Testament he prooueth, was foretolde of Christ, that he should offer; and by the new he sheweth that he did offer in the cup which he deliuered to the twelue Apostles. You therefore abuse Cy∣prians words, when you bring them to prooue that Christ had water as wel as wine, and that if we leaue out either, we follow not Christs example, for he namely vrgeth Christs action for the vse of wine, and that if we omit, we violate the Lords institution. Philan. Cyprians reason will declare that he speaketh of both; and his words to that ende are so manifest that we maruel you wil stand in it. Thus he saith,Epist. 63. ad Caecil. In sanstificando calice Domini offerri aqua sola non potest, quomodo nec vinum solum potest. Nam si vinum tantum quis offerat, sanguis Christi incipit esse sine nobis: si verò aqua sit sola, plebs incipit esse sine Christo. In sanctifying our Lordes chalice, water alone may not bee offered, as also not wine alone. For if a man offer wine alone, the bloode of Christ begin∣neth to bee there without vs. And if water alone, (be offered) the people beginne to bee (in the cup) with-out Christ. And therefore he resolueth,Ibidem. Quando in calice vino aqua miscetur, Christo populus adunatur. When water is mixed in the chalice with wine, then the people is vnited vnto Christ. Theo. Sir we neuer denied that Cyprian spake of water in one part of the Sacrament, and to continue the vse thereof alluded to the mysticall in∣terpretation of water, which Saint Iohn maketh in his Reuelation, when he saith,Reuel. 17. The waters, which thou sawest where the whoore (of Babylon) sitteth, are peoples, multitudes, Nations and tongues; but it is one thing to alledge Christs institution for the necessitie of hauing water in the sa∣cred cup, which Cyprian did not, and an other thing to play with figures and allegories as Cyprian doth,Cyprian al∣loweth water in the Lords cup, & shew∣eth what it may signifie: but he doth not deriue it from Christs example. when he sheweth what water may signi∣fie. That Christ mixed water with wine at his last Supper, no Scripture reporteth, and the Gospell kéeping silence, no man can iustly prooue it: And therefore Cyprian neyther did, nor could auouch any such thing: but that water was and might be vsed in the Church of GOD, and in Saint Iohns vision of the whoore of Babylon was parabolically taken for nations and countries, this we can graunt both to you and to Cyprian without any preiudice. And yet I must let you vnderstand that neither this kind of prouing by pa∣rables is alwais sound, nor this collection, yt without water ye people is not fi∣gured in the Lords cup, is any néedful point of christian religiō. For Cyprian
himselfe elsewhere sheweth that wine alone in the Lords cup, though no wa∣ter be added, resembleth the people vnited to Christ far better than water, & that resemblance is alledged & subscribed vnto by S. Augustine, the other is not. Cypr. lib. 1. e∣pist. 6. ad Mag∣num.When the Lord called his body, bread, that is made of the kneading together of many corns, he declareth the vnion of our people whose bur∣den he bare. And when he called his blood, wine, which is pressed out of many kernels and clusters of grapes, and gathered into one liquor, he sig∣nifieth also our flocke coupled with the permixtion of a multitude con∣ioined. And this way he saith, Ibidem. the Lords sacrifices declare the vnitie of Christians knit togither with firme & inseparable charitie: whose words S. Austen repeateth and commendeth Aug. de Bap∣tis. lib. 7. ca. 50. writing against the Donatists. And vseth the very same in a Sermon of his owne concerning this matter. Ex sermo. ad Infantes. Cita∣tur à Beda in 1. Cor. 10. Ibidem. As to make the visible kinde of bread, many cornes are kneaded into one (lump of dough) so also of the wine, brethren call to your memories how it is made one. Many grapes hang in the cluster, but their iuice runneth into one liquor. Wherupon he concludeth that the Lord hath consecrated at his table the mysterie of our peace and vnitie. The wine sig∣nifieth the people better than water doth. The Iesuits themselues receiue not the saying of Cyprian.This similitude is grounded on the nature of the elements, and significa∣tion of the Sacraments, the other is not: and that the faithfull be not ioined to Christ their head in this mysterie, but by mingling water with wine, this doctrine is neither safe, nor true, by the confession of either side, yours & ours: especially yours, for you exclude the people not only from the water, but also from the wine, and yet by the bread alone you suppose them to be coupled and vnited to Christ their head: and we for our side confesse, that both parts alike doe knit vs vnto Christ, as well the bread as the cup, and that not the mixing or tempering of either element, but the due receiuing of both doth incorpo∣rate vs into Christ. Phil. Then you refuse this saying of Cyprians as vntrue. Theo. We can giue Cyprian leaue to dally with allegories, and to allude to the mingling of water & wine then vsed in the Church: but we can not giue you leaue to de∣riue it from Christs institution, and to make it an essentiall part of the Sa∣crament. And yet you crosse Cyprians authoritie more than we doe. For where the mixing of water with wine is required by Cyprian, that the peo∣ple and not the Priests onely, might be ioined with Christ in that part of the mysterie, you retain the action, and frustrate the signification, by taking both wine and water from the people of God: and therby shew that your mixture is wholy superfluous as not directed to that end, which Cyprian speaketh of, but rather to the contrary. Can the Ie∣suits tell how the people are in the cup after conse∣cration?And of all others you may least indure Cyprians comparison, for he saith, that after cōsecration, as Christ is in the wine, so the people is in the water: and if you transubstantiate the water into the people, as you do the wine into Christ, and bring them within the compasse of your chalice, you had néede of a chalice as wide as the church, or else you shall shrewdly throng them toge∣ther.
Your doctrine therefore reiecteth the meaning and saying of Cyprian, more than ours; and with more pride: we hauing the gospel for our discharge when we say that Christ commanded no mixture in his last Supper:Their owne schooles are against them. & your owne Schooles with one consent to affirme with vs, that water is no neces∣sarie part of this Sacrament. The Gospell in plaine spéech reporteth of our Sauiour, that he dranke the fruit of the vine. His owne words are, Mat. 26. I say vnto you I will not drinke henceforth of this fruit of the vine: Chrysost. in Mat. homil. 83. which surely, saith Chrysostom, yeel∣deth wine and not water. Your owne Schooles conclude flatly with vs a∣gainst you. Thom. part. 3. quaest. 74. ar∣ticl. 7. Scotus in 4. sen∣ten. distinct. 11. quaest. 6. & In∣nocen. de officio missae part. 3. ca. 4. affirme the same. Non est aqua vino miscenda de necessitate Sacramenti. To mingle water with wine is no necessarie point of (this) Sacrament. Water by the position of your owne Schooles is not necessary, then of consequent arbitra∣ry: that is euery church hath ful liberty to vse wine alone, as Christ did, with out danger of departing or dissenting frō the primatiue church, though they for some respects delaied their wine with water and the Sacrament is as perfect, and as consonant to Christs institution without the mixture of wa∣ter, as with it. Phi. That Christ vsed wine we do not deny, but we auouch that he also min∣gled it with water. Theo. We knowe you auouch it, but we would sée you proue it. Phi. Cyprian saith it. Theo. Cyprian saith it not; he saith rather the contrarie.Cypr. lib. 2. ep. 3. Inuenimus vinum fuisse quod sanguinem suum dixit. We finde it was wine,Ibidem. which (the Lord) called his blood. And againe: Cum dicat Christus, ego sum vitis vera, sanguis Christi non aqua est vtique sed vinum. Wheras Christ saith, I am a true vine, surely the blood of Christ is not water but wine. And againe he saith,Ibidem. that Noë typum futurae veritatis ostendens, non aquam sed vinum biberit, foreshewing a figure of the truth that should follow dranke not water, but wine. Phi. Not water alone, but mixed with wine. Theo. Then all that Cyprian either pretendeth or alledgeth Christ insti∣tution for, is the hauing of wine, & not of water: and though he vse the words mixtus and miscere very often, yet his meaning is to proue by scripture the adding of wine, not of water to the Lords cup. Phi. He nameth both wine & water as I haue shewed you. Theo. And as I haue answered you, both were lawful, and then vsed in the church: but Christs institution is vrged by him for wine and not for water: and though he call the cup (mixtus) mingled, be∣cause there might be and were then both in vse, yet the scriptures which he citeth concerning this Sacrament, and the figures which he bringeth make cléerely for wine,Cyprians proofes are all for wine. and not for water: And therefore that Christ mingled wa∣ter at his last Supper, or commanded vs so to doe, can not be prooued by Cy∣prian, nor any other learned and ancient father: but that the church of Christ tempered her wine with water (though not in all places, nor at all times as your boasting vaine serueth you to affirme) that we grant may be proued by Cyprian and others, and was euer confessed by vs: mary that is not our que∣stion. You charge vs with the breaches of Christs institutiō, in which and in
euery part of which,The question is not whe∣ther water was then and now may be vsed, but whether it were a part of Christs or∣dinance. there is an absolute necessitie, that you should proue if you could tell which way to do it, but your loftie words and weake proofes haue no coherence; you speake it in state, as if it were more than Gospell, and when you come to bring foorth your proofes, you wrest a poore place of Cyprians, and so take your leaues. Phil. We bring you S. Iames Masse, which in expresse termes affirmeth that Christ after Supper taking the cup and mingling it with wine & wa∣ter, sanctified it, blessed it, and gaue it to his Disciples. Theop. Of Iames Masse,Iacobi Missa. I haue spoken before: In such rotten records, neither receiued nor regarded in the Church of Christ,The Church of Rome pro∣ueth the most part of her religion by such forge∣ries. till errour and ignorance grew so great, that the Pastours could not or would not discerne fables from truths, and forgeries from sincerities, lieth the summe of your late Rhemish religion; but take back your Monkish corruptions, and let vs haue likely testimonies for that you say, or none; you may alleage S. Iames Gospell which is yet ex∣tant, with as good credit, as S. Iames Masse: and so the Gospels of Nicode∣mus, Thomas,Dist. 15. § Sancta Roma∣na. Andrew, Barnabas, and Bartholomew, or if those like you not, the Acts of Peter, Philip and Andrew, and the Reuelations of Paul, Ste∣uen, and Thomas;Manie things forged in the Apostles names, and yet reiected by the church of Christ. for these be of the very same mint and stamp, that Iames Masse, and the Apostles canons and constitutions are; but knowe you Sir, that as Heretikes and other idle persons forged these things in their names, so the Church of Christ euer reiected them as false and hereticall, and suffered no christians to ground their actions or doctrines on such corruptiōs. Phil. Sainct Basils Masse confirmeth the same. The words are: Likewise taking the cup of the fruite of the grape,Basilij Missa. & mingling it, & giuing thanks, and blessing,These three Masses be all of one sort. and sanctifieng it, he gaue it to his holy Disciples. Theoph. A pigge of the same sow. They that would offer to broach their fansies in the Apostles names, would neuer sticke at the Fathers works. It is easie to put Ambrose, Austens, Basils and Chrysostoms names to any thing; and yet the word which is vsed in Basils Liturgie doth not conuince the mingling of water with wine, and Chrysostoms Liturgie doth apparently shew that water was mingled with wine for the people long after consecration, and yet before distribution, which argueth my saying to be most true, that they delaied their wine for sobrietie, they did not mixe it for any mysterie. Phil. Sainct Basill, I am sure, saith Miscens: Christ mingling (the wine) gaue it to his disciples. Theo. The Greeke word for mis∣cens doth not euer import the mixture of water.The Gréek words for miscens & mixtus, if they come from , do not alwaies signifie ye mingling of water with wine, but generally the tempering or pouring out of wine for him that shall drinke, though none other kind of liquour be added to it. Erasmus giueth that obseruation vpon the word ; and Sainct Iohn so vseth it whē he sayeth,Apocal. 14. He shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, , which is mixed (or poured) without mingling into the cup of his wrath: where  being without mixture, is said to be , that is, mingled or rather infused into the cup of Gods wrath.
Upon which spéech Erasmus noteth. Graecis  dicitur quod infunditur in calicem bibituro, etiamsi non aqua diluatur aut alio potus genere. The Grecians call that  when (any thing) is powred into a cup for him that shall drinke,Eras. annotat. in 14. Apoc. though it be not delaied with water, or any other kind of li∣quour. In this sense manie of the Fathers that wrate in Gréeke may vse , and yet no mingling with water can be inferred vpon those words, as your interpreters ouer gréedily imagine. Phil. You pare the words of Saint Basils Liturgie, but Saint Iames Masse is so manifest for Christes mingling water with wine, that you are faine to deny the worke. Theo. If the Church of Christ did receiue it, I will not deny it: but if they knew no such monument, why should you be suffered now to sort vs out what forgeries you list for Apostolike labours? Phil. The sixth generall councell vnder Iustinian, receiued the Concil. in Trull. sub Iusti. cap. 32. Iames his Masse neuer receiued nor vsed in the Church as his. Masse of S. Iames and S. Basill as authentike: and proued by their Concil. in Trull. sub Iusti. cap. 32. Iames his Masse neuer receiued nor vsed in the Church as his. authorities against the Ar∣menians vsing wine alone in the mysteries, that Christ had both water and wine in his sacrifice. Theo. That councell, which you cite, was neither the sixt generall, nor any generall councell at all. It was celebrated 700. and odde yeares after Christ, by which time it may be, Iames his Liturgie was gotten into some credite amongst them: and yet they alleadge neither of them for Christes institution, but only that deliuering the Church seruice in writing ,Ibidem. cap. 32. they taught that order to perfit the sacred cup with wine and water in the diuine ministration. Philand. Call you the credite of that councell also in question? Theo. I might well do it,Laurent. Surius to Concil. 2. ad∣monitio ad le∣ctorem de Cano∣nibus qui sixtae Synod. dicun∣tur. Ibidem. if I would but follow the iudgement either of your néerest friends, or of those that liued next to the time when this councell was cal∣led. Surius the great Soultan of your side sayeth, that some of those are thought to be Supposititij vel Graecorum temeritate deprauati: either forged, or depraued by the rashnesse of the Grecians. And Theophanes who wrate not long after the kéeping of the councell, sayeth that those are falsly sayd to be the canons of the sixt councell, and giueth this hard iudgement of them: vt enim in caeteris omnibus falsitatis arguuntur,This councell is prouinciall and late, and vehementlie suspected by themselues. ita in hac re quoque mentiuntur: as in all other things they be taken tardie with falsehood, so in this also they make a lie: But for our parts we sée no reason to deale so rigorousely with them. They were but a prouinciall councell, if they were any councell at all: for we haue nothing left but the canons and those contradicted by name. Next the makers liued more than 700. yeares after Christ, and might soone be deceiued by the titles and shewes of these Liturgies: Lastly, what corruptions haue crept since either into the canons or into the Litur∣gies we know not, and in those cases which the Gospell exactly reporteth as it dooth the Lords Supper, we beléeue no man against or without the Gos∣pell. And that in Chrysostoms Liturgie water was mingled long after con∣secration
for the people to drinke,Chrysostoms Liturgie min∣gleth water with wine after conse∣cration for the people to cōmunicate. Chrysost. Missa. the booke it selfe will shew you: where the words of Christes institution being repeated thrée leaues before, when the time for the Priests and people to communicate approched, it is said, Acci∣piunt Diaconi sacros calices praestolantes cum feruente aqua venientem Subdiaco∣num. Tunc infundit aquam calidam quantum sufficit. Deinde sumit corpus Domini∣cum. The Deacons take the sacred cups or chalices, expecting the Deacon that bringeth water (that hath) boiled. Then he powreth in (to the cha∣lices) warme water so much as sufficeth,Sodde water poured into the wine af∣ter consecra∣tion, could be no mysterie. The transla∣tion which their owne men haue set foorth, hath the words which I cite. and after receiueth the Lords body. Now Sir with all your cunning tell vs for what signification and mysterie, water that had sodde, was powred into the chalice after consecra∣tion, if not to temper and delay the headinesse of the wine before the priest or people did drinke of it: and if your braines be not mingled with too much me∣lancholie, you will perceiue, that could be no part of Christs institution. Phi. We find no such thing in Chrysostoms Masse. Theo. It were maruel that I should find it, and not you. Phil. Reade his Liturgie translated by E∣rasmus, and if you find it I will giue you this hand. Theo. Your hand will do me no good: I had rather you should confesse a truth than hazard a ioint. Reade Chrysostoms Liturgy which Leo Thuscus translated into the Latin tongue, and Claudius de Saintes, a man of your Religion hath set foorth of Plantines Presse 1560. and if you find not the words, as I repeat them, re∣turne thē to me for masterlesse creatures, which I would be loth you should. Phil. But mention is made in the very beginning of the same Liturgie, that the priest mixed water with wine before consecration. Theo. It may be the priest did temper that which himselfe should drincke, before consecrati∣on. But after consecration, before the rest of the Clergie or the people did communicate, they delaied it with water in such sort as I tell you: what the cause was, iudge you. Phil. Why this was done, I can not so well say, but this I know, that all catholike churches in the world haue euer mixed their wine with water. Theo. No maruell to see the Church of Christ mixe her wine with water at her dayly com∣munions whē the people were fasting, since the so∣berer sort of heathens in those coun∣tries durst not drinke those strong wines without some delaie. Polyd. de in∣uentoribus re∣um lib. 5. ca. 9.Had they so done, yet so long as they did it for sobrietie, not for necessi∣tie, it nothing concerneth Christes institution, which we labour to restore, nor bindeth any man as a matter of religion or cōscience: but now your flan∣ting humor swelleth aboue truth and measure when you say all Churches in the world haue euer obserued the same. Phil. Name one age or place that hath not done it. Theo. That is the way indéed to cast the burden on other mens shoulders, which your selues should beare: and yet we can soone choake you with an instance, and that by the verie confession of your owne fellowes. The seuenth Bish▪ of Rome from Peter first mingled water with wine at the Lords table. Alexander septimus à Petro Pontifex conseraturus primus aquam vino miscuit, instituít{que} vt ex azimo, non fermentato vt antea consueuit fieret pane. Alexander the seuenth from Peter, was the first, saith Polydore, that mingled water with wine at consecration, and ordained that the oblation should be of vnleauened bread, and not of leauened, as till that time was vsed. Lo Sir the whole church of Christ in all ye Apostles times vsed wine alone, & an hun∣dred
yeares after Christ beganne the first admixtion of water with wine, and vse of vnleauened bread in the Lordes supper; which you with forgerie vnder Iames name would father on Christ himself; though he in the Gospel with his owne mouth deny it. For countries we can giue you the like. The Armenians for 1145. yeares after Christ died leauened bread, and mingled no water with their wine at the Lordes akle. See the report of Otho Frisingensis in whose time they began to hearken to the church of Rome. Their Metropolitane had vnder him The Armeni∣ans for a 1000. yeares and vp∣ward mixed no water with their wine. a thowsand Bishops: and in some things agreed, in some things dissented from the Greeke church. Where amongst other things, he sayth of the whole coun∣trie of Armena: Otho. ri∣singens. lib. 7. cap 32. Ponunt fermentatum panem sicut illi: aquam autem, vino non mis∣cent, sicut nos & illi. They vse leauened bread (in the Lordes supper) as the Grecians do: mary they mingle no water with their wine, as both we & the Grecians do. These bee your famous obiections which you exaggerate, as if they were some mighty breaches of Christ ordinaunce, wherein to let passe the holde which wee haue in the Gospell,Their obiecti∣ons be so farre from trueth that their owne schoole go cleare with vs against them. being thereby cleared from your pelting quarelles in the eyes of all men that euer reade the wordes of Christ, if your owne Schooles in eyther or any of these thinges which you oppose, goe not cleare with vs, that they bee no partes of Christes institution, wee will yeelde to the fault and correct that ouersight. If they doe, then let your friends conceiue what truth there is in your muthes, and what credit is to bee giuen to your wrangling obseruations sent vs lately from Rhemes, wherein without all shame and care, you refute, not vs, but your selues and your owne conclusi∣ons, that you might say somewhat against vs, before the simple and vnlearned, were it otherwise neuer so false or foolish, and euen contrary to your own Prin∣ciples. But you did well to beginne first: you sawe howe plainely you were to bee taken tardie with many wilfull and inecusable breaches of Christes institu∣tion, and therefore you thought it safest to make the salie first on vs,The Iesuites Testament is as full of po∣iurie as it is of heresie. that whiles we were occupied in defending our own, we should desist from impug∣ning your Masse, which is nowe nothing else but an heape of sinnefull de∣uises and abuses inuented by Satan, and broached by Antichrist, to deface and frustrate the Lordes supper. Phi. Who can abide your blasphemies against the blessed Masse? Theo. Call you that blssed, where besides your These be 5. as deepe wounds in the worde of Christ as e∣uer the Iewes made in his flesh. fruitlesse prayers and These be 5. as deepe wounds in the worde of Christ as e∣uer the Iewes made in his flesh. superstitious ceremonies: your prine & halfe commnion subuerteh he Lords insttution, your These be 5. as deepe wounds in the worde of Christ as e∣uer the Iewes made in his flesh. sacrifice derogateth from his death and bloodshedding your These be 5. as deepe wounds in the worde of Christ as e∣uer the Iewes made in his flesh. adoration of bread & wine conuinceth you of hainous & open Idolatrie? Phi. Thse words declare your fury. Theo. Those deedes shew foorth your piee. Phi. You can not proue so much as one of these things which you obiect. Theo. If we moue not euery one of them; we will acquite you from them all Phi. That shall you neuer do. Theo. So must you say though it bee neuer so plaine: but to the point.
The Priestes sole receiuing. Mat. 26. Mark. 14. Luk. 22. 1. Cor. 11. As needfull to giue as to breake the bread.Where learned you, tha he Priest might celebrate the Lordes Supper o∣penly in the church, wit any man to communicate with him, the people standing by, and gasing on hm? The Gospell is against you: for Christ took bread, and when hee had giuen thankes hee brake it, and gaue it to the Disciples: you breake the bread in your priuate Masse for fashions sake, but to whom doe you giue it? Giuing is a part of the Lordes supper, as wel as brea∣king. If it bee needefull to breake the bread, because Christ did so: wee conclude it as needfull to giue th bread, because he did both: and the bread is August. epist. 59.broken, as Augustine affirmeth, to be diuided: In vaine then is it broken if it be not giuen. This the wordes that next insue, confirme. Accipite, edite, take ye, eate ye. The wordes bee plurall: ergo they bee neither truly repeated, nor dulie followed,These wordes be spoken in the plurall nū∣ber & of other mens persons. except others receiue with the Priest. For his person and action is wholy singular, and so perforce you must either chaunge the wordes of Christs institution, which is no way lawfull: or increase the number of communicants, which euerteth your priuate Masse. 1. Cor. 10. We are all partakers of one bread, saith Paul, describing thereby the Lordes Supper: and with you no man is parta∣ker besides the Priest. 1. Cor. 11. When you come togither to eate (the Lords sup∣per) tarie one for an other, that ye come not together vnto condemnation, which the Apostle Epist. 118. spake of this Sacrament, as you hearde out of Augu∣stine. To lile purpose stay you for them, which shall eate nothing when they come. Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11.The Lordes supper ought to be common to all, because he gaue the Sacramentes equally to all his Disciples, that were present: and your Masse is priuate to the Priest alone. Call you this an imitation of the Lordes Supper, or a perfourmance of his will, when you frustrate the very wordes which hee spake, and neglect the chiefest thing which himselfe did at his table? Luk 22. 1. Cor. 11. Doe this, sayth Christ, in remembraunce of mee: that is neither omit, nor alter you this institution, but in all pointes doe that, which I did before you: which you doe not, & therefore as yet we see not how you can excuse your selues from a plaine contempt of Christ and his ordinance. Phi. Is this all you can say? Theo. This is more than you yet haue answe∣red, or, as I think, can for all your crakes. Phi. It is answered with a word. The. Such a word it may be, that it will worke miracles; but in the meane time how keepe you Christs institution? Phi. The Rhemish Test. sol. 451. nu. 23. [in the night. Christes acti∣ons and words are necessarie, though the circumstances be not.All the circumstances of time, person and place, which in Christes action are noted, neede not to bee mitated. As that the Sacrament shoulde bee ministred at night, to men onely, to only twelue, after supper and such like: because (as S. Cyprian epist. 63. nu. 7. & S. Aug. epist. 118. nu. 6, note) there were causes of those acci∣dentes in Christ, that are not nowe to bee alleadged for vs. Theo. That which you say is true, but it serueth not your turn. The circum∣stances of time, as whether at night or in the morning: of place, as whether in church or in chamber: of person, as whether men or women: twelue, or any o∣ther number: these things we grant be wholy in different. The reason is. The
Lord neither in his speech, nor in his actions which he commaunded vs to imi∣tate, did comprise any of these particulars.Matth. 26. He tooke bread, he gaue thanks, he brake it, and eate it, saieng, this is my body. The cup likewise he tooke, and when he had giuen thanks he gaue it them, drinke ye all of this, this is my blood of the new Testament. Luk. 22. Do this in remembraunce of me. These things be essential parts of the Lords supper commaunded by him to be followed of vs. These if you neglect, you neither obey his precept, nor celebrate his supper, but prophanely and wickedly thrust his ordinance out at doores that your owne de∣uises may take place. Phi. His words, The sanctifi∣cation of the meate is per∣formed by those wordes, but the vse & end of the sup∣per is directed by the other. The precept that Christ gaue vs to fol∣low him pre∣ciselie concer∣neth his acti∣ons. this is my body, this is my blood of the new Testamēt, &c. are essentiall parts of this mystery, and so are the elements: for in these two con∣sist the matter and forme of the sacrament. The. And what are his acions? be not they likewise essential parts of his supper? Phi. What actions meane you? Theo. Giuing thāks, breaking, giuing, eating, drinking; wtout which it is not the Lords supper. Phi. These be certain accidents which our Sauior then vsed, they be not of the essence of the sacrament. Theo. With what words did he com∣mand vs to continue this memoriall of him? Phi. Do this for a commemoratiō of me. Theo. Let it be, in remēbrance of me, or for a cōmemoration of mee, whether you wil, so you take not commemoration for Dirges: which Christ needeth not, since he liueth & raigneth in the glory of God his ather; the Greeke is . For the remembrance of me: but the first part of the sen∣tence is , Do ye this. Phi. It is so, what then? Theo. He that charged his Apostles & in them all others, to do what he did, taught them that his acti∣ons were essentiall to his Supper as well as words. He did not wil them to say this, but to doe this in remembrance of him. Phi. Do you not thinke the repeating and vsing of his words to be necessarie in the celebration of the Sacrament?The Rhemish Test. fol. 452. nu. 24. [take, eate. To what end is meate if it be not eaten? Theo. Yeas, but I adde that his actions are as necessary. Phi. There is difference betweene the making of a medicine or the substance and ingredience of it, and the taking of it. Theo. There is: but whē the medicine is neuer so well made if it be not ministred to the patient, the making of it is vtterly vaine. Phi. Yet the making of it, is not the ministring of it. Theo. The one is the end of the other, and therfore without the ministring the making is superfluous.The Rhe. Test. Ibidem. Eating and drinking are not essentiall parts of the Sacrament, but of the sup∣per they are. Phi. Then taking and eating is not the substance, or being, or ma∣king of the sacrament or sacrifice of Christs body and blood, but it is the vse & applica∣tion to the receiuer, of the things that were made & offered to God before. Theo. Nei∣ther did I say that eating and drinking were the substantial partes of the sacra∣ment, but of the Lords institution. Phi. As though the sacrament were not our Lords institution. Theo. Christes institution containeth as well the vse as the matter or forme that must be vsed. A supper is not only the meate prouided, but also the act of eating that which is prouided; & so the Lords institution or Sup∣per imploieth the vse and action as well as the word and elements. Phi. The vse of it is to be a sacrifice, as well as a sacrament: and in a sacrifice, offering is rather required than eating. Theo. That is the way to correct the son
of God, who saide not,The Iesuites neglect hat ich Christ , and busie  which he did . take this and offer it, but take this and eate it. Eating which Chrst commaunded, you neglect; offering which e did not commaunde, you esteeme; and yet you would bee followers of Christ. Phi. Did not Christ▪ say to his Disciples Do this? Theo. You knowe we presse you with that say∣ing of his. Ph. Doe this, that is A that is  by the Poet Vi∣gil cm faciam vitula.offer this. Theo. So you say, but where saith Christ so? Phi. Doubt you whether this bee a sacrifice? Theo. We talke not what names the Lordes supper may be called by, but what wordes Christ v∣sed. Phi. H side Doe this. Theo. To wit that which he did before, for so the demonstratiue bindet the sense. Phi. And what if Christ sacrificed himselfe, as he sate at table? Theo. must come to that issue, or else your sacrificing is cleane without Christs commaunding. Phi. Christ himsele seemeth to mention some such thing, when hee sayeth, 1. Cor. 11. Mat. 26. This is my body, which is (not which shalbe) broken for you. And this is my blood Oige. in Matt. tract. 35. & Chrys. in 1. Cor. ho. 27. read the very words of Christ in the future tense. which is shed (not which shall be shed) for many for remission of sinnes. If this were not a sacrifice, wat was it? Theo. It was the forete∣ling of that which was then at hand presently to ensue. Phi. Christ vsed the pre∣sent and not the future tense. Theo. And yet the suffering, which hee specified by the breaking of his body, and shedding of his blood was not present, but the next day on the crosse. If you teach that Christs blood was really shed at the ta∣ble for remssion of sinnes, you must put him twise to death, & make the later death which was on the crosse to be vtterly idle. For Hebr. 10. where remission (of sin) is, there needeth no more sacrifice for sin. If thē remissiō of sins were obtained by the actual shedding of Christs blood at his last supper, his death & crosse the next day were superfluous. If forgiuenes were not obtained ouer night, but that the Lord the next day was to shed his blood for our sinnes, then spake he before hand of that which the next day should follow: & his speech in the present tense noteth nothing but that hee had euen then giuen him-selfe ouer to death for our sakes, which immdatly they should beheld. No act of Christes therefore at his last supper importeth any reall sacrifice that he then made,Christ ordai∣ned a Sacra∣ment to be di∣uided, not a sacrifice to be offered. but he did institute a Sacrament of thankesgiuing, and co∣maunded vs by eating and drinking to bee partakers of his bodie that was wounded and bloode that was shedde the next daie for the remitting and pardoning of our sinnes. So that you must either retayne eating and drinking at the Lordes table, or else renounce both the beneit of his passion, and memoriall of his death, with an open neglect of his last Will and Te∣stament. Phi. Wee do retaine it, and as you know, by our canons we bind all priests that consecrate to De consecrat. dist. 2. § Rela∣tum est. They binde the Priest to cōmunicate.communicate in both kindes. Theo. Let the decrees of men alone, do you bind them to it by the words of Christ? Phi. We do, though the pu∣nishment bee expressed in the canons, and not in the Scriptures. Theo. It in punishment enough to bee guiltie of the body and bloode of Christ, a grea∣ter you can not impose, make your canons as seuere as you will. Phil. Yet you see we binde them to communicate. Theophil. You should breake
Christes institution, if you shoulde doe otherwise. Philand. And therefore wee doe that which I tell you. Theophil. Then eating and drinking are necessary partes of Christes institution. Philand. Of his action they are partes, but not of the Sacrament. Theophil. Neither doe I say that they are partes of his bodie & blood, but of his example and ordinance. Philand. Wee graunt. Theo. And the neglecting of those actions which Christ in his person perfourmed before vs, is a breach of his institution as well as the chan∣ging or omitting of his wordes.The Priest charged to do as Christ did. Philand. In the Priest it is. Theo. Of the Priest wee speake: for Christ charged him, and not women or lay-men to doe as he did. Phi. Then wee agree to your last position, that if the Priest do not obserue Christes actions as well as Christes wordes he transgresseth Christes institution. Theoph. Then your Priestes are all guiltie of violating Christes institu∣tion. Phi. Doe they not eate and drinke at the Altar, as hee did? Phi. That Christ himselfe did eate and drinke at the ministration of the Sacrament,The words of Christ rather binde him to distribute thā him selfe to cōmunicate. is not expressed in any part of his institution, though some wordes that followe after declare he dranke of the same fruite of the vyne which the rest did, but the whole course of his actions & speeches stood in deliuering the mysteries vnto o∣thers. He tooke bread, that hee might breake it: hee brake it, that hee might giue it: he gaue it, that they should eate: and so his wordes declare which are both plurall and spoken to others, take ye, eate ye, not singular or to himselfe. Though therefore your Priest take and eate for his part,The Priest in euerie priuate Masse doth make a mock of these words take ye, eate ye. The Rhemish Test. fol. 451. nu. 23. [in the night. The Church must not choose what she will follow but rather o∣bey that which Christ commanded. The prima∣tiue Church knewe not what Priuate Masse ment. yet since Christ brake the bread that it might bee diuided among others, & bid them take and eate, it is certaine your Priestes neither doe as Christ did, nor as hee commaun∣ded his Apostles to do, nor as the very wordes of Christ, which he repeateth, do specifie. For Christ said, take ye, eate ye, which in their priuate Masses your Priestes doe not, and for that cause euerie such Masse is a manifest contempt of Christes wordes and deedes confessed and rehearsed by your owne mouthes, at the altar, as partes of his institution. Phi. The Catholike church onely, by Christes spirit can tell, which thinges are imitable, which not, in al his actions. The. When himself hath appointed what ac∣tions of his he will haue to be followed; the church is bound to obey, & not licen∣ced to make her choise: But in this case the church of christ hath faithfully done her duty. For she alwayes obserued these actions of Christ her Lord and master, and verified his wordes, till Antichrist with pride and power came to take vp his seat in the middest of her, and to proportion all religion to his vnsounde and deceiued affection. Phi. Is the catholike church in this point with you? Theo. Yea and against you mightily. The canons, as you terme them, Apostolicall, prohibit your pri∣uat Masse. Apostol. can. 9. Whosoeuer of the faithfull enter the church & heare the scri∣ptures read, if they stay not out praiers & receiue the sacred communion: let them as peruerters of ecclesiasticall order bee put from the communion. Which words the Contil. Antio. caon 2. councell of Antioch repeateth and confirmeth as agreeable
to Christian discipline in their dayes. Reade the church seruice which (as you tell vs) Iames, Basill, and Chryso∣stom coposed, you shall finde them publike communions not priuate masses; read what Dionysius S. Pauls schler (as you beare men in hand) and Iustinus the martyr report of the tration of the Lords Spper in their daies. Dionys. ecclesi. hirarch. cap. 3. This is the generall and catholike description and order of the diuine mysteries, saith Dionysius, that first the minister himself receiueth & then imparteth the same to others. Iusti. Apol. 2.Towards the end of our praiers, aith Iustinus, we salute one an other with a kisse after that bread and a cup of wine delaied with water are brought to him that hath charge ouer his brethren, which he taketh and giueth thankes to the father of all through the sonne and holy Ghost;They delaied their wine with water lest meere and strong wine should annoie anie of the communicāts. his praier and thankes all the people standing by confirme with answering A∣men: then those which are called with vs Deacons giue euery man that is present of the bread and wine tempered with water, and carie the same to such as are absent. This I trowe resembleth our communion not your priuat masse, & this without controuersie was the catholike and Apostelike maner of solemnizing the Lordes Supper in the Primatiue church. Yea the church of Rome which you woulde seeme so much to reuerence withstood this your profanation of the Lordes supper a long time with marue∣lous zeale. De cons. dist. 2. § peracta.Consecration ended, saith Pope Calixtus, let all communicate that will not stand excommunicated: for so the Apostles determined, and the holy Romane church obserueth. The maner of the whole church in Pope Gregories time 600. yeares after Christ was for a Deacon to crie to the people, Greg. Dialog. lib. 2. cap 23.Si quis non communicet, det locum, he that mindeth not to communi∣cate let him auoide. Pope Martine willed him to be De cons. dist. 2. ¶ Si quis. cast out of the catho∣like church, which entered the church of God, and with held himselfe from the communion of the Sacrament. Charles the Emperour 800. yeares after Christ gaue commaundement vteg. Franciae, lib. 1. cap. 132. omnes fideles communicent, & ad Missas perex∣pectent sine ala depraedicatione, that all the faithfull should communicate, and looke at masse so to do without other warning. What need we farther proofe in a case so manifest? your owne fellowes confesse no lesse: Rationaìe di∣no officio. lib. 4. cap. 53. In the primatiue church, saith Durandus, all that were present at the celebration of the Masse did euery day cōmunicate. Their oblation was a great loafe sufficient for al, which the Grecians are said to continue to this day.No priuate Masse in the primatiue Church by their owne confession. So that both the wordes of Christs institution, & the traditiō of the primatiue church directly refute your priuate Masses and proue the communion now vsed in the church of England to be good and catholike. The Chry. hom. 27. in 1. Cor. Lordes supper, saith Chrysostom, ought to bee common. For such thinges as are the Lords belong not to this or to that seruant, but are commō to all. If then it be the Lords, as in deed it is, thou shouldst not take it as thine owne to thy selfe, but propose it to all in common, as being the Lordes. Thou doest not suffer it to be the Lords, whē thou doest not suffer it to be cō∣mō, but eatest it thy selfe. Idem hom. in dictum Pauli oportt haereses esse. Paul calleth it the Lords supper, which is receiued
in common, with one consent of all assembled together, for vntill all com∣municate & be partakers of that spiritual food, the mysteries once set foorth are not taken away, but the priests standing still stay for all, yea for the poo∣rest of all. So Theodoret: The Theod. in 1 Cor. 11. Lords table is equally proposed vnto al mē: of that supper all are partakers alike. And Haymo: Haym. in 1. Cor. 11. The Sacrament of christs body is called a supper by reason of the communion, because it ought to be common to all the faithfull and iust. If this doctrine be true, as there can be no question of it, then are your priuat Masses far from Christs institution, & as far from the catholike order of Christs church, which suffered no man to bee present at the time of the diuine mysteries but such as would & did participate, sending the rest away that could not be par∣takers of▪ the Lords table.The verie name of the Masse, as all auncient wri∣ters vse it, im∣pugneth their priuate Masse. And this the very name of your Masse as I haue pro∣ued, doth shew, signifieng the demising of all such as might not communicate; which if you should do in your priuat Masses you should leaue an empty church, yea the priests must take paines to serue & answere himselfe, since no man be∣sides the priest hath any part of that banquet, which Christ prouided for all: and bequeathed vnto all to bee the monument of his passion, and pleadge of their saluation. With like rashnes you take from the people when you do admit them once a yeare to their rightes (as you call it) the cup which should be to them,The Lordes cup rasly ta∣ken from the people. Mat. 26. Luk. 22. the com∣munion of the Lordes blood, Drinke ye all of this, sayth our Sauiour, and di∣uide it mongst you. These words you repeate for a shew, but you falsifie them in sense. For you suffer no lay-man to tast of the Lords cup, as if one part of this mystery were sufficient, the rest superfluous; or you might dispence with christs institution at your pleasure. Phi. Christ spake that to such as were Priests & not vnto the lay people. The. Doth your conscience serue you Philander to play the wanton in so great and deepe mysteries of christian religion? To whom then were these words spoken, take ye, eate ye? not to the selfesame parties to whom it was said Drinke ye?The cup was deliuered at the same time to the same persons with the bread, ergo both or nei∣ther pertaine to the people. If none may drinke but priests, because the disciples which dranke were Priests: then by the same logike none should eate but priests, because neither time, place, nor persons were chaunged betweene these two precepts eate ye, drinke ye, but in al respects the cup was deliuered at the same time, to the same persons, when the bread was. So that you must either exclude the people from both, which I trust you dare not, or admit them to both which is the very point that we presse you with. Heare what a man of your side thinketh as well of this consequent, as of your halfe communion.Grrd. Lorich. de missa publica rrognda. There be some false catholikes that feare not to stop the reformation of the church what they can. These spare no blasphe∣mies, least that other part of the Sacrament shoulde bee restoared to the lay people. For say they, Christ spake drinke ye all of this, onely to the A∣postles: but the words of the Masse be these, take and eate ye al of this. Here I would know of them whether this were spoken only to the Apostles: then
must laymen abstaine likewise from the element of bread,If your owne mpanions  tell you , take  to your  consci∣ences. which to say, is an heresie, yea a pestilent and detestable blasphemie. It is therefore consequēt that both these words (eate ye, drinke ye) were spoken to the whole Church. I will not take this aduantage, that your owne fellow doth proclaime you for false Catholikes, heretikes and horrible blasphemers, God giue you grace to see whither you be fallen and whence: This for your liues you cannot shifte, but these two precepts eate ye, drinke ye, by the tenor of Christs institution must be referred to the same persons, and so both or neither pertaine to the people. Surely the wordes which our Sauiour vsed in deliuering the cup, are more generall and effectiue than when he gaue the bread,Mat. 26. Drinke ye all of this, and Mark. 14. they all dranke of it: Luk. 22. take it, diuide it among you. This cup is the newe Testament in my blood which shall be shed for The blood of Christ was shedde for the people as well as for the Priest: the cup therefore belongeth to the one as wel as to the o∣ther. you. Now the Lord shed not his blood for the Priest onely, but also for the people, neither was the new Testament established in the blood of Christ for the Priestes sake but as well for the redemption of the people. Then as the fruites and effects of the blood of Christ are common to the people with the Priest, so should the cup also which is the communion of his blood shed for the remission of the peoples sins, be diui∣ded indifferently betweene the Preist and people. Chrys. hom. 18. in 2. Cor. There is, saieth Chryso∣stome, where the Priest differeth nothing from the people, as when wee must receiue the dreadfull mysteries. For it is not here, as it was in the olde Lawe, where the Priest eate one part and the pleople an other, nei∣ther was it lawfull for the people to be partaker of those thinges which the Priest was,One cup pro∣posed to all both people and Priest. but now it is not so, but rather one bodie is proposed to all, and one cup. Phil. The church then might like that the people shoulde haue the cup, as the church after did mislike it for many and weightie causes, but how proue you that Christes precept extendeth vnto the people? Theo. Wee can haue no bet∣ter interpreter of Christes speech than his Apostle, that was best acquainted with the true meaning of our Sauiour. 1. Cor. 2.Wee haue, sayth he, the minde of Christ: and 1. Cor. 11.that which I deliuered you, I receiued of the Lorde. So that hee did not correct, but onely report the Lordes ordinaunce, and in de∣liuering both kindes to the whole church of Corinth, priest and people without exceptiō the teacher of the gentiles did neither swarue frō the first institutiō, nor right intentiō of Christ his master.1. Cor. 10. S. Paul exten∣deth Christes words, drinke you al of this, to the whole Church. The cup of thāksgiuing which we blesse, is it not the communion of Christes blood? The bread which we breake, is it not the communion of Christs body? Ye can not drink the cup of the Lord & the cup of diuels. Ye can not be partakers of the Lordes table and of the table of diuels. Can you frame vs a reason out of these wordes of Sainct Paul, to dissuade the Corinthians from eating and drinking such things as the Gen∣tile there sacrificed to Idols, & not confesse that they dranke of the Lords cup? It is not possible. For this is Sainct Paules argument: You can not drinke both the Lordes cuppe and the cuppe of diuels: the cuppe of thankes giuing which wee blesse (and you all drinke of) is the communion of the
Lordes blood, therefore you maie not drinke of the cup of diuels. YOV CANNOT DRINKE BOTH,The people of Corinth by S. Pauls in∣struction re∣ceiued from Christ him¦selfe, were par∣takers of the Lords cup. inferreth they did, and should drinke one, which was the Lordes cup, not the cup of diuels: els Paul should haue said, you maie drinke neither: not the cup of diuels, for they might haue no fellow∣ship with diuels; neither the Lordes cup, for that is reserued for the Priest by your doctrine: but both, saith Paul, you cannot drinke, ergo they must drinke one which was not the cup of diuels. Againe the cup which they dranke not, could to them be no Communion. For nature teacheth vs that to be partaker of a cup, is to drinke: but the Lordes cup was to them the communion of his blood, ergo they dranke of the Lordes cup. My collection is so cleare, that the vulgar translation, which you are tied to by the Councell of Trent, putteth these verie woordes in the text, Omnes de v∣no pane, & de vno calice participamus, we all are partakers of one bread, AND OF ONE CVP. In 1. Cor. 10. The latin fa∣thers recei∣ued those wordes, we all are partakers of one cup, in∣to S. pauls text. Ambrose, In 1. Cor. 10. The latin fa∣thers recei∣ued those wordes, we all are partakers of one cup, in∣to S. pauls text. Hierom, In 1. Cor. 10. The latin fa∣thers recei∣ued those wordes, we all are partakers of one cup, in∣to S. pauls text. Bede, In 1. Cor. 10. The latin fa∣thers recei∣ued those wordes, we all are partakers of one cup, in∣to S. pauls text. Haymo, and others found it so consequent to S. Pauls former woords, and coherent with his maine rea∣son, that they sticke not to keepe this addition (& de vno calice) in their verie terts, on which they comment. So that out of question Paul taught the Church of Corinth to distribute the Lordes supper to the Christians in both kindes, and that as he saith, he receiued of the Lorde. And who that hath anie shame or sense left, reading the next Chapter that followeth, where Christes institution is fullie proposed and largelie debated by S. Paul, will or can doubt, but the Lorde at his last Supper ordained both kindes for all the faithfull?1. Cor. 11. Did S. Paul speake these wordes to the Priests alone, or to the peo∣ple also? As often (saith Paul to the whole Congregation) as ye shall eate this bread and drinke this cup, ye shewe the Lordes death till he come. Whosoeuer shall eate this bread & drinke the cup of the Lord vnworthilie, shall be guiltie of the bodie and blood of the Lorde. Let a man therefore (not speaking of this or that man, but of euerie man) examine himselfe, and so let him eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup. And least you should want a generall affirmatiue to iustifie this our exposition, take these woordes of S. Paul and quiet your selfe.1. Cor. 12. We all as well the people as the pastours. By one spirit are we all Baptized into one bodie, whether we be Iewes or Grecians, bond or free, and WE ALL HAVE DRVNKE into one spirit. Can you looke for directer or plainer woordes? All Iewes and Gentiles, bond and free not onelie dranke, but by drinking were made partakers of one and the same spirite, uen as by baptisme they were grafted into one bodie. Then if Christ himselfe deliuered both kindes at his last Supper with a strait and generall charge for the cup,The Iesuites cannot take the cup from the people without sub∣uerting these maine places of Scripture and parts of Christs insti∣tution. drinke yee all of this; and Paul recei∣uing his instructions from Christ his master, proposed the same to the Lay men of Corinth no lesse than to the ministers, excepting none, Iewes nor Gentiles, bond nor free, from this precept, how dare you Philander and your late Con∣uents restraine the people from drinking of it? The (Lordes) cup is the new couenant, which he hath made with all beleeuers: do none beleeue but Priests? For the remission of sinnes; are laie men no sinners? as a memoriall of his
death; maie the people loose that remembrance? It is, saith Paul, THE COM∣MVNION OF HIS BLOOD, and the partaking of his spirite; haue the peo∣ple no right to the blood of Christ, that was shed for them; or will you claime his spirite as peculiar to Priestes, which is common to all the children of God? Philand. The Church I warraunt you did ponder and consider these reasons,The Catho∣like Church ministred the communion to the people in both kinds. when shee tooke this order, and finding them vnsufficient, shee de∣creed with vs that the cuppe was not necessarie for the Laie peo∣ple. Theoph. What Church I praie you? The primatiue and aunci∣ent Church of Christ, where catholicisme should beginne? Wee can assure you no. They ministred in both kindes to Priest and people, men and wo∣men without exception. DIONYSIVS. Dionys. eccles. hierarch. ca. 3. The breade that was whole be∣ing broken into manie partes, and ONE CVP DIVIDED AMONG ALL, the Bishoppe in these (twaine) perfiteth the holie Sacrifice. The sacred Communion of one and the same breade AND COM∣MON CVP, bindeth (Christians) to diuine concorde and likenesse of manners, as being nourced vp together. IGNATIVS. Ignat. ad Phi∣ladelphens. There is but one flesh of the Lord Iesu, and one blood that was shed for vs: there is also but one bread, that is broken for all; and ONE CVP THAT IS DIVI∣DED AMONG ALL. ATHANASIVS. (If those be his expositions which you haue set forth in his name) Athanas. in 1. Cor. 11. The dreadfull cup was deliuered (by the Lorde) TO ALL MEN ALIKE. CYPRIAN: Cyprian. lib. 1. epis. .2. How doe we prepare (the people) for the cup of martyrdome, if we doe not first admit them in the Church to DRINKE THE LORDES CVP BY RIGHT OF COM∣MVNION? AVGVSTINE: August. quaest. super Leuiti∣cum, li. 3. cap. 57. Not onelie no man is forbidden but rather ALL MEN that seeke for life ARE ENCOVRAGED TO DRINKE. And againe speaking to the people De conse. dist. 2. ¶ quia passus. simul bibimus, quia simul viuimus, WE DRINKE TOGETHER (at the Lordes table) because we liue together. CHRYSOS∣TOME as before. Chrysost. hom. 18. in 2. Cor. One bodie is proposed to al and one cup. GREGORIE. De cons. dist. 2. ¶ quid sit sanguis.The blood of Christ is now not powred into the hands of vnbeleeuers, but into the mouthes of the faithfull. THEOPHILACT. Theoph. in 1. Cor. 11.How happeneth thou drinkest alone, whereas this dreadfull cup was deliuered to all men indifferentlie? HAYMO: Hay. in 1. Cor. cap 10.The cup is called a communion (by Paul) be∣cause all men are partakers of it. PASCHASIVS:Paschas. de cor∣po. & sagui. Dom. cap. 43. Their halfe communion is so Catholik that the ma∣ster of their sentences 1200. eres after Christ knewe it not. Christ gaue the cup, and said, Drinke ye all of this, as well the Ministers, as the rest of the belee∣uers. Infinite are the places which might be brought to make faith, that for a thousand yeares in the Church of God, the people were not depriued of the Lordes cup. The master of your sentences who liued verie neare twelue hun∣dred after Christ knewe not this maiming and paring of Christes institution which now raigneth in your churches. Sentent. lib. 4. dist. 1. Therefore is the Sacrament, saith he, celebrated in two kinds, that in Christ the taking of soul and flesh, and in vs the redeeming of them both might be signified. For the flesh of Christ is
offered for our flesh, and his soul for our soules. It is taken vnder both kindes which profiteth both partes. If it shoulde be receiued in one kinde onely, that would declare, that it auayled for the safegard of one part onely, soule or body, not for both ioyntly.De consist. 2. ¶ comp. Glos sa ibidem. 1300, yeares after Christ there was no communion in one kinde, but in case of necessitie. The gloze that followed an hun∣dred yeeres after, resteth him-selfe on the same reason with the same wordes, and shrinketh not from the communion in both kinds, but in the danger of sick∣nes, or point of necessitie. Insirmus vel sanus in necessitate potest sumere cor∣pus sine vino: a sicke man (whome the drinking of wyne might hurt) or an whole man in case of necessitie (where hee can not choose) may receiue the body without the wyne. Then in the Church where prouision might soone bee made for all, and no necessitie coulde bee pretended, it was not as yet counted lawefull for the people to receiue the Sacrament in one kinde. Philand. But if the Church after vppon good deliberation,As though the Church could haue cause or power to chaunge Christes ordi∣nance. sawe suffi∣cient cause to chaunge that order, who made you controllers of Christes spouse? Theoph. That vnshamefast harlot, which foureteene hundred yeeres after Christes ascention woulde both alter her husbandes will, and de∣fraude his children of that portion, which their Lorde and Sauiour had allotted them, did prostitute her selfe and bastardize her ofspring as much as lay in her, and is no way woorthie to haue the honour of a mother, or name of a spouse, though shee paint her selfe neuer so freshly with youthfull colours: And the reasons which mooued her so to doe,Rationale diui∣nor. officio. lib. 4. cap. 42. Two weightie reasons for their commu∣nion in one kinde. were as ridiculous, as the fact was impious. Durandus sayth, Non esset decens, tantum sanguinem conficere, nec calix capax inueniretur: It woulde not bee decent to consecrate so much blood (as must serue the people) neither can there so bigge a chalice bee gotten. Gerson beateth his braines to iustifie that, which the councell of Constance did, in taking the Lordes cup wholy from the people not yet nyne score yeeres agoe: and when hee hath all doone hee commeth in with these toyes:Gerson tract▪ contra haeresin de communione Laicorum sub viraque specie. The Catholik considerations for which the the Church of Rome aboli∣shed Christes institution. THE length of Laymens beardes, the loth∣somnes to drinke after others, the costlynes of so much wyne, the diffi∣culties first of getting, then of keeping wyne from sowring, freezing and breeding of flies, the burden in bearing and daunger in spilling it, last of all, the peoples vnwoorthynes to match (Messere magnifico) the Priest in the receite of this Sacrament. Bee not these valiant inducements for you to chaunge the last Will and Testament of Christ Iesus, and abrogate that which was orderly kept in the church for a thousande yeeres and vpward? And yet these were the grauest and profoundest considerations that your friendes had to leade them to this attempt: and these you knowe bee verie miserable. Gerson I graunt shifteth what hee can to bring other proofes, that both kindes are not simply needfull, but why the councell of Constance tooke the cup cleane from the people, (which violence before was neuer offered them,) of this I say, Gerson a chiefe agent in that councell labouring purposely to
shewe the reason of their doings, neither doeth, nor could, yeelde any better or weightier occasions than these which I nowe repeated, and the reader shall find blazed with great confidence in the second part of the foresaid treatise. O deintie fathers and sleeke diuines which for long beardes, and vnsweete breathes, for a litle paynes, and no great charges, for frostes in winter, and flies in sommer thought best to correct Christes institution, and not onely to forsake the full consent of all ages and Churches in expounding the same, but also to chase the people by terror of secular power and ecclesiasticall curse from the cup of their saluation, from the communion of Christs blood, To followe Christes insti∣tution is ad∣iudged to be heresie and accursed with our late Ro∣manists.and felowship of his holy spirit. Such fathers, such fansies. What is mockerie, what is iniurie to God and man, if this be Religion or pietie? The Church of Rome, you will say concluded with them. That increaseth her sinnes, and excuseth not their follies. If an Angel from heauen had con∣spired with them, our duetie bindeth vs to detest both him and them as accur∣sed,What the an∣cient Church of Rome thought of this mangling the commu∣nion. if they step from that which the primatiue church receiued from Paul, and Paul from Christ: Howe much more then ought wee to reiect that which the church of Rome presumeth not onely besides, but against the sacred scriptures? And yet to speake vprightly the auncient church of Rome maketh wholy with vs in this cause. For no church euer resisted your mangled communions with greater vehemencie than the church of Rome did, till couetousnesse and pride blinded her eyes, and hardned her heart against God and his sonne. De cons. dist. 2. § Cum omne.Pope Iulius, that lyued vnder Constantine the great, made this decree. We heare that certaine led with schismaticall ambition against the diuine ordi∣nances, and Apostolike directions doe giue TO THE PEOPLE the Eucha∣rist dipped in wyne for a full communion. They receiued not this from the Gospell, where Christ betooke his body and blood to the Disciples. For there is recited the deliuering the bread by it selfe, and the cup by it selfe.The people must haue the bread and the cup deliuered them seueral∣lie and asun∣der in both kindes. Let therefore all such error and presumption cease least inordinate and per∣uerse diuises weaken the soundnes of fayth. If the communion bee neither perfite, nor agreeable to Christes institution, and Apostolike prescription, ex∣cept the people receiue both kinds seuerall, and asunder, the bread from the cup, and the cup from the bread, as Christ ordayned, and the Gospel declareth: Ergo your excluding the people cleane from the cup is altogether repugnant to the manifest intent of our Sauiour, and right imitation of his Apostles. And what if the first authors of your drie communion were the Manichees, are you not wise men, and well promoted to forsake the precept which Christ gaue you, the president which Paul left you, the course which the christian world for so many yeeres obserued, and followe so pestilent and pernicious a sect of heretikes, reprooued and long since condemned by the church of Rome, for that very fraude and abuse in the Sacraments, which you bee nowe fallen vnto? The Manichees,Leo serm. 4. de quadragessima. sayth Leo, to couer their infidelitie, venter to bee present at our mysteries, and so carie them-selues in the receiuing of the Sacraments, for their more safetie, that they take the body of Christ with an vnwoorthy
mouth, but in any wise they shunne to drinke the blood of our redemption.The Man∣ches the first auths of the . Which I would haue your duoutnes (speaking to the people) learne for this cause, that such men might bee knowen to you by these markes, and when their  in them as . cons. dist. 2. § Coperimus. To nstaine fom the Lords cup is sacrilege. sacrilegious simulation is founde, they may bee noted and bewray∣ed by the Godly, that they may bee chased away by the priestly power. Against this disorder of Manichees wrate Pope Gelas, as your friende Master Harding confesseth. Wee haue intelligence that certaine men recei∣uing onely a portion of the sanctified body abstaine from the cup of the sa∣cred blood: who for that it appeareth, they be entangled with I knowe not what superstition let them either receiue the whole Sacraments, or be dri∣uen from the whole: because the diuiding and parting of one and the same mysterie can not bee without grieuous sacrilege. The sense is plaine. To take the Lordes breade, and not drinke of the Lordes cup, is a seuering and di∣stracting of this mysterie, which by the iudgement of these two Popes is open sacrilege: ergo neither Catholike or christian. What shift nwe Philander, to saue your selues from sacrilege?Artic. 2. contra I ps. Sar. Spake Gelasius of the Manichees as Master Harding resolueth? Graunt it were so. Then what was sacrilege in them, can it bee catholike in you? If that auncient church of Rome condenmed this in the Manichees, howe commeth your late Church of Rome not onely to suffer, but also to commaund the same? Can you turne darknes to light, and sacrilege to Religion?To forbeare the Lords cup is sacrilege in all persons, and ages as well as it was then in the Manichees. That were a marueilous alteration. But Sis your minds may change wee knowe: Christes institution can not chang; The contempt thereof, in Manichees, in Papistes: as then, so still, was and will be sacrilege. Spake Gelasius not of the Manichees but of certaine Priestes that recei∣uing the bread at the Lordes table neglected the cup? Yet Leo speaketh of the Manichees by name, and hose Laymen,Leo speaketh of Lor  though Gela∣sus dint, and calleth it sacrilege in them to re∣frame the Lords cup. Mat. 26. and mingled with the people, and cal∣leth their forbearing the Lords blood a sacrilegious sleight: & reason were you should prooue that onely Prieses are ment in this place of Gelasius, and not suppose what you list at your pleasures, as the gloze doeth and others of your side, that stand on this answere. The woordes are indefinite, and touch as well people as Priest: but let vs imagine that Gelasius spake of Priestes, first then you commit sacrilege in restraining all Priestes from the communion of both kinds, except they say Masse themslues. Next if it bee sacrilege in the Priest, why not in the people? The precept of our Sauiour, drinke ye all of this, com∣priseth all, both Laymen and Priestes. His Apostle 1. Cor. 11. extendeth the same to the whole Church of Corinth. Chrysostome sayth Chrysst. mi. 18. in. 2. Co. the Priest differeth nothing from the people in receiuing the mysteries, but one cup is proposed to al: De c. dist. 2. §. qua passus. In Chalice nobiscum vos estis: You (sayth Austen to the people) are in the (Lordes) cup no lesse than we.Thephil. in 1. Cor. cap. 11. The cup was deliuered to all men (Priest and people) with like condition, as Theophilact affimeth.Paschas. de r∣pore & sag. Dom. cap. 43. Drinke yee all of this, that is, sayth Paschasius, as well other beleuers as Ministers. Hence wee frame you this argument. The cup was by Christ deliuered to Priest and People with
like condition, and like precept:If it be sacri∣lege in the Priest, it is no lesse in the people. the refusing of the Lordes cup is sacrilege in priests by the position of Gelasius and the confession of your friends: it is there∣fore no lesse than sacrilege for the people to refraine the same. What then is it, for you to pull the Lordes cuppe out of their handes, by rigor and force, for so trifling respectes as you pretende, but apparent, violent, and wilfull sacrilege? Phi. They woulde haue it to be sacrilege to withstād their fansies, and to follow Christs commaunde∣ment.It was sacrilege then for the people to refuse or refraine the cup, be∣cause the church was content to admitte them to it: But now the church is o∣therwise resolued, it were sacrilege to expect, or demand it. Theo. What shall the man of sinne and sonne of perdition when he commeth, (if hee bee not alrea∣dy come, and you his supporters to hold vp his seate in the temple of God) say more than you now say; that you at your lists may breake the commandements of the great and euerlasting God, and alter his ordinances; and to blame you for it, or recall you backe from your enterprise, is sacrilege?Esa. 5. Woe bee to you that call good euill, and euill good, which set darkenesse for light, and light for darkenesse, and put bitter for sweete, and sweete for bitter. Woe bee to you that are (so) wise in your owne eyes, and (so) prudent in your owne conceites, that you preferre your owne Counsell before the wisedome of God. Philand. Nay you preferre your wittes before the whole Church of GOD: you woulde not other-wise take vppon you to controle your forefa∣thers and teachers in such sort as you doe. Theoph. If they forsooke their fathers, yea GOD him-selfe,We maie wel forsake them that forsooke both God and their fathers before them. why shoulde wee not renounce them rather as parricides than resemblance of their auncestours? Philand. They were Catholikes, and so are wee. Theoph. You leaue the steppes both of Christ and his Church, and yet you must and will bee catholikes. Philand. Wee followe them better, than you doe. Theoph. So it appeareth by your halfe communion, which they condemned for sacrilege, and you embrace for Religion. Phi. Here is such a stirre about eating and drinking, as though all consi∣sted therein,The Iesuites can not heare of eating and drinking at the Lordes ta∣ble on the peo∣ples behalfe, because they haue dischar∣ged them frō both. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 10. Ioan. 6. and in the meane while you neglect and abolish the holy and vn∣bloody sacrifice, which is farre more Catholike, than your communion. Theo. You neede not make so light of eating and drinking at the Lordes table. There depende greater promises and dueties on that, than on your vnbloody sacrifi∣cing the sonne of God. As often as yee shall eate this breade and drinke this cup, yee shewe the Lordes death till hee come. Without eating and drin∣king therefore the Lordes death is not shewed. The bread which we breake, (to be eaten) is it not the communion of Christes body? The cup of blessing which wee blesse (that all may drinke of it) is it not the communion of Christes blood? If wee refuse eating the one, or drinking the other, can we be partakers of Christ or his spirit? Hee that eateth my flesh, sayth our sauiour, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in mee and I in him: and except you eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his blood, yee haue no life in you.
These bee the fruites, and effectes of religions and worthie eating and drin∣king at the Lordes table: shewe vs the like for your sacrificing, and wee will thinke you had some occasion though no reason to turne the Lords Supper in∣to an offering. Philand. This one Sacrifice hath succeeded all other,The Rhe. Test. fol. 447. n. 21. you can not drinke. and fulfilled all other diffe∣rences of Sacrifices, and hath the force and vertue of all other, to be offered for all per∣sons and causes that the others, for the lyuing and the dead, for sinnes and for thankes∣giuing, and for what other necessitie soeuer of body or soule. Bee not these as great and good effectes of our Sacrifice, as those which you nowe rehearsed for ea∣ting and drinking at the Altar?The sacrifice of the Masse. Theo. They bee great, if you had as good authoritie for the one as wee haue for the other. Philand. Wee haue better. Theo. Wee must giue you leaue to say so, but you shall giue vs leaue not to beleeue you. Phi. All the fathers with one consent stand on our side for the Sacrifice. Theoph. Were it so, that yet is many degrees beneath the cre∣dite of our conclusion. You bring vs the speaches of men, wee bring you the woorde of God: I trust you will aguise some difference betwixt them. Phi. As though wee coulde not bring you Scriptures as well as fathers for the sa∣crifice of the Masse. Melchisedec by his oblation in bread and wyne did properly and most singularly prefigurate this office of Christes eternall Priesthoode,The Rhe. Test. fol. 447. Ibidem. and sacrificing himselfe vn∣der the formes of bread and wyne: which shall contynue in the Church through∣out all Christian Nations in steede of all the offeringes of Aarons Priesthood,Their proofe for the Sacri∣fice of the Masse. as the Prophet Malachie did foretell, as Saint Cyprian, Saint Iustine, Saint Iri∣neus, and others the most auncient Doctors and Martyrs doe testifie. Cyprian epistola 63. num. 2. Iustin. dial. cum Trypho. post med. Iren. libro 4. capit. 32. And Saint Augustine libro 17. cap. 20. de ciuitat. Dei. & libro primo contra aduers. leg. & prophet. ca. 18. & lib. 3. de baptism. ca. 19. S. Leo sermone 8. de passione: auouch that this one sacrifice hath succeeded all other, and fulfilled all other differences of Sa∣crifices, &c. Yea in S. Pauls epistle to the Church at Corinth the first and tenth chap∣ter:The Rhe. Test. Ibidem. They wil proue their sacrifice by S. paul him∣selfe. We maie obserue that our bread and chalice, our table and altar, the participa∣tion of our host and oblation, be compared or resembled point by point, in all effectes, conditions, and properties, to the altars, hostes, sacrifices, and immolatious of the Iewes and Gentiles. Which the Apostle woulde not, or coulde not haue done in this Sacrament of the altar, rather than in other Sacraments or seruice of our Re∣ligion, if it onelie had not beene a Sacrifice and the proper worship of God among the Christians, as the other were among the Iewes and heathen. And so doe all the fa∣thers acknowledge, calling it onelie, and continuallie almost, by such termes as they doe no other Sacrament or ceremonie of Christes Religion: The Lamb of God laide vpon the table: Concil. Nicen. The vnbloodie seruice of the Sacrifice, In Con∣cil. Ephesin. epist. ad Nestor. pag. 605. The sacrifice of sacrifices: Dionys. Eccles. Hieronym. cap. 3. The quickning holie sacrifice: the vnbloodie host and victime: Cyril. Alex. in Concil. Ephes. Anat. the propitiatorie sacrifice both for the liuing
and the dead. Tertul. de cor. Milit. Chrys. ho. 41. in 1. Corinth. ho. 3. ad Phil. Ho. 66. ad pop. Antioch. Cypr. epi. 66. & decaena. Do. nu. 1. August. Euch. 109. Quaest. 2. ad Dul∣cit. to. 4. Ser. 34. de verb. Apost. The sacrifice of our mediator: the sacrifice of our price: the sacrifice of the newe Testament: the sacrifice of the Church. August. li. 9. ca. 13. & li. 3. de baptist. ca. 19. The one only inconsumptible victime, without which there is no Religion. Cyprian. de caen. Do. nu. 2. Chrysost. ho. 17. ad Hebr. The pure oblation, the newe ofspring of the newe Law: the vital and impolluted host: the honorble & dread∣ful Sacrifice:God graunt you may haue eyes to see your follies. Not one of all these scrip∣tures or fa∣thers maketh for the Sacri∣fice of their Masse. the Sacrifice of thankesgiuing or Eucharistical: & the Sacrifice of Mel∣chisedec. This is the Apostles and fathers doctrine. God grant you may find mercy to see so euident and inuincible a trueth. Theo. You be nowe where you would be; and where the fathers seeme to fit your foote: But if your sacrifice bee conuinced to bee nothing lesse than catho∣like, or consequent to the Prophets, Apostles or Fathers Doctrine, what say you then to your vanitie in alleaging, if not impietie in abusing so many Fa∣thers and Scriptures to proppe vp your follies? Phi. Bee not these places which we bring you for this matter, vndeniable, vnauoydable, indefeatable, vn∣answerable? Theo. In any case lay on loade of termes: You haue made vs so many in your late Rhemish testamēt, that now you must not seeme to lack. But what if all these places neede neither denying, auoyding, defeating nor answe∣ring? What if not one of these fathers, whose works you cite as thick as hops, euer spake or heard of your external and real sacrificing the sonne of God afresh for the sinnes of the worlde, but they vsing the wordes Sacrifice and oblation to an other purpose, you force a priuate and peculiar sense of yours vpon their speaches against their meanings? Phi. This is euer your wont, when the woordes bee so plaine that you can not deny them, to flie to the meaning. Theo. In deede this hath beene not the least of Satans sleights in conueying your Religion from steppe to step & point by point, to keepe the speach,The generall order of the Romish Reli∣gion is to keep the fathers phrases, and to chaunge their faith. and chaunge the sense of the learned and auncient fathers, that what with the phrases which were theirs, and the forgeries which were not theirs, and yet caried their names, hee might make the way for Anti∣christ to set vp his visible Monarchie of error and hypocrisie. Phi. This is the way to rid your selues of all obiections. Theoph. And the other is the way to drowne your selues in the deapth of all corruption: but so long as wee holde their fayth and doctrine, which were the lights and lampes of Christes church, we can spare you their phrases here and there skattered in their writings, & you no whit the neerer the trueth of their beliefe. Phi. You hold not their fayth in this or any other point of your Religion. Theo. The greatest boasters bee not alwaies the greatest conquerours: Let it therefore first appeare what they teache touching the Sacrifice of the Lords table,How the Lordes supper maie truelie be called an oblation and a Sacrifice. and what wee admit: and then it will soone bee seene which of vs twaine hath departed from them. The fathers with one consent call not your priuate Masse, that they neuer knew, but the Lordes Supper a Sacrifice, which wee both willingly graunt
and openly teach: so their text, not your gloze may preuayle. For there besides the sacrifice of praier and thankesgiuing, which we must then offer to God for our redemption & other his graces bestowed on vs in Christ his sonne: besides the dedication of our soules and bodies to be a reasonable, quicke, and holy sa∣crifice to serue and please him: besides the There are four kindes of Sa∣crifices in the Lords supper, and not one of them is the popish Sacri∣fice. contribution and almes then giuen in the primatiue Church for the reliefe of the poore and other good vses: a Sa∣crifice no doubt very acceptable to God: I say besides these three sundry sortes of offerings incident to the Lordes table, the very Supper itselfe is There are four kindes of Sa∣crifices in the Lords supper, and not one of them is the popish Sacri∣fice. a publike memorial of that great & dreadful sacrifice, I meane, of the death & bloodshed∣ding of our sauiour, and a most assured application of the merites of his passion, for the remission of our sinnes, not to the gazers on, or standers by, but to those that with faith and repentance come to the due receiuing of those mysteries. The visible sacrifice of bread and wyne representing the Lords death S. Au∣sten enforceth in these words: August. de side ad Pe. cap. 19.Hold most firmly, neither doubt of this in any case, that the only begotten sonne of God taking our flesh offered himselfe a sweet smelling sacrifice to god, to whom with the father & the holy ghost, the Patriarks, Prophets, & Priests vnder the old law sacrificed brute beasts, & to whō now, in the time of the new Testament, with the (same) father & holy spirite, the holy Catholike Church throughout the world doth not cease to ofer the sacrifice of breade and wine in faith & charitie. In those carnal Sa∣crifices there was a figuration of the flesh of Christ, which he should offer, & bloud which he should shed for the remissiō of our sins: In this sacrifice there is a The Catholike Church offe∣eth bread and wine to God for a thankesgi∣uing in remem∣brance of his sonnes death. Our Sacrifice is the giuing of thankes and remembring of his death. thankesgiuing & remembrance of the flesh which he hath offered and bloud which the same god hath shed for vs. With him agreeth Ireneus: Christ Irineus, lib. 4. cap. 32.willing his Disciples to offer vnto God the first fruites of his creatures (not that god needed them, but lest they should be found vnfruiteful or vnthank∣ful) toke the creature of bread and gaue thanks saying this is my body. And likewise he confessed the cup which is a creature amongst vs to be his bloud teaching the new oblation of the new Testament, which the Church recei∣uing from the Apostles offereth to God throughout the world. Ibidem. cap. 34. The Church offereth to God of his creatures with thanksgiuing: & sanctifying that which the faith∣full receiue at the Lords ta∣ble. We must thē offer to god, & in al things yeeld thanks to god the maker with a pure mind, vnfaigned faith, stedfast hope, and feruent loue, offering the first fruits of his Creatures: and this oblation the Church only sacrificeth in purity to the cre∣ator, offering to God of his creatures with thanksgiuing. And this we offer to him not as if he stoode in neede (of these presents) but rendring him thanks for these his gifts, and sanctifieng the creature. This oblation of bread & wyne for a thankesgiuing to God, & a memoriall of his sonnes death was so confessed & vndoubted a trueth in the church of Christ, till your Schoolemen beganne to wrest both Scriptures and Fathers to serue their quiddities, that not onely the Liturgies vnder the names of Clemens, Ba∣sil, and Chrysostome do mention it: (Clemens. Apost constitutio. lib. 8. cap. 17.We offer to thee our king and God this bread & this cup according to thy sonnes institutiō: Liturg. Chrys. & Basil. tua ex tuis offerimus tibi domine, we offer thee O Lord these thy gifts of thine own (creatures.) Which
sense Irineus Lib. 4. cap. 34. vrgeth against valentine,) but also the very Missals vsed in your own Churches at this day do confirme the same. These be the woordes of your own Offertorie: Offertorium Missae. Their owne Masse-booke is against the sacrifice which they defend to be in their masse. Receiue holy Father, God euerlasting, this vndefiled host, which I thine vnworthy seruant offer to thee my king and true God, for my sinnes, negligences, and offences innumerable, for al standers by, yea for all faithful christians as wel liuing as departed this life, that it may helpe me & thē to attaine eternal life. Ibidem. We offer to thee O Lord this cup of saluation, in∣treating thy goodnes that it may be taken vp into thy sight, as a sweet smell for the sauing of vs & the whole world. Ibidem. Receiue blessed Trinitie this oblatiō which we offer to thee in remēbrance of the passion, resurrection, & ascēti∣on of Christ Iesus our Lord. Ibidem. We humbly beseech thee most merciful father through Iesus Christ thy son our Lord that thou accept & blesse these gifts, these presēts, these holy vndefiled sacrifices, which we offer to thee first for thy Church, holy and catholike &c. For al true belieuers &c. For al here pre∣sent &c. For the redemption of their soules, and hope of saluation. By their owne bookes it is e∣uident that they doe not sacrifice Christ, but the creatues of bread and wine. Marke this contradiction in their masse-booke to the sacrifice which the Ie∣suits pretend.Certainely you speake these words long before you repeate Christs instituti∣on, your Masse-booke doth apparently prooue that which I report, if I mistake the secretes of your masse, let the shame bee mine. What then offer you in this place? Christ, or the creatures of bread & wine? By your own doctrine Christ is not present, neither any change made til these wordes, This is my body, this is my blood, be pronounced, ergo before consecration the creatures of bread & wyne keepe their proper & earthly substance, when notwithstanding your selues offer thē to God in your masses for the remissiō of your sins, redēption of your soules, & to profit the quick & the dead by that oblation. You teach the people that no∣thing is offred by the priest to god the father for remission of sins, but Christ his son: Your masse, where this should be done, conuinceth yt you sacrifice not Christ, but the creatures of bread & wine. Be you not more thā blind which see not that the praiers which you daily frequent refute ye sacrifice which you falsly pretend? Phi. As though the ancient fathers did not also say that Christ himself is daily offred in the church. Theo. Not in the substance which is your error, but in sig∣nification, which is their doctrine & ours. Take their interpretation with their words & they make nothing for your local & external offring of christ. Aug. ad Bonif. epist. 23. Christ is offe∣red not in sub∣stance but in a Sacrament or representati∣on of his death. Was not Christ, saith Austen, once sacrificed in himselfe? and yet in a sacrament is he offered for the benefite of the people, not euery Paschal feast only but euery day. Neither doth he lie, that whē the questiō is asked him, answereth, Christ is offred (daily.) For if Sacraments had not a certain similitude of the things, wherof they be sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at al. And by rea∣son of this similitude they vsually take the names of the things them-selues. Christ is offred daily: this is true, saith Austen, but how? The communion is a sacrament of the Lords death; & sacraments haue the names of the things them selues from a certaine resemblance that is betwene them. This doctrine diffe∣reth much from yours, and yet must Austen stand for a christian and Catholike father, when you by your patience shall goe for vpstarts.
Phi. S. Augustine spake this not of the liuely flesh & blood of Christ which we sacrifice to god the father by the priests hands for the sins & necessities of mē:Christ slaine for our sinnes is the true sa∣crifice of the Lords table. but of his death & passiō represented at our masse by the holy mysteries. The. In deed S. Augustin spake of yt he knew: as for your cōceit of sacrificing the liuely flesh & blood of Christ in substance vnder the formes of bread & wine by ye priests hands; neither he, nor any good author was euer acquainted with it. And to say the truth the very spring & roote of your error is this yt you seek for a sacrifice in the Lords supper, besides the Lords death. Marke wel the words of Cyprian. Cypr. li. 2. ep. 3.The passion of the Lord is the sacrifice which we offer: Of Ambrose, Ambros. in 10. ca. epist. ad Heb. Our high priest is he that offred (on ye crosse) a sacrifice to clense vs: the very same we offer now; which being then offred cannot be consumed; this Sacrifice is a sāplar of that, we offer that very sacrifice for euer: Of Eusebius, Euseb. de de∣monst. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 10. Christ after al things (ended) offred a wōderful oblation & most excellent sacrifice (on the crosse) for the saluation of vs al, & gaue vs a memorie therof in stead of a sacri∣fice: we therfore offer the remēbrance of that great sacrifice in the mysteries which he deliuered vs. Of Chrysost. Chrys. in Mat. hom. 83. Bringing these mysteries we stop the mouthes of those that aske, how we proue that Christ was sacrificed (on the crosse.) For if Iesus were not slaine, whose signe and token is this sacrifice? Of Austen, Aug. contra Faust. l. 20. c. 21.We sacrifice to God in that only manner, in which he commanded we should offer to him at the reuealing of the new Testament: the flesh and blood of this sacrifice was yeelded in verie trueth when Christ was put to death: after his ascention it is now solemnized by a Sacramēt of memorie. The verie elements and actions of the Lordes Supper conuince no lesse.The actions and elements of the supper resemble his death. The bread which we breake, what else doth it represent, but the Lordes bodie that was broken for vs? The cup, which we drinke, what els doth it resemble saue the Lordes blood that was shed for our sakes? De cons. dist. 2. § cum frangi∣tur. When the host is broken, and the blood poured out of the cup into the mouthes of the faithfull, what other thing, saith Prosper, is thereby designed, than the offering of the Lordes bodie on the crosse, and the shedding of his blood from his side? 1. Cor. cap. 11. As Christ is crucified in the mysticall supper, euen so is he offe∣red.As often as you shall eate this bread and drinke of this cup, you shewe forth the Lordes death till he come: saith Paul. There can be no question of this, the spirit of god hath spoken it. Then if the death of Christ be the sacrifice which the church offreth, it is euident that christ is not only sacrificed at this ta∣ble: but also crucified: & crucified in yt selfe same sort & sense that he is sacrificed: but no man is so mad as to defēd that christ is really put to death in these myste∣ries: ergo neither is he really sacrificed vnder the formes of bread & wine: which thing your selues haue lately ventered & rashly presumed without al antiquity. The catholik fathers I can assure you say, christ is offered, & christ is crucified in the Lords supper indifferently. So Ierom, Hier. in ps. 95.Christ is euery day crucified to vs. So Chrysostom,Chrysost. in acta Apost. hom. 21. The death of christ is here performed. So Gregory, De cons. dist. 2. § quid sit san∣guis. Christ dieth againe in this mysterie, & his flesh suffreth for the saluation of the peo∣ple: so to conclude, Austen, Aug. Euang. quaest, l. 2. ca. 38. The gētiles now through the whole world tast & lick the passion of Christ in the sacraments of his body & blood. If you can
expound this you shall not neede to stagger at the rest. The church hath no Sa∣crifice propiciatorie besides the death of her Sauiour, and therefore as she doth kill him, so she doth offer him in her mysteries. If you can not, learne by the di∣rection of your own decrees, what doctrin was taught in the primatiue church, and euen in your own church for 1300. yeres touching this matter. De cons. dist. 2. § hoc est quod alimus. The offe∣ring of the (Lords) flesh, by the Priests hands is called the passion, death, and crucifying of Christ, Non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio, Not in precise truth, but in a mystical signification, or it your gloze delight you rather, Glossa de cons. dist. 2. § quid sit sanguis. In this mysterie Christ dieth, that is his death is represented; his flesh suffereth, that is his passion is represented. In this very sense Christ is offred daily. Chrysostom, Chrysost. in 10. cap. epis d Hebr. Do we not offer euery day? we do: but a memorial of his death. We do not offer an other sacrifice, but euer the same or rather we continue the remembrance of that sacrifice. Ambrose, Ambr. in 11. ca. epist. 1. ad Cor. Because we were deliuered by the Lords death, we bearing that in mynd do signifie with eating and drinking the flesh and blood that were offred for vs: It is a memorial of our redemption. Eusebius, Eusebale de∣monstra. Euan∣gelic. lib. 1. ca. 10. Christ offered a wonderful sacrifice for the saluatiō of vs al, & we haue receiued a memorial of that most sacred oblation to be performed at the Lordes table according to the rule of the new testament. Augustin, August. 83. quaest. cap 61. Christ is offe∣red at the table, that is a sacrament & similitude of his death is ce∣lebrated. Christ is our high priest after the order of Melchisedec, which yeelded himself a slain sacrifice for our sinnes, and gaue vs a similitude & image of that oblation to be celebrated for a re∣mēbrance of his passiō, in so much that we may see that, which Melchisedec offred to God, now sacrificed in the church of Christ throughout the world. Emissenus, De cons dist. 2. § quia corpus. This is Christi∣an & comforta∣ble doctrine.Considering that Christ was to take his body from our eyes & place the same in the heauens, it was requisite he should institute the sa∣crament of his body and blood for vs at his last supper, that it might alwaies be continued in a mysterie, which was once offred for a ransom, & because the work of our redemption did neuer faile, the sacrifice of our redemption might be perpetual, and that euerlasting oblation (of Christ on the crosse) might remaine fresh in memorie and present for euer in grace. Theod. in cap. 8. ad Hebr.Theodorete, If Christ (by his owne sacrifice on the crosse) brought to passe, that other sacrifices should be superfluous, why doe the Priests of the new Testament execute the mysticall Lyturgie or Sacrifice? It is cleare to them that are instructed in our mysteries, that we doe not offer an other sacrifice, but continue the memorie of that one and healthful Sacrifice. For so the Lord himself commanded vs, doe this in my remembrance, that in behold∣ing the figures, we should remember the paines which he suffered for vs, & beare a louing heart towards him that did vs so much fauour, and expect the receiuing of good things to come (which he promised.) Theoph. in 10. cap. ad Hebros.Theophilact, Do we then offer vnbloody sacrifices? No doubt wee doe mary by being a remembrance of the Lords death. He was once offred, and yet we offer him alwaies, or rather we celebrate the memorial of that obla∣tion, when he sacrificed himselfe (on the crosse.)
Receiue this addition which they make; and wee graunt you that oblation, which they teach. Christ is offered, or rather a memorial of his death and ob∣lation is celebrated.What sacrifice the fathers taught, and of∣fered. This later correction doeth expound and interprete their former assertion. You can require no plainer, nor sounder doctrine. They piese not Christ with their handes, they shroud him not in accidences, they pray not for him, that God Canon Missae supra § propitio ac sereno vultu. will vouchsafe to respect and accept him as hee did the giftes and (external) sacrifices of Abel, Abraham and Melchisedec, as you do in your Masses: they neuer tolde vs the very fact and intention of the Priest were meritorious; these bee your absurdities and blasphemies: They did of∣fer an Liturgia Ba∣silij.vnbloody sacrifice not of flesh but of Spirite and mynd, Cypr. li. 2. epist. 3. & August. 83. quaest. ca. 3. the selfe∣same which Melchisedec did two thousande yeeres before Christ tooke flesh, and therefore not the flesh of Christ: a Dionys. eccles. hierach. cap. 3. figuratiue sacrifice, to witte, Signes, Samplars, Similitudes and Memorials of his death and bloodshedding. So that Christ is offered dayly but Mystically, not couered with qualities and quantities of bread and wyne; for those be neither mysteries nor resemblances to the death of Christ:Paschal. de cons. dist. 2. § ite∣ratur. The true expo∣sition of the Sacrifice at the Lordes ta∣ble. but by the breade which is broken, by the wyne which is drunke, in substance creatures, in signification Sacraments, the Lordes death is figured & proposed to the communicants, and they for their parts, no lesse peo∣ple than Priest, do present Christ hanging on the crosse to God the father, with a liuely faith, inward deuotion, and humble prayer, as a most sufficiēt and euer∣lasting Sacrifice for the full remission of their sinnes and assured fruition of his mercies. Other actual and propitiatorie sacrifice than this the church of Christ neuer had, neuer taught. You beleeue not mee. Well, what if your owne fellowes and friends teach the same? What if the master of your Sentences, what if the Glozer of your de∣crees, what if the Ringleader of your Schoolemen make with vs in this questi∣on, and euince, that for twelue hundred yeres after Christ your Sacrifice was not knowen to the woorlde:How long the Church was without their kind of sacri∣fice. Sententiarum. lib. dist. 12. will you giue the people leaue to bethinke them∣selues better, before they call you or account you catholikes? Then heare what they say: Peter Lombard in his 4. booke and 12. distinction. I demaund whe∣ther that which the Priest doeth bee properly called a Sacrifice or an obla∣tion, and whether Christ be daily offered, or els were offered only once.The master of the sentences is against the Iesuits in the sacrifice of their Masse. To this our answere is briefe: that which is offred and consecrated by the priest is called a sacrifice and oblatiō, because it is a memorie & representation of the true sacrifice, & holy oblatiō made on the altar of the crosse. Also Christ died once on the crosse, and there was he offred himself, but he is offred dai∣ly in a sacrament, because in the Sacrament there is a remembrance of that which was once done. Now what this meaneth, Christ is offred in a sacramēt, we need no fairer interpretation thā that which your own gloze oftē repeateth: Glossa. de cons. dist. 2. ¶ semel.Christ is offred in a sacrament, that is, his offring is represented, & a memorie of his passion celebrated. § in Christo. It is the same oblation which he made, * that is, a repre∣sentation of the same passion. § Iteratur. Christ is offered euery day mystically, * that is, the oblation which Christ made for vs is represented in the sacrament of his body & blood.
Thom. part. 3. quest. 83. art. 1.With these concurreth Thomas of Aquine. Because the celebration of this Sacrament is a certaine Image of Christs passion, it maie conuenient∣lie be called the sacrificing of Christ. The celebration of this Sacrament is termed the immolating of Christ in two respects: First, for that, as Austen saith, resemblances are woont to be called by the names of those thinges whose resemblances they are; next The latter schoolemen since Thomas mistaking the former, tur∣ned these words to opus operatum, and taught the Priests act to be the right meane to ap∣plie Christes death to the quick and the dead. Can their do∣ctrine be Ca∣tholike that so latelie was vnknowen to their own fel∣lowes? 24. places ci∣ted by the Ie∣suits in their testament to no purpose, and so 14. by the maker of their Apolo∣gie. for that by this sacrament wee be made partakers of the fruite of the Lordes passion. Here find you no reall, locall, nor externall offering of Christ to God his father by the Priest for the sinnes of the people; which is your opinion at this daie; you finde that the cele∣bration of the Lordes supper maie be called an oblation, first, for that it is a representation of Christs death, and sacraments haue the names of the things which they signifie; next, because the merits and fruits of Christs passion are by the power of his spirite diuided and bestowed on the faithfull receiuers of these mysteries. Nowe boast of your Catholike doctrine, that your pratling Sophists and wandering Friers inuented but yesterday; now call for your souereigne Sa∣crifice not onelie repugnant to the sacred Scriptures and auncient fathers, but reiected by the Mint-master of your sentences, refuted by the conclusions of your Seraphicall Doctor, shunned by your rude Gloze-maker, and cleane thwart to the Canon of your ordinarie Masse. If you speede no better in the rest of your causes, a worse name than fugitiues will become you and your companions well enough, without perill of slaunder or breach of charitie. These foundations lying sure; to wit, that the creatures of bread and wine are offered to God for a thanksgiuing, when they be sanctified and receiued ac∣cording to his sonnes institution, and that Christ himselfe is daylie offered and crucified in a mysterie, because the breaking of his bodie, and shedding of his blood on the crosse are proposed and renewed by the bread which we eate, and cup which we drinke at the Lordes table; these conclusions I saie standing good we receiue the foure and twentie places which here you huddle, and the fourteene which the Pen-man of your Apologie hath shufled into his sixt chap∣ter, (being for the most part the same that these are, and the rest weaker than these;) and affirme that not one of them teacheth anie other sacrifice than we haue shewed and confessed, and that is no such offering as you auouch and de∣fend at this daie to be in your Masse. For you will haue a reall, externall and corporall kinde of offering the liue fle of Christ by the Priests hands, vnder the formes of bread and wine to God the father for the sinnes of men:Their reall & actuall sacri∣fice must needes be made with handes, and so the gestures of the Priests hands is all the sacrifice the Iesuites haue. and this manual seruice or act of the Priest you auouch to be meritorious and propitia∣torie for those that can purchase the Priests good will to be mindfull of them in his memento. This is, we saie, a wicked inuention of yours, not the assertion of anie fa∣ther: They celebrated and solemnized the Lordes death by sanctifying the creatures as Christ ordained, and by diuiding them to such as were faithfull and thankeful to God for the redemption of the world in the blood of his sonne:
and this their incitation and prouocation of all men to faith, praier, thanks and obedience was the acceptable seruice and Sacrifice of the new testament. To this we would recall you, by telling you that God careth not for the Priests hands,What Sacri∣fice it is that God regar∣deth. but for the peoples hearts, and that he requireth not one mans crossing, but the whole Churches calling on him with one heart and one mouth, that he may be honoured, and wee comforted in the death of his sonne. And this was it that Malachie foretolde, and not the Priests holding vp the Chalice, or clen∣ly conueighing the paten, as he must in your Sacrifice. Phi. The Prophet Malachie did plainly foretel (our Sacrifice) as S. Cyprian,The Rhemish Test. fol. 447. Malac. 1. S. Iustine, S. Ireneus, and other most ancient Doctors and Martyrs doe testifie. Theo. Why? What saide the Prophet Malachie? Phi. I haue no will to you, saith our Lord of Saboth (to the Iewish Priests) and a gift wil I not receiue of your hands. For from the rising of the sunne to the setting thereof, my name is great among the Gentils, and in euery place A CLEANE OBLA∣TION IS OFFERED AND SACRIFICED TO MY NAME. Theo. Ma∣lachie doth not say it shal be offred at the Altar, or by the Priests hands, or vn∣der the formes of bread & wine:The prophesy of Malachie discussed. but a pure oblation is offered vnto my name. Phi. And what oblation can be so pure, as the bodie and bloud of Christ? Theo. Neither saith hee, the purest, but a pure oblation is offered, Phi. What other oblation hath the new Testament, but only that? Theo. Sacrifice for sinne it hath none, but that which the sonne of God made on the crosse: mary yet the new Testament teacheth vs other oblations besides that: though I confesse all our words and works, & euen our selues must bee washed and sanctified in that sacrifice: before we, or any thing that we say or doe can be acceptable vnto God. Phi. What oblations doth the new Testament teach vs besides that? Theo. You haue not forgotten, I dare say, what Peter saith.1. Pet. 2. What sacrifi∣ces the newe testament teacheth vs to offer vnto God. And ye as liuely stones be made a spirituall house, and an holy Priesthood, to offer vp spiritual Sa∣crifices acceptable vnto God by Iesus Christ. Phi. Why may not S. Peter speake that of the annointed Priests, and their true sacrifices? Theo. So he doth, but he meaneth all Christians, and not your shauelings. Phi. You would picke a quarell to holy oile: but you bee not yet at rest from the sacrifice. Why may not S. Peter I pray you speake of the blessed Masse? Theo. Because hee speaketh to al both men and weomen: and telleth them of a blesseder matter than your masse, that is of the true spiritual sacrifices, in which god taketh more pleasure than in your mumbling of fruitlesse Masses. Phi. What are those? Theo. S. Paul vttereth two of them almost in one sentence. Hebr. 13. The Sacrifice of praise. Of mercie. Let vs therefore by him offer the Sacrifice of praise alwaies to God, that is, the fruite of lippes confessing his name. To doe good and distribute forget not: for with such sacrifices God is pleased; which liberali∣tie els where he calleth Phil. 4. a sweete smelling odour, and a sacrifice acceptable and pleasaunt to God. A third kind of Sacrifice is that which he mentio∣neth to the Romanes. Rom. 12. Of our selues. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that you giue vp your bodies a liuing SACRIFICE, holy and acceptable vnto
God (which is) your reasonable seruing of God. Phi. These were Sa∣crifices of the old Testament as wel as of the new. For Dauid saith, Psal. 115. To thee will I sacrifice the offerings of praise, and call vpon the name of our Lord: and of the next, Eccles. 35. Psal. 50. He that sheweth mercie, offereth a Sacrifice: and so of the third, These be the sacrifices of the new testa∣ment, which God requireth at our handes, and of which Malachie speaketh. A sacrifice to God is a spirit, afflicting him-selfe with penance. Theo. Keepe your penances to stuffe puddings. The sacrifice to God is a troubled (or a broken) spirit. We will not now striue for wordes. These you see be Sacrifices of the olde Testament as well as of the new. Theo. And therefore the truer and purer Sacrifices. For the rest were shaddowes, these were none: and so those were abolished, which these were not. Phi. But Malachie speaketh of a new Sacrifice that was neuer before. Theo. He speaketh of the true Sacrifice, which from the beginning and so to the ende, was and shall be more acceptable to God than the bloody and ex∣ternall sacrifices of the Iewes: Of a new Sacrifice, that neuer was before he speaketh nothing for ought that I can see. Phi. The sacrifice which Christ made of himselfe vnder the formes of bread and wine, was a new sacrifice. Theo. Uerie new, if anie such were made. Phi. Of that Malachie spea∣keth. Theo. Who tolde you so? Phi. S. Cyprian, S. Iustine, S. Ire∣neus, and others. Theo. You might doe well to speake more directlie for nowe wee knowe not whether you alledge them to expound the Prophet Ma∣lachie,The Iesuites in alledging the fathers vse such cunning that a man cā hard∣lie perceiue to what end they name them. or whether you make them Prophets to tel what shall continew in the Church throughout all Christian Nations in steade of all Aarons offerings. Phi. They will tell you the meaning of Malachie. Theo. They will in deed: but you neither quote them right, nor applie them right, if you cite them to shew that your Massing Sacrifice was forespoken of by the Prophet Mala∣chie. Phi. No? whie? Theo. Cyprian in that epistle maketh no mention of Malachie, nor of his woordes:Three fathers abused by the Iesuits to per∣uert the words of Malachie Iustinus and Ireneus alledge him; marie not for the Priests act in offering the sonne of God, nor for Christs secret lodging vnder the formes of bread, but for the praiers and thankes that all the faithful giue to GOD, when they come to bee partakers of this mysterie. Philand. They say Malachies woordes are perfourmed in the Eucharist. Theo. Not by the Priestes handes or gestures, but by the peoples heartes and voyces. Philand. Those be your shyftes. Theoph. Goe to, you shifters: is it not e∣nough for you to beguile the simple with emptie soundes, shewes, and names, but you will resist a manifest trueth when you are sure to haue it prooued to your faces? Cyprian in that place which they cite doth not so much as speake of Ma∣lachie. Cyp. ad Quirinū lib. 1. cap. 16.Cyprian in his 63. epistle meddleth not with Malachies wordes, but if you woulde in deede learne what hee thought or wrate of that prophesie, and what hee counted to bee the Sacrifice that Malachie foretolde, turne to his in∣structions giuen to Quirinus against the Iewest, he first booke and 16. chap∣ter, where he proueth that the old sacrifice should bee abolished, and a newe suc∣ceede: and there you shal find him expound it to bee Sacrificium laudis & iustitiae:
the Sacrifice of praise and righteousnes, and that by no worse mans authoritie than Dauids. Iustinus I grant alleadgeth the wordes, and saith, God (in that speech) doth witnes, that all the sacrifices, which Christ Iesus appointed to be done in his name, at the Eucharist of bread (and wine) are acceptable to him. But what Sacrifices they were, which Christ deliuered and prescribed in the Eu∣charist for his, to do, the wordes of Iustinus that presently follow do perfectly o∣pen.Iustinn Dial. cum Tryphone aduers. Iudaeos. Iustinus restrai¦neth the words of Malachie to praiers and thankes: other sacrifice he ac∣knowledgeth none in the Lords supper. Preces quidem & gratiarū actiones bonorum perfectas solas esse & Deo gratas hostias ego quo{que} concedo. Haec enim sola facienda acceperunt Christiani in aridi hu∣midi{que} sui cibi commemoratione, in quo, mortis quam per se perpessus est Deus Dei filius memoria re colitur. That the prayers and thankes of the good are the on∣ly perfect sacrifices and pleasant to God I confesse. For these onely (sacri∣fices) haue the christians receiued to be done in the celebration of that their (Eucharistical) food & liquor, in which the memory of the death of the son of God, who himselfe was God, is renewed. You should haue spared the ve∣ry quoting of this place by mine aduise: for if all the Preachers in England would haue laide their heades together in wordes to crosse your actuall & cor∣porall sacryficing the flesh of Christ, they could not haue done it in quicker and smarter speech. Ireneus maketh euen as much for you, as Iustinus did: for he not onely sub∣uerteth your reall sacrificing of Christ, when hee teacheth that the church offe∣reth the creatures of bread and wine in token of her thankefulnesse vnto God: but the very wordes of Malachie he expoundeth by S. Iohns authority for the praiers of the Sainctes.Irenae. li. 4. ca. 33 Benè ait, & in omni loco incensum offertur nomini meo, & sacrificium purum. Incensa autem Iohan. in Apocalypsi orationes ait esse Sanctorum. Ibidem. cap. 34 Et ideo nos quoque offerre vult munus ad altare frequenter sine intermissione. Est ergo altare in coelis.Ireneus ex∣poundeth Ma∣lachies wordes of praier, obe∣dience, and thankesgiuing as we doe. Illuc enim preces nostrae & oblationes nostrae diriguntur. Well saith God (by Malachie) In euery place incense is offered to my name and a pure sacrifice. Now incense Iohn in his Apocalypse calleth the prayers of the Sainctes. And therefore (God) will haue vs offer a gift at (his) altar cōtinually without intermission. The altar is in heauen. Thither are our prai∣ers and oblations directed. Phi. Yet S. Irenens applyeth the wordes of Malachie to the Eucharist. Theo. He doth, but that sacrifice he saith is the offering vnto God the first fruits of his creatures for a thankesgiuing: and with that restriction hee limiteth the word offerimus which he often vseth:Iren. lib. 4. ca. 34, Ireneus tea∣cheth not the offering of Christ to his father but of creatures for a signe of thāk∣fulnes. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34 Offerre igitur oportet Deo primitias eius crea∣turae. Offerimus einon quasi indigenti, sed gratias agentes donationi eius, & sancti∣ficantes creaturam. Wee must offer to God (but) the first fruites of his crea∣tures. Wee offer to him not that he wanteth, but giuing him thankes for his bountifulnesse, and sanctifieng the creature. Here is a sacrifice of thanks∣giuing for his mercies, & not Christ, but the creatures of bread and wine offe∣red vnto God with prayer, and other christian duties which hee nameth, as cleane thoughtes, faith without hypocrisie, firme hope, feruent dilecti∣on:
these are the sacrifices of the new Testament & of the Lords table, not pro∣per to the priest, but common to the people: nor finished with the hāds, but per∣fourmed with the spirite of man, which is the true seruice of the second co∣uenant. Phi. You turne and winde the Scriptures as you please: but sure the Pro∣phet Malachie directly toucheth our Sacrifice.The rest of the fathers inter∣prete Mala∣chies wordes after the same manner. Theo. You dreame so ear∣nestly of it, that all the Fathers in Christes church can not pull you from it. What Cyprian, Iustine, and Ireneus write of this prophesie you do or may vnderstand by that which is saide; if the number bee too smal you may haue moe, to assure you that the Prophet neuer thought of your reall and cor∣porall sacrificing of Christes fleshe to God the Father by the Priestes fin∣gers. Tertullian alleadging the very wordes, Tertul. aduer. lud. eos.Et in omni loco offerentur munda Sacrificia nomini meo. In euery place shall there bee brought cleane Sa∣crifices vnto my name: addeth, Indubitatè, quod in omni terra exire habe∣bat praedicatio Apostolorum. Vndoubtedly (the Prophet Malachie mea∣neth) that the preaching of the Apostles was to bee spredde ouer all the earth. Against Marcion hee sayeth, Tertul. aduer. Marc. lib. 4. Et in omni loco Sacrificium nomine meo offeretur, & sacrificium mundum, scilicet simplex oratio de conscientia pura. In euerie place shall there bee offered in my name a sacrifice, and that a cleane sacrifice, to witte, sincere praier from a pure conscience. So Eusebius. Euseb. de de∣monst. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 6.Where (Malachie) doeth say, that incense and sacrifice are offered to God in euerie place, what else meaneth hee but that (it is done) in euery Countrie and in all Nations, which in deede were to offer to the most high God the incense of prayer and sacrifice which is called cleane, no longer by blood, but by godly workes. Nowe what those workes were, Cyrill will teach you. Cyril. contra Iuliam i. 10.Wee vse sacrifices, but of the spirite and minde. For wee haue a precept that leauing the grosse seruice (of the Iewes) wee shoulde yeelde a subtile, fine and spirituall sacrifice. And therefore wee offer vnto God for a sweete smell, all sortes of vertues, faith, hope, charitie, iustice, continence, obedience, mildnesse, per∣petuall prayses, and other (such) vertues. So Hierom. Hie. in Zacha∣riam lib. 2. ca. 8. Incense is offe∣red to the name of the Lord in euerie place and a cleane sacrifice not in the oblations of the olde Testament, but in the holynesse of Euangelicall puritie, of which incense wee reade in other places (as when Dauid sayeth,) Let my praier bee directed as incense, in thy sight, and the lifting vppe of mine handes (as) an Euening sacrifice. So Augustine: August. contr. liter. Petilia. li 2. cap. 86. Heare yee (Donatistes) the Lorde saying (thus) by his Prophet, In euerie place shall incense bee yeelded to my name and a pure sacrifice. With this sacrifice of your brethren, which God (most) respecteth, you shew your selues, by your cauilling, to bee grieued, and if at any time you heare the name of the Lord to bee praysed from East to West, which is the liuely sacrifice, whereof it is written, Offer to God the sacrifice of
praise, your coūtinances hang as did that homicides (which slue his brother.) Phi. This nothing infringeth our assertion. Theo. But this declareth the meaning of Malachie. Phi. Our oblation is a sacrifice of praise & thanks∣giuing. Theo. Had you kept your selues there and not runne farther to fan∣sies of your owne framing, and Uictimes (as you call them) of your own pre∣suming, you might haue offered that cleane sacrifice foretolde by Malachie, which nowe you doe not. Phi. You will not haue his wordes pertaine to the Eucharist. Theo. You will neuer speake trueth so long as you may shift with facing. Phi. Confesse you thē that Malachie spake of the Eucharist?We striue not for the worde sacrifice which the Ie∣suites verie di∣ligentlie prooue, but for their kinde of sacrifice, which they cannot proue by the testi∣monie of any one father. The. With all our hearts. Phi. You bee nowe ouer the shooes in your owne cestern. The. But it doeth me no hurt, for I feele no wet. Phi. You graunt the Eucharist to be a sacrifice which your fellowes will be angrie with you for. Theo. Neither they, nor I, euer denied the Eucharist to be a sacrifice. The verie name infor∣ceth it to be the sacrifice of praise and thankesgiuing, which is the true and liuely sacrifice of the new Testament. Phi. I thought you woulde backe againe. Theo. I am nowe as farfoorth as euer I was, or as any of these ancient fathers are, which haue expounded the wordes of Malachie. Phi. Then you must affirme it to be a sacrifice. Theo. Leaue this foolish repeating and often inculcating that which neither benefi∣teth you, nor annoyeth vs.In what sense the Lords sup∣per is both a Sacrament & a Sacrifice. Our duties to God, are our sacrifices. The Lordes table in respect of his graces & mer∣cies there proposed to vs is an heauenly banquet which we must eate, & not sa∣crifice: but the duties which he requireth at our handes when wee approch to his table, are sacrifices, not sacramentes: as namely to offer him thankes and praise, faith and obedience, yea our bodies and soules to bee liuing, holy, and acceptable sacrifices vnto him, which is our reasonable seruing of him. Phi. This must bee doone when wee receiue the sacrament, but this is no part of the Sacrament.Frō these sacri¦fices the Eu∣charist hath his name▪ Theoph. These bee the conditions without which God will not haue vs come to his Table, and for these respects the Eucharist hath his name, thereby to put vs in minde of our duties. Phi. Wee do not deny these sacrifices to bee good and holy, and then most requisite, when wee drawe neerest vnto God, as at his table, but we adde that the very sacrament it selfe is a sacrifice, and the celebration thereof is a continuance of that ob∣lation which Christ made in his owne person on the Altar of the crosse. Theo. This wee graunt to bee most true in that sense which Sainct Augustine and other auncient and Catholike Fathers doe auouch it: that is, because Sacra∣mentes haue the names of those thinges whose Sacramentes they are.This sacramēt hath the simi∣litude, and therefore the name of Christs death and passion▪ And since this is the Sacrament of the Lords death and a passion, we do not sticke to say that Christ is dayly crucified and sacrificed for the sinnes of the world: mary not really, or corporally, but by way of a mysterie; that is his crosse and bloodshedding are proclaymed and confirmed in the eyes of all the faith∣full by these signes of his death, and seales of his truth, by which hee first witnessed that his bodie should bee broken, and his blood shed for the remission of our sinnes.
Philand. Why then refuse you the fathers expressing their opinion of this sacrifice?The Iesuits are verie plentifull in heaping im∣pertinent alle∣gations. Theo. Nay, why doe you abuse their wordes, to support your errors: and wheresoeuer you find the names of sacrifice and oblation in them referred to the Lordes supper, why alleadge you the places with such confidence as if the fathers were at your commaundement, to meane nothing but your reall sacri∣ficing the sonne of God vnder the formes of bread and wine? Phi. What other meaning could they haue? Theo. I haue already shewed you by their owne writinges what other meaning they had. Phi. You say, they call it a sacrifice, because it is a signe and memoriall of his death on the crosse. Theo. That is sufficient to shew their meaning. Phi. But their words are so weightie, that a cold and naked signification, doth not answere the force of them.The Rhe. Test▪ pag. 447. The Lambe of God laide vpon the table: conc. Nice. The quickning holy sacrifice: the vnbloody host and victime. Cyril. Alex. in conc. Ephes. Anath. 11. The onely inconsumptible vi∣ctime, without which there is no religion.All these fa∣thers speake of Christs bodie broken and blood shed on the cross which are resembled in this sacra∣ment. Cypr. de caen. Dom. nu. 2. Chrys. hom. 17 ad Heb. The sacrifice of our price. Aug. confess. lib. 9. cap. 13. Theo. What a pat∣ching you keepe to no purpose? Phi. Dare you attribute these speeches to the creatures of bread and wine? Theo. Dare you attribute them to the Priestes externall gestures? Is his act the lambe of God, or the price of our ransome, or the holy and quickning sacrifice? Phi. No, but the fleshe and blood of Christ are, which the Priest offereth, as wee say, to God for the sinnes of the people. Theo. The power of Christs death the Iesuits at∣tribute to the Priests act.To what ende then alleadge you these places for the Priests act, which shewe the worthinesse of Christes sacrifice, and the power of his death? Phil. Our sacrifice worketh those effectes. Theo. And so doth ours. Phi. Then you bee of our opinion. Theo. As though we did resist you touching the thing that is offered, and not touching the manner of offering. That Christ is the lamb of God laid on the Lordes table before the eyes of our mindes, that his flesh woun∣ded and bloud shed for our sinnes are an holy quickning, and euer during sacrifice, and the most sufficient price of our redemption, we vrge this against you, you neede not vrge it against vs, wee fully and faithfully teach it: The question betweene vs, is howe this sacrifice once made on the Crosse is daily re∣nued in our mysteries. The Iesuites sacrifice.You will haue a reall, corporall, and local profering of Christs fleshe to God the father vnder the formes of bread and wine made by the Priestes externall actions and gestures for the sinnes of such as he lift: this is we say a wicked and blasphemous mockerie. His passion is the true oblation of the church: his flesh wounded and blood shedde are the only sacrifices for sinne: which oblation that it might be alwayes in our hearts and sights, he hath commaunded vs to conti∣nue in his church, by a memoriall of his owne erecting: and to applie the same to our selues by a stedfast hope in his mercies & humble prayer vnto his holynes as often as wee approach to his table to bee partakes of his death & me∣rites.How the death of Christ is both offered and applied. And therefore the Priestes act can no way bee auailable for those that stand by & looke on, and neither communicate with him in praier or in the par∣ticipation of the mysteries. And your alleadging four and twentie places of the
fathers for this kinde of sacrifice, of which they neuer thought, sheweth what fi∣delitie and sinceritie you haue vsed in the rest of your Rhemish obseruations, which you sent ouer but to occupy mens heades, whiles you were working an other feate. Phi. What feat could we haue in hand,Your feate was to pre∣pare the peo∣pl against a daie. but the testifieng of trueth to our Countrie men, & that wee haue done to the vtter confutation of your hereticall doctrine? The. You must needs cōfute vs, for besides abusing of scriptures, which you wind like a withe about your fingers: where the Fathers will not serue your turnes, you will force them euen by skores t depose what you list: and though they vse but generall and indifferent wordes, yet you will by and by quote them to be of your opinion.A man maie soone peuer the fathers by skores, as the Iesuits haue done in their Testament. Phi. Where haue we so done? Theo. Omit the places that are past in this beadrole of Fathers which here are brought, shewe but one that euer mentioned your kinde of sacrifice, wee will trouble you no farther, you shall set vp your Masse againe. Phi. What wee shall not. Theo. I will helpe you the best I can. Phi. Any of the places which wee bring, is sufficient to iustifie our sacrifice. Theo. As well euery, as any. They cal the Lordes Supper ministred according to his institution, an OBLATION and SACRIFICE, or as your pen runneth, an HOST and a VICTIME: what then? Phi. Then wee say trueth when we teach it to be a sacrifice, & not only a sa∣cramet.What sacri∣fice it is the Iesuits woulde establish. The. Then you lie the more, when you say that you really & corporally sacrifice the Sonne of God vnder the formes of bread and wine: and that the Priestes act, though the people neither vnderstand what he saith, neither know what he doth, but gaze on him whiles he alone murmureth to himself in a toūg vnknown, & maketh that priuat to one which should be common to al by Christs institution: is notwithstanding very profitable before God, for such as hire his paines, or please his humour: to bee had in minde, when hee rubbeth his memory. Phi. You peruert our doctrine. Theo. It may bee my termes doe not please you,They produce the name of sacrifice vsed by the fathers and vnder∣stand thereby their owne fansies. but I tell you the thinges which wee reiect in your sacrifice. Leaue your presumptuous and meritorious application of Christes death as pleaseth the Priest, leaue your reall and corporall inclosing of Christ vnder accidentes and shewes of bread and wine, confesse the Lords Supper to be a publike actiō & pertinent to the whole church as it was ordained, and let your prayers instruct and direct the hearts of the simple and haue their open & euident assent, & as for the name of sacrifice and oblation, it shall not offend vs. Phi. The chiefe occasion of your hatred against the dayly sacrifice is this, that you do not acknowlege the real presence of Christ in this sacrament, & that maketh you neither to offer him,The reason whie we doe not vse the worde sacri∣fice so often as the fathers doe. nor to adore him as we doe: yea skant to abide the fathers wordes wherein they witnesse that he is offered, and must bee ado∣red vnder the formes of bread and wine. Theo. We hate your follies, we hate not their speeches; and yet there are reasons why wee doe not thinke our selues bounde to take vppe the frequent vse of their termes in that point, as wee
see you doe. For first they bee such wordes as Christ and his Apostles did for∣beare, and therefore our faith may stand without them. Next they be darke and obscure speeches wholy depending on the nature and signification of Sacra∣mentes, which the simple doe hardly conceiue.The fathers phrases begui∣led the Iesu∣its whiles they were too eger on them. Thirdly wee finde by experi∣ence before our eyes, howe their phrases haue entangled your senses, whiles you greedily persued the wordes, and omitted the rules that shoulde haue mol∣lified and directed the letter. These causes make vs the warier and the willin∣ger to keepe to the wordes of the holy Ghost, though the fathers applications, if you therewithall take their expositions, doe but in other termes teach that which we receiue and confesse to bee true and sincere. Philand. The name of sacrifice hath no warrant in the Scripture.Woulde you make vs beleeue that the sacrifice of the Altar hath no warrant in the Scripture? Theo. Shewe mee the place where it is so called, and then will I graunt that in the worde I was deceiued. Phil. First you hearde the worde OBLATION in Malachie. Theo. I did, but I heare him not applie it to the Sacrament.The Rhe. Test fol. 447. Philand. Melchisedec by his oblation of bread and wine did properly and most singularly prefigurate this sa∣crifice. Theo. But the Scripture doeth not say, that either Melchisedec did sacrifice bread and wine, or that Christ at his last supper did imitate Mel∣chisedec. Phi. Hee was a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec. Theo. Saint Paul sheweth in what thinges Melchisedec resembled Christ, as in that hee was the king of righteousnesse and peace,Heb. 7. without father, without mother, hauing neyther beginning of his dayes, nor ende of his life, (and) remaining a Priest for euer, without partner or successour: but of sacrificing bread and wine, as you say Melchisedec did, Saint Paul saith nothing. Phil. The Fathers do, almost euerie one of them. Theo. I doe not deny, the resemblace to be both tolerable and vsuall among the fathers, but I say the scriptures haue no such thing. Phil. Sainct Paul himselfe maketh an whole discourse to proue the Sa∣crament to bee the Sacrifice of Christs body and blood in the church. Theo. Where? In his Apocalypse,A man shall finde manie thinges in the Rhemish ob∣seruations which are not the text of the Scripture. The Rhe. Test. fol. 447. which your law mentioneth? Phi. No Sir, I alleadge his canonicall writinges. Theo. Where may a man seeke to finde it? Phil. Looke our obseruations vppon his 10. chapter of the first to the Corinthians. Theo. Nay in your obseruations I knowe wee shall finde many thinges that are not in the scriptures: they were purposely made, that where your religion stood not in the text, at lest it might stand in the gloze: but I would heare Saint Paul saye so much, or but halfe such a worde, and then I were aunswe∣red. Phi. The Iesuites would prooue if they could tell how that S. Paul cal∣leth the lords Supper a Sa∣crifice.In all that discourse you may obserue that our bread and chalice, our table and Altar, the participation of our host and oblation, bee compared or resem∣bled point by point in all effectes, conditions, and proprieties to the Altars, hosts, sacrifices and immolations of the Iewes and Gentiles: Which the Apostle would not, nor could not haue doone in this Sacrament of the Altar, rather than in o∣ther Sacramentes or seruice of our religion, if it onely had not been a Sacrifice & the
proper worship of God among the Christians, as the other were among the Iewes and Heathen. Theo. Tel me not what I may obserue, but what you can conclude. Is the worde sacrifice attributed to the Lordes Table in that chapter? Phi. By resemblaunce and comparison it is. Theophil. Speake first whether so much bee expressed by the Apostle in plaine wordes; and then after wee will examine what may bee collected. Philand. In plaine wordes it is not, but This point by point is not worth a blew point. point by point it is compared in all effects, conditions and proprieties to the altars, hostes, sacrifices and immolations of the Iewes and Gentiles. Theo. Where is this resemblaunce of your bread and Chalice, table and altar, host, and oblation point by point in all effectes, conditions and proprieties to the altars, hostes, sacrifices and immolations of Iewes and Gentiles? Phi. In S. Paul. Theophil. I see no such thing. Philand. You wil not for feare you should be driuen to confesse that S. Paul calleth our host a Sacrifice. Theo. Let vs then examine S. Pauls purpose, that we may see both what he saieth, and to what end he saith it. The christians at Corinth in respect of aquaintaunce or alliaunce with o∣thers that were Heathens in that citie,Their miscon∣stering of S. Paul exami∣ned. did not sticke, if they were inuited, to goe to the banquetes and feastes of the Pagans, which they kept in the Tem∣ples of their Gods, when they did sacrifice vnto them, and at which they spent such cates and wines as they had then offered to their Idols.The faulte which the A∣postle reproo∣ueth in the Corinthians. The pretēce which the christians had for their resorting to the Pagans feastes was this, that they knewe the idoll was nothing, and therefore giuing thankes to God for his creatures, they did eate of all things without scruple of conscience, how∣soeuer it had beene vsed, or to whomsoeuer it had beene offered. This Sainct Paul reproueth them for: and sheweth that though the Idoll in it selfe bee nothing, yet since the Gentiles did offer those thinges, which were at their idols feastes, not to God but to diuels, the christians could not sit at the same tables with the Pagans,This was par∣taking with I∣dols and dis∣honoring of God. reioycing, triumphing, and feasting in the names of their idolles, but they must needes bee partakers of their idolatrie. Nowe howe that could stand with their comming to the Lords ta∣ble, where they professed to serue him, and none but him, hee wisheth them to consider. The reason which hee draweth from the Lordes table, (you call it a comparison point by point, in all effectes, conditions and proprieties, to the al∣tars, hostes and sacrifices of the Heathen) may bee eyther a comparison or an opposition, but liker of the twaine to bee rather an opposition than a com∣parison. For so Sainct Paul knitteth vp his argument. You can not drink (both) the Lordes cup, and the cup of diuelles: you can not bee partakers (or eate) of the Lords table, and of the table of diuels.S. Pauls rea∣son against it by waie of comparison or opposition▪ The one you are par∣takers of: as you know. For the cup of thanksgiuing, which we blesse, is it not the cōmunion (or participatiō) of Christs blood? The bread which we breake is it not the communion of Christs body? You cannot there fore haue any fel∣lowship
with the table or cup of diuels, but God will surely reuenge it, as the forsaking of himselfe and seruing of his enimie. This may the whole drift of S. Paul stand good and his reason forcible without your point by point or your effectes, conditions, and proprieties of altars, hostes or Sacrifices. Though Saint Pauls reason be ramed by waie of com∣parson, yet the Iesuits illation is not necessary.If any list to make it a comparison, he may for me; & yet that way I see no cause why you should so proportion Christes mysteries to the diuels sacrifices, that point by point they must answere one an other in all effectes, conditions and proprieties of Altars, hostes and immolations. For this sufficeth S. Pauls in∣tet, that where the christians thought it a matter indifferent, and lawfull to eate & drink in the temples and at the tables of Heathen Idols, he by examples both of christian and Iewish religion sheweth them that though they did not sa∣crifice: and so tooke themselues to be free from Idolatrie: yet seeing they re∣ioyced and feasted with the men and meates that were addicted and consecrated vnto Idols, they were partakers of their wickednesse. And therefore the thing which S. Paul vrgeth in this comparison of Christian, Iewish and heathnish religion is not offering or sacrificing, but in plaine words eating & drinking at the same table with men of any profession, where their rites and ceremonies, be they good or bad,Eating of thinges con∣secrated vnto Idols is fellow¦ship with di∣ul, though they be not sole elie sa∣crificed vnto them. are vsed, as well as their offeringes and immolations: and in that sense the conclusion holdeth on either side, though the thinges be not re∣ally sacrificed vnto God or the diuell, but dedicated or consecrated to either of them, or frequented in either of their names. For as he that eateth and drinketh at the Lordes table, partaketh with him and his; so he that doth the like at the diuels table, linketh himselfe in the like fellowship with the diuell and his ad∣herentes, though the meates that are set on the table bee not first solemnly sa∣crificed to the diuell but blessed either in his name or with his ceremonies, who being a wicked spirit affecteth to be honored in like sort and equal tate with the true and mighty God. Phi. S. Paul sayth the Gentiles did sacrifice their meates to the diuel. Theo. So much the worse for those Christians that did eat them, yet that doeth not in∣ferre that the creatures at the Lords table were, point by point, in all effects and conditions vsed and sacrificed to him as the heathens cates were to their Idoles.The Iesuites prooue by the diuels sacrifi∣ces that their Masse is a sa∣crifice. And to draw your argument from the diuels table to proue that the bread and wine at the Lordes table be sacrificed is a strange kinde of diuinitie, if it bee not worse. Certainly not the sacrifice, but the Sacrament ordained by Christ to be taken and eaten from his table, doeth make vs members of Christ: and ioyneth vs all in one fellowship of his mysticall body: the Priestes sacificing of Christes flesh doth not helpe the matter, for ought that we know, or you proue, but by such sleeuelesse,No man par∣taker of their sacrifice be∣sides the Priest because n man ea∣teth of it but the Priest. I wil not say witlesse conceites as these be. And yet your owne comparison ouerthroweth your owne oblation. For if in Pagan, Iewish, and euen in Christian religion, as you say, they which eate of the Sacrifice be partakers of the sacrifice, we infer that in your priuate masses where the Priest alone ateth and no man eateth with him, the people haue no part in that sacrifice: & so your oblation, if it be any, auaileth no man but your
selues, because no man eateth of it besides your selues, which is more against your profit, than the name of sacrifice would do you good, if you could uince it by S. Paul. Phi. God helpe you masters: ye be so addicted to the bellie, that you thinke of nothing, ut of eating & drinking. The sacrifice you admit not, the sacramēt you adore not: but if you may eate and drinke, then are you safe. Theo. This diuinity will better become the diuels table whence you lately fet your sacri∣fice,To eate and drinke at Christes table is Christs or∣dinance: to sa∣crifice is not. than the Lordes sacramentes or the seruauntes of Christ. To eate & drinke at his table is not our inuention but his institution: and therefore no point of gluttonie, as you leuly surmise, but of pietie, which you skant beleeue: as appeareth by your abolishing that order which Christ left, and deuising an other of your owne without any warrant from him. For where Christ said, take ye, eate ye, you like not that, but haue chaunged it into Looke ye, adore ye, telling the people they do God good seruice when they giue his diuine honour to dead & slesse creatures. Phi. No Sir, we teach them to adore Christ and not the creatures of bread and wine.Adoration of the sacramēt. The Iesuites pretending to adore Chist, adore the creatures of bread and wine. Theo. You first imagine the creatures to be Christ, & then you giue them diuine honor, as if they were Christ: but if they be creatures still, howe doth your false imagination excuse you from idolatrie? Phi. Wee be sure they be not. For Christ saide of them This is my bodie, and this is my blood; and therefore honoring that which the Priest holdeth in his hands, and lifteth vp af∣ter consecration, we be sure we honor Christ and not the creatures of bread and win. Theo. So S. Paul said, The rocke was Christ, and yet to worship that vi∣sible rocke with diuine honor, had beene idolatrie. Phi. The speeches be nothing like.No difference betweene these two speaches: the Rocke was Christ, and this is my bo∣de. Theo. Then tell vs the difference. Phi. Christ spake the one actiuely and presently: the other was but a collectiō of things past long before made by S. Paul. And again the one is in the new Testament the other in the old. Theo. You might haue added that the one was stone, the o∣ther bread: the one in the desert, the other in the city. Philand. Keepe your tri∣fling distinctions for your selues. Theo. They wil no way but be ioyned cheek by cheek with yours. Christ, you say, spake the one; & who spake the other in Paul but Christ? Paul said of himselfe that 2. Cor. 13. Christ spake in him: and Christ saieth of his Apostles, Mat. 10. It is not you that speak but the spirit of your father that speak∣eth in you. And therefore you must receiue that which Paul spke 1. Thes. 2. We haue plai∣ner words that the Rock was Christ than they haue that the bread is Christ. Pauls speach doth inter∣pret Christs words. not as the word of men, but, as it is in deed, the word of god: & that cannot went trueth because the word of God is truth. Phi. We do not deny but he spake truth. Theo. Then haue we plainer proofe that the stony rock in the desert wa Christ: than you haue that the bread on the Lords table is Christ. For Christ doth not say in precise terms that the bread was his body, but only, this is my body. And as for the diuersitie of the two testaments, that maketh nothing to this issue. For if the rocke of the old test. were Christ, the bread of the new Test. can be no more: and therfore diuine adoration was as due to the rocke then, as it is to the bread now. Phi. By no meanes. For the rocke was not transubstantiated into Christ as
the bread is. The. If Pauls words be true without chāging the rock into Christ, why may not the words of Christ be likewise true without turning the substāce of bread into the substance of his body? Phi. We tell you the reason. The one is substantially conuerted into Christs flesh, and so was not the other. Theo. This is your fansie, to dreame of a difference where none is: the affrmations be like, why should not the adorations bee like? And if you could not worship the rock, without cōmitting idolatrie though the rock were Christ, how can you giue di∣uine honor to the bread and wine since they bee Christ euen after the same sort that the rock was? Whie do they not adore the Priest as well as the pixe?Or, if that comparison do not please you, why do you worship the pixe wherein the bread is, & so the chalice wherein the wine is, & not the priest that by your do∣ctrine doth create & eate Christ? Phi. We worship neither the pixe, nor the cha∣lice, but Christ that is contained in them both. Theo. And is not the same Christ that was contained in them both, inclosed in the priests body when he eateth and drinketh your sacrifice?That which was contai∣ned in the pixe is inclo∣sed in the Priests bodie. Phi. Yeas. Theo. And as really contained in his body, as in your golden boxe or gilden chalice? Phi. But yet we adore not the flesh of christ after it is once entered the mouth of man. Theo. You do not I know, but why should you not? Why suffer you Christ in any place to be without the honor, that is due vnto him? Wil you serue him where please you, & ourskip him at your dis∣cretions? Phi. Should we adore him, when we know not where he is? The. You be as sure he is in the Priest as in the pixe: for you see him in neither: Why then do you adore him in the one, and not in the other? Phi. Christ must not be adored at our discre∣tion, but at all times and in al places.I think you would not haue vs adore our sauiour. The. I would not haue you adore him whē & where you only list, much lesse to adore a peece of bread in his steed: be first sure you haue him & then adore him wheresoeuer you find him. Phi. So we do. Th. You do not. You adore him not in the priest. Phi. We see him not. The. Wil you not adore him till you see him? How then do you see him in the chalice, or in the pixe? Phi. There we be certaine he is. Theo. You be as certaine of the other. Phi. The fathers wil vs to adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries, but not in other mēs bodies. The. Do they wil you to adore the mysteries themselues, I mean the mystical & sacramental signes? Phi. Not the signes thēselues, they bee but accidents & not to be adored, but the sacrament it self they teach vs to adore. The. With diuine honor? Phi. With what els? The. Adoration, if it be attributed in any father to the mystical signes is that kind of reuerence which we yeeld to things that be sanctified for Gods vse, & not godly honor. Phi. I smel a rat. The. If a rat should eate the host, it would make a foule worke among the Iesuits. No father tea∣cheth that the Sacramēt should be a∣dored.You were best then looke to your host: for that of all others, that is a most dange∣rous beast to your deuotion. Phi. Why? The. I wil tel you that anon, in the mean time what was it, that troubled your wits? Phi. With a sly distinction of twofold adoration you think to slip the fathers which we will bring against you for the worshipping of the blessed sacrament. The. Is that al your feare? Phi. That is a way to wrangle, & to make the people beleeue our doctrine touching adoratiō of the sacrament is not catholik. The. Set aside one father, whom your selues shall not deny but that he speaketh of the substāce of bread & wine: & in the rest, which
you bring we wil vse no such aduātage. Phi. What wil you not do? The. We wil not choke you with that second acception of adoration: shew that the fathers a∣dored the sacrament, or taught the people to so doe, wee require no more. Phi. That I will presently. S. Austen saith ep. 118. c. 3. that it is he that the Apostle saith shalbe damned,The Rhe. Test fol. 453. nu. 29. [not discerning the bodie. that doth not by singular veneration or adoration make a difference between this meat & al others. And again in Psa. 91. No man eateth it before he adore it. And S. Ambro. li. 3 c. 12. de spi. sanct. We adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries. S. Chrysost. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. We adore him on the altar, as the Sages did in the manger. S. Nazianzene in Epitap. Gorgon. My sister called vpon him which is worshipped vpon the altar. Theodo∣ret. Dial. 2. In cōfes.Halfe this would serue if anie part of it were to the purpose. The mystical tokēs be adored. S. Denys this Apostles scholer, made solemne inuocation of the sacrament after consecration. Eccl. Hierar. ca. 3. part. 3. in princip. & before the receiuing, the whole church of God crieth vpon it, Domine nō sum dignus, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori. Lamb of god, that takest away the sins of the world, haue mercie on vs. A smoothe tale of Robin Hoode will prooue the adoration of the sacramēt as well as this that here en∣sueth. And for better discerning of this diuine meat, we are called from cōmon profane houses to Gods church: for this, we are forbiddē to make it in vul∣gar apparel, & are appointed sacred solemne vestments. Hier. in Epitap. Nepot. & li. 2. adv. Pel. ca. 9. Paulinus ep. 12. ad Seuer. Io. Diac. in vit. D. Greg. li. 3. ca. 59. For this is the hallowing of Corporals & chalices. Ambr. 2. off. ca. 28. Nazian. Orat. ad Arianos: Optatus li. 6. in initio. For this profane tables are remoued & altars consecrated. Aug. Serm. de temp. 255. For this, the very priests themselues are honorable, chast, sacred, Hier. ep. 1. ad Heliodor. ca. 17. li. 1. adv. Iouin. ca. 19. Ambr. in 1. Tim. 3. For this the people is forbidden to touch it with common hands. Nazian. orat. ad Arian. in initio. For this great care & solicitude is taken that no part of either kind fall to the ground, Cyril. Hieros. mystag. 5. in fine. Orig. ho. 13. in ca. 25. Exod. For this sacred prouision is made that if any hosts or partes of the Sacrament doe remaine vnreceiued, they bee most religiously reserued with all honour and diligence possible, and for this, examinatiō of consciences, confession, continencie, & (as S. Augustine saith) receiuing it fasting. Thus do we catholiks & the church of God discerne the holy body & blood by S. Pauls rule,Epist. 118. ca. 6 not only from your prophane bread & wine (which not by any secrete abuse of your Curates or clearkes, but by the verie order of your booke, the Minister, if any remaine after your Communion, may take home with him to his own vse, and therfore it is no more holie by your own iudgement than the rest of his meates) but from al other either vulgar or sanctified meates, as the catechumens bread, & our vsual holy bread. Theo. I had thought we should haue had adoration of the sacrament proued, & here commeth The Phari∣sees and the Iesuits meete iust in this kinde of holi∣ne▪hallowing of coapes, corporals, chalices, Altars, priestes, pixes, and (not at al, or last of al) the hallowing of soules, which in wisemens account deserued to goe alone or at least first in the Kalender. For your often & curious clensing of the outsides of coates, cups, stones, handes & such like implementes sauoreth of the Pharisees holines, who supposed then as you do now, that God is highly serued with such solemne prouision & sacred solicitude, though this be more than euer Christ at his last supper had care for, or mind of, for ought that we find by report of the Gospell. Mary this is not our purpose. You must
proue your adoration of the sacrament, let hallowing of Uestments and Altars alone till an other time: and persue that which is denied. Phi. So we do. Haue you not here S. Austen, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Nazianzene,This number is sufficient if they speake to the matter. Theodorete, & S. Denys, that the sacrament should bee ado∣red? Theo. Theodorete is not in your bookes, that he is not sainted with the rest: yet is he an ancient & learned writer: but take your pleasure: The rest well deserue it, and therefore I am not angrie with it, though S. Paul extende the name sainct to the hearers as well as to the eachers, & to the liuing aswell as to the dead. Phi. You would be saints. The. God grant vs to be his seruants. Phi. You must change your faith first. The. Why? We worship no creatures in steed of Christ,They suppose creatures to be Christ: and then at all aduentures they adore them in his steade. All these fa∣thers are im∣pertinent to this purpose. Not one of them besides Theodoret speaketh of the externall Sacrament. It is one to a∣dore Christ which is in the mysteries, & an other to adore the my∣steries them∣selues which no father tea∣cheth. The Rhemish Test. sol. 453. Epist. 118. ca. 3. as you do. Phi. Wil that lying neuer be left? Theo. Would God for your own sakes it were a ly, but I feare it is  true. Phi. Christ wee adore, creatures we do not. Theo. The sacramentes you adore, and those be creatures: as in Baptisme the water, in the Lords supper, the bread & wine. Phi. We adore the B. sacrament of the Altar, as wee learned of the catholike fathers: creatures we adore none. Theo. Of what fathers did you learn it? Phi. I haue told you, of S. Austen; S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Nazianzene, Theodorete, & S. Denys. Theo. Set Theodorete aside (who writing in greeke vseth the word adoration for an externall regard & reuerence, such as we giue to the books & vessels that are san∣ctified to diuine vses, though more amply to the sacramentes ordained by God himself: & saith that the mystical signes themselues remaining in their former (& earthly) substance are adored, that is reuerently & religiously handled, as becommeth so great mysteries:) I say set him aside, & not one of the rest so much as toucheth that which you should proue. Phi. They say the sacrament must be adored. Theo. They say Christ must be adored. Phi. Yea, but in the mysteries, and on the altar. Theo. So Christ is to bee adored, in heauen, in his church, & most of al in our own hearts & bodies: will you thence collect that either heauen, or the Temple, or our selues are to be ado∣red? Phi. But neither heauen, nor the temple are sacraments. Theo. Yet Christ is adored in them, though they be not in like sort with him, & so may Christ be a∣dored in the misteries, though the mysteries themselues may haue no such honor. Phi. S. Austē saith, It is he that the Apostle saith should be damned that doth not by singular veneration or adoration make a difference betweene this meate & all others. Theo. S. Austen in that place speaketh not one word of adoration. He saith: The Apostle affirmeth it to be vnworthily receiued of thē, qui hoc non discernebāt à caeteris cibis veneratione singulariter debita, which did not discern it from other meates with the veneration (that was properly or) singularly due (vnto it.) Phil. S. Augustine peruerted by the Iesuis. Aug. e Dotr. Christ. li. 3. ca. 9.Uery wel. Singular veneration is al one with diuine adoration. Theo. In your corrupted iudgemēts. Phi. What els is it? Theo. Veneratiō is a word that S. Austen fourdeth al the signes & sacraments of the old & new Testament, a∣doratiō he reserueth only to God. Of veneratiō he saith, Qui veneratur ignum vtile diuinitus insitutum, non hoc vèneratur quod videtur & transit, sed illud
potius, quo talia cuncta referenda sunt. Hee that reuerenceth a signe that is profitable, and ordayned by God, reuerenceth not the thing which is visi∣ble and transitorie, but that rather, to which all such (signes) are referred. And so concludeth namely of baptisme and the Lordes Supper.Ibidem. Quae vnusquis{que} cū percipit qu referantur imbutus agnoscit,S. Aug. allow∣eth veneratiō but not adora¦tion to this or anie other Sa∣crament. vt ea non carnal seruitute sed spirituali potius libertate veneretur. Which (two Sacramentes) when euerie Christian receiueth, he knoweth, being once partaker of them, whither to refer them, that he may reuerence them with a spirituall libertie, rather than with a car∣nall seruitude. And least you should not vnderstand what difference he putteth betweene the corporall creature and the heauenly brightnesse in this, and so in other sacra∣mentes, he saith farther:Ibidem. li. 3. cap. 5. Not to distin∣guish the signes from the thinges is a miserable seruitude of the soule. August. de ve∣ra Religio. c. 54. Adoratiō due onelie vnto God. Ea demum est miserabilis animae seruitus signa pro rebus accipere, nec supra creaturam corpoream oculum mentis ad auriendum aeternum lu∣men leuare non posse. That is a miserable bondage of the soule, to take the signes (or Sacramentes as you doe) for the thinges themselues, and not to be able to lift vp the eye of the mind aboue the corporal creature to perceiue the eternall brightnesse. Of adoration he saith, Rectè scribitur hominem ab angelo prohibitum ne se aedo∣raret, sed vnum Deum, sub quo esset ei & ille conseruus. It is very wel recorded in the Scriptures that a man was prohibited by an angel to adore him, but only God, vnder whom he himself was a fellow seruant vnto God. And therefore he saith, Ibidem.Ecce vnum Deum colo, Behold I worship (& adore) none but God▪ and thence he deriueth the name of religion,Ibidem. Quod ei vni religet animas nostras. Because it relieth our soules on him alone. So that veneration you may giue to sacramentes, adoration you may not, and yet you finely conuey the one into S. Augustines text iointly with the other, as if they were both foūd in his words which they are not. Phi. He saith singular veneration. Theo. You say so, but he sayeth not so: His words are, Veneratione singulariter debita, with that veneration which is due (onely or) singularly to this Sacrament. Phi. And what is that but adoration?August. ep. 118. What vene∣ration is due to this Sacra∣ment. Theo. If you might be iudges it should be nothing else, but S. Au∣gustine sayth, Not to be contemned, is the veneration due vnto it. Contemptum solum non vult cibus ille: that meate misliketh onele contempt: that is either to bee dayly receiued without regard, or to be still refused vpon pretence of vn∣worthynesse. And that being the case of which S. Augustine disputeth, your cunning serueth you, in steede of examining thēselues, before they receiue it, which S. Augustine meaneth, to set the people not at all to receiue it but to fall downe and adore it with diuine honour in Christes place, which is as wil∣full a contempt of his ordinaunce, and as shamefull an abuse of his sacramentes as can be committed. Phi. The same father in an other place saieth of the Sacrament,In Psal. 98. No man eateth it before he adore it. Theo. Are you not desperatly set, tht to defile your selues with open idolatrie, will force the Fathers to fit your umours a∣gainst
their owne speeches? S. Augustine saith of Christes fleshe which hee tooke of the virgine Marie, Nemo illam carnem manducat nisi prius adorauerit. No man eateth that fleshe of Christ vnlesse hee first adore it: you make no more bones at the matter but strike THE FLESH (of Christ) out of Sainct Augustines wordes,What S. Aug. spake of Christes flesh, the Iesuites turne to their host. and referre adoration to the corporall creature, which the Priest holdeth in his fingers. Is not this, trowe you, sounde dealing in the greatest mysteries of our saluation, and imminent peril of your dam∣nation, purposely to shut your eyes least you shoulde see the truth or agnise the rashnesse of your newe founde adoration? What haue Sainct Augustines wordes to doe with your adoring the mysticall signes, when hee directly na∣meth the flesh of Christ, which is both eaten with the spirite, and adored in the spirite: yea the very eating of it is the adoring of it, since it is not ea∣ten but by beleeuing,The true ea∣ting of christs flesh is all one with the ado∣ring of it. hoping and reioycing in it, which are the chiefe branches of Gods diuine honor. Phi. As though the fleshe of Christ were not really closed in the forme of bread, and corporally eaten with the mouth of man? Theo. One errour must needes drawe on an other,The ground of all their er∣rors & abuses in the Masse is their reall presence. or rather your reall and carnall presence is the groundworke of all your errors and abuses in the Masse. Phi. The deniall of it is the high way to all your heresies and blasphemies against the doctrine of the church: and for our partes, till you leaue that, wee looke for no better at your hands. Theo. Looke to your own feete, least whiles you watch our hands, your legges slip into the pit of destruction. Phi. Wee bee past all feare of that. Theo. And so be those, that are past all recouery: but yet for the sauing of other mens soules if not of yours, we will first weigh the proofes of your adoration, & after not sticke to suruay the partes of your Transubstantiation. Go on there∣fore with your former authorities. Phi. S. Ambrose saieth, De spir. sanct. lib. 3. cap. 12. We adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries. Theo. Uerily and We adore Christ in thē: we adore not the mysteries themselues. so doe wee, but the mysteries and sacramentes themselues wee doe not adore, neither did Sainct Ambrose euer teach any man to adore them. Phi. I see you mistake vs. You thinke we adore the formes of bread and wine: where in deede we doe not, but rather we adore Christ the sonne of the ly∣uing God, and second person in Trinitie in those mysteries as Saint Ambrose sayeth, or as wee speake more vsually vnder those The accidēts of bread and wine be ab∣surdities, they be no myste∣ries. formes of breade and wine. Theo. I mistake you not, I knowe you adore that which is locally and really inclosed within the compasse of your host and chalice, supposing it in mat∣ter and substance to bee the glorious body of Christ, apparelled with accidents of bread and wine, as whitenesse, roundnesse, sweetenesse, moystnesse, and such like proprieties of bread and wine; but your foundation wee say is false, and therefore your building must needes bee ruinous. Christ is present in the my∣steries not by the materiall substaunce of his body closed within the formes of bread and wine,How Christ is present in the mysteries. but by a diuine and spirituall vertue and efficience, not mixing , but entering the hrt of the faithull, and nou∣rishing
them with his spirit and grace to eternall life, the elementes abiding in their proper and former essence and substance. And therefore when you adore them, as if they were Christ in nature and substaunce, which in trueth they are not, you worship not Christ,This is not to adore Christ but the crea∣tures. but giue his honour to creatures, and in steede of washing your sins away by the death and blood of Christ, you kindle the wrath of God against you, by mystaking his sonne, and adoring the elementes with di∣uine honor in lue of Christ. Phi. Tush, we regard not these wordes of yours: we haue assurance from Christ himselfe that it is his body, and so long wee passe not for any thing that you can alleadge or obiect against vs.The mis∣construction of Christes words leadeth them to this Idolatrie. Theophil. But if you misconster his wordes to make a deade and corruptible creature to bee the seconde person in Trinitie, and giue it that honour, which is due to the glori∣ous and immortall God, what assuraunce can you haue that Christ Iesus will put vp this reproach at your handes, and not auenge himselfe on you, as on proud idolates? Phi. Are you well in your wits to vrge vs so often with open Idolatrie, where as wee shewe you so plaine proofes of our defence? Theo. Plaine quoth you?Christ is ado∣red in the my∣steries though he be not lo∣callie inclo∣sed in them. In good faith they bee such as no meane Scholer woulde stumble at. Christ, you proue, is adored in the mysteries and on the Altar. Why shoulde hee not bee adored in all places, and in all his giftes, and for all the monumentes of his grace and mercie bequeathed vs in this life, that he may prepare vs for the next? And if this rule bee generall, howe great cause haue wee to a∣dre him in the water, where hee clenseth vs from our sinnes: and at the table, where hee feedeth and strengthneth our soules and spirites with their proper nourishment, which is the precious ransome that was paide to recouer vs from death and hell, and to bring vs to his immortall light and blisse? What Christian heart recounting his aboundant goodnesse and fatherly rea∣dynesse with his owne stripes to heale vs, with his owne bloode to washe vs, with his owne death to quicken vs, will not bee resolued into prayers and teares, to yeelde all honour and adoration to him that doeth offer vs these treasures at and on his table? Phi. These bee goodly words to bleare mens eyes,We shut him not vp in the compasse of the host, but by faith wee behold & en∣ioy his pre∣sence at his table. where in deede you de∣nie him to bee present eyther at, or on the Altar. Theo. Wee confesse him to bee there present with all his giftes and blessinges to him, that will be∣holde him with the eye of faith, and reach out the hand of his soule to appre∣hende him, in greater might and maiestie, than you doe, when you shroude him with your formes of breade and wine, and pale him rounde with a pixe as it were with a sepulchre. Mary locall dimension or inclusion with∣in the compasse of the host or chalice wee appoint him none: His trueth is annexed to the Sacramentes, and his power vnited to the creatures after a wonderfull and inspeakeable manner,This presence is fruitful and effectuall, theirs is not. by the mighty working of the holy ghost, but yet wee must not direct his diuine honour and seruice to anie part of the Altar, or circumference of the visible creatures: wee must rather Lyft
vp our hearts as the faithfull were alwayes admonished in this sacrament,We must lift vp our harts not to the host, but vnto heauen. and take heede that wee doe not basely bende our eyes on the bread or wine to seeke Christ in them, and vnderneath them, much lesse worshippe them in steede of him, which is the next way to dishonor him, and deifie them against the very rules and Principles of our faith. Phi. But S. Chrysostom saith, We adore him on the altar, as the Sages did in the manger:Chys. in 1. Cor. homil 24. Nazianz. in e∣pitaph. Gorgo∣niae. Christ is ho∣noured and serued on the Altar, though he be not cor∣porallie fast∣ned to the host. and S. Nazianzene saith of his sister Gorgonia, she cal∣led on him which is worshipped on the Altar. Theo. What wordes soeuer Chrysostom and Nazianzene vse to expresse the place where Christ is serued and adored, yet this is euident, that they attribute adoration not to the visible element or sacrament but vnto Christ, who may well be saide to be worshipped on the Table or altar, for so much as there is the fruite, force and efect of his heauenly grace and trueth proposed vnto all, and from thence the prayers and thankes of all are offered vnto him by the religious heart and voice of the Pa∣stor that standeth at the Lordes table to bee the mouth of al, and yet you deale vntruely with both those fathers as you do almost with al the rest of the writers that passe your pen. Chrysostom corrupted by the Iesuits.Chrysostomes wordes are, Tu non in praecepe id, sed in Altarivides. Thou seest (his bodie) not in a manger but on the Altar. Now betweene seeing & adoring there is good difference, if you bee not so blinde, that you can see no∣thing. Phi. He speaketh it to that ende, that we should adore it, as the Sages did when they found him in a manger. Theo. He hath some wordes tending to this ende, that we should adore the body of Christ, since the wicked and barba∣rous Magi did yeelde him that honour, but he ioyneth no such wordes togither as you cite: he saith not, we adore him on the altar, but let vs that be citizens of heauen, at least imitate those Barbarians. Phi. That is in adoring Christ. Theo. As if we doubted of that? But where is, on the altar, which you haue ad∣ded of your owne,Chrys. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. We must get vp to heauen with the wings of faith before we can rightlie adore Christ, as Chryso∣stome would haue vs to a∣dore him. We maie be∣hold the host with lesse a∣doe, if that had beene Chrysostoms meaning. without your authors consent? Phi. He sayeth, thou seest him on the Altar. Theo. But neither with corpo∣rall eyes, nor vnder the formes of bread and wine. And that well appeareth in the very same place when he saith, Ascende igitur ad coeli portas, & tunc quod di∣cimus intueberis. Climbe vp to the gates of heauen, and then thou shalt see that which we now say. To which end he told them before that becomming Eagles in this life they must fly vppe to heauen it selfe or rather aboue the heauens. For where the carcas is (saith Christ) there wil the Eagles be. The Lordes body (is) the carkas in respect of the death (which hee suffered.) Eagles (Christ) calleth vs to shew vs that he must flie on high, which will come to this body, & euer mount vpward, & haue the eye of his mind most bright, to behold the sonne of righteousnes: He that teacheth you to ascend to the highest heauens there to adore Christ neuer ment you should adore the hst in the Priestes handes in steede of Christ: and as hee neuer ment it, so he ne∣uer spake it, though you haue plaied some ligier de main to make his wordes sound to that sense.
Phi. Nazianzenes sister called on him that (is) worshipped vpon the al∣tar.Nazianz. in e∣pitaph. Gorgo∣niae. Theo. She did so: but when she made her prayers to Christ there was nei∣ther Priest by, nor pixe there, that you should dreame shee made her prayers to the host.Christ is true∣lie said to be honored on the altar, be∣cause his mer∣cies are thēce deliuered vn∣to vs and our prayers from thence offe∣red vnto him sitting in heauen. Nazianzene saith shee went to the Church  in the dark of the night, & kneeling close to y• altar she did inuocate, , him that is honoured thereon: not meaning the host, which at that instant was not on the Altar, but Christ who is truly said to be honoured on the altar or Table, because his mercies are there layde foorth in the mysteries, and the prayers and supplications of all the faythfull offered chiefely from that place vnto him, though hee sit in heauen according to the materiall substance of his humane bodie. Phi. He is honored on the Altar; that is say you the Altar is the place whence honour is giuen vnto him, what sleights you haue to auoyd the fathers? Theo. Haue you no worse to enforce them, and you shal do them lesse wrong than you doe. When the woman of Samaria sayd to Christ, Ioan 4. Our fathers worshipped (God) in this hill, did she meane that God was in the hill, or that the worshippe was there dne vnto him? When it was said to Moses, Exod. 3. Ye shal serue God vp∣on this mountaine: was that mountaine before hand allotted to God, or to his seruice? So Christ is honoured on earth,Christ is ho∣nored on earth, and yet that doth prooue him to be perso∣nallie on earth. though hee bee in heauen, because the earth is the place where hee is honored and serued. And yet wee doubt not but Christ himselfe is also present euen in the mysteries and on the Altar or Table of the Lorde, albeit not in that corporall and carnall manner which you conceiue. And therefore though the wordes cary a double sense, yet we admit them both, so you adore Chrit and not the creatures of bread and wyne in his steed, which Nazianzene was farre from allowing, and his sister from doing. For speaking in the same place of the mysticall elements,Nazianzens sister had the Sacrament a∣bout her, which she did not adore, but him that was serued on the sacred ta∣ble. which you woulde haue the people to adore as Christ, he saith, . If any where (about her) she found part of the figures of the sacred body and blood which her hande had layd vp in stoare, watering that with teares (not adoring it with diuine worshippe) shee departed presently cured of her disease. That which you affirme to bee the real and natural flesh and blood of Christ, shee had about her, as many men and weomen vsed in the primatiue church to carie the same about them, and yet shee did not adore that which she had in her hand, but him that is serued and honored on the Altar or table of the Lord. Phil. You pare these places with certaine circumstances I know not how. But S. Denys the Apostles scholer,Eccles. Hie∣rarch. cap. 3. made a solemne inuocation of the Sacrament af∣ter Consecration in these woordes: But thou, O diuine and most holy Sacra∣ment, shewe (thy selfe) plainely to vs, and brighten the eyes of our mynde with thy singular light that can not bee couered. You aske proofe for ado∣ration of the Sacrament, We will shewe you where you haue corrup∣ted this father in expresse wordes. wee shewe you where the Apostles scholer prayed to the blessed Sacrament in expresse woordes, and higher adoration than pray∣er there can bee none. What woulde you more? Theo. Wee woulde haue
you regard if not your consciences before God, yet your credites before men. Phi. Doe wee not so thinke you; when wee ioyne with Saint Pauls scholer, and teach the people to doe as hee did? Theo. O wicked and wilfull corrup∣tion! Phi. Corruption? Why? What? Wherein? Theo. The prayer which hee maketh to the sonne of God, you wrest to the corporall and externall crea∣tures. Phi. No sir, that shift will not serue. If these be not his words, then you be furiously bent to forge.His woordes bee, But thou O di∣uine and most holy Sacrament, which hee spake (after consecration,) and yet you will not acknowledge them, you bee so furiously bent against the blessed Sacrament. Theo. You neuer read them once. The Iesuits say this inuocae∣tion of the Sa∣crament was made after con∣secration, as if Dionyius had beene mum∣bling a Masse, and not wri∣ting a booke. If the Greeke woorde had been , as it is not, that was no cause for you to wrest it to the Sacra∣ment.After consecration whats that? Was hee at masse when hee made this prayer? Phi. Hee made this inuocation of the Sacrament after Consecration. Theo. Did ye euer read the woordes? Phi. Twenty times. Theo. Where was the host, when hee made this prayer? Phi. What can I tell? To the host he made it. Theo. Was he praying at the Altar, or writing in his studie when he vttered these wordes? Phi. What is that to vs? Theo. You say, hee prayed to the host, and that after Consecration: where hee good man was busie at his booke, and beseeching God to lighten his vnderstanding that hee might write the trueth. Phi. Wheresoeuer hee was, hee sayth, O thou diuine and most holy Sacrament. Theo. Did hee write in Latin or in Greeke? Phi. In Greeke. What then? Theo. The woorde Sacrament is not Greeke. Phi. No.  is the Greeke woorde: but that in Latin is the Sacrament. Theo. Graunt the Greeke woorde were , are there no mysteries besides the Sacrament? Philand. Yeas. There are mysteries that are not the Sacrament. Theoph. You shall otherwise not only enlarge the limits of your masse to containe your seuen Sacramentes, but also multiplie the number of your seuen sacramentes, to seuen thousand times seuen. For al secrets and wonders in heauen, earth and hel, which passe the reach or knowledge of the naturall or regenerate man, bee mysteries. Phi. In deede a mysterie is a secrete, as well as a Sacrament. Theo. And that in euil things as well as in good. As 2. Thes. 2.the mysterie of iniquitie, Apoc. 17. There are manie myste∣ries which are not the sacra∣ment of the Altar.the mysterie of the woman and beast, on which the whore of Babylon sate. Phi. All this is true. Theo. And as in euill, so in good thinges, Saint Paul sayth often, The my∣sterie of God and of Christ. As when hee signifieth to the Colossians his care for them to Colos. 2. know the mysterie of God euen the father, and of Christ, and so the 1. Tim. 3. mysterie of fayth,Ephes. 6. of the Gospel, 1. Tim. 3. The diuine & humane na∣tures of Christ are most wonder∣full mysteries. of Godlynes, and such like. Phi. Ue∣ry wel. Theo. As these be mysteries because they be secrets aboue our natural capacitie though reueiled vnto vs by God in his word, so is the nature of God a most incomprehensible mysterie, namely the mysterie of the blessed trinitie, which is neither expresseable in our words, nor conceiueable with our heartes. Phi. This we doubt not of. Theo. So is there the mysterie of Christes incar∣nation, of his death and passion, of his resurrection and ascension, and of a thousand such, which Christ calleth the Mat. 13. mysteries of the kingdome of God,
and Paul meaneth when he saith, Let a man so esteeme vs as the Ministers of Christ and disposers of Gods 1. Cor. 4. mysteries. And for that cause the whole Gospel is called 1. Colos. 1. a mysterie hid since the world began and from all ages, but nowe made manifest to his Saints. Phi. This is not to our purpose. Theo. I thinke it bee not: you haue vtter∣ly peruerted the wordes of Dionysius, (if that bee his worke, and those were his wordes which you alleage,) and nowe you are loth to see it. Phi. Conuince vs before you condemne vs. Theo. What other conuiction neede wee than your own conclusiō? Dionysius speaking to Christ saith, at lest as you suppose, Thou diuine and most holy mysterie, replenish the eyes of our soules with (thy) singular and vnextinguished light. You, because the word mysterie when it is applied to corporall and externall creatures doeth sometymes signifie a sacra∣ment, haue robbed Christ of his honor,The Iesuites ignorance in wresting Dio∣nysius. and giuen it to the element of bread, and slaundered that writer, whatsoeuer hee was, for an open Idolater like to your selues. Are not the people well holpe vp to trust such gamsters as you bee, that leade them to so daungerous impietie with such manifest im∣pudencie? Phi. Your railing vayne is come vpon you. Theo. And what vaine is come on you that will rather make a shipwracke of your owne and other mens salua∣tions, than you will seeme to relent from your errors?The Iesuits meanes to defend their errors, be as wicked as their errors. Phi. It is no error. The. It is an impious and haynous error: and you bolster it vp with as euill & wic∣ked meanes, that is by corrupting and forcing other mens writings to beare out your doings. Phi. Dionysius in that whole chapter treateth of nothing but of the Sacra∣ment. Theo. And the Sacrament consisting of two partes,He maie treat of the Sacrament, & yet speake to Christ be∣cause Christ is the trueth and perfecti∣on of the Sa∣craments. an earthly and an heauenly: the heauenly part of the sacrament is Christ. Why might hee not therefore make his prayer vnto Christ to direct his pen, before hee assayed to treat of those mysteries? Phi. So hee did, but yet intending to pray to Christ, hee speaketh to him in the Sacrament. Theoph. It is one thing to pray to the sacrament as you though falsely say S. Denys did, and an other thing to pray to him that is euery where present in that hee is God and hath a speciall kinde of operation by the power and grace of his flesh and blood in the sacred mysteries as hee is man vnited in the same person with God. And yet these wordes doe not import him to bee in the sacrament. Certainely Christs diuine and humane nature were most woonderfull mysteries before this Sacrament was ordayned: and all the wordes that your author vseth if they were,Do you no peruert the words when you force them for ado∣ration of cor∣ruptible crea∣tures against the authors mning? as you cite them, are onely these, Thou diuine and most holy mysterie, which agree to Christ without any respect of the Sacrament, more properly and truly than to your host or chalice. Philand. Yet they may bee taken as spoken to the sacrament: and there∣fore wee did not peruert them, we did but preferre that construction before the other. Theo. That is, where diuine honour was giuen to christ, you deriue it from him to the host. Phi. Not from him, but finding him truely and corporal∣ly
present in the sacrament, there we honor him where we find him. Theo. Your doings we know: but Dionysius words haue no such sense. Philand. They may haue, and that sufficeth vs. Theo. But if by them you will prooue so great a matter as this is, which we nowe haue in hand: they must necessarily enforce your exposition and not indifferently beare an other as well as yours or rather better. This answere might suffice, if Dionysius had vsed the word , as you suppose he did: but now his text is,  But O most diuine and holy expiation (or Sacrifice) reueiling the enigmaticall couerings, which are figuratiuely adiacent vnto thee, bee opened clearly vnto vs: Or if any man like rather to haue it an Apostrophe,A second ex∣position of Dionysius his words. to a thing lacking life, such as the learned are well acquainted with, and the Scriptures often vse: he may inter∣prete it neerer to the right signification of the word , and say, but O most diuine and sacred rite or institution, referring it to that manner and order of celebrating the Lords supper, which Christ first ordayned, and may properly be called .Dionysius di∣stinguisheth the elements from that which he speaketh to. Ios. 10. 3. King. 13. Esa. 1. Psal. 24. The impera∣tiue moode is no praier except the person be such as we maie not o∣therwise speak vnto but by praier. Howsoeuer it is euident hee maketh no inuocation of the host or chalice, nor speaketh to them, but, calleth them , aenigmaticall vayles or integuments figuratiuely adherent or an∣nexed to the perfection of the mysteries. Phi. Runne you for refuge to the Rhetoritians? Theo. As though the scrip∣tures were not full of the like speaches? Ioshua sayd, Thou sunne stand stil in Gibeon, and thou moone in the valley of Aialon. And so the man of Iudah, O Altar, Altar, thus sayth the Lord, behold. And Esai him-selfe beganne his pro∣phesie with, Heare O heauens, and hearken O earth. Phi. Those were spea∣ches, not prayers; as this is. Theoph. They bee all imperatiue moodes, as well as this, and so is that saying of Dauid, Lyft vp your heades, ye gates, and bee yee lift vp, you euerlasting doores, and the king of glory shall come in; which yet is no prayer to the doores. The moode of it selfe is not precatiue ex∣cept the person bee such, as wee must not commaunde but onely intreate: and beeing vsed to thinges without life it sheweth the desire of our heart touching them, not any supplication vnto them. And therefore you doe not onely the di∣uines but also the Grammarians wrong, when you conclude an inuocation of the Sacrament out of Dionysius woordes, because the verbes bee imperatiue. For the woord  contayneth the whole action, institution, and celebrati∣on of the Lordes Supper,Christ is not reallie coue∣red with the vailes of bread and wine, but figuratiuelie represented and truelie receiued by them. yea the inwarde grace as well as the outwarde ele∣ments: and Dionysius might say to Christes ordinance , bee opened vnto vs, without inuocation of the host or Chalice, as well as Dauid sayde, , be you lifted vp, to the gates: and yet made them no Gods. Phi. Yet by this place you see, Christ is couered with the formes of bread and wyne, as with garments, and that is woorde for worde our opinion. Theo. Adde , figuratiuely as your author doeth, and then both your reall pre∣sence is ouerthrowen, and the doctrine which wee teach clearely established.
For wee confesse that Christ worketh in vs, and presenteth himselfe vnto vs in these mysteries, as it were in certaine vayles and couerings. Which mystical∣ly by way of signification and spiritual operation containe and clothe his grace and truth: but not really nor by material or corporall inclusion, as you affirme:Dionys eccles. hierarh. cap. 3. and so himselfe expresseth his mynd in this very chapter, . The reuerent (or venerable) signes, by which Christ IS SIGNIFIED and emparted vnto vs, being set on the Altar: Christ is signified and receiued by these signes and figures, and to him, not to the sacrament spake Dionysius (if that were his worke,) but that Christ is locally or substancially closed within the formes of breade and wine, or that hee prayed to the host and Chalice, Dionysius hath no such sense nor wordes. Phi. To Christ hee spake, we doubt it not, mary when he was couered with signes and figures of bread and wyne. Theo. Signes and figures the aunci∣ent fathers doe not take for shewes and accidents as you doe, but for substantial and vsuall creatures, such as you may not adore. Phi. We say no. Theo. Of that anon: in the meane tyme, well you may thinke that had you beene in Dio∣nysius place you would haue prayed to the Sacrament, but his woords import no such matter. Philand. Why shoulde not hee as well as the rest of the godly?The Rhe. test. fol. 453. The whole Church This is right Iesuiticall re∣ligion to crie thus vpon a dumb & dead creature. No blasphe∣mie. crieth vpon it, Domine non sum dignus, Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori: Lambe of God, that takest away the sinnes of the world, haue mercie on vs. Theo. Whome meane you by the whole Church; your selues, or all the Godly since Christ? Philand. Neuer aske that question: they did as wee doe, and wee doe as they did. Theo. If you speake of your selues, then here is the witnes of your owne mouth, that you CRY VPON IT (I meane on your host which in sub∣stance is a base and corruptible creature,) O Lorde, O God, O Lambe of God that takest away the sinnes of the worlde, haue mercie on vs.Iere. 2. What greater sinne did they commit which sayde to a stocke, thou art my Father, and to a stone, thou hast begotten mee; whom the holy Ghost hath traduced for a me∣morable and yet detestable crewe of Idolaters?The Iewish & heathen Ido∣laters were neuer so grosse Whether it is greater to bee a father, or to be a God? to beget, or to take away the sinnes of the world? They sayd the one, you say the other: who can forbid the banes but that you shoulde be coupled with them, if not preferred before them as more outragious in disho∣noring God than they were? Phi. Doe wee not this to Christ, and is hee not woorthie of it? Theoph. Why then doe you cry on it, and not on him? Philand. Wee be perswaded that when wee call on it, wee call on him. Theo. So were they that tooke a stocke for their father, and a stone for their maker. They thought they wor∣shipped God, and not the Image. Philand. But wee bee sure that Christ made this to bee him-selfe, when hee sayde, this is my body. Theo. He sayd, I am the doore, I am the vyne, and yet neither doore, nor vyne are really and personally the sonne of God. Philand. Hee spake those things in parables,
and by way of resemblance: this he spake in plaine trueth without all figures:If it be a figu∣ratiue speach as anon shall be prooued, you shall cough me the ranckest Ido∣laters that e∣uer were on the face of the earth. and therefore this must bee substantially turned into Christ, though that bee not. Theoph. You make your reall and corporall presence a refuge for your erroneous and absurde assertions: But if that bee false as well as the rest, then are you plunged ouer head and eares in the myre and sinke of sinne and heresie. Phi. If God bee not in heauen, wee shall neuer come there: but if hee bee, wee can not misse our way. For hath the whole Church thinke you lyen in sinne and heresie till your newe doctrine came lately from Geneua? Theo. In deede I thinke this reason is euen as good as the most of those which your friendes haue freshly sent vs from Rhemes; but abuse not your selues with such stately follies: GOD may well bee in heauen and is no doubt; and yet you neuer come there for refusing the right way thither. Philand. The Iesuites crake they haue the whole church with them, when they haue not so much as one father for the greatest points of their religi∣on.Wee goe the same way that the whole church since Christes time went before vs. Theoph. This pride so bewitcheth you, that you can not see howe farre you bee fallen from the fayth of Christes Church, which was in auncient and vncorrupted ages. Philand. As though wee did not ioyne with them in this and all other poyntes of Religion. Theoph. You ioyne with them as darke-night doeth with day-light. Philand. Haue wee not their full consent for those thinges which you impugne? Theoph. As namely for adoration of the sacrament, where you pretend the whole Church, and shewe not one man that euer taught of the Sacrament that It should bee adored. Philand. Was not the whole Church taught to say vnto It, and crie vpon It, Domine non suum dignus, Lorde I am not woorthie? Theo. Prooue that this or any other inuocation or adoration was vsed TO IT as you say: and you shall goe free for all.The Rhe. test. pag. 21. nu. 8. Domine non sum dignus. Phi. Origen, ho. 5. in diuers. When thou eatest, (sayth hee) and drinkest the body and blood of our Lorde, hee entereth vnder thy roofe. Thou also therefore humbling thy selfe say, Lord I am not woorthy. So sayde Liturg. S. Chrysost. Graec. sub finem. Origen and Chrysostome abused for in∣uocation of the Sacra∣ment. S. Chrysostome in his Masse. Theoph. This they were taught to say, but to what were they taught to say it? Philand. To the Sacrament. Theo. Who sayth so besides you? Phi. Origen and Saint Chrysostome. Theoph. Perhaps they taught the people that kinde of prayer when they did communicate at the Lordes Ta∣ble: but did they teach the people to say so to the Sacrament? Philand. E∣uen thus to crie VPON IT, and thus to say VNTO IT, Lorde I am not woorthie. Theo. Look the pla∣ces when you will, and you shall finde it to be other∣wise.We would gladly heare that of their owne mouthes, wee trust not yours. Philand. Looke the places and you shall find it to bee as wee say. Theo. We haue viewed the places and find you to be Lyars. Phi. Are not those Ori∣gens words which we rehearse? Theo. Origen hath the words, which you cite, but he teacheth not the people to direct them to the Sacrament. Philand. To whome then? Theoph. To whome, but to christ the sonne of God? Phi.
And he is in the sacrament. Theo. Their assertions, not your additions, are the thinges we aske for. That these and all other partes of diuine honor are due to christ, no christian maie doubt; but that the same maie be directed and applied to the host, that is your blasphemie, no father uer taught it. Origen discussing the Centurions fact and faith telleth his audience that Christ entereth vnder the roofes of all beleeuers two waies;How Christ at this daie en∣tereth our roofe. Orig. hom. 5. ad. diuers. first by his mini∣sters, then by his mysteries. Intrat & nunc Dominus sub tectum Credentium duplici figura vel more. The Lorde euen at this daie entereth the roofe of those that beleeue after two sortes or manners. For when holie and accep∣table pastours of the Church to GOD enter our howsen, euen then and there the Lord entereth by them, and be thou so affected, as if thou recei∣uedst the Lorde himselfe. An other waie is, when thou receiuest that holy meate,Christ ente∣reth the soule and not the mouth of mā. and eatest and drinkest the bodie and blood of the Lord, for then the Lorde entereth thy roofe also. Thou therefore humbling thy selfe, i∣mitate the Centurion and saie: Lord I am not worthie, that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe. This must be said, as well when the preacher entereth our house, as when we receiue the sacrament: for it is plaine by Origen that christ commeth vnder our roofe in both these cases,We must saie Lord I am not worthie, to Christ, & not to the Sacra∣ment: for the Centurion saide it to Christs persō. Christ is more truelie and substantiallie in vs than in the Sacra∣ment. That Christ dwelleth re∣allie and cor∣porallie in vs, See Chryso∣stome homil. 83. in Mat. Cy∣ril. in Iohan. lib. 10. cap. 13. & li. 11. ca. 26. Hi∣larius de Trini∣tate lib. 8. but that he dwel∣leth so in the Sacrament the Iesuits shall neuer prooue. and we are not worthie in either of them or in any other case, that the sonne of God should come vnder our roofe. As then it were madnes to deifie the Preacher, because Christ voutsafeth to come in him and with him, or to salute him with the diuine honour due to christ and to say to a mortall man, Lord I am not worthy: so can it be no lesse impietie to saie to the dead creatures in which or with which we receiue christ from his table, Lord I am not worthie. Phi. Doe you thinke that Christ is none otherwise in the Sacrament, than he is in a mortall man? Theo. He is more truelie, reallie and naturallie in those men that be his members than he is in the elements that be vsed at his ta∣ble. Phi. O shamefull heresie! Is anie mortall man transsubstantiated into Christ, as the elements are by power of consecration? Theo. That which I saie is most true; men are the members of Christ, bread is not: Christ abi∣deth in them and they in him, in the breade he doeth not: he will raise them in the last day, the breade he will not: they shall raigne with him for euer, the breade shall not. And therefore take backe your shamefull error of transsubstantiating the elements into christ, since he is more really in vs than in the pixe or the chalice, and yet we are not substantiallie conuerted into him. Phi. I will neuer beleeue this whiles I haue a daie to liue. Theo. Nei∣ther doe I meane in this place to enter that discourse: yet for the confirmation of it, I send you to Chrysostome, Cyrill, and Hilarie, who will teach you so much in plaine wordes, that christ is in vs reallie, naturallie, corporallie, carnallie, substantiallie, which of the Sacrament you shall neuer be able to prooue. For the sacrament is no part of his mysticall bodie, as we are, and
therefore we are knit vnto him euen by the trueth of his and our nature, flesh, and substance, as members of the same bodie to their head, the Sacrament is not, but onelie annexed as a signe to the heauenlie grace, and vertue of Christ mightilie present, and trulie entering the soule of euerie man that is filie pre∣pared with faith and repentance to receiue and lodge so worthie a ghost. Phil. The Sacrament is turned into the reall and naturall flesh of Christ, and so are not we. Theoph. If that were true, when the Sacrament is turned by naturall digestion into the nourishment of our bodies, the flesh and blood of Christ must likewise be conuerted into the substance of our bodies:Christ ente∣reth not our mouthes, when he com∣meth vnder our roofe. but that is so blasphemous and impious that you dare not abide it; and there∣fore Christ entereth not our mouthes, when he commeth vnder our roofe, but possesseth our soules & replenisheth them with his heauenlie presence & power of grace and life: neither must we saie to the Sacrament, Lord I am not wor∣thie; since that is an earthlie and corruptible creature: but to Christ himselfe who hath promised in his Gospell that he and his Ian. 14.father wil come and dwel with vs, and perfourmeth the same by the hearing of his worde, and receiuing of his Sacraments, by which meanes he commeth and phes. . dwelleth in our harts by faith, as S. Paul affirmeth, and not in our mouthes or bellies by anie local and reall comprehension as you imagine. Phi. Wee doe not deny that Christ commeth by his worde vnto vs; but the Sacraments haue a speciall presence of his, which the worde hath not. Theo. The sacraments take their force onely and wholy from the worde, neither is the worde anie whit the stronger or better for the visible signes, but our weak∣nes is staied and supported by them and they endued with power and vertue by the worde to sanctifie the receiuer, where it is beleeued. And therefore Christ commeth and dwelleth in vs, as truely by his worde as by his sacraments, and if you compare them, more truely by his worde, than by the signes and seales of his worde. Phi. We eate his flesh and drink his blood in the sacrament, in the word we do not. Theo. Christ dwel∣leth in vs as trulie by his word, as by his sacramētsWe eate his flesh & drinke his blood more truely in the word, than in the Sacramental and mystical signes. S. Hierom saith, Hier. in Psal. 147. Ego corpus Iesu E∣uangelium puto: & quando dicit, qui non commederit carnem meam, & biberit san∣guinem meum licet & in mysterio possit intelligi, tamen verius corpus Christi & san∣guis eius sermo Scripturarum est. The body of Iesus I think to be the Gospel, & when he saith, he that doth not eate my flesh and drinke my blood though this maie be vnderstood of the Sacrament,The flesh of Christ is eatē more truely in his worde than in the sacraments. yet the worde of the Scriptures is more truely the bodie and blood of Christ. S. Austen saith: De Cons. dist. 2. § vt quid paras. August. de ciui. . 21. ca. 25. Beleeue and thou hast eaten: to beleeue in him, is to eate the liuelie bread: and that he calleth of the twaine the truer kinde of eating the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ. For repeating these woordes of our sauiour, he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood, abideth in me and I in him, he saith, Ostendit quid sit non Sacramento tenus sed reuera copus Christi manducare. Christ shew∣eth what it is to eate his flesh, not by way of a Sacrament, but in deede,
(or truely.) So that the flesh and blood of Christ are MORE TRVELY in the members and words of Christ than in the Sacraments; and yet your selues teache no man to say to the Preacher, or the Scriptures, Lorde I am not woorthie. Phi. Chrysostome in his Masse sayde the very same woordes, to the Sa∣crament. Theo. Howe knowe you what hee sayde, that died so long before you?No such words are found in Chrysostoms Liturgie. Phi. You shall find them in his Liturgie. Theo. Well we may hereafter, when you haue put them in; but as yet we find no such wordes at all in his Li∣turgie. Phi. The Greeke exemplar hath them. Theo. Not those which either Erasmus or Leo Thuscus had when they translated it into Latin: if you haue gotten new copies contrarie to the olde, reason is you publish them, and prooue the credits of them before we regard them. Phi. So we will. Theo. And with all you must shew that hee speaketh these wordes to the Sacrament: otherwise they conclude nothing for you,The woordes may be there, & yet not spo∣ken to the sa∣crament. no more than Origens words did in the like case, when he taught men to say them to Christ at the sacred communion. Phi. That is your euasion: for both Origen and S. Chrysostome sayde it to the Sacra∣ment. Theo. That is your intrusion: for neither Origen nor Chrysostom hath any such reference. Phi. See the bookes. Theo. Neuer appeale to the sight of the bookes, but produce the wordes. This is your cunning in your Rhemish Testament to bid vs often Pag. 21. l. n. 12 pag. 463. lin. 11. (See) the fathers, and Pa. 452. li. 30. The Iesuites bid vs see the fathers, but they doe not tell vs what we shall finde there. (so the rest) but wee haue seene them, where you come in thickest with them, and there finde nothing for your false and erro∣neous fansies. And therefore either alleage their woordes, when you vse their names, or say you sawe them not: wee lyst not at your bidding to goe seeke for oysters in the Ocean. Philand. You feare to bee confounded by them, and that is the cause you will not (See) them. Theoph. They bee not our, but your allegations, and did they make for you, wee should soone haue tidings of you: mary nowe their woordes comming short of your assertions, to beare out the matter you send the reader to the names and workes of many Fathers, where hee must picke out what hee can at his fingers endes,It is not e∣nough to will vs to see the fathers: they must saie to what end they alledge them. and in the meane time not bee able to charge you with corrupting them, since you bid him (See) them, but tolde him not what hee shoulde finde in them. This is a way to quote what authorities you list, bee they neuer so impertinent, and yet to amaze the simple with the number, and wearie the learned with not expressing what wordes you take hold of, and what they seeke for: which in questions of fayth were very needefull. Phi. They say wee tell you,Chrysostome praieth to Christ in hea∣uen, not to the sacramēt. auoyde it how you can. Theo. They say no such thing: and though Origen, as you haue hearde bee farre enough from it, yet Chrysostom in the place which you cite is farther off, I meane, from direc∣ting his prayers to the sacrament. Making his supplications to God after consecration, hee sayth, Liturg Chrys. Ipse Do∣mine caelitus respice ad seruos tuos inclinantes tibi capita sua. Thou Lorde looke from heauen on thy seruants that bowe their neckes vnto thee. And againe,
Attende Domine Iesu Christe Deus noster de sancto habitaculo tuo, & de throno gloriae regni tui,Ibidem. & veni ad sanctificandum nos qui in excelsis vna cum patre sedes, & hic nobiscum inuisibiliter ades. Behold Lorde Iesu Christ, our God, FROM thy holy habitation,He woulde haue Christ behold the people from heauen, not from the sa∣crament. and FROM the throne of the glory of thy kingdome, and come to sanctifie vs, who sittest in the heauens with thy father; and art here with vs inuisibly. Hee desireth the sonne of God to beholde his seruantes from heauen, not from the sacrament, and from thence hee looketh for sanctification, not from the patent or Chalice. Phi. Hee sayth that Christ is also present with vs here on earth, though af∣ter an inuisible manner, which wee take to bee vnder the formes of breade and wyne. Theo. That Christ is present with vs here on earth, wee firmely be∣leeue, to our great comfort. Where two or three, sayth our Sauiour, are gathered together in my name,Mat. 18. Mat. 28. I am in the middest of them: and againe, Lo I am alway with you vntill the ende of the worlde: but that hee is corporally present vnder the formes of bread and wine, that is nei∣ther auouched by Chrysostome, nor admitted by vs; it is your vaine and fruitlesse fansie.How Christ is present with vs. Phi. How can his body bee present but bodily? Theo. These woordes of Chrysostom inferre not, that Christes body is present, but that Christ is pre∣sent. And since Christ consisteth of two natures, the diuine may bee present though the humane bee not. Christ absent, sayth Austen, is also present. For vn∣lesse hee were present,August. in Io∣han. tract. 50. hee coulde not bee helde of vs our selues. But because it is true that hee saith, Lo I am with you for euer vnto the end of the world, hee is both departed, and yet here. Hee is returned (whence hee came) and hath not yet forsaken vs.His diuinitie is present with vs. For his body hee hath caried into heauen, but his (diuine) maiestie hee hath not taken from the world. Neither is his diuine power onely present with vs, but also wee haue his humane nature many wayes with vs in this worlde.Idem Ibidem. Habes Christum in praesen∣ti & in futuro. In praesenti per fidem, in praesenti per signum Christi, in praesenti per Baptismatis Sacramentum,His humanity present with vs manie waies, though not in sub∣stance. in praesenti per altaris cibum & potum. Thou hast Christ, sayth Austen, in this worlde, and in the next. In this world by faith, in this worlde by the signe of Christ, in this world by the Sacrament of bap∣tisme, in this world by the meate and drinke of the altar. By these things wee haue him in this worlde not really, locally, or corporally, but truely, comfortably and effectually, so as our bodies, soules and spirites bee sanc∣tied and preserued by him against the day of redemption, when wee shall see him and enioye him face to face in that fulnesse and perfection which wee nowe are assured of by fayth, and prepared for by cleanesse and meekenesse of the inward man. The whole Church therefore neuer The Rhe. test pag. 453. The auncient Church did exactlie di∣stinguish the sacrament from Christ. cried vppon the Sacrament, Lorde I am not woorthy, Lord beè mercifull to mee a sinner: Lambe of God that takest away the sinnes of the worlde haue mercy on vs: You doe sinnefully slaunder them, they did exactly and precisely distinguish the corruptible creature from the eternal crea∣tor,
and taught all men to lift vp their hearts from the elements, which were before their eyes, to him that is in heauen, and shall come from thence and from no place else to iudge the world. Saint Austen wil haue the rude ones to be taught that the Sacraments, are De Catech. rudibus. cap. 26.Signacula rerum diuinarm visibilia, sed res inuisibiles in eis honorari: Visible scales of things diuine, but the things visible to be honored in them. And as if the case were so plaine that no man could well doubt thereof, he saith, De Baptis. lib. 3. cap. 10. Si ad ipsas res visibiles quibus Sacramenta tractantur, animum conferamus, quis nesciat eas esse corruptibiles? Si autem ad id quod per illas agitur, quis non videat, non posse corrumpi? If we looke to the visible things (or elements) by which the Sacraments are perfourmed, who can be ignorant that they are corruptible? But if we looke to that which is doone by them, who doth not see, that that can not bee corrupted? Saint Ambrose saith, Ambr. de Sa∣crament. li. 4. cap. 3. Venisti ad Altare, vidisti Sacramenta posita super Altare, & ipsam quidem miratus es creaturam. Ta∣men creatura solemnis & nota. Thou camest to the Altar and sawest the Sacra∣ments placed on the Altar and maruelledst at the very creature: yet is it an vsuall and knowen creature. Origen purposely creating what part of the Sacrament did sanctifie the receiuer, saith; Orig. in 15. Matt. Ille cibus qui sanctificatur per verbum Dei & obsecrationem, iuxta id quod habet materiale in ventrem abit & in secessum eijcitur. Nec materia panis, sed super llum sermo est qui prodest non indigne Domino commedenti illum. Haec de typico Symbolicoque corpore. The meate which is sanctified (at the Lords table) by the word of God, and praier, as touching the materiall (partes) which it hath, goeth into the belly and so forth by the priuie: neither is the matter of bread it, that profiteth the worthy receiuer, but the worde rehearsed ouer it. This I speake of the typicall and figuratiue body. For this cause the great Councell of Nice directed the whole Church to lift vp their vnderstanding aboue the breade and wine which they sawe;The whole Church cried on the people to lift vp their harts. and by faith to conceiue the lambe of God slaine for the sinnes of men and proposed and exhibited on the Lordes table in those mysteries. Their woordes bee Concil. Nice. . Let vs not base∣lie bend our mindes on the bread and cup, that are set before our eyes (at the Lordes Supper) but lifting vp our thoughtes let vs by faith be∣holde  signifieth in as well as on. on (or in) the sacred table the Lambe of God taking awaie the sinne of the worlde. Which admonition the Church euer after obserued by crying vpon the people to lift vp their hartes, not to the Sacramentes which they saw, but from them to him that liued and raigned in heauen; whome they adored in equall degree with the father and the holie Ghost; and whome they behelde and touched with the eyes and handes of their faith, but not with their corporall limmes or senses. August. in Io∣han tract. 50. Christ is both seene and touched by faith. Quomodo in caelum mittam manum vt ibi sedentem teneam? Mitte fidem & tenuisti. Howe shall I sende vp my hande to heauen, to reach (Christ
sitting there? Sende thy fayth (sayth Austen) and THOV HOLDEST HIM (fast enough. Ambr. in Luc. li. 6. ca. 8. de filia princ. Synag. vesici. Fide Christus tangitur, fide Christus videtur: non corpore tangitur, non oculis comprehenditur. By fayth (sayth Ambrose) Christ is touched, by fayth Christ is seene: hee is not touched with our body, not viewed with our eyes. And therefore Chrysostome saith, Chrys. in 1. Cor. hom. 24. Hee must flie (not to the Sa∣crament, but) on hie that will come to this body: Ibidem. euen to heauen it selfe, or rather aboue the heauens: for where the body is, there also (will) the Eagles (bee.) Phi. Christ is on the table, be∣cause his death is so∣lemnized in the mysteries on the table.The councell of Nice sayth, The Lambe of God is on the sacred table: where then did they seeke him or made they prayers vnto him, but on the Altar? Theo. They lifted vp their heartes to him that sate in heauen, and from hea∣uen looke downe vppon them, and their prayers, before they could please God, were directed to the same place and person that their heartes were. You must therefore either fasten their hearts and faiths to the Sacrament, or suffer their prayers together with their affections to ascend to heauen Colos. 3. where Christ sit∣teth at the right hande of God, and Phil. 3. from whence we looke for (our) Saui∣our, euen the Lord Iesus Christ. Phi. All the places which are yet alleaged against you, you haue shyfted off, by referring the speaches to Christ him-selfe sitting in heauen, and as you say not in the sacrament: But Theodorets woordes are so cleare, that no shift will erue. Hee speaketh of the very mysticall signes and Sacraments which are seene with eyes, and touched with handes,Theod. dial. 2. and of them hee sayth: Intelliguntur ea esse, quae facta sunt, & creduntur, & adorantur vt quae ill sint, quae creduntu. The Sacraments, are vnderstood to be the things which they are made, & are beleeued and ADORED as being the same which they are beleeued. Theo. Not one of the fathers which they bring spea∣keth of the externall sa∣crament saue onelie Theo∣doret.Onely Theodoret of all the fathers that euer mentioned adoration spake of the Sacrament it selfe. The rest direct their words to Christ raigning in glory, not to the host or Chalice in the Priestes hande. Hee in deede spea∣keth of the mysticall signes, which the rest did not. Philand. Then yet there is one Father for the adoration of the Sacrament: you sayde wee had none. Theo. Woulde you prooue so high a point of Religion, as this is, to bee Catholike by one onely Father, and such an one as you thinke not worthy to bee called a Saint? Phi. These exceptions are but dilatorie, and quite besides the matter.The mysticall signes must be adored, but not with di∣uine honor. Doe you graunt that hee sayth the mysticall signes must bee ado∣red? Theo. Hee sayth so. Philand. And such vpstarts as you are, woulde bee credited against him, when you say the Sacrament is not to bee adored. Theoph. Wee reason not about our credite, but about your conclusion. Philand. That is too plaine for your stoare. Theo. Why doe you then con∣ceale it so long? Phi. These men cā plaie with shadowes ve∣rie pretilie.You shall soone heare it, and haue your belly full of it. The mystical to∣kens bee adored sayth that auncient Father Theodorete. Marke nowe howe nimbly we come within you, & ouerthrow you in plain field. If you deny it, we haue here antiquitie for it: If you grant it, then are you worse than miscreants
for holding all this while against it. Theo. With such weapons I thinke A∣lexander the great did conquere the worlde. Phi. When you come to a non plus, then you fall to idle talke. But leaue digressing, and giue vs a short and direct answere, which wee knowe for your heartes you can not. Theo. You knowe much; but if you knewe your selues and your owne weakenes it were better. Phi. Did I not tell you, this place would ouerthrowe you? Theo. Be∣cause hee sayth the substance of bread and wyne must be adored. Phi. Hee sayth no such thing;The mysticall tokens remai∣ning in their former sub∣stance must be adored. but the mysticall tokens must be adored. And what are the mysticall tokens but the mysteries themselues, which are all one with the Sacrament? Theo. Can you take the top and the tayle, and leaue out the myddle so cunningly? Phi. Wee leaue out nothing. Theo. Theo∣dorets wordes are,Theod. Dial. 2. Neque enim sigra mystica post sanctificationem recedunt a sua natura. Manent enm in priore substantia, & figura & forma: & videri & tagi possunt sicut & prius: Intelliguntur antem ea esse quae facta sunt, & credutur & a∣dorantur vt quae illa sint, quae creduntur. The mysticall signes after consecration doe not depart from their owne nature. For they remaine in their former substaunce, and figure and forme, and may bee seene and touched as they were before: but they are vnderstoode to bee those thinges which they are made, and are beleeued AND ADORED as being the things which they are beleeued. The mysticall signes,If they will a∣dore the sub∣stance of breade, Theodorets wordes will helpe them forward, but not other∣wise. not departing from their owne nature but remay∣ning in their former substance are adored. By this you may prooue; if you bee so disposed, that the creatures of bread and wyne must bee adoren, which per∣haps in your Church is no fault, because it is so often: But the Church of Christ abhorreth it as a wicked impietie to adore any dead or dumbe creature. And therefore you must bee driuen as well as we, to seeke for an other, and far∣ther meaning in Theodorete: otherwise you will shake the foundation of your owne fayth with your owne antiquitie, more than you shall doe ours. Our answere is easie.Adored is sometimes as much as eueenced. The mysticall signes, hee sayth, are adored, but not with diuine honour: and adoration with the Grecians as also with the Scrip∣tures, when it is applied to mortal men or creatures, signifieth onely a reuerent regard of their places or vses. Your owne Lawe sayth:De cons. dist. 3. § venerabiles in glossa. ¶ cul∣tu. In hoc sensu possumus, quamlibet rem sacram adorare, id est reuerentiam exhibere. In this sense wee may adore any sacred thing whatsoeuer, that is giue it (due) reuerence. So that you vtterly ouerthrowe both your adoration and your Transubstantiation, when you brought Theo∣dorete to tell vs that the substance of bread is adored (that is reuerenced) and yet remayneth after Consecration. For if it remaine, what adore you but the substance of a dead creature?The Iesuits authorities for adoration of the Sacra∣ment prooue no such thing And that if you doe, howe many steppes are you from open Idolatrie? Thus though wee crake not of our conquests as you doe, wee returne your authorities for adoring the sacrament as either impertinent or insufficient, & giue vs cause to consider that your worshipping it with diuine honour is no catholike or ancient veritie, but a pernicious and wicked noueltie.
Phil. Is it wickednes to worship Christ? Theop. You defile the name of Christ,The reall pre∣sence. & spoile him of his worship, by giuing them both to senseles creatures. Phi. How often shall we beate this into your dull heades, that we giue this honour to the Sacrament, and not to senseles creatures? Theo. And howe often shall wee ring this into your deaffe eares,This is my bo∣die, doth not infer the reall presence. that the Sacrament in corpo∣rall matter and substance is a senseles and corruptible creature? Phi. Did not Christ saie this is my bodie? Theo. You must prooue the speach to be literall, as well as the wordes to be his. Phi. Is not the letter plaine, this is my bodie? Theo. The letter is so plaine, that it killeth the carnall inter∣preter; and hath driuen you whiles you would needs refuse the figuratiue and spirituall constructions of Christs words, to these absurdities and enormities, which haue euen ouerwhelmed your Church. Phi. Not the words, but the exposition of the wordes is the thing that we striue for. The Iesuites maie soone bring a thou∣sand authori∣ties for this point, and not one to the purpose.Can you wish for plainer wordes than these, this is my bodie? Theo. I could wish that in expounding these wordes you did relie rather on the catho∣like fathers, than on your vncatholike fansies. Phi. All the fathers with one voice toyne with vs in this doctrine. Theoph. You doe but dreame of a drie Summer. Not one of the auncient fathers euer spake of your reall presence, or the literall sense of these wordes, on which you buyld the rest. Phi. Will you haue a thousand places for that purpose; or if varietie of writers do rather content you, wil you haue three, or four hundreth seuerall fathers, all auncient and catholike in diuers ages and countries that shall depose for our doctrine in this point? Theo. I can enter a course to saue you paines, and to make a readier dispatch if you will be ruled by me. Phi. What is it? Theo. Bring vs but one father for 800. yeares that euer taught your transsubstantiation, and wee will count it catholike. Phi. What talke you of one? You shall haue one hundreth of as auncient and catholike writers, as anie were in the Church of christ for a thousand yeares after his ascending to heauen. Theo. You were best take it, when you be wel offered. One faire and sufficient authority shall please vs better, than a cartloade of names abused, and places peruerted. Phi. It is as easie for vs to bring them by whole hundreds. A man that once supplied the same roome which you doe nowe,The papists in this questi∣on thinke to conquere with number if not with strength of places. hath produced two hun∣dreth of them in his Diacosion Martyrion: Vernierus, an other of our side, hath alledged 318. seuerall and sundrie writers: as manie as there were Bi∣shops in the great Councell of Nice: Garetius, a man of singular reading hath gathered foure hundred fourtie fiue good and substantiall Authors, euen from Melchizedech, to this present age, besides Poets, women, Councels, Mira∣cles, visions, Iewes, Ethnicks, and heretiks, which all beare witnes to our doctrine. And if you haue not seene the bookes, I will lend you them for your instruction: I could be content I tell you to be at anie cost to win a soul, and wish to you no worse than to my selfe. Theo. Your kindnes without cause, is but seruice without thankes. I haue seene your Diacosion Martyrion, your great & vniuersal Councell militant tou∣ching the truth of the most diuine sacrament of the Eucharist assembled by Vernierus & your nine orders & Rancks of I know not whom, digested by Garetius: besides
the labours & trauels of many others your adherents:The papists beap vp places for their reall presence by hundreths, & not one to the purpose. And reading them all, I find not one father that euer dreampt of your material & corporal conuersion of the elements into christ for 800. yeres & vpward. Hyperbolical speaches I find in Chrysostom, & some hard similitudes in damascene & others: but a manifest testimonie for the real & carnal presence, which you defend, I find none: and as for the fathers which be any thing ancient they go clearely and exactly with vs in this question. Phi. With you? By this a man may perceiue you neuer saw them, or at lest neuer read them. My selfe can alleage you 500. places, wherof you shall not an∣swere one,It were more wisdome for them to vn∣destād what they alledge, than to al∣ledge they know not what. but by meere shifts & iestes & of tropes and figures and such like moc∣keries. Theo. It were paynes better bestowed for you to vnderstand what you alleage, than to alleage that which you vnderstand not. You may wrest and mis∣use 500. places of ye fathers, as your friends before you haue done, in this point, & your selues in other questiōs haue shewed the like actiuitie. But that the sub∣stance of the bread vanished by consecratiō, & the substāce of Christs body real∣ly succeedeth vnder the same dimensions & accidents of bread & wine, & entereth our mouthes locally cōprised within those formes; for this you shal neuer shew vs any one father greeke or latin, within the compas of 800. yeres after Christ. Phi. A thousand authorities can we bring you with a wette finger that shall clearly conuince the presence of Christ in the sacrament. Theo. And not one of them shal conclude that maner of presence which you maintain.We striue not for Christs presence in the mysteries, but for the manner of his presence. Phi. As for the maner of his being there, it forceth not much, so you grant him to be really and verily present. Theo. His presence there can do you litle good, except the man∣ner of his presence be likewise expressed and auouched by the places which you would bring. Phi. If he be present, ergo the substance of his flesh is present: and that must needs be corporally & locally cōprised in the formes of bread & wine. Theo. What father saith so besides your selues? Phi. They al say, he is presēt. Theo. And so do we. Phi. In words you say it, but when you come to the push, you deny the truth and effect of his presence.The presence which the Ie∣suits hold the fathers neuer head of. Theo. Wee do not looke you should vnderstand vs that vnderstand not your selues. You haue framed of your own heades a certaine maner of Christes pre∣sence in the supper without the direction or consent of any learned or auncient father: and that of al others the grossest and absurdest that could be deuised: and nowe you no sooner heare the name of Christes body or blood in the mysteries,Garetius, Ver∣nierus, and the rest, if a father do but name the body of Christ, bring him in by and by for a wit∣nes on their side, and then they muster them by hun∣dreths. but you straightway grow to a speciall conceite, that your reall and carnall presence is there confirmed and confessed. And this made your builders of Ba∣bel, as they posted through the Fathers, to note euery place and person, that did but mention The body of Christ as a witnes for Transubstantiation: where if it woulde haue pleased you and your fellowes to haue weighed the rules and cautions of the fathers together with their speaches and exhortatiōs & not to haue hunted after your owne fansies in their phrases, but marked & re∣mēbred their instructiōs, how they would be takē & vnderstood, whē they speak of ye christiā mysteries, you should haue saued a great deale of labor, which now
you should haue saued a great deale of labour, which nowe you haue spent to no purpose, & gained securitie from this difficultie, which hath stted your schooles and churches with a most pernicious and yet a monsterous error. Phi. And wee say that you bee so blinded with presumption and rebellion a∣gainst the Church of God, that you will not yeelde to all the fathers that euer wrate of this matter since Christes time, but because they nowe and then speake of signes and figures, you You turne all fm the thing, them∣selues to the signes, & that is the cause of your error. turne all to tropes and metaphores, as if neither Christ himselfe, nor any of his Apostles, or their successors, the Godly teachers and Pastours of his church had euer spoken properly or plainely of this sacra∣ment, but al in clouds and riddles, such as neither Priest nor people, that should come after, could possibly conceiue, and none to this day had vnderstood, till you came lately to trouble the world with heresie and inquitie. Theo. Take your pleasures, your tongues bee your owne, who can tame them if you will not containe them? You haue learned of your fathers to Psalm 64.whet them like swordes, and to Ierem. 18. Wisd. 1. smite with them: and to shoote foorth your ar∣rowes, euen, bitter wordes; but the mouth that rageth with lies (& slanders) as the wise man forwarneth, destroyeth the soule; and in the meane time your errors are nothing diminished or excused by your taunts or teeth-gawles. As touching the matter it selfe, Sacraments of their owne nature, and by their first and chiefe erection are visible signes of inuisible graces; so that if they be no signes, they bee no sacraments: and though the signes must bee dili∣gently distinguished from the thinges, yet for good causes in teaching and wri∣ting do the signes beare the names of the things them selues,These wo rules must be obserued in reading the fathers tou∣ching this matter, els we shall infinite∣ly erre. whose signes they are, in so much that no father speaking or writing of the bread or wyne after they be once made sacraments, giueth them any other name, than the body and blood of Christ; not that in earthly matter or essence they be really conuerted in∣to those diuine things, as you falsely gather, but for that remaining in their for∣mer & vsual both nature and substance, they haue in them, & cary with them the fruite, effect, and force of Christs flesh wounded, & blood shed for the remission of our sinnes. And because the people shoulde regarde not the creatures which they see, but the graces which they beleeue, therefore the Fathers euery where without exception call the elements by the names of the inwarde and heauenly vertues, that are annexed to them, and conferred with them by the trueth of his word, & power of his spirit. This is ye first rule, which you should haue obserued. To mistake the signes for the thinges themselues, must needes bread a mon∣sterous error.The next is that whensoeuer they teach and propose the dignitie, proprie∣tie or efficacie of the Sacrament, they meane not the creatures, which our eies and tasts doe better iudge of, than their tongues or wittes can teach vs, but that other diuine, lyfe-giuing and soule-sauing part of the sacrament, which our heartes by fayth take holde on, and possesse more really and effectual∣ly, than if it were chammed in our mouthes, or buried in our stomackes, as you grossely conceiue of those thinges which bee most high and heauenly. These two Rules remembred, a very meane scholer may soone discharge the burden of all your allegations. For either you mistake the one part for
the other,Al their alle∣gans are answered with thee two obseruati∣ons. supposing that to bee corporall which in deede is spirituall: or else you vrge the name which the signe beareth for similitude, as arnstily to all in∣tents as  were were the thing it selfe, which causeth you to  so many texes, and to straie so farre from trueth, that no sound can recall you. Phi. Away with your new found obseruations: The catholike church hath the spirit of trueth promised for her direction, and therefore the wil none of your wise inuentions to qualifie the fathers speeches. Learne you rather at her handes to beleeue the wordes of Christ,The literall prssing of those wordes is the gound of al their er∣ror. who first appointed this Sacrament, and pronounced it to be himselfe, without signe or figure, when he saide, this is my body, and this is my blood, not spirituall or metaphoricall, but the same body, which was broken, and the same blood which was shed for remissio of sinnes: and that I trust you will confesse was his naturall, and locall, hath body and blood. Theo. The question is not,Christ did make the bread a God, but added grace to the signe that it might becom a sacrament. whether that were his naturall body, which suf∣fered on the crosse, but when hee saide of the bread, this is my bodie, whether he substantially changed the dead element into himselfe, & made the creature be∣come the creator, or whether he annexed his trueth to the signe, and grace to the Sacrament which required both the word of Christ, to make the promise: and his power, to perfourme the speech. And therefore we beleeue and acknow∣ledge the wordes of our Sauiour to bee very needeful in ordaining this Sa∣crament, euen in such manner and order as they were spoken: that the signes might haue the fruites and effectes of his body and blood: But that hee chaun∣ged substances with the bread and wine or deified the creatures, that his speech doth not inferre: and that as yet we doe not beleeue, except you can shewe vs howe the fleshe of Christ, which was first made of a woman, is nowe be∣come to be made of bread, and a dead and senslesse creature exalted to bee the son of God. Phi. We do not say the bread is substantially conuerted into Christ,If bread be not made the sonne o God, then sure the bread is not made Christ. or made the sonne of God: but the bread is abolished, & in the place thereof commeth the glorious flesh of our Lord and Sauiour, who is the Sonne of God. And in that sense we hold the creator is now where the creature was: but the dead element is not made the Sonne of God: you woulde faine catch vs at such an ad∣uantage. Theo. How you can auoide it,If the breade be Christ it must needs be made Christ: for before it was not Christ. Christ doth not saie, this is chaunged for or with my bodie, but this is my bo∣die. I yet perceiue not: for if the bread bee nowe Christ, which before it was not, ergo the bread is made Christ, and by conse∣quent a dead element is nowe become or made the Sonne of God, which I thinke will hardly stand with the very first groundes of Christian religion. Phi. You presse the letter against both reason and trueth. For the one is sayd to be conuerted or chaunged into the other, because the one displaceth and suc∣ceedeth the other: & so is it a chaunge rather of the one for the other, than a con∣uersion of the one into the other: if you take conuersion properly, as the Philo∣sophers do. Theo. Christ deth not say, where the bread was, there is nowe my body, but this (bread) is my body . And since before consecration it was
not his body, and now by repeating the wordes, is become his body: the conclu∣sion is euident, that by your opinion the bread is made Christ, and so become the sonne of God. Phi. You thinke to snare vs with schoole-trickes: but setting your sophismes aside, we plainly beleeue the Sacrament is Christ. Theo. You must beleeue the bread is Christ, which as yet the Articles of our Creede will not suffer vs to doe,If the breade be Christ, ergo it is God: for he is God. I meane, not to thinke that a dead and dumbe creature may bee God. Phi. Do we say the bread is God? Theo. You must auerre it, if you stick to the letter of Christs words, for he said of the bread, as you inforce it, this is my selfe: now, he was God. Phi. I thought I should be euen with you at Landes end. Christ did not say this bread is my bodie,THIS in Christs words must needes note some∣what. but this is my bodie, where now is the force of your ar∣gument? Theo. Euen where it was. Phi. Why? Christ sayd, this is, not mea∣ning bread, or any other creature. Theo. That this must be somwhat, else no∣thing was the body of Christ, & so you loose not only the bread, but also the body, Phi. Nay he said, this is, and that must needs be somwhat, it can not be nothing. Theo. It is well you haue found it. I said so before you. Then this is my bo∣dy. What this? Was it bread that he spake of: or somthing else? Phi. He spake of that,This must bee this somwhat, and not this nothing. which he had in his hands. Theo. You meane, not long before. Phi. In deede you say he had at that present, when he spake the wordes, nothing in his handes, and so you would haue nothing to be his body. Theo. Hinder not our course with matter impertinent to this place. The de∣monstratiue THIS noteth that which Christ then gaue to his Disciples, as wel as that which (you thinke) he then held in his hands. Choose whether you wil, of force the thing must be all one. For that which hee helde, that he gaue, and of that which he first helde and after gaue,The Iesuits be loath to tell vs what is mēt by this in the wordes of Christ. hee saide, this is my body. Phi. He did so. Theo. What was it? Phi. Somwhat it was, whatsoeuer it was. Theo. What somwhat do you say it was? Phi. What if I cannot tell? Theo. Then must you seeke farther for your chaunging of substances: The words of Christ, if you know not whereof he spake, proue no conuersion of the bread into his bo∣dy. For vnlesse THIS be taken to import the bread, the bread by those wordes can not be changed: and if not by these, then surely by none. Phi. I see your drift: you fet about to force me to confesse that by the strict coherence of our Sauiours wordes This indeede is the right literall sense of our saui∣ours wordes, and since that is apparently false, the figu∣ratiue sense must take place. the bread is Christ: & since that propositiō in precise speech is vntrue, you would come in with your figures. Theo. And your drift is as open, that hauing deuised a reall and carnall presence to your selues by colour of Christes wordes, and perceiuing the same to bee no way con∣sequent to the letter, which you pretend: least you shoulde bee disproued to your faces, you will not admit the perfect and plaine context of Christes wordes: but stand houering about other sophisticall illusions, which will not helpe you. For we haue the ful confession of scriptures & fathers against you, that the pronoune (THIS) in Christes words must bee restrained to the bread and to nothing else. The Lord tooke breade, and when hee had giuen thankes he brake (no
doubt the bread that he tooke) and gaue to the Disciples (the selfesame that he brake) saying,Matth. 26. The connexi∣on of the gos∣pell reerreth THIS to the bread in the wordes of Christ. take ye, eate ye (this that I giue you) This is my bodie. What THIS could our Sauiour mean, but, THIS that he gaue, THIS that he brake, THIS that he tooke, which by the witnesse of the Scripture it selfe was bread? If you suppose that he tooke bread, but brake it not: or brake it, but gaue it not: or gaue it his Disciples to eate, but told them not this, which he gaue them, but some other thing besides that was his body, you make the Lords supper a merry iest,THIS of it selfe inferreth nothing, and therefore must be gui∣ded by the cir∣cumstances of the text. where the later end starteth from the beginning and the middle from the both. The pronoune THIS of it selfe inferreth nothing, and therefore except you name the bread which Christ pointed vnto, when he spake these wordes, you cō∣firme not the faithes, but amase the wits of your followers. S. Paul proposing the Lordes Supper to the church of Corinth expresseth that very word which we say the circumstances of the Gospel import. As 1. Cor. 11. often as ye shall eate (saith he) This bread, and drinke this cuppe, you shew foorth the Lords death till he come. The 1. Cor. 10. bread, which he brake, is it not the com∣munion of Christs body?1. Cor. 11. Let a man examine himselfe, and so let him eate of that bread and drinke of that cup: for whosoeuer shall eat this breade and drinke the cup of the Lord vnworthily shal be guilty of the body & blood of the Lord.Saint Paul in plaine speach ioyneth THIS to the bread Al the fathers referre THIS to the bread. So that as wel by the coherēce of the former words in the description of the Lords supper, as by the manifest adiectiō which S. Paul putteth to the de∣mōstratiue, we conclude our sauior pronoūced of the bread, that it was his body. The referring of THIS to the bread all the catholik fathers that euer wrate with pen in the church of God, acknowledge with one consent. Iustinus, Iust. Apol. 2.Wee be taught, that the sanctified foode (which nourisheth our fleshe and our blood) is the fleshe and blood of that Iesu. Tertullian, Tertul. aduer. Iedaeos. So Christ taught vs, calling bread his bodie, and discussing the wordes of the supper, Idem li. 4. con∣tra Marcionē.Why, saith he, doth (Christ there) call bread his bodie? Austen, De cons. dist. 2. § qui māducas.That which your faith requireth to be taught, the bread is the body of Christ, and the cup his blood. Cyprian, Cypr. de vn∣ctio. Chrismat. Our Lord at his table gaue (to the Disciples) with his own handes bread and wine: on the crosse hee yeelded his body to the souldiers handes to be wounded, that (his Apostles) might teach (all) Nations) how bread and wine were (his) flesh and blood. Ireneus,Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34. How shall it appeare to them that the bread (on which they giue thankes) is the body of their Lord, and the cup his blood, if they graunt not Christ to be the sonne of the creator of the world? Idem. li. 4. c. 57How did the Lord rightly, if an other were his father, taking bread of this condition, that is vsuall amongst vs, confesse it to bee his body? Hierom, Hier. ad Hedi∣biam. quaest. 2.Let vs learn that the bread which the Lord brake & gaue to his disciples, is the Lords body, himself saying to thē, take ye, eate ye, this is my body. Athan. or at lest the cōmentary that is extāt in his name, Athan in 1. Cor. cap. 11.What is the bread? the body of Christ. Epiphan. Epiph. in An∣chorato.Of that which is round in figure & sens∣les in power, the Lord would say by grace, this is my (body.) Cyrill, Cyril. catechis. mystag. 4.Christ thus auoucheth and saith of the bread, this is my body. Theodorete, Theod. ial. .In the verie giuing of the misteries, he called bread his body.
The Iesuites loose all hope of their trans∣substātiatiō, if THIS in the wordes of Christ do not note the bread.And of all others your selues may not shrink from this resolution of Christs wordes: the surest holde of your reall presence, though it bee not much, stan∣deth onely on this settle. For what wordes haue you besides thse, to proue that the breade is chaunged from his former substaunce? Uerily none. Then if in these wordes, which should worke the change, there be no mention at all of bread: how can that, which is no way comprised in them, bee chaunged by them? So miraculous a change can not be wrought by silence, but rather (if a∣ny such be) by the power of Christes words, and in those words must the thing at least be named, that shall be changed. Againe the demonstratiue THIS must needes note that which was there present on the Lordes table, before the words of consecration were wholy repeated: and the flesh of Christ coulde not be pre∣sent vnder the likenesse of bread without or before Consecration: ergo the pro∣noune inferreth not Christ, but the bread, which by your owne positions is not abolished, but De can dis. 2. § ante benedi∣ctioe, Glssa ibidem. in vltimo instanti prolationis verborū, in the very last end & in∣stant of vttering these wordes. And therefore remaine in his owne nature whē the first word was pronounced. Which some not the meanest men of your side foresaw very well howsoeuer you since haue taken other counsel, and therefore they say: Gerson. contr. Floretum li. 4. Dicendum est, quod hoc demonstrat substantiam panis, We must behold, saith Gerson, that the pro∣noune THIS, doeth demonstrate the substaunce of bread: and Steuen Gardiner: Gard. contra diabolic. sophist. Christus ait euidenter hoc est corpus meum demonstrans panem: Christ sayeth plainly this is my body, pointing to the bread. Notwithstan∣ding afterward he changed his minde in this, as in many other thinges & came to In his Marc. Antoni. Consr. Indiuiduum vagum: as if Christ had saide THIS (what is it, I can not tell, but it must needes be somwhat) is my body. Occam and other profound fellowes of your side bethinking themselues how your opinion might best agree with the wordes of Christ, say the pronoune THIS must be referred to the Occam. in 4. sntent. dist. 13. bodie of Christ: as if our Sauiour had said, this (my body) is my body. To make all cocksure, the coronell of your schol∣men, I meane the gloze resolueth the doubt on this wife: De cons. dist. 2. § timrem Glossa ibidem. Solet quaeri quid de∣monstretur per pronomen hoc, It is a common question what is ment by the pronoune THIS: whether bread, or the body of Christ? Not bread, for that is not the body of Christ: nor yet the body of Christ, for it appeareth not, that there is any transubstantiation, till the wordes be all pronounced. To this demaund I say that by the word THIS, Then haue the Iesuits small hold in the literall sense of Christs words for their trans¦substantiatiō. nothing is ment, but it is there put materially (without anie signification at all.) Thus you turned and tos∣sed the wordes of Christ so long till you brought all that the Lord did and saide at his last supper to plaine NOTHING. With such vnchristian toyes were your scholes fraughted,That this is the right pur∣port of Christs words it cannot be doubted. and the worlde deceiued: such monsters you hatched when once you left the direction of the Scriptures and Fathers, and fell to broaching your owne gesses. But you must either admit our explication (this breade is my body) for the right ordering and perfitting of Christes wordes, or else dis∣sent from the manifest Scriptures, from al the catholike Fathers, and with
shame enough from your owne fellowes and fansies. Phi. Wee sticke not so much at the filling vp of the wordes which Christ spake, as at the constering and expounding of them. You delude them with tropes and significations,So long as the letter is true we maie not flie to fi∣gures: but if that be false we kill our soules except we lie to fi∣gures. as if Christ had beene speaking parables, and not ordaining sacramentes. Wee say there must be a reall truth and actiue force in them to perfourme the letter as it lieth. For in Scripture so long as the letter may possibly be true, we may not fly to figures. Theo. In that you say right. We must imbrace the sense which is occurant in the letter before all others, if it agree with faith and good maners: but if it crosse either of them, we must be∣ware the letter, lest it kill: and seeke for an other and deeper sense which must needes be figuratiue. That direction S. Augustine giueth to al men, when they read the Scriptures. Aug. de dtr. Christiana lib. 3 cap. 10. When the speach must be figuratiue. The literall coherence of these wordes (this bread is my bodie) is impossible, blasphemous and barba∣rous. To reprooue the miscon∣sterer is to re∣uerence the speaker. Iste omnino modus est (locutionis inueniendae propriá∣ne an figurata sit) vt quicquid in sermone diuino neque ad morum honestatem, nec ad fidei veritatem proprie referri potest, figuratum esse cognoscas. This is the perfect way (to discerne whether a speech be proper or figuratiue) that whatsoe∣uer in the word of God can not be properly referred either to integritie of maners or verity of faith, thou resolue thy selfe, it is figuratiue. Phi. That prescription is very sound: but it furthereth not your figuratiue sense. For the letter of these wordes, which we stand for, is neither against faith nor good manners. Theo. The literall acception of these words as they lie, this (bread) is my body, is first impossible by your owne confession, next blasphemous by the plaine leuell of our Creede, and lastly barbarous by the ve∣rie touch and instinct of mans nature. Phi. Charge you Christ with so manie foule ouersightes in speaking the wordes? Theo. The wordes which Christ spake, be gratious and religious we know: but where there may be brought a double construction of them, a carnall or a spirituall: a literall or a Sacramē∣tall, the literall construction, which you will needes defend to deface the other, is we say reproued as no part of our Sauiours meaning, by those three barres which we proposed. Phi. You propose much, but you proue litle. Theo. I should proue euen as much as you do, if I should proue nothing: but that which I proposed, shall not want proofe. The first your owne friendes will helpe me to proue. Your Lawe saieth, De cons. dist. 2. § panis est in Altari. Glossa ibidem. Not possible by their owne confession, that breade should be the bodie of Christ. To saie that bread is christ in proper speach is hor∣rible blasphe∣mie.Hoc tamen est impossible, quod panis sit corpus Christi: Yet this is impossible, that bread should be the body of Christ. Why striue you then for that which your selues grant is not possible to be true? Why forsake you the mysticall inter∣pretation which is possible? what greater vanitie can you shewe than to cleaue to that sense, which you see can not stande? If it be bread, how can it be Christ? If it be Christ, how can it be bread? The second is as cleare. For if breade in proper and precise speech bee the flesh of Christ, ergo bread is also the feede of Dauid: ergo breade was fastned to the crosse for our sinnes: ergo bread was buried, rose the third day from death, and now sitteth in heauen at the right hand of God the Father: nay, no questiō, if bread be Christ, then is bread the Sonne of God, and second person in the
sacred Trinitie: which how wel your stomaks can digest we know not, in truth our harts tremble to heare an earthly, dead, and corruptible creature, by your literall & carnall deuotion, aduaunced to the Lord of life & grace, the maker of heauen and earth, yea the liuing and euerlasting God: and yet if bread be truely and properly Christ, these monsterous impieties you can not auoide. Thirdly what could you deuise more iniurious and odious to christian mild∣nesse & maners,To eate flesh in proper speach is a∣gainst nature and far from all pietie. than the letter of these words: eate you (this is) my flesh, drinke you (this is) my blood. Had you bin willed in as plain termes to cruciie Christ, as you bee willed to eate his fleshe, you woulde not I trust haue presently ban∣ded your selues with the Iewes to put him to death, but rather haue staggered at the letter, and sought for some farther and other meaning: Yee be now wil∣led to eate his flesh & drinke his blood which is a precept far more hainous & horrible in christian behauiour and religion, if you follow the letter: as Austē affirmeth. August. con∣tra aduers. legis & Propheta. lib. 2. cap. 9.It appeareth more horrible to eate mans flesh than to kill it, to drinke mans blood than to shed it. And againe, (The Capernites) Idem contra eundem. lib. 1. cap. 14.were more excusable, that coulde not abide the wordes of Christ, which they vnder∣stood not, being (in deede) horrible (in that they were spoken) as a bles∣sing, not as a cursing: Cyril. in Iohan. lib. 4. cap. 22.They thought, saith Cyrill, Christ had inuited them to eate the raw flesh of a man, and drinke blood, which thinges be horrible to the verie eares. Why then presse you the letter, which is hainous, & for∣get that the speech can not be religious except it be figuratiue? Uerily S. Austen concludeth the speech to be figuratiue for this only reason. August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16. To eate flesh is an hainous act: ergo Christs words are figuratiue This is S. Au∣stens reason, if the Iesuites can reure him, let them.If the scripture seeme to cōmand any vile or ill fact, the speech is figuratiue. Except ye eate the fleshe of the son of man, and drinke his blood, you shall haue no life in you: facinus velflagitium videtur iubere, Christ seemeth to com∣mand a wicked & sinfull act: figura est ergo, It is therefore a figuratiue speech, commanding vs to be partakers of the Lords passion & sweetly & profitably to keep in mind that his flesh was crucified & woūded for vs. If then the real eating of Christs flesh with our mouthes, and actuall drinking of his blood with our lips be wicked and hainous, why presse you the letter of these wordes eate you, this is my body: drinke you, this is my blood, against truth, against faith, against nature, neither possibility, nor christianity, nor cōmon honestie suffering your exposition to be good, & S. Austen in plaine termes concluding, It is ther∣fore a figure of speech. Phi. Sir, you bee misconstered all this while. The verbe, which coupleth both partes of the proposition togither,Where Christ said, this bread is my bodie: the Ie∣suits say, this must be no bread before it can be my bodie. doeth not here signifie this to bee simply that, but this to be really changed in that, as if our Lord had said, THIS (breade) is (now become) my body, that is substantially changed into my body. Theo. Sir you shuffle the words of Christ to serue your dreames, & yet you scape not the rockes which you thought to shunne. If the bread must be changed in substance, that is become no bread, afore it be the body of Christ, ergo breade is not the body of Christ, and so your construction is a plaine contradiction to the letter which you would interprete. For Christ said, this (bread) is my
body: that cannot be true, say you, vnlesse the bread loose first his substance, and ceae in deede to be breade: and so where Christ saide (this) bread is my body, you expound his wordes in this sort, that it must first be no bread, afore it can be his body. Besides in absurdity there is no difference whether you say,It is as great blasphemie for the bread to be turned into Christ, as to be Christ. bead is Christ, or bread is made Christ, & changed into Christ. For that which is made Christ, without all question, is Christ: & so the same blasphemies are consequent to this exposition, that were dependant on the former. Phi. Well, yet the bread may be abolished, and Christs body succeede in the place where the bread was, without any of these inconueniences. Theo. Thither are you faine to flie, when you be hardly pressed with the sequeles of the literall sense:The Iesuits would faine shift to haue the letter stand true, but it will not be. but in the meane time you forget that you be cleane gone from the wordes of Christ, which you pretended to folow. He said this is my body, you, to expoūd his speach say THIS must first vanish away and then my body shall succeede in the same place, and be couered with the same accidents, though THIS neither in shew, nor substance,The Iesuites vrging the letter stppe fardest from the letter. It is a world to see their Schoolemen tosse the woordes of Christ from post to pillo: and at length to leaue them as men in a Maze. be my body. Phi. This is sophistry, which the catholike fathers were neuer acquainted with. Theo. If it be any, it is yours & not ours: you first forsooke the exposition of Christs words which the learned and godly fathers with one accord witnessed & & deliuered: & then stūbling at the letter, you hatched your carnal & local presence against Scriptures and fathers: and when the wordes of Christ would not sit your fansies, you racked & wrenched them til you brought both them to nothing, and your selues to a maze, that you knew not what you said: where as if you had continued their interpretation, you had cleared the wordes of Christ from all perplexities, inioyed the fruites of the Lords table without perill of Idolatrie or impietie, eased your selues of those absurdities, which you be now plunged in vp hard to the eares. Phi. What interpretation meane you? Theo. That which the Fathers ge∣nerally beleeued & publikly taught in the church of Christ. Phi. And what expo∣sition was that,Not one of the auncient fathers euer affirmed the woordes of Christ to be literall. but the same which we now vrge, & you resist? The. Shew but one ancient father that euer affirmed the wordes of Christ, at his last Supper were properly spoken, or literally to be taken, and wee will receiue your sense. Phi. What? you will not? Theo. What neede you repeate it, when you heare vs offer it? Phi. Not a father, that euer auouched these words of Christ, this is my body, to be properly spoken, or literally taken? Theo. Not a father, that is ancient. Phi. How would you lie, if you might be let alone? I can name you pre∣sently a good number of them that in exquisite termes shal affirme the words of Christ to be literall.Those later grecians that prele the let∣ter doe it to far other pur∣pses than the Iesuits doe. Theo. Shal they be auncient? Phi. I can not tel what you mean by auncient, you would haue them belike before Christ was borne. Theo. As though there were not difference both in the ages and credites of those wri∣ters, that haue gone before vs in the church of Christ. Phi. They shall bee auncient. Theo. Damascene perhaps & Theophilact. Phi. Yea Epiphanius, Euthymius and many others. The. Many others: is a note
aboue ela: These foure affirme that Christ did not say, this is the image or fi∣gure of my body: but this is my body: which we confesse was needefull for the first ordayner and institutor of the Sacrament to say: Mary by those wordes our Sauiour did not meane to abolish the substance of breade, or wine, but to Whie Christ was to saie this is my bo∣die, and not this is the fi∣gure of my bodie.vnite the force and fruite of his flesh crucified, and blood shed for our sinnes, to the elementes, that receiuing the one, we might through faith, bee partakers of the other, by the working of his spirite, and power of the word which he then spake: much lesse did these later writers (the eldest of them being more thā 700 yeres after Christ) intend to gainesay the fathers that were before them of grea∣ter iudgement and deeper knowledge: howsoeuer in shew they seeme loth, that Christes wordes should be recalled to a bare and naked figure, which for our parts, we do not. Phi. All the aunci∣ent fathers with one con∣sent affirme the wordes of Christ to be figuratiue.A bare figure? nay they will haue no figure in the wordes of Christ: & to that ende they vrge the very letter, as excluding all tropes & figures which you now take vp in a spleene to frustrate our proofes. Theo. Did the Fathers meane to frustrate your proofes, when they tooke vppe this doctrine many hun∣drethes, before you or your reall presence were hearde of? Philand. Do they teache the wordes of Christ, eate, this is my bodie, to bee figura∣tiue? Theo. I haue shewed you causes sufficient to fray the godly from the let∣ter, which doth rather kill than quicken the carnal interpreters, yet am I con∣tent to forgo them all, if in expounding the wordes of Christ figuratiuely, the catholike and ancient fathers do not make expressely with vs and against you directly. Tertullian. Tertul. lib. 4. contr. Marc.The bread, which was taken and giuen to the Disciples, Christ made his body by saying, this is my body, that is, the figure of my bo∣die. Why doth (Christ) call bread his bodie? (Marcion) vnderstandeth not this was an old figure of the body of Christ speaking by Ieremie: they laide their handes togither against mee, saying, come, let vs cast wood on his bread, that is, the crosse on his bodie. Therefore the lightner of anti∣quities in calling the bread his bodie, fully declared what he would then (at his last Supper) haue the bread to signifie. Augustine discussing the wordes of Moses, the soule of all flesh is his blood. Aug. in Leuit. quaest. 57.The thing, saith he, that doth si∣gnifie commonly taketh the name of the thing, that is thereby signified: as it is written, the seuen eares of corne (which Pharao dreampt of) bee seuen yeres, he said not they signifie seuen yeres: & the seuen kine be seuen yeres & many such speeches. So was it saide (by Paul) the rocke was Christ: hee sayde not, the rocke did signifie Christ, but as if it had beene the selfesame thing, which by substance it was not, but by signification. Euen so the blood because it signifieth the soule, is after Idem contra A∣dimant. cap. 12. the manner of Sacramentes called the soule. The manner of Sacramēts is to haue fi∣guratiue spea∣ches. I can interprete this precept to consist of a signe (or figure) for the Lord did not sticke to say, this is my bodie, when hee gaue the signe of his bodie. And speaking in Christes person, he sayeth, Idem in psal. 98.This bodie which
you see, you shal not eate, neither shal you drinke the blood, which they that crucifie me, shall shed; I haue commended a Sacrament vnto you: that (Sa∣crament) spiritually vnderstood shal quicken you. Idem de doctr. Christ. li. 3. c. 16It is therefore (as you hearde before out of the same Father) a figure) of speech) commaunding vs to be partakers of the Lords passion. For the Lord at his supper, saith he, Idem in psa. 3.com∣mended and deliuered to his disciples the figure of his body and blood. Cy∣priā, Cypr. de vn∣ctio. Chrisma. The Lorde taught his disciples at his last supper howe the signes and the things might haue the same names.The Lord at his last supper gaue bread and wine with his own hands, on the crosse he gaue his body to be wounded by the souldiers handes, that syncere truth secretly printed in his Apostles might teach the Nations, how bread and wine were (his) flesh and blood, and how the causes agreed with their effectes, and different names and kindes might be reduced to one es∣sence, and the (signes) signifieng and the thinges signified might be called by the same names. Origen, Orig. in Leuit. hom. 7.There is in the very Gospell a letter that doth kill: not onely in the old Testament is there a deadly letter found, but in the new Testament there is a letter that doth kill him, which doeth not spiritually conceiue the thinges that be spoken. For if you take this saying, (except yee eate my flesh and drinke my blood) according to the letter, this letter killeth. And againe▪ Idem in cap. 15 Matth.Not the matter of bread, but the word recited ouer it, doth profit the wor∣thy receiuer. This I speake of the typical and figuratiue body. Ambrose, Ambros. de iis qui initiātur mysterii cap. 9.It was the true flesh of Christ that was crucified and buried, this therefore is the Sacrament of that true fleshe. The Lord Iesus himselfe sayth, this is my body. Before the blessing of (these) heauenly wordes it is called an other kind of thing, after consecration the body of Christ is (thereby) signified. Idem in 1. Cor. 11.In eating and drinking (at the Lords table) We signifie the body and blood (of Christ) that were offered for vs.Idem de Sa∣cramentis lib. 4. cap. 5.The new Testament is confirmed by blood, in a figure of which (blood) We reciue the mysticall cup. The priest (in the church seruice) faith, Make this oblation ascribed reasonable and accepta∣ble for vs, which is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord Iesus. Hie∣rom, Hyer. in 26. Matth.When the Pascal lambe was eaten Iesus taketh bread which strength∣neth the heart of man, and goeth to the true sacrament of the passouer, that as Melchisedec had done offering bread & wine in a profiguratiō of him, so he likewise might represent the truth of his body & blood. Idem in 14. Marci.For Iesus tooke bread and giuing thankes brake it, transfiguring his body into the breade. Chrysostom,Chrysost in psal. 22. This table hath he prepared for his seruants, that hee might e∣uery day for a similitude of the body and blood of Christ, shew foorth in a Sacramēt vnto vs bread and wine after the maner of Meschisedec. Idem ad Cae∣sarium Mona∣chum.Before it be sanctified, we cal it bread, but the diuine grace once sanctifieng the same by the ministerie of the priest, it is deliuered from the name of bread, & coū∣ted worthy to be called the Lordes body, though the nature of bread conti∣new there still. So that Author. operit imperfect. in Mat. homil. 11.in the sanctified vessel, there is not the true body of Christ, but a mystery of his body is there contained. Nazianzene, Nazianz. in oratio. de pasch.Let vs bee partakers of the passeouer, figuratiuely notwithstanding as yet: though this
Passeouer bee more manifest than the former. Theodoret. Theod. dial. 1. Our Sauiour at hs last sup∣per chaunged the names, not the sub∣stances of the elements: thē must needes the speach be figuratiue.Our Sauiour in deed changed the names, & called his bodie by the name of the signe, and the signe by the name of his body. The reason whereof is manifest to those that are acquainted with the diuine mysteries. He would haue the receiuers of these heauenly mysteries, not looke to the nature of the things, which are seen: but hearing the alteration of names, be∣leeue the chāge which is there made by grace. For he that called his natural body wheat & bread, & named himself a vine: the same Lord honored the signes & elements of bread & wine) which we see, with the name of his bo∣dy, & blood, not changing the nature (of the signes) but casting grace vnto nature. Prosper, De consecrat. dist. 2. § hoc est. Prosper. The diuine breade, which is the flesh of Christ, is after a sort called the body of Christ, being in deed (but) the sacramēt of Christs bodie. Which words your own law thus expoundeth. The Glossa Ibidē. diuine bread which truly representeth the flesh of Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperly: wherfore it is said after a sort (which is) non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio, not in exactnes of truth, but in a mysterie of signification. So that this is the meaning, it is called the body of Christ: that is (the body of Christ is thereby) signified. Bede, Beda in Lucā, cap. 22. The solemnities of the old Passeouer being ended, Christ commeth to the newe, which the church is desirous to continue in remem∣brance of her redemption, that in steede of the flesh and blood of a lamb, he substituting the sacrament (or sacred signe) of his flesh and blood in the fi∣gure of bread and wine, might shew himselfe to be the same, to whome the Lord sware and will not repent, thou art a Priest after the order of Melchise∣dec. Druthmarus, Christ. Druth∣mar. in Mat. The Lord gaue his disciples the sacrament of his body for the remission of sinnes, that being mindfull of his deede, they might alwaies in a figure do that, which he was to do for thē, & not forget his loue. This is my body, that is in a sacrament. Wine maketh glad & increaseth blood, and for that cause the blood of Chirst is aptly figured thereby. Bertram, Bertram de corp. & sang. Dom. That bread & wine is figuratiuely the body and blood of christ: the maner thereof is in a figure & representation: in mysterio, non veritate: in a mysterie, not in truth & plaine speech. Phi. You thinke to winne the spurres, but you may chance to loose bootes and all. These places, which you bring, haue a shew before the simple, but there is no pith nor substance in them: and with one puffe wee can blowe them all a∣way. Theo. Though the Iesuites haue not one an∣cient father for their lite∣rall sense, yet they will help the matter with brag∣ging.It must be such a puffe then, as wherwith you first blew away christ and his gospel, and brought in your own decrees, to ouerrule both God and man with the breath of your mouthes. Phi. You scoffe: my meaning is that I can crosse them all with one answere. Theo. If they were sprites, you might driue them away with crossing, but being ancient and godly fathers they will tell on their tales to your reproofe, crosse you what you will or can, in their wayes. Phi. I will not crosse it in their way, but in yours. Theo. When you will: where∣fore serue my feete but to tosse it out of the way, or at lest to step ouer it, that it hinder not my way?
Phi. Al these fathers affirme, the bread to be a signe & figure of Christs body:The Iesuits will haue the figure & the trueth to be al one. This we grant, and thereto adde, that it is both a figure, and the trueth it selfe. You may be gone, you haue your errand. Did I not tell you, I would soone dis∣patch you? Theo. You be very pleasureable whatsoeuer the matter be: but had you no better skill to dispatch men of their liues, than you haue to defeate vs of ou authorities, many a thowsand should now liue, that you haue slaine. Philan. You would runne to by-quarrels; but I must hold you to the stake. Theo. In deede that was alwayes the surest answere, that you gaue vs. The rest was no∣thing: no more is this. For first it is apparently false that in Sacraments the signe & the truth may be all one thing.Though the figure might be also the trueth, as it cannot, yet a figuratiue speach can no waie be pro∣per. Next if that might be, yet doth it not disappoint any one of these testimonies. For they do not only witnes that the bread is a sign of christs bodie, but also that christes wordes were figuratiue, and that in deliuering the myste∣ries he called the bread his body, by way of signification, similitude, re∣presentation, after the maner of Sacramentes, in a signe not according to the letter, but in a spirituall and mysticall vnderstanding, and if you respect the precise speech, improperly, and figuratiuely.Will it please the Iesuits to learne that the speach is figuratiue, r∣go not proper. And though the signe might happily be one thing with the truth it self, as you affirm wtout al truth; yet may not a figuratiue speech be properly takē, nor ye letter vrged against the spirituall meaning, least that which was spoken to quicken the inward man, subuert the faith and indanger the soul, which in mistaking a figure of speech must needs in∣sue, as S. Augustine sheweth. De doct. Chri∣stiana li. 3. ca. 5.In principio cauendum est ne siguratam locuti∣onem ad literam accipias. Ad hoc enim pertinet, quod ait Apostolus, litera occidit, spi∣ritus autem viuificat. Cum enim figurate dictum sic accipitur tanquam proprie di∣ctum sit, carnaliter sapitur. Neque vllamors animae congruentius appellatur. The first thing that you must beware is this:To take a fi∣guratiue speach accor∣ding to the letter killeth the soul. that you take not a figuratiue speech according to the letter. To that belongeth the Apostles admoni∣tion, the letter killeth, the spirite quickneth. For when wee take that which is figuratiuely spoken, as if it were properly spoken, it is a car∣nall sense: Neither is there any thing more rightly called the death of the soule. In vaine then doe you thinke to shift off the matter with this foolish con∣ceite, that one and the same thing may be both a trueth and a figure. For were that so, yet can not a figuratiue speech bee literally taken without killing the soule: and the Fathers which I produced affirme the minde and speech of our Sauiour, in calling the bread his body, was spirituall, figuratiue and mysticall by way of signification, such as is vsed in Sacra∣mentes, not literall nor carnall according to the strict sund and order of the wordes:The signe in no sacrament can be the thing it selfe. Marie now your answere, besides that it is altogether idle, is vtterly false. For in this sacrament as in al others, there is great difference betwixt the signes and the things thēselues, and the distinct properties of ech are so sensible, that if your wits be not laid vp for holy daies, you can not but perceiue thē. The signes are visible, the things inuisible; the signes are earthly, the things heauēly
the signes corruptible, the thinges immortall: the signes corporall, the thinges spirituall.The signe & the trueth must be two things. The signes are one thing, the trueth is not the same, but an other thing, and euen by plaine Arythmetike, they be two things, and not one. The Eucharist, as Ireneus teacheth, Ire. li. 4. ca. 34.Consisteth of two things, an earthly & an heauenly. De cons. dist. 2. § hoc est. This is it that wee say, this is it that we seeke by all meanes, saith Austen, to approue (to wit) that the sacrifice of the church is made of two and consisteth of two thinges, sacramento & re sacramenti: of the sacred signe: and the thing it selfe. For sacramentes are August. con∣tra Maximi∣num li. 3. ca. 22. signa rerum, aliud existen∣tia, aliud significantia, signes of truthes, being one thing in themselues, and si∣gnifieng an other. Chryso. in Ge∣nes. hom. 35.It were no figure, saith Chrysostome, if all thinges inci∣dent to the truth were to be found in it: much lesse if it were the truth it selfe. Aug. epist. 23.Sacraments haue a certaine similitude (but no identitie) with the thinges whose signes they be. If therefore De doct. Chri∣stiana, lib. 3. cap. 5. To take the signes for the thinges bee a miserable seruitude of the soule, as Austen noteth, what is it to affirme the signes to be the things themselues but a wilfull blindnesse of heart, choosing ra∣ther to rush into any brake with daunger both of credit and conscience, than to acknowledge the truth once disdayned and refused? Phi. I haue yet an other answere in stoare. Theo. If that be no better than this, your stoare is little worth. Phi. The sixt of S. Iohns Gospell directeth the wordes of Christ at his last supper.The most part of the Fathers which you bring, speake not of Christes wordes, when hee did institute the Sacrament, but declare his meaning in the sixth of Sainct Iohns Gospell when the Ca∣pernites stumbled at his doctrine. Theo. You may keepe this still in stoare for the goodnes of it. Tertullian, Austen, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierom, Chryso∣stom, Theodorete, Prosper, Bede, Bertram, Druthmarus and your own law speake directly of the sacrament: and so doth Origen, when he calleth the bread on the Lords table, the typicall and figuratiue body: onely that place of his mentioneth the sixt of Iohn, where he saith, If you take this saying according to the letter, this letter killeth. Phi. Mary Sir that place is the chiefest: & how closely you could conuey it in amongest the rest, to make men beleeue he spake that of the sacrament, which is nothing so. Theo. Why? doth not the 6. of S. Iohn foretel and declare the same kinde of eating Christs flesh and drinking his bloode, which was after perfour∣med by Christ at his last supper whē he said, This is my body, this is my blood? Phi. Doth it say you? Theo. I do not say, Christ speaketh in the sixth of Iohn of the materiall ele∣mentes of bread and wine,The 6. of S. Iohn doth not teach the ea∣ting of the signes at the Lordes table, but the eating of the thinges themselues. which were then first ordained to bee pledges of his inuisible graces, when the Supper was first instituted: and there∣fore not spoken of before that time: but this is it which I affirme, and in this the learned and auncient Fathers agree with mee, that where this mystery consisteth of two partes, an earthlie matter, and an hea∣uenly vertue: the sixth of Sainct Iohn treateth not of the signes, but of the thinges them-selues: not of the figures representing, but of the trueth represented: not of that which is corporally proposed, but of that which is
Ghostly receiued in the Lordes supper, which is the better and diuiner part of this Sacrament: and that the Disciples there learned, in what sort themselues and all the faithfull after them should eate the Lords flesh and drinke the Lords blood at his table, to be thereby quickned, norished, and incorporated with him,The thinges themselues that are pro∣posed and re∣ceiued at the Lords table were fully de∣clared by our Sauiour in the 6. of S. Iohn. as members of his mysticall body. So that if any doubt arise, not touching the creatures of breade and wine, but touching the fleshe and blood of Christ, which are the Principall partes of this mystery, the solution and explication of euery such doubt must be fet from the place, where the Lord first reuealed this secret, rebuked the Capernites for the misconstruction of his words, and taught his Disciples how they should be both fruitfull partakers of his flesh, & rightful interpreters of his speech. Phi. You woulde faine haue it so: but wee meane to barre you that chace. Theo. You cannot bar vs,The fathers are all of that opinion. but you must bar Chrysostom, Cyprian, Cyrill, Au∣sten and others, that confesse the same trueth before vs. Chrysost. hom. 83. in Mat.How chanced, saieth Chrysostome, the (Disciples) were not troubled when they heard this: take, eate, this is my body? Because (their master) had debated the same matter largely and profoundly before.The same matter before debated. For at first when he spake of these thinges many were offended at the very words. So Cy∣prian, Cypr. de caenae Domini.To the sonnes of Abraham doing the workes of Abraham the high Priest bringeth foorth bread and wine saying this is my body. There arose before this,The same speach hand∣led in the 6. of Iohn. as we reade in the Gospell of Iohn, a question touching the no∣uelty of this speech, and at the doctrine of this mysterie the hearers were a∣mazed. So Cyrill, Cyril. in Iohan. lib. 4. cap. 14.The (Capernites) before they beleeue, question bu∣sily with him. Therefore the Lord did not tell them how that might be, but exhorteth them to seeke for it with faith: mary to the beleeuing disciples, he gaue peeces of breade, saying: take yee, eate ye, this is my body: Like∣wise the cuppe hee deliuered round, saying: drinke yee all of this. Thou seest, that to those which asked without faith, hee did not open the maner of this mysterie, but to those which beleeued, yea when they did not aske, hee declared the same: And Augustine: August. con∣tra aduers. legis & Prophet. lib. 1. cap. 24. When Christ spake of the Sacra∣ment of his body and bloode, they saide this speech is hard. Who can heare it? You see by the constant opinion of these Fathers, that our Sauiour in the sixt of Iohn taught his Disciples what manner of eating his flesh and drinking his blood they should expect at his last Supper, and that they therefore started not at these words this is my body, because they learned of him before what to looke for, and well remembred his interpretation of himselfe, when the Caper∣nites staggered at the like speech. Then perforce what sense the wordes of Christ in the sixt of Iohn doe beare, the same must the wordes of the supper re∣taine: but there Christ teacheth the spirituall eating of his fleshe by faith, his wordes bee figuratiue: ergo the Lordes supper doeth not import any corporal eating of his flesh, nor literall exposition of his wordes. And why? The perfor∣mance may no way differ from the promise. The promise made by Christ in
the sixt of Iohn (the bread which I will giue is my flesh) was figuratiue:If the flesh of Christ be a∣ten in the Lordes sup∣per as he taught it should be in the 6. of Iohn, then must the wordes of the supper be ex∣pounded by the 6. of Iohn: and the one being figura∣tiue, the other cannot be li∣terall. The wordes then of the Supper THIS (which I now giue) is my body perfour∣ming the same must likewise be figuratiue. For Seales doe not alter or in∣fringe, but strengthen and confirme that which was promised. The creatures of bread and wine Christ ordained at his last Supper to bee Sacramentes and Seales of his former promises vttered in the sixth of Iohn, ergo they change not his meaning expressed before: That was spiritual & figuratiue: therefore the wordes of the Supper can not be corporall nor literall. And the wordes of O∣rigen expounding the sixt of Iohn, are a iust proofe, that if in the wordes of the Supper you follow the letter, that letter killeth. Phi. This can not be. Christ in the sixth of Iohn, you say, teacheth a spiritu∣all and figuratiue kinde of eating his fleshe, and in deliuering the Sacrament we be sure he spake of a corporall not of a spirituall eating his body. For when our Lord saide take, eate, this is my body, did hee not meane they should take it with their handes, and eate it with their mouthes? And therefore either the one place doth not serue to expound the other,The breade must be eaten corporallie at the Lordes ta∣ble though the flesh of Christ cannot be eaten there or else∣where but on∣lie spiritual∣lie. or else in both places is prescri∣bed a reall and corporall eating the flesh of Christ, & drinking his blood: which we rather imbrace as the likeliest. Theo. In those wordes take and eate, spoken at the last Supper, hee ment, no doubt, the corporall taking and eating of that creature which hee gaue them: and when hee added this is my body, which hee tolde them before they must eate, if they would haue any life in them, he recalled to their mindes, as Chrysostom noteth, the doctrine hee had taught them of eating his flesh and drinking his blood: in which because they were wel instructed by the Capernites error and their masters declaration of himselfe (that the wordes, which he spake, were spirite and life) they neither started nor stumbled at his speech,The bread must be eaten corporallie: & the flesh of Christ spiri∣tuallie: ergo the bread is not his bodie but by a figure of speach v∣suall to this & other sacra∣ments. but presently perceiued the Lord was ordayning a Sacrament to confirme their faith, and not hiding his fleshe vnder accidentes or any other couerts to enter their mouthes, for which grossenes the Capernits were before reproued. Christes exposition therefore in the sixt of Iohn, was purposely made to con∣fute the carnal Iewes, who when they heard of eating mans flesh and drinking blood, dreampt of no kind of eating and drinking but with their bodily iawes & lips, and for that cause murmured, as if they had beene inuited to some barba∣rous & brutish act: & next to teach the disciples that indured his words, in what sort they should looke for a diuiner & purer kind of eating the flesh of Christ, and drinking his blood,The Lordes Supper ad∣deth Seales and assuran∣ces to the promise made in the sixt of Iohn, but al∣tereth not the doctrine. by beleeuing, hoping and reioycing in his fleshe, that was wounded, and blood that was shed for their sinnes. This he assured, and ratified vnto them, by ordaining afterward a Sacrament, which they shoulde visi∣bly see, but inuisibly vnderstand: & corporally receiue, but spiritually interprete: in beleeuing the same by the power of his worde and spirit to haue in it, & cary with it the fulnes of his trueth & mercy, openly sealed with those pledges of his promises, & instruments of his grace, lest their faith should faint by reason of his departure & absence from thē, or their harts faile them as if they were destitute
of his protection & fauor, amidst so many troubles as should inclose them. Phi. If you You must needes haue it so, except you will dis∣sent from all your fellowes and from the fathers. will needes haue the sixt of S. Iohn to pertaine to the Sacra∣ment: then is there, say we, a reall & corporall kind of eating established in that chapter. For Christ in plaine speech saith,Ioan. 6. my flesh is meate in deede, and my blood is drinke in deede. Theo. It is well that you bethinke your selfe at last: you were about to dissent both frō the fathers & from your own felowes. For the fathers, as I haue shewed you, confesse that the Disciples were by the words of Christ in this place instructed how they should eate his flesh & drinke his blood, euen in the sacrament:The Papistes verie greedily tie the 6. of Iohn to the sacrament, little thinking it would ouer∣throw their real presence. & that made thē vnderstand him when he said, take, eate, this is my body, drink ye al of this, this is my blood; and as for the men of your side, they run all to this issue, that the sixt of Iohn not only treateth of the sacra∣ment, but also strongly concludeth your reall presence, and externall eating of Christs flesh with bodily partes, as with teeth, throte, and such like: in so much that if you goe that way, which you were about, you goe alone. Your friende Master Harding with a present courage, as his manner is, saith: Artic. 5. di∣uis. 2. contra e∣piscop. Sarunt.We can not finde where our Lord perfourmed the promise which he made in the first chapter of Iohn: the breade which I will giue is my fleshe, which I will giue for the life of the world, but only in his last supper. Steuen Gardiner his Master vttered euen the very same wordes before him. Part. 3. obiect. 1. In Marco Constantio. Pro∣misit Dominus se daturum nobis in pane carnem suam, dicens, panis, qum ego da∣bo, caro mea est, quam ego dabo pro mundi vita. Sed quod promisit Christus, nō legimus cum praestitisse nisi in coena.That Christ perfourmed this promise ONLIE in the supper, is as false, as it is true that he did there perfourme it. The Lord promised that he would giue vs his flesh in bread, when he said, the bread that I will giue is my flesh, which I will giue for the life of the world. But that which Christ promised wee doe not read that he perfourmed, except it were in the Supper. And though they both ouerlash, when they say he performed it only in the supper, yet in this you may not vary frō them, that he performed that promise of his, & verified that do∣ctrine of his in the supper. For so the fathers said before them as I haue proued: and so your late Testament vpon the sixt of S. Iohn saith of al their side,The Rhe. test. fol. 236. nu. 53. [you shall haue no life. The ca∣tholikes teach these wordes to be spoken of the sacrament. Phi. We do so. The. Then what exposition the learned & ancient fathers made of Christs words in the 6. of Iohn,If the 6. of Iohn be figu∣ratiue, then the wordes of the supper are also figu∣ratiue: but the 6. of Iohn is fi∣guratiue: ergo. Clemens. Alex.  lib. cap. 6 Tetula re∣surectis. car∣nis. the same they intēded & referred to the words of the supper: But the words of christ teaching vs in the 6. of Iohn that we must eate his flesh & drinke his blood, before we can haue my life in vs, are by the cō∣mon consent of all the fathers Allegoricall, mysticall & figuratiue, ergo the figu∣ratiue interpretatiō of Christs words in the supper is catholike. Phi. Think you we are so foolish as to beleeu that ye fathers were the autors of your figures? Th. Chuse whether you wil beleeue vs or no, we speak no more thā we mean to proue. Clemens Alexan. The Lord in the gospel of Iohn when he said, eate ye my flesh & drink ye my blood, he called that by an alegory, meat & drink, which is euidētly mēt of (our) faith & (his) promise. Tertul. He pronounced his flesh to be that heauēly bread, vrging thē al along (that dicourse) with an allegory of needefull foodes to remember their fathers that preferred the bread and
flesh of Egypt before the diuine vocation. Origen,Orig. in Leuit. hom. 7. Our Lord and Sauiour saith except you eate my flesh, and drinke my blood, you shall not haue life in you My flesh is truely meate & my blood is truly drinke. He that can no skill of these things may perhaps turn his eare from them, as they did which said: how can he giue vs his flesh to eat? who can heare it? & they departed frō him. But you, if you be the children of the church, if you acquainted with mysteries (& Sacraments) of the Gospell acknowledge the thinges that wee say,The figura∣tiue sense is the spirituall sense: the li∣terall is car∣nall. they be the Lords. Acknowlege that there be figures in the diuine books, & therefore examine thē as spirituall men, not as carnall, & vnderstand what is said. If you conster these thinges as carnall men, they hurt you, they doe not nourish you. Chrysostom, The words that I speak to you are spirite, that is, spirituall, hauing nothing that is carnall in them. If a man should carnal∣ly take them he should gaine nothing.Chrysost. in I∣han. homil. 46. What is carnally to vnderstand thē? Simply as they be spoken, neither to seek any farther.To vnderstād the woordes simplie as they lie is to vnderstand them carnal∣lie. For the things that we see, must not so be iudged of, but all mysteries (& Sacraments) must be consi∣dered with the inward eyes, that is spiritually. Phi. Spiritually we grant we must vnderstand them, but not figuratiuely. Theo. What is spiritually, but figuratiuely? Eating and drinking are corpo∣rall actions, not spirituall; and properly perfourmed with the partes of our bo∣dies, not with the powers of our soules.The woordes in S. Iohn. are figura∣tiue because eating and drinking are referred not to the bodies but to the soules of the faithfull. Since then by the constant confession of all the fathers, the Lord throughout this chapter did not refer eating & drinking to the bodies of his Disciples, but vnto their soules: and ment their faith, & not their teeth: it is apparant that the wordes of our Sauiour are allegoricall and figuratiue, I meane translated and deriued by an allegorie from the body to the mind, from chamming to beleeuing, from swallowing to remembring, to be short, from the flesh of his Disciples to their spirites, and in that respect cal∣led spirituall. The manner of eating there specified is spirituall, the wordes there vsed are mysticall, to wit, not literall but allegoricall: and so the Fathers mainly teach. Basil, Basil. in psal. 33. Tast & see how sweete the Lord is. We haue often marked that the powers of the soul are called by the same names by which the members of the body are. Because then our Lord is the true bread, & his flesh is meate indeede, it must be that the sweetnes of that delicious bread be felt of vs by meanes of spirituall tast.The inwarde man eateth the flesh of Christ. There is a certaine mouth of the minde and oule within man, which is nourished by the word of life, the bread I mean which came from heauen. Origen, Orig. in cantica canticorum ho∣mil. 2.To euery part (or power) of the soule Christ becommeth euerything. Therefore he is called the true light, that the eyes of the soule may haue wherewith to be lightned, therfore the word, that the eares (of the soule) may haue what to heare, therefore the bread of life, that the tast of the soule may haue what to relesse.The soul must relesse the bread of life. Tertullian, Tertul. de re∣srect. carnis.The wordes that I haue spoken to you, be spirit and life. Making his word to quicken by rea∣son his word is spirite and life: hee called the same word his flesh, because the word was made flesh, and so for the procuring of life was to bee
desired (yea) TO BE DEVOVRED WITH HEARING, CHEWED WITH VNDERSTANDING, AND DIGESTED WITH BELEEVING.This waie Christ is ea∣ten, and not with teeth & iawes. Cyprian. Cypr. de caen Domini.The master of this ordinance (and feast) saide that except we did eate (his flesh) and drinke his blood, we should haue no life in vs; directing vs with a spirituall instruction and opening our wittes for the conceiuing of so great a matter, thereby to let vs vnderstād that our abiding in him is eating & (our) drinking is as it were an incorporating with him in that (mutual) seruices are yeelded, wils ioyned, and affections vnited.What it is to eate Christ. The eating therefore of this flesh is a certaine coueting and desiring to abide in him. Athanasius. Athan. in hec quicunque dex∣erit verbum in ilium hominis.Therefore doth he mention his ascending into heauen, to pull from them their corporall cogitations (and thinking on his flesh,) and that they might thenceforth learne that the flesh of which he spake, was celestiall foode from heauen, and spirituall nourishment which hee giueth. Augustine. August. tract. in Iohan. 25.Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy bellie? BELEEVE AND THOV HAST EATEN. Ibidem tract. 26. To beleeue in him, this is to eat the liuing bread. HE THAT BELEEVETH EATETH. He is inuisibly fedde, because hee is inuisibly regenerated. He is inwardly a babe, inwardly new. In what part he is renewed, in that part is he nourished. Bernard that in respect of antiquitie liued but yesterday can teach you the meaning of this place. Bernard. in psal. qui habi∣tat. sermo. 3. When they heard him say, except you eate the flesh of the sonne of man and drink his bloud; they saide this is an hard speach, and departed from him. And what is to eate his flesh and drinke his bloud, but to communicate with his passions, and imitate that conuersation which he ledde (here) in flesh? The text it selfe doth in sight conuince so much:The verie text confir∣meth the fa∣thers speaches Iohannis sexto, The Lord often times ex∣poundeth his owne wordes purposly to this effect, vers. 27. Worke not for the meate which perisheth, but for the meate which dureth to eternall life, vers. 29.and this is the worke of God, that you beleeue in him whom he hath sent. vers. 35. Non ambulan∣do sed credendo ad Christum currimus. Au∣gust tract. 26. in Iohan. I am that bread of life, he that commeth to me (not by walking but by beleeuing) shal not hunger, he that beleeueth in me shal neuer thirst. Hunger and thirst are no way quenched, but with eating and drinking. Then how can the beleeuer but still hunger, and still thirst, except we graunt that he, which beleeueth, both eateth and drinketh?vers. 53. Beleeuing prooued to be eating. Verily verily I say vnto you, except you eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud you haue no life in you. He then which hath life▪ per consequence eateth the flesh of christ and drinketh his bloud: but he that beleeueth hath eternall life, as our Sauiour affirmeth in the same place with no lesse vehemencie, vers. 47. Verily verily I say vnto you, he that beleeueth in me hath euerlasting life; ergo he that beleeueth eateth the flesh and drinketh the bloud of Christ. For if eating and drinking in this place were referred, to the mouth and teeth, how could Iudas, or any other of the wicked that is once partaker of the Lordes table, perish? The wordes of Christ be plaine. vers. 51. Your fathers did eate Manna in the wildernes, and are dead: If any man eate of this bread he shal liue for euer: vers. 54.whosoeuer eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, hath eternall life. But the wicked notwithstanding the corporal cham∣ming
of this Sacrament die the death of sinners,The wicked doe not eate though they grind with their teeth & swallowe with their iawes neuer so fast. ergo they neither eat the lesh of Christ, nor drink his bloud, not because their teeth or iawes faile them, but by reason they want faith which is the right and proper instrument of spiritual eating. Since then man Rom. 10. beleeueth with his heart vnto righteousnes, as Paul teacheth, not with his iawes nor lippes; ergo the soul of man, which only beleeueth, only doth eate the flesh of Christ; and our bodies which haue no meanes to beleeue, can neither eate nor drinke in that sort and sense that our Sauiour there speaketh of. You cannot with honestie steppe from so manifest, both Scriptures and Fa∣thers, as these bee that I haue brought; or if you can dally with so good and graue witnesses in so weightie matters, I trust the Godly will bee fully resol∣ued that the manner of eating Christs flesh and drinking his bloud,The manner of eating Christes flesh is spirituall by faith and vn∣derstanding the wordes expressing it be allegori∣call. which the Lord himselfe first proposed in the sixt of Iohn, was not LITERALL NOR CORPORALL, as the Capernites vnderstand him and were deceiued, but ALLEGORICALL AND SPIRITVALL. ALLEGORICALL in re∣spect of the words which be not there precisely taken in their vsuall significati∣on for grinding with the teeth, and straining downe the throate, but figuratiue∣ly spoken, and import as much as confessing & imbracing with hart and inward affectiō. SPIRITVAL, because not our mouths, but our minds, not our bellies, but our spirites are nourished with the flesh and bloud of Christ, and that not by chewing or swallowing, but by remembring and beleeuing that his bodie was wounded, and his bloud shedde for our perfect and eternall redemption. If the Supper be correspon∣dent to the doctrine of our Sauiour in the 6. of Iohn, the ma∣ner of eating Christes flesh must be spiri∣tuall by faith, not corporall with teeth, & the wordes, this is my bo∣dy, figuratiue. Now the Lords Supper is correspondent not contrarie to the first of Iohn, as we saw before by the verdit of the fathers, & confession of your selues: there∣fore the Lords table teacheth no literall nor carnal, but a spirituall & mysticall eating of the lesh of Christ and drinking of his bloud: which you cannot obserue so long as you presse the letter of these wordes: Take, eat, this is my body. For taking and eating in the Supper bee corporall actions, euen as break∣ing the bread and deliuering the cup are. Then if the wordes this is my bodie bee literall, the consequent is ineuitable that the flesh of Christ is really taken with hands, actually brused with teeth, corporally lodged in the belly: But this error the Lorde in his own person confuted, and the Catholike fathers refell as impious, irreligious and haynous, ergo the wordes of the Supper this is my body, bee not literall, but rather aunswerable to the doctrine proposed in the sixt of Iohn, which is nothing lesse than literal. Phi. You make but a double manner of eating Christes flesh, where you should make a triple. A carnal, spirituall, This is a poore shift: for sacramentall eating is no more but ea∣ting the sa∣cred signe of that heauen∣lie foode. and Sacramentall. A carnal, which the capernites dreampt of, when they supposed they should haue eaten raw flesh to sight and tast as they did other meates. A spirituall, by faith and vnder∣standing; in which sort, euery good man may eate the flesh of Christ and drinke his bloud at any time without the mysteries. A Sacramentall, as when wee
eate the flesh of Christ vnder the formes of bread and wine: though we neither see nor ast flesh or blood. Of these three sortes the sixt of S. Iohns Gospell re∣felleth onely the carnall, which the Capernites grossely fell to, when they heard our Sauiour speake of the Sacrament. Theo. I blame you not, if you bee loath to be counted Capernites. They were reproued by our Sauiour as grosse mistakers of his speach;The Iesuits would faine gt from the Capernites if they coulde tell how. and lewde forsakers of his fellowship: but would God you were as willing to leaue their error, as you be to refuse their name. Phi. Wee be farder, than you from their opinion. And you be rather Capernites: that aske how can he giue vs his flesh to eate, and will not beleeue any eating of Christes bodie with the mouth, except your eyes and tongues maie first discerne and tast the same. Theo. We aske not him, how he can doe anie thing that he will; but wee aske you, how you know that both his will and his worde are changed since he rebu∣ked the Capernites for their grossenes? Phi. We doe not say that either his will or his word are chaunged. Theo. Then the doctrine of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, which he deluered in the sixt of Iohn, remaineth in the same force and strength, that it did at first, when he reuealed it to his disciples. Philand. It doth. Theo. And the same exposition of his woordes, which he then annexed to them, abi∣deth good for euer. Phi. What else? Theo. And he, that deuiseth or tea∣cheth any other manner of eating his flesh or drinking his bloode at his last Suppper,What Christ spake of the soul the Ca∣pernites vn∣derstood of the body: let the Iesuits therefore dresse and hide the lesh of Christ how they can from their ight and tast, so long as they will eate it with teeth & iawes they shalbe Caper∣nites. than is there declared and confirmed by himselfe, is either a Caper∣nite or worse. Phi. He is. Theo. But that eating which he there taught, was by faith and vnderstanding; and they that murmured at him and depar∣ted from him thought he had ment eating with the mouth and teeth: What lck you then of the Capernites error, when you affirme that the naturall and substantiall bodie of christ is really eaten with teeth, and locally dis∣cendeth into the stomacke, which is the waie that all other meates doe passe, when they nourish the bodie? Phi. We defie both you and them: we doe not incline to their error. We eat christ in a mysterie by faith: and though we tast & see nothing, but bread & wine, yet doe we preferre the trueth of his promise before the iudgemēt of our senses, which you doe not. And therefore you falsely slaunder vs, when you charge vs with the carnall opinion of the capernites. Theoph. I can yeeld you no freer choice, than if you like not their companie, to leaue their error. You must not looke to misconster the wordes of christ as they did, and take skorne to be called as they were. Phil. I tell you, wee doe not teare the flesh of christ with our teeth, as they thought they should. Theo. You holde that the flesh of christ entereth your mouthes,It skilleth not how Christes flesh be coue∣red, but with what part it is eaten soul or bodie. and is really bruised (though somewhat fauourablie) with your teeth, and locallie dis∣cendeth downe your throates into the closet of your bellies. What differ you now from the capernites? what kinde of eating were they rebuked for, if not for this?
Man hath but two kindes of eating as him selfe consi∣steth of two parts: for ech part one.Moe kindes of eating, than by minde or by mouth, with faith or with teeth, that is, corporall, or spirituall, you cannot imagine. Man hath no mo partes but a soule and a bodie, therefore he can vse no kinde of eating, but either with his soule, or with his body. You must new frame men, which is past your reach, before you can chalenge this diuision as vnsufficient: ech part hath his kinde and sort of eating. Now which of these twaine did the Capernites fa∣sten on; the spirituall or the corporall kinde of eating the flesh of Christ? Not the spirituall, for they Iohn. 6. Which of those twaine will the Iesu∣its choose, but they must ei∣ther forge their corpo∣rall eating with teeth, or ioine arme in arme with the Capernites. beleeued not as the Scripture saith of them, and they which lack faith, lack the right and true meanes of spirituall eating. Besides, our Sauiour went about to teach them the spirituall eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood, for so doth himselfe expound his owne woordes, and his whole Church after him did testifie that his meaning. If then the Capernites lighted on the same manner of eating, which christ proposed to them, they deser∣ued rather praise than blame: but they mistooke the wordes of christ, and were rebuked of him, ergo they thought on the corporall eating of christs flesh with teeth and iawes, which is the selfe same point that you affirme in your doc∣trine. Phi. We neither Then you dif∣fer from the Capernites in seeing but not in eating the flesh of Christ. Whether a man maie not carnallie eate that which he neither seeth nor tasteth: let the Iesuits consult the Cookes. see nor tast the flesh of christ, which they dreampt they should, and therefore we be most free from their madnes. Theo. You cham the flesh of christ actuallie with your teeth and swallowe the same dwne your throates: and these be the proper actions and right instrumentes of externall and caperniticall eating, your eyes and your tast be not: els blind men and such as by reason of sicknes can tast nothing, by your diuinitie can eate nothing: and meates so deuised and handled by art that we can neither by sight nor tast dis∣cerne them, if your Rule be good, be neither corporallie taken nor eaten, which is so false that wee neede not refute you, cookes and Pastlers will laugh you to scorne. Grinding with teeth and swallowing downe the throat that it may descend to the stomack is the verie definition of carnall eating: and since you concurre with the capernites in those two pointes, notwithstanding you vary from them in sight and tast, yet your opinion establisheth a corporall eating of christes flesh and a literall peruerting of his wordes no lesse than theirs did. And which of the learned fathers I pray you, did euer put this difference be∣tweene the words of christ & the capernites error, that where they thought they should haue both eaten & seene his flesh, the Lord ment that indeed they should as they thought eate the same with their teeth and iawes, marie they should not see nor tast it. Was this the meaning of our Sauiour when he saide, The wordes that I speake to you be spirite and life? Did his Church after him so conster his wordes? Athan. in il∣lud quicunque dixeris verbum in filium homi∣nis. The thinges that he spake were not carnall but spiri∣tuall, saith Athanasius. Chrysn Iohā. homil. 45. They were spirituall hauing nothing in them that was carnall, as Chrysostome and Theophilact witnes. Orig. in Leuit. hom. 7. Examine them as spirituall men, saith Origen, not as carnall.Theophi. in 6. Iohannis. The letter doeth kill hm that doth not spirituallie weigh the things that are spoken. Cypr. de caena Domini. Christ giueth vs a spirituall instruction, saith Cyprian: and Austen, August. in psalm. 98. Vnderstand you spiritually
that which I haue spoken. Oecume. in 6 Iohannis. Christ here calleth the spirit, the spirituall vn∣derstanding of those things that he spake, saith Oecumenius. Beda. in 6. Iohannis. What is spirit and life, saith Bede? They must be vnderstood spiritually. What is now left for you and your fellowes but either to be coupled with the Capernits for your literall pressing the wordes of Christ and corporall eating of his flesh,If Christ mēt the soule of man should eat his flesh by faith, they be capernites that bring their mouthes to eate it, though they neither see it nor tast it. or els to proue, which you can hardly doe, that your teeth and iawes be not car∣nall as the Capernits were, but spirituall. Your mouthes and bellies I trow be flesh and not spirite; members of the bodie, no parts of the mind; in them con∣sisteth neither faith nor deuotion, and therefore vnlesse you can transubstantiate your soules into your iawes, and your harts into your throates, your receiuing of Christ in at mouth, and chamming his flesh with teeth that it may passe to your stomackes, is neither spirituall nor mysticall, but a carnall and right Ca∣perniticall kind of eating. Phi. Why doe you twite vs with the Capernites whom we so often haue disclaimed? They feared lest they should eate raw flesh: we haue no such feare. Theo. The flesh of Christ, which you eate, can not be reall if it be not raw: and therefore your stomackes may be stronger to digest it than theirs were, but you eate the flesh of a liue man with your mouthes which they feared they should, and were deceiued. Phi. They thought they should haue eaten Christ by peece meale. Theo. And is your opinion any whit the better, because you eate him whole at one morsel? Phi. This is profane scoffing. Theo. Take heede that yours bee not worse than prophane eating of that which is diuine & holy.There may be manie diffe∣rences in ea∣ting, but al ea∣ting the flesh of christ with teeth & iawes is Caperniti∣call. Phi. We eate his flesh in a mysterie. Theo. What mysterie lyeth in your mouthes and bellies? Phi. Is it not a greate mysterie that Christ is eaten vnder the formes of bread and wine? Theo. None at all, if you set your teeth and iawes on worke to eate him as the Capernites thought they should, when they peruerted the wordes of Christ. Phi. They supposed they should haue seene and tasted mans flesh, which is horrible. Theo. Eating as I haue shewed you, doth consist not in seeing or tasting, but in chamming and swallowing: & since you therein consent with the Capernites, though you could alleadge twentie diuersities betweene their maner of eating & yours, yet both are corporal and contrary to that doc∣trine which Christ deliuered in the sixt of Iohn For that, as I haue proued, was intended and referred to the soules and spirits of men, not to their throats or entrals: and therefore well in couering the body of Christ, and deluding your senses, you may differ from the Capernites: but in preparing your teeth and iawes for the flesh of Christ, and in drawing his wordes from their mystical and figuratiue sense, you ioyne with the Capernites against all the Catholike Fa∣thers that euer wrate in the Church of Christ. Phi. Haue we, thinke you, Not one that is aunci∣ent. no fathers with vs, as well for the literall con∣struction of Christs wordes, as for the For that you misconster some that be auncient, but their true meaning is against it. corporal eating of his flesh in the Sa∣crament? Corporall I call it, not because we see it or tast it, as we doe other meates, but because we be sure it entereth our mouthes when we receiue our
rightes, and is really contained in our bodies. Theo. You may abuse some fathers to make a shew: but otherwise you haue no ground in them either of your literall vnderstanding Christs speach, or corporal eating of christs lesh. Phi. Haue we not? Mo Saintes than euer were in the Kalendar.S. Damascen, S. Epiphanius, Theophilact, Euthymi∣us and others earnestly presse the literal construction of christs words against your signes and figures: and as for eating the flesh of Christ with our very mouthes, S. Austen, S. Chrysostom, S. Leo, S. Gregorie, S. Cyril, Ter∣tullian & others are resolute, whō I trust you wil not condemn for Capernites. By this way the simple learne what to looke for at your hands, that wil out∣face so plaine a trueth. Theo. He that will be good at outfacing let him studie your Testament, and hee neede none other teacher: but what trueth is it that we outface? Phi. Neuer father, you said, auouched the literal sense of Christes wordes. Theo. Four late gre∣cians vrge the letter, but to no such end as the Ie∣suits doe.I said, no ancient father; of which number I do not account these late Grecians to be. And therefore if they did contradict that which Tertullian, Au∣sten, Origen, Chrysostome and others did teach long before them, wee would not regard them: but as yet I see no such thing proued by them. Phi. Damasib. 4. cap. 14.The proofe is easie. S. Damascene rehearsing the wordes of Christ, This is my body, immediately addeth, not a figure of my body, but my body; not a figure of my bloud, but my bloud. S. Epiphanius likewise, (Christ) said, take, eate, this is my body.Nice. Synod. 2. actio. 6. Hee saide not take, eate the Image of my body. And Theophilact,Theophil. in 26. Matth. Bread is the very bodie of our Lord and not a figure correspondent. For he said not this is a figure, but this is my bo∣dy. And so Euthymius,Euthymius in Matth. cap. 64. Christ said not these are signes of my body, but these are my body. These be manifest places: and yet such is your impudencie that you affirme no father euer vrged the literall force of Christes words. And so for the corporall eating of Christs flesh with our mouthes: S. Au∣gustine saith,Aug. pist. 118. It hath pleased the holy Ghost that in the honour of so great a Sacrament, our Lordes bodie should enter into the mouth before other meates. And S. Chrysostome,Chrysost. homil. 29. in 2. Cor. De cons. dist. 2. § quid sit. Our mouth hath gotten no small honour receiuing our Lordes bodie. And S. Gregorie, (The bloud of the lambe) is sucked not only by the mouth of the heart, but also by the mouth of the body. And S. Leo,Leo. serm. 6. de ieio 7. mēsis. That is receiued by the mouth which is beleeued by the heart. And Tertullian,Tertul. de re∣surrect. carnis. (Our) flesh doth feede on the bodie▪ and bloud of our Lord▪ And S. Cyril,Cyril. lib. 4. cap. 14. in Iohan It was needfull that this rude and earthly body should be recouered to immortalitie by touch, tast and foode of the same kind with it selfe. You aske for fathers: here they be both many in number and auncient in time to discharge vs that we be no Capernites: and to refell your foolish vaunt, that all antiquitie were of the verie same mind that you are now. It may be you neuer vnder∣stood them.It may bee you neuer heard the places before: If you did not I will pardon your ignorance so you repent your rashes. Theo. Yeas sir, I haue seene them, and  may bee weighed them better than euer you did. And notwithstanding your magnificence, it will appeare
you be not free from ignorance, whatsoeuer you be from impudencie. Phil. I will burne my cloathes to my shirt if euer you answere them. Theo. But saue your skinne from the fire, though you spare not other mens blood nor bones. Phi. We It is no same for vs to suffer as Christ did, nor glorie for you to doe as Iudas did. vse you but as heretikes should be vsed. Theo. If it be heresie for vs to serue god according to the Gospel of his sonne, what is it for you to serue him with your own medlees? Phi. You would flie the fielde rather than your life, but I must keepe you to it. Theo. You runne so fast from God and your Prince that you may soone ouer-goe vs, if we would flie, but as yet I see no cause. Damascene, Theophilact, and Euthymius presse the letter of christes speach not to deriue thence your carnal and gutural eating of christs flesh,The meaning of Damascen and others after him in pressing the letter. nor to con∣troll that which Tertullian, Austen, Origen, Chrysostome, and others (men of farre greater learning and authoritie than these) taught long before them in the church of God, but to shew, that bread and wine be not only tokens and bare signes of christes fleshe and bloud but also cary with them and in them the vertue power and effect of his death and passon.Euthymius in Matth. cap. 64. He vrgeth the wordes lest the signes should seeme to be without vertue. Euthymius, Christ said not these be the signes of my body and bloud, but these are my bodie and bloud. We must therefore NOT LOOKE TO THE NATVRE of the giftes which are proposed, BVT TO THE VERTVE. Against them which defend, that this Sacrament doth only figure, not offer: signifie, not exhibite grace: the letter may wel be forced to proue the diuine power and operation of the mysticall elemenets: Against vs which hold the visible signes in substance to bee creatures: in signification mysteries: in operation and vertue the things themselues, whose names they bear, this illation conclu∣deth nothing. Yet for the better explication of him selfe and others vsing the like kind of speach: Theophilact addeth this worde ONLY. Marke that the bread which is eaten of vs in the mysteries,Theophil. in 6. Iohannis. Non est TANTVM figuratio quaedam carnis Domini, is not an only figuring of the Lords flesh, but the Lords very flesh. For he saide not the bread which I will giue, is a fi∣gure of my flesh,Not a figure onely, that is not an idle signe without fruite and ef∣fect. but is my flesh. Their meaning was as we see by their own words to teach more than idle signes, or ONLY figures in the Lords supper, because together with the name goe the vertes and effects of Christes flesh & bloud, vnited in manner of a Sacrament to the visible signes. And this their assertion neither troubleth our Doctrine, nor strengthneth your error. Againe these writers may very well say the Sacraments of the Gospell BE NO FIGVRES but TRVETH IT SELFE,No figures of thinges to come. in that respect, as figures bee taken for samplers of things to come. Such were the figures of the law, which did premonstrat the cōming of christ in flesh,All figures abolished by the comming of Christ in flesh. & ceased at his cōming. And so the mysteries of the Lords table were not figures of things expected, but euidences of the truth there sitting in persō, & the next day to be nailed to the crosse, therby to fulfil & abolish al figures: & our sacramēts are now not signes of farther pro∣mises, but memorials of his mercies alredy performed. Do this saith christ, (not in figure of an other truth to come) but in remēbrance of me (which am come:)
for memorie you know stretcheth only to things past and doone: and in this sense the letter may bee safely pressed, and your carnall conueyance nothing relieued. The defēders of Images would not haue the sa∣cramen cal∣led an Image of Christ.I find a third cause that might induce them to force the letter in this sort, & yet no way confirming your grosse supposall, which is this. When the Greeke church fell at variance for Images, they which held that Christ ought not to be figured after the likenes of our bodies, amongest other reasons alleadged this for one, that the Lord at his Supper Extat in 2. Synod. Nicen. actio. 6. for a true and effectuall Image of his incarnation, chose the whole substance of bread, not any way like the pro∣portion of a man, lest it should occasion Idolatry. The defenders of Images, whose side Damascene tooke, pressed with this obiection durst not flee to your annihilation of the substance of bread and adoration of the Sacrament, with di∣uine honour: which no doubt they would haue doone with great triumph, had those two points of your Doctrine beene then counted catholike, but yeelding and by their silence confessing, that the substance of bread remayned in the sup∣per,The cause whie the Gre∣tians pressed the letter is nothing neere the Iesuites real presence. Damasce. lib. 4. cap. 14. This Epipha∣nius was as earnest for painted and carued Ima∣ges as the el∣der was a∣gainst them. and was not adored (for so the contrarie part opposed) at length for very pure neede came to this shift: that the mysticall bread was not ordained to re∣semble and figure Christs humane nature, nor so called by christ at his maundie who said not, this is a figure of my body, but my body; nor a figure of my bloud, but my bloud: and when Basil and Eustathius were produced affirming the bread and wine to be figures and resemblances of Christs flesh and bloud, the Patrones of Images replied that was spoken alwaies before, neuer after consecration. Wherefore Damascene first beganne this myncing and straining the wordes of Christ, not to build on them any reall or corporall con∣uersion of the bread into the flesh of christ, but in fauour of his artifical pictures and Images he could by no meanes abide that the mysteries should after con∣secration be called Images, and figures of Christs bodie. The next that traced this path after Damascene was Epiphanius: not that auncient and learned Bishoppe of Cyprus, but a pratling Deacon in the ba∣stard Councell of Nice, whose furious and fanaticall answer to the Councel of Constantinople, (that made this obiection) declareth more tongue than witte, more face than learning. Nicen Synod. 2. actio. 6. Christ did not say take ye, eat ye the Image of my bodie. Reade whiles thou wilt (saith hee) thou shalt neuer find that either the Lord or his Apostles, or the Fathers called that vnbloudie Sacrifice, which the Priest offereth, AN IMAGE. Thus doth he braie foorth This Epi∣phanius might haue beene a Iesuit for his lustie craking. defi∣ance to the whole worlde without trueth, without shame. For Chrysostome saith, Chrysost. in Matt. hom. 83 If Iesus were not once dead, whose image and signe is this Sacrifice? This Idem hom. 17. in epist. ad Heb. Sacrifice is an image and samplar of that Sacrifice. And Gelasius, Gelas. consra Eutichen.Surely the IMAGE and resemblance of the bodie and bloud of Christ is celebrated in the action of the mysteries. We must therefore so thinke of the Lord Christ himselfe as we professe and obserue in his IMAGE. And likewise Theodoret. Ortho. Theod. dial. 2. The mysticall signes which are offered to god by his Priests whereof doest thou call them signes? Eranist, Of the body &
blood of the Lord. Ortho: It is very well saide. Conferre then the image with the paterne and thou shalt see the likenes. Dionysius calleth it both an Dyonis. eccle∣siast. hierach. cap 3.image and a figuratiue sacrifice. Nazianzene excusing himselfe, Nazanz. in Apolog. . Apostl. con∣s. li. 6. ca. 3. How should I, saith he, presume to offer vnto God that externall sacrifice; the image of the great mysteries? Clemens, Offer you in your churches the image of the royall body of Christ. Macarius, Macar. h 27.In the Church are offered breade and wine the images of his flesh and blood. The  ahers keepe the same word & the same sense. Ambrose,Amrs. dn∣fie. E. 1. ca. 48. In the law was a shadow: in the Gospel is an image, in heauen is the trueth. Before was offered a lambe or a calf, now Christ is offred, here in an image: there in truth where he intreateth his father as an aduocate for vs. Austē,August. oo∣gintarum quae∣ionum. cap. 61. The sacramēt is an Image of Christes death and passion. Christ gaue an image of his burnt offering to be celebrated in the church for a remem∣brance of his passion. The rest say the like: but what neede we farther refutati∣on of so ridiculous and vnshamefast a bragge, such causes, such councels: such poppets, such Proctors. The very children in the church of God knowe that the diuine mysteries by the generall definition of a Sacrament be visible signes of inuisible graces, and as Augustine interpreteth the word De cons. dist. 2. § Sacrifiium. Sigebert. in an. 885. Regino li. 2. an. 868. Chrono. Can. If these Gre∣cians had beene of the Iesuits opini∣on the mat∣ter had not beene great, but now they are not. How the late Grecians that presse the letter may be vn∣derstood. The Iesuites trust more to their practises then to their authorities, otherwise their holde were verie slender.Sacramentum: id est, sacrum signum, a Sacrament, that is a sacred signe. So that vnlesse they be signes they can possibly be no sacraments, & neither sacraments nor signes can they be without or before cōsecration which this stout champion had not yet lear¦ned, & therfore his verdict in matters of religion, except his cunning were grea∣ter, may be wel refused. As Damasene and your prating Epiphanius were more than 700. yeares after Christ, so Theophilact and Euthymius are farre younger. The first of them was Bishoppe of the Bulgarians, who were conuer∣ted to the faeth 868. yeares after Christ: the second your owne chronologie placeth after Gracian and Lombard 1100. yeares short of Christ. Were then these later Grecians wholy with you, what gaine you by them? If you woulde oppose them to Tertullian, Origen, Cyprian, Austen, Gelasius, Thedorete & o∣thers of purer times and sounder iudgements, you could winne nothing by that bargaine: the choice were soone made, which to take, which to leaue; but in deede you do them wrong to returne them for transsubstantiators: they neuer knew what it ment. They say the mysteries of the Lords table be not only fi∣gures but haue the truth annexed: No figures (of grace differed) but seales of mercy perfourmed in Christ and inioyed of vs: no called figures or images of Christes flesh after consecration, but bearing as well the names as the fruits and effects of the things themselues whose sacraments they bee. This maketh nothing for your locall inclosing of Christ vnder accidentes, neither for your corporal mingling of his flesh with your flesh, which are the two points that we chiefely detest in your reall presence. Thus the greatest storme, from which you thought, no roose could rescue vs, is halfe ouerpast, and no hurt done: if the rest fal as faire besides vs, it wil be high time for your to leaue disputing, and fall to practising, as the rest of your fellowes
do, which bee lurking at home to infuse a rebellion, or stirring abroad to boile it vp to his highth. Your kingdom will neuer reflorish by pen and paper: you must lay more plots, and make new mariages: Your time is short, your rage great. Phi. When you be confuted by reason, then beginne you to charge vs with treason: but answere the places which we bring you, or I will leaue you, I haue somewhat else to doing. Theo. I thinke it bee the truest word you spake this moneth; but an answere, if that be all you looke for, you shall not lack. The fathers abused tht are alladged for the e. eating the fleh of christ with teeth and awe.The fathers whom you alleage for eating the real & naturall flesh of Christ & drinking his blood with your mouthes & throates, are fowly abused, & their words ignorantly misconstered, if not purposely peruerted. Phi. Are you there at host? I see by your winding, you wil run to their meaning. Theo. What wrōg is that, if by their own rules, I recal you to the right conceiuing of their word? Phi. If you may make rules for religion, we shall haue some wise worke of it, I dare vndertake. Theo. If themselues made rules to direct their hearers least their words should happily be mistaken, you shew both your religion & wisedom in refusing the same. Phi. We refuse thē not, if they be theirs. Theo. If they be not, you may the sooner repel thē. Phi. Wel then, what are they? The. There shal not be many of them: one will serue this turne. Phi. That one then what is it? The. The signes haue the names of the things themselues, & therfore out of the places which you haue brought you may not conclude, that the naturall flesh of Christ is actually eaten with teeth,The rule in in∣terprteth al the fathers that seeme to say the fleshe of Christ is eaten with our mouths. This Rule for the signes to beare the names of the things them∣selues, is pro∣per to Sacra∣ments. or his blood really drunk with your lips, but rather that the visible signes & elements which are corporally receiued into your mouthes & stomackes haue the vertues of those thinges whose names thy beare after consecration. Phi. I thought we should haue some such shift: but trust me, this of all others is the fondest & absurdest that you could make. For what ground of faith shal persist vnshaken, if you giue men this scope, to confesse the nms, but not the thinges? So the Iew may reply, when Christ is proued to be the true Mssias, that he is so called, but not so in deede. So any heretk may delude the whole scriptures, if words shal stand as empty sounds, without their sense. See to what miserie you be driuen, whiles you withstand the blessed Sa∣crament, how far better were you to adore the same with vs catholks than to run into such hereticall briers? The. Your sumptuous exhortatiō is but a ridiculous Iudification of your selues & others. We do not say that in matters of doctrine words may be receiued with∣out their natural & due signification: but in Sacramentes we say, the signes re∣maining in their former substance are called by the names of the thinges them∣selues, & therfore you must take good heed that you do not rashly conclude that of the one which was spokē of the other: least you fall into that seruitude & sicknes of the soule, which S. Austen warned you of before. Phi. Would you appoint, whē the fathers words shalbe consered of the signes,Their owne rules in all reason are to limite their own speech. & wen of the things? The. Neither we nor you: themselues are the ittest men to limit what they spake of the signes, & what of the things. Phi. And do they say, they spake this, which I al∣leage, of the signes? The. They do. Phi. f I should stay here til that be proued,
I should neuer go hence. Theo. The matter is not so hard to be proued as you make it.This must be vndestood of the sgnes & not of te things them∣selues o els there is a con∣tadiction in the athers. For if they mainly teach that Christs flesh, is not eaten with teeth, not swalowed with iawes, not receiued into the cōpasse of the belly, they must eithr contradict thēselues, which they do not: or those speeches which you bring, must be vnderstood of the signes called by the names of Christs flesh & blood, though in truth they be not those things, but sacraments of them, as they by their own cautions wil instruct you. Phi. I can not abide this going about the bush. Theo. Indeed madmē wil through the midst, though they tear their flesh to the boanes for their labor. Phi. Do you think vs mad? The. It is greater madnes to sea your own soules with the rigor of other mens phrases, when they giue you war∣ning to the contrary, than to wound your owne bodies with the sharpnes of a∣ny thornes. Phi. We presse not their speeches against their prescriptions, you ra∣ther would frustrate their meaning with your figures. The. Let them tell their owne tales,Three things that may be doubted of in the sacramēt. The names of the elements changed after conecration. what they teach concerning the parts of this Sacrament, & then it will soone be seene whether you or we peruert them. There be three thinges in the bread & by like proportion in the wine that may be douted of, the name, the substance, the power & operation. When we see which of these three be chan∣ged, and which vnchaunged, the myst of error will soon be scattered. The name we prooue to be chaunged by the generall confession of all the fa∣thers, Theod. dial. 1. Our Sauiour, saih Theodoret, changed the names and called the signe by the name of his bodie. Christ Tertul. aduer. Idaeos. called bread his bodie, saieth Ter∣tullian. Cypr. de vnct. Chrismatis. The signifying (elementes) and the thinges signified are called by the same names, saith Cyprian. Ambr. de Sa∣cramentis lib. 5. cap 4. Before the wordes of Christ, saith Am∣brose, that which is offered is called bread, when once the words of Christ be rehearsed, it is now called not bread, but (his) bodie. De consecrat. dst. 2 ¶ hoc est quod. The bread, saith Prosper, is called the bodie of Christ being in trueth the Sacrament (that is the sacred signe) of Christes bodie. Chrysostom, Chrysost. ad Caesar. Mnl. After sanctification it is discharged from the name of bread, and counted worthie to beare the name of the Lords bodie, notwithstanding the nature of brad still remaine. Ra∣banus, Rola. de Ins. clri. lib. 1. cap. 31. Because bread strengthneth (our) bodies, therefore is it itly termed the bodie of Christ. Bertram. Brtram. de corp. & sag. Dom. The signes be called the Lords body & blood by reason they take the name of that thing whose sacraments they be. The general rule is plainely set downe by the famous Clarke S. Austen in these wordes. August. ad Boniac. epis. 23. Can there be a plainer rule to keepe vs fom ras mi∣staing the fathers? If Sacraments had not a certaine likenes and resemblance to the things, whose sacraments they are, they should be no sacraments at all. And for his similitude they commonly beare the names of the things them∣selues. As therefore the Sacrament of christs body is after a sort the bodie of christ, and the sacrament of christes blood (after the same sort) the blood of christ: euen so the sacrament of faith (meaning thereby baptisme) is saith. We he buried, saith Paul, with christ through baptism into his death. H saith not we signifie that (his) burial, but he saith plainly we . The sacra∣mēt of so great a thing he would not cal but by the  thing it self. Upon this verie ground be concluded,Contra Adi∣mant. cap. 12. as you heard  Ld dou∣bted
not not to say, this my body: when he gaue the signe of his body. What mauell then if the catholike Fathers vsed often the names of the body & blood of Christ, where the materiall elementes of bread and wine must be vnderstood, since this is the certaine rule of al sacraments, and the common order of all an∣cient diuines writing of the Lordes supper,The fathers after conse∣cration ne∣uer called the bread by anie other name thā the body of Christ, though the substance of bread still re∣mained. to call the giftes proposed at the Lordes table the body and blood of Christ. The wilfull contempt of which ob∣seruation hath miserably snared and hampered you and your fellowes euerie where referring and forcing that to the naturall fleshe of Christ, which by the learned and godly fathers was spoken and ment of the visible signes called by the names of the body and blood of Christ. The second thing that you sticke at, is the substance of bread, which we say remaineth and abideth as well after consecration as before. You wil haue it ei∣ther vanish to nothing, or else to bee turned and conuerted into the very fleshe of Christ there present God & mā vnder the whitenes, roundnes & such like shewes & appearances of bread,The bread re∣maineth after consecration in his proper and former natue and SVBSTANCE left only to content the sight and palate, least the raw flesh of Christ should displease your eyes or offend your tast. This is your doc∣trine, and this we say is not catholike. The church of Christ neuer held, that the substance of bread perished or ceased after consecration, it is a late deuise: you can bring no father that is ancient for this assertion: they neuer taught, they ne∣uer heard, they neuer dreampt any such thinges. They taught that the mysti∣call signes were creatures well knowen, not straunge and miraculous acci∣dentes, that the substance of bread was not changed, but remained still af∣ter consecration: and this they taught in as plaine words as heart can ima∣gine, or tongue expresse: lette the Reader bee iudge, if I aye not the truth. Gelasius an ancient Bishop of Rome, for his antiquitie reuerenced of vs, for his place not to be refused of you, writeth thus against Eutiches, Gelas. contra Eutichen.The sacra∣ments, which we receiue, of the body & blood of Christ, are a diuine thing, & by them are we made partakers of the diuine nature, & yet for all that ceaseth not the substance or nature of bread & wine to be. Theodoret, Theod. dial. 2.The mystical signes do not after sanctification depart from their own nature, for they remaine in their former substance, figure & forme. Ambrose, Ambros. de sa∣cramentis. lib. 4. cap. 3.Thou camest to the altar, & awest the sacraments theron, & wonderest at the ve∣ry creature: yet it is a olemn & known creature. Ireneus, Ien. li. 4 c. 32. Christ counseling (or willing) his disciples to offer to God the first fruits of those creatures, tooke that bread, which is a creature, & gaue thankes saying, this is my bo∣dy. Et cap 34.We must therefore in all thinges be found thankefull to God the crea∣tor, offering the first fruits of those creatures, which be his: and this obla∣tion the Church onely maketh in puritie to the creatour, offering to him of his own creatures with thankes giuing. Origen (The Lords bread) accor∣ding to the material (partes) thereof goeth into the belly,Origen. in 15. Matth. and thence to the draught: (so that) it is not the matter of breade that doeth proitte the rcei∣uer, but the worde rehearsed ouer it. Epiphanius, Epipha. in Anchorao. That which our Saui∣our
our tooke in his hand, and saide this is my (body,) wee see to bee neither proportional nor like to his image in flesh, nor his inuisible Deity: for this is of a round figure, & hath no power of sense: but our Lord wee knowe to bee wholy sense, wholy sensitiue. Cyprian, Cypr. de Caenae Domini. Since the Lord said, do this in my re∣membrāce, this is my flesh, & this is my blood: as often as with these words, & this faith we do (that he did) this substantial bread & cup sanctified with a solemn blessing is profiable for the life & safegard of the whole man: being both a medicine to heal our infirmities, & a sacrifice to clense our iniquities. Chrysostom, After cōsecration Chrysost. ad Ce∣sr. Monach. it is deliuered from the name of bread, & re∣puted worthy to be called the Lords body, nothwithstanding the nature of bread still remaine. Austen, Aug. serm. ad infantes. These things are therefore called Sacramentes, because in them one thing is seen, & an other thing vnderstood. That which is seen, speciem habet corporalem, hath a corporal shape (or kind:) that which is vnderstood hath a spiritual fruit. Idem de doctr. Christ. li. 3. ca. 5. This is of al other a miserable seruitude of the soule to mistake the signes for the things themselues, & not to be able to lift vp the eye of the minde aboue the corporall creature, to behold the light that is eternall. The councell of Constantinople, Extat in 2. Synod. Nicen. actio. 6. Christ commaunded the whole substaunce of breade, chosen for his image, to bee set on his table, least if it resembled the shape of a man, idolatrie might bee com∣mitted. Bertram, Bertram de corp. & sangui∣ne.The signes, as touching the substances of the creatures, are the same after consecration, which they were before. Can you looke for plainer or directer witnesses? Do they not all ioyne toge∣ther in one profession and succession of truth, that the mysticall signes after con∣secration be knowen, corporal, and senselesse creatures, abiding in their pro∣per and former, yea their whole nature and substance?We our selues can speake no plainer words than the fa∣thers did be∣fore vs a∣gainst the Ie∣suits error. The power & operation of the signes. Their power and operati∣on chaunged, causeth the change of their names though their substance re∣maine. Be not these wordes significant and pregnant, directly conuting your reall inclosing and corporall eaing of Christ vnder the shewes and accidentes of bread and wine? The third thing that I saide was to bee considered in the elementes of bread and wine, is their power and operation. For since the substance of the crea∣tures is not chaunged, the signes coulde not iustly beare the names of the thinges them-selues, except e vertue, power, and ffect of Christs fleshe and bloode were adioyned to them, and vnited with them after a se∣crete and vnspeakable manner by the working of the holy Ghost: in such sort that whosoeuer duelie receiueth the signe, is vndoubtedly partaker of the grace: offered vnto all, but inioyed onely by those that with fayth and repen∣tance clense the inward man from that corruption of flesh & spirit which Christ abhorreth. Cyprian of Sacraments in generall writeth thus. Cypr. de vn∣ctio. Chrism. To the elements once sanctified, not now their owne nature giueth effect, but the diuine vertue worketh (in them) more mightily: the trueth is present with the signe, and the spirit with the Sacrament: so that the worthines of the grace appeareth by the verie efficiencie of the things. Of the Lordes Supper in speciall thus he saith. bThere is giuen the foode of immortalitie, differing from commō
meates: Corporalis substantiae, etmens speciem, retaining the kind (or truth) of a corporal substāce (for your shewes, without substance were not yet known) but by secret efficiencie prouing the presence of the diuine vertue. This common bread chaunged into flesh and blood, procureth life and groweth to our bodies, & so by the vsuall course of these things, the weakenes of our faith is succoured, and aught by a sensible argument, that the effects of eter∣nal life is in the visible Sacramēts, & that we be vnit to Christ no so much by a corporal, as by a spiritual transitiō. Ambrose, Ambr. de sa∣cramentis lib. 6 cap. 1. Perhaps tou wilt say, I ee the likenes, I see not the truth of blood. But it hath a resemblāce. Ibidem. li. 4. cap. 4. For as thou tookest a resemblance of his death, so doest thou drink a resemblance of his precious blood, to this end that there should be no horror of blood, and yet it might worke the price of our saluation, and the grace of our redemption might remaine.Ibidem. lib. 6. cap. 1. Therfore for a similitude thou receauest the Sacrament, sed ver ae naturae gratiā, virtutē{que} consequeris, but thou obtainest (therby) the grace & vertue of the true nature. Gelasius, Cels. contra Etichen. By the sacraments (which we receiue) wee be made partakers of the diuine nature: they truely represent to vs the vertues and effects of that Principal mysterie. Hilarius, Hilar. de Tri∣it. lib. 8.These things tasted & taken bring this to passe, that Christ remaineth in vs: this is Idem in psal. 127. The vertue of that table to quicken the receiuers. Leo, Leo de cons. dis. 2.  in qui∣bus. In that mystical distribution of the spirituall nourishment that is giuen, this is taken that receiuing the vertue of the heauenly meate, we may be chaunged into his flesh, who was made flesh for vs. Chrysostom,  hom. 83. in Mh. Let vs come to the spirituall dugge of this chalice, and suck (thence) the grace of the spirit.August. trat. in an. 26. Austen, The Sacrament is one thing, the vertue of the Sacrament is an other thing. Iem de cons. dist. 2. § qui manducat.Euery man receiueth his part, whereby grace itselfe is called parts, and where Idem. in psal. 77. the Sacraments were com∣mon to all, grace was not common to all, which is the vertue of the Sacra∣ments. And againe, The (Capernites) Idem. tact. in Iohan. 27. thought he would haue giuen them his body, but he told them hee would ascend to heauen: no doubt hee ment whole. When you shall see the sonne of man ascending where hee was be∣fore, surely then shal you see that he doth not giue his body that way which you imagine, surely then shal you perceiue that his grace is not consumed with biting. Euthymius, Euthym. in Ma. cap 64. We must not looke to the substance of the signes, but vnto the vertue of them. He doth change these things vnspeakably into his very body, that quickneth, and into his very precious blood, and into the grace of them both: We must therfore not looke to the nature of the things proposed (at the Lords table) but vnto the vertue of them. Wherefore The∣odoretes wordes are most true, The d. dial. 2. The signes which are seene, Christ did ho∣nor with the names of his body and blood; not chaunging the nature (or substance of them) but casting grace vnto nature. And so did Ambrose meane when hee sayde: Ambros. de sacraenis. ib. 4. cap. 4. If there bee so great strength in the word of the Lord Iesu, that all thinges beganne to bee, when they were not: howe much more shall it bee of force, that (the mysticall elementes) should be the same they were before, and yet bee chaunged into an other thing? The same in earthly matter and substaunce which they were before, chaunged in
vertue, power and working, whereby wee see they beare not onely the names, but also the fruites and effectes of those thinges, whose Sacraments they bee. This is their doctrine touching the visible part of this Sacrament,The naturall and true flesh, of Christ is eaten with teeth. which is seene with eyes, felt with handes, and rused with teeth: of that there is no doubt but it entereth our mouthes and resteth in our bowels: and that, for the causes which I before rehearsed, aer consecration is e∣ury where called by thm the Lordes body: but that the naturall fleshe of Christ, which is th other and inwarde part of the Sacrament, en∣tereth the mouth, or abideth the teeth, or passeth downe the throate, or logeth in the stomack: this is a position wholy repugnant both to Fathers and Scriptures. Mark. 7. Nothing can enter both te hart and the bellie.Doe you not know, sayth Christ, that whatsoeuer thing from without entereth into a man▪ can not defile him: because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belie. Then by the iudgement of our Sauiour nothing can enter oth the hat & the blly: but the flesh of Chris entereth into the hart, ergo . Cor. 6. The bellie, saieth Paul, is for meates & meates for the bellie, and God will destroy both it and them: the bodie of Chrst Gd wll not destroy, it is therefore no meate for the bellie. If not for the l∣li, then not for the mouth,Mat. 15. because eueie thing that entereth the mouth goeth into the bellie, and so foorth to the raught. But so basely to thnk of the flsh of Christ is apparent and  wickednesse: ego the fleshe of Christ neither fillth our bellies, nor ntrth ou mo:Mark 7. For no∣thing that entereth the mouth, can either defile (or sanctifie) Meats, 1. Cor. 8. saith Paul (whih passe by the mouth) doe not commend vs vnto od, neither doeth the kingom of God (which is our sanctification con of mats, and drinkes:Rom 17. but Christ Heb. 13. with his blood doeth sanctifie the people: and Io 6. hee that atth my flsh & drinketh my blood, saith e, remaineth in mee and I in him, and hath eternall life, ergo nether his fleshe nor s blood enter ou muthe. To be short,Ephes. 3. Christ dwelleth not in bellies by locall com∣prehension, but in our hearts by faith: his flhe seedeth not ur bodies for a tie, but our soules for euer: his wordes were spoken not of our mouthes, which beleue not: ut of our spirites, which haue no fleshe nor boanes: and consequently neither teeth to grinde, nor iawes to swallow, but one∣ly aith and vnderstanding. Lette all this bee de, if the learned and auncient Fathers doe not conclude the same. Chrysostome, Chsost. hom. 43. in lon. Care not for the nourishment of the bodie, but of the spirit. (Christ is the bread) which eeth not the bodie but the soule, and Idem ex variis  in Mat 9. filleth not the belly, but the minde. Ambrose, Ambros. de ijs qui steriis . Christ is in that sacrament, because it is the bodie of Christ.De consecrat.  2  non es∣ais. It is therefore no bodily, but Ghostly meate. NOT THIS BREAD, which entereth into the bodie, but the bread of eternall life is it that vpholdeth the sub¦staunce of our soule. Cyprian, Cyprian. de Caena Do. As often as we doe this wee whe not our
teeth to bite, but we breake the sanctified bread with a sincere faith. Cyril, Cyril. lib. 3. in Ihan. cap. 28.Let vs therefore (as our Sauiour saith) labour not for the meate, which go∣eth into the bellie, but for the spirituall foode, which confirmeth our harts and leadeth vs to eternall life. Austen, Augle cons. dist. 2. § verum sub sigma. It is not lawfull to deuoure Christ with teeth. Idem de verbis Domini in E∣g. Lc, sermo. 33. Prepare not your iawes, but your harts. We take but a morsel, & our hart is replenished. Therfore not that which is seen, but that which is be∣leued, doth feed. Idem. tract. in Iohan. 25. Why prouidest thou thy teeth & thy belly? Beleeue & thou hast eaten. Betrā, At the Lords table Bertram. de corp. & san∣guine Domini. Christ is pres∣sed with teeth swallowed with iawes, or receiued into the belly. Their owne law deesteth it for an here∣sie. we look not on that which is brokē in peeces, which is pressed with teeth, which feedeth the body, but onely that which is taken spiritually by faith. Doth the meate (which the faithful re∣ceiue in the church) as touching that which is corporally taken, that which is chammed with teeth, that which is swallowed with iawes, that which is closed in the compasse of the belly, put vs in assurance of eternall life? This way (no question) it feedeth our flesh, which shall dy, neither yeeldeth vs a∣ny kind of incorruption. For this, which the body receiueth, is corruptible: that which fayth beholdeth feedeth the soule, and perfourmeth vs euerla∣sting life. If these fathers be not able to remoue you from the corporal eating of christs flesh with teeth & iawes, heare in how plaine termes your own Law doth check this grossenes of yours. De cons. dist. 2. ¶ non isle panis. & ¶ ribus gradibus. Glos∣sa ibidem. The flesh of Christ is not incorporated with vs, des∣cendeth not into the stomacke, passeth not into the nourishment of the bo∣dy, for it is the food of the soule, not of the body. And where Pope Nicholas draue Berengarius in his recantation to say, that the flesh of Christ was truely chāmed between the teeth of the faithful: Your Gloze could forebear no lon∣ger, but cried out, De cons. dist. 2. ¶ ego Berenga∣nius. Glossa i∣bidem. Nisi sanè intelligas, except thou take good heede to these words, thou shalt fal into a greater heresie than euer Berengarius held. Then blame not vs Philander for saying this your assertion is not catholike, the Pro∣uost Mareschall of your owne side, not long since, sayde it was hereti∣call. Phi. Haue you done? Theo. I haue if you list to begin. Phi. What a stirre is here to bring beggers to the stockes, & al not worth a straw? Theo. In deede Friers are the neerest kinsmen that beggers haue: they both liue by shifting, & gaine by dissembling, saue that Friers are alwaies within doores, when beg∣gars are without: But what is it that doth so much offend you in my speech? Philan. You runne along with Scriptures and Fathers, as if all were yours. Theophil. I shew you a trueth confirmed by the Scriptures, auouched by the Fathers, and confessed by your owne fellowes: If that displease you, your mouth is out of tast. Philand. Haue you the trueth? so hath the Diuell: for you bee his members in that you bee Heretikes. Theo. This is but a iades tricke, when you feele the spurres, to fling out behind. The more you reason the more you finde that you haue runne the race of your owne deuises without the fathers: and now you can not resist, you fall to reui∣ling and cursed speaking.
Phi. We can with one lifte lay all your authorities in the mie.You must not onely answer, but your an∣swers must be sound and good. Theoph. Your can is great, but your liquor small. I dare promise for you, that you will struggle what you can to bee rid of the burden. Phi. With three bare words I wil answere your three parts, and all your proofes. Theo. They may be so bare, they will doe you no good: but at aduenture what are they? Phi. That the signes after consecration carie the names, and effectes of the things themselues: I graunt it to be very true, but it answereth not the pla∣ces which I did obiect: And as for the substance of bread remaining, which sme Fathers seeme to affirme, wee say substance is there takn not for the very substance it selfe, which is really changed into the body of Christ, but for some other thing. Theo. What other thing? Phi. Not for that which you meane. Theo. Let my meaning alone, and speake you to their assertion that say the breade and wine remaine after Consecration in their former and pro∣per nature and substance.A man may better take hot for cold and ower for sweet, thā sub∣stance for ac∣cidentes. Phi. Substance is there taken for nature. Theo. Nature is so general that it compriseth both the substance & accidents of euery thing. If then the signes remaine in their former nature, they must retaine both their former substance, and their former accidents. Phi. Their substance they doe not: their qualities they doe, as sight, tast, bignes and such like pro∣perties. Theo. But the places which I cite, affirme, they retaine both; and namely their proper and former substance. Phi. That is, their former quali∣ties. Theo. Doth substance signifie qualities? Phi. In these places And so chalk doth signifie cheese. it doth. Theo. Why more in these than in others? Substance in all learning is diuided against accidents: how then commeth substance by your learning to be taken for accidents? Phi. It is so. For o∣therwise those sayings were all one with heresie, if substance should be taken in his proper signification. Theo. Yea marie: now you come to your right co∣lours. If the fathers words should not be violently wrested from their perpe∣tual & naturall signification, you cannot possibly auoide, but they taught hat doctrine for Catholike, which you now reiect for heresie. Phi. First their wordes bee plaine: and their mea∣ning is plai∣ner, as shall appeare when we come to the drift of their conclu∣sion. Neuer Catho∣like father saide the sub∣stance of bread was a∣bolished by consecration as the Iesuits saie. They neuer taught it. The. Themselues be dead, and do not speake: their words in which they spake, whiles they liued, make as directly for vs, as we can spake any: vn∣lesse you turne all that euer they said, the vpside downe, and take figures for truths, substance for accidents, creatures for shewes, teeth for faith, & heauen for earth. Which priuilege of interpreting scriptures and fathers cleane con∣trarie to the sense, if you can procure or iustifie, I will be your suretie, all the Protestants in Christendome shal neuer touch the least haire of your heads, in all the follies, which you defend. Phi. We doe not force them against their meaning. Then shew your exposi∣tion to be true by other points of their doctrine, and partes of their writings, which must infallibly force you to that construction. Phi. So we doe. Theo. With places as shamefully abused as these. Phi. No by inumerable and ine∣uitable authorities. Theo. Bring but one father that shall say the substance of bread and wine is ceased or abolished by consecration, and you shall haue
free leaue to doe what you will, with all the rest. Phi. We can bring infinite. Theo. You may the sooner choose out one. Philan. You would put vs to bring other proofes, before you haue answered those that are alreadie produced. I brought you sir fathers affirming the flshe and bloud of Christ were receiued with our mouthes: you would leape to new matter, and shake them off at your fingers end: but I will none of that. First make euen with the old scores before you enter on a new reckoning. Theophi. You were the cause of that digression, and not I. You replied to my proofes and persued not your owne. And yet you neede not say your places are vnanswered, your selfe haue con∣fessed the weakenes of your owne authorities, & yeelded them as vnsufficient to beare the weight of your conclusion, what other answere would you haue?If the signes bae te nmes of the things them∣selu: hen the les au∣thties are vnuficient to conlude tht Chst is eaten wih our teeth. Phi. Haue I dissabled mine owne proofes? Theo. Your owne conclusion you haue. Phi. Would you make me so madde? Theo. I thinke you were more sober then, than now. For then you agised a trueth, and now you resist it againe. Phi. What did I agnise? Doe you thinke I was a sleepe, that I would con∣ue my sele? Theo. No the clearenes of trueth was such, that you could not shadowe the beames of it, and therefore in a brauerie you did admit it, though now you would to your owlelight againe. Phi. This is counsell to me: I know not what you mean. Theo. Dd you not confesse it to bee very true tht in this sacrament the signes after consecration did carie the names and effects of the things them∣selues? Phi. Yeas, I did. Theo. Recat you that? Phi. I doe not. Theo. Then are the places, which you brought for the rel eating of Christs fleshe with your mouthes and teeth, returned backe without your conclusin. For the signes which are called after consecration by the names of hrists bodie and blood,We must as∣cnd to hea∣un before we eate Christ: which with our mouthes we cannot. do enter our mouthes, and passe our throates, the true flsh & bloud of christ do not, but re eaten at the Lords table only of the inward mā by faithful deution and affctin preparing the hart that Christ may lodge there, & dwll there, where hee dlightth, and not in the mouthes and awes of men which is no place for him, that siteth in heaun, whither we must flie with the spirituall wings of our soules and spirites, before we can be patakers of him. Phi. You shall not so delde me. The Rule  granted was vey true: but how proue you that these speeches mut be so consted?If the fathers of ne that Christ is not eaten wth teeth as they do hen these ples must be nderstood of he signes and no of the thgs them∣sles. In other cases it may be true, though not in this. Theo. If the Rule which I laide downe be very true, then your places can inerre nothing, or so much as the wordes which you brought may be spoken as well of the signes, as of the things themselues: and in that case the promises receiuing a double consuction, by your own con∣fesson, how can your conclusion stand god, importing that sense which is not only most doubted, and least proued, but laly denied by the same fathers in o∣ther places, as I haue shewed? Phi. Tute: I will not be mocked wih such istes: you shall answer thm place by place, as I cite them, or els I wil not speake one word more. Theo.
You importune mee to spende time, which nowe waxeth short, but it will be the worse for your selfe: your egernes without trueth will be your owne dis∣credit: and the more paticularly, the more plainly it will appeare. Phi. I haue As many as thee be es in the ball of myne eye. aduantages in their wordes against your euasion,. 18 which I will not o∣mit. Theo. In Augustine, 23. & Chrysostome, and Tertullian you haue vtterly none. Austen saith that in honour of so great a Sacrament (as this is) it hath pleased the holie Ghost, that (the sacred and sanctified bread) which after a sort is called the Lords bodie (though indeed it be the signe & Sacrament of his bodie should enter the mouth before other meats that sue onely to feed & nourish ou flesh. Chrysostome saith, a dimant. cap. 12. It is no small honour that our mouth hath gotten, by receiuing (the sanctified bread after consecration. 29. . 2 Cor. countd worthy to be called) the Lords body (Id a Csar. Mnach.though the nature of bread still remain) And indeed so is it no small both comfort and honour, that God hath vousaed to confirme and eale his mercies vnto vs with these elements, that are cnuer∣ted into our fsh: to shew vs that we are as reallie inusted, & strengthned with his grace and rueth, as our bodies are nourised and encreased with the sgns and Sacraments of his grace. And to that end Tertullian saith, Our  flsh see∣deth on the (bread which Id. contra  lb. 4. The Iesus hue no hold in these a∣thers, but on∣ly because they call thē signes by the names of the thing, which is as commō with them as sand with the Sea. Christ called his) bodie (and hath in it the ffcts of his body): that our soules might be replenished with God. Phi. These be your corrections o their speaches, they be not their intentions. Theo. Looke better to them, and you shall finde that I haue added no wordes but such as them selues in other places haue deluered to declare their owne both meaning and speaking. Phi. The rest doe make for vs. Theo. Cyril saith nothing, but that as the soul hath faith and grace to clense it, and prepare it to eternall life: so Cyril. lib 4. cap. 14. in Ih. By cognato tacti, , & cio, Cyil meaneth the sustance of bread and wine, & nt of Christs bodie. it was needfull that our rude and arthlie bodie should be brought to immortalitie by (corporal and earthlie) food (that) our bodies touching, tasting and feeding on creatures like themselues might take them as pledges of our resurrection. Gregorie comparing the two Passeouers, the Iewes, and ours, and allu∣ding to the storie of theirs aith,De cens rt. ist. § 2. quid sit. The blood (of our Passeouer) is sprinckled on both Posts, when it is drunke not onelie with the mouth of the bodie, (as the cup is, which after the manner of Sacramentes is the Communion of Christes bloode) but also with the mouth of the hart, (which is the true drin∣king of Christes blood). Phi. We will none of that, by your leaue: you must graunt that in As ough in strict and  any thing could be drūk both by the soule and the bodie. strict and precise speach according to the woordes, the blood of Christ is drunke by the mouth of the bodie, as well as by the mouth of the soule. Theophil. Hath the soule a mouth in strict and precise speach? or hath shee lips to drinke according to the letter? Phi. Would you make me such a foole as so to thinke? Theo. Then if one part of the sentence be figuratiue, why not the other? If that which hee doth most vrge, be not literall, why shal the letter be eracted in the harder and vnlikelier part of the comparison? If the whole be but an allusion, whie eract you that strictnes and precisenes of the speach in either part? It is not possible that one and the same thing should
be reallie drunke by the mouth of the bodie, and the mouth of the soul. If it be corporall, how can it enter the soul? If it be spirituall, how can it enter the mouth? And if those be Gregories wordes, which your own Lawe assigneth to him in the verie same homilie: his exposition shaketh your real presence, more than all the authorities, you can bring, shall settle it. De cons. dist. 2. ¶ species in hom. Pascha. Quidam non improbabi∣liter exponunt hoc loco carnis & sanguinis veritatem, ipsam eorundem efficientiam, id est peccatorum remissionem. Some not amisse doe expound the trueth of Christes flesh and blood in this place to be the verie efficience of the same things: that is, the remission of sins. Take this construction with you, & bring out of Greg. or Leo, what you can, it wil not help the tight of a barely corne. Phi. S. Leo saith, eo de ieiunio 7. mensis ser∣mo. 6. You ought so to communicate at the sacred table that you doubt nothing of the trueth of the bodie and blood of christ. Hoc enim ore sumitur, quod fide creditur & frustra ab illis Amen respondetur, à qui∣bus contra id quod accipitur disputatur. For Leoes wordes examined. that is receiued with the mouth which is beleeued by our faith, and in vaine doe they answer Amen, which dispute against the thing that themselues receiue. O noble Lion, and such as all the heretikes in Europe will neuer encounter. Theo. You speake like a Li∣on, but the spite is your eares are too long to be taken for a beast of that metal. You foolishly peruert the meaning of Leo: and if you did but vnderstand the right course of his reason, you would suppresse both his voice and your vaunt for verie shame. Phi. He that will trust your sayings, shall haue manie false fiers, when he should not. Theo. And he that will credit your doings shall feele manie quick flames, when he would not. Phi. You be better at quipping, than at answe∣ring. Theo. You are lothe we should encroch on your common. But re∣turne to Leo. Can you tell against whome he wrote? Phi. Against such as you are, that denied the trueth of Christes bodie and blood in the Sacrament. Theo. Were they men without names, or names without men? Phi. Mock not: they were But Euti∣ches against whome Leo spake, imagi∣ned that Christes body had neither shape, quanti∣tie nor cir∣cumscription, and so doe the Iesuites dreame of Christ in the Sacrament. If Leo refel Eutiches, he must also refel the Iesuits, for they spoile Christ of the naturall con∣ditions of a bodie as Eu∣tiches did. your auncetours. Theo. They say it is a wise childe that knoweth his owne father. Doe you? But in sadnes whome did Leo traduce in that sermon? Phil. Mary Eutiches and such like heretikes. Theoph. You saie well: for Leo nameth him but a litle before in that sermon, and against his opinion he reasoneth. Philand. I am content with that. Theoph. What was his error? Phi. He denied the trueth of Christes bodie and blood in the Sacrament. Theo. Who told you so? Phi. I gather it by those that refute him. Theo. By them you shall learne his error: but this it was not. Philan. What was it, say you? Theo. Eutiches affirmed that Christes humane nature and substance was not onely glorified by his ascension, but consumed and turned into the nature & immensitie of his Godhead. Against him wrate Theodorete, Gelasius, and others: and one of the cheefest argumentes which they bring against him, is that which Leo here toucheth in a woorde or two. Phi. That argument cleane confoundeth your sacramentarie Sect. Theo. Yours or ours it must needes
confound:By this argu∣ment it is eui∣dent in what sense Theo∣doret & Gela∣sius vse the word substāce when they saie the sub∣stance of bread remai∣neth. The Iesuites reiect the ma∣ior, minor, & conclusion of the auncient fathers a∣gainst Eui∣ches: be they not then quarter ma∣sters in his shippe? Gelas. contra Eutich. for this it is. As the bread and wine after consecration are chan∣ged and altered into the bodie and bloud of Christ, so is the humane nature of Christ conuerted into his diuine after his resurrection & ascension: but the bread and wine are not changed neither in substance, nor forme, nor figure, nor natu∣rall proprieties, but only in grace and working: ergo Christs humane nature is not changed into his diuine EITHER IN SVBSTANCE, circumscrip∣tion, or forme, but only endewed with glory and immortalitie. Phi. This is no Catholike reason, but sauoreth altogether of your hereti∣call poison. Theo. They which first framed and vrged this reason against Eutiches, in your opinion were they heretikes? Phi. No father euer vsed it. Theo. If they did, must not they be doubbed for heretikes as the first proposers of that reason, or at least you for affirming now the quite contrarie? For you reiect both their assumption & conclusion against Eutiches as starke false, and whose ancetour then is Eutiches but yours? Phi. They do not vse it, as you report it. Theo. Looke you offspring of Eutiches, whether Gelasius, Theo∣doret and Augustine do not vrge it in those verie pointes and wordes which I repeate. Thus Gelasius framed his reason against Eutiches. An image or simili∣tude of the bodie and bloud of Christ, is celebrated in the action of the my∣steries. It is therefore apparant and euident enough, that we must holde the same opinion of Christ the Lord, which we professe, celebrate and re∣ceiue in his image: That as those (signes) by the working of the holy Ghost passe into the diuine substance, and yet remaine in the proprietie of their owne nature: Euen so that verie principall mysterie it selfe, (whose force & truth (that Image) assuredly representeth) doth demonstrate one whole and true Christ,If Christ con∣sist of two sub∣stances di∣uine and hu∣mane, the sa∣crament like∣wise cōsisteth of two substā∣ces an hea∣uenlie and an earthly. Theod. dialog. 2. to continue the (two natures) of which he consisteth, properlie remaining. And lest you should not vnderstand what he ment by this, The signes still abide in the proprietie of their owne nature: he expoundeth him∣selfe an saith, Non desinit esse substantia vel natura panis & vini. The substance or nature of bread and wine ceaseth not, or perisheth not. When Theodoret had made an entrance to the very same reason by laying this foundation, Oportet archetypum Imaginis esse exemplar: the Originall must be answerable to the Image: the heretike caught the words out of his mouth and said: It hapned in good time, that you did mention the diuine mysteries: for euen thereby will I prooue the Lordes bodie to be chaunged into an o∣ther nature. As then the signes of the Lordes bodie and blood are other thinges before the inuocation of the Priest, but after they are chaunged and become other (than that they were:) so the Lords bodie after his assumption is chaunged into his diuine substance.If the sacra∣ment be trās∣substantiated, so must the humanitie of Christ be likewise changed▪ The maior being good, & such as Gelasius and Theoderet did both auouch; that as the signes were changed after consecration, so was Christes humanitie after his assumption: if your opinion had then beene taught in the church that the substance of bread and wine were changed by consecration, the conclusion
had beene infallible for Eutiches error, that the substance of Christes humanitie had beene changed by his ascention into his diuinitie: and not only both these Fathers had had their mouthes stopped, but Eutiches error had beene inol∣ble, as beeing grounded on a Maior that was a confessed and famous trueth, and on a Minor that was (as you thinke, the vndoubted saith of the Church. Mary the Minor in deed was apparantly false, though you now defend it for Catholike Doctrine, and with the plaine deniall of that as a manifest vntrueth, Theodoret inferreth the contrarye:Theodorets conclusion against Eu∣tches. that because neither the Substance, nor naturall proprieties of the bread and wine are chaunged by consecration, as the whole Church then beleeued and confessed: therefore neither the sub∣stance, nor shape, nor circumscription of Chrises humane nature were changed by his ascention: but his body remaineth in the ame substance, quantitie, and forme, that he rose from death, and ascended vp withall: and with the very same forme and substance of flesh shall come to iudge the worlde. These are his wordes. Theod. dial. 2. If Christs hu∣mane nature in heauē keep his former sub¦stance: so doth the bread which is an Image of that mystery. Both their Se¦minaries can∣not answre this agumēt but by con∣demning Ge∣lasus and Theodoret fo hereikes or at least themselues.Thou art caught (saith Theodoret to the heretike) with the same nets that thou laiedst for others. The mysticall signes after sanctification doe not depart from their own nature. For they remanie in their former substance, and figure, and forme &c. Conferre then the Image with the originall and thou shalt see the likenes (betweene them). For the figure must be like to the trueth. That body (therefore of christ in heauen) hath his former shape and figure & circumscription, & to speake al at once, (his former) substance. Lay all your heades together: ad graunting the Maior (which the whole Church held) auoide the conclusion of Eutiches withut the denying the Minor as Theodoret did, (which yet is your faith and beleefe at this day) and we wil grant you to be Catholiks and our selues heretikes: If you cannot, see how far you be fallē from the doctrine of Christs church, and that in no lesse point than the greatest and chiees Sacrament, on which you haue wickedly founded your adoration, oblation, halfe communion, priuate masse and barbarous pray∣ers, without example, without warrant of God or man. Phi. Theodoret hath set you vppe in your Ruffe, but I would you knew it: in this case we care neither for Theodoret, nor you: if that were his opinion, as it is yours. Theo. And who hath put you into your ruffe: that you not on∣ly despise that learned and auncient Bishoppe, but the whole Church in him, which then so beleeued, and you cannot auoide at this day, except you will bee Eutichians? Phi. The Maior is not altogether so sund as you thinke it. Theo. Yet did Gelasius and Theodoret confound that error with that comparison:De consecrat. distinct. 2. & hoc est quod dico. and S. Augustine long before thm did vrge the same. This is it that wee say, this is it that by all meanes we labour to confirme, (to witte) that the Sa∣crifice of the Church consisteth of two things: the visible kinde of ele∣mentes, and the inuisible flesh and bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ: the Sa∣crament, and the thing of the SACRAMENT: euen as the person
of Christ consisteth of God and man;Ther must be two diffe∣rent substan∣cs in the Sa∣crament as there are in the peson of Christ. Leoes words wr inten∣ded against the Eutichi∣ans. for so much as euery thing containeth the nature and trueth of those things of which it consisteth. By which rule it is certaine there mus be in the sacrament the nature, truth and substance of bread and wine, euen as in Christes person either nature hath his trueth and substance, without confusion or distraction. Phi. We haue fathers to the contrary, if the time did serue to produce them, as anon I will: In the meane while what is this to Leo? Theophil. Leo in few words abbridgeth the sum of this reason: and saith the followers of Euti∣ches doe in vaine with their mouthes recene the Sacrament, since with their hartes they doe not beleeue the tueth of Christs humane nature: and answer Amē to no purpose, so long as they dispute against that, which they would sem to enioye by receiuing the seale and pledge thereof in the church with others. Phi. This is your Commentarie besdes the text: his wordes are, The selfe same (bodie) which wee beleeue with faith,Hoc: doth not signifie the selfe same bodie, but the selfesame pointe of aith, or pro∣potion of the image and the original. is receiued with mouth. Which you cannot interprete to be mant of the bread. For the breade is not beleeued with hart: and against the trueth of Christs bodie, not against the bread did the followers of Eutiches dispute. Theo. Doth Leo aie the sel same (bodie)? Phi. He saith Hoc ore sumitur quod fide creditur: that is receiued with the mouth, which with (our) faith is beleeued, and that cannot be the bread. The. Much lesse maie it be the natural bodie of Christ. For then Leo had migh∣tilie confirmed, & not confuted Eutiches opinion. His error was that the huma∣nitie of christ after his ascension was swallowed vp of his diuinitie, and so chan∣ged that it was now no naturall bodie. Against this if Leo should haue opposd your reall presence in the Sacrament where Christs body is without quantity,The real pre∣sence had beene the next way to help Euti∣ches error. shape, circumscription, distinction of partes and all other conditions of a natu∣rall body: he had beene a Proctour or Eutiches impiety, not a confuter of it. Neither could Eutiches himslfe haue wished a better defence for his heresie than the confesson f such a bode as you imagine in the sacrament, and therfore you hak that HOC ilfauouredly, when you make Leo rather a consenter with Eutiches, than a disprouer of him, with your fantasticall presence: which is an approbation and no refutation of Eutiches error. Phil. What a slander this is, that the reall presence should be a refuge for Eutichs error? Theoph. Such a slaunder as with all your cunning you shall neuer wipe awaie. Phi. Doe we not affirme the The substāce of it you affirme in wordes, but you spoile t of all naturall shape, quan∣titie, and cir∣cumscription. substance of Chrises hu∣mane flesh to be in the Sacrament? The. Such a substance, as Eutiches him selfe imagined, hauing neither proportion of shape, nor position of parts, nor re∣pletion of place, nor anie condition incident to a naturall bodie: but the godly fathers were farre from vrging such a substance against Eutiches. They pres∣sed him with the bodilie shape, circumscription, extension, and perfeion of Christes flesh, as well in all other requisites as in substance: and to prooue this amongst other arguments, they brought, as I haue shewed, the Sacra∣ment for a resemblance and demonstrance of both natures in Chris: that as the bread after consecration keepeth his quantity, quality, shape and substance, not∣withstanding
it be vnited, and annexed to the heauenly grace, that worketh in the sacrament: so the bodie of Christ after his assumption retaineth his former perfection, proportion, figure and substance, loosing no poin nor part of his humane nature, but only replenished with immortall glorie. Christs bodie in the Sacra∣ment is euen such a bodie as Eutiches did imagine. Leo doth not saie that Christs bodie was enclosed in the host: but they ought to be∣leeue that of Christs bodie in heauen, which they saw in the ele∣ments recei∣ued with their mouthe, to wit, the per∣fect continu∣ance of their former sub∣stance. We doe not interpret the fathers as pleaseth vs, but we take heede that we subuert not their maine do∣ctrine by some of their phrases which by their owne rules maie be reuoked to a good sense.This must be Leoes Hoc, if he will do any good with alleaging the Sacra∣ment against Eutiches, as I haue proued by Austen, Gelasius and Theodoret: Otherwise if he do but mention your real presence he openeth the gappe and le∣uelleth the way to Eutiches furie, and runneth headlong against the rest of his fellow seruants and successours, that vsed the same argument to confute Eui∣ches with a manifest contradiction of your reall presence. Phi. I bring you Leoes wordes. Theo. Leoes wordes haue nothing in them to crosse that sense which I establish. Hoc signifieth any thing, and hath no relation to Christes flesh in the sacrament: but to the proportion rather betweene Christ & the sacrament: in that they beleeued no other thing of Christ than they saw with their eyes, & receiued with their mouths in the Sacrament; to wit, the perfect shape & substance of bread after Consecration: & consequently they must holde the same opinion of Christs humanitie after his ascension. Phi. If you vse this trade: you may peruert all the fathers writings, and make what sense you list to their sayings. Theo. Peruert them no more than we doe, and you shall neuer euert the maine doctrine as you haue doone. We measure heir wordes by their owne warrant, and suffer nt a phrase here and there, which may bee well reuoked to their rules, to vndermine the chiefe groudes of their faith. Phi. No more doe we. Theo. Why then rage you, to heare v say, that these few places, which you haue brought for eating christs bodie with your mouthes and iawes, may be referred to the signes called by those names, as well as to the things themselues? Phi. You take vpon you to bee Iudges and to pronounce at your pleasures, when the words shall belong to the one, and when to the other: so that no father shall say any thing against your heresie, but yet will by and by turne it and wind it I knowe not whither. Theo. Nothing more hindereth the search for trueth than a desire to lye. We shew you the general admonition of the fathers themselues, that after con∣secration they call the visible signes no longer by their woonted names, but by the names of those things whose signes they are, and whose vertues they haue. This Rule we say is then to take place, when the speach which we find in a fa∣ther, if it should be referred to the things themselues, would be both absurd, and repugnant to the rest of his Doctrine and to himselfe in other places. This is not to turne the fathers whither we will, but to take heede we fall not into the pitte, which they If this be not lawfull in expounding the fathers, I maruell what is. warne vs to auoide. Phi. If you would neuer vse that rule but in that case, you were not so much to be blamed: marie your pretences bee verie faire when your perfourmances be farre vnlike. Theo. Doe you lacke eyes to see, or tongues to speake when we tread awrie? Phi. Trust to it: wee doe not. The. We would not you should. Our dealing in Religion must be such
as not only you may not spr, but God may nor disike. Phi. Ths shng and  of Fathers, neither God nor man can like. Theo. A lower saie were er or your smll bottm:  you gathr so much wind and weather that yo can neuer gt o shore. Phi. ou speake pa∣rables. Theo. can  nerprete. The niy o your  o your harts is such, that you can not soely discusse and  any Phi. Who can e aent, and see so much  ply ered? Theo. to tke wg, whsoeur you be to offer . Phi. s ? The. You must tl vs what, before we can redrss it. Phi. I alleaged six Fathers to proue, that the flsh of Chrs is eaten in the sacament corporally with our mouthe. You come in with a new trick of Trenhmore, & tel vs they spa of the signes caled by tose names after consecration, not of he things theselues. Theo. Is this such wrong? Phi. I promise you it You are an∣gry because the fathers doe not serue your follies no better. moueth me to the very hart to see you so delude them. Theo. I blame you not. You thought you had some great hold in the Fathers for your corporal eating of Christ with your teeth: and I remember you would burn all to your shirt if euer they were answered:It cannot be now mista∣ig they have so often beene tolde of thir error, & they still deferd it as they did before. and now the wight of them is seene, they are but grsse mystakinges, if not peruertinges of the Fathers: and you must seeke for an other pedegree. Your real coueing of Christ with the shewes of bread and wine, and corporall eating him with your teeth hath no de∣duction from he ancient Fathers. Phi. If you may be suffered to gloze them, as you doe. Theophil. Howe often must I tell you, it is their owne gloze, and not mine? Philand. The rule is theirs, but why doe you applie it to these places? Theo. I haue tolde you that also, because they shoulde otherwise contradict both themselues, and others.Vide supra fol. 760. This is spoken of the thinges thēslues: ergo the Iesuits places must be ment of th signes cal∣led by he names of Chrsts bodie and blood, r ele there is a manist contradiction in the fathers Wee we not wisely occupi∣ed to followe the Iesuits in this point Phil. Contradict? why? Teophil. The selfe same Fathers aouch, that the fleshe of Christ entereth not the bodie, is not bitten with teeth, filleth not the bellie: they say it is not pietie to eate him with teeth: wee must not prepare teeth, iawes, or bellies for him: your owne awe sayeth: hee descendeth not into the stomacke, and the West church for 800. yeares confssed that Christ is not corporally ta∣ken of vs, not chamme with teeth, not swallowed with iawes, not clo∣sed in the compasse of the belle, our Sauiour himselfe decideth that nothing can enter both the heart and the bellie: and that the fleshe of Chrst ente∣rth the heart, and feedeth the soule, he cn be no christian that doubteth. This apparent negatiue not wthstanding, when they sometimes, treaing of other mtters, happen to say, Our mouth receiueth the body of Christ: the substance of our flesh is increased and consisteth o his bodie and blood: you would haue vs interprete these sayings of the very same things whch they de∣nied to passe that way, and not of the signes, which in the perpetuall vse of speech amongest all Diuines after consecration were called by thse names and none other: & leauing their own direction which they giue vs, to charge them with a flat contradiction, and hayous assertion as themselues agise: if the
letter bee vrged, and the speech not mollified with a spiritual and mysticall ex∣position. Phi. Nay Sir, wee doe not say, that the substaunce of our fleshe is in∣creased or consisteth of Christes bodie and blood: that were a wicked as∣sertion in deede, the body of Christ is glorious and impassible: and not reallie mixed with our flesh, much lesse conuerted into the substaunce of our bodies: as that speech importeth. Theo. But yet the Fathers that affirme the one, af∣firme the other, and certaine it is that nourishing is the principall ende of ea∣ting:Eating is in vaine without nourishing. If then Christes flesh doe en∣ter our mouthes it must nourish our bodies. so that eating the flesh of Christ is vtterly superfluous, if wee bee not therby norished. Phi. Our souls are norished, not our bodies, with that heauenly food. Theo. Then must our souls eate it, & not our bodies. Phi. Our bodies eat it, that our soules may be nourished by it. Theo. Eating, digesting and nourish∣ing be consequent and coherent actions: and therefore they must all three be ei∣ther corporall, or spirituall. If the soule be nourished, the soule must eate, & digest that which is eaten. If the body eat, the body must digest and be norished by that food. Phi. Would We would not haue it so: but if you vn∣derstand the fathers when they say the one, why doe you peruert them in the other? you haue our bodies norished & substantially increased with the flesh of Christ? Theop. The Fathers I say auouch the one, as well as the other: If then you can expounde the one, why doe you peruert the other? Phi. What doe they auouch? Theophil. That the substance of our flesh is in∣creased, and consisteth of the bodie and blood of Christ. Philand. Proue that. By your leaue I thinke you vse multiplication with the Fa∣thers. Theop. Then when I produce them, I trust you will come foorth with your diuision. Philand. Let mee heare them. Theophil. You shall. Iustinus, Iust. Apol. 2. . The foode sanctified, (of which our blood & flesh are nourished by conuersion) we are taught to be the flesh & blood of that Iesus which took our flesh on him. Ireneus, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34. Quomodo dcunt carnem in corruptionem deuenire, & non percipere vitam, quae à cortore Domini & sanguine alitur? How say they that our flesh shall perish and not be partaker of life, since it is nourished of the verie bodie and blood of our Lord? And again, Idem lib. 5. Fit Eucharistia corporis & sanguinis Christi, ex quibus angetur & cosistt carnis nostrae substantia. There is made the Eucharist of the bodie and blood of Christ: of which the substaunce of our fleshe is increased, and consi∣steth. And therefore hee concludeth: Ibidem. Quomodo negart carnem capcem esse donationis Dei, qui est vita aeterna, quae corpore & sanguine Christi tritur. How doe they deny our flesh to bee capable of the gift of God who is eter∣nal life, since it is So Cyprian saith, panis in carnem & san∣guine muta∣tus  vitam & incre∣entum corpo∣ri. noshed of the body & blood of Christ. And after so Chry∣sostome. Phi. Repeate no more. If I beleeue not this: that which cōmeth after, what∣soeuer it be, will not preuaile. Theo. How think you? must this be referred to the naturall & true body & blood of Christ, or else to the signes bearing those names
when once they bee sanctified? Philand. No doubt to the fignes. Theop. And were it not open madnesse to auouch it to bee really true of the thinges themselues whose signes those are? Philand. It were. Theophil. Why then, since corporall eating serueth only for corporall nourishing,A man would thinke this were plaine enough for farre yonger scholers, than the Iesuites would seeme to be. and hath a continuall and naturall coherence with it, doe you confesse the trueth in the later, and not as well in the former part of that action? why doe you not ex∣pound them both alike? Philand. To say the immortall fleshe of Christ is conuerted and turned into the quantitie and substaunce of our mortall flesh, is an horrible heresie. Theophil. And so say that his fleshe is eaten with our mouthes and awes, & lth in our stomacks, is the verie pathway & right in∣troduction to that heresie, or at least to as brutish and grosse an erour as that is. Philand. The Fathers affirme that his body is eaten with our mouthes. Theophil. And so they affirme,Our resurre∣ction doth not depend vpon the tou∣ching of Christes flesh with teeth, for then the wicked should ise to eternal life. Concil. Nicen. 1. that his bodie and blood doe increase and augment the substaunce of our mortall and sinnefull bodies. Phi∣land. But that can not bee. Theophil. No more can the other. Philand. Howe shall our bodies rise at the last day, if Christes body bee not in them? Theophil. Our resurrection dependeth not on the act of eating his flesh, but of nourishing our fleshe with his, as Ireneus telleth vs: and the thinges which wee eate, are not the causes, but as the great Nicene councell admonisheth, the pledges of our resurrection: Their words be : we must beleeue, these to bee the signes or pledges of our resurrection. Philand. S. Chrysostom earnestly inforceth the eating of Christs flesh. And sayth wee doe not onely eate it, but euen Hom. 45. in Iohannem. * fasten our teeth in his fleshe. Theo. In deede hee saith so, but if you did not auert both your eyes, and eares from the trueth, you would perceiue by that verie sentence, both the maner of his & other Fathers speeches of that Sacrament, and the right intent of their Do∣ctrine in those cases. His wordes are, Chrysost. hom. 45. in Iohan. As Christ is seene & tou∣ched, so is he eaten and di∣gested. Both these speaches: the flesh of Christ entereth our mouthes, and increaseth the substance o our flesh, haue oe and the selesame construction. Non se tantum videri permittens: deside∣rantibus, sed & tangi, & manducari, & dentes carni suae infigi, & desiderio sui om∣nes impleri. Christ suffering himselfe not only to bee seene of those that are desirous, but to bee touched, and eaten, and our teeth to bee fastned in his flesh, and all to be satisfied of their longing after him? Phi. Lord, me thinketh these words be verie plain words. He suffereth our teeth to bee fastned in his fleshe▪ Theo. Uerie plaine they bee, but very false also, vnlesse you either take the flesh of Christ for the signe called by that name: or else referre teeth, and biting to the soule and faith of the ward man a wel as you do the eyes & hands wherewith we see him & touch him. Phi. Look what an sion you haue since gotten. Theo. Nay looke what a subuersion of all truth and saith you be since fallen to. Phi. Doth not this Father say, wee fasten our teeth in his flesh? Theo. Doeth hee not also say, We see him with our eyes & touch him with our handes? Phi. That is referred to our faith: as S. Ambrose teacheth. Ambros. in 9. Lucae li. 6. § &  vir cui nomen Iairus. Fide Christus videtur, side Christus tangitur. By faith
Christ is seene, by fayth Christ is touched. Theoph. And why shall not the next (which is more vnlikely to bee true,) bee referred to faith as well as the former? Sainct Ambrose likewise saying,Idem in pre∣cati. praeparāt. ad Mssa. Comedat te cor meū: panis sancte, panis viue, panis munde, veni in cor meum, intra in animam meam. Let mine heart eate thee: O holy bread, O liuing bread, O pure-bread, come into my heart, enter into my soule; and Cyprian calling it Cypr. de caena Domini. the proper no∣rishment of the spirite: besides infinite others that for a thowsande yeares taught that doctrine in the church of God & not your gutturall eating of Christ with teeth and iawes. Phi. That eating of Christ in the Sacramēt which wee teach the Church helde for a 1000. yeares: theirs is not yet a∣greed on a∣mongst them∣selues. What man∣ner of eating Christ in the Sacrament the fathers taught.Was your maner of eating Christes fleshe which you defende in the sa∣crament, taught in the church for a thowsande yeares? Theop. Euen ours was: and when yours came first to be proposed, your schoolemen ran euery man his way, fighting and scratching one an other ho should fal fastest and farthest from the truth. Philand. Blush you not to auouch two such monsterous lies? Theop. A lyar will easily suspect any man, as knowing him-selfe to delight in lies: but GOD bee thanked, that lyes with you bee truethes with vs, and with all that haue any knowlegde of GOD or care of his truth. The things which I affirmed be manifest truethes, and such as you will blush at for verie shame, if you be not sworne to your holie Fa∣ther against Christ, as well as you bee against your Prince. Origen commenting vppon these wordes of the Supper, this is my bo∣die, this is my blood: Origen. tract. 35. in 26. Mat. this breade, sayeth hee, (which Christ) confes∣seth to bee his bodie, is the worde that nourisheth our soules: and this drinke which hee confesseth to bee his blood, is the worde that moy∣steneth and passinglie cheereth the heartes of such as drinke it. Thou which art come vnto Christ, Idem in Leuit. hom 9. sticke not in the blood of (his) fleshe, but rather learne the blood of (his) worde, and heare him saying to thee, this is my blood, which shall bee shedde for the remission of your sinnes. Idem tract. 35. in 26. Mat. Hee that is partaker of the mysteries knoweth the flesh and blood of the worde of God. For the bread is the word of righ∣teousnesse, which our soules eating are nourished with: and the drink is the worde of the knowledge of Christ according to the mysterie of his birth and death. The blood of the Testament is poured into our heartes for the remission of (our) sinnes. Athanasius, Athana. in il∣lud quicunque dixerit verbū. Howe fewe men woulde his bodie haue sufficed, that this shoulde bee the foode of the whole worlde? Yea therefore doeth bee warne them of his as∣cension into heauen that he might drawe him from thinking on his bodie, and they thereby learne, that the flesh, which he spake of, was celestiall meate from aboue, and spirituall nourishment to bee giuen by him. The (wordes) which I spake to you are spirite and life, which is as much as if hee had sayde: this (bodie) which is in your sight and dely∣uered (to death) for the worlde, shall bee giuen you for meate, that
it may bee Not corpo∣rally lodged in the sto∣macks, but spiritually di∣stributed to your soules. spiritually distributed in euery one of you, and be an assuraunce and preseruatiue to raise you to eternall life. Cyprian writing of the Lordes Supper, Cypr. de caena Domini. This nourish∣ment is pro∣per to the spi∣rit, ergo not common to the bodie. Eating and drinking, saieth hee, bee referred to the one and same end: with the which, as the substance of our bodies is increased and preserued, so the life of the spirite is maintained with his proper nourish∣ment. What foode is to the fleshe, that faith is to the soule: what meate is to the body, that the worde is to the spirite, working euerlastingly with a more excellent vertue that which bodily meates doe for a time and vn∣till a season. Ambrose approaching to the sacred communion which you intitle a prayer preparing to Masse, amongest other thinges speaketh thus to Christ himselfe. Ambros. in o∣ratio. praeparan. ad Missam 1. How hapned S. Ambrose had quite for∣gotten his mouth and his iawes in all this long praier before his approch∣ing to the my∣steries? Thou Lord saydst with thine holy and blessed mouth, the bread which I will giue, is my fleshe (giuen) for the life of the world. Hee that eateth mee, shall liue through mee, hee abideth in mee, and I in him. I am the liuing bread which came downe from heauen, if any man eate of this bread hee shall liue for euer. Most delightful bread heale thou the tast of my heart, that I may feele the sweetenesse of thy loue. Let mine heart eate thee, and with thy present relesse let the bowels of my soule bee replenished. Angels eate thee with full mouth, let man that is a pilgrime (on earth) eate thee as his weakenesse will suffer him, that hee faint not in the way, hauing this prouision for his iourney. Holy bread, liuing bread, beautifull bread which camest from heauen and giuest life to the worlde, come into my heart, and clense mee from all filth of flesh and spirit. En∣ter into my soule, heale and sanctifie me within and without. No man earnester in this point than S. AustenAug. in psal. 103. This visible bread confir∣meth the stomack, confirmeth the bellie. There is an other bread which con¦firmeth the hart, because it is the bread of the hart. There is a wine that doth rightly cheere the hart & can do nothing but cheere the hart.Not the sto∣mack nor the bellie. Therfore vn∣derstand so of the bread, as thou doest of the wine, inwardly hūger, inwardly thirst: blessed are they which hunger & thirst after righteousnes, for they shal be satisfied. That breade is righteousnes: that wine is righteousnesse, is trueth: and Christ is the trueth. I am saieth hee the liuing bread which came from heauen: and, I am the vine, you are but braunches. Idem. tract. 26. in Iohan. To beleeue in him, this is to eate the liuing bread, hee that beleeueth ea∣teth. Man is inuisibly fedde, because hee is inuisibly regenerated. He is inwardly (in soule) a babe, inwardly (in minde) renewed. (Looke) in The bodie is not regenera∣ted: the body therefore is not fed with the true flesh of Christ.what part man is newe borne, in that part is hee fedde. The (vnbeleeuing) Iewes were farre from this heauenly breade, neither knewe they howe to hunger for it: the iawes of their hearts were dull, and this bread requireth the hunger of the inward man. Take heed brethren: eate you this heauenly bread spiritually, bring innocencie to the altar. Idem. in serm. de corp. & sa∣guine Domini. Citur à Beda in 1. Cor ca. 10. Eate life, and drinke life. For then is the bodie and blood of the Lord life to each man, when that which is visiblie taken in the Sacrament, is in very trueth spiritually eaten, spiritually drunken, Ast. in serm. de verbis E∣uangelij. Cita∣tur à Beda ibidem. When Christ is eaten, life is eaten; neither when wee
eate him, doe wee make peeces of him. In deede in the Sacrament it is so: and the faithfull knowe howe they eate the fleshe of Christ: euerie man taketh his peece. Wherefore grace it selfe is termed peeces. Christ is eaten by peeces in the sacrament, and yet hee remaineth whole in hea∣uen, hee remayneth whole in thine heart. Idem in E∣uang. Luc. serm. 33. Prouide not your iawes, but your heart. Thence is this Supper commended. Beholde wee be∣leeue in Christ, wee receiue him with our fayth. In taking wee know what wee should thinke: wee take him but a litle, and our heart is re∣plenished. Macarius, Macar. ho. 27. In the church is offered breade and wine the samplar of his body and blood, and they which are partakers of the vi∣sible breade, doe spiritually eate the Lordes fleshe. Emissenus, Euseb. Emisse∣nus. de cons. dist. 2. ¶ quia cor∣pus. When thou goest vppe to the reuerende Altar to bee filled with spirituall meats, by fayth beholde, honour and wonder at the sacred bodie and bloode of thy God: touch it with thy mynde: take it with the Not with the hand of thy bodie. hand of thyne heart, and chiefely prouide that the What shall the mouth haue, if the inward man must swallowe the whole? inwarde manne swallowe the whole. This Doctrine continued eight hundreth yeares after Christ. Bertram then liuing is witnesse sufficient. Bertram. de corpor. & sang. Domini.The bodie and blood of Christ, if thou consider the outward appearance, is a Not acci∣dents without a subiect. creature subiect to mutation and corruption: but if thou waigh the vertue of the mysterie, it is life per∣forming immortalitie to those that receiue it. Ibidem. As touching the visible crea∣ture (the mysteries) feed the body, but by the vertue of a mightier substance, they feede & sanctify the soules of the faithful. Ibidem. What we should eat & what we should drinke the holy Ghost expresseth by the Prophet. Tast and see howe sweete the Lord is. Doeth that breade corporally tasted, or that wine sipped, shewe howe sweete the Lorde is? whatsoeuer tast that hath, it is corporall and pleaseth the iawes. Hee doeth therefore inuite vs to vse the relesse of our spirituall tast, & in that breade and drinke to dreame of no corporall thing, but to conceiue all to bee spirituall. Ibidem. This meate confirmeth our heart, and this drinke cheereth the heart of man, sayeth the Prophet. By the which it is euident, that nothing in this meate, no∣thing in this drinke must bee corporally taken, but the whole spiritual∣lie considered. For the soule which is ment by mans heart in this place, is not fedde with corporall meate or drinke: but is refreshed and nourished with the worde of God. Ibidem. Faith beleeueth that, which is not seene: and spiritually feedeeth the soule, and cheereth the heart, and giueth eter∣nall life, whiles wee marke, not that which feedeth the bodie, The flesh of Christ then is neither pres∣sed with teeth nor broken in peeces. not that which is pressed with teeth, not that which is brused in peeces: but that which is spiritually taken with faith. Ibidem. For this is a spirituall foode, and a spirituall drinke, spiritually feeding the soule. Paschasius commeth after Bertram in age, but ioyneth with him in the same confession of trueth. Paschas. de corp. & sang. Domini. ca. 9. The diuine mysteries our inwarde man recei∣ueth through the grace of Christ with vnderstanding, and by them is hee
made one bodie with Christ through the power of faith. Cap. 11. The fleshe and blood of Christ, because they bee thinges spirituall, are fullie receiued by fayth and vnderstanding. Cap. 12. It is not lawfull to eate Christ with teeth. Cap. 14.Christ is the meate of Angels, and this Sacrament is truely his fleshe, and his blood, which (fleshe and blood) man eateth and drinketh spirituallie. And so by Doe the An∣gels eat flesh? or haue they teeth? what food the Angels liue, by that also man liueth: because in this that man receiueth, all is diuine and spirituall. Wee drinke spiri∣tually, and wee eate the spirituall flesh of Christ in which is beleeued to bee eternall life. Cap. 29. All that wee eate is spirituall. Cap. 38. The power of faith and vnderstanding, which doubteth nothing of Christ, doeth tast, and re∣lesse the whole spiritually. Cap 19. Otherwise but for faith and vnderstanding, what finde they, which tast these thinges, besides breade and wine? Cap. 46. The visible quantitie must not bee esteemed in this mysterie, but the power of the spirituall Sacrament. Wee must not respect howe much (of the quantitie) is pressed with our teeth, but how much is receiued through faith and loue. Therefore my sonne when thou commest to the participation of this mysterie, Not the wide∣nes of thy mouth to re∣ceiue Christ, but the bo∣some of thy soul, that is thy saith. OPEN THE BOSOM OF THY MINDE, cleanse thy conscience, and receiue thou not what a morsell con∣taineth, but AS MVCH AS THY FAITH APPREHENDETH. Fulbertus a thousand yeres after Christ treadeth the same path.Fulbertus in epist. ad Adeo∣datum. That which appeared outwardly to be the substance of breade and wine is nowe made the bodie and blood of Christ That is not by local inclu∣sion, but by mysticall ope∣ration. inwardly. Tast therefore, and see howe sweete the meate is, but learne before what manner of tast it hath. It bea∣reth the tast of Angels foode, hauing in it a mysticall and pleasaunt re∣lesse, which thou canst not discerne with thy mouth, but mayest vn∣derstande with thine inwarde affection. Holde readie the This is the mouth that receiueth Christ: & not the bodily mouth as the Iesuits hold. mouth of thy fayth, open the iawes of hope, stretch out the bowels of loue, and take the breade of life (which is) the nourishment of the inwarde man: Tast I saie the sweetenesse of this heauenly banquette, but lothe the smatche of the earthlie fruites. For from the faith of the inwarde man commeth the tasting of the diuine iuyce, whiles by the taking of the healthful Eucharist, CHRIST FLOWETH INTO THE BOWELS OF THE SOVLE OF THE RECEAVER, AND THE RELI∣GIOVS MINDE ADMITTETH HIM INTO HER CHAST AND INNERMOST ROOMES. There shall neede no long discourse to proue that these Catholike Fa∣thers teach in the Lordes Supper a spirituall kinde of eating the fleshe of Christ by faith and vnderstanding,The spirituall eating the fa∣thers taught: the corporall they did not teach. as wee doe: not a corporall with teeth and iawes, as you doe: The places bee manie, the wordes plaine: you can not shift them vnlesse you will desperatly take fleshe for spirite, bo∣die for soule, chamming for beleeuing, earth for heauen, yea a dumme and dead creature for the liuing and euerlasting sonne of God: which were not one∣ly sensible blindnesse, but in excusable madnes.
Phi. The spiritual eating wee doe not deny, but we Your adding that which you should not, is no war∣rant for vs to beleeue it. Iohn. 6. adde to that a corporall, because the soul may bee partaker of Christ by faith, notwithstanding the mouth receiue the very flesh of Christ vnder the formes of bread and wine. Theo. This is your onely refuge that is left: and this will not helpe you. For examine this answere a while, and you shall soone see the weakenesse of it. My flesh is true∣ly meate,Christ is not meate for both the parts of man: and that which is eaten is meate. saith Christ, and my blood is truely drinke. Hee that doubteth of this, we holde him accursed, you doe the like: thus farre we agree. Mary for what part of man, soule or bodie, this meate was prouided, in this we dissent. You say for the body, no lesse than for the soule: wee say for the soule, and not for the body. So saide Chrysostome before vs. This meate feedeth not the body, but the soule. So saide Ambrose.Chrys. homil. 43. in Iohan. It is no bodilie, but Ghostlie meate. So said Augustine: Prepare not your iawes, but your harts: thence is this super commended: so saide Cyprian, This is Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis, ca. 9. the proper nourishment of the spirit, and not common to the flesh. Now that which is eaten is meate. And therefore if Christ bee no meate for the bodie, but onely for the soule, as∣suredly Christ is not eaten of our bodies, but of soules only. Aug. de verbis Dom. in Lucam serm. 33.Next you confesse that the mortall and sinnefull bodies of men may not bee substantially nourished with the glorious and immortall flesh of Christ: and eating is altogither in vaine (euen of the flesh of Christ it selfe) without norish∣ing,Cypr. de Caena Domini. & al the fathers with one consent teach this to be the end of caring the fleshe of Christ,For what part christ is meat, that part he nourisheth: which the Ie∣suits dare not confesse to be true of the bodie. that we should be thereby norished to life eternal. Why then striue you for a corporal eating where your selues dare not defend any corporal norishing? Why distract you eating frō norishing, by referring them, one to the body, & the other to the soule, which the Fathers alwayes ioyned & applied to one & the self same part of man? Many mothers, saith Chrysost. deliuered their infants whē they are born to other norces: which he would not do, but norisheth vs with his own body. And in the same place where he saith, Chrys. hom. 83. in Mat. & 45. in Ioan. Ipsum vides, ipsum tangis, ipsum comedis, thou seest him, thou touchest him, thou eatest him: addeth, Ibidem. Ea nam{que} re nos alimur quam Angeli videntes tremunt. For we are nourished with that thing, which the Angels tremble when they behold. And so the rest of the Fathers call it not onely meate to eate,Chrysost. in Matt. hom. 83. but (Cypr. de cae 11 Domini. nutrimentum & I. dist. 2. d consec. ¶ In quibus] alimoniam) norishment & food, to keepe the receiuer in plight and good liking. So that that part of man doth not eat the fleshe of Christ, which is not norished with it: And since you dare not auouch that our bodies are really nourished with the flesh of Christ, why shoulde you hold that our mouthes do reallie eate him? Lastly with what one meate can you fit both the bodies and soules of men? That which entereth the body must bee locall and corporall.Athana in il∣lud quicunque dixerit verbū. That which feedeth the soule must bee spirituall and intellectuall. The soule hath no locall receites, nor corporall instrumentes for her kinde of eating, but onely faith and vnderstanding.Chrysos. in . 83. No one  the bode & the sol. So that if the fleshe of Christ in this mysterie bee materiall and locall, how canne it feede the soule? If it bee spirituall and intellectuall, howe can it bee chammed with teeth, or closed in the streites of the stomack? Local not local, corporal not corporal be plaine con∣tradictions,
and by no meanes incident to the naturall flesh of Christ. One it must needs be, both it cannot be: though you would sweate out your hearts with wrangling. And that Christ is not eaten with teeth or mouth,Iohn. 6. He that abi∣deth not in Christ doth not eate christ by the manifest re∣solution of Christ him∣selfe. Iohn. 6. the Ghospell in plaine wordes auoucheth with vs. Whosoeuer eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud hath eternall life: my flesh is meat indeed, my bloud is drinke in deed: hee that eateth my fleshe, and drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in me, and I in him, saith our Sauiour. The wicked liue not by Christ, neither abide in Christ, and therefore by the verie determination of the Lorde him-self, they neither eate his flesh, nor drinke his bloude. Runne nowe to your distinction of corporall and spirituall eating when you will, but so long as these wordes stand written in the Ghospell, he that eateth me, euen he shall liue by me: the Godly will soone conclude, that SVCH AS LIVE NOT BY CHRIST, DOE NOT EATE CHRIST:Such as liue not by Christ doe not eate Christ. and so that corporall eating of Christes flesh, which you would erect, common to the faithfull and faithlesse, to be no kind of eating at al, notwithstanding they receiue the materi∣all and external elementes of this mysterie. Phi. In spite of all your places and proofes,A sacramen∣tall eating hath in it both the cor∣porall eating of the signes with teeth, & the spirituall eating of Christ by faith. there is a Sacramentall eate∣ing of Christs flesh, with mouth and iawes, besides your spirituall eating it with faith and spirite: which you could not doe vnlesse it were really present: & therefore you doe not well to beguile the simple in this sort with refuting one trueth by an other, whereas the fathers confessed both. Theo. In spite of all your late deuises & euasions, the flesh of Christ is not truely eaten with Caper∣nites teeth or Iesuits iawes: neither do the fathers auouch any such thing, saue in that sense which I last declared, that the signes so called are eaten of the wic∣ked with their mouthes and throates: but of the flesh it selfe and bloud of Christ, they plainly affirme the contrarie. S. Augustine expounding the wordes of our sauiour, hee that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, remaineth in me and I in him: saith, Aug. de ciui. Dei. li. 21. c. 25. To eate christ in a sacramēt is not so much, as to eate him indeede. Ostendit quid sit non Sacramento tenus, sed reuera manducare corpus Christi, & eius sangui∣nem bibere. (The Lord) sheweth what it is to eate the flesh of christ & drinke his bloud: not by way of a sacrament, but in deede. As if he had said, hee that remaineth not in me, and in whom I doe not (likewise) remaine, let him neuer say nor thinke that he eateth my flesh or drinketh my bloud. That which here he calleth Sacramento tènus, before in the same Chapter hee called solo Sacramento: opposing against it, reuera mānducare, & prouing that neither heretikes, nor wicked Christians do in deede eate the bodie of Christ, but only the Sacrament, that is the sacred signe of his bodie. Ibidem. They rightly vnderstand that he must not be said to eate the bodie of christ, which is not in the body of christ: as heretikes be not, and of wicked liuers, though they keepe in the Church, he saith, Ibidem. Nec isti dicendi sunt manducare corpus Christi quia nec in membris computandi sunt Christi. Neither are these (that liue wickedly) to bee saide to eate the bodie of christ, since they must not be counted the mem∣bers
of Christ. Phi. Not spiritually but Sacramentally they do eate the bo∣die of Christ, though they be wicked: and so Sainct Augustine teacheth. Theo. Keepe the wordes and sense which S. Augustine hath, & you shall be free from this error, which now you are in. Augu.  Io∣an. tract. 26. The sacranē∣tali eating of Christ is the eating of the sacred signe wherby he is figured. He that remaineth not in Christ, and in whom Christ abideth not, without all doubt doth not spiritually eate his fleshe, nor drinke his bloud, though carnally and visibly he presse with his teeth the Sacrament of Christs bodie and bloud. Sacramentall eating is the carnall and visible pressing with teeth the Sacrament of Christes bodie and bloud: it is not the reall eating of Christ himselfe. Phi. The Sacrament is Christ we say. Theo. But so said not Sainct Augustine. He diligently distinguisheth, Sacramentum & rem Sacramenti: the Sacrament and the thing (which is the other part) of the Sacrament, interpreting the Sacrament to be Contra. aders. leg. & Prphe lib. 2. cap. 9. & de ciuit. Dei. li. 10. cap. 5. Sacrum Signum: a sacred Signe: and the thing it selfe to be the bodie of Christ. The De cons. dist. 2. ¶ hoc est. The sacramēt is not the bo∣die of Christ but after a sot, that is by a mystee of signification. Sacrifice of the Church consisteth of two (parts) Sacrament & re Sacramenti, id est corpore Christi: of the sacrament, & the thing of the Sa∣crament, which is the bodie of Christ. There is therefore the Sacrament, & the thing of the Sacrament, to witte, the body of Christ. Of the Sacrament, he saith. August. in Io∣han. ract. 26. It is receiued at the Lordes table of some to life, of some to destruction. Res vero ipsa, cuius & Sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium quicunque eius particeps fuerit: But the thing it selfe, whereof that is a Sacrament, (is receiued) of all men to life, and of none to death whosoeuer is partaker of it. The rest ioyne with him in that assertion. Hier. in Ose. cap. 8. (Heretikes) saith Hierom, doe not eate his fleshe whose fleshe is the meate of the faithfull. Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 8. Whosoeuer, saith Ambrose, eateth this bread, he shall not die for euer, and it is the bodie of Christ. Cypr. de caena Domini. None is partaker of this lambe, saith Cyprian, that is not a right Israelite. Orig. in Mat. cap. 15. The wicked eate the Sa∣crament, but they eate not Christ. Christ ente∣reth and abi∣deth where he is recei∣ued. The worde, saith Origen, was made fleshe, and true meate: the which whosoeuer eateth shall liue for euer, Quem nullus malus potest edere, whom no wicked person can eate. The Sacraments, that is the sacred signes of Christes bodie and bloude the wicked doe eate: Christ him-selfe they doe not. And why? The Sacraments are carnally pressed with teeth, which they are partakers of as well as the Godlie; but Christ him-selfe is not eaten with teeth, and therefore the wicked wanting both spirite and faith by which he is receiued, cannot possibly eate his fleshe, or drinke his bloud: though they come to his table neuer so often. Phi. If Christ be really contained in the visible Sacrament, how can they receiue it, but they must receiue him also? Theo. If hee were locally and substantially there inclosed, it could not be auoided, but receiuing the one into their mouthes, they must needs also receiue the other into the same passage: but because neither he is eaten with teeth, nor entereth the bodies of the wicked, (as where hee abydeth not,) therefore wee rightly conclude that hee is not corporally couered with the accidentes of bread and wine, as you grossely conceiue.
Phi. The lambe of God lieth on the Altar, by the very profession of the first Nicene Councel:Concil. Nicen. 1. we aske you now where and how, if not vnder the forms of bread and wine? Theo. The best handfast you haue in fathers or Councels for this cause, is a few speeches wrested and forced from the inward man to the outward, & from the soul which they ment, to the bodie, which you vrge: thereby to settle your reall and bodily presence, but all in vaine. For as we doubt not that Christ is alwaies present on his table in trueth,How Christ is present on the table. grace, vertue, and effect, if we open the eyes of our faith to beholde him, and mouth of our spirites to re∣ceiue him: so the local and corporal hiding of his humane substance vnder the shewes of breade and wine was neuer taught by any Catholike father or coun∣cel: least of al by the first Nicen Synode: exhorting vs in those mysteries: or Concil. Nicen. Ibidem. on that sacred table by faith to consider the lambe of God that tooke away the sinnes of the world: Whch if any doe not both professe and perfourme, he is not worthie to be counted a Christian. Phi. How, saith S. Chrysost, wilt thou stand before the tribunal of Christ,Chrysost. ad Poi. Antioch. hom. 61. which inuadest euen his own bodie with wicked hands and lippes. Theo. This is not the way to seeke for trueth, but to shadowe the same with phrases of speeches.With these two points of cunning the Iesuites per∣uet all the fathers they bring for this matter. And yet in these and al other your allegations out of Chrysostom and others, you cōmit these two grosse ouersightes. You vnderstand that of the sensible creatures in the sacrament, which was spoken of the insensible grace: & you refer that to the visible parts of our bodies, which was intēded to the inui∣sible powers of the mynd, & wt these false foūdations you run along the fathers, peruerting euerie place that you quote, as a meane diuine may soone perceiue. Phi. These be your shifts to auoide the fathers which we bring, because you will not acknowledge the real & corporal presence of christ in the sacrament. Theo. First proue that Christ is really and corporally present vnder the forms of bread and wine, & then reproue vs if we do not cknowledge it. Phi. Doubt you that? Theo. Can you proue that? Phi. What? That Christ is present in the sacrament? Theo. Is that the thing which we deny? Phi. For ought that I see, you graunt not so much. The. God forbid we should deny that the flesh & bloud of christ are truly pre∣sent, & truely receiued of the faithfull at the Lords table. It is the doctrine that we each others, and comfort our selues with. Wee neuer doubted, but Cypr. de vn∣cti. hrysmais. the trueth was present with the signe, & the spirite with the sacramēt, as Cypri∣an saith. Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 3. We confese a more mightie fruitfull, and heauenly pre∣sence of christ in the Sacra∣ments than the Iesuits do. We knew there could not follow an operation, if there went not a presence before. Set a side your carnal imaginations of Christ couered with accidences, & his flesh chammed betweene your teeth, and say what you will ei∣ther of his inuible presence by power and grace, or of the spiritual and effectu∣all participation of his flesh and bloud offered and receiued of the faith-full by this Sacrament for the quickening and preseruing of their soules and bodies to eternall life, we ioyne with you: no wordes shal displease vs, that any way de∣clare the trueth or force of this mysterie. Your locall compassing of Christ with the shewes and fantasticall appearances of bread & wine, your reall grin∣ding
of his flesh with your iawes, these be the points that we deny to be Catho∣like: these doe the fathers refute as erroneous, and in these your owne fellowes be not yet resolued, what to say, or what to hold. Phi. Be not we resolued what to hold of Christes reall being in the Sacra∣ment, and the corporall eating his flesh with our mouthes? Theo. How you be secretly resolued, I know not: your iudgementes laid downe to the world in writing are cleane contrarie. Phi. Ours? Theo. Whose said I but yours? Phi. Howsouer in other thinges we retaine the libertie of the Schooles to dis∣pute pro & con, yet in this you shall finde vs all together. Theo. Together by the eares as dogges for bones. Infinite are the contenti∣ons of their Schooles a∣bout these & such other points of their reall and carnall imagina∣tion.Omit your contentions, what the pronowne H O C supposeth; what the verbe E S T ignifieth, when and how the bread is abolished, whether by con∣uersion or annihilation: what bodie succeedeth, and whether with distinction of parts and extension of quantity, or without: what subiect the accidents haue to hang on, whether the aire or the body of Christ: what it is that soureth and pu∣trifieth in the formes of bread and wine: whether it be the same bodie that sit∣teth in heauen: and if it be, how so many contradictions may be verified of one & the same thing: Omit, I say, these with infinite other like contentions, the cor∣porall eating of christ with your mouthes, are you all agreed about it? Philan. We are. Theo. Your two Seminaries are perhaps, because they hearken rather for sedition in the realme,The cheefest Papists are togither by the eares for their corpo∣rall eating of Chistes flesh with teeth & iawes. The gloze maketh it an heresie to say that Christes fleh is be∣twixt the teeth than for Religion in the Schooles: But the great Rabbins of your side are they in one opinion concerning this matter? Phi. Great and small consent togither against you. Theo. Against trueth they doe, but in their owne fantasticall error they doe not. The cheefest Pillours of your church, when they come to that point (which is now in handling) wander in the desert of their owne deuises, as men forsaking and forsaken of trueth. Your Gloze is content, if a man gape wide, that the body of christ shall enter his mouth, but he holdeth it for an heresie, that the teeth should touch the same; and therefore when the iawes beginne to close, he dispatcheth away the body of christ in post towards heauen. De cons. dist. 2. § tribus gradi∣bus. In Glossa. Certum est, It is (no coniecture but) certaine, that as soone as the formes of bread be pressed with the teeth, tam cito, pre∣sently the bodie of christ is caught vp into heauen. Durandus is more fauourable to the teeth, and will haue christ Durand. in ra∣tionali diuinor. officior. lib. 4. Rubr. de 6. par. Canonis. present in the mouth, chamme he that list, till his awes ake, but hee is as strait laced a∣gainst the stomack as the glozer is against the teeth, and wil by no meanes haue the bodie of christ to passe thither, building himselfe on these wordes of Hugo, Christ is Ibidem. Durandus will haue it in the mouth, but no farder. corporally present in visu & in sapore, whiles wee see or tast (the sacrament). Ibidem. Durandus will haue it in the mouth, but no farder. As long as our bodily senses are affected, so long his corpo∣rall presence is not remooued: but when once the senses of our bodie be∣ginne to faile (that we neither see nor tast the formes) then must wee seeke no longer for a corporall presence, but retaine the spirituall: because christ passeth from the mouth (neither to heauen as the Gloze said, nor to the sto∣mack as the rest affirme) but to the hart. And better it is that he goe straight
to the mind, than descend to the stomacke. Others is whome Bonem. in 4 senem. dist. 13. rtic. 2. quaea. Bonauenture will haue Christ in the bellie, but thne he shal not stire. Bonauenture more inclineth, will no way, but Christ must take vp his lodging as wel in the stomacke as in the mouth: may thence they suffer him not to wagge, neither vpward nor downward, whatsoeuer be∣come of the accidentl forms of bread and wine. And lest it should be hought as Durand and Hugo say, that the bodie of Christ goeth to the hart, he repieh that,Ibiem. Teslues confse their owne varietie of pan, touching the coporall ea∣ting of Christ: and graunt it hard to iudge what to hold. Quantum ad substantiam (corporis) certum est quod non vadit in metem, sed vtrum sic vadt in ventrm, dubium est propter diuersitatem opinionum: as tou∣ching the substance (of his bodie) it is cleare that he passeth not to the mind, but whether he so come (that is in the substance of his bodie, from the mouth) to the belli, this is yet in doubt, by reason of the diuesitie of opinions: & in so great varietie, what to hold is had to iudge. Yet he liketh not, that Aut Ibidm. mus in ventrem traijceret, aut in cloacam descenderet: the bodie of Christ shuld goe into the bellie of a mouse, or be cast foorth by the draught, because the eares of well disposed persons would abhorre that, & sidiceremus, haeretici & infideles deriderent nos, & irriderent, and if we should defend that, the heretiks and infidels would iest at vs, and laugh vs to scorne. This notwithstanding Alexander de Hales in spie of al heretikes and infi∣dels entereth on it: Alex. de Ha∣s. part. 3. quaes. 45. If a dog or an hogge, saith he, should eat the whole consecrated host, I see no cause but the Lords bodie should goe therewith∣all into the bellie of that dog or hog. Thomas of Aquine sharpely repro∣uth them which thinke otherwise: Thom part. 3. quaest. 80. ar∣ic. 3. The Thomists wil haue Christ in the bellies of mice and hogges if they eate the Sacrament. Some haue saide that as soone as the Sa∣crament is taken of a mouse or a dog, streight way the bodie and bloud of Christ cease to be there: but this is a derogation to the trueth of this Sacra∣ment. In auour of Thomas, Petrus de Palude, Ioannes de Burgo, Nicolaus de Obellis, with the whole sect of Thomists (neither few in number, nor mean in credite with the church of Rome) defend the same: yea where the master of the sentences seemed to shrinke from this loathsome position. Senten. lib. 4. dist. 13. It may wel be said, that the bodie of Christ is not receined of brute beasts: the facultie of diuines in Paris with full consent gaue him this check, here the master is refused. And for feare lest the field should be wonne without him, in steppeth Anto∣nius Archbishoppe of Florence, and recompenseth his late comming with his lewd writing. First hee telleth, how Petrus de Palude dressed the Glze for saying, Anton. part. 3. tit. 13. cap 6. § 3. de fecti∣bus Misae. Here is the perfection of their real pre∣sence and cor∣porall aing of Christes flesh with their teeth. that Christ is caught vp to heauen as soone as the formes of the sa∣crament are pressed with our teeth, Quod dicere est haereticum: which to say is hereticall. And therefore they ioyne both in this, that the bodie of Christ may not only be eaten of a Mouse, but also it may be vomited vppe by the mouth and purged downe by the draught: say Bonauenture what he will or can in detesta∣tion of their folke. These be their words, Ibidem. Igitur corpus Christi & sanguis tam diu manet in ventre & stomacho vel vomitu & quocunque alibi, quamdiu species manet. Et si specie incorruptae euomutur (illa autem qandoque non corrùpta emt∣tutur vt in habentibus fluxum) ibi est vere corpus Christi: Therefore the bodie and bloud of Christ remaine in the bellie an stomacke or in vomite and
in whatsoeuer course of nature, so long as the shewes of bread and wine re∣maine. And if they be vomited orBehold chri∣stian reader the iust re∣ward of error, and learne to reuerence the trueth of God. purged, before they be altered (as some∣times in those that are troubled with the fluxe) euen there is the true bodie of Christ. O filthie mouthes and vncleane spirites! What Capernite, what heretike, what Infidel was euer, I say not so carnall and grosse, but so barba∣rous and brutish? Is this the reuerence you giue to the sacred and glorious flesh of Christ? Is this the corporal presence that you striue for? Shal For this the Iesuits striue. Mice, Dogges, and Swine haue eternall life, that you bring them to eate the fleshe and drinke the bloud of our Sauiour? The rest of your sluttish diuinitie no re∣ligious hart can repeate, no Christian eares can abide: let your neerest frindes be iudges whether this kinde of eating doe not match not only the Capernites, but also the Canibals. This grosnes is so wicked that they are ashamed of i, but they can∣not auoide it. This vile and wicked assertion, you will beare men in hand, you did euer de∣test, and so think to discharge your selues: but you cannot scape so: The church of Rome, whose factours and attournies you be, must answere to God and the worlde for suffering, admitting and strengthning this sacrilegious blasphe∣mie. For when these things were first broched, what did she? Did she controle the doers, and condemne the filthines of their error? Did she so much as note the men, or mislike the matter? No Philander: she proposed the question in her sentences. Senten. lib. 4. dist. 13. Quid igitur sumit mus, vel quid manducat? What then doth the mouse take, or what doth he eate? And with her colde and indifferent answer, Deus nouit, God knoweth, she set the schoole men on work, she laid vp the ashes of those mice, next her altars for reliques, she fauored, aduanced and canonized the spredders of it. Thomas of Aquin was her only Paramour, Hugh of Cluince who commended a Priest for eating the sacrament which a leaper had cast vp Cum vilissimo sputo,To Canonize and promote the men was the next way to spred their errors. was Saincted of her: she made Antonius no worse man than an Archbishoppe. What? Call you this the quenching or kindling, the suppressing or increasing of heresies? No maruaile if you recken Rebels for Martyrs, your holy mother the Church of Rome hath the cunning to make saints of blasphemers. Returne, returne for shame to grauitie, trueth and antiquitie: Learne to distinguishe that which is seene in this Sacrament from that which is beleeued, I meane the visible creature, from the grace which is not visi∣ble. Chrysost. in Mat. hom 83. HADST THOV BEENE, saith Chrysostome, WITHOVT A BODIE (Christ) WOVLD HAVE GEEVEN THEE HIS INCORPO∣RALL GVIFTS NAKEDLY (that is without any coniunction of corpo∣rall creatures:) BVT NOW BECAVSE THY SOVL IS COVPLED WITH A BODIE, THEREFORE IN THINGS THAT BE SENSI∣BLE, THINGS INTELLIGIBLE ARE DELIVERED THEE. Cyril. cate∣chis. mysago. 4. AS BREAD, (saith Cyril of this sacrament) SERVETH FOR THE BODIE, SO THE WORD SERVETH FOR THE SOVL. It is neither noultie nor absurditie to say that the bread of the Lorde, as touching the material sub∣stance, may bee deuoured of beasts, digested of men, and will of it selfe in
continuance mould and putrifie:The creatures maie manie waies miscary: the flesh of Christ be∣cause it is not locallie in∣cloed, can not. The flesh of Christ not subiect to any vncleanes or corruption. Such is the condition of all creatures that serue to nourish our bodies, and this is a creature well knowen and familiar to our senses: But the word of God which is added to the corporall elements, the grace which is annexed to the visible signes, and the flesh of Christ which quick∣neth the soul of man by faith, these thinges I say be free from all violent, and vndecen abuses, and iniuries. For they be no corporall, mortall, nor earthlie creatures, but spirituall, eternall and heauenly blessings, and therefore in no case subiect to the greedines of beasts, vncleanes of men, or weaknes of nature. Ambrs. de sa∣cramenti, lib. 1. cap. 5. The element is one thing, saith Ambrose, the operation is an other thing. Idem de iis qui initiantur my∣steriis. cap. 3. That which is seene (in all Sacraments) is temporall, that which is not seene is eternall. August. de ap. contra Donati. lib. 3. cap. 10. If wee looke to the very visible thinges, wherein Sacra∣ments are ministred, who is ignorant, saith Austen, that they be corruptible? But if wee consider that which is wrought by them, who doth not see, that that cannot suffer any corruption? Of the Lordes Supper Origen affirmeth that the bread as Orig. in 15. Mat. touching the matter or materiall (partes) thereof go∣eth into the bellie and forth by the draught, but the praier and bles∣sing, which is added, doeth lighten the soule according to the portion of faith. Rabanus. de ist. Clricor. lib. 1. cap. 31. The sacrament (that is the sacred element) is one thing, saieth Rabanus the power of the Sacrament is an other thing. The Sacra∣ment is receiued in at the mouth, with the vertue of the Sacrament, the inwarde man is filled: the Sacrament is turned into the nourish∣ment of the bodie, by the vertue of the Sacrament wee attaine eternall life. This dotrine your schoolemen either wilfullie reiected, or foolishly peruer∣ted to make Christ substantiallie present in your Masses, and for that onely cause fel thy to the locall shutting of him within the formes of bread, and the corporall eating his flesh with their teeth. Which grossenes once preuailing in your Church of Rome,The schoole∣men were dri∣uen to this buishnes by the very se∣quele of their reall presence. Thomas, Alexander, Antonius and the greatest Clarkes of your side were by the consequent of your reall presence forced to consse that the flsh of Christ might be subiect to the teeth and iawes as well of beastes, as of vnbeleeuers. For wickednes is worse than sluttishnes; and the bodies of sinnefull men God more detesteth than he doth the bowels of vn∣reasonable creatures. Since then by the generall consent of your Church Christ doeth not refuse the bellies and intralles of faithlesse persons: why say they should he not be verily contained in the capacities and inwardes of brute beastes, if by mischaunce they deuoure the Sacrament? This hold fast your gloze layeth hands on. De cons. dist. 2. § qui bene. Glossa ibidem▪ The Iesuits at this day cannot auoid that filthie doctrine, but by grosse and apparent mockeries. Si dicatur quodmus sumat (corpus Christi) non est mag∣num inconuenins, cum homines sceleratissimi illud sumant. If it be said that a mouse taketh the bodie of Christ, it is no great inconuenience, seeing most wicked men doe receiue the same: and this Bonauenture setteth downe for the chiefest motiue to that vile assertion. Phi. To tel you truth I like not that position. Theo. So long as you defend Christs humane substance to be locally present in your host, you cannot for your
hart auoide it, but either by mocking your slues, and deluding your senses, or els by feeding mice with miracles, and leaing me in man dauger ∣pen Idolatrie. For what is it, say you, that mi, hen they lght on your host? what aunswer make you to this question, that your master proposed, and your pewfellowes striue for? Will you say with Thomas Walden tomo 2. qui de sacra∣mentis est. c. 46. They might as well defēd they bee n mice, or bid that ouch the Sacrament, but Angels in those snapes. Guimundus and Thomas Walden tomo 2. qui de sacra∣mentis est. c. 46. They might as well defēd they bee n mice, or bid that ouch the Sacrament, but Angels in those snapes. Walden, two principall vpholders of your new found presence, that when mice gnaw the Sacrament, it is but a trick of deceptio visus, wee thinke they doe so, but in deede they doe not so, she poore mice be otherwise occupied, our sight is deceiued? They must needes be verie louing and deuout chickens of Antichrists broad, that will suffer you to pul out their eies, and elcee that you say, though they see the contrarie. To such men you may soone perswade what Religion you list, but the wise reader will neuer be led with such monsterous fansies. Will you take part with Innocentius and others that De cons. dist. 2. § qui bene: Glossa Ibidem. This is a sure waie to keepe mce from ea∣ting Christ, but thēselues are in  great dunger to e im, as the mice. They haue but the two for . statim desinit esse Sa∣cramentum, ex quo à mure tangitur, it ceaseth to be a Sacrament as soone as anie mouse (or other east) toucheth it, and the bodie of Christ leaueth that host for euer? Then besides that you proude miracles to fate mice, and noursh them with empty shewes, you must (before you may worship any such host, as hath beene reserued, which is common with you:) you mus I say cal beastes, birds, wormes and flies com nobis, and examine them by Commission, whe∣ther any of them touched your sacrament. Else how can you be sue that Christ is there present? For if your Sacrament were but pecked by some bird, or m∣ld by some se, Christ is departed, and the shape of bread is adored by you with diuine honour as if it were the sonne of God, which is palpable and inde∣fensable  ry. Like you neither of these bold and blind ghesses? Indeed they be rather sick∣ dreames than graue mens answers yet if these please you not you must  of  be driuen to say with Alxander and Antonius, that the flesh of Christ descendeth into the bellies of my, dogges and swin; as well as into the bodes of wicked and vngodly eceiuers, which whether it be worse tha carnall and caperniticall let the sober and discreee eader pronounce for . Phi. You may not doubt in  church but some things are amsse. Theo. It goeh had wih your church when these  amisse. Farre otherwise did the learned and auncient fathers thinke and speake of this mysterie. They taught christ to be present not in sh, but in grace: not in reall and corporall existence, but in spirituall and fruitfull ffcience. They prepared for m not their iawes and bellies,Where Christ sitteth in the glorie of God the father farre from the iniuries and abuses of men or beast. but their mindes and harts. They fe him not downe from heauen to spred him on a patene, and shrowd him in a pixe, but exalted all men to mount alft with the winges of faith, and there aboue in heauen (not here belowe in earth) to behold the brightnes of his glorie, and tast the sweet∣nes of his mercie. In proposing, vrging & repeating which doctrine, wee finde them most carefull and diligent, most earnest and vehement; and that, if no∣thing
else will serue to conuince your nouelties. For as that part of man, which eateth the flesh of Christ, euerteth your reall presence: because no locall or corporall substaunce can enter or seede the soul; and the trueth of Christes flesh in this mysterie by the generall consent of all ages and churches doeth en∣ter and feede the soule: so the place, whither wee must ascend, before wee can eate the Lords flesh doth clearly confute the same. Where Christ is present thither must our hearts be directed,No teeth nor iawes can reach to Christ, but onely faith that enioyet him in the heauens. The Christi∣ans were ne∣uer taught to turne their harts to the host. when they are prepared to eate Christ: But the church of God in her publike prayers, & the catholike Fathers in their writinges neuer taught the faithfull to st their af∣fections on the thinges before them, but to lift vp their hearts from the Lords able to the highest heauens where Christ sate at the right hand of his Father: Ergo neither shee beleeued, nor they professed that Christ was really closed vn∣der the formes of bread & wine. Which point dislike you Philander, or which thinke you best to deny? Shoulde our hearts be turned from the place where Christ is present? I trust you bee more respectfull of God and your christian dutie, than to say, that the mindes and hearts of christian men may bee turned from Christ, or from the place where Christ is. Should the people turne their hearts to your host and chalice, looking there to find Christ? Why then did S. Paul teach vs to Coloss. 3. seeke those thinges which are aboue, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God, and to set our affections (on heauenly thinges) not on thinges which are on earth, as where Christ is not to be found? Why did the primatiue church in this sacrament alwayes cri,August. de bo∣no viduitatis. cap. 16. Sursum corda, Lift Vp to hea∣uen, to the Priests hands. Whither wee must lift vp our harts to seeke fr Christ. vppe your hearts, and the rest answere, habemus ad Dominum, we lift them vppe vnto the Lord? Why did the learned and ancient Fathers teach the godly not to regard the thinges proposed on the Lordes table, but to mount aboue the skies with the spirituall winges of faith, there to fasten on the Lordes fleshe as Eagles, and there to receiue the cup of the new Testament? Were the fleshe of Christ really placed on your altars, as you tel vs; why should they skip him there corporallie present, and leade the people to seeke for him so farre, that their bodies by no meanes coulde attaine to the place, but onely their mindes and spirits? Ambrose, Ambros. in 1. Luc. lib. 8. § de duobus in vno lecto. &c. There is a bodie of which it was saide, my fleshe is meat in deede. About this bodie are the true Eagles, which houer about it with spirituall winges. The soules of the righteous are therefore compared to Eagles, because they flie high, and leaue these places (or thinges) below. Idem lib. 10. in 24. cap. Luc. ¶ de hora Do∣minicae resur∣rect. We touch not Christ with corporall handling, but by faith. Therefore nei∣ther on the earth, nor in the earth, nor after the flesh ought we to seek Christ, if we will find him. Chrysostom, Chrys. in 10. cap. 1. Cor. hom. 24. That dreadfull sacrifice doth lead vs to this, that in this life becomming Eagles we should flie vp to heauen, or rather aboue the heauens. For where the carcasse is, thither wil the Eagles. Nowe the Lordes body is the carcasse by reason of his death. Eagles he calleth (vs) to shew that he which commeth to this bodie Which dogs & mice can∣not doe. must flie aloft, and haue nothing to do with the earth, but euer mount vpward, & behold
the (bright) sun of righteousnes with the piercing eie of his mind. This table is for Hir. Hdibie quaest. 2. agles, not for houghs. Ierom, Let vs ascend with the Lord into the great parlour dcked & cleane, & aboue (in heauen receiue at his hands the cup of the new Testament, & there keepe our passouer with him. Paschasius: Paschas. de corpre & san∣guin. Dom. cap. 52. If we be willing to receiue these things with Christ, let vs ascend aboue in∣to the parlour of life. Let vs mount vpward because they which staie below (on earth) drinke not sweete wine with Christ, but the poyson of Dragons vnhappily with Iudas. Therefore, sayth Paul sauor you those things which are aboue, not the things which are on earth. For this cup of the new Testa∣ment is not any where receiued but aboue (in heauen.) Where the carkae is,August. qu est. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 42. thither will the Eagles resort, that is, saith Austen, into heauen, whither frō hence (Christ) caried with him the body, which hee tooke in the nature of man. Had we no better ground to refuse that your corporal cating & reall presence, this were sufficient.If Christ be absent in bo∣die from the earth, how can his flesh be really pre∣sent in the host? For where without question the flesh of Christ must bee locally present in your host before it can bee really pressed with teeth, the sacred scriptures & catholik fathers affirm, that the true flesh of Christ is absent from earth, & verily present in heauen, whither we must and may send our harts and faithes to be partakers of him, our hands & mouthes we can not sende: & there∣fore your late deuised doctrine must needes be dissident from the scriptures, and vnknowen to the former & purer church of christ. Act. 7. I see, saith Stuen, the hea∣uens open, and the sonne of man standing at the right hand of God: Act. 3.whom the heauēs, saith Peter, must contain vntil the time that al things be restored. Phi. As though he might not also be in earth? Theo. Being ascended into heauen,The flesh of Christ is not on earth. he is no more in earth, if that be true which the Angels said to his Dis∣ciples. Act. 1. When he as∣cended he was taken vp from vs. This Iesus which is taken vp from you into heauen, shall so come, as you haue seene him go into heauen: ergo when he ascended into heauen he was taken vp from them, and not left with them: and so the Lord himselfe before had taught them. Iohn. 16. I came foorth from the father, and came into the world, now contrariwise I leaue the world, and go to the father. So that his ascen∣ding to the father was the leauing of the world, and his abiding with the father imployeth his absence from the world. Iohn. 12. The poore you alwaies haue with you, but me, sayth hee, you shall not alwayes haue. Nowe am I no more in the world, but come to thee holy father:Iohn 17. Christ going to his father is no more on earth. ergo now Chrit being with his father is no more in the world, but remaineth in heauen and as touching his humane na∣ture is absent from the earth, which not onely the scriptures pronounce, but also the fathers with one voice professe. Tertullian, Tertul. de re∣surrect. carnis. In the very palace of heauen to this day sitteth Iesus at the right hand of his father: man, though also God: fleshe and blood, though purer than ours: neuerthelesse the very same in substaunce and forme in which he ascended. Augustine, August. in E∣uang. Iohan. tract. 50. Let vs shew the Iewes at this day where Christ is, would God they would heare, and take hold of him. Hee was slaine of their fathers, he was buried, he rose againe, and was knowen of
his Disciples, and before their eyes ascended into heauen, and there now sit∣teth at the right hand of the father. Let them heare this, and lay hold on him. Perhaps he will say, whom shall I take holde of? him, that is absent? howe shall I reach my hand vp to heauen, to take hold on him sitting there?What means we haue to take hold of Christ now absent in heauen. Send thy faith, and thou hast hold of him. Thy fathers held him in the flesh, hold thou him in thine heart. Hee is both departe and present, he is returnd whence he came, and hath not left vs. His body hath hee caried to heauen, his maiestie hath hee not withdrawen from the world. Ibidem. Mee shall you not alwayes haue. He spake this of the presence of his body. For touching his maiesty, prouidence, inspeakeable and inusible grace, it is true that he said, I am alwayes with you to the end of the world. How Christ is prsent with vs, and howe he is absent from vs. But as touching the fleshe which the word took, touching that by the which he was born of the virgin, fastned to the crosse, laide in the graue, you shall not alwayes haue me with you. And why? because he is ascended into heauen and is not here: there hee sitteth at the right hand of the father. Cyrill, There: not here. Wee must here diligēt∣ly marke, that albeit hee haue withdrawen from hence the presence of his bodie, yet in the maiestie of his Godhead hee is alwayes with vs,Cyril in Ioan. lib. 6. cap. 14. Christ absent in flesh. euen as himselfe readie to depart from his Disciples promised, behold I am with you at all tymes vnto the end of the world. Lib. 9. cap. 21. For the faithfull must beleeue though hee be absent from vs in body, yet in his (diuine) vertue he is euer present with all that loue him: Lib. 9. cap. 22. with whome hee euer hath beene and will be present though not in bodie yet in the vertue of his Deitie. Lib. 11. cap. 3.Hee coulde not bee conuersant with his Apostles in fleshe, after hee was once ascended to his Father: yet Lib. 11. ca. 21. for so much as Christ is truely God and man, they should haue vnderstood, that in the vnspeakeable power of his Godhead hee meant to bee alwayes with them, though in fleshe hee were absent: and Lib. 11. ca. 22. by that onely meanes, notwithstanding hee bee absent in fleshe, hee is able to saue his. Origen, Orig. tract. in Matth. 33. His bodie ab∣sent from vs. His manhood is neither in all places nor at all times with vs. according to his diuine nature hee is not absent from vs, but hee is absent according to the dispensation of his bodie which hee tooke. As a man shall hee bee absent from vs, who is euerie where in his diuine nature. For it is not the manhood of Christ that is there wheresoeuer two or three bee gathered togither in his name, neither is it his manhood that is with vs at all times vntill the ende of the worlde: neither is his manhood present in euerie congregation of the faithfull, but the diuine vertue that was in Iesu. Ambrose, Ambr. li. 10. super ucae cap. 24. de hora Do∣minicae resurre∣ctionis. christ is not to besought nei∣ther on earth nor in earth. Steuen a∣middest the Iewes saw thee (O Lord) absent. Marie among the Angels sawe thee not, being present. Steuen sought not for thee on earth, who sawe thee standing at the right hand of God. Marie, which sought thee in earth, could not touch thee. Steuen touched thee because he sought thee in heauen. Therefore neither on the earth nor in the earth nor after the flesh ought wee to seeke thee, if we wil find thee. Gregor. in E∣uang. homil. 2. Gregory, Christ is not here by the presence of his flesh, which yet is nowhere absent by the presence of his maiesty.Ibidem homil. 30. The word incarnat both remaineth & departeth. He departeth
(from his) in bodie, and remaineth (with his) in diuinitie: Ibidem hom. 29. The fathers themselues teach both partes of this consequent Christ is in heauen; ergo not in earth. Wee must therefore brethren follow him thither in hart whither we beleeue him to be ascended in body. If the fleshe of Christ bee not in earth, nor on earth, as these learned Fa∣thers teach vs, howe can it be locally closed in your massing waters? If his hu∣mane nature be placed in heauen at the right hand of God there to remaine till the time that all thinges be restored, and from thence, not from any place els, shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead, howe vainely doe you suppose him to bee corporally present in your pxes,August. epist. 57. ad Darda∣num. That the sub∣staunce of Christs bodie maie be in manie places at one time is a condemned heresie. and really lodged in your bellies? Phi. His bodie wee say may be present in many places at one time. Theoph. This you say, but what ancient Father euer said so before you? yea▪ rather why forget you that this is often refuted by them as a leude and hereticall fan∣sie? Doeth not Sainct Augustine of purpose debate the matter and in euident termes giue this flat resolution against you? August. epist. ad Dadanum. 57. Doubt not, saieth hee▪ the man Christ Iesus to bee nowe there, whence he shall come (to iudge∣ment) but keepe in minde and holde assured the christian confession, that he rose from the dead, ascended into heauen, sitteth (now at the right hand of his Father, and Nec aliunde quam inde. from thence, from no place else, shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead. And so shall he come, by the very witnesse of Angels as he was seene to goe into heauen: that is In eadem car∣nis forma atque substantia. in the verie same forme & sub∣stance of his fleshe the whch hee hath endued with immortalitie, not be∣reaued of the former) nature. According to this forme (of his manhood) wee must not thinke him to bee diffunded in euerie place. For we must be∣ware that wee doe not so defende the God-head of a man, that wee take from him the If Christes manhood be in euerie place he loo∣seth the truth of his bodie. trueth of his body. It is no good consequent, that which is in God, should bee euerie where, as God himselfe is. One person is both God and man, and one Christ Iesus is both these: euerie where as he is God, in heauen as he is man. In eadem epi. ad finem. Dout not I say that Christ our Lord is euerie where present as God, but In aliqu loco coeli. in some one place of heauen by the meanes of his true bodie. And againe,August. in Io∣han. tract. 30. Let vs giue the same eare to the He speaketh of the trueth of the gospel, not of the truth of the bodie of Christ. holy Gospell, that we would to the Lord himselfe if he were present. The Lord is aboue (in heauen) but the trueth is here which also the Lord is. The body in which hee rose β Vno loco esse poest. β can be (but) in one place:  his trueth is euery where dis∣persed. Doeth not Vigilius a blessed Martyr and Bishoppe of Trident vpholde the verie same point against Eutyches, and his accursed companions?Vigilius con∣tra Eutych. lib.  cap. 4. The fleshe of Christ, sayeth hee, WHEN IT WAS IN EARTH, SVRE∣LY WAS NOT IN HEAVEN, AND NOWE BECAVSE IT IS IN HEAVEN, CERTAINLIE IT IS NOT IN EARTH: yea so farre it is from being in earth, that wee looke for Christ after the flesh to come from heauen, whom as hee is God the word we beleeue to be with vs in earth. Then by your opinion, either the worde is comprised in a
place as well as the flesh (of Christ) or That the flesh of Christ should be e∣uery where was a sequl of Eutyches heresie. the flesh (of Christ) is euery where togither with the worde, seeing one nature doeth not receiue in it selfe a∣ny different and contrary state. Now to be contained in a place, and to be present in euerie place be thinges diuerse and verie dislike: and for so much as the word is euery where, and the fleshe of Christ not euery where, it is cleare that one and the same Christ is of both natures, that is euerie where according to the nature of his diuinitie, & contained in a place according to the nature of his humanity.Christ mā∣hood conai∣ned in a place. This is the catholike faith, and confession which the Apostles deliuered, the Martyrs confirmed, and the faithful per∣sist in to this day. Doth not Fulgentius handle the same question,From this the Iesuits be vtterly fallen. and precisely trace the steps of Sainct Augustine and Vigilius? Fulgent. ad Thrasimundum Regem. lib. 2. cap. 5. One and the same sonne of God ha∣uing in him the trueth of the diuine and humane nature, lost not the pro∣prieties of the true Godhead, and tooke also the proprieties of the true manhead: one and the selfesame: locall by that he tooke of man, and infi∣nite by that he had of his Father: one and the verie same, according to his Christs hu∣mane sub∣stance is not both in hea∣uen & earth at one time. humane substaunce absent from heauen, when hee was in earth: and for∣saking the earth, when hee ascended to heauen: but according to his diuine and infinite substaunce, neither leauing heauen when hee came downe from heauen, neither departing from earth when hee ascended to heauen. The which may bee gathered by the most certaine wordes of the Lord himselfe. I ascend to my Father, and your Father. Howe coulde he ascende but as a If Christ be not locall, he is no true man. locall and true man? or howe can hee bee present with the faithfull but as an infinite and true God? not as if the humane substance of Christ might bee euery where diffunded, but because one and the same Sonne of God, albeit according to the trueth of his manhead hee were then locally placed on earth, yet according to his Godhead (which in no wise is concluded in any place) hee filled heauen and earth. This true manhead of Christ which is locall, as also his true Godhead, which is alwayes infinite, wee see taught by the Doctrine Apostolicall.The body of Christ contai∣ned in one  place, not dif∣funded in ma∣nie. For that Paul might shewe, the bodie of Christ as of verie man, to bee contayned in a place, he sayeth to the Thessalonians: You turned to God from idolles, to serue the liuing and true God, and to looke for his Sonne from heauen; declaring that hee surely shoulde corporally come from heauen, whom he knewe to bee corporally raysed from the dead. His conclusion is this, Whereas then the fleshe of Christ is This with∣out question is the Chri∣stian faith, and not the Iesuits vbiqui∣tie or multi∣locitie. proued without question to bee con∣tained in a place, yet his Godhead is at all times euerie where, by the wit∣nesse of Paul, &c. These bee no wrested or maymed allegations, but graue and aduised authorities of learned and auncient Fathers, plainely concluding with vs against you, that the fleshe of Christ is not absent onely from earth, and nowe sitteth aboue at the right hande of GOD, but also locally contay∣ned in some one place of heauen by reason of the trueth of his bodie: and therefore not dispersed in many places or present in euerie place, as you would
nowe make the world beleeue it is in your Masses. Philand. This is a bare shift of the Iesuits, & yet this is all the refuge they haue.This was spoken of the shape, but not of the substance of Christs bodie. For Sainct Augustine sayeth, Aug. epist. 57.Secundum hanc formam non est putan∣dus vbique diffusus: according to this (externall) shape and forme we must not thinke him euerie where diffused: and yet the trueth and substaunce of his bodie may bee in many places at one time. Theop. You forget that the rest say nature and substaunce: as Vigilius, Vigil. contra Eutych. li. 4. cap. 4. Circumscribitur loco per natu∣ram carnis suae: Christ is circumscribed with place by the nature of his flesh: and Fulgentius,Fulgent. lib. 2. cap. 5. ad Thrasi¦mundum regē. Secundum humanam substantiam derelinquens terram, cum as∣cendisset in coelum; according to his humane substaunce leauing the earth, when hee ascended into heauen: and againe, Ibidem. Non quia humana Christi sub∣stantia fuisset vbique diffusa: not, as if the humane substaunce of Christ should bee euerie where diffunded. By the which it is cleare that neither the forme, nor substaunce of Christes bodie can be present in many places at one time. And what doeth Sainct Augustine meane by the word forme, but the per∣fection and trueth of mans nature,Fourme is all one with truth and per∣fection. as Ambrose, Leo, Chrysostome & others doe? What is, sayeth Ambrose, Ambros. lib. 7. epist. 47. in the forme of God? in the nature of God? Leo epist 97. I demaund, sayeth Leo, what is ment by this, taking the forme of a seruaunt? Doubtlesse the perfection of mans nature. Chryso. in cap. 2. epist. ad Phil. serm. 6. The forme of a seruaunt is out of question, the nature of a seruaunt, sayeth Chrysostome. Therefore Augustine him-selfe addeth this reason why Christ must not bee thought to bee euerie where present, Aug. epist. 57. ne veritatem corporis auferamus, Least wee take from him the trueth of his bodie: concluding that Christ is euerie where, Ibidem. Per id quod ho∣mo is substāce as well as shape. Christ can haue no hu∣mane sub∣stance with∣out humane shape. per id quod Deus est, by that (nature) which is God: in coelo autem, per id quod homo, in heauen by that (nature) which is man: Where these wordes that which is man interprete what he meane by the former speech whē hee saide: according to this forme Christ is not euerie where present. But let the worde bee taken in your sense, yet doth it fully confirme our as∣sertion. For humane forme and shape is inseparably ioyned to the sub∣staunce of Christes bodie: and Christes humane forme by your confession can not bee present in many places at one time: ergo neither his humane sub∣stance. These waine, shape and substaunce can not bee seuered: hee is no man that hath not the shape of man. Now choose whether that bodie which, as you say your hosts containe, shall keepe the forme and shape of man, or loose the nature and substaunce of Christ. For the Lord Iesus as man, must haue not onely the substaunce but also the shape of a man. Aug. epist. 57. So shall hee come, as you haue seene him go to heauen, that is, saith Austen, in the very same shape and substance of (his) flesh. Phili. cap. 3. Our vile bodie, saith Paul, shall he change to bee fashioned like to his glorious bodie: but our bodies shall then haue distinction of partes, proportion of shape, circumscription of place: ergo the glorified body of Christ hath and must haue these very proprieties of our na∣ture. So that if his bodily shape can be but in one place: his bodily substance
can be in no moe. Therefore saith Fulgentius: Fulgent. ad Thrasimund regm. lib. 2. cap. 5. Quod siverum est corpus Chri∣sti, loco potest vtique contineri: if Christ haue a true bodie, that no doubt may be concluded in a place. And Theodoret, Theod. dial. 2. It is no hu∣mane bodie that hath not shape, as well as substance. Illud enim corpus habet priorem formam & figuram, & circumscriptionem, & vt semel dicam corporis substantiam: that bodie (which Christ caried to heauen with him) hath the same forme, figure, circumscription, & at one word the same substance of a bodie, which it had before. Phi. S. Chrysostome and S. Ambrose affirme the contrary. Theo. What affirme they? Phi. That one and the some bodie of Christ is euerie where pre∣sent. Their words are,Ambro. in. 10. cap. ad Heb. & Chrys. hom. 17. in eadem epist. Quonim multis in locis offertur, multi Christi sunt? equa∣quā, sed vnus vbique est Christus, & hic plenus existens, & illic plenus, vnum corpus. Because we offer in many places, are there many Christs? no by no meanes: but one Christ is euery where, here whole, and there whole, one body. And S. Chrysostom exceedingly wondring at so miraculous a presence crieth out; Chrysost. de Sacerdotio. li. 3.O the strangenes of the thing; O the goodnes of (our) God! He that sitteth aboue with his Father (in heauen) at the verie moment of time is handled with the fingers of all men. Theo. Make you Chrysostom and Ambrose the disciples of Eutyches?Chrysostome and Ambrose could not gainesay the rest, and be Catholikes. Phi. Make you no worse reckoning of them, than I do: and they shall haue their due honor. Theo. I thinke them to be farre from Eutyches errour. Phi. And so doe I. The. Why then alleadge you their words for that erronious position which was condemned in Eutyches? Phi. I alleadge them for the reall presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Theo. Your reall presence and vbiquitie if you will haue Christs humane substance dispersed in many places, without shape or cir∣cumscription, are the verie bowels and inwardes of Eutyches heresie. Phi. No Sir, S. Chrysostom and S. Ambrose were no heretikes. Theo. In deede they were not: and therefore you doe them the more wrong to wrest their spee∣ches to make for his madnes. Philand. We produce them to confirme a trueth. Theophil. The very same trueth, that the church of Christ abhorred in Eu∣tyches. Phi. What did the church abhorre? Theo. Euen this which you would proue by the words of Ambrose & Chrysostom:The Iesuites would drawe Chrysostome and Ambrose to be of Euty∣ches opinion. hat the flesh of Christ after his ascen∣sion was not locall nor circumscribed within any certaine place. Phi. We grant the manhood of Christ in heauen, is locall and circumscribed with place: & that setteth vs free from Eutyches errour. Theo. It doeth if you constantly keepe that point of faith and contradict it not by an other deuise. Phi. We verilie be∣leeue, and publikely professe that Christes humane nature in heauen hath quan∣tity, shape, distinction of parts, circumscription and all other conditions of a naturall and true body:These condi∣tions of a true bodie the manhead of Christ maie haue where∣soeuer it be. what would you more? Theo. We would no more, but if you fall from that, are you not within the compasse of Eutyches furie? Phi. We fal not from it. The. Then how can Christs body in the sacrament wāt all these, which christiā religion affirmeth to bee permanent & perpetual in the mā∣hood of Christ? or why would you collect out of Amb. or Chry. against the very
principles of faith that Christes humane fleshe is vncircumscribed, and euerie where diffused? Philand. Wee meane that of Christes fleshe in the Sacrament, not of his manhood in heauen. Theophil. Bee there many Christes? Philand. Who sayth there are?There is but one Christ: & that one Christ hath but one body; which is not euery where. you heard that euen now reproued by S. Chrysostom and S. Ambrose, as a wicked absurditie, to say that there were many Christes. And therefore they concluded there was but one Christ euerie where. Theo. That one Christ, hath hee many naturall and substantiall bodies? Philand. Why aske you those questions of vs? we bee not infected with any such frensie. Theo. You may the sooner answere. Hath Christ two reall and naturall bodies, the one in heauen, the other in the Sacrament? Phi. No, this is all one with that. Theo. That by the rules of your creede is locall and circumscribed: if this bee the same howe can this bee without quantitie, shape, and circumscription? Phi. Beleeue you not Christ when hee sayde this is my bodie? Theop. Yeas very∣ly: but you so expound his words, that you subuert the whole frame of his truth and our common faith, with your reall and locall presence. Phi. Do we subuert the common faith with our opinion? Theo. Our Christian faith is this. Aug. de es∣sentia diuinita∣tis. Wee must beleeue, sayeth Augu∣stine, the Sonne of God, according to the substance of his Deitie to be inui∣sible, incorporall and vncircumscribed, but according to his humane na∣ture to be visible, corporall, and locall. You heard Vigilius the martyr say, Vigil. contra Eutych.. lib. 4. cap. 4. For so much as the word is euery where, and the fleshe of Christ not euery where, it is cleare, that one and the same Christ is of two natures: eueriwhere according to the nature of his Diuinity, and contained in a place according to the nature of his humanitie: and this, sayeth hee, is the catholike fayth & confession which the Apostles deliuered, the Martyrs confirmed, & the faithfull stand in to this day. This faith and confession if you infringe of vio∣late, you ioyne handes with Eutyches against the church of God, and against the groundes of our common creede: and this you must needes impugne if you defend the naturall body of Christ to be euery where present, as you would gather out of Ambroses and Chrysostomes wordes. Philand. Wee say not, euerie where, but in the Sacrament. Theoph. But their wordes are, euerie where.The words of Ambrose and Chrysostome as the Iesuites conster them, are against the verie grounds of our common faith. How Chryso∣stome & Am∣brose must be vnderstood. Vnus vbique est Christus, one Christ is euerie where. Philand. That is in the Sacrament. Theophil. That is your additament. They say generally, one Christ is euerie where. Phil. To say that his humane nature is euerie where without any restraint, were in deede a braunch of Eutyches errour. Theophil. And since they say so: you must either vnderstande it of his diuine nature, which is rightly and truely sayde to bee euerie where present without addition, or else of the spirituall and effectuall presence of his bodie which entereth the soules, and strengthneth the hearts of all the faythfull by the power of his grace and trueth of his promise. And either of these wayes their wordes are verie sound, & your locall presence no part of their speech.
Phi. S. Chrysostom saith, Chrys. de Sa∣cerdot. lib. 3. Chrysostoms figuratiue & vehement peaches much abused by the Iesuits. Omnium manibus pertractatur: he is euē hand∣led with al men fingers. Theo. You do that father very much wrong, to wrest his eloquent and figuratiue speeces to your carnall and grosse surmises. The verie tenor of his wordes wil declare that hee meaneth nothing lesse than your corporal and locall touching, With our bodily hands, wee neither can nor doe touch Christ. S. Ambrose saith.Ambros. lib. 10. in 24. Luc. Non Corporali tactu Christū, sed fide tangimus: We touch not Christ with our fingers, but with our faith. And so S. Austen August. epist. Iohan tract. 1. Ipsum iam in caelo sedentem manu contrectare non possimus, sed fide contingere. We cannot handle Christ with our fingers sitting now in heauen: but with our faith we may. In this sense Chrysostomes wordes are very true but nothing to your corporall vbiquitie of Christs flesh. Phi. How shall wee know that this was his meaning:Chrysostome himselfe ex∣cludeth the corporall vn∣derstanding of his words. finding no words of his to direct vs to that sense? Theo. His speech is otherwise so false, that none but Iesuits would make any doubt of it. And yet the very next wordes be∣fore these are a plain admonition to the hearers what to conceiue of this & such like places. Chryso. de Sa∣cerdot. lib. 3. Annon euestigio in caelos transferris: annon carnis cogitationem omnem abijiens nudo animo, mente pura circumspicis quae in caelo sunt. Art thou not pre∣sently caried vppe to heauen? Doest thou not, casting all cogitation of (thy) fleshe aside, with a pure mind and soul seuered (from the bodie) looke round on the things which are in heauen? In this spirituall and yet hyperbolicall vehemencie he goeth on, amplifieng euery poinct, & saying that Christ is hand∣led with al their fingers, and that Ibidem. in the open sight of all that stoode about: concluding no corporall or locall comprehension of Christ in the Sacrament by any of these mysticall and figuratiue speaches (whereof he is ful,) but only that Chrys. Ibidem. grace flowing into the Sacrifice should inflame all their hearts, and make them cleaner than siluer, purged and tried in the fier. This is the presence of Christ which Chrysostome auoucheth, euen the influence of his (heauenly) grace: & that spiritual force and grace, as Gregorie saith, may very wel be constered to be the trueth of his bodie and bloud in the mysteries. So that the same christ is euery where present, not by local or corporal diffusion, but by mysticall operation: and one bodie is proposed to all, not to ill their mouthes, but to clense their hearts,The power of God must ne∣uer be allead∣ged against his wil, nor our faith which he hath commaunded vs to beleeue. and to giue them assurance of eternall life. Phi. May not the body of Christ in the sacrament bee such as wee defend, though his bodie in heauen be not? Theo. If the body of Christ in the sacra∣ment be the very same that is in heauen, how can it so much differ from it? If it be an other, how can it be his, since he hath but one naturall bodie, and that by no meanes capeable of such contrarieties as you imagine? Phi. Is not Christ omnipotent? Theo. Almightie hee is in working his will, not in chan∣ging his nature. Phi. Wil you limite his might? Theo. The christian faith is not repugnant to his might, but agreeable to his trueth, which you may not sub∣uert with a pretence of his power at your pleasures. Tertullian saith very wel, Tertul. ad∣uers. Praxeam. Gods omni∣potencie a common re∣fuge with he∣retikes. If in our owne presumption we abruptly vse this reaso, (nothing is hard
to God,) wee may faine what we list of God, as though he had doone it be∣cause he could do it. We must not, because he can doe all things, therefore beleeue he hath doone that, which he hath not. But we must search, whe∣ther he hath doone it or no. For this respect some things may be hard vnto God himselfe, to witte, that which he hath not doone, not because he could not doe it, but because he would not. Phi. Can not the power of Christ alter the nature of his manhoode? Theo. Were it possible that the manhoode of Christ might be changed and altered in his essentiall proprieties,When wee produce gods power for our fansies a∣gainst his trueth wee make him a lyar, and in subiection to our willes. (which assertion the Church yet alwayes reiected as hereticall) why stand you so much on this what Christ can doe, when you plain∣ly perceiue by your Creed what Christ will doe? Shal his power ouerthwarte his will? Or his arme disappoint his mouth? We neede not dispute whether it be possible or no, this sufficeth vs, that the Lorde himselfe saith, he will leaue the world and be no more in the worlde: Whatsoeuer he can doe, this we be sure, he will doe: his worde is trueth, and his will knowen: against that if you stand and oppose his power to make him a lyar, assure your selues hee hath power enough to be reuenged on your obstinacie, for vrging his power (which is no part of your care) against his wil, which he hath commanded you to beleeue and obay.The Iesuits pretend god-power against the christian faith. Phi. It is you that neither beleeue his wil, nor agnise his power: we build our selues on both. Theo. His wordes by which you gather his will, you rame and inuert to your owne purposes: and when we would reduce you from the misconstruction of his speach by the very tenor of the Christian faith, you pleade his power to delude his trueth and ouerflorish a lewd heresie with a shew of his omnipotencie. Phi. We do not pretend that power of God for any vn∣trueth. Theo. If the Christian faith bee trueth; you vrge his power against his trueth. Phi. Go we against the Christian faith? Theo. Confesse you the distinction of two natures in Christ after his ascension? Phi. We do. Theo. And the proprieties of either to remaine without confusion, conuersion or alte∣ration? Philand. What els? Theophil. This then is the Christian faith, that hth natures in Christ now doe, and euer shall keepe and continue their seuerall and different proprieties without failing or changing. Phi. Or if you do not see your selues condē∣ned in the great councel of Chalcedō, Act. 5. definitio. 2. as heeis for not belee∣uing it.That we beleeue. Theo. How thē can the manhood of Christ be in many places at one time? Or how can it in any place or time be without shape, quantitie, circumscripti∣on and such like proprieties of mans nature? Phi. In heauen it hath them. Theo. If they can not be changed or altered, the manhoode of Christ must haue them: not in heauen only, but in earth also, & in euery place where the substance of his bodie is. Philand. A very witty excption. Then you be∣leeue the Christian faith to be true euerie where sauing in the Sacra∣ment, and what is that but wilfullie and openlie to denie the faith where you list? Saue in the Sacrament. Theophi. If that be the same bodie which was on the Crosse, it must haue the same natural proprieties of a body which that had. Phi. It hath as many as it may. Theo. It must haue as many as it should. Phi. Which be they? Theo. Proporti∣on of shape, distinction of parts, extension of quantitie, circumscription of place,
and the very same substance of fleshe which hee tooke of his mother Marie. Phi. You name these things which you see bee not in the Sacrament. Theophi. I name those which the manhood of Christ must haue, wheresoeuer it be. Phi. Must haue? What necessitie is in that▪ Theo. As much as the denying of your faith & contradicting of his trueth. For these proprieties the body had that hung on the Crosse, and without these hee can be no true man. Philan. In heauen we tell you he hath them. Theophil. And in the Sacrament, wee tell you, ee hath them not: Ergo the manhoode of Christ is not in the Sacrament. Phi. Whatsoeuer he can doe: you bee here∣tikes in the meane time for contradi∣cting the christian faith. Cannot Christ be where he list without those consequents? Theo. His bodie can not. Phi. Doe not you nowe deny him to be omnipotent? Theophi. Doe not you now alleadge his power to frustrate both his will and your faith? Philand. You hold christ cannot, if he would. Theo. We say christ would not, though he could. And since his will is euident by his worde, as our common faith auoucheth, you doe wickedly to crosse his will with his power, and make his might attendant on your follies. Tertul. aduer. PraeeamDei velle, posse est: & non posse, nolle. The power of God (which we must stand on) is his wil: and that which he will not, that he cannot. You must not therefore ima∣gine what you list: and then ground vpon the power and strength of GOD: it is error and impietie whatsoeuer is repugnant to his trueth, and to fa∣ther your falsehoodes on his almightie power is irreuerent and insolent blasphemie. Phi. You doe not so much as confesse that he can doe it: and that causeth vs to suspect you doubt of Gods omnipotencie. Theo. Because we suffer you not to vnload your absurdities and impieties on Gods power at your plea∣sures.The Iesuites incurre not onelie Impie∣ties but im∣possibilities. Philand. First graunt hee can doe it, and of that wee will com∣mune afterward. Theo. What shall I graunt? Phi. That Christ according to his corpo∣rall presence may be in many places at one time if it please him. Theo. What then shal become of S. Austen that said: Christ August. con∣ra austum. li. 20. cap. 11.could not concerning his cor∣porall presence be at one time in the sunne, in the moone, and on the crosse? And of S. Cyril affirming that Christ Cyril. in Ioan. lib. 15. cap. 3. These fathers were not a∣fraide to saie, Christ coulde not be in ma∣nie places at one time.could not be conuersant with his A∣postles after he once ascended? If hee could not bee in three places at one time, how could hee bee in moe? If not in earth when he was in heauen, how both in heauen and earth as you your selues conceiued and woulde haue vs confesse? And yet the thing, which we withstand, is far more impossible than this. For the manhoode of Christ, by the tenour of the christian faith hath and must haue, after his ascension, humane shape, partes, length, breadth, both extended & cir∣cumscribed: and otherwise to thinke, is the wicked and cursed opinion of Euty∣ches condemned long since by the church of God for a meere impietie. You to a∣uoide the burdē of that sentence confes these properties are & must be permanēt in ye body which our sauiour tooke of the virgin: & wherein he now sitteth at the
right hand of God his father:The Iesuits whiles they would shunne Eutyches er∣ror, runne headlong in∣to contradi∣ctions & yet stick in the same mire that Eutyches did. marie the selfesame bodie you defend to bee in the sacrament without shape, partes, length or breadth either extended or circum∣scribed, which is wee say simplie impossible. For shaped not shaped, extended not extended, circumscribed not circumscribed, be plaine contradictions, & those of one thing, at one time, are not possible. Phi. Is any thing impossible to God?2. Tim. 2. Theo. Doth not the Apostle say,Hebr. 6. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. c. 10. Negare seipsum non potest, God cannot deny himselfe? & Impossibile est De∣um mentiri, it is impossible that God should lie? S. Austen well noteth Di∣citur omnipotens, faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult, vnde propterea quae∣dam non potest, quia est omnipotens. God is said to be omnipotent, in doing that he will, not in suffering that hee will not. And therefore can he not doe some things, because he is omnipotent. And S. Ambrose likewise, Ambr. lib. 6. epist. 37. Quid ergo ei impossibile? Non quod virtuti arduum, sed quod naturae eius contrarium. What then is impossible to God? not that which passeth his power, but that which is contrarie to his nature. Ibidem. Impossibile istud non infirmitatis, sed virtutis & maiestatis: quia veritas non recipit mendacium, nec Dei virtus leuitatis errorem. This impossibilitie proceedeth not of infirmitie,What thing are impossible to God, and why. but of might and maiestie: because the trueth (of God) admitteth not a lie: nor the power of God any note of inconstancie. So that all changes against his nature, or falshoods a∣gainst his trueth bee vtterly impossible to GOD: and that because hee is al∣mighty. Phi. Of contradi∣ctions one part is euer false: and all falshood im∣possible to God.That we know. Theo. Then this also you must needs know, that contradictions be impossible: for, of thē if one part be true, the other is euer false: and that God should be false it is not possible. You must therfore either with Eutyches affirme the manhood of christ to be changed from his former shape, partes, quantitie and circumscription: and consequently from his former sub∣stance: or els against religion and learning, reason and sense defend contradicti∣ons, that is trueth and falshoode to bee possible both at one time;A lie in worke is as bad as a lie in word, & as contrarie to the nature of God. which is no∣thing but to make God a liar in his workes as you be in your wordes for main∣taining that error. Phi. At diuers times, and in  contradictions may bee true. Theo. There can be but one part  other at the same instant is ineuitablie false: and as for your  the proprieties of christes bodie, which wee speake of, bee abslute and inherent necessities, no relations nor comparisons: you may keepe them for some better art: in this assertion they will doe you no seruice.This is right Iesuitical skill to saie the bo∣die of Christ is and is not contained in a place. Phi. What if we say the bodie of christ in the Sacrament, hath the same proportion of shape, extension of partes, and circumscription of place which it hath in heauen, how can you refell vs? Theo. Neuer take the paies to incur new contradictions: a shorter answer will serue you for all: and that is: say you beleeue, you cannot tell what. For otherwise men wil thinke you madde, if you fall to these positions that Christ in the host hath an humane shape, and yet the host, which couereth him, fully round: that he is there in the These bee worse than the Poets chi∣mers. iust length
and breadth of a man, and yet exactly enclosed in euery cromme of the bread, & drappe of the wine, that he is * circumscribed with place, and yet contained in no place, that he * consisteth of skinne, fleshe and bones, and yet breaketh in shi∣uers, and is poured out like liquor: these with infinite other such outragious and enourmous absurdities and contrarieties will declare rather the weakenes of your braines, than the maner of his presence. You shall do well therefore either to shew vs what father euer taught these things before you, or els keepe this confusion of al religion & learning for those that list to ieopard their souls vpon such iests: The Realme of England is not yet minded to admitte thse monsters into their Creede. Phi. The best gounds you haue for these thinges are dreames and miracles of your owne making. We teache not these things without good grounds, and such as the Catholike Fathers before vs embraced, and allowed. Theo. If you follow their steppes, then shew vs their writings for that you affirme. Phi. Can wee not thinke you? Theo. What you can doe, I care not: you do not, I see. Phi. What one thing defend we, which we haue not their witnes and warrant for? Theo. You haue not one father for this whole question. Phi. Not for the real presence? Theo. You may runne on with some misconstructions of the Fa∣thers: which are as soone answered by vs, as obiected by you: but an euident te∣stimonie for any of the partes which I haue proposed, you haue none. Phi. What partes? Theo. Your head is wandring that you haue since forgotten For none of these pointes haue the Ie∣suits so much as one aunci∣ent father. them. For none of these pointes haue the Ie∣suits so much as one aunci∣ent father. That Christ spake not of the bread when he said, this is my body: or that the sense of his wordes was literall, or that the substance of bread ceaseth after consecrati∣on, so as nothing remaineth of the former elements but accidents: or For none of these pointes haue the Ie∣suits so much as one aunci∣ent father. that the corporall eating with the mouth (of which the Fathers speak) must be meant of the things themselues, and not of the signes called by those names and hauing those vertues after sanctification: or For none of these pointes haue the Ie∣suits so much as one aunci∣ent father. that the material substance of Christs na∣tural body may be present in many places at one time: or For none of these pointes haue the Ie∣suits so much as one aunci∣ent father. that it is no heresie to defend the body of Christ after his ascension may lack circumscription, ex∣tension or shape: For any of these bring vs but one sufficient and auncient authoritie, we will omit the rest, and admit your Masse. Phi. Will you stand to that worde? Theo. If you will vndertake the proofe. Philand. You be good at vnderta∣king, but naught at perfourming. I will. Theo. And what if you performe it not, will you bethinke your selfe how lewdly you seduce the people of this land vnder a pre∣tence of pietie and resist the annoincted of God vnder a colour of blind deuotion and zeale to your holie Father the worker of al this wickednes though the founder of your two Celledges? Phi. If I perform not that, I will do any thing: marie prouided alwaies you shall not cauill at the Fathers workes, when I cite them, and say they be forged. Theo. Prouided also, that you pro∣duce the Fathers workes themselues, and not the bare reportes of your fellowes, that haue falsely conueied many thinges in the Fathers names. Philand. You shall haue their owne workes. Theoph. Then keepe on your owne course.
Phi. The rest of the points, which you propose, I am alreadie past: only trā∣substaniation, which you most impugne, I kept to the last to giue you the list: But if I proue it so, as you shall not deny it, will you be as good as your pro∣mise, and become a catholike? Theo. A Catholike if I were not, I would bee with a good will, but not of your making. For if you cannot shew me one Fa∣ther that euer taught your Transubstantiation, wel you may It is enough for the Iesus to call them∣selues Catho∣lies, though they cannot shw one wri∣ter for a thou∣sand yeares that taught ther transub∣stantiation. call your selues catholiks and christes own fellowes if you will: but all that be Godly and wise will take you for deceitful, if no for desperate, heretikes. But why spend you time with triling thus? It were better your fathers were on foot, at lest, if you haue them. Phi. Haue them? Such as shall amaze you when you heare them. Theo. Your vaine is in. A stourdie preface doth ill become an hungrie Oratour. Phi. Marke the end. Theo. I would see the man, that I might marke him. Phi. S. Austen shalbe the Which will say neuer a word for your purpose. This is cited out of S. Au∣sten by frier Walden tomo 2. de Sacramen∣tis cap. 83 a di∣uine worke in D. Allens iudgement. lib. 1. de Euch. sac pa. 34. This forgery with others was iudicially allowed by Pope Martin the fifth and his Cardinals in their Con∣sistorie. man. Theo. Was he a Transubstantiator? Phi. Fairly, flatly, fully. Th. So was the moone first made of green cheese. Phi. You wil not beleeue him, til you heare him. Theo. He is not long in comming hath he not yet learned his lesson? or are you scant resolued whether it be he or not? Phi. It is euen he: and these be his wordes, Non dubitare debet alquis, cum panis & vinum consecrantur in veram substantiam Christi: ita vt non remaneat sub∣stantia panis vel vini: cum multa alia etiam in operibus Dei non minus miranda vide∣mus. Hominem enim substantialiter mutat Deus in lapidem, vt vxorem Loth: & in paruo artificio hominis faenum & filicem in vitrum. Nec credendum est quod sub∣stantia panis velvini remaneat: sed panis in corpus Christi: & vinū in sanguinem con∣uertitur, solummodo qualitatibus panis & vini remanentibus. No man ought to doubt when bread & wine are consecrated into the trew substance of christ, so as the substance of bread & wine doth not remaine, whereas we see ma∣nie things in the works of God no lesse maruelous (than this). A man God changeth substantially into a stone, as Loths wife: & in the small workman∣ship of man, hay & ferne into glasse. Neither must we beleeue that the sub∣stance of bread or wine remaineth, but the bread is turned into the bodie of Christ, & the wine into (his) bloud, the qualities (or accidents) of bread & wyne only remaining. What say you to this check, is it mate or no? Theo. The words are sufficient, if the writer be ancient. Phi. Then are you gone: for the author is S. Austen▪ Theo. He seemeth to haue beene some glassmaker, rather than S Austen: for he saith the This young Austen lac∣ked not onely learning and trueth, but Latine and witte. working of glasse is as wounderful a feate, as the turning of bread into Christs bodie. Phi. You would disgrace the writer: but he will not so be put out of countenance. Theo. I think he will not: for had he, or you, any shame left, he would haue blushed al his while to beare S Austens name, which was none of his: & you would haue had some remorce to deceiue the worlde with such apparent & euident treacheries. Phi. I thought where we should haue you. Now you cannot shifte the wordes, you  the place for a forgerie: but this is against the first pro∣uiso, which I made with you. Theophi. Then shew vp where you find it
in his workes: for that was the second prouiso, which you agreed to. Phi. I assure my selfe these wordes are Saint Austens. Theophil. Your assurance is not currant. Shewe vs where, that wee may finde them. Phi. What if I haue not the booke in a readme? Theo. Name the place and it shll suffice. Phi. Perhaps it is Had you not beene asha∣med of your occupation you would haue printed i. not printed. Theo. By whome then is it reported? Phi. By such as would not lye. Theoph. By Walden the frier that wrate against Wicleff? Phil. What if he were the reporter? Theophil. Where had he it? Phi. In an old copie, written with an auncient and set hand. Theo. Which ne∣uer no man sawe besides himselfe. Philand. That you cannot tell. Theoph. Nor you: but where is that copy now? Philan. Why aske you me? out of S. Augustine he had it. Theo. Shew vs the booke, and beare the bell. Philan. He saith it. Theo. As though your frierly practises, and manifolde forgeries vnder the fathers names were not too wel knowen to trust a Romish Coruester vpon his bare worde, in a matter of such importance. Phi. In my conscience,The woordes did so plainly betray thm∣selues, that they haue since suppres∣sed the booke for vere shame. hee woulde not wilfullie belye S. Augustine. Theophil. Your conscience is no good consequence. In my knowe∣ledge there was no such doctrine taught in the Church, as these woordes import whiles S. Augustine liued: nor fiue hundreth yeares after his death: but the contrary was earnestly maintained and auouched, as I haue prooued by Gelasius, Theodoret, and others. And therefore either Walden must make it of his owne heade, or ignorantly light on a patch of Anselmus, or some such late writer, vnder the name of Saint Augustine: which was common in your Abbayes and is at this day confessed by your owne fellowes. Philand. If you thinke Saint Augustine were mistaken:Bede likewise forged by Walden. you shall haue in venerable Bede as plaine woordes for this point as in Saint Au∣gustine. Theophil. And as plainely forged as Saint Augustine was? Philand. Heare what he saieth before you iudge. Theophil. I am as rea∣dy to heare as you to speake. Philand. His woordes are, Citatura The. Walden, tomo 2. vt su∣pra cap. 82. Ibi forma panis videtur, vbi substantia panis non est. There the forme of bread appeareth, where the substance of bread is not. Theophil. These places hit your handes as patte as if your selues had framed them. Philand. You were best saie this is forged, Theophil. I neede not. It saith so much of it selfe, creept you can shewe where it is written. Philand. In his He neuer wrate anie such booke▪ booke de my∣steriis missae. Theophil. There be extat eight tomes of his workes: is it in any of them? Philand. It maie be, it is not. Theophil. Did he euer write any such booke, as de mysteriis missae? Philand. What else? Theo. Who saith so? Phi. This is alledged out of that booke. Theo. But is he ne∣uer wrate anie such booke, how can thi be alldged out of him? Phi. If he did not, you saie something: but how prooue you, that he wrate no such booke? Theo. Ny you must prooue he did. We hauing the Catalogue of his labours witnessed by Triemius and others of your owne friends: and eight tmes of his writinges at this day extant find no such booke named as Walden mentioneth. Philand. All this notwithstanding, he might write
such a booke.The credite of both these places lieth onely on frier Walden, who  fourteene hundreth yeares after Christ, and neuer anie man saw the bookes be∣sides him. Why should not a man be∣leeue the le∣gend, as well a  Wal∣den, the le∣gend that be∣ing of more authoritie & antiquitie thā the frier? Theo. He might, is not enough: you must prooue he did, before we acquite you of corruption. Phi. Walden repeateth those wordes as out of his booke. Theo. We had too late experience of Walden in S. Austen, to beleeue either him, or you. Phi. You will deny all things. Theo. You yet bring nothing, but that which is no where found in the fathers workes, if it be not lewdly forged in their names. Thinke you with such trumperie to trie your selues Catholikes? Phi. We haue found and good records. Theo. Bring out those, for these be worse than rotten. A frier, fourteene hundreth and thirtie yeares after Christ, to come with new places out of Austen and Bede cleane contrarie to the rest of their writings, and such as neuer any man alledged before him: and neuer any man saw them after him, who but seducers would bleare the world, and blinde themselues with such authorities? Phi. Wee did but alledge them to sound what you would say. Theo. Then leaue them with shame, since you see what they are; and get you to other, if you haue anie. Phi. You would haue them auncient. Theo. Would you prooue your selues Catholikes by men of your owne faction? Phi. If you count that a faction, all the fathers were of From Pope Hildebrand downeward, a number of proud and stately pre∣lates haue beene of your faction. our faction. Theo. You may soone make them to any faction, if you follow frier Waldens fashion: but bring vs their workes that we may iudge of their woordes, or els you striue in vaine. Phi. Hereafter I will. Theo. Then haue you a cold sute of this question. For of accidentes without subiect, or abolishing the substance of bread, neuer father spake one word. Phi. Yeas: S. Chrysostome aith, Chrys. sermo. 1. de Eucharist. in Euceniis. Chrysostoms words exami∣ned. Doest thou see bread? doest thou see wine? Doe these thinges goe to the draught as other meates doe? Not so. Thinke not so. For as when waxe is put to the fire nothing of the substance remaineth, nothing redoundeth: so here also thinke thou the mysteries consumed with the substance of the (diuine) bodie. Heare you this Theo∣philus? Nothing of the former substance remaineth but the same is consumed with the presence or substance of Christes bodie. Theo. I heare it well Phi∣lander, if you would take it right. When you put waxe into the fire, nothing, neither shew, nor substance remaineth: this is so true, that it will doe you small good. Phi. Will it not? So it is in the mysteries, saith this father. Theoph. You would haue it so. But Chrysostome saith, That is, thinke not on the clements but lift vp the eyes of thy mind aboue them, as if they were consumed. so thinke, when thou com∣mest to the mysteries. Phi. And should wee thinke a falshood, when wee ap∣proch to the mysteries? Theo. No: but pull both your hartes and eyes from the materiall elements, as not regarding them: and fixe your cogitations on the celestial grace and vertue that preuaileth and worketh in the mysteries. Phi. He would haue vs thinke the mysteries to be consumed. Theo. If any reall mutation were to be concluded by this place, your holie formes and accidents of breade and wine must be packing, as well as the substance. For when waxe is throwen into the fire, what accidences can you et vs remaining? doe they not perish togither with the substance? If you consult the Schooles, they will tell you the accidentes onely perish, the matter doeth not. So that
Chrysostomes similitude maketh litle for your conuersion of substances with∣out accidences,Accidents must be con∣sumed as wel as substance by Chryso∣stomes simili∣tude. That which is not is no my∣sterie: and Chrysostome saith the my∣steries are consumed. his illation certainly maketh lesse. Thinke, saieth he, that the mysteries in like ort be consumed. The substance of bread, which you say is not, can no way be taken with you for the mysteries: but the shewes and formes of bread and wine by your opinion must be counted in this and all other places the sacred mysteries: and therefore if any mysteries be consumed, your acciden∣ces can neuer scape the brunt of these wordes: Howbeit Chrysostomes true meaning was not to turne the bread and wine from their former qualities or substances, but the communicantes from all vnworthy and earthly cogitations of the mysticall elements: and to stir them rather to marke in this Sacrament the wonderfull power and effects of Gods spirit and grace, than the base condi∣tion and naturall digestion of bread and wine. Phi. Would S. Chrysostom haue vs thinke the mysteries to bee consumed, vnlesse in deede they were consumed? Theo. His directing our cogitations for religion and reuerence rather to the inward force, than outward appearance of the mysteries, doeth not chaunge the sensible qualities of bread and wine, whereof hee spake,The end of Chrysostomes admonition and instructi∣on. much lesse the substance alone, whereof he spake not: but draweth the receiuers from that which their eyes behold, to that, which by faith they beleeue to the secreter and diuiner part of the Sacrament: not abolishing the one, but preferring the other, as more worthy to be considered and desired by the commers to the Lordes table. And in this sense he willeth the people not to thinke that the Priest is a man in the verie next wordes that followe without line or letter betwixt. Chrys. in Eu∣caeniis. sermo. 1. de Eucharist. Wherefore approaching (to the Lordes table) doe not thinke that you receiue the diuine body at the handes of a man, but that you take a fierie coale by the Seraphims tongues, which Esay sawe in his vision. Can this be Chrysostoms meaning,Chrysostome would haue the communi∣cants thinke the Priest is no man and the sacrament is a fierie coale. It is wilfulnes to vnderstand one part of this sentence and to per∣uert the o∣ther. that in act and verie deede the Priest is changed into a Seraphim, his hand into a paire of tongs, the body of Christ in∣to a coale of fire? Except you be past your fiue wits, you wil say no: yet Chryso∣stom in the same place perswadeth the cōmunicants so to think as he did before that the mysteries were consumed by the substance or presence of Christs body. Then if the latter wordes inferre no such chaunge: why should the former? If you be not so foolish as to mistake the second part of this sentence, why be you so wilfull as to peruert the first, vttered at the same time, to the same purpose, with the verie same phrase of speach? Chrysostomes intent is no more to trans∣substantiate the bread, than the priest, or the bodie of Christ: but with vehement amplifications (as his manner is) he perswadeth the people to come to the Lordes table with no lesse reuerence than if they were to receiue a fierie coale (as Esay did in his vision) from one of the glorious Seraphims. And to this end also doth he kendle them what he can, not to be basely minded and affected to∣ward the mysteries, as if they were onely bread and wine, in that sort to passe through the bellie with other meates, but to prepare their hartes, and to lift them vp to God,Ibidem. as they promised to doe when the Priest saide, lift vp your
minds and harts, & they made answere, we lift them vp vnto the Lord. These wordes therefore force no reall mutation in the thinges receiued,The right cō∣struction of Chrysostoms wordes. but leade the receiuers from thinking on the weake creatures, which they see, to the mighty power of Gods graces, which they see not: and this is done with a religious cō∣sideration, not with any monsterous transubstantiation or annihilation of the sacred mysteries. Phi. S. Cyrill of Ierusalem saith: Cyril. Catechis. mystagogica. 4. Know you for a suerty, that this bread which is seene of vs, is not bread, though the tast find it to be bread, but the body of Christ. And so Theophilact, Theophil. in 26. Matth. That the Sa∣crament is no breade: is a new kinde of speach though not much materi∣all for the Ie∣suits. It appeareth to bee bread, but it is fleshe. Theo. The first authors of this speach were late writers, as Theophilact, or lately set foorth by your fellowes not without great suspition, as Cyrill of Ieru∣salem: and the speech it selfe doth somwhat vary from the stile both of the Scri∣ptures and fathers which acknowledge this mysterie to be bread & wine. 1. Cor. ca. 10. The bread, which we breake, saith Paul, is it not the communion of Christes bo∣dy? We all are partakers of one bread. 1. Cor. 11. As often as you eate of this bread & drink of this cup, you shew the Lords death til he come. Let a man examine himselfe, and so let him eate of this bread and drink of this cup. And our Sa∣uiour in the Gospell speaking of the cup: Matth. 26. I will not drinke hencefoorth of this fruit of the vine. Tertul. Tertul. lib. 1. contra Marcio∣nem.Christ hath not, euen at this day reiected the water of the creator, by which he doth wash his, nor the bread, by the which hee doth represent his verie body. Clemens Alexandrinus, Clemens Alex. lib. 2. cap. 2. pe∣dago. This is my blood, euē the blood of the grape. Cyprian, Cypr. lib. 2. e∣pist. 3. We find it was wine, which the Lord cal∣led his blood. The Lord called his body, bread kneaded togither of many cornes, and his blood, wine pressed out of many clusters of grapes. Origen, (Orig. in 15. Matth.The Lords bread) according to the materiall (partes) thereof goeth into the belly and so foorth by the draught. Austen, August. tract. in Iohan. 26. The elder fa∣thers affirme the Sacramēt to be bread. As the men of God before vs did expound this, the Lord commended his body & blood in those things which are made one of many. For the first is kneaded of many cornes into one (lumpe) the other is pressed of many clusters into one (liquour). That then which you saw, is bread; which also your eyes can tell you. Cyrill of A∣lexandria, Cyril. in Ioan. lib. 4. cap. 14. To the beleeuing Disciples Christ gaue peeces of breade, saying; take, eate, this is my body. Hesychius, (Hee meaneth) Hesych. in Le∣uit. cap. 8. ii. 12. that mystery, which is both breade and fleshe. The phrase it selfe therefore (It is not bread) sauoreth of later ages and writers: and crosseth that course of speeche which both Scriptures and Fathers obserued: and yet if you suffer them to declare their owne mindes, they may soone be reconciled to the rest. Theophilact What they meane that say it is no bread. expressing the same point in other wordes, saieth: Theophil. in Marc. cap. 14. Speciem quidem panis & vini seruat, in virtutem autem carnis & sanguinis transelementat. (Christ) keepeth the shape (or kind) of bread and wine, but changeth thē into the vertue of his body and blood. Cyrill openeth his owne saying more at large, Cyril. Catech. mystagogica. 3. The bread of the Eucharist after the inuocation of the holy Ghost,
is nowe no more common bread, but the bodie of Christ. Idem Catech. mystagogica. 4. No breade: that is, no bare and cō∣mon bread.In the new Law, the heauenly bread and cup of saluation sanctifie both soule and bodie. As the bread serueth for the bodie, so doth the word for the soule. Thinke not therefore (of the Sacrament) as of bare bread and bare wine, it is the body and blood of Christ according to the Lordes owne wordes. And although sense tell thee this (that is bare bread and wine) yet let faith con∣firme thee, neither iudge them by tast, but rather by faith assure thy selfe without all doubt that the body and blood (of Christ) are giuen vnto thee. This assertion, we grant, is right and good; and this intent had hee, when hee said, the bread which is seene is no bread, meaning no common, no bare bread. In which assertion other ancient Fathers concurre with him. Iustinus, Iust. Apol. 2.Wee receiue not these thinges as a common & vsual bread, or accustomed drink, but we be taught, that the food blessed by praier of the worde receiued from him, is the fleshe and blood of that Iesus which tooke fleshe (for our sakes.) Ireneus, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34. The bread hauing the inuocation of God is nowe no common bread, but an Eucharist (or thankesgiuing) consisting of two things, a ter∣restriall & a celestiall. So Ambrose, Ambros. de iis qui mysteriis initiantur. ca. 9. (The Sacrament) is not that which na∣ture hath framed: but that which blessing hath halowed. They do not auouch the Sacrament to bee simply no bread; they teach it to bee no naturall nor v∣suall bread, because the vertue, power and force of Christes flesh is vnited to it and receiued with it, though to sight and ta it keepe the shewe of nothing else but bread. Phi. What is species panis which the Fathers speake of,Species panis is not taken for the qualities of the bread without the substance. Wee haue no triall of sub∣stance, but by sense. but the vtter appea∣rance of bread, when the substaunce is altered? Theo. Doeth species signifie a hape without substaunce? Philand. It signifieth the shape, and not the sub∣staunce. Theo. Euerie creature hath his substaunce ioyned with his sen∣sible shape and forme: and therefore though the one doe not signifie the other: yet the one inferreth the other by the verie necessitie of nature: neyther hath GOD giuen vs any perfecter triall of substaunce than by sight and sense: which is sure enough, because shewes without substaunce are no creatures. Philand. But this in the Sacrament is miraculous: and that is the reason, why species in the Fathers doeth signifie a shewe without sub∣staunce: or as our Schooles rather like to say for perspicuities sake: ac∣cidentes without a subiect. Theophil. Your Schooles were perspicu∣ous, as the Lande of Aegypt was light-some, when it was couered with palpable darkenesse: but where doeth any Father speaking of the Sa∣rament, take species for a shewe without substaunce?Species doeth rather import than exclude the substance of these and all other crea∣tures. Philand. That is uerie where the meaning of the word, when they applie it to the Sacrament. Theo. How proue you that? Phi. It needeth no proofe: the very word doeth o signifie. Theophil. The worde, species, doeth no more exclude the sub∣taunce of breade and wine in the Sacrament: than species humana, the shew,
shape and forme of a man, which you haue, doth take from you the ubstance & truth of mans nature. Which if you thinke it doeth looke what answere you will make to him that shall aske what lieth vnder the shape of a man in you: it must be the substance of a man, or some worse thing. And if you can keepe both the shape and substaunce of man; why may not the bread and wine do the like▪ for all the word species, which is verified of men and other creatures aswel as of the bread and wine in the mysteries? Phi. The comparison is not like.The compari∣son is liker than you are ware of. For the bread is changed and so am not I. Theophil. Doe you not often change both the inward and outward man, I meane the state of body and soule? Phi. I change as others doe. Theo. You can be no christian; if you be not changed from the state in which you were born. You were born the child of Gods wrath, and seruant of sinne: if you be renewed and freed from that, then are you wholy changed. Phi. This is no No more is that in the bread any sub∣stantiall change. substan∣tiall change, such as we affirme to be in the bread. Theo. If you would proue that which you affirme, you might happen to conclude that, which now you can not. Phi. That is soone prooued. Theo. I maruell then you stay long, before you doe it: and faint so often when you begin it. You auouch that the word species in the Fathers signifieth your shewes without substance, and accidents without subiect: and when the very shew of men, which you beare about you, conuinceth that follie: you presume a substantiall change to be in the bread to helpe foorth the vse of the word, which you imagine against all learning & reason, was their meaning. The word spe∣cies taken for euident truthFor the worde species, though it bee diuersely vsed among the Fathers and often iterated in this matter of the Sacrament: yet shall you neuer bring vs a∣ny one place, where it is taken for a shew without substance: and therefore by that worde you can hardly inferre the bread to be changed in substaunce, and nothing to be left besides the accidentes. Sainct Ambrose sayeth it impor∣teth as much, as an euident sight and trueth. Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis cap. 4. Speciem pro veritate accipien∣dam legimus. Specie inuentus vt homo. Wee read this word species to bee ta∣ken for the verie trueth (of a thing.) As Christ was found (not in shew, but) in trueth like a man. And of the Lordes cuppe,Idem de sacra∣mentis. li. 4. c. 4. Perhaps thou wilt say, speciem sanguinis non video, sed habet similitudinem. I see not the trueth of blood, but it hath the resemblance. Which obiection Ambrose repeateth shortly af∣ter in these words, Lib. 6. cap. 1. Similitudinem video, non video sanguinis veritatem. I see the resemblance, I see not the truth of blood. Where note that species is not one∣ly contrary to the onely likenesse and appearance of any thing, but equiualent with the trueth and nature of euery thing. Then are shewes without sub∣staunce your fansies without iudgement: you neuer receiued any such do∣ctrine from the Catholike Fathers, your selues haue deuised it of late, since barbarisme preuailed in your Schooles, and Antichrist was exalted in your churches. Philand. So species is nowe and then vsed: but doeth that inferre that this is the generall signification of the word wheresoeuer we finde it? Theo. This
sufficeth to exclude your shewes without substaunce,Species is the substance & kind of anie creature. vnlesse you can bring some better inforcement than the very word: which you can not. And yet Sainct Ambrose giueth an other vse of the worde, (and that treating of the Sacra∣mentes) which vtterly subuerteth your accidental shewes. Ambr. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 4. Creaturae non potest esse veritas, sed species, quae facile soluitur at que mutatur. No creature can bee (said to be) a trueth, but a shew or appearance, which is soone dis∣solued and abolished. In this sense species is all one with any creature or substaunce, which soone decaieth, as euerie mortall thing doth: and the learned Fathers writing of the Sacrament continually vse the worde to signifie the nature and kinde of euerie creature, and not the naked shewes or acci∣dentes. Sainct Ambrose, Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 9. Ante benedictionem alia species nominatur: before it be blessed, it is called an other (not shewe but) kinde. Ibidem. Grauior est ferri species, quam aquarum liquor. The kinde (or nature) of Iron (not the shewe of yron) is weightier than the liquor of water. Ibidem. If the word of Elias were able to fet fire from heauen, non valebit Christi sermo vt species mutet elementorum: shall not the word of Christ be of strength to change the kindes (not the shapes) of these elementes? So doeth Augustine likewise. August. de catechizandis rudibus. ca. 26.Non sic habendam esse speciem benedictione consecratam quemadmodum habetur in vsu quolibet: the kinde (or element) consecrated with blessing, must not be so reckoned of, as it is in common vse. Idem in psal. 77. Idem cibus illorum qui & noster, sed significatione idem, non specie: the (Fathers of the old Testament) had the same food which we haue: but the same in signification, not in (external) kinde: Idem tract. 26. in Iohan. Aliud illi, a∣liud nos, sed specie visibili: they (dranke) one thing, we (drink) an other thing, but in visible kinde: Idem in tract. 45. in Iohan. Ibi Petra Christus: nobis Christus, quod in altari Dei po∣nitur. Si speciem visibilem intendas, aliud est. To them the Rock was Christ: to vs that is Christ which is set on the altar of God. If you looke to the visible kinde, it is an other thing (than that they dranke.) In these places you can not interprete species, a shewe without sub∣stance, vnlesse you wil transubstantiate Manna which the children of Israel did eate,Species is no∣thing lsse with the aun∣cient fathers than a shewe without sub∣stance. the rocke which they dranke of, the hatchet which Elizeus made swm, the bread that is in common vse without & before consecration: for these things Austen and Ambrose (comparing them with this Sacrament) do call visibiles species, visibles kindes, as they do the bread and wine proposed to the faithfull at the Lordes table. And were you so peruerse that against the meaning of the Father, nd signi∣fication of the word, you would needes haue species to bee taken for your mira∣culous and mysticall accidences, I can tell you they are like to shrinke in this change as well as the substaunce. For Ambrose saith, Ambro. de iis qui initiantur mysteris. cap. 9. Sermo Christi mutat species elementorum, the word of Christ changeth by your interpretation) the shewes of the elementes: which is so apparantly false, that your selues dare not abide it: And therefore species must stand, not for the outward formes and shewes, but for the thinges themselues. As Sainct Augustine speaking of the
Sacramentall bread, sayth: Aug. ermo. ad infantes. Cita∣ur à Beda. 1. Cor. cap. 11. vt sit visibilis species panis, multa grana in vnum consperguntur. Manie cornes are kneaded togither to make (not the shew, but) the visible kinde (or creature) of bread. By which it is euident that species with auncient writers in their discourses of this Sacrament, is not a shewe without a substaunce, as you vainly suppose, but a kinde or creature, which is far from accidentes hanging in the ayre, you know not how, by mira∣culous geometrie. Philand. Wee ground not our selues so much on the bare name of species, as on the change of the bread and wine, made by vertue of consecration: as all the A change of the elements they confesse, but not yours. Fathers witnesse. Theo. It is a verie simple foundation to builde on a bare word, which hath many significations besides that, and any signification, rather than that, which you conceiue: and yet that is one of the best foundati∣ons you haue for your newe founde shewes without substaunce: and as for the chaunge of the sacred elementes made by the wordes of Christ, and mentioned in the Fathers: if you did not vrge your fansies on their phrases, but examine their doctrine, you should soone spie your error: which nowe you will not, you bee so wedded to the preiudice of your owne opinion. Phi. Doe not all the Fathers with one voice confesse a change to bee made in the elementes by the words of Consecration? Theo. Doe not we acknow∣ledge the same? How could vsuall bread taken of the fruites of the earth, and seruing only to feede the bodie,The chaunge in the elemēts is indeede wonderfull. become a Sacrament & instrument of heauen∣ly grace and life, to quicken and strengthen the soule of man, but by some great and maruelous chaunge? Phi. Such as none coulde perfourme, but the migh∣ty finger of God himselfe. For so S. Ambrose and others to perswade this chaunge, haue recourse to Christes eternall power and trueth. Theo. Yea ve∣rily. Phi. That confession is suffcient to confute the doctrine which you defend. Theo. I see not how. Phi. If the bread were not changed from his former substance, it could nei∣ther bee miraculous,One sacramēt in his effect and force is more miracu∣lous than ma∣nie corporall and sensible woonders. nor neede the omnipotent power of Christ. For figures & similitudes men may make: but this mutation is wrought by the mightie pow∣er of the holy Ghost: and the manner is vnsearchable. Theo. Greater power & truth are required for the finishing of one Sacrament, than for the working of many miracles. Miracles not only the godly, but also the wicked haue diuerse times wrought. The Sorcerers of Egypt did some wonders. Antichrist hath his miracles, and those not a few: But Sacramentes, no Sainct, no not the chosen and elect Angels of heauen can institute. For who dare promise, who can performe the spirituall and celestiall graces of God to bee annexed to the vi∣sible signes, but only God?Christs eter∣nall power & trueth is re∣quired for the working of erie sacra∣nt. How could water regenerate the soule, if the worde were not God? How could bread and wine norish to life euerlasting, vnlesse the same God had likewise spoken the word? We must in al sacraments be fully persuaded of Christs infallible truth, & al∣sufficient power, before we can either beleeue, or inioy the promises. If his word might lack truth, or want power, then should our faith vanish, & these outward
elements perish without profiting vs: but with him is no changing, neither can any thing defeate his wil: & therefore when wee bee taught to looke not on the weaknes of the creatures which be corruptible, but on the perfection of his hea∣uenly word, which is puissant & predomināt ouer al things, what doth this helpe your real & corporal cōuersion of bread into Christ? What maketh this for Trā∣substantiation? God is wonderfull in this and all other his sacramentes, not by casting away substances,God is marue∣lous in his sa∣cramēts with∣out transsub∣stantiation. and leauing accidences, but by working that in our hearts by the mightie power of his spirit aboue nature, which the visible signes import to our senses: and this is more maruelous in any wise mans eye, than your accidentall shewes without a subiect. Phi. God is maruelous in all his workes: but in this more than in any o∣ther: because the substance of the bread & wine is changed,No father a∣uoucheth the substanee of breade and wine to be chaunged. where the qualities are not. Theo. That change you dreame of; but who auoucheth it besides your selues? or what ancient father euer mentioned any such? Phi. They all confesse the change which we speake of. Theo. You bee so deepe in your empty shewes, that wee take your all to bee as much as none. Phi. Thinke you, as you list: wee knowe what wee haue. Theo. If your stoare bee so great, why make you such curtsie to name vs one? Phi. You will quarell with him, when I bring him. Theo. Your selfe mistrust him, before you offer him. Phi. I mistrust your carping, not his writing. Theo. If mine answere bee not sound, wherefore serue you but to refute it? Phi. Wel then,De cons. dist. 2. ¶ quia corpus. Eusebius Emissenus hath an euident testimony for this mat∣ter. Recedat omne infidelitatis ambiguum, quandoquidem qui author est muneris, ipse est etiam testis veritatis. Nam inuisibilis sacerdos visibiles creaturas in substantiam corporis & sanguinis sui verbo secreta potestate conuertit, ita dicens, Accipite & com∣edite: hoc est corpus meū. Et sanctificatione repetita, accipite & bibite, ait. Hic est sanguis meus.This sermon is forged in Eusebius E∣misenus name. Ergo sicut ad nutum praecipientis Domini repente & ex nihilo substiterunt excelsa caelorum, profunda fluctuum, vasta terrarum: ita pari potestate in spiritualibus Sacramentis, vbi praecipit virtus, seruit effectus. Let all doubt of infidelitie depart, because he that is the author of the gift is also the witnesse of the trueth. For the inuisible priest turned the visible creatures into the substance of his bodie and bloud with his word (and) secret power, saying, take, eate, this is my body, and repeating the sanctification he saide, take & drinke; this is my bloud. Therefore as at the Lordes becke commaunding, the high heauens, the deepe waters, the wide earth were made on the sud∣daine of nothing: so with like force in the spiritual Sacraments, when (his) power commandeth, the effect followeth. These words be plaine enough, if either truth or authority can content you. The. Either shal content me, if I may be sure of either. Phi. Here you find both. Theo. Who wrate this sermon which you cite?If his age be not knowen, how can his authoritie be esteemed? Phi. Eusebius Emissenus. Theo. When liued he? Phi. Why doe you aske? Theo. Reason we knowe his age before we receiue his testimonie. Phi. His age I can tell you is as an∣cient as his doctrine. Theo. I thinke both of one antiquity. For neither the mā,
nor the matter were knowen in the church of Christ for 900. yeares and vp∣ward. Phi. How you be deceiued? S. Hierom maketh mention of Eusebius E∣missenus, that Hier. de scrip∣toribus ccles. in Euseb. E∣meseno. wrate short homilies vpon the Gospels somewhat before his time. Theo. And that made your fellowes put his name to certaine latine homilies, that were none of his: and to beare men in hand he was a frenchman: but when he liued they can not tell. Phi. Yes, S. Hierom saieth hee died vnder Constantius, more than twelue hundred yeares ago. Theo. Eusebius Emissenus then wrate and then died: but who wrate these latine homilies that were extant in his name? Phi. Himselfe. Theo. What countriman was he?The Iesuits say he was a Frenchman. Phi. I thinke a Frenchman. Theo. So Canisius both your collegue, and the compiler of your huge chaos or catechisme, sayeth: ma∣rie when he liued, that hee could not tell: and therefore of his owne authoritie placeth him 200. yeres after S. Hierom with a perchaunce,Canisij Chrono∣logia in 500. least if we should aske him for his proofe, he might be taken with a lie. His wordes are, Euse∣bius Emissenus Gallus,Perhaps, is as much as you cannot tell when. cuius habentur homiliae, hoc fortè tempore claruit, Eusebius Emissenus of Fraunce, whose homilies wee haue extant, perhaps liued at this time: that is, 500. yeres after Christ. Phi. And so it may be. The. But this is not he, that S. Hierom speaketh of. For he died vnder Cōstantus; whose raign and life ended 343. after Christ. Phi. The elder hee was, the better his credit for this question. Theo. But the worst is,Emesenus is bishop of E∣mesa in Sy∣ria. that Eusebius Emissenus was a Bishop in Syria, & wrate in greeke: and therefore to assigne him latine homilies, and to suppose him to bee a french∣man, was a very grosse corruption, and such as children will deride. Phi. Might there not be an other of that name? Theo. Ye as in that place, but in Fraunce there could bee none. Phi. Why not? Theo. Because Emesenus doth signifie Bishop of Emesa in Syria, where this Eusebius liued, and as S. Hierom wri∣teth, was buried at Antioch the chiefe Metropolis of Syria. Phi. But this is Eusebius Emissenus which Gratian alleadgeth. Theo. Gracian hath put Emisse∣nus for Eme∣senus by neg∣ligēce or wil∣fulnes choose you whether. No such place in all Europe as whence Emis∣senus shoulde be deriued. This was a common pra∣ctise with the friers in the fahers wos.It is not the first word by fiue hundred, that Gratian hath altered. For Euse∣bius Emesenus Sainct Hieroms certificate is verie good: for Eusebius Emissenus the first record that we finde is in Gratian: where by the verie stile, periods, casures, members and agnominations you may perceiue him to be a latinist, & as Canisius addet, a Frenchman. Now in what age he liued, & in what place he preached, we require some proofe before we can or will admit these things to be his, which you haue forged in his name. Emissenus must be a deriuatiue from some place: shew any such place in Europe, and then you saie somewhat for the likelyhood, though not enough for the certainty of this writer. Philand. What if we can not? Theophil. Then hee that hath but halfe an eye, may soone discerne  treacherie. Your Monks & Friers seeking to colour their fained holines, & late sprong faith with the reuered titles of acient fathers, prfered the names of Austen, Ambrose, Hierō Cyprian, Isidore, & others before diuerse of their own d fe:
& finding in S. Hierom, Eusebius Emesenus to be an old writer, gaue him a new liuerie with the rest, and ascribed certaine latin homilies such as they had vnto him: whom themselues, or Gratian that first lighted on this old new wri∣ter corruptly called Eusebius Emissenus. And because the forgerie did hardly hang together, the right Eusebius beeing a Gretian and of great antiquity, Ca∣nisius the generall Atturnie for your religion, hath deuised twoe more of that name: one a french-man, that perchance, he saith, florished in the fift Centurie, and an other that Canisij Chro∣nologia in anno Dom. 500. wrate after Gregory the great and expounded the ghos∣pels: but when either of them liued, or where they taught, neither he nor you can bring vs any proofe besides your bare and vaine supposals. Phi. Wil you not trust the inscription of the worke it selfe? Theo. That were the way to let euery frier and forgerer,Nothing is more easie than to giue a false inscripti∣on to aie booke. create new fathers at his pleasure. It is as easie for them that copie out other mens workes, to make false as true inscriptions, and so haue your Monkes plaied with euery father that was an∣cient, as the most partiall of your owne side doe confesse, and in this is too appa∣rent. For how many mens names thinke you, did this homilie beare, which you alleadge, not yet two hundreth yeres ago? Phi. What can I tel? Theo. Then I can. Looke in Walden, and in one Chapter you shal find this very ser∣mon beare three mens names. Phi. Is that possible? Theo. The lesse possible the thing: the more palpable your forging. In the 67 chapter,Tomo 2. de sa∣cramentis. Walden ci∣teth a peece of this sermō vnder Ansel∣mus name be∣fore he was ware. Walden tomo 2. de sacramen∣tis. cap. 68. his aduersarie alleaged the woordes, which you bring out of Isidore, in his sermon beginning with Magnitudo caelestium. That Wal∣den doth not much impugne, but very often so calleth him: and yet at length re∣membring himselfe, he or some man for him, yeeldeth to the decrees, and calleth that writer Eusebius Emisenus by Gratians authority: marie with a single s: where now a double is gotten both into the worde, and into Gratian, and yet in the 68 chapter forgetting what he him selfe or others for him had done, he ci∣teth an other part of the same sermon vnder Anselmus name: Ratificat eandem cōparationem in sermone spe dicto, qui incipit Magnitudo caelestiū, Anselmus dicens: This comparison Anselmus doth ratifie in his sermon often spoken of which beginneth Magnitudo caelestium, though afterward in the same chapter he re∣turne againe to his former staggering, and call the writer of your wordes Isi∣dore or rather Eusebius. Phi. Let him be Isidore, or Eusebius, we You mut care for the author before you cite him as a witnes in religion. care not whether. Theo. Since the Sermon is not his, whose name it beareth, we may not suffer you to choppe names as you list: neither neede we so much as regard the words, before wee know the author: lest we reuerence lewd and late Friers vnder the names of ancient and learn Fathers. Phi. Whatsoeuer he was, ancient he was, and taught the same doctrine, without all question, which we doe. Theo. His antiquitie you know not, and his doctrine you vnderstand not. For though we like not your shuffling and exchanging of names with the fathers, and broaching your fancies and heresies vnder their  this whle sermon we can and doe admitte, as hauing no∣thing
either dissident from true antiquitie or repugnant to that which we teach. Phi. Will you say that doctrine of his is not repugnant to yours? Theo. Why should I not? Phi. Wil you confesse that the visible creatures are tur∣ned into the substance of christs flesh by the secret power of his word?They are, but by no ma∣eriall or cor∣poral change. The. His words I say, make nothing for your abolishing the substance of bread and wine, and leauing the accidents. Phi. He saith, the visible creatures are tur∣ned into the substance of Christs body and bloud. Theo. But he saith not, the substance of the visible creatures is turned into the substance of christs flesh. Phi. How are we made flesh of Christs flesh and bones of his bones, and yet keepe our earthly sub∣stance? How can one creature bee turned into the substance of an other, but by loosing his former substance? Theo. In natural mutations it is so, but this is nothing lesse than natural. Phi. It is diuine and supernaturall. Theo. And so is it likewise spirituall and mysticall: not really changing the matter and substance of the elements, but casting grace vnto nature. Phi. Nay he saith the substance of the creatures is changed. Theo. Where saith he so? Phi. He saith which is al one, that the visible creatures are chan∣ged into the substance of christs body. The. But by no material nor corporal change. Phi. How can the creatures be turned into christs substāce, but by a ma∣terial & corporal change? Theo. That is your error, not your authors addition. Phi. It is not possible to be otherwise. Theo. What if your own writer in this very case and place reproue you for a liar? Phi. That Yea forsooth the next words will tell you so much. earthly creatures shoulde be turned into Christs substance, without a materiall and substantiall change? Neuer say it: it cannot be. Theo. Will you looke but two lines far∣ther, and you shall see this great impossibilitie auouched by your own author. Quomodo tibi nouum & impossibile esse non debeat, quod in Christi, substantiam terre∣na & mortalia conuertuntur, te ipsum, qui in Christo es regeneratus, interroga.De cons. dist. 2. ¶ quia corpus. How this to thee should neither be strange nor impossible, that mortal & earth∣ly creatures are turned into Christs substance, aske thy selfe which art rege∣nerated in Christ.How mortall creatures may be tur∣ned into Christs sub∣stane. Somtimes since thou wast farre from life, excluded from mercie, and banished from the path of saluation as being inwardly dead, & suddenly initiated by the lawes of christ & renued by the healthfull myste∣ries, thou didst passe into the body of the church, not by sight but by faith, & thou which wert the sonne of perdition obtainedst to be made the adopted child of god by a secret puritie: remaining in the same visible measure, thou grewest inuisibly without increase of quantitie: & being thy self & the very same,Such a chāge is in the sa∣cred lements by your au∣thors owne confession. that thou wast (before) in processe of faith thou becamest another: in the outward (man) nothing was added, & al changed in the inward: Taking this spiritual & immaterial change of euery christiā in baptism, to shew in what sort, & how he ment that mortal & earthly creatures by consration are conuer∣ted into the substance of christ: which is far frō a corporal & substantial change, such as you would vrge by pretēce of his words in y• creatures of bread & wine. Phi. This construction cannot stand:A thing may be chaunged, and yet keepe his former substance. that creatures should be turned into an other substance, and yet remaine in their owne and former substance: For then how are they chaunged? Theo. In your physical conceits it cannot: but
if you consult those Fathers that were the first introducers of this speeche, you shall finde it may. Gelasius ioyneth them both together in one sentence, the one to expound the other.Gelasius contr Eutich. In diuinam transeunt spiritu sancto perficiente sub∣stantiam, permanent tamen in suae proprietate naturae. (The sacraments of the bodie and blood of Christ) passe into a diuine substance by the working of the holie Ghost: and yet remaine in the proprietie of their owne nature. And lest you shoulde cauell that they kept their former qualities and not their substance, in expresse woordes he saith, & tamen non desinit esse substantia vel natura panis & vini: and yet (for all they passe into a diuine substance) the (former) substance or nature of bread and wine ceaseth not, nor is aboli∣shed: no more than the manhood of Christ was chaunged from his former sub∣stance, when after his ascension it was replenished with diuine glorie. Phi. You frustrate the sayings of the fathers with your comparisons. Theo. They be their owne comparisons & principal intentions in those places where they speake these wordes: and therefore if you will rack the one to your length,A man may soone rack a wod to any purpose, if he respect not the intent & concurents. and not respect the other, you may soone force some phrases to feede your fansies. But this is not the safest way for you to walke in matters of faith: nor the rightest course for you to take to come by their meaning. You must looke how far they presse their own words, & what they would conclude, not what you lst to conceiue: or imagine of their speaches. Howsoeuer they mention a change of the bread into the diuine essence & substance, no father auoucheth any corporal, material, or substantial change of the elements into the bodie & blood of Christ: but a spirituall, mystical and effectual annexing & vniting the one to the other, either pat retaining the trueth of his former and proper nature and substance. This is apparent by those very places & sentences, which you bring to prooue a chaunge: the fathers teach not the one without the other, as you saw for e∣ample in Gelasius and your Eusebius: and so in Cyprian:Cypr. de caen Domini. Panis iste, quem do∣minus discipulis porrigebat, non effigie sed natura mutatus omnipotentia verbi factus est caro: This bread which the Lord gaue to his disciples, chaunged not in shape, but in nature by the omnipotencie of the word is made flesh: and lest you should dreame of any materiall or substantiall chaunge, as your manner is, the verie next wordes in the same sentence, are:Cypr. Ibidem. Et sicut in persona Christi huma∣nitas videbatur, & latebat diuinitas: ita sacramento visibili, ineffabiliter diuina se infundit essentia: and as in the person of Christ,Two substan∣ces in the sa∣crament as there wee in Christ. his humanitie was seene, his diuinitie was hidde and secret: so in the visible sacrament the diuine essence doth infuse it selfe, after an vnspeakeable manner. Phi. Did you bring this place for vs or against vs? you could not haue ligh∣ted on a fitter for our purpose, if you shuld haue sought these seuen yeares. The. I knowe it is one of your best authorities, as you make your account: and yet it is no way preiudiciall to vs, if you suffer the father him-selfe to tell out his owne tale:This is one of their surest places. and bee content to heare as well the ending as the entring of it. Hee saieth the bread is chaunged: in nature; into the flesh of Christ; by the almightie power of the woorde, expressing in what, into what, and by what the
bread is chaunged: moe parts you cannot make. Phi. Wee need not. Theo. And yet all these notwithstanding he meaneth no materiall nor corporall change of the bread or wine, but that, as in the person of Christ there were two distinct & perfect substances vnited and ioyned, the one his manhood that was seene, the other his godhead that was hid: euen so to the visible Sacrament persisting in his former substance, doth the diuine essence infunde it selfe after a secret and vnsearchable manner, Virtutis diui∣nae inuisibili efficientia pro∣bans adesse prae∣sentiam. Cypr. de aena Domini. proouing the presence of an heauenly vertue to bee there by the inuisible efficience. Philand. If you will haue the bread keepe his proper and perfect both na∣ture and substance, what change is there made in the bread? Theoph. This chaunge is not the casting awaie of any thing, that was in the bread, either na∣ture or substance; but the casting vnto it of an heauenly and inuisible grace: and so Theoorete expresseth the mutation that is in this sacrament.Theod. dial. 1. Non natu∣ram ipsam transmutans sed naturae adiiciens gratiam. Not changing (or casting away) nature it selfe, but adding grace vnto nature. And that is S. Ambrose his meaning when hee saieth,Ambos. de Sa∣crament. lib. 4. cap. 4. Sunt quae erant, & in aliud commutantur. (The bread and wine) are the verie same that they were (And so Ber∣tram 700. yeares agoe did expound these wordes of S. Ambrose. both in nature and sub∣stance) and are changed into an other thing. Philand. How can this be that they should be changed and yet continue the same: but as wee expound it, that in substance they be chaunged, and yet in shew continue as they were before? Theoph. This is your fansie wee know: but the learned fathers by their change meane no such thing: they teach not any de∣traction or diminution of that which was, but an adiection and apposition of that which was not. And therefore they witnes both: as well the permanence of the elements in their former nature, as their change into an other. Chryso∣stome said as you heard before.Chrysost. ad Cae∣srium. The bread (sanctified) is counted worthie to be called the Lordes bodie, etsi natura panis in ipso permansit: though the na∣ture of bread remaine there still: and Theodoret,Theod. dial. 2. Neque enim signa illa mystica post sanctificationem recedunt à sua natura, those mysticall signes doe not by Consecration depart from their nature. And Gelasius:Gelas. contr Eutychen. De cons. dist. 2. ¶ Hoc est. Non tamen desinit esse substantia vel natura panis & vini: and yet the substance or nature of bread & wine doth not cease (or perish). And to this verie sacrament S. Austen ap∣pleth this Rule: Omnis res naturam & veritatem illarum rerum in se continet: ex quibus conficitur. Euerie thing containeth (or keepeth) the nature & truth of those things, of which it consisteth. Phi. You refu Cyprian, you doe not expound him. He saith the nature (of the bread) It is chaun∣ged by adding grace vnto it, not by taking substance fro it. is changed; you prooue it remaineth: be not these contrarie? Theo. B your exposition they are, by ours they are not. For the nature of bread, wee say remaineth, and is in nothing diminished, but encreased with an heauenly vertue that is added to it. And this, though it be a chaunge to that which it was not, yet is it no change from that which it was. Philand. That is properly chaunged which is altered from that it was. Theo. And that is as properly saied to be chaunged, which is increased with that it was not,
though it be not altered in substance from that it was. The soule of man is often chaunged, but neuer in substance. The bodie from the cradle to the graue hath many increases and changes, but in substance persisteth the same that it was be∣fore it came into the worlde. Euerie thing that groweth, keepeth that it had, & atchiueth that it had not, and yet is that a change. But what neede we other examples, since the fathers themselues doe both by their words, & similitudes shew what changes they ment? A childe is By these ex∣amples the fa∣thers declare what chaunge is in the bread. changed by baptisme: not in loosing or altering the substance of bodie or soul which hee had: but in attaining the grace & blessing of God which he had not. The Lorde himselfe is By these ex∣amples the fa∣thers declare what chaunge is in the bread. changed in person by his ascension, not that the trueth, shape or circumscription of his flesh are abolished, but endued with immortall glory. So shall he By these ex∣amples the fa∣thers declare what chaunge is in the bread. alter our vile bodies not by spoiling them of their substance, but by imparting to them of his brightnes, and as S. Paul writeth,1. Cor. 15. We shall not all sleepe, but we shall be changed. Phi. S. Pauls wordes are nothing to the Sacrament. Theo. They are somwhat to the vse of the word which I proposed: and yet Ireneus doth not sticke to resemble the change in the Sacrament to the verie hope and assurance which our bodies now haue of that glorie before they be changed, or haue cast off their mortal and earthly corruption. As, saith he,Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34. the bread which is of the earth receiuing the inuocation of god, is now no common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, an earthlie & an heauenlie, so our bodies receiuing the Eucharist, be now not corruptible (that is not wholly destina∣ted to corruption) [as] hauing hope of resurrection. Phi. But S. Ambrose repeateth De iis qui my∣steriis initian∣tur. cap. 9. examples of corporall and substantial changes, when he would proue that blessing in this sacrament ouerbeareth na∣ture. Theo. S. Ambrose doth not say,S. Ambrose by his seauen ex∣amples shew∣eth the power of the worde, not the man∣ner of the chaunge that is in the Sa∣crament. that the bread is changed after the same manner, but meaning to shew that praier and benediction worketh where nature cannot, yea many times altereth nature: hee bringeth seauen examples, whereof fiue are no substantial changes: & in the end concludeth, that if the prai∣ers & speech of mē could turn & alter things aboue & against nature, much more can the word of christ bring to passe that the elements shal bee that they were, & yet be changed into that they were not, and which by nature they are not. Phi. He hath no such wordes in that chapter. Theo. His conclusion there is this, Sermo ergo Christi, qui potuit ex nihilo facere quod non erat, non potest ea quae sunt, in id mutare quod non erant?Ambros. de iis qui initiantur mysteriis. cap. 9. The worde of Christ, who could of nothing make that which was not, can hee not change those things which are, into that which before they were not? And in the next booke intitled De Sacra∣mentis, assuming the same matter, and producing almost all the same examples and arguments: he resolueth in these wordes,Ambros. de Sa∣cramentis. lib. 4. cap. 4. Si ergo tanta vis est in sermone Domini Iesu, vt inciperent esse quae non erant, quanto magis operatorius est, vt sint quae erant, & in aliud commutentur? If there bee such force in the worde of the Lord Iesu, that the things which were not, (at his worde) beganne to be, how much more can it worke this, that they shal be the same they were, &
(yet) be changed into an other thing?Ambr. Ibidem lib. 4. cap. 4. And to shew vs an example, how a thing may be that it was, & yet be changed: he forthwith addeth, Tu ipse eras, sed era vetus creatura, posteae quam consecratu es, noua creatura esse caepisti: Vis scire quam nouae creatura? Omnis inquit, in Christo nouae creatura. Accip ergo, quemadinodū sermo Christi creaturam omnem mutare consueuerit: & mutat quando vult institu∣ta naturae.In this chap∣tr his exam∣ples are no substantiall chaunges, though he purposely persue the  point that he did before. Thou thy selfe wast: but thou wast an oulde creature: after when thou wast Baptised, thou begannest to be a new creature. Wilt thou know how (true it is that thou art) a new creature? Euery one, saith the Apostle, (is) in Christ a new creature. Learn then how the word of Christ is accusto∣med to chaunge euery creature▪ and when he will, he altereth the course of nature keeping the same similitude of Baptisme for the explication of himselfe that the rest do: & thereby declaring he meaneth nothing lesse than that the mat∣ter and substance of the bread and wine should be changed. For he that is bap∣tised, suffereth no materiall, substantiall nor corporall chaunge: though hee bee borne a fresh and putte on Christ: and euen so the sacred elements are turned into the fleshe of our Sauiour, without abolishing their former nature or substance. Phi. If these places of S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose conclude not for vs: certainly they conclude nothing against vs: and therefore you cannot refell our assertion by them. Theo. I doe not. I shew, the places which you take most hold of, haue no such sequel as you surmise: & so your transubstantiation is your late and priuate imagination, without all antiquite. Phi. Call you that late or priuate, which hath beene the generall and constant confession of all Christen∣dome for these Neuer catch  Iesuit with∣out a crake. fifteene hundereth yeres? Theo. It doth you good to crake, though there be neither trueth nor sense in that you say. Hath al christendom for these fifteene hundereth yeres confessed the substance of bread and wine at the Lords table to be changed into the reall & natural body & bloud of Christ? Phi. It hath. Theo. How shal we know that? Phi. You may find it in their writings. Theo. How chanceth then you can not shew one that for 800 yeares made that confession? Phi. We can. Theo. You do not as yet. Phi. Yeas we Some forge∣ries you shew∣ed vs, but one place of anie auncient wri∣ter you nei∣ther did nor can shew vs. The summe of all the ob∣iections that they can make, which are worth the answering. haue done it. S. Augustine told you plainly, the substance of breade and wine did not remaine, but only the qualities: and venerable Bede said, there was the shew, but not the substance of bread. Be not these direct and faire proofes? Theo. Fairely forged they be: but otherwise the writers themselues were neuer of that opinion. Phi. I haue proued by S. Chrysostome and S. Cyril that it is no bread. Theo. No bare; nor common bread, as our sense doth iudge; but yet the nature of bread still remaineth though endued with a more diuine and mightie grace. Phi. The bread is chaunged as S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose teache. Theo. Not by loosing that it had, but by annexing that it had not. Phi. It is conuerted into the substance of Christ. Theo. But by no materal nor cor∣porall chaunge of the former substance. Phi. This is your deluding of fathers. The. That is your abusing of them. Phi. You recal their wordes to your liking. Theo. And you inforce thē against
their meaning. Phi. Who shall iudge of that? Theo. Not you. Phi. Nor you. Theo. Let their owne mouthes be trusted. Phi. I am well contented. Theo. Then are you condemned. For where their wordes beare our exposition as wel as yours:Wee prooue our exposii∣on by other direct places: they haue no∣thing but the generall am∣biguitie of the wordes. you vrge a corporal and substantial change on their speaches in euery place: which they in plaine wordes protest to be no part of their faith. Phi. Where find you that protestation? Theo. Is your memorie so short, that I must now make a new repetition? Phi. You went about to prooue that the substance of bread remained. The. And that which I professed, I performed: you may turne back & view the words.See fol. 756. The substance of bread doth not cease to be: the signes remaine in their former substance. As touching the substan∣ces of the creatures they are the same after Consecration that they were be∣fore. And that was Cyprians meaning when he said,Cypr. de caena Domini. Corporalis substantiae reti∣nens speciem: retaining their kind of corporall substance: as also this substan∣tiall bread. This is warrant sufficient in any Christian mans iudgement for vs so to interpret the fathers words, as we do not abolish the substance of bread, which they confesse remaineth. Phi. Had that beene their doctrine, would their after-commers thinke you,Their after-commers kept the same doctrine for almost a thousand yeares. haue so soone swarued from their faith? Theo. They did not. That verie con∣fession, that the substance of bread remained after consecration, dured almost a thousand yeares in most parts of the West Church, and namely in this realme. Omit Bertram that liued 830. after Christ, whose booke is extant, purpose∣ly and largely treating of this matter. Walafridus an other of that time giueth flat euidence against your chaunging of substances in the sacrament, when hee saith,Walafrid. Ab∣bas. de rebus eccles. cap. 16. Citatur a Ga∣retio. In caena, quam ante traditionem suam vltimam cum Discipulis (Christus) habuit, post Paschae veteris solemnia, corporis & sanguinis sui sacramenta in panis & vini substantia eisdem Discipulis tradidit. In the supper which (Christ) had with his Disciples last before hee was betraied, after the solemnities of the olde Passeouer, he deliuered to the same disciples the sacraments of his bodie and blood in the substance of bread and wine. And so doeth Druthmarus re∣porting our Sauiours act at his last supper, in these words,Christianus Druthmarus in Matth. Transferens spiri∣tualiter panem in corpus suum, & vinum in sanguinem: (Christ) chaunging the bread into his bodie, and the wine into his bloode spirituallie. And so Pas∣chasius, though you haue here & there enterlaced that book to help your selues, and printed it, vnder the name of Rabanus as well as of Paschasius.Paschas de cor∣pore & sangui∣ne Domini, cap. 28. Panis con∣firmat cor hominis, & vinum letificat, &c. propter quod in eadem substantia iure ce∣lebratur hoc mysterium salutis. Bread confirmeth and wine cheereth the hart, &c. wherefore in that substance is this mysterie of (our) saluation worthi∣ly celebrated. Waleramus Bishop of Medburg a thousand yeares after Christ continued the same doctrine, though some Italians then beganne to fortifie their new con∣ceits of shewes without substance. His wordes are,Citr a Tho. Walden. to. 2. de Sacramentis▪ cap. 65. Materiae vel substantia Sa∣crificij non simpla est, sicut nec pontifex solius diuinae, vel-humanae solius substantiae est. Est ergo tam in Pontifice quā in sacrificio diuina substātia, est & terrena, Terrena in
vtroque est illud quod corporaliter vel localiter videri potest: diuina in vtroque verbum inuisibile, quod in principio erat Deus apud Deum. The matter or substance of the sacrifice is not single,Two substan∣ces in the sa∣crifice as well as in Christ. as also the high priest himself, is neither of a diuine sub∣stance only, nor of an humane only. There is then as wel in the high Priest as in the sacrifice an heauenly substance, there is also an earthly substance The earthly substance in thē both is that which may corporally & locally be seen. The heauenly in them both is the inuisile word, which in the begin∣ning was God with God. The Church of England, euen to the conquest held the same Doctrine, and taught it to the people of this Land in their publike homilies which are yet to be seene of good record in the Saxon tongue. The sermon then read on Easter day, throughout their Churches is a manifest declaration of that which I say: where amongst others, these words are occurrent.The doctrine preached in the Saxons Churches of this realme vntill the con∣quest. The holy font water that is called the welspring of life is like in shape to other waters, and is sub∣iect to corruption: but the holy Ghosts might commeth to the corruptible water, through the Priests blessing, and it can after wash the bodie and soul from all sinne through Ghostly might. Beholde now we see two things in this one creature. After true nature that water is corruptible water, and af∣ter Ghostly mystery, hath hallowing might. So also if we behold that holie housell after bodily vnderstanding, then see we that it is a creature corrupti∣ble & mutable:The sacramēt is a corrupti∣ble & mutable creature. if we acknowledge therein ghostly might, thē vnderstād we that life is therein, and that it giueth immortalitie to them that eate it with beliefe. Much is betwixt the inuisible might of the holy housel, & the visible shape of his proper nature. It is naturally corruptible bread, and corrupti∣ble wine, and is by might of Gods word truly Christes bodie and his bloud: not so notwithstanding bodily, but Ghostly. Much is betwixt the bodie Christ suffered in, and the body that is hallowed to housell. The body true∣ly that Christ suffered in was borne of the flesh of Mary, with bloud, & with bone, with skinne, and with sinewes, in humane limmes, with a reasonable soul liuing:The sacramēt is not Christs bodie corpo∣rallie. and his Ghostly body, which wee call the housell, is gathered of many cornes: without bloud and bone, without limme, without soul.This then is not the reall and naturall body of christ. And therefore nothing is to be vnderstood therein bodily, but al is Ghostly to be vnderstood. Phi. What care we for your Saxon recordes? Theo. Lesse care we for your Romish & Monckish recordes so lately and grossely forged, as we haue proued: yet this to your inward grief you may now see: & shal an other day to your vtter confusion feele, that your nouelties touching the Sacrament were neuer hard of in the Church of England,Lancfrancus and Anselme since the con∣quest the first authors of transsubstan∣tiation within this realme. nor in the Church of Christ, til Lancfrancus, An∣selmus & other Italians a thowsand yeres after christ, came in with their Anti∣christiā deuises and inuentions: expounding Species and forma panis for the qua∣lities & accidents of bread without any subiect or substance: which once taking place you fel amaine both to sacrilegious sophismes against trueth, and rebel∣lious practises against Princes; & ceased not til you brought them to their hight
in your late Laterane Councell vnder Innocentius the third, 1215 yeares af∣ter Christ. This is your Catholicisme that you so much vaunt of, which the Christian world was vtterly ignorant of for almost a thousand yeares; and to the which you would now reduce the simple with a shew of holines; pretending greate grauitie and admirable antiquitie with bolde faces and eger speaches, though you be void of both, if you were well examined. Phi. Were the doctrine of elder ages in some doubt, which we knowe to be fully for vs; yet you confesse these last fiue hundreth yeares are cleare on our side. Theo. The miter and Scepter were yours:Worldly king∣domes & ho∣nors haue bin subiect to An∣tichrist in these latter a∣ges. the mysterie of iniquiiie wor∣king as was foretold; and infecting the West Church with hypocrisie and here∣sie, as fast as the Turke oppressed the East with rage & tyrannie: Yet in euerie of these last & most corrupted ages, God raised a number of innocent and simple men, with the confession of their mouthes, and expence of their liues, to witnesse his trueth against the pride and fury of their aduersaries, whome your holie fa∣ther hanged, burned, and otherwise murdered for repining at his proceedings, that whome with honour and ease he could not allure: at lest he might quaile with terror and torment. Phi. Shoulde wee leaue the fellowship of holie Popes, famous Prelates mighty Princes, learned and Religious Moncks and Friers, yea Saints:The Iesuits are euē drunk with the glory and renowne of them selues and their ad∣herents. and ioyne our selues to a fewe condemned and infamous heretikes, as you doe? Theo. That which is pretious and admirable before men, may be odious & detestable before God. The dignities of men cannot deface the truth of Christ; the higher their states, the greater their falles, if they did oppose themselues a∣gainst the highest. Phi. You say they did. Theo. I doe not: but this I say, that if the respect of their externall and temporall glorie, be the ground of your con∣science, you haue a wicked affection as well as Religion. To follow men a∣gainst God, is to magnifie them afore God. Phi. You condemne them for cast-awaies. Theo. I am not their iudge.God may call in all times & places whom he please, though wee know it not. He that made them, might be mercifull to them amiddest the defects and dangers of those daies, as he hath been to some in all ages and places: yet that is no safetie for you to defend their open errors, and wilfully to continue their wickednes. Phi. Were not our fathers religious and holy men? Theo. Iustifie not your fathers against God, lest their mouthes condemne you for a pernicious ofsprng. God will be glorified, when he iudgeth, say you and your fatther what you can to the contrary. Reprooue not the sharpnes of his iustice, which he neuer sheweth but for great and vrgent cause: submit your selues rather, and acknow∣ledge it is his vndeserued, and yet not vnwoonted mercie that you be not consu∣med as your fathers were before you, but haue yet time and warning to repnt. Phi. And are you such Saints that you eede no repentance?It is not of our worthines but of his great mercy that w haue his tru∣eth which o∣thers had not. Theo. Wee desire to liue no longer, than we confsse before heauen and earth, that as God hath beene righteous in reuenging the sinnes and iniquities of our fathers, by taking his trueth from them, and leauing them to the power of darkenes, and kingdome of Antichrist: so he might most iustly for our vngodlines & vnthank∣fulnes
haue wrapped vs in the same confusion and destruction: saue that of his infinite and vnspeakeable mercy, he woulde haue his Gospell preached afresh for a witnes to all Nations before he come to iudgement:Mat. 24. to make all men inex∣cusable, that haue either not beleeued, or not obeyed the truth. And this causeth vs, not onely with all that is within vs, to giue glorie to his name for so great a blessing, but to beseech him, that though we be lighted on the ends of the world when charitie waxeth cold,Mat. 24. Luk. 18. Iude. and faith is skant found on the face of the earth, we may not be caried away with the error of the wicked to perdition; especially not to followe the way of Cain, that dipped his hands in his brothers bloode; nor take the wages of Balaam, to curse and reuile the people of God; nor perish in the contradiction of Corah, for resisting both God and the Magistrate: but rather that wee may be sanctified and saued by the might of his word, and store of his mercy laid vp in Christ his sonne for all that beleeue him, and call vp∣on him. Phi. God send vs such part as our fathers had. Theo. You be so displeased with God for punishing the sinnes of your fathers with blindnes and error in these later ages,We must nei∣ther dislike the iustice of God towards others, nor refuse his mercie offe∣red to our selues. The Iesuits are so deepe in loue with them-selues & their fa∣thers, that they take skorne to stoope to the grace of God. that now you will none of his light, nor grace, though he of∣fer it freely to saue your soules: but if you will needes perish, your owne bloode be on your owne heades: yet haue vs excused, if we thinke our sinnes heauie e∣nough, though wee adde not thereto the neglect of his worde, and contempt of his trueth as you doe. In the knowledge of God and reuerence of his iudge∣ments there is a path way to repentaunce, and hope of mercy: in the proude dis∣like of his seueritie towards others, and subberne refusall of his goodnes to∣wards our selues, there is nothing but an heaping of extreme vengeaunce, which shall consume the wicked and impenitent resisters of his word and spirit. Phi. We be not of that number. Theo. Were you not; you would be more carefull to search, and willing to embrace the trueth of Christ once vnderstoode with all readines and lowlines of minde, knowing that God resisteth the proud and giueth grace to the humble, and not with an high-looking and self-plea∣sing perswasion, that all is yours, neglect your duty to God and man. Phi. We obserue both. Theo. You obserue neither. Subiection to your lawfull Prince you haue forsaken, and not onely fledde the Realme,What subie∣ction the Ie∣suits yeeld to their Princes that displease the Pope. The Iesuites talke a pace of their catho¦licisme but they prooue it verie slow∣ly. and incited others to doe the like, but the Christian alleageance, which the Prince requireth of her subiects you impugne with shifts and slaun∣ders, in fauor of him, who wickedly and iniuriously taketh vpon him to be the supreme Moderator of earthly kingdomes, & chiefe disposer of princes Crowns: and so fast are you lincked in confederacie with him, that in open view of all men you will allow no Prince to beare the sword longer than shall like him, but proclaime rebellions of subiects against their Soueraignes to be iust & ho∣norable warres, if he authorize them by his Censures. And where, to cloake your wicked and enormous attempts you boldely sur∣mised, that you did, whatsoeuer you did, for that Religion which was ancient & Catholike: we haue presently taken you so tardie & short of your reckoning that
for sixe of the greatest and cheefest points now in question betwixt the Church of England and the Church of Rome, and reformed in this Realme by publike authoritie: you cannot bring vs so much as one ancient & euident testimony, that your faith and Doctrine was euer taught or receiued in the primatiue church of christ, and yet you please your selues in your owm conceits, and compasse the earth to An old pra∣ctise of the Pharisies. get prosilites fit for such teachers, whom you may traine vp in error, and vse as instruments to catch vnstable soules, and fier vnquiet heades: that you by them may disturbe realmes and fishe for Princes thrones and liues in troubled waters. Phi. All this is as false, as God is true.We desire n more of their owne friends but to weigh their proofes in these cases. Theo. God himselfe shall skant be trueth if you may be the iudges: except hee take your parts. But facing and craking laid aside, you must referre the iudgement of your doings and sayings to others, and not to your selues. Phi. To Catholikes I am content. The. They must be then of your instructing: that is, such as will trust neither fathers nor Scriptures against your Canons: otherwise in that you haue saide they shall find no great cause to like your impugning the Princes power, & right to esta∣blish Lawes within her owne lande without the Popes leaue: and to hold her Crowne against his censures: and as litle shall they find to cal you, or count you Catholikes. Phi. Men of your own pitch will soone assent to any thing. Theo. Let them be but indifferent and weigh what you haue brought. Phi. More we can bring, when we see our times. The It skilleth not how much, but how sound that is which you can bring. Phi. Of that hereafter: and yet in the meane time there be many other thinges besides these that you haue handled, that These God willing shalbe handled afore it be long. must be discussed, before we can be pronounced no Catholikes. And as in these you seeeme with wresting and wrenching to haue some aduan∣tage: so in those we could forthwith confound you. The. Euen as you haue doone in these. Phi. A great deale more readily if I had time to stay the triall of them: but this holy tide I must spend in other matters of more importance. Theo. What: In spredding newes, that the king of Spain doth stay but for the next summer? Phi. We meddle not with forraine affaires, Theo. A They studie Machauel more than S. Paul. number of you be better seene in policie, than in diuinitie: you were borne belike to be rulers, though it be but of Rebels as Sanders was, that thought it a praise to take the field in person against his Prince. Phi. My trauell is not to that end. Theo. You leaue that for others: and trauel to sound the harts of your adherents, whether they be in number, welth and zeale likely and readie to giue assistance, if any should inuade. Phi. What vnchristian coniectures you haue of vs: Theo. None but such as your owne deedes and wordes occasion. Phi, What cause haue we giuen you to speake this of vs? Theo. What greater cause can you giue,If they defēd rebellions in open sight, what do they in secret cor∣ners.? than openly to auouch as you haue done in your Defence of Catholiks (as you call them) y• rebellions a∣gainst such Princes as the Pope deposeth are godly, iust & honourable wars? Phi. If hee may depose them they are. Theo. You haue in print affirmed both, and sought to proue them with all your might: and therefore what shal we
thinke your secret whispering and reconling to the Church of Rome is, but a craftie bayte of Malcontentes to make rebels? Phi. The parties themselues can witnesse we neuer mention any such thing in our absolution. To them we appeale for record. Theo. For my part I thinke you doe not: It were too grosse conspiracie & treason to take vowes and oths of subiects against their Prince by name: and therefore if you should take that open course you were worthie to ride to Tyburne not only for traytors but also for disards.Persons recō∣ciled must in the end be traitors whe∣ther they ment it at first or no the Iesuits haue so tempered religion and treasō to flat∣ter the Pope. But when you reconcile them, you take assurance of them by vow, oth, or other adiuration that they shall embrace the Catholike faith and hold Communion & vnitie with the Church of Rome for euer after. Phi. Why should we not? Theo. Then when it pleaseth my Lord the Pope to depriue the Prince and to excommunicate al that assist or agnise her for a lawfull ma∣gistrate, what must your reconciled sort doe: Is it not against their oth & faith giuen to you at their restitution to the bosome of the Catholike Church (as you terme it) to obay their Prince against the censures of your Church? Phi. I haue hast in my way Theophilus: and I haue said as much as I wil at this time. Theo. I can hold you Philander no longer than you lit: but yet remember this as you ride by the way, which I reiterate, because both your Seminaries shall think the better of it: that as many as you reconcile, so long as you teach, this for a point of faith, Vnlesse they recall this po∣sition, the cō∣clusion is ine∣uitable. that the Pope may depose Princes and must bee obayed in those his censures of all that will be Catholikes, so many both heretikes against God, and traytors against the Prince, you hatch vnder the hoode of religion: and also that the thinges now reformed in the Church of England are both catholik and christian, notwithstanding your fierce bragges, and fiery wordes, lately sent vs in your RHEMISH Testament. To the KING euerlasting, immortall, inuisible, vnto GOD which is only wise, be honour and praise for euer and euer. Amen
The speciall contents of euery part. The contents of th first part. The Iesuits pretenders of obe∣dience. Pag. 2 The causes why they fledde the Realme. 5 The proofes and places of their Apologie. 7 Forcing to Religion. 16 Two Religions in one Realm. 21 Toleraunce of error. 26 Toleraunce of error in priuate places and persons. 27 Compulsion to seruice and Sa∣craments. 29 Exacting the oth. 30 Their running to Rome. 35 This Lande receiuing the faith from Rome. 40 Preachers sent from Rome with the Kings consent. 41 Preachers, not conspirators frō Rome. 41 Howe the Fathers soughte to Rome. 42.48 Athanasius at Rome. 44 Chrysostomes request to Inno∣centius. 51 A forged Bull against Arcadi∣us. 53. Chrysostomes banishment. 55 How Saint Augustine sought to Rome. 56 How S. Basil sought to Rome. 58 S. Ieroms letters to Damasus. 60 The Rocke on the which the Church is built. 62 S. Cyprian lately corrupted. 65 Gratian suspected. 66 Peters person laide in the foun∣dation of the Church. 67 Theodoret and Leo. 67 The Bishop of Rome resisted. 68 Paul resisted Peter. 69 Polycarpus resisted Anicetus. 70 Polycarpus resisted Victor. 70 Cyprian resisted Stephanus. 71 Flauianus withstoode foure Bi∣shops of Rome. 72 Cyrillus withstoode the Bishop of Rome. 72 Councels resisting the Byshop Rome. 73 The Councell of Africa resisted the Byshop of Rome. 74 Forged Decretals. 76 The councel of Ephesus threat∣ning the Legates of Rome. 78 The Councell of Chalcedon a∣gainst the Bishop of Rome. 79 The Councell of Constantino∣ple against the Bishoppe of Rome. 81 Corruptiōs in the Canō lawe. 81 The Brytons resisting the Bi∣shop of Rome. 82 The Grecians detesting him. 83 The Germans deposing him. 84 His owne Councels depose him. 85. Fraunce resisting the Pope. 92 Paris appealeth from him. 94 The french King resisting the Pope. 95 The Kinges of England against the Pope. 97 Our resistaunce more lawefull than theirs. 104 Peters dignitie not imparted to the Pope. 104 S. Ieroms praise of Rome. 105 The manners of Rome since his time. 105 The manners of Rome in his time. 106 S. Cyprian forced to make for Rome. 106 S. Augustine forced to make for Rome. 107 From Peters seate is from Pe∣ters time. 107 The intent of the Seminaries. 108. High experiments of Popes. 112 High experiments of the Popes clergie. 114 The Iesuits slaunder England and Scotland. 118 What the Iesuits worke & teach in this land. 119 The Pope succeedeth his Aun∣cestors neither in seate nor beliefe. 12 The contents of the se∣cond part. The Princes power to COM∣MAVND for trueth. 124 Princes be gouernours of coun∣tries, Byshops be not. 127 Byshops by Gods lawes subiect to Princes as well as others. 128. The Prince by Gods law char∣ged with Religion. 129 Princes may commaund for re∣ligion. 133 Constantine commaunding for Religion. 134 Constantius commaunding Bi∣shops in causes ecclesiastical. 135. Iustinian commanding for cau∣ses Ecclesiasticall. 137 Charles commanding for cau∣ses Ecclesiasticall. 139 The lawes of Charles for cau∣ses Ecclesiasticall. 140 Ludoikes lawes for causes Ec∣clesiasticall. 144 Ludouikes lawes & visitors. 144 What is ment by (SVPREME.) 146. Supreme is subiect to none on earth. 146 Princes subiect onely to God. 147. Princes not subiect to the Pope. 147. The Pope subiect to his Prince. 148. Constantine superiour to the Pope in causes ecclesiastical. 150 Emperours superiour to the pope in causes Ecclesiasticall. 152 The Prince superiour to the Pope. 160
Ieremies words expounded. 160 How Prophets may plant and roote out kingdoms. 161 Howe Kinges must serue the Church. 162 How Byshops are to be obeied. 164 How the Church is superiur to Princes. 167 What is ment by the Church 168. The Prince not aboue the Church. 171 Princes haue power ouer the persons of the Church. 172 The woordes of S. Ambrose to Valentinian. 173 The behauiour of S. Ambrose towards Valentinian. 174 Valentinian refused to be iudge betweene Byshops. 177 Valentinians fault. 178 Theodosius searched and esta∣blished the trueth. 178 Princes decreeing for truth. 179 Athanasius: Osius; Leontius. 179 Athanasius reproued Constanti∣us. 180 Athanasius expounded. 181 Why Constantius was reproued. 182 Osius words examined. 188 Leontius discussed. 189 What Hilarie misliked in Con∣stantius. 190 Kings commended in the scrip∣tures for medling with religi∣on. 191 Moses & oshuaes example. 192 King Dauids care for religiō. 193 Princes charged with the whole law of God. 194 Asa, Iehosaphat, & Ezekiah per∣fourmed that charge. 193 Manasses Idolatry & repētance. 196 Iosiah reformed religion. 197 Nehemiah correcteth the high Priests doings. 197 Princes medled with religiō. 198 Princes vsed to commaund for religion. 198 God commādeth by their harts 199. Princes commanding for Religi∣on. 200 Princes haue ful power to com∣mand for trueth. 202 Princes may prohibite and pu∣nish error. 203 To commaund for causes Eccle∣siasticall was vsuall with Prin∣ces. 204 To commaund Bishops for cau∣ses Ecclesiasticall was vsuall with auntient Princes. 206 The Iesuites purposely mistake the Princes supremacie. 213 The Iesuits cauelling absurdities against the Popes power. 221 This land oweth no subiection to tribunals abroade. 228 This lande not subiect to the Popes tribunall. 229 What subiection the Pope re∣quireth. 231 The Pope maketh it sacrilege & blasphemie to doubt of his tribunall. 231 A right Rhomish subiection. 232 Patriarks of the west. 233 Patriarks subiect to Princes. 234 This Realme not in the Popes Prouince. 135 The Patriarkedome dissolued. 235 The words of the oth examined. 236 It is easie to plaie with wordes. 237 Princes gouerne with the sword, Bishops do not. 238 Princes only beare the sword in all spirituall things & causes. 238. Princes supreme bearers of the sword. 240 Supreme gouernour displaceth not Christ. 241 Princes may not commaunde against the faith or Canons. 242. Gregorie shamefully corrupted. 243. Spirituall men a matters. 244. Carnall things called spirituall 245 Carnall thinges made spirituall to increase the Popes power and gaine. 245 Carnall things made spirituall. 246 Princes charged with spirituall things. 247 Princes chiefely charged with things truly spirituall. 247 Princes charged at Gods hands with things spirituall, not tē∣porall. 249 The Prince charged to plant the faith and rule the church. 250 The King of Englands charge. 250 The Prince charged with God∣linesse. 251 Their power is equall with their charge. 252 The sword prohibited vnto Bi∣shops. 253 Only princes beare the sworde. 254 The words of the oth. 254 Supreme concluded out of saint Paul. 255 The Apostles subiect vnto Prin∣ces. 255 Suffering is a sign of subiection. 256. The direction of the sword. 257 Who shall direct the sword. 257 No man Iudge of trueth. 258 Discerners of trueth. 259 The people are charged to dis∣cern the truth. 260 The people must discerne tea∣chers and try spirits. 261 We be not bound to the Bishops pleasure. 262 Wherein Bishops are superiour to Princes. 263 The function not the person. 264 The priests person subiect to the Prince. 264 The right direction vnto trueth. 265. The best direction for Princes. 266. Who shall direct Princes. 267. Successiō is no sure directiō. 268 Bishops may erre. 26
Councels may erre. 270 & 276 Number no warrant for trueth. 270 Councels haue erred. 272 Consent without staggering due only to the Scriptures. 276 The Pope may erre. 277.304.311 Christ praied for Peter. 278 Peter failed in faith. 279 Christ praied for all. 280 No one set ouer the Church. 281 The Romane Church may faile in faith. 283 Cyprians place discussed. 283 The misconstering of (Non po∣test) 284 Cyprians opinion of the Ro∣manes. 286 S. Pauls warning to them. 286 S. Ierome misconstered 287 The Romanes may erre. 288 Moses chaire might erre. 289 The high Priests did erre. 290 Christs promise to his Church. 291 The godly may erre. 292 S. Iohns words abused. 293 The whole Church erreth not. 294. The Iesuites condemned for flatterers by their owne fel∣lowes. 294 What Popes haue erred. 296 Liberius an heretike. 297 Honorius an heretike. 299 Vigilius an heretike. 301 Anastasius an heretike. 302 Shiftes to saue the Popes from erring. 303 Caiphas free from error 305 Caiphas as free from error as the Pope. 305 The Popes tribunall hath er∣red. 306 Vaine mockeries of the Iesuites to saue the Popes error. 309 Their owne Church confesseth the Pope may erre. 310 The iudge of faith must not erre. 312 The contents of the third part. The Pope hath no power to de∣priue the Prince. 314 What God hath allowed to Princes, the Pope cannot take from them. 317 Princes not depriuable by the Pope. 318 The Prophets deposed no Prin∣ces. 319 Saul reiected by God, not depo∣sed by Samuell. 320 Saul depriued of the succession, not of the possession of the Crowne. 321 Dauid annointed to succeed. 325 Ieroboam plagued, not depo∣sed. 325 Prophets may threaten. 326 Vzziah stricken with the leprosie, not assaulted with violence. 327 Lepers seuered from mens cōpany, but not disherited. 328 Vzziahs pride. 329 Athalia slaine. 329. Achab reprooued, not deposed. 330. Elias induced the King and the people to kill Baals prophets. 331 Elias no executioner. 332 Fier frō heauen at Elias word. 332. Iehu willed by God to take the sworde. 333 Elizeus deposed no King. 333 No Scripture confirmeth the deposition of princes. 334 Kinges holde their dignities of God, not of priests. 335 The priest no Iudge of the princes crowne. 336 The priest to direct, the Iudge to decide. 338 Princes not subiect to priestes. 339. Princes depriued priests. 340 Princes brake couenaunts with God, and yet were not depo∣sed. 341 No prince deposed in the olde testament. 341 Christ is King of Kinges, but not the pope. 342 Christ haue many prerogatiues which the pope may not haue. 343 Binding of sinnes, not of Scep∣ters. 344 Depriuing is not feeding. 345 Temporall reuenge not lawfull for priests. 445 Heretikes must not be saluted, yet princes must be obeyed. 346. Heretiks must haue their du. 347 Society not duty prohibited. 348 Wee must shunne the wicked, but not disobeie the magi∣strate. 348 Excommunication inferreth no deposition. 350 The Iesuites claime temporall and externall power for the pope. 350.351 God, not Paul stroke Elima blinde. 352 What is ment in S. Paul by de∣liuering vnto Sathan. 353 The Apostles laid violēt hands on no man. 354 The goods and bodies of men are Cesars right. 355 Priests no Iudges of temporall thinges but makers of peace betweene brethren. 357 The temporall and spiritual di∣stinct regiments. 358 The Ciuill state directed, not punished by the spiritual. 359 Princes committed to the prea∣chers charge, not subiected to the popes court. 360 Princes may be put in mind of their duties. 361 Nazianzene subiect to the prince. 361 Howe the preacher correcteth. 362 Howe manie degrees the pope will be aboue the prince. 363 If he heare not the Church let him be to thee as an Ethnick. 364 Ethnicks must not be deposed. 364 The Church cannot depose the prince. 365
The Church submitted herselfe to Princes. 366 The Church hath no commissiō to depose Princes. 367 The church with thē is the Pope 367 Neuer king obayed the Popes Censure. 368 The Church neuer decreed that Popes should depose Princes. 368 Impertinent examples. 369 Excommunication is not depo∣sition. 370 The fact of Babylas. 371 Babylas died vnder Decius. 371 The Prince penitent for his sins. 372 S. Ambrose and Theodosius. 373 Anastasius excommunicatiō vn∣certaine. 374 Michaels excommunication vn∣proued. 374 Lotharius mistaken. 375 Of seuen examples but one pro∣ued. 375 S. Austens opinion of such ex∣communications. 376 The end of excommunication ceaseth in Princes. 376 The Church praied for tyrants. 377 The Church praied for the wel∣fare of hereticall Princes. 378 The Church praied for Constan∣tius. 378 A lustie leape from the keyes to the sword. 379 Rebellion against Princes defen∣ded to be iust and honourable warres. 380 Graund theeues & murtherers. 381 The Popes warrant to rebels. 381 The Pope cānot warrant Rebel∣lion. 382 Scriptures abused to serue Re∣bellion. 383 Asa remoued his mother from her dignitie. 383 The Iudiciall part of Moses Law is ceased. 384 The execution of Moses Law cō∣mitted to none but to the ma∣gistrate. 384 No reuenger but the Magistrate. 384 Phinees fact had Moses warrant. 385 Moses a magistrate and no priest after Aarons order. 386 Moses a Leuite but no priest. 387 Moses a Prophet, no sacrificing Priest. 388 And so was Samuel. 389 Many offred that wer no priests 389 Sauls sin was infidelitie. 389 The Priest did not appoint the wars. 390 The warres of Abiah. 391 Edome & Libnah reuolting. 391. Ten tribes might fight with two 392 The Church of Christ neuer a∣lowed rebellion. 392 S. Basil alowed not the people to rebel for his defence. 393 S. Ambrose alowed no tumult at Millan in fauour of him. 394. Athanasius did not stirre Con∣stance against Constantius. 396 Athanasius neuer spake euill of Constantius. 396 Athanasius neuer disobaied Cō∣stantius. 397 Athanasius would not haue the people rebel for his cause. 398 The tumult at Alexandria for Peter against Lucius. 399 Atticus harboured strangers but not armed subiects against their Princes. 400 The Persian war was lawful. 400 What Leo requested of the Em∣perour. 401 The Christians were subiect to Iulian, though he were an A∣postata. 403 The Church of Christ wanted no forces to resist. 404. 406 Christes church obayed wicked Princes for conscience sake. 405 Leo the third was denied his re∣uenues in Italy but not depri∣ued by the pope. 408 The pope did not appeare in this rebellion of Italy against Leo. 409 The diuision of the Empire was not for religion. 412 Their owne stories doe not pre∣tend religion for the diuision of the Empire. 413 The diuision of the Empire. 416 Platina reproued. 417 Who deposed Childericke. 418 Childericke deposed for a foole. 419 Wauering about Pipines title. 421 Philippicus reiected as a rebell. 421 Lewes the third. 422 The line of Pipine ended. 423 An other change of the Empire. 423 The pope gained by rolling the Empire to and fro. 424 Henry the fourth. 424 Pope Hildebrand attempting to depriue Henry the fourth. 425 The Iesuits commend Hildebrād to the skies for fitting their rebellious humor. 426 Hildebrand & Henry the fourth. 428 Spitesul slaunders of the Iesuites against Henry the fourth. 430 Hildebrands vertues by the con∣fession of his own countrimē and Cardinals. 431 Hildebrand fauoured of Moncks for taking their part against maied priests. 433 Hildebrandes vndermining Hē∣ry the fourth. 433 The true causes of Henryes ex∣communication. 434 Henry the fourth no Symonist 435 The Moncks to flatter the pope diffame the prince for symo∣nie. 436 What Hildebrand ment by Si∣monie. 437 The Princes consent for placing of Bishops was no simony. 437 The Pope sought vniust quarels against Henry the fourth. 438
The prince not boūd to the popes penaunces. 440 Hildebrands successe. 441 Hildebrand the first that offered depriuation to Princes. 441 The Romish art to weary princes. 442 The on dsplaceth the father. 443 Hildebrand and Boleslaus. 444 Princes not punishable by Priests. 445. Adrian & Frederick the first. 446 Frederics aunswer to the Popes letter. 447 Adrian conspireth against Frede∣rick. 447 The Pope conspireth against the Emperour. 448 Alexander made Pope by the cō∣spirators against Victor. 449 Alexanders election not good. 450 Frederick tyred by the Popes pra∣ctises. 451 The Popes foote in the Princes neck. 451 Honorius & Frederick the 2. 452 The Popes quarrels against Fre∣derick the second. 453 The lewdnes of Gregorie the 9. against Frederick the secōd. 454 The Italian stories spitefully pur∣sue those Princesse that with∣stood the Pope. 456 Fredericks peace with the Turke could not iustly be disliked. 457 The Pope hath beene the ruine of both Empires. 458 The Pope crossigned Souldiers a∣gainst Frederick as against a Turke. 459 The second quarrell between Fre∣derick and the Bishop of Rome. 460 The Pope nourisheth rebellion a∣gainst Frederick. 461 And to help the matter deposeth him. 462 The causes of his deposition exa∣mined. 462 The censure of Innocentius a∣gainst Frederick. 463 Fredericks right to the kingdome of Sicily. 464 The Popes proceedinges against Frederick. 465 The whole west Church in an vp∣roare about the deposing of Princes. 466 Eberhards oration against the Pope for presuming to depose Princes. 467 Frederick poisoned and stifled in his bed. 468 Lodouike the fourth and Iohn the 22. 469 Germany taketh part with Lodo∣uike against Pope Iohn. 470 The Pope maketh it heresie to mi∣slike his pride or his wealth. 471 What submision the Pope requi∣red of Lodouike. 472 The Germanes sweare obedience to Lodouike for all his depositi∣on. 473 King Iohn of this Realme. 474 King Iohn pursued by the pope for standing in his owne right. 475 To interdict whole Realmes for one mans offence is vnchristi∣an policy. 476 The Byshops of England eger to haue King Iohn deposed. 477 The discord of Princes exalted the Pope. 478 The french King finely cousened by the Pope. 478 King Iohn the Popes farmor. 479 King Iohn could not bind his suc∣cessour. 479 The Nobles lament the seruitude of this Realme. 480 George King of Bohemia mole∣sted by the Popes censures. 481 Half the kingdom of Nauarre sur∣prised by the Spanish King. 482 Thomas Becket an arrogant re∣sister of his Prince. 483 Princes brought vnder the Popes feet by their own dissension. 484 The Kings of France ouerreached the Pope. 485 The stirre betweene Philip of Sweueland & Otho the 5. 486 The Emperour taketh his fare∣wel of Italy by selling al he had both there and elsewhere. 487 These tragicall vprores prooue no right in the Pope to depose Princes. 488 The Iesuits mistake an imprecatiō in Gregory for a depriuatiō. 489 The Realme neuer conesed the Popes power to depriue prin∣ces. 490 Iesuits within compasse of treason by the auncient lawes of this land. 491 Treason to aide the Pope against the Queene by the statute of Edward the third. 492 The Commons ide their King a∣gainst the Pope. 493 The King of Englands othe. 493 The Patriarches of Constantino∣ple deposed no Princes. 494 The people might couenaunt in their elections. 494 Zimisces an vsurper & a murde∣rer. 496 A seditious Patriarck liuing at the same time with Hildebrand. 497 Baptisme bindeth no Prince to the opes depriuation. 498 Byshops may not prescribe condi∣tions to Princes. 498 They haue no power to prescribe conditions to Princes. 499 Princes not depriuable by the Pope. 500 Wicked reasons of the Iesuits for the depriuing of Princes. 501 Christians may not kill tyrantes though Heathens did so. 502 The Pope & his Cardinals woorse than Heathen. 503 The Cardinals letter for the kil∣ling of the Queene. 503 Murdering of princes mainteined by the Iesuits. 504 The princes life is sought for by their warres for religion. 505 Obedience to Christ forceth vs to no rebellion against the prince. 506. Princes appoint paines for others not for themselues. 507 Caluins name falsely pretended for rebelliō against princes. 509
Beza doth not allowe subiects to displace their prince. 510 The Nobles of Fraunce might lawfullie defend themselues a∣gainst the Guise. 511 Piuate men may not beare arms against a tyrant. 512 Zuinglius woordes concerne not our case. 513 Zuinglius aloweth no man to vse violence to tyrants. 514 Succession established by God himselfe. 515 Goodman and Knokes. 516 Luther did not alow rebellion a∣gainst Princes. 517 The Germanes no Rebels in de∣sending▪ their libertie. 518 The Iesuits case not like the Ger∣manes. 518 The Iesuits obiect they care not what. 519 The lawes sometimes permit resi∣staunce 520 The stirres of Germany, Flaun∣ders, Fraunce & Scotland. 521 The manifold rebelliōs of papists. 522 The Iesuits treasons. 522 Complaint of persecution. 522 Treason made religion by the Ie∣suits. 523 Deposition of Princes is against religion. 524 Pastours haue no power to com∣pell. 526 Death inflicted in England not for religion, but rebellion. 527 The power which the Pope clai∣meth is no point of religiō. 528 Peters keyes abused to colour the Popes tyranny. 529 Supreme heade misliked by some of the Germans. 530 Supreme head mistaken by wrong information 631 Supreme head not vrged by vs. 532 The Magistrate no gouernour of the conscience. 533 Where God commaundeth there no authorite wanteth. 534 Trueth is authoritie sufficient a∣gainst all the world. 535 One man with trueth is a warrant against all the world. 536. The faith of our fathers is not al∣waies trueth 537 God forbiddeth vs to follow the steppes of our fathers. 538 The godly confessed their fathers did erre. 539 All humane lawes & barres giue place to God. 540 The prince might make lawes for trueth maugre the Pope. 541 Princes haue setled religion with∣out Councels. 542 Christian religion receiued vpon the direction of a lay man. 543 Trueth authorised the Apostles against Priests & Princes. 544 Railing on Princes is a capitall crime. 545 The contents of the fourth part. No point of Poperie Catholike. 546. What is truely CATHOLIKE. 547 The worshipping of Images is not Catholike. 547 The west Church against the wor∣shipping of Images. 548 Corruption to help the credite of the second Nicen councell. 549 The worshipping of Images dete∣sted in the Church of Christ as Heresie. 550 The mage of God made with hands may not be worshipped. 552 The Iewes & Gentiles did erect their Images vnto God. 553 The heathen adored their stocks as the Images of God. 554 The Image of man set vp vnto God is an Idoll. 556 The wodden Image of Christ may not be worshipped 557 The honour done to a wodden I∣mage is not done to Christ. 559 Adoration of Images no Aposto∣lick tradition. 562 S. Basill forged to make for ado∣ration of Images. 563 The shamefull forgeries and falsi∣ties of the second Nicene coun∣cell. 564 Both Scriptures and fathers wic∣kedly abused by the second Ni∣cene Councl. 565 The second Nicene Councel con∣uincing it selfe of forgerie. 566 What an Idole is. 567 A wrong seruice of God is Idola∣trie. 568 The Church of Rome giueth di∣uine honour vnto Images. 569 Christs honour may not be giuen to Images. 570 The hauing of Images is not Ca∣tholike. 572 Athanasius palpablie forged in the second Nicene Councell. 574 The Church next to the Apostles, reiected Images. 574 Images came first from Heathens vnto Christians. 575 Images reiected by godly Bishops. 576. No corporall submission may be giuen to Images. 577 The Nicene Bishops play the so∣phists in decreeing adoration vnto Images. 577 The wodden crosse of Christ may not be adored. 578 Not one word in scripture for ad∣oration of Images. 580 No point of faith may be built on traditions. 581 No point of faith beleeued with∣out Scripture. 582 Baptizing of Infants is a conse∣quent of the Scriptures. 583 It may be a tradition, yet groun∣ded on the Scriptures. 584 Baptisme of Infāts prooued need∣full by the Scriptures. 585 Rebaptization repugnant to the Scriptures by S. Augustines iudgement. 588 The perpetuall virginitie of Ma∣rie the Mother of Christ. 589 The Godhead of the holy ghost expressed in the Scriptures. 590 His proceeding from the father and the sonne confirmed by the Scriptures. 592
Expresse scripture is the sense and not the syllables. 593 Fathers wrested to speake against the scriptures. 594 The Popish faith is their owne tra∣ditiō against the scriptures. 597 Their adoration of images is a late and wicked inuenion of their schooles. 598 Images adored in the Church of Rome with diuine honour 600 Images reiected by Catholike Bi∣shops. 601 S. Austen condemneth Images as vnprofitable signes. 602 Custome without trueth is but the antiquitie of error. 603 Praier in an vnknowen toung pro∣hibited by Saint Paul in Gods name. 604 S. Paul speaketh of vnknowē toūgs 606 An vnknowen toung cannot edi∣fie. 607 Diuine seruice in a knowen toung cannot choose but edifie. 608 S. Paul speaketh of three learned toungs as wel as of others. 610 S. Paul speaketh of the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine as well as of other tongues. 611 S. Pauls wordes comprise both Church seruice & sermons. 612 Saint Paul 1. Cor. 14. speaketh of Church seruice. 613 The Church vnder the Apostles had no set order of diuine ser∣uice. 614 The Church vnder the Apostles did sing, blesse, and pray by the gyft of the spirite. 615 The Apostle had no certaine prai∣ers or seruice. 616 The Iesuits halting reasons that S. Paul did not speak of the church Seruice. 616 S. Paul to the Corinthians spea∣keth of Church seruice. 620 No man may say AMEN to that he vnderstandeth not. 624 Necessary to vnderstand our prai∣ers. 625 The primatiue Church had neuer her praiers and seruice in an vnknowen tongue. 627 The latine seruice was vnderstood in the Countries where it was. 629 Alleluia is vsed in all tongues as∣well barbarous as others. 630 The Britans had no latine seruice. 632 Alleluia soung at the plough. 632 The Iesuits manner of alleaging impertiment authorities. 633 Bede doth not say that the people of this Realme had the latine seruice in his time. 634 The prayers of the primatiue Church were common to all the people. 636 The Masse book proueth that the people should vnderstand the Priest 639 The Priest needeth no speach in his praiers but to edifie the hearers, 640 Praier is as acceptable to God in a barbarous, as in a learned toūg. 642 Seruice in an vnknowen tongue is no custome of the vniuersall Church. 643 The primatiue church had her ser∣uice in such tongues as the peo∣ple vnderstood. 644 The primatiue church allowed praiers in barbarous tounges. Whether side commeth nearest to christs institution. 650 S. Paul by the Lords supper mea∣neth the sacrament. 651 The name Masse whence it first came. 655 We doe not swarue from christes institution. 657 Christ did blesse with the mouth, and not with the finger. 658 Blessing in the scriptures applied to diuerse and sundrie thinges 659 To doe any thing vpon or ouer the bread is not needefull 660 The rehearsall of christs wordes maketh a sacrament. 661 We shew our purpose at the Lords table by our words and deedes. 662 The worde beleeued maketh the Sacrament. 664 Vnluened bread is not of the sub¦stance of the Sacrament 664 Water is no part of Christs insti∣tution. 663. & 670 Water is not necessarie in the Lordes cup euen by the confes∣sion of their own schooles. 668 No water mingled whiles the A∣postles liued. 672 The Masse an open profanation of Christs institution. 673 Priuate Masse euerieth all that christ did or said at his last Supper. 674 Christ did not sacrifice himselfe at his last supper. 676 The Primatiue church had no pri∣uate Masse. 678 The Lords supper ought to be cō∣mon. 679 The Lords cup was deliuered to the people as well as the bread. 679 Christs precept for the cup exten∣deth as well to the people as to the Priest. 680 In the primatiue church the lords cup was common to all. 682 The causes for which the church of Rome changed christs insti∣tution. 683 The auncient church of Rome ve∣ry vehement against half com∣munions. 684 Forbearing the Lords cuppe con∣demned in laymen as sacrilege 685 Sacrilege in the Priest can be no religion in the people. 686 The Iesuits proofes for their sacri∣fice. 687 How the fathers call the Lordes supper a sacrifice. 688 Their own Masse booke contradi∣cteth their sacrifice. 690 The Lords death is the sacrfice of the Lords supper. 691 A memoriall of christs passion is our daily sacrifice. 692 The elder sort of Schoolemen knew not their sacrifice. 693
The Iesuits heape vp fathers for a shew though they make, no∣thing for them. 694 The Sacrifices of the new Testa∣ment be spirituall. 695 What sacrifice it is that Malachie speaketh of. 696 The Lords Supper is a sacrifice for diers respects. 699 The Priests act can not applie the death of Christ 700 The Iesuits sacrifice. 701 The word Sacrifice is not vsed by the holy Ghost. 702 S. Paul maketh nothing for the sa∣crifie of the Masse. 703 Adoration of the sacrament. 705 The Sacrament must not bee ado∣red. 706 The Iesuits proofes for adoration of the Sacrament. 707 No Father teacheth the adoratiō of the sacrament. 708 S. Austen was far frō adoring the sacrament. 709 Christ adored in the misteries. 710 Chrysostome did not adore the sa∣crament. 712 Nazianzene doth not say that his sister adored the sacrament. 713 Dionysius made no inuocation of the Sacrament. 714 Dionys. corrupted by the Ies. 715 The whole church slaundered by the Iesuites. 716 Origen & Chrysst. lengthned by the Iesuits to serue the adoratiō of the Sacrament. 718 Origens words . 719 Christ  our roote. 719 Christ dwelleth in vs more truely than in the Sacrament. 719 The Church directed her prayers to Christ in heauen. 722 The Sacrament is a corruptible creature. 722 We must not basely bēd our minds on the visible creatures. 723 The mystical signes must be reue∣renced, but not adored with Godlike honour. 724 The signes remaine in their for∣mer Substance. 725 The Real presence. 726 Why the Iesuites mistake the fa∣thers in this matter. 728 The bread is made God by the Ie∣suites constructions of Christs wordes. 729 Christ said of the bread this is my bodie. 730 The Papistes say THIS in the words of Christ is taken for no∣thing. 732 The causes why the wordes of Christ at his last Supper were not literal. 733 For what cause S. Austen conclu∣deth the wordes of Christ to be figuratiue. 734 The Iesuits cānot tel how to make the letter agree with ther opi∣nion 735 The figuratiue sense of Christes words auouched by the fathers. 736 The signe in the Sacrament cānot be the trueth. 739 The 6. of S. Iohn expoundeth the words of the supper 740 The fathers refer the 6. of Iohn to the Lordes supper 741 The fathers themselues refer the 6. of Iohn to the sacrament. 742 The words in the 6. of Iohn are fi∣guratiue because the actiōs are spirituall. 744 To eate christ is to beleeue and a∣bide in Christ. 745 In S. Iohn the manner of eating is spiritual, the manner of speak∣ing is allegorical. 746 What the Capernits error was. 746 How the Ies. differ from the Caper¦nites. 748 What fathers the Iesuits haue for their literall sense & corporall eating. 750 What the late Grecians ment by pressing the letter. 751 The Sacrament is a signe of christ on the crosse. 753 In sacraments the signes haue the names of the thinges thēselues. 754 The signes remain in their former substance. 756 The power and operation of t signe is changed. 75 The substance of christs flesh doth not enter our mouthes. 759 Christ is not eaten with teeth. 759 The Iesuites narrowly driuen whē they must take substance for accidents. 761 Christ is not eaten with teeth or iawes. 762 The refutation of Eutiches error ouerthroweth trāsubstantiatiō. 764. Eutiches error is not refuted but confirmed by the real presence. 766. Leoes words do not import the re∣all presence. 767 The iesuits make the fathers con∣tradict themselues. 769 That body which entereth our mouths increaseth the substāce of our flesh. 770 What manner of eating Christ in the Sacrament the Church taught for a 1000. yeares. 772 The spirituall eating of Christ in the Sacrament excludeth the corporall. 776 What the Sacramentall eating of Christ is. 778 The wicked do not eat Christ. 779 The Church of Rome is not yet re∣solued of her corporal eating of Christs flesh. 780 The first Authors of their corporal eating, condemne ech others o∣pinion for heresie. 680 The grossenes of Papistes worse than carnal o capernitical. 782 The Elemēts may putrify, the flesh of Christ cannot. 783 Their sluttish diuinity is a necessi∣ry sequele to their real presēce. 783 We must ascend to heauen where Christ sitteth in his glorie. 384 Our harts must be lifted vp to hea¦uen, not o the he. 785 The true flesh of Christ is in heauē and absent from the earth. 786 The manhood of Christ is not in many places at once. 788
The substaunce of Christes bodie must be cōtained in one place. 790. Christes manhoode is not euery where by the verie principles of our faith. 792 How one & the same christ is e∣uerywhere present. 792 The power of God doth neuer crosse his will. 793 Contradictions bee as impossible as falshoods be. 796 The Iesuites haue not one father for their transubstantiatiō. 797 S. Austen horribly forged by fri∣er walden. 798 Bede vsed in the same sort by the same frier. 799 In what sense Chrysostome saide the mysteries are cōsumed. 800 How the Sacrament may be saide to be no bread. 801 Species doth not signifie shewes without substaunce. 803 The Persons of men cannot pre∣iudice the truth of God. 817 The happines of our times is gods goodnes not our worthines. 818 The Iesuites religion is like their subiection. 819 The Iesuites positions bee both trayterous and hereticall. 820. Faultes escaped. The first number noteth the page, the second the line, m. margent, c. correction. Page 9. line 18. safely. read falsly. p. 20. l. 25. mercy. The breath. r. mercy, the breach. p. 25. l. 30. Anastasius r. Athanasius. p. 37. l. 38. Tiberius. r, Liberius. p. 63. l. 33 cunning r. cumming. p. 64. l. 30. you can. r. Phi. You can. p. 66. l. 14. Seneca. r. Semeca. p. 72. l. 9. A∣thanasius r. Anastasius. p. 82. m. 4000. r. 1000. p. 93. l. 12. Burdeaus r. Burges. p. 97. l. 24. cattels r. chattels. p. 120 l, 41. cōuert r. cōtriue p. 128. l. 32. and if. r, Theo. And if. p. 149. l. 34. Maximus r. Mariaus. p. 173. l. 23. do you not. r, Phil Do you not. p. 180. l. 38. whch spoken r. which is spokē. p. 201. l. 1. adiudge to haue r. thē to haue. p. 204. l, 41. they do r. they may do. p. 228. m. whether the Pope. r. while the Pope. p. 229. l. 38. nec ipse nec alterū r. nec ipse possit alterū. p. 240. l. 13. goodline: r, godlines, p. 259. l. 8, & dare. r you dare. p. 270. l. 23 Protopius r, Procopius. 276, 12. sound r. found. 280. l. 3. resist r. sist. & 26 r. Theo. Sure. p. 301. l, 3. there r. three. 303. 3 your. r our. 35. l. 28. writing r. vttering. 318. l. 2. reasonable r. treasonable. 333. l. 31. perceiue r.  perceiue. & 32.  r.  & 39 shaken r. not shakē. p. 337. l. 1. you do r. you not do. p. 339. l. 28. the defence r. you defend. 350. l. 19. maintaining r. maiming. p, 364. l. 42. christian princes r. christians to be. 373. l. 29. precepts r. presence. & 38. seales r. seates. p. 385. m. stay. say. 393. m. in the praier r. in the praise. p. 407. m. what faces r. what forces. 421.15. others r. othes 423. l. 37. Foroniliensem r. Foroiuliensem. p. 42. l. 11. Rhemish r Romish. p. 430. l. 9. Frederike r. Lodouike 439. l. 25. both r. but. p. 448. l. 43. Pauia r. Papia. 450. m r lesse then their. 474. l. 8. restrained r. restored. p. 485. l. 20. of Nations r. of al Nations. p. 502. wee damned r. we be damned. 505. l. 37. They had. r. Theo. they had. 508.9 & 10. lines dele. p. 512. m. wars r. words. p. 513. m. manifest r. manifold. p. 548. l. 32. though r. ought 551. l. 12 restraining r. esteeming. 567. l. 23. aequè r. deductū aequè. 571 l. 29. saluation r. salutation. . 574.11, God r. gods. 586.38. satifactō r. sanctiiction. p. 605. l. 30. fond r foode. 607. l. 8. Phi. r. Theoph. p. 636 l. 7. We. r. Phil. We. p. 713. m. doth proue r. doeth not proe 734 l. 3. to the r. to be the. p. 743. l. 33. my life r. any life. 758. l. 20. that is r. this is. p. 759. m. i eaten r. is not eaten. 760. is pressed. r. is not pressed. 762. l. 38. promises r. premises. p. 773.17. present r. pleasant. 782. m. vide Antonium r. vide Antoninum. Quotations in the margent either wanting or falsly printed. P. 10. lib. imperf. r. lib. imper. 2. p. 13. lib. 10. r. lib. 1. p. 14. tract. 50. r. tract. 5 p. 20. 2. Cor. 34 r. 2. Chro. 34. p. 48 idem lib. 3 r. lib. 2. p. 57. epist. 90. r. 91. Ibid. in ep. 90. r. 91. p. 66. distin. 39. r. 93. p. 136.37. & 31. r 37. & 38. p. 137. Nouell. consit. 123.133. r. consit. 5.123.133. p. 157. cap. 74. r. 78. p. 161. Esaie 6. r. Esaie. 60. p. 206. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 4. r. 34. p. 230. Concil Afric. cap. 29. r. 92. p. 237. lib. cap. 37. r. lib. 1. cap. 37. p. 259. hom. 2. r. hom. 21. p. 262. 1. Cor. 17. r 1. Cor. 11. p. 265. definit. 8. r. definit. 80. p. 270. Socr. lib. 1. ca. 2. r. lib. 2. cap 20.271. c. 52.1.53.276. cap. 33. r. cap. 31.295. tit. 22. cap. 3. r. cap. 4.3.297. Socr. lib. 4. &c. r. Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 15.344. 1. Cor. r. 1. Cor 5.346. Mat. 16. r. Mat. 10.347. 1, Iohn 10. r 2 Iohn. 1, 351. cap, 5, r. Act. 5, p. 372. lib, r, lib, 5.377, 1480, r, 1580, ibid. 8. Tim, r, 1, Tim, 2, ib, e em, 19, r, 29, 417, fol, 888, r. 288, 422, gener, 23, r, gener, 24, 57, lib, 5, r, lib, 8, 581, tract, 44, r, 49, 625, expos, 1. r, expo, 2.753, octo tam, r, octoginta trium, Quotations wanting. 23, to the l, 38, Theod, lib, 4. cap, 1, 45, l, 1, Atha, apol. contr, Arian, 385, l, r, in Iohn. lib, 12, cap, 96.
