3832 S107111 99842814 7505
A CATALOGVE and Succession of the Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, and Ʋiscounts of this Realme of England, since the Norman Conquest, to this present yeare, 1619. TOGETHER, With their Armes, Wiues, and Children: the times of their deaths and burials, with many their memorable Actions. Collected by RAPHE BROOKE Esquire, Yorke Herauld: Discouering, and Reforming ma∣ny Errors committed, by men of other Profession, and lately published in Print; to the great wronging of the Nobility, and preiudice of his Maiesties Officers of Armes, who are onely appointed and sworne to deale faithfully in these causes. Quam quis{que} norit Artem, in hac se exerceat. Printed by WILLIAM IAGGARD, and fold at his house in Barbican. 1619.
TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince, IAMES, King of Great-Britaine, France, and Ire∣land, &c. Most Gracious Soueraigne: ALthough I thinke not the meane fruite of my Studies worthy so great a Patron as your selfe, and therefore dedicate the same onely to those Honourable Lords your Commis∣sioners for the Office of Earle Marshall of England, vnto whose Censure and Office, all matters of Honour and Armes belongeth, and are committed: (yet after fiftie yeeres labour and experience, Now treating of Nobility, Honour, and Armes, which are deriued from the fountaine of Royall authori∣tie of Kings and Princes, and being heereunto partly led by ver∣tue of my Office of Herauld, wherein I haue serued your MAIESTY and the late Queene ELIZABETH of famous memory, these for∣ty yeeres) I held it my bounden dutie, thus much at least (by hum∣ble Praeface) to intimate vnto your HIGHNESSE, that heere I disco∣uer and reforme many things heeretofore grossely mistaken, and abused by ignorant persons; who venturing beyond their owne element and skill to write of this subiect, haue shewed themselues more bold and busie, then skilfull in Herauldry, and haue thereby so troubled the cleare fountain of Honorable Titles and Descents, flowing from your MAIESTY and former Princes, that true Nobi∣litie is greatly blemished and obscured thereby. For the amend∣ment and preuention of these and the like abuses hereafter, I most humbly pray a reformation, and that vpstarts and Mountebankes
within this our profession, may be prohibited to make their pro∣fite and credite, vpon the discredite and impouerishing of your MAIESTIES poore seruants the Officers of Armes, who labor dai∣ly, and spend both their bodies and substance, faithfully to pre∣serue and keepe in Register, the Descents and Achiuements of the Nobilitie and Gentrie of this Kingdome, with their Noble and worthie Actes, Marriages, Issues, and Armes, which is no easie thing now to do. And much more harder it will be heereafter, if these busie bodies (catching by chance the imperfect Notes of He∣raulds deceased) shall be suffered to publish in print their owne in∣uentions, as true and infallible verities, whereby in time to come, it will be hard to distinguish light from darknesse, and truth from falshood, vnlesse your Princely care and feeling heereof, may bee signified vnto the Lords Commissioners to redresse the same. So most humbly praying your MAIESTIES pardon, I beseech the King of Kings, long to continue and prosper your happy Reigne ouer vs. Your Maiesties most humble deuoted Subiect and Seruant, RAPHE BROOKE, Yorke Herauld.
TO THE RIGHT HONOV∣rable, Edward Earle of Worcester, Lord Keeper of the Priuy Seale; Lodowicke Duke of Lenox, Lord Steward of his MAIESTIES Houshold; George Marquesse of Buckingham, Maister of his Maiesties Horse; Charles Earle of Nottingham, High Admirall of England; William Earle of Penbroke, Lord Chamberlaine of his Maiesties Houshold; Thomas Earle of Arundell, and Thomas Earle of Suffolke, Commissioners for the Office of Earle Marshall of England: Priuy Counsellors to IAMES King of GREAT-BRITAINE, and Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter. Right Honourable, THE meane Artificer that found fault with Apelles, so long as hee presumed not vltra Crepidam, was heard and allowed so well; that the most Excellent Painter thereupon amended his picture: and yet the same be∣ing the onely one (perhaps) of some ordinary person, well or ill done, could greatly hurt no man. But great hurt and preiudice (my Lords) may ensue vnto many, yea, euen vnto your selues and your posterity (ioyned as they are, and may bee, with other Noble families) by the mishapen, ill wrought, and deformed Pictures of false Pedigrees and Descents of English Nobilitie, which some busie Antiquaries (as they would be called) of late intruding, haue pub∣lished in Print. It were therefore to be wished, that Bookes of that kinde should bee examined by experienced Officers, and therewith haue your Lordships allowance, before they passe the Presse. But sithence hitherto it hath bin neglected and lightly passed ouer, as a matter of smal importance, and of lesse profit; I trust I shall with your Honourable fauours, doe my Prince and Countrey the seruice, yea my selfe and fellow-Officers of Armes, the right; presuming not vltra Caduceum, to exa∣mine the writings of these intruders, and reforme their errors: whereof to giue you a taste. Iohn Stow (in the Vinnet of his Annales, printed 1592.) hath made, Richard Duke of Yorke, and Anne Mortimer, to be Father and mother to K. Edward 4. in doing where∣of, he hath made the said Richard to marry his owne mother. M. Milles (page 543.) saith, that Charls Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by Margaret Lady Mortimer his second wife, had issue, Henry Earle of Lincolne, Frances wife to Henry Grey, Marquesse Dorset, and Eleanor maried to Henry Clifford Earle of Cumberland; whereas the said Henry, Fran∣ces, & Eleanor, were the children of Charles Brandon, by Mary the French Queen. M. Martin, in his History of the Kings of England (page 60.) hath. That King Iohn of England, had issue foure sons; Henry, who was after King; Richard elect King of the Ro∣manes;
William of Valence Earle of Penbroke, and Guydo Disnay: which William and Guydo, were the sons of Hugh le Brun, Earle of the Marches of Aquitain in France, and not King Iohns. What a confusion and trouble may this breed in after Ages; both for Descents, Armes, and true Kindred: as also suits of Law, Duelloes, and Challenges; Nay (my good Lords) were not the Crowne so well established in the King, and his Royall issue (which God long preserue:) what a Way is heere opened (if it bee not stopt in time) for vaine Titularies and Competitors to presume on? So dangerous a thing it is, for the vnskilfull to deale in matters of Herauldry, that are not sworne & pro∣fessed Officers thereto. Had I bene as forward to set out mine owne labors, as those haue bene to vent the imperfect Collections of others, I might (I thinke) haue writ∣ten of this subiect before some of them were borne: for any time these fiftie yeeres, it hath bene my studie. And when I had almost finished a true Catalogue of the Kings, Princes, and Nobles of this Realme, that haue bin since the Normane Con∣quest, with intent to leaue it to posterity only in Writing, and in the Office and Col∣ledge of Armes (which indeede ought to be the Store-house of all honourable Acti∣ons and Designes) I staide awhile at sight of the blinde and mishapen whelps, which the ouer-hasty brought forth. But now, as well for the Reasons afore-shewed, as also at the instance of some of my Honourable Friends; I haue thought meete (ha∣uing first made his Maiesty acquainted therewith) to publish and present the same vnto your Lordships; wherein besides the errors aboue cited, your Honours shall haue heere in the next leafe following, many others: yea, such as cry out to bee re∣formed, by your authority; which I trust of your owne Noble care and Honoura∣ble dispositions you will so execute, that henceforth the Nobility and Gentry of this Land, together with the Officers of Armes, may hold their owne better: And that the vndigested Notes of dead Heraulds and Painters bookes (to the preiudice of the liuing) be not published by any. And that in these matters of Armes and Descents, none but sworn Officers of Armes may be suffered to meddle; yea, & that amongst our selues, none may be suffered to giue the ancient Ensignes and tokens of Honour and Armes, vnto such as haue neither Descent nor Deserts to commend nor enable them thereunto. These and the like abuses done to our Profession, are enough (my good Lords) for me to point at by way of Epistle, and fully sufficient (I hope) to draw your Ho∣nourable cares for amendment thereof. But many more great errors haue I likewise discouered, yea (almost) in euery page of my Booke: which Booke (with my poore endeuours) I humbly offer vnto your most Noble protection and Patronage: And if your Honors shall be pleased, fauourably to censure and accept the same (as ear∣nestly I wish and pray you) I shall thinke my paines heerein well bestowed, & take encouragement to perfect and finish a farre greater worke begun in this my Professi∣on: otherwise to do you the best seruice I am able. Your Lordships deuoted in all duty and seruice, RAPHE BROOKE, Yorke Herauld.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Kings of England, since the Norman Conquest, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. WIlliam, sur-named the Conqueror (cousin vnto King Edward the Confessor, in the third and fourth degree) base sonne of Robert the sixt Duke of Normandy, be∣gotten of Arlet his Concubine, daughter of a Skinner and Burgesse of the Citty of Faloys; who hauing ouerthrowne and slaine King He∣rauld in battell, was vpon Christmas day, in the yeare of Christ, 1066. crowned King of England, (not by Stigand Archbishop of Can∣terbury, because he was a very proud and leud liuer) but by Aldred Archbishop of Yorke; at which time, the saide William caused both the Bishops and Noblemen of the Realme, to sweare fealty to him before S. Peters Altarat Westminster. He married Mauld, daughter of Baldwyn the fift Earle of Flanders (sur-named the Gentle) who dyed the second day of No∣uember, 1083. and was buried at Cane in Normandy, in S. Maries Church: and William Conqueror her husband dyed at Roan, on Thursday, the 8. of the Ides of September, 1087. the 51. of his Dukedome of Normandy, the 21. of his King∣dome of England, and of his age the 74. and was buried at Cane in S. Stephens Church, which he before had built. He had issue, 4. sonnes, and 6. daughters. For the authority of the Armes of the Kings of England, from William Con∣querors time, to king Richard the first, I finde none of any great credite, but what hath beene vsed by traditions, that will I set downe as I finde them. William Conqueror (as it is saide) vsed the Armes of Rollo the Dane, and first Duke of Normandy, which he bare as belonging to the Dukedome of Norman∣dy: Gueulles, deux Lyons passant gardant, d'or.
His Issue. Robert, sur-named Curtuoise, (which is, Short Bootes) being Duke of Nor∣mandy, was taken prisoner at Tenarchbray in Normandy, in the yeare 1106. and by commandement of William his brother, he had both his eyes put out, and dyed in the Castle of Cairdiffe, in the yeare 1134. when he had beene prisoner there, 28. yeares, and was buried at Glocester. He married Sibill, sister of William Earle of Conuersana in Italy, by whom he had issue, William and Henry. Richard, second sonne of William Conqueror, was slaine in the New Forrest by a Stag, and was buried at Winchester. William the third sonne, sur-named Ruphus, of his red haire, serued vnder his Father, at the battaile of Gerberoth in Normandy, where hee was wounded. After being King, and hunting in the New Forrest the second of August, Wal∣ter Tirrell a French Knight, shot him with an Arrow, whereof he presently dy∣ed, in the yeare 1100. hauing reigned twelue yeares and eleuen moneths, being 43. yeares olde. Henry the fourth sonne, was borne at Selby in Yorkshire, 1070. and sur-named Beauclarke (or sine Scholler) was by his Father knighted at Westminster, in the yeare 1086. Cicely eldest daughter, borne in Normandy, was Abbesse at Cane, where shee dyed without issue. Constance the second daughter, married to Alan Earle of Britaine, sur-named Fergant, dyed without issue, and was buried at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolke. This is that Constance, which the honest man Dolman, alias Parsons, setteth downe to haue issue, Conan le Grosse the second Duke of Britaine, and Conan le Grosse to haue issue Hoell, disinherited by his Father; and Bertha, married to Eudo Earle of Porret. Alice the third daughter, was married to Stephen, Earle of Bloys in France, and had issue, King Stephen and others; and after professed her selfe a Nun, at Marciquy in France, and was there buried. Ela, in her childhood was promised in marriage, to King Herauld of Eng∣land, but hee refused her, and married another, by reason whereof, she died vn∣married without issue. Gundred the fift daughter, married William de Warren, a Nobleman of Nor∣mandy, whom William Conqueror made Earle of Surrey, by whom she had issue, William the second Earle Warren and Surrey, and dyed in childebed, at Castle-Acre in Norfolke, and was buried at Lewis in Sussex, 1085. Margaret the sixt daughter, promised to Alphonsus King of Gallicia in Spain, and dyed without issue. William Peuerell, base sonne of William Conqueror, was Lord of Nottingham, and had issue, William a sonne.
King William Rufus. WIlliam Rouse or Rufus, sur-named of his red haire, the third sonne of William Conqueror. This Wil∣liam serued vnder his Father at the battaile of Gerberoth in Nor∣mandy, where he was wounded: He began his Reigne of King of England, the ninth day of September, in the yeare of our Lord, 1087. & was crowned at Westminster, by Lanfranke Archbishoppe of Canterbury, the first day of October. He was of person a square man, red coloured, his haire somewhat yellow, his eyes not one like another; he was of meane stature, somewhat big bellied, hee was very variable, inconstant, couetous and cruell; he ouer-bur∣dened his Subiects with vnreasonable taxes, pilled the rich, and oppressed the poore. And being a hunting in the New Forrest, the second day of August, in the yeare 1100. Sir Walter Tirrell, a French Knight, shooting at a Deere, vnawares smote him in the breast, that he fell downe starke dead, and neuer spake word. His body being conuay∣ed to Winchester, was there buried in the 43. yeare of his age, hauing reigned al∣most thirteene yeares, leauing no issue to succeed him. Les armes de son peré.
King Henry the first. HEnry, the fourth and youngest sonne of William Conquerour, was borne at Selby in Yorkshire, 1070. and for his learning was cald Beauelark; he was brought vp in the study of the liberall Arts at Cam∣bridge, vnder Henry Newborough Earle of War∣wicke. He began his Reigne the second of Au∣gust, and was crowned at Westminster, by Maurice Bishop of London, (Anselme Bishop of Canterbury beeing then in exile) the fift of August, 1100. He was strong and mighty of body, high of stature, amiable of countenance, blacke haired, faire eyes, broad breasted, well in flesh, full of merry conceits, excellent in wit, eloquent in speech, and fortunate in bat∣taile; and for these, he had three notable vi∣ces, couetousnesse, cruelty and letchery. Hee maried two wiues, the first was Mauld, daugh∣ter of Malcolme Canmoir, King of Scotland, (otherwise Malcolme with the great head) she was married to him at London, in the yeare 1100. and liued with him 17. yeares, and dyed in May, in the yeare 1118. & was buried at S. Peters church at Westminster, leauing issue one sonne and a daughter; she built a house for lea∣pers neere London, called S. Gyles in the field. His second wife was Adelicia, daughter of Godfrey, first Duke of Louaine, and sister of another Godfrey, and Iocelyn of Louaine: She was married the 29. of Ia∣nuary, 1121. and continued his wife fifteene yeares, but had no issue by him. She was after married to William de Albeney Earle of Arundell, by whom she had issue, William the second Earle of Arundell, Godfrey, and Ioane married to Iohn Earle of Angi. This Henry dyed of a surfet at Dennises, in the Forrest of Li∣ons in Normandy, the first day of December, in the yeare 1135. being about 67. yeares olde, hauing reigned King 35. yeares and foure Moneths. In this Henry, ended the line of the heyres male of the Norman Kings, ha∣uing reigned heere 69. yeares, after whom came the French, by marrying the heyre generall. Les armoiries de son peré. His Issue. William, sonne of King Henry and Queene Mauld his first wife, was borne in the yeare 1102. and being 14. yeares old, the Nobility did him homage, & three
yeares after, he married Mary, the daughter of Foulk Earle of Aniou; and the same yeare was made Duke of Normandy, for which he did homage to King Lewis the Grosse of France, and after was drowned, comming out of Normandy into England, the 26. of Nouember, 1120. beeing then eighteene yeares of age, leauing no issue of his body. Mauld, the only daughter of king Henry the first, by Mauld his first wife, was borne the fourth yeare of her Fathers Reigne, and was married to the Empe∣rour Henry the fourth, for his second wife, being but seuen yeares olde at her es∣pousing, and married and crowned at eleuen, at Mentz in Germany, in the yeare 1114. with whom she continued twelue yeares, and out-liued him, but had no issue by him. After she married Geffrey Plantagenet, Earle of Aniou, son of Foulke king of Ierusalem, in the yeare 1127 and had issue Henry, after King of England; Geffrey, Earle of Nantes in Britaine; and William, Earle of Poytou: She was his wife 23. yeares, and a widdow 17. yeares, and after dyed in Roan, 1167. and was buried at Bec Abbey in Normandy. His Issue by Concubines. Robert (of some Writers called the Consull of Glocester) base sonne of King Henry the first, begotten of Nest, the daughter of Rice ap Teuder, the great Prince of South Wales, who was after married to Girald de Windsore, Constable of the Castle of Penbroke. This Robert married Mabell, daughter of Robert Fitz-Ha∣mond, Lord of Glamorgan, by whom he had issue, William Earle of Glocester, and others, as in the Title of Earles of Glocester is more at large. Reginald, base sonne of King Henry the first, begotten of the daughter of Ro∣bert Corbet, of Alencester in Warwickshire, had issue, foure daughters his heires, as in the Title of Earles of Cornwall, is more at large. Henry, slaine in Anglesey in North-Wales, without issue. Richard, Mary and Margaret were drowned, with their brother William, com∣ming out of Normandy into England, 1120. Elizabeth, base daughter of King Henry the first, (begotten of Elizabeth, sister of Walleran Earle of Meulan, and Robert Bossue Earle of Leicester) was wife to Gilbert Strongbow Earle of Penbroke, and Mother to Richard Earle of Penbroke, as in the Title of Earles of Penbroke. Iulian, Countesse of Passy.
King Stephen. STephen, Earle of Mortaine and Bolloigne in Picardy, third Son of Stephen, Earle of Bloys and Champaigne, begotten of Alice, the third daughter of William the Conqueror and Queene Mauld; was crow∣ned King on S. Stephens day, by William Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, at Westminster 1135, by the plotting of his younger Brother Henry, who was Bishop of Winchester, and Abbot of Glostenbury, and who had drawn vnto his Fa∣ction, William Archbishop of Canterbury, the very first man that before had sworne fealty to Queene Mauld the Empresse, and to stir vp the Nobility of the Realme against the saide Mauld, protesting, that it was basenesse for so many great Peeres to be subiect vnto a womā. And further, to helpe forward this mischie∣uous plot, (another of the same brood) Roger Bishop of Salisbury, the late Kings Treasurer, protested, that the Nobility were free from the Oath they had before made to Mauld the Empresse, by reason that she had married Geffrey Plantagenet, without their priuity and consent, (as though free Princes could not marry without the consent of their Subiects) which false instigations of these wicked Bishops, made the Nobility to forswear themselues, in swearing fealty vnto King Stephen a Vsurper. And these were the fruites of these honest Churchmen, who were the cause, and losse also of many a mans life. This Stephen married Mauld, daughter of Eustace Earle of Bolloigne, Brother of Godfrey and Baldwyn kings of Ierusalem, by whom he had issue, three sonnes and two daughters: he reigned eighteene yeares, ten moneths, and odde dayes, and dyed at Douer the 25. of October, 1154. being 49 yeares olde, and was buried at Feuersham in Kent, where his Queene and Sonne were also buri∣ed. She dyed at Heningham Castle in Essex, the third of May, 1151. It is said, that King Stephen entring this Realme, the signe being in Sagittarius, and obtayning great victory by the helpe of his Archers, assumed the Sagitarius for his Arms. Et portoit, gueulles a Sagitarius d'or. Their Issue. Baldwyn the eldest sonne, dyed in his infancy, and was buried at London, in the Priory of the Trinity within Aldgate, founded by Queen Mauld, wife to king Henry the first. Eustace second sonne, was by his Father created Earle of Bolloigne, and mar∣ried
Constance, sister of Lewis the seuenth King of France, and dyed without issue the tenth of August, 1152. and was buried at Feuersham. William the third sonne, married Isabell, daughter and heyre of William the third Earle Warren and Surrey, in whose right he was Earle Warren and Surrey, Lord of Norwich and Peuensey, Earle Mortaine, and Lord of the Egle in Nor∣mandy. He dyed in his returne from Tholouz, in the yeare, 1160. Mauld, the eldest daughter of King Stephen, dyed young, and was buried at London, in the Priory of the Trinity within Aldgate, cald Christ-Church, now the Dukes place. Mary, second daughter of King Stephen, was Abbesse of the Nunnery at Rumsey in Hampshire; after she forsooke her habite, and married Mathew, Bro∣ther of Philip Earle of Flanders, who (in her right) was Earle of Bolloigne, and had issue, Ida and Mauld. King Henry the second, HEnry, the second of that Name, (sur-named Short-mantle, borne in France) Son of Geffrey Plantage∣net, Earle of Antou, and Mauld the Empresse, daughter of King Henry the first; began his Reigne ouer this Realme of Eng∣land, the twentieth day of October, 1154. His first comming was to Winchester, where the Nobles of the Realme came vnto him, of whō he tooke homage and fealty: then comming to London, he was crowned at Westminster by Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, the 17. of December, 1154. being then 23. yeares of age. He chose to be of his Counsell, the gra∣uest and wisest he could finde, & such as were best experienced in the Lawes of the Land. He expelled by publike Proclamation, all stran∣gers out of the Land, who had swarmed into England, in the time of variance betweene king Stephen and him: amongst whom, William of Ypers Earle of Kent, was also com∣pelled to be gone; taking into his hands all such lands and possessions as per∣tained to the Crowne, which had bene before alienated and made away to any person of what degree soeuer. From Hugh Mortimer, he took the Castles of Cle∣bery, Wigmore & Bridgnorth. He maried Elianor, daughter and sole heyre of Willi∣am Duke of Aquitaine, Earle of Poictiers and Tholouze, the fift of that name, (begotten of the daughter of Raymond, Earle of Tholouse.) This Elianors Title,
was the cheefe cause of those bloody warres betwixt England and France; yea, and the Bellowes that blew that vnnaturall discord, betwixt the Father and his Sonnes. She ouer-liued her husband, and did see three of her sonnes to be kings; and dyed the third of the Kalends of Aprill, 1204. This Henry dyed the 6. day of Iuly, 1189. in the 61. yeare of his age, when he had reigned 34. yeares, 9. moneths, and two daies, and was buried at Founteuerald, in the Dutchy of Alan∣son, neere to the Towne of the Egle. Et portoit, gueulles au deux leopard passant d'or. The Jssue of King Henry the second, and Queene Elianor bis VVife. William eldest sonne, borne in the yeare, 1152, to whom the Nobility sware fealty at the Castle of Wallingford in Berkshire; he dyed in the yeare 1156, be∣ing but fiue yeares olde, and was buried at Reading, by his great Grandfather, King Henry the first. Henry the second sonne, after the death of William his Brother, was Duke of Normandy Earle of Aniou and Mayne, and was crowned king in the life time of his Father, the 1. of Iune, 1170. His wife was Margaret, daughter of Lewis the younger, king of France, and was married at Newburgh in Normandy, 1160. and she was after crowned Queene at Winchester, 1163. He dyed at Marcell in Tou∣raine, the eleuenth of Iune, 1182. and was buried at Roan. Richard the third sonne, was borne at Oxford, 1157. and was sur-named of the French, Cuer-de-Lyon. He was first created earle of Poyctou, & had the whole Dutchy of Aquitaine, for which he did his homage to King Lewis the yonger, of France, 1170. After he fell at variance with his Father, and maintained wars against him: but he was afterwards reconciled into his Fathers loue againe, & succeeded him in his Kingdome. Geffrey the fourth sonne, borne the fift yeare of his Fathers Reigne; he mar∣ried Constance, daughter and heyre of Conan Duke of Britaine, and did his ho∣mage for the same to his brother Henry, and dyed at Paris, 1186. the 19, of Au∣gust, and was buried in our Lady Church there, hauing issue, Arthur, Duke of Britaine, borne after his Fathers death; and a daughter named Elianor, which dy∣ed in prison, in King Henry the thirds time. This Constance was also married to Randoll Earle of Chester. Philip the fift sonne, was borne in the fifteenth yeare of his Fathers Reigne, and dyed young, and was buried in S. Paules Church in London. Iohn the sixt sonne, was borne in the yeare 1166. and sur-named Sanz-terre without Land; because when he was King, hee resigned his Crowne and King∣dome to the Pope: which Pandulphus his Legate kept (for the space of foure daies) to the Popes vse. He was created Earle of Mortaigne, and had withall the Earledomes of Cornwall, Glocester, Derby and Lancaster, the Honours of Wal∣lingford and Nottingham, and lastly was King.
Mauld the eldest daughter, was borne in the third yeare of her Fathers reign, and married Henry, sur-named the Lyon, Duke of Saxony and Sardinia; she sur∣uiued her husband, and dyed in the first yeare of King Richard the first, and was after buried by her husband in the Church of S. Blase at Brunswick, leauing issue, Othe Emperor, Henry Duke of Saxony, and William, and a daughter named Eli∣anor. Elianor second daughter, borne at Roan, 1162. married Alfonsus the ninth of that name, King of Castile in Spaine, and had issue, Sancheus that dyed yong, as also his brother Ferdinando; Henry King of Castile; Blanch Queen of France, wife to Lewis the eight, and Mother of S. Lewis; Berengar married vnto Alphon∣sus King of Leon, Vrraca Queene of Portingall, and Elianor wife to King Iames King of Arragon. Ioane the third daughter, borne in the Citty of Angiers in France, 1166. be∣ing but eleuen yeares olde, was conueyed to the Citty of Palermo, and there married to William the second King of Cicill, Duke of Apulia, and Prince of Ca∣pua, 1177. and was crowned Queene at the same place. She had issue, a sonne na∣med Beaumond, who was Duke of Apulia, and dyed young: She was after mar∣ried to Raymond the fourth of that Name, Earle of Tholouze, and had issue Ray∣mond, the last Earle of that House or Family; and a daughter married to Berald of Elbeine, Prince of Orange. Issue by his Concubine. WIlliam, sur-named Longspee (or Long-Sword) begotten of his Paramore, the Lady Rosamond, daughter of Walter Lord Clifford, married Ela, daughter and heyre of William Fitz-Patricke Earle of Salisbury, and had issue, William Longspee a Baron; Stephen second sonne; Nicholas Bishop of Salisbury; and Ri∣chard the fourth sonne, was a Cannon at Bradstocke: Idona, married to William Beauchampe Baron of Bedford; Ella, first married to the Earle of Warwicke, and after to Philip Lord Basset; and Isabell, first married to William Lord Vescy, and after to Walter Lord Clifford, Father of Roger.
King Richard the first. RIchard, third sonne of King Henry the second, was borne at Oxford, in the yeare 1157, who for his inuin∣cible valor, and haughty courage, was sur-named Cuer-de-Lyon, or the Lyons Heart; and did beare on his Shield or Targe, for his Armes, a Lyon rampant, which was the first Armes that euer I haue seene borne by any in England. He began his Reigne ouer England, the sixt day of Iuly, in the yeare of our Lord, 1189. being 35. yeares olde. And vp∣on the solemnizing of his Fathers Funerals, he went to the City of Roan, where, on the twen∣tieth of Iuly after, he was proclaymed Duke of Normandy. In the beginning of his reigne, Pope Innocent solicited him with many strong perswasions, and promises of his blessings, to wage warre in his owne person against the Turkes in the holy Land, and to attempt the winning of Ierusalem from the Infidels; which iourney he vndertooke, because Fredericke the Emperor, and Philip the second of France, and Leopoldus then Arch-Duke of Austria, and others had engaged themselues, to further those at∣tempts, that their generall meeting should be in Sicilia: and that such wealth & booty as God and good fortune should make them owners of, should be equal∣ly shared and diuided amongst them and theirs. King Richard to supply his wants, and to furnish himselfe with money, he solde the Castles of Barwick and Rokesbrough to the King of Scots, for ten thousand pounds; and the Lordship and Earledome of Durham, vnto Hugh the proud Bishop of that See, for a great summe of money. He also enriched himselfe by the sale of sundry Honours, Lordships, Mannors, Offices, Priuiledges, Royalties, and other things; prote∣sting, that (for the performance of so great and honourable a seruice) hee was not vnwilling to sell his Citty of London, if any were able to buy it, rather then he would be chargeable vnto others. His iourney being performed, and hee proclaymed King of Ierusalem, and had the possession thereof, and after ma∣king his returne for England; was in great danger of shipwracke, where he saued his life by swimming, neere vnto Histria, which lyeth betweene Aquileia and Venice. And comming to the Territories of Leopold in Austria, hee was by him taken prisoner & solde to the Emperour Henry the sixt, for threescore thousand Markes; which Emperour assessed him to pay for his ransome, one hundred thousand pounds; for which, security being giuen, he was set at liberty. Hee was first contracted in marriage to Alice, daughter of Lewis the seuenth king of France, but with her he neuer kept company, nor had any issue.
His second wife was Berengaria, daughter of Sanches the fourth, King of Nauarre, who married him at Ciprus, and accompanied him to the holy land. He was slaine by Bertram de Gurdonn, with the shot out of a Crossebow, at a Castle of the Viscount of Limoges, called Chalons, which wounding him in the shoulder, the Surgeons hauing drawne out the wood of the Arrow, and not the enuenomed yron forke; mangled the Arme with cruell incisions, that the paines thereof hastned his death, when he had raigned almost nine yeares. He was bu∣ried at Founteuerard in France at his Fathers feete, the 6. of Aprill, in the yeare 1199. without any lawfull issue. He had two base children, Philip a sonne, and Isabell a daughter. King Richard the first did beare for his Armes in his Pauis or Shield, one ly∣on rampant: and this is the first Armes that euer I could see any authority for. King Iohn. IOhn, the sixt and youngest sonne of King Henry the second, was borne in the yeare 1166. and by his Father was made Earle of Mo∣riton, and Lord of Ireland; and by the boun∣ty and guift of King Richard his Brother, hee was Earle of Cornwall, Lancaster & Somerset, and after his brothers death, at Roane he was created Duke of Normandy. And lastly, vpon the Ascension day, 1199. hee was crowned at Westminster, King of England. He was sur-na∣med Iohn Sanz-terre, because (when hee was King) hee resigned both Crowne and King∣dome to the Pope which Pandulphe the Le∣gate kept for the space of foure dayes to the Popes vse. The whole course of this Kings gouernment, was accompanied with continu∣all troubles; and his two Persecutors were Pope Innocent the third, and Philip the second, then King of France. He married two wiues, the first was Isabell, daughter & co-heyre of William Earle of Glocester, sonne of Earle Robert, married to him when he was Earle Moritayne, the first of King Richard the first, and after tenne yeares (hauing no issue) was the first yeare of his Reigne diuorced from him, vn∣der pretence of consanguinity, and married to Geffrey Magna-vile, Earle of Es∣sex;
and after his decease, to Hubert de Burgo, Earle of Kent, and dyed without issue. Isabell, second wife to King Iohn, was daughter and heyre of Aymer, Earle of Angolesme, by whom he had issue, as heereafter followeth. This Isabell ouer-li∣ued King Iohn, and married Hugh de Brun, Earle of the Marches of Aquitaine, & Lord of Lusignan and Valence in Poyton, (to whom she should haue bene mar∣ried, before she married King Iohn) by whom she had diuers children, greatly aduanced by King Henry the third, their halfe brother. This King, lying in the Abbey of Swansteed, not farre from Lincolne, was poysoned by a Monke, of the Order of S. Bernard; who to make his match sure, and to auoide iealousie and suspition, first dranke vnto the King, and poysoned himselfe: the King beeing brought from the saide Abbey in a Horse-litter, vnto the Castle of Newarke, there dyed on S. Lukes night, the 14. Kalends of Nouember, and was after bu∣ried at Worcester, in the yeare 1216. when he had reigned 17. yeares, fiue mo∣neths, lacking eight dayes, at the age of 51. yeares. This Iohn, beeing King of England and Duke of Normandy, in right of his Grand-mother Mauld the Empresse; and Duke of Aquitaine by Elianor his Mo∣ther, ioyned the Armes of Aquitaine, being a Lyon passant gardant, vnto the Armes of Normandy and England, making it Gueulles trois Lyons passant gardant d'or. King Johns Jssue by Isabell his last Wife. King Henry the third, borne at Winchester, the first of October, 1208. being the tenth yeare of his Fathers Reigne. Richard, second sonne of King Iohn, was borne the next yeare after his Bro∣ther King Henry, by whom he was made Knight, and created Earle of Cornwal; and by the Electors, chosen to be Emperor of the West, and crowned King of the Romans and Almany, at the Citty of Acon in Germony; (others haue, at A∣quisgraue) He married three wiues; the first was Isabell, daughter of William Marshall the younger, Earle of Penbroke, widdow of Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Glocester, by whom he had issue, Henry slaine at Vitirbo in Italy, & Iohn, who dy∣ed both without issue. His second wife was Senchia, daughter of Raymond Earle of Prouince, and sister of Queen Elianor his brothers wife, who was crow∣ned with him at Acon, and by whom he had issue, Edmond Earle of Cornwall, & others. His third and last wife was Beatrix, Niece to the Archbishop of Co∣leyne. This Richard dyed at his Mannor of Barkhamsted, the 20. of Aprill, 1271. others say, 1272. and his body was buried in the Monastery of Hayles in Gloce∣stershire, and his heart in the Abbey of Reuly at Oxford, which was of his foun∣dation. Ioane the eldest daughter, was married to Alexander, the second King of Scots,
who comming into England, to see her Brother King Henry the third, dyed at London, and was buried in the Nunnery at Tarent in Dorsetshire, the fourth of March, 1236. Elianor second daughter, was first married to William Marshall the younger, Earle of Penbroke, who dyed before the wedding Feast was ended. She married after, Simon Mountfort Earle of Leicester (sonne of Simon Earle Mounfort in France) who maintaining the Barons warres, against King Henry the third, was slaine at the battaile of Euesham, 1265. After whose death, she and her Children were banished England, and dyed in the Nunnery at Montarges in France; as in the Title of Earles of Leicester is more at large. Isabell youngest daughter, was borne in the yeare 1214. who being 21. yeares of age, married the Emperour Frederick in the Citty of Wormes in Germany, the 20. of Iuly, 1235. She being his sixt Wife, had issue by him, Henry elected King of Cicily, and Margaret, Wife of Albert Landgraue of Thurin: She dyed in child∣bed the first of December, 1241. Base Children of King IOHN. Richard, base sonne of King Iohn, with Hugh de Burgo Earle of Kent, ouer∣threw the Nauy of Lewis the French Kings sonne, in the second yeare of King Henry the third. He married Rohesia, daughter and heyre of Richard de Douer, sonne and heyre of Fulbert de Douer, who built the Castle of Chilham. Geffrey Fitz-Roy, base sonne of King Iohn, who transported Soldiours into France, when Arch-Bishop Hubert forbad King Iohn his Father to go thither. Ioane, base daughter of King Iohn, begotten of Agatha, daughter of William Earle Ferrars and Derby, was married to Lewellin Prince of Wales, 1204. with whom her Father gaue in marriage, the Castle and Lordship of Elinsmere, in the Marchesse of South-Wales.
King Henry the third. HEnry, sonne and heyre of king Iohn, was borne at Winchester, the first of October, in the yeare 1208. being the 10. yeare of his Fathers Reigne; & be∣ing of the age of nine yeares, was crowned King at Glocester, the 28. of October, 1216. by Peter, Bishop of Winchester, and the Protecti∣on of him and his Realme, was committed to William Marshall the elder, Earle of Penbroke; and after his death, 1218. hee was committed to Peter, Bishop of Winchester, by whose coun∣sell he was crowned the second time, at West∣minster, in the fift yeare of his Reigne. He had great trouble and wars with his Barons, and was taken prisoner at the battaile of Lewis in Sussex, 1263. and with him, Richard King of Romanes his Brother, and Prince Edward his sonne, with many others; Simon Mountfort Earle of Leicester, Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, and Robert Earle Ferrars and Derby, being the Ring-leaders of the re∣bellious Barons. Not long after, the King, Prince and others were set at liberty, and raising new Forces, fought a battaile at Euersham in Worcestershire, where the Barons were discomfited, and Simon Earle of Leicester, with his eldest sonne, & Sir Hugh Spencer, and many others of great account were slaine. This ouer∣throw did vtterly defeat the Barons, and depriued them of all their hopes; and so reuiued the melancholy King, that now he began againe to be sensible of his strength, and resolued (with all speed possible) to breake those chaynes, with which so lately he was so strongly bound. He married Elianor, second daughter and one of the co-heyres of Raymond Berengarius, Earle of Prouence, by Beatrix, daughter of Thomas Earle of Sauoy, and sister to the Earles Amee and Peter, and Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbu∣rie. She was married at Canterbury, the 14. of Ianuary, 1236. and was crowned at Westminster, the 19. day of Ianuary after. He fell sicke at S. Edmonds-bury in Suffolke, and dyed the 16. of Nouember, 1272. when he had liued 65. yeares, and reigned 56. yeares, and 28. dayes, and was buried at Westminster. She was his Wife 37. yeares, his Widdow 19. yeares, and dyed a Nun at Almesbury, the 25. of Iune, 1291. and was buried in her Monastery, the 11. of September after. Et portoit, d'engleterre, gueulles trois lyons passant gardant d'or, arme & lampasse d'azur.
His Issue. Edward eldest sonne, was borne at Westminster, the 28. of Iune, 1239, he was sur-named Long-shanks, of his tall & slender legs, he was made knight in Spaine, by Alphonsus King of Castile, and Earle of Chester by his Father, after the death of Dauid Earle of Chester, without issue male. Edmond second sonne, borne the 26. of Ianuary, 1245. sur named Crouch∣backe, of bowing in his backe: He was entituled King of Cicilia and Apulia, & was created Earle of Lancaster. He had the lands of Simon Mountfort, Earle of Leicester, and Robert Ferrars Earle of Derby giuen him; who were disinherited, for raising war with the Barons, against the King. He dyed at Bayon in Gascoigne, the fift of Iune, 1296. being 50 yeares old; as in the Earles of Lancaster is more at large. Richard third sonne dyed young, and was buried at Westminster. Iohn fourth sonne, dyed also young, and was buried at Westminster. William fift sonne dyed young, and was buried in the new Temple at London. Henry fixt sonne dyed young, and was buried at Westminster. Margaret eldest daughter, was the first Wife of Alexander the third, King of Scots. Beatrix second daughter, borne at Burdeaux in Gascoigne, married to Iohn the first, Duke of Britaine, who had issue, Arthur and Iohn. Katherine third daughter, borne at London, 1252. dyed young. King Edward the First. EDward, eldest sonne of King Henry the third, was borne at Westminster, the 28. of Iune, 1239. was surnamed Long shanks of his long legs, and be∣gan his Reigne the 16. of Nouember, in the yeare of our Lord, 1272. beeing then beyond the Sea, comming homeward from the Holy-Land; and the 19. of August, in the second yeare of his Reigne, both he and his Queene Elianor were crownd at Westminster, by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury. At which Coronation, Alexander King of Scots, & Iohn Earl of Britaine were present, with their wiues, who were both sisters to K. Edward. At which sollemnity, fiue hundred great horses were let at liberty by the King of Scots, the Earles of Cornwall, Glocester, Penbrooke, Warren, & others as they alighted from their backs; and it was free for any that could, to catch & haue thē as their owne.
King Edward being returned out of Wales, diuers complaints were presen∣ted vnto him, against diuers of his Iustices, namely, Sir Thomas Weyland, Lord Chiefe-Iustice of the Kings Bench, Adam Stretton, William Brampton, Roger Leicester, and Iohn Luneth, all Iustices of the said Bench. with Robert Lithbury, Master of the Rolles; Sir Thomas Weyland, by a Quest of twelue men was found guilty, accessary of a murder, for releeuing the murderer after the deed done; For which, he tooke Sanctuary in the Church of the Fryars Minors at S. Ed∣monds-bury; from whence he was had, and brought and deliuered to Sir Robert Mallet Knight, who sent him to the Tower of London, and after banished the Land, and all his goods confiscated to the Kings vse. William Brampton, Roger Leicester, Iohn Luneth, and Richard Lithbury before named, being accused of wrongfull iudgements, and other foule mis-demeanors, were deliuered out of the Tower of London, by paying each of them a thousand Markes fyne; and Sa∣lomon de Rogester, Thomas de Sudington, Richard de Boiland, and Walter de Hop∣ton, Iustices that rode the circuites, were charged with the like offences, & were punished accordingly. Sir Raphe de Hingham, a Iustice of great account and who had the managing of the whole affaires of the Realme, was charged with many notorious abuses, and purchased his peace with a great summe of money; A∣dam de Stretten, Lord Chiefe-Baron of the Exchecquer, a man of great possessi∣ons, lost all his liuings, and 34. thousand Markes in ready money; and yet it was thought he had great fauour, in that he lost not his life. King Edward married two wiues, and had issue by them both. Queene Elia∣nor his first Wife, was sister of Alphonsus King of Castile, and daughter of Fer∣dinando the third; She was married to him at Bures in Spaine, 1254. and was crowned with him, and liued with him 36. yeares, and dyed at Herdeby in Lin∣colnshire, the 29. of Nouember, 1290. and was buried at Westminster, and at eue∣ry place where she rested, comming from Herdeby, he erected a Crosse. Margaret his second wife, was sister of Philip the faire, King of France, and eldest daughter of Philip the Hardy, son of S. Lewis; she was married vnto him at Canterbury, the 8. of September, 1299. She ouer-liued King Edward, and remai∣ned a Widdow ten yeares after, and dyed the 10. of Edward the second, 1317. and was buried in the Gray-Fryars in London, before the high Altar in the Qui∣er, which before she had built. King Edward dyed at Brugh vpon the Sands, in the yeare 1307. the seuenth of Iuly, when he had reigned 34. yeares, seuen moneths, and odde dayes, being 68. yeares olde, and was buried at Westminster; vnto which Church he had gi∣uen a hundred pound lands a yeare. Et portoit, de gueulles, au trois lyons paffant gardant d'or, armé & lampasse d'azur. His Issue by his first Wife. Iohn eldest sonne, borne at Winchester, and dyed a childe, and was buried at Westminster, the 8. of August, in the last yeare of King Henry the third. Henry second sonne, dyed young, his Father being then in the Isle of Cicill, &
was buried at Westminster, the 20. of Nouember, 1272. Alphons third sonne, borne in the Towne of Mayne in Gascoigne, as his Fa∣ther and Mother were comming out of the Holy-Land to England, the 23. of Nouember, 1273. and dyed at Windesore, the 4. of August, 1285. and was buried at Canterbury. Edward the fourth sonne, borne at Cairnaruon in North-Wales, the 25. of A∣prill, 1284. After the death of Lewellyn ap Griffith, was created Prince of Wales, by his Father, being the first of the Kings sonnes of England, that had that Ti∣tle. He was also Earle of Ponthieu, and of Chester, and was made Knight by his Father, on Whitsonday, 1306. Elianor eldest daughter, borne at Windesore, in the 50. yeare of her Fath Reigne, and was married with a Proxie, to a Deputy for Alphons King of Ar∣ragon, sonne of King Peter, who dyed before marriage, leauing his Kingdome to his Brother Iames. She was after married at Bristow, 1292. to Henry the third Earle of Barrie, in Champayne in France, and had issue, Edward Earle of Barrie, from whom the Dukes and Earles of Barrie do descend. Ioane her daughter, was married to Iohn Earle Warren and Surrey in England. Ioane second daughter, was borne at Acon in the Holy-Land, where her Mother remained, during her Fathers wars with the Sarrazins, and beeing 18. yeares olde, was married to Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Glocester and Hartford, by whom she had issue, Gilbert Earle of Clare, slaine in Scotland without issue, and others as in the Title of Earles of Glocester. She married to her second hus∣band, Sir Raphe Mounthermer Knight, who (during his wiues life) was Earle of Glocester, and sate in all Parliaments by that Title. She liued 38. yeares, and dyed in the first yeare of the Reigne of King Edward the second, and was buried in the Fryers Augustines in Clare. Margaret third daughter, borne in the Castle of Windesore, 1275. and at 18. yeares of age, was married at Westminster, on the 9. day of Iuly, 1290. to Iohn the second Duke of Brabant, and had issue, Iohn the third, Father of Margaret, wife of Lewis of Mechlyn, Earle of Flanders, and Mother of the Lady Marga∣ret, heyre of Brabant and Flanders, who was married to Phillip Duke of Bur∣gundy. Berengaria the fourth daughter, borne 1276. and dyed a childe. Alice the fift daughter, dyed young. Mary sixt daughter, borne at Windesore the 22. of Aprill, 1279. was at ten yeares of a made a Nun, at Ambresbury in Wiltshire, at the request of Queene Elianor her Grand-mother, who at that time, was Lady Abbesse there. Elizabeth the seuenth daughter, was borne in Rutland Castle in Flintshire, 1284. and being 14. yeares olde, was married at London, to Iohn the first of that name, Earle of Holland, and Lord of Freezeland, who dyed two yeares after without issue. After whose death, she was married to Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, without any dowry, by whom she had issue, Iohn and Humfrey, as in the Title of Earles of Hereford. Beatrix, the eight daughter of King Edward the first. Blanch the ninth daughter, dyed a Childe.
Issue by Queene Margaret, the second Wife. Thomas, the fift sonne of King Edward the first, was borne at Brotherton, a little Village in Yorkshire, in the yeare 1300. and was (after the death of Roger Bigot) created Earle of Norfolke and Marshall of England. He had two wiues, the first was Alice, daughter of Sir Roger Hayles, of Harwich in Suffolke, by whō he had issue, Edward and others, as in the Title of Earles of Norfolke. His se∣cond wife was Mary, daughter of William Lord Ros, widdow of Sir Raphe Cob∣ham, who out liuing him, married the third time, William Lord Bruse, of Brember in Sussex. Edmond the sixt sonne, was borne at Woodstocke in Oxfordshire, the fift of August, 1301. and was created Earle of Kent. He married Margaret, daughter of Iohn, and sister and sole heyre of Thomas Lord Wake of Lidell in Northamp∣tonshire, and had issue, two sonnes that dyed without issue, and one daughter, as in the Title of Earles of Kent. The daughter was Ioane, sur-named, The faire Maid of Kent, first married to William Mountague Earle of Salisbury; from whō being diuorced, she was after married to Sir Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, and by him had issue, Thomas and Iohn, both Dukes of Surrey, and Earles of Hun∣tington. Lastly, she married for her third husband, Edward the blacke Prince, & had issue, King Richard the second. This Edmond was beheaded at Winchester, the 19. of March, in the fourth yeare of King Edward the fourth his Nephew. Elianor the tenth daughter, was borne at Winchester, the 6. of May, 1306. & dyed young without issue, and was buried in S. Peters Church at Westminster. King Edward the second. EDward of Carnaruan, so named of the place of his birth, began his Reigne, the seuenth day of Iuly, 1307. and on the 24. day of February after, he with his Q. Isabell, were crowned at Westminster, by Hen∣ry, Bishop of Winchester. He caused Walter de Langton, Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, and Lord Treasurer of England, to b rrested by Sir Iohn Felton, Constable of the Tower of London, and sent to Wallingford, there to bee kept prisoner, and his goods to bee confiscate and giuen to Pieres of Gaueston; which Pieres being before banished England by the said Bi∣shops meanes, was now sent for and receiued againe into most high fauour, and made Earle of Cornwall, his principall Secretary, & Lord Chamberlaine. By whose company and soci∣ety,
he was sodainly corrupted; whereby he neglected and disdained the good counsell and company of his Nobility, giuing himselfe to wantonnesse, passing his time in voluptuous pleasure, and riotous excesse. And to helpe this matter forward, Pieres furnished the Court with Iesters, Ruffians, flattering parasites, and other vile and naughty rybalds, that the King might spend both dayes and nights in iesting, playing, banquetting, and other such dishonourable exercises. And to aduance those like vnto himselfe, he procured for them honourable Of∣fices and preferments: all which, greatly encreased the hatred of the Nobility, and the more, in regard of his high & haughty cariage of himselfe. Being now aduanced to honour, he would not once yeeld an inch to any; which procured him great enuy amongst the cheefest Peeres of the Realme; namely, Henry La∣cy, Earle of Lincolne; Guy, Earle of Warwicke; and Almerick de Valence, Earle of Penbroke, the Earle of Arundell, and others; who, vpon such wrath and displea∣sure, as they had conceiued against him, thought it not meete to suffer the same any longer; in hope that the Kings minde might haply be altered to better pur∣pose, if the corrupter thereof were once banished from him. Heereupon they assembled together in a Parliament time, at the New Tem∣ple in London, and there agreed, that the said Pieres should depart, and be bani∣shed the Realme againe the second time; and not to returne againe at any time after. To this the King (but sore against his will) agreed, and made his Let∣ters Patents to the saide Lords, to witnesse the same: and the Archbishop of Canterbury did pronounce the said Pieres accursed, if he tarried any longer then the time appointed him, and likewise all those that should ayde, helpe, or main∣taine him. Whereupon Pieres was constrained to ship himselfe at Bristow for Ireland, though sore against the Kings will, threatning the Lords to bee reuen∣ged. But not long after, Pieres returned againe into England, and came to the King at Yorke; at whose comming, the King greatly reioyced; and lying in the Bishops Pallace, caused Pieres to be lodged in the Castle, not farre from him. Not long after, the King was willing (for his recreation) to take the Sea, lea∣uing Pieres of Gaueston at Yorke. The Barons pursued Gaueston, who fledde to Scarborough, where the Barons tooke him, and carried him to a place called Blacklow, and there the 9. of Iune, caused his head to be stricken off. Afterwards, the young Prince, the Queene and Nobility, finding fault with the two Spencers (Hugh the Father, and Hugh the sonne, for misleading and abusing the King & State, in like manner as Gaueston had done) caused them likewise to be taken & put to death, without any triall, or answer. Which done, the Queene with her Sonne and the Nobility, called a Parliament, wherin King Edward was iudged not worthy to beare or weare the Crowne; but (for diuers causes) was to be de∣posed, and Prince Edward his sonne, to bee chosen in his place. This beeing a∣greed on, King Edward being all this while prisoner in Kenilworth Castle, was taken and carried from thence by night, to Corffe Castle, and from thence to Barkely Castle, where he was most cruelly murdered, by Thomas Gorney & Iohn Maltreuers, and others his keepers. He was deposed the 25. of Ianuary, 1326. when he had reigned almost twenty yeares, and was murdered the 21. of Sep∣tember, 1327. and his body was buried at Glocester.
He married Isabell, daughter of Philip the faire King of France, and sister and heire of her three Brothers, Lodowike Hutin, Philip the long, and Charles the faire. She was married in our Lady Church at Bolloigne, the 22. of Ianuary, 1308. being but twelue yeares olde, and was his wife twenty yeares, and his widdow thirty, and dyed at Rising neere London, and was buried in the Gray-Fryars in London. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. His Issue. Edward (sur-named of Windsore) eldest sonne, borne in Windsore Castle, the 13. of October, 1312. the sixt of his Fathers Reigne. He was first created Prince of Wales and Duke of Aquitaine, in a Parliament held at Yorke, 1322. and was made Lord warden of England; vnto whom all the Lords swore fealty, and re∣ceiued the oath of allegiance. He was after King of England, by the name of King Edward the third. Iohn (sur-named of Eltham) second sonne, was borne at Eltham, in the yeare 1315. and at twelue yeares of age, was created Earle of Cornwall, at a Parlia∣ment held at Salisbury, 1327. and after dyed in Scotland at S. Iohns Towne, vn∣married, 1333. and lyeth buried at Westminster. Ioane eldest daughter, was borne in the Tower of London, and was married at Barwicke (being very young) the eighteenth day of Iuly, 1329. to Dauid Prince of Scotland, sonne and heyre of Robert Bruse, being but seuen yeares of age. This Dauid was after King, by the name of Dauid the second. She was his wife 28. yeares, and comming into England to visite her brother King Edward the third, dyed without issue, 1353. and was buried in the Gray-Fryars in London. Elianor second daughter, was married to Reginald, second Earle of Gelders, for his second Wife, and had giuen her in marriage, 15000. pounds, 1332. Who being Vicar general of the empire, to the emperor Lewis of Bauaria, created him the first Duke of Gelders. She had issue, Reginald and Edward, both Dukes after their Father, and dyed without issue, leauing his Dutchy and his Wife to his Ne∣phew William, Duke of Gulike, his halfe sisters sonne.
King Edward the third. EDward, the third of that Name, borne in Windesore Castle, 1312. after the de∣posing of his Father, began his Reigne the 25. of Ianu∣ary, 1327. and was crowned at Westmin∣ster, the first day of February after, by Walter, Archbishop of Canterbury. And because he was but 14. yeares of age, and not able to gouerne of himselfe, it was decreed, that twelue of the greatest Lords within the Realme, should haue the rule and gouernment, vntill hee came of more yeares: which were, the Arch-Bishops of Canterbury and Yorke, the Bi∣shops of Winchester and Hereford, Henry Earle of Lancaster, Thomas of Brother∣ton, Marshall of England; Edmond of Woodstocke, Earle of Rent; Iohn Earle War∣ren, Thomas Lord Wake, Henry Lord Per∣cy, Sir Oliuer Ingham, and the Lord Iohn Ros; who were sworne of the Kings coun∣sell, and charged with the gouernment, as they would answere the same. In the first yeare of this Kings Reigne, dyed Charles King of France, the third Brother of Queene Isabell, Mother of King Edward the third; by whose death, the Kingdome of France did descend to King Edward, by Isabell his Mother, the onely sister and heyre of her three Brothers, Kodowike Hutin, Philiple Long, and Charles the faire, Kings of France. But the said Kingdome was vsurped and possessed by Philip de Valois, Vnckle to the saide Charles, who did intrude him∣selfe by force. In the yeare 1339. King Edward going to make his clayme to the Kingdome of France, (praied ayde of the Flemings, who before had sworne, and bound themselues in a bond of a Million of golde in the Popes Chamber, that they should alwayes helpe the King of France, and fight vnder his Ensigne) for re∣lease whereof, King Edward, by the perswasion of Iaques D'Artuell of Gaunt, did quarter the Armes of France, with the Armes of England, and proclaimed himselfe King of France. By which acte, the Flemings held themselues dischar∣ged of their band and oath. After, Charles the sixt French King of that Name, enuying greatly, that the Kings of England should beare the Armes of France, (which was semie de luces) changed the same vnto three De luces; of which thing, King Henry the fift of England tooke example and bare the like. By rea∣son
whereof, the Kings of France, haue euer since ceased to make any further change of their Armes. He married Philip, daughter of William Earle of Henault and Holland, and sisters daughter of Philip of Valoys, King of France afore mentioned. This mar∣riage was at Yorke, the 24. of Ianuary, and she was crowned at Westminster, the first Sunday in Lent following, 1327. She was his Wife 42. yeares, and dyed the 15. of August, 1369. and was buried at Westminster. King Edward her husband, dyed at Sheene, now called Richmond, the 21. of Iune, 1377. after hee had liued 65. yeares, and reigned 50. yeares, 4. moneths, and 28. dayes. His body was con∣uayed from Sheene, by his foure sonnes Lionell Duke of Clarence, Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Edmond of Langley Duke of Yorke, and Thomas of Wood∣stocke Earle of Cambridge, with others, and was buried at Westminster. His Issue. Edward eldest sonne (borne at Woodstocke the fifteenth of Iuly, 1329.) was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitaine and Cornwall, and Earle of Chester, and Earle of Kent in right of his Wife Ioane, daughter of Edmond Earle of Kent (brother by the Father, to King Edward the second) She had bin twice married before, first to the Earle of Salisbury, and after to Thomas Holland. She had is∣sue by Prince Edward, two sonnes, Edward borne at Angolesme, who died yong; and Richard borne at Burdeaux, who was after King of England, by the name of King Richard the second. This Prince had issue also, two bastard sonnes, Sir Iohn Sounder, and Sir Ro∣ger Claridon Knights; the latter was attainted in King Henry the fourths time. William second sonne, was borne at Hatfield in Hartfordshtre, 1335. and was sur-named William of Hatfield; he had his christen name of William Earle of He∣nauls, his grand father, and dyed in his childhood, and was buried at Yorke. Lionell third sonne, was borne in the Citty of Antwerpe, the 29. of Nouem∣ber, 1338. and was sur-named of Antwerpe. He had two Wiues, the first was Elizabeth, daughter and heyre of William Burgh, Earle of Vlster in Ireland, in whose right he was first created Earle of Vlster. And because he had with her the Honour of Clare in Norfolke, as parcell of the Inheritance of her Grand∣mother (Elizabeth, sister and co-heyre of the last Gilbert de Clare Earle of Gloce∣ster) He was in Parliament, 1362. created Duke of Clarence; from which Dut∣chic, the name of Clarenceux, King of Armes of the South parts of England, ta∣keth his denomination. He had issue by the saide Elizabeth, one onely daughter named Phillip, married to Edmond Mortimer Earle of March, Grand-father of Anne, Countesse of Cambridge, Grand-mother of King Edward the fourth. He was after married at Millaine in Lumbardy, to the Lady Violanta, daugh∣ter of Galeazo, the second Duke thereof; as in the Earles of Clare is set forth. Iohn fourth sonne, borne at Gaunt in Flanders, 1340. was first created Earle
of Richmond, which was surrendred to Iohn Duke of Britaine, sur-named The valiant, who had married Mary his sister, to whose Dukedome formerly it had belonged. This Iohn married three Wiues, the first was Blanch, daughter and heire of Henry Duke of Lancaster (sonne of Edmond Croochbacke) by whom he had is∣sue, King Henry the fourth; Phillip, Wife to Iohn the first, King of Portingall; and Elizabeth, first married to Iohn Holland Earle of Huntington, and after to Sir Iohn Cornwall Baron of Fanhope. His second Wife was Constance, eldest daugh∣ter of Peter King of Castile and Leon, in whose right he intituled himselfe King of both those Realmes, and had issue Katherine, Wife to Henry the third, sonne of King Iohn, King of both those Realmes. His third Wife was Katherine Swynford, Widdow of Sir Otho or Otes Swyn∣ford, Knight of Lincolnshire, daughter and co-heyre of Sir Payn Roet, alias Guien, King of Armes, a Gascoigne borne, whose other daughter Anne, was married to Sir Geffrey Chaucer Knight, the Poet. By this Katherine Swinford, he had issue before marriage, and made legitimate by Acte of Parliament, the 20. yeare of King Richard the second; Iohn Earle of Somerset, Thomas Duke of Excester, & Earle of Dorset, Henry Bishop of Winchester, and Cardinall; and Ioane, first married to Raphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland, and after to Robert Ferrars, Baron of Ouesley. These children begotten of Katherine Swynford, were sur-na∣med Beauforts, of Beaufort Castle in France, where they were borne. Edmond of Langley fift sonne, was created Earle of Cambridge, in the 36. yeare of King Edward the third, and after Duke of Yorke, 1386. He married Isa∣bell, daughter and co heyre of Peter, King of Castile and Leon, as in the Title of Earles of Cambridge and Dukes of Yorke. William, sur-named of Windsore, where he was borne, dyed young. Thomas the youngest sonne, sur-named of Woodstocke (where he was borne) was by King Richard the second, first created Earle of Buckingham, and after D. of Glocester, as in those Titles is more at large. Isabell, eldest daughter of King Edward the third, was married at Windsore to Ingelram de Guisnes, Lord of Coucy, Earle of Soysons, and Duke of Austria, whom King Edward her Father, made Earle of Bedford, by whom she had issue two daughters, Mary, married to Henry of Barre, and Philip, Wife to Robert Vere Earle of Oxford, Duke of Ireland, and Marquesse of Dublyn, who after forsooke her, and married one Lancerona, a Ioyners daughter, who came into England with Queene Philip out of Bohemia. Ioane second daughter, married by Proxy to Alphons, the eleuenth King of Castile and Leon. Blanch third daughter dyed young, and was buried at Westminster. Mary fourth daughter, married to Iohn Mountfort Duke of Britaine. Margaret youngest daughter, was the first Wife of Iohn Hastings Earle of Penbroke.
King Richard the second. RIchard the second, borne at Burdeaux, sonne of Edward the blacke Prince, and grand∣childe to King Edward the third, being eleuen yeares olde, began his Reigne the 21. day of Iune, in the yeare of our Lord, 1377. and was crow∣ned King at Westminster, the 16. of Iuly. In beauty, bounty and liberality, he farre passed all his Progenitors; but was ouer∣much giuen to rest and quietnesse, little regarding matters of Armes: and being young, was most ruled by young Coun∣sell, regarding little the Counsell of the sage and wise men of the Realm. Which thing, turned this Land to great trouble, & himselfe to extreme misery; For being first disgraced by his Cousin, Henry of Bullingbroke, Duke of Hereford, sonne of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, he was at length by him (with the generall con∣sent of a whole Parliament) deposed frō his Crowne and Kingdome, the 29. of September, 1399. and committed to pri∣son, and afterwards wickedly murdered. For being sent to Pomfret Castle to be safely kept, and Princely maintained; was shortly after by King Henries di∣rection and commandement, (who feared least his Estate might bee shaken, so long as King Richard liued) wickedly assaulted in his lodging, by Sir Pieres of Exton, and eight other armed men, from one of which (with a Princely cou∣rage) he wrested a browne Bill, and therewith slew foure of them; and with an admirable resolution, fought with all the rest: vntill comming by his owne Chaire (in which the base cowardly Knight himselfe stood for his owne safety) he was by him stricken with a Pole-axe, in the hinder part of his head, that pre∣sently he fell downe to the ground and dyed, when hee had reigned 22. yeares, 14. weekes, and two dayes. He married two Wiues, the first was Anne, daughter of the Emperor Charles the fourth, and sister of Wenceslaus, Emperour and King of Bohemia, who was crowned Queene the 22. of Ianuary, 1384. hauing bene his Wife ten yeares, and dyed at Sheene in Surrey, 1394. and was buried at Westminster without is∣sue.
His second Wife was Isabell, daughter of Charles the sixt, King of France, whom he affianced in the 19. yeare of his Reigne, she being then but 7. yeares olde: by reason whereof, he neuer had any company with her. She was after the said Richards death, sent back againe into France, being then not full twelue yeares olde, without any dowry, because the marriage was neuer consumated. The Lord Henry Percy had the conuaying of her, in the yeare, 1401. Et portoit, France seme escarelle d'engleterre. King HENRY the Fourth. THE right of the Crowne of England, after the death of King Richard without issue, ought to haue descen∣ded to Edmond Mortimer, Earle of March, sonne and heyre of Ro∣ger Mortimer, whose Mother Philip, was daughter and heyre of Lionell, Duke of Clarence, third sonne of king Edward the third. Which notwithstanding, Henry, sur-named of Bullingbroke, Duke of He∣reford, and sonne and heyre of Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, fourth Son of king Edward the third, was elected king, and began his Reigne the 29. of Septem∣ber, 1399. After which, he made many new Officers, viz. Thomas his second son, he made Lord high Steward of England. The Earle of Northumberland, Consta∣ble of England. The Earle of Westmer∣land, Marshall of England, &c. and was crowned at Westminster, the 13. of Octo∣ber after. The Dukes of Yorke, Surrey & Albemarle, with the Earle of Glocester, bare the Canopy ouer him (which Office, now the Barons of the Cinque-Ports do execute) Sir Tho: Dymmoke (ancestor of the now Noble and worthy knight, Sir Edw. Dymmok of Lincolnshire) was Champion, and rode 3. times about the Hall in compleate armor, challenging any that should gaine-say the kings right, throwing down his Gauntlet to maintaine the same. He created Henry his eldest Son, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earle of Chester, and heyre apparent to the Crown; and at his death, he gaue him this charge to keepe (as he would an∣swer the same before God) viz. To minister the Lawes indifferently, to ease the op∣pressed, to beware of flatterers, not to defer iustice, nor to be sparing of mercy. Punish (quoth he) the oppressors of thy people, so shalt thou obtaine fauor of God, and loue of thy subiects; who, whiles they haue wealth, so long shalt thou haue obedience; but be∣ing made poore by oppressions, will be euer ready to stir & make rebellion & insurrec∣tion.
He yeelded to God his spirit, the 20. day of March, 1412. the 46. yeare of his age, when he had reigned 13. yeares, sixe moneths, lacking ten dayes. His body being conueyed to Canterbury, was there buried. He married two Wiues, the first was Mary, second daughter and co-heyre of Humfrey de Bohun, Earle of Hereford, Essex and Northampton, and Constable of England, who dyed in the yeare 1394. and was buried at Canterbury. His second Wife was Ioane, daughter of Charles King of Nauarre, and Wid∣dow of Iohn Mountfort Duke of Britaine, who dyed at Hauering in the Bower in Essex, without issue, the tenth of Iuly, 1437. and was buried at Canterbury. His Issue by his first Wife. Henry eldest sonne, was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall & Earle of Chester, in the first yeare of his Fathers Keigne. This Henry, in the time of his Fathers banishment, was sent into Ireland; and, vpon hearing of his Fathers a∣riuall into England, King Richard caused him to bee imprisoned with Humfrey, sonne and heyre of Thomas of Woodstocke, in the Castle of Trime in Ireland; but in the first yeare of King Henry the 4. they were both deliuered, and comming into England, Humfrey dyed of the plague at Chester. Thomas second sonne, was created Duke of Clarence, in the eleuenth yeare of King Henry the 4. and in the 8. yeare of King Henry the 5. he was made Lieute∣nant Generall of France and Normandy; and (in the yeare after) was slaine at Bangy-Bridge in France, by the Duke of Orliance. He married Margaret, daugh∣ter of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, and Widow of Iohn Beaufort Earle of So∣merset; as is more at large in the Title of the Dukes and Earles of Clarence. Iohn third sonne, was made Duke of Bedford, the 11. yeare of King Henry the 4. his Father; and in the fift yeare of Henry the 5. his brother, he was by Parli∣ament made Regent of England, and Head of the publike Wealth. He knighted King Henry the 6. his Nephew, at a Parliament held at Leicester, in the 4. yeare of his Reigne. And in the first yeare of the said King Henry the 6. being made Regent of France, Charles King of France dying: the most part of France was deliuered to him by the Nobility there, to the vse of King Henry the sixt. His marriages and death is more at large in the Title of Bedford. Humfrey, fourth sonne of King Henry the 4. was by his Brother King Henry the 5. made Duke of Glocester; and in the first yeare of Henry the 6. he was made Protector of the Kingdome of England, for 15. yeares, during the said kings mi∣nority; and was stiled, Humfrey, by the grace of God, Sonne, Brother and Vnckle to Kings, Duke of Glocester, Henault, Holland, Zeland and Penbroke, Lord of Friez∣land, great Chamberlaine of England, Protector and Defender of the Kingdome and Church of England. He had two Wiues. His first Wife was Iaquet, daughter and heyre of William, Duke of Bauaria, and Earle of Holland, who was before betrothed to Iohn Duke of Brabant, and was therefore after diuorced from this Humfrey without issue. His second Wife was Elianor, daughter of Reginald, Lord Cobbam of Ster∣burgh
in Surrey, who for witchcraft and poysonings, was much defamed. Queene Margaret, Wife to King Henry the sixt, enuyed greatly his estate & go∣uernment, and practised with others, his ouerthrow and destruction; for after, he was found murdered in his bed, at Bury in Suffolke, and was after buried at S. Albons in Hertfordshire. Blanch eldest daughter, was married at Collen, to William Duke of Bauaria, sonne and heyre of Lewis of Bauaria. After she married the King of Arragon: and thirdly, she married the Duke of Barre, but had no issue by any of them. Philip, second daughter of King Henry the 4. was married to Iohn, King of Denmarke and Norway, and dyed without issue. King HENRY the fift. HEnry the fift, sur-named of Monmouth in the Mar∣ches of Wales, where he was borne, in the yeare 1388. Hee began his reigne, the 20. day of March, in the yeare of our Lord 1412. And the ninth day of Aprill after, hee was crowned King at Westminster, by Thomas of Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury. Which done, he called before him all his yong Lords and Companions, that were followers of his young actions; to euery of them he gaue rich guifts, and commanded, that as many as would change their life and manners, (as he intended to do) should follow him still; and to those that would persist in their former life and conuersa∣tion, hee commanded vppon paine of death, neuer after to come in his pre∣sence. This Prince, by the instigation and prouokement of some of these vnthrifty and lewd Companions, in his Fathers dayes, smote the then Lord Chiefe-Iu∣stice of the Kings Bench, a blow on the Face: for which, hee was by his Father imprisoned, and put from his place of being President of the Kings Counsell; which Office (to his great greefe and disgrace) the King gaue to Thomas Duke of Clarence, his second sonne. This King following his Father vsed euery day when no state was kept, after dinner, to haue a Cushion laid on the cupboord, & there to leane a whole houre or more, to receiue Petitions and heare complaints of whosoeuer would come.
And in those dayes, when the King dyned in his Chamber, the Steward of the Houshold, sate alwayes in the Hall, vnder the Cloth of Estate, the same being rolled vp aboue his head, and such Knights with him, as waited that time vpon the King. He dyed in the Castle of Boys de Viscenne, not farre from Paris, the 13. day of August, 1422, when he had reigned nine yeares, fiue moneths, and odde dayes, being 36. yeares old, and was buried at Westminster. He married Katherine, daughter of Charles the sixt, King of France, at Troyes in Champaigne, the third of Iune, 1420. and the 14. of February after, she was crowned at Westminster, and was his Wife, two yeares and three moneths. She was after married to a Noble Gentleman, named Owen Theodor of Wales, by whom she had issue three sonnes, Edmond, Iasper and Owen; Edmond was made Earle of Richmond; and married Margaret, daughter and sole heyre of Iohn D. of Somerset, and had issue, King Henry the seuenth: Iaspher the second sonne, was Earle of Penbroke, and after Duke of Bedford. This Queene Katherine dyed at Bermondsey in Southwarke, the second of Iune, 1436. and was buried at Westminster, leauing issue by King Henry the fift her husband, King Henry the sixt. This King left Seme de lices, and bare three. Et portoit, France, escartelle d'engleterre. King HENRY the sixt. HEnry the sixt, borne at Windsore, being an infant not nine moneths olde, began his Reigne the last of August, in the yeare of our Lord, 1422. The gouernment of his Realmes was committed to Humfrey Duke of Glocester, and the guard of his person to Thomas Duke of Excester, and to Iohn Duke of Bedford, the Regiment of France. These his three Vnckles, with great wisedome and valour discharged the trust committed vnto them. This Henry, on the sixt of Nouember, 1429. in the 8. yeare of his Reigne was crow∣ned at Westminster with solemnization. Hee tooke his iourney to France, and comming to Paris, was receiued with great solemnity: and on the 17. of No∣uember, 1431. was crowned King of France, in our Lady Church in Paris. Hee espoused Margaret, daughter of Reyner, Duke of Aniou, (and titulary
of Cicily, Naples and Ierusalem) by Proxy at the Citty of Towers in Touraine, in Saint Martyns Church, by William de la Pole his Procurator, in the presence of the French King and Queene; which King, was Vnckle to the Brides Father, and the French Queen, Aunt to her Mother. She being conueyed to the Abbey of Tichfield, was there solemnly married to King Henry the sixt, the 22. of A∣prill, 1445. and was crowned at Westminster, the 30. day of May after. In the 33. yeare of this Kings Reigne, he lost the battaile at S. Albons; and was ta∣taken prisoner at the battaile of Northampton, by the Earle of Warwicke, the 38. yeare of his Reigne; and the yeare after, was deliuered againe by Queen Mar∣garet his Wife, after the second battaile of S. Albons; but in the same, after the battaile at Mortimers Crosse, the King and Queene fled to Yorke; and the Earle of March, comming to London with his power, was proclaimed King of Eng∣land. And in the fourth yeare of his Reigne, hee tooke King Henry, neere the Abbey of Selby in Lancashire, and brought him prisoner to the Tower of Lon∣don. And in the ninth yeare of his Reigne, King Henry the sixt, was againe de∣liuered, by the Duke of Clarence and the Earle of Warwicke. King Edward flying into Flanders, was proclaimed a Vsurper; but the next yeare after, King Edward returning againe into England, and comming to Lon∣don, tooke king Henry in the Bishops Pallace, and after gaue battaile to the Earle of Warwicke, at Barnet, where the said Earle, with his brother Iohn Neuill Mar∣quesse Mountague were slaine. And in the same yeare, 1471. he also gaue a great ouerthrow to Queene Margaret, at Tewkesbury; in which battaile, the saide Queene, with Prince Edward her onely sonne, were taken prisoners; Prince Edward being first stricken by King Edward, Richard Duke of Glocester, stabbed him to the heart with his Dagger. The Queene his Mother was conuayed to London, where she remained in prison, vntill Reyner her Father purchased her deliuerance with great summes of money; who after returning to her owne Country, there dyed. After this battaile at Tewkesbury, King Edward the fourth came to London, on the 21. of May, 1471. with thirty thousand men: and the same night, King Henry was murdered in the Tower of London, and the morrow after, brought into S. Paules Church in London, in an open Coffin bare-faced, where hee bled: From thence he was conuayed to the Blacke-Fryars, and there also bled. Lastly, his body was conuayed to Windsore, and there buried.
King Edward the fourth. EDward, Earle of March, borne at Roan in Norman∣dy, sonne and heyre of Ri∣chard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, by Cicely Neuill, daughter of Rafe, Earle of Westmerland; about the age of eighteene yeares, began his Reigne, the 4. day of March, 1460. and was crowned at Westminster, the 28. of Iune after. Philip Commines, writing of the death of this King Edward the fourth, saith. The late King Edward the 4. of England, be∣ing heyre of the House of Yorke, vtterly destroyed the House of Lancaster, vnder the which, both his Father and he had li∣ued many yeares. And although the said King Edward had done homage to King Henry the 6. being of the house of Lanca∣ster: did he not afterwards hold him pri∣soner many yeares, in the Tower of Lon∣don, where in the end he was murdered? Haue wee not seene also (saith hee) the Earle of Warwicke, principall Gouernour of all the said King Edwards Offices (after he had put to death all his enemies, especially the Duke of Somerset) in the ende became deadly enemy to the king his Master, gaue his daughter in marriage, to Edward Prince of Wales, sonne of King Henry, attempted againe to set vp the house of Lancaster, past with the said Prince into England, discomfited in the field and slaine, both he and his bro∣ther, with many other Noblemen their kindred, and others, who in time past had done the like to their enemies? After all this, the children of these, when the world turned, reuenged themselues, and caused (in like manner) the other to die. For after King Edward was quiet in his place and Realme, and receiued yearely out of France, 50000. Crownes, paide him in the Tower of London, and was growne so rich, that richer he could not be; he dyed sodainly, as it were of me∣lancholy, because of the French Kings marriage with the Lady Margaret, the Duke of Austriches daughter. For so soone as hee was aduertised thereof, hee fell sicke, and began then to perceiue, how he had bene abused, touching the marriage of his daughter, whom he had caused to be called the Lady Dolphi∣nesse: then also was the pension (which he had receiued out of France) taken frō him, which he called Tribute, &c.
He married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Wooduile Earle Riuers, and Ia∣queline his Wife, Dutchesse of Bedford, and Widdow of Sir Iohn Grey, slaine at S. Albons, where he was knighted, the day before his death, by King Henry the sixt. After whose death, she was priuatly married to King Edward the fourth, the first day of May at his Mannot of Grafton in Northamptonshire, 1464. and the next yeare after, was crowned Queene at Westminster, the 26. day of May. She was his Wife, 18. yeare, eleuen moneths, and nine dayes, and in the beginning of King Edward the fift (her sonnes Reigne) she was forced to take Sanctuary at Westminster; and after, hauing all her lands and possessions seized vpon by King Henry the seuenth, liued in meane estate in the Monastery of Bermondsey in Southwarke, where not long after she dyed, and was buried at Windsore, by King Edward her husband, who dyed before at Westminster, the 9. day of April, 1483. at the age of 41. yeares, when he had reigned 22. yeares, one moneth, and odde dayes. His Issue. Edward, eldest sonne of King Edward the fourth, borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster, the 4. of Nouember, 1471. the tenth yeare of his Fathers Reign; at that time King Edward was expulsed the Realme, by the Earle of Warwicke; but Fortune changing, the Father was restored, and the Sonne created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester, the first of Iuly. Richard, second sonne of King Edward the fourth, borne at Shrewsbury, and being but a childe, was created Duke of Yorke. He was betrothed vnto Anne, daughter and heyre of Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, Earle Marshall, War∣ren and Nottingham; but he enioyed neither wife, nor life long, for he was (with his brother Edward) murdered in the Tower of London; which place euer since is called, The bloody Tower. George third sonne, was also borne at Shrewsbury, and being very yong, di∣ed and was buried at Windsore. Elizabeth eldest daughter, borne at Westminster, the 11. of February, 1466. she was promised in marriage to Charles the Dolphin of France, wooed and cour∣ted by Richard Duke of Glocester, her vnhappy Vnckle, after he had murdered her two Brothers, and he then King; but after she was married to King Henry the seuenth. Cecily second daughter, was motioned to marry Iames, Prince of Scotland & Duke of Rothsay, but it tooke no effect, and so she was married after to Iohn Vis∣count Welles, whom she out-liued, and married againe to one Kyme of Lincolne∣shire, and dyed without issue.
Anne third daughter, married to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, Earle Marshall, and Lord Treasurer of England, and had issue, two sonnes who died very young. She dyed without issue, and was buried at Framingham in Norfolke. Bridget fourth daughter, was borne at Eltham in Kent, the tenth of Nouem∣ber, 1480 and was a Nunne at Dartford, where she remained till she dyed. Mary fift daughter, was promised in marriage to the King of Denmarke; but she dyed before marriage, in the Tower of Greenwich, 1482. and was buried at windsore. Margaret sixt daughter, dyed in her Infancy. Katherine seuenth daughter, married William Courtney, Earle of Deuonshire, and Lord of Ochampton, and had issue, Henry Earle of Deuonshire, whom Henry the eight created Marquesse of Excester, 1525. His Bastards. Arthur Plantagenet, base sonne of King Edward the fourth, begotten of Eli∣zabeth Lucy, was created Viscount Lisle at Bridewell in London, the 26. of Aprill, 1533. in right of his Wife Elizabeth, sister and heyre of Sir Iohn Grey Viscount Lisle the Widdow of Edmond Dudley. This Arthur had issue three daughters; Bridget, Francis and Elizabeth, as is more at large in the Title of Viscounts. Elizabeth, base daughter of King Edward the fourth, married to Sir Thomas Lumley Knight, who dyed before his Father George Lord Lumley, and had issue, Richard Lord Lumley, that dyed the second of King Henry the eight; & George Lumley a second sonne.
King EDVVARD the fift. THis young King, being vn∣der the protection of Ri∣chard Duke of Glocester his vnnaturall Vnckle, at the death of his Father beeing in Wales, was brought and lodged in the Bishops Pallace of London, the 4. day of May, 1483. The Queene his Mother, with his yong brother the Duke of Yorke being in the Sanctuary at Westminster; Richard, the then Protector, sent the ho∣nest Lord Cardinall to the Queene, for the deliuery of the saide Duke of Yorke out of the Sanctuary; who by his sweet and poysoned words, and protestations to his Mother, that it wold be for all their good to deliuer him: This yong Prince was deliuered, and brought to the King his Brother, in the Bishops Pallace of London, and from thence conuayed to the Tower of London, with shew of pre∣paration for the day of Coronation; where they remained some two months. At which time, the saide Protectour sent one Greene (a trusty seruant of his) vnto Sir Robert Brakenbury, then Constable of the Tower, to murder the said two Princes; who stoutly denying to doe so foule an acte, Sir Iames Tirrell, a seruant of the said Protectors, was sent to Bra∣kenbury the day after, to haue the keyes of the Tower, and custody of those two Infants deliuered to him. Which being done accordingly, the young King and his brother were shut vp together, and al company remoued from them, sauing that miscreant dog, that was to execute that bloody and butcherly acte; who about midnight, brought a rout of Runnagates into their Chamber, who sud∣denly lapping them vp amongst the cloaths of their bed, smothered these two sweete Babes, the Lords Annointed. This young King, was at his Fathers death, eleuen yeares, fiue moneths, & fiue dayes old.
King Richard the Third. RIchard the third, borne at Fo∣theringhay Castle in North∣amptonshire, third sonne of Ri∣chard Duke of Yorke, and bro∣ther to King Edward the fourth, Lord Protector, and murderer of king Edward the fift his Nephew: And (by common report) a monster in nature; for hee had many teeth when he was borne. He was very much deformed of his body; of sta∣ture he was but low, croocke-backed, his left shoulder much higher then the right, his visage vncomely, his complection swart, his left arme withered almost to the bone. He made his conscience in all things to serue his will, though his will could not be obtained, without the effu∣sion of guiltlesse blood. He was so cun∣ning a dissembler, that he would accom∣pany (most familiarly) with such as in∣wardly he hated in his heart. He spared no mans death, whose life resisted his vn∣godly purposes. This Richard, was honored with the Title of Glocester, a title and name euer ominous, all of them dying violent and vntimely deaths: which hee regarded not, his destiny enforcing, his aspiring minde gaue him no rest, vntill his restlesse body found it lastly in the graue. He was slaine at a battaile fought at Redmore neere Bosworth, the 22. of August, 1485. when he had reigned two yeares, two moneths, and fine dayes. The slaine body, all tugged and torne naked, and not so much as a clout left to couer his shame, was trussed behind Blanch Sengler, his Pursuiuant of Arms, like a Hog or Calfe, his head and armes hanging on the one side of the horse, & his legs on the other side, all besprinkled with mire and blood, & was so brought to Leicester, and there for a miserable spectacle, the space of two daies lay naked and vnburied: his remembrance being as odious to all, as his person deformed and loathsome to be looked vpon. Lastly, his body was buried at Leicester, with∣out any Funerall pompe. He married Anne, second daughter and co-heyre of Richard Neuill, Earle of Warwicke and Salisbury, and had issue, Edward their onely childe, created by King Edward the fourth, Earle of Salisbury, and by his Father, Prince of Wales, as in the Earles of Salisbury is set foorth.
King HENRY the Seuenth. HEnry, earle of Rich∣mond, borne in Pē∣broke Castle, sonne of Edmond of Had∣ham, Earle of Rich∣mond, and Marga∣ret his wift, daugh∣ter and onely heyre of Iohn Beaufort, D. of Somerset: which Edmond of Hadham, was sonne and heyre of Owen Tudor, begotten of Queene Katherine, Widdow of King Henry the fift, and daughter of Charles the sixt French King. This Henry fledde into Britaine, in the first yeare of King Edward the fourth; and in the se∣cond yeare of king Richard the third, he arriued and landed at Milford Hauen in Wales, and with a small power came to Leicester, and at a little Towne thereby called Bosworth, where a cruell battaile being fought; King Richard was slaine in the Field; and his Crown which he ware (being found) was by the Earle of Derby and others, put vpon this Henries head, and presently proclaymed King of England in the Field, 1485. He married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of King Edward the 4. the 18. day of January, 1485. shee being nineteene yeares olde, whereby was vnited the two Families of Yorke and Lancaster, to the great ioy of all English Subiects, be∣twixt whom, infinite contentions and mortall warres, had formerly consumed and destroyed many thousands of noble and valiant Gentlemen. Shee was crowned at Westminster, the 25, of Nouember, 1487. the third of her Husbands Reigne, and continued his Wife, 18. yeares, and 24. dayes, and dyed in Childe∣bed in the Tower of London, the eleuenth of February, being the day of her birth, 1503. and was buried at Westminster.
His Issue. Arthur, eldest sonne and heyre, borne at Winchester, the 20. day of Septem∣ber, 1486, who, by his Father was created Prince of Wales, in the fift yeare of his Reigne, Duke of Cornill, and Earle of Chester; who, vpon the 14 day of No∣uember, 1501. being fifteene yeares old, married Katherine, daughter of Ferdi∣nando King of Spain; she being then about eighteene yeares of age. This mar∣riage was solemnized in he Cathedral Church of S. Paul in London, and within 4. moneths and 19. dayes after, he dyed at Ludlow, the second of Aprill, 1502. he being then 15. yeares 6 moneths, and 13. dayes olde, and was buried at Wor∣cester, in S. Maries Church. Henry second sonne, borne at Greenwich in Kent, the 22. of Iune, 1491. In his infancy he was created Duke of Yorke, and Marshall of England; and after King of England. Edmond third sonne, was borne in the yeare 1495. and was created Earle of Somerset, and dyed young at Bishops Hatfield, being not sine yeares olde, 1499. and was buried at Westminster. Margaret eldest daughter, borne the 29. of Nouember, 1489. and being 14. yeares olde, was married to Iames the fourth, King of Scotland, 1503, and had issue, Iames the fift, King of Scotland, Arthur and Alexander, and one daughter, all which but the eldest, dyed without issue yong. Shee married to her second husband, Archibald Douglas, Earle of Anguish, 1514. by whom she had issue, Margaret, married to Mathew Earle of Lenox, who had issue, Henry Lord Dern∣ley, after King of Scotland in right of Mary Queene of Scotland his Wife, by whom he had issue, Iames, King of great Britaine, 1618. Elizabeth second daughter, borne the second of Iuly, 1492. and dyed the 14. of September, 1495. and was buried at Westminster. Mary third daughter, was first married to Lewis King of France, who liued not long with her, but dyed without issue. After whose death, she married for her second husband, Sir Charles Brandon a Noble Knight, and after Duke of Suffolke, as in the Title of Earles of Suffolke is more at large. Katherine fourth daughter, borne vpon Candlemas day, 1503. in the 18. yeare of her Fathers Reigne, who dyed young.
King HENRY the Eight. KIng HENRY the eight, borne at Greenwich, the 22. of Iune, 1491. and at the age of twelue yeares, was by his Father, cre∣ated Duke of Yorke, and (after his Bro∣ther Arthurs deth) Prince of Wales. And in the 18. yeare of his age, he began his Reigne of King of England, the 22. of Aprill, and on the 25. day of Iune after, was crowned with his Wife Queen Ka∣therine, at Westminster, 1509. And in the fourth yeare of his Reigne, hee wonne Turwin and Turney; hauing vnder his Banner, the Emperor Maximillian, with most of the Nobility of Brabant, Plan∣ders and Holland. And in the 37. yeare of his Reigne, the Towne of Boloigne was yeelded vnto him; hee being there in person, at the winning thereof. Hee married sixe Wiues, and died on Thurs∣day, the 28. of Ianuary, 1547. when he had Reigned King, 37. yeares, and ten moneths. His Wiues. KAtherine, the first Wife of King Henry the eight, was daughter of Ferdinan∣do the sixt, King of Spaine (and the Widdow of Prince Arthur his brother) and was married to King Henry the eight, the third of lune, 1509. and was crow∣ned with him, the 25. day of Iune after: And twenty yeares after was diuorced from him, by the Bishop of Canterbury. She dyed at Kimbalton in Huntingtonshire, the 8 of Ianuary 1535. and was buried in Peterborough Church. ANNE, the second Wife of King Henry the eight, was second daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen, Earle of Wiltshire and Ormond. She was first created Marchionesse of Penbroke, hauing one thousand pounds a yeare giuen her to maintaine her estate; and was married to him in the Closet at White-Hall, the 25. of Ianuary, 1533. and was crowned at Westminster, on Whitsunday the first of Iune. She was his Wife, three yeares, three moneths, and 25. dayes, and after was beheaded in the Tower of London, the 19. of May, 1536. and was buried in the Chappell, within the said Tower.
IAne the third Wife, was daughter of Sir Iohn Seymour Knight, and sister of Edward, Earle of Hartford and Duke of Somerset. She was married vnto King Henry the eight, the 20. day of May, which was the very next day after the be∣heading of Queene Anne. This Iane, was his Wife one yeare, fiue moneths, and 24. dayes, and dyed in childe-bed of King Edward the sixt, the 14. of October, 1537. and was buried at Windsore. ANne of Cleue, the fourth Wife of King Henry the 8. was sister of William, Duke of Cleue, and was married vnto him at Greenwich, the 6. of Ianuary, 1540. in the 31. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, and was his Wife sixe moneths, and the yeare after was diuorced, and by Acte of Parliament decreed, that she should be no more called nor taken for Queene; but should be called the Lady Anne of Cleeue. She remained in England, long after King Henries death, & was marshalled with the Lady Elizabeth, going through London, to the Coronation of Queene Mary, 1553. KAtherine Howard, the fift Wife of King Henry the 8. was daughter of Lord Edmond Howard, brother of Thomas Howard, the third Duke of Norfolk of that Family, & was married to the said King, the 8. of August, 1540. at Hampton-Court, and was his Wife, one yeare, sixe moneths, and 4. dayes. She was conuic∣ted of adultery, and by Parliament adiudged to bee beheaded in the Tower of London, the 12. of February, and was buried in the Chappell there, by Queene Anne Bullen, 1542. KAtherine Parre, widdow of Iohn Neuill, Lord Latimer, and daughter of Sir Thomas Par of Kendall Knight, and sister of William Par, Marquesse of Northampton, was sixt Wife to King Henry the eight, and was married to him at Hampton-Court the 12. of Iuly, in the yeare 1543. She was his Wife, 3. yeares, 6. moneths, and 5. dayes. She was after King Henries death, married to Thomas Seymour, Lord Admirall, and after his decease, she married Edward Burgh, sonne of Thomas Lord Burgh. She dyed in child-bed, 1548. Issue by his first Wife. Henry, first sonne of King Henry the eight, begotten of Queene Katherine his first Wife, was borne at Richmond in Surrey, the first of Ianuary, 1509. who liued not full two moneths, and dyed the 22. of February after, and was buried at Westminster. Another sonne, whose name is not well knowne, borne of Queene Kathe∣rine his first Wife, in the sixt yeare of his Reigne, who dyed very young. The death of these two Princes. King Henry tooke as a punishment from God, for begetting them of his Brothers Wife. Mary, the third childe and first daughter, begotten of Q. Katherine, was borne at Greenwich in Kent, the 18. of February, 1518. who out-liuing her yonger bro∣ther
King Edward the sixt, and being then Queene, and 36. yeares olde, married Phil∣lip King of Spaine, to the great dislike of many her louing Subiects, and small content to her selfe, as more at large in place conuenient will be shewed. Issue by his second Wife. Elizabeth, second daughter of Henry the eight, begotten of the Lady Anne Bollen, his second Wife, was borne at Greenwich, vpon Sunday, the seauenth of September, 1534. and was christned of Doctor Cranmer, Archbishop of Can∣terbury, &c. She succeeded her Sister Queene Mary, as Queene of England; and was for wisedome, vertue, piety and iustice, not onely the mirrour of her Sexe, but a patterne for Gouernment, to all the Princes of Christendome. Another man-childe had Queene Anne, but still borne, the 29. of Febru∣ary, 1535. to the great greefe, both of the Father and Mother. Issue by his third Wife. Edward, the sixt and last childe of King Henry the eight, begotten of Iane Seymour, his third Wife; was borne at Hampton-Court, the 12. of October, 1537 being cut out of his Mothers wombe (as Iulius Caesar is saide to haue beene) Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolke, were his Godfathers, and Lady Mary his sister, his Godmother. Hee was first created Prince of Wales; and after the death of his Father, crowned King of England. A base Sonne by his Concubine. Henry Fitz-Roy, base sonne of King Henry the eight, begotten of Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Iohn Blount Knight (then Lady Talboys) and borne in the Man∣nour of Blackmore in Essex, in the yeare 1518. who beeing eightene yeares of age, was created Earle of Nottingham, at the Kings Pallace of Bridewell; as in the Title of Nottingham is set foorth.
King EDVVARD the Sixt. EDward, the sixt of that Name, sonne of king Hen∣ry the eight, and Lady Iane Seymour (his third Wife) was borne at Hampton-Court, the 12. of October, 1537. And in the 29. yeare of his Fathers Reign, being cut out of his Mothers wombe, and sixe dayes after was created Prince of Wales; and after his Fathers death, was proclay∣med King, the 28. of Ianuary, 1547. be∣ing then nine yeares olde, and lying at Hatfield, the Nobility conducted him to London, and so to the Tower. During the time of his abode there, his Vnckle Edward Seymour, Earle of Hertford, was chosen and made Protectour, and chiefe Gouernor of the Kings person, vntill hee came to the age of eighteene yeares. The sixt of February after, the Lord Protector knighted King Edward in the Tower of London; which done, King Edward presently after, knighted Sir Hen∣ry Hoblethorne, then Lord Maior of Lon∣don, and Sir Henry Portman, one of the Iudges of the Kings Bench. The 17 of February, the Lord Protector was created Duke of Somerset, and the 20. of Fe∣bruary, King Edward rode through London to Westminster, and was there crow∣ned. In the life time of King Henry the eight a marriage was treated of, between Mary, late Queene of Scotland; Vnto which, a Parliament at Edenburgh had consented, in the yeare 1543. but that tooke not effect; for she was after marri∣ed to the Dolphin of France. This Noble Prince dyed at Greenwich, the 6. of Iuly, 1553. being the seuenth yeare of his reigne, and the seuenteene yeare of his age, and was buried at West∣minster, the 9. of August after.
Queene Mary. MARIE, eldest daughter of K. Henry the eight, by Katherine his first Wife, was borne at Green∣wich, the 18. of February, 1518. and began her Reigne the 6. of Iuly, and was proclaymed Queene, the 17. day of the said Moneth, in the yeare 1553, In her young yeares shee was sued vnto, to be married to the then Emperour, the King of Scots, and the Duke of Orleance in France. But all these failing, at thirty sixe yeares of age, shee married Phillip, King of Spaine, to the great dislike of her Subiects, and small content of her selfe. She was crowned at Westminster, the last of September, in the yeare afore∣said, and dyed at S. Iames by Charing-Crosse, the 17. of Nouember, 1558. whē she had reigned fiue yeares, foure mo∣neths, and eleuen dayes, being 42. yeares olde, and was buried at Westminster, leauing no issue of her body.
Queene ELIZABETH. ELizabeth, second daughter of King Henry the eight, and Queene Anne Bollen his Wife; was borne at Greenwich, the seuenth of September, 1534. And by the great fa∣uour and grace of God, was aduanced to the Emperiall Throane, passing ma∣ny dangers of life, wherewith shee was oppressed (being a prisoner) during her sisters Reigne. Vpon the seuenteenth day of Nouember, 1558. she was proclaimed Queene of England, France and Ireland; and vpon the fifteenth of Ianuary after, was crowned at Westminster, by the Bi∣shop of Carlile. She was for wisedome, vertue, piety and iustice, not onely the Mirrour of her Sexe; but a Patterne for Gouernment, to all the Princes of Chri∣stendome. Shee dyed at Richmond, the 24. of March, 1602. being 69. yeares, sixe mo∣neths, and 17. dayes olde, when she had Reigned 44. yeares, foure moneths, and seuen dayes. Her body being brought to White-Hall, and her Statue made very like in her Parliament Robes, with a Crowne Imperiall on her head, and a Scepter in her hand, was on Thursday, the 20. of August, carried in a Chariot, drawne with foure horses couered with blacke Veluet, to S. Peters at Westminster; and after all ceremonies performed, was buried in a faire Toomb, made by commandement of King Iames.
King IAMES. I Ames, King of Scotland (onely sonne and heyre of Henry Stewart, late King of Scotland, and of Queene Mary his Wife, Dowager of France, and daugh∣ter and heyre of Iames the fift, King of Scotland) was borne in Edenburgh-Castle, the 19. of Iune, 1566. and was proclaimed King of England, France and Ireland, at London, the 24. of March, 1602. being then 36. yeares of age. And on the 25. of Iuly after, 1603. was crowned (with Queene Anne his Wife) at Westminster, by the hands of the most reuerend Father in God, Iohn whitift, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; in the presence of the No∣bility and States of the Realme. Whose greatnes, with all honour, happinesse and peace, God now sanctifie and encrease in him and his issue, to all posterity. This potent & magnificent Monarch of Great-Britaine, married Anne, daughter of Fre∣dericke the second, King of Denmarke & Norway, and Sister to Christian the 4. now King of Den∣marke, 1618. She was borne at Scanderburgh, the 12. of December, 1574. and at the age of 16. years was married by Proxy, at Groningburg in Den∣mark, the 20. of August, 1590. vnto this most high and most mighty Prince, by whom she hath had most royall Issue, as followeth. Their Issue. Henry, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester, was borne on Tues∣day, the 19. of February, 1593. and dyed without issue, at S. Iames House neere Charing-Crosse, and was buried at West minster very Prince-like, the 7. of December, 1612. Robert Stewart second sonne, dyed very young. Charles, Duke of Albany, Marquesse of Ormond, Earle of Ros, and Lord of Ardma∣noch, third sonne of Iames, King of Great-Britaine, was borne the 27. of February, 1600. and was created Duke of Yorke at White-Hall, on Tuesday the 6. of Ianuary, 1604. and af∣ter, on the 4. of Nouember, 1616. he was likewise at White-Hall created Prince of Wales and Earle of Chester. Lady Elizabeth, borne the 19. of August, 1596. was married to Fredericke, Elector Pa∣latine of the Rhyne, and hath issue, Henry Fredericke, and Charles Lewis. Margaret, borne the 24. of December, 1598. and dyed in Scotland young. Mary, borne in England, and dyed an Infant, and was buried at Westminster. Sophia, borne at Greenwich, and dyed an Infant, and was buried at Westminster.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles of Clare and Clarence, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RIchard Fitz Gilbert, Earle of Aucencis and Brionniae in Normandy, came into England with William the Con∣queror, who gaue him the Townes & Castles of Clare in Suffolke, and Tunbridge in Kent, with diuers other great Seigneuries in England. This Richard maried Roheisia, daugh∣ter of Walter Gifford Earle of Longueuile in Normandy, and had issue, Gilbert, Roger Lord of Clauering, Walter a great Ba∣ron and Founder of Tinterne Abbey, 131 and Robert Lord of Woodham Water, and was after slaine in Wales, in the yeare, 1136. GIlbert Fitz-Richard, sonne and heyre of Richard afore∣said, was the first Earle of Clare, and married Adeliza, the daughter of the Earle of Cleremont, and had issue, Iohn the second Earle of Clare, who dyed without issue; Richard Earle of Clare, whom some say, dyed before his Father; Gil∣bert sur-named Strongbow, Earle of Penbroke, Walter and Heruy de Montmauritio, and dyed in the yeare, 1152. Et portoit, d'or au trois cheurons de gueulles. RIchard Fitz-Gilbert, third Earle of Clare, and Lord of Tunbridge in Kent, married Adelize, sister of Randoll Earle of Chester, and had issue, Gilbert that dyed without is∣sue, and Roger who was after Earle of Clare and Hartford. This Richard dyed in the yeare, 1156. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. Place this Catalogue of Clare and Clarence, betwixt page 52. and 53.
GIlbert, Earle of Clare and Hartford after his Father. He married (as William Gemeticensis hath) Elizabeth, sister of Walleran, Earle of Meullent, and dyed without issue. ROger de Clare, brother and heyre of Gilbert aforesaide, was Earle of Clare and Hartford. He married Mauld, daughter and heyre of Iames S. Hillary (she married after, William Earle of Arundell) and had issue, Richard Earle of Clare and Hartford, and others; and died in the yeare, 1174. Et portoit, d'or trois cheurons de gueulles. RIchard, Earle of Clare and Hartford, sonne of Roger a∣foresaid, married Amicia, second daughter and one of the heyres of William Earle of Glocester, and had issue, Gil∣bert Earle of Clare, Hartford and Glocester; and Ioane, wife to Rice Grig, Prince of Demiciae, and dyed in the yeare 1218. and was buried in the Priory of Tunbridge. Et portoit, les armes de son pere'. GIlbert, Earle of Clare and Hertford, and Earle of Glo∣cester by his Mother Amicia (after the death of his two Aunts without issue.) He was a witnesse to King Henry the thirds Charter, of Lands that he gaue (in the 9. yeare of his Reigne) to the Abbey of Peterborough, by the name of Gilbert, Earle of Clare, Hertford, and Glocester. He married Isabell, third sister, and one of the heyres of Anselme Mar∣shall, Earle of Penbroke, and had issue, Richard Earle of Clare, Hertford and Glocester, and William de Clare; Isabell, wife to Robert Bruse; Amie, wife to Baldwin Earle of Deuon, and others. He dyed at Penrose in Britaine, as the Book of Teuks∣bury hath, 1230. and lyeth there buried. Et portoit, d'or trois cheurons de gueulles.
RIchard de Clare, the second Earle of Glocester, sonne of Gilbert aforesaid, married first Margaret, daughter of Hugh de Burgo Earle of Kent, but by her he had no issue. His second wife was Mauld, daughter of Iohn Lacy Earle of Lin∣colne, and Constable of Chester, by whom hee had issue (as the booke of Teukesbury mentioneth) Gilbert, the second Earle of Glocester, &c. Thomas de Clare, that was Steward of the Forrests in Essex; Bees, Treasurer of Yorke Mynster; Isabell, a Nun at Barking; Margaret, Wife to Edmond Earle of Cornwall; Rose, Wife to Roger Lord Mowbray. This Richard dyed at Fsmeresfield in Kent, 1262. and lyeth buried at Teukesbury; but others haue, he dyed in France, and was brought into Eng∣land, and buried at Teukesbury. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. GIbert de Clare (sur named the Red) after the death of Richard his Father, was Earle of Clare, Hertford, and the third Earle of Glocester of that sur-name. Hee married two Wiues, the first was Alice, daughter of Hughle Brun, Earle of Angolesme, and the Marchesse of Aquitaine, and had issue, Isabell, Wife to Morris Lord Berkley. This Alice fell lunaticke, and was diuorced from this Gilbert: After which, he tooke to wife Ioane (sur-named of Acres) daugh∣ter of King Edward the first; with whom the saide Gilbert had neyther lands nor money, but onely the Kings fauour, which before he had lost, for refusing to goe with him the said King to the aid of Guy, Earle of Flanders, against the French King, 1287. He had issue by his last wife Ioane, Iohn that dyed young, leauing his three sisters his heires: Elianor, wife to Hugh Lord Spencer; Elizabeth, first married to Iohn Burgh Earle of Vlster in Ireland; and after to Theobald Lord Verdon; & lastly, to Sir Roger Damory, Baron of Armoy in Ireland; Margaret the 3. daughter, was first maried to Peter or Pieres of Gaueston, Earle of Cornwall; & after to Hugh Lord Audley the yonger, who after was Earle of Glocester. This Gilbert dyed in Wales, 1295. and was buried at Teukesbury. After the death of this Gilbert, the Title of Clare fell to the Crowne, which after King Edward the 3. bestowed that Title on Lyonell his sonne. Et portoit, d'or au trois cheurons de gueulles. LYonell (sur named of Antwerpe, the place of his birth) third sonne of King Edward the third, was created Earle of Wiltshire, in the 26. yeare of his Fathers Reigne; and in the 36. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he was created Duke of Clarence. He married to his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heyre of William Burgh Earle of Vlster, and had issue, Phillip his onely childe, married to Edmond Mortuomary, Earle of March and Vlster: and to his second wife he mar∣ried Violenta, daughter of Galeas, Viscount of Millayne, and
sister to Iohn Galeas, first Duke of Millaine, in whose right, the State and Lords of Italy did fully determine to crowne him King of Italy; but halfe a yeare be∣fore the time appointed; he dyed at Venice, 1368. and was there buried, hauing no issue by his last Wife. Et portoit, France seme & D'engleterre escartellé au lambell d'argent, en chescun point au Canton de gueulles. THomas Plantagenet, second sonne of King Henry the fourth, and brother to King Henry the fift, was created Earle of Albemarle, and Duke of Clarence, in the yeare 1411. He was also Lord Steward of England, and Constable of the Kings Hoste, and Lieutenant Generall of his Army in France and Normandy. He was also President of the Kings Counsell, after Prince Henry his brother was dismissed that Office, for striking the Lord Chiefe-Iustice, and after was slaine at the battaile of Bangy, by the Duke of Alanson (and the treachery of Andrew Forgusa a Lumbard, whom hee o∣uermuch trusted) and with him was slaine, the Earles of Tankeruile, Sir Gilbert Vmfreuile, the Earle of Kent, and the Lord Ros: and the Earles of Somerset, Suffolke, and Perch, with the Lord Fitz-Walter, were taken prisoners, the 9. of King Henry the fift, leauing no issue of his body, and was buried in Christ Church in Canterbury. Et portoit, France semé, escartellé D'engleterre au lambell d'argent chargé de trois cantons de gueulles. GEorge Plantagenet, borne at Dublyn in Ireland, third Son of Richard Duke of Yorke, and brother to King Edward the 4. was created Duke of Clarence, 1461. and after the death of Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke, his Wiues Fa∣ther, he writ himselfe, George Duke of Clarence, Earle of Warwicke and Salisbury, Lord of Richmond, & great Cham∣berlaine of England. Hee married Isabell, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Richard Neuill, Earle of Warwicke and Sa∣lisbury aforesaide, and had issue Edward, commonly called Earle of Warwicke (who dyed without issue, being beheaded in the Tower of London, the 15. of King Henry the 7.) and Margaret, Countesse of Salisbury, who was wife to Sir Richard Pole Knight, Father of Henry Lord Montague, and Reginald Pole Cardinall; which Margaret was also beheaded, in the 33. yeare of King Henry the eight. This George was secretly murdered in the Tower of London, 1477. and was buried at Teukes∣bury. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Arundell, with their Armes, Wiues, and Children. ROger Montgomery, Earle of Belesmo in Norman∣dy, sonne of Hugh Montgomery and Sibell his wife, daughter of Herfastus the Dane, (brother of Gonor, wife of Richard the first Duke of Nor∣mandy of that name) came into England with William the Conqueror: vnto whom the saide William did giue (for his good seruice) the Earledomes of Arundell and Shrewsbury. He married Mabiria, daughter and heyre of William Taluays, with whom he had all her Fathers Inheritance, (as William Gemiticensis hath, page 686,) and had issue fiue sonnes and foure daughters, viz. Hugh and Robert, both Earles of Arun∣dell and Shrewsbury; Roger the third sonne (surnamed Pictauensis) was Lord of the Honour of Lancaster; Arnulph the fourth sonne, was Castle-keeper of Penbrooke, and Philip was the fift sonne. His daughters were, Emma, Matilda the second daughter was married vnto Robert Earle of Moretaigne; Mahell was the third daughter, and Sibell the fourth daughter was maried vnto Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord of Glamorgan in South-Wales; which Robert, founded or re-edifi∣ed the Monastery of Tewkesbury. This Earle Roger was left by William Con∣queror to be Gouernor to his sonne William Rufus, and was after slaine at Cair∣diffe in South-Wales, 1091. and was buried in the Abbey at Shrewsbury, which before he had founded. HVgh de Belismo, sonne and heyre of Roger aforesaid, was after his Father, Earle of Arundell and Shrewsbury, and was slaine at Anglesey in North-Wales, 1098, (by Magnus, a Pirate of the Isles of Orcades) with the shot of an Arrowe which strooke him in the eye. He dyed without issue, & was buried by his Father in the Abbey at Shrewsbury. I finde no Armes borne by him.
RObert de Belismo, after the death of Hugh his Brother, was the third Earle of Arundell and Shrewsbury; who entring into rebellion, manned and fortified his Castle of A∣rundell, against King Henry the first, 1103. and was by the said King banished England, and his Castle and Honour of Arundell giuen in dower to Queene Adeliza, the Wife of King Henry the first. And after being taken at the battaile of Trenchbray in Normandy, with Robert Courtoise Duke of Normandy, were both brought into England & imprisoned in the Castle of Cairdiffe, where they had their eyes put out, & remained prisoners during their liues, as in the title of Shrewsbury is more at large. WIlliam de Albeneio, sonne of William de Albeneio who came into England with William the Conqueror, and had giuen him the Castle of Bockenham and the Mannor of Wymondham in Norfolke, to hold of the King to him and his heires to be the Kings Butlers at their Coronations. He was after Earle of Chichester, in the 19. yeare of King Stephen as doth appeare by the Charter of King Stephen, of the pacifi∣cation of the troubles betwixt him and Henry Duke of Nor∣mandy (Holinshed, page 63.) and diuers other the said Willi∣ams owne Charters. He married Queene Adeliza the widow of King Henry the first, and daughter of Godfrey Duke of Lo∣raine, with whom he had the Castle and Honor of Arundell (being her dower) which Mauld the Empresse afterwards proclaimed him Earle thereof (which ti∣tle it is said) that King Henry the second confirmed to the saide William and his heyres in the first yeare of his Reigne. This William, with Reginald de Warren, conducted Mauld the daughter of King Henry the first into Saxony, to be mar∣ried vnto Duke Henry, after Emperor in the yeare 1114. He founded the Pri∣ory of Bockenham, and dyed in the third yeare of King Henry the second, and was buried in the Priory at Wymondham by his Father, leauing issue by his wife Queene Adeliza, two sonnes, and a daughter, viz. William, Godfrey, and Alice; which Alice was married to Iohn Earle of Angie.
WIlliam de Albeney, the sonne of William and Queene Adeliza, was the second Earle of Arundell of that name: he was alwayes faithfull vnto King Henry the second, and ayded him against Henry the young King his sonne, & tooke prisoners at the battaile fought at Saint Edmundsbu∣ry, 1173. Robert Earle of Leicester, Hugh Earle of Chester, and Hugh de Chasteles a Frenchman with many others, and sent them into Normandy to King Henry the second, who imprisoned them in the Castle of Faloys. He married Mauld daughter and heyre of Iames de Santo Hillary, and the wid∣dow of Roger Earle of Clare, by whom he had issue, William the third Earle of Arundell and Alan; and after dyed at Wa∣uerly the 4. Ides of October, 1177. and was buried at Wymondham (as Mathew Paris hath, page 127.) Et portoit de gueulles au lion rampant d'or, arme & lampasse d'azure. WIlliam de Albeney, the third Earle of Arundell, vnto whom (as Roger Houeden hath, page 320.) King Henry the second in the yeare 1177. did giue the Earledome of Sussex: At which time he restored to Robert Earle of Lei∣cester, and Hugh Earle of Chester, all their Lands which they were seized of fifteene dayes before the warre began. He married Mabell, daughter of Hugh Keuilioc Earle of Chester, and second sister and co-heyre of Randoll Blundeuile, the sixt Earle of Chester: and had issue, two sonnes & foure daugh∣ters, viz. William and Hugh, both Earles of Arundell & Sus∣sex, who died without issue: Mabell the eldest daughter, was married vnto Sir Robert Tatesall Knight; Isabell the second daughter was married to Iohn Fitz-Alan, Lord of Clun and Oswaldstre; Nicho∣lea the thirde daughter was Wife to Roger Lord Somery; and Cecily the fourth daughter, was married to Roger Lord Monthault of Hawarden in Flintshire. This William dyed in the yeare 1196. and was buried at Wymondham. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
WIlliam de Albeney the fourth Earle of Arundell, and second Earle of Sussex of that name, dyed without issue, in his returne from Ierusalem, in the yeare of our Lord, 1221. and was brought into England, and buried at Wymond∣ham. Leauing his rich patrimony to his Brother Hugh, who being vnder age, Hubert de Burgo Earle of Kent and Chiefe-Iustice of England had his Wardship. Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'or, armé & lampasse d'azure. HVgh de Albeney, second sonne of William the third, and Brother and heire of William de Albeney, the fourth Earle of Arundell, was the fift and last Earle of Arundell, and third Earle of Sussex of that Family. He married Isabell, daugh∣ter of William Earle Warren and Surrey, and dyed without issue, and was buried at Wymondham by his Ancestours, in the yeare of our Lord, 1243. the 28. of King Henry the third, leauing his foure sisters his heyres, who made partition of his Lands in the yeare aboue said. Mabell the eldest sister, had the Mannor of Bockenham; Isabell the second sister had the Castle and honour of Arundell; Nicholea had the Man∣nor of Barrow; and Cecily the fourth sister had the Mannor of Rising in Norfolke, with diuers other Lands, and were married as afore∣said. Et portoit les armes de son freré. RIchard Fitz-Alan, Lord of Clun and Oswaldstre in Wales, (sonne and heire of Iohn Fitz-Alan, grandchilde of a∣nother Iohn Fitz-Alan and Isabell d' Albeney his wife (by their sonne Iohn) was the first Earle of Arundell of that surname. This Isabell being the second sister and co-heire of Hugh de Albeney, had the Castle and Lordship of Arundell by parti∣tion allotted to her for her part. Which Castle and Seig∣neury of Arundell, being now descended vnto this Richard, he claimed the Title and Name of Earle of Arundell; and by reason of the possession thereof only, was without any other creation, Earle of Arundell, and had place and voyce in Par∣liament, by the name and tytle of Richard Earle of Arundel;
as more at large is sette downe in an Acte of Parliament, made the eleuenth of King Henry the sixt; by occasion of that memorable competition betweene Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, and Iohn Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, for the saide Earledome of Arundell, as heereafter is set foorth. This Richard marri∣ed Alizon, daughter of the Marquesse of Saluce in Italy; by whom he had issue, Edmond Earle of Arundell; Isabell wife to Hugh Lord Spencer, Earle of Win∣chester; Mauld married to Phillip Lord Burnell; & Margaret the third daugh∣ter was married to William Boteler, second Baron of Wemme. Hee dyed in the 30. yeare of King Edward the first; & his wife dyed in the yeare, 1292. the 21. of Edward the first. Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'or, armé & lampasse d'azure. EDmund Fitz-Alan, sonne and heire of Richard aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Lord of Clun and Os∣waldstre, and second Earle of Arundell of that surname. He married Alice, daughter of William, and sister and heire of Iohn Earle Warren and Surrey, by whom he had issue Richard a sonne, and two daughters. Alice the eldest daughter was married to Iohn de Bohun, Earle of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England; Iane the second daughter, married Warren Lord Lisle. This Edmund was borne in the Castle of Malborough: he was very hatefull to Queene Isabell, who by the meanes of her Minion Roger Lord Mortimer, was taken at Shrewsbury, and brought to Hereford, & there be∣headed, in the twentieth yeare of King Edward the second. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. RIchard Fitz-Alan, sonne of Edmond afore-said, was the third Earle of Arundell of that sur-name, Lord of Clun and Oswaldstre (and by his Mother Earle Warren and Surrey, Lord of Bromfield, Yale, Chircland, and Dinas bran in North-Wales.) He was restored in bloud by King Edward the third, and entailed the Castle, Honour, and Lordship of Arundell, in the 21. yeare of king Edw. the third, to himselfe for terme of life, the remainder to his heires male of his body begot∣ten and to bee begotten of the body of Elianor his Wife, Daughter of Henry Plantagenet Earle of Lancaster, and Si∣ster of Henry Duke of Warwicke; by whom hee had
issue, three sonnes, and foure daughters, viz, Richard after Earle of Arundell, Sir Iohn of Arundel, knight (that married Elianor, daughter of Iohn Lord Mal∣treuers, and sister and heyre of Henry Baron Maltreuers; in whose right he was after Lord Maltreuers, and sayling into little Britaine, was drowned neere vn∣to the Coast of Ireland, the fifteenth of December, 1379. Leauing issue, Iohn Lord Maltreuers, & others.) And Thomas the third sonne of the said Richard, was Archbishop of Canterbury, & L. Chancellor of England. Alice the eldest daughter was married to Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent; Elianor the second daughter dyed young; Ioan the third daughter was married to Humfrey de Bo∣hun Earle of Hereford, &c. and Mary the fourth daughter, was married vnto Iohn Lord Strange of Blackmere. This Richard dyed in the Castle of Arundell, the 49. of King Edward the third, and was buried in the Priory of Lewis. Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'or, at mé & lampasse d'azur. RIchard Fitz-Alan, sonne of Richard aforesaid, was the fourth Earle of Arundell and Surrey, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. He married Elizabeth, daugh∣ter of William de Bohun, Earle of Northampton, and had issue three sonnes, and foure daughters, viz. Thomas Earle of A∣rundell and Surrey; Richard and William dyed both yong without issue. Elizabeth the eldest daughter, was married to Thomas L. Mowbray Earle of Nottingham; & after to Sir Ro∣bert Gousell knight. Ioan the second daughter, was married to William Beauchampe Baron of Abergauenny (Father of Ri∣chard Earle of Worcester.) Margaret the third daughter, was married to Sir Rowland Lenthall knight, and had issue, Edward that dyed without issue. Alice the fourth daughter was maried to Iohn Charlton Lord Po∣wis, and dyed without issue. This Richard the fourth Earle of Arundell, marri∣ed to his second wife, Phillip daughter of Edmond Mortimer Earle of March, widow of Iohn Hastings Earle of Penbrooke, and had issue Iohn that dyed yong. This Richard, with Thomas Duke of Glocester, Thomas Earle of Warwicke, and Thomas Mowbray Earle Marshall and others, combined and sware each to o∣ther, against Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole Duke of Suf∣folke, for abusing and misleading the King. For which, and some other causes King Richard the second obiected against them, some of them were banished, others condemned to perpetuall prisonment, and this Richard beheaded at the Tower-hill by London, whose body was buried in the Augustine-Fryars, in Lon∣don, the 21. of King Richard the second. Et portoit, lez armes de son peré.
THomas Fitz-Alan, sonne of the aforesaid Richard, was restored in bloud the first yeare of King Henry the 4. and was the fift Earle of Arundel and Surrey of that name. He maried Beatrix, base daughter of Iohn king of Portingall, in the Citty of London, 1405. in the presence of King Henry the fourth, but had no issue; by reason whereof; all his Lands pertaining and belonging to the Earldomeof Surrey, was diuided and went amongst his sisters before mentioned, and the Earldome of Arundell, with the Lands thereunto be∣longing and intailed, went to Iohn Fitz-Alan Lord Maltre∣uers, son of Iohn Lord Maltreuers, grandchild of Iohn Fitz-Alan, Lord Maltreuers, and Elianor his wife, sister and heyre of Henry Lord Maltreuers: (which last Iohn, was Vnckle of this Thomas the fift Earle of Arun∣dell, who dyed in the yeare of our Lord God, 1416. Et portoit, gueulles au lion tampant d'or, arme' & lampasse d'azur. IOhn Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, sonne of Iohn Lord Mal∣treuers, granchilde and heire of Iohn Fitz-Alan Lord Mal∣treuers, and Elianor his wife, sister and heyre of Henry Lord Maltreuers: vpon whom (as next heire male vnto Thomas Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell aforesaid) the Castle and Seig∣neury of Arundell descended, by vertue of the entaile for∣merly made by Richard Fitz-Alan the third Earle of Arun∣dell, in the 21. yeare of King Edward the third. In right of which his possession of the said Castle and Lordship of A∣rundell, the saide Iohn Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers by Petiti∣on in Parliament, the 11. of King Henry the sixt, pursued his claime to the Earledome of Arundell (before set on foote by his Father Iohn Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, vpon the death of Thomas Fitz-Alan late Earle of Arundell) alledging that all his Ancestours, as well before as since the Con∣quest, which had beene seized of the Castle, Honor and Seigneury of Arundell, had beene Earles of Arundell. Vnto which Petition, Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke appeared, who as heire to Elizabeth, second sister and co-heire of the foresaid Thomas Earle of Arundell (from whom the saide Duke stood already possessed of the Earledome of Surrey) made his claime likewise to the Earle∣dome of Arundell. Whereupon the King and the Lords then assembled in Par∣liament, vpon a deliberate hearing of the matter, approuing the aforesaid alle∣gations of the Lord Maltreuers, touching the Castle and Seigneury of Arun∣dell; and finding him accordingly to be by descent lawfully seized of the saide Castle and Seigneury of Arundell; did by acte of Parliament declare the saide
Iohn Lord Maltreuers to be without any other creation, Earle of Arundell. This Iohn married Mauld, daughter and heire of Robert Louell and Elizabeth Brian his wife, daughter and heyre of Sir Guy de Bryan the yonger, and had issue, Humfrey Fitz-Alan the seuenth Earle of Arundell; & Amicia married to Iames Boteler Earle of Ormond and Wiltshire. He dyed in the thirteenth yeare of King Henry the sixt, and was buried at Lewis in Sussex. Milles, page 656. setteth downe, that King Henry the 6. by his Charter bearing date the 12. yeare of his Reigne, did giue the Dukedome of Torraine to this Iohn and his heires male. To this, M. Camden in the Margent of this my Booke, replieth and saith, That true it is this Iohn had the profits of the said Dukedome giuen him, but not the Title, Name, and Stile of Duke. Which I meruaile greatly at, considering that in his last Impression of his Britannia, page 310. hee saies, that this Iohn was created Duke of Torraine Which if he say truely, then had he both the name & stile of Duke. Et portoit, lez armoiries de sonperé. HVmfrey Fitz-Alan, after the death of his Father was the seuenth Earle of Arundell, and dyed yong without issue, in the sixteenth yeare of the Reigne of King Henry the sixt, leauing William his Vnckle to succeed him in the Earledome of Arundell. Et portoit, guenlles au lyon rampant d'or, armè & lampasse d'azur. WIlliam Fitz-Alan, Vnckle and heyre of Humfrey a∣foresaide, was the eight Earle of Arundell of that name, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. In this Williams time the 18. of king Henry the 6. there grew a que∣stion in Parliament for precedency of place, betweene him and Thomas Earle of Deuonshire; who alledged, that the said William Earle of Arundell, holding by the late creation (as he supposed) of Iohn Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, in the 11. yeare of the fore-saide King, ought not to haue priority of him: whereupon the Acte of Parliament aforesaid concer∣ning Iohn Earle of Arundell, was had into consideration
by the King and the Lords of the vpper house, and the Lords Comitties, after great consultation and perusall of Euidences (as is there said) did conclude, that the saide William was not Earle by way of any late creation, but was de∣clared Earle of Arundell, in as much as he was Lord and Heritor of the Castle, Honour, and Seigneury of Arundell: and that the Name and Title of Earle, belonged to the said Castle and Honour, and had alwaies done to the Lords of the said Castle, of time that no minde is, & long before. So as it was then by the King, with the aduice of the Lords spiritual & temporal, declared and decreed, that the said William Earle of Arundel shold haue, keep, & enioy his seat, roome, and place in the Parliaments and Councels, and in other places in the Kinges presence, by way of preheminence and worship, as euer had any of his Ance∣stors, Earles of Arundell afore this time; as in the saide Parliament Rowle is more at large. This William married Ioan, daughter of Richard Neuill Earle of Salisbury, and sister of Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke, by whom hee had is∣sue, Thomas Fitz-Alan the 9. Earle of Arundell; William, George, and Iohn, and a daughter named Mary; and dyed in the third yeare of King Henry the sea∣uenth. Et portoit, le armes deson peré. THomas Fitz-Alan, after the death of William his Father, was the ninth Earle of Arundell of that name, Lord Maltreuers, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and married Margaret, daughter of Richard Wooduile, Earle Riuers and Baron of Wimington, slaine at Banbury the 10. of King Edward the fourth, and second sister and one of the heires of Richard Earle Riuers her brother; & had issue, two sonnes and two daughters, viz. William the tenth Earle of Arundell, and Edward: Margaret the eldest daughter, was married vnto Iohn de la Pole Earle of Lincolne; and Ioan the second daughter was married vnto George Neuill, Baron of Abergauenny. He dyed in his Parke of Dunlee, the 16. of King Henry the 8. & was buried at Arundell the 21. of Nouember, 1524. Et portoit, gueulles au Lyon rampant d'or, arme & lampasse d'azur.
WIlliam Fitz-Alan, sonne and heire of Thomas afore∣said, was the tenth Earle of Arundel, Lord Maltre∣uers, Clun, and Oswaldstre; hee married to his first Wife, Anne daughter of Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, & had issue Henry the eleuenth Earle of Arundell, Anne and Katherine, which two daughters dyed both without yssue. His second Wife was Elizabeth daughter of Robert Wil∣loughby Lord Brooke, by whom he had issue two daughters, Margaret and Elizabeth that dyed also without yssue. This William dyed in the 35. yeare of King Henry 8. and was bu∣ried in the Castle of Arundell, 1543. Et portoit, le armories de son peré. HEnry Fitz-Alan, sonne of William aforesaide, was after his Father Earle of Arundell, Lord Maltreuers, Clun, &c. and Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter. He married two Wiues; the first was Katherine, daughter of Thomas Gray Marquesse Dorset, Lord Bonuile and Haring∣ton, and sister of Henry Gray Duke of Suffolke; by whom he had issue Henry Lord Maltreuers, which married Anne, daughter and sole heyre of Sir Iohn Wentworth Knight, and died and was buried at Bruxels without issue, 1556. being but nineteene yeares of age. Hee had also two daughters his heires, Iane the eldest was married to Iohn Lord Lum∣ley, and had issue Charles, Thomas, and Mary, which dyed all three without issue. Mary the second daughter and co-heire, was married to Thomas Howard the last Duke of Norfolke of that family; and had issue Phil∣lip Howard after Earle of Arundell. This Henry maried to his second wife, Ma∣ry daughter of Sir Iohn Arundell of the West Country Knight, the widdow of Robert Radcliffe Earle of Sussex, by whom he had no issue. He was Gouernor of Callis when King Henry the eight besiedged Boloine, and Lord Marshall of his army, Lord Chamberlaine to King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixt, and Lord Steward of the Houshold to Queene Mary and Queene Elizabeth, and dyed very old the 25. of February, 1579. the 22. of Queeene Elizabeth, & was buried at Arundell with his Ancestors. Et portoit, gueulles au Lyon rampant d'or, arme & lampasse d'azur.
PHillip Howard eldest son of Thomas late Duke of Norfolk, attainted as aforesaid, & of Marie his wife, second daugh∣ter and co-heire of Henry Fitz-Alan abouesaid (vnto whom was conueyed the Castle and Honour of Arundell) did in right thereof (vpon the death of Henry Fitz-Alan his grand father) assume the Name and Title of Earle of Arundel, be∣ing not as yet restored in blood, and by that name was sum∣moned to the Parliament holden at Westminster, the 16. day of Ianuary following, in the 23. of Queen Elizabeth, and sate there in presence of the said Queene as Earle of Arun∣dell almost two monthes before his restitution in blood, which was concluded in the vpper house of Parliament, on the tenth day of March after, as doth appeare by the Iournall booke of that Parliament. He married Anne daughter of Thomas Lord Dacres, and sister and co-heire of George Lord Dacres of Gillesland, by whom he had issue Thomas Howard now Earle of Arundell, 1619. This Phillip was attainted of Treason the 14. of A∣prill, 1589. and died a naturall death in the Tower of London, the 19. day of Nouember, 1595. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. THomas Howard Earle of Arundell and Surrey, the onely sonne of Phillip Earle of Arundel, was restored in blood by King Iames in the second yeare of his reigne, 1604. and after made one of the saide Kings most Honourable Preuy Councell, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and one of the Lordes Commissioners for the office of Earle Marshall of England. This Noble Lord out of his loue and honourable disposition (with the other Lords Commissio∣ners) was the means that his Maiesty did augment and dou∣ble the pensions of the Kings Heraulds and Pursuiuants of Armes, with an allowance of ten pounds the yeare for euer, towards the maintenance and repairing of their Office or Colledge. He mar∣ried Aletheia yongest daughter and coheire of Gilbert Talbot Earle of Shrews∣bury, by whom he had issue Iames Lord Maltreuers, and Knight of the Bath, Sir Henry Howard knight of the Bath: Thomas and Gilbert died both young, William and Charles Howard, Anno 1618. Et portoit, Gueulles a vn band entre six croislets botonny siche d'argent.
A CATALOGVE of the Earles of Albemarle, with their Wiues, Armes, and Children. STephen, sonne of Eudo, Earle of Blesensis and Champaine, by Matild his Wife, halfe sister by the Mother to William Conquerour, was Lord of the Citty of Albemarle in Norman∣die, (by the gift of Odo, Bishop of Bayon and Earle of Kent his Vnckle) Of which Citty, King William Ru∣fus in the sixt yeare of his Reigne, did not onely create him Earle of, but also gaue him the Isle of Holdernesse, with the Castle and Towne of Bitham, and other great Seigniories & Lands in England and Normandie. In the fiue and twentieth yeare of King Henry the first, this Stephen was Witnesse to the saide Kings Charter of Lands that he gaue to the Abbey of Reading. He married  daughter of Roger Mortimer, sonne of Raphe, and had issue three sonnes and foure daughters; William Earle of Albemarle, Stephen, and Ingeram: the daughters were all married out of England, but the youngest, who was first married vnto William de Romare, Earle of Lincolne, and after to Peter de Brus, who dyed in the Holy-Land, in the sixe and twentieth yeare of King Henry the first. Et portoit, Gueulles a vn Croix patee vaire.
VVIlliam surnamed le Gros, sonne of Stephen, was after the death of his father Earle of Abemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse; he married Cicely daughter of William Fitz Duncan (sonne of Malcolme King of Scots) by Alice de Rume∣ly Lady of Harwood, with whom he had in marriage the Ho∣nour and Lands of Crauen in Yorkeshire, and had issue Hawis his onely daughter and heire, first married to William de Mag∣nauile Earle of Essex, and after to William de Fortibus, (or de Forts) Baron of Olem, by whom she had issue William de Forts Earl of Albemarle, father of Aueline, wife of Edmond first earle of Lancaster (sonne of King Henry the third:) lastly the said Hawis married Baldwin de Betun. This William le Grosse founded the Abbey of Melsa, Anno one thousand one hundred and fiftie, and dyed the seauen and twentieth yeare of King Henry the second, and was buried in the Abbey of Thornton, which was of his owne foundation. Et portoit, les armes de son Pere'. VVIlliam Magnauile Earle of Essex, and Lord of Plesse; and in right of Hawis his wife, daughter and heire of William le Grosse, was also Earle of Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse, in the yeare of our Lord one thousand one hun∣dred seuenty and nine, and died at Roane, in the second yeare of King Richard the first, without issue. Et portoit, escartelle d'or & gueulles. WIlliam de Fortibus, Baron of Olem, second husband vnto Hawis Countesse of Albemarle, Daughter and heire of William le Grosse, in whose right he was Earle of Al∣bemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse, by whom hee had issue, William Earle of Albemarle (father of Aueline wife of Edmond Earle of Lancaster.) This William de Forts, by the name of Earle of Albemarle, in the sixt yeare of the reigne of King Ri∣chard the first, was a witnesse to the saide Kings Charter of Lands that hee gaue to Reginald de Argentyne, and died in the seuenth yeare of King Richard the first. Et portoit, d'argent au le chef d'gueulles.
BAldwine de Betun (by consent of King Richard the fir married, and was the third husband to Hawis Counte of Albemarle, Daughter of William le Grosse; in whose right  was Earle of Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse, by who he had issue one only daughter his heire named Hawis, whi was married to William, sonne and heire of William Marsh Earle of Penbrooke, and died without issue. Maister Lambert in his Perambulation of Kent page 533. saith, That this Ba wine de Betun liued, and was a Testie in the seauenth yeare  King Iohn; and therefore I holde him the third husband to Hawis Countesse of Albemarle, and not the second, as Ma∣ster Camden and Maister Milles haue set him downe to be, her other two h∣bands being dead long before. This Baldwine dyed in the thirteenth yeare o King Iohn, and was buried in the Abbey of Meaux, whereof he was the Foun∣der. Et portoit, d'argent bande de six d'argent & de gueulles, au chef d'or. WIlliam de Fortibus, sonne of William de Forts by Ha Countesse of Albemarle aforesaide, after the death of his mother, and her three husbands, was the sixt Earle of A∣bemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse: He maried Auelyne daugh∣ter of Richard Lord Montfichet, and by her had issue William which was after Earle of Albemarle. This William died in the six and twentith yeare of King Henry the third, and was bu∣ried in the Abbey of Meaux. Et portoit, d'argent au chef de gueulles. VVIlliam de Fortibus, the last of that name and Familie, was the seauenth Earle of Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse, &c. He married to his first wife Christian daugh∣ter of Alan Earle of Galloway in Scotland, who died without is∣sue, the 30. yeare of King Henry the third, and was buried in the Abbey of Thornton. His second wife was Isabel daugh∣ter of Bauldwine, the fourth of that name Earle of Deuon, and sister and heire to Baldwine the fift and last Earle of Deuon of the surname of Riuers; by whom he had issue two sonnes, and two daughters. Thomas the eldest sonne died without is∣sue, and was buried at Stamford; William the second Sonne
died at Oxford without issue, and was buried by his brother; Auice the eldest sister died also without issue, and was buried in the Abbey of Melsa; and Aue∣line the second sister and co-heire of Baldwine aforesaid, was married in the fifty foure yeare of king Henry the third, to Edmond Crooke-backe Earle of Lancaster, second sonne of the said king Henry the third. This Countesse of Albemarle and Deuon, and Lady of the Isle of Wight (for so she writ her selfe) ouer liued her husband, and in her widdow-hood sold the Isle of Wight, and a great part of the Earledome of Deuon, and counselled her daughter Aueline to giue her whole in∣heritance, after her death (from the Courtneis her next heires) to Lord Edmond her husband and his heires, which she accordingly did. This William died in the fortith yeare of king Henry the third, and was buried in the Abbey of Meaux. Et portoit, les armes de son pere'. THomas of Woodstocke, sixt son of King Edward the third, was by King Richard the second, created Earle of Albe∣marle, (he was also Earle of Buckingham and Northampton, Duke of Glocester and Constable of England) and married Elianor daughter and co-heire of Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England, and had issue, Humfrey Earle of Buckingham, and Anne married to Edmond Earl Stafford. This Thomas of Woodstock was taken by force out of his Castle of Plessy in Essex, by Thomas Mowbray Earle Marshall of England, and conueied secretly to Callis, and there most cruelly murthered: his body beeing brought ouer into England, was buried at Westminster the xxij. of King Richard the second, 1398. Les armes de france seme, & D'engleterre escartelle, a la bordute d'argent. EDward Plantagenet, sonne and heire of Edmond of Langley Duke of Yorke, in the thirteenth yeare of King Richard the second, was Earle of Rutland and Corke, his father then liuing; and in the one and twentith of the said Kings reigne, hee was created Duke of Albemarle, from which Dukedome he was deposed by Parliament, in the first yeare of King Henrie the fourth. He married Phillip daughter and co-heire of Iohn de Mohun Lord of Dunsten, and was slaine at the battell of E∣gencourt 1415. and was buried at Fotheringale without issue. Et portoit, france seme & D'engleterre escartelle, a lambell de trois points perpale gueulles & d'argent, charge' de six chastells d'or & six lions rampant gueulles.
THomas Duke of Clarence (second sonne to King Henrie the fourth, in the thirteenth yeare of his Fathers reigne, was created Earle of Albemarle, and was after slaine by the Duke of Orliance at Bangie bridge in France, the ninth of K. Henry the fift, without issue; and his body being brought o∣uer into England, was buried in Christ-Church in Canter∣burie. Et portoit, les armes d'France seme escartelle, D'engleterre, au lambell d'ermyn trois cantons gueulles. RIchard Beauchampe, Earle of Warwicke (Lieutenant Gene∣rall vnder Iohn Duke of Bedford Regent of France) was by King Henry the sixt created Earle of Albemarle. Hee mar∣ried for his second wife Isabell the Widdow of Richard Beau∣champe Earle of Worcester (his cousine Germane) daughter and heire of Thomas Lord Spencer, and Earle of Glocester, by whom he had issue Henry Duke of Warwicke, &c. He dyed at Roan in the 17. yeare of King Henry the sixt, and was bu∣ried at Warwicke. Et portoit, gueulles a vne fees & six croiseletz d'or.
A Catalogue of the Earles of Anguish and Kyme, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. GIlbert Vmfreuile, Earle of Anguish, Lord of Prodhoo, Ot∣terborne, Harbotle, and Ridesdale, a man of great Fame heere in England in King Henry the thirds time, and King Ed∣ward the first; married and had issue Gilbert and Robert, both Earles of Anguish. Et portoit, gueulles a vne quintfoile & le champe croisele patee d'or. GIlbert Vmfreuile, sonne and heire of Gilbert aforesaid, was after the death of his Father also Earle of Anguish, Lord of Prodhoo, &c. He fought the battell of Argile: after which, hee with William Valence Earle of Penbroke, encountred Ro∣bert Brus King of Scots, at S. Iohns Towne in Scotland. This Gilbert sate in Parliament helde at Northampton in the first yeare of King Edward the first, by the name and Title of Earle of Anguish, in which yeare he died without issue. Et portoit, les armes de son Pere'. RObert Vmfreuile (second sonne of the first Gilbert, & bro∣ther and heire to the last Gilbert) was after his Brother Earle of Anguish, Lord of Prodhoo, &c. He sate in Parliament held at Westminster, the second yeare of King Edward the se∣cond, and so continued vnto the seuenteenth of the same Kings reigne, as Earle of Anguish, and then dyed. He marri∣ed Luce daughter and heire of Phillip de Kime, a great Baron, and had issue Gilbert, Robert, and Thomas; and a Daughter named Elionor, married to Sir Gilbert Borrowdon, Knight. Et portoit, les armes de son Frere'.
GIlbert Vmfreuile (sonne and heire of Robert) was after his Father Earle of Anguish, Lord of Prodhoo, Otterborne, Harebotle, and Ridesdale, and by his mother Lord of Kyme. Hee married to his first wife, Iane daughter of Robert Lord Willoughby; and after, he married Matild, daughter & heire of Sir Thomas Lucy of Cockermoth knight, and dyed without issue in the yeare 1384. (His last wife was maried afterwards vnto Henry Percy first Earle of Northumberland.) This Gil∣bert fought the battell of Gladesmore, at which time hee was Marshall of Scotland, & sate in Parliaments in England from the eight yeere of K. Edward the third, vntill the fourth of King Richard the second, by the name and title of Gilbert Earle of Anguish. Et portoit, Gueulles a vne quintfoile & le champe croisele patee d'or. RObert Vmfreuile (second Brother of the last Gilbert) in the eight yeere of King Henry the fift, was created Earle of Kyme, and was after slain by the Duke of Orleance at Ban∣gie-bridge in France, the ninth of King Henry the fift, & was buried at Calice, and after remooued from thence and inter∣red in the Monastery of Kyme. Hee married Anne, daughter of Raphe Neuill first Earle of Westmerland. This Robert haue I made to be Earle of Kyme (vpon the cre∣dit of Claurenciux Cooke) and yet do I greatly doubt therof, for that I cannot euer finde any of that Name and Family to sitte in Parliament after the last Earle Gilbert (in the fourth yeare of King Richard the second) brother of this Robert. This descent of Vmfreuile is diuersly set forth by sundry persons, who haue made many heyres male to the last Gilbert more then I can finde any good proofe for. Therefore for the better cleering thereof, take this out of the Kings Records: Gilbert the last Earl of Anguish, with Mauld Lucy his wife, did entaile diuers lands to themselues, and the heyres of their two bodies: and for default thereof, to Robert his brother, and to the heirs male of his body: and for default thereof, to Thomas Vmfreuile his third Brother, and to the heires male of his body: and for default thereof, the remainder to Elizabeth (or Elionor) his Sister, wife of Gilbert Borrowdon, and the heires of their two bodyes: and that Elionor the wife of Henry Talboys is daughter and heire of Gilbert Borrow∣don, and Neece and heire of the saide last Earle Gilbert, and is forty yeares of age.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Atholl, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. DAuid (sur-named) Strathbogie, Earle of Atholl in King Henry the thirds time, married Isabell, one of the Daughters & Heyres of Richard of Chil∣lam (base sonne of King Iohn) and had issue, two sonnes, Iohn and Dauid, Iohn was hanged, and died without issue: Dauid his Brother succeeded him in the Earledome. Et portoit, pale de six d'or & de sable. DAuid Stratbolgie or Strathbolgie, second sonne and heire of Dauid, Earle of Atholl, married Ioane, daughter & one of the heires of Iohn Lord Comen of Badzenoth; and of Ioane his Wife, second sister and one of the heires of Aymer de Va∣lence Earle of Penbroke, with whom hee had in mariage the Barony and Castle of Mitford in Northumberland, and sate in Parliament by the name and title of Earle of Atholl, the 17. yeare of King Edward the second, and the fifteenth of King Edward the third, and had issue, Dauid Earle of Atholl, Elizabeth and Philip, and was slaine by Andrew Murrey, in the yeare 1335. Et portoit, pale de six d'or & de sable. DAuid Strathbolgie, after the death of his Father Dauid, was Earle of Atholl in Scotland, and Baron of Mitford in England: he sate in Parliament helde at Westminster, the 43. of King Edward the third, by the name and title of Earle of Atholl, and died in the 44. yeare of the same Kings reigne. After whose death his inheritance was diuided betweene his two sisters and heires: Elizabeth the eldest sister was maried to Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester; and Philip the second, was married to Sir Iohn Halsham Knight, and had issue. After the death of this last Dauid, the title of Earle of Atholl went to the Family of Stewarts in Scotland. Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles and Dukes of Buckingham, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. WAlter Gifford, the second of that name, Earle of Longuile in Normandy, came into England with William the Conqueror, and was a Wit∣nesse to King Henry the first his Charter, for the reformation of the Lawes and Customes of England. He married  and had issue Walter the se∣cond Earle of Buckingham, and Hugh. Hee had also a Sister, named Rhohisia, married to Richard Fitz-Gilbert, Lord of Clare and Tunbridge, Grand-father of Gilbert sur-named Strongbow, Earle of Penbroke (by his sonne Gilbert.) Et portoit, Gueulles trois Lions passant en pale d'argent. WAlter Gifford, the second Earle of Buckingham, and of Longuile in Normandy in France, married one Er∣myngard, who with her said husband founded the Abbey of Notley neere to the Towne of Buckingham, in King Henrie the seconds time. The said Walter dyed without yssue, and was buried in the saide Abbey, in the yeare 1164. leauing al his entailed Lands to Osbert Gifford his nephew (by his bro∣ther Hugh:) and all his other Lands to William Marshal earle of Penbroke, who had married Isabell daughter and heyre of Richard Strongbow, sonne of Gilbert Earle of Penbroke, grand∣child to Rhohisia Gifford aforenamed. Et portoit, les armories de son Pere'. THomas of Woodstocke (sixt sonne of King Edw. the third) being Constable of England, was in the first yeare of K. Richard the second created Earle of Buckingham, and sate in Parliament the same yeare by that name and Title; and in the ninth year of the said Kings reigne, he was created Duke of Glocester. He married Elianor daughter and co-heyre of Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of England; by whom hee had issue Humfrey Earle of Buckingham; and Anne, who was married to Ed∣mond Earle Stafford. This Thomas was strangled to death vnder a Feather-bed at Callis, by Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke, and Marshall of England, 1396. Et portoit, France seme & D'engleterre escartelle, auborder d'argent.
HVmfrey Plantagenet (sonne of Thomas of Woodstocke) af∣ter the death of his Father was Earle of Buckingham, and being banished England into Ireland, was re-called backe a∣gain by King Henry the fourth, in the first year of his reigne, in which returne hee dyed of the plague at Chester, (others haue at Couentry) and was buried in the Abbey of Walden in Essex, without issue. Et portoit les armes de son Pere'. HVmfrey Stafford (sonne and heire of Edmond Earle Staf∣ford, by Anne Plantagenet, daughter of Thomas of Wood∣stocke) was created the first Duke of Buckingham, in the 22. yeare of K. Hen. 6. 1443. and to haue the precedent place of all other Dukes in England. He married Anne, Daughter of Raphe Neuill first Earle of Westmerland, and had issue foure sonnes and three daughters, viz. Humsrey Earle of Stafford the eldest sonne slaine at S. Albons the 33. yeare of K. Hen. 6. (in the life time of his father) Iohn Stafford the second sonne was Earle of Wiltshire; Richard the third sonne dyed young; and Robert the fourth sonne was Archbyshop of Canterbury. Katherine the eldest daughter, was married vnto Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury; Iane the second daughter, was married first to William Lord Bardolph, and after to Sir William Knyuet Knight; and Anne the third daughter was first maried to Aubrey de Vere (son and heire of the Earle of Ox∣ford) and after to Sir Tho: Cobham Knight. This Humfrey with Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, Thomas Lord Egremont, and Iohn Viscount Beaumont, was slaine at the battell of Northampton, in the 38. yeare of K. Hen. 6. 1460. (the king being then taken prisoner) and his body buried in the Gray-Friars at Northampton. Escartelle France & d'engleteire, au bordur d'argent (being his mothers armes) quartered vvith his owne armes, d'or au Cheueron gueulles. HEnry Stafford (sonne and heire of Humfrey Earle Staf∣ford, slaine at the first battell of S. Albons, 1455.) after the death of Humfrey Duke of Buckingham his grand-father, was Duke of Buckingham, Earle Stafford, Hereford, and Nor∣thampton, Lord of Brecknocke, Kimbalton, and Tunbridge, was by King Richard the third, 1482. made Constable of Eng∣land. Hee married Katherine daughter of Richard Wooduile, Earle Riuers, and sister and heire of Anthony Wooduile Earle Riuers, by whom he had issue Edward Stafford Dke of Buc∣Kingham, Henry Earle of Wiltshire, and Humfrey that dyed
young. Elizabeth married to Robert Radcliff Lord Fitz-Walter. Anne the se∣cond daughter was first married to Sir Walter Herbert, Knight, and after vnto George Lord Hastings, and Earle of Huntingdon, by whom she had issue, Francis Earle of Huntingdon and others. This Henry Duke of Buckingham was behea∣ded at Salisbury, the 2. of King Richard the third, for plotting with Henry Earle of Richmond, against the said King. Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. EDward Stafford (sonne and heire of Henry aforesaid) be∣ing restored, the first of King Henry the seuenth, 1486. was the last Duke of Buckingham; he maried Elianor daugh∣ter of Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, and had issue, Henry Lord Stafford (who married Vrsuld daughter of Sir Richard Pole, knight, and of Margaret his Wife, daughter of George Duke of Clarence) and three daughters, viz. Elizabeth married to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, and Earl Mar∣shall of England. Katherine the second daughter, was married to Raffe Neuill Earle of Westmerland: and Mary the third daughter, was married to George Neuill Baron of Abergauen∣ny. This Edward, for consulting with a Monke (or Wizard) how he might ob∣taine the Crowne; was araigned at Westminster Hall, before the Duke of Nor∣folke, then high Steward of England, and found guilty of high treason, and af∣terwards beheaded at the Tower Hill by London, the 13. of King Henry the 8. 1521. Et portoit, les armoiries de son bisayeul. SIR George Villers Kinght, (a yonger sonne of Sir George Villers of Leicestershire, knight) was created Baron of Whaddon, and Viscount Villers at Woodstocke, the 27. of Au∣gust, 1616. and the 16. of Ianuary after, hee was created at White-Hall, Earle of Buckingham: lastly, he was made Mar∣quesse of Buckingham, at White-Hall the first of Ianuary, 1617. by the deliuery of a letters Patents: he was also knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, Master of the Horse, & one of his Maiesties most honourable priuy Councell, and in commission for the Office of Earle Marshall of England, 1618. Et portoit, d'argent au Croix de gueulles, charge de cinq coquilles d'or.
MAry, Daughter of Anthony Beaumont, second Sonne of William Beaumont of Cole Ouerton in Leicestershire, was by the great and extraordinary fauour and bounty of Iames King of Great Britaine, made Countesse of Buckingham, by the deliuery of a Letters Patent, bearing date the first of Iu∣ly, 1618. And had giuen her for the maintenance of the saide dignity, an yearly fee or rent of twenty pounds, issuing out of the saide County during her life. She married three Hus∣bands; the first was Sir George Villers of Brookesby in Leice∣stershire, Knight; by whom shee had issue Sir Iohn Villers Knight, Sir George Villers Marquesse of Buckingham; Christo∣pher Villers, and Susan wife to Sir William Feilding of Newen∣ham, in the County of Warwicke Knight. Her second Husband was William Rey∣ner Gentleman, by whom she had no issue. Her third and last Husband, now liuing, is Sir Thomas Compton Knight, second sonne of Henry Lord Compton, & brother of William Lord Compton, now Earle of Northampton, 1618. Et portoit, d'azur au Lyon rampant, seme' de lices d'or. Place this leafe of Buckingham betwixt Follio 20 and 21.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles of Bedford, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. INgelram de Coucy (sonne of Ingram by Ka∣therine the daughter of the Duke of Austria) Seigz de Coucy, D'Oysy et Mountmirall, was created Earle of Bedford the fortith yeare of King Edward the third, 1365. and married Isabel the said Kings daughter, with whom he had in marriage the Mannor of Morholm, the moities of the Mannors of Wirisdale and Ashton, with the third part of the Lordship of Whittington, in the County of Lancaster, and had issue two daughters his heires, Blanch and Phillip; and as Clarenceus Cooke hath, Blanch married Harman Earle of Cely; and had issue Barbara wife to Sigismond the Emperor. Phillip the second daughter was married to Robert Vere, Duke of Ireland, and Marques of Dublyn. M. Glouer Somerset saith, hee had a third daughter named Mary, married to Henry of Barre, and had issue Robert de Barre; and Ioan married vn∣to Lewis of Luxemburg, Earle of S. Paul. And M. Aiscu in his Chronicle, page 84. hath, that Mary the daughter of this Ingelram de Coucy, was married to A∣lexander King of Scots for his second wife:(and thus do Writers varie.)Hee died at Bars in , 1397. Et portoit, burelle de six vair & de Gueulles. This Ingelram de Coucy had a base daughter named Mauld, married vnto the Lord Strange, by whom she had issue Ancarat, wife to Sir Henry Husee, knight. IOhn Plantagenet (third sonne of King Henry the fourth) in the second yeare of King Henry the fift, was created Duke of Bedford, Earle of Richmond, and Lord of Kendall, & in the fift yeare of the same Kings reigne, hee was made Protector of the Realme of England, and head of the publike Weale. Also in the fift of King Henry the sixt, he was made Regent of France, and was styled, Iohn Regent of France, Duke of Bedford, Aniou, and Alanson, Earle of Mayne, Harecourt, Drux, Richmond, and Carlell, and Viscount Beaumond. Hee Knighted King Henry the sixt, in the yeare 1425. and marri∣ed to his first wife Anne daughter of Iohn Duke of Burgundy, but by her had no issue; and to his second wife he married Iaquelline, daughter of Peter Earle of S. Paul, and by her had no issue: (she was after married to Ri∣chard Woodiule Earle Riuers, and had issue Elizabeth wife to King Edward the
fourth.) This Iohn as Constable of England, determined the controuersie be∣tweene Reginald Lord Gray of Ruthen, and Sir Edward Hastings Knight, for the bearing of the Armes of Hastings. And at the winning of Vernoyle tooke the Duke of Alanson prisoner, and with the losse of 2100. of his common soldiers, slew of their Enemies fiue Earles, two Viscounts, one and twentie Barons, se∣uen thousand French, and two thousand fiue hundred Scots: and after dyed at Paris, the fourteenth of September, and was buried at Roane in our Ladie Church, An. 1435. vnder a sumptuous Monument; which when Lewis the ele∣uenth, King of France was counselled to deface, he answered saying: What ho∣nor shall it be to Vs, or to you, to breake this rich Monument, and to pull out of the ground the dead bones of him whom in his life time, neither my Father, nor your Pro∣genitors, with all their puissance, were once able to make flye one foote backwards? Wherefore let his bodie now lye in rest, which when he was aliue, would haue disqui∣eted the proudest of vs all. And for the Tombe I assure you it is not so decent nor conuenient as his honor and Acts deserued. Et portoit, France seme & D'engletterre escartelle, a lambell per pale ermyn & azur, aule second 9. de Luces d'or. GEorge Neuill (sonne of Iohn Neuill Marquesse Mounta∣gue) was created Duke of Bedford, and his Father Mar∣quesse Mountague in the tenth yeare of King Edward the fourth: and in the seuenteenth yeare of the said kings reigne, both the saide George and Iohn his Father, were by Acte of Parliament deposed from all their honourable Titles, the words whereof followeth. The King by aduice and assent of his Lords Spiritual and Tem∣porall, and by the Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same ordained, establisheth & enacteth, That from henceforth, the erection and making of Duke, and all the Names of Dignity, giuen to the saide George, or to the saide Iohn Neuill his Fa∣ther, be from henceforth voyde, and of no effect. And that the saide George and his heires from henceforth, be no Dukes, nor Marquesse, Earle, nor Baron, nor be repu∣ted nor taken for no erection or Creation afore made: but of that name of Duke and Marquesse, Earle and Baron, in him and his heires cease, and bee voide and of none effect, the said Erection or Creation nothwithstanding. This George dyed without issue, and was buried at Shrief Huton the fourth of May, 1483. twelue yeeres after his Father, leauing his fiue Sisters his heires, viz. Anne married vnto Sir William Stoner Knight; Elizabeth wife to the Lord Scrope of Vpsall; Margaret married to Sir Iohn Mortimer, and after to Robert Horne; Luce wife to Sir William Fitz-Williams Earle of Southampton, and after wife to Sir Anthony Browne Knight; and Isabell the fift Sister, was married to Sir William Hudleston Knight; all which fiue Sisters had issue. Gueulles, au Saulttur d'argent aulambell gobonne d'argent & d'azur.
I Asper of Hatfield (sonne of Owen Tuder, by  the Widdow of King Henry the fift, and brother to King Hen∣ry the sixt by his mother) was created Earle of Penbroke in the 3. yeare of King Henry the sixt: and in the fift yeare of King Edward the fourth, he was attainted by Parliament, & his Earledome of Penbroke giuen vnto William Lord Herbert, slain after at the battel of Banbury the ninth of King Edw. the fourth. This Iasper, with his Nephew Henry Earle of Rich∣mond returning out of Britaine into England, in the last yeare of the reigne of King Richard the third, who beeing slaine at the battell of Bosworth, 1485. Henry Earle of Richmond, was crowned King by the name of King Henry the seuenth: who did not onely restore this Iasper his Vnckle to the Earledome of Penbroke, but also crea∣ted him Duke of Bedford in the first yeare of his reigne. He died in the yeare of our Lord 1495. and was buried in the Abbey of Kensham, without any lawfull yssue. He had a base daughter named Ellen, married to William Gardner of Lon∣don. Et portoit eschartelle France & D'engletterre au bordur d'azur seme Martlets d'or. SIr Iohn Russell, Knight of the Garter, Controller of the houshold to King Henry the eight, and one of his priuie Councell, was created Lord Russell in the thirty yeare of the said Kings reigne, 1538. and in the third yeare of K. Edward the sixt, he was created Earle of Bedford. This Sir Iohn Russel was before made Lord Admirall, and Lord priuy Seale by King Henry the eight. He married Anne daughter and sole∣heire of Sir Guy Sapcotes Knight; by whom he had issue Fra∣ces Lord Russell, after Earle of Bedford. He died at his house by Iuy bridge in the Strand neere London, and was buried in the parish. Church of Cheyneys, in the yeare 1555. Et portoit, d'argent au Lion rampant de Gueulles arme & lampasse d'azur, au la chef sable charge de trors coquilles d'argent. FRances Lord Russell, and Earle of Bedford (son and heyre of Iohn Earle of Bedford) was Knight of the Garter, and one of the priuy Counsell to Queene Elizabeth. He married two wiues; the first was Magaret daughter of Sir Iohn S. Iohn, and sister of Oliuer Lord S. Iohn of Bletso, by whom hee had issue foure sonnes, and three daughters, that is to say, Edward Lord Russell that dyed without issue; Iohn Lord Russell, se∣cond sonne, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Antho∣ny Cooke Knight, and Widdow of Sir Thomas Hoby Knight, by whom hee had issue two daughters, Elizabeth that dyed without issue; and Anne married to Henry Lord Herbert, son
and heire of Edward Earle of Worcester. Frances Russell the third sonne, after the death of Iohn his Brother, was Lord Russell, and married Iulian daughter of Sir Iohn Forster Knight, Lord Warden of the middle Marchesse against Scot∣land, and was slaine by the Scottes at a day of truce (in the life time of Frances his Father) hauing issue Edward after Earle of Bedford. Sir William Russel, knight, fourth sonne was created Lord Russell of Thornhaugh, in the Tower of London by King Iames, in An. 1603. and had to wife Elizabeth, daughter and heyre of Longe of Chengie in the Countie of Cambridge Esquire. Anne the eldest daughter, was wife to Ambrose Dudley Earle of Warwicke: Margaret the second daughter, was married to George Clifford Earle of Comberland, and had issue Lady Anne Countesse of Dorset: Elizabeth the third Daughter, was married to William Bourcher Earle of Bath, and hath issue Edward, now Lord Fitz-Warren. This Frances Earle of Bedford, married for his second wife, Brid∣get daughter of Iohn Lord Hussee, the Widdow of Henry Manners, Earle of Rut∣land, but by her had no issue. He died the twenty eight of Iuly, in the 27. yeare of the reigne of Queene Elizabeth, and was buried at Cheyneys by his Father, in the yeare of our Lord, 1584. Et portoit, les armes de son Pere'. EDward Lord Russell (Granchilde to Frances Earle of Bed∣ford by his sonne Frances slaine by the Scots) succeeded his Grandfather, and is now Earle of Bedford, 1618. and ma∣ried Luce daughter of Iohn Lord Harington of Exton, and Si∣ster and co-heire of Iohn Lord Harington of Exton, by whom he hath  yssue. Et portoit, d'argent au Lion rampant d'Gueulles, arme & lampasse d'azur, au la chef sable charge de trois coquilles d'argent.
A Catalogue of the Dukes and Earles of Britame and Richmond, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. ALan (sur-named Fergant, or the Red) Earle of Britaine and Richmond, (sonne of Hoel, second sonne of Alan Caignard, by Hawis his Wife, daughter and heire of Alan Duke of Britaine, and great Aunt to William Conquerour) to whom the saide Conqueror in the fourth yeare of his Reigne (at the siedge of Yorke) did giue vnto him and his heires, all the Lands & Ho∣nours, late belonging vnto Earle Edwin in Yorkshire. This Alan Fergant married first, Constance, daughter of William Conquerour, who died without issue. And after he married Ermingard, daughter of Foulk Rechin Earle of Anion, and had issue, Conan, sur-named le Grosse; vnto whom also was giuen the Earledome of Britaine; but the Earledome of Richmond, the saide William Conquerour gaue to his Cousin Alan, sur-named Niger, or the Blacke, (Sonne of Eudo, the sonne of Geffrey, first Duke of Britaine of that name, by Hawis his wife, daughter of Richard the first Duke of Normandy.) This Alan Fergant di∣ed in the yeare of our Lord, 1093. and was buried in the Monastery of Rhedon, in the seuenth yeare of King William Rufus. Et porteit, eschiquettee d'or & d'azur, à canton ermyn. STephen Derien Earle of Ponthiur, Lord of Goelo and Tre∣guer, was after his Brother Alan the Blacke, the third Earle of Richmond, vnto whom King Henry the first did giue Wal∣tham with the Soke in the County of Lincolne. Hee married Hawis, Countesse of Guingamp, and had issue, Alan sur-named the Sauag; Henry, Earle of Ponthieur; Geffrey, sur-named Bot∣terell, and others. Henry, Earle of Ponthieur had issue, Alan, to whom King Iohn did confirme Waltham with the Soke in these words. I Iohn, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and Earle of Aniou, &c. Know
you, that I haue giuen and granted vnto Alan, sonne of Henry of Britaine, sonne of Earle Stephen, Waltham with the Soke, &c. Witnesse, William of London, Henry of Winchester, Bishops; and Geffrey Fitz-Piers Earle of Essex, and others, of which Henry, is descended Lords Fitz-Alans of Bidall. This Stephen Derien (as Somer∣set Glouer hath) died in the yeare, 1104 and was buried at Begar, and his heart was buried in the Monastery of S. Maries at Yorke, as he himselfe desired. ALan (sur-named the Sauage, Lord of Auangour, sonne of Stephen Derien, was after the death of his father, the 4. Earle of Richmond; and married Bertha, eldest daughter and co-heire of Conan le Grosse, in whose right hee was the third Earle of Britaine, and had issue, Conan le Petit. This Alan was faithfull to King Stephen, in his warres with Mauld the Em∣presse; and besiedged the Citty of Lincolne in her behalfe, and Henry Duke of Normandy her sonne: Hee dyed in the yeare, 1166. and was buried in Britaine, in the thirteenth yeare of King Henry the second. COnanle Petit (sonne of Alan the Sauage) was the fourth Earle of Britaine, and the fift Earle of Richmond: He mar∣ried Margaret, daughter of Henry Earle of Huntington, and sister of William, King of Scots, by whom he had issue, one only daughter named Constance, his heire, who was first mar∣ried to Geffrey Plantagenet, third sonne to King Henry the se∣cond; afterwards shee married Randolph Earle of Chester (from whom shee was diuorced:) her third husband, was Guydo, Viscount of Torraine, by whom shee had issue, two daughters; Alice the eldest, was married vnto Peter de Dreux, Duke of Britaine; and Katherine the second daughter, was married to Andrew de Vetre. All which three husbands, the said Constance honoured with the Title of Earle of Britaine and Richmond. This Conan, founded the Monastery of Richmond, and was there buried, in Anno, 1170. Et portoit, les armoiries de Britaine, ermin.
GEffrey Plantagenet, (third Son of King Henry the second) in the 17. yeare of his fathers reigne, married Constance, daughter and sole heire of Conan le Petit; in whose right, hee was both Earle of Britaine and Richmond, and had issue, Ar∣thur, and Elianor, whom King Iohn kept in prison in the Ca∣stle of Bristow, where she dyed a Virgin, in Anno, 1241. and was buried in the Monastery of Ambresbury; vnto which Monastery, she gaue the Mannour of Mekesham, with the ap∣purtenances. This Geffrey dyed, and was buried at Paris in France, the 33. yeare of King Henry the second, beeing but twenty and eight yeares old. Et portoit, gueulles trois Leopards d'or. Qui sont composees des armes de Guyenne & de Normandy ensemble. ARthur Plantagenet, Earle of Britaine and Richmond, (Son of Geffrey aforesaid, by Constance his wife, the heire of Britaine) was proclaimed King of England, and Duke of Nor∣mandy, after the death of King Richard the first, his Vnckle; and being ayded by King Philip of France, whose daughter he had married, made warres against King Iohn his Vnckle; & being taken prisoner at the Castle of Mirobel in Norman∣die, was carried to Roane Castle, where leaping from the Wall thereof, with intent to escape, was drowned in the Ditch, without issue, in the yeare, 1202. Et portoit, gueulles trois Leopards passant enpale d'or, au lambell de cinq points d'azur. GVY, or Guydo, Viscount of Thouars (second husband to Constance the heire of Britaine) was also in her right the next Earle of Britaine and Richmond, and by her had issue, two daughters his heires, Alice and Katherine; Alice was married to Peter de Dreux; and Katherine was the wife of Andrew de Vitre in Britaine. Et portoit, d'or cinq fleurs de liz d'azur au quanton de gueulles.
RAndoll, sur-named Blundeuille, the sixt Earle of Chester, (third husband to Constance, the heire of Britaine and Richmond, and daughter and heire of Conan le Petit) was in right of the saide Constance his wife (and permission of king Iohn) Earle of Richmond, Anno, 1204. and was after diuorced from the said Constance for her incontinency, hauing no issue by her: he dyed at his Castle of Wallingford, in the 17. yeare of king Henry the third. Et portoit, d'azur, à trois gerbes d'or. PEter Brian Earle of Dreux (after the diuorce, and surren∣der of Randoll Blundeuile Earle of Chester) was both D. of Britaine and Earle of Richmond, in right of Alice his wife, daughter and co-heire of Guy, Viscount of Thouars, and Con∣stance his wife, daughter and heire of Conan le Petit, as by this Charter following it doth appeare. Petrus Dux Britanniae & Comes Richmond, habet honorem de Richmond sibi redditum quem Ranulphus Comes Cestriae & Lincolne prius habuit. Teste Rege apud Nantes, 22. Maij. Anno. 1229. He had issue, Iohn Duke of Britaine, and Ioland that was married vnto Hugh de Brun, Earle of the Marches of Picardy. PEter of Sauoy (Vnckle to Queene Elianor, wife to K. Hen∣ry the third) came into England in the yeare, 1241. At which time, king Henry the third gaue him the Earledome of Richmond, and made him Chiefe of his priuy Counsell, and in the 29. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, this Peter began to build the house, now called the Sauoy, in the Strand neere London. This Peter surrendred the Earledome of Richmond, and after dyed in Sauoy, in the yeare, 1267. He married Ag∣nes, daughter and heire of Aimon, Prince of Falcianack, and had issue, Beatrix, wife to Guy, sonne of Andrew, Dolphin of Vienna. Et portoit, d'or à l'aigle de sable portant à l'escusson barre de 10. d'or & sable, à le couronne in band vert.
IOhn de Dreux (sonne of Peter Brien) had the Dukedome of Brittaine, and Earledome of Richmond, made ouer vnto him in these words. De comitatu Richmond recepto in excambi∣um a Petro de Sabaudia & concessi Iohanni Duci Britanniae. Te∣ste Rex, apud Northampt. 5. Maij. pat. Anno. 50. Hen. 3. So that I hold this Iohn, to be both Duke of Britaine, and Earle of Richmond (although some Writers deny the same:) He mari∣ed Blanch, daughter of Theobald, King of Nauarre, by whom he had issue, Iohn the second of that name, Duke of Britaine, and Earle of Richmond. He dyed in the yeare, 1286. Et portoit, eschiquette d'or & d'azur au quanton de ermyn. IOhn de Dreux (sonne of Iohn de Dreux afore-saide) was Duke of Brittaine and Earle of Richmond, in the 44. yeare of king Henry the third, and married Beatrix the saide kings daughter, and had issue, Arthur Duke of Britaine, Iohn Earle of Richmond, Peter and Henry that both dyed young; Alice, Abbesse of Fount-Euer Mary married to the Earle of S. Pole, and Blanch the third daughter, was wife to Philip, sonne and heire of the Earle of Arthoys. This Iohn dyed at Lions in France, in the yeare 1305. with the fall of a wall. Et portoit, eschequette d'or & d'azur, à bordure gucuiles, charge auleopards d'or, au quanton ermyn.
ARthur Duke of Britaine (sonne and heire of Iohn, the se∣cond Duke of Britaine of that name) was after his Fa∣thers death, Duke of Britaine: he married two wiues, the first was Beatrix, Viscountest of Limogen, and Lady of Auennos in Hennault, by whom hee had issue, Iohn Duke of Britaine, that dyed without issue, and Guy, Earle of Pentebria (who married Iane, daughter and heire of Henry de Auangour, and had issue, Ioane, wife to Charles Earle of Bloys, nephew to Phi∣lip de Valois, King of France.) The said Arthur tooke for his second wife, Yoland, daughter and heire of Almericke Earle Montford, by whom he had issue, Iohn Breno Earle Mount∣ford, and after Duke of Britaine; Blanch, wife to Robert de Flanders Earle of Marle; Alice, Countesse de Vendosme; and Beatrix married to Guy Earle of Lauall. This Arthur died in the yeare, 1312. as Bertram de Ar∣gentre affirmeth. Et portoit, eschiquette d'or & d'azur, à bordure gueulles chargé an leopards d'or, au quanton ermyns. IOhn de Dreux (second sonne of the second Iohn Duke of Britaine, and Beatrix his wife, daughter of King Henry the third) and second Brother to Arthur Duke of Britaine a∣foresaide, sate in Parliament helde at Westminster, by the name and title of Iohn de Britaine, Earle of Richmond, the 34. of King Edward the first, and so continued vntill the ninth of King Edward the third, and did his homage at New-Castle for the saide Earledome, 1332. Hee built the body of the Church of the Gray-Fryars in Newgate-Market, in the 34. yeare of King Edward the first, which cost him three hundred pounds, and gaue many rich Iewels and Orna∣ments to be vsed in the same; he dyed without issue, and was buried in the said Church, the ninth of King Edward the third. M. Milles, in Somersets Booke, saith he died in Little-Britaine, and was buried at Vanys, Anno, 1334. Et portoit, les armoiries de son frere. Arthur.
IOhn de Dreux, sonne and heire of Arthur Duke of Britaine, after his fathers death, was Duke of Britaine, and after the death of Iohn his Vnckle, Earle of Richmond. This Iohn had three Wiues, and dyed in Britaine without issue, Anno 1340. leauing Iohn Mountford his halfe brother by the father, to succeed him in the Dukedom of Britaine, who had issue, Iohn the Valiant. Et portoit, ermyn. RObert de Arthoys, a Noble-man borne, of the blood roy∣all of Erance, descended from another Robert, sonne of Lewis the eight, and brother to Saint Lewis King of France: he was Councellor vnto Philip de Valois, King of France, who sentenced the Earledome of Arthoys from the said Robert, vn∣to Mauld, Countesse of Burgundy (the saide Roberts Aunt) which sentence so discontented the saide Robert, that in his greefe he vttered these words: By mee was Philip made King, and by me he shall be deposed againe. For this, was this Robert proclaimed traytor throughout all France, and was driuen to flye into England, to King Edward the third, who kindly receiued him, and created him Earle of Richmond, in the 16. yeare of his Reigne. This Robert was the first that mooued King Edward to make his title and claime to the Crowne of France, in the right of Queene Isa∣bell his Mother: he was Admirall of the English Fleet, and Generall of the wars in France; and was after hurt in the head at the siedge of the Citty of Vannes in Britaine, and being conuayed to London for the cure of his hurts, shortly after died there, in the yeare, 1342. and was most honourably buried in Saint Paules Church in London; the King being at his Funerall, did weare blackes. Et pertoit, seme' de France ou lambell de gueulles, chastelle' d'or. IOhn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, (fourth sonne of King Edward the third) was by his Father in the yeare of our Lord, 1342. made Earle of Richmond; and in the 46. yeare of his said Fathers Reigne, he surrendred the said Earledome of Richmond againe. He married Blanch, daughter and co-heire of Henry Duke of Lancaster, and had issue, King Henry the fourth (as in the Title of Lancaster is more at large.) Et portoit, escartelle France seme' & D'engleterre à vne lambell d'ermyn.
IOhn Breno, third sonne of Arthur Duke of Britaine, begot∣ten of his second wife Ioland, Countesse of Mountford, Daughter and heire of Almericke Earle Mountford; whome Phillip de Valoys King of France did confiscate in his Earle∣dome of Mountford, because hee ayded King Edward the 3. In consideration whereof, King Edward the third gaue vnto this Iohn the Earledome of Richmond in England. He sate in Parliament held at Westminster in the 34. yeare of the sayde Kings reigne, by the name and Title of Iohn Earle of Rich∣mond. He was bound by Indenture, bearing date 1373. to serue King Edward the third in his warres in France and Bri∣taine, against Phillip of Valoys: in which Indenture, he is stiled Iohn Duke of Britaine, Earle Mountford and Richmond. He married Ioan daugh∣ter of Charles King of Nauarre, after married to King Henry the fourth of Eng∣land. This Iohn had issue, Iohn Mountford surnamed the Valiant; and a daugh∣ter named Ioan, wife to Rafe Basset of Drayton. This Iohn was taken prisoner at Nantes by the Earle of Bloys, and dyed after in prison at Paris in France. IOhn Mountford (surnamed the Valiant, sonne and heire of Iohn Breno) after the death of his Father was Duke of Bri∣taine, and Earle of Richmond: which Earledome hee was de∣posed of by Acte of Parliament, the fourth of King Richard the second. He married Mary daughter of King Edward the third; and had issue, Iohn Duke of Britaine, sur-named the Sage (who had issue Peter and Frances, both Dukes of Bri∣taine, that dyed without issue;) Richard Earle of Estamps, and Arthur the third of that name, who was also Duke of Brit∣taine, and Earle of Richmond, after his two Nephewes, Peter and Frances. This Iohn Mountford slew the Earle of Bloys. Et portoit, esche quettee d'or & d'azur, vne border D'engleterre, a' quanton de Britaine. RAphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland, was made Earle of Richmond for terme of life by King Henry the fourth, and dyed the fourth of King Henry the sixt, as in the title of Westmerland is more at large. Gueulles au saulteur d'argent.
IOhn D. of Bedford, third son of King Henry the fourth, was Regent of France, Duke of Bedford, Aniou, and Alawson, Earle of Mayne, Harecourt, Dreux, Richmond, and Carlell, and Viscount Beaumont. He died the xiii. of Henry the sixt, as in the Title of Bedford is more at large. EDmond of Hadham (the place of his birth) sonne of Owen Teuder by Queene Katherine, and halfe brother by the mother to King Henry 6. was created Earle of Richmond at Reading in the 31. yeare of the said Kings reigne, notwith∣standing that Arthur Duke of Britaine was then liuing, and did vse that Title. He married Margaret, daughter and heire of Iohn Beaufort, Duke of Somerset (Granchilde to Iohn of Gaunt, by his sonne Iohn) and by her had issue, Henrie Earle of Richmond, after King of England, by the name of King Henry the seuenth. This Margaret in the yeare 1491. by the commandement and authority of King Henry the seuenth, her sonne, made the Orders (yet extant) for great Estates of Ladies and Noblewomen for their precedence, Attires, and wearing of Barbes at Funerals, ouer the chin, vpon the chin, and vnder the same; which Noble & good Orders at this day is greatly profaned and abused, by euerie meane and common woman, to the great wrong and dishonour of honourable Estates. This Edmond dyed in the yeare 1456. & was buried in the Gray Friars church in Carmarden in Wales, 35. of Hen. 6. And Margaret his wife died in the yeare 1509. and was honorably buried in the Abbey of Westminster. Et portoit, escartelle France & D'engleterre a'vne bordur d'azur, seme' sturs de liz, & Marlettes d'or RIchard Duke of Glocester (brother to King Edward the fourth) did stile himselfe Earle of Richmond. And Mills in Glouer Somersets booke, page 614. sayeth, That this Ri∣chard had the saide Earledome of Richmond giuen vnto him, and the heyres of his body, the twelfth day of August, in the second yeare of King Edward the fourth. Hee bare for his Armes Escartelle France, & d'engleterre a vne lambel ermyn charge au trois quantons de gueulles.
HEnry Earle of Richmond (sonne of Edmond of Hadham, and Margaret his wife, Countesse of Richmond) in the 11. yeare of King Edward the fourth, fledde with his Vnckle Iasper Earle of Penbroke into Britaine, where they remained vntil the third yeare of the reigne of King Richard the third; and then returning again, landed at Milford Hauen in Wales, and fought a battaile with the said King Richard at Bosworth Field, where he slew the said Richard, and after was crowned King of England, by the name of King Henry the seauenth. He married Elizabeth, daughter and heyre of King Edward the fourth, and had issue, Prince Arthur that dyed without issue, and Henry Duke of Yorke, who was after King of Eng∣land, by the name of king Henry the eight. Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere'. HEnry Fitz-Roy, base sonne of King Henry the eight, (be∣gotten of the Lady Talboys, daughter of Sir Iohn Blount, Knight) was in the 17. yeare of his Fathers reigne, created Duke of Richmond, &c. He married Mary, daughter of Tho∣mas Howard Duke of Norfolke, but by her had no issue. Hee dyed at S. Iames house beyond Charing-Crosse, beeing but 16. yeares of age, and was buried at Thetford in Norfolke, the 28. of King Henry the eight (as Grafton hath;) Others haue, that he lyes buried at Framingham in Norfolke. He bare for his Armes, France & D'engleterre' a' bordur escartelle' ermyn & compone d'argent & d'a∣zur, abatun sinester d'argent, a' vne Eschutcheon de pretence escartelle' gu∣culles & varrey d'or & vert, sur la tout, au Lion rampant d'argent, au chefe d'azur, vne chastel entre deux testes du cerf d'argent. LEwis Stewart, Duke of Lenox, and Lord Aubigny, created Earle of Richmond and Baron of Setterington in Eng∣land, by Letters pattents vnder the great Seale of England, (without any ceremony of creation) in the yeare, 1614. He was also Lord Darnley, rebant and Methuen, Lord Great Chamberlaine and Admirall of Scotland, Lord Steward of the houshold to King Iames, and one of his Maiesties most honourable priuy Counsell, Knight of the Garter, and one of the Commissioners for the Office of Earle Marshall of England, 1618. Et portoit, France a' la bo de gueulles, fermaille d'or de huit pieces, escar∣telle d'or, à la face eschiquette d'argent & de azur, bordure de gueulles, sur le tout, d'argent au saulteur de gueulles, entre quatre quintesuilles de mesme.
A Catalogue of the Earles of Bath, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. PHilibert de Chandew a Britaine, borne in France, a kinde friend to King Henry the seauenth in the time of his ba∣nishment out of England; which to requite, the said King in the first yeare of his Reigne, from the degree of a Baron, cre∣ated him Earle of Bath, and gaue him also a hundred markes yearely, issuing out of the profits of Somersetshire & Dorset. IOhn Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin of Tauestoke in Denonshire (sonne of Foulke Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin of Tauestoke) was created Earle of Bath at White-Hall the ninth of Iuly, in the 28. yeare of King Henry the eight. He married Cecily, daughter of Giles Lord Daubeny, and sister and heyre of Hen∣ry Lord Daubeny, Earle of Bridgwater, and had issue, Iohn Bourchier, second Earle of Bath, and two daughters; Eliza∣beth the eldest, was married vnto Sir Iohn Chichester of De∣uonshire, knight: Dorothy the second daughter, was married to Sir Iohn Fulford, knight. This Iohn the second Earle of Bath, dyed in the 31. yeare of King Henry the eight. Et portoit, d'argent à la Croix eugreslee de gueulles accompaignee de quatre bouces de sable, à lambel d'azur chargee de neaf fleurs de liz d'or. Iohn Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin, the 2. of that name, and 3. Earle of Bath, married to his first Wife, Elizabeth, daugh∣ter of Sir Walter Hungerford, knight, and had issue, Elizabeth. His second wife was Elianor, daughter of George Mannors, Lord Ros, by whom he had issue, Iohn Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin that died before his father, sir George Bourchier, knight, and Henry; he had also two daughters, Mary the eldest, was married vnto Hugh Wyot of Exeter; Cecily the second daugh∣ter, was married to Thomas Peyton, Customer of Plimouth. This Iohn married to his third wife, Margaret, daughter and heire of Iohn Donington, Esquire, and had issue, Susan & Brid∣get; Bridget was married to  Price of Montgomerishire in Wales. This Earle dyed in the third yeare of Queene Elizabeth. Et portoit, les amoiies de son pere.
WIlliam Bourchier (sonne and heire of Iohn Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin that died before his Father) grand∣childe to Iohn Bourchier second Earle of Bath, was the third Earle of Bath, of that sur-name, and Lord Lieutenant of De∣uonshire and Cornwall, married Elizabeth, daughter of Fran∣cis Russell Earle of Bedford, and had issue, Richard, how Lord Fitz-Warin, and Frances a daughter, 1618. Quiporta, d'argent à la croix engreslee de gueulles entre quatre Bouces de sa∣ble, à lambell d'azur chargee de neuf fleurs de liz d'or. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Bridg-Water, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. HEnry Lord Daubeny (sonne of Giles Lord Daubeny, Chamberlaine to king Henry the seuenth) on the 21. day of Iuly, in the 30. yeare of king Henry the eight, at his Mannour of Ocking, was created Earle of Bridg-Water in Somersetshire; and married Katherine, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, and the wid∣dow of Sir Rice ap Thomas, Knight of the Garter, and dyed without issue, leauing Cecily his sister and heire married vnto Iohn Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin, and first Earle of Bath. Et portoit, gueulles cinq Lozenges en face d'argent. IOhn Egerton, Knight of the Bath, at the Coronation of king Iames, second sonne and heire Male of Thomas Egerton, Ba∣ron of Ellesmore, Viscount Brackley, and Lord Chancellor of England, was by Letters Patents, bearing date, 1618. made Earle of Bridg-water. He married Lady Frances, daugh∣ter and co-heire of Ferdinando, late Earle of Derby, and hath issue, Iames, Viscount Brackely, and nine daughters, viz. Frances, Arbella, Elizabeth, Cecily, Mary, Penelope, Katherine, Magdalen, and Anne.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Boughan, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. HEnry Lord Beaumont of Fokingham, came into England with Queene Isabell, wife to king Ed∣ward the second, and married Alice, daughter and one of the heyres of Alexander Boughan, Earle of Boughan in Scotland, (which Alexan∣der was sonne of Alexander Comen, Earle Boughan by Eliza∣beth his wife, third daughter and one of the heires of Roger Quincy Earle of Winchester) & had issue, Iohn L. Bello-Monte, who married Elianor, daughter to Henry Earle of Lancaster, and had issue, Henry Lord Beaumont. This Henry Lord Beaumont of Fokingham, sate in Parliament held at Westmin∣ster the ninth of King Edward the third, by the name and ti∣tle of Henry de Bello-Monte Earle of Boughan, and so continued vnto the thir∣teenth of the same kings Reigne. Et portoit, d'azur flurette au lion rampanr d'or à vne baston gobonne d'argent & de gueulles. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles Palatine of Chester, with their Armes, Wiues, and Children. HVgh, sur-named Lupas, a Norman borne, (sonne of Richard, Viscount of Aurenges in Normandy, by Margaret his wife, halfe sister by the Mother to William Conquerour) came into England with William the first, who gaue vnto him and his heires, the Earl∣dome of Chester, to hold as freely of him by the sword, as he the said William held England by the Crowne. This Earle Hugh in the 12. yeare of king William Ruphus, conquered Anglesey in Wales, he married Ermentrude, daughter of  and had issue, Richard the second Earle of Chester, Ro∣bert, Abbot of S. Edmonsbury, and Otwell that was Tutor to the Children of king Henry the first: he dyed, and was buri∣ed by Ermentrude his Countesse, in the Abbey of S. Werburge in Chester, which was of his owne foundation, 1103. Et portoit, d'azut à vn test de Lou erased d'argent.
RIchard, sonne of Hugh Lupus, after the death of his Fa∣ther, was the second Earle of Chester, after the Norman Conquest, who in the 19. yeare of King Henry the first, was married in France, to Lucy, daughter of Stephen, Earle of Bloys and Champaine, by Adela his wife, daughter of William Con∣queror; and in the 20. yeare of King Henry the first, hee with his wife, the Kings sonne, and daughter, and Otwell his Bro∣ther, and others, to the number of 160. persons were drow∣ned, comming out of Normandy into England, without issue; leauing Randoll Meschines his cousin-germane by Margaret his Fathers sister, to succeed him in the Earledome of Chester. Et portoit, d'gueulles crusuly d'or, a'un teste de Lou craze d'argent. RAndolphe, sur-named Meschines, sonne of Randolphe Mes∣chines Earle of Carlell, by Margaret, the sister of Hugh Lupus the first Earle of Chester, was the third Earle Palatine of Chester after the Conquest. He married Lucy, daughter of Algar the Saxon, Earle of Leicester, and sister to Edwin Earle of Mercia, and Mocar, Earle of Northnmberland, who before was the Wife of Roger Romara, and Mother of William Roma∣ra Earle of Lincolne. This Randolphe surrendred Carlell, his Fathers Earledome, to King Henry the first; and dyed in the yeare, 1129. and was buried at Chester, in the 30. yeare of the saide Kings Reigne; leauing issue, Randolphe sur-named Ger∣nonijs, the fourth Earle of Chester; and William, Earle of Cambridge; and a daughter named Adeliza, married to Richard Fitz-Gilbert, Lord of Tunbridge, Auncestor to the Earles of Clare, Glocester, and Penbroke, (as William Gemiticensis affirmeth.) Et portoit, d'or a'vn Lion rampant de gueulles la cowe estant. RAndolphe, sur-named Gernonijs, sonne of Randolphe Mes∣chines, was after his father, the fourth Earle Palatine of Chester after the Conquest: hee, with his Brother William, Earle of Cambridge, was Witnesse to the Charter of Alexan∣der Bishop of Lincolne, of his gift of the Island of Hafreholme, to the religious Nuns of S. Maries, of the order of Sister-sen∣ces, 1139. the fourth of King Stephen. And in the yeare, 1141. this Randoll, and Robert Earle of Glocester, tooke the saide King prisoner at Lincolne. He married Mauld, daughter of Robert Earle of Glocester, base sonne of King Henry the first; by whom he had issue, Hugh the fift Earle Palatine of Chester, and Richard; and died poysoned by the practise of his Wife and William Peuerell Lord of Nottingham, in the yeare, 1156. Et portoit, de gueulles au Lion rampant d'argent à la cowe estant.
HVgh, sur-named Kiuilioc, sonne of Randolphe Gernons, was the fift Earle Palatine of Chester; he married Bertrade, daughter of Simon Earle Mountford and Eureux in Norman∣die, and had issue, Randolphe Blundeuile, the fixt Earle Palatine of Chester, and Earle of Lincolne; and foure daughters, Mauld the eldest was married to Dauid Earle of Anguish, Gallaway, and Huntington: Mabell the second daughter, was married to William de Albenieo Earle of Arundell: Agnes the 3. daugh∣ter, was married to William Ferrers, Earle of Derby & Lord of Chartley: and Hawis the fourth daughter, was wife to Ro∣bert Quincy Earle of Winchester, & had issue, Margaret, mar∣ried to Iohn Lacie Earle of Lincolne; and Mabell, wife to Hugh Lord Audley. This Hugh died the 27. of King Henry the second, 1180. Et portoit, d'azur à six garbes d'or. RAndolphe, sur-named Blundeuile (sonne & heire of Hugh Kiuilioc) was the 6. Earle Palatine of Chester, as also Earle of Lincolne, whom K. Hen. the 2. made knight, in the 33. yeare of his reigne, and gaue him in marriage, Constance the onely daughter and heire of Conan, Duke of Little Britaine, & Earle of Richmond in England (the widdow of Geffrey his son) with the Dutchy of Britaine, & Earldome of Richmond: and in the second yeare of K. Iohn, this Randolph was diuorced from the said Constance, and after married Clemence, daughter of Willi∣am de Fengeres, and sister of Geffrey. He had also a third wife, which was Margaret, daughter of Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, and Constable of England, but had no issue by any of them. This Randolph was restored to the Earldome of Lincolne, in the 3. yeare of K. Hen. 3. as Cousin and next Heire of William Romara Earle of Lincolne: and in the 9. yeare of the said kings reigne, he was a Witnesse to the kings charter, of lands that he gaue to the Abbey of Peterborow, by the name of Randolphe Earle of Chester & Lincolne; and after his returne out of the Holy-Land, he died at his Castle of Wallingford, in the 17. yeare of K. Hen. the 3. and was buried at Chester; leauing his foure sisters his heires, before mentioned. This Randolph was of great fame and esteeme in the times of King Henry the second, King Richard the first, King Iohn, & King Henry the third: In which time he built the Castles of Bee∣ston and Chartley, and the Monastery of de la Croix. Et portoit, d'azur à trois garbes d'or.
IOhn (by the place of his birth) sur-named the Scot, was Earle of Huntingdon and Cambridge, by his Father Dauid▪ Earle of Anguish and Huntingdon aforesaid, (which Danid, was brother to William, king of Scots) and by Mauld his Mo∣ther, eldest sister and co-heire of Randolphe Blundeuile Earle of Chester, he was also the seuenth Earle Palatine of Chester. Also in the 21. yeare of king Henry the third, he was restored to the Earledome of Northampton, as cousin and heire of Si∣mon Seintlize Earle of Northampton; and in the 22. of the said Kings reign, he died at Darnall, & was buried at Chester, with∣out issue, hauing married Helyn, the daughter of Llewellyn ap Iorworth Prince of North-Wales. Which Earldome of Chester, King Henry the 3. 1238. assumed into his owne hands, and gaue other lands to the saide foure Si∣sters of Iohn (surnamed the Scot) afore named; the issue of whom, after clay∣med the kingdome of Scotland, in King Edward the firsts time, since which time, the Princiality of Chester, hath beene vnited to the Principality of Wales, by Acte of Parliament held at Westminster, the 21. of King Richard the second; at which time (as Somerset Herald hath) the King created William Brugs, Chester Herald by his Letters Patents, sealed with his Seale of the said Principality. Et portoit, d'or à trois pens d'gueulles. EDmond (sur-named Crowch-backe) second sonne of king Henry the third, was by his Father created Earle of Che∣ster; which Title and Earledome, hee surrendred to his Bro∣ther Prince Edward, and was after made Earle of Lancaster; and after the attaindore of Simon Mountford, & Robert Earle Ferrars, he was also made Earle of Leicester and Derby, as in the Title of Lancaster is more at large. Et portoit, les armes D'engleterre, au lambell de France. EDward, first sonne of King Edward the first, was Prince of Wales, Earle of Cornwall and Chester, and after King of England, by the name of King Edward the second. This Prince Edward, in Anno, 1298. vpon complaint made by Doctor Langton, then Byshop of Chester, was committed to prison; and Pierce of Gaueston banished England, and not to returne againe vpon paine of death. Et portoit, D'engleterre au lambell d'argent.
EDward, first sonne and heire of king Edward , was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and  of Chester and Flint, and after, king of England, by the name of king Edward the third. Et portoit, D'engleterre au lambell d'argent. EDward, sur-named the blacke Prince, sonne and heire of king Edward the third, was Duke of Cornwall, and Aqui∣taine, and Earle of Chester and Flint. This Edward died be∣fore his Father, 1376. and was buried at Canterbury. Et portoit, escartelle France seme & D'engleterre, au lambell d'argent. RIchard of Burdeaux, sonne and heire of Edward the black Prince, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester, and after, king of England, by the name of king Richard the second. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. HEnry of Monmouth, sonne and heire of king Henry the fourth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, & Earle of Chester, and after, king of England, by the name of king Henry the fift, as more at large is set downe in the Title of Cornwall. This Henry was dismissed of being President of the kings priuy Counsell, for striking the then Lord chiefe Iu∣stice. Et portoit, escartelle, France seme & D'engleterre, au lambell d'argent.
HEnry Plantagenet, sonne and heire of king Henry the fift was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and  ∣ster, and after king of England, by the name of  the sixt. Et portoit, France & D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward Plantagenet, sonne and heire of king Henry the 6. was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Che∣ster. This young Prince was murdred at Tewkesbury, 1471. & there buried, as in the title of Cornwall is more at large. Et portoit, France & D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward, sonne and heire of king Edward the fourth, was borne Duke of Cornwall; and after, in the yeare, 1470. was by Parliament created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester; and was after king of England, by the name of king Edward the fift, and was murdered in the Tower of Lon∣don. Et portoit, France & D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward, sonne and heire of king Richard the third, was al∣so Duke of Cornwall; and in the first yeare of his fathers Reigne, he was created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester; and after dyed without issue.
ARthur, sonne and heire of king Henry the seuenth, vvas Duke of Cornwall; and in the fifte yeare of his Fathers reigne, he was created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester, and dyed without issue, being but 14. yeares of age. Et portoit, escartelle & D'engleterre, au lambell d'argent. HEnry, second son to King Henry the seauenth, was Duke of Yorke, and after the death of Arthur his brother, was created Prince of Wales and Earle of Chester, in the 19. yeare of his Fathers reigne; and was after king of England, by the name of king Henry the eight. Et portoit, France & D'engleterre, escartelle au lambel d'argent EDward, sonne and heire of king Henry the eight, was D. of Cornwall, and after created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester; he was after King of England, by the name of king Edward the sixt. Et portoit, France & D'engleterre escartelle, au lambel d'argent. HEnry Frederick, sonne and heire of Iames, King of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland; the fourth of Iune, 1610. was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester, and died without issue, 1612. Et portoit, les armes d'engleterre an lambell d'argent.
CHarles, second sonne of Iames, King of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland, being Duke of Albany, Marques of Ormount, Earle Ros, and Lord of Ardmanoch, was Created Duke of Yorke at White-hall, the sixt of Ianuary, 1604. and afterwards at the same place, the 4. of Nouember 1616. he was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles and Dukes of Cornwall, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RObert Earle Mortaigne, sonne of Harlowyn de Co∣mitis Villa, and Herlot his wife, Mother of William Conqueror, who coming into England with the said Conqueror, had giuen him the Earledome of Cornwall, and made Earle thereof. He maried Mauld, daugh∣ter of Roger Montgomery, Earle of Shrewsbury and Arundell; by whom he had issue, William Earle Mortaigne and Corne∣wall, and Mauld wife to the Earle of Tolouse, who had issue a daughter named Helen, married to William Duke of Aqui∣tame. This Robert was slaine in Northumberland, in the yeare, 1087. WIlliam Earle Mortaigne in Normandy, sonne of Robert aforesaide, was after his Father the second Earle of Cornwall, who with Robert de Bellismo, William Estoteuile, and William Crispin, did aide Robert Curthose Duke of Normandy, against king Hen. 1. his brother, at the battell of Trenchbray in Normandy; where they were taken prisoners in the eight yeare of the said kings reigne: the said William being before disinherited, and his Earldome giuen vnto Stephen, sonne of the Earle of Champaigne, (who was after King of England) and were sent ouer sea into England, to be kept in perpetual prison; Robert Duke of Normandy being sent to the castle of Cardiffe in Wales, had his eyes put out; and this William became a Monke at Bermondsey in Southwarke, and there dyed without issue. His Armes, as Glouer Sowerset hath, is, d'hermines au chief endented de gueulles.
REginald, base sonne of king Henry the first, begotten of his Concubine, the daughter and co-heire of Robert Cor∣bet, Lord of Alencester in the County of Warwick, was made the third Earle of Cornwall, in the fift yeare of king Stephen. He maried Beatrice, & had issue, 4. daughters his heires: Hawis the eldest, was married to Richard de Riueris, the third Earle of Deuonshire, and Lord of the Isle of Wight; Matild married Robert Earle of Mellent; Vrsul the third daughter, was wife to Walter Dunstanuile, Baron of Castlecombe; and Sarah the fourth daughter, was married to the Viscount of Lymocense. He had also issue by his Concubine Beatrix de Vannes, a sonne sur-named, Henry filius Comitis, who dyed in Gasconie, with∣out issue. This Reginald died at Cicester, in the yeare, 1176. as Robert Montencis hath; and was buried at Redding. Et portoit, gueulles à deux lions passant gardant d'or, à baston sinester d'azur. RIchard Plantagenet, (sur-named Cuer-de-Lyon) the third sonne of king Henry the second, was Earle of Poictiers, and the fourth Earle of Cornwall, as doth appeare by the Corporation of the Towne of Helleston in Cornwall. He was after the death of Henry his brother, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and writ himselfe king of Ierusalem. He con∣quered Cipers, and died of a shot out of a Crosse-bow, at the fiedge of Limosin in Britaine, in the yeare, 1199. He married Berengaria, daughter of Sanchius, King of Nauarre, but by her had no issue: he had a base sonne, named Philip. I haue his Seale of Armes to a Charter, wherein is a Lyon rampant onely. IOhn, (sur-named Without Land) fourth sonne of king Henry the second; first married Alice, daughter and one of the heires of Hubert, Earle of Moriton, in Anno, 1172. In whose right, his father made him Earle of Moriton, and after, Lord of Ireland: this Alice died without issue; after whose death, he married to his second wife, Isabell, third daughter and one of the heires of William Earle of Glocester, from whom he was diuorced, without issue. He was also Earle of Glocester (and after king of England) and by king Richard the first his bro∣ther, Earle of Cornwall, Lancaster, and Somerset, Lord of the honours of Wallingford, Tikell, Marlesborough, and Ludgar∣shall. Lastly, this Iohn married to his third wife, Isabell, daugh∣ter of Aimer, Earle of Engolesmi, by whom he had issue, king Henry the third, & Richard, Earle of Cornwall, &c. Et portoit, gueulles à trois leopards d'or à baston d'azur.
RIchard, second sonne of King Iohn, in the eleuenth yeare of King Henry the third, his brother, was created Earle of Poictou and Cornwall; and in the twelfth yeare of the said Kings reigne, the king gaue him all the Lands in England, which were Reginald Dampmartins Earle of Bologines. And in the yeare, 1257. he was by the Princes of Germany, chosen king of the Romaines, and crowned at Aquisgrane. Hee did write himselfe, Richard, King of the Romaines, and alwayes Augustus, and married to his first wife, Isabell, sister and one of the heires of William Marshall, the younger Earle of Pen∣broke, and had issue, Iohn that dyed young, Henry slaine by Guy and Simon, sonnes of Simon Mountfort Earle of Leicester, in the Church of S. Siluester in Viterbium in Italy, 1272. in reuenge of their Fa∣thers death, that was slaine in the Barons wars in England; and Richard that di∣ed without issue. His second wife was Sanchia, daughter and one of the heires of Reymond Berengar Earle of Prouince, and sister to Queene Elianor, by whom he had issue, Edmond Earle of Cornwall, and Richard that dyed at the siedge of Barwicke, with an Iron shot in his head, 1296. He had also Richard a base sonne, who was the Father of Sir Geffrey Cornwall, knight, of whom is descended the Family of Cornwalles of Burford. This Richard dyed at his Castle of Bark∣hamsted neere London, 1272. and was buried in the Abbey of Hales in Gloce∣stershire, which was of his foundation. Et portoit, d'argent à vn lion rampant de gueulles, Corone d'or, au bordure sable besantee. EDmond Plantagenet Earle of Cornwall, (sonne and heire of Richard, King of Almaine, and Earle of Cornwall) with Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, had the gouernement of England, in the absence of king Edward the first beyond the Seas. He married Margaret, daughter of Richard de Clare, Earle of Glocester and Hartford, and dyed without any law∣full issue, at Ashbridge in Buckinghamshire, the 29. of king Ed∣ward the first; where he had built an Abbey of Bonhommes Order, and was buried by his Father, in the Abbey of Hales, 1300. Et portoit, les armes de son pere.
EDward, first sonne of king Edward the first: In the 27. yeare of his Fathers reigne, 1298. Doctor Langton then Byshop of Chester, complained grieuously to the King vpon this Prince Edward, who (by the lewd aduice of Pierce Ga∣ueston, his gracelesse companion) brake forcibly into his Parke, and made hauocke of his game; for which, this Prince was committed to prison, & Gaueston was banisht the land, and commanded not to returne againe vpon paine of death. This Prince in the thirteenth yeare of his Fathers Reigne, 1301. came to Chester, and receiued homage of the free-hol∣ders of Wales; in which yeare he was created Earle of Corn∣wall, and after King of England, by the name of king Ed∣ward the second. Et portoit, les armes D'engleterre, au lambell d'argent. PIerce Gaueston (a Gascoigne borne) was made Baron of Wallingford, and after, in the first yeare of king Edward the second, was created Earle of Cornwall, and Lord of the Isle of Man; and in the third yeare of the said Kings Reigne, hee married Isabell, second sister and co-heire of Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester and Hartford; and in the sixt yeare of the said Kings reigne, (after he had bin banished England twice) he was taken by Guy Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, and be∣headed at a place neere vnto Warwicke, called Gauershi (or Blacklow) and was after buried in the Fryars at Langley, with∣out issue. Et portoit, Sinope six aigles d'or, membrez & becquez d'gueulles. IOhn of Eltham (so named of the place where he was borne) second sonne of King Edward the second, and brother to King Edward the third, in the second yeare of his said Bro∣thers reigne, was made Earle of Cornwall; and in the ninth yeare of the said Kings reigne, he died at S. Iohns Towne in Scotland, without issue; and was buried in the Abbey of West∣minster, 1334. After whose death, king Edward the third in the 12. yeare of his reigne, made the Earledome of Cornwall a Dukedome, and gaue it to his Sonne Edward the blacke Prince, with the Earledome of Chester: since which time, the Kings eldest sonnes haue bene Dukes of Cornwall. Et portoir, d'argent à lion rampant de gueulles corone d'or, au bordure sable bezanteé.
EDward, sur-named the Blacke Prince, sonne and heire of King Edward the third; in the eleuenth yeare of his Fa∣thers reigne, was created the first Duke of Cornwall, & Earle of Chester, and in the 17. yeare of the said Kings reigne, hee was created Prince of Wales; and in the 36. yeare, he had gi∣uen him the Principality of Aquitaine: and in the 42. yeare of of king Edward the third, he sate in Parliament by the name and title of Edward Prince of Wales and Aquitaine; he tooke Iohn the French King prisoner, at the battaile of Poictiers, in the yeare, 1356. He married Ioane the repudiat wife of Willi∣am Mountague Earle of Salisbury, and daughter of Edmond of Woodstock Earle of Kent; by whom he had issue, Edward that dyed yong, & Richard, sur-named of Burdeaux, who was after king of England, by the name of king Richard the second. This noble Prince Edward died at Can∣terbury, the 8. of Iune, 1376. and was buried in Christ-Church there. Et portoit, France seme & D'engleterre, escartelle, au lambell d'argent. RIchard sur-named of Burdeaux, sonne and heire of Ed∣ward the blacke Prince, was after the death of his Father, Duke of Cornwall and Earle of Chester; and after created Prince of Wales, at Hauering at Bowre, in the 0. of King Ed∣ward the third his grand-father. He married Anne, daughter of Weselaus king of Bohemia, who died, and was buried at Westminster, in the 17. yeare of his reigne, without issue. And to his second wife, he married Isabell, daughter of Charles the French King, being very young, but by her had no issue: hee was after King of England, by the name of king Richard the second, and was deposed from the kingdome, and she sent in∣to France againe, the first of king Henry the fourth, and mar∣ried vnto Charles, sonne of Lewis, Duke of Orleance. Et portoit, lez armes de son pere. HEnry, sur-named of Monmouth, the place of his birth, sonne and heire of king Henry the fourth, was in the first yeare of his Fathers reigne, created Prince of Wales, he being Duke of Cornwall before; for the eldest sonne and heire ap∣parant of the king of England, is Duke of Cornwall by birth, but he is Prince of Wales by speciall creation, inuesture, and donation of the lands thereunto belonging, and not by birth. He was after king of England, by the name of king Henry the fift. Et portoit, France seme & D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent.
HEnry Plantagenet, sonne and heire of king Henry the fift, was borne Duke of Cornwall; and being not full  moneths of age, was proclaimed king of England, in the yeare, 1422. by the name of king Henry the sixt; and on the 6. of Nouember, 1429. (being the eight yeare of his reigne) he was crowned king of England at Westminster; and in the yeare, 1431. he was crowned king of France in Paris, in our Ladie Church there; and after was murdred in the Tower of London, 1470. by Richard Duke of Glocester (as the re∣port then commonly went.) The body of this king was con∣ueyed from the Tower, to the Church of S. Paul in London, and there laide on a Beere, bare-faced, which did bleed in the sight of all the beholders. From thence, by boate it was carried vnto the Mona∣stery at Chertsey, fifteene miles from London, and there was first buried, and after remoued to Windsore, and there in a new Vault entoombed. Et portoit, France & D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward, sonne & heire of king Henry the sixt (being borne Duke of Cornwall) in the 32. yeare of his Fathers reigne, was created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester, by Acte of Parliament. This young Prince, at the battell of Tewkes∣bury, 1470. was taken prisoner by Sir Richard Crofts, and af∣ter murdered by the Dukes of Clarence and Glocester, and by Thomas Marquesse Dorset, & the Lord Hastings. This Prince married Anne, second daughter and co-heire of Richard Ne∣uill, Earle of Warwicke and Salisbury, but had no issue by her; she was after married to Richard Duke of Glocester, after king of England. Et portoit, France & D'engleterre, escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward, eldest sonne to king Edward the fourth, borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster, the 49. yeare of king Henry the sixt, was created Prince of Wales, by authority of Parli∣ament, and Earle of Chester, in the eleuenth yeare of his Fa∣thers reigne, (being before Duke of Cornwall) who with his young brother the Duke of Yorke, was murdred in the Tow∣er of London, by the wicked practise of Richard Duke of Glocester, his Vnckle; who after vsurped the Crowne of Eng∣land. Et portoit, France & D'engleterre, escartelle, au lambell d'argent.
Edward, the onely sonne of king Richard the third, was Duke of Cornwall; and in the first yeare of his Fathers reigne, he was created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester, and died (being but ten yeares of age) without issue. Et portoit, escartelle France & D'engleterre, an lambell d'argent. ARthur Duke of Cornwall, sonne and heire of king Henry the seuenth; in the fift yeare of his Fathers reigne, was created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester; and married Katherine, daughter of Ferdinando Duke of Austria, and king of Spaine, when he was but fourteene years of age, & dyed in the next yeare after, 1501. without issue, at Ludlow, and lieth buried at Worcester. France & D'engleterre, escartelle, au lambell d'argent. HEnry Duke of Yorke, (second sonne of king Henry the seuenth) after the death of Arthur, his brother, was D. of Cornwall; and in the nineteenth yeare of his Fathers reigne, was created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester; & after, he was king of England, by the name of king Henry the eight. Et portoit, les armes de son frere.
HEnry Stewart, sonne and heire of Iames, king of great Britaine, France, and Ireland, was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester, the fourth of Iune, 1610. and died after at S. Iames, neere Charing-Crosse, with∣out issue; and was buried in the Abbey at Westminster, the seuenth of December, 1612. A Catalogue of the Earles of Carlile, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RAndolphe Meschines, sonne of Randolphe, Viscount of Baieulx, and Alice his wife, base daughter of Richard the third, Duke of Normandy, came into England with William the Conquerour, who gaue him the Earledome of Carlile. He married Margaret, sister of Hugh Lupus, the first Earle of Che∣ster after the Conquest, and Aunt and heire of Richard the second Earle of Chester; by whom he had issue, Randolphe the third Earle of Chester, William Meschines Lord of Egre∣mont, and Geffrey Lord of Gillesland, and died, Anno, Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant de gueulles la cowe estant. Andrew de Harcla of Westmerland, knight, for his good seruice in vanquishing and taking prisoner, Thomas Earle of Lancaster, and other his abetters, the kings enemies & dis∣loyall subiects; was by king Edward the second, in the 14. yeare of his reigne, girt with a sword, and had giuen him the Title and Earledome of Carlile, (for this was the vsuall ma∣king of Earles in those dayes.) But afterwards, this Andrew proued vngratefull to his King and Country, in his warres in Scotland, receiuing secretly from the Scots, a great sum of mo∣ney for a bribe, to betray his Master; for which his offence,
he being apprehended and taken, was degraded first of his knight-hood, and af∣ter, of all honourable Titles, by cutting off his Spurs from his heeles, then by disgirding of him, & breaking his sword ouer his head; and lastly, by tearing his Coate of Armes off his body, by a Herald. This done, he was drawne and hanged, beheaded, and quartered, the last day of October, 1322. Et portoit, les armoiries de seint George, au primier quanton à marlette de sable. IOhn Plantagenet, third sonne of king Henry the fourth, was in the second yeare of king Henry the fift, his brother, crea∣ted the first Duke of Bedford, Earle of Richmond, and Lord of Kendall; and in the fift yeare of the said kings reigne, hee was made Protector of the Realme of England (as in the Title of Bedford is more at large) and Earle of Carlile: (which di∣uers late Writers deny,) for thus do I finde him written in his owne Deeds and Charters. Iohn, Regent of the Realme of France, Duke of Bedford, Aniou, and Alanson, Earle of Mayne, Harecourt, Drux, Richmond, and Carlile, and Viscount Beau∣mont. He married (in the yeare, 1433.) Iaquelline, daughter of Peter of Lucemburge, Earle of S. Paul, but by her had no issue. He dyed in France, the tenth of September, 1435. and was buried in the Cathedrall Church in the Citty of Roane in Normandy, in a very stately Toombe. Et portoit, semé de France & D'engleterre, à vn lambell de cinq, ermyn & d'azur, neuf fleurs de liz d'or. RIchard, fourth sonne of Richard Duke of Yorke, (and bro∣ther of king Edward the fourth) was in the first yeare of the said kings reigne, 1460. created Duke of Glocester, and Earle of Carlile, and after was made Constable and Lord Admirall of England. And lastly, when hee had caused his two Nephewes, king Edward the fift, and Richard Duke of Yorke, his brother, to be murdered in the Tower of London: He vsurped the Crowne, and was king of England, by the name of king Richard the third. Et portoit, France escartelle D'engleterre, d'lambell ermyn charge à trois can∣tons de gueulles.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Cumberland, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. HEnry Clifford, Lord Clifford, Skipton, Westmerland, and Ves∣cie, was by king Henry the eight, created Earle of Cum∣berland, at Bridewell, the eighteenth of Iune, 1525. the 17. year of the said kings reigne; and married Margaret, daughter of Henry Lord Percy, fift Earle of Northumberland, by whom he had issue, Henry Earle of Cumberland, and Sir Ingram Clif∣ford, knight; and foure daughters, Katherine the eldest, was married to Iohn Lord Scroope of Bolton; Matilda was wife to Iohn Coigniers of Hornby; and Elizabeth was married to Sir Christopher Medcalfe, knight; and Iane was married to Sir Iohn Hudleston, knight. This Henry dyed the 22. of Aprill, in the 34. yeare of king Henry the eight. Et portoit, eschequette d'or & d'azur à la face de gueulles. HEnry Lord Clifford, sonne and heire of Henry aforesaide, after the death of his Father, was the second Earle of Cumberland, Lord Clifford, Skipton, Westmerland, and Vescy, & married to his first wife, Elianor, daughter and co-here of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, by his wife Mary, Queene of France, (second daughter to king Henry the seuenth) by whom he had issue, Margaret, married to Henry Stanley Earle of Derby, by whom he had issue, Ferdinando Earle of Derby, that dyed without issue Male, and William now Earle of Der∣bie, 1618. This Henry maried to his second wife, Anne, daugh∣ter of William Lord Dacres of Gillesland, and by her had issue, George Lord Clifford, the third Earle of Cumberland, & Fran∣cis the fourth Earle of Cumberland; and three daughters, Frances the eldest daughter, was married to Philip Lord Wharton, Elianor and Mary dyed both young. This Henry dyed in Anno, 1569. the 12. of Queene Elizabeth. Les armes de son peré.
GEorge Lord Clifford, after the death of Henry his father, was the third Earle of Cumberland, Lord Clifford, Skip∣ton Westmerland, and Vescy, and Sheriffe of Westmerland by in∣heritance: a most Noble and Martiall man, both by Sea and Land, and honoured with the honorable Order of the Gar∣ter, 1592. He married Margaret, daughter of Francis Lord Russell, and Earle of Bedford, the 25. of Iune, 1577. and had issue, Francis Lord Clifford, and Robert that died young; and a daughter named Anne, married to Richard Sackuile, Baron of Buckhurst, and Earle of Dorset. This George dyed in the Strand at Landon, in the yeare, 1605. without issue Male. Et portoit, eschiquettee d'or & d'azur, à la face de gueulles. FRancis Clifford, brother of George aforesaid, succeeded and was the fourth Earle of Cumberland, Lord Clifford, Skip∣ton, Westmerland, & Vescy, now liuing, 1618. he maried Grizell, daughter of Hughes of Vxbridge, Esquire, and wid∣dow of Henry Neuill, Father of Edward Neuill, now Baron of Abergauenny, 1618. and hath issue, Henry Lord Clifford, Margaret and Frances. Et portoit, les armes de sonperé. A Catalogue of the Earles of Cam∣bridge, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. WIlliam Meschines, sonne of Randolphe Earle of Che∣ster, and second brother of Randolphe Gernonijs Earle of Chester, was the first Earle of Cambridge, & by that name and title, I finde him a Witnesse to the Charter and guift of Alexander Bishop of Lincolne, of the Island of Hafreholme, which the said Alexander gaue to the religious & holy Nuns of the order of Sister-sences, bearing date, the fourth of king Stephen, 1139. Whom hee married, or what issue hee had, I finde not.
WIlliam Marquesse of Iuliers, (or Iuliac) vnto whom king Edward the third, on the seuen day of ay, in the 14. yeare of his reigne, did giue the Earl  bridge, with the Towne and Castle, and twenty pounds by yeare in fee, to him and the heires of his body begotten: and inuested him into the said Earledome, at Westminster, by the girding of him with a sword, and besides, gaue him by letters patents, a thousand pounds of yearely rent. He maried Ma∣ry, sister and heire of Edward Duke of Gelderland, Nephew to king Edward the third, and had isssue. Mary, married vnto Iohn, sonne and heire of Iohn Duke of Cleeue. Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant de sable. IOhn of Henault (Vnckle to Queene Philip, wife to king Ed∣ward the third) a younger sonne of the Earle of Henault, was in the sixteenth yeare of the said kings reigne, 1342. cre∣ated Earle of Cambridge, which honour & Earledome soone after he lost, by reuolting to the French king. Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant de sable, arme & lampasse de guelles; escartel∣le d'or au lion rampant de gueulles. EDmond of Langley (so called of the kings Mannor house of Langley, where he was borne) fift sonne of king Ed∣ward the third, was created Earle of Cambridge, in the 36. yeare of his Fathers reigne; he was also Lord of Tyndall, & after Duke of Yorke, and married Isabell, daughter and one of the heires of Peter king of Castile and Lions, and had issue, as in the Title of Yorke. He dyed in the third yeare of king Henry the fourth, 1401. and was buried at Langley by Isabell his wife. Et portoit, France seme & D;engleterre au lambell d'argent neuf orteaux.
RIchard of Conesburgh, second sonne of Edmond of Lang∣ley, aforesaid, was created Earle of Cambridge, at a Parli∣ament held the second yeare of king Henry the fift; and in the yeare after, by the procurement of the Dolphine of France, he with Henry Lord Scroope of Masham, then Lord Treasurer of England, and Sir Thomas Grey of Northumberland, knight, did conspire the kings death at Southampton, as the said king was shipping his men for France; for which their treason, they were beheaded there. He married Anne, sister and heire of Edmond Mortimer, Earle of March and Vlster; and had issue, Richard Earle of Cambridge, and Duke of Yorke, and Isa∣bell, married to Henry Lord Bourchier and Earle of Essex. Et portoit, les armes de son pere' RIchard Plantagenet, sonne of Richard of Conesbourgh, in the fourth yeare of king Henry the sixt, was created D. of Yorke, Earle of Cambridge and Rutland, and Lord of Tyn∣dall; he was also Earle of Marche and Vlster, Lord of Wig∣more and Clare by his Mother. He married Secily, daughter of alphe Neuill. first Earle of Westmerland, and had issue, Ed∣ward, who was after king, by the name of king Edward the fourth, Edmond Earle of Rutland, and Richard D. of Glocester, and after king of England, by the name of K. Richard the 3. & diuers daughters, as in the title of Yorke. This Richard with his Son Edmond, was slaine at the battell of Wakefield, 1460. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Deuon, and Marquesses of Exeter, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RIchard de Riparijs, (sonne of Baldwine Riuers) to whom (M Camden saith) king Henry the first gaue the Towne of Tiuerton, and the honour of plimpton, and created him Earle of Deuonshire; and granted to him the third penny of the yearely reuennew of the same County, being ten Marks. Lastly, the said king gaue him the Isle of Wight, whereby euer after he was called Earle of Deuonshire, and Lord of the Isle. He married and had issue, Baldwine de Riuers, Earle of Deuon.
BAldwine de Riuers, sonne of Richard aforesaid, was the se∣cond Earle of Deuonshire, and builded three Monasteries, viz. Christ-Church, Quarara in the Isle of Wight, and Lira in Normandy; he fortefied the Citty of Exeter, against king Ste∣phen, and was banished England, with his wife and children; and had the Isle of Wight taken from him, in the yeare, 1136. He married Adelizia, daughter of  by whom he had issue, Richard, Henry that dyed yong, and William, sur-na∣med Vernon, (the place where hee went to schoole, or was brought vp in.) This Baldwine dyed in the yeare, 1155. and was buried in the Abbey of Quarara. RIchard de Riuers, eldest sonne of Baldwine aforenamed, was the third Earle of Deuonshire, and did giue lands to the Abbey of Quarara (in the 13. yeare of king Henry the second) to pray for the soules of Baldwine his father, & Ade∣lizia his mother, Countesse of Deuon. He married Hawis, daughter and one of the heires of Reginald Earle of Cornwall (base sonne of king Henry the first) and had issue, Baldwine and Richard, both Earles of Deuonshire, who dyed without issue. This Richard dyed in the Citty of Cenomania in Franc, in the yeare, 1161. BAldwine de Riuers, sonne and heire of Richard aforesaid, was after his father, the fourth Earle of Deuon, and mar∣ried Alice, daughter of Raphe de Dol in Berry, (as Milles hath, pag. 457.) he was Earle but a while, and dyed without issue; leauing Richard his brother to succeed him in his Earledome and lands.
RIchard de Riuers (second sonne of Richard, the third Earle of Deuon, and brother and heire of Baldwine, the fourth Earle of Deuonshire) was the fift Earle of Deuonshire, and married Margaret, daughter and one of the heyres of Iohn Lord Biset, and gaue lands to the Abbey of Bruer, to pray for the soule of Earle Richard his Father, his own health, and Margaret the Countesse his wife, hee died without issue, and was buried at Montbroge in Normandy, the thirtieth of King Henry the second. Etportoit, d'or, au lion rampant d'a∣zur. This is the first man that bare this Armes, that euer I could finde: and for the Griffyn which hath bene vsually set downe for their Armes, it is but a deuice, and no Armes. WIlliam, sur-named de Vernon, of the Towne of Vernona in Normandy, where he was borne, as some haue (but the booke of Forde Abbey hath, where he went to schoole) af∣ter the death of Baldwine and Richard, his two Nephewes, without issue, was the sixt Earle of Deuonshire, and Lord of the Isle of Wight. He married Mabell, daughter to Robert Earle of Mellent, with whom her Father did giue in marriage all his lands of Kiderminster, Moreis, and Redeliston, which were be∣fore the lands of her Mother Mauld, one of the daughters & heires of Reginald Earle of Cornwall, (base sonne of K. Henry the first;) by whom, this William had issue, Baldwine, who mar∣ried Margaret, daughter of Waryn Fitz-Gerald, Chamberlaine to king Iohn; and dyed before his Father, leauing issue, Baldwine his sonne and heire. This William had issue also, two daughters; the eldest was Iane, mar∣ried vnto William Bruer, the younger Lord of Torbay, who dyed without issue: Mary the second daughter, was first married to Sir Robert Courtney, knight, sonne of Reginald, and after, to Peter de Prouz, and had issue. This William de Vernon, by his Deed or Charter, bearing date the fourth of September, 1206. did giue lands to the Abbey of Quarara, to pray for the soules of king Henry, and Bald∣wine his father, and A lelicia the Countesse his Mother, and Earle Richard his brother, and for the health of Mabell the Countesse, his wife, and Baldwine his sonne; and after dyed, in the yeare of our Lord, 1216. the first of king Henry the third. Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur, armé & lampasse de gueulles.
BAldwine de Riuers, the fourth of that christen name (Son of Baldwine the third, which dyed before his father) was after the death of William de Vernon, his grand-father, the se∣uenth Earle of Deuonshire, and Lord of the Isle of Wight. He married Amicia, daughter of Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Glocester and Hertford, by whom he had issue, Baldwine the fift, and eight Earle of Deuonshire of that sur-name, and Isa∣bell de Fortibus, Countesse of Albemarle, the wife of William de Fortibus Earle of Albemarle. This Baldwine in the 25. yeare of the reigne of king Henry the third, was created Earle of the Isle of Wight, at the sute and petition of Richard Earle of Cornwall, the kings brother, (whose Ward this Baldwine had bene:) and in the 29. yeare of the said kings reigne, the saide Baldwine dyed in his youthfull yeares. After whose death, his Countesse Amicia gaue lands to the abbey of Bruarne, to pray for the soules of Gilbert de Clare, late Earle of Glocester, her Father, and for Isabell the Countesse her Mother, and Baldwine late Earle of Deuonshire, her husband, and for the health of her owne soule, & Bald∣wine her sonne. She dyed in the yeare, 1283. Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur. BAldwine de Riuers the fift of that name, and eight Earle of Deuonshire, of that sur-name, & Lord of the Isle of Wight. Hee married Auice, daughter of  a Sauoyan borne, and neere kineswoman of Queene Elianor, and had issue, a sonne named Iohn, that dyed yong in France without issue. This Baldwine the fift, dyed in the 46. yeare of K. Henry the third; leauing Isabell de Fortibus Countesse of Albemarle, his sister and heire. Et portoit, les armes, de son Pere'. HVgh Courtney, knight, (the second of that name) cousin and heire of Isabell de Fortibus, Countesse of Albemarle, that is to say, sonne of Hugh, grand-childe of Mary de Riuers, sister of Baldwyne the third (that dyed before his Father) grand-father of Isabell de Fortibus, Countesse of Albemarle; was by Letters Patents made the ninth Earle of Deuonshire, the ninth of king Edward the third; and married Agnes, sister of Sir Iohn S. Iohn, knight, by whom he had issue, foure sonnes and three daughters, viz. Hugh Courtney, the tenth Earle of Deuonshire; Thomas the second Son, married Murell, daugh∣ter
of Iohn de Mules: Iohn the third sonne was Abbot of Tauestoke; and Robert was the fourth Son: Elianor the eldest daughter, was wife to Iohn Grey; Elizabeth the second daughter, was married to Bartholmew de Lasle, of the Isle of Wight; & Egelyne the third daughter, was wife to Robert Lord Scales. This Hugh dyed in the fourteenth yeare of king Edward the third, 1340. and was buried at Co∣wike. Et portoit, d'or, trois torreaux, au lambell d'azur. HVgh Courtney, the third of that christen name, (sonne of Hugh the second) after the death of his father, was the tenth Earle of Deuonshire, and married Margaret, daughter of Humfrey de Bohun, the eight Earle of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England, by his wife Elizabeth, daughter of K. Edward the first, & had issue Hugh Courtney that dyed without issue, Edward that was after Earle of Deuonshire, Sir Thomas Courtney, knight, Philip Courtney of Powderham, Wil∣liam Courtney, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Humfrey and Peter that dyed young: Hee had issue also, three daughters, Katherine the eldest, was married to William Lord Haring∣ton; Elizabeth, to William Lord Moune of Dunster Castle; and Margaret, wife to Iohn Lord Cobham, &c. This Earle Hugh dyed at Tiuerton, in the last yeare of king Edward the third, 1376. and was buried at Exeter. Et portoit, d'or, trois torteaux, au lambell d'azur. EDward Courtney, sonne of Hugh Earle of Deuon aforesaid, was the eleuenth Earle of Deuonshire, and married Eme∣line, daughter of Sir Iohn Dauney, knight, and had issue, Ed∣ward Courtney, the twelfth Earle of Deuonshire, and Sir Hugh Courtney of Haccombe, knight; and dyed in the 16. yeare of the reigne of king Richard the second, 1392.
EDward Courtney, sur-named the blinde, suceeded Ed∣ward his father, and was the 12 Earle of , and sate in Parliament, the sixt of king Henry the fift: he married Elianor, daughter of Roger Mortimer, Earle of March and V∣ster, and had issue, Hugh, the thirteenth Earle of Deuonshire. This Hugh (sur-named the blinde) by his Deed, bearing date the second of king Henry the fift, did giue to Sir Hugh Court∣ney, knight, his brother, the Mannors of Gotheringdon, Stan∣combe-Dauney, and Southalington in the County of Deuon, & dyed in the seuenth yeare of the said kings reigne, 1418. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré. HVgh Courtney (sonne and heire of Edward, sur-named the blinde) after the death of his Father, was the thir∣teenth Earle of Deuonshire, and sate in Parliament by that Title, the same yeare his Father dyed. He married Anne, daughter of Richard Lord Talbot, and had issue, Thomas Earle of Deuonshire, and dyed in the tenth yeare of the reigne of king Henry the fift, 1421. Et portoit, d'or à trois torteaux, au lambell d'azut. THomas Courtney, sonne of Earle Hugh afore-said, succe∣ded his Father, and was the fourteenth Earle of Deuon∣shire, and Lord of Ochampton: he married Margaret, daugh∣ter of Iohn Beaufort, Earle of Somerset, and Marquesse Dor∣set, by whom he had issue, three sonnes and two daughters: Thomas the eldest sonne, beeing in the battell  with king Henry the sixt, against king Edward the fourth, was there taken prisoner, and had his head smitten off. Henry the se∣cond sonne, was likewise beheaded at Salisbury, the eight of king Edward the fourth; and Iohn the third sonne, was slaine at Tewkesbury, in the tenth yeare of king Edward the fourth, Ioane the eldest daughter, was married to Sir Roger Clifford, knight; and Eliza∣beth the second daughter, was wife to Sir Hugh Conwey, knight. This Thomas, being at the battell of Touton, 1460. was taken prisoner, and beheaded at Yorke.
HVmfrey Lord Stafford of Southwike, sonne of William Stafford of Hooke, Esquire; in the ninth yeare of king Ed∣ward the fourth, was created Earle of Deuonshire, 1460. and maried Isabell, daughter of Sir Iohn Barry, knight, but had no issue by her. This Humfrey became vngratefull to king Ed∣ward, and fell from him, and after was taken by some of K. Edwards friends, and carried to Bridgwater in Deuonshire, and there had his head smitten off, in the yeare, 1460. hauing bene an Earle but three Moneths and odde dayes. Et portoit, d'or au Cheuron de gueulles à la bordure engreslee de sable. EDward Courtney of Haccombe, sonne of Sir Hugh Court∣ney of Bokonoke, knight, grand-father to Edward Courtney the eleuenth Earle of Deuonshire, was after the death of Hum∣frey Stafford, restored in blood, and made the sixteenth Earle of Deuonshire, in the first yeare of king Henry the seuenth: he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Philip Courtney of Mol∣land, knight, and had issue, William Courtney Earle of Deuon∣shire. This Edward had foure sisters, whose issue came after to be his heyres. The first was Elizabeth, married to Iohn Tre∣therfe, of whom Viuian is descended: the second was Mauld, wife to Iohn Arundell of Taluerne: Isabell the third sister, was married to William Moune: and Florence the fourth sister, was married to Iohn Trelauny, and thus are they set downe in the said Edwards Will. He dyed in the first yeare of king Henry the eight, 1509. Et portoit. WIlliam Courtney, sonne of Edward, was after his Fa∣thers death, the seuenteenth Earle of Deuonshire, and Lord of Okhamton, and married Katherine, daughter of king Edward the fourth; and had issue, Henry Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, and Marquesse of Exeter; and dyed at Greene∣wich, the ninth of Iune, in the third yeare of the reigne of K. Henry the eight, 1511. and was buried in the Blacke-Fryars in London. Et portoit, d'or trois torteaux, au lambell de azur.
HEnry Courtney, sonne of William aforesaid, by Katherine his wife, daughter of king Edward the fourth, was after his Father, the eighteenth Earle of Deuon, & Lord of Ochamp∣ton. He was after created Marquesse of Exeter, at Bridwell, the eighteene of Iune, 1525. and married to his first wife, Eliza∣beth, daughter and heire of Sir Iohn Grey, Viscount Lisle, by whom he had no issue: after, he married Gertrude, daughter of William Blount, Baron Mountioy (begotten of Elizabeth, the daughter & one of the heyres of Sir William Say, knight) by whom he had issue, Edward Courtney, the last Earle of De∣uonshire of this progeny. This Henry Marquesse of Exeter, Henry Poole Lord Mountague, & Sir Nicholas Carew of Beddington in the Coun∣ty of Surrey, knight, were attainted and executed for high treason, 1538. at the Tower Hill, for being priuy with Cardinall Poole (brother to the Lord Moun∣tague) to procure forraine power (in the Popes aide) to inuade this Realme. Soone after, this Gertrude Marquesses of Exeter, Margaret Countesse of Salis∣bury, with others, were likewise attainted for the same treason, but Gertrude was not executed, but died, and was buried in a faire Toombe in Wimborne Minister, in the yeare, 1557. Et portoit, escartellé France & D'engleterre, au bordure escartellé de mesme: escartellé Courtney, qui est, d'or à trois Torteaux. Le tiers, de mesme, le quart, Riuers, qui est d'or au lion rampant d'azur, arme & lampasse de gueulles. EDward Courtney, sonne and heire of Henry Marquesse of Exeter, and Earle of Deuonshire, being long prisoner in the Tower of London, was by Queen Mary, in the first yeare of her reigne, 1553. restored in blood, and made Earle of De∣uonshire, at her Mannor of Richmond; and three yeares after, he dyed at Padua in Italy, the fourth day of October, 1556. without issue, (some haue, he was poysoned:) He was the last Earle of that Name and Family of Courtneys. Et portoit, les Armoities de son Peré.
CHarles Blount, Baron Montioy, (second sonne of Iames Blount, Lord Mountioy, and brother and heire of William Baron of Mountioy) Lord Deputy and Lieutenant of Ire∣land; who expulsed the Spaniards there, and compelled the Rebels to submission, was by King Iames in the first yeare of his reigne, 1603. created Earle of Deuonshire, the 21. of Iuly, at Hampton-Court. He dyed without any lawfull issue, in the Dutchy-house in the Strand, and was buried at Westminster with great pompe, in the Abbey, in the yeare, 1606. Et portroit, burelle vndeé de six d'or & de fable. WIlliam Cauendish, knight, was created Baron of Hard∣wike, on Satterday, the fourth of May, 1605. and af∣ter by King Iames, in August, 1618. he was made Earle of De∣uonshire. He married two wiues, the first was Anne, daughter and heyre of Henry Kighley of Kighley in Lancashire, Esquire, & had issue, William Lord Cauendish of Hardwike, who mar∣ried Christian, daughter of Edward Bruse, Baron of Kynlosse, and Master of the Rolles; Frances, wife to Sir Henry Maynard, knight, Mary and Elizabeth. This Williams second wife, was Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Boughton of Causton, and wid∣dow of Sir Richard Wortley, knight, by whom hee had issue, Sir Iohn Cauendish, knight of the Bath, who dyed without issue. Et portoit de sable au trois testes du cerf d'argent, les cornes d'or.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles Ferrars, and Derby, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. HEnry Earle Ferrars, a Norman borne, sonne of Wake∣line, came into England with William the Conquerour, who gaue him the Castles of Tutbury & Oucume, with diuers other great Seigneuries in England and Normandy. He married one Berta, and had issue, Eugenulphus, William, and Robert; and two daughters, Gundred, and Emelyn. He foun∣ded the Abbey of Tutbury, in the yeare, 1080. Vnto which Foundation, were Witnesses Eugenulphus, William, & Robert his sonnes. And for proofe that this Henry was an Earle. (which some great and late Writers denie) I haue heere set downe the said Henries Epitath, which I finde printed in the yeare, 1577. and dedicated to the late Earle of Essex, and said to be found in the Abbey of Tutbury. Hic iacet Henricus de Ferrarijs comes, huius Ecclesiae fundator Imago, nomine cu∣ius Anno milleno domini quater at{que} viceno Tutburia{que} nono domus est fundata pa∣trono. It is said that he bare for his Armes, argent. 6. horse-shooes sable. RObert de Ferrars, after the death of Henry his Father, and Eugenulphus and William his two Brothers, without is∣sue, was the second Earle Ferrars, and by that name was Witnesse to king Henry the first his Charter, of lands which he gaue to the Abbey of Tutesbury. Also in the 31. yeare of the said kings Reigne, hee began the Foundation of the Ab∣bey of Muriuall, and dyed in the 19. yeare of king Stephen, and was buried at Muriuall, leauing issue, William Earle of Tutesbury, slaine in his lodging in London, without issue; Robert Earle Ferrars, and Wakelyn de Ferrars the third sonne. Les armes de son pere, d'argent à fix Ferres de cheuall de fable.
RObert de Ferrars, the second of that name, after the death of Robert his Father, and William his brother, was the third Earle Ferrars, whom diuers late Writers haue great∣ly mistaken, they affirming him to be the first Robert, Founder of Muriuall Abbey, and to be Earle of Nottingham; when as in truth, it was this Roberts Father, that was Founder of Muriuall Abbey, and another Robert Ferrars, grand-childe of this second Robert by his sonne William, that was made Earle of Nottingham, as heereafter will appeare in his due place. And where they say they haue seen Deeds and Charters, to approue their affirmation, it is vntrue; for those they meane, are vnperfect Notes and Abstracts, taken out of Glouer Somersets Booke of Miscellania; which Book I haue, and perusing the same, finde them of small cre∣dite. This Earle Robert married, and had issue, William Earle Ferrars, the fourth Earle Ferrars; and died in the yeare, 1184. the 31. of king Henry the second: but others haue, that he dyed in the Holy-Land, in the yeare, 1190. the second of king Richard the first, which is mistaken. Et portoit, lez armoities de son peré. Now to the issue, which M. Milles maketh this Robert to haue, in his Booke of succession of Earles, pag. 869. viz. William de Ferrars Earle of Derby. Petronell (or Pernell) wife of Henry Lord Stafford; and Elizabeth married vnto William Marshall Baron of Rie: I confesse William onely, but no daughters at all. For by a Record of the 26. of King Henry the 3. it is proued, that Henry Lord Staffords wifes name was Mabell, daughter of Robert Musegros and Agnes his wife, daughter of William Earle Ferrars and Derby, great grand-sonne of Ro∣bert Ferrars Earle of Nottingham, which Milles saith, died in the holy-land, 1190. And for Elizabeh the other daughter, to be married to William Marschall, Baron of Rye and Heng∣ham in Norfolko, which died, 1266. that is most vntrue; for that William hee meaneth, had to his wife Alina, daughter and heire of Hubert, Baron of Rye, and died in the 11. yeare of king Edward the first, as by an Inquisition of that date it doth appeare. VVIlliam Earle Ferrars, Lord of Tutbury in Stafford∣shire, and Oucume in Rutlandshire, sonne of the se∣cond Robert Earle Ferrars, married Margaret, daughter and heire of William Peuerill of Nottingham, (whose grand-father William was the base sonne of William Conqueror, begotten of the wife of Randolphe Peuerell of Hatfield Peuerell) and had issue, Robert and William: Robert the eldest sonne in the life time of his Father, was made Earle of Nottingham, and dyed without issue William the second sonne, after the death of his Father was Earle Ferrars, and first Earle of Derby. This Wil∣liam Earle Ferrars the Father, dyed (as Roger Houedon hath, Fol. 390. b.) at Achon in the Holy-Land, in the yeare, 1190. But Milles (in Glouer Somersets Book of successions of Earles, pag. 870.) hath, that he dyed in the yeare, 1247. and Margaret his wife to dye in the same year, the 32. of king Henry the third, which I doubt of. Et portoit, d'argent, à six Ferres de cheual de sable.
WIlliam de Ferrars, the second Earle Ferrars of that christen name, was by king Iohn made the first Earle of Derby of that sur-name. He married Agnes, the third sister and co-heire of Randolphe Blundeuile, Earle of Chester and Lincolne: in whose right he was Lord of Chartley, and had issue, William Earle Ferrars and Derby, Robert, Hugh, and Tho∣mas de Ferrars; and dyed in the yeare of our Lord, 1242. and was buried at Muriuall, the 27. of king Henry the third. Et portoit, vaire d'or & de gueulles, à la bordure de azur seme Ferrars de che∣uall d'argent. VVIilliam de Ferrars, the third of that name, was Earle Ferrars and Derby, Lord of Tutbury and Chartley. He married two wiues, the first was Sibell, daughter of Willi∣am Marshall the elder Earle of Pembroke, and one of the fiue sisters and heyres of Auncelme Marshall Earle of Pembrooke, (with whō he had 1520. pounds Rents of assize per annum) and had issue; fiue daughters, who inherited their Mothers in∣heritance, and were married as followeth. Agnes the eldest, was married to William Lord Vescy of Alnwicke in Northum∣berland: Isabell first married vnto Gilbert Basset, and after, vnto Reginald de Mohun the younger Earle of Somerset Ioane the third daughter, was married vnto Iohn Mohun, Sonne of Regi∣nald aforesaid: Mauld the fourth daughter, was married to Philip de Kyme, Lord of Kyme, and had issue, Sibell wife to Franke de Bohun, Baron of Midhurst in Sussex: and after, she married William de Fortz Baron of Clapton; and thirdly, the said Mauld married William de Vallibus: Anne or Agatha the fift daughter, was married to Hugh Mortimer of Chilmersh, sonne of Ralphe Lord Mortimer of Wigmore. The foresaid William Earle Ferrars, married to his second wife, Margaret, daughter and one of the heyres of Roger Quincie Earle of Winche∣ster, and Constable of Scotland, by whom he had issue, Robert Earle Ferrars and Derby, and William Lord and Baron of Groby, by the gift of his Mother; and a daughter named Agnes, married to Robert Musegros, sonne of Richard Lord of Derhurst. This William dyed of a bruise, taken with a fall out of his Coach, in the yeare, 1253. the 38. of king Henry the third. Et portoit, vaire d'or & de gulles.
RObert de Ferrars (sonne and heire of William Earle Fer∣rars and Derby) was also Earle Ferrars and Derby, and combined with Simon Mountfort Earle of Leicester, and Gil∣bert de Clare Earle of Glocester and others, to raise warre a∣gainst king Henry the third, because he refused to stand to the Statutes made by Parliament at Oxford, for the banishment of Strangers, &c. In which ciuill discord, this Robert, in the fiftieth yeare of the said kings reigne, was taken prisoner at the Battell of Chesterfield, and imprisoned in the Castle of Chipenham, neere to Windesor; where he, for the obtayning of his liberty, became bound (before Iohn Chishull Lord Chan∣cellor of England) and did assure ouer all his Lands in Eng∣land (excepting Chartley, and the Towne of Bolbrooke) to diuers Noblemen his sureties, for the payment of fifty thousand pounds in one day, and at one entire payment, to Lord Edmond the kings sonne; which payment being not perfor∣med at the day appointed; the said Lord Edmond, vpon the surrender of the a∣foresaid Sureties, tooke possession of all the said Lands, which were then valued at two thousand pounds per annum: his Sureties were, the Lord Henry, Son to the king of Romans, William Valence Earle of Pembrooke, Iohn Earle Warren and Surrey, William Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, Roger Somery, Thomas Clare, Ro∣ger Walleron, Roger Glifford, Hamon Le Strange, Bartholmew Sudley, and Robert Bruse, Barons. This Earle Robert, married Elianor, daughter of Ralphe Lord Basset, and had issue, Iohn Lord Ferrars of Chartley; and dyed in the seauenth yeare of king Edward the first, 1278. After whose death, the Dukes and Earles of Lancaster had the Titles of Derby, vntill the first yeare of king Henry the se∣uenth, that he bestowed the same vpon Thomas Stanley, his Father in law. Et portoit, les Armoiries de son peré. EDmond Plantagenet, sur-named Crowch-backe, second Son of king Henry the third, and Brother of king Edward the first, was Earle of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby; as more at large doth appeare in the Title of Lancaster. Et portoit, gueulles trois Leopards d'or, au lambell d'azur semé fleurs de liz d'or.
THomas Plantagenet, sonne and heire of Edmond aforesaid, was after his Father, Earle of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, as in the Title of Lancaster. He dyed without issue, leauing Henry his brother his heire. Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. HEnry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth, Brother to Tho∣mas Plantagenet, (was after his Father & Brother) resto∣red to be Earle of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, with the Office of high Steward of England, as in the Title of Lanca∣ster is more at large. Et portoit, D'engleterre, à vn band d'azur. HEnry, sur-named Tortcoll (or Crook-necke) sonne & heire of Henry Monmouth, was in the life time of his Father created Earle of Derby, in the eleuenth yeare of king Edward the third, as in the Title of Earles of Lancaster. Et portoit, gueulles à trois leopards d'or, au lambell d'azur neuf fleurs de liz d'or. IOhn sur-named of Gaunt, (the place of his birth) fourth sonne of king Edward the third, writ in his Stile, Iohn, sonne of the king of England, Duke of Aquitaine and Lancaster, Earle of Derby, Lincolne, and Leicester, and high Steward of England; as in the Earles of Lancaster is more at large. Et portoit, escartelle semé de France & D'engleterre, à lambell d'hermines.
HEnry of Bullingbrooke, sonne of Iohn of Gaunt, was crea∣ted Earle of Derby, in the ninth yeare of king Richard the second, his Nephew; and in the twentieth yeare of the same Kings reigne, hee was made Duke of Hereford; and lastly, King of England, by the name of King Henry the fourth. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. THomas Lord Stanley, and of Man, knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and Lord Steward of the house to King Edward the fourth, was created Earle of Derby, in the first yeare of king Henry the seuenth, on Simon and Iudes day; and in the same yeare, he was made also high Constable of England. He married to his first wife, Elianor, daughter of Ri∣chard Neuill Earle of Salisbury; by whom he had issue, sixe sonnes and foure daughters, viz. Thomas and Richard dyed young; George the third sonne, was Lord Strange, in right of Ioane his wife, daughter and heyre of Iohn Lord Strange of Knocking, and died before his Father, the third of king Henry the seuenth; William the fourth sonne dyed young; Edward the fift sonne, was Lord Monteagle; and Iames the sixt sonne, was Bishop of Elie: Ioane the eldest daughter dyed young; Katherine the second daughter, Anne the third daughter dyed young; and Margaret the fourth daughter, was married to Sir Iohn Os∣berton, knight. This Thomas married to his second wife, Margaret, daughter & heire of Iohn Duke of Somerset, the widdow of Edmond Earle of Richmond, and Mother to King Henry the seuenth; by whom hee had no issue. Hee dyed at Lathum in Lancashire, in the twentieth yeare of King Henry the seuenth, 1104. And Margaret his wife, Countesse of Richmond, dyed in the first yeare of king Henry the seuenth. Et portoit, d'argent à la bande d'azur, chargee de trois testes de cerf d'or.
THomas Lord Stanley, Strange and of Man, grand-childe to Thomas aforesaid, by his sonne George, was the second Earle of Derbie of that Family, and married Anne, daughter of Edward Lord Hastings, and sister of George, Earle of Hun∣tingdon (who was after married to Iohn Radcliff, Lord Fitz∣water.) This Thomas had issue, three sonnes and one daugh∣ter, viz. Iohn Lord Strange, that dyed before his Father; Ed∣ward that was after Earle of Derby, and Henry that dyed young of the sweat. Margaret the daughter, married Robert Radcliff Earle of Sussex. This Thomas dyed in the 13. yeare of king Henry the eight, 1521. Et portoit, les armoities de son pere. D'argent à la bande d'azur, chargee de trois testes du cerf dor. EDward Lord Stanley of Lathum, Strange of Knocking, & of Man, Son of Thomas aforesaid, was the 3. Earle of Derby of that Family, who had three wiues: the first was Dorothea, daughter of Thomas Howard, the second D. of Norfolke, by whom he had issue, three sonnes and foure daughters; Henry, who after his Father was the fourth Earle of Derby; Sir Ed∣ward Stanley of Einsham in Oxfordshire knight; and Sir Tho∣mas Stanley knight; who married Margaret, daughter and one of the heyres of George Vernon of Derbyshire, knight: Anne the eldest daughter, was first married to Charles Lord Sturton, and after to Sir Iohn Arundell of Cornwall, knight; Elizabeth was wife to Henry Parker Lord Morley; Iane married to Edward Lord Dudley; and Mary the fourth daughter, was wife to Edward Lord Stafford. This Edward had to his second wife, Margaret, daughter of Ellis Barlow of Lanca∣shire, by whom he had issue, George that dyed young; Katherine, wife to Sir Tho∣mas Kniuet, knight; Margaret, married to Iohn Iermyn of Rushbrooke in Suffolke. Lastly, the said Edward married to his third wife, Mary, daughter of George Cot∣ton, but by her had no issue. He dyed at Lathum, the 24. of October, in the 14. yeare of the most happy Queene Elizabeth, and was buried at Burscogh, two miles from Lathum. Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere.
HEnry Lord Stanley of Lathum, Strange of Knocking, and of Man, sonne and heire of Edward, was the fourth Earle of Derby of that sur-name, and knight of the Garter. He married Margaret, daughter of Henry Clifford Earle of Cumberland, and Elianor his wife, daughter and one of the co-heires of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, by Mary Q. of France, his wife; and had issue, Edward that dyed young, FErdinando and William, both Earles of Derby one after the other. He dyed in the yeare, 1593 and was buried at Et portoit, d'argent à la bande d'azur chargee de trois testes de cerf d'or. FErdinando Lord Stanley, Strange, and of the Isle of Man, Sonne and Heire of Henry Earle of Derby, was after his Father, the fift Earle of Derby, Lord Strange, and of the Isle of Man; and married Alice, daughter of Sir Iohn Spencer of Northamptonshire, knight; and had issue, three daughters his heires generall, Anne married to Grey Bruges Lord Shandos, Frances the second daughter was married to Sir Iohn Egerton knight, and after Earle of Bridgwater, and Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Henry Lord Hastings Earle of Huntingdon. He dyed in the yeare of our Lord, 1594 and was buried at Et portoit, d'es armes de son pere. WIlliam Lord Stanley, Strange, and of the Isle of Man, second sonne of Henry Earle of Derby, and Brother and heire Male of Ferdinando, was the sixt Earle of Derby, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. He married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Edward Vere, late Earle of Ox∣ford, by Anne Cicell his wife, daughter of William Lord Bur∣leigh and Lord Treasurer of England; and hath issue, Iames Lord Strange, Robert second sonne, and Anne married to Sir Henry Portman of Orchard in Somersetshire, Baronet, 1618. Et Portoit, les armes de son peré.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Marquesses and Earles of Dorfet, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. OSmond Earle of Seez in Normandy, was by William Con∣queror made Bishop of Salisbury, & after, the first Earle of Dorset, (as M. Camden hath in his Britannia, pag. 217) But Milles, in Somerset Glouers Booke of the successions of Earles, pag. 392. hath, that the said Osmond was Earle of So∣merset; and therefore to which I shall giue credite, I leaue to the indifferent Reader. IOhn, Brother of king Richard the first, was Earle of Morton, Lancaster, and Cornwall, and Lord of the Mannour of Wal∣lingford, Marlesburgh, and Tikell; and in the right of Haw is his wife, (daughter, and one of the heires of William Earle of Glocester) Earle of Glocester; and after, by the guift of king Richard the first, Earle of Somerset and Dorset; and lastly, King of England, by the name of King Iohn. Et portoit, D'engleterre à la bande d'azur. IOhn sur-named Beaufort, sonne of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by the Lady Katherine Swynford, his third wife, was created Earle of Somerset, at a Parliament held the 20. yeare of king Richard the second: and in the 21. yeare of the said kings reigne, he was created Marquesse Dorset, and Lord Chamberlaine of England, and in the first yeare of King Henry the fourth, he was by Parliament deposed from the ti∣tle of Marquesse Dorset, and remained onely Earle of Somer∣set. This Iohn, with the rest of the Children which Iohn of Gaunt had, before marriage of the said Lady Swynford, were
made legitimate, by Parliament held at London, in the yeare, 1397. He married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, and Duke of Surrey, (and one of the sisters and heires of Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent and Lord Wake) by whom he had issue, Iohn Duke of Somerset, and Edmond, both Dukes of So∣merset, and Thomas a third sonne: he had also two daughters, Iane, married to Iames the first, king of Scots; and Margaret, which was married to Thomas Courtney Earle of Deuonshire. This Iohn, dyed in the 13. yeare of king Henry the fourth. Et portoit, escartellé France seme & D'engleterre à la bordure gobonne d'argent & d'azur. THomas Beaufort, third sonne of Iohn of Gaunt, by the La∣dy Katherine Swynford, was Earle of Perch, and after cre∣ated Earle of Dorset, in the 13. yeare of king Henry the fourth, 1412. And in the fourth yeare of king Henry the fift, hee was created Duke of Exeter, and had the leading of the Rere∣ward, at the battell of Egincourt, and after dyed without is∣sue, at his house at Greenwich, in the fift yeare of king Henry the sixt, being Gouernor of the kings person. He was buried at S. Edmonds-burie in Suffolke. Et portoit, escartellé France seme & D'engleterre à la bordure gobonne d'ar. gent & de azur. EDmond Beaufort, second sonne of Beaufort Earle of So∣merset, and grand-childe to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lan∣caster, was Earle of Moriton in Normandy, Lord of Chirke & Chirk-land in Wales, by the gift of king Henry the fift; and af∣ter was created Earle of Dorset, in the 21. of king Henry the sixt, 1442. And in the 23. of the said kings reigne, he was cre∣ated Marquesse Dorset: and lastly, in the 25. of king Henry the sixt, he was created Duke of Somerset. He was Regent of France, and comming into England, was slaine at the first battell of S. Albons, on the part of king Henry the sixt, against Richard Duke of Yorke, and was buried in the Abbey at S. Albons. He married Elianor, second daughter and one of the heyres of Richard Beauchamp Earle of Warwick, by whom he had issue, Henry Duke of Somerset, and Edmond Duke of Somerset, and Iohn, slaine at the battell of Tewkesbury; and fiue daughters, Margaret, wife to Humfrey Earle Stafford; Elizabeth, wife to Sir Henry Fitz-Lewis; Anne, wife to Sir William Paston knight; Iane, first married to the Lord Hoth of Ireland, and after to Sir Rich. Fry knight; Elianor, first married to Iames Butler Earle of Wiltshire, and after to Sir Robert Spencer, knight. Et portoit, les armes de son pere.
HEnry Beaufort, sonne of Edmond aforesaid, was Duke of Somerset, Marquesse Dorset, and Earle of Moritaine, Lord of Chirke and Chirkland in the Marchesse of Wales. He left king Henry the sixt, and took part with Edward of Yorke, who had then obtayned the Crowne. But afterwards he reuolted againe to king Henry, and fought the battell of Exham, where he was taken prisoner, and by Parliament, held the fourth of king Edward the fourth, was attainted and lost his head; lea∣uing no lawfull issue of his body; after whose death, his bro∣ther Edmond tooke vpon him the Title of Duke, Marquesse, and Earle; but he taking part with the Faction of Lancaster, against the house of Yorke, was also taken prisoner at the battel of Tewkesbury, in the yeare, 1471. by king Edward the fourth, and two dayes after was behea∣ded, leauing no issue of his body begotten. This Henry Beaufort, ☜ by his Con∣cubine Ioane Hill, had a sonne named Charles Somerset, whom king Henry the eight in the 5 yeare of his reign, created Earle of Worcester and Lord Herbert of Gower, of whom, Edward now Earle of Worcester, 1618. is descended. Et portoit, escartelle France & D'engleterre à la bordure gobonne d'argent & d'azur. THomas Grey, Knight of the honourable Order of the Garter, (and halfe Brother by the Mother to king Ed∣ward the fift) was in the fifteenth yeare of king Edward the fourth, created Lord Harington and Bonuile, and in the same yeare he was also created Marquesse Dorset. He married Ci∣cely, daughter and heire of William Bonuile Lord Harington, and had issue, seuen sonnes and eight daughters, viz. Edward and Anthony dyed young; Thomas the third sonne was Mar∣quesse Dorset after his Father; Richard, Iohn, and Leonard dy∣ed also young without issue; George the seuenth sonne was a Clarke: Dorothy the eldest daughter, was first married to Ro∣bert Willoughby Lord Brooke, and after to William Blount Lord Mountioy; Cecily married to Iohn Sutton Baron of Dudley; Elianor wife to Iohn Arundell of Lan∣heron in Cornwall, Esquire; Elizabeth was married to Gerald Fitz-Gerald, Earle of Kildare in Ireland; Mary was married to Walter Deuereux, Lord Ferrars of Chertley & Viscount Hereford; Margaret married to Richard Wake of Blisworth, Esquire; Bridget dyed young, and Anne was a Nunne. This Thomas, dyed in the tenth yeare of king Henry the seauenth, Anno, 1494. Et portoit, burelle de six d'argent & d'azur, trois torteaux en le chef à vne lambell de hermines.
THomas Grey, Marquesse Dorset, Lord Harington and Bon∣uile, (sonne and heire of Thomas Grey, Marquesse Dor∣set, and Cicely Bonuile) married Margaret, the widdow of Wil∣liam Medley, and daughter of Sir Robert Wotton of Bocton in Kent, knight, and had issue, Henry Grey Duke of Suffolke, and Lord Iohn Grey, who married Mary, sister of Sir Anthony Browne, Viscount Mountague, and had issue, Sir Henry Grey of Pergo, after made Baron of Groby, by king Iames, 1603. Ed∣ward Grey the third sonne, and Thomas the fourth sonne: he had three daughters also, which were thus married. Elizabeth was married to Thomas Lord Audley of Walden, and Chaun∣cellour of England; Katherine was wife to Henry Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell; and Anne the third daughter was married to Henry Willoughby of Wollerton in Nottinghamshire Esquire. This Thomas Marquesse Dorset, dyed in the 22. yeare of king Henry the eight, Anno, 1530. Et portoit, burelle de six d'argent & d'azur trois torteaux en le chef a vn lambell de hermines. HEnry Grey, the third Marquesse Dorset, Baron of Groby, Bonuile, Harington, and Astley, (sonne of the second Tho∣mas Marquesse Dorset, and Margaret Wotton) married Lady Frances, eldest daughter, and one of the heyres of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, and Mary Queene of France, his wife, by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Harington that dyed without issue; Iane married to the Lord Gilford Dudley, who were both beheaded; and Katherine the second daughter, said to be maried to Edward Seymour Earle of Hertford; Mary the third daughter maried Martyne Keys Serieant Porter. This Henry was by king Edward the sixt created Duke of Suffolke, 1551. and after was beheaded for treason, at the Tower-Hill neere London, the first of Queene Mary, 1553. Et portoit, les armoiries, de son pere. THomas Sackuile, (sonne and heire of Richard Sackuile of Buckherst, knight, Chancellour of the Exchequer) who in his youth was a Scholler in the Vniuersity of Oxford; and there profited so well, that he became an excellent Poet, lea∣uing many of his labours both in Latine and English to the world; After he became a Student in the Temple, where hee proceeded Barrester; from thence hee was called by the Queene and State, and created Baron of Buckherst, the ninth of Queene Elizabeth; and after, the 13. of March, 1603. by
King Iames was created Earle of Dorset in the Tower of London. He was also Lord high Treasurer of England, Knight of the Garter, and Chancellor of the Vniuersity of Oxford; and married Cecily, daughter of Sir Iohn Baker knight, of the priuy Counsel to Queen Mary, by whom he had issue, Robert Lord Buck∣hurst, after Earle of Dorset; Henry the second sonne: Sir William Sackuile knight, third sonne; and Thomas, fourth Son; and three daughters, Anne married to Sir Henry Glemham of Suffolke knight; Ioane married to Anthony Browne, Viscount Montague; Mary married to Sir Henry Neuill knight, sonne & heyre of Edward Baron of Abergauenny. This Thomas dyed sodainly of a dead Palsie, sitting in Counsell at White-Hall, in the yeare, 1608. Et portoit, escartelle d'or & de gueulles au baston de vaire. RObert Sackuile, sonne and heire of Thomas, was after his Father, Earle of Dorset, and married Lady Margaret, onely daughter of Thomas late Duke of Norfolke, by whom he had issue, Richard Sackuile the third Earle of Dorset of that Family; and Edward Sackuile, knight of the Bath at the cre∣ation of Prince Charles: hee had issue also, two daughters, Cecily married to Sir Henry Compton, knight of the Bath; and Anne married to Edward Seymour, sonne and heyre of Ed∣ward Seymour, and grand-childe to Edward Earle of Hart∣ford. This Robert, founded at East Griensted in Sussex, a Colledge for thirty and one poore people, and gaue to their maintenance, 330. pounds yearely to the worlds end; and dyed in the same yeare his Father dyed, at Dorset house in Fleetstreete, and was buried by his Fa∣ther in Sussex, 1608. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. RIchard Sackuile, Baron of Buckhurst, and the third Earle of Dorset, and sonne and heire of Robert Sackuile, the second Earle of Dorset of that Family, married the Lady Anne Clifford, daughter and sole heire of George Clifford Earle of Cumberland, by whom he hath issue now liuing, La∣dy Margaret Sackuile. Et portoit, escartelle d'or & de gueulles au baston de vair.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Essex, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. GEffrey Magna-uilla, sonne of William, and Grand∣childe to Geffrey Magna-uilla, which came into Eng∣land with William the Conqueror, was created Earle of Essex, by King Stephen; vnto whose Lettes Patents or Char∣ter, were Witnesses, William de Ipres, Henry de Essex, Iohn, Son of Robert Fitz-Walter, Robert de Newborough, and others. After, Mauld the Empresse winning him to her Faction, gaue him the Tower of London, the Towne of Walden in Essex, with the Shriffealty of Middlesex, Essex, and Hertford∣shire, to hold them as Geffrey his Grand-father held them; as also all the lands which Eudo (his grand-father by the Mo∣ther) the Sewer to king Henry the first, held in Normandy. He married Rohesia, daughter of Alberick de Vere, Chiefe-Iustice of England, and had issue Arnold, banished by king Stephen, Geffrey and William; and was after slaine with the shot of an Arrow, out of the Castle of Burwell, in the 9. yeare of King Stephen, 1143. Rose his wife, was after married to Payne Beauchamp, Baron of Bedford. Et portoit, escartelle d'or & de gueulles. GEffrey Magnauile, or Mandeuill, second sonne of Geffrey aforesaid, after the banishment of Arnold his elder bro∣ther, without issue, and the disinheriting of his Father by K. Stephen, was restored by king Henry the second, to the Earle∣dome of Essex, with the third penny of the pleas within that County. In which his Charter, he had confirmed vnto him all honours, priuiledges, and lands held by Geffrey his great grand-father, William his grand-father, and Geffrey his Fa∣ther; aswell in England as in Normandy, commanding, that he and his heyres should haue and hold the said County of Essex, as freely and lawfully, as any Earle in England or Nor∣mandy held his Earledome: Vnto which his Charter were Witnesses, Reginald Earle of Cornwall, Robert Earle of Leicester, Roger Earle of Clare, and others. He married Eustachia, kineswoman to king Henry the second, but had no issue by her. He dyed in the yeare of our Lord, 1165. Et portoit, les armes de son pere.
WIlliam Mandeuill, brother of Geffrey aforesaid, was the third Earle of Essex, (vnto whom king Henry the second gaue license by his Charter, to fortefie his Castle of Plessy in Essex.) He married Auice, daughter and heire of of William le Grosse Earle of Albemarle, in whose right he was also Earle of Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse in Yorkshire: and to his second wife, he married Christian, daughter of Ro∣bert Fitz-Walter, Lord of Woodham Water in Essex, and af∣ter dyed at Roane without issue, in the second yeare of King Richard the first; leauing Beatrix de Say, his Aunts grand∣childe, his heire, who was married to Geffrey Fitz-Piers of Ludgarshall, the fourth Earle of Essex. Et portoit, elcartellé d'or & de gueulles. GEffrey Fitz-Piers of Ludgarshall-Castle in Wilishire, Chiefe-Iustice of England, married to his first wife, Bea∣trix, eldest daughter of William Say, son & heire of Will. Say, & Beatrix his wife, sister of Geffrey Mandeuile Earle of Essex) In whose right, the said Geffrey Fitz-Piers (at the Coronation of K. Iohn) was made earle of Essex (the family of Mandeuils being then spent.) He had issue, 3. sons and one daughter, viz. Geffrey sur-named Mandeuile, Earle of Essex; William his brother also Earle of Essex; and Henry that was Deacon of Wolfren-Hampton; Mauld the daughter, was married to Hen∣ry de Bohun Earle of Hereford: after, this Geffrey married to his second wife, one Auelyne, and by her had issue, Iohn Fitz-Pters Lord of Berkhamsted, and Chiefe-Iustice of Ireland, who had to wife, Isa∣bell, daughter and heyre of Ralphe Bigot, and widdow of Gilbert Lacie. This Gef∣frey, dyed in the 14. yeare of King Iohn, 1212. Et portoit, gueulles à trois Cheurons componnee d'argent & d'azur. GEffrey Fitz-Piers, sirnamed Mandeuile, eldest son of Gef∣frey de Ludgarshal, was after his Father, Earle of Essex, & Lord of Plessy. He married Isabell, third daughter & heire of William Earle of Glocester, the repudiat wife of K. Iohn; for which he was fined to pay the king twenty thousand Marks, and so to haue all the Lands and Fees belonging to her, ex∣cept the Castle of Bristoll, and the Chases belonging to the same. He was slaine at a Tournament, held neere London, without issue, 1216. and was buried in the Priory of the Tri∣nity in London; after whose death, the said Isabell tooke to husband, Hugh de Burgo, Chiefe-Iustice of England. Et portoit, escartellé d'or & de gueulles à le escarboucle pomette & fleurette de sable brochant sur le tout.
WIlliam Fitz-Piers, second brother of Geffrey afore∣said, was after his brothers death the next Earle of Essex, and tooke part with Lewis the French kings sonne, a∣gainst king Henry the third. He intayled all his Lands with the Earledome of Essex, vpon Mauld his sister and heire, married to Henry de Bohun, Earle of Hereford, and Lord high Constable of England. He dyed without issue, in the three and twenty yeare of king Henry the third. Et portoit, les armes de son frere, viz. Escartelleé d'or & de gueulles à l'escar∣boucle pommette & fleutette d'or brochant fur le tout. HVmfrey de Bohun, the fift of that name, sonne and heire of Henry de Bohun and Mauld his wife, sister and heyre of Geffrey and William Fitz-Piers aforesaide, was Earle of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England; and married Mauld, daughter and heire of Ralphe de Issodon, Earle of Angi in Normandy, and brother of Hugh le Brun, Earle of the Mar∣ches of Aquitaine, as more at large doth appeare in the Ti∣tle of Earles of Hereford. Et portoit, d'azur à la band d'argent à deux cottizes entre six lions rampant d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the seuenth of that name, was after the death of Humfrey his grand-father, Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England, and Lord of Brecknock. He married Mauld, daughter of Ingelram de Fines, and had issue, Humfrey the eight, and dyed at Plessy in Essex, the 27. of king Edward the first, 1298. Et portoit, les armes de son pere.
HVmfrey de Bohun, the eight of that name, (sonne of Hum∣frey the sixt, which dyed before his Father) was Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England. He married Eli∣zabeth, daughter of king Edward the first, being the widdow of Iohn Earle of Holland, and had issue, Iohn, Humfrey, and William, all three Earles, and Edward and William, twins, as in the Title of Earles of Hereford. This Humfrey was slaine at Borough-bridge, the 15. of king Edward the second, 1322. IOhn de Bohun, (sonne and heire of Humfrey de Bohun the eight) after the death of his Father, was Earle of Hereford and Essex, &c. Hee married two wiues, as in the Title of Earles of Hereford, but had no issue. He dyed in the 9. yeare of king Edward the third, 1336. and was buried in the Abbey of Stratford neere London. Et portoit, d'azur à la band d'argent, à deux cottices entre six lions rampan d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the ninth of that name, sonne of Hum∣frey the eight, and brother and heire of Iohn aforesaide, was also Earle of Hereford and Essex, &c. He ouer-liued his younger brother William, Earle of Northampton, one yeare, one moneth, and fiue dayes; and dyed at Plessy in Essex, the 36. of king Edwird the third, 1361. and is buried in the Au∣gustine-Fryars in London. Les armes de son frere Ieane.
HVmfrey de Bohun, the tenth of that christen name, son and heire of William de Bohun Earle of Northampton, and Ne∣phew and heire of Iohn de Bohun the eight, and Humfrey the ninth, his Vnckles, was after their deaths, Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of England. He mar∣ried Iane, daughter of Richard Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell, and had issue, two daughters his heires; Elianor the eldest was married vnto Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester, with the Earledome of Essex, and Constableship of Eng∣land; and Mary the second daughter was married to Henry Plantagenet Earle of Derby (after king Henry the fourth) with the Earledomes of Hereford and Northampton, & the Lord∣ship of Brecknock, and the Patronage of Lanthony. This Humfrey dyed, and was buried at Walden, the 46. yeare of king Edward the third, 1371. Et portoit, d'azur à la band d'argent à deuz cottizes entre 6. lions rampant d'or. HEnry Bourchier (sonne of William Bourchier, created Earl of Ewe in Normandy, the fift of king Henry the fift, and of Anne his wife, daughter and heyre of Thomas of Wood∣stocke, Duke of Glocester, & of Elianor his wife, eldest daugh∣ter and co-heyre of Humfrey de Bohun, the last Earle of Here∣ford and Essex of that name) in his Charter, bearing date the eleuenth of king Henry the sixt, writ himselfe Earle of Ewe and Lord Bourchier; and in the 25 yeare of the saide Kings Reigne, by another Charter he writ himselfe Earle of Ewe, and Viscount Bourchier: lastly, in the 27. yeare of king Hen∣ry the sixt, Richard Duke of Yorke did confirme certain lands vnto him in marriage with Isabell his sister, by the name of Henry Viscount Bourchier; giuing her also an anuity of a hundred pounds per annum. So that it seemeth, that when Charles the French King had recouered Normandy, all Titles of honour of English-men ceasled, (for of right, no man can carry a title of dig∣nity of another mans land or inheritance.) In the 35. yeare of the said K. Henry the 6. this Henry was created Viscount Bourchier. And lastly, in the first yeare of K. Edward the 4. he was created Earle of Essex, in right of Elianor de Bohun his grand-mother, wife of the foresaid Thomas of Woodstocke. This Henry Bourchier married Isabell, daughter of Richard Earle of Cambridge, and sister of Richard D. of Yorke, and had issue, William Bourchier, who married Anne, daughter & one of the heyres of Rich. Wooduile Earle Riuers, & dyed before his father; Henry Bour∣chier 2. Son married Elizabeth, daughter and heire of Thomas L. Scales; Humfrey Bourchier 3. Son married Ioane, cousin & heire of Ralph L. Cromwell of Tatershall in Lincolnshire; Thomas Bourchier 4. Son, married Isabell, daughter & heire of Sir Iohn Barry knight; Iohn Bourchier 5. Son, maried Elizabeth, daughter & heire of Henry L. Ferrars of Groby; Edward 6. Son, was slaine at Wakefield; & Fouke the 7. son died yong. This Hen. Earle of Essex, died in the 23. of K. Edw. the 4. 1482. Porter, d'argent a la creix engreflee de gueulles, entre quatre busleuz de sable.
HEnry Bourchier, sonne and heyre of William Bourchier, that dyed before his Father) and grand-childe to Henry Earle of Essex next before mentioned, was after the death of his said Grand-father, Earle of Essex and Viscount Bour∣chier. He married Anne, daughter and heyre of Sir William Say knight, and had issue, one onely daughter named Anne, married to William Lord Parre of Kendall, who in her right was Earle of Essex. This Henry brake his necke with the fall from his horse, the 31. yeare of King Henry the eight. 1539. Et portoit, d'argent à la Croix engreslee de gueulles; entre quatre busseux de sable. THomas Cromwell (sometimes seruant to Cardinall Wol∣sey) was created Baron Cromwell of Okeham in Rutland∣shire, the 28. of King Henry the eight; and on the 14. day of Aprill, the 31. of King Henry the eight, he was created Earle of Essex: at which time the king deliuered him a Patent for the Lord Chamberlainship of England. He writ in his stile, Earle of Essex, Vicegerent, great Chamberlaine of England, Keeper of the priuy Seale, Chancellor of the Exchequer, & Iustice of the Forrests and Chases, from the Riuer of Trent Northward. He maried one of the daughters of one Williams of Wales, and had issue, Gregory Cromwell, who was created Lord Cromwell, the same time his Father was created Earle of Essex. This Thomas being in the Counsell Chamber the 9. of Iuly, in the 31. of Henry the eight, was arrested, and the 19. of the same Moneth was attain∣ted by Parliament, neuer comming to answere; and the 27. of Iuly after was beheaded at the Tower Hill. Et portoit, d'azur seu vne fees entre, trois lion ceaux rampant d'or, vne Rose gueulles, entre deux cornish choughes propre. WIlliam Parre, created Baron of Kendall, the ninth of March, in the 31. yeare of king Henry the eight; and in the 25. yeare of the said kings Reigne, he was created Earle of Essex at Hampton-Court, in regard hee had married Anne, the daughter & heire of Henry Bourchier late Earle of Essex, from whom afterwards he was diuorced for her incontinen∣cy. He was lastly created Marquesse of Northampton, in the first yeare of king Edward the sixt, and married to his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of George Brooke Lord Cobham, and after her decease, he tooke to his third wife, Ellen, daughter of George Saueburgh a Swedian borne, (which yet liueth, 1618.) He dyed without issue, and was buried at Warwicke, in the yeare, 1571. leauing Anne his sister and heyre married to William Herbert Earle of Pembrooke. Et portoit, d'argent à deux faces d'azur, à la bordure engreslee de sable.
WAlter Deuereux, Viscount Hereford, and Lord Fer∣rars of Chertley, (sonne of Richard, sonne of Walter, sonne of Iohn Deuereux, and Cecily Bourchier, the sister of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, and cousin and heire of Anne Bourchier, late wife of William Parre, Marquesse of Northamp∣ton) was created Earle of Essex by Queene Elizabeth, in the yeare, 1571. and after made Marshall of Ireland. He married Lettice, daughter of Sir Francis Knolles, knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of the said Queenes houshold, and sister of William Lord Knolles, Baron of Grais, and Viscount Walling∣ford; by whom he had issue, Robert Earle of Essex, Sir Walter Deuereux, slaine at the siedge of Lisbon, Penelope, married to Robert Lord Rich, and Dorothy, first married to Sir Thomas Perrot knight, and after to Henry Percie Earle of Northumberland. This Walter dyed at Dublyn in Ireland, 1575. and was buried at Carmarden in Wales, where he was borne. Et portoit, d'argent à la face de gueulles trois torteaux en le chef. RObert Deuereux, sonne of Walter, was Earle of Essex, and Earle Marshall of England, Viscount Hereford, Baron Ferrars of Chartley, Lord Bourchier and Louaine, Master of the Horse and Ordenance to Queene Elizabeth, Knight of the Garter, one of her Maiesties priuy Counsell, and Chan∣cellour of the Vniuersity of Cambridge; married Frances, daughter and heyre of Sir Francis Walsingham, principall Se∣cretary to Queene Elizabeth, being the widdow of Sir Philip Sydney knight; by whom hee had issue Robert, now Earle of Essex. This Robert was attainted of high treason, and for the same was beheaded within the Tower of London, the 25. of February, 1601. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. RObert Deuereux, sonne and heyre of Robert, after the death of his Father, was by king Iames restored in blood and liuing, and is now, 1618. Earle of Essex, Viscount Here∣ford, &c.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes, Marquesses and Earles of Excester, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. IOhn Holland knight, (second Son of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent) was created Earle of Huntingdon, in the eleuenth yeare of king Richard the second; and in the 21. of the same Kings reigne, he was created Duke of Exeter. And because Aubrey de Vere Earle of Oxford, who held the Office of Lord Chamberlaine of England, had released his right therein, the said King Richard bestowed that great Office vpon this Iohn, and the heyres male of his body begotten, by Letters Pa∣tents, bearing date the 21. of the said Kings reigne. He marri∣ed Elizabeth, daughter of Iohn of Gaunt. Duke of Lancaster, and Blanch his wife, and had issue, Richard that dyed young, Iohn Duke of Excester, and Earle of Huntingdon, Edward that dyed without is∣sue, and Constance a daughter, first married to Thomas Mowbrey, sonne & heyre of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, banished by King Richard the second, and after to Iohn Lord Grey of Ruthyn. This Iohn Holland, in the first yeare of King Henry the fourth, was deposed by Parliament from being Duke of Exce∣ster; and after in the same yeare, he was beheaded at Cicester. Et portoit, D'engleterre à la bordure de France. THomas Beauford, (sonne of Iohn of Gaunt, begotten of the lady Katherine Swyneford, his third wife) was created Earle of Perch in Normandy, and made Lord Chancellour of England, the 12. of king Henry the fourth; and in the foure∣teenth yeare of the said kings Reigne, hee was created Earle of Dorset; and lastly, in the fourth yeare of king Henry the fift, he was created Duke of Excester, and made Knight of the Order of the Garter. He had the leading of the Rere∣ward at the battell of Edgincourt, and the gouernement of King Henry the sixt, at his Coronation committed vnto him, during his minority. He married Margaret, daughter of Sir Thomas Neuill of Horneby-Castle, but by her had no issue. He dyed at his house of East-Greenwich in Kent, and was buried at S. Edmonds∣bury in Suffolke, the fift of Henry the sixt, leauing the King his heire. Et portoit escartellé, France & D'engleterre, au bordure gobonne d'argent & d'azur.
IOhn Holland (sonne of Iohn aforesaid) was Earle of Hun∣tington, and of Iuory in Normandy, Lord of Sparre, Lieute∣nant generall of the Dukedome of Aquitaine, Admirall of England, and Constable of the Tower of London, whom King Henry the sixt created Duke of Excester, in the yeare, 1443 at Windsore. He married two wiues, the first was Anne, daughter of Edmond Earle Stafford, by whom hee had issue, Henry Holland Duke of Excester. And to his second wife, he married Anne, daughter of Iohn Mountacute Earle of Salis∣bury, and by her had issue, a daughter named Anne, first mar∣ried to Iohn Lord Neuill, sonne and heire of Ralphe Neuill the second Earle of Westmerland, by whom she had no issue. Se∣condly, she married Sir Thomas Neuill knight, (brother of Ralphe Neuill the se∣cond Earle of Westmerland, and Vnckle to Iohn her former husband) by whom she had issue, Ralphe Neuill the third Earle of Westmerland: the said Anne, the 4. yeare of Edw. 4. married to her 3. husband, Iames Earle Douglas. This Iohn Hol∣land died in the 26. yeare of K. Henry the 6 and lyeth buried by his two Wiues, in S. Katherines Church by the Tower of London. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. HEnry Holland, onely sonne of Iohn Holland Duke of Ex∣cester aforesaid, (by his first wife the Lady Anne Staf∣ford) was after his Fathers death, Duke of Excester, & Earle of Huntington; who in the first yeare of king Edward the 4. was disinherited by Acte of Parliament, with Henry Duke of Somerset, and Thomas Earle of Deuonshire; and in the 13. yeare of the said kings Reigne, he was found dead in the Sea, betweene Douer and Calice. He married Anne, daughter of Richard Duke of Yorke, and sister to king Edward the 4. but by her had no issue. She was after married to Sir Thomas sainto Leodegario (or S. Leoger) knight, and had issue by him, a daughter named Anne, married to George Mannors Lord Ros of Hamlake. This Henry Holland so found drowned, was buried at Westminster, on the South∣side of the Chappell, with these Armes on his Toombe and Targe. Et portoit, les Armes D'engleterre au bordure de France. HEnry Courtney, Earle of Deuon, Lord of Ochampton, and Knight of the Garter (sonne of William Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, and Katherine his wife, daughter of King Ed∣ward the fourth) was created Marques of Excester at Bride∣well, the 8. of Iune, 1525. in the seuenteenth of King Hen∣ry the 8. He maried two wiues, the first was Elizabeth, daugh∣ter and heire of Iohn Grey, Viscount Lisle, who dyed without issue. His 2. wife was Gertrude, daughter of William Blount, L. Mountioy, (and heire to Elizabeth her mother, who was
daughter and heire of Sir William Say knight) by whom he had issue, Edward the last Earle of Deuonshire, who dyed without issue. This Henry Marquesse of Excester, was attainted of high treason, for ayding of Reginald Poole Cardi∣nall and a fugitiue with money, &c. (as in the Title of Deuonshire) and was be∣headed with Henry Poole Lord Mountague, and Sir Edward Neuill knight, in the thirtieth yeare of king Henry the eight. His last wife Gertrude was also attain∣ted of high treason the same yeare, but not executed; she dyed afterward, and was buried at Wynborne Mynster in Dorsetshire in the yeare, 1557. Et portoit, escartelleé, France & D'engleterre à vne bordure escartelleé de lun en l'autre, escartelle, Courtney qui est d'or trois torteaux; le tiers le mesme: le quart; Riuerijs, qui est, d'or au lion rampant d'azur. THomas Cecill, Baron of Burghley, (sonne and heyre of William Cecill, Baron of Burghley, and Lord high Trea∣surour of England) was created Earle of Excester at Greene∣wich, in the third yeare of King Iames. He married Dorothie, daughter and one of the co-heyres of Iohn Neuill Lord La∣tymer, and had issue, foure sonnes and sixe daughters, viz. William Cecill Lord Burghley, who married Elizabeth, daughter and heyre of Edward Mannors Earle of Rutland, and had issue, William Lord Ros, Sir Richard Cecill Knight, Sir Edward Cecill knight, and Thomas Cecill Esquire, fourth sonne. Luce the eldest daughter, was married to William Paulet Marquesse of Wynchester; Mildred the second daughter, was married first to Sir Thomas Read, knight, and after to Sir Edmond Trafford of Lancashire, knight; Mary the third daughter, was married to the Lord Denny; Elizabeth the fourth daughter, first married to Sir William Hatton, alias Newport, knight; and after to Sir Edward Coke knight, Lord Chiefe-Iustice of the kings Bench, & one of his Maiesties most honorable priuy Counsell; Dorothy the fift daughter was married to Sir Gyles Allington of Hounslow-Heath knight; and Francis the sixt daughter was married to Sir Richard Tufton, knight. Et portoit, burelle de six pieces d'argent & d'azur, sur le tout six escussons de sable, charge de six lyons d'argent.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Ewe, or Augy in Normandy, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. VVIlliam Earle of Ewe and Mutterell, came into England with William Conqueror, who gaue him the Mannors of Tudenham, Woleston, and Aluer∣deston, with all other such lands as hee could get or conquer from the Welsh. He was after banished England for rebelli∣on, and his lands giuen away to Walter Fitz-Richard, sonne of Constance, sister of this William Earle of Ewe. The saide Walter Fitz-Richard, conquered Nether-Gwent, and halfe the Country of Lege. He founded the Abbey of Tynterne, and dyed without issue, in the third yeare of King Stephen; leauing his inheritance to Gilbert, sur-named Strongbow, Earl of Pembrooke, his Nephew, and was after buried at Tynterne. IOhn Earle of Augie (sonne of Iohn) married Alice, daugh∣ter of William Daubigney Earle of Chichester, by Alice his wife, late widdow of king Henry the first, and had issue, Hen∣rie Earle of Augie, Iohn de Augie, Matilda and Margaret, and after dyed in the yeare of our Lord, 1171. the 18. of Henry the second. HEnry Earle of Augie sonne of Iohn) gaue to the Monks of Bermondsey in Southwarke, his lands called Osware∣ston, neere Romenelin in the Parish of Lida, and the lands of Iohn the Clarke in Belsinton, and married and had issue, Alice his onely daughter and heire, married to Ralphe de Isodon, 1241. 26. Henry the 3.
RAlphe de Isondon (sonne of Geffrey de Luzigna, Earle of the Marchesse of Aquitaine in France, and brother of Hugh le Brun) married Alice, daughter and heire of Henry Earle of Angy in Normandy, and in her right was Earle of Angie, after the death of Henry her Father aforesaid. This Ralphe, in the first yeare of king Iohn, was one of the Noble∣men that swore the league betweene the saide king, and the Earle of Flanders. Hee had issue, one onely daughter his heire, named Mauld, married to Humfrey de Bohun, Earle of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England. Et portoit, barre d'argent & d'azur au lambell de gueulles de cinq pieces. WIlliam Bourchier, created Earle of Ewe, at Maunt in Normandy, the fift of king Henry the fift; and marri∣ed Anne, daughter of Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Gloce∣ster, and sister and one of the heyres of Humfrey her bro∣ther, and had issue, Henry Bourchier, Earle of Ewe and Essex; William Lord Fitz-Warrin; Iohn Lord Bernes, and Thomas Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and Cardinall of S. Cirac in Rome; and Anne his daughter, was married to Iohn Mow∣bray Duke of Norfolke. This William, dyed in the eight yeare of King Henry the fift, at Troys in Champaine; and his body being brought ouer Sea into England, was buried at Eyston, in Kent. Et portoit, d'argent au croix engreslee de gueulles, entre quatre buffeux de fable. HEnry Bourchier, sonne and heire of William aforesaide, was after the death of his Father, Earle of Ewe in Nor∣mandy, vntill the 28. yeare of king Henry the sixt, that Charles the French king had recouered that earledome to the crown of France. Afterwards he sate in Parliament, by the name & title of Lord Bourchier, vntill the 35. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, that he was created Viscount Bourchier, king Edward the fourth in the first yeare of his reigne, created him Earle of Essex: and in the 13. of king Edward the fourth, he was Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, as in the title of Essex is more at large. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles of Glocester and Hartford, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RObert, sur-named the Consull of Glocester, base sonne of King Henry the first, (begotten of Nest, the daughter of Rhice ap Tewder, Prince of South-Wales, who was after married to Girald de Wyndesore, Constable of Penbroke-Castle, and auncestour of the Earles of Kildare in Ireland) in the 11. yeare of his Fa∣thers Reigne, was created Earle of Glocester. He assisted and tooke part with Mauld the Empresse, his halfe sister, against K. Stephen the Vsurper; which Stephen being taken prisoner, and imprisoned in the Castle of Bristoll: This Robert, very shortly after, was likewise taken by King Stephens forces; whereupon it was concluded, that a King for an Earle, and an Earle for a King, should make an exchange, and eyther set the other at liber∣ty. He married Mabell, daughter and one of the foure heyres of Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord of Corboil in Normandy, Cardiffe in Wales, and Tewksbury in Eng∣land, and had issue, William Earle of Glocester, Roger Bishop of Wynchester, Ri∣chard Bishop of Bayon in Normandy, and Hamon slaine at Tholouze, with Willi∣am King Stephens sonne, 1160. He had also two daughters, one named Mabell, married to Aubre de Vere; the second was Matilda, married to Randolphe Gerno∣nijs, Earle of Chester. This Robert, builded the Castles of Bristoll and Caerdiffe in Wales, and the Monastery of S. Iames by Bristoll, and dyed in the 12. yeare of King Stephen, and was buried in the saide Monastery, 1146. Et portoit, de gueulles au trois Restes des Armes d'or.
WIlliam, sonne and heire of Robert Consull, was after his Father, Earle of Glocester, and Lord of Glamor∣gan, in right of his grand-father Robert Fitz-Hamon, who wonne the said Lordship, from Iustine ap Gurgan, Lord of Glamorgan, in King William Ruphus time; and made his a∣bode in the said Castle of Caerdiffe, where the saide Robert kept his Courts Monethly, and vsed therein Iura Regalia, hauing his twelue Knights to attend him the first day, they hauing senerall Lodgings giuen to them, & their heires for euer within the said Castle. He married Hawis, daugh∣ter of Robert Bossu Earle of Leicester, and had issue, Robert that dyed before his Father, 1166. and three daughters; Mabell the eldest, was married vnto Al∣mericke Mountfort, Earle of Eureux in Normandy; Amicia was married to Ri∣chard, Earle of Clare and Hartford; and Isabell the third daughter of this Willi∣am, was first married to King Iohn, and from him was diuorced for neerenesse of kinne; and after she was married to Geffrey Mandeuill Earle of Essex; and for her third husband, she tooke Hugh de Burgo, Earle of Kent, and Lord Chiefe-Iustice of England. This William, built the Abbey of Keinsham, and dyed in the yeare of our Lord, 1183. and was buried in the said Monastery. M. Glouer Somerset Herald, hath, that King Henry the second, after the death of this Willi∣am without issue Male, gaue the Title and Earledome of Glocester, to Iohn his son, who married Isabell, the third daughter of the said William; and gaue to Mabell the eldest daughter, married to Almericke Mountfort, one hundred pounds; and to Amicia the second daughter, wife to the Earle of Clare, another hundredpounds. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. IOhn (sur-named Without Land) the fourth sonne of King Henry the second, in right, or by reason of his wife Isabell, third daughter and co-heyre of William Earle of Glocester, was made Earle of Glocester by the said King his Father, in the yeare, 1187. Afterwards, King Richard the first, his bro∣ther, in his loue and bounty gaue him the Earledomes of Cornewall, Deuon, Nottingham, and Lancaster; after whose death, he came to be King, by the name of King Iohn. And because Isabell his wife was counted barren, a diuorce was procured from the Pope, and he married againe to Isabell, daughter of the Earle of Angolesme, by whom hee had issue, King Henry the third. Et portoit, les armes d'engleterre au baston d'azur brochant sur le tout.
ALmerick Mountfort, Earle of Eureux in Normandy, after the diuorce of King Iohn, from his wife Isabell, yongest daughter & co-heire of Will: Earle of Glocester, was the next Earle of Glocester, in right of his mother Mabell, eldest daugh∣ter and heire of the fore-said William Earle of Glocester, in the second yeare of king Iohn. He maried Millescent, daughter of Hugh Gurney and of Iulian his wife, sister to Reginald Earle Bullen, and had with her in marriage, the Mannor of Hans∣ton, but by her had no issue. She was after married to William Cantelupe, and had issue, Thomas Bishop of Hereford, and Iu∣lian married to Robert Tregoz, Lord of Ewias Herald. This Almerick dyed, and was buried in the Monastery of Kenisham. Et portoit, de gueulles party & endenté d'argent de six pieces. GEffrey de Mandeuile, Earle of Essex, sonne of Geffrey Fitz-Piers of Ludgarshal, maried Isabel, the third daugh∣ter and co-heire of William Earle of Glocester, (the repudiat wife of K. Iohn) & was after the death of Almerick Mount∣fort without issue, made Earle of Glocester, and by that name and title was a Witnesse to king Iohns Charter of lands and liberties, that he gaue to the Church of Dyrham. This Gef∣frey died without issue, in the yeare, 1216. the last yeare of king Iohn, of a wound giuen him at a Tournament helde at London, leauing William Mandeuile his brother to succeed him in the Earledome of Essex, and Gilbert de Clare in the Earledome of Glocester. Et portoit, escartellé d'or & de gueulles à le escarboucle pomette & fleurette de sable brochant sur le tout. GIlbert de Clare (son and heire of Richard earle of Clare & Hartford, by Amicia second daughter and co-heyre of William Earle of Glocester) was after the death of Geffrey Mā∣deuill, made Earle of Glocester; and in the 9. yeare of K. Hen. the 3. he was a Witnesse to the saide kings Charter, of lands that he gaue to the Abbey of Peterborough, by the name of Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Glocester and Hertford. He married Isabell, the 3. daughter of William Marshall the elder, and sister & co-heire of Anselm Marshall Earle of Penbroke, & Marshal
of England, by whom he had issue, Richard Earle of Clare, Glocester, and Hert∣ford; Gilbert and William twins; and three daughters, Isabell the eldest, was wife to Kobert Brus, of Annanderdale in Scotland; Amie the second daughter, was married to Baldwyn Riuers Earle of Deuon, and Lord of the Isle of Wight; Anne third daughter dyed young. Hee dyed at Penros in Britatne, and was buried in the Priory of Tewkesbury, the fourteenth of king Henry the third: his widdow was after married to Richard Earle of Cornwall, and King of Romans. Et portoit, d'or à trois Cheurons de guenles. RIchard de Clare, second Earle of Glocester of that name, married two wiues, the first was Margaret, daughter of Hubert de Burgo, Earle of Kent, and Chiefe-Iustice of Eng∣land, by whom he had no issue. His second wife was Matil∣da, daughter of Iohn Lacie Earle of Lancolne, and Constable of Chester, by whom he had issue, three sonnes, and three daughters; Gilbert the eldest sonne, was after his Father Earle of Glocester; Thomas the second sonne, was Steward of the Forests in Essex, (who maried Iulian, daughter of Mau∣rice Fitz-Maurice of Ireland, and had issue, Gilbert, Richard, and Thomas) Beuis the third sonne, was a Church-man in Yorke Mynster; Margaret the eldest daughter, married Edmond Earle of Cornwall, sonne of Ri∣chard Earle of Cornwall, and king of Romanes; Rose the second daughter of Ri∣chard de Clare Earle of Glocester, maried Roger Lord Mowbray of Axholme; and Isabell the third daughter, was a Nunne at Barking in Essex. Grafton and Fabi∣an saith, that this Richard died in the yeare, 1260. and that Gilbert his sonne suc∣ceeded him, to whom the Father gaue great charge, to maintaine the Statutes made as Oxford. But M. Milles hath in M. Somersets Book of Earles, p. 370. that (the Annals of S. Augustines in Canterbury hath) he died in the yeare, 1262. at Emeresfield in Kent, at the Lord Iohn Crioils house; and that his bowels were buried at Canter∣bury, in Christ-Church; his heart at Tunbridge, and his body at Tewkesbury. Diuers other good authors affirme, that this Richard Earle of Glocester dyed in France.
GIlbert de Clare (sur-named the Rea) sonne and heyre of Richard aforesaid, was the third Earle of Glocester and Hereford of that sur-name, and married two wiues; the first was Alice, the widdow of Iohn Earle Warren and Surrey, daughter of Hughle Brun, Earle of Angolesme, and of the Marches of Aquitaine, by whom he had issue, a daughter na∣med Isabell, married to Maurice Lord Berkley. This Alice falling mad, was diuorced from this Gilbert her husband; af∣ter which diuorce, the second of May, 1290. at Westminster, the said Gilbert married Ioane, daughter of king Edward the first (sur named Ioane of Acres, because shee was borne at Acres in the Holy-Land;) by whom he had issue, Gilbert the fourth Earle of Glocester and Hertford; and three daughters, Elianor the eldest, was married to Hugh Lord Spencer; Elizabeth the second daughter, was first married to Iohn Burgh Earle of Vlster; secondly, she was married to Theobald Lord Verdon; and thirdly, to Sir Roger Damory, Baron of Armoye in Ireland. Isa∣bell the third daughter, was first married to Pierce of Gaueston, Earle of Corn∣wall, by whom she had no issue; and after, to Hugh Lord Audley the younger. This Gilbert, before the marriage with his last wife Ioane, had lost the fauour of king Edward the first, for refusing to go with him ouer Seas, to the ayde of Guy, Earle of Flanders, against the then French King: for which cause, king Edward seized all the said Gilberts Lands, and forced him after to marry his daughter without dower, lands, or money: which done, the said King granted backe a∣gaine all the Lands, confirming them to the said Gilbert, and Ioane his wife, & the issue begotten of their two bodies, in Fee-Farme. This Gilbert, dyed in the Castle of Mounmoth, in the 24. yeare of king Edward the first, and was buried in Tewkesbury Priory, by his Father, 1295. Et portoit, d'or, à trois cheurons de gueulles. RAlphe de Mounte-hermer, (seruant to Gilbert de Clare and Ioane of Acres) after the death of Earle Gtlbert, married the said Ioane his Mistris, in the yeare, 1296. Which marriage being done without the knowledge and consent of king Ed∣ward her Father, this Ralphe was committed to prison, in the Castle of Bristoll; and all those Lands and Castles as he had formerly made ouer to the saide Ioane and her former hus∣band Gilbert, he caused to bee seized againe into his hands. But shortly after, by the intercession of Anthony Bec, Bishop
of Duresme, a peace was made betweene the K. & his daughter, & her new hus∣band; & the yeare following, 1297. at a Parliament held at London, her former lands were restored to her again, with others: & in the 27. yeare of the said kings Reigne, the same Ralphe was summoned to Parliament, by the name and title of Earle of Glocester and Hertford, and by that name and title of honour, hee sate in all Parliaments after, vntill the first yeare of king Edward the second, 1307. In which yeare, young Gilbert de Clare being of age, was admitted to his lands and honours, and sate in Parliament alwayes after, as Earle of Glocester and Hereford, during his life. And the said Ralphe Mount-hermer (his Father in law) was euer after summoned, and sate in all Parliaments, as Lord Mount-hermer. This Ralphe had issue by his Countesse Ioane, two sonnes, Edward Mount her∣mer that dyed without issue, and was buried in the Augustine-Fryars at Clare; and Sir Thomas Mount-hermer knight, who married and had issue, Margaret, married to Iohn Mounta-cute, and had issue, Iohn Mounta-cute Earle of Salisbury. He dyed in the 17. yeare of king Edward the second, 1323. and Ioane his Coun∣tesse, dyed in the yeare, 1305. at her Mannor of Clare. Et portoit, d'or, à l'aigle de vert, membres, & becquez de gueulles. GIlbert de Clare (sonne & heire of Gilbert de Clare, sur-na∣med the Red, & Ioane of Acres) was the last Earle of Glo∣cester and Hartford of that firname and Family. He married Matilda, daughter of Iohn de Burgh, son & heire of Rich. Earle of Vlster in Ireland, and had issue, a son which died in his in∣fancy. This Gilbert being, with K. Edw. the 2. in Scotland, to raize the siedge of Sterling-Castle, was there slaine in the yeare, 1313. whō the Scots would gladly haue saued for ran∣some, had they knowne him; but he had neglected to put on his Coate of Armes ouer his armor. With him were slain (as Tho: Walsingham hath) Sir Edmond Mauley, Sir Robert Clifford, Sir Paine Tiptoft, Sir William Marshall, & Sir Gyles Argentyne, knights, with many others. K. Robert Brus caused the bodies of this Gilbert Earle of Glocester, & Sir Robert Clifford, to be sent to K. Edw. being then at Barwick, to be buried at his pleasure, demanding no reward for the same. This Gilbert was borne at Tewkesbury, in the yeare, 1291. & was there buried by his Father, lea∣uing his inheritance to be diuided between his three sisters his heires, who were
married as before is expressed. The partition of these lands, were made in the eleuenth yeare of the reigne of king Edward the second. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. HVgh de Audley, (second sonne of Nicholas Lord Audley, and grand-childe of Iames Lord Audley of Heleigh, and of Ela his wife, daughter of William Longespee, sonne & heire of William Longespee Earle of Salisbury) after the death of the last Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, at a Parliament held at Westminster, the eleuenth yeare of king Edward the third. This Hugh Audley, was made Earle of Glocester, Henry of Lancaster, Earle of Derby, William Mountague, Earle of Sa∣lisbury; William Clinton, Earle of Huntington; and Robert Vf∣ford, Earle of Suffolke; and did all sitte, and had place and voyce in the saide Parliament by those honourable Titles. He married Isabell, the third sister and co-heire of the last Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, and had issue, one onely daughter, Isabell married to Ralphe, first Earle Stafford; and after dyed in the yeare, 1347. and was buried in the Priory of Tunbridge. Et portoit, gueulles fretté d'or, à la bordure d'argent. THomas of Woodstocke, sixt sonne of King Edward the third, in the fiftieth yeare of his Fathers Reigne, sate in Parliament held at Westminster, by the title onely of Con∣stable of England; which Office he did execute, in right of Elianor his wife, eldest daughter and one of the two heyres of Humfrey de Bohun, Earle of Hereford, Essex, & Northamp∣ton, and Constable of England; and in the first yeare of king Richard the second, he was made Earle of Buckingham and Northampton; and in the ninth yeare of the saide Kings Reigne, he was created Duke of Glocester; and after, in the yeare, 1397 he was taken by force from his Castle of Plessy in Essex, by Thomas Mowbray, first Earle Marschall, and conuayed to Callis, and there strangled to death with Towels; after whose death, Elianor his wife be∣came a Nunne in the Abbey of Barking in Essex. This Thomas, by Elianor his wife had one onely sonne named Humfrey, Earle of Buckingham, and 4. daugh∣ters; the sonne (after his Fathers death) with Lord Henry, sonne to the Duke of Hereford, was by King Richard the second banished into Ireland, where he re∣mained as prisoner, in the Castle of Tryme, vntill the first yeare of king Henry the fourth; and then being sent for into England, dyed of the plague at Chester, in his returne homeward, without issue, in the yeare, 1399. Anne, the eldest sister and co-heyre of this Humfrey, was married first to Edmond Earle Stafford, and after to William Bourchier Earle of Ewe in Normandy; Ioane the second sister, was married to Gilbert Lord Talbot; Isabell was a Nunne in the Minories by London; and Philip the fourth sister dyed young, without issue. Et portoit, escartelleé France seme & D'engleterre, à la bordure de argent.
THomas Lord Spencer, great grand-childe to Hugh Lord Spencer the younger, and Elianor his wfe, eldest sister & co-heyre of Gilbert de Clare, the last Earle of Glocester afore∣said, was created Earle of Glocester, in the 21. yeare of king Richard the second and in the first yeare of king Henry the fourth, he was deposed by Acte of Parliament, from the ti∣tle and dignity of Earle of Glocester, and was behded at Bristoll, 1400. He married Constance, daughter of Edmond of Langley Duke of Yorke, and had issue, Richard Lord Spencer, that dyed without issue the Kings Ward; and two daugh∣ters, Elizabeth that dyed yong at Caerdiffe in South-Wales, & Isabell, who was borne 7. months after her Fathers death; & was twice maried, first to Richard Beauchamp, Earle of Worcester, and Lord of A∣bergauenny, by whom she had issue Elizabeth: her second husband was Richard Beauchamp Earle of Warwick (cousin-germane to her other husband) by whom she had issue, Henry Duke of Warwicke. Et portoit, d'argent, escartelle gueulles frette d'or, au baston de sable, brochant sur le tout. HVmsrey Plantagenet, fourth sonne of king Henry the 4. was at a Parliament held at Westminster the second of king Henry the fift, created first Earle of Pembroke, and after Duke of Glocester; and in the first yeare of King Henry the sixt, he was by Parliament, made Protector of England, du∣ring the Kings minority, (which was fifteene yeares) and writ in his Stile, Humfrey Duke of Gocester, Earle of Henault, Holland, Zealand, and Penbroke, Lord of Frisia, great Cham∣berleine of England, and Defender of the Realme of Eng∣land. He married two wiues, the first was Iaquet, daughter & sole heyre of William Duke of Bauaria & Holland; (the then wife of Iohn Duke of Brabant) from whom hee was diuor∣ced, hauing no issue by her: his second wife was Elianor, daughter of Reginald Lord Cobham of Sterburgh in Surrey (who long before had bene his Paramore) by whom he had no lawfull issue. After, at a Parliament held at S. Edmonds∣bury in Suffolke, 1446. he was arrested of high Treason, & within few dayes af∣ter, he was found strangled to death, in the Abbey of Bury, by the procurement of the Marquesse of Suffolke. He builded the Diuinity Schoole in Oxford, and his Mannour house of Greinwich, and embattelled the same. Hee had issue, a base daughter named Antigone, wife to Henry Grey Earle of Tankeruill: his body was conuayed to the Abbey of S. Albons, and there buried. Et portoit, France semé escartelle D'engleterre à la bordure d'argent.
RIchard Plantagenet, fourth sonne of Richard Duke of Yorke, and brother to king Edward the fourth, was by his said Brother, in the first yeare of his Reigne, created D. of Glocester. To this Richard, was the gouernment commit∣ted of king Edward the fourths two sonnes, (K. Edw. the 5. & Richard Duke of Yorke) whom hee caused most vnnaturally to be murdred in the Tower of London; after whose death, he vsurped the Crowne and Kingdome, in the yeare, 1464. and was stiled, king Richard the third. Hee married Anne, daughter and co-heire of Richard Neuill, Earle of Warwicke and Salisbury, (widdow of Edward Prince of Wales, slaine at Tewkesbury) and was after slaine at Bosworth field, by King Henry the seuenth, the 22. of August, 1485. leauing no issue to succeed him. Et portoit, France, escartelle D'engleterre au lambell de hermines, charge au trois cantons de gueulles. EDward Seymour, Knight of the honourable Order of the Garter, was created Viscount Beauchampe, the 28. of king Henry the eight; and in the yeare after, he was created Earle of Hartford; (which Earledome, and the Title of Dignity, had slept from the death of Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Gloce∣ster and Hertford.) And in the first yeare of king Edward the sixt, he was made Duke of Somerset; as in the title of So∣merset is more at large. Et portoit, gueulles à deux volz de L'aigle en L'eurre d'or. EDward Seymour, sonne of Edward Duke of Somerset a∣foresaid, was by Queene Elizabeth, in the first yeare of her Reigne, restored and created Earle of Hartford, and is now liuing, 1618.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Hereford, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RAlphe de Maunt, Earle of Hereford, in Edward the Con∣fessours time, and William the Conquerors, who being sent to encounter Algar Earle of Leicester, then a ba∣nished man, and returned into England; fled very cowardly from his forces in Herefordshire, leauing his Country & Cit∣ty of Hereford, to the mercy of the kings enemies, in the yeare, 1055. For which cause, William Conqueror degraded him, and tooke from him his Earledome of Hereford. He dyed, and was buried at Peter-borow. WIlliam Fitz-Osborne, Earle of Breteuile in Normandy, (son Osberne de Crepon, by Albreda his wife, daugh∣ter of Ralphe Earle of Iuery) whose grand-father Herfast us the Dane, was brother to Gonora, wife of Richard the first D. of Normandy, great grand-mother to William Conquerour. This William came into England with the saide Conquerour, and was the chiefe man that perswaded him to vndertake the Conquest of England; for the which, and his good ser∣uice, the said Conqueror made him Earle of Hereford, in the yeare, 1068. and Marshall and Lord Steward of England; and in the kings absence in France, the said William was made Vice-Roy, and Gouernor in England. He married Adelice, daughter of Roger Tonny, Standard-bearer of Normandy; by whom he had issue, three sonnes and two daughters; William the eldest sonne, succeeded his Father in all his honours and possessions in Normandy; and Roger the second sonne, after the death of his Father, was Earle of Hereford, and had all his Fa∣thers lands in England; Roald the third sonne, was a Monke: Emme the eldest daughter, was wife to Ralphe de Waiet a Saxon, and Earle of the East Angles, that is, Norfolke, Suffolke, and Cambridgeshire; Itta the second daughter, was wife to Robert Bellemont Earle of Leicester. This William Fitz-Osberne, was slaine, as some haue, at Kerdiffe in South-Wales. Others say, in the warres in Planders, ta∣king part with Arnold Earle of Flanders, in the yeare, 1072. and William Gemiti∣censis hath, that he was buried in the Monastery of Cormelias, which was of his Foundation. Et portoit, de gueulles au bande d'argent, sur le tout an face d'or.
ROger de Breteuile, (second sonne of William Fitz-Os∣berne) was after the death of his Father, Earle of Here∣ford, in the yeare, 1072. He made and concluded the marri∣age betweene Emma his sister, and Ralphe de Wayet; at which marriage, the greatest part of the Nobility were present, and there conspired together, to turne out William the Conqueror againe; Waltheof Earle of Huntington (son of Siward Earle of Northumberland) being one of them, tooke shipping and went into Normandy, and there reuealed the whole matter to the said King William, committing himselfe wholly to his mercy. But this Roger continuing in his intended conspiracy, was taken priso∣ner by Vrso de Abtot, Shirieffe of Worcestershire, and others, and being brought to his tryall by his Peeres, was found guilty of high treason, and condemned to perpetuall imprisonment, during his life; where he dyed without issue. And Waltheof Earle of Huntington (notwithstanding his submission) was taken and carried to Wynchester, and there beheaded, and his body buried in the fields without the Citty, but after remoued to Crowland. Et portoit, les armes de son pete. MIlo Fitz-Walter (sonne of Walter, Constable of the Castle of Glocester, and of Emme his wife, daughter of Drew de Balun Lord of Abergauenny) succeeded his Father in the Constableship of Glocester; and was by Mauld the Empresse, made Earle of Hereford, and Constable of her Court, in the sixt yeare of king Stephen. He married Sibell, daughter and heire of Bernard Newmarch, Lord of Breck∣nock by Nest his wife, daughter of Griffith ap Lewellyn, Prince of South-Wales, and had issue, fiue sonnes and three daugh∣ters, viz. Roger, Walter, Henry, William, and Mahell, all Earles of Hereford, and Constables of England, sauing William onely; (who dyed before his elder brother Henry) Margaret the eldest daughter, married Humfrey de Bohun the third of that name, (who after the death of his wiues brothers, was both Earle of Hereford, and Constable of England;) Bertha the second daughter, was married to Philip de Breus, Lord of Brember, Abergauenny, &c. Luce the third daughter, was wife to Herbert, sonne of Herbert, and grand∣childe to Henry Fitz Herbert (Chamberlaine to King Henry the first) and of his wife, daughter of Robert Corbet (Concubine of king Henry the first) Lord of Alencester in Comit Warwick. This Milo, dyed the eight of king Stephen, & was buried by Sibell his wife, in the Abbey of Lanthony by Glocester, which he foun∣ded in the yeare, 1135. Et portoit, gueulles à la bande d or, oue la autre bande d'argent.
ROger, eldest sonne and heire of Milo, vnto whom King Henry the second gaue the Mote of Hereford, with the Castle, and the third peny of the Reuennewes of Pleas of the whole County of Hereford, wherof he made him Earle. He was also Constable of England Lord of Brecknock, Ca∣er-went, Gower, and of the Forrest of Deane, all which (sayth Somerset Glouer) were confirmed vnto him by King Henrie the second his Letters Patents, bearing date at Warwicke, the twelfth day, next after the conclusion of peace between King Stephen and him. This Roger dying without issue, Wal∣ter Henry, & Mahell his brothers, succeeded him in his lands and possessions, and died also without issue. Whereby their whole Inheritance was diuided betweene their three sisters, who were maried as aforesaid. Et portoit, gueulles deus bands vne d'or & la autre d'argent HEnry de Bohun, (sonne of Humfrey de Bohun the fourth, and Grand childe to Humfrey the third, and Margaret his wife, daughter of Milo Earle of Hereford, and Constable of England, and sister and co-heyre of her fiue brothers, was in right of the said Margaret his grandmother, created Earle of Hereford by Letters patents, bearing date the third of Nouember, in the first yeare of king Iohn, as also Consta∣ble of England. He married Mauld, daughter of Geffrey Fitz-Piers of Ludgarshall, Earle of Essex, and sister and heire of Geffrey and William (sur-named Mandeuils) her Brothers, and had issue. Humfrey de Bohun the fift. He dyed in the 4. yeare of king Henry the third, 1220. going to the holy Land; and his body being brought backe into England, was buried in the Abbey of Lanthony. Et porteit d'azur à la band d'argent, à deux cottices entre six Lions rampant d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the fift of that name, sonne and heire of Henry aforesaid, was after his Father, Earle of Here∣ford and Constable of England, and Patron of the Abbey of Lanthony, and Earle of Essex in right of his mother. To this Humfrey did king Henry the third, in Anno 1241. release the remainder of a debt of 20000. Markes, which Geffrey Magnauile Earle of Essex his Vnckle, was to pay vnto him as a fine laide vppon him, for marrying Isabell, the repudiate wife of King Iohn, daughter and heyre of William Earle of Glocester. This Humfrey married two wiues, the first was
Mauld, daughter and heire of Ralphe de Isondon, Earle of Angy in Normandy, by whom he had issue Humfrey de Bohun the sixt, that dyed before his Father in the Castle of Bristew being taken prisoner at the battell of Eusham, 1265. and two daughters, Mauld the eldest, was maried first to Anselme Marshall Earle of Penbroke, and after to Roger Quincy Earle of Winchester; and Alice the second daughter, was married to the Lord Thony. The said Humfreys second wife, was Mauld de Auenesbury, by whom he had issue, Iohn de Bohun Lord of Haresfield, Father of Edmond, and then died in the third yeare of King Edward the first, 1274. and was buried at Lanthony. Les arme de son peré. HVmfrey de Bohun, the seuenth of that Christian name, (sonne and heire of Humfrey the sixt, that dyed before his Father) was after the death of Humfrey de Bohun the fift his grand-father, Earle of Hereford, and Constable of Eng∣land; and by his Mother Elianor, daughter and co-heire of William de Breose, he was Lord of Brecknocke. He married Mauld, daughter of Ingelrame de Fines a Frenchman, & had issue Humfrey de Bohun the eight; and after dyed at Plaisie in Essex, the 27. of king Edward the first, 1298. and was buried with his wife, at Walden Abbey. Et portoit, d'azur à la bande d'argent, à deux cottices entre six Lions rampant d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the eight of that Christian name, son and heire of Humfrey the seuenth, was Earle of Here∣ford, Constable of England, & Patron of Lanthony Abbey, third Earle of Essex, and Lord of Brecknock. He married Eli∣zabeth, daughter of King Edward the first, (Widdowe of Iohn Earle of Holland, with whom hee had no dowry, but onely the Kings fauour, which before he had lost, by refu∣sing to go with him into Flanders, to the ayde of Guy Earle of Flanders against the French King) by whom he had issue foure sonnes and two daughters; Iohn the first sonne, was after his Father, Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England, and died vvithout issue; Humfrey the second son,
had all his brother Iohns honours, aad dyed also without issue; Edward & Willi∣am were twins, borne at Caldecot in Wales; Edward dyed drowned in Scotland, before the death of his brother Humfrey, and was buried at Walden; William the 4. brother, was a Martial man, and by K. Edw. the third. 1336. was created Earle of Northampton, and did execute the Office of Constable of England, for his brother Humfrey, and dyed before him, in the yeare, 1359. Elianor the eldest daughter of this Humfrey the eight, was married to Iames Butler Earle of Or∣monde; and Margaret the second daughter, was wife to Hugh Courtney Earle of Deuonshire. This Humfrey the eight, was slaine with Thomas Earle of Lancaster, at Burrowbridge, by Andrew of Harcla, Earle of Carlell, the 15. of king Edward the second, 1322. and was buried in the Black-Fryars in Yorke; and Elizabeth his wife, dyed the 9. of king Edward the second, and was buried in the Abbey of Walden in Essex. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. IOhn de Bohun, sonne and heire of Humfrey the eight, was af∣ter his Father, Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England. He married two wiues, the first was Alice, daugh∣ter of Edmond Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell, who dyed in childe-bed, and was buried at Walden, with her infant sonne. His second wife was Margaret, daughter of Ralphe Lord Basset, by whom he had no issue. He dyed at Kirby There, 1334. the 9. of king Edward the third, & was buried at Strat∣ford Abbey neere London. Et portoit, d'azur â la bande d'argent, à deux cottices entre six lions ram∣pant d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun the ninth, second sonne of Humfrey the eight, and brother and heyre of Iohn de Bohun, Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England, succeeded his Fa∣ther and Brother: he ouer-liued his brother William of Nor∣thampton, one yeare, one moneth, and fiue dayes, and dyed without issue, at Plaisie in Essex, 1361. and was buried in the Augustine-Fryars in London, leauing Humfrey de Bohun the tenth, his Nephew by his brother William de Bohun, Earle of Northampton, to succeed him in all his Lands and Dignities. Les armes de son pere.
HVmfrey de Bohun, the tenth and last of that name, was af∣ter the death of William his Father Earle of Northamp∣ton; & after the death of Humfrey his Vnckle, Earle of Here∣ford, Essex, and Constable of England, Lord of Brecknock, & Patron of the Abbey of Lanthony. He married Ioane, daugh∣ter of Richard Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell, and had issue, onely two daughters his heires, Elianor the eldest, was mar∣ried to Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester, a younger sonne of king Edw. the third; and Mary the second daugh∣ter, was wife to Henry Plantagenet, sonne and heyre of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and after King of England, by the name of king Henry the fourth. He dyed in the 46. yeare of king Edward the third, 1371. and was buried at Walden. Et portoit, d'azur, à la band d'argent, à deux cottices entre six lions rampant d'or. HEnry Plantagenet (or Henry of Bullingbroke) Earle of Derby, sonne and heyre of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lan∣caster, married Mary, second daughter and co-heire of Hum∣frey de Bohun the tenth of that name, with whom he had the Earledome of Hereford and Northampton, with the Lord∣ship of Brecknock, and the Patrionage of Lanthony; and in the yeare, 1397. he was created Duke of Hereford, by King Richard the second; and after the death of his Father, hee was also Duke of Lancaster. This Henry Duke of Hereford, being accused of diuers points of high treason, (against king Richard the second) by Thomas Mowbray then Duke of Nor∣folke; for clearing himselfe thereof, he challenged the saide Duke of Norfolke to a single combate, which was by him accepted, and allow∣ed by the King. But when the appointed day was come, and the two Dukes within the lists in field, ready to performe the same, the king would not suffer them to proceed; but banished the Duke of Norfolke the land for euer, (who shortly after dyed at Venice) and the Duke of Hereford for sixe yeares. But this Duke Henry returned backe againe the same yeare, and by force tooke king Ri∣chard prisoner at Flynt Castle, and brought him to the Tower of London, where he was vniustly constrained to resigne his kingdome to this Henry, who was after crowned king, by the name of king Henry the fourth. He had issue by his wife Mary, Henry who was after king of England, by the name of king Henry the fift; and dyed the 20. of March, 1412. Et portoit, semé de France, escartelié d'engleterre, au baston de gueullce.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Huntington, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. VVAltheof (sonne of Siward the great Earle of Northumberland) married Iudith, daughter of Lambert Earle of Lens in Artoys, and Niece to William the Conqueror, by Mauld his halfe sister (by the Mo∣ther) daughter of Herlwyn Comittis Villa, and Arleta his wife; with whom the said Conqueror gaue in marriage, the Earledome of Huntington. The said Waltheof and Iudith had issue, three daughters onely; Mauld the eldest was married first to Simon Saint Lize, and had issue, Simon the second; Earle of Northampton; after shee married Dauid, sonne of Malcolme Makduncan, and brother to the second Mauld, Queene of England, and had issue, Henry Earle of Hunting∣ton; Iudith the second daughter, was married to Ralphe Lord Toney of Flam∣sted; and Bertha the third daughter, was wife to Robert Fitz-Richard Dapifer, (descended out of the Family of Clare.) This Waltheof (at the marriage of Ralphe de Waiet, with Emme the sister of Roger Bretiuile) with diuers other great Lords, did conspire together, to turne William the Conqueror and his Normans a∣gaine out of England: which conspiracy being reuealed by Waltheof, and he sub∣mitting himselfe to the Kings mercy, the said Conqueror notwithstanding, cau∣sed him to be beheaded at Winchester, 1075. and his body to be buried in the Fields, neere the Towne; which afterwards was taken vp againe, and buried at Crowland in Lincolnshire. Et portoit, d'argent au lion rampant d'azur, au chef de gueulles. SImon Saint-Lize (the first of that name, sonne of Randoll, sur-named the Rich, a Norman borne) with Warner le Rich, his brother, came into England to the ayde of William Ruphus, who bestowed the Hundred of Falkeley (valued then at forty pounds a yeare) vpon him, to shooe his Horses; For the saide Simon and his brother Warner, had brought with them to ayde the saide King, forty knights. King Henry the first, entreated a marriage betweene the saide Simon, and Iudith, the Widdow of Earle Waltheof, which she refused, because the saide Simon was lame; whereupon the King
gaue him in marriage, Mauld, the eldest daughter and co-heyre of Waltheof & Iudith, with the Earledome of Huntington. This Simon, with Mauld his wife, builded the Castle and Abbey of S. Andrewes in Northampton, in the sixt yeare of king Henry the first, and had issue, Simon the second Earle of Huntington, & Waltheof, Abbot of Melrose; and after dyed, in the yeare, 1127. and was buried in the Abbey of Bourne. Et portoit, per pale endente d'argent & gueulles. DAuid (sonne of Malcolme king of Scots, and brother to king Alexander) by the fauour of king Henry the first, had to wife, Mauld, the eldest daughter and co-heyre of Earle Waltheof, the widdow of Simon Saint-Lize Earle of Huntington, (and by that title of Earle of Huntington, the said Dauid was a Witnesse to king Henry the firsts Charter, of lands and liberties he gaue to the Citty of London.) But when Alexander his brother was dead without issue, and he sent for to be king, there was a peace made betweene King Stephen & him, with condition, that the Earledome of Hun∣tington should abide and remaine to Henry, sonne of the said Dauid; for which, he should sweare fealty, and doe homage to king Stephen. By reason whereof, Simon Saint-Lice the second of that name, to whom of right, as the elder sonne of Mauld his Mother, the said Earledome of Huntington did belong, was neglected and excluded. This Dauid had issue, Henry Earle of Huntington, (in his Fathers life time) and dyed in the yeare, 1153. and was buried at Dunfirmlyn in Scotland. Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'gueulles. HEnry, sonne of Dauid king of Scots, was Earle of Hun∣tington in the life time of his Father: He married Ada, daughter of William de Warren the second, and sister of Wil∣liam the third Earle Warren and Surrey, and had issue, Mal∣colme and William, both Kings of Scots; and Dauid the third sonne was Earle of Huntington and Carect; hee had also three daughters, Ada married to Florence Earle of Holland; Margaret married to Conanle Petit, Earle of Britaine; and Mauld that dyed young. This Henry, dyed at Calcone, the 18. of king Stephen, 1152. his Father being then liuing. Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant de gueulles.
SImon Saint-Lice, the second of that name, Earle of Nor∣thampton, (after the death of king Henry the first; and Henry sonne of Dauid king of Scots) entred into peaceable possession of the Earledome of Huntington, which he could neuer obtaine before, during the said kings Reigne, for that he had giuen the saide Earledome to Dauid, his wiues bro∣ther, who had married this Simons Mother, whose children by her first husband Simon Saint-Lice the first, being young, were sent into Normandy, and committed to the custody of Stephen Earle of Albemarle, their Mothers Vnckle. This Si∣mon married Isabell, daughter of Robert Bellomont (sur-na∣med Crouch-backe or Bossue) Earle of Leicester, & had issue, the third Simon Saint-Lice, Amicia, and Hawis. He founded the Abbey of S. Mary de Pratis, neere Northampton, & Sawtre in Huntingtonshire; and dyed the 18. of king Stephen, 1152. as Henry of Huntington hath, Fol. 227. b. Et portoit, per pale endente d'argent & gueulles. MAlcolme king of Scots, eldest sonne and heyre of Henry Earle of Huntington aforesaid, and grand childe to king Dauid (in the minority of Simom Saint-Lice the third) was Ward to king Henry the second, and was with him in his ex∣pedition to Tholosse, for which he had giuen vnto him the Earledome of Huntington, which he held during his life. The King was often sued vnto in the behalfe of young Simon the right heyre, for Iustice, but it was euer denyed him; at the ende of 12. yeares and sixe moneths of his Reigne of King of Scotland, he dyed at Gedworth, and was buried at Dum∣firmelyn without issue, 1165. leauing William his brother to succeed him; in whose time, Simon Saint-Lice could obtaine no fauour or grace, vntill king Henry the yonger, and the said William & Dauid his brother with others, made wars against king Henry the second. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. WIlliam, second sonne of Henry Earle of Huntington aforesaid, in the life time of king Malcolme his elder brother; by the fauour of king Henry the second, was Earle of Huntington; but after his brothers death, and hee in the kingdome, forgot his duty, and in Armes forcibly entred Northumberland, where he was taken prisoner at Anwike, & led to Richmond, in the yeare, 1174. and after was ransomed vpon these conditions, that he should acknowledge himselfe the king of Englands Liegeman, against al men for the Relme of Scotland, & his other lands, & to pay one hundred thou∣sand pounds sterling; part wherof he should pay presently, and for the rest, he should pawne and morgage Cumberland,
Huntington and Northumberland, vntill the money were paide, and for farther security, that he should neuer after inuade or moue warre against England, hee should deliuer into King Henry the seconds custody, foure Castles. viz. Barwick, Roxborow, Edenborough, and Sterling Castles; and so Huntington was taken from King William, and restored to Simon S. Lice, the third of that name, who was right heyre thereof; but he dying without issue, the Earledome of Hunting∣ton returned againe to William king of Scots, who with the consent of king Ri∣chard the first, gaue it to Dauid his yonger brother (Hollingshed, pag. 189. Title of Scotland.) This William married Ermingard, daughter of Richard Beaumont, sonne of Roscellin, Viscount Beaumont, and had issue, Alexander king of Scots; Isabell married to Roger Bigot Earle of Norfolke, that dyed without issue; Mar∣garet wife to Hubert de Burgo Earle of Kent; Mariona wife to Eustace de Vescy; Ada wife to Patricke Earle of Dunbarre; and Aufrica married to William de Say of Ireland. This William king of Scots dyed, 1124. Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant de gueulles. SImon Saint-Lice, the third of that name, and sonne and heyre of Simon the second, after that William king of Scots was depriued of the earledome of Huntington, receiued both the Castle and Earledome of Huntington, as his right inheri∣tance, and so peaceably enioyed the said title and Earldome during his life, by king Henry the second, and restored euery man to his right, whom the Scots had eyther wronged or dispossest in that County. But the saide king Henry, seeing daily contention to arise betweene the Scots, and the Saint-Lices, for this Earledome of Huntington, caused the Castle to be raced to the ground; but Simon held the Earledome, and married Alice, daughter of Gilbert de Gaunt Earle of Lincolne, but died without issue, in the yeare, 1184. the 31. of Henry the 2. After whose death, the said King restored the Earledome of Huntington againe to Wil∣liam King of Scots; who by the permission of king Richard the first, surrendred the same to Dauid his yonger brother. Et portoit, lez armoiries de son peré. DAuid Earle of Carect, third son of Henry Earle of Hun∣tington, was knighted by king Henry the second, the day of his sonne Henries Coronation, and had by the guift of William king of Scots his eldest brother, the Earledome of Huntington, with the third penny of the County of Cam∣bridge giuen him, in Anno, 1190. after the death of Simon Saint-Lice the third, without issue. And hauing sworne feal∣ty to King Richard the first, he went with him towards the Holy-Land, and carried with him 500. knights, whom hee carried vpon his owne charges. He maried Mauld, the eldest daughter of Hugh Kiuilioke, and sister and co-heyre of
Randoll Blundeuile, the sixt Earle of Chester and of Lincolne, and had issue, Iohn sur-named Scot, Earle of Huntington and Chester, and Margaret, wife to Alan of Galloway, Constable of Scotland: Isabell the second daughter, was married to Robert Brus Lord of Annandale; Ada was married to Henry Hastings; and Mauld dyed a Virgin. He dyed at Yerdley in Northamptonshire, and was buried in the Abbey of Saultrey, neere Counington in Huntingtonshire (as Sir Robert Cotton hath.) Et portoit, d'or trois estaches de gueulles, ioynantz en point. IOhn sur-named Scote, (sonne of Dauid Earle of Hunting∣ton before mentioned) was after his Father, Earle of Hun∣tington; and in right of Mauld his Mother, eldest sister and co-heyre of Randoll Bloundeuile Earle of Chester, he was also Earle of Chester; and after, in the one and twentieth yeare of king Henry the third, hee was restored to the Earledome of Northampton, and married Helyn, daughter of Lewellyn, Prince of North-Wales, and dyed without issue at Darnhall, the two and twentieth of king Henry the third, (as is more at large in the Title of Earles of Chester) and was buried at Chester; after whose death, the saide King resumed and tooke into his hands the saide Earledome and Principalitie of Chester, and gaue other lands and signeuries to the said Iohns Sisters afore∣said, who after their brothers death, challenged the kingdome of Scotland. Et portoit, les armoiries les son Peré. VVIlliam de Clinton, sonne and heyre of Iohn de Clin∣ton and Mauld his wife, daughter of Lewis Vis∣count Beaumont, and grand-childe to another Iohn de Clin∣ton, and Idona his wife, daughter and one of the heyres of Sir William Odingselles knight; was created Earle of Hun∣tington, in the eleuenth yeare of king Edward the third; and three yeares after, he was made Lord Admirall of England, and was taken prisoner in France; for which he was forced to sell most part of his lands for to pay his ransome. Hee married Iulian, daughter and heyre of Sir Thomas Leyborne knight, but by her had no issue. He founded the Priory at Marstock, and dyed without issue, in the yeare, 1353. leauing Iohn Lord Clinton his Nephew by his Brother Iohn, to be his heyre. Et portoit, d'argent six croix au pied fiché d'or, au chef d'azur chargeé de deux molettes d'or perce de gueulles.
GViscard de Angolisme (or Guichard d' Anguillem) a French man borne in Gascoigney, a very expert man in warlike affayres, was made Knight of the honourable Order of the Garter, by king Edward the third, and set in the eight Stall of the Souereignes side. After, in the first yeare of king Richard the second (whose Tutor he was) hee was created Earle of Huntington, and had giuen him a thousand Markes yearely out of his Treasury. He married one Constance, but I finde not any issue that he left behinde him. He dyed in the third yeare of the reigne of King Richard the second, 1379. Et portoit, d'or seme de billettes au lion rampant d'azur. IOhn Holland Knight, (second sonne of Sir Thomas Holland knight, Steward of the house to William Mountague, Earle of Salisbury; who marrying his Mistris Ioane, daughter of Edmond of Woodstocke, and sister and heyre of Iohn Earle of Kent, was in her right Earle of Kent, and sate in Parliament, held at Westminster the 34. of king Edward the third, by the name and title of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, & the next yeare after, dyed;) in the eleuenth yeare of king Richard the second, was created Earle of Huntington; and in the 21. yeare of the said kings reigne, he was created Duke of Exce∣ster, and made Gouernour of Callis: and Alberick de Vere, Earle of Oxford, (Vnckle of Robert Vere Duke of Ireland) hauing resigned all his interest and right of the Office of Lord high Chamber∣laine of England, king Richard bestowed the same vpon this Iohn, Duke of Exce∣ster, by Letters Patents, bearing date, 1397. But after, in the first yeare of king Henry the fourth, this Iohn was deposed by Parliament, from the title and dig∣nity of Duke of Excester, and in the same yeare was taken at Circester by the Townes-men, and beheaded in the Market-place, with the Duke of Surrey and the Earle of Salisbury, for plotting king Henry the fourths death. This Iohn, Duke of Excester, married Elizabeth, daughter of Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and sister to king Henry the fourth, by whom he had issue, Iohn Holland Duke of Excester, and Earle of Huntington, Sir Edward Holland knight, and Constance, first married to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, and Earle of Nottingham, by whom shee had no issue: after she married Iohn Lord Grey of Ruthyn, by whom she had issue, two sonnes, Edmond created Earle of Kent, and Thomas Grey, Lord of Rugemond. Et portoit, les armes D'engleterre au bordure de France.
IOhn Holland, the second Earle of Huntington, restored by Acte of Parliament, the fourth of king Henry the fift (hee was sonne of Iohn Holland Duke of Excester, beheaded at Circester.) This Iohn, when king Henry the fift was to go in∣to Normandy, was sent before to skoure the Seas, who mee∣ting with nine Carricks of Genoa, which were going to aide the French King, fought with them, and sunke sixe of them, and tooke the other three, with great store of money and treasure, and brought them with his prisoners to the King, in the yeare, 1416. And in the 22. yeare, of king Henry the 6. this Iohn was restored to the Dukedome of Excester, & writ in his Stile, Duke of Excester, Earle of Huntington, and of Iuory in Normandy, Lord of Sparre, Admirall of England, Ireland, and Aquitaine, Lieutenant Gene∣rall of the Dutchy of Aquitaine, and Constable of the Tower of London. He married two wiues, the first was Anne, daughter of Edmond Earle Stafford, by whom he had issue, Henry Duke of Excester, and Earle of Huntington: his se∣cond wife was Anne, daughter of Iohn Mountague Earle of Salisbury, by whom he had issue, a daughter named Anne, first married to Iohn Lord Neuill, sonne & heyre of Ralphe the second Earle of Westmerland, by whom she had no issue; af∣ter she married Sir Thomas Neuill knight, Vnckle to her former husband, and had issue, Ralphe Neuill the third Earle of Westmerland. This Iohn Holland Duke of Excester, died in the 26. of king Henry the sixt, and was buried by his two wiues, in S. Katherines Church neere the Tower of London. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. HEnry Holland, Duke of Excester, and Earle of Hunting∣ton, onely sonne of Iohn his Father, in the first yeare of king Edward the fourth, was disinherited by Acte of Parli∣ament, with king Henry the sixt, his Queene, and his sonne and others, to the number of 140. And in the 13. yeare of the same Kings Reigne, hauing long followed the Duke of Burgundies Camp in meane sort, was found drowned in the seas, betweene Douer and Callis. He married Anne, daughter of Richard Duke of Yorke, & sister to King Edw. the fourth; which lady was after maried to Sir Thomas S. Leoger knight, by whom she had issue, a daughter named Anne, married to George Mannours Lord Ros of Hamlake, of whom the now Earle of Rutland is descended; as more at lardge is set downe, in the Duke of Excester.
THomas Grey, sonne of Sir Iohn Grey knight, and halfe brother by the mother to king Edward the fift, was by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster, the 14. day of August, in the 12. yeare of king Edward the fourth, created Earle of Huntington, to him and the heyres male of his bo∣dy. And in the 15. of the said Kings Reigne, he was created Marquesse Dorset: he married Cicely, daughter and heyre of William Lord Harington and Bonuill, by whom he had issue, as in the title of Dorset is more at large. Et portoit, burelle de six d'argent & d'azur à chef trois torteaux, au lambell d'hermines. WIlliam Lord Herbert of Gower, sonne and heyre of William Earle of Penbroke slaine at Banbury, the 9. of king Edward the fourth) was after his Father, Earle of Penbroke; which Earledome he surrendred vnto King Ed∣ward the fourth, who made his eldest sonne Prince Edward, Earle of Penbroke, and this William Lord Herbert, Earle of Huntington, at Oburne, the 19. of king Edward the fourth; which Earledome of Huntington, king Henry the seauenth confirmed vnto the saide William in the third yeare of his Reigne. Hee married Mary, daughter of Richard Wooduill Earle Riuers, and Iaquet his wife, and sister and one of the heyres of Richard Wooduill Earle Riuers her brother, by whom he had issue, one onely daughter his heyre, named Elizabeth, married to Charles Somerset Earle of Worcester. He dyed the 16. of Iuly, in the sixt yeare of King Henry the seuenth. Et portoit, per pale d'azur & de gueulles, trois lions rampant dargent. GEorge Lord Hastings, Hungerford, Botreaux, Molyns, and Moeles, was created at White-Hall, in the 21. yeare of K. Henry the 8. Earle of Huntington; he was sonne of Edward Lord Hastings, Chamberlaine to king Edward the fourth, & married Anne, daughter of Henry Lord Stafford, second D. of Buckingham, by whom he had issue, Francis Lord Hastings and second Earle of Huntington; Edward created by Queene Mary, Lord Hastings of Loughborough in Leicestershire; Sir Thomas Hastings knight, Henry Hastings and William; he had 3. daughters also, Dorothy maried to Richard Deuereux, sonne and heyre of Walter Viscount Hereford, Mary and Katherine. He died in the 36. yeare of king Henry the 8. & was buried at Ashbye de la Zouch in Leicestershire. Et porteit, d'argent au manch de sable.
FRancis Hastings, sonne and heire of George, was after the death of his Father, Earle of Huntington, Lord Hastings, Hungerford, Botereux, Molyns, and Moeles: He married Ka∣therine, daughter and one of the heyres of Henry Pole Lord Montacute, sonne and heire of Margaret Plantagenet, Coun∣tesse of Salisbury, beheaded in the Tower of London, 1541. (condemned by Parliament) neuer being arraigned nor tri∣ed before. The said Francis and Katherine had issue, Henry Lord Hastings, and Earle of Huntington, that dyed without issue; Sir George Hastings knight, Earle of Huntington; Sir Edward Hastings kinght; William, Francis, and Walter; Ka∣therine wife to Henry Clinton Earle of Lincolne; Francis wife to Henry Lord Compton; Anne, Elizabeth married to Edward Somerset, now Earle of Worcester, 1618. and Mary Hastings. This Francis Earle of Hunting∣ton, dyed in the second yeare of Queene Elizabeth, 1560. and was buried at Ash∣bie de la Zouch. Et portoit, d'argent au Manch de fable. HEnry Hastings, knight of the Garter, after the death of Francis his Father, was also Earle of Huntington, Lord Hastings, Hungerford, Botereux, Molyns, and Moeles, Lord President of the Counsell at Yorke, married Lady Katherine, daughter of Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberland, & sister to Ambrose Earle of Warwicke, and Robert Earle of Leicester, by whom he had no issue: He dyed in the yeare, 195. Et poitoit, les armes de son peré. GEorge Hastings, second sonne of Francis Earle of Hun∣tington, and brother and heyre of Henry aforesaid, was the fourth Earle of Huntington, of that Family & sur-name, and married Elianor, daughter and co-heyre of Sir Iohn Port of Derbyshire, knight; and had issue, Francis Lord Hastings that dyed before his Father, who married Sara, daughter of Sir Iames Harington, and sister of Iohn Lord Harington; by whom he had issue, Henry now Earle of Huntington, 1618. and others; the saide George had issue also, Sir Henry Ha∣stings
knight, who married Dorothy, daughter and co-heyre of Sir Francis Wil∣loughby of Wollarton in Nottinghamshire knight; Edward that dyed in Germany; Katherine wife to Edward Vmpton, and after his death, shee married Sir Walter Chetwin of Staffordshire knight; and Dorothy was married to  Stewart a Scotchman, slaine at Islington in single combate, by Sir George Wharton, sonne and heyre of the Lord Wharton. Et portoit, d'argeut au Maunch de fable. HEnry Hastings, sonne and heyre of Francis Lord Ha∣stings, and grand childe to George Earle of Huntington; after the death of his said Grand-Father, was the fift Earle of Huntington of that sur-name, and married Elizabeth, third daughter and co-heyre of Ferdinando Earle of Derby, and had issue, Henry Lord Hastings, Ferdinando, Alice, and Eliza∣beth. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. A Catalogue of the Earles of Kent, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. ODO, halfe brother to William Conqueror by the Mo∣ther, was by the saide William, first made Bishop of Baieux in Normandy, and after Earle of Kent in Eng∣land. He was a subtile man, and after the death of William Fitz-Osberne, had the whole rule and gouernment of Eng∣land, vnder William Conqueror his brother. He was a great enemy to Lanfranke, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and was banished England, for taking part with Robert Duke of Nor∣mandy, his Nephew, against William Ruphus. He went with the saide Robert his Nephew to the Holy-Land, and at the siedge of Antioch he ended his life. It is said he bare for his Armes, Gueulles à lion rampant d'argent, au Crosier stafe en band sinester d'or.
WIlliam de Ipre, a Fleming borne, (and base sonne of Philip Viscount of Ipre) came into England in the 4. yeare of king Stephen, to ayde him in his warres against Mauld the Empresse; for which seruice, the said king created him Earle of Kent, 1141. After which, king Stephen was ta∣ken prisoner at Lincolne, by Mauld the Empresse, and Robert Earle of Glocester, and imprisoned in the Castle of Bristoll. But not long after, Mauld the Empresse, with her Brother Robert Earle of Glocester, went to Winchester, where Henry Bishop of Winchester, brother to King Stephen and William of Ipre, gathered a great Army, and made her to abandon the Castle; but Robert her brother, seeking to backe her in her flight, was himselfe taken prisoner, and deliuered to king Stephens Queene, then newly entred Winchester, who deliuered the said Robert, to William of Ipre, to be imprisoned in the Castle of Rochester in Kent. These two great prisoners being straitely kept, at length through mediation of friends, a peace was con∣cluded, that they should both be deliuered, the King to his Kingdome, and the Earle to his liberty. This William of Ipre, was after made Steward of the kings house, and founded the Abbey of Boxley in Kent, and was banished England, by king Henry the second, 11.4. and before his death became blinde, and tooke vp∣on him the habite of a Monke, in the Abbey of Loan, and there dyed, 1164. Et portoit, geronne d'er & d'azur à l'escusson de gueulles, au baston sinester d'argent broch nt sur le tout. HVbert de Burgo (or de Burgh) Lord Chamberlaine to K. Iohn, Steward of Poytow, and Lord Chiefe-Iustice of England, was created Earle of Kent by Letters Patents, bea∣ring date the 10. of December, in the 13. yeare of king Henry the 3. and had the keeping of Douer, Rochester, and Canterbu∣ry, granted to him during life, by a Charter bearing date the 16. of Hen. the 3. At last he procured himselfe great hatred of all the Nobility, for causing the said king to breake his word and deed, for the restitution of those lawes and auncient cu∣stomes, which before he had granted to the Subiects; which did greatly agrauate the hate of the Commons. He married three wiues, the first was Margaret, daughter of Sir Robert Arsike knight; the second was Isabell, daughter and one of the heyres of William Earle of Glocester, (the repudiate wife of king Iohn.) His third wife was Margaret, daughter of William, and sister of Alexander king of Scots: he had issue by his first wife, Iohn de Burgo, who married Hawis Lamale, and dyed before his Father, leauing his sonne Iohn, Baron of Lamale, his heyre. This Hubert, dyed at his Castle of Bark∣hamsted in Hartfordshire, the 27. of king Henry the third, and was buried at the Fryars Predicants in London, where now White-Hall standeth. Et portoit, gueulles sept lozengies vairé. 3.3.1.
EDmond Plantagenet, sur-named of Woodstocke, the place of his birth, third sonne of king Edward the first, by his second wife Margaret, daughter of Philip king of France, in the 15. yeare of king Edward the second, his brother, was created Earle of Kent. And after, at a Counsell held at Win∣chester, the 5. of Edward the third, 1330. the morrow after S. Gregories day, he was arrested, and on the Vigill of S. Cut∣bert, adiudged to dye for high treason; for abetting many of the Nobility to plot the deliuery of king Edward the se∣cond out of prison: for which, by the malice of Queene Isabell, the then Kings Mother, and Roger Mortimer her Sweet-heart, he was beheaded at Winchester, in the yeare a∣foresaid: He married Margaret, daughter and heyre of Iohn Lord Wake of Li∣dell and Burne, and had issue, two sonnes, Edmond and Iohn, and one daughter named Ioane; the two sonnes were both Earles of Kent one after the other, and dyed without issue; Ioane their onely sister and heyre, sur-named the Faire Maide of Kent, was first married to William Monta-cute Earle of Salisbury, from whom she was diuorced; and after married to Sir Thomas Holland knight; and lastly, she was married to Edward the Blacke Prince, Father of K. Richard the 2. Et portoit, d'engleterré au bordure d'argent. EDmond Plantagenet, eldest sonne and heyre of Edmond of Woodstocke aforesaid, succeeded his Father in the Earl∣dome of Kent, and dyed the Kings Ward without issue, the sixt of king Edward the third, leauing Iohn his brother to succeed him in the Earledome of Kent. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. IOhn Plantagenet, second sonne of Edmond of Woodstocke, was after the death of his elder brother, Earle of Kent, & by that title of honour, sate in Parliament, the 25. of King Edward the third, and dyed the yeare after without issue. He married Elizabeth, daughter of the Duke of Iuiers, who af∣ter was married to Eustace Dampreticourt, second sonne of the Lord Dampreticourt in Henault, by whom she had issue, Sanchius Dampreticourt, knight of the Order of the Garter, in king Edward the thirds time, and one of the first Founders of the said Order. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
SIr Thomas Holland knight, and one of the first Founders of the Noble Order of the Garter, (sonne of Sir Thomas Holland of Lancashire, knight) was Steward of the house to William Monta-cute, Earle of Salisbury; and in right of Ioane his wife (sister and heyre of Iohn Earle of Kent aforesaide) was by king Edward the third, created Earle of Kent, and Lord Wake of Lidell, and had issue, Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent, and Duke of Surrey; Iohn Holland Earle of Huntington, and Duke of Excester, by king Richard the second; and a daughter named Ioane, married to the Earle of S. Pole. He dyed in the 34. yeare of king Edward the third, 1360. Et portoit, d'azur au leopard rampant le Champ fleurette d'argent. THomas Holland, halfe brother (by the Mother) to King Richard the second, was after the death of Thomas, his Father, Earle of Kent, and Lord Wake of Lidell. He married Alice, daughter of Richard Eitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell, and had issue, Thomas Earle of Kent, Edmond, Iohn, and Richard; & 6. daughters, Elianor first maried to Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, and after to Edward Charlton Lord Powes; Mar∣garet, married first to Iohn Beauford, Marquesse Dorset, and Earle of Somerset; and after to Thomas Duke of Clarence, sonne of king Henry; Ioane the 3. daughter, was first married to Edward Duke of Yorke; and after, to William Lord Wil∣oughby of Eresbie; and thirdly, to Henry Lord Scroope; and lastly, to Sir Henry Bromflet knight; Alice the fourth daughter, was wife to Tho∣mas Mountague Earle of Salisbury; Elizabeth the fift daughter, was married to Iohn Lord Neuill, sonne of Ralphe, first Earle of Westmerland; and Bridget the sixt daughter, was a Nunne at Barking. This Thomas Holland, dyed the 20. of King Richard the second. Et portoit, les armes d'engleterre au bordure d'argent. THomas Holland, Earle of Kent and Lord Wake (sonne of Thomas aforesaid) married Constance, daughter of Ed∣mond of Langley Duke of Yorke, widdow of Thomas Lord Spencer, but by her had no issue; after he tooke to wife Ioane, daughter of Hugh Earle Stafford, by whom he had no issue. This Thomas was created Duke of Surrey, the 21. of King Richard the second, 1398. And in the yeare, 1400. he, with the Earles of Huntington and Salisbury, intending vnder colour of a Maske or Mummery, at the Castle of Windesorre, to haue surprized king Henry the fourth, and to haue restored
King Richard againe; and so by that meanes to haue gotten restitution of their former titles of honour, with their possessions which they had lost, by iudgment of the last Parliament, a little before. But this their conspiracy being discouered to the King, and he fled to London, they were driuen to flye to Cicester, where the rude Townesmen and others set vpon them, tooke them, and in the Market-place stroke off their heads: his body was buried at Cicester, but after taken vp againe, and enterred in the Priory of Montgrace, which was of his Fathers foundation. This Thomas Duke of Surrey, did beare for his Armes, King Ed∣ward the Confessors Armes, within a border ermyne, impaled with the Armes of England, within a border argent; as by his Seales is manifested. EDmond Holland, second sonne of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, and brother to the last Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent, and Duke of Surrey, slaine at Cicester, was after the death of his said Brother, Earle of Kent, and Lord Wake of Lidell; and by king Henry the 4. was made Lord high Ad∣mirall of England; and being at the siedge of Briake in Bri∣taine, the 9. of the said Kings Reigne, was wounded in the head with an Arrow, shot out of a Crosse-bowe, whereof he dyed within fiue dayes after. He married Luce, daughter of Barnaby, Viscount of Millaine, the widdow of Lewis of Va∣loys; who after this Edmonds death, married for her third husband, Sir Henry Mortimer knight. This Edmond dyed without issue, the 9. of king Henry the 4. 1408, and lyeth buried at Bourne in Lincolnshire, leauing his sixe sisters his heyres, married as aforesaid. Et portoit, les armes d'engleterre, au bordure d'argent. WIlliam Neuill, a yonger sonne of Ralphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland, begotten of Ioane his second wife, daughter of Iohn of Gaunt, and Lady Katherine Swyn∣ford, was created Earle of Kent, in the first yeare of king Ed∣ward the fourth; and after made Lord Admirall of England and knight of the Garter. He married Ioane, daughter and heyre of Thomas Lord Falconbridge of Shelton; in whose right he was also Lord Falconbridge, and had issue, Ioane, wife to Sir Edward Bedhowing knight; Elizabeth married to Sir Richard Strangwais knight; and Alice married to Sir Iohn Coigniers knight. This William, dyed about the second yeare of king Edward the fourth, and was buried in the Priory of Gisburg. Et portoit, gueulles au faulteur d'argent, chargé d'une Moletté d'sable.
EDmond Grey, Lord of Ruthin, Hastings, and Weishford, was created Earle of Kent, in the fift yeare of king Edward the fourth, and married Katherine, daughter of Henry Percy, second Earle of Northumberland, by whom hee had issue, Lord Anthony Grey, that dyed without issue before his Fa∣ther, and was buried at Luton, neere S. Albons; George Grey, second sonne, was after his Father, Earle of Kent; hee had issue also two daughters, Elizabeth married to Robert Gre∣stocke, sonne and heyre of Ralphe Baron of Grestock; & Anne, the wife of Iohn Lord Grey of Wilton. Et portoit, burellee de six d'argent & d'azur, au chef trois torteux. GEorge Grey, Lord Grey of Ruthin, Hastings, and Wesh∣ford, second sonne and heyre of Edmond aforesaid, was after his Father, the second Earle of Kent of that sur-name. He had two wiues, the first was Anne, daughter of Richard Wooduile Earle Riuers, the widow of William Viscount Bour∣chier, by whom he had issue, Richard Earle of Kent: His se∣cond wife was Katherine, daughter of William Herbert, Earle of Penbroke, slaine at Banbury; by whom hee had issue, Sir Henry Grey of Wrest, knight; (who after the death of his bro∣ther Richard the vnthrift, did discontinue and refuse to take vpon him the title and name of Earle) George Grey third sonne, Edmond and Anthony; & one daughter named Anne, married to Iohn L. Husee, who had issue, Bridget first married to Henry Manners Earle of Rutland; and after, to Sir Rich. Morison knight; and lastly, to Francis Russell Earle of Bedford. This George, dyed in the twentieth yeare of King Henry the seuenth. Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. RIchard Grey, sonne and heyre of George Earle of Kent aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the third Earle of Kent of that Family: he married Elizabeth, daugh∣ter of Sir William Hussee knight, Chiefe-Iustice of the Kings Bench; and dyed (when he had greatly wasted his estate) fifteenth of king Henry the eight, at his house in Lumberds∣streete in London, without issue, and was buried in the White Frayars in Fleetstreete, 1523. Et portoit, burelle de six, d'argent & d'azur à le chef trois torteux.
REginald Grey Esquire, (sonne and heyre of Henry Grey Esquire, grand-childe to George Earle of Kent aforesaid, by his sonne Sir Henry Grey of Wrest, knight) was in the yeare, 1571. aduanced to the title and Earledome of Kent, (which before was discontinued, for want of competent li∣uing to maintaine the same, by this Reginalds Father, and Grand-father) by the speciall fauour and bounty, of the most famous and renowned Queene of famous memory, Queene Elizabeth. He married Susanna, daughter of Richard Berty Esquire, and Katherine Dutchesse of Suffolke his wife, by whom he had no issue, and died in the yeare of our Lord, 1572. and was buried in S. Giles Church without Cripple∣gate, in London, by his Grand-father, Sir Henry Grey knight; leauing Henry Grey his brother, to succeed him in his Earledome. Et portoit, les armes de Grey. Burelle de six d'argent & d'azur à la chef trois torteux. HEnry Grey, third sonne of Henry Grey Esquire, and bro∣ther and heire of Reginald Earle of Kent aforesaid, was the fift Earle of Kent of that Family. Hee married Mary, daughter of Sir George Cotton of Cheshire, knight; the wid∣dow of Edward Stanley Earle of Derby, by whom he had no issue. He dyed in the yeare, 1613. and was very honourably buried at Wrest, leauing Sir Charles Grey knight, his brother, to succeed him in his Earledome. Et portoit, les armes de son frere. CHarles Grey, third sonne of Henry Grey Esquire, and bro∣ther and heyre of Reginald and Henry Earles of Kent, afore mentioned, was after their deaths, the sixt Earle of Kent of that sur-name; and married Susan, daughter of Ri∣chard Cotton of Hampshire, Esquire, and had issue, Sir Henry Grey, Lord of Ruthin, who married Elizabeth, second daugh∣ter and co-heyre of Gilbert Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, and a daughter named Susan, married to Sir Michaell Longfield of Buckinghamshire, knight, 1618. Et portoit, burelleé de six d'argent & d'azur à la chef trois torteux, au lam∣bell crmyne.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Kendall, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. IOhn Duke of Bedford, third Son of king Henry the fourth, was by his Brother, king Henry the fift, created Earle of Kendall, and made Regent of France. Hee married two wiues, but had no issue by eyther; the first was Anne, daugh∣ter of Iohn Duke of Burgundy; the second was Iaquet, daugh∣ter of Peter of Luxenburge, Earle of S. Paule in France. He dyed in the 23. yeare of king Henry the sixt, and lyeth buried in a faire Toombe, in the Cathedrall Church at Roan: whose Monument, when king Charles the eight came to see, one of his Nobles willed him to deface the same, that no further memory might be had of him there. To which speech, the said king replyed and saide; That if the whole strength and power of France could not expell him liuing, it were no honour to take reuenge vpon the dead; and therefore, saide he, let him now rest in peace. Et portoit, France seme, escartelle d'engletetre, à lambell de cinq pointz de Britanie & de France. IOhn Duke of Somerset, after the death of Iohn Duke of Bedford, without issue, was by king Henry the sixt, made the next Earle of Kendall. He was at the battaile of Bangie∣bridge, where Thomas Duke of Clarence the kings brother, was slaine, and himselfe taken prisoner by the Duke of Orli∣ance, the 9. of king Henry the fift; from which imprisonment he was shortly after deliuered by ransome. He married Margaret, daughter and heyre of Sir Iohn Beauchampe of Bletso knight, the widdow of Sir Oliuer S. Iohn knight, de∣scended of the S. Iohns of Fanmon in South-Wales, by whom he had issue, Margaret his onely daughter and heyre, marri∣ed first to Edmond of Hadham Earle of Richmond, by whom she had issue, king Henry the seuenth: she married afterward, Thomas Stanley, Earle of Derby, but by him had no issue. This Iohn, dyed in the 22. of king Henry the sixt, and was buried at Wimborne Minster, in Dorsetshire. Et portoit, France, escartelleé d'engleterre, au bordure gobonne d'argent & d'azur.
IOhn de Foix, Viscount Casleton, and Lord Greyley (sonne of Gaston de Foix, knight of the Order of the Garter, brother to the Counte de Foix Capitaine de la Bouche Countie de Lon∣gueuile et de Beuancies) for his good seruice done against the French, was by king Henry the sixt, 1446. created Earle of Kendall in England, and made Knight of the Order of the Garter: some of the house of Foys, now Earles of Longue∣uile in France, do write themselues at this day, Earles of Lon∣gueuile and Kendall. He married Margaret, daughter of Mi∣chaell de la Pole, Earle of Suffolke, and sister to William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolke, by whom he had issue, Iohn de Foys, fa∣ther of Anne, wife of Vladislaus king of Hungary. This Iohn de Foix, had his Armes pulled downe at Winsore, the third of king Edward the 4. Et portoit, à deux vaches passans de gueulles, accolees, accornees, & clarinees de azur, escartelle d'or à trois palz de gueulles, sur le tout au lambell de fable charge de cinq coquilles d'argent. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Lincolne, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. VVIlliam de Romare, a Norman borne (sonne of Roger de Romare, and halfe brother of Randoll Meschines, the fourth Earle of Chester by his Mother Luce, daughter of Algar the Saxon, Earle of Chester, and sister of Morcar, Earle of Northumberland & Lincolne) was created Earle of Lincolne in the sixt yeare of king Ste∣phen, to whom the said king gaue the Mannour of Chirche∣ton, the Castle of Geynsborough, and the Castle of Pontfret in Yorkshire. Vnto which Grant, were Witnesses, Randoll Mes∣chines. Earle of Chester; Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Penbroke; and Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Hartford, and others. He mar∣ried Hawis, daughter of Stephen, sonne of Eudo Comes Ble∣sensis & Champaine, and sister of William le Grosse Earle of Albemarle, by whom he had issue, William de Romare the second, Lord of Bullingbroke, who tooke to wife, Mauld, daughter of Baldwyn Riuers Earle of Deuonshire, and dyed before his Father, in the yeare, 111. leauing issue, a sonne named William the third, who also dyed without issue, in Anno, 1175. and one daughter named Hawis, marri∣ed to Gilbert de Gaunt, Earle of Lincolne. This last William de Romare, by his Deed, gaue lands to the Abbey of Reuesbie, to pray for the soule of William his Father, & William the Earle, his Grand-father, 1172. the 19. of King Henry the 2. Et portoit, gueulles sept macles d'or sené de croix recroisettees de mesme.
GIlbert de Gaunt, Lord of Lindesey in Lincolnshire (sonne of Walter de Gaunt, by Mauld, daughter of Alan Earle of Britaine, and grand-childe to Gilbert de Gaunt (that came in∣to England with William Conqueror) by Eustacia, daughter of the Earle of Cenomania) taking part with king Stephen, a∣gainst Mauld the Empresse, was taken prisoner by king Hen∣ry the second, being then Duke of Normandy; who commit∣ted him to the custody and keeping of Randoll Meschines, alias Gernons, the fourth Earle of Chester, who married him to Hawis, daughter of William de Romara, his halfe brother by the Mother, by whom he had issue, Gilbert de Gaunt, that dyed in the yeare, 1160, Father of the last Gilbert Earle of Lincolne; Baldwyn second sonne, Lord of Bourne and Dipping, who founded the Abbey of Bourne, 1140. and dyed in the yeare, 1156; and one daughter named Alice, married to Simon S. Lize Earle of Northampton, who dyed without issue. This Gilbert the Earle, dyed in the yeare, 116. and was buried in the Abbey of Bardens in Lin∣colnshire. Et portoit, burelle d'or & d'azur au bande de gueulles. GIlbert de Gaunt, grand-childe of Gilbert de Gaunt, Earle of Lincolne, (by his sonne Gilbert, who was disinherited by King Henry the second, for taking part with king Stephen) was made Earle of Lincolne, by Lewis King Philip the French kings sonne, in the 18. yeare of king Iohn, which king Henry the third did afterwards confirme to the said Gilbert, in the third yeare of his Reigne: In which yeare he dyed, & was buried in the Abbey of Ramsey, without issue; after whose death, king Henry the third did giue the saide Earledome of Lincolne, to Randoll sur-named Blundeuile, the sixt Earle of Chester. Et portoit, burelle d'or & d'azur au bande de gueulles. RAndoll Meschines (sur-named Blundeuile) the sixt Earle of Chester from Hugh Lupus, and the fourth Earle of this Family, sonne of Hugh Keueliock, sonne of Randoll Ger∣nons, halfe brother by the Mother, to William Romara Earle of Lincolne, was restored to the Earledome of Lincolne, in the yeare, 1218. the third of king Henry the third, after the death of his kinesman Gilbert de Gaunt the last Earle of Lin∣colne of that sur-name. (It is set downe by some exquisite Wri∣ters, that this Randoll dying without issue, did giue the Title and Earledome of Lincolne, to his sister Auice, the wife of Robert
Quincy, and so he the said Robert, became Earle of Lincolne; which thing I can hardly beleeue; for that all honours and titles of Dignities are deriued and enioyed by the bounty and fauour of the King or Soueraigne; and therefore, that this guift of Randoli to his sister, could make her Countesse, or Robert her husband Earle of Lincolne, is idle and altogether vntrue.) He married first, Constance, daughter of Conan Earle of Britaine and Richmond, (the widdow of Geffrey Plantagenet) from whom he was diuorced, the second of king Iohn; and after married Cle∣mence, daughter of William Fengeres; and to his third wife, he tooke Margaret, daughter of Humfrey de Bohun, Earle of Hereford, but had no issue by any of them. He was a Witnesse to king Henry the thirds Charter, bearing date, 1224. of lands that he gaue to the Abbey of Peterborough, by the name of Randoll Earle of Chester and Lincolne; and after dyed at his Castle of Wallingford, the 17. yeare of King Henry the 3. & was buried at Chester, leauing his foure sisters his heyres, which were married, as in the title of Earles of Chester. Et portoit, d'azur à trois garbes d'or. IOhn Lacie, Baron of Halton, Lord of Ponfret and Blacke∣burneshire, and Constable of Chester, sonne and heyre of Roger, was created Earle of Lincolne, in the 17. yeare of king Henry third, and married Alice, daughter of Gilbert, Lord of the Egle, and Baron of Pimsey; and to his second wife, hee married Margaret, daughter and one of the two heyres of Robert Lord Quincy (sonne and heyre of Saire Quincy Earle of Winchester) by Hawis his wife, the fourth sister, and one of the heyres of Randoll Blundeuile, Earle of Chester & Lin∣colne, by whom he had issue, Lord Edmond Lacie, that dyed before his Father, in the yeare, 1257. who before had maried Alice, daughter of the Marquesse of Saluce in Italy, and had issue, Henry Lacie Earle of Lincolne; and Mauld, maried to Richard de Clare Earle of Glocester. This Iohn, dyed in the 24. yeare of king Henry the third, & was bu∣ried in the Abbey of Stanloe. Et portoit d'or au lion rampant de pourpe. HEnry Lacie, (grand-childe of Iohn Lacie Earle of Lin∣colne, by his sonne Edmond) was the second Earle of Lincolne of that Family, Baron of Halton, and Constable of Chester, and Lord of Denbeigh, by king Edward the first. He writ in his stile, Earle of Lincolne, Constable of Chester, Lord Ros and Roweniock, and married to his first wife, Margaret, daughter and heire of William Lonspee, grand-childe of Willi∣am Longspee Earle of Salisbury, by his sonne William, by whō he had issue, Edmond Lacie drowned in a Well in Denbeigh
Castle, in the life time of his father; & Alice, maried to Thomas Plantagenet, Earle of Lancaster, Leicester, & Derby. This Henry, married to his second wife, Ioane, daughter of William Martyne Lord Camoys, but by her had no issue. He dyed at his house, now called Lincolnes Inne, in Chancery-Lane, in London, 1311. and lyeth buried in Paules Church, in London, in S. Dunstans Chappell. Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant de purpre. HEnry of Mounmoth (sur-named Tortcoll) sonne of Hen∣ry Earle of Lancaster, and brother and heyre of Thomas Earle of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, that married Alice Lacy aforesaid, was created Earle of Derby, in the life time of his Father; after whose death (which was in the yeare, 1345.) he was also Earle of Lancaster, Leicester, and Lord high Steward of England; and in the 25. of king Edward the third, he was made Duke of Lancaster; and in the 27. yeare of the same Kings reigne, he had the Earledome of Lincolne giuen him. He married Isabell, daughter of Henry Lord Beau∣mont, and had issue, two daughters his heyres; Mauld the eldest was married to William Duke of Bauarre, Earle of Henault, Holland, and Zeland; Blanch the second daughter, was wife to Iohn of Gaunt Earle of Richmont, (fourth sonne of king Edward the third) who after the death of this Henry, his Father in law, was the second Duke of Lancaster. This Henry, dyed in the 35. yeare of king Edward the third. Et portoit, d'engleterre au band d'azur. IOhn de la Pole, sonne and heyre of Iohn de la Pole second Duke of Suffolke, was created Earle of Lincolne, in the sea∣uenth yeare of king Edward the fourth, and married Mar∣garet, daughter of Thomas Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell, by whom he had no issue. He was slaine in the life time of his Father, at Stokefield, taking part with Martine Swarth, the 16. of Iune, in the second of king Henry the seuenth, 1487. Et portoit, d'azur à la face à trois testes de leopards d'or, au lambell d'ar∣gent.
HEnry Brandon, sonne and heyre of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke, by Mary the French Queene, being a∣bout twelue yeares of age, was created Earle of Lincolne, at Bridewell, in the seuenteene yeare of king Henry the eight, and then dyed without issue, his Father liuing. Et portoit, burelle d'argent & de gueulles de dix pieces au lion rampant d'or, correné perpale gueulles & d'argent au lambell d'argent. EDward Clinton, Lord Clinton, was created Earle of Lin∣colne, in the 14. yeare of Queene Elizabeth, 1572. and made Lord Admirall of England. He married three wiues, the first was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Iohn Blount, the wid∣dow of the Lord Talboys, by whom he had issue, Bridget, wife to Robert Dymock of Lincolnshire, Esquire, Father of Sir Edward Dymock, his Maiesties most worthy Champion; Ka∣therine, wife of William Lord Borough, Father of Thomas Lord Borough, Lord Deputy of Ireland; Margaret, wife to Charles Lord Willoughby of Parham. His second wife was Vrsula, daughter of William Lord Sturton, by whom he had issue, Henry lord Clinton, Edward, & Thomas, which Tho: had to wife, Mary, daughter of Iohn Terrell of Warley; Anne Clinton maried to William Ascough, sonne & heyre of Sir Francis Ascough of Kelsey in Lincolnshire, knight; Francis married to Gyles Bruges, Lord Shandos of Sudley Castle: His third wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Gerald, Earle of Kildare in Ireland, by whom he had no issue. He dyed in the 26. yeare of Queene Elizabeth, and was honourably buried at Windesore, 1585. Et portoit, d'argent six croiseletz de sable, au pied fiche, au chef d'azur chargé de deux molettes d'or. HEnry Lord Clinton, Son and heyre of Edward Earle of Lincolne, and Lord high Admirall of England, after the death of his Father, was Earle of Lincolne, and married Ka∣therine, daughter of Francis Hastings, Earle of Huntington, by whom he had issue, Thomas Lord Clinton, and Earle of Lincolne, 1616. Sir Edward Clinton knight, who married Ma∣ry, daughter of Thomas Dighton of Sturton; and Elizabeth Clinton, wife to Sir Arthur Gorge knight.
THomas Lord Clinton, and Earle of Lincolne now liuing, 1618. married Elizabeth, daughter and one of the heyres of Sir Henry Knyuet knight, and hath issue, Edward Lord Clinton, knight of the Bath, Henry and Thomas Clinton, Ka∣therine, Elizabeth, and Francis. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles Palatines of Lancaster, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. IOhn (sur-named Without-Land) brother of king Richard the first, was by the said King, created Earle of Lancaster, and had giuen him also the Earledomes of Nottingham, Deuonshire, and Cornwall. He married Isabell, third daughter and one of the heyres of William Earle of Glocester, by whom he had the said Earldome, conditionally, that he should giue yearely betweene the other two sisters, foure hundred pounds; but from the said Isabell he was diuorced, in the first yeare he came to bee King; as in the title of Earles of Glocester, is more at large. Et portoit, les armes d'engleterré an baston d'azur brochant sur le tout. EDmond (sur-named Crouchbacke) second sonne of king Henry the third, borne in the yeare, 1245. and created Earle of Lancaster by his Father, in the yeare, 1267. He had also giuen him, the Earledomes of Leicester and Derby, with the Office of high Steward of England, after the attaindor of Simon Mountfort Earle of Leicester, slaine at the battaile of Euesham, and the disinheriting of Robert Ferrars Earle of Derby. Hee married two wiues, the first was Auelina, daughter of William de Fortibus, Earle of Albemarle, and si∣ster and heyre of William de Fortibus, Earle of Albemarle, by
whom he had no issue. His second wife was Blanch, Queene of Nauarre, daugh∣ter of Robert Earle of Artoys, by whom he had issue, Thomas Earle of Lancaster, Henry Lord of Munmoth, and Iohn that dyed in France, without issue. This Ed∣mond was Lieutenant of Gascoigne, in the first yeare of king Edward the first; & being sent into Aquitaine with an Army, dyed at Bayon, in the yeare, 1296. and his body being brought ouer Seas into England, was buried at Westminster, on the North-side of the high-Altar. Et portoit, gueulles au trois leopards passant d'or, au lambell de cinq pointz seme de France. Or thus, d'engleterre au lambell de France. THomas Plantagenet, sonne and heire of Edmond Crouch∣backe, was after the death of his Father, Earle of Lanca∣ster, Leicester, and Derby, and Lord Steward of England. Hee married Alice, daughter and heyre of Henry Lacie Earle of Lincolne, by the daughter and heyre of William Longspee, Son and heyre of William Longspee Earle of Salisbury, by whom he had no issue. This Alice was held to be a very loose and vnchaste woman of her body, for in the life time of this Tho∣mas, her husband, she maintained Sir Richard S. Martyn for her Sweet-heart, and after her husbands death, she married two other husbands, the first was Ebulo Lord Strange of Knocking; and the second, was Hugh de Frenes, by whom she neuer had any issue. Notwithstanding, she gaue all her lands and inheritance to Thomas her first husband, and to his heyres for euer. This Thomas, siding with the Barons against king Edward the second, in hatred of the Spencers, was taken prisoner at Burrough Brigge, by the treachery of Robert Holland and Andrew of Hercley, and brought to Pomfret, a Castle of his owne, and without the Walles thereof was beheaded, in the 14. yeare of King Edward the second, leauing Hen∣ry his Brother, his heire. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. HEnry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth, brother and heire of Thomas Earle of Lancaster, beheaded at Pomfret afore∣said, was restored to the Earledome of Lancaster, Leicester, & Derby, with the Office of high Steward of England, in the first yeare of king Edward the third. He married Mauld, daughter and heire of Sir Patrick Cadurcis (or Chaworth) knight, Lord of Kidwelly and Ogmore in Wales, and had issue, Henry Earle of Derby, and first Duke of Lancaster; and sixe daughters, Blanch the eldest, was married to Thomas Lord Wake of Lidell; Mauld the second, was first married to Willi∣am Lord Burgh, Earle of Vlster in Ireland; and after, to Sir Ralphe Vfford knight; Ioane the third daughter, was married to Iohn Lord Mowbray of Axholme; Isabell was Abbesse of Almesbury; Elianor
the fift daughter, was first married to Iohn, sonne of Henry Lord Beaumond; and after to Richard Earle of Arundell; and Mary the sixt daughter, was married to Henry Lord Percy of Alnewike. He dyed at Leicester, and was there buried in the Monastery of the Channons, in the yeare, 1345. Et portoit, les armes d'engleterre au band d'azur. HEnry of Monmouth, sur-named Tortcoll, sonne & heyre of Henry Earle of Lancaster, and grand-childe of Ed∣mond Crouch-backe aforesaid, was created Earle of Derby, in the tenth yeare of king Edward the third; his Father being then liuing; after whose death, he was also Earle of Lanca∣ster, Leicester, and Lord high Steward of England; and at a Parliament helde at Westminster, the 25. of the saide Kings Reigne, he was created Duke of Lancaster; and about two yeares after, the saide King gaue him the Earledome of Lin∣colne. He married Isabell, daughter of Henry Lord Beaumont, (cousin-germane to Queene Isabell, wife to king Edward the second, by whom he had issue, two daughters his heyres; Mauld, married Willi∣am Duke of Bauarre, Earle of Henault, Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland; Blanch the second daughter, was married to Iohn of Gaunt, fourth sonne of king Ed∣ward the third, and after Duke of Lancaster. This Henry, for some disgrace∣full words, supposed to be spoken by him, against the Duke of Brunswicke, was by the saide Duke challenged to a single combate, before king Iohn of France; which this Henry gladly accepted of; and at the appointed time, they beeing both prouided, entred the listes with haughty courage, for the triall of their cause: but King Iohn reconciled them, to the great contentment and honour of the Duke of Lancaster. This Henry dyed of the plague, and was buried in the Collegiate at Leicester, which himselfe founded, and placed therein a Deane, twelue Maior Canons, and so many inferior Brethren) in the 35. yeare of king Edward the third. Et portoit, d'engleterre au band d'azur. IOhn of Gaunt, (so named of the place where he was borne) fourth sonne of king Edward the third, was created Earle of Richmond, in the yeare, 1355. and in the 38. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, hee sate in Parliament, with the title of Duke of Lancaster, and Earle of Richmond; and did write in his stile, Iohn, sonne to the King of England, Duke of Aqui∣taine and Lancaster, Earle of Derby, Lincolne, and Leicester, & high Constable of England, (and as some haue, high Consta∣ble of France; but of that I doubt; For Robert de Morell Lord of Fiennes, was then Constable of France.) And in
the fiftieth yeare of King Edward the third, he sate in Parliament, by the name of Iohn, King of Castile and Lions; also in the 14. yeare of king Richard the se∣cond, his Nephew, he was made Duke of Aquitaine, by deliuering him a golden Rod, and putting vpon his head a rich Bonnet. He married three wiues, the first was Blanch, daughter and co-heyre of Henry the first Duke of Lancaster, by whō he had issue, Henry, after king of England; Phillip, wife to Iohn king of Portingall; and Elizabeth married to Iohn Holland Duke of Excester. His second wife was Constance, daughter and one of the co-heyres of Peter, king of Castile, by whom he had issue, Katherine, married to Henry, sonne of king Iohn of Spaine, with the Title to the kingdomes of Castile and Lions. His third wife was Katherine, daughter of Payne Ruet, alias Guien, king of Armes, and Widdow of Sir Otes Swynford, knight, by whom he had issue before marriage, Iohn sur-named Beau∣fort, Earle of Somerset, and Marquesse Dorset; Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Win∣chester, and Cardinall of S. Eusebius, as also Chancellor of England; Thomas Beaufort, Earle of Dorset, Duke of Excester, and Chancellour of England; Ioane Beaufort, first married to Ralphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland; and after to Robert Ferrars, Lord of Ousley: This last marriage with Katherine Swynford, & the legitimating of her children was made good, by a Bull from Rome. This great Duke and Prince, dyed in the 22. of king Richard the second, and lyeth buried in Paules Church in London. Et portoit, semé de France, escartellé d'engleterre, au lambell d'hermines. HEnry Plantagenet, borne at Bullingbroke, sonne and heire of Iohn of Gaunt, was created Earle of Derby in the life time of his Father, 1385. by king Richard the second; and in the 21. yeare of the said kings reigne, he was made Duke of Hereford, and by that name and title sate in the Parliament, held at Westminster; and after being accused of treason, by Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, was banished England for ten yeares; meane time dyed Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, his Father; whom this Henry succeeded in the Dukedome of Lancaster; and after, deposing King Richard, and obtaining the kingdome, he ordayned by assent of Par∣liament, that Henry his eldest sonne should enioy the same Dignities, and be stiled Prince of Wales, Duke of Lancaster and Cornwall, and Earle of Chester: and so this Henry being crowned King, vnited the whole In∣heritance of Lancaster vnto the Crowne. Since which time, the Ducall Title of Lancaster hath bene drowned in the Title of the Regall Dignity. This Henry, married Mary, daughter and one of the two heyres of Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of England, by whom he had issue, Henry Prince of Wales, Thomas Duke of Clarence, Iohn Duke of Bed∣ford, Humfrey Duke of Glocester; Blanch married to William Duke of Bauarre; and Philip married to Iohn, king of Denmarke and Norwey. He dyed in the yeare, 1412. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Leicester, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RObert de Bellomont (a Norman borne) sonne of Roger de Bellomont, Lord of Ponteaudemer, and Adelina his wife, sister and heyre of Hugh Earle of Mellent, (after the death of Leofrike, Algar, and Edwin, Saxon Earles) was made Earle of Leicester, by king Henry the first, 1103. Hee married Elizabeth, daughter of Hugh the great Earle of Ver∣mandois, and had issue, Waleran, Earle of Mellent in Norman∣die, and of Worcester in England; and Robert sur-named Bos∣su; Adelina wife to Hugh Mounfort; and Isabell, married to Gilbert Strongbow Earle of Penbroke: this Isabell, daughter of Hugh the great Earle of Vermandois, ouer-liued her first husband, and after married William the second Earle Warren and Surrey. This Robert, dyed in the yeare of our Lord, 1118. the 19. of King Henry the first. Et portoit, de gueulles, à l'quintfoille d'hermyne. RObert de Bellomont, sur-named Bossu, (of his crooked backe) was the second Earle of Leicester, after the death of his Father; he was Chiefe-Iustice of England, in King Henry the seconds time, and married Itta, daughter of Roaldo de Waet, Earle of the East Angles, & had issue, Robert Blanch∣maynes the third Earle of Leicester, Henry, Geffrey, and Iohn; Isabell married to Simon S. Lize, Earle of Northampton; and Hawis, married to William Earle of Glocester. This Robert, dyed in the thirteenth yeare of king Henry the second, and was buried at Leicester. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
RObert de Bellomont, sur-named Blanchmaynes, of his white hands, sonne of Robert Bossu, was the third Earle of Lei∣cester after the Conquest: He married Pernell (or Petronell) daughter and co-heire of Hugh Grentmesnell, Lord of Hinck∣ley, & Lord Steward of England; with whom he had in mar∣riage, the Honour of Hinckley, and Office of Lord Steward of England. She built the body of the great Church of Leice∣ster, and lyeth there buried in the Quier, by the high Altar; leauing issue, Robert Fitz-Pernell, Earle of Leicester; William a leaper, who built the Hospitall of S. Leonards in I eicester, and dyed before his Father, without issue; Roger, Bishop of S. Andrewes in Scotland; Amicia, wife to Simon Earle Mount∣fort, Brother of Almericke Earle of Eureux; and Margaret married to Saier de Quincy, Earle of Winchester. This Robert, was slaine in the Holy-Land, at Duras in Greece, where he was buried in the yeare, 1190. Et portoit, de gueulles à l'quintfoille d'hermyne. RObert, surnamed Fitz-Pernell, sonne of Robert Blanch∣maynes, was after the death of his Father, the fourth Earle of Leicester; and in right of his Mother, Lord high Steward of England. He married Lourette, daughter of Willi∣am Lord Brews of Brember in Sussex, by whom he had no is∣sue. This Robert went with King Richard into the Holy-land, and was there taken prisoner, and paide for his ransome, two thousand Markes: He dyed in the yeare of our Lord, 1204. and was buried in the Abbey of Leicester, the sixt of King Iohn; leauing Simon de Mountfort, and Saier de Quincy, who had married his two sisters his heyres. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. SImon de Mountfort (sonne of Simon Earle Mounfort in France, sonne of another Simon Earle Montfort, and Ber∣tha his wife, daughter of Richard Earle of Eureux, and Con∣stable of France: which last Simon, was grand-childe of Ro∣bert, sur-named the Holy King of France, by his base sonne Al∣mericke Earle Mountfort) married Amicia, eldest fister and co-heyre of Robert Fitz-Pernell Earle of Leicester, in whose right he was created Earle of Leicester, & made Lord Stew∣ard of England, in the eight yeare of king Iohn, as may ap∣peare by his Charter, dated at Slingesbie, the tenth day
of March, 1206. This Simon, with his sonne was after banished England, & dis∣inherited for rebellion against the king, and allying themselues to the French King. He was Generall of the Army, at the siedge of the Citty of Tholouse, who before the Gates thereof, was striken in the head with a stone shot out of an En∣gine, whereof he dyed sodainly; and his Brother Almericke, besiedging a Ca∣stle hard by the said Citty, at the same time, was likewise slaine in the yeare, 1218. This Simon had issue by his wife Amicia, Almericke Earle Montfort in France; and Simon that was after Earle of Leicester, in England. Et portoit, gueulles, au hon d'argent à la double queué passee en en Saulteur. SImon de Montfort, second sonne of Simon Montfort Earle of Leicester, and Amicia his wife, hauing compounded & agreed with Almericke his elder brother, for his right & title of the Earledome of Leicester, came into England, and was graciously receyued of king Henry the third, 1235. who did not onely restore to him the Earledome of Leicester, with the Office of Lord Steward of England, but also in the yeare, 1237. gaue vnto him in marriage, his sister Elianor, the widow of William Marshall (the yonger) Earle of Penbroke, by whō he had issue, Henry Montfort, slaine with his Father at the battaile of Euesham, in the yeare, 1256. Simon Montfort, Guy, and Almerick, were all three banished the Land by Acte of Parliament; Edward and Richard dyed young; and Elianor his daughter, was married to Le∣olyne, Prince of Wales. When the Noblemen of England raised warre against king Henry the third (for denying to performe the Orders and Decrees made a little before, at a Parliament held at Oxford) this Simon was made their Gene∣rall; and at a battaile, strocke neere Lewis in Sussex, he tooke the King with his Brother Richard, Earle of Cornewall and king of Almayne, with Prince Edward his sonne, prisoners; but Prince Edward escaping, bid the Barons battaile againe at Euesham, where this Simon was slaine, & the Barons ouerthrowne, in the 40, yeare of the said kings Reigne. This Simon the second Earle of Leicester, at the Coronation of Queene Elianor, challenged the Office of Lord Steward of England (in right of Amicia, his Mother, daughter of Robert Blanchmaynes, and Pernell his wife, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Hugh Grentmesnill) which Ro∣ger Bigot Earle of Norfolke gain-said, alledging, that that Office belonged to him of right, by Alice the other daughter of Hugh Grentmesnill; to which this Simon answered, That in King Iohns time this Controuersie was agreed, That the Earle of Leicester that then was, should giue to the then Earle of Norfolke, tenne Knights Fees; for which the Earle of Norfolke did release all his right and claime to the said Office of Lord high Steward of England; Whereunto Earle Roger replied & said, That of those ten Knights Fees, there were yet two & a halfe vnpaid; To which it was answered, That by the Lawes of the Realme, the saide Roger might recouer the re∣mainder of those Knights Fees: And so Simon was receiued to execute the saide Office, at the Coronation of Queene Elianor. Et portoit les armes de son pere.
EDmond (sur-named Crouch-backe) second sonne of king Henry the third, in the fiftieth yeare of his Fathers reigne, was made Earle of Leicester, and high Steward of England, and had also giuen him the Castle of Kenelworth, and marri∣ed Aueline, daughter and heyre of William de Fortibus, Earle of Albemarle; as in the title of Earles of Lancaster is more at large. He married to his second wife, Blanch, Queene of Nauarre, daughter of Robert Earle of Arthoys, and had issue, Thomas Earle of Lancaster, Henry, and Iohn; and after died at Bayon in France, 1295. and was buried at Westminster, on the North side of the Altar. Et portoit, d'engleterre, au lambell de France. THomas, eldest sonne and heyre of Edmond Crouchbacke, Earle of Leicester, and high Steward of England, marri∣ed Alice, daughter and heyre of Henry Lacie Earle of Lin∣colne, but by her had no issue. He was beheaded at Pomfret, in the yeare of our Lord, 1322. as is more at large in the Title of Earles of Lancaster. Et portoit, d'engleterre, an lambell de France. HEnry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth (brother & heyre of Thomas aforesaid) was restored to the Earledomes of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, with the Office of high Steward of England, in the eighteenth yeare of king Edward the second, and married Mauld or Matild, daughter & heyre of Sir Patrick Chaworth knight, and had issue, as in the Earles of Lancaster. He dyed in the yeare, 1345. and lyeth buried at Leicester. Et portoit, les armes, d'engleterre à la band d'azur.
HEnry of Monmouth (sur-named Tortcoll) sonne & heyre of Henry Lord of Monmouth, and grand-childe of Ed∣mond Crouchbacke, was after the death of his Father, Earle of Lancaster, Leicester, and high Steward of England, and af∣ter created Duke of Lancaster, in the yeare, 1351. He marri∣ed Isabell, daughter of Henry Lord Bellomont or Beaumont; and had issue, two daughters his heyres, Mauld the eldest, married to William Duke of Bauary; and Blanch the second daughter, was married to Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. He dyed of the plague, and was buried at Leicester, the 35. of king Edward the third. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. WIlliam of Bauary, Earle of Henault, Holland, Zeland, and Frizland, married Mauld, daughter & co-heire of Henry of Monmouth, sur-named Tortcoll, the first Duke of Lancaster; by reason whereof, he was Earle of Leicester, in the 35. yeare of king Edward the third; as doth appeare by his Charter, bearing date, 1360. He dyed withour issue. Et portoit, les armes de Bauary Perbendee lozengie d'argent & d'azur. IOhn of Gaunt, (so named of the place where he was borne) fourth sonne of king Edward the third; after the death of William of Bauary, his brother by marriage, was by his Fa∣ther, created Earle of Leicester, Lincolne, and Derby, in the yeare, 1361. as in the Earles of Lancaster, is more at large. He married Blanch, the second daughter and co-heyre of Henry first Duke of Lancaster, by whom he had issue, King Henry the fourth, and others. He dyed in the yeare, 1399. Et portoit, France semé, escartelle d'engleterre au lambell d'hermyns.
HEnry of Bullingbroke, sonne and heyre of Iohn of Gaunt, was Duke of Hereford in the life time of his Father; and after created Earle of Leicester and Derby, as also Lord high Steward of England; and lastly, king of England, by the name of king Henry the fourth. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. RObert Dudley, fift sonne of Iohn Dudley Duke of Nor∣thumberland, was created Earle of Leicester, and Baron of Denbeigh, in the sixt yeare of Queene Elizabeth, 1564. at S. Imas house on Michelmas day. He was Knight of the ho∣nourable Order of the Garter, and of S. Michael, L. Stew∣ard of her house, and Master of the Horse, and one of her Maiesties most honourable priuy Counsell. He married two wiues, the first was Amie, daughter and heyre of Sir Iohn Rob∣sert, knight, who dyed without issue. His second wife was Lettice, daughter of Sir Francis Knolles, Treasurer of the houshold to Queene Elizabeth, and Knight of the Noble Or∣der of the Garter, by whom he had a sonne named Robert, Baron of Denbeigh, who dyed young without issue. This Robert dyed without any lawfull issue, at Cornebury Lodge in Oxfordshire, 1588. and was buried at Warwick, leauing issue, Robert a base sonne, begotten of Duglasse Howard, sister of Charles Earle of Not∣tingham. Et portoit, d'or au lyon rampant vert à la double queue'. RObert Sidney, Lord Gouernour of Vlishing, sonne of Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of the Counsell of the Marchesse of Wales, and of Lady Mary his wife, eldest sister and co-heyre of Robert Dudley Earle of Leicester, fift sonne of Iohn Dud∣ley, Duke of Northumberland, was by King Iames, the thir∣teenth day of May, 1603. created Baron Sidney of Penshurst, in the Tower of London: and on the furth day of May, 1605. he was created Viscount Lisle at Grienwich; and lastly,
on Sunday, the second day of August, 1618. he was created Earle of Leicester, at Salisbury: he being then Lord Chamberlaine to Queene Anne, and knight and companion of the Noble Order of the Garter. He married Barbary, the on∣ly daughter and heyre of Iohn Gamage, Lord of Coytie in Glamorganshire, by whom he hath issue now liuing, Robert Lord Lisle, who married Lady Dorothy, eldest daughter of Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland; Lady Mary married to Sir Robert Wroth; Lady Phillip wife to Sir Iohn Hubert knight, sonne & heyre of Sir Henry Hubert knight, Baronet and Lord Chiefe-Iustice of the Court of common Pleas; and Lady Barbara Sidney the third daughter, yet vnmarried, 1618. Et portoit, d'or à la pheon d'azur. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of March, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. ROger Lord Mortimer of Wigmore, (sonne and heyre of Edmond Lord Mortimer of Wigmore) was created the first Earle of the Marchesse of Wales, in the second yeare of king Edward the third, at a Parliament held at Sa∣lisbury. Vnto this Roger, was committed the gouernment of Edward the third, for that he was generally accounted a man of singular vertue; and vnto him was ioyned Edmond of Woodstocke Earle of Kent, and Henry Plantagenet Earle of Lācaster, as assistants. A Parliament being held at Northamp∣ton, 1328, a dishonourable peace and marriage was made, wherein the King (by the directions of his Mother, and this Roger Mortimer) released to the Scots, their homage, fealty, and seruice due to him for that kingdome; and deliuered vp to them also, the grand Charter cal∣led Ragman; which vnder the hands and seales of their late King, and of the Nobility of Scotland, testified their tenure and subiection to the Kings of Eng∣land. This Roger, in the fourth yeare of king Edward the third, was taken at Nottingham Castle at midnight, in Queene Isabell the Kings Mothers chamber, (with whom he had bene ouer familiar) by William Lord Montague, & others, and sent to the Tower of London, and condemned of high treason at Westmin∣ster, in presence of the whole Parliament; and after drawne to the common Gallowes, and there hanged two dayes and two nights, and then taken downe and buried in the Grey-Fryars Church. He married Ioane, daughter and heyre of Peter Iamuile, Lord of Mede, Vaucolour, and Trime in Ireland, and had issue,
Edmond Mortimer, knighted at the Coronation of King Edward the third, with his Brother Sir Roger Mortimer, and Geffrey Mortimer Lord of Cowich; Iohn the fourth sonne of this Roger, was slaine at a Iusting at Shrewsbury; Katherine the eldest daughter, was married to Thomas Beauchampe Earle of Warwick; Ioane married to Iames Lord Audley; Agnes married to Laurence Hastings, Earle of Penbroke; Margaret married to Thomas, sonne and heyre of Maurice Lord Berkeley; Mauld married to Sir Iohn Charlton, Lord Powis; Blanch, wife to Peter Lord Grandison; and Beatrix the seuenth daughter, was married first to Edward, sonne and heyre of Thomas of Brotherton, Earle of Norfolke; and after to Tho∣mas Brews. Et portoit, barre d'or & d'azur, au chef palee les corners geronne à vn escuchon d'argent. ROger Mortimer, grand-childe to Roger Mortimer, the first Earle of March aforesaid, by his sonne Edmond, was re∣stored in the 29. yeare of king Edward the third, to the Earl∣dome of March, and all other lands, honours, and possessi∣ons, which his said Grand-Father was possessed of; for that he was, contrary to law (as the Lawyers then saide) put to death, being neuer brought to answer; (which course of Iu∣stice was vsed before, at the triall of the Earles of Lancaster, Winchester, Glocester, and Kent, by the aduice of the said Ro∣ger and Queene Isabell.) This Roger, was one of the first Founders of the Order of the Garter, and married Phillip, daughter of William Mountague Earle of Salisbury, and had issue, Roger Mortimer, that dyed without issue before his Father, and Edmond Mortimer, that was the third Earle of March; Margaret married to Robert Vere Earle of Oxford; and Margery married to Iohn Lord Audley. He dyed in Burgundy, at a Towne called Roueray, in the three and thirtieth yeare of King Edward the third, and his body being brought into England, was buried by his Auncestors, at Wigmore. Et portoit, barre d'or & d'azur, au chef palee les corners geronne à vn escuchon d'argent. EDmond Mortimer, second sonne and heyre of Roger Mor∣timer, the second Earle of March, (was after the death of his Father) the third Earle of March, and Lord of Wigmore. He married Phillip, daughter and onely heyre of Lionell of Antwerpe, Duke of Clarence, Earle of Wiltshire and Vlster, & Lord of Conaught and Trime in Ireland, by whom he had is∣sue, Roger Mortimer, the fourth Earle of March, and Sir Ed∣mond Mortimer, knight, that married the daughter of Owen Glendour; Sir Iohn Mortimer knight, the third sonne, was be∣headed for treason, the third of king Henry the sixt; Eliza∣beth
married to Henry Lord Percy, sur-named Hotspurre; Philip, first married to Iohn Hastings, Earle of Penbroke; and after to Richard Earle of Arundell; and lastly, to Iohn Lord S. Iohn, and dyed without issue. This Edmnd, recered from William Mountague Earle of Salisbury, the Castle and honour of Den∣beigh, which king Edward the third had giuen before to Roger Mortimer Earle of March, this Edmonds Grand-Father. This Edmond, died at Corke in Ireland, the fift of king Richard the second, and was buried at Wigmore. Et portoit, burelle de six pieces do'r & 'd'azur, au chef de la primier deux paletts entte deux base equites de la second, sur le tout à vn escuchon d'argent. ROger Mortimer, after the death of Edmond, his Father, was the fourth Earle of March of that sur-name, whom king Richard the second nominated for his successour in the kingdome of England, 1387. being descended of the body of Philip, onely daughter and heyre of Lionell Duke of Cla∣rence, third sonne of king Edward the third. He married Eli∣anor, daughter of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, Lord Wake, and Duke of Surrey, and sister and co-heyre of Thomas her brother, by whom he had issue, two sonnes and two daugh∣ters; Edmond the first sonne, was the fift Earle of March; Roger the second sonne dyed young; Anne was married to Richard of Coningsbourgh Earle of Cambridge, sonne of Ed∣mond of Langley Duke of Yorke; and Elianor married to Edward Courtney Earle of Deuonshire. He was writ and stiled Earle of March and Vlster, Lord of Wig∣more, Trime, Clare, and Conaught; and was slaine by the wilde Irish, being then Lieutenant of the Kings Forces in Ireland, in the two and twentieth yeare of King Richard the second, and bare the Armes of his Father. EDmond Mortimer, sonne and heyre of Roger aforesaide, was after the death of his Father, the fift Earle of March and Vlster, and Lord of Wigmore, Trime, Clare, & Conaught, and married Anne, daughter of Edmond Earle Stafford, and dyed without issue, in the Castle of Trime in Ireland, the third of King Henry the fixt, and was buried at Stoke neere Clare, leauing Richard Duke of Yorke, his Nephew and heyre to succeed him: Anne his widdow was after married to Iohn Holland Earle of Huntington. Les armes de Mortimer.
RIchard Plantagenet, (sonne and heyre of Richard of Co∣nesburgh Earle of Cambridge, by Anne his wife, sister & co-heyre of Edmond Mortimer, the fift Earle of March) af∣ter the death of his Father, and Edmond Mortimer his Vnc∣kle, did write himselfe, Duke of Yorke, Earle of Cambridge, Vlster, March, and Rutland, Lord of Wigmore and Clare. He married Cecily, daughter of Ralphe Neuill, first Earle of West∣merland, and had issue, Edward Earle of March, (after king, by the name of king Edward the fourth) and others, as in the title of Yorke. This Richard, was slaine at the battaile of Wakefield, 1460. and the 39. of king Henry the sixt. Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre à bordure d'argent seme lyons ram∣pant purpre. EDward Plantagenet, sonne and heyre of Richard Duke of Yorke aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Earle of March and Vlster, and Lord of Wigmore and Clare; and lastly, king of England, by the name of King Edward the fourth. Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre à vnlambell d'argent, charge de neuf torteaux. A CATALOGVE OF THE Marquesses Montague, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. IOhn Neuill, brother of Richard Neuil (sur-named the great) Earle of Warwicke and Salisbury, was in the first yeare of king Edward the fourth, created Lord Mountague; and in the fourth yeare of the said Kings Reigne, hee was created Earle of Northumberland at Yorke; (at which time, Henry Percie Earle of Northumberland liued in banishment attain∣ted; but afterward obtayning the Kings fauour, he returned into England, and was restored to his Earledome of Northū∣berland againe, in the eight yeare of king Edward the fourth) And in the tenth yeare of the said Kings Reigne, (the saide
Iohn hauing surrendred his grant of the said Earledome) was created Marques Mountague; and in the yeare after, was slaine at Gladmore Heath, at the battell of Barnet; and being brought to London in one Coffin, with his brother the Earle of Warwicke, was set in S. Paules Church in London, with their Faces bare, to be seene three dayes, and then carried to the Priory of Bisham, and there both buried in one graue. This Iohn, married Isabell, daughter and heyre of Sir Ed∣mond Engelesthorp knight, and had issue, George Neuill, created Duke of Bedford, the tenth of king Edward the fourth; and fiue daughters, (who after the death of the saide George without issue, were his heyres) Anne the eldest, was married to Sir William Stoner knight; Elizabeth, married to the Lord Scroope of Vpsale; Margaret, married to Sir Iohn Mortimer knight; and after to  Horne; Lucy, was first married to Sir Thomas Fitz-Williams of Aldwarpe, Father of Wil∣liā Fitz-Williams, Earle of Southampton; and after to Sir Anthony Browne knight; and Isabel the 5. daughter, was maried to Sir William Hudleston knight. Al which fiue daughters had issue. This Iohn, Marquesse Mountague, and George Duke of Bedford, his sonne, were by Acte of Parliament, the 17. of Edward the 4. degraded of all honourable Titles, in these words. Where afore this time, the King our Soueraigne Lord, for the great zeale and loue he bare to Iohn Neuill, late named Marquesse Mountague, and other conside∣rations him mouing, did erect and make George Neuill, the eldest sonne of the saide Marquesse, to bee Duke of Bedford; and at that time, for the great loue his saide Highnesse bare to the saide Iohn Neuill, purposed and intended to haue giuen to the saide George, for sustentation of the same dignity, sufficient life-lode: And for the great offences, vnkindnesse, and mis-behauing that the saide Iohn Neuill hath done and committed to his saide Highnesse, as is openly knowne, he hath not cause to depart any life-lode to the saide George. And for asmuch, as it is openly knowne, that the saide George hath not, nor by inheritance may haue any life-lode, to support the saide Name, Estate, and Dignity, or any name of Estate. And oft-times it is seene, that when any Lord is called to high Estate, and hath not life-lode conueniently to support the saide Dignity, it induces great pouerty and indigence, and causes oft times great extortion, embracery, and maintenance to be had, to the great trouble of all such coun∣trtes, where such estate shall hap to be inhabited. Wherefore the King, by the aduice and assent of his Lords spirituall and temporall, and the Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, or dained, established, and enacted, that from henceforth, the saide Erection and making of Duke, and all the names of Dignity, giuen to the saide George, or to the saide Iohn Neuill his Father, be from hence-forth voide, and of no effect. And that the said George & his heires, from hence-forth be no Dukes, nor Marquesse. Earle, nor Baron, for no erection, or creation afore made; but of that name of Duke, and Marquesse, Earle, and Baron, in him and his heires ceasse, and he voide, and of none effect; the saide Erection or Cre∣ation notwithstanding. This haue I thought good to mention heere, that Noble∣men and others may be warned, how they sell and consume their auncient Li∣uings and Patrimonies, left them by their Ancestors; least wanting where-with-all to maintaine their Estates, the King degrade and disable them from bearing any honorable Title, as he did these two Noblemen, the Father and the Sonne. Et portoit, gueulles au Saulteur d'argen, au lambell gobonne d'argent & d'azur.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earle of Mountgomery, his Armes, Wife, and Children. PHilip Herbert, (second sonne of Henry Herbert Earle of Penbroke, and brother of William, now Earle of Penbroke, 1618.) was made Knight of the Bath, at the Coronation of King Iames; and on Satterday, beeing the fourth day of May, 1605. he was created at Greenwich, first Baron of Sher∣land, and the same day, Earle of Mountgomery; and lastly, he was made Knight of the Garter, 1608. He married Susan, daughter of Edward Vere Earle of Oxford, and hath issue, Anne Sophia. Et portoit, per pale d'azur & de gueulles au trois lyons rampant d'argent à vn bordur gobonny d'or & de gueulles, au cressant pur la difference. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles of Northumberland, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. COpso, was made Earle of Northumberland by William the Conqueror, and was after slaine by Osculph, the late disinherited Earle of Northumberland, as hee was en∣tring into the Church of Newburne.
MOrchar, sonne of Algar Duke of Mercia, and brother to Edwyn (as witnesseth Ingulph. fol. 511.) was made earle of Northumberland by William Conqueror, after the death of Copso. This Morchar (with his brother Edwyn & others) mis∣liking of the gouernment of king William, fled the Realme, and returning againe, fortifyed the Isle of Elie, and seated themselues in a place called Thorney. But after long siedge of that place, Morchar was taken prisoner, and so kept all Willi∣am Conquerors dayes, and dyed in prison in the second yeare of William Ruphus. He had a sister named Lucia, first married vnto Iuo Talboys, a great Baron of Angeo; and after to Roger Romara, Lord of Bullingbroke, by whom she had issue, Willi∣am Romara Earle of Lincolne: and the third time she married Randall Meschi∣nes, the third Earle of Chester, and had issue another Randall, sur-named Gerno∣nijs, the fourth Earle of Chester. Et portoit, de sable à l'aigle d'or, membrè & beque de gueulles. Gospatricke, (sonne of Maldred, and Aldgith his wife, Si∣ster of Syward the great Earle of Northumberland) was after the depriuation of Earle Morchar, the next Earle of Northumberland; and because he suffered Malcolme King of Scotland with a power to enter England; was by the Conque∣rour depriued of this Earledome, in the yeare, 1072. and after dyed in banishment. Of this Gospatricke, did descend the Noble Families of Neuils of Midelham, Branspath, & Raby. Et portoit, de gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. VVAltheof (sonne of Syward the great Earle of Nor∣thumberland, by Alfleda his wife, daughter of Al∣dred, sometime Earle of Northumberland) was the next earle of Northumberland and Huntington, after Gospatricke. This Waltheof, in the yeare, 1074. at Exningham in Cambridge∣shire, at the marriage of Raphe, Earle of the East Angles, (Norfolke and Suffolke) with the daughter of William Fitz-Osbert, and sister of Roger Earle of Hereford; conspired with the said Roger and Raphe, and many others, to expell & driue Will: Conqueror out of England againe. For which conspiracy,
this Waltheof was taken and beheaded at Winchester, and was buried without the walles of the Citty, in a place where two high-wayes meete; but afterwards his body was taken vp againe, and with great honour carried to Crowland, and there buried, in the yeare, 1076. He married Iudith, Niece to William Conque∣rour, and daughter of Lambert Earle of Lens in Artoys, with whom the said Con∣queror did giue in marriage, the Earledome of Huntington; he had issue by her three daughters; Mauld the eldest, was married first to Simon S. Lize, Earle of Northampton, and had issue, another Simon; after shee married Dauid king of Scots, and had issue, Henry: Iudith the second daughter, was married to Ralphe de Tony, sonne of Roger Tony, Baron of Flamsted in Hartfordshire, and had issue, Gohilda, wife to Robert de Newborough, younger sonne of Henry Earle of War∣wicke; Alice the third daughter, was married to Robert Fitz-Richard, Sewer to King Henry the first, sonne of Richard Fitz-Gilbert, Lord of Tunbridge & Clare, and had issue, Walter, of whom is descended the now Earle of Sussex, 1618. Et portoit, d'argent au lyon rampant d'azur au chef de gueulles. VVAlcher, Bishoppe of Durham, borne in Loraine, bought of William Conquerour, the Earledome of Northumberland, and for a time was Earle thereof, after the death of Waltheof. He was a proud and an insolent Prelate, couetous and rich, & was slaine by the Commons at Goats-head, on the Riuer of Tyne, 1079. for denying to do them Iu∣stice, vnlesse they would first pay vnto him, foure hundred pounds of currant money; as Mathew Paris, more at large setteth downe. I pray God wee haue no such Bishops Iusticers in this our age; for the said Mathew further saith, That there were aboue a hundreth persons slaine about this matter. RObert Mowbray, an honourable Englishman, after the death of Walcher, obtayned of William Conqueror the earledome of Northumberland. And after, hauing slaine Mal∣colme king of Scots, and his sonne, neere to Anwike, in the yeare, 1092. demanded reward for the same; which beeing neglected, he was so moued, that when king William Ruphus sent his Letters for him, he denyed not only to come to him, but combyned with diuers other Noblemen of the Realme, how to depriue the said King of his Crowne; which being reuealed, he was driuen to flye to the Monastery of S. Owin, from whence hee was taken by force, and carried to prison,
and after, by the Kings Commandement, was brought before his owne Castle of Bamborough, and there willed to haue his eyes put out, vnlesse his Wife, and Moreall her kinesman (who were within the saide Castle) would yeeld vp the same; which being surrendred, this Robert was sent to be imprisoned in the Ca∣stle of Windesore, 1096. (Houeden, fol. 267.) During which time, king William Ruphus held the Earledome of Northumberland in his owne hands, and disinhe∣rited all the said Roberts Progeny. He was after shorne a Monke at S. Albons, where he dyed, the seuenth of king Henry the first, 1106. The most of his ho∣nours and lands, were giuen to Lord Nigell de Albeney, Chamberlaine to King William Ruphus, for his good seruice, done at the battaile of Tenarch-bray, where he slew the horse of Robert Duke of Normandy, tooke him prisoner, & brought him into England, and there deliuered him to the king his brother, who sent him to prison, to the Castle of Cairdiffe in South-Wales, where he had both his eyes put out, and pined to death with sorrow, in the 35. yeare of king Henry the first, and was buried at Glocester. Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'argent. HEnry, sonne of Dauid king of Scots, begotten of Mauld, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Waltheof Earle of Nor∣thumberland and Huntington, was by king Stephen, made Earle of Northumberland; (as M. Camden citeth out of Poly Chronicon of Durham, and that William his sonne, did also write himselfe Earle of Northumberland) But I rather think, that if they did assume that title of Honor, it was done more vpon their owne wils, then by any iust title or right they had to the same: but see more of this, in the Earles of Hunting∣ton. Et portoit, d'or à trois peuz ioynantz au point de gueulles. HVgh de Pudsey, or Putiaco, (Nephew to king Stephen, as Glouer Somerset hath) Bishop of Durham, a very ambi∣tious, proud, and couetous man, bought of king Richard the first, the Earledome of Northumberland, for terme of his life, and was girt with the Sword of the Earledome (as then the custome was:) At the doing whereof, the king vsed these words: Am not I a good craftesman, that haue made a new Earle of an olde Bishop? And to make his ambition more ma∣nifest, he gaue the king one thousand Markes, to bee made Chiefe-Iustice of England. But afterwards, perceiuing the King to frowne, and be angry with him, voluntarily did re∣signe the saide Title and Earledome againe to the King, and remained onely Bishop, all his life time after. This Stone Priest dyed in the yeare, 1195. leauing issue, three bastard sonnes. Et portoit, party per saulteur d'or & d'argent, à la croix patee d'azur.
HEnry Lord Percie, of Alnwick in Northumberland (sonne of Henry Lord Percy, and of Mary his wife, sister of Hen∣ry Duke of Lancaster) was created the first Earle of Northū∣berland of that sur-name, at the Coronation of king Richard the second, 1377. and that day was Deputy for Margaret, Dutchesse of Norfolke, and Countesse Marschall of England, and did execute the Office of Earle Marshall. This Henry, in the first yeare of king Henry the fourth, had giuen him the Isle of Man, to be holden of the King by seruice, to beare the the Sword, which he wore when he entred England. Also this Henry and Henry Hotspurre, his sonne, fought the battaile of Hallidowne Hill, against the Scots, 1402. and hauing the vi∣ctory, tooke these Earles prisoners; Mordake, Earle of Fiffe; Archibald, Earle Duglasse; Thomas, Earle of Murrey; and Robert, Earle of Angus. And after the battaile of Shrewesbury, he was committed to the Tower of London, and being from thence deliuered, in the ninth yeare of king Henry the fourth, he, with the Lord Bardolphe, came out of Scotland with a power against the King; and at Bramham More was encountred by Thomas Rookeby, then Shireffe of Yorkshire, where the said Earle was taken prisoner, the Lord Bardolphe wounded to death, and brought to Yorke, where they were both beheaded, in the yeare, 1408. He married two wiues, the first was Margaret, daughter of Ralphe Lord Neuill of Raby, by whom he had issue, Henry sur-named Hotspur, slaine (with Thomas Per∣cie Earle of Worcester, his Vnckle) at the battaile of Shrewsbury; Sir Thomas Percie knight, Father of Henry Percy, Earle of Atholl in Scotland; Sir Ralphe Per∣cie third sonne, slaine in battaile by the Sarrazins; and Alan the fourth sonne dyed young. This Henries second wife, was Mauld, daughter of Thomas Lord Lucy, and sister and heyre of Anthony her brother, by whom he had no issue; notwithstanding, she gaue all her lands to her husband, conditionally, that he and his heyres should for euer after, quarter and beare her Armes, next to his owne, and before the Percies Armes; which was granted, and to this day is per∣formed. Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant d'azur: escarelle Percy, qui est d'azur au cinq fizelles en face d'or. HEnry Lord Percie (grand-childe to Henry Lord Percy, & first Earle of Northumberland, by his sonne Sir Henry Hotspur) was restored and made the second Earle of Nor∣thumberland, the third of King Henry the fift. Hee was sent pledge into Scotland, for his Grand-father, who was taken prisoner at the battaile of Otterborne, the 12. of King Richard the second, 1388. and there continued vnto the yeare, 1414. Who after taking part with King Henry the sixt, against Ri∣chard Duke of Yorke, was slaine at the first battaile of S. Al∣bons, in the yeare, 1455. He married Elianor, daughter of
Ralphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland, and had issue, Henry the third Earle of Northumberland; Thomas Lord Egremant, slaine at the battaile of Northamp∣ton, the 39. of king Henry the sixt; William Percie, Bishop of Carlell; Anne, mar∣ried to Thomas Lord Hungerford; Katherine, wife to Edmond Grey Earle of Kent; and Elizabeth was married to the Lord Clifford; and diuers other children which dyed without issue. Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur, escartelleacute; gueulles à trois Luces hauriant d'argent, le tierce de Percy qui est d'azur cinq fizelles en face d'or, le quart de la premier. HEnry Lord Percy, the third Earle of Northumberland of that Family, taking part with King Henry the sixt, was slaine on Palme-Sunday, the 29. day of March, in the first yeare of king Edward the fourth, betweene Touton & Sax∣ton, with the Earles of Shrewsbury and Deuonshire, and the Lord Clifford. He married Elianor, daughter and heyre of Ri∣chard Lord Poynings, Brian, and Fitz-Payne, by whom he had issue, Henry the fourth Earle of Northumberland; Elizabeth married to Henry Lord Scroope of Bolton; Elianor married vnto Reginald West, Lord Laware; and Margaret married to Sir William Gascoine knight. Et portoit, d'or au lyon rampant d'azur, armé & lampassé d'gueulles; escattelle Lucy, qui est, gueulles à trois Luces hauriant d'argent. IOhn Neuill, Lord Mountague, Brother to Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke and Salisbury, was created Earle of Nor∣thumberland by Letters Patents, dated at Yorke, the 28. day of May, in the fourth yeare of king Edward the fourth, by rea∣son Henry Lord Percy, sonne and heyre of Henry the third, Earle of Northumberland, was then fled into Scotland, with King Henry the sixt, and for a time remained there; yet after returning againe, and obtayning the Kings fauour, was re∣stored to the Earledome of Northumberland againe; & this Iohn Neuill; surrendring his Grant of that Earledome, was created Marquesse Mountague, the eight of king Edward the fourth, as in the ti∣tle of Mountague is more at large. Et portoit, de gueulles au Saultier d'argent, au lambell gobonne d'argent & d'azur.
HEnry Lord Percie (sonne and heyre of Henry Percy the third Earle of Northumberland, after the surrender of Iohn, Marquesse Mountague, of the Earledome of Northum∣berland) was restored to his Fathers Earledome, in the yeare, 1467 and was the fourth Earle of that name and Family, & Knight of the Garter; who being with king Richard the third at the battaile of Bosworth neere Leicester, against Henry Earle of Richmond, (where the said king was slaine) was ta∣ken prisoner; whom king Henry the seuenth, after pardoned, and tooke to fauour, and made him of his priuy Counsell. After all which, 1488. a taxe being granted by Parliament, of the tenth penny of all lands and goods; (to the ayde of the Duke of Britaine) which those of the Bishopprick of Durham and Yorkshire did refuse to pay; the king commanded this Earle Henry to distresse, or otherwise to leuie the money; which being made knowne to the rude people, they with great violence set vpon the Earle, and furiously slew him, in a place called Cock∣ledge, by Thurske. 18. miles from Yorke, in the 4. yeare of king Henry the 7. & was buried in Beuerley Minster with his wife. He married Mauld, daughter of William Herbert Earle of Penbroke, by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Percy, the 5. Earle of Northumberland; Sir William Percy knight; Alan Percy a Clarke; and Ioceline Percy; and three daughters; Elianor, wife to Edward Stafford, Duke of Bucking∣ham; Anne, married to William Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell; and Elizabeth, which died young. Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur escartelle gueulles à trois Luces hauriant d'argent. HEnry Lord Percy, after the death of his Father, was the fift Earle of Northumberland, Lord Poynings, Fitz Payne and Bryan, & knight of the honourable Order of the Garter, & married Katherine, daughter and one of the heires of Sir Robert Spencer, knight, and of Elianor his wife, daughter of Edmond Beauford, D. of Somerset, & sister and co-heire of Hen∣ry Beauford & Edmond, Dukes of Somerset, her brothers; and had issue, Henry Percy, the 6. Earle of Northumberland of that name; Sir Thomas Percy knight; Sir Ingelram Percy knight, & Margaret, married to Henry Clifford, first Earle of Cumber∣land. He died in the 18. yeare of king Henry the eight. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
HEnry Lord Percy, after the death of Henry the fift, his Fa∣ther, was the sixt Earle of Northumberland of that sur∣name, and was made Knight of the Garter, in the two and twentieth yeare of king Henry the eight; he was sent by the saide King with a Commission vnder the great Seale of Eng∣land, to attache and arrest Cardinall Wolsey, and to carry and deliuer him prisoner to the Earle of Shrewsbury, at Sheffield Castle, which he did; although the Cardinall proudly chec∣ked him, & told him, that he was a member of the Colledge of Cardinals in Rome; and that neyther the King, nor any other temporall Prince vnder Heauen, could or ought to intermedle with him, for any cause or matter whatsoeuer. This Henry, married Mary, daughter of George Talbot, Earle of Shrewesbury, and dyed without issue, at Hackney neere London, the thirtieth day of Iune, in the 29. yeare of king Henry the eight, and was there buried. (His second brother Thomas being before executed, for taking Armes against King Henry the eight, in the first difference about Religion.) He gaue a great part of his Lands and Inheritance to the said King, and others. After this Henries death, the Earle∣dome of Northumberland lay vacant, vntill King Edward the sixt made Iohn Dudley, Viscount Lisle, Duke of Northumberland. Et porte it, d'or au lyon rampant d'azur, escartelle de gueulles à trois Luces hauriant d'argent. IOhn Dudley knight, was first created Viscount Lisle, the 33. yeare of King Henry the eight; and in the first yeare of King Edward the sixt, he was created Earle of Warwicke; and the eleuenth of October, in the fift yeare of the saide Kings Reigne, he was created Duke of Northumberland. He marri∣ed Iane, daughter and hyre of Sir Edward Guilford knight, and had issue, eight sonnes and fiue daughters, viz. Henry, who dyed at Bullen; Iohn, Earle of Warwicke, who dyed without issue; Thomas dyed young; Ambrose Earle of War∣wicke, who dyed without issue; Robert, Earle of Leicester, dy∣ed also without any lawfull issue; Guilford Dudley beheaded, with the Lady Iane his wife; Henry slaine at S. Quintins; and Charles the yong∣est sonne, dyed a Childe: Lady Mary the eldest daughter, was married to Sir Henry Sidney, knight of the Garter, and Lord President of Wales, Father of Ro∣bert, Baron of Penshurst, Viscount Lisle, Earle of Leicester, and Knight of the Garter; Lady Margaret dyed young; Lady Katherine third daughter, married Henry Hastings, Earle of Huntington; Lady Temperance and Lady Katherine, dyed both young. This great Duke, on the 22. day of August, in the first yeare
of Queene Mary, was beheaded at the Tower-Hill, with Sir Iohn Gates, and Sir Thomas Palmer, knights. Iohn Cocke, Lancaster Herald, (some-time seruant to this Duke) begged of Queene Mary, to bury the head of his olde Master, in the Tower of London; which was granted him with the whole body, and perfor∣med accordingly. In remembranee whereof, the said Lancaster, did (euer after) beare for his Creast, a Beares head, siluer, crowned gold. Et portoit, d'or au lyon rampant, à la queué nouce de vert, armé & lampassé de gueulles. THomas Percy, (Nephew to Henry Percy, the sixt Earle of Northumberland, by Thomas his brother, put to death by K. Henry the 8. as aforesaid) after the death of Iohn Duke of Northumber land, was by Queene Mary restored in blood; and by Letters Patents, bearing date, 1557. created a new Lord Percy, and the seuenth Earle of Northumberland of that Family, to him and the heyres male of his body; and for de∣fault thereof, to his brother Henry, and the heyres male of his body. After. Queene Elizabeth made him knight of the Garter, in the fift yeare of her Reigne; of which he was de∣graded, in the yeare, 1569. for rebellion with Charles Earle of Westmerland, and afterwards attainted by Parliament, in Anno, 1571: and lastly, was beheaded at Yorke, in the yeare, 1572. He married Anne, daughter of Henry Somerset, Earle of Worcester, and sister of William Earle of Worcester, & had issue, Thomas that dyed young; Elizabeth, married to Richard Woodroofe of Yorkshire; Mary, wife to Sir Thomas Grey of Northumberland, knight; Lucie, mar∣ried to Sir Edward Stanley, of Einsham in Oxfordshire, knight; a younger sonne of Edward Stanley Earle of Derby; and Iane married to the Lord Henry Sey∣mour, brother to the now Earle of Hartford. Et portoit, d'or an lyon rampant d'azur, armé & lampasse de gueulles, escartelle de gueul es à trois Luces hauriant d'argent. SIr Henry Percy knight, (second brother of Thomas afore∣said) was after his said brothers death and attaindure, by vertue of the former entayle and Grant, the eight Earle of Northumberland, in the 16. yeare of Queene Elizabeth; and after, being accused of treason, and imprisoned in the Tower of London, shot himselfe to death with a Dag, charged with two Bullets, before either his cause was heard, or he arraign∣ed, in the yeare, 1585. Hee married Katherine, one of the daughters and co-heyres of Iohn Neuill Lord Latimer, by whom he had issue, Henry, now the 9. Earle of Northumber∣land, 1618. Thomas that dyed young; William third sonne; Sir Charles Percy knight; Richard Percy; Sir Alan Percy knight; Sir Ioceline Percy knight; and George Percy Esquire: Anne Percy dyed young; and Lucy married to Sir Iohn Wotton knight. Et portoit, d'or au lyon rampant d'azur, escartelle Lucy, qui est, gueulles à trois Luces hauriant d'argent.
HEnry Lord Percy, sonne and heyre of Henry aforesaide, (after the death of his Father) was the ninth Earle of Northumberland, Lord Poynings, Fitz-Payne and Bryan; hee was made Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, by Q. Elizabeth, Anno, 1593. and of the priuy Counsell to King Iames. He married Dorothy, daughter of Walter Deuereux, Earle of Essex (and widdow of Sir Thomas Perrot knight) by whom he hath issue, two sonnes and two daughters; Sir Al∣gernon Percy, Lord Percy, and knight of the Bath, at the Cre∣ation of Prince Charles; and Henry Percy a second sonne; Lady Dorothy Percy the eldest daughter, married to Sir Ro∣bert Sidney, Lord Lisle, and Knight of the Bath, at the creati∣on of Prince Henry; and Lady Luce the second daughter, married Iames Lord Hayes, Viscount of Doncaster, 1618. Et portoit, dor au lyon rampant d'azur, escartelle gueulles à trois Luces hauriant d'argent. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles of Norfolke, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RAphe de Waiet, a Britaine borne, was by the guift of Wil∣liam the Conquerour, the first Earle of the East Angles, (that is to say, Norfolke, Suffolke, and Cambridgshire) and ga∣ping after an alteration and change in the State, was dispos∣sessed of that Honour and Title, in the ninth yeare of the said Kings Reigne, for conspiring to expell him out of England; which was done at the marriage of this Raphe, with Emme, the daughter of William Fitz-Osberne, Earle of Hereford, and Marshall of England, and sister to William de Britolio Earle of Iuory, and Roger Earle of Hereford. There was in this con∣spiracy, Waltheof the great Earle of Northumberland, diuers Bishops, Abbots, and Barons: all which, by the Arch-Bi∣shop Lanfrake, were made knowne to William Conqueror, he being then in Nor∣mandy, which caused him with all speed to returne into England, and apprehen∣ding the said Waltheof, and Roger Earle of Hereford; Waltheof was beheaded at Winchester, and Roger had his eyes put out, and was kept in prison during his life. This Raphe de Waiet, keeping the Castle of Norwich, against the loyalty of William the first, was driuen out of England, and went with his wife to ter∣salem; leauing behinde him one daughter named Itta, who married Robert Earle of Leicester, in Anno, 1103.
HVgh Bigot, (sonne and heire of Roger Bigot, Sewer to King Henry the first, and Adeliza his wife, daughter and co-heyre of Hugh Grentmesnell, Lord Steward of England) a Noble Baron of this Realme, and Steward of the house to King Henry the first, being present at the death of the saide King, testified vpon his Oath, before the Arch-Bishoppe of Canterbury, and other the Nobility of this Realme, that king Henry the first, willed vpon his death-bed: that Stephen his Nephew, and not Mauld the Empresse (his daughter) should succeed him in the kingdome of England. For which Oath, King Stephen in the first yeare of his Reigne, made this Hugh, Earle of Norfolke. (Tho: Walsingham Ypodigma Neustriae. pag. 38.) He married Iulian, daughter of Alberick de Vere, the Kings Chamberlaine, and had issue, Roger Bigot, after Earle of Norfolke, and William a second sonne. He dyed in the 24. yeare of king Henry the second, 1177, and was buried in the Priory of S. Bennets in Thetford. Et portoit, d'or à la croix de gueulles. ROger Bigot, Earle of the East Angles or Norfolke, the se∣cond of that sur-name, in the yeare, 1215. with diuers o∣ther Noblemen of the Realme, did require of King Iohn, to haue the auncient Lawes of S. Edward the Confessor, renewed and confirmed vnto them; which being denyed, they put themselues into Armes, & sent for Lewis (Philip) the French Kings sonne, promising to make him King of England. At whose request he came, and landed in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, the 21. day of May, 1216. and comming to London, there had fealty sworne vnto him by the said Noblemen. So that through all England, was nothing but killing and firing, vn∣till it chanced, the Viscount of Meyln, a Nobleman of France (which came with Lewis into England) to fall very sicke in the Citty of London; who feeling death to approach, called vnto him certaine of the Barons of England, vnto whom he vttered these words. I am sorry (said he) Brethren, for your subuersion and deso∣lation, whereof you are ignorant; For Lewis, and sixteene of the Earles and Barons with him, haue sworne, that if it be his chance to subdue England, and to be crowned King, hee would banish out of the Realme, all those Noblemen which now take his part, as Traytors to their King. A little while after, King Iohn dyed, and Henry his sonne became King, and made an agreement with his Nobles, whereby Lewis was faine to abandon and leaue England, and goe into France backe againe. This Roger, married Isabell, daughter of Hamelyn Plantagenet, (base sonne of Geffrey Plantagenet, Earle of Anioye) Earle Warren and Surrey, and had issue, Hugh Bigot Earle of Norfolke, and others. He dyed, and was buried at Thetford. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
HVgh Bigot, sonne of Roger aforesaid, after the death of his Father, was the third Earle of Norfolke of that surname, and married Mauld, the eldest daughter of William Marshall, the elder Earle of Penbroke, and Marshall of England, and one of the fiue sisters and co-heyres of William Marshall and his foure brothers, all Earles of Penbroke, and Marshals of England, and had issue, three sonnes and one daughter; Roger the eldest sonne, was after his Father, Earle of Norfolke, and Marshall of England: Hugh the second sonne, was Chiefe-Iustice of England, and was slaine at Lewis, in the yeare, 1264. Raphe Bigot the third sonne, married Bertha, daughter of the Lord Furniuall, and had issue, Iohn and Isabell, who was first married to Gilbert Lacie, of Meth in Ireland; and after to Iohn Fitz-Geffrey a Baron; and Isabell the daughter of this Hugh the Earle, was married to Hugh de Albeneio, Earle of Arundell. The Petition of Marshals Lands, was made in the 31. yeare of king Henry the third, whereof this Mauld had for her part. 1120. pounds per annum, with the Office and Rod of Marshall of Eng∣land, and the Mannor and Castle of Chepstow, or Strigull in Wales. She ouer∣liued her husband, and in the said 31. of Henry the third, she gaue the Office and Rod of the Marshalship to Roger her eldest sonne, who was then Earle of Nor∣folke, and Marshall of England; and as Mathew Paris hath, this Hugh dyed at London, the ninth of king Henry the third, 1225. And M. Milles hath, pag. 504. That he hath seene diuers Charters of this Hughes, signed and sealed with a Seale of a Lyon passant vpon the same. Which I greatly maruaile at, considering, that both the saide Hugh, and Roger his Father, did vse and beare in their Shields and Seales, a plaine Crosse, which is grauen in stone, and painted on the North-side of the Cathe∣drall (or Minster) at Westminster, in the time of king Henry the third, with ma∣ny other Noblemens Armes, who liued in that time. And further I speake of my owne knowledge, that neuer any of this Noble Family of Bigots, did euer giue other Coate of Armes, then Gold, a Crosse Gueulles, before they married with Marshals daughter, and were Marshals of England: At which time, they did assume and take a Coate, vsed by William Marshall Earle of Penbroke and his sonnes (who were Marshals of England) for the Office of Marshall; which was party per pale Or, and Verte, a Lyon rampant gueulles. And thus much haue I thought good heere to mention, because I see in diuers Noblemens Armes, (who are descended of the saide Bigots) this deuised Armes, in stead of the true and right Coate of Bi∣got.
ROger Bigot, sonne and heyre of Hugh and Mauld Mar∣shall, was the 4. Earle of Norfolke, and first Marshall of England of that Family. To this Roger, was granted the Mar∣shalship of England by Mauld his Mother, presently after the death of Anselme Marshall Earle of Penbroke, (the fift and youngest sonne of William Marshall the elder, Earle of Penbroke, and Marshall of England, about the 31. yeare of king Henry the third) And at the Coronation of Queene Elianor, wife of king Henry the third, he made his claime, to execute the Office of high Steward of England (which hee claymed in right of Adeliza his great Grand-mother, daughter and co-heyre of Hugh Grentmesnell, high Steward of England) Which was gain-saide by Simon Mountfort Earle of Leicester; for that it was alleadged by the saide Simon, that at the Coronation of king Iohn, there was an agreement made betweene their Auncestors, viz. That Robert Earle of Leicesters Auncestor, should pay and giue vnto Roger Bigots Auncestor, ten knights Fees for the same; of which, there were but seuen and a halfe paide. Which variance, the King tooke into his owne hands, and adiudged Simon Mountfort to execute the Office of high Steward; and that Roger Bigot should bring his Action for the other two Knights Fees and a halfe, remaining vnpaid. This Roger married Isabell, daughter of William king of Seots, and sister of king Alexander; and dyed of a bruise, running at Tilt, without issue, Anno, 1269. Leauing Roger his Nephew (sonne of Hugh his Brother) to succeede him in his Earledome. Et portoit, party pale d'or, & de vert, au lyon rampant de gueulles. ROger Bigot, the fift Earle of Norfolke of that Family, and Marshall of England, Nephew to Roger the fourth Earle of Norfolke, by Hugh Bigot Chiefe-Iustice of England his bro∣ther. This Roger Bigot, Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, and Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford and Constable of Eng∣land, were commanded by king Edward the first, to goe with him into Aquitaine, to the ayde of Guy Earle of Flanders, (whom Charles the brother of Philip king of France, had at S. Omers in France, a little before ouercome in single com∣bate) which they denyed, except he would put in vse, and restore to his Subiects, the lawes of Magna Carta; which the said king refused to doe; and going on his iourney without them, to the ayde of the said Guy against the French King; at his returne backe againe (for punish∣ment of these Noblemens contempt) first hee caused Gilbert de Clare Earle of
Glocester, to marry Ioane of Acres, the said Kings daughter, without any dowry: And Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, to marry Elizabeth, the widdow of Iohn Earle of Holland, another of the said Kings daughters, with the like condi∣tions. And that this Roger Bigot Earle of Norfolke, should surrender and deli∣uer vp into the Kings hands, all his lands in England, Wales and Ireland, with the Office of Marshall of England; reseruing vnto himselfe an estate for tearme of life, with a thousand pound more encrease, which the saide King would allow him; with this prouiso, that if the saide Roger had issue lawfully begotten, then he should without all contradiction, receiue all from the said King againe, with the encrease of 1000. pounds per annum from the King. He married two wiues, the first was Alynae, daughter of Philip Basset, and widdow of Hugh de Spencer, Iustice of England. His second wife was Aice, daughter of Iohn de Auenne, Earle of Heynault, and dyed without issue, in the yeare, 1305. And by an Inqui∣sition taken the fourth of December, the 35. of king Edward the first, Iohn Bigot was found to be his Brother and heyre. After the death of this Roger Bigot, Earle of Norfolke, King Edward the first, did giue the Office of the Marshalship of England, to Thomas of Brotherton his second sonne; whom king Edward the second did create Earle of Norfolke. Et portoit, party pale d'or & de vert, au lyon rampant de gueulles. THomas of Brotherton, second sonne of King Edward the first, by Margaret his second wife, daughter of Philip the third King of France, after the death of Roger Bigot, the fift Earle of Norfolke of that name; was by king Edward the first his Father, made Marshall of England; and in the ninth yeare of king Edward the second, his halfe Brother, he was created Earle of Norfolke, and married Katherine, daughter of Sir Roger Halys of Harwich knight, and had issue, Edward and Margaret. Edward was after his Father, Earle of Norfolke and Suffolke, and Marshall of England, and dyed the Kings Ward, the same yeare his Father dyed; leauing Margaret his sister and heyre, who was first married to Iohn Lord Se∣graue; and after to Sir Walter Manye knight. By the Lord Segraue, she had issue, Elizabeth and Anne; Elizabeth was married to Iohn Lord Mowbray; and Anne was Lady Abbesse at Barking in Essex. By Sir Walter Manye she had issue, Tho∣mas and Margaret; Thomas was in his youth drowned in a Well, at Detford in Kent; and Margaret was married to Iohn Lord Hastings, Earle of Penbroke, and Lord of Aburgauenny. This Thomas dyed, and was buried in the Abbey of S. Edmondsbury in Suffolke, in the yeare, 1338. Et portoit, d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent.
MArgaret, daughter and sole heire of Thomas of Brother∣ton aforesaid, was (for the greatnesse of her birth, her large reuennues and wealth) created Dutchesse of Norfolke, for tearme of her life, in the 21. yeare of King Richard the 2. at whose Coronation, shee exhibited her Petition in these words. To the right honourable Lord, the King of Castile and Legeons, Duke of Lancaster, and Steward of England. Hum∣bly beseecheth (Margaret, daughter and heire of Thomas of Brotherton, late Earle of Norfolke, and Marshall of England) to be accepted, to the Office of high Marshall, now at the Corona∣tion of our Soueraigne Lord the King, after the death of the said Thomas her Father, executing it by her Deputy, as Gilbert Strongbowe, Earle of Pembroke, did at the Coronation of King Henry the second. That is to say, to appease the debates in the Kings house, the day of his Coronation, & to make deliuerance of all lodgings, &c. Taking of euery Earle, Baron and Gentle∣men, made Knights of the Bath that day, a Palfrey and Saddle, &c. Shee married two Husbands, and had issue by them both, as before is mentioned, and dyed the 24. of March, 1399. and was buried at the Fryars Minors in London. Et portoit, lez Armoiries d'engleterre au lambell d'argent. THomas Lord Mowbray; (sonne of Iohn Lord Mowbray, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and heyre of Margaret, Dutchesse of Norfolke, and Iohn Lord Segraue her husband) after the death of Iohn Lord Mowbray, Earle of Nottingham, and Marshall of England his Brother; was by King Richard the second, created Duke of Norfolke, 1397. and the first Earle Marshall of England (for before this time they were but Lord Marshals.) This Thomas, with Henry of Bulling∣broke, Earle of Derby, and Duke of Hereford, was banished the Realme, in the 22. yeare of king Richard the second, be∣cause he the said Henry, had complained vnto this Thomas Lord Mowbray, of the Kings euill gouernment: of all which, this Thomas made the King acquainted with, and thereupon, the king called Duke Henry before him, demanding the truth thereof; which Henry stoutly denyed the accusation, praying to haue the combate of his accuser. Thomas Mowbray maintained, what before he had affirmed, and accepted the Challenge: Whereupon, he King granted their requests, and signed a day for tryall thereof. At which time, the King being well aduised by his Counsell, for-bid the saide Combate, and banished Duke Henry for ten yeares, and Thomas for all dayes of his life, who trauelling into Italy, and after to Venice, dyed there with greefe, in the yeare, 1400. the first of king Henry the fourth, and was there buried. He married two
wiues, the first was Elizabeth, daughter of the Lord Strange, by whom he had no issue. His second wife was Elizabeth, sister and one of the heyres of Thomas Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell, by whom he had issue, Thomas Lord Mowbray, be∣headed at Yorke, with Richard Scrope Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in the yeare, 1405. Iohn the second sonne, was Duke of Norfolke; Margaret the eldest daugh∣ter, was married vnto Sir Robert Howard Knight, Father of Iohn Duke of Nor∣folke; Isabell the second daughter, was first married vnto Henry Ferrars of Gro∣bie, and after to Sir Iames Berkeley knight, Father of William, Marquesse Berkeley. Et portoit, gueulles au lyon rampant d'argent, armé & lampasse d'azur. IOhn Lord Mowbray, second sonne of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke (and yonger Brother of Thomas, behea∣ded at Yorke, who was commonly called Earle Marshall, & by no other Name or Title) was restored to the Earledomes of Nottingham and Surrey, in the first yeare of king Henry the fift, with the Office of Earle Marshall. And in the fourth yeare of the saide Kings Reigne, at a Parliament held at Lei∣cester, the king was dubbed knight, by Iohn Duke of Somer∣set, then Regent of France, and this Iohn Mowbray, restored to be Duke of Norfolke. He married Katherine, daughter of Raphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland, and of Ioane his wife, daughter of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by whom he had issue, Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke; and after dyed at his Mannor of Epleworth, in the Isle of Axholme, 1434. and was buried in the Charter-house of Carthusians there. Et portoit, les arm es de son peré. IOhn Lord Mowbray, sonne of Iohn aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Duke of Norfolke, Earle Marshall and Nottingham, Lord Segraue, and of Gower. He married Elianor, daughter of William Lord Bourchier, and sister of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, and had issue, Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke. He dyed in the first yeare of king Edward the fourth, 1461. and lyeth buried in the Abbey of Thetford. Et portoit, de gueulles au lyon rampant d'argent, armé & lampasse d'azur
IOhn Lord Mowbray, sonne of Iohn aforesaide, and Elianor Bourchier his wife, was in the life time of his Father, created Earle Warren and Surrey, by king Henry the sixt, and after his Fathers death, he was also Duke of Norfolke, Earle Mar∣shall of England, and Earle of Nottingham, Lord Segraue, & Bruse of Gower. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Iohn Tal∣bot, first Earle of Shrewsbury, and had issue, one only daugh∣ter his heyre, named Anne, who was maried to Richard Duke of Yorke, second sonne to king Edward the fourth, and dyed without issue. This Iohn dyed in the fifteenth yeare of King Edward the fourth, 1475. at his Castle of Framingham, and was buried in the Abbey of Thetford. His Inheritance was equally diuided betweene the Howards and Berkleyes, who were descended of Margaret and Isabell, daughters of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, before mentioned. Et portoit, gueulles au lyon rampant d'argent armé & lampasse d'azur. RIchard Duke of Yorke, second sonne of King Edward the fourth, married Anne, daughter and onely heyre of Iohn Lord Mowbray, the last Duke of Norfolke, and Marshal of England of that name; in whose right hee was Duke of Norfolke, and Earle Marshall of England. This Richard, with his brother King Edward the fift, was, by the vnnaturall and cruel command of Richard Duke of Glocester, their Vnc∣kle, most barbarously murdered in the Tower of London, in the yeare, 1483. leauing no issue. Et portoit, France, escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent, chargee d'e neuf torteaux. IOhn Howard knight, (sonne of Robert Howard knight, and of Margaret his wife, daughter and co-heyre of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, was first made Baron by King Edward the fourth, 1461. And after, by king Richard the third, he was created Duke of Norfolke, the 28. of Iune, 1483. He married two wiues, the first was Katherine, daughter of William Lord Molins, by whom he had issue, Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey, and Duke of Norfolke, and foure daughters; Anne the first daughter, was maried to Edmond Gorge knight; Isabell, married to Robert Mortimer of Essex, knight; Iane, married to Iohn Timperley Esquire; and Margaret was mar∣ried to Iohn Windham of Cowtherke in Norfolke, knight. This
Iohns second wife, was Margaret, daughter of Sir Iohn Chedworth knight, by whom he had issue, Katherine, married to Iohn Bourchier Lord Berners, who had issue, three daughters and heyres; Ioane, Margaret and Mary. This Iohn Duke of Norfolke, was slaine at Bosworth field, in the ayde of King Richard the third, on Monday, the 22. of August, 1485. Et portoit, de gueulles à la bande entre six croix recroisettees, au pred fiché d'argent. THomas Howard, sonne & heyre of Iohn Duke aforesaide, was created Earle of Surrey, in the first yeare of King Richard the third, and Lord Treasurer of England, in the six∣teenth yeare of king Henry the seuenth; and was made Duke of Norfolke, at the Bishop of Canterburies house at Lambeth, 1514. the fift of king Henry the eight. And for an honour and augmentation to his Armes, he had giuen him by the said King, in the middle of the Bend of his auncient Armes, in a Schocheon gold, a demie Lyon rampant, shot in the mouth with an Arrow, within a double tressure gueulles. He married two wiues, the first was Elizabeth, daughter & sole heyre of Sir Fredericke Tilney knight, and had issue, Thomas, after Duke of Norfolke; Edward slaine at Brest, without issue; Edmond Howard, who married Ioyce, daughter of Richard Culpeper of Kent, (and had issue, Ka∣therine, wife to king Henry the eight) Elizabeth, wife to Thomas Bullen Earle of Wiltshire; and Muriell, married to Iohn Grey Viscount Lisle. His second wife, was Agnes, daughter of Philip Tilney Esquire, by whom he had issue also, William Howard Baron of Effingham, and Admirall of England, Lord Chamberlaine to Queene Elizabeth, Knight of the Garter, and Lord priuy Seale; Thomas Ho∣ward, that dyed in the Tower of London; Dorothy, married to Edward Stanley, Earle of Derby; Anne, wife to Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford; Elizabeth, married to Henry Radcliffe Earle of Sussex; and Katherine, first married to Sir Rice ap Tho∣mas, Knight of the Garter; and after to Henry Dawbeny, Earle of Bridgwater. This Thomas Duke of Norfolke, dyed in the sixteenth yeare of the reigne of king Henry the eight, and was buried in the Monastery at Thetford, 1524. Et portoit, de gueulles à la bande à six croix recroisettees fitchez d'argent.
THomas Howard, third Duke of Norfolke of that surname, Earle of Surrey, and Earle Marshall of England, Lord Mowhray, Segraue, and Bruse of Gower, &c. Hee married two wiues, the first was Anne, daughter to king Edward the fourth by whom he had issue Thomas, who dyed yong with∣out issue, and was buried at Lambeth. His second wife, was Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Stafford Duke of Bucking∣ham, by whom he had issue, Henry Howard Earle of Surrey, beheaded at Tower-Hill by London, 1546. in the life time of his Father (leauing issue by Frances his wife, daughter of Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford, Thomas, Henry and Iane) Thomas Ho∣ward, second sonne, was Viscount Byndon; and Mary marri∣ed to Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Richmond, base sonne of king Henry the eight. This Thomas dyed at Kenningham Hall, the first and second of King Philip and Queene Mary. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré. THomas Howard (sonne of Henry Howard Earle of Surrey beheaded, & grand-childe of Thomas Howard, the third Duke of Norfolke) was restored in blood by Queene Mary, and made the fourth Duke of Norfolke, Earle of Surrey, and Earle Marshall of England, Lord Mowbray, Segraue, & Bruse of Gower. Queene Elizabeth made him of her priuy Coun∣sell, and knight of the honourable Order of the Garter. He married three wiues; the first was Mary, daughter and co∣heyre of Henry Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell, by whom hee had issue, Philip Howard Earle of Arundell, that dyed in the Tower of London. His second wife, was Margaret, daughter and sole heyre of Thomas Lord Audley, of Walden in Essex, by whom he had issue, Thomas, after Earle of Suffolke, and Lord William Ho∣ward, and a daughter named Margaret, married to Robert Sackuile Earle of Dor∣set. His third wife, was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Francis Leiborne knight, and widdow of Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland, by whom he had no issue. This Thomas, the fourth Duke of Norfolke, was after attainted of high treason, and beheaded at the Tower-Hill, the 4. of Iune, 1572. This Noble Duke, was a great Friend and Benifactor to the Officers of Armes. Et portoit, de gueulles, à la band à six croix recroisette es pied fiche d'argent.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Marquesses and Earles of Northampton, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. VVAltheof, sonne of Syward the great, Earle of Northumberland, married Iudith, Niece to Willi∣am Conqueror, and daughter of Lambert, Earle of Lens in Artoys, (with whom the said Conquerour gaue in marriage, the Earledomes of Huntington and Northampton) by whom he had issue, three daughters his heyres; Mauld the eldest, was married first to Simon S. Lize (who in his wiues right was after Earle of Northampton) and after shee was married to Dauid, sonne of Malcolme king of Scots: Iu∣dith the second daughter, was married to Rafe de Toney, sonne of Roger de Toney, Baron of Flamsted: Alice the third daugh∣ter, was married to Robert Fitz-Richard, Sewer to King Hen∣ry the first. This Waltheof was beheaded at Winchester, by commandement of William the first, in the yeare, 1075. and his body first buried without the walles of the said Towne, and afterward remoued, and interred in the Abbey of Crow∣land in Lincolneshire; as more at large is set downe in the Title of Earles of Nor∣thumberland. Et portoit, d'argent au lyon rampant d'azur, au chef de gueulles. SImon S. Lize, a Norman borne, and sonne of one Randall le Rich, had the Earledome of Northampton, and the Hun∣dred of Falkley giuen him by king William Ruphus. He marri∣ed Mauld, the eldest daughter, and one of the heyres of Wal∣theof, Earle of Northumberland, Huntington and Northamp∣ton, and had issue, as in the Title of Earles of Huntington is more at large. He built the Castle of Northampton; and hee, with Mauld his wife, in the sixt yeare of king Henry the first, founded the Abbey of S. Andrew in Northampton. This Si∣mon, after going to the Holy-Land, to fight against the Sar∣razans, at his comming homewards dyed in the yeare, 1152. in the Priory called Charity, and there lyeth buried. After his death, king Henry the first, gaue his widdow in marriage, to Dauid, brother of Alexander king of Scots. By which marriage, the saide Dauid obtained of King Henry the first, to be Earle of Huntington, during the minority of young Simon S. Lize, sonne of this Simon and Mauld. Et portoit, party per pale endente d'argent & de gueulles.
SImon S. Lize, the second of that name, after the death of his Father, was Earle of Northampton; and being very young at his Fathers death, was committed to the custody of Earle Dauid, who had married Mauld his Mother, who sent him ouer Seas into Normandy, to be nurtured & broght vp, where he serued in the wars. Meane time, Henry, sonne of Earle Dauid, his halfe brother by the Mother, enioyed and carried the Title and Honour of Earle of Huntington. And although this Simon did oftentimes sollicite King Henry the first (by Petitions and other meanes) to bee restored to the saide Earledome of Huntington, his Mothers Inheritance; yet could he neuer obtaine the same, so long as King Henry liued. After whose death, and that Henry Earle of Huntington dyed also, in the life time of Dauid his Father, by whose meanes he had held the same; this Simon obtained the said Earledome of Huntington, and enioyed it quietly, with the Earledome of Nor∣thampton, by the fauour and good liking of King Stephen. He married Isabell, daughter of Robert Bellomont, sur-named Crouch-backe, Earle of Leicester, and Chiefe-Iustice of England, and had issue, Simon S. Lize the third of that name, Earle of Northampton; Amicia and Hawis two daughters; and dyed in the yeare, 1152. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. SImon S. Lize, the third of that name, and the fourth Earle of Northampton and Huntington, had great suites with the Scots; for king Henry the second, in the time of this Simons Wardship, did giue the Earledome of Huntington, to Mal∣colme king of Scots, sonne of Earle Henry aforesaid; and after his death, William king of Scots, brother of the saide Malcome had the same, and resigned it to his younger brother Dauid, who enioyed the same, vntill William king of Scots, and Ro∣bert Earle of Leicester, with others, sided with king Henry the second, who then caused Richard de Lucy, Chiefe-Iustice of England, and William Marshall Earle of Penbroke, to inuest this Simon S. Lize into that Earledome, as the true heyre; and by this meanes did Simon come to haue and enioy the said Earledome of Huntington, by iudge∣ment of the King and Peeres of the kingdome, as of right belonging to him. He married Alice, daughter and heyre of Gilbert de Gaunt Earle of Lincolne, and di∣ed without issue, in the yeare of our Lord, 1184. Et portoit, party per pale endente d'argent & de gueulles.
WIlliam de Bohun, fourth sonne of Humfrey de Bohun, the eight Earle of Hereford and Essex, and Consta∣ble of England, was created Earle of Northampton, in the 12. yeare of king Edward the third, and Deputy for his Brother Humfrey, for the Office of Constable of England, the saide Humfrey being olde, and vnfit to vse the same. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Bartholmew de Badelismere, Baron of Leeds Castle in Kent, and had issue, Humfrey de Bohun, the last of that Family and Name, Earle of Hereford, Essex, and Nor∣thampton, and Constable of England (after the death of his Father and Vnkle) and Elizabeth, married to Richard Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell and Surrey. This William dyed be∣fore his elder brother Humfrey de Bohun the 9. Earle of Hereford, Essex, & Con∣stable of England, in the yeare, 1359. and was buried at Walden in Essex. Et portoit, d'azur, fur le bande d'argent, trois muletz de sable, entre deux cottices & six lyons rampant d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the last of that name, sonne and heyre of William Earle of Northampton his Father, and Ne∣phew and heyre of Humfrey de Bohun the 9. Earle of Here∣ford, Essex, and Constable of England. In all which Titles and Honours, he succeeded both his Father and Vnkle, and married Ioane, daughter of Richard Fitz-Alan Earle of Arun∣dell, and had issue, onely two daughters his heyres; Elianor the eldest, was married to Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester (by whom the Title of Northampton did descend to the Family of Staffords) Mary the second daughter, was married to Henry of Bullingbroke; who (in her right) was cre∣ated Duke of Hereford, and after king of England, by the name of king Henry the fourth. This Humfrey dyed in the 35. yeare of king Ed∣ward the third, and was buried by his Wife, at Walden in Essex. The Dukes of Buckingham, from the 23. yeare of king Henry the sixt, vntill the thirteenth of king Henry the eight, did write and stile themselues Earles of Northampton and Hereford; because they were descended of the eldest daughter and heyre of Humfrey de Bohun, the tenth and last Earle of that Name and Fa∣mily. Et portois, d'azur, à la bande d'argent, entre deux cottices & six lyons rampant d'ot.
VVIlliam Parre, Knight of the Garter, (sonne of Sir Thomas Par of Kirby Kendall knight) was created Baron of Kendall, the 9. of March, in the 30. yeare of King Henry the 8. And in the 36. of the said kings Reigne, he was created Earle of Essex, in regard he had married Anne, the daughter and heyre of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex. And lastly, in the first yeare of King Edward the sixt, he was cre∣ated Marquesse of Northampton, and writ in his Stile, Earle of Essex, Vicegerant, great Chamberlaine of England, Kee∣per of the priuy Seale, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Iu∣stice of the Forrests & Chases to the Riuer of Trent North∣ward. He married three wiues, the first was Anne, daughter and onely heyre of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, from whom hee was diuor∣ced. His second wife, was Elizabeth, daughter of George Brooke Lord Cobham. And his third wife was Helen, daughter of George Suaueburgh, a Swedian borne, but had no issue by any of them. He dyed in the yeare, 1571. and was buried at Warwicke, leauing Anne his sister, married to William Herbert Earle of Penbroke, his heyre. Et portoit, d'argent, deux barres d'azur à la bordure engresleé de sable. HEnry Howard Esquire, second sonne of Henry Earle of Surrey, beheaded in Anno, 1546, and brother of Thomas Howard, the last Duke of Norfolke of that name, was resto∣red in blood by Queene Mary; and by king Iames created Baron of Marnehill, at the Tower of London, the 13. day of March, 1603, and the same day and time, he was also created Earle of Northampton, &c. and died at his house by Charing-Crosse, in the yeare, 1614. His body was conueighed to Douer Castle, and there buried without any solemnity. Et portoit, les armoiries de Howard à vec la cressant. VVIlliam Lord Compton, knight of the Bath, (sonne of Henry Compton knight, who was made Baron Compton by writ, the eight of May, 1572.) was created Earle of Northampton by king Iames, at Salisbury, the second day of August, 1618. He married Elizabeth, daughter and onely heyre of Sir Iohn Spencer knight, sometime Alderman and Maior of London, & had issue, Spencer Lord Compton, knight of the Bath, at the Creation of Charles Prince of Wales, 1616.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of NOTTINGHAM, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RObert de Ferrars (sonne of William Earle Ferrars, and of Margaret his wife, daughter of William Peuerell Lord of Nottingham, disinherited by king Henry the second, 1155. for consenting to the poysoning of Randall Earle of Chester) was made the first Earle of Nottingham, in the life time of his Father and Mother. He gaue lands to the church of S. Oswalds, by the name of Robert Earle of Nottingham; and after died without issue, and was buried in the Abbey of Lenton. Et portoit, vaire d'or & de gueulles. IOhn Lord Mowbray, sonne and heyre of Iohn Lord Mow∣bray of Axholme, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter & heyre of Iohn Lord Segraue, and Margaret his wife, daughter and heire of Thomas of Brotherton; was created Earle of Notting∣ham, at the Coronation of king Richard the second, 1377. and after dyed at London without issue, 1381. being but 18. yeares of age, his Mother then being liuing. After whose death, king Richard bestowed the said Earledome of Notting∣ham vpon Thomas Mowbray, this Iohns yonger brother, who was after created Duke of Norfolke. This Iohn was buried in the White-Fryars (or Carmelites Fryars) in London, the sixt yeare of King Richard the second. Et portoit, de gueulles au lyon rampant d'argent, armé & lampasse d'azur. THomas Lord Mowbray, younger Brother of Iohn Lord Mowbray aforesaid, was after his brothers death, made Earle of Nottingham, the sixt of Richard the second, and by a Charter bearing date the 12. day of Ianuary, the 9. of King Richard the second, he had giuen him the name and honour of Earle Marshall of England, to him and the heyres Male of his body. (Before which time they were but Lord Marshals) And after in the 21. of the said Kings Reigne, he was created Duke of Norfolke, & permitted to beare the Armes of S. Ed∣ward the Confessor, impaled with the Armes of the Marshal∣shippe of England, viz. Per pale d'or & vert an lyon rampant
Gueulles. After al which fauours, king Richard the second banished this Thomas, with Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford; Vpon which, he tooke such excee∣ding griefe, that he dyed at Venice, and was buried there, in the Abbey of S. George, in the first yeare of king Henry the fourth. He married Elizabeth, sister and one of the co-heyres of Thomas Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell, and had issue, Thomas & Iohn, both Earles of Nottingham and Dukes of Norfolke; Isabell mar∣ried to Sir Iames Berkeley knight; and Margaret, married to Sir Robert Howard knight. He writ in his stile, Thomas Duke of Norfolke, Earle of Nottingham, and Earle Marshall of England, Lord Mowbray, Segraue, Bruse of Gower and Stu∣teuile. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. THomas Mowbray (after the death of Thomas his Father in banishment at Venice) was Lord Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke, Earle of Nottingham, and Earle Marshall of Eng∣land. He married Lady Constance, daughter of Iohn Holland, Earle of Huntington, and Duke of Excester, but by her had no issue. He was after accused and found guilty of high trea∣son, and for the same was beheaded, with Richard Scrope Arch-Bishop of Yorke, in the sixt yeare of king Henry the 4. and his body was buried at Yorke. Et portoit, de gueulles, au lyon rampant d'argent armé & lampasse d'azur. IOhn Lord Mowbray (second brother of Thomas Mowbray beheaded at Yorke) was Earle of Nottingham, and Earle Marshall of England; and in the fourth yeare of king Henry the sixt, he was created Duke of Norfolke. He married Kathe∣rine, daughter of Raphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland, & had issue, Iohn Lord Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke, Earle of Nottingham, and Earle Marshall of England, Lord Segraue, and Bruse of Gower, &c. and dyed at his Mannor of Eple∣worth, in the Isle of Axholme, and was buried in the Abbey or House of Carthusians there, in the yeare, 1432. Et portoit, les armoiries de son frere.
IOhn Lord Mowbray, sonne of Iohn aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Duke of Norfolke, Earle of Nottingham and Earle Marshall of England, Lord Segraue, and Bruse of Gower. He married Elianor, daughter of William Lord Bour∣chier, and sister of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, by whom he had issue, Iohn Earle Warren and Surrey, and after Duke of Norfolke, and dyed in the first yeare of king Edward the fourth, 1461. and lyeth buried at Thetford. Et portoit, de gueulles au lyon rampant d'argent, armé & lampasse d'azur. IOhn Lord Mowbray, sonne and heyre of Iohn and Elianor Bourchier) in the life time of his Father, was created Earle Warren and Surrey, by king Henry the sixt; & after the death of his Father, he was Duke of Norfolke, Earle of Nottingham, and Earle Marshall of England, Lord Segraue, and of Gower. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Iohn Talbot, first Earle of Shrewsbury of that name, and had issue, one onely daughter and heyre named Anne, married to Richard Duke of Yorke, second sonne of king Edward the fourth, who dyed both without issue, leauing all the Mowbrayes lands and liuings, to be diuided betweene the two Families of Howards and Berk∣leys. He dyed at Framingham Castle, in the yeare, 1475. and was buried with his Auncestors at Thetford. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. WIlliam Lord Berkley, of Berkley Castle in Glocester∣shire, sonne of Iames Lord Berkley, and of Isabell his wife, daughter of Thomas Lord Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, by Elizabeth his wife, sister and one of the heyres of Thomas Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell; was created Viscount Berkley, the 21. of king Edward the fourth: And in the first yeare of King Richard the third, he was made Earle of Nottingham, & Earle Marshall of England. And in the fourth yeare of king Henry the seuenth, he was created Marquesse Berkley, and married Anne, daughter of Iohn Fynes, Lord Dacres of the South, and dyed without issue, the seuenth of King Henry the seuenth, and was buried in the Augustine Fryars in London, giuing to the saide King, most part of his Lands. Et portoit, de gueulles au Cheuron accompaigne de dix croix formies d'argent.
HEnry Fitz-Roy, base sonne of King Henry the eight, be∣gotten of the Lady Talboys, daughter of Sir Iohn Blount Knight, was created Earle of Nottingham, in the 17. yeare of his Fathers Reigne; and after in the yeare, 1525. he was cre∣ated Duke of Richmond and Somerset at Bridewell; and at the same time he was made Lieutenant Generall from Trent Northwards, and Lord Warden of the East, West, and mid∣dle Marchesse towards Scotland. He married Mary, daughter of Thomas Howard, second Duke of Norfolke, & dyed with∣out issue, at S. Iames house by Charing-Crosse, the 28. of king Henry the eight, and was buried at Thetford in Norfolke. Et portoit, escartelle France & d'engleterre, au bordur escartelle ermyn & gobonne d'argent & d'azur au baston finestre d'argent, sur le tout, au eschutcheon escartelle de gueulles & vaire d'or & de vert à lyon rampant d'argent, au le chef d'azur à Castell entre deus test du cert cabushed d'argent. CHarles Baron Howard of Effingham, and Lord Admirall of England, Son of William L. Howard of Effingham, was created Earle of Nottingham, at White-Hall, the 23. of Oc∣tober, 1597, by Queene Elizabeth. He married Katherine, daughter of Henry Cary, Baron of Hunsdon, & L. Chamber∣laine of the house to the said Queene, by whom he had issue, William Howard Baron of Effingham; and Charles Lord Ho∣ward of Effingham; Elizabeth, married to Sir Robert Southwell knight; Francis, married first to the Earle of Kildare, and af∣ter to Henry Lord Cobham; Margaret the third daughter, was married to Sir Richard Lusun of Staffordshire knight. This Charles married to his second wife, Margaret, daughter of Iames Stewart Earle of Murrey, and had issue, Iames a sonne. Et portoit, les armes de Howard, sur le tout au Molette de sable.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Oxford, with their Armes, Wiues, and Children. AVbrey de Vere, (sonne of Aubrey de Vere, Chamberlaine to King Henry the first, Portgraue of London, and Chiefe-Iustice vnder king Henry the first, slaine by the Commons in London, in the yeare, 1140. descended from the Earles of Guisnes; and that sur-name from Vere, a Towne in Zeland, (as M. Camden hath others in Normandy) was by king Henry the second, and Mauld the Empresse his Mother, restored first to the Chamberlainship of England, and the Portgraueship of London (which hee had lost before in the ciuill warres) and after had giuen him, the choise of foure Earledomes in England, viz. Oxford, Huntington, Cambridge∣shire, and Wiltes, with this condition, that if Dauid of Scotland did challenge the Earledomes of Huntington and Cambridge, he should not haue eyther of them; and for that the said Dauid did challenge Huntington and Cambridge, as his due and right inheritance, the saide Aubrey made his choise to take Oxford: In which Earledome, when the saide Henry the second came to the Crowne, hee by his Charter did confirme and make the said Aubrey, Earle of Oxford. This Aubrey married Adelizia, daughter of Henry of Essex, Baron of Raleigh, the kings Constable, by whom he had issue, Aubrey and Robert Vere, both Earles of Ox∣ford one after another; and a daughter named Rohesia, first Countesse of Salis∣bury, and after wife to Geffrey Magnauile Earle of Essex; and lastly she married Paganus de Beauchamp, Baron of Bedford: She founded the Church, and built the Towne of Royston. This Aubrey the first Earle of Oxford, dyed in the yeare, 1194. the sixt of king Richard the first. Et portoit, escartellé, de gueulles & d'or, le premier canton, chargé d'une Molette d'argent. AVbrey de Vere, sonne of Aubrey aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the second Earle of Oxford, and Lord high Chamberlaine of England. This Aubrey did con∣firme the guift of 7. liberatis terre, which Aubrey his Father did giue to the Canons of S. Edith (or Esith) in Essex, and married Adelizia, daughter of Roger Bigot Earle of Norfolke, by whom he had no issue. He dyed in the yeare, 1214. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré.
RObert Vere the third Earle of Oxford, and great Cham∣berlaine of England, brother of Aubrey the second afore∣said, paide a fine of one thousand Markes to King Iohn, in the 16. yeare of his reigne, for the seizure of those lands which lately were of the inheritance of Earle Aubrey his el∣der brother, and thereby was seized of the Castles of Heue∣ning ham and Caneuil, with their appurtenances, and had also giuen him the Wardship of William Fitz-Otho, to bestow in marriage with his Niece. Notwithstanding all which fauors, he tooke part with the Barons, who maintayned Lewis the French Kings sonne against king Henry the third, in the year, 1215. He married Isabell, daughter and heire of Hugh Lord Bulbec, of Bulbec Castle in Buckinghamshire, and of Swefham Bulbec in Cambridg∣shire, and Founder of Wiburne Abbey in Bedfordshire; and had issue, Hugh de Vere Earle of Oxford, and Sir Henry Vere knight; of whom the Lord Mordant and others are descended. He had issue also, one daughter named Isabell, marri∣ed to Sir Iohn Courtney knight, great Grand-father of Sir Hugh Courtney, first Earle of Deuonshire of that name. She founded the Preaching Fryars in Oxford, and lyeth there buried in Anno, 1245. This Robert also founded the Priory of Hatfield Brodoke, where he lyeth buried crosse-legged, in the yeare, 1221. with this Epitaph. Sir Robert Vere the first, and third Earle of Oxford, lyeth heere. God if he please, haue mercy of his soule. Whosoeuer shall pray for his soule, shall obtaine forty dayes pardon. His Armes depicted vpon his Shield or Pauice, is gold, a quarter of France Seme, charged with a Molet Argent. HVgh de Vere, sonne and heyre of Robert aforesaid, was re∣stored and made Earle of Oxford, and Lord great Chā∣berlaine of England, in the yeare, 1233. and married Hawis, daughter of Sayre de Quincy, Earle of Winchester, and had issue, Robert de Vere, after Earle of Oxford, Aubrey, & Richard; Margaret, married to Hugh de Cressi, with whom her Father gaue in marriage, the Mannor of Keteringham, with the ap∣purtenance (Robert Lord Quincy, and Lord William Blande being Witnesses to the said Charter sanz date.) Mauld se∣cond daughter, and Isabell Vere the third daughter. This Hugh dyed in the yeare, 1263. and was buried at Colne, the 48. of King Henry the third. Et portoit, de gueulles, escartellé d'or; le premier brisé de vn molette d'argen.
RObert de Vere, the second of that christen name, sonne & heyre of Hugh aforesaid, was the fift Earle of Oxford of that sur-name, Lord Bulbec, and great Chamberlaine of Eng∣land; who siding with the Barons in the ciuill dissentions a∣gainst king Henry the third, was taken prisoner by Prince Edward the kings sonne, in a battaile neere Kenelworth, in the yeare, 1265. He married Alice, daughter and heyre of Gilbert Lord Samford, and Chamberlaine to Queene Elianor, and had issue, Robert Vere Earle of Oxford; Hugh de Vere, second sonne, who married Dionisia, daughter and heyre of William Montchensey, Lord of Swanescamp knight, and dyed without issue; and Alphonsus de Vere knight, third sonne, who dyed before his other two elder brothers, and was buried at S. Albons, the second of king Edward the third. Ioane the eldest daughter, married William de Warren, sonne of Iohn Earle War∣ren and Surrey; Lora the second daughter, was wife to Reginald Argentein, with whom, her Brother Robert (as Milles hath, pag. 682.) did giue in marriage, the Mannor of Ketlingham in Norfolke. This Robert died in the yeare, 1295 and was buried at Colne, in the 24. yeare of king Edward the first. Et portoit, les armes de son peté. RObert de Vere, the third of that name, sonne and heire of Robert the second, was after the death of his Father, the sixt Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and great Cham∣berlaine of England, and was called The good Earle of Ox∣ford. He was sent by king Edward the first into Aquitaine, with an Army to releeue his people against the French. He married Margaret, daughter of Roger Lord Mortimer, and sister of Roger, first Earle of March, and dyed without issue, in the yeare, 1331. and was buried at Colne in Essex. Et portoit, gueulles escartelle d'or, le premier beise de vn molette d'argent. IOhn de Vere, sonne of Sir Alphons de Vere knight, and Ne∣phew and heire of Robert and Hugh his Vnkles, whom hee succeeded, and was the seuenth Earle of Oxford, Lord Bul∣bec, Samford, and great Chamberlaine of England. He mar∣ried Mauld, daughter of Bartholmew Badelismer, Baron of Leeds in Kent; and sister and one of the heyres of Giles Lord Badelismer her brother, by whom he had issue, three sonnes and two daughters, viz. Thomas and Aubrey, both Earles of Oxford; and Iohn Vere third sonne, dyed without issue. Mar∣garet the eldest daughter, was first married to Henry Lord
Beaumont, and after to Sir Iohn Deuereux knight; Isabell the second daughter, was first married to Sir Iohn Courtney, Grand-father of Hugh, the first Earle of Deuonshire of that Family; and after to Sir Oliuer Dynham knight. This Iohn Earle of Oxford dyed in the 33. yeare of king Edward the third, 1358. Et portoit, de gueulles escattelle d'or, le prinier brise de vn Molette d'argent. THom as de Vere, sonne and heyre of Iohn aforesaide, after the death of his Father, was the eight Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and Lord great Chamberlaine of Eng∣land, and married Matilda, daughter and heyre of Sir Raphe Vfford knight, Lord Chiefe-Iustice of England, vnder King Edward the third, and had issue, Robert de Vere Earle of Ox∣ford, Marquesse of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland, and after di∣ed at Bentley in Essex, the 18. day of September, the 45. of King Edward the third. Et portoit, les Armes de son peré. RObert de Vere, the fourth of that name, and 9. Earle of Oxford, at eight yeares of age, was Lord Bulbec, Samford, and great Chamberlaine of England; and to augment his honour, king Richard the second, in the 9. yeare of his reigne, created him Marquesse of Dublyn, and gaue him a thousand Markes lands by the yeare, with the Castle of Flynt in Wales; also he gaue to him the sonne and heyre of Charles de Bloys, thē a prisoner; for whose redemption he had 20000. pounds; and in the 10. yeare of the saide Kings reigne, he was made Duke of Ireland. After all which, the King granted him by Letters Patents, to hold the kingdome and Soueraignty of Ireland, and to beare for his Armes, Azure, three Crownes gold, within a bordure argent, quartered before his owne Coate. He was much hated of the Nobility, for abusing the Kings eares to the hurt of the Sate. Hee married Philip, daughter of Ingelram de Guisnes, Lord of Coucie and Earle of Bedford, by Isabell his wife, daughter of king Edward the third, whom he diuor∣ced, and tooke to wife Lantegronia, a meane woman, that came with the Queene out of Bohemia, but had no issue by eyther of them. At last he was banished Eng∣land by the Barons, and went into France, where about fiue yeares after, being a hunting, he was slaine by a wilde Boare. King Richard hearing thereof, out of his loue caused his body to be brought into England, and to bee apparelled in Princely Ornaments and Robes, and put about his necke a chaine of gold, and Rings vpon his fingers, and so was buried in the Priory of Earles Colne in Essex, 1392. The king being thereat, did weare blackes. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
AVbrey de Vere, after the banishment and death of Robert Duke of Ireland his Nephew, was the tenth Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec and Samford, 1393. But the Chamber∣lainship of England (saith Milles) which his Auncestors did hold in Fee, he surrendred vnto king Richard the second, who bestowed the same vpon Iohn Holland Duke of Excester, his halfe brother by the Mother. He married Alice, daughter of Iohn Lord Fitz-Walter, of Woodham Walter in Essex, and had issue, Richard Earle of Oxford, and Iohn that dyed without issue, the ninth of Henry the fift; Alice a daughter, was marri∣ed to Sir Iohn Fitz-Lewis knight. This Aubrey dyed in the first yeare of king Henry the fourth, and was buried in the Priory of Earles Colne in Essex, in the yeare, 1400. Et portoit, gueulles, escartelle d'or, le premier brise de vn Molette d'argent. RIchard de Vere, (twenty foure yeares olde at the death of his Father Aubrey) was the eleuenth Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec and Samford; and in the third yeare of King Henry the fift, he was made Knight of the Garter. He married Alice, daughter and one of the heyres of Sir Richard Serge∣aulx knight, and widdow of Guy S. Albon, by whom hee had issue, Iohn Earle of Oxford, and Sir Robert Vere knight, who married Margaret, daughter of Sir Hugh Courtney of Hac∣ham knight, (and heyre to her Mother Phillip, one of the daughters and heyres of Sir Warren Archdeacon knight) and had issue Iohn, who married Alice, daughter and heyre of Walter Kilrington, alias Colbroke, by whom he had issue, Iohn de Vere Earle of Oxford. This Richard dyed in the 4. yeare of King Henry the fift. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. IOhn de Vere, the second of that name, sonne and heire of Ri∣chard aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the 12. Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec and Samford. He married Eli∣zabeth, daughter and heyre of Sir Iohn Howard knight, and had issue, Aubrey de Vere, Iohn de Vere Earle of Oxford; George Vere knight, that dyed before his Brother; Richard and Tho∣mas knights; Mary, a Nunne at Barking in Essex; Ioane, mar∣ried to Sir William Norris of Yatterden knight; and Elizabeth was married to William Bourchier, sonne and heyre of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex. This Iohn, was one of the Noble∣men
that withstood and gain-saide the Lords spirituall, for place and preceden∣cy in Parliament, in King Henry the sixt time; which controuersie is entred on the back-side of the Parliament Rolle thus. Memorandum, the Lords spirituall alleadged in that Parliament, that for so much as they were spirituall Barons, they ought to haue of right the precedent place of the Lords Temporall; For (saide they) it was well knowne, how farre things spirituall exceed temporall. To which, the Barons temporall answered, That whatsoeuer right or priuiledge they had or could challenge, it came from them, and their Auncestors, and their almes-deeds, who had beene the worthy Founders and Benefactors of the saide Lords spirituall: and fur∣ther saide, That it was an vnseemly thing, for Masters to be inferiors to their Ser∣uants. Besides, the Lords temporall further affirmed, That they were descended of Honourable and Noble Families, and so were not the spirituall Barons; Which matter being well vnderstood and indifferently weighed, the Lords Temporall preuailed, and had place and precedency giuen them. This Iohn, with Aubrey his eldest sonne, Sir Thomas Tudenham knight, William Tirrell and Iohn Mont∣gomery Esquires, were attainted, and at seuerall times beheaded at Tower-Hill neere London, in the yeare, 1462. Iohn and his sonne Aubrey, were buried in the Augustine Fryars in London, the first of king Edward the fourth. Et portoit, de gueulles escartelle d'or, le primier brise de vn molette d'argent. IOhn de Vere, second sonne of Iohn Earle of Oxford, behea∣ded with his eldest sonne Aubrey, was after his Father and Brothers death, the 13. Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec Sam∣ford and Scales, great Chamberlaine and Admirall of Eng∣land; who not long after the battaile and ouerthrow of Bar∣net, 1471. fled into Cornewall to S. Michaels Mount, where he was taken by King Edward the fourth, and sent prisoner to the Castle of Hames beyond the Seas, where he continued vntill the first yeare of king Henry the seuenth, with whom he came into England, and fought the battaile at Bosworth-Field, where King Richard was slaine. He maried two wiues, the first was Margaret, daughter of Richard Neuill Earle of Salisbury, by whom he had issue, Iohn that dyed in the Tower of London yong, in the time of his Fathers banishment. His second wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Scrope knight, the widdow of William Lord Beaumont, by whom he had no issue. He dyed without issue, in the fourth yeare of King Henry the eight, and was buried at Colne in Essex, leauing Iohn de Vere, sonne of George his Bro∣ther, to succeed him in the Earledome of Oxford, &c. Et portoit, les armes de son pere.
IOhn de Vere, the fourth of that name, sonne and heyre of Sir George Vere knight, and Nephew and heyre of Iohn, the thirteenth Earle of Oxford, succeeded his Vnkle Iohn, & was the fourteenth Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford and Scales, Lord great Chamberlaine of England, and Knight of the Garter. This Iohn was commonly called Little Iohn of Camps: Hee married Anne, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, and Treasurer of England, and dyed with∣out issue, in the eighteenth yeare of King Henry the eight, the 14. of Iuly, 1526. and was buried at Colne, leauing Iohn de Vere, his great Vnkle Roberts Grand-childe to succeed him. Et portoit, de gueulles, escartelle d'or, le primier brise de vn molette d'argent. IOhn de Vere, the fift of that name, (sonne of Iohn Vere, Son of Robert Vere, second brother of Iohn Earle of Oxford, be∣headed with his sonne Aubrey, in the yeare, 1462.) was the fifteenth Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford and Scales, and great Chamberlaine of England. He married Elizabeth, daughter & heyre of Edward Trussell of Staffordshire, knight Banneret, and had issue, Iohn de Vere the sixt of that name, Earle of Oxford; Aubrey de Vere second sonne, who married the daughter of Spring of Lanham in Suffolke, and had is∣sue Hugh: Geffrey Vere third sonne (Father of Iohn Vere of Kirby Hall; Sir Francis Vere knight, the great Leader in the Lowe Countries; and Sir Horatio Vere Knight) Elizabeth, married to Thomas Lord Darcie of Chich; Anne, wife to Edmond Lord Sheffield; and Francis mar∣ried to Henry Howard Earle of Surrey, beheaded the 38. of King Henry the 8. This Iohn dyed at Heueningham Castle, the 19. of March, in the 31. yeare of King Henry the eight, 1539. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. IOhn de Vere, the sixt of that christen name, sonne of Iohn the fift, was after the death of his Father, the sixteenth Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and great Cham∣berlaine of England. He married two wiues, the first was Dorothy, the daughter of Raphe Neuill Earle of Westmerland, by whom he had issue, Katherine married to Edward Lord Windsore of Bradenham; and Fayth that dyed without issue. His second wife was Margaret, daughter of Iohn Golding, and sister of Sir Thomas Golding knight, by whom hee had
issue, Edward Earle of Oxford; and Mary, married to Peregrine Berty, Lord Wil∣loughby of Eresbie. This Iohn dyed in the fourth yeare of Queene Elizabeth, and was buried at Heueningham, the third of August, 1561. Et portoit, de gueulles, escartelle d'or, le primier charge à vn molette d'argent. EDward Vere, sonne and heyre of Iohn, was after the death of his Father, the 17. Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Sam∣ford, and Lord great Chamberlaine of England. He had two wines, the first was Anne, daughter to William Cecill Baron of Burghley, and Lord high Treasurer of England, by whom he had issue three daughters; Elizabeth, married to William Stan∣ley Earle of Derby, and Lord Strange, in Anno, 1594. Bridget, wife to Francis Lord Norris of Ricot; and Susan married to Philip Herbert Earle of Montgomery. This Edwards second wife was Anne, daughter of Thomas Trentham of Rocester in Staffordshire Esquire, and one of the Maids of Honour to Queene Elizabeth, by whom hee had issue, Henry Vere the 19 Earle of Oxford now liuing, 1618. This Edward dyed the 24. of Iune, 1604. and was buried at Hackney. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré. HEnry Vere, sonne and heyre of Edward Vere Earle of Ox∣ford, by his second wife, was after the death of his Fa∣ther, the 18. Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and Lord great Chamberlaine of England now liuing, 1618. Et portoit, gueulles escartellé d'or, le primier charge à vn Molette d'argent.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Penbroke, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. GIlbert, sur-named Strongbowe, (of drawing of a Strong Bowe,) second sonne of Gilbert Earle of Clare in Suf∣folke, and Lord of Tunbridge in Kent, and grand-childe of Richard Fitz-Gilbert (Sewer to William Conquerour) and Rohesia his wife, daughter of Walter Gifford, Earle of Longe∣uile in Normandy; was created Earle of Penbroke, in the 4. yeare of King Stephen; hee was also Marshall of the Kings Pallace, and Lord of Chepstow, Strighull, Tudenham, Wola∣ston, Aluerdeston, and halfe the Country of Liege. Hee was heyre of Roger and Walter Fitz-Richard his Vnkles; which Walter was a great Baron, and Lord of Caer-went in Mon∣mouthshire, and Founder of Tinterne Abbey in Wales, 1131. He married Elizabeth, sister of Walleran Earle of Mellent, and Robert Earle of Leicester (twin brothers) and had issue, Richard Strongbow Earle of Penbroke, and Basill, married to Raymond, sonne of William Fitz-Gerald of Ireland. This Gilbert dyed in the 14. yeare of King Stephen, and was buried by his Vnkle Walter Fitz-Richard, in the Abbey of Tinterne. Et portoit, d'or, trois cheurons de gueulles, au lambell de cinq points d'azur. RIchard of Clare, sonne of Gilbert sur-named Strongbow, of whom it is saide, that this Richard standing vpright, with the Palmes of his hands would touch his knees; he was after his Father, Earle of Penbroke, L. of Strighull, Chepstow and Caer-went, and Lord Marshall. Dermoc, Mac-Murough, sonne of Patricke, King of Leinster in Ireland; whose Sub∣iects rebelling against him, prayed this Richards ayde, who being a most valorous Captaine, granted his request, & went with sufficient strength, and conquered all Leinster. In re∣compence whereof, this Dermoc gaue his daughter Eua vnto him in marriage, with all the Country of Leinster, (which contayned weshford, Kildare, Kilkenny, Ossory and Carlogh) Al which Lands he enioyed with the good liking of King Henry the second, eight whole yeares. He had issue, one onely daughter his heyre, named Isabell, who being 14. yeares Ward to King Henry the second, was giuen in marriage to Wil∣lliam Marshall the elder, Earle of Penbroke. This Richard dyed, and was buried at Kilkenny, in Anno, 1176, and afterwards his body was taken vp againe, and buried at Dublyn in Ireland. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
VVIlliam the Kings Marshall, sonne of Iohn, & grand∣childe of Gilbert, was in right of his wife Isabell, daughter and heyre of Richard Strongbow aforesaid, created Earle of Penbroke, by King Iohn, on the day of his Corona∣tion, 1199. and had giuen him the Marshalship of England. King Richard the first, in the first yeare of his Reigne, 1189. gaue this Isabell in marriage, to this William Marshall, she be∣ing then his Ward, by whom he had issue fiue sonnes; Willi∣am, Richard, Gilbert, Walter and Anselme, all Earles of Pen∣broke, and Marshals of England, and dyed without issue. Hee had also fiue daughters, who were married as followeth. Ma∣tild the eldest, was married to Hugh Bigot Earle of Norfolke, with whom he had in marriage, the Marshalship of England, and Hemsted Marshall in Barkshire, by which the said Office is held: Ioane the second daughter, was married to Wa∣rin de Montchensey, Lord of Swanescamp: Isabell the third daughter, was first married to Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester, and after to Richard Plantagenet Earle of Cornwall, younger sonne of King Iohn: Sibill the fourth daughter, married William Ferrars Earle of Derby; and Eua the fift daughter, was married to William Bruse Lord of Brecknock. This William, after the death of King Iohn, had the gouernment of King Henry the third, being but ten yeares of age, vntill the said William dyed, which was in the yeare, 1219. and was buried in the Temple in London, the 16. of March, the fourth of king Henry rhe third. This Williams Father did beare for his Armes, Gueulles à la bande fizelle d'or; (as his Seale doth witnesse) But after he and his sonnes came to be Marshals, they vsed for their Armes, D'or party de vert, au lyon rampant de gueulles sur le tout, arme & lampasse d'azur. WIlliam Marshall the younger, sonne and heyre of Wil∣liam Marshall the elder, was the fourth Earle of Pen∣broke, and Marshall of England, Lord of Strighull, Chepstow, Caer-went, Leigh (or Liege) Weshford, Kildare, Kilkenny, Osso∣rie and Carlogh: and married two wiues; the first was Alice, daughter and heyre of Baldwin de Betun, Earle of Albemarle and Holdernesse (by Auis his wife, daughter and heyre of William le Grosse Earle of Albemarle.) His second wife was Elianor, daughter of king Iohn, and sister of king Henry the third. He dyed without issue, the 6. of Aprill, 1231. the 15. of king Henry the third, and was buried by his Father, in the Temple of London, leauing Richard his brother to succeed him. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré.
RIchard Marshall, second sonne of William Marshall the elder, who after the death of William his Brother, the 5. Earle of Penbroke, and Marshall of England, Lord of Longe∣uile in France, Strighull, Chepstow, and Caerwent, &c. did giue to the Church of S. Maries of Thame, certaine Woods in Crendon, to pray for his owne soule, and Geruasia his Wife; (and as Mathew Paris hath) when king Henry the third did, vpon the suggestion of Peter Bishop of Winchester, remoue all his home-bred Subiects from their Offices in his Court, and preferre certaine strangers of Poictiers in their roomes; this Richard not liking thereof, came boldly vnto the King, in the presence of many the Nobility & others, and tolde him, that by ill counsell he had sent for strangers into the Land, to the great hurt of his kingdome and subiects, to the impeachment of the Lawes and Liberties of this Realme. For redresse whereof, he vowed he would sight so long as hee had any life; and thereupon ioyned league with Luellyn Prince of Wales & others. But whilest the King was busied in leuying an Army, to send against him and Luellyn, word was brought to this Richard, that Morice Fitz-Gerald and other Irish, had sacked his Countries and Lands in Ireland. Vpon the hearing whereof, he hasted thether with fifteene Knights, to encounter with his enemies; and ioy∣ned battaile with them vpon Satterday the first of Aprill, 1234. and fought ele∣uen houres, vntill his horse was slaine vnder him. And he then falling to the ground one of the Irish perceiuing his backe part ill armed, lifted vp his haber∣geō, & thrust a knife into his backe vp to the haft, giuing him his deadly wound, and then brought him to a Castle of his owne named Kilkenny, (which the said Maurice Fitz-Gerald had taken a little before from him) where he dyed fifteene dayes after withoutissue, hauing beene Earle but three yeares. Hee was buried in the Quier of the Fryars Minories at Kilkenny, the 18. of King Henry the third. Et portoit, les armes de son frere. GIlbert Marshall, third Son of William Marshall the elder, after the death of Richard his brother, was restored to King Henry the thirds fauour and grace, & to all his brothers Lands and Honours, both in England and Ireland; and for the same did his homage in the same yeare, 1234. and was Earle of Penbroke and Marshall of England, Lord of Longe∣uile in France, Linester in Ireland, and of Chepstow and Strig∣hull in Wales, &c. He married Margaret, daughter of William King of Scots, but had no issue. He miscarried at a Turna∣ment held at Hartford, by endeuoring to stay his horse from his swift running, who being cast out of his Saddle, the horse gaue him such a blow on the breast, with his head backward, that he died therof the same day, in the Abbey of Hartford neere Ware, in the yeare 1242. His body being conueyed to London, was buried by his Father in the Temple. Et portoit, d'or party de vert au lion rampant de gueulles sur le tout, armé & lampasse d'azur.
WAlter Marshall, fourth sonne of William Marshall the elder, with whom King Henry the third (after the death of his Brother Gilbert Marshall) was greatly displea∣sed, denying him those Honours and Seigneuries belonging vnto him from his Auncestors, saying: That this Walters el∣dest Brother William, did rescue Lewis the French Kings Son being in England, that he was not taken prisoner. Secondly, that his Brother Richard was his enemy, and was slaine in o∣pen field against him. And thirdly, that his brother Gilbert that dyed last, had all his dignities restored to him by the Kings fauour; and that (contrary to the saide Kings Com∣mandement) he went to the Tiling at Hartford, which was held to the Kings disgrace. But afterwards, the King being well pacified, this Walter was admitted to be Earle of Penbroke and Marshall of England, and to haue all other the honours and lands his brothers held and enioyed before. He married Margaret, daughter and co-heyre of Robert Lord Quincy (sonne and heyre of Sater de Quincy Earle of Winchester) widdow of ohn Lacie Earle of Lincolne by whom he had no issue. He dyed at Goderich Castle by Monmouth, the fourth of December, 1245. and was buried at Tynterne Abbey without issue, in the 30. yeare of King Henry the third. Et portoit, les armes de son freré. ANselme Marshall, the fift sonne of William Marshall the elder, was at the time of his Brother Walters death, Dean of Salisbury, and after admitted to be Earle of enbroke, and Marshall of England. He married Mauld, daughter of Hum∣frey de Bohun, Earle of Hereford and Constable of England, and dyed without issue, the 22. of December, being the 18. day after the death of his Brother Walter; leauing his rich Patrimony and Inheritance, to be diuided amongst his fiue sisters and heyres before mentioned. I finde this Earledome of Penbroke in ancient time, to be a County Palatine, & had all Iurisdiction Regall. And that the Earle had vnder him there, Iustices of his owne, a Shireiffe, Steward, Chancellour, Chamberlaine, Coroner, Escheter, and diuers other Officers, necessary for a Re∣gal Iurisdiction, all made and appointed by himselfe He had Sssions, & Coun∣ty Courts Monethly, in which County Courts were tried all Real Pleas what∣soeuer, by originall Writ, vnder the Seale and Name of the said Earle; all fynes were leuied, and recoueries passed, and all Writs made in the Earles name, (and not in the Kings) He had power to pardon all offences, and had his Chancery, court of Common Pleas, and Exchequer, holden within his Castle of Penbroke; whereunto all the Inhabitants of that Country resorted, for iustice and triall of all their causes. He erected Townes, and incorporated them with many large and ample liberties. He had all manner of forfeitures and escheats whatsoeuer. He had within his County, 9. Castles of his owne, and 12. Seigneuries or Man∣nors,
which were parcell of his County. The Iurisdiction royall of this Earle∣dome, remained and was permitted in the Earles themselues, from the time of the Norman Conquest, vntill the 27. yeare of King Henry the 8. Whereas all o∣ther Earles of this Realme, had lost their Iurisdictions many hundred yeares before, and had but the bare names of their Earledomes. Also the said Earles of Penbroke, by Office at the Coronations of the Kings of England, were to carry a paire of gilt Spurs. To end; this County is called Penbrokshire, of the Towne so named; for the word Pen (in Welsh) signifieth the head or chiefe part of a thing; and Bro, signifieth a Vale or plaine soyle, fertile and fit to beare Corne, &c. Et portoit, d'or party de vert, au lyon rampant de gueulles, sur le tout, armé & lampasse d'azur. WIlliam de Valence) so sur-named of the place where he was borne) sonne of Hugh le Brun, Earle of the Marchesse of Aquitaine, and halfe brother by the Mother, to King Henry the third; was created Earle of Penbroke, in the yeare, 1247. He married Ioane, daughter and heyre of Warin Lord Montchency, and Ioane his wife, second sister and co∣heyre of Anselme Marshall Earle of Penbroke, by whom hee had issue, Aymer de Valence Earle of Penbroke, and Iohn that dyed a childe; and foure daughters, viz. Isabell, married to Iohn Lord Hastings of Aburgauenny (one of the Competitors for the Crowne of Scotland) Ioane the second daughter was married vnto Iohn Lord Comyn of Badzenoth (sonne of Iohn Lord Comyn and Mary his wife, daughter of Iohn Balliol) Agnes the third daughter, was first mar∣ried to Maurice Fitz-Gerald; and after to Henry Ballioll, brother of Alexander Ballioll Lord of Chilham, and dyed without issue; Margaret was the 4. daughter. This William de Valence and Ioane his wife, gaue to the Towne of Tembie the first Charter of incorporating them; licensing thē to chuse euery yeare Port-Reifes: He granted likewise to the Burgesses, free common yearely vpon al his grounds and Medowes, from the time of mowing, vnto the purification of Mary; which to this day they enioy. This William dyed in the yeare, 1296. and was buried in a magnificent Toombe, on the South-side of the Abbey at Westminster, the 25. yeare of King Edward the first. Et portoit, burelle d'argent & d'azur de dix pieces, à l'otle de Marlettes de gueulles. AYmer de Valence, sonne and heyre of William de Valence a∣foresaid, and Ioane his wife, daughter of Warin Montchen∣sey Lord of Swanscampe, was after the death of his Father, Earle of Penbroke and Weshford, and Lord of Montigniac; he was Lord Gouernor of the Realme of Scotland, vnder king Edward the first, during the controuersie betweene Iohn Bal∣lioll and Robert Bruse. Hee married three wiues, the first was Beatrix, daughter of Raphe de Nele Constable of France. The second was the daughter of the Earle of Barre; and the third was Mary, daughter of Guy de Chastillion,
Earle of S. Paule, but had no issue by any of them. He dyed in France, in the yeare, 1323, and his inheritance (for want of heyres of his body) was diuided betweene his sisters aforesaid; and Laurence Hastings, grand childe to Isabell his eldest sister, succeeded him in the Earledome of Penbroke and Weshford. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. LAurence Lord Hastings, Weshford and Aburgauenny, (Son of Iohn Lord Hastings, and Grand-childe of another Iohn and Isabell, eldest sister and co-heyre of Aymer de Va∣lence Earle of Penbroke) was by Letters Patents, dated at Mont-Martyn, the 30. day of October, the 13. of king Edward the third, created Earle of Penbroke, who being very young; the King gaue his Wardship to the Lady Isabell de Burgo, Lady of Clare, who was Custos of Penbroke, during the said Laurences minority. He had two wiues, the first was the earle of S. Paules daughter, by whom he had no issue. His second wife was Agnes, daughter of Roger Mortuomary Lord of Wig∣more, and first Earle of March, by whom he had issue, Iohn Lord Hastings, who was but two yeares olde at the death of his Father, 1361. the 36. of King Edward the third. Et portoit, d'or à la Maunch de gueulles. IOhn Lord Hastings, (sonne of Laurenc aforesaid) was after the death of his Father, Earle of Penbroke; and being but 27. yeares of age, was sent by King Edward the third, to re∣moue the siedge at the Citty of Rochell in France, where by the way as he was going, hee was encountred vpon the Sea by Henry the Vsurper of Castile, and taken prisoner with 160. others, who were carried into Spaine; where after two yeares imprisonment there, he was solde to a Nobleman of France, with whom hauing agreed for his ransome, at his de∣parture, was poysoned at a banquet, and died in France, the 16. of Aprill, in the yeare, 1375. (his ransome money beeing come to Callis to redeeme him) He married two wiues, the first was Margaret, daughter of King Edward the third, by whom he had no issue. His second wife was Anne, daughter and heyre of Sir Walter Manny knight of the Garter, by whom he had issue, Iohn Lord Hastings and Earle of Penbroke, three yeares olde at the death of his Father. Et portoit, les armes de son pere.
IOhn Lord Hastings, (sonne of Iohn Earle of Penbroke, by Anne Manny his wife) after the death of his Father, was Earle of Penbroke, Lord Hastings, Weshford, & Abergauenny. And because he was very yong, king Edward the third made William Lord Beauchamp. Custos of the County of Penbroke. And after, being with King Richard the second at Woodstock, at a Christmas, in running at a turnament, was slaine by his good Friend Sir Iohn S. Iohn, in the yeare, 1389. after he had beene Earle 14. yeares. He married Philip, daughter of Ed∣mond Mortimer the third Earle of March, but had no issue. He was buried in the Fryers Minorites, within Newgate in London: And his inheritance went to his Cousin Sir Edward Hastings knight; who, for some displeasure taken against him by the King, was committed to the Fleet, where he dyed without issue. After whose death, King Richard seized all his liuings into his hands; although afterwards Reginald Grey of Ruthin made claime to the same, as next heire; and at the Coronation of King Henry the fourth, carried the gilt Spurs, which belonged of right for the Earle of Penbroke to do. It is saide, that since Aymer de Valence Earle of Pen∣broke (who was one of the Peeres that condemned Thomas Earle of Lancaster) to this Iohn, none of the Earles of Penbroke did liue to see their sonnes, so vn∣timely did they dye. King Richard the second, in the yeare, 1397. did giue the Earledome of Penbroke, to his Queene Isabell, and vnder her, Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester and Lord of Hauerford, was made Custos of the Earldome; which they enioyed vntill king Henry the fourth obtayned the Crowne, who tooke the same then into his owne hands. Et portoit, d'or, à la Maunch de gueulles. HVmfrey Plantagenet, (fourth sonne of king Henry the 4.) was by king Henry the fift his brother, at a Parliament held at Leicester, the second yeare of his Reigne, created Earle of Penbroke, and shortly after Duke of Glocester. Hee writ in his stile; Humfrey, sonne and brother to Kings, Duke of Glocester, Earle of Henault, Holland, Zeland & Penbroke, Lord of Frisia, great Chamberlaine of England, and Defen∣der of the Realme. This was that Duke Humfrey, who al∣wayes standing for the Commons, being bountifull to the poore, and seeing Iustice duely executed, was commonly called, The good Duke of Glocester. (I wish there were ma∣ny such Duke Humfreys now liuing.) This great Duke and Protector, for with∣standing the insolent proceedings of Queene Margaret, wife to King Henry the fixt; at length (by her meanes) was strangled to death at S. Edmondsbury in Suf∣folke,
in the 25. yeare of King Henry the sixt, and lyeth buried in the Abbey at S. Albons. He married two wiues, the first was Iaqueline, daughter and heyre of William Duke of Bauare; and the second wife was Elianor, sister of Thomas Lord Cobham of Starborough, but had no issue by eyther. He had a base daughter na∣med Antigone, married vnto Henry Grey Earle of Tankeruile, and Lord Powis. Et portoit, France, escartelle d'engleterre, au bordur d'argent. VVIlliam de la Pole, Lord Wingfield, &c. was created Earle of Penbroke, by Letters Patents, bearing date at S. Edmonds-bury, the third of March, 1446. the 25. of king Henry the sixt; which Title & Dignity he enioyed not long; for at the next Parliament after, 1450. he was banished Eng∣land, and in his flying, was taken and beheaded; and his body being carried to Wingfield Colledge in Suffolke, was there bu∣ried: After whose death, the Earledome of Penbroke reuer∣ted againe to the Crowne, where it remained two yeares. This William married Alice, daughter and heyre of Thomas Chaucer, of Newelme in Oxfordshire Esquire; as in the Title of Suffolke is more at large. Et portoit, d'azur à la face & trois testes de Leopards d'or. IAsper of Hatfield, knight of the Garter, (sonne of Owen Tu∣der and Queene Katherine, daughter of Charles the sixt, French King, and widdow of king Henry the fift, of England) was created Earle of Penbroke, by King Henry the sixt his halfe Brother, in the yeare, 1452. But after, when King Ed∣ward the fourth expulsed king Henry the sixt, this Iasper was attainted, and William Lord Herbert created Earle of Pen∣broke in his place, in the yeare, 1462. In whose Letters Pa∣tents mention is made, that he had the said Earledome giuen him, in consideration he had expelled the Rebell Iasper. Af∣ter that this William Herbert was slaine at Banbury, his sonne William succeeded him in the said Earledome of Penbroke. And after, when King Henry the sixt was restored againe (by the Earle of Warwicke) this Iasper was also restored to be Earle of Penbroke, in the yeare, 1470. But in Aprill fol∣lowing, 1471. Iasper was taken prisoner at Barnet Field, and put from the Earle∣dome of Penbroke againe: which Earledome being surrendred by the second William Lord Herbert, to King Edward the fourth, he gaue it to Prince Edward
his sonne who enioyed it during his life. Afterwards King Richard the third held the same all his life time; who being slaine by king Henry the seuenth, 1485. this Iasper was againe (the third time) restored to the Earledome of Penbroke, & in the yeare, 1486. he was crcated Duke of Bedford. Some haue, that this Iasper married Katherine, daughter of Richard Wooduile Earle Riuers, the widdow of Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham; but howsoeuer, he dyed without any law∣full issue, the 11. of King Henry the seuenth; leauing a base daughter, named Hellen, married to William Gardiner of London. Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, à la bordur d'azur semé de Merlottes d'or. WIlliam Herbert, Lord of Ragland Castle in Monmoth∣shire, descended from Henry Fitz-Herbert, Chamber∣laine to King Henry the first, and Alice Corbet his wife, (Con∣cubine to the said King, and of whom he begot Reginald earle of Cornwall.) This William was Knight of the Garter, and after the attaindor of Iasper of Hatfield, was created Earle of Penbroke, in the 8. yeare of king Edward the fourth; and be∣ing sent by the said King to encounter Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke, and George Duke of Clarence, (who intended the setting vp againe of King Henrie the sixt) was at Banbury field 1469. taken prisoner and beheaded the ninth of King Edward the fourth, and buried at Tinterne Abbey: the said King Edward being also taken prisoner by the Earle of Warwicke at the same time. He married Anne, sister of Sir Walter Deuereux knight, Lord Ferrars of Chartley, and had issue. William Lord Herbert of Gower, (and after his Father, Earle of Penbroke) Sir Walter Herbert, and Sir George Herbert of S. Iulians, and sixe daughters; Cicely was Baronesse of Grestoke; Mauld was married to Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland; Katherine, wife to George Grey Earle of Kent; Anne was married to the Lord Powis; Isabell was married to Sir Thomas Cook∣sey Knight; and Margaret the sixt daughter, was first married to Thomas Tal∣bot Viscount Lisle, and after to Sir Henry Bodringham knight. This William Earle of Penbroke had issue by Mauld, daughter and heyre of Adam ap Howell Graunt, his Paramore, Richard Herbert of Ewyas, Father of Sir George Herbert of Swansey knight, and of William Herbert Earle of Penbroke. Et portoit, party per pale, d'azur & de gueulles, au trois lyons tampant d'argent.
WIlliam Lord Herbert of Gower, (sonne and heyre of William Earle of Penbroke, beheaded at Banbury a∣foresaid) was after his Father, Earle of Penbroke, which earle∣dome he surrendred to King Edward the fourth, and in lieu therof, the said King created him Earle of Huntington, by his Letters Patents bearing date at Oburne, the fourth of Iuly, in the 19. yeare of King Edward the fourth; who at that time gaue the said Earledome of Penbroke to his sonne Prince Ed∣ward. This William married Mary, the fift sister and co-heyre of Richard Wooduile, Earle Riuers, and had issue one onely daughter his heyre, named Elizabeth, married to Charles So∣merset Earle of Worcester. This William dyed in the 6. yeare of King Henry the seuenth. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. EDward Plantagenet, sonne and heyre of King Edward the fourth, was in the 19. yeare of his Fathers reigne (vp∣pon the surrender of William Herbert of the Earledome of Penbroke) created Earle of Penbroke, at the Kings Mannor of East Hampsted. This Prince Edward was after King, by the name of King Edward the fift, and liued not long after; who being dead, King Richard the third held the said Earledome of Penbroke all his life time. After whose death, Iasper Tuder was restored againe to that Earledome, and helde it to his death, in the yeare, 1495. And then did King Henry the se∣uenth giue the same Earledome to Prince Henry his sonne, who held and enioy∣ed it, vntill he was King, and long after, and passed all things within the saide County, vnder the Seale of the said Earledome, and by the name of Earle of Penbroke, (and not as King, nor vnder the great Seale of England) and so it con∣tinued, vntill the 27. yeare of his Reigne, that Wales was reduced to sheere ground, and the authority royall of all Lordships Marchesse in Wales, was dis∣solued by Acte of Parliament, and resumed into the Kings hands; at which time, the great and large authority and iurisdiction Royall, of the Earledome of Penbroke (being alwayes before a County Palatine) was dissolued; and the Earles that haue beene sithence, haue onely had but the Name and Dignity, as other Earles of England; where before that time, they were as absolute Princes of themselues. Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent.
ANne Bollen, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Thomas Bollen, Viscount Rochford, and Earle of Wiltshire; was created Marchionesse of Penbroke at Windesore Castle, on Sunday the first of September, 1532. the 24. of King Henry the eight, at which time, the saide King deliuered vnto her two seuerall Letters Patents; one of her said Creation, the other of the guift of a thousand pounds a yeare to maintaine her Estate. Afterwards, the 25. of Ianuary, 1533. King Henry married the said Anne, Marchionesse of Penbroke, and by her had issue, the renowned and most famous Princesse Queene Elizabeth, who reigned Queene, forty foure yeares, and died the 24. of March, 1602. and lyeth honourably buried in the Abbey at West∣minster. This Queene was beheaded within the Tower of London, the 19. of May, 1536. and her body with the head, was buried in the Quier of the Chappel of the Tower. Et portoit, d'argent au Cheuron entre trois testes de Beufs coupé sable. WIlliam Herbert, sonne of Richard Herbert of Ewyas Esquire, and grandchilde to William Herbert Earle of Penbroke, beheaded at Banbury, was of the priuy Chamber to King Henry the eight, and one of his Excecutors; he was made Master of the Horsse, and Knight of the Garter, the third of King Edward the sixt; and in the fift yeare of the said kings Reigne, he was created Lord Herbert of Caerdiffe, and Earle of Penbroke; he was also of the priuy Counsell to king Edward the 6. twice Lord President of the Counsell e∣stablished in the Marchesse of Wales, Lieutenant generall, ioyned with the Lord Russell and the Lord Grey, for suppres∣sing the Rebels in the West Countries, and against Sir Tho∣mas Wyat, and Generall of all the English Forces at S. Quintins; twice Gouernor of Callis, of the priuy Counsell also to Queene Mary and Queene Elizabeth, & grand Master of the Houshold to the late Queene Elizabeth. He married two wiues, the first was Anne, daughter of Thomas Parre, Baron of Kendall, & sister and co-heyre of William Parre Marquesse of Northampton, Earle of Essex, Lord Parre, Ros of Kendall, Fitz-Hugh, Marmyon, and S. Quintine; by whom hee had issue, Henry Lord Herbert, after Earle of Penbroke; Sir Edward Herbert of Red-Castle knight; and Lady Anne, married to Francis Lord Talbot, Son and heyre of George the sixt Earle of Shrewsbury. This William, married to his second wife, Anne, daughter of George Talbot, the fourth Earle of Shrewsbury, but by her had no issue. He dyed at Hampton-Court, the 18. of Aprill, and was buried in S. Paules Church in London, in the yeare, 1570. being the 73. yeare of his age. Et portoit, party per pale d'azur & de gueulles au lyons rampant d'argent, à la bordur gobonne d'or & gueulles, sur la gueulles bezants.
HEnry Herbert, Earle of Penbroke, Lord Herbert of Caer∣diffe in Wales, Knight of the honourable Order of the Garter, Lord President of the Counsell of the Marchesse of Wales; married two Wiues; Katherine the first wife, was daughter of George Talbot, the sixt Earle of Shrewsbury, by whom he had no issue. His second wife was Mary, daughter of Sir Henry Sidney, knight of the Garter, and of the priuy Counsell to Queene Elizabeth, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of the Counsell of the Marchesse of Wales, and si∣ster to Robert Sidney, Viscount Lisle and Earle of Leicester, Knight of the Garter, and Chamberlaine to Queene Anne, by whom he had issue, William Lord Herbert of Caerdiffe, and after his Father, Earle of Penbroke; Philip Herbert second sonne, created Earle of Montgomery; and Lady Anne, that dyed young vnmarried at Cam∣bridge, and was there buried, 1601. Et portoit, per pale d'azur & de gueulles, au trois lyons rampant d'argent, à vn bordur gobonny d'or & de gueulles. WIlliam Herbert, sonne and heyre of Henry aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Earle of Penbroke, Lord Herbert of Caerdiffe in Wales, Fitz-Hugh, Marmion, and S. Quintine, Lord Chamberlaine to King Iames, Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, one of his Maiesties most honourable priuy Counsell, and one of the Comissi∣oners for the Office of Earle Marshall of England. He mar∣ried Mary, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Gilbert Lord Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, but as yet hath no issue, 1618. Et portoit, per pale d'azur & de gueulles, au trois lyons rampant d'ar∣gent, à vn bordur gobonny d'or & de gueulles.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Rutland, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. EDward Plantagenet, Son and heyre of Edmond of Lang∣ley Duke of Yorke, fift sonne of King Edward the third; was in the life time of his Father, at a Parliament helde at London, the 14. of King Richard the second, created Earle of Rutland, and of Corke in Ireland. And in the 21. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he was created Duke of Albemarle; from which, in the first yeare of King Henry the fourth, hee was by Parliament deposed. Notwithstanding, after the death of his Father, 1401. he was Duke of Yorke, Lord high Constable and Admirall of England, Lord of Tyndall, and Knight of the Garter. He married (at Fotheringhay in Nor∣thamptonshire) Philip, third daughter and co-heyre of Iohn de Mohun, Lord of Dunster Castle in Somersetshire, by whom he had no issue. He was after slaine at the battaile of Agin Court-Field, the third of King Henry the fift, 1415. and was buried at Fotheringhay, leauing Richard his brother to succeed him. Et portoit, France semee escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent brifé de neuf torteaux. RIchard Plantagenet, sonne and heyre of Richard Conings∣borough Earle of Cambridge, second brother of Edward aforesaid, after the death of his Vnkle Edward without issue, was restored to be Duke of Yorke, Earle of Cambridge and Rutland, and Lord of Tyndall, in the fourth yeare of King Henry the sixt; he was also Earle of March and Vlster, Lord of Wigmore and Clare, in right of Anne his Mother, sister & heyre of Edmond Mortimer Earle of March, &c. He married Cecily, youngest daughter of Raphe Neuill, first Earle of West∣merland, by whom he had issue, (as in the title of Yorke) Hee was slaine at the battaile of Wakefield, by Queene Margaret, in the 38. yeare of King Henry the sixt, and was buried at Fotheringhay in Nor∣thamptonshire. Et portoit, France semee, escartellé d'engleterre, au bordur d'argent charge de ly∣ons rampant purpre.
EDmond Plantagenet sonne and heyre of Richard Duke of Yorke aforesaid, was the third Earle of Rutland in the life time of his Father; who being with his saide Father at the battaile of Wakefield, 1460. the 39. of king Henry the 6. and but 12. yeares olde, fell downe vpon his knees desiring mer∣cy; was cruelly stabbed to the heart, by Iohn Lord Clifford of Westmerland, who did sweare, that (by that acte) he would be reuenged for Thomas his Fathers death. After he was thus murdered, he was first buried at Pomfret, and from thence remoued, and brought to Fotheringhay Castle, & there buried by his Father. Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell de cinque points d'argent, chargeé à deux 2 lyons gueulles & neuf torteaux. Escartelle à vec Vlster & Mortymer. THomas Mannors, Knight of the Garter, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir, and Trusbut, (sonne and heyre of George Mannors Lord Ros, and Anne his wife, daughter and heyre of Sir Thomas S. Leoger knight, and Anne Dutchesse of Excester his wife; which Anne was sister of king Edward the fourth) was created Earle of Rutland by king Henry the 8. at his Pallace of Bridewell in London, by Letters Patents, bea∣ring date the 18. of Iune, the 17. of the saide Kings Reigne. King Henry the 8. did also augment vnto his ancient Armes, (in regard that he was descended of the sister of King Ed∣ward the fourth) gold, two barres azure; a chiefe quarterly a∣zur and gueulles; on the first two Flour-de-lucesgold; in the second, a lyon passant gardant of the first, the third as the second, the fourth as the first. He married Elianor, daughter of Sir William Paston of Norfolke knight, by whom he had issue, fiue sonnes and sixe daughters; Henry Mannors the eldest sonne, was after his Father, Earle of Rutland; Sir Iohn Mannors knight; Sir Ro∣ger Mannors knight; Sir Thomas Mannors knight; and Oliuer was the fift Son. Gertrude, married to George Talbot, sixt Earle of Shrewsbury; Anne, married to Henry Neuill, fift Earle of Westmerland; Frances, wife to Henry Neuill, Lord of Aburgauenny, and Mother to the Lady Vane of Kent; Katherine, wife to Henry Capell Esquire; Elizabeth, married to Sir Iohn Sauage knight; and Isabell the sixt daughter dyed young. This Thomas, dyed in the 35. yeare of king Henry the eight, and lyeth buried at Bosworth in Leicestershire.
HEnry Mannors, Knight of the Garter, (sonne and heyre of Thomas aforesaid) was the second Earle of Rutland of this Family, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and Trusbut; He married two wiues; the first was Margaret, daughter of Raphe Neuill, fourth Earle of Westmerland, by whom he had issue, Edward Mannors, third Earle of Rutland of this Family; and Iohn the fourth Earle of Rutland; and a daughter named E∣lizabeth, who was married to Sir William Courtney of Powder∣ham knight, Elianor married to Iohn Bourchier Earle of Bath. His second wife was Bridget, daughter of Iohn Lord Hussy of Lincolnshire, the widdow of Sir Richard Morison knight, but by her had no issue; she was after married to Francis Russell Earle of Bedford. He dyed in the fift yeare of Queene Elizabeth, and was buried at Botesworth, 1563. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. EDward Mannors, Knight of the Garter, (sonne and heire of Henry) was after the death of his Father, the third Earle of Rutland of this Family, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Bel∣uoir and Trusbut, and cheefe Commissioner, appointed by Queene Elizabeth, to continue the league betweene her and Iames the sixt, King of Scotland, (now our most dread and Soueraigne Lord and King, 1618.) there being ioyned with him, the Lord Euers, Thomas Randolph Esquire, and others. He married Isabell, daughter of Sir Thomas Holcroft, of the Vale Royall in Cheshire knight, by whom he had issue, one onely daughter and heyre named Elizabeth, married to Wil∣liam Cecill Lord Burghley, sonne and heyre of Thomas Earle of Excester, by whom he had issue, William Lord Ros, that died beyond the seas in Italy, without issue, 1618. This Edward dyed in the 29. yeare of the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth, and lyeth buried at Botesworth. Et portoit, d'or, deux burelles d'azur, au chef escartelle d'azur & de gueulles, en le premier deux fleur-de-lizes d'or, à la second au lyon passant gardant d'or. IOhn Mannors, (brother and heyre male of Edward afore∣said) was the fourth Earle of Rutland of that Family, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and Trusbut; and married Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Charlton, of Apley in Shropshire, by whō he had issue, Edward that dyed an Infant; Roger, that was Earle of Rutland; Francis, Earle of Rutland; Sir George Man∣nors Knight, and Oliuer; Bridget, wife to Sir Robert Tirwhit of Lincolnshire Knight; Frances, married to William Lord Willoughby of Parham; Elizabeth, married to Emanuell Lord Scroope of Bolton. This Iohn dyed in the yeare, 1587. Et portoit, les armes de son frere.
ROger Mannors, sonne and heyre of Iohn aforesaide, was after the death of his Father, the fift Earle of Rutland, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and Trusbut; and married E∣lizabeth, daughter and heyre of that worthy and renowned Sir Philip Sidney knight, slaine at Zutphen in Gelderland, the 17. of October, 1586. and dyed without issue, in the yeare, 1600. leauing Francis Mannors his brother, to succeed him. Et portoit, d'or à deux burelles d'azur, au chef escartelle d'azur & de gueulles, en la premier deux fleur de-liz d'or, à la second au leopard pas∣sant d'or. FRancis Mannors, second sonne of Iohn Earle of Rutland, and brother and heyre of Roger, the fift Earle of Rutland of this Family; was the sixt Earle of Rutland, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and Trusbut, and Knight of the Noble Or∣der of the Garter, 1618. He married two wiues, the first was Mary, daughter and one of the co-heyres of Sir Henry Kny∣uet of the West Country, and had issue, Katherine. His second wife is Cecily, daughter of Sir Iohn Tufton knight, (and wid∣dow of Edward Hungerford) by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Ros that dyed a childe, and Francis Lord Ros of Hame∣lake, now liuing, 1618. Et portoit, d'or à deux burelles d'azur, au chef escartelle d'azur & de gueulles, en la premier deux fleur-de-liz d'or, à la second au leopard passant d'or.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles Riuers, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RIchard Widdeuill, Baron of Wimington, married Iaquet, daughter of Peter of Luxenburgh, Earle of S. Paul, the widdow of Iohn Duke of Bedford, Regent of France; for which marriage, he was fined to pay to King Henry the sixt, the summe of one thousand pounds, because hee did the same without the said Kings priuity and consent; yet after∣wards obtayning the said Kings fauour, he was elect Knight of the Garter, the 4. of August, and enstalled the 30. of Octo∣ber, Anno, 28. of Henry the sixt; and on the 26. of May, the 4. of King Edward the fourth, he was created Earle Riuers, & made high Constable of England. He had issue by the saide Iaquet, seuen Sons and sixe daughters, viz. Anthony Widdeuill, Earle Riuers after his Father; Lewis dyed young; Iohn dyed young also; Iohn the fourth sonne, was slaine with his Father at Edgcote-field; Lyonell fift sonne, was Bishop of Sa∣lisbury, (and Father to Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, by his Concu∣bine) Edward sixt sonne; Richard the seuenth sonne, was Earle Riuers after An∣thony his elder brother: Elizabeth the eldest daughter, was first married to Sir Iohn Grey of Groby knight; and after to King Edward the fourth; Margaret was married to Thomas Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell; Anne the third daughter, was first married to William Bourchier, sonne of Henry Earle of Essex; and after to George Grey Earle of Kent; and thirdly, to Sir Edward Wingfield knight; Iaquet was married to Iohn Lord Strange of Knocking; Mary, was wife to William, Her∣bert Earle of Huntington; and Katherine the sixt daughter, was first married to Henry Stafford, second Duke of Buckingham; and after to Iasper of Hatfield, D. of Bedford. This Richard, with Iohn his sonne, were taken out of the Mannour of Grafton, by Robin of Riddesdale, Captaine of the lewd people of Northamp∣tonshire, and catried to Northampton, and there beheaded, without any Legall proceeding, in the yeare, 1469. Et portoit, d'argent, à la facé & quanton de gueulles.
ANthony Wideuile, was after the death of Richard his Fa∣ther, Earle Riuers and Lord Scales, in right of his wife E∣lizabeth, daughter and heyre of Thomas Lord Scales, of Nu∣cels in Hartfordshire. He was made Knight of the Garter, in the fift yeare of King Edward the fourth; and in the first yeare of King Edward the fift, by the procurement of Ri∣chard Duke of Glocester (then Lord Protectour) was sent to Pomfret, & there beheaded, without any iust or lawfull cause laid against him) the 13. of Iune, 1483. This Anthony had issue onely a base daughter named Margaret, who was mar∣ried to Sir Robert Poynes knight. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. RIchard Wideuile, after the death of Anthony his brother, without lawfull issue, was Earle Riuers, Lord Scales of Nucels, and Grafton, and dyed without issue, in the seuenth yeare of King Henry the seuenth; leauing his sixe sisters his heyres, who were married as aforesaid. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Shrewsbury, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. ROger de Montegummery, Earle of Belismo in Normandy, sonne of Hugh de Montegummery, & of Sibell his wife, fift daughter of Herfastus the Dane, (brother of Gonora wife to Richard the first Duke of Normandy of that Name) came into England with William the Conquerour, who gaue him the Earledomes of Shrewsbury and Arundell. He marri∣ed Maberia, daughter of William Taluaise, and sister & heyre of Arnold de Belismo, and had issue, fiue sonnes and foure daughters, (as William Gemiticensis hath) Hugh Earle of Shrewsbury, slaine at Anglesey in Wales, 1097, without issue; Robert was also Earle of Shrewsbury and Arundell; Roger the third sonne, was Earle of Poitow, and Lord of the Honor
of Lancaster in England, by the guift of William Ruphus; Philip the fourth sonne, and Arnold the fift sonne was Castle-keeper of Penbroke, who with his Brother Robert, was banished England. The foure daughters were, Emma; Matild, marri∣ed to Robert Earle of Moretaigne; Mabill the third daughter; and Sibill was the fourth daughter, who was married to Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord of Glamorgan, Founder of Tewkesbury Abbey in England, and Lord of Torigney in Normandy. This Roger was left by William Conqueror, to be Gouernor to his sonne William Ruphus, and was slaine at Caerdiffe in South-Wales, and buried at Shrewsbury, in the Abbey which before he had founded. HVgh de Montegummery, (sonne of Roger aforesaide) was after the death of his Father, Earle of Shrewsbury and Arundell. He, with Hugh Earle of Chester, tooke the Isle of Man by force and strong hand, 1098. At which time, Magnus King of Norway, and grandchilde to Olaue, after he had ioy∣ned to his Empire, the Islands of Orcades and Menauia; came with a few Ships to the Isle of Man; whom this Hugh being willing to resist on the shore, was stricken in the right eye with an Arrow, of which hurt, the eight day after, hee dyed without issue, and was buried by his Father, in the Abbey of Shrewsbury. Vpon whose Toomb, (M. Milles saith) his Por∣traiture is made of stone, with his legs acrosse, (as in olde times was vsed) and vpon his Shield Azure, a lyon rampant gold, with a border, as before is specified in the Title of Earles of Arundell. RObert de Montegummery, second sonne of Roger afore∣said, and brother and heyre of Hugh, was the third Earle of Shrewsbury and Arundell, and married the daughter and heyre of Guy Earle of Pontiue in Normandy. He was a man very outragiously giuen, and most cruell to his owne Chil∣dren and Hostages, whose eyes (with his owne hands) hee plucked out. Hee helde and fortified the Castles of Shrewsbury, Arundell, Tickhill, Bruge, and Carrocoue in Eng∣land, against king Henry the first, which after was his vndo∣ing. For thereupon the King proclaimed him Traitor, and shortly after, all his Townes and Castles being yeelded vp vnto the said King, he was banished England, with his Bro∣ther Arnold, in the yeare, 1103. the fourth yeare of the said Kings Reigne. But afterward this Robert, with Robert Duke of Normandy, the Kings eldest brother, were taken prisoners at the Battaile of Tenarsbray, and were brought into Eng∣land, where they had both their eyes put out, and kept prisoners in the Castle of
Caerdiffe in South-Wales, where they miserably ended their dayes. This Robert had issue, William sur-named Taluaise Earle of Sage, who married Ela, daughter of Hely, brother of Geffrey Earle of Aniou, widdow of the Duke of Burgundy: Iohn his second sonne, had all his Lands in Normandy and Mayne: his eldest daughter married Iuhell, sonne of Walter de Meduana; and Ela was first married to William, the third Earle Warren in England; and after to Patricke Earle of Sa∣lisbury. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. IOhn Lord Talbot, Strange of Blakmer, Furniuall & Verdon, Gouernor of Anioye and Mayne, (sonne of Richard Talbot, Baron Talbot of Castle Goderic, and brother and heyre male of Gilbert Lord Talbot) was created Earle of Shrewsbury by Letters Patents, bearing date at Windsore, the 20. day of May, in the 19. yeare of king Henry the sixt. And by another Letters Patents, dated at Westminster, the 17. of Iuly, the 24. of king Henry the sixt, he was made Earle of Wshford, & Steward of England, and after Marshall of France; and be∣ing sent to succour them of Burdeaux, tooke the Towne, and placed therein a Garrison; and proceeding further into the Country, to releeue the Towne of Castellon in Aquitaine, which the English had recouered; (the French hauing on all sides begirt the same) at which time, a great battaile being then fought, this Iohn was with the shot of a Piece there slaine, the 7. of Iuly, 1453. the 32. of King Henry the sixt. He married two wiues, the first was Mauld, daughter and onely heyre of Tho∣mas Neuill, Lord Furniuall, by whom he had issue, Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrews∣bury; Sir Christopher Talbot, and Sir Humfrey Talbot knights. His second wife was Margaret, eldest daughter and co heyre of Richard Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke, by whom he had issue, Iohn Talbot Viscount Lisle, vnto whom his Fa∣ther gaue the Lordship of Panswike, Whaddon, Morton, Wotton, Schirborne, Polycot, and other Lands in Shropshire; Sir Humfrey Tablot knight, slaine in Mont-Sinay; Elizabeth, wife to Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke; and Elianor married to Thomas Butler, of Sudely Castle in Glocestershire. This Iohn being slaine as aforesaid, with Iohn Viscount Lisle his sonne, his body was buried in a Toombe at Roane in Normandy, whereon this Epitaphe is written. Heere lyeth the right Noble Knight, Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, Earle of Weshford, Waterford and Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodrich and Orchenfield, Lord Strange of Blakmer, Lord Verdon of Acton, Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Louetofte of Worsop, Lord Furniuall of Sheffeild, Lord Faulconbridge, Knight of the Noble Order of S. George, S. Michaell, and the golden Fleece, great Marshall to King Henry the sixt, of his Realme of France, who died in the Battaile of Burdeaux, 1453. Hoc bare for his
Armes, Gueulles au lyon rampant d'or, à labordure endenté de mesme. Which Armes were Rice ap Griffiths, Prince of South-Wales, whose daughter named Wentlian, was married to Gilbert Talbot (in King Henry the thirds time) Aunce∣stor of this Iohn. IOhn Talbot, second Earle of Shrewsbury of that Name and Family, was after the death of Iohn his Father, also Lord Talbot, Strange of Blakmer, Furniuall, Verdon, and Knight of the Garter. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Iames Butler, Earle of Ormond in Ireland, and had issue, Iohn Talbot the third Earle of Shrewsbury; Sir Iames Talbot knight, who dy∣ed the 11. of King Edward the fourth; Sir Gilbert Talbot of Grafton, knight Banneret, and Captaine of Callis third Son; Christopher Talbot fourth sonne, was Arch-Deacon of Che∣ster; & George was the fift Son; Anne the eldest daughter, was married to Sir Henry Vernon of the Peake in Derbyshire; and Margaret was the second daughter. This Iohn was slaine in a battaile at Northampton the tenth of Iuly, 1460. the 39. yeare of King Henry the sixt, whose part he tooke, (and in which battaile the said King himselfe was ta∣ken prisoner) and was after buried in the Priory at Worsop. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. IOhn Talbot, sonne and heyre of Iohn the second, was after the death of his Father, the third Earle of Shrewsbury, Wesh∣ford and Waterford, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakmer, and married Katherine, daughter of Hum∣frey Stafford Duke of Buckingham, Earle Stafford, Hereford, and Northampton, by whom he had issue, George Talbot the fourth Earle of Shrewsbury; and Thomas that dyed with∣out issue; Anne a daughter, was married to Thomas Butler the last Baron of Sudley, who dyed without issue. This Iohn dy∣ed at Couentry, in the yeare of our Lord, 1473. the 4. kalends of Iuly; and his body was buried in our Lady Chappell at Worsop. Et portoit, de gueulles au lyon rampant d'or, à la bordure endent de mesme.
GEorge Talbot, the fourth Earle of Shrewsbury, vpon whose Toombe at Sheffield, he is stiled Earle of Shrews∣bury, Weshford and Waterford, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakmer, and Knight of the honourable Or∣der of the Garter. This George, being but twenty yeares of age, was at the battaile of Stoke, where hee fought manfully, in the behalfe of King Henry the seuenth, who made him Knight of the Order of the Garter; and after he was made Steward of the house to King Henry the eight, and Generall of the Army at the siedge of Turwin. 1513. He married two wiues, the first was Anne, daughter of William Lord Hastings, Chamberlaine to king Edward the fourth, by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Talbot, that dyed without issue, and was buried at Calke Priory; Francis Lord Talbot, and Earle of Shrewsbury after his Father; Iohn, and Iohn, both borne, & buried at Ashby de la Zouche; William Talbot fift sonne, borne at Sheffield; Ri∣chard Talbot sixt sonne, borne at Chelsey: and fiue daughters; Margaret, married to Henry Clifford Earle of Cumberland; Anne and Dorothy, both borne at Wing∣field; Mary, wife to Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland; and Elizabeth the fift daughter, was married vnto William Lord Dacres of Gillesland. This Georges second wife, was Elizabeth, daughter and one of the heyres of Richard Walden, of Erith in Kent knight; of whom he begot Iohn, that dyed young, and Anne, married to Peter Compton, sonne and heyre of Sir William Compton knight; and after to William Herbert Earle of Penbroke. This George dyed at Wingfield, the 26. of Iuly, 1538. and was honourably buried by his first wife, at Sheffield. Et portoit, de gueulles au lyon rampant d'or, à la bordure endenté de meme. FRancis Talbot, sonne and heyre of George, was borne in the Castle of Sheffield, in the yeare, 1500. the 16. of king Hen∣ry the seuenth, and was the fift Earle of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakemer, & knight of the Garter. He married two wiues, the first was Mary, daughter of Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland, by whom he had issue, George Lord Talbot, and sixt Earle of Shrewsbury; Thomas Talbot that dyed at Sheffield without issue, the 25. of king Henry the eight; and Anne, first married to Iohn Lord Bray, and after to Thomas Lord Wharton, and dyed without issue. His second wife was Grace, daughter of Robert Shacker∣ley of Derbishire Esquire. He dyed the 21. of September, the second of Queene Elizabeth, and was buried at Sheffield, in the yeare, 159. Et portoit, les armoities de son pere.
GEorge Talbot, sixt Earle of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot, Fur∣niuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakmer, sonne and heyre of Francis aforesaid, was made Knight of the Garter, in the third yeare of Queene Elizabeth; and at the arraign∣ment of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, Lord Steward of England, and presently after Earle Marshall of England. He married two wiues, the first was Gertrude, daughter of Tho∣mas Mannors Earle of Rutland, by whom he had issue, Fran∣cis Lord Talbot, that dyed before his Father without issue; Gilbert second sonne, was after his Father, Earle of Shrews∣bury, and dyed without issue male; Edward the third sonne, was after his Brother Gilbert, also Earle of Shrewsbury, and dyed without issue; Henry Talbot the fourth sonne. Katherine Talbot the eldest daughter, was married to Henry Lord Herbert, after Earle of Penbroke, but had no issue; Mary the second daughter, was married to George Sauell, sonne of Hen∣ry Sauell of Barraby in Lincolnshire; and Grace the third daughter, was married to Sir Henry Cauendish knight, sonne and heyre of William Cauendish of Chattes∣worth knight. This George his second wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Iohn Hard∣wike, of Hardwike in Derbishire Esquire, by whom he had no issue. He dyed on Wednesday, the 18. of Nouember, in the Castle of Sheffield, and was buried the 13. of Ianuary, at Sheffield, 1590. Et portoit, de gueulles, au lyon rampant d'or, à la bordure endente de me sme. GIlbert Talbot, the seuenth Earle of Shrewsbury of this Fa∣mily, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakmer, succeeded his Father George, and married Mary, daughter of Sir William Cauendish of Chatsworth, and had issue, three daughters his heyres; Mary the eldest, was mar∣ried to William Lord Herbert of Caerdiffe in Wales, and Earle of Penbroke; Elizabeth, married to Sir Henry Grey Lord of Ruthin, sonne and heyre of Charles now Earle of Kent, 1618. Alithea the third daughter, was married to Thomas Howard, now Earle of Arundell, 1618. This Gilbert dyed at his house in Broad-streete in London, and was conuayed to Sheffield, & there most honourably buried, being Knight and Companion of the Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Maiesties most honourable priuy Counsell, 1618. Et portoit, les armes de son pere.
EDward Talbot, second sonne of George, and brother and heyre male of Gilbert aforesaid, was the eight Earle of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blackmer. He married Ioane, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Cuthbert Lord Ogle, by whom he left no issue. Hee dyed in London, and his body was priuately buried at Westminster, 1618. GEorge Talbot, sonne and heyre of Iohn Talbot of Grafton Esquire, by Ratherine his wife, daughter of Sir William Peter, of Ingerston in Essex Knight, heyre male of Sir Gilbert Talbot of Grafton, knight of the Garter and Bannaret, second sonne of Iohn Lord Talbot, second Earle of Shrewsbury; after the death of Gilbert and Edward, Earles of Shrewsbury afore∣said, without issue male; was by King Iames, 1618. admitted the ninth Earle of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Ver∣don, and Strange of Blackmer. Et portoit, de gueulles u lyon rampant d'or à la bordure endente de mesme. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Salisbury, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. PAtricke de Eureux, (sonne of Walter de Eureux, Earle of Rosemer, and Sibill his wife, Founders of the Monastery of Bradenstoke, 1093.) was Steward of the house to Mauld the Empresse, by whose meanes the Earledome of Salisbury was confirmed vnto him, in the 28. yeare of king Henry the second. He married Ela, the widdow of William, the third Earle Warren and Surrey, daughter of William Taluaise, Earle of Pontine, grand-childe to Roger Mountgomery, by his sonne Robert de Mountgomery Earle of Shrewsbury, by whō he had issue, William Fitz-Patricke Earle of Salisbury and Ro∣semer,
Patricke and Philip, Cannons at Bradenstock. This Patricke was a Witnesse to the Charter of pacification of the troubles betweene King Stephen, and Hen∣ry Duke of Normandy, 1152, and after was slaine in Aquitaine, by Guy de Lusig∣nan, in comming as a Pilgrim from S. Iames de Compostella, and as the Priory Booke of Lacok hath, the 6. Kalend of Aprill, 1168, and was buried at S. Hilla∣ries, the 15. of king Henry the second; (Doctor Powell in his description of Wales, Fol. 154, saith, that about the yeare, 1094. Roger Montgomery, William Fitz-Eu∣stace, and Arnold Harecourt, were slaine neere Caerdiffe in Wales; and Walter de Eureux Earle of Salisbury, and Hugh Gurney were hurt, and after dyed in Nor∣mandy) Which Walter was Father of this Patricke, which M. Camden denyeth to be Earle. Et portoit, d'azur six lyons rampant d'or, 3, 2, 1. armé & lampasse de gueulle. VVIlliam de Eureux, sonne and heyre of Patricke, was the next Earle of Salisbury and Rosemer after his Father. He married Eleanor, daughter of Tirell de Mainers, by whom he had issue, two daughters his heyres; Ella the el∣dest, was married to William sur-named Longspee, base sonne of king Henry the second, begotten of the faire Lady Rosa∣mond Clifford; Mabell the second daughter, was married to Lord Nigell de Mowbray, with the Mannour of Banested in Surrey. This William (as Lacok Priory Booke hath) dyed the 15. Kalend of May, in the yeare, 1196. and was buried at Bradenstoke. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. VVIlliam sur named Longspee, (by reason of a long Sword which he vsed) base sonne of king Henry the second, (begotten of the fayre Lady Rosamond Clifford, his Concubine) was Earle of Rosemer, & by king Richard the first his halfe brother, was created Earle of Salisbury. This William Longspee, was the last that writ in their Stiles, Earles of Rosemer; for after that Philip King of France had gotten Normandy, Guyan, Poictiers, and Britaine, about the 6. yeare of king Iohn; all such Noblemen of England, as had eyther Earledomes or Baronnies in those Countries, left to write or entitle themselues of the same. Hee married Ella, eldest daughter and co-heyre of William Fitz-Patricke, Earle of Salisbury aforesaid, & had issue, William Longspee, from whom king Henry the third did take both the
title of Earle, as also the Castle of Salisbury, and who after dyed in a battaile a∣gainst the Infidels, in the yeare 1250. Stephen Longspee Chiefe-Iustice of Ireland, second sonne, (vnto whom William his Brother gaue the Mannor of Wamberge. This Stephen had to wife, Emmelyne Countesse of Vlster, daughter and heyre of Walter Ridelesford, Baron of Bray in Ireland. Nicholas Longspee the third sonne, was Bishop of Salisbury, and dyed, 1296. Richard Longspee was a Cannon at Bradenstoke: Isabell the eldest daughter, was married to William Lord Vescy; Ella, married to Thomas, sixt Earle of Warwicke; and after to Philip Lord Basset; and Idona the third daughter, was married to William Beauchampe Baron of Bedford. This William Earle of Salisbury, was Constable of Douer-Castle, and sayling with Richard Earle of Cornwall his Nephew, and Philip de Albeney into Gas∣coigne, the tenth of Henry the third, recouered Poictiers, which before was lost by king Iohn; and in their return againe into England, hardly escaped shipwrack, being strangely cast vpon the Cornish shores, and dyed in the same yeare 1226. and lyeth buried in the Cathedrall Church at Salisbury, in a faire Toomb. After whose death, Ella his Wife and Countesse, professed her selfe a Nunne, in the re∣ligious house at Lacok in Wiltshire, which was of her Foundation, and was the first Abbesse thereof. Afterward she forsooke her Abbatesse, in the yeare 1257. and dyed in the yeare 1261. This William lyeth buried with these Armes vp∣pon his shield, D'azur six lyons rampant d'or, 3,2,1. which were the Armes of William Fitz-Patricke, his wiues Father. WIlliam Lord Montacute, (Son of Simon Monte-acute, Baron of Shipton Monte-acute) was created Earle of Salisbury, in the  yeare of king Edward the third, and had giuen him the Castle and Barony of Denbigh; and in the 17. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he was crowned King of the Isle of Man, and had giuen to him and his heyres, a thousand Markes land by the yeare, (for taking of Roger Lord Morti∣mer prisoner, at Nottingham Castle, who had beene too fami∣liar with the kings Mother.) This William, when king Ed∣ward the third went to clayme his right to the Crowne of France, against Philip de Valois, 1138, was taken prisoner, and carried to Paris, and after ransomed by the exchange of the Earle of Morret, who was then prisoner in England. At this expedition, king Ed∣ward prayed the ayde of the Flemings, who excused themselues, by an oath and bond of a Million of gold, which they had taken and made, in the Popes Cham∣ber, that they should alwayes helpe and ayde the King of France, & fight vnder his Standard & Arms; whereupon, by the aduice of Iaques D' Artiuille of Gaunt, king Edward did quarter the Armes of France before his owne of England, and proclaimed himselfe King of France, by reason whereof, the Flemings helde themselues discharged both of oath and bond, and so did ayde and helpe king Edward. This William married Katherine, daughter and one of the co∣heyres
of William Lord Grantson, a Burgonyan borne, and a great Baron in Eng∣land; by whom he had issue, two sonnes and foure daughters; William the eldest, was after his Father, Earle of Salisbury; Sir Iohn Montague knight, married Margaret, daughter and heyre of Sir Thomas Mounthermer knight, (sonne of Raphe Mounthermer Earle of Glocester) and dyed before his brother William, in the 13. yeare of king Richard the second. Sibill the eldest daughter, was married to Edmond Earle of Arundell, for his third wife: Philip the second daughter, was married to Roger Mortimer Earle of March; Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Gyles Lord Badelismer, and dyed without issue; Agnes the 4. daugh∣ter. This William founded the Abbey of Bristlesham Montague, and dyed at a Iusts and Turney at Windsore, in the yeare, 1343, and was buried in the White-Fryers in London. Et portoit, d'argent au trois Lozengies en face de gueulles. VVIlliam Lord Mountacute (sonne and heyre of Willi∣am Earle of Salisbury aforesaid) after the death of his Father, was the second Earle of Salisbury, Lord of Den∣bigh, and of the Isle of Man, of that name; which honour of Denbigh, was recouered from him, by Edmond Mortimer Earle of March. He was one of the Founders of the Noble Order of the Garter, and Gouernor of Callis, vnder king Ri∣chard the second, 1380. He solde the Isle of Man, to William Lord Scroope, Treasurer of England, and Earle of Wiltshire; who being after beheaded, king Henry the fourth, gaue the Isle of Man, to Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, to hold of him and his Successors, kings of England, by the seruice of bearing the sword at the Coronation. He married Elizabeth, daughter and one of the co-heyres of Iohn Lord Mohun, of Dunster Castle in Somersetshire, and had issue, William his onely sonne & heire, slaine at Tilt at Windsore, by Wil∣liam his Father, the 6. of Richard the second. This William the Father, dyed in the 20. yeare of king Richard the second, leauing Iohn his Nephew (sonne of Iohn his Brother) to succeed him, 1396. Et portoit, les armes de son sonperè. IOhn Mountacute Knight, sonne & heyre of Sir Iohn Moun∣tacute knight, and Nephew and heyre of William Earle of Salisbury his Vnkle, was the third EArle of Salisbury of that name, and was one of the Noblemen which conspired the death of king Henry the fourth, at a Iusts held at Oxford; but beeing disclosed, diuers of them were put to death; and this Iohn and Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, flying vnto Circester, were by the rude Townes-men there, brought into the Market-place, and there had their heads smitten off, the first yeare of King Henry the fourth. He
married Mauld, daughter and heyre of Sir Adam Francis of London, knight, and widdow of Sir Alan Boxhull knight, Lieutenant of the Tower, and had issue, Thomas Mountacute Earle of Salisbury, and Richard that dyed without issue, & three daughters; Anne the eldest, was first married to Sir Richard Hanckford, af∣ter to Sir Iohn Fitz-Lewis knight; and thirdly, to Iohn Holland Earle of Hun∣tington, and Duke of Excester; Margaret the second daughter, was married to William Lord Ferrars of Groby; and Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Robert Lord Willoughby of Eresbie. Et portoit, d'argent, au trois Lozengies en face de gueulles. THomas Montacute, Son of Iohn Earle of Salisbury, slaine by the Commons at Circester, was restored to be Earle of Salisbury, in the tenth yeare of king Henry the fourth; and after in the sixt yeare of king Henry the sixt, hee was made Knight of the Garter; and in the yeare, 1423. he raised the siedge of Crauant in Burgoigne, where he, with the losse of 21. hundred men, slew eight thousand of the enemies. After he was substituted Vice-Regent of the Countries of France, Bry and Champaigne, and Sir Iohn Fastoffe Deputy in the Dutchy of Normandy. And in the sixt yeare of king Henry the sixt, he, with William de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, and Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, besiedged the Citty of Orliance in France, where he and Sir Thomas Gargraue knight, looking out of a high Win∣dow, in a Tower at the Bridge ende, to view the Towne, was shot with a Bul∣let from the enemy, which brake the Window, and droue the shiuers thereof in∣to his Face and Head; vpon which wound, hee dyed within eight dayes after. Whose body being brought into England, was honourably buried by his Aun∣cestors, at Bisham Abbey in Barkshire, 1428. He married Eleonor, daughter of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, and sister and one of the heyres of Edmond Earle of Kent; and had issue, one onely daughter and heyre named Alice, married to Richard Neuill, a younger sonne of Raphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland. This Thomas had a base sonne named Iohn. Et portoit, d'argent, au trois Louzengies en face de gueulles.
RIchard Neuill, third sonne of Raphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland, (by Ioane his second wife, daughter of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) was made Earle of Salisbury, after the death of Thomas Montague his wiues Father, and Knight of the Garter, in the 15. yeare of king Henry the sixt, and Lord Chancellor, in the 32. yeare of the said kings reign. He tooke part with Richard Duke of Yorke, against king Hen∣ry the sixt, and was taken prisoner by Queene Margaret, at the battaile of Wakefield, and beheaded at Pomfret, and his head sent vpon the ende of a Speare to Yorke: in which bat∣taile, was Richard Duke of Yorke also slaine, 1460. This Ri∣chard Neuill, married Eleanor, daughter and heyre of Thomas Montague Earle of Salisbury, and had issue, foure sonnes and sixe daughters; Richard the eldest sonne, was after restored and made Earle of Salisbury, and af∣ter Earle of Warwicke; Iohn the second sonne, was created Marquesse Moun∣tague; Thomas the third sonne, married the widdow of the Lord Willoughby, and dyed without issue; George the fourth sonne, was Arch-bishop of Yorke, and Lord Chancellor of England. Ioane the eldest daughter, was married to Willi∣am Pitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell; Cecily the second daughter, was married vnto Henry Beauchamp Duke of Warwicke; Alice the third daughter, was married to Henry Lord Fitz-Hugh, Baron of Rauenswath; Eleanor the fourth daughter, was married to Thomas Stanley, first Earle of Derby of that name; Katherine the fift daughter, was wife to William Bonuill Lord Harington; and Margaret the sixt daughter, was married to Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford. This Richards body, was first buried in the Priory at Pontfret, and after remoued to Bisham Abbey, neere Windesore in Barkshire. Et portoit, gueulles au Saukeur d'argent, au lambell gobonne d'argent & d'azur. RIchard Neuill, sonne and heyre of Richard Neuill Earle of Salisbury aforesaid, was restored to be Earle of Salis∣bury; and in right of his wife, he was Earle of Warwicke; he was also great Chamberlaine and high Admiral of England, Lord Warden of the North Marches toward Scotland, and of the Cinque-Ports, Captaine of Callis, high Steward of the Dutchy of Lancaster, and knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. This famous and great Earle of Warwicke, did set vp and pull downe Kings at his pleasure. First he set vp king Ed∣ward the 4. and put downe king Henry the 6. and after some breach and vnkindnes between them, this Richard took Hen∣ry the 6. out of prison, where he had bin ten yeares, and placed him againe in his Regall Throne, forcing Edward to flye into Flanders, to seeke ayde of the D. of Burgundy his brother in law. But Edward returning againe, did encounter with this great Earle, & his brother Iohn Marquesse Montacute, at Barnet field, where they were both slain, in the year, 1471. This Earle Rich. married Anne, daughter
of Richard Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, and sister and heyre of Henry Duke of Warwicke, by whom he had issue, two daughters his heyres; Isabell the eldest, was married to George Plantagenet Duke of Clarence; and Anne the second daughter, was first married to Prince Edward, and after to Richard Duke of Glocester, after king, by the name of Richard the third. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. GEorge Plantagenet, borne at Dublin in Ireland, third sonne of Richard Duke of Yorke, and brother of king Edward the fourth, was created Duke of Clarence, in the yeare, 1461. And by Letters Patents dated at Westminster, the twenty fiue of March, the 12. of King Edward the fourth, he was created Earle of Salisbury and Warwicke. This George married Isa∣bell, sister and co-heyre of Henry Duke of Warwicke, and had issue, Edward Earle of Warwicke, who from his childe-hoode was kept in the Tower of London, and in the ende beheaded by king Henry the seuenth, leauing no issue; and Margaret, the daughter of the said George, married Sir Richard Pole knight, and was beheaded after her brother, in the 33. yeare of king Henry the eight. This George was secretly murdered in the Tower of London, in the yeare, 1477 and was buried at Tuekesbury. Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent au trois cantons de gueulles. EDward, onely sonne of King Richard the third, & Queen Anne his wife, was borne in the Castle of Middleham, neere Richmond, in the County of Yorke, 1473, who beeing not foure yeares of age, was created Earle of Salisbury, the 17. yeare of the Reigne of king Edward the fourth. And on the twenty foure day of August, 1483, he being then about ten yeares olde, was by his Father created Prince of Wales, and dyed before his Father. Et portoit, les armes d'engleterre au lambell d'argent.
MArgaret Plantagenet, daughter of George Duke of Cla∣rence, and sister and heyre of Edward Earle of Warwick, beheaded as aforesaid, was created Countesse of Salisbury, by king Henry the eight, in the fift yeare of his Reigne, and in the 31. yeare of the said kings Reigne, shee was attainted by Parliament, of high treason, together with Gertrude, wife of Henry Courtney, Marquesse of Excester, Reginald Pole her sonne, Sir Adrian Fortescue and others; and after was be∣headed in the Tower of London, the 33. of king Henry the 8. She was married to Sir Richard Pole knight, (borne in Wales) & had issue, Henry Pole Lord Mountague beheaded; Reginald Pole Cardinall; Geffrey Pole third sonne; Arthur Pole fourth sonne; and Vrsula, married to Henry Lord Siafford, sonne and heyre of Edward Duke of Buckingham. Et portoit, France & d'englere tre escartelle au lambell d'ermyn trois cantons de gueulles. RObert Cecill knight, (second sonne of William Cecill, Ba∣ron of Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, and Knight of the Garter, by his second wife Mildred) was first created at the Tower of London, the 13. of May, 1603. Baron Cecill of Essenden in Rutlandshire. And at White-hall the 20. day of August, 1604. he was created Viscount Cranborne in Dorsetshire; and lastly at Greenwich, the fourth of May, 1605, he was created Earle of Salisbury by King Iames. Hee was also Master of the Court of Wards, Chancellor of the Vni∣uersity of Cambridge, Lord high Treasurer of England, and Knight of the Order of the Garter. He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Brooke Lord Cobham, and had issue, William Cicell Earle of Salisbury, 1618. and a daughter named Francis, married to Henry Lord Clifford, sonne and heyre of Francis Earle of Cumberland. He dyed at Marlborough, on Sunday, the 24. of May 1612. Et portrit, burellee de dis d'argent & d'azur. sur le tout six eschuchons, 3, 2, 1. sable, charge de six lyons rampant à la premier, au Cressand pur le difference. VVIlliam Cecill, Baron Cecill of Essenden, Viscount Cranburne, and Earle of Salisbury, 1618. married Katherine, youngest daughter of Thomas Howard Earle of Suffolke, and Lord high Treasurer of England, and had issue, Iames that dyed young, and Frances a daughter.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes, Marquesses, and Earles of Suffolke, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RObert de Vfford knight, Son of Sir Robert Vfford knight, Steward of the houshold to King Edward the second, and of his wife Cecily, daughter and co-heire of Robert de Valonijs Lord of Orford, was created Earle of Suffolke, in the eleuenth yeare of king Edward the third, 1335, as also Knight of the Garter; he was Lord of Eay and Framling∣ham in Suffolke. Before this Robert, did the Family of Bigots hold Norfolke and Suffolke together as one County. This Robert, and William Mountague Earle of Salisbury, were Ge∣nerals of king Edward the thirds Army in Flanders, when he went to make his clayme to the Crowne of France, descen∣ded to him by his Mother, and kept from him by Philip de Valois the Vsurper, 1338. He serued vnder the blacke Prince, at the battaile of Poictow, where Iohn the French King was taken prisoner, 1359, and married Margaret, daughter of Sir Iohn Norwich, of Mettingham Castle in Suffolke, and Aunt and heyre of Iohn her Nephew, (by Walter her Brother) by whom hee had issue, William Vfford Earle of Suffolke, and three daughters; Cecily, married to Iohn Lord Willoughby; Katherine, married to Robert Lord Scales; and Marga∣ret, married to William Lord Ferrers of Groby. He dyed in the 43. yeare of King Edward the third. Et portoit, de sable au croix engresse d'or. WIlliam de Vfford, sonne and heyre of Robert afore∣said, was the second Earle of Suffolke of that sur∣name, L. of Eye and Framlingham, he married Isabell, daugh∣ter of Thomas Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke, and had issue, Thomas, William & Edward, who dyed all without issue. This William Earle of Suffolke, dyed sodainely in the Parliament house at Westminster, the 15. day of February, 1382. leauing his three sisters his heyres, who were married as aforesaid. Les armes de son peré.
MIchaell de la Pole knight, sonne and heyre of Sir William de la Pole Knight Banneret, & Katherine his wife, daugh∣ter of Sir Iohn Norwich knight, and grand-childe to another Sir William Pole knight; (which Father and Grand-father of this Michaell, doth disproue our late Writers, who setteth him downe to bee of base Parentage and birth) Hee was Lord Wingfield, and Lord Chancellour of England; and by King Richard the second, he was created Earle of Suffolke, in the yeare, 1385. and had giuen him a thousand Markes by the yeare, out of the Kings Treasury. But when King Richard began to decline, by reason of the discord of the Nobility, the honour of this Michaell (being newly raised) decreased also. For by a pub∣like Decree, he was banished England, the 12. yeare of king Richard, as a great corrupter of the King; in which banishment, he dyed with griefe at Paris, 1389 and was after buried at Hull. He married Isabell, daughter of Sir Iohn Wing∣field knight, and sister and heyre of Sir Thomas Wingfield, of Wingfield Castle in Suffolke knight, and had issue, fiue sonnes; Thomas de la Pole, borne 1366. William, borne 1367. Michaell, borne 1368. Richard, borne 1369, and Iohn borne, 1373. He had issue, three daughters; Margaret, married to William Lord Ferrers of Groby; Elizabeth and Anne. Et portoit, d'azur à la face entre trois testes de leopards d'or. MIchaell de la Pole, Lord Wingfield, sonne of Michaell a∣foresaid, was restored to be Earle of Suffolke, after his Father in banishment, the 22. of king Richard the second, and married Katherine, daughter of Hugh Earle Stafford, and had issue, sixe sonnes and fiue daughters, viz. Michaell de la Pole, Earle of Suffolke; William second sonne, was after the death of Michaell his elder brother, Earle, Marquesse and Duke of Suffolke; Thomas was a Clarke; Sir Iohn de la Pole knight, Captaine of the Towne of Auerenges in Normandy; Miles de la Pole, and Alexander: Isabell the eldest daughter, was mar∣ried to William Lord Morley; Katherine, was Abbesse of Ber∣king; Elizabeth dyed young; Philip the fourth daughter, was wife to the Lord Burnell; and Margaret married Iohn de Foys, Earle of Kendall in England, sonne of Gaston de Foys, Earle of Longeuile in France. This Michaell dyed of the Flix; at the siedge of Hareflew, 1414. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré.
MIchaell de la Pole, the third of that name, Lord Wing∣field, and Earle of Suffolke, was slaine at the battaile of Egen-Court, with Edward Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, the 25. of October, 1414, leauing no issue of his body, and was bu∣ried at Butley. Et portoit, d'azur à la face entre tro testes de leopards d'or. WIlliam de la Pole, Lord Wingfield and Earle of Suffolk, (second sonne of Michaell the second Earle of Suf∣folke of that Family) after the death of Michaell Earle of Suffolke his elder brother, without issue, (being Captaine of the Castle and Citty of Auerenges in Normandy, was in the 22. of king Henry the sixt, created Marquesse of Suffolke, and in the 25. yeare of the said kings reigne, he was made Earle of Penbroke; and lastly Duke of Suffolke, in the 26. of Henry the sixt. After all which honors giuen him, in the yeare 1449, he was banished England for fiue yeares, for being too fami∣liar with Queene Margaret, priuy and consenting to the yeelding and losse of Anioy and Mayne, (as also to appease the murmuring of the people, for the murdering of the Duke of Glocester:) and as he was taking of Ship to paste for France, he was surprized and taken on the sea, by a Shippe of warre, called the Nicholas, belonging to the Duke of Excester, then Constable of the Tower of London, and there presently beheaded, and his body cast into the Sea, which was after found and taken vp againe at Douer, and brought to the Colledge at Wingfield in Suffolke, and there honourably buried. He married Alice, daughter and heyre of Sir Thomas Chaucer knight, sonne of Sir Geffrey Chaucer the Poet, by whom he had issue, Iohn Duke of Suffolke, and William. Et portoit, d'azur à la face entre trois testes de leopards d'or. IOhn de la Pole, sonne and heyre of William aforesaide, being the fift of this Family, was after the death of his Father, Duke of Suffolke. He was Founder of the house of the Car∣thusians at Kingston on Hull, where the house of the saide Poles as yet remaineth like a Pallace. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, and sister of king Edward the fourth, and had issue, Iohn de la Pole, created Earle of Lincolne, the seuenth of king Edward the fourth, who hauing no issue of his body, was slain at Stokefield, with Mar∣tyn Swarth, who vniustly had taken vp Armes against King
Henry the seuenth, in the yeare 1487, the second of the said Kings Reigne. Ed∣mond the second sonne, was Earle of Suffolke; Humfrey was a Clarke; Edward the fourth sonne was Arch-Deacon of Richmond; and Richard the fift sonne was slain at Pauia in Italy, at a battaile foughten in the yeare, 1525. Katherine the eldest daughter, was married to William Lord Sturton; Anne the second daugh∣ter, was a Nunne at Sion; Dorothy was the third daughter; and Elizabeth the 4. daughter, was married to Henry Louell Lord Morley. This Iohn dyed in the yeare 1491. and was buried at Wingfield, of which he was Lord and Owner. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. EDmond de la Pole, second sonne and heyre of Iohn de la Pole Duke of Suffolke, by Elizabeth his wife, sister of king Edward the fourth, was the last Earle of Suffolke of that Fa∣mily, (a bold, stout, and couragious man, but very intempe∣rate in his anger) This Edmond vpon a time killed a meane man, which fact King Henry the seuenth pardoned, notwith∣standing he tooke it so ill, that he was arraigned for the same. As he shortly after (without the Kings licence) went into Flanders to his Aunt Margaret, Dutchesse of Burgonay, but after returning backe againe: he excused himselfe so, as hee obtayned the kings fauour; and not long after, while Prince Arthurs marriage with Katherine of Spaine, and the peoples heads were occupied with delights; he, with his Brother Richard departed the second time into Flanders, against the Kings will and knowledge, where he re∣mained as an exile, hearing that some of his Friends were put to death, and o∣thers committed to perpetuall imprisonment. Hee wandered vp and downe, both in France and Germany; but finding no place of rest or safety, at last, yeeld∣ing himselfe into the hands of Philip, Duke of Burgundy and Flanders, was at length brought into England, and beheaded at Tower-Hill for treason, in the yeare 1513. being the fift of king Henry the eight. He married Margaret, daugh∣ter of Richard Lord Scrope, & had issue, Anne a Nun in the Minnories at London. Et portoit, d'azur à la face entre trois testes de leopards d'or. CHarles Brandon, (Son of Sir William Brandon knight) was knight of the Garter, and Master of the Horse to K. Hen∣ry the 8. & by him created Viscount Lisle, in the yeare 1513, and after Duke of Suffolke in the same yeare. In which yeare, there was a solemne triumph, at Tilt & Turney proclaimed in France by the Dolphin: to which, this Charles, with the Marques Dorset, and many other Noble Lords and Gentle∣men, went with the Kings licence. And in the first dayes tri∣umph, the Marques Dorset bare himselfe so valiantly against Monsieur Grue (an Almanois) that with his Speare, hee
wounded him very dangerously in the head. And Duke Charles at the Turney, ouerthrew his aduersary, bearing both man and horse to the ground. This Duke Charles had foure wiues, the first was Margaret, daughter of Iohn Neuill, Mar∣quesse Montague, (widdow of Sir Iohn Mortimer knight) by whom he had no issue. The second was Anne, daughter of Sir Anthony Browne knight, Gouernor of Callis, by whom he had issue (before marriage) a base daughter named Anne, married to Edward Gray Lord Powis; and another daughter after marriage, na∣med Mary, married vnto Thomas Stanley Lord Montegle. His third wife was Mary, Queene of France, widdow of Lewis the 12. and second sister to King Henry the eight, by whom he had issue, Henry Brandon Earle of Lincolne, that di∣ed before his Father, without issue, and two daughters; Francis, married to Hen∣ry Grey, Marquesse Dorset, and after Duke of Suffolke; and Eleanor the second daughter, was married to Henry Clifford Earle of Cumberland. The fourth wife was Katherine, daughter and one of the heyres of William Lord Willoughby of Eresbie, by whom he had issue, two sonnes, Henry Brandon Duke of Suffolke, and Charles, who dyed young, both in one day of the sweating sicknesse, at Bugden the Bishop of Lincolnes house, the 14. of Iuly, 1551. This valiant Charles Duke of Suffolke, departed this life at Guilford, the 24. of August, 1544. the 36. of king Henry the eight, and was buried very honourably with a Hearse at Windesore. Et portoit, burlle d'argent & de gueulles de dix pieces, à la lyon rampant d'or, coronne per pale d'argent & de gueulles. HEnry Grey, Marquesse Dorset, and Baron Ferrers of Gro∣by, Huntington, Wooduill, and Asheley, Iustice of the For∣rests and Chases by South, the Riuer of Trent, and knight of the Garter; was after the death of Henry Brandon Duke of Suffolke and Charles his brother, created Duke of Suffolke, the eleuenth of October, the fift of king Edward the sixt. He married Lady Francis, daughter of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, by Mary the French Queene, Dowager of France; and had issue three daughters: Iane the eldest, was married to the Lord Guilford Dudley, sonne of Iohn Duke of Northū∣berland, who were both beheaded without issue. Katherine the second daughter, was married to Henry Lord Herbert, from whom (against her will) she was diuorced. Mary, married to Martyn Kayes of Kent Esquire, and dyed without issue. This Henry Grey Duke of Suffolke, was beheaded at Tow∣er Hill, the 23. of February, in the first yeare of Queene Mary, 1554. Et portoit, burelle de six d'argent & d'azur trois torteaux à lambell d'ermyn.
THomas Lord Howard, second sonne of Thomas Howard late Duke of Norfolke, and of Margaret his second Wife, daughter and onely heyre of Thomas Lord Andley of Wal∣den, Lord Chancellor of England; was by Summons of writ to the Parliament, made Lord Howard of Walden: he was Lord Chamberlaine to Queene Elizabeth, and King Iames, and knight of the Garter; and after created Earle of Suffolke at Hampton Court, on Thursday the 21. of Iuly, 1603. and lastly made Lord Treasurer of England. He married Ka∣therine, eldest daughter and one of the co-heyres of Sir Hen∣ry Knyuet, of Chorlton in Wiltshire knight, by whom he had issue, Theophilus Lord Walden; Sir Thomas Howard, knight of the Bath; Henry Howard, Charles Howard, Robert Howard, William Howard, and Sir Edward Howard, all knights of the Bath; Iohn the 7. sonne dyed yong; Eli∣zabeth the eldest daughter, was married to William Lord Knolles of Greyes, and Viscount Wallingford; Francis second daughter, wife to Robert Carre Earle of Somerset; and Katherine the third daughter, was married to William Cecill now Earle of Salisbury, 1618. Margaret the fourth daughter dyed young, and was buried at Walden in Essex. Et portoit, gueulles à la band entre six croix au pied fiche d'argent à croissant sable pur la difference. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles of Somerset, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. VVIlliam de Mohun, (or Moun) the 3. of that name from the Norman Conquest, (grand-childe to William de Moun, surnamed Sapell, Lord of Dun∣ster Castle in Somersetshire, by his sonne William) was made Earle of Somerset by King Henry the first; and by that name and title, did found the Priory and Conuent of S. Maries of Brinton, & gaue to the Cannons Regular of the same, diuers Lands for their maintenance. To which his Charter, are wit∣nesses, William de Moyn his Son, Henry Iuwe, William de Brin∣ton, Hugh de Punchardon and others. This William (as Mathew Paris hath) in the yeare 1138. did keepe and fortefie his Ca∣stle of Dunster, against K. Stephen; and William Talbot kept the Castle of Hereford; William Louell the Castle of Ludlow; and William Fitz-Alan the Castle of Salopesbury, on the part of Mauld the Empresse, and Henry Duke of Normandy her sonne. This William de Moun Earle of Somerset, married Luce, daughter of  and had issue, William de Mohun Lord of Dunster and Oodecombe, Muneth and Culueton in Somersetshire. Et portoit, guculles, au Manch mal taile d'ermyn le maine propre tenant à la flour de liz d'or.
REginald de Mohun Lord of Dunster, (sonne and heyre of Reginald de Mohun Lord of Dunster, grand-childe of William de Mohun Earle of Somerset, by his sonne William) was the second, and last Earle of Somerses of that Family, & did by that Name & Title giue his Mannor of Aexministre, with the appurtenances, to found the Abbey of Newham; To which his gift are witnesses, Richard Earle of Cornwall, the Kings brother, Simon Earle of Leicester, Henry Earle of Oxford, Iohn Fitz-Geffrey, Ran-Fitz-Hubert, Hugh Tracy, Hugh Peuerell of Ermington, William Malherbe knights and others. Prima pars Patent. Anno, 14, Edw. 3, m. 33. He married Isabell, daughter of William Earle Ferrars and Derby, & co∣heyre of her Mother Sibell, sister and co-heyre of Anselme Marshall, Earle of Penbroke, by whom he had issue, Iohn de Mohun Lord of Dunster, &c. This Re∣ginald lost his Title of Earle, in siding with the Barons against king Henry the third, and dyed in the 43. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, and was buried in the Abbey of Newham. Et portoit les armoiries de son peré, gueulles, au Manch mail taile d'ermyn, le maine pro∣pre tenant à la flour de liz d'or. IOhn sur-named Beaufort (of Beaufort in France, which came to the house of Lancaster, by Blanch of Arthois, wife to Edmond first Earle of Lancaster) sonne of Iohn of Gaunt D. of Lancaster, begotten of Ratherine Swinford before marri∣age; who with his brothers and sisters, were made legitimate by Acte of Parliament, in the 21. yeare of king Richard the second, and in the yeare, 1396. he was made Earle of Somer∣set, and the yeare after, Marquesse Dorset; from which king Henry the fourth depriued him; leauing him onely Earle of Somerset. He maried Margaret, daughter of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, and sister and co-heyre of Edmond Earle of Kent, by whom he had issue, Henry Earle of Somerset, that dyed young without issue, and Iohn, who by king Henry the fift, was created the first Duke of Somer∣set, and had issue, one onely daughter named Margaret, Mother to king Henry the seuenth; Edmond the third sonne, succeeded his Brother Iohn in the Duke∣dome of Somerset, and was slaine at the first battaile of S. Albons. Ioane the el∣dest daughter of this Iohn Beaufort, was married to Iames the first king of Scots; and Margaret the second daughter, was married to Thomas Courtney Earle of Deuon. He dyed in the eleuenth yeare of king Henry the fourth, and was buried on the North side of Thomas Beckets Shrine at Canterbury. Et portoit, France seme, escartellé d'engleterre, au bordur gobonne d'argent & d'azur.
IOhn Beaufort, sonne of Iohn Earle of Somerset, and grand∣childe to Iohn of Gaunt (after the death of his Father, and his elder Brother Henry Earle of Somerset) was created the first Duke of Somerset, in the 21. yeare of king Henry the 6. He was taken prisoner before by the Duke of Orliance, at Bangie-Bridge in France, the ninth of the saide Kings Reigne, and deliuered vpon ransome. He married Margaret, daugh∣ter of Sir Iohn Beauchampe of Bletso knight, and sister & heire of Iohn her Brother, by whom he had issue, one only daugh∣ter and heyre named Margaret, who by Edmond of Hadham Earle of Richmond her husband, had issue king Henry the se∣uenth. (Milles, pag. 398. saith) Edmond Beauford brother of this Iohn, succeeded him in his Dukedome of Somerset, which was thought to be a great preiudice to Margaret, this Iohns daughter and heyre, if according to the olde custome, when the male issue fayleth, the titles, honours and dignities should not depend vpon the pleasure of the King, to distribute the same to who he pleaseth. The which, in a word I answer thus, That if King Henry the fift did giue the Dukedome of Somerset to Iohn, the Father of this Margaret & his heyres male (as he did) and as commonly all Kings vse to doe, when they giue the like honours: (This Iohn dying without issue male) what wrong doth the King to any, in giuing his owne, to whom and where he pleaseth? and to speake truely, I haue not seene but one Letters Patents otherwise, which was by King Henry the sixt, 1458. to Iames Butler, who had the Earledome of Ormond to him and his heires male, and the Earledome of Wiltshire to him and his heires gene∣rall. And this I hope shall be sufficient, to proue that King Henry the sixt did no wrong to this Margaret, in giuing her Fathers title of honour to his brother, nay, had he giuen it to a meere stranger, it had beene iustifiable. This Iohn dyed in the 24. yeare of king Henry the sixt, and lyeth buried in Winborne Minster in Dorsetshire. Et portoit, les armes de son perè. EDmond Beaufort, Earle Moriton in Normandy, and Lord of Chirke and Chirkland, in the Marchesse of Wales, (bro∣ther of Iohn Duke of Somerset aforesaid, and grand-childe of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) was after the death of his elder brother without issue male, created first Marquesse Dorset, 1444. and in the 25. yeare of king Henry the sixt, hee was made Duke of Somerset; and after, he with Henry Earle of Northumberland, Humfrey Earle Stafford, and Thomas L. Clifford, were slaine at the battaile of S. Albons, on the part of king Henry the sixt, 1455. and the king himselfe taken priso∣ner & brought to London. This Edmonds death greatly gree∣ued K. Hen. because in him he had put all his trust and confidence; and for that also, such a Chiefetain as he, who had long gouernd in Normandy, & bin Regēt of France, & for his Countries sake, had so valiantly borne himselfe against the French, shold now be slaine at home by his owne countrimen. He married Eli∣anor, daughter & one of the heires of Richard Beauchamp earle of Warwick, & had
issue, foure sonnes and fiue daughters, viz. Henry the eldest sonne, was after his Father, Duke of Somerset, and was beheaded in the yeare, 1463. Edmond the se∣cond sonne, was also Duke of Somerset after his Brother; Iohn the third sonne, was slaine at the battaile of Teukesbury without issue, 1470, and Thomas the 4. sonne, dyed without issue. Elianor the eldest daughter, was first married to Iames Butler Earle of Wiltshire, and after to Sir Robert Spencer knight; Ioane the second daughter, was first married to the Lord Hoth of Ireland, and after to Sir Richard Fry knight; Anne the third daughter, was married to Sir William Paston knight; Margaret the fourth daughter, was first married to Humfrey Earle Stafford, and after to Sir Richard Darell knight; and Elizabeth married vnto Sir Henry Lewis knight. This Edmonds body was buried at S. Albons, in the Abbey there. Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, à vn bordur gobonne d'argent & d'azur. Henry Beaufort, sonne and heyre of Edmond aforesaide, was after the death of his Father, Duke of Somerset, Marquesse Dorset, Earle Moriton, Lord of Chirke and Chirk∣land, and Lieutenant of Callis. He, by assaults tooke the Ca∣stle of S. Auian in Mayne, and slew therein 300. Scots, and hanged all the French he found therein. He most disloyally fell from king Henry the sixt, to Edward of Yorke, who then had gotten the Crowne; but when king Henry had obtained succour of the Scots, and was entred the Bishopprick of Dur∣ham, this Duke Henry reuolted from Edward, and came to king Henry againe; and sighting the battaile at Exham, was with William Talboys, the Lord Ros, Molyns, and Hungerford, Sir Henry Neuill, Sir Thomas Wentworth, and Sir Richard Tunstall, vnluckily taken prisoner, by Iohn Marquesse Mountague, and there beheaded, in the yeare 1462. He had issue, a base sonne named Charles Somerset, (begotten of Ioane Hill his Concubine) who was after created Earle of Worcester, of whom the now Earle of Worcester is descended. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. EDmond Beaufort, brother and heyre of Henry Duke of So∣merset aforesaid, and second sonne of Edmond Duke of Somerset, slaine at S. Albons, was the last Duke of Somerset of this Name and Family, who taking part with the house of Lancaster, was with Prince Edward (sonne of king Henry the sixt) taken prisoner at the battaile of Tuekesbury, by King Edward the fourth, 1471. and within two dayes after behea∣ded there, without issue, leauing his fiue sisters his heyres be∣fore mentioned. Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre à la bordur gobonne d'argent & d'azur.
EDmond, third sonne of King Henry the seuenth, was born at Greenwich in Kent, 1495. and was created Duke of So∣merset; and after dyed at Bishops Hatfield in Hertforashire, in the yeare 1499, being not full fiue yeares olde, and was buri∣ed in the Abbey at Westminster. HEnry Fitz-Roy, knight of the Garter, and base sonne to king Henry the eight (begotten of the Lady Talboys, daughter of Sir Iohn Blount knight) beeing a childe of sixe yeares olde, was by his Father in the 17. yeare of his reigne, created Duke of Somerset and Richmond at Bridewell, and married Mary, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Nor∣folke, but by her had no issue. He dyed at S. Iames house by Charing-Crosse, being but 16. yeares of age, and was honou∣rably buried at Thetford in Norfolke, the 27. of king Henry the eight, 1535. (as Grafton hath) Others hath, that he lyeth buried at Framingham in Norfolke. He bare for his Armes, Escartellé France & d'engleterre, à bordur escartellé ermyn & compone d'argent & d'azur, abatun sine∣stre d'argent, à vn escutcheon de pretence escartellé gueulles & varrey d'or & vert, sur la tout, au lyon rampant d'argent, au chef d'azur vn Chastel entre deux testes du cerf d'argent. EDward Seymour, knight of the Garter, was created Vis∣count Beauchamp in the Whitson weeke, 1536. and Earle of Hertford, the 18, of October, 1537. and lastly Duke of So∣merset, the 17. of February, 1547. the first of king Edward the sixt. He was Lord Protector both of the Kings person & Kingdomes, and to leade to war (as wel by Sea as by Land) all the Kings Armies, as Lord Lieutenant Generall; he was also Lord high Treasurer and Earle Marshall of England, & Gouernor of the Isles of Gernesey and Iersey. He maried two wiues, the first was Katherine, daughter and co-heyre of Sir William Foliot, of Woodland in Dorsetshire knight, & had issue, Lord Edward Seymour of Berye Pomery in Deuonshire; & Iohn second Son. His se∣cond wife was Anne, daughter of Edward Stanhop Esquire, by whō he had issue,
Edward Seymour, now Earle of Hertford, 1618. Lord Henry and Edward; Anne the eldest daughter, was married to Iohn Dudley, Earle of Warwicke; Iane was the second daughter; Mary the third daughter, was married to Andrew Rogers; Ka∣therine the fourth daughter; and Elizabeth the fift daughter, was married to Sir Richard Knightley knight. This Edward was arraigned at Westminster Hall (the first of December, the fift of king Edward the sixt) of high treason, and was found guilty of Fellony; for which, the 22. of Ianuary after, he was behea∣ded at the Tower-Hill. Et portoit, de gueulles à deux Ailes de l'agle en leuure d'or. RObert Carr, a man greatly fauoured and honoured by King Iames, who first created him Baron of Branspath, and after Viscount Rochester, at White-Hall on Monday, the 25. day of March, 1611. and lastly Earle of Somerset, in the yeare 1614. And for a further fauour, the saide King made him Lord Chamberlaine of his Houshold, Knight of the Garter, and one of his honourable priuy Counsell. He mar∣ried Francis, second daughter of Thomas Howard Earle of Suffolke, and Lord high Treasurer of England, by whom hee had issue, a daughter named Anne. This Robert and his wife (beeing suspected to bee of the counsell, and consenting to the poysoning of Sir Thomas Ouerbury knight, (sometime his familiar friend and fauourite) were both called in question, endited and arraigned at Westminster Hall, in May 1616, and there by the Peeres were found guilty, and had iudgement to dye for the same. Et portoit, de gueulles au cheuron d'argent, chargé de trois estoilles de sable, brise de vn leopard pas∣sant d'or, du primier canton de l'escu.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles of Stafford, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RAphe Lord Stafford, Steward of Gascoigne, descended lyneally as heyre male of the body of Heruy Bagot, and Millescent his wife, sister & heire of Robert Lord Staf∣ford, in king Iohns time. This Raphe was created Earle Stafford in the 25. yeare of king Edward the third; and married Margaret, daughter and heyre of Hugh Lord Audley Earle of Glocester, and had issue, Hugh Earle Stafford, and Sir Richard Stafford knight, and three daughters; Beatrix the eldest, was first married to Maurice, Earle of Desmond in Ireland; and after to Thomas Lord Ros of Hamlake; Ioane the second daughter, married Iohn Charlton Lord Powes, and Margaret the third daughter, was maried to Iohn Stafford, Patron of the Church of Brom∣hall in Staffordshire. This Raphe dyed in the 45. of king Edward the third, 1370. and was buried in the Priory of Tunbridge, by his wife Margaret. Et portoit, d'or au cheuron de gueulles. HVgh Lord Stafford, sonne of Raphe Earle Stafford, after the death of his Father, was the second Earle Stafford, and married Philip, daughter of Thomas Beauchamp the elder, Earle of Warwicke, and had issue, Thomas, William & Edmond, al three Earles of Stafford; and Raphe slaine by Iohn Holland; and foure daughters, Margaret, wife to Raphe Neuill Earle of Westmerland; Katherine, married to Michaell de la Pole, Earle of Suffolke; Ioane the third daughter, married Thomas Hol∣land Earle of Kent; and the fourth daughter, was married to Iohn Lord Ferrars of Chartley. This Hugh dyed in his re∣turne from Ierusalem, in the Isle of Rhodes, in the tenth yeare of king Richard the second, and was buried by his wife, in the Abbey of Stone in Staffordshire. Et portoit, d'or, au cheuron de gueulles.
THomas Lord Stafford, sonne and heyre of Hugh afore∣said, was the third Earle Stafford, and died without issue, in the fourteene yeare of king Richard the second, and was buried by his Father and Mother, in the Abbey of Stone, lea∣uing William and Edmond his brothers, to succeed him in the Earledome of Stafford. But William dying without issue, Ed∣mond the third sonne succeeded Earle. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. EDmond Stafford, third sonne of Hugh Earle Stafford, and brother and heyre of Thomas and William his brothers, was (after their deaths) the fift Earle Stafford, and Lord of Tunbridge. He married Anne, daughter of Thomas of Wood∣stocke, Earle of Buckingham, and Duke of Glocester, and sister and onely heyre of Humfrey her brother; by whom he had issue, Humfrey Earle Stafford, and first Duke of Buckingham; and Philip that dyed young; Anne, first married to Edmond Mortimer Earle of March and Vlster, (but by him had no is∣sue) after she married Iohn Holland Earle of Huntington, and had issue, Henry Duke of Excester. This Edmond, with Tho∣mas Percy Earle of Worcester, and Henry Percy his Nephew, was slaine at the battaile of Shrewsbury, in the fourth yeare of king Henry the fourth, and was buried at Stafford, in S. Augustines Fryars. Et portoir, d'or au cheuron de gueulles. HVmfrey Stafford, sonne of Edmond, was the sixt Earle Stafford, whom king Henry the sixt in the 23. yeare of his Reigne, created the first Duke of Buckingham, and gaue him place and precedence before all other Dukes of England. He writ in his Stile; Humfrey, Duke of Buckingham, Earle Staf∣ford, Hereford and Northampton, Lord of Brecknock and Hol∣dernesse. This Humfrey in the eight yeare of king Henry the fift, did his homage at Roan, for the Earledome of Perch; and at the same time, Arthur Duke of Britaine did the like for the Earledome of Yurye. He married Anne, daughter of Raphe Neuill first Earle of Westmerland, & had issue, Humfrey Earle Stafford, who married Margaret, sister and co-heyre of Edmond Beaufort, Duke
of Somerset, and was wounded with an Arrow, at the first battaile at S. Albs, the 33. of Henry the sixt, of which wound he dyed the yeare after, in the life time of his Father, 1455. Iohn the second sonne, was created Earle of Wiltshire; and Richard the third sonne, was slaine with the fall from a horse; George & William were twins, and dyed both young: Anne the eldest daughter, was first married to Aubrey de Ver, sonne and heyre of Iohn Earle of Oxford, and had no issue; After she maried Sir Thomas Cobham knight, sonne of Reginald Lord Cobbam of Sterborough, and had issue; Anne the second daughter, was first married to Wil∣liam Lord Bardolph, and after to Sir William Kniuet knight; and Katherine the third daughter, married Iohn Lord Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury. This Humfrey was slaine at the battaile of Northampton, in the 38. yeare of king Henry the 6. and his body buried in the Grey Fryers in Northampton. He bare for his Armes, France and England quarterly, within a bordure argent; which was the Armes of Thomas of Woodstocke, his Grand-father by his Mother. HEnry Lord Stafford, (sonne and heyre of Humfrey Staf∣ford, by Margaret his wife, sister and co-heire of Edmond Beaufort Duke of Somerset) grandchilde of Humfrey Staf∣ford the first Duke of Buckingham, and Anne Neuill his wife; was after the death of his said Grandfather, the second Duke of Buckingham, Earle Stafford, Hereford and Northampton, Lord of Brecknock, Kimbalton and Tunbridge, and Knight of the Garter; who falling in dislike with king Richard the third, laboured the returne of Henry Earle of Richmond out of France. Diuers Authors diuersly report the cause thereof; but one amongst the rest saith, that Humfrey the tenth Earle of Hereford, Northampton, and Essex, and Constable of England, in king Richard the seconds time, had two daughters his heyres; Elianor the eldest, married to Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester; and Mary the second daughter, mar∣ried to Henry Earle of Derby (after King, by the name of Henry the 4.) whose issue being spent and ended in Prince Edward, sonne of king Henry the 6, this Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, made clayme to that part of Humfrey de Bohuns Lands, which before were conueyed to Mary the second daughter (they being then in the Crowne) for that this Duke Henry was then the onely heyre both of Elianor and Mary. At which clayme and demand, King Richard the third was greatly offended, and saide; Will you (Duke Henry) challenge the right of king Henry the fourth, by which hee wrongfully held the Crowne, and so make way vnto it? Which speech of the king, went so neere to the Dukes heart, that euer after, he sought and plotted, how he might work the returne of Henry earle of Richmond out of France, and to depriue king Richard of his Crowne. And to effect the same, he raised diuers forces, and entred into Armes; which King Ri∣chard
hearing of, leuied a greater, and went to Salisbury to meete him; but the Dukes Army being too weake, he was forced to flye for succour to the house of Humfrey Banister his seruant neere Shrewsbury, who for hope of gaine, betrayed him to Iohn Mitton Shireffe of Shropshire, who tooke and conuayed him to Sa∣lisbury, where without any arraignment or lawfull tryall, he was beheaded the second of Nouember, 1483. This Duke Henry married Katherine, sister and one of the heyres of Richard Wooduill Earle Riuers, and had issue, Edward Earle Stafford, and Duke of Buckingham, Henry Earle of Wiltshire, and Humfrey that di∣ed young. He had also two daughters, Elizabeth maried to Robert Radcliffe, Lord Fitz-Walter and Earle of Sussex; and Anne, first married to Sir Walter Herbert knight, and after to George Lord Hastings Earle of Huntington. Et portoit, France & d'engleterre escartellé, an bordur d'argent. EDward Stafford, sonne and heire of Duke Henry afore∣said, was after the death of his Father restored, the first of king Henry the seuenth, to all his Fathers honours, digni∣ties and possessions, which king Richard the third tooke from him; and was Duke of Buckingham, Earle Stafford, Hereford and Northampton, and Constable of England. He married Elianor, daughter of Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Stafford (for after the death of this Edward, the Family of Staffords neuer attai∣ned other title of honour, then onely of Barons) He had is∣sue also three daughters; Elizabeth the eldest, was married to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, and Lord high Treasu∣rer of England; Katherine the second daughter, was married to Raphe Neuill fourth Earle of Westmerland; and Mary the third daughter, married George Ne∣uile Lord of Abergauenny. This Edward, was a Prince of high spirit, and very ambitious, daily plotting of treason against king Henry the eight, by which hee ouerthrew himselfe, and all his Noble Family; and for the same, was beheaded at the Tower-Hill by London, the 17. of May, 1521. in the thirteenth yeare of King Henry the eight. Les armoiries de son peré.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Southampton, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. BEauois a Saxon, and flower of Chiualry in his time, was at the siedge of Yorke, in the fourth yeare of William Con∣queror; and the yeare after, fought the great battaile at Cairdiffe in South-Wales, against the Normans; he was made Earle of Southampton by the said Conqueror, and was a Wit∣nesse to his Charter, of lands that he gaue to the Abbey of S. Edmonsbury in Suffolke, by the name and title of Earle Bea∣uois. He dyed without issue (knowne) the tenth yeare after the Norman Conquest. This is that Beauois of Southampton. M. Camden in his Britannia, pag. 272. saith, That whiles the Monkes laboured to set out his fame with their faigned Fables, they obscured his doughty and Martiall Actions in Armes. VVIlliam Fitz-Williams, knight of the Garter, Treasu∣rer of the houshold to king Henry the eight, Lord Priuy Seale, and Lord Admirall of England, was created Earle of Southampton, at Hampton Court, the 29. yeare of the said Kings Reigne. He married Mabell, daughter of Henry Lord Clifford of Westmerland, and sister and heyre of Henry first Earle of Cumberland, and dyed without issue, at New-Castle vpon Tine, the 34. yeare of king Henry the eight. Et portoit, lozengie d'argent & de ueulles. THomas Wriothesley, Knight of the Garter, sonne of Willi∣am Wriothesley, Yorke Herald of Armes, and grandchilde to Iohn Wriothesley, alias Garter king of Armes, was created Baron of Tichfield, at Hampton Court the first of Ianuary, the 35. of Henry the eight, Anno, 1543. and Lord Chancellor of England, in May the yeare after; in which Office he con∣tinued vntil the beginning of king Edward the sixt his reign, when for his obstinacy in the Romaine Religion, he was the sixt of March remoued, and William Paulet Lord S. Iohn of Basing put in his place. He was after created Earle of South∣hampton,
the 17. of February, in the first yeare of king Edward the sixt, & mar∣ried Iane, daughter and heyre of William Cheney, by whom he had issue, Henry the second Earle of Southampton of that name, and foure daughters; Mary the eldest, was first married to William Shelley of Michelgroue in Sussex, and after to  Lister, sonne of Sir Michaell Lister knight; Elizabeth, was wife to Tho∣mas Radcliffe Earle of Sussex; Katherine, married to Thomas Cornwallis Groom-Porter; and Mabell the fourth daughter, was wife to Sir Walter Sands knight. He dyed at his house called Lincolne Place in Holborne, the 30. day of Iuly, in the fourth yeare of king Edward the sixt, and was buried in S. Andrews Church in Holborne. Et portoit, d'azur à vn croix d'or, enuironne de quatre faulcons close d'argent. HEnry Wriothesley, sonne and heyre of Thomas aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the second Earle of Southampton, and Baron of Titchfield. He married Mary, daughter of Sir Anthony Browne Viscount Mountague, and knight of the Garter, by whom he had issue, Henry Wriothesly the third Earle of Southampton of that Family; and Mary married to Thomas Arundell Baron of Warder. He dyed at Ythell in Hampshire, the fourth of October, 1581. and was bu∣ried at Titchfield, the 23. of Queene Elizabeth. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. HEnry Wriothesley, (sonne and heyre of Henry aforesaid) was the third Earle of Southampton of this Family, and Baron of Tichfield, Knight of the Garter, and Captaine of the Isle of Wight. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Iohn Vernon of Hodnet in Staffordshire, and had issue, Iames Wri∣othersley; Thomas a second sonne, Penelope, Anne and Eliza∣beth, 1618. Et portoit, d'azur à vn croix d'or, enuironné de quartre faucons d'argent.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Sussex, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. VVIlliam de Albeney, the third of that Name, grand∣childe to William de Albeney and Queene Aeli∣dise his wife, (the widdow of King Henry the first) by his sonne William the second; was in the life time of his Father, created the first Earle of Sussex, by King Henry the second, and girded with the Sword thereof. (Roger Ho∣ueden, pag. 320. a. line 36. 1177.) He was faithfull to the said King, in all his wars against Henry Courtmantell his sonne, the young King. He married Mabell, the daughter of Hugh Kiuiliock, Earle of Chester, and had issue, two sonnes & foure daughters; William and Hugh, both Earles of Arundell and Sussex, who dyed without issue; Mabell the eldest daughter, was married to Sir Robert Tatesall Knight; Isabell the second daughter, married Iohn Fitz-Alan, Lord of Clun and Oswaldstre; Nicholea the third daughter, mar∣ried Roger Lord Somery; and Cicely the fourth daughter, was married to Roger Lord Monthault, of Hawarden in Flintshire. This William dyed at his Mannor of Offington, in the yeare, 1199. and was buried at Wimondham. Et portoit, de gueulles au lyon rampant d'or, armé & lampasse d'azur. VVIlliam de Albeney, the fourth of that Name, and se∣cond Earle of Sussex; was a Witnesse to the Char∣ter of King Iohn, bearing date the fourth of May, in the 14. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, by the name of William of Arundell, Earle of Sussex, and dyed in his returne from Da∣mieta in Palestine, 1221. And his body being brought into England, was buried at Wimondham, leauing his Brother Hugh his heyre, to succeed him; whom Hubert de Burgo Chiefe-Iustice of England, had the custody of, during his Wardship. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
HVgh de Albeney, brother and heire of Willm aforesaide, was Earle of Arundell, and the third Earle of Sussex. He married Isabell, daughter of William Earle Warren & Surrey, and dyed in the prime of his youth, without issue, 1243. and was buried with his Auncestors, in our Lady Church at Wy∣mondham, who were Patrons and Founders thereof, leauing his foure sisters his heyres. Mabell the eldest, was married to Sir Robert Tatesall, who had by partition of her brothers lands, the Castle and Barony of Buckenham. Isabell the se∣cond sister, being married to In Fitz-Alan, Lord of Clan and Oswaldstre in Wales, had the Castle & Honour of Arun∣dell, Nicholea the third sister, being wife to Roger Lord Some∣ry, had the Mannor of Barrow; and Cicely the fourth sister, beeing married to Roger Lord Mouthalt, had the Castle of Rising in Norfolke. The partition of these lands and others, was made and diuided betweene these foure sisters and beyres of this Hugh, in the 28. yeare of King Henry the third. Et portoit, de gueulles a lyon rampant d'or, arme & lampasse d'azur. IOhn Plantagenet, (sonne and heyre of William, the 6. Earle Warren and Surrey, and grand-childe to Hamelyne Planta∣genet, base sonne of Geffrey, Earle of Anion and Mayne) the seuenth Earle Warren and Surrey, was by King Henry the third, made Earle of Sussex; which honour was then voyde, by the death of Hugh de Albeney, Earle of Arundell and Sus∣sex. This Iohn was one of the Noblemen, which King Henry the third commanded to assemble at London, to treate of di∣uers matters. Amongst which, one was, that all men should shew before the Iustices of the Kings Bench, by what right they held their lands; which thing did much molest & dis∣quiet the Subiects, vntill this Iohn made his appearance, who being asked by what right he held his Lands, sodainly drew out his sword, and saide; By the sword did my Grand-father hold his Lands; and with this will I keepe them. But Alan Zouch Lord Chiefe-Iustice, tolde him, That if he could yeeld no other reason, iudgement would be giuen against him: whereupon, the said Earle immediately before the Iudges, did cruelly wound and hurt the saide Alan; of which wound, he shortly after dyed. For which murder, the said Iohn Earle War∣ren, Surrey and Sussex, was arrigned, and acquitted by the oath of 25. Knights: in that he affirmed vpon his honour, that he did not commit the said facte, vpon any pretenced malice, neyther in contempt of the King, nor his Lawes; but on∣ly in defence of his ancient Inheritance; and so was released, vpon payment of a fyne of 1200, Markes, in Anno, 1270. After King Edward the first, in the 25. yeare of his Reigne, made this Iohn, Earle Warren and Sussex, Gouernour of Scotland; Sir Hugh Cressingham, Lord Treasurer; and William Earnley Chiefe-Iustice.
He married Alice, daughter of Hugh le Brun, Earle of the Marches of A∣quitaine and halfe sister to King Henry the third, by whom he had issue, as in the Title of Surrey. He dyed at Kenington, the first of the Kalends of October, the 33 of King Edward the first, and was buried at Lewis in Sussex, 1304. Et portoit, eschiquettee d'or & d'azur. IOhn Plantagenet, Earle Warren and Sussex; as also Earle of Stratherne in Scotland, Lord of Brmfield and Yale, and grand-childe and heyre of Iohn, the seuenth Earle Warren by his sonne William; who after the death of his grand-father, enioyed all his Lands & Honors, for the space of 41. yeares, and dyed without issue, 1347, leauing Alice his onely sister and heyre, married to Edmond Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell, to succeed him in all his Inheritances. M. Camden in his Bri∣tannia, pag. 320. denyeth this Iohn, and Iohn his Grandfather, to be euer Earles of Sussex, in these words. After the death of Hugh de Albeneio, the last Earle of Arundell and Sussex of that sur-name; the Title of Earle of Sussex lay hidden and lest, vntill that King Henry the eight, in the 21. yeare of his Reigne, created Robert Rad∣cliffe Earle of Sussex. But to proue the contrary, and that they were both Earles of Sussex, you shall haue these proofes following. (Tho: Walfingham, pag. 60.) About the Feast of S. Michaell, 1294. Elianor, daughter of King Edward the first, was giuen in marriage at Bristow, vnto Henry Earle of Barry, by whom she had issue, a daughter named Ioane, married to Iohn de Warren, Earle of Surrey & Sussex. (Againe, the same Author further saith) This yeare 1305. dyed Iohn de Warren, Earle of Surrey and Sussex; after whom, his Grand-childe also named Iohn, did succeed, taking to wife the Kings Niece, by his daughter Elianor, who the Earle of Barry had married. (And thus much for the first Iohn) Now to proue this second Iohn (his grand-child) to be Earle of Sussex, take this out of an olde originall Deed. Atonsceus que ces lettres verront et erront, Antoni, par la grace de Dien Patriarch de Ierusalem, et Euesque de Duresme, Henry de Lacy, Cami∣te de Nicole, Iohn de Garrone, Comite de Surrey et de Sussex, Eymar de Valence, Co∣mite de Penbroke, Hamfraie de Bohun, Comite de Hereford et de Essex, Robert de Clifford, &c.a Boloigne le D'arein Iour de Ianner, lan de grace M.CCC. et Septism. Et portoit, eschiquettee d'or & d'azur.
RIchard Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell, Lord of Clun and Oswalstre, after the death of Iohn Plantagenet, Earle Warren, Surrey and Sussex, was knighted by King Edward the first, in the 18. yeare of his Reigne, at which time he was also girt with the Sword of the Earledome of Sussex. He was sonne of Iohn Fitz-Alan, grand-childe of Iohn Fitz-Alan, & Isabell his wife, second sister, and one of the heyres of Hugh de Albeney the last Earle of Arundell & Sussex of that name; vnto which Isabell, the Castle and Honour of Arundell fell by partition. Some late Writers haue set downe, that in re∣spect the Family of Fitz-Alans had the Castle of Arundell, they were Earles of Arundell; which to me is very strange, that a dead Stone, or Castle made of Stones and Timber, can giue an honour & title of dignity to a liuing creature. But this is contradicted and proued vntrue by many examples, where Noblemen haue solde the place whereof their Title of Honour was, and yet notwithstanding, both they and their heyres haue re∣tained their titles of honour still, and can it be better manifested then in this ve∣ry Family of Fitz-Alans? For had not this Richards Father, his Grand-father, and great Grand-father (all three Iohns) the possession of the Castle of Arun∣dell, with the appurtenances, and yet neuer any of them earles therof? &c. This Richard married Alison, daughter of the Marquesse of Saluce in Italy, and had is∣sue. Edmond Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundell, beheaded at Hereford, 1326. as is more at large in the Title of Earles of Arundell. He dyed in the 30. yeare of King Ed∣ward the first, 1301. Et portoit, de gueulles, au lyon rampani d'or armé & lampasse d'azur. RObert Radcliffe, sonne of Iohn Radcliffe Lord Fitz-Wal∣ter, was Knight of the Garter, Lord Fitz-Walter, Egre∣ment and Burnell, and after created Viscount Fitz-Walter at Bridewell, the 18. of Iune, in the 17. yeare of King Henry the eight; and the 8. of December, in the 21. yeare of the saide Kings reigne, he was created at White-Hall Earle of Sussex. He married three wiues, the first was Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Fitz-Walter, Sir Humfrey Radcliffe of Elstow, knight; and George Radcliffe third sonne. His second wife was Margaret, sister of Edward Earle of Derby, by whom he had issue, Anne, wife to Thomas Lord Wharton; and Iane, married to Sir Anthony Browne, Viscount Mountague. His third wife was Mary, daughter of Sir Iohn A∣rundell of Cornwall knight, by whom he had issue, Sir Iohn Radcliffe knight, who dyed without issue, in the yeare 1566. and was buried in S. Olaues in Hartstreete in London. This Earle Robert dyed at Chelsey, the 28. of Nouember, 1542, the 34. of King Henry the eight. Et portoit, d'argent à la bande engresley de sable.
HEnry Radcliffe, sonne and heyre of Robert aforesaid, after the death of his Father, was Earle of Sussex, Viscount Fitz-Water, Lord Egremont and Burnell, and knight of the Garter, & married two wiues; the first was Elizabeth, daugh∣ter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, by whom he had issue, Thomas the third Earle of Sussex of this Family; and Henry the fourth Earle of Sussex; and Francis. His second wife was Anne, daughter of Sir Philip Calthorp knight, by whom he had issue, Egremont Radcliffe, attainted of treason; Mary, married to Sir Thomas Mildmey of Essex knight. This Henry dyed in the fourth yeare of Queene Mary, 1557. and was buried in S. Laurence Poultneys Church, neere London-Stone in London. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. D'argent à la bande engresley de sable. THomas Radcliffe, sonne and heyre of Henry aforesaide, was after the death of his Father, Earle of Sussex, Vis∣count Fitz-Walter, Lord Egremont, Burnell, and Knight of the Garter, Lord Chamberlaine of the Houshold to Queene Elizabeth, and Iustice of Eyre, of all the Forrests and Parkes beyond the Trent. He married two wiues, the first was Eliza∣beth, daughter of Thomas Wriothesley, Earle of Southampton, by whom he had issue, Henry and Robert that dyed young without issue. His second wife was Frances, daughter of Sir William Sidney knight, and sister of Sir Henry Sianey knight of the Garter. He dyed without issue, at his house at Bermondsey in Southwarke, the 9. of Iune, 1583. and was very honourably carried through London, to New Hall in Essex, and there buried with a Hearse, and the Officers of Armes giuing their attendance the 9. of Iuly after. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. HEnry Radcliffe, second sonne of Henry the second Earle of Sussex, and brother and heyre of Thomas the third Earle of Sussex, was after the death of his brother, the fourth Earle of Sussex of his Family, Viscount Fitz-Walter, Lord Egremont and Burnell, Knight of the Garter, and Captaine of Ports-mouth, married Honora, daughter and heyre of Antho∣ny Pound, of Hampshire Esquire, and had issue, Robert Rad∣cliffe the fift Earle of Sussex. He dyed in the yeare, 1593. Et portoit, d'argent à la bande engreslee de sable.
RObert Radcliffe, sonne and heyre of Henry aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the fift Earle of Sussex of that Family, Viscount Fitz-Walter, Lord Egremont and Bur∣nell, and knight of the Garter, 1618. Hee married Bridget, daughter of Sir Charles Morison knight, by whom hee had issue, Henry Radcliffe Lord Fitz-Walter, who married Iane, daughter of Sir Michaell Stanhop knight; Thomas Radcliffe second sonne; Elizabeth, wife to Sir Iohn Ramsey, Viscount Hadington; and Honora Radcliffe. Et portoir, d'argent à la band engreslee de sable. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Surrey, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. VVIlliam de Warren, sonne of William de Warren, a Norman, begotten of the daughter of Herfastus the Dane. This William, with Roger Mortimer his younger brother, came into England with William the Con∣queror, whose daughter Gundred, the saide William married, and had giuen him in marriage with her, all Chirkland, Brom∣field and Yale; and after was by the said Conquerour made Earle of Surrey, and Lord of Dinasbrayne in Wales. He built the Castle of Holt, and founded the Priory of Lewis in Sus∣sex; and had issue by the Countesse Gundred his wife, Willi∣am de Warren, the second Earle of Surrey; and a daughter named Gundred; and after died the 8. of the Kalends of Iuly, 1088. the first of king William Ruphus, and was buried at Lewis. His wife Gundred dyed in childe-bed at Castle-Acre in Norfolke, the 6. of the Kalends of Iune, 1085. three yeares before her husband, and was buried also at Lewis. About this Williams creation, and who made him Earle of Surrey, there hath bin some question, (which heere I hope to giue satisfaction of) M. Camden in his Britan∣nia setteth downe, that king William Ruphus made him Earle, and not William Conqueror. And M. Milles, in his Booke (called Somersets vntruly) pag. 616. fol∣loweth him, step by step. M. Camden for his authority, voucheth the said William de Warrens Charter, of the Foundation of the Priory of Lewis, (as he saith) in these words. Donaui &c. pro salute Domini mei Willielmi Regis qui me in Angliam adduxit, &
pro salute Dominae meae Matildis Reginae matris vxoris meae, & prosalute Domini mei Willielmi Regis fillij sui, post cuius aduentum in Anglicam terram, hanc Char∣tam feci, & qui me Comitem Surregiae fecit, &c. To this will I adde this, taken out of the Originall booke of Lewis, which I hope will ende this Controuersie, and cleare the doubt. Willielmus de Warren primus Comes Surrey, et fundator Ecclesiae Lewensis diem suum clausit extremum viij. Kal. Iulij. Anno gratiae. 1088. et fundationis Ecclesiae praedictae xi. et A conquestu xxiij. Iste primo non vocabitur nisi solummodo Williel∣mus de Waren postea vero processu temporis a Willielmo Rege et Conquestore An∣gliae cuius filiam disponsauit, plurimum Honoratus est at{que} comes Surrey factus, et appellatus est. Iste iacet in Capello Lewensis iuxta Domina Gundradam Comitissam suam et filiam praedicti Regis Conquestoris, &c. By this it is manifestly proued, that William the Conqueror (and not William Ruphus) did create, and make this William de Warren, the first Earle of Surrey. Also it is to be remembred, that the Countesse Gundred died three yeares before her Husband, and two yeares before her Father; and how could she then haue the Title and Name of Countesse, vnlesse her Husband had beene an Earle be∣fore she dyed, in William Conquerors time. Et portoit, Eschequetteé d'or & d'azur. VVIlliam de Warren, the second Earle of Surrey, sonne and heyre of William the first, finished the Priory of Lewis (begun by his Father) & new founded the Church of our Lady at Castle-Acre, 1090. He married Isabell, daugh∣ter of Hugh the great Earle of Vermandois, & sister of Raphe de Peronne Earle of Vermandois, and widdow of Robert de Bellomont Earle of Mellent, by whom hee had issue, William the third Earle Warren and Surrey; and Reginald, which Regi∣nald married Alice, daughter and heyre of William de Wir∣mingay. He had also two daughters, Gundred married to Ro∣ger de Bellomont Earle of Warwicke; and Ada to Henry Earle of Huntington, Son of Dauid king of Scots. This William died the fift day of the Ides of May, 1138. which was the fifty yeare of his Earledome, wherin he con∣tinued vntill the third yeare of king Stephen, and then was buried at his Fathers feete, in the Church of Lewis. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
VVIlliam de Warren, sonne and heyre of William the second Earle Warren and Surrey, was after the death of his Father, the third Earle Warren and Surrey; and married Ela, daughter of William Taluace Earle of Sagiens, grand childe to Roger Montgomery, Earle of Arundell and Shrewsbury, by his sonne Robert. Hee had issue, William de Warren, Patricke and Philip; hee had also a daughter named Isabell, who was first married to William of Bloys, (sonne of King Stephen) Lord of the Egle, and Earle of Mortaigne and Boloigne; and after to Hamelyn Plantagenet, Earle Warren and Surrey in her right. This William the third Earle Warren and Surrey, dyed going to Ierusalem with Lewis King of France, in the yeare 1148. when he had bene Earle ten yeares; and Ela his Countesse dyed 26, yeares after, in the yeare 1174. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré. WIlliam of Bloys, sonne of King Stephen, was Earle of Mortaigne and Boloigne, Lord of the Egle, and of the Honour of Peuensey, and by his wife Isabell, onely daughter and heyre of William, the third Earle Warren and Surrey, hee was also the 4. Earle Warren and Surrey: he liued in the time of King Stephen his Father, and of king Henry the second, & dyed without issue, and was buried at Tholouse, in the yeare 1159. leauing his two sisters his heyres, to succeed him in his Inheritance. Ida the eldest, was married to Reginald Damp∣martyn, Earle of Boloigne in her right; and Mauld the second sister, was married to Henry Duke of Lorrayne. Et portoir, de gueulles à trois palz de vair, au chef d'or, charge de vn Aigle de gueulles, membrez & becquez d'azur. HAmelyne Plantagenet, second sonne of Geffrey Plantage∣net and Mauld the Empresse, was Earle of Aniou, Tou∣rayne and Mayne in France, and married Isabell, daughter & onely heyre of William, the third Earle Warren and Surrey, (the widdow of William of Bloys aforesaid) in whose right he was Earle Warren and Surrey, and had issue, William Earle Warren and Surrey; and two daughters. Isabell the eldest, was married to Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolke; and Margaret the second daughter, was married to Baldwyn Riuers Earle of Deuonshire. This Hamelyne continued Earle 43. yeares, in the Reignes of Henry the second, Richard the first, and king Iohn, and dyed in the yeare 1202. and was buried by his wife Isabell, in the Chapter house at Lewis. Et portoit, semé de France à la bordure d'engleterre.
WIlliam Plantagenet, sonne and heyre of Hamelyn and Isabell his wife, was the sixt Earle Warren and Surrey, and married Mauld, daughter of William Marshall the elder, Earle of Penbroke, and sister and one of the heyres of Anselm Marshall, Earle of Penbroke (the Widdow of Hugh Bigot, Earle of Norfolke) by whom he had issue, Iohn Earle Warren and Surrey, and two daughters: Margaret the eldest daugh∣ter, was married to the Lord Percy; and Isabell the second daughter, was wife to Hugh Earle of Arundell. This William assumed vnto himselfe the sur-name of Warren, & did beare his Mothers Armes, and was Earle 28. yeares, and dyed at London, the fift of the Kalends of Iuly, 1239. the 23. yeare of the Reigne of King Henry the third, and was buried by his wife Mauld, in the Abbey of S. Pancrace, at Lewis in Sussex, who dyed three yeares before. Et portoit, eschiquette d'or & d'azur. IOhn, the seuenth Earle Warren and Surrey, and Regent of Scotland in King Edward the firsts time, sonne of William Plantagenet aforesaide, and Mauld Marshall his wife; was by King Henry the third, made Earle of Sussex; which Earle∣dome had lien voyde from the death of Hugh de Albeney, Earle of Arundell and Sussex; (as in the Title of Earles of Arundell and Sussex is more at large.) This Iohn married to his first wife, Alice, daughter of Hugh le Brun, Earle of the Marches of Aquitaine, halfe (sister by the Mother) to King Henry the third, by whom hee had issue William de Warren, who married Ioane, daughter of Robert Vere Earle of Oxford, and dyed before his Father, in the yeare 1286. and two daughters: Elianor the eldest, was marri∣ed first to Henry Lord Percy, and after to a Scottish Earle in Scotland; Isabell the second daughter, was married to Iohn Balioll King of Scots. This Iohns second wife was Ioane, daughter of William Lord Mowbray, and had issue Iohn, of whō Warren of Poynton in Cheshire is descended. He dyed at Kenington, the fift of the Kalends of October, 1304. and the 33. yeare of King Edward the first, and was buried at Lewis by his wife Alice, who dyed fourteene yeares before. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
IOhn the eight and last Earle Warren, Surrey and Sussex, (sonne and heyre of William de Warren, that dyed before Iohn the seuenth Earle Warren, Surrey and Sussex his Father, 1286.) and Earle of Stratherne in Scotland, Lord of Brom∣field and Yale: he liued in the times of Edward the first, the second, and the third, Kings of England, and was Earle 41. yeares from his Grand-fathers death, to whom he was im∣mediate heyre. He married Ioane, daughter of Henry Earle of Barre, and of Elianor his wife, daughter of King Edward the first, but by her he had no issue. He departed this life, the day before the Kalends of Iuly, in the yeare of our Lord God, 137. in the 21. yeare of King Edward the third; leauing no issue of his body begotten, whereby the Inheritance fell to Alice his sister, wife to Edmond Earle of Arundell, his next heyre. Et portoit, eschiquettee d'or & d'azur. RIchard Fitz-Alan, sonne and heyre of Edmond Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell by Alice his wife, sister & heyre of Iohn, the eight and last Earle Warren and Surrey, &c. was after the death of his Father, Earle of Arundell, Lord of Clun and Oswaldstre, and chiefe Butler of England, and (in right of his Mother) he was Earle of Surrey, Lord of Brom∣field, Yale, Chirkland, and Dynas-bran in Wales. He married Elianor, daughter of Henry Earle of Lancaster, widdow of Iohn Lord Beaumont, and had issue, Richard Earle of Arundel, Iohn, Thomas and others, (as in the Title of the Earles of A∣rundell) He dyed in the Castle of Arundell, the 49. yeare of Edward the third, and was buried in the Priory of Lewis in Sussex. Et portoit, gueulles au lyon rampant d'or lampasse, & armé d'azur. RIchard Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell and Surrey, sonne of Richard Fitz-Alan and Elianor his wife, succeeded his Father in the Earledomes aforesaid. And being charged to combine with Thomas Duke of Glocester, Thomas Earle of Warwicke, and others, to raise a rebellion at Haringey Parke, all were taken, arraigned, and found guilty of treason, the 20. of King Richard the second; for which, the said Richard Earle of Arundell, was beheaded at Tower-Hill by London, and his body was buried in the Augustine Fryers in London. He married Elizabeth, daughter of William de Bohun Earle of
Northampton, and had issue, Thomas Earle of Arundell and Surrey; Richard and William that dyed young without issue, and foure daughters; Ioane the eldest, was married to William Beauchampe, Baron of Aburgauenny; Elizabeth the se∣cond daughter, was wife to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, and after Earle of Surrey by his wife. Margaret the third daughter, was married to Sir Rowland Lenthall Knight; and Alice the fourth daughter, was married to Iohn Charlton, Lord Powis. Et portoit, lez armes de son peré. THomas Holland, Earle of Kent, and Lord Wake, sonne of Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, and halfe brother to king Richard the second, was (after the attaindor & death of Ri∣chard Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell & Surrey) created Duke of Surrey, in the 21. yeare of King Richard the second. He was one of them which accused Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Glocester, of treason; for which, in the first Parliament held in king Henry the fourths time, 1399. he with the rest of the accusers, were depriued both of honors and liuings. But afterwards, conspiring with others of the Nobility, to sur∣prize King Henry the fourth, and to set vp King Richard a∣gaine (who was then liuing) was with the Earle of Salisbury bewrayed, & fly∣ing to Circester in Glocestershire, were by the Townes-men there, taken and be∣headed in the yeare 1400. He married Constance, daughter of Edmond Langley Duke of Yorke, the widdow of Thomas Lord Spencer, Earle of Glocester, & dy∣ed without issue. Et portoit, gueulles à trois leopards passant en pale d'or, au bordur d'argent. THomas Fitz-Alan, sonne and heyre of Richard aforesaid, by Elizabeth Bohun his wife, in the first yeare of King Henry the fourth, was restored in blood, after the ataindour of his Father, and was Earle of Arundell and Surrey, Lord of Bromfield and Yale, and Knight of the Garter, Lord War∣den of the Cinque-Ports, and Constable of Douer Castle. This Thomas obtained great honour and fame, for his vali∣ant atchieuements; amongst many, one was his going out of Normandy to the Bellouacas, to hinder the building of the Castle of Gerbery, with a small company of Souldiers; at whose comming the enemy left the Castle. At which great peece of seruice, this Thomas was very sore wounded, whereof he shortly after dyed, the 13. of October, 1414. in the third yeare of King Henry the 5. and was buried at Arundell. He married Beatrix, base daughter of Iohn K. of Portugall, at London, in the yeare 1405. in the presence of K. Henry the 4. (after whose death, she maried Iohn Holland Earle of Huntington) & had issue, Iohn Fitz-Alan, who
dyed in the life time of his Father, without issue; by reason whereof, and that this Thomas had no issue male to succeed him, his Inheritance (which belonged to the Earledome of Surrey) was diuided amongst his foure sisters before men∣tioned. But the Earledome of Arundell went according to his restitution, and the intayle, to Iohn Fitz-Alan, Lord Maltrouers, his Vnckle Iohns grand-childe, by his sonne Iohn. Et portoit, gueulles au lyon rampant d'or, armé, & lampasse d'azur. IOhn Lord Mowbray, (sonne of Iohn, grand-childe of Tho∣mas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and one of the heyres of Richard Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell and Surrey) was in the life time of his Father, created Earle of Surrey by King Henry the sixt. And after the death of his Father, he was Duke of Norfolke, Earle of Nottingham, and Earle Marshall of England, Lord Segraue, and of Gower. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Iohn Tal∣bot, first Earle of Shrewsbury, and had issue, Anne his onely heyre, married to Richard Duke of Yorke, sonne of King Ed∣ward the 4. He dyed at his Castle of Framingham, 1575. and was buried at Thetford in Norfolke. Et portoit, gueulles à vn lyon rampant d'argent, lampasse & armé d'azur. RIchard of Shrewsbury, (so named because he was borne there) second sonne of King Edward the fourth, was by his Father, created Duke of Yorke by Acte of Parliament, 1474. And in the right of Anne his wife (daughter and heire of Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke) hee was also Duke of Norfolke, Earle Warren, Surrey, Nottingham, and Earle Mar∣shal of England, Lord Mowbray, Segraue and of Gower. This Richard being but a Childe, with his Brother King Edward the fift, were (by the commandement of Richard Duke of Glocester their vnnaturall Vnckle) secretly murdered in the Tower of London, the 9. day of the Kalends of Iune, 1483. without issue. Et portoit, escartelle France & d'engleterre au lambell d'argent, trois cantons de gueulles.
THomas Howard, sonne and heyre of Iohn Howard first Duke of Norfolke, was by King Richard the third, crea∣ted Earle of Surrey, in the life time of his Father, 1483. and after his Fathers death, he was also Duke of Norfolke, and Lord Treasurer of England. He fought the battaile at Flod∣don-Field in Northumberland, against Iames the fourth, King of Scots, in the absence of Henry the eight in France; in re∣membrance whereof, the saide King Henry, gaue him for an augmentation to his Armes, on an Escutcheon gold a demye Lyon rampant, with an Arrow shot in his mouth, within a double tressure gueulles. He maried two Wiues, and had issue by thē both: His first Wife was Elizabeth, the onely daughter and heyre of Sir Fredericke Tilney Knight, (the Widdow of Humfrey Burchier Lord Barners) by whom he had issue, three sonnes and two daughters: Thomas the eldest sonne, was Duke of Norfolke; Edward the second sonne, being Lord Ad∣mirall, was slaine at Brest, without issue. Edmond the third sonne, married Ioyce, daughter of Richard Culpeper of Kent, and had issue two sonnes, and a daugh∣ter named Katherine, wife to King Henry the 8. Elizabeth the eldest daughter of this Thomas Duke of Norfolke, was married to Thomas Bullen Earle of Wiltshire, and Muriell his second daughter, was Wife to Iohn Grey Viscount Lisle, and af∣ter she married Sir Thomas Knyuet Knight. This Thomas Duke of Norfolke, mar∣ried to his second Wife, Agnes, daughter of Philip Tilney Esquire, and had issue, three sonnes and foure daughters; William the first sonne, was Baron of Effing∣ham, Lord Admirall and Chamberlaine of the houshold to Queene Elizabeth; Richard the second sonne, and Thomas the third son, died in prison, in the Tower of London, for contracting mariage with the Lady Lenox; Anne the first daugh∣ter, was married to Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford; Dorothy the second daughter, was wife to Edward Stanley, Earle of Derby; Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Henry Radcliffe Earle of Sussex; and Katherine the fourth daughter, was first married to Sir Rice ap Thomas, Knight of the Garter, and had issue. She was after married to Henry Daubeny, Earle of Bridg-water. This great D. dyed in the 16. yeare of K. Henry the 8. 1524. and was buried at Thetford in Norfolke. Et portoit, gueulles à la bande d'argent entre six croix recroisettes bottonne au pied fiche de la primier. THomas Howard, sonne and heyre of Thomas the second Duke of Norfolke, was after his Father, the third Duke of Norfolke, and second Earle of Surrey of that Family, Earle Marshall, and Lord Treasurer of England, Knight of the Garter, Lord Mowbray, Segraue, and Bruse of Gower. He mar∣ried two Wiues, the first was Anne, daughter of King Edw. the 4. by whom he had issue, two sons that died yong. His se∣cond wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Stafford D. of Buckingham, by whom he had issue, Henry Howard Earle of Surrey (who was arraignd of high treason at the Guild-hall in London,
the 15. of Ianuary, 1546. the 38. of King Henry the eight, and was found guilty, by twelue common Iuriats, and the 19. day of the same Moneth, was beheaded at Tower-Hill) who married Frances, daughter of Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford, and had issue, Thomas Howard the fourth Duke of Norfolke, and Thomas Vis∣count Byndon, and Mary a daughter, married to Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Rich∣mond and Earle of Nottingham, (base sonne of King Henry the eight, begotten of the Lady Talboys.) This Thomas third Duke of Norfolke, dyed in the first & second yeares of King Philip and Queene Mary. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. THomas Howard, sonne and heyre of Henry Earle of Sur∣rey aforesaid, & grand-childe to Thomas the third Duke of Norfolke, was restored by Queene Mary, and made the fourth Duke of Norfolke, Earle of Surrey, and Earle Mar∣shall of England, Lord Mowbray, Segraue, and Bruse of Gower, and Knight of the Garter. He married three Wiues, the first was Mary, daughter and heyre of Henry Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundell, by whō he had issue, Philip Earle of Arun∣del. His second wife was Margaret, daughter & heire of Tho∣mas Audley, Lord Audley of Walden in Essex, & Chancellour of England, by whom he had issue, Thomas Howard Earle of Suffolke, and Lord William third sonne, and Margaret, marri∣ed to Robert Sackuile Earle of Dorset. His third Wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Francis Leyborne knight, the Widdow of Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland, but by her had no issue. This Thomas was beheaded at the Tower-Hill, in the yeare 1572. Et portoit, gueulles à la bande d'argent, entre six eroix recroisettees betonne, au pied fiche d'argent.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Tankeruile, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. HEnry Grey (sonne of Sir Iohn Grey Knight, & of Ioane his Wife, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Edward Charlton Lord Powis) for his Martiall prowesse and valour, was by King Henry the fift, 1417. created Earle of Tanquer-vile in Normandy, to haue vnto him and his heyres males, by deliuering one Bassinet at the Castle of Roan euery yeare on S. Georges day. There were created with him at the same time, Gascoine de Foyz, Earle of Longevile; and Sir Iohn Bourchier Earle of Ewe. This Henry married Antigone, base daughter of Humfrey Duke of Glocester, by whom he had issue, Richard Lord Po∣wis, Humfrey second sonne, and a daughter named Elizabeth, married to Sir Roger Kyneston Knight, and was after slaine in a battaile at Blan∣gie, neere to the Citty of Angiers, by the Duke of Alanson, where were slaine with him, the Noble Duke of Clarence, Gilbert Vmfrauile, Earle of Anguish, the Lord Ros, and almost 2000. others, the 22. day of March, 1420. Et portoit, burelle d'argent & d'azur de huit pieces, sur la tout à la bande de gueulles. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles and Marquesses of Winchester, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. SAherus de Quincy, Lord of Groby in Leicestershire, sonne of Robert, was created Earle of Winchester, the 13. of March, in the eight yeare of the Reigne of King Iohn, & had giuen him by the said Kings Charter, a rent or annuity, issuing out of the profits of Hampshire; and was one of the Noblemen, to whom the rest of the Kingdome gaue autho∣rity, to cause the King to abide and stand to his Edict, which (with the consent of the whole body of the Realme) was en∣acted by a Parliament held at Rowning-Mead, betweene Windesore and Staynes, in the 17. yeare of the said King Iohn. Hee was also the chiefe man the Barons imployed, to bring into the Land Lewis the French kings son, to aide the Barons against king Iohn.
He did giue and confirme by his Charter, vnto Robert de Quincy his eldest Son, to indow Hawis his Wife, sister to the Earle of Chester, Buceheberdar, Gran∣tesset, Bradham, and Herdewich, with their appurtenances, for one hundreth pounds lands; with condition, that if those lands were not worth one hundred pounds the yeare, he should make it vp so much of other his owne Lands of In∣heritance in England, by the iudgement of lawfull Knights, to wit, men of the Earles of Chesters and his. And further, the said Saer did giue to his said sonne Robert and Hawis his Wife, two Knights fees, viz. the fee of Mathew Turpin, of Winterslawa in Wiltshire, and the fee of Richard Turuile of Helmeden. Witnesse to this Deed, Earle Dauid, William Earle Ferrars, &c. This Saer, married Margaret, second sister and co-heyre of Robert Fitz-Per∣nell, Earle of Leicester and Steward of England, by whom he had issue, Robert Lord Quincy, Roger second sonne, after his Father, Earle of Winchester, and a∣nother Robert third sonne, and two daughters; Hawis the eldest, was married to Hugh de Vere Earle of Oxford: the second I finde not certainly, neyther her name, or what became of her. He dyed at Acon, going to the Holy-Land, in the 4. yeare of King Henry the third: his body was buried at Acon, his heart and bowels being brought into England, was buried in the Abbey of Gerondon in Leicestershire, 1219. He bare for his Armes, in a Seale annexed to his Charter (in my custody) A fece with a lambell of 12. points; but the colours thereof (as yet) could I neuer finde. ROger Quincy, (second sonne of Saer aforesaide) after the death of his Father, and in the absence of Robert his elder brother in the Holy-Land, assumed the title and name of Earle of Winchester. For which, Robert his elder brother, vpon his returne againe into England, brought an assize, for entring and vsing the title of Earle of Winchester, it being the said Rogers Free-hold: which being come to bee tryed at Westminster, the King being there in person, gaue iudgement for Roger the second sonne, by reason he had bene inuested in the saide Earledome, and had place and voyce in the high Court of Parliament and elsewhere, as Earle of Winchester; he was to hold and continue the title still, during his life. He married Hellyn, daughter and heyre of Alan, Lord of Galloway in Scotland; in whose right, he was Constable of Scotland, and Lord of Galloway, and had three daughters his heyres; Margaret the eldest, was married to William de Ferrars Earle of Derby, with the Barony of Groby; Hellen the second daughter, was married to Alan Lord Zouch, of Ashby de la Zouch in Leicestershire; and Eliza∣beth the third daughter, was married to Alexander Comyn, Earle of Bucqhaine in Scotland. He dyed the 25. of Aprill, the 48. of King Henry the third, 1264. Et portoit, gueulles à sept maseles d'or. 3.3.1.
HVgh Lord Spencer (sonne and heyre of Hugh Chiefe-Iu∣stice of England, slaine at the battaile of Euesham, 1256. taking part with Simon Mountfort Earle of Leicester, against King Henry the third) was created Earle of Winchester, in the 14. yeare of King Edward the second, at a Parliament held at Yorke. At which time, Sir Andrew of Harkley, was made Earle of Carlile; and in the 16. yeare of the said kings Reigne, he was made Lord Treasurer of England, and Lord of Denbigh. This Hugh and Hugh his sonne, were the great fauourites to King Edward the second; who being suspected to be corrupters of the King, were by the Nobility banished the Realme. But after, the King being minded to recall them home againe, to his Company and Counsell: Queene Isabell pursued this Hugh to Bristow, and taking him, commanded him to be bound; and without any further answere or tryall, to be drawne and hanged in his Armor, taken downe aliue and bowelled, his bowels to be burned, and his head to be smitten off, and his body to be hanged vp againe, and after foure dayes, to be cut all to pieces, & giuen to dogs to eate; his head was sent to Winchester, and there set vp in the yeare 1326. He married Isabell, daughter of William Beauchampe Earle of War∣wicke, (the widdow of Sir Patricke Chaworth, Lord of Kidwelly in Wales) by whom he had issue, Hugh Lord Spencer Earle of Glocester, executed by the No∣bility at Hereford; and a daughter named Isabell, which was second Wife to Iohn Lord Hastings of Aburgauenny, &c. Et portoit, d'argent, escartellé de gueulles frette d'or, sur la tout au band de sable. LEwis of Brugges, a Burgundian borne, Lord de la Gru∣thuse, Prince of Steenhuse, Lord of Auelghien, de Spiers, de Amested, et de Oscampe, was created Earle of Winchester by Letters Patents, bearing date the 23. of Nouember, in the 14. yeare of King Edward the fourth. By which Patent, he had also giuen him (by way of increase to his Armes) D'a∣zur a dix mascles d'or en orme d'une Canton de nostre propre armes d'engleterre: cest asauoir, de gueulles vn leopard passant d'or armé d'azur. pat. 12. Edw. 4. pars. 1. m. 2. These honours did King Edward confer vpon him, because hee gaue him great entertainment, when he was driuen out of England, by Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke. Which Earledome of Winchester, when King Edward was dead, the said Lewis resigned againe to King Henry the seuenth. He married Margaret, daughter of Henry de Borselle, Lord of Vere, Sande∣burgh and Phalix, and had issue, Iohn de Brugges Lord of Gruthuse, Father of Reginald Brugges, Lord of Gruthuse. His ancient Armes was, D'or à la croix sa∣ble; and his Wiues Armes were, Sable à la face d'argent.
WIlliam Pawlet Knight, sonne and heyre of Sir Iohn Pawlet knight, descended of a second Brother of the Pawlets of Wiltshire, was created Lord S. Iohn of Basing, the 9. of March, in the 30. yeare of king Henry the 8. and knight of the Garter, in the 35. yeare of the said Kings Reigne; and in the third yeare of King Edward the sixt, hee was created Earle of Wiltshire: and the eleuenth of October, in the fift yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he was created Marquesse of Winchester: he was also Lord high Treasurer of England, & Master of the houshold to King Edward the sixt, and Presi∣dent of the Counsell. He was borne in the yeare 1483. and was of the priuy Counsell to King Henry the eight, King Ed∣ward the sixt, Queene Mary, and Queene Elizabeth of famous memory. He li∣ued to see one hundreth and three persons issue out of his loynes, and dyed at Basing, the tenth of March, 1571. vvhere he was honourably buried, when hee had liued 87. yeares. Who being on a time asked, how he carried himselfe in those tempestuous times (wherein so many of all sorts miscarried) His answere was; By being a Willough, and not an Oake. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Capell knight, and had issue, foure sonnes and foure daughters; Iohn Pawlet Marquesse of Winchester; Sir Thomas Powlet knight, who married Mary, daughter and co-heyre of Thomas Moore of Dorsetshire; Sir Chidioc Powlet of Wade knight, third sonne, who married Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas White; and Sir Giles Powlet fourth sonne, married  daughter of  Trapes. Alice the eldest daughter, was Wife to Richard Stowell of Somersetshire; Margaret se∣cond daughter, married Sir William Berkley Knight; Margery the third daugh∣ter, was married to Richard Waller of Oldstoke; and Elianor the fourth daugh∣ter, was wife to Sir Richard Pecksall Knight, Master of the Buck-Hounds. Et portoit, sable trois espees àuec le pointz embas d'argent, au cresant d'or. IOhn Powlet (sonne and heyre of William aforesaide) suc∣ceeded his Father, and was Marquesse of Winchester, Earle of Wiltshire, and Lord S Iohn of Basing. He married Eliza∣beth, daughter of Robert Willoughby Lord Brooke, and had is∣sue, William Powlet, Marquesse of Winchester after his Father; Sir George Powlet of Crundall in Hampshire Knight; Richard Powlet third sonne; and Thomas Powlet fourth sonne, who married Anne, daughter of  Brent; Mary Powlet eldest daughter, was married to Henry Lord Cromwell of Oukham in Rutlandshire; and Elizabeth the second daughter, was first married to Sir William Courtney of Powderham Knight, and after to Sir Henry Oughtred Knight. This Iohn dyed at his house at Chelsey, 1576. and was buried at Basing, the 19. of Queene Elizabeth. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré.
WIlliam Powlet (sonne and heyre of Iohn) was in the life time of his Father, summoned to the Parliament held at Westminster, 1575. as Lord S. Iohn of Basing, & there had place and voyce accordingly; and after his Fathers death, he was also Marquesse of Winchester, and Earle of Wiltshire. He married Anne, daughter of William Lord Ho∣ward of Effingham, & heire to her Mother Katherine, daugh∣ter and co-heyre of Sir Iohn Broughton, of Tuddington in Bedfordshire, by whom he had issue, William Powlet Marques of Winchester now liuing, 1618. Anne, wife to Sir Thomas Dennis of Deuonshire Knight; and Katherine, Wife to Giles Wroughton Knight, sonne and heyre of Sir Thomas Wrough∣ton of Broadhinton in Hampshire Knight. This William dyed in the yeare, 1598. Et portoit, sable trois espees auec le pointz embas d'argent, au cresant d'or. WIlliam Powlet, Marquesse of Winchester, Earle of Wiltshire, and Lord S. Iohn of Basing now liuing, 1618 married Lucie, daughter of Thomas Cecill, Baron of Bourgh∣ley, and Earle of Exeter, and had issue, William Lord S. Iohn of Basing, who married Mary, daughter of Anthony Browne, Viscount Mountague; Thomas second sonne; Iohn third son, Henry fourth sonne, Charles fift sonne, and Edward the sixe sonne, &c. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of Worcester and Meullen, their Armes, Wiues, and Chlidren. VVAlleran de Bellomont, or Beaumont, sonne of Ro∣bert de Beaumont, Earle of Meullen in Norman∣dy, was by King Stephen created Earle of Worce∣ster, in the yeare 1144. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Si∣mon Mountfort, Earle of Eureux in Normandy, and Aunt of Simon Mounfort, Earle of Leicester in England, by whom he had issue, Robert Earle of Meullen, and Lord of Pont-Auda∣mare, who married Mauld, one of the daughters & co-heires of Reginald Earle of Cornwall (base sonne of King Henry the first) and had issue, Henry, Peter, and Mabell; Henry dyed without issue; Peter was Earle of Meullen, and reuolted to the French King, 1166. deliuering vp to him his Castle of Bellomont; Mabell the daughter, was married to William de Riueris (sur-named de Vernon) Earle of Deuonshire, and had issue, Baldwin and Mary, which Mary was first married to Sir Robert Courtney Knight, and after to Peter Prouz of Deuonshire, of whom there are many remaining at this day. To which Peter de Prouz, the saide Robert Earle of Meullen, gaue in franke marriage with the saide Mary his grand-childe, the third part of his lands in England; and vnto Baldwin de Riueris her brother, he gaue other lands in Normandy, with the Mannors of Estruminster, Moreys, and Riddleston in England. This Walleran, founded the Abbey of Bordesley in England, in King Henry the seconds time, and dyed in the yeare 1166. and was buried at Worcester. Others haue, that he dyed a Monke at Pratelles in Normandy. Et portoit, fizelle d'or & d'azur en bande, à vn bordure de gueulles. SIr Thomas Percy Knight, Vice-Chamberlaine to King Ri∣chard the second, (sonne of Henry Lord Percy, and yong∣er brother of Henry Percy first Earle of Northumberland) was after made Steward of the Houshold to the said king; and in the yeare 1397. was created Earle of Worcester, and Lord high Admirall of England. But afterwards (enuying King Henry the fourths vsurpation, and obtaining the King∣dome) entred into a conspiracy with Henry Hotspur his bro∣thers sonne, and many other Noblemen and Knights, to surprize King Henry, whilest hee was busied in his wars in Wales. Which plot being discouered, they were constrained to abide the hazard of a battaile at Shrewsbury, the fourth
of the said Kings Reigne. Where, vpon the rumour of the death of Henry Hot∣spar, who was then slaine with a Launce; all the rest fled, but this Thomas Earle of Worcester, who was taken prisoner, and the next day after beheaded at Shrewsbury, 1403. He married Elizabeth, eldest sister and co-heyre of Dauid Strabolgie, Earle of Atholl, by whom he had issue, Henry Percy Earle of Atholl, who married Margaret, daughter of Sir Mathew Brus of Scotland, and had is∣sue, two daughters his heires; Elizabeth was maried to Sir Thomas Burgh knight, of whom, the Lord Burgh of England descended; and Margaret the second daughter, married Henry Lord Gray of Codnor. Et portoit, d'or an lyon rampant d'azur: à eressant gueulles. RIchard Beauchamp (sonne and heyre of William Beau∣champe Baron of Aburgauenny) was created Earle of Worcester, in the seuenth yeare of King Henry the fift, and married Isabell, daughter of Thomas Lord le Despencer, and sister and heyre of Richard Lord le Despencer, and had issue, Elizabeth his daughter and heyre, Wife to Sir Edward Neuil Knight, younger sonne of Raphe Neuill, first Earle of West∣merland, who was summoned to Parliament by Writ, as Ba∣ron of Aburgauenny, the 29. of Henry the six. This Richard Earle of Worcester, was leader of the wars in France, in King Henry the fifts time, and in besiedging the Citty of Meux in Bry, was slaine with a stone throwne out of an Engine, in the tenth yeare of King Henry the fift, and was buried in the Abbey of Tewksbury. Et portoit, gueulles à vn face & six croiseletz botones d'or, à vn croissant sable en la face. IOhn, Lord Tiptoft and Powis (sonne and heire of Iohn Lord Tiptoft, and Ioice his Wife, daughter and co-heyre of Ed∣ward Charlton Lord Powis) was created Earle of Worcester, in the 27. yeare of King Henry the sixt; and the yeare after, he was made high Constable of England, and Lieutenant of Ireland. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Hopton, and sister and heyre of Sir Walter Hopton, by whom he had issue, Edward Lord Tiptoft, who was after restored, & made Earle of Worcester by King Edward the fourth. This Iohn Earle of Worcester, was attainted by Parliament, and be∣headed at the Tower-Hill, the tenth of King Edward the 4. 1470. and his body was buried in the Preaching Fryars in London. Et portoit, d'argent à vn Saulteur engresley de gueulles.
EDward Lord Tiptoft, after the death of his Father, was restored in blood, and made Earle of Worcester by King Edward the fourth. He dyed without issue, the 12. of Angust, in the third yeare of King Richard the third, and was buried at Ely; leauing his Fathers foure sisters his heyres, viz. Phillip, married to Thomas Lord Ros of Hamlake; Ioane, Wife to Sir Edmond Englethorpe of Cambridshire; Ioice, married vnto Edmond Sutton, sonne and heyre of Iohn Lord Dudley; and Margaret the fourth daughter, professed her selfe a Nun. Et portoit, les armes de son pere. CHarles Somerset, Knight Banneret, (base sonne of Henry Beaufort Duke of Somerset, begotten of Ioane Hill his Concubine) was Vice-Chamberlaine to King Henry the se∣uenth, and after Lord Chamberlaine, both to King Henry the seuenth and King Henry the eight. Hee married three Wiues, the first was Elizabeth, daughter and heyre of Willi∣am Herbert Earle of Huntington, by whom he was Lord Her∣bert of Gower, and was after created Earle of Worcester, at Lambeth house on Candlemas day, 1513. in the first yeare of King Henry the eight. His second Wife was Elianor, daughter of Edward Sutton Lord Dudley. His third Wife was Eliza∣beth, daughter of Thomas Lord Laware: By his first Wife he had issue, Henry Lord Herbert, after Earle of Worcester; and Elizabeth, married to Sir Iohn Sauage knight. By his second Wife he had issue, Sir Charles Somerset knight, Captaine of Risebanke and Callis; Sir George Somerset of Badmansfield Hall in Suffolke; and a daughter named Mary, married to William Lord Grey of Wilton. By his third Wife he had no issue. This Charles, in the tenth yeare of King Henry the eight, surrendred and yeelded vp to Mounsieur Chastillion, to the vse of the French King, the Citty and Castle of Tourney, for foure hundreth and sixty thousand Crownes, to be paid to King Henry. At which surrender, the said Chastillion was not suffered to enter with Banner displayed, but rolled vp, because the said Citty was not wonne by force, but yeelded vp by composi∣tion (which is to be noted.) He was Knight of the Order of the Garter, & dyed in the 17. yeare of King Henry the 8. and was buried at Windesore. Et portoit, lez armes de France & d'engleterre escartelle, à vn bordure gobonne d'argent & d'a∣zur, au baston finester d'argent, sur le tout à vn escusson per pale d'azur & de gueulles au trois lyons rampant d'argent.
HEnry Somerset Lord Herbert, and second Earle of Wor∣cester of that name, married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Anthony Browne Knight, and had issue, William Lord Her∣bert, after Earle of Worcester, Sir Charles Somerset Knight, and Standard-bearer of the Pensioners, to Queene Elizabeth. Thomas Somerset, who dyed in the Tower of London; Fran∣cis Somerset fourth sonne, was slaine at Muscleborough field. Lady Elianor eldest daughter, married to Sir Roger Vanghan; Lady Luce second daughter, was Wife to Iohn Neuill Lord Latymer; Lady Anne third daughter, married Thomas Percy Earle of Northumberland, beheaded at Yorke, 1572. and La∣dy Iane the yongest daughter, was maried to that worthy and valorous knight, Sir Edward Mansell of Glamorganshire, Father of Sir Thomas Mansell, Baronet, Sir Robert Mansell knight, and others. This Henry dyed. Et portoit, d'or, à la face France escartelle d'engleterre, à la bordure gobonne d'argent & d'azur. VVIlliam Somerset, Lord Herbert, and Earle of Worce∣ster, sonne and heyre of Henry aforesaid, & grand∣childe to Charles, married Christian, daughter of Edward Lord North of Kirthing in Cambridgshire, by whom he had issue Edward Lord Herbert, and two daughters; Elizabeth, married to William Windesore, a younger sonne of William Lord Windsore; and Luce the second daughter, was married to Henry Herbert, sonne of Sir Thomas Herbert of Wynestow in Mountgomerishire in Wales. This William was Knight of the Garter, and dyed at his house by S. Iohns at London, and was honourably conueighed by the Officers of Armes and others, to Chepstow in Wales, and there buried in the yeare, 1589. Et portoit, lez armes de son peré. EDward Lord Herbert, after the death of his Father Willi∣am, was the fourth Earle of Worcester of that Family, Knight of the Garter, Lord Priuy Seale, of his Maiesties pri∣uy Counsell, and one of the Lords Commissioners for the Office of Earle Marshall of England, a very honourable and good friend to the Officers of Armes, 1618. He married Lady Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Ha∣stings Earle of Huntington, and Katherine his Wife, daughter and heyre of Henry Pole, Lord Montague, and had issue, Willi∣am Lord Herbert, that dyed without issue, Henry L. Herbert
now liuing, who married Anne, daughter and sole heyre of Iohn Lord Russell, sonne and heyre of Francis Earle of Bedford; Sir Thomas Somerset, Knight of the Bath, & Master of the Horse to Queene Anne; Sir Charles Somerset, Knight of the Bath; and Sir Edward Somerset, Knight of the Bath, fift sonne; Lady E∣lizabeth Somerset, wife to Sir Henry Guilford Knight; Katherine second daugh∣ter, married William Lord Peter of Writile in Essex; Anne, Wife to Sir Edward Wynter of Glocestershire Knight; Francis, married to Sir William Morgan of Llantarnam in Monmouthshire; Blanch, wife to Thomas Arundell, sonne & heyre of the Lord Arundell, of Warder Castle; and Katherine the youngest daughter, was married to Thomas, now Lord Windsore, 1618. Et portoit, d'or, à la face escartelle France & d'engleterre, à la bordure gobonne d'argent & d'azur. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of VViltshire, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. LIonell Plantagenet, (sur-named of Antwerpe, the place of his birth) third sonne of King Edward the third, was by his Father, in the 26. yeare of his Reigne, created Earle of Wiltshire, and in the 36. yeare of his Reigne, he was created Duke of Clarence. He married Elizabeth, daughter and heyre of William Lord Burgh, Earle of Vlster in Ireland, and of Mauld his wife, sister of Henry Duke of Lancaster, by whom he had issue, Philip his onely daughter and heyre, married to Edmond Mortimer Earle of March. This Leo∣nell dyed comming from Mellent, in the yeare of our Lord, 1368. &c. Et portoit, les armoities de France & d'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'ermyn, chargeé au trois cantons de gueulles.
WIlliam Lord Scroope (sonne of Richard, Lord Scroop of Bolton, Lord Chancellour of England) was by King Richard the second, in the 21. yeare of his Reigne, cre∣ated Earle of Wiltshire; & the yeare after he was made Lord high Treasurer of England, and Knight of the Garter. Whō when Henry of Bullingbroke, Duke of Lancaster, came from being a banished man to be King, by the name of king Hen∣ry the 4. he tooke this William Lord Scroope, Sir Iohn Bussie, & Sir Henry Greene (King Richard the seconds Fauorites) and beheaded them at Bristow, in the yeare 1399. This William, bought the Isle of Man, of William Mountague, Earle of Sa∣lisbury; which Island, after the said Williams attaindor, King Henry the 4. did giue it to Henry Percy the first, Earle of Northumberland, in the first yeare of his Reigne; to hold the same, by the seruice of carrying the sword, with which he entred England before him at his Coronation. He dyed without issue, leauing Roger his Brother to succeed him. Et portoit, d'azur à la band d'or. IAmes Butler (sonne and heyre of Iames Butler, fourth Earle of Ormond) was in the life time of his Father, created earle of Wiltshire, in the 27. yeare of King Henry the sixt; and in the 37. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he was made Knight of the Garter; and the yeare after, Lord high Treasurer of England. And in the first yeare of King Edward the fourth, he was beheaded at New-Castle, without issue; leauing Tho∣mas his brother his heyre, who after succeeded him, and was Earle of Ormond. Et portoit, d'or au chef endenté d'azur. IOhn Stafford (second sonne of Humfrey, Duke of Bucking∣ham) was made Knight of the Garter, in the tenth yeare of King Edward the 4. and in the 12. yeare of the saide Kings Reigne, he was created Earle of Wilishire. He married Con∣stance, daughter and heyre of Sir Henry Greene, of Drayton in Northamptonshire Knight, and had issue, Edward Earle of Wiltshire; and dyed in the 14. yeare of King Edward the fourth, 1473. Et portoit, escartellé France & d'engleterre au bordure & cressant d'argent.
EDward Stafford, sonne and heyre of Iohn aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Earle of Wiltshire, and died without issue, the 14. of King Henry the seuenth, 1498. and was buried at Drayton in Northamptonshire, which Lordship he had by his Mother, Constance Greine. Et portoit, lez armoiries de son peré. HEnry Lord Stafford, (second sonne of Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, and brother of Edward the third Duke of Buckingham, beheaded at the Tower-Hill, the 13. of Henry the eight) was created Earle of Wiltshire, in the first yeare of King Henry the eight, 1509. He was made Knight of the Garter before, in the 20. yeare of King Henry the sea∣uenth, and married Muriell, sister and co-heyre of Iohn Grey, Viscount Lisle, but by her had no issue. This Henry dyed the 6. of March, the 14. of King Henry the eight. THomas Bollen (sonne and heyre of Sir William Bollen of Blickling in Norfolke Knight, and of Margaret his wife, daughter and one of the heyres of Thomas Butler Earle of Ormond, Brother and Heyre of Iames Butler, Earle of Wilt-Wiltshire, afore mentioned) was first created Viscount Roch∣ford in the 17. yeare of King Henry the eight; and in the 21. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he was created Earle of Wilt∣shire and Ormond; and to haue the State, Title and Dignity of Wiltshire, to him and his heyres male, and the State, Title and Dignity of Ormond, vnto him and his heyres for e∣uer (a president not to be sampled) He was made Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of the Houshold to King Henry the 8 in the 15. yeare of his Reigne. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolke, and Earle Marshall of Eng∣land, and had issue, George Bollen Viscount Rochford, beheaded without issue, and two daughters; Anne the eldest, was first created Marchionesse of Penbroke, & after married to King Henry the eight. Mary the second daughter, married to William Cary, Esquire for the body to King Henry the eight. This Thomas, Earle of Wiltshire and Ormond, dyed in the 30. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, 1538. Et portoit, d'argent au cheuron entre trois testes de Boef cope de sable, armé d'or.
WIlliam Powlet Knight, descended of a second Bro∣ther of the Powlets of Wiltshire, was created Lord S. Iohn of Basing, in the 30. yeare of Henry the eight, and made Knight of the Garter, the 35. of the same Kings Reigne; and after, in the third yeare of King Edward the sixt, he was cre∣ated Earle of Wiltshire: and in the fift yeare of the said kings Reigne, he was created Marquesse of Winchester, as more at large doth appeare in the Title of Winehester. Et portoit, sable trois espees avec le points embas d'argent, au cressant d'or. IOhn Powlet, sonne and heyre of William, succeeded his Fa∣ther, and was Marquesse of Winchester, and Earle of Wilt∣shire, and Lord S. Iohn of Basing, and dyed at his house at Chelsey, 1576. and was buried at Basing, the 19. of Queene Elizabeth, as is more at large, in the title of Winchester. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. WIlliam Powlet, sonne and heyre of Iohn, was in the life time of his Father, summoned to Parliament, 1575. as Lord S. Iohn of Basing; and after the death of his Father, he was both Marquesse of Winchester, and Earle of Wiltshire, and dyed in the yeare 1598. as in the Title of Win∣chester. Et portoit, sable trois espees auec le pointz embas d'argent, au cressant d'or.
WIlliam Powlet, Lord S. Iohn of Basing, Earle of Wilt∣shire, and Marquesse of Winchester now liuing, 1618. married Lucie, daughter of Thomas Cecill Earle of Excester, by whom he hath issue, as aforesaid, in the Title of Winche∣ster. Et portoit, sable trois espees auec le pointz embas d'argent, au cressant d'or. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles of VVestmerland, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. RAphe Lord Neuill, of Raby, Branspath, in the Bishop∣pricke of Durham, Warkeworth in Northumberland, Sheryhuton in Yorkshire, & Midleham in Richmondshire, &c. was created Earle of Westmerland, in the 21. yeare of the Reigne of King Richard the second; and in the first yeare of King Henry the 4. he was made Earle of Richmond for terme of life. He was also Knight of the Garter, Earle Marshall of England, and Lord Warden of the Marches towards Scot∣land. He married two wiues, the first was Margaret, daugh∣ter of Hugh Earle Stafford, by whom he had issue, two Sons and seuen daughters, Iohn Lord Neuill his sonne and heire, married Elizabeth, sister and co heyre of Edmond Holland Earle of Kent, and had issue, Raphe second Earle of Westmerland and others, and dyed in France before his Father. Raphe the second sonne, was Lord of Ousley in Warwickshire, in right of Mary his Wife, daughter and co-heyre of Robert Fer∣rars Baron of Ousley. Mauld the eldest daughter, was married to Peter Lord Mauley of Moulgraue: Alice, wife first to Sir Thomas Grey of Heton, and after to Sir Gilbert Lancaster: Philip, wife to Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland: Mar∣garet, married to Richard Lord Scroope of Bolton: Anne, wife to Sir Gilbert Vm∣freuile, of Kyme in Lincolnshire; Margery was Abbesse of Barking; and Eliza∣beth was a Nun in the Minories in London. His second Wife was Ioane, daughter of Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lanca∣ster, by the Lady Katherine Swinford, by whom hee had issue also, eight sonnes and fiue daughters: viz. Richard Neuill Earle of Salisbury; William
Neuill, Lord Falconberg; Edward Neuill, Lord of Aburgauenny; George Neuill, Lord Latymer; Robert Neuill, Bishop of Duresme; Cuthbert, Henry and Thomas Neuill, dyed without issue. Katherine the eldest daughter, was married to Iohn Mowbray, second Duke of Norfolke, by whom she had issue. Elianor second daughter, was Wife to Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland? Anne the third daughter, was married to Humfrey Stafford, Duke of Buckingham; Iane a Nun; and Cicely the fift daughter, was married to Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, who had issue, King Edward the fourth, and King Richard the third. Which Ri∣chard Duke of Yorke, by the greatnesse and the number of his Wiues kindred, was able to bandy for the Kingdome of England, against the House of Lanca∣ster. This Raphe dyed in the 4. yeare of King Henry the sixt, 1425. Et portoit, gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. RAphe Neuill, sonne and heyre of Iohn Lord Neuill, and grand-childe of Raphe, first Earle of Westmerland afore∣said, was after the death of his said Grand-father, the second Earle of Westmerland, Lord of Raby, &c. He married Eliza∣beth, daughter of Henry Lord Percy (sur-named Hotspurre) sonne and heyre of Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, by whom he had issue, Iohn Lord Neuill, who maried Anne, daughter of Iohn Holland, Duke of Excester, and Earle of Huntington, and was slaine at Towton-Field, on Palme-Sun∣day, the first of King Edward the fourth without issue, in the life time of Earle Raphe his Father. After this Iohns death; Sir Iohn Neuill Knight his Vnckle, married Anne Holland his Widdow, of whom he begot Raphe Neuill, the third Earle of Westmerland. This Raphe second Earle of Westmerland, died the third of Nouember, the second of King Richard the third, 1484. Et portoit, gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. RAphe Neuill (sonne and heyre of Sir Iohn Neuill knight, second brother of Raphe, second Earle of Westmerland) was after the death of his Father and Vnck the third Eaile of Westmerland, and married Margaret, daughter of Sir Roger Booth of Barton in Lancashire Knight, (Brother of Laurence Booth Bishop of Yorke) and had issue Raphe Neuill, that dyed before his Father; who hauing married Editha, daughter of Sir William Sandes of Hampshire, had issue Raphe Neuill the 4. Earle of Westmerland. T his Raphe, the third Earle of West∣merland had issue also, a daughter named Anne, married to Sir William Cogniers Knight, and dyed. Et portoit, gueulles au Saulteur d'argent.
RAphe Neuill, (sonne of Raphe Lord Neuill, and Editha Sandes) was after the death of Raphe Neuill third Earle of Westmerland his grand-father, the fourth Earle of Westmer∣land, Lord of Raby, Banspath, &c. and Knight of the Garter. He married Katherine, daughter of Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, by whom he had issue, seuen sonnes and ten daughters: the first sonne Henry, was after his Father, the 5. Earle of Westmerland; Sir Thomas Neuill Knight, second son; Edward Neuill, Christopher Neuill fourth sonne, Raphe, George and Cuthbert Neuill; Elianor the eldest daughter, died with∣out issue; Dorothy, was wife to Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford; Mary, wife to Sir Thomas Danby Knight; Ioane Neuill; Mar∣garet, wife to Henry Mannors Earle of Rutland, who lyeth buried at S. Leonards at Shoreditch, 1560. Elizabeth, wife to Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland; Elia∣nor, wife to Sir Brian Stapleton Knight; Katherine, wife to Sir Iohn Constable of Holdernesse, buried also at Shoreditch, 1591. Anne, wife to Sir Foulke Greuill Knight; and Vrsula the youngest daughter. This Raphe dyed in the 15. yeare of King Henry the eight, 1523. Et portoit, les armoiries de son peré. HEnry Neuill (after the death of Raphe his Father) was the fift Earle of Westmerland, Lord of Raby, Branspath, Shery-huton and Midleham, and Knight of the Garter. He married Anne, daughter of Thomas Mannors Earle of Rut∣land, and had issue, Charles Neuill, sixt Earle of Westmerland; Katherine, married to Sir Thomas Grey of Chillingham knight; Elianor, wife to Sir William Pelham Knight, Master of the Or∣denance to Queene Elizabeth. This Henry married to his se∣cond Wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Richard Cholmley Knight, by whom he had diuers children that dyed yong. He dyed the 9. of February, 1564. the sixt of Queene Elizabeth. Et portoit, de gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. CHarles Lord Neuill, after the death of Henry his Father, was the sixt and last Earle of Westmerland, Lord of Ra∣bie, Branspath, Shery-huton, Midleham, &c. This man, vn∣mindfull of his Princes fauors, and of his duty to his Coun∣try, ioyned and combined himselfe, with Thomas Percy Earle of Northumberland, and others, and was the chiefe Leader & Stirrer of the Insurrection in the North parts of England, a∣gainst Queene Elizabeth of famous memory, in the yeare, 1570. For which rebellion, he was by Parliament adiudged
a Traitor, and had his goods and lands consiscated, and himselfe to haue suffe∣red death, had he not fled beyond the Seas, where hee hued long after in very poore and miserable estate, and where he dyed. He married Anne, daughter of Henry Howard Earle of Surrey, and fifter of Thomas Howard, the last Duke of Norfolke, and had issue three daughters, Ka∣therine Neuill, Elianor and Margaret. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earles and Dukes of VVarwicke, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. HEnry de Nouoburgo (a Castle or Towne in Normandy, where the saide Henry was borne) sonne of Roger de Bellomont, and Adelina his Wife, daughter of Walleran, and sister and heyre of Hugh Earle of Mellent (Father and Mother also of Robert, Earle of Mellent and Leicester) was created Earle of Warwicke, by William the Conqueror, & had giuen him the Borough and Liberties of Warwicke, as fully and surely, as when they were belonging to the Crowne of England. He married Margerie, sister and heyre of Rotrc, Earle of Pereh, by whom he had issue, siue sonnes; Roger de Bellomont, Earle of Warwicke; Rotherick, Archbishop of Ro∣an; Robert, sur-named of Newburgh; Geffrey and Henry, and two daughters. He founded the Priory of S. Sepulchres in Warwicke, and dyed in the 23. yeare of King Henry the first, 1123. and was buried with his Aunce∣stors, at Pratum (or Preaux) neere the Towne of Pont-Adamare in Normandy. Et portoit, lozengie d'or & d'azur. ROger de Bellomont (sonne and heyre of Hry le puo∣burgo aforesaid) was after his Father, the second Earle of Warwicke after the Conquest. He maried Gundred, daugh∣ter of William, the second Earle Warren and Surrey, and had issue, William Earle of Warwicke, who dyed without issue, and Walleran, who was the fourth Earle of Warwicke. This Roger made diuers iournies to the Holy-Land, and dyed the se∣cond day of the Ides of Iune, in the yeare 1153. and was bu∣ried at Warwicke. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
VVIlliam de Plesseto, sonne and heire of Roger de Bello∣mont, was after his Fathers death, the third Earle of Warwicke after the Norman Conquest. He married two Wines, the first was Matilda, eldest daughter and co-heyre of William Lord Percy, and sister of Agnes, the Wife of Ioce∣line de Louaine. His second Wife was Margaret, daughter of the Lord D'eyuile, but had no issue by eyther. He dyed the 17. day before the Kalends of December, 1183. leauing his Brother Walleran to succeed him in the Earledome of War∣wicke. Et portoit, les armes de son bisayeul. WAlleran (second sonne of Roger de Bellomont) after the death of William his elder brother, was the fourth Earle of Warwicke, and married two wiues; the first was Margaret, daughter of Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford, who dyed without issue. His second Wife was Alice, daugh∣ter of Iohn Harecourt, by whom he had issue, three sonnes & one daughter, William, Henry and Walleran; Alice the daugh∣ter, was married to William Mandud, Baron of Hanslape in Buckinghamshire, and Chamberlaine of the Exchecquer. This Walleran, at the Coronation of king Iohn, did carry the sword vpon the right hand of the said King, for his seruice due for the Earledome of Warwicke, and dyed in the yeare 1200. be∣ing the second of King Iohn. Et portoit, lozengie d'or & d'azur à la bordur gueulles. WIlliam, sonne and heyre of Walleran, the fourth Earle of Warwicke, was after the death of his Father, the fift Earle of Warwicke: In whose time, all England was vn∣der the subiection of the Pope, for seuen yeares together. He dyed without issue, as Iohn Rous of Warwicke hath. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
HEnry, second sonne of Earle Walleran, and brother and heyre of William, the fift Earle of Warwicke aforesaide, was the sixt Earle of Warwicke. He was euer faithfull to king Iohn, although he tooke from him the Lordship of Gower in South-Wales. He alwayes maintained the said Kings part, a∣gainst Lewis the French Kings Sonne, and others the Nobili∣ty of the Realme: who tooke vnto themselues the name of Maintainers of the liberties of the Kingdome. Hee married two Wiues, the first was Margery, daughter of Henry de Oy∣ley, Baron of Hochnorton, and Founder of Osney Abbey and Missenden, and sister & co-heyre of Henry D'Oyley the yong∣er, by whom he had issue, Thomas Earle of Warwicke, and a daughter named Margery, who was first married to Iohn Marshall (Brother of William Marshall the elder, Earle of Penbroke) who (in her right) was Earle of Warwicke, and dyed without issue. Her second husband was Iohn de Plessetis, a Pictauian borne, who in her right was also Earle of Warwicke. This Henry married to his second Wife, Phillip, daughter of Thomas Lord Basset, of Hedington in Oxfordshire, Founder of the Priory of Bisseter, by whom he had no issue. He dyed in the second yeare of King Henry the third. Les armes de son peré. THomas, sonne and heyre of Henry, the sixt Earle of War∣wicke, after the death of his Father, was the 7. Earle of Warwicke; and married Ela, daughter of William Longspee, Earle of Salisbury, base sonne of King Henry the second, by whom he had no issue. Hee dyed issuelesse, the 26. of King Henry the third, 1242. leauing his sister Margery his heire, and to possesse his Inheritance; She being married to Iohn Mar∣shall, as aforesaid. Et portoir, eschiquettee d'or & d'azur, au cheumon d'hermines. IOhn Marshall, sonne of Iohn the Kings Marshall in King Henry the seconds time, and Brother of William Marshall the elder, Earle of Penbroke, (whom M. Milles hath greatly mistaken in his Booke, pag. 794) This Iohn married Marge∣rie, sister and sole heyre of Thomas, the seuenth Earle of War∣wicke, in whose right, he was the eight Earle of Warwicke, by the permission and fauour of King Henry the third, and after dyed without issue, the 27. yeare of the said Kings Reigne. Et portoit, de gueulles à la band fizelle d'or.
IOhn de Plessetis, a Pictauian borne, after the death of Iohn Marshall, married Margery his Widdow, sister and heyre of Thomas, the seuenth Earle of Warwicke, in whose right (& King Henry the thirds permission and fauour) he was the 9. Earle of Warwicke. This Iohn, with diuers other Englishmen, trauelling from Aquitaine towards their owne country ouer land, by a safe conduct of the French Kings, were arrested in a Towne of Poictow, called Ponts, and there imprisoned (notwithstanding they shewed the saide Licence) hee dyed without issue, in the yeare 1263. and was buried in the Mo∣nastery of Missenden in Buckinghamshire. Et portoit, d'argent à six annelletz de gneulle. 32, 1. WAlleran, third sonne of Walleran, the fourth Earle of Warwicke, and Vnkcle and heyre of Margery, Coun∣tesse of Warwicke his Niece, after whose death, and her two husbands, Iohn Marshall, and Iohn de Plessetis Earle of War∣wicke; he was the tenth Earle of Warwicke, and the last of that Family. In his time liued these famous Writers, Robert Gros∣hed Bishop of Lincolne; Roger Bacon and others. Hee dyed without issue, leauing William Manduit, Baron of Hanslape, his sister Alices sonne to succeed him, as Iohn Rous of Warwick hath. Et portoit, lozengie d'or & d'azur à la bordur de gueulles. WIlliam Manduit (or Maledoctus) sonne of William Manduit, Baron of Hanslape, and Alice his wife, sister and heyre of Walleran the tenth Earle of Warwicke, was after the death of William his Father, Baron of Hanslap, and here∣ditary Chamberlaine of the Exchequer; and after the death of Walleran his Vnckle aforesaide, was the eleuenth Earle of Warwicke, and was surprized in his Castle of Warwicke, by Simon Mountfort Earle of Leicester; and (with his Wife and Family) were carried away prisoners to the Castle of Kenel∣worth, and his Castle of Warwicke despoyled, because he took part with King Henry the third, against the Barons. He dyed without issue, the 4. day of the Ides of Ianuary, in the yeare 1268. and was buried honourably at Warwicke, leauing Isabell his sister and heyre, married to William Beauchampe Baron of Elmeley, called the Blinde Baron. Et portoit, d'argent à deux barres de gueulles.
WIlliam Beauchampe, or Bello-Campo, Baron of Aelm∣ley and Hanslap sonne of William Beauchampe, and Isabell Manduit, was the 12. Earle of Warwicke, Shirieffe of Worcestershire by Inheritance, and Chamberlame of the Ex∣chequer, and by his Wife, Lord of Kirtling. This William, with Richard Bishop of London, Reginald Grey, Iohn Gifford, and Alan Plugenet, were appointed Tutors and Gouernours to Prince Edward, in the absence of King Edward the first his Fathers abode in Flanders, He married Mauld, daughter and one of the heyres of Iohn Fitz-Geffrey, Lord of Kirtling, and Chiefe-Iustice of Ireland, and had issue, Guy Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke; Isabell, wife to Patrick Chaworth, Lord of Kidwelly in South-Wales; and Mauld, married to  Blount. He dyed at Aelmley, the 26. of King Edward the first, and was buried at Worcester by his Father, in the Fryars Minories. Et portoit, gueulles à la face entre six croix croisettees d'or. GVy Beauchampe, sonne and heyre of William the 12. Earle of Warwicke, was after the death of his Father, the thir∣teenth Earle of Warwicke, Baron of Aelmley and Hanslap, and Founder of the Colledge at Elmeley, and had ginen him by king Edward the first (for his good seruice) the Castle of Bar∣nard in the Bishopricke of Durisme, being parcell of the Ba∣liols inheritance. He was one of the Noblemen, which caused Peter of Gaueston (King Edward the seconds Minnion) to be beheaded. Hee married Alice, daughter of Raphe de Toneio, and sister and heyre of Robert Lord Toneio, Baron of Flamsted, & had issue two sonnes, Thomas and Iohn, and a daughter named E∣lizabeth, wife to Thomas Lord Astley; Thomas was after his Father, Earle of Warwicke, and Iohn was Admirall of England, Constable of Douer Castle Lord Warden of the Cinque-Ports, Knight; and one of the first Founders of the Noble Order of the Garter, and dyed in the 34. yeare of King Edward the third, and was buried in the body of the Church of S. Paul in London, leauing Thomas Earle of Warwicke his heyre, who was then found to be 40. yeares of age, and a∣boue. This Guy, dyed in the yeare 1315. the 9. of King Edward the second, and was buried at Brodesley in Worcestershire. Et portoit, gueulles à la face entre six croix croisettees d'or.
THomas Beauchampe, the 14. Earle of Warwicke, after the death of Guy his Father: hee was borne in the Castle of Warwicke, & christened by Thomas, Earle of Lancaster. And in the yeare 1337. he was made Marshall of England, by king Edward the third, during pleasure, and was one of the Foun∣ders of the Noble Order of the Garter. He walled and em∣battelled his Castle of Warwicke, and adorned it with Gates and Bulwarks. He was at the battailes of Cressy, Poictiers, & at the assiedge of Callis, with king Edward the third He mar∣ried Katherine, daughter of Roger Mortimer, Earle of March, and had issue, three sonnes and sixe daughters; Guy the eldest sonne married, and had issue two daughters, Elizabeth and Katherine, and dyed before his Father, in the 34 yeare of king Edward the third. Thomas second sonne, was after his Father, Earle of Warwicke; William the third sonne, was Baron of Aburgauenny: Mauld, wife to Roger Lord Clifford; Kathe∣rine, married Hugh Earle Stafford; Elizabeth, wife to Iohn Beauchampe, Baron of Hatche in Somersetshire; Ioane, Wife to Raphe Basset of Drayton; Isabell, married to William Vfford, Earle of Suffolke; the last was a Nun. Et portoit, de gueulles à la face entre six croix croisettees d'or. THomas Beauchampe, after the death of Thomas his Fa∣ther, and Guy his eldest Brother, was the 15. Earle of Warwicke, &c. This Thomas, vpbraided King Richard the second, with the murder of Thomas Duke of Glocester his Vnckle; For which, he was euer after very hateful vnto him, and was in the 21. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, at a Parli∣ament, adiudged and condemned with the Earle of Arundel, of high treason; the Earle of Arundell was beheaded, and this Thomas confined to the custody of William Lord Scroop, and Earle of Wiltshire, into the Isle of Man: A great part of his Inheritance being taken from him, was giuen to Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent and Duke of Surrey, halfe Brother to King Richard. But after, in the second yeare of King Henry the 4. he was restored againe, both to honour and lands. He married Margaret, daughter of William, Lord Ferrars of Groby, and had issue, Richard Earle of Warwicke, and Margaret, married to Iohn Baron Dudley. He dyed in the second yeare of King Henry the 4. in his Castle of Warwicke, and was there buried by his Ancestors. Et portoit, les armes deson peré.
RIchard Beauchampe, sonne of Thomas aforesaid, was af∣ter his Fathers death, the fixteenth Earle of Warwicke, and by his Wife, Lord Lisle. He was Gouernour of Norman∣dy, and Lieutenant generall vnder Iohn, Duke of Bedford, Re∣gent of France, for King Henry the 5. who made him Cap∣taine of Callis, and of the Citty and Castle of Meaux in Bry. He married two Wiues, the first was Elizabeth, daughter & heyre of Thomas Lord Berkeley, & Margery his wife, daugh∣ter and heyre of Warren, Lord Lisle and Tyes, by whom he had issue, three daughters, who were heyres to their Mother; Margaret the eldest, was married vnto Iohn Talbet Earle of Shrewsbury, and had issue, Iohn Talbot Viscount Lisle. Elianor the second daughter, was first married to Thomas Lord Ros, of Hamelake; and after to Edward Beauford, Duke of Somerset. Elizabeth the third daughter, was Wife to George Neuill, Lord Latimer. This Richards second Wife was Isabell, daughter of Thomas Spencer, Earle of Glocester, and sister and heyre of Richard Lord Spencer, by whom he had issue, Henry Duke of Warwicke, and Anne, mar∣ried to Richard Neuill, Earle of Salisbury, who (in her right) was after Earle of Warwicke. This Richard, the sixteenth Earle of Warwicke, dyed at Roan, in the yeare 1439. and his body being brought into England, was buried in the New Colledge at Warwicke, the 17. of King Henry the sixt. Et portoit, de gueulles à la face entre six croix croisettes d'or. HEnry Beauchampe, sonne of Richard aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the seuenteenth Earle of War∣wicke, and of Albemarle, Baron of Elmesley, Hanslape, Spen∣cer, and Aburgauenny, and Knight of the Garter. And in the 20. yeare of King Henry the sixt, he was restored to all his li∣uings, with great applaud and honour, being crowned King of the Isle of Wight, by the Kings owne hands, and made cheefe Earle of England. And in the yeare 1444. being the 23. of the saide Kings Reigne, he was created Duke of War∣wicke, and had granted him in all meetings and assemblies, both in Parliament and elsewhere; to haue place and prece∣dence next after the Duke of Norfolke, and before the Duke of Butingham. He had giuen him also the Castle of Bristow, with the appurtenances, and the Isles of Gernsey and Iarsey. He married Cicely, daughter of Richard Neuill, Earle of Salisbury, and sister of Richard, Earle of Warwicke, and had issue, one onely daughter and heyre named Anne, being but two yeares olde at his death. She was Ward to William de la Pole, Duke; Marquesse and Earle of Suffolke; and
dyed in the yeare 1449. being but sixe yeares of age, and was buried at Reading; and Henry her Father dyed at Hanley, the place of his birth (being not full 22. yeares olde, in the yeare of our Lord, 1446. and was buried at Tewkesbury (as Iohn Rous of Warwicke hath. Et portoit, les armes de son peré. RIchard Neuill, some and heyre of Richard Neuill, Earle of Salisbury, married Anne, daughter of Richard Beau∣champe, the 16. Earle of Warwicke, by his second Wife, and sister and sole heire of the whole blood of Henry Beauchamp, Duke of Warwicke aforesaid; in whose right, this Richard Neuill, in the 28. yeare of King Henry the sixt, was the eigh∣teenth Earle of Warwicke; and by that Name and Title sate in Parliament held at Westminster, the 33. of the saide Kings Reigne; and in the 39. yeare of Henry the sixt, his Father be∣ing dead, was also Earle of Salisbury and Lord Monthermer, great Chamberlaine and Admirall of England, Lord War∣den of the North Marches towards Scotland, and of the Cinque-Ports, Cap∣taine of Callis, and high Steward of the Dutchy of Lancaster. At what time this Richard was sent into France, to treate a marriage for King Edward the 4. King Edward fell in loue, and married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Wooduile, Earle Ryuers (the Widdow of Sir Iohn Grey) which pro∣cured great hatred betweene this Earle and the King. Which disgrace, this Ri∣chard beeing not able to digest, plotted a confederacy with George, Duke of Clarence, King Edwards brother, for to restore King Henry the sixt: and assem∣bling his Forces at Banbury, he ouerthrew King Edward in battaile, and tooke him prisoner. But King Edward within a while after (by the helpe of his Friends) made an escape from out the Castle of Banbury, wherein he was pri∣soner, and began a new warre at Stamford, where he was Conquerour, and en∣forced this Earle Richard to flye into France. But within sixe moneths after, hee returned againe into England, and enforced King Edward to flye into Flanders, to Charles Duke of Burgundy, who had married his sister; setting King Henry at liberty, after ten yeares imprisonment. After all which, King Edward (by the assistance of his said Brother of Bur∣gandy) came into England againe, and waging battaile against King Henries Faction, at Barnet, ten miles from London, vanquished his enemies, and slew this Richard, and his brother Iohn, Marquesse Mountague, in the yeare 1471. beeing Easter day. And this was the ende of this great Earle of Warwicke, who pulled downe Kings, and set them vp againe at his pleasure. He had issue by his saide Wife, two daughters his heyres; Isabell, married to Gearge Plantagenet, Duke of Clerence, Brother to King Edward the 4. And Anne, first married to Edward, Prince of Wales, sonne of King Henry the sixt, who was slaine at Tewksbury; and after to Richard Duke of Glocester, after King of England. Et portoit, gueulles  faulteur d'argei, au lambell gobonné d'argent & d'azur.
GEorge Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, brother of King Edward the 4. found drowned in a But of Malmescy, in the Tower of London. He married Isabell, daughter and co∣heyre of Richard Neuill, Earle of Warwicke aforesaide, in whose right he was the 19. Earle of Warwicke, and had issue, Edward, the twentieth Earle of Warwicke, and Margaret, Countesse of Salisbury, Wife to Richard Pole Knight, Fa∣ther of Henry  Mountague, as in the Title of Clare is more at large. Et portoit, les armoiries de France escartellé d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent chargeé de trois cantons de gueulles. EDward Plantagenet, sonne and heyre of George, Duke of Clarence, and Nephew to King Edward the 4. was after the death of his Father, Earle of Salisbury, and the twen∣tieth Earle of Warwicke, and the last heyre male of the Fami∣ly of Plantagenets. He was a childe of most difastrous for∣tune, as the creature, who had from his Cradle beene nursed vp in prison, & his fatall day was hastened by another mans folly. For a certaine youth of meane parentage, was subbor∣ned by a knaue Priest, to take vpon him, the name and per∣son of this Earle Edward; giuing it out, that he had lately es∣caped out of the prison, in the Tower of London. This bruit caused a great tumult amongst the Commons, who thē were glad to heare, that a branch of the Plantagenets was to be restored to the Impe∣riall Diadem. But the truth was, that Edward Earle of Warwicke, had complot∣ted with Perkyn Werbert (as it was said) to make an escape: the which attempt, was then helde no lesse a crime then high treason it selfe. But the plot being dis∣couered, the silly young Nobleman, was brought to his triall for the same, the 21 of Nouember (Iohn Earle of Oxford, being then appointed Lord high Ste∣ward of England) and found guilty, and for the same the 28. day of Nouember after after, in the 15. yeare of King Henry the seueuth, was beheaded at the To∣wer-Hill. His body being conuayed to Bisham, was there buried, he being then 24. yeares of age, 159. Et portoit, les armes de son peré.
IOhn Sutton, alias Dudley, sonne of Edmond Dudley, and Eli∣zabeth, daughter of Edward Grey, Viscount Lisle, and Aunt and heyre of Elizabeth Grey, Countesse of Deuon; was cre∣ated Viscount Lisle, the 34. of King Henry the eight, and after Earle of Warwicke, in the first yeare of King Edward the sixt, 1547. And lastly, in the fift yeare of the said King Edward, he was created Duke of Northumberland. He married Anne, daughter of Edward Guilford, & sister and heyre of Sir Henry Guilford Knight, by whom hee had issue, eight sonnes and fiue daughters. Henry the eldest sonne, married Wynefred, daughter of Richard Lord Rich, and dyed at the siedge of Bollen, 1543. Thomas dyed young; Iohn third sonne, was Earle of Warwicke: he married Anne, daughter of Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset, and dyed without issue, being 24. yeares olde: Ambrose the fourth sonne, was also Earle of Warwicke, and dyed without issue; Robert the fift sonne, was Earle of Leicester, & married Lettice, daughter of Sir Francis Knolles, Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of the Houshold to Queene Elizabeth, and had issue, Robert, Baron of Denbigh, that dyed yong; Guilford Dudley sixt sonne, married the Lady Iane, daughter of Henry Grey Duke of Suffoke, who were all three beheaded, in the yeare 1553. Henry the seuenth sonne, married Margaret, daughter and onely heyre of Thomas, Lord Audley of Walden, and was slaine at S. Quintins, 1557. She was after married to Thomas Howard, the last Duke of Norfolke. Charles the eight sonne, dyed young; Temperance, Margaret and Ka∣therine, dyed all three young; Mary, was married to Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of Wales, and had issue, Sir Phillip Sidney knight, and Robert Sidney Earle of Leicester, 1618. and Katherine the youngest daughter, was married to Henry Hastings, Earle of Huntington. This Iohn, Duke of Northumberland, was beheaded at Tower-Hill, in the yeare 1553. Et portoit, d'or au lyon rampar vert à la queue nouee. AMbrose Dudley, sonne of Iohn, Duke of Northumberland, on S. Stephens day, the 26. of December, 1562. and the 4. of Queene Elizabeth, at White-Hall was created Baron Lisle, and the same day made the 22. Earle of Warwicke. He was Master of the Ordenance, and Knight of the Garter, and of the priuy Counsell to the said Queene. He married three wiues, but had no issue by eyther: the first was Anne, daugh∣ter and co-heyre of William Whorwood, Atturney generall to King Henry the eight: the second was Elizabeth, daughter of Gilbert, Lord Talboys: & the third was Anne, eldest daugh∣ter of Francis Lord Russell, and Earle of Bedford. He dyed without issue, in the yeare 1589. and was buried at Warwicke. Et portoit, lez armoiries comme son pere.
RObert Lord Rich of Leze, grand childe to Richard Rich, created Lord Rich of Leze, the 17. of February, 1547. and Lord Treasurer of England (by his sonne Robert Lord Rich) was by Letters Patents dated at Salisbury, the  of August, 1618. made the three and twentieth Earle of War∣wicke. He married Penelope, daughter of Walter Deuereux, Earle of Essex, and had issue, Robert Lord Rich, who married Frances, daughter and heyre of Sir William Hatton Knight, & hath issue, Robert and others. Sir Henry Rich, Knight of the Bath, second sonne, married Isabell, daughter and heyre of Sir Walter Cope Knight; Charles third sonne; Luce, eldest daughter, married to Sir George Cary of Deuonshire Knight; Essex second daughter, was married to Sir Thomas Cheeke Knight; and Penelope third daughter. Et portoit, gueulles au cheuron, accompaigne de trois croix recroisettees d'or. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earles of YORKE, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. OTho, sonne of Henry Leo, Duke of Bauaria, Saxom and Sardinia (begotten of Mauld, daughter of Henry the second, King of England, who was after Emperor, by the name of Otho the 4.) was girt with the Sword of the Earledome of Yorke, in the first yeare of the Reigne of King Richard the first his Vnckle, 1189. But afterwards King Ri∣chard made an exchange with Otho, and gaue him the Earle∣dome of Poictow, for the Earledome of Yorke. He married two wiues, the first was Mary, daughter of the Duke of Bra∣bant; the second was Beatrix, daughter of Phillip the Empe∣rour, sonne of Fredericke the Emperour, and dyed without issue in Saxony, 1218. This Otho had a brother both by Father and Mother, na∣med William, from whom are descended, the Dukes of Brunswicke and Lune∣burgh in Germany: who, for memory of their alliance and kindred with the Kings of England, bare for their Armes, the ancient Armes of the Dukes of Normandy. Gueulles deux leopards passant d'or.
EDmond, fift sonne of King Edward the third (sur-named of Langley, the Kings Mannor house neere S. Albons, where he was borne) was created first Earle of Cambridge, in the 36. yeare of his Fathers Reigne, and Lord of Tindale, and was Knight of the Garter: and in the ninth yeare of King Richard his Nephew, hee was created Duke of Yorke. He married two Wiues, the first was Isabell, second daugh∣ter and one of the heyres of Peter, King of Castile & Leon, by whom he had issue, Edward, Earle of Rutland, Duke of Albemarle and Yorke; Richard, after Earle of Cambridge; and Constance, first married to Thomas Spencer, Earle of Gloce∣ster, and after to Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent. This Edmonds second Wife was Ioane, daughter of Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent, and sister and co-heyre of Edmond Holland, Earle of Kent, but by her had no issue. He was in the absence of his Father in France, made Protector of the Realme of England; and after dyed in the third yeare of King Henry the 4. his Nephew, and was buried at Langley. Et portoit, France seme & d'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent chargee au 9. torteaux. EDward Plantagenet (sonne and heire of Edmond of Lang∣ley aforesaid) was created Earle of Rutland & of Corke, in the 13. yeare of King Richard the second; and in the 21. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he was created Duke of Al∣bermale, and Constable of England; and after the death of his Father, he was also Duke of Yorke, and Lord of Tyndall. He married Phillip, daughter and one of the heyres of Iohn Mohun, Lord of Dunster, but by her had no issue. He was slaine at the battaile of Egincourt, the 25. of October, the third of King Henry the fift, 1414. At which battaile were slaine, Charles Lord Dalabreth, high Constable of France; Iaques le Chastilion, Lord of Dampier, high Admirall of France; Iohn, Duke D'Alanson; Anthony, Duke of Brabant; Edward, Duke of Barry; the Earles of Marle, Vawdemont, Blawmont, Grand preè, Russey, Faulcon∣bridge, Fois and Lastrake; 25. Lords, 8000. Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of Name & Armes. This Edwards body was brought ouer sea into England, and buried at Fotheringhay. Et portoit, lez armoiries de son pere.
RIchard Plantagenet (sonne and heyre of Richard of Co∣nesburgh, Earle of Cambridge, second sonne of Edmond Langley, Duke of Yorke aforesaid) was after the death of Ed∣ward his Vnckle without issue, restored to be Duke of Yorke, Earle of March and Vlster, Lord of Wigmore and Clare, &c. He was Lieutenant to King Henry the sixt, in his Kingdome of France, and Dukedome of Normandy, 1435. and was Chiefe of the Faction of the White Rose, being descended of Lyonell, Duke of Clarence. This Richard, raised a deadly war against the House of Lancaster, clayming his lawfull right in the Kingdome of England: which after, his sonne Edward obtained, and was King, by the Name of Edward the fourth. He wonne the bat∣taile of S. Albons, against King Henry the sixt, 1455. and in the same yeare, he was made by Parliament, heyre apparent to the Crowne, and Lord Protector of the Realme. And after, in the 39. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he was slaine with his young sonne Edmond, at the battaile of Wakefield, 1460. at Fotheringhay. He married Cecily, daughter of Raphe Neuill, first Earle of Westmerland, and had is∣sue, Henry that dyed young; Edward, that was after King, by the Name of king Edward the 4. Edmond Earle of Rutland, slaine in the Towne of Wakefield, by the Lord Clifford, the same day his Father was slaine in the battell. Iohn, William and Thomas dyed young; George, Duke of Clarence, and Richard, Duke of Glo∣cester, after King. Anne the eldest daughter, was first married to Henry Holland, Duke of Excester, and after to Sir Thomas Saint-Leoger Knight by whom he had issue, Anne, Mother of Thomas Mannors, Earle of Rutland; Elizabeth, Wife to Iohn de la Pole, Duke of Suffolke; Margaret third daughter, wife to Charles, Duke of Burgundy and Vrsula. Et portoit, France semé & d'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent chargee au neuf torteaux. RIchard, sur-named of Shrewsbury, the place of his birth second sonne of King Edward the 4. was by his Father (at a Parliament helde at Westminster, the 20. day of May, 1474.) created Duke of Yorke; and in the 19. yeare of the said Kings Reigne, he married Anne, the onely daughter and heyre of Iohn Lord Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke, Earle War∣ren and Surrey, & Earle Marshall of England, in whose right he was Duke of Norfolke, &c. This Richard, beeing but a childe, was with his brother, King Edward the fift (by the command of Richard, Duke of Glocester, their vnnaturall Vnckle) most cruelly murdered in the Tower of London, the 9. day of the Kalends of Iune, 1483. without issue: his place of buriall was neuer knowne certainly to this day. His wife died also young without issue, and was buried at Westminster. Et portoit, France & d'engleterre escartelle, à lambell d'argent chargee au neuf torteaux.
HEnry, second sonne of King Henry the seuenth, in the tenth yeare of his Fathers Reigne, was created Duke of Yorke, in the Parliament house at Westminster, and after Prince of Wales; and lastly King of England, by the name of King Henry the eight; Father of Elizabeth, that most worthy and triumphant Queene of most happy memory. Et portoit, escartelle France & d'engleterre, à lambell d'argent chargeé au neuf torteaux. CHarles, second sonne of Iames, King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland; being Duke of Albany, Marquesse of Ormont, Earle of Ros, and Lord of Ardmanoch; was cre∣ated Duke of Yorke, by his Father, at White-Hall, on Twelfe∣day, being the sixt of Ianuary, 1604. and after created Prince of Wales at White-Hall, the third of Nouember, in the yeare, 1616.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Viscounts since the Norman Conquest, their Armes, Wiues, and Children. IOhn Lord Beaumont, sonne of Henry Lord Beaumont, sate in Parliament the tenth yeare of King Henry the sixt, as Lord Beaumont; and was after by Letters Patents, bearing date at Reading, the 12. of February, in the 18. yeare of King Henry the 6. made Viscount Beaumont. He maried Elizabeth, daughter and heyre of Sir William Phillips, Lord Bardolph, & had issue, William and Henry, both Viscounts, and dyed with∣out issue leauing Iane their sister and heyre, married to Iohn, Lord Louell. This Iohn, was slaine at the second battaile of Northampton, the 9. of Iuly, the 38. of King Henry the sixt. Et portoit, d'azur, au lyon rampant seme de lices d'or. I finde (before this Iohn, Viscount Beaumont) Iohn Robsert, Captaine of S. Samers in France, sonne of Sir Lewis Robsert, knight of the Garter, to be Viscount Robsert, in King Henry the fifts time. But by whom, or where hee was made Vis∣count, I finde not, neither whom he married, or of any issue he left behind him. HEnry Bourchier Knight, sonne and heyre of William Bour∣chier, created Earle of Ewe, at Maunt in Normandy, by King Henry the fift, sate in Parliament the 15. of King Henry the 6. as Lord Bourchier; and in the 25. yeare of the said kings Reigne, he was in Parliament, by the name and title of Vis∣count Bourchier; and in the 27. yeare of King Henry the 6. Richard Duke of Yorke, by his Charter, did confirme certaine Lands vnto him, in marriage with Isabell his sister, with an annuity of one hundred pounds by the yeare, by the name and title of Henry, Viscount Bourchier. He had issue 6. sonnes, William that dyed before his Father, Sir Henry Bourchier knight; Humfrey, slaine at Barnet-Field, 1471. Iohn, Thomas and Edward; and dyed in the yeare 1483. Et portoit, d'argent à vn croix engresleé de gueulles; entre quatre bouces de sable.
IOhn Talbot, second son of Iohn Talbot, first Earle of Shrews∣bury, by Margaret his Wife, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Richard Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke, was created Vis∣count Lisle, in the 31. yeare of King Henry the 6. He married Ioane, daughter and one of the co-heyres of Sir Iohn Chedder Knight, and had issue, Thomas Talbot, who was also Viscount Lisle, and was slaine at Wotton Vnderedge, without issue; and Elizabeth, married to Edward Grey, who in her right was al∣so Viscount Lisle. This Iohn, was slaine with his Father, in the wars in France, in the yeare 1453. Et portoit, gueulles au lyon rampant, à la bordure engresleé d'or; au croissant d'argent WIlliam Berkeley, sonne of Sir Iames Berkely Knight, & of Elizabeth his Wife, daughter of Thomas Mow∣bray, Duke of Norfolke; was created Viscount Berkeley, the 20. yeare of King Edward the 4. and after Marquesse Barke∣ley; and married two Wiues, but had no issue by eyther. He gaue most part of his Lands to King Henry the seuenth, and dyed the seuenth of the said Kings Reigne, and was buried in the Augustine Fryars in London, leauing Sir Morris Berkeley Knight, (his brother) his heyre. Et portoit, gueulles au cheuron accompaigné de dix croix patees d'argent. FRancis Louell, sonne of Iohn, Lord Louell, and Iane his Wife, sister and heyre of William, Viscount Beaumont; was created Viscount Louell, at Eltham, in the 22. yeare of King Edward the fourth; and in his stile did write himselfe, Vis∣count Louell, Baron Holland, Deyncourt, and Grey of Rother∣field. He married Anne, daughter of Henry Lord Fitz-Hugh, and was after slaine at Stoke-field, 1487. without issue, leauing his two sisters, Ioane and Friswold his heyres; Ioane was mar∣ried to Sir Bryan Stapleton Knight, and Friswold to Sir Ed∣ward Norris Knight. Et portoit, burelle vndeé de six d'or & de gueulles.
EDward Grey, second sonne of Reginald, Lord Grey of Ru∣thyn, married Elizabeth, daughter of Iohn Talbot, Viscount Lisle, and sister and heyre of Thomas her brother; in whose right he was created Viscount Lisle, by King Edward the 4. and had issue, Iohn Grey, Viscount Lisle, who married Muriel, daughter of Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolke, and had is∣sue Elizabeth, married to Henry Courtney, Earle of Deuon, & dyed without issue: the saide Edward had also issue, two daughters, Elizabeth and Muriell; Elizabeth was first marri∣ed to Edmond Dudley, of the priuy Chamber to King Henry the seuenth, and had issue, Iohn Dudley, Viscount Lisle, and after she was married to Arthur Plantagenet, base sonne of king Edward the fourth, who was also Viscount Lisle. Muriell the second daugh∣ter, was Wife to Henry Stafford, Earle of Wiltshire, but by him had no issue. Et portoit, burelleé de six d'argent & d'azur, trois torteaux en chef au lambell d'argent. IOhn Lord Welles, sonne of Lyonell Lord Welles, and Marga∣ret his Wife, Dutchesse of Somerset, daughter of Iohn Lord Beauchampe, was created Viscount Welles, by King Henry the seuenth; and married Cecily, daughter of King Edward the fourth, by whom he had issue a daughter, named Elizabeth, which dyed without issue. He dyed, and was buried in the Augustine-Fryars in London. Et portoit, d'or, au lyon rampant à la double queué sable, armé & lampasse de gueulles. SIr Charles Brandon Knight, created Viscount Lisle, the 4. of King Henry the eight, and Duke of Suffolke, in the fift yeare of the saide Kings Reigne: who, at the request of the French Queene, then his Wife, resigned the Title and Dig∣nity of Viscount Lisle, to Arthur Plantagenet, base sonne of King Edward the 4. who had married the daughter & heyre of Edward Grey, Viscount Lisle aforesaid, and had issue, as is more at large in the Title of Suffolke. Et portoit, burelle d'argent & de gueulles de dix pieces, à la lyon rampant d'or coronne per pale d'argent & de gueulles, armé & lampasse d'azur.
ARthur Plantagenet, base sonne of King Edward the 4. was after the surrender of Charles Brandon, created Vis∣count Lisle at Bridewell, the 26. of Aprill, in the 15. yeare of King Henry the eight, and married Elizabeth, daughter of Ed∣ward Grey, Viscount Lisle, and sister and heyre of Iohn Grey her brother, by whō he had issue, three daughters his heires, Bridget, Frances and Elizabeth; Bridget, was wife to Sir Willi∣am Carden Knight; Frances, married first Iohn Basset, & after, Thomas Monke of Deuonshire; Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Sir Francis Iobson Knight. This Arthur dy∣ed the third of March, 1542. the 33. yeare of the Reigne of King Henry the eight. Et portoit, France & d'engleterre escartellé au baston sinestre d'argent. But most commonly he is made to quarter the Armes of Vlster and Mortimer (as his Fa∣ther did before he was King: which I hold not good, for a bastard hath no right to any Armes but his Fathers chiefe Coate; to shew he was the naturall sonne of such a man. IOhn Dudley Knight, sonne of Edmond Dudley, and Eliza∣beth his wife, sister and heyre of Iohn Grey, Viscount Lisle, was created Viscount Lisle, by King Henry the eight, in the same yeare Arthur Plantagenet dyed, 1542. and was after made Earle of Warwicke, and lastly Duke of Northumber∣land, as in those Titles is more at large. Et portoit, d'or au lyon ram pant à la double queué vert. RObert Radcliffe, Baron Fitz-Walter (grand-childe of Sir Iohn Radcliffe Knight, and Elizabeth his Wife, daughter and one of the heyres of Walter Lord Fitz-Walter) was cre∣ated Viscount Fitz-Walter, in the 17. yeare of King Henry the eight; and after, he was created Earle of Sussex. He mar∣ried three Wiues, and had issue by them all, as in the Title of Earles of Sussex, is more at large. He dyed in the 34. yeare of King Henry the eight, 1542. Et portoit, d'argent au band engreslee sable.
THomas Bollen, sonne and heyre of Sir William Bollen of Blickling in Norfolke, Knight, and of Margaret his wife, daughter and one of the heyres of Thomas Butler Earle of Ormond in Ireland, being Treasurer of the houshold to King Henry the eight, was created Viscount Rochford at Bridewell, in the 17. yeare of the saide Kings Reigne, and in the yeare 1529. Earle of Wiltshire. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Howard, second Duke of Norfolke, and had issue, as in the Title of Earles of Wiltshire is more at large. He dyed in the 30. yeare of King Henry the eight. Et portoit, d'argent au cheuron entre trois testes de Boef cope de sable armé d'or. EDward Seymour, knight of the Garter, and vnckle to king Edward the sixt, was first created Viscount Beauchampe in the 28. of Henry the eight, 1536. and Earle of Hartford the 29 of Henry the eight: and lastly, Baron Seymour and Duke of Somerset, the first of King Edward the sixt, 1547. He mar∣ried two wiues, and had issue by them both, as before in the Title of Hertford is set foorth. He dyed, beheaded (for fel∣lony) at the Tower-hill by London, the eleuenth of Ianuary, 1551. the 5. of King Edward the sixt. Et portoit, gueulles à deux Ailes l'aigle en leurre d'or. WAlter Deuereux, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, (sonne of Iohn Lord Ferrers and Cecily Bourchier his Wife, Si∣ster of Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, and cousin and heyre of Anne, the wife of William Parre Marquesse of Northamp∣ton) was created Viscount Hereford, the first of King Edward the sixt; and married Mary, daughter of Thomas Grey Mar∣quesse Dorset, and had issue, Sir Richard Deuereux knight, who dyed before his Father, leauing issue by Dorathea his Wife (daughter of George Lord Hastings, and Earle of Hun∣tington) Walter Earle of Essex, who married Lettice, daugh∣ter of Sir Francis Knolles, Knight of the Garter, and Treasu∣rer of the Houshold to Queene Elizabeth, and had issue, Robert late Earle of Es∣sex, &c. Et portoit, d'argent à vn face gueulles au trois torteaux in chef.
LOrd Thomas Howard, second sonne of Thomas Howard the third Duke of Norfolke, was created Viscount Ho∣ward of Bindon, the first of Queene Elizabeth. He married Elizabeth, daughter and one of the co-heyres of Iohn Lord Marney, and had issue, Henry, Viscount Byndon; Thomas Vis∣count Byndon, that died in the yeare, 1610. Francis and Gyles, and three daughters, Elizabeth, Grace, and Douglas married to Sir Arthur Gorge Knight. Et portoit, les armes de Howard avec la cressant pur la difference. ANthony Browne, Knight of the Garter, was created Vis∣count Mountague at Hampton-Court, the second of Sep∣tember, 1554. the first of Queene Mary, and married two Wiues, the first was Iane, daughter of Robert Radcliffe Earle of Sussex, by whom he had issue, Anthony Browne his eldest sonne, who married Mary, daughter of Sir William Dormer of Ethorp in Buckinghamshire, and dyed before his Father, leauing issue Anthony Browne, now Viscount Mountague, 1618. and Mary, married vnto Henry Wriothesley Earle of Southampton, Father of Henry now Earle of Southampton, 1618. This Anthonies second wife, was Magdalen, daughter of William Lord Dacres of Gillesland in the North, by whom he had issue, Sir George Browne Knight, Thomas and Henry, and three daughters; Elizabeth wife to Sir Robert Dormer, sonne of Sir William aforesaid; Mabell second daughter, and Iane Browne was the third daughter. This Anthony dyed at his house of Medhurst in Sussex, and was there very honourably buried, with foure Officers of Armes. Et portoit, fables trois lions passant en la band entre quatre cottice d'argent. SIr Robert Cecill Knight, second sonne of William Cecill, Baron of Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, be∣ing Secretary to Queene Elizabeth, and Master of the Court of Wards, and Chancellor of the Vniuersity of Cambridge) was by King Iames, first created Baron of Essenden, in the Tower of London, the 13. of May, 1603. and after Viscount Cranburne, the 20. of August, 1604. and lastly Earle of Sa∣lisbury, the 4. of May, 1605. He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Brooke Lord Cobham, and had issue, William Cecill now Earle of Salisbury, 1618. and Francis, wife to Henry Lord Clifford, sonne & heyre of Francis Clifford, now Earle of Cumberland, 1618. Et portoit, burelle de dix, d'argent & d'azur, sur le tout, six Eschuchons 3.2.1. sable six lions rampant d'argent, à vn cressant pur la second difference.
SIr Robert Sidney, Knight of the Garter, sonne of Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord President of the Counsell of the Marches of Wales; was first created Baron of Penshurst, in the Tower of London, the 13 of May, 1603. and after, Viscount Lisle at Greenwich, the 4. of May, 1605. And lastly, was created Earl of Leicester it Salisbury, the second day of August, 1618. being then Lord Chamberlaine to Queene Anne. He married Barbara, daughter and sole heyre of Iohn Gamage, Lord of Coytie in Glamorganshire, and had issue, Sir Robert Sidney, Knight of the Bath and Lord Lisle, now liuing, 1618. and others; as in the Title of Earles of Leicester is more at large. Et portoit, d'or à la pheon d'azur. SIr Robert Carr Knight, borne in Scotland, was first created Viscount Rochester at White-Hall, on Monday in the Easter weeke, being the 25 of March 1611. and lastly, by Letters Patents bearing date, 1614. made Baron of Branspath and Earle of Somerset. He was also Lord Chamberlaine of the Houshold to King Iames. He married Frances, daughter of Thomas Howard, Earle of Suffolke. This Robert and his Lady Frances, were both arraigned at Westminster Hall, the 24. and 25. of May, 1616. for being priuy and consenting to the poi∣soning of Sir Thomas Ouerbury Knight, the said Earles great friend and fauouret; and were found guilty by Peeres, and had their iudgement to dye for the same; as in the Title of Somerset is more at large. Et portoit, gueulles au cheuron d'argent, chargé de trois estoilles de sable, brise de vn leopard passant d'or, du primier canton de l'esu. SIR George Villers Knight, a younger sonne of Sir George Villers of Brookesby in Leicestershire Knight, was first cre∣ated Baron of Whaddon, and after Viscount Villers at Wood∣stocke, the 27. of August, 1616. and the 16, of Ianuary after, he was created Earle of Buckingham at White-Hall: and last∣ly, the first day of Ianuary, 1617 he was made Marquesse of Buckingham, by the deliuery of a Letters Patents. He was al∣so Knight of the Garter, Master of the Horse, one of his Ma∣iesties most honourable priuy Counsell, & one of the Lords Commissioners, for the Office of Earle Marshall of Eng∣land, 1619. Et portoit, d'argent au croix de gueulles, chargé de cinq coquilles d'or.
SIr Thomas Egerton Knight, beeing Lord Chancellour of England, was created Baron of Elesmere at Hampton-Court, the 17. of Iuly, in the first yeare of King Iames; and the 7. of Nouember, 1616, hee was created (at White-Hall) Viscount Brackley. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Tho∣mas Rauenscroft of Flintshire, and had issue, Thomas that dy∣ed before his Father, and Sir Iohn Egerton, now Earle of Bridgwater, 1619. and a daughter named Mary, married to Sir Francis Lee, Knight of the Bath. He dyed at York-Place, by Charing-Crosse. Et portoit d'argent, au lion rampant gueulles, entre trois pheons, à la bordure engresley de sable. SIr William Knolles, Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of the Houshold to King Iames, and Master of the Court of Wards, was first created Baron of Grayes, in the Tower of London, the 13. of May, 1603. and after Viscount Walling∣ford at White-Hall, the seuenth of Nouember, 1616. He mar∣ried two wiues, by the first he had no issue. His second Wife was Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of Thomas Howard, Earle of Suffolke, and Lord Treasurer of England, by whom hee had issue. Et portoit, d'azur à la croix recercelez desiiont, semé croix recroisettes d'or. IAmes, Lord Hay of Sauley, was by the deliuery of a Letters Patents, made Viscount Doncaster, in Iuly, 1618. and mar∣ried two wiues; the first was Honora, daughter and sole heire of Edward Lord Denny of Waltham, and had issue. His se∣cond wife was Lady Luce, second daughter of Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, by whom he had issue. Et portoit, d'argent trois escuchons de gueulles. FINIS.
Errors published in Print, to the great preiudice of those they concerne. MAry Queene of Fraunce, Sister of King Henry the eight, had issue by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, her Husband, two sonnes; Henry Brandon Duke of Suffolke, and Charles a second son. Milles page 543. HEnry Brandon Duke of Suffolk, & Charles his brother, were the sons of Katherine Willoughby Dutchesse of Suffolke, and not the sonnes of Marie the French Queen, as Milles hath. THomas Grey, Marquesse Dorset, begot of Margaret Wootton his wife two Sonnes; Sir Iohn Grey Knight, who married Marie, Daughter of Anthony Browne, Viscount Montague, and Henry Grey, Baron of Groby. HEre Henry Grey Baron of Groby, is made to bee brother to Iohn his owne Father. And Mary Browne, is al∣so made to bee daughter to her owne brother. Mil. page 408.   WIlliam de Romera, Earl of Lin∣colne, married Auice, daughter of Richard de Riparijs, and had issue Wil∣liam de Romara who maried the daughter of Stephen Earle of Albemarle. HEere the father is made to marrie his sons wife, and the sonne his owne mother, which the foundation of the Abby of Reuesby doth approue. Mil. 936. & 937.   IOhn Courtney, begot of Elianor daugh∣ter of Hugh Spencer Earle of Winche∣ster Hugh Courtney, whome King Edw. the third made Earle of Deuonshire. HEere Eleanor Spencer, is made to be mother to Hugh Earle of De∣uonshire, when as in truth she was his wife. Milles page 459.   IN the yeare 1546. the Duke of Nor∣folke and his sonne the Earle of Surrey, were sodainly apprehended, and sent to the Tower of London, for bearing in their Escochion certaine Armes, which were pretended onely to belong vnto the King, which Armes notwithstanding, they and their Ancestours time out of minde had borne, without checke or controulement.
For this offence was the said Earle endi∣ted, &c. HAd not this Writer beene a little too bold and busie, in matters of Armes and Herauldry (wherein hee hath shewed himselfe verie ignorant) he would neuer haue put this in print. I wish him therefore to know, that the honourable family of the Howards he speaketh of, may, and doe lawfully beare, and quarter, the Armes of Tho∣mas
of Brotherton the Kings son; but not the king of Englāds Armes. Ther¦fore I wold haue M. Martyn to know, that those Armes he mentioneth, did want a lambell for the difference; the neglect whereof, made it the Kinges Armes, and not Tho: of Brothertons. HEnry Stafford (sonne of Humfrey the sixt Earle of Stafford, and Anne Neuil his wife) maried Margaret Coun∣tesse of Richmond, mother to King Henry the seuenth. THey that are desirous to find this Henrie Stafford, and his marriage with Margaret Countesse of Richmond mother to king Henry the 7. must goe into Purgatory for it; for in heauen, nor vpon the earth it is not to be foūd Mill. page 433.   EDward Fynes, Lord Clynton created Earle of Lincolne, 1572. THere was neuer any of the family or name of Fynes Earl of Lincoln, to this time, 1618. But the trueth is, there was one Edw: Clynton, that was created Earle of Lincoln, in the yeare 1572. which I take to be the person he meaneth. Henry Fynes, Earle of Lincolne.   Mil. page 950 and 952.   WIlliam, Brother of Malcolm king of Scottes, maried Ermingard, Daughter of Richard de Beaumont, at Woodstocke in the Kings Chappel, the 33. yeare of King Henry the second, and died in the yeare 1124. the 27 yeare of his age THis William is made to marry this Ermingard his wife at Woodstocke, 62. yeares after he was dead: For the 33. of King Henry the second, is 1186. and the yeare of his death, as he saith, is 1124. Milles page 909.   KIng Iohn left behind him foure sons, viz: Henry who succeeded him, Ri∣chard who was elected K of the Romans; William of Valence, and Guido Disnay: and three daughters, the second was ma∣ried to William Marshal, Earle of Worce∣ster, &c. KIng Iohn had but two sonnes, and none named William of Valence, or Guy de Disnay, for they wer the sons of Hugh le Brun, Earle of the Marches of Aquitaine, and not king Iohns; and that William Marshal was earl of Wor∣cester is as vntrue as the other; for he was onely Earle of Penbroke, and not of Worcester. Martyn, page 59, 60.   RObert de Bellemont, Earle of Mel∣lent, maried Matild, daughter and one of the heirs of Reginald Earl of Corn∣wall, son of King Iohn. Mills page 830. FRom the beginning of the reign of King Henry the first, to King Iohn, was 98. yeares, and so far wide is this Author from the truth. For this Regi∣nald he mentioneth, was base sonne of King Henry the first, and not of King Iohn.
LEttice daughter of sir Frances Knols, was widdow of Robert Earle of Es∣sex. THis Lettice, is made to be Wife to her owne sonne. Mil. pag. 843.   HVgh de Audley, youngest Sonne of Iames Audley, and of Adela Long∣spee. THis Hugh de Audley, was not the sonne of Iames Audley, and of Ade∣la Longspee. But the sonne of Nicholas Audley, and Katherine Giffard his wife. Milles pag. 378.   MIchaell de la Pole (sonne and heire of Michaell, and Katherine Staf∣ford) married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norffolk, & had issue three daughters; Isabell, wife to the Lord Morley, Katherine a Nunne, and Elizabeth Countesse of Kendall. THis Michael de la Pole, whom hee sayth had issue 3. Daughters, dyed at Egencourt fielde in Fraunce, 1415. without any issue at all. And this Isa∣bell, Katherine, and Elizabeth, Coun∣tesse of Kendall, were his three sisters, both by Father and Mother, and not his daughters. Mil. pag. 535.   THomas Earle of Arundell, married Constance, Daughter of Edmond of Langley, Duke of Yorke, and had yssue, Anne married to Hugh de Audley, vvho had isvue Iames. THis Thomas Earle of Arundel, ne∣uer had any such Daughter, na∣med Anne, but dyed the third of King Henry the fift, without any issue at all. Neither was there euer any such Hugh Audley, that euer married anie such Woman. Mil. pag. 347.   RObert, base son of King Henrie the first, was the first Earle of Gloce∣ster, and married Mabell Daughter of Robert Fitz Hamon, and Sibel his Wife, daughter of Robert de Belesmo, Earle of Shrewsbury. RObert Fitz-Haman, neuer marri∣ed any Sibill, daughter of Robert de Belesmo. For Robert de Belesmo had his eyes put out, and dyed in the Ca∣stle of Kardiffe in Wales, without any issue: And for Mabell the daughter of Robert Fitz-Hamon, shee neuer marri∣ed Nigell Lord Mowbray, for that Ma∣bell he married, was daughter and co∣heyre of William Fitz Patrich, Earle of Salisbury, who had giuen her in Mar∣riage, the Mannor of Bansted in Sur∣rey, as is manifested by the said Grant. After this Roberts death, Mabell his Wife, married Nigell, Lord and Baron of Mowbray.   Milles, pag. 359  
ISabell, daughter of Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Hertford, married William L. Bruse of Gower in Wales. THis Isabell, married Robert Brus of Annanderdale in Scotland, and not William Bruse of Wales, and so both the man, and the matter, quite mista∣ken. Milles pag. 369.   ISabel daughter of William king of Scots married Robert Lord Ros of Hamlake, Father of Robert Lord Ros, father of Wil∣liam Lord Ros, Competitor for the crown of Scotland. RObert Lord Ros, that married Isa∣bell daughter of William King of Scots, had issue William L. Ros, who had issue, Robert Lord Ros of Hamlake, Fa∣ther of another William, that was one of the Competitors for the Crowne of Scotland. So ye the first William L. Ros is quite left out, and by that means the second Robert is left without a father. Mil. pag. 507.   RObert de Valonijs, Lord of Orford married Cicely, sister of William Blound, and had issue Cicely de Valoniis wife to Robert Vfford, steward of the hou∣shold to King Edward the second. RObert de Valoniis, which marryed the Sister of William Blound, had is∣sue a sonne Robert, who was Father of Cicely de Valoniis wife to Robert Vfford: So that, the right Father of Cicely Valo∣nijs that married Robert Vfford is quite left out, and not once mentioned, and Robert de Valonijs & Cicely Blound, who was her Grand-father and Grand mo∣ther, made to be her father & mother. Milles, pag. 528.   MArgaret, daughter of Sir Iohn Nor∣wich Knight, and sister and heyre of Thomas Norwich, was wife to Robert Vfford Earle of Suffolke. THis Margaret, was Sister of Sir Walter Norwich Knight, and Aunt and heyre to Iohn Norwich, son of the sayde Sir Walter. So that this discent, is out of ioynt, and greatly mistaken. Mil. pag. 529.   RIchard Plantaginet, sonne of King Iohn, was created Earle of Cornwal in the yeare 1227. and died at Barkham∣sted, being very old, in the yeare 1572. NOw surely, I haue not read of any so olde since Christs time. For, by this accompt of 1227. and 1572. this Richard liued after his being Earl, 345. yeares. And then was hee a verie olde man indeed. Mil. pag. 552.   RRobert Sackuile, eldest son of Tho∣mas, was after his Father, Earle of
Dorset, by Lady Margaret Howard, sole Daughter of Thomas Duke of Norfolke. HOw this Robert Sackuile, could be Earle of Dorset, by Lady Marga∣ret
Howard his Wife, is more then by my Bookes I can find; considering his father was created Earle of Dorset, to him and his heires male. Mil. pag. 413.   ALan (sur-named the redde) or Fer∣gant, Earle of little Britaine, marri∣ed the daughter of Fulke Rechin Earle of Anioy; and had issue, Howell disinheri∣ted, Bertha maried to Eudo Earle of Por∣het, and Constance wife to Geffrey sonne of Iuhell. HEre is Howell, Bertha, & Constance, made to be Children to Alan Far∣gant, when as they were the children of Conanle Grosse Earle of Britaine, and so they fathered vpon a wrong father. Milles pag. 588, 589.   WIlliam the first Earle Warren & Surrey, married Gundred, dau∣ghter of William Conqueror, and had is∣sue William and Reginald, who marryed Adeliza, Ladie of Wirmingay in Norfolk, and had issue William de Warren.   WIlliam the second Earle Warren and Surrey, sonne of William the first, married Isabel, daughter of Hugh the great Earle of Vermandois, and had yssue, William the third Earle Warren, & Reginald de Warren, who married Ade∣liza daughter of William de Wormegay, and had issue, William. REginald de Warren, mentioned in this place, is made to haue two se∣uerall Fathers and Mothers, as by this aforesaid it may appeare; but the first is false. His true Father was William the second Earle Warren, and his mo∣ther was Isabel, Sister of Rafe de Peron∣ne, Earle of Vermandois. Mil. pag. 616, 617, 618, 619.   WIlliam the third, Earle of Arun∣dell and Sussex, maried Mabel, sister and Coheire of Hugh Meschines, surnamed Blundeuile, the last Earle of Chester of that Family. THere was neuer any Hugh Mes∣chines Earle of Chester (surnamed Blundeuile) nor any Mabell his Sister. But the trueth is, there was a Mabell, which was Sister and Co-heire of Ran∣doll Blundeuile Earle of Chester. Mil. pag. 642, 643.   ISabell, second Sister and Co-heyre of Hugh Earle of Arundell and Sussex,
married Iohn Fitz Alan, Lord of Clun and Oswaldtre; by whose right, the Castle and honour of Arundell came to the Fitz Alans. Their sonne Iohn Fitz Alan, was Father of Richard first Earle of Arundel of that Family. IT is true, that this Isabell married Iohn Fitz Alan, and had issue Iohn,
who by Mauld Verdon his wife, had is∣sue a third Iohn, who marryed Isabell Mortimer, and had yssue Richard the first Earle of Arundel, which thirde Iohn is omitted, and so the sayde Ri∣chards Grandfather made to be his fa∣ther. Mil. pag. 643.   HEnry Percy the ninth Earle of Nor∣thumberland, Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-Payne, and Brian, and in his mothers right, Lord Latymer. HOw this Henry Earl of Northum∣berland, can be Lord Latymer in right of his Mother, is more then by my reading I could euer finde any proofe for. Milles pag. 734. For I take it, that all Daughters and heyrs of a Baron by Writ (be they ne∣uer so many) are all interessed alike by their birth, to their Fathers Dignitie; which Dignity by no meanes can bee diuided, & therefore lost (when there is more Daughters then one) and to reuert to the King frō whence it came, to bestow vppon which daughter hee will, or other stranger, whomsoeuer it shall please him. LOra daughter of William Bruse Ba∣ron of Brecknocke, wife vnto Robert Fitz Pernell Earle of Leicester, and Si∣ster of that William Bruse, who was com∣monly called Earle of Brember Castle in Sussex, & Lord of Brecknock and Aber∣gauenny, she left siue daughters her heirs, Isabel, Ela, Mauld, Eua, and Eleanor. IT is true that this Lora did marry Ro∣bert Fitz Pernel, Earle of Leicester. But that she had fiue daughters, is very vntrue: for the saide Robert died with∣out yssue. And those fiue Daughters heere mentioned, were the Daughters of William Lord Bruse of Brecknocke, begotten of Eua his Wife, one of the daughters of William Marshall, the el∣der Earle of Penbrooke. So that this Lora was their great Aunt, & not their mother. Mil. pag. 836.   WIlliam de Clynton, youngest sonne of Iohn de Clynton, and of
Ida his wife, daughter and one of the heirs of William de Oding sells Baron of Mar∣stoke, was by King Edward the third cre∣ated Earle of Huntington, 1337. THis William de Clynton, Earle of Huntington here mentioned, was
sonne of Iohn Lord Clynton and Mauld Beaumont, and Grandchild to another Iohn and Idona. Mil. pag. 916. Now he hath left out Iohn L. Clyn∣ton, and Mauld Beaumont the said Wil∣liams right father and mother, & made him son to his Grandfather and Grand mother Idona. IOhn Hastings, son and heire of Law∣rence, was the second Earl of Penbroke, who at his death, lefte Anne Maney his wife great with child of Iohn Hastings the third Earle of Penbroke. Mil. pag. 1098. HOw could Margaret, daughter of King Edward the third, be mother of Iohn Hastings the third Earl of Pen∣broke, when as at the said Iohns death, he sayth; that Anne Manny his Fathers second wife was great with Childe of him, except he proue that he had two Mothers. Iohn Hastings third Earl of Penbroke was son of Iohn Hastings, second Earle of Penbroke, begotten of his first wife Mar∣garet, daughter of King Edward the third Milles page 1099.  
A Table of the Seuerall Cata∣logues contained in this Booke. ARundell. 1 Albemarle. 10 Anguish. 15 Atholl. 17 Buckingham. 18 Bedford. 21 Britaine & Richmond. 25 Bath. 35 Bridge-water. 36 Boughan. 37 Chester. 37 Cornwall. 44 Carlile, 51 Cumberland. 53 Cambridge. 54 Deuonshire. 56 Derby. 65 Dorset. 73 Essex. 78 Excester 85 Ewe or Augie. 88 Ferrars. 65 Glocester. 90 Hartford 90 Hereford. 99 Huntington 105 Kent. 114 Kendall. 121 Lincolne. 122 Lancaster 127 Leicester. 131 March. 137 Mountague. 140 Mountgomery. 142 Northumberland. 142 Norfolke. 151 Northampton. 161 Nottingham. 165 Oxford. 169 Penbroke. 177 Rutland. 189 Richmond & Britaine. 25 Riuers. 193 Shrewsbury. 194 Salisbury. 200 Suffolke. 208 Somerset. 213 Stafford. 219 Southampton. 223 Sussex. 225 Surrey. 230 Tankeruile. 239 Viscounts. 269 Winchester. 239 Worcester. 244 Wiltshire 248 Westmerland. 252 Warwicke. 255 Yorke. 265
Faults escaped in Printing, to be Corrected thus. IN Edward the 1. Children by his first wife, reade Elianor borne the 50. yeare of her Grand-fathers Reigne. In Edw. 1. Children by his second wife, line 20. reade Edward the third, for Edward the fourth. In Edward the seconds issue, reade Iohn of Eltham died in Anno, 1334. for 1354. In Henry the 8. base children, reade Henry Fitz-Roy created Earle of Notting∣ham at seuen yeares of age. Pag. 13. line 33. reade Dunster, for Dunsteth. Pag. 18. line 9. reade before He maried; (by the name of Earle of Buckinghā.) Pag. 20. line 12. reade Vrsula for Vrsuld. Page 21. line 22. reade Apulia, for Turkey. Page 22. line 39. reade Sir Thomas Fitz-Williams, Father of William. Pag. 23. line 1. reade Katherine for Margaret. Ibid. line 4. reade 31. for 13. Page 24. line 7. reade Hampton-Court, for the Tower of London. Ibid. line 10. reade third for second. Ibid. line 11. reade second for third. Ibid. line last, reade hath issue, for had no issue. Page 29. line 17. reade Euerard for Euerus. Page 34. line 33. reade Tarbolton, for Trebant. Page 36. line 6. reade Edward Lord Fitz-Walter, for Richard. Ibidem. The Earle of Bridgwaters Armes, vide, 276. Page 37. line 23. reade Aurenches for Aurenges. Ibid. line 29. reade Rufus for Ruphus. Pag. 38. line 18. reade Morcar, for Mocar. Pag. 39. line 11. reade Robert Quincy, sonne of Sayre Earle of Winchester. Page 47 line 23. reade Gauershith, for Gauershife. Page 48. line 22. reade Wenselaus for Veselanus. Page 52. line 16. reade Dreux for Drux. In the beginning of the Earles of Clare, line 1. reade Richard sonne of Gilbert, for Richard Fitz-Gilbert. Ibid. line 11. reade 1131, for 1331. Ibid. leafe 2. line 26. reade Gilbert for Iohn. Ibid. at Rich. the second Earle of Glocester, line 8. reade Beuis for Benet. Ibid. last page, line 18. reade Kyme for Kent. Page 54. reade Edward Neuill for Henry Neuill. Pag. 62. line 11. reade Grandchilde for Grandfather. Page 63. line 7. reade Somersetshire for Deuonshire. Pag. 64, line 17. reade Sir William Maynard, for Sir Henry. Page 71. line 19. leaue out, Einsham in Oxford. Pag. 73, line 3. reade 217. for 2171. Pag. 74, line 16. reade Edmond Beauford, sonne of Iohn Beauford.
Errata: Page 79▪ line 29. reade for Geffrey Fitz-Piers Armes, Et portoit, escartelle d'or et de gueulles au bordure vaire. Page 83. line 29. reade Sir Nicholas Tufton, for Sir Iohn. Pag. 83, line 32. In Parr, reade 36, for 25. Ibid. line 30. reade Baron Parr of Kendall. Page 90. line 20. reade Baieux for Bayon. Page 98. line 21. reade, was made Baron Seymour, and Duke, &c. Pag. 99, line 11. reade sonne of Osberne. Page 104. for Henry Plantagenets Armes, reade Semè de France escartellè D'eng∣leterre au lambell d'hermines. Pag. 109, line 7. reade, 1219. (as Sir Robert Cotton saith.) Pag. 117, line 2. reade Sir Thomas Holland, sonne of Sir Robert. Pag. 120, line 16, reade Sir Henry Grey second sonne, for third. Pag. 122, line 34, reade 1151, for 111. Pag. 136, line 19, reade 1588. for 1586. Page 150. line 25, reade Sir Thomas Stanley, for Sir Edward. Ibid. line 42. adde Elianor Percy, wife to Sir William Herbert. Pag. 153, line 15, reade partition, for petition. Pag. 176. line 14. reade Elizabeth for Anne. Ibid. line 16. reade 18. Earle of Oxford, for 19. Pag. 187, line the last, reade du trois lyons, for lyons. Page 190. line first, reade Edmond Plantagenet third son, for son and heyre. Ibid. line 1. reade Edmond Plantagenet third son of Richard Duke of Yorke. Page 191. line 9. leaue out Elianor married to Iohn Bourchier. Page 192. line 16. reade Frances for Mary. Pag. 199, line last, reade 1616, for 1618. Page 202. line 24. reade 11. for 9. Page 210. line 4. reade had issue, for had no issue. Pag. 212, line 23. reade Harington, for Huntington. Page 213. line 6. leaue out Queene Elizabeth. Page 214. line 8. reade Hugh for Henry Vere. Page 215. line 23. reade, which was by King Henry 8. to The Bullen, as in pa. 250 Page 223. line 21. leaue out (heyre.) Ibid. line 21. reade sister, for sister and heyre. Pag. 233, line 11. reade 38, for 28. Pag, 234, line 12. reade 1347, for 1357. Page 242. line 33. reade M. 11. for M. 2. Pag. 263. line 8. reade Henry Lord Mountague. Ibid. line the last, reade 1499, for 1599. Page 265. line 3. reade Chancellor, for Treasurer. FINIS.
