384 99840115 4587
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP∣full Sir Thomas Erskene Knight, Gentleman of the late Princes privie Chamber. {inverted ⁂} THose timelesse teares on his vntimely fall, Who, in his time, bred solace to vs all, If ought, that's worth the reading, therein be, Duetie should bid me dedicate to thee. But since there's nought but sighes, and teares, and grones, Nor halfe so much of those as fits our moanes. And yet such as they are, I doe not see, To whome they rather do belong then thee, Then thee; whose intrest in his life was most, And hath by death so deare a Master lost, As time's vnable to produce his Peere, Nor euer did, nor euer shall I feare. For whome I sigh'd out those disorder'd grones, For Mourners keepe no methode in their mones, But as the passion is conceau'd in thought Abruptly, so into the world'tis brought. Mourning's a naturall motion in the heart, And scornes to be reform'd by rules of Art.
Then (worthy Knight) such as they are, receaue them, For were they better, none but thou should haue them, And when my mourning muse shall change anew, This sable habite in a brighter hew, I'le vrge my vtmost vaine, to bring to light Some worke more worthy of your Worships sight. Your Worships assured to command, ROBERT ALLYNE.
FVNERALL ELEGIES vpon the most lamentable death of the thrice illustrious Prince Henrie, Prince of Wales, &c. EBbe channels roare, deepe streames in silence runne: Small woes haue words, but mightie cares be mute. Speach can expresse some shallow mourners mone, But dare not vndertake deepe forrows fute, Onelie salt teares, and windie sighs disclose Some airie vapours of our warrie woes. Immortall springs of in-exhausted teares, Shall haue their moysture first exhausted drie, Eolian winds which from darke caues appeares Shall sigh out all their substance in the skie, Before they can lament his losse too much, Who dying left not earth another such. What cannot eloquence by sweet detection Make most profoundly in our sences sinke, Having attainde such exquisite perfection, As to expresse more then the heart can thinke: Yet neither tong, nor mind can speake, nor meane, The halfe of halfe the losse which we sustaine. Why should deepe cares be skanted thus in speach, Why should not worlds of words attend our woes, Which might to th'earths remotest borders stretch, To pierce the flintie breasts of proudest foes, Whence floods of teares might gush to mourne his fall, Whose deare example doth concerne vs all. Who while his Father rulde this mighty land With heavenly wisedome is our Supreame head,
He might haue beene vnto that head a hand, His forces through another world to lead. Whose glorious conquests in the continent, The glory of our Iland might augment. While his victorious Father heere at home, Rulde his proceedings by diuine directions, Till both made famous by the fall of Rome, Had been admired for the earthes perfections. Ah then could death haue never com'd too soone, Nor halfe those teare: beene spent vppon his toombe. But in the golden morning of his age, To be bereft by death before his time; Whom nature had but showne as on a stage, To be so much admired in his prime: Least if hee had attain'd to further fame, The worldes foure Monarchies had lost their name. That wee by building vp our hopes too hie, Might, bejng frustrate, catch the deeper fall, Whome nature now beginning to envy, Would turne our painted joyes to bitter gall; Permitting that braue Prince t'approch no nearer, That after death his losse might bee the dearer. Blind, touchles, tasteles, deafe, and senceles snake, Where were thy eyes, thy eares, thy sences gone: O tis too true, when thou those wounds did make, Nor eyes, nor eares, nor sences thou hadst none. For if thou hadst, (ah cruellest of vipers) His fall had ne're bred such a world of weepers. Hadst thou but seeene how braue he rulde his stead. With what a whirle-wind hee did shake his speare, With what a Princely grace hee bare his head, What Majestie did in his lookes appeare, The least of those, if thou hadst eyes to see, Had throwne the forceles dart from trembling thee. Hadst thou (vngentle elfe) had eares to heare him, In modest manly speach his mind disclose; Thy fatall dart had ne're had force to deare him, Or if smell, touch, or tast, or all of those,
Or any of them all, could thee withstand Thy steele had sure falne harmeles from thy hand. Either thou mean'st to throw all mortalls downe. To emptie th'earth beginning at the best. Or else all deadly hate in one to crowne, And neuer after to annoy the rest. Or is there one that rules aboue thy head, Who with a thought can strike a mortall dead. O sure there is, hee for our greevous sinnes Bereft our deerest hope, and for our sake, God at his owne house judgement oft beginnes, The head bejng hurt, to make the members quake. Whome to containe this Ile was all too straight; Him heavens thought worthy of a higher seat. Of whome may well be said as in the storie, Was sayd by Phillip many yeeres before, Of his braue Child, , And true it proou'd; but we may say't much more▪ Not Macedone, nor Brittaine, but the earth Was all too base to hold so great a birth. Go death, and mount in victories amaine, Disperse thy conquests in a wofull volume, Amongst th'insulting sonnes of Ottomaine, How Christendome hath lost her chiefest colume. Haplie those Paynimes shall applaud the same, And raise eternall trophies of thy shame. Go dull the eares of Antichristian Rome, With sweeter musicke then the earth can yeild; Whose Bow'ls did late within her brest consume, To see great Brittaines heyre to braue the field Against proud Babell, and her champion Spaine, T'haue brought the Gospell in request againe. Tell thou hast brought to his vntimely toombe, One who in time had com'de t'haue worne the crowne Of Brittaine, and throwne downe the walles of Rome, And layd them leuell with the lowest ground. And all that envi'de at great Brittaines blis, Shall change their mourning, and rejoyce at this.
But Brittaine shall consume her selfe in teares, And bath her wofull face in floods of brine, Nor shall the dae of dayes, nor monthes, nor yeares Confine her griefe, vntill by grace diuine, Our young succeeding Prince expresse in time The high worth which the world expect'd of him. And ô (God graunt) he may performe no lesse, Nay rather may so farre exceed his brother, As he in highest gifts of hopefulnesse, And Princely vertues did surpasse all other. That once great Brittaine, and the world may vtter, That Henrie dy'de but to admit his better. And truely if the eye, and brow, and face, Do not deceiue the sence with false conceites, Which beare I know not what Maiestike grace; But greater farre then shines in lower states. How farre the Lyons lookes exceedes the Lambes, So farre thy show braue Prince excelles a mans. If these deceiue not, as indeed they do not, These rules of Phisnom'e cannot wrong informe. What though thy yeres do promise what they owe not; Yet more then they haue promis'd they'le performe. And (ô would God) I might but liue to see, That hope effect'd, which all conceiue of thee. That yet our Barbarous en'mies in the East, Within the Empire of old Babilon, And that proud misticke Babell in the Weast, That holdes the cup of fornication, By whose vile dregs the Kings on earth are drunke, May be in deepe of darke confusion sunke. How shin'd great Brittaines Lampes of late so cleere. Like Planets in their opposite aspects, While Fathers rayes vpon his sonne did peere, Resuming splendor from his sonnes reflects. Which glorious lights the world did late admire, Reciprocating betwixt the sonne and sire. Lending, and borrowing from each others light, As Phoebus throwes his rayes vpon the Moone,
Who represents his person in the night, Then yeilds her splendor when her course is done. To him, from whome shee borrow'd all her glore, Yet lost no light by her, but gain'd the more. No more the great Apollo of this Ile Did loose his light jmparting't to his sonne, But gain'd a greater glorie all the while, While all redoubled, backe againe did runne. By Rayes of which reciprocating light, This Ile had alwaies day, and knew no night. Till death by interposing his darke hand, Did intercept those beames, and holde them backe. Which spred a darke ecclipse o're all this land, And chang'd all brightnes in Cimmerian blacke. By those great Luminaries dire defects Portending most prodigious effects. Which God averte, and turne vpon our foes, Least doubtlesse this small Ile at length become A boundlesse continent of endlesse woes, Reaping the juste desert of threatned dome. Since Gods long suffring is at length out-runne, Whose judgements at his owne house are begunne, God graunt our sinnes procure no greater wrath Vppon our heads, but that wee once may turne To true repentance, by a lively fayth, And for our many sinnes sincerely mourne, That God may in his mercie yet restore This darkened Iland to her former glore. And in the person of our tender Prince Renew those lampes of discontinued light, Which haue beene droun'd in darkenes ever since That worthy Prince did bid the world goodnight. Let never this small Ile, while heavens remaine, Be dark'd with such a dire eclipse againe. And though the bravest branch be cut away, Yet seat the roote most stedfast in his place, To shine from Thames, and Trent, to Forth, and Tay, Eternall in his never ruin'd race.
From whence while earth indures may still be one, To rule th'vnited Ile of Ath. So long as Tay, and Forth. and Tr, and Thames. Irrignates this Ile with christ all streames. ¶ In Effigiem Principis. SWeet senslesse stone that sensibly expresseth A Princes person, in his mortall daies, So artificiall, that each one confesseth, The Caruers curious paines deserueth praise; That one small sparkle of Promethean fire, Might make thy breathles body moue, and spire. That since th'immortall substance of his soule Hath gain'd by death an everlasting crowne, And endles fame his vertues doth enrode In registers of never dark'd renowne; His earthly parts which onely mortall bee, May liue, and be immortaliz'de in thee. That no part of so great a worth should perish, But all be cloth'd with incorruption, Whose soule, bones, vertues, heavens, art, fame do cherish Against death, rottennes, and obliuion. While either heavens, or arte, or fame shall liue, No part of those three parts shall not surviue. While thou pure marble shalt possesse a place, Amongst the best of English Potentates And with thy Princely presence there shalt grace The glorious crew of great Plantagenets. Where Henries, Edwards, Richards, still surviue. In Marble bodies as they seem'd aliue. Why then thogh art can saue from earth's corruption, The earths owne body, which is due to wormes: Yet cannot so paint out the Soules perfection, A greater taske then Painters art performes, To braue oblivion with his memorie, Concernes the sacred art of Poetrie
And (ô would God) some Orpheus might arise, Whose pow'rfull verse did moue deafe Rockes to heare him, While Beasts, and Birds, and Stones, and Plants, and Trees, And Nymphs, and Fawnes came thronging to be neare him. Let such a one in golden lynes set forth The jmage of his soules admired worth. If gazers swarme about his picture so, To marke the sweet resemblance of his face: What troupes, what worlds of men should seeke to know A mirror of his vertues, and his grace. While one amongst the rest that viewd his toombe Distilling teares should thus the rest informe. Heere lyes (but Ah how can hee lye so low? Who living still aspired to be high.) Yet heere he lies, (and doth his soule also? No sure it mounts jmmortall th'rough the skie) Heere lyes (why then where are his vertues gone? And are those too in toomb'de within this stone.) Once more, heere lyes the body of a Prince, Whome nature grace'd with such divine perfection, That all that e're were borne before, or since, Did choose him for their chiefe by rare election. Famous for learning, valor, wisedome, worth: Royall by vertue, beauty, bounty, birth. Whose childhood promis'de greater hope of praise, Then ever Prince attained in his time, Whose vertues made the fame of former dayes Obscured in the springtide of his prime. Till nature doubting so great grouth in strength, Should haue surpasde even natures selfe at length. Did cut him off by death, before his day, Who even in dying, triumph'de o're that elfe, Ah whither am I carri'd, heere jle stay, Least following him too farre, I loose my selfe, Sith mortall pennes vnworthy are to write, And too too base to treat a theame so great. Sweet bones within your toombe, rest still in store, Till God rejoine you to the soule in glore.
Epitaphium. Two Kingdomes strone for Intrest in one Prince, Heauens claim'd me from them both, and reft me hence; Scotland my Cradle, England hath my Horse, The Heauens my Soule, my Ʋertues liue in verse. 2. I liv'd three Kingdomes hope, foes terror, Parents life, I di'de their dearest losse, their Ioy, their endles griefe. To the Kings most excellent Maiestie. GReat mightie Monarch of this mourning Ile, Whose griefe is ours, or ours is thine, or rather Both waile but one griefe, in a diff'rent stile, Thou mourning for a Sonne, we for a Father, Yet all but one, who both was borne to bee A Sire to vs, but first a Sonne to thee. Our blisse, our bale is borrowed but from thine, For when thou weep'st, then we are drown'd in teares: And when some signes of joy beginne to shine In thy bright lookes, then mirth in vs appeares. Not swerving once from thee in this, nor that, As if vpon thy brow we read our fate. Then if thou tenders (as no doubt thou does) Our weale (great King) lament his death no more Who cannot die, and then we cannot choose But doe the same, that thou hast done before. Looke on thy living Sonne, and thou shalt see A liuely mirror both of him, and thee. Then in the Lethe of his christ all eyne. Intombe the thought of both our griefe, & thine.
To the Queenes Maiestie. WHo seeks (great Queene) with words t'asswage thy woes, Would stop the Seas strong tyde, with sticks, and stroes. That over-flowing Ocean in thy breast Must haue free course, till high spring-tides be past, Yet when that planets pow're beginnes to wane, Solatious words may calme those stormes againe. On this sad subiect still thy mind doth runne, And onelie this that thou hast lost a Sonne, And such a Sonne as never Ladie lost, Of whose match earth dare not be bold to bost. Tis all most true, and therefore all the earth Was all vnworthy of so great a worth. More worthy farre to raigne with Saints in Heavens, Then sit on earth to judge twixt oddes, and evens. Yet liv'd he long, although his life seem'd short, That Ship sailes most that soonest gets her Port. He dies not soone that still on death is musing, Life's measur'd, not by time, but by times vsing. Meane men and Princes, all were borne to die, Death's the last line of mortall miserie, The end of wandring, and the doore of rest; Where he that soonest comes, his lot is best. Then for a death so happy, to be sorie, Is nothing, but to envie at his glorie. Though thou (great Queene) hath lost what thou held dearest, Yet two surviue, that to his worth come nearest, Who now vnmatch'd, were once surmatch'd by him, But since no other to that height can clim, Sweet royall Impes grow still more cleare and purer, Since he is gone, whose worth made yours obscurer. Vnmatched now, but onelie each by other, An vnmatch'd Sister to a matchlesse Brother. And after many yeares, and months, and daies, Liue both to close your dying Parents eyes.
To Prince CHARLES. ADmired Phoenix, springing vp apace, From th'ashes of another Phoenix bones, Which (too too courteous) yeelded thee his place, Least earth were burden'd with two birds at once Of that rare kind, which loues to liue alone, Whose onelie essence is to be but one. T'was needfull (so heavens fatall verdict runnes) The first to die, the last spring from his embers. Heavens bounds (though boundlesse) cannot hold two sonnes, Nor earth containe two (more then) Alexanders, And both so great, that yet the earth doth grone To beare so great a burden as the one. And since Heavens haue alloted thee to liue, Braue Prince, the mirror both of th'one, & th'other, So Heavens I wish may to thy glorie giue Ioyn'd with thine owne, the vertues of thy Brother. That thou a two-fold Phoenix may attaine, A Phoenix race of yeares on earth to raigne. To the Lady ELIZABETH. MIrrour for Ladies, in whose life contend Vertue, and beautie, which should grace the most, Long may their strife continue, without end, To grace thee still, till life, and all be lost. Which after many yeares, and daies, be done When fruitfull Rhine is cover'd with thy sead, That from thy royall breast may spring some one, The living jmage of our Prince that's dead. Then thou may say, sweet Youth, proceed in praise, Such was thy Princelie Vncle in his time, Such may thou be, but having longer daies, That all thy life may equall but his prime,
Which if it doe, I boldlie dare divine, No others life shall ever equall thine. That both of you, when he those words shall heere, May to his mem'rie sacrifice a teere. To the Prince PALATINE. THe fame (braue Prince) of wonders in our Ile, Sprung from the Thames, astonished the Rhine; That all Rhines dainties in thine eyes seem'd vile, To view those wonders that were thought divine, Which when thou crost the raging Seas to see This Ile a litle Heaven did seeme to bee. Where three great lights all in a spheare did shine, From one great maine light borrowing their aspects, No cloud came nigh to crosse th'eclipticke line, They by his rayes, he bright by their reflects. On whom shin'd backe the beames from all the three, Like Rivers paying tribute to the Sea. But at thy comming came those dire defects, That dim'd the greatest light that grac'd our day, And thou to breed a second sadde eclipse, Would lead the second of the two away. Yet doe great Prince, for what thou mean'st to do, Is but t'jngraft another with the two, That three (though sundred) yet may no lesse shine, O're all the bounds betwixt the Thames and Rhine. FINIS.
