4889 99852509 17834
THE PLEASANT HISTORY OF CAWWOOD the ROOKE. OR, The Assembly of Birds, with the severall Speeches which the Birds made to the Eagle, in hope to have the Government in his Absence: And lastly, how the Rooke was banished; with the Reason why crafty Fellowes are called Rookes. As also fit Morralls and Expositions added to every Chapter. London Printed by T.C. for F. Grove, and are to be sold at his Shoppe, at the upper-end of Snow-Hill, neere the Sarazens head without New-Gate. 1640.
THE PLEASANT HISTORY OF Cawwood the Rooke. CHAP. I. IN the heate of Summer, when the Woods were lined with pleasant shade, and filled with the chéerefull Musicke of the feather'd Quiresters. It hap∣ned that the Eagle, the royall King of Birds, intending to leave off his goverment a a while, and to live solitary in the Desarts of Arabia, made a Proclamation to be drawne in this manner. That séeing he purposed for some reasons best knowne unto himselfe, to retire unto the Arabian Desart, & for some few Moneths to leave off all rule and dominion; he therefore tendring
the welfare of his Subjects, and being carefull they might not lacke one in his absence to administer Iustice unto them, thought good to signifie his Royall Will and Pleasure, which was that all Birds; of what name, co∣lour, or degree soever, should repaire unto the Wood, cal∣led Sylvia; and that there he purposed to chuse one a∣mongst them to rule the rest; who could declare himselfe to be most worthy in merit and desert. This Proclama∣tion being written and subscribed with Aquila Rex avi∣um, which is in English, The Eagle King of Birds: It was no sooner made knowne through all thickets, hedges, and bushie fields where Birds doe resort, but that presently their hearts were inflamed with ambition, every one de∣siring to prove himselfe worthy of the Vice-regency or government, during the retiring of the King. So that in a short time there were come unto the Court of Sylvia. Ru∣bert the Robin, Mavis the Magpie, Phillip the Sparrow,
the Blackbird, Starling, and Iackdaw, with Philomel the Nightingall, Tom Titmouse, Parvis the Wren, Spincke the Finch, Columber the Dove, and Maybird the Cuckoo, with many others which came with prepared spéeches to make knowne their owne worth. But now the Eagle having seated himselfe on a high Cedar trée, began to looke downe upon the Assembly of Birds, who sate upon the lower boughes round about him, and by the piercing quicknesse of his eye, hée soone perceived that his cosen Ra∣pax the Hawke, who was somewhat a kin unto him, and Cawwood the Rooke were onely absent. So that before he would make knowne his minde unto them, he sent Flywill the Buzzard for his cosen Rapax the Hawke, and Cawwood the Rooke; and withall fearing that the Hawke kept out of the way, because he had committed many outrages, upon the smaller birds, hée sent him a frée pardon for all his former offences, bidding Flywill to command him to come away with all spéede. The Morrall. THere is no man hath so meane a conceit of himselfe, but he thinkes he deserveth honour and preferment, as may appeare by the Wren and the small Birds, who all resorted to the Court upon the Eagles Proclamation, to make the worthiest Vice-regent in his absence. The Hawke and the Rooke keeping away from Court, doth shew that a guilty conscience, is a selfe accuser, and ma∣keth men afraid to come in fight, especially at any publike Meeting. CHAP. II. How Flywill the Buzzard carried a Pardon to Rapax the Hawke, and how the Hawke and the Rooke requited him for his paines. NO sooner had Flywill the Buzzard tide the Pardon with a string round about his necke, but straight hée
tooke wing, and flew away to a Wood some thrée miles of, to which he knew the Hawke and the Rooke did use to resort, and there accordingly he soone méete with them, and delivered the Pardon to the Hawke, telling him that the King out of his frée mercy, had sent him a Pardon for all his former bloody facts, wishing him to obey the former Proclamation, and to make all hast that could be to come unto the Court. The Hawke tooke the Pardon▪ and ha∣ving reade it, he gave Flywill the Buzard many thankes, for that he being so short of wing, had tooke the paines to bring him these good tidings and so walking aside with Cawwood the Rooke, as if they had consulted about go∣ing to the Court; the Hawke told the Rooke that this Buzard, (albeit he was a kin unto him, was a shame and disgrace unto all Hawkes, being a Coward, and not da∣ring to cease on any thing but dead Carrion, or some scattered guts, or to take childrens bread and butter out of their hands, all which doe shew the basenesse of his bréeding, and that he never came out of the true Nest or Airy of the Hawkes; and therefore friend Rooke, séeing thou hast béene accounted a cunning Politition in thy dayes, I would intreats thée to instruct me in some devise how we might make him a way, and yet have no hand in the matter. The Rooke scratching his head with one of his clawes stood still a while, till at last turning to the Hawke, he told him, that there was a new invention come into his braine how to make away the Buzard, and set him going with a powder. After this they retur∣ned againe unto Flywill the Buzard, who never suspected what they had contriv'd against him, but complained un∣to them that he had gotten a great cold in his head, by flying so farre in a rainy day, hée being onely us'd to haunt Warrens, and there to flie from one old trée to ano∣ther, and so passe away the time. But no sooner had the Rooke heard him say that he had gotten a cold, but hée presently tooke hold of the occasion, telling him that there was no better medicine for a cold than warmth; and
therefore if he would but tie his head about with a cloath, he should finde that the rhume would presently void it selfe, and runne out of his beake in a great abundance. The Buzard being full of paine with the headach▪ con∣sented thereunto, so that the Rooke very carefully and cunningly tyed a clout round about his head, and so bid him flie to the next trée. The foolish Buzard thinking hée could finde out the way for all he was blindfolded, tooke wing, and flew directly against the body of a great Oke, which beate him backe so violently, that he came flutte∣ring through the boughes, till at last he caught hold on one of them with his talents, and so having pearch'd him∣selfe, he thought to sit there, till the Hawke and the Rooke, his learned Phisitions did come unto him; but they flew unto an other trée from whence they might behold the Buzard sitting very demurely by himselfe. But hée had
not sat there long, when it hapned that one came by with a birding péece, and perceiving so faire a marke, went towards him, and taking his aime gave fire, and shot the Buzzard that he came tumbling down starke dead. Which when the Rooke & the Hawke perceived, they flew away toward the Court; the Hawke being very glad that his Cosen Buzzard was brought to this end, and so giving the Rooke many thankes for inventing this devise which had so luckily tooke effect, they both flew together to the Court. The Morrall. SOme are so blindfolded that they cannot discerne dan∣ger before it come upon them, as may appeare by the Buzard, who sate blindfolded in the tree, till the Fowler came by and shot him. The Hawke bringing his Cosen Buzzard to an untimely death; and sheweth that the rich doe despise their poore kindred, and so doe expose them to danger. CHAP. III. How Rapax the Hawke, and Cawwood the Rooke came to the Court, and how the Eagle declared unto the Birds the reason why he called them together. THe Eagle being, as before mounted upon a Cedar, all the Birds in a circle sat round about him, making such a charme of severall notes, tunes, and ditties, that if you had heard them, you would have sworne you had never heard the like. As they were thus sitting together, in came the Hawke and the Rooke with nimble wing, and tooke their place amongst the other Birds. And so the Hawke having made obeysance to the King, began in an eloquent spéech, to amplifie the Kings mercy, who had not onely granted him a frée pardon for all his former bloody offences, but also safe protection to come unto that
place. But the Eagle cut him off in his spéech, saying, Co∣sen, I hope my mercy shall finde that reward which I expect, which is, that you will amend your life, for that is the best way to give me thankes, and satisfie the whole Common wealth of Birds, who else, though they dare not speake yet openly, yet in their hearts they will condemne me of iniustice, for remitting the bloody mur∣ders, and slaughters of my Subiects which you have day∣ly committed. But I have other matters to declare un∣to you, & therefore I would have you give attention, and so with his Scepter (which he held in one of his talents) making a signe unto them for silence. He began his Roiall spéech in this manner. My loving Subiects, it behodeth a King to be carefull of his Subiects, even from the highest to the lowest; I therefore doe here professe, that all my Subiects are equally deare unto me, so that my Cosin the Hawke is not more deare unto me than the little Wren. It behoveth me therefore that as I have made knowne my purpose unto you by my Procla∣mation, which is, to leave my Court of Sylvia, and flye into the solitary Desarts of Arabia; so it is necessary for the establishing of peace and quiet in my absence, that I leave one to rule and governe over you; and to this end I have called you to this Assembly, that whatsoever Bird among you can prove himselfe to be the worthiest, either by parentage, merit, or desert, or any other way, him I will make King in my absence. Therefore let every one speake boldly in the behalfe of themselves, and urge what reasons they can in their owne practise. The Birds hea∣ring this began to clappe their wings, and with chirping and chattering gave a great applause to the Eagles spéech. The Morrall. THat when a wicked offender receives mercy, either from the King or a Magistrate, he cannot shew more Thankefulnesse than by amending his life; for so the Kingly Eagle told his cosin Rapax the Hawke. Kings
ought to take care of their Subjects in their absence, as appeareth by the Eagles speech to the Commonalty of Birds, whose rejoycing thereat, does shew how accepta∣ble the gracious Speech of a King is to his loving subjects. How Parvis the Wren made a speech unto the Eagle. THe Wren all this while sate upon thornes, though indéede she were now upon a higher trée than ever she was in her life before, being alwayes wont to créepe and péepe in the hedge bottome, and therefore it séemes that the hight of the tree had put high conceits into her head. So that packing up her selfe, and getting upon a small twigge, from whence shee might be séene of all the company, she began most earnestly to desire the Kingly Eagle to make her his substitute; for sayes she, though I am but a Wren, and of a small body, yet my heart is as bigge as the best; and for my wit and policy, you may sée it in building my nest, and the workemanship thereof. And therefore though I am least of Birds, yet if you please, I thinke my selfe worthy to beare the greatest au∣thority among Birds. The Wren would still have gone on, being all heart and tongue; but that the Eagle com∣manded Rubert the Robin to speake next. The Morrall. THis sheweth that men of least desert will put them∣selves most forward, as is seene by the Wren prefer∣ring her selfe before all other Birds, and the reason is be∣cause those that have the least worth, have the greatest opinion of themselves. How Rubert the Robin spake to the Eagle. MY Lord the Eagle, I hope Rubert the Robin is not unknowne unto you, whom men, women, and children, doe love, honour, and respect; no Péece is dis∣charged against me, no snare set for me, so that I flye
with safetie into houses, butteries, and cellers, because no man will hurt a Robin. The reason why I am beloved is for my courtesie and familiarity towards men, for if I finde a dead body in the Wood, I and the rest of my fel∣lowes doe bury it with Mosse and Leaves, and for this I am called the Sexton of the Wood: Besides, I sing in Winter, neither can the coldest frosts put me downe, when all the other Birds like cowards creepe into bushes, I therefore having the better heart, and being generally beloved, doe know no reason why I may not governe the Common wealth of Birds in your roiall absence. The Morrall. IT is some Argument of worth in our selves when we are beloved of others, as appeares by the speech of Ru∣bert the Robin, who urges it as a praise unto himselfe, to be beloved of men. The Owles Speech. THe Owle being not in those times afraid of the other Birds, but estéemed as a grave Counseller, began to speake next; but with such a hollow voice, as no man could understand him, yet some of his words were to this purpose. May it please your roiall Eagleship, the Owle was beloved of Pallas, and the Lacedemonians did coyne their money with the stampe and picture of an Owle, so much did the Lacedemonians love me. But the Birds hearing the Owle speake of the Lacedemonians, they fell all into a confused chirping or laughter, so that the Owle without taking any leave flew away, and ever since that time hath hid his head in an old Ivy trée, being ashamed of day light, and shunning the company of the other Birds. The Morrall. THat when men will strive to shew learning at unsea∣sonable times, it makes them prove rediculous, as ap∣peares by the Owle, who was laught at for his learned speech of the Lacedemonians.
The Speech of Philomel the Nightingall. AFter the Owle was laughed out of countenance. The Nightingall began to delight their eares with her swéete harmonious voyce; and no sooner had she fra∣med her selfe to speake, but the Birds were ready to give attendance to her spéech; which was in this manner. Most royall Soveraigne, if I should declare my sorrowes which I record by night, making the Thorne my Song∣booke, I know it would move you to compassionate my unjust ravishment; for know, that I was daughter to a King, and ravished by my Sister Prognes husband, called Tereneus, and afterward by some strange power, we were all changed into Birds; Tereneus into a Lapwing, my Sister Progne into a Swallow, and I Philomel into a Nightingall who still in lamentable tunes, setting my brest against a thorne, doe warble forth my owne griefe. And seing every bird hath frée liberty to praise her selfe, I may boldly say, that I am the honour of the Woods, the darling of the Spring, the Lovers joy; for young men and maides will walke out together to heare my notes, and if they heare me before May-bird the Cuckoo, they are in good hope they shall enjoy their swéete hearts that yéere. I am called Philomel for my melodious straines, my body is little, my voyce is loud, so that one said of me, Vox es praeterea nihil: That I was onely a voyce and nothing else. If therefore my great birth, my former wrongs, or plea∣sant tunes have any power to declare my merit, I hope the Crowne and Scepter may be worthily resigned unto me, having béene sometime a Kings Daughter, and there∣fore fit to be made Quéene of the Woods. The Morrall. INjured vertue is pittied of all men, which made Phi∣lomel declare the story of her ravishment, and by the Birds giving so diligent attention, unto her, is shewed that a well delivered speech hath a great power over the mind and affections.
The Cuckooes Speech. MAybird the Cuckoo having heard the sweete spéech which Philomel had made, thinking he could have made as good himselfe, for yet he had not suckt so many egges to make him hoarse, and therefore getting upon a bared bough, he began to wipe his beake, and rubbe it upon the tree, afterwards he fluttered his wings, and at last, fetching his breath as if he meant to make a long spéech▪ he began in this manner. Great King, I am the Cuckoo, Cuckoo, Cuckoo, & so he could goe no further, but still cried Cuckoo, Cuckoo, whereat all the other Birds laugh'd, and the Cuckoo was much dismaide, and since then hée will never be séene of the Birds but only in May, and for that reason he is called the Maybird. The Morrall. THis shewes that great preparations, have small per∣formances, and that those whose braines seeme to be in labour with a Mountaine, doe at last bring forth a Mouse, as may be perceived by Maybird the Cuckoo, who made them beleeve that she had great matters to speake, and at last could say nothing but Cuckoo, Cuckoo, and so was laugh'd at for her paines. The Speech of Corvino the Crow. WHen the Cuckoo had ended with shame, as she began with great ostentation. Then Corvino the Crow stood up, and told them he was a great Astrolo∣ger, having knowledge in the influence of the starres, the shiftings of the windes, the change of the weather, all which he made knowne unto men by voyce, so that the Shepherds are wont to say, When the Crow doth cry amaine, Then you may be sure of raine. Besides, my craft and cunning it is such, that I am seldome ensnar'd & brought to ruine, and therefore I ought for my policy to be prefer'd. If a horse chance to die, I am presently upon his bones; or if a Lambe or Shéepe be weake, I picke out his eyes, and afterward doe flye to some trée and from
thence doe heare how the Shepheards curse me, but yet for all that I thrive the better. If therefore Policy or Know∣ledge in affaires may enable one for publike government, you may make me your Substitute, and deliver the Crowne unto the Crow, for to him it belongeth, if desert may beare it away. The Morrall. THose that have no knowledge, will presume many times to be professors of Arts, so that Every Art hath some ignorant fellowes, who will pretend to have skill therein, as Mountibankes will needes be Physitions, and fellowes with a little Lattine will needes be Schollers, as the Crow, because he cries sometimes before raine, would therefore needes be an Astrologer. The Speech of Mavis the Magpie. THe Magpie after this began to chatter out her minde, saying he was once a King, and so was changed into a Pye, and therefore he might now againe be changed from a Pye into a King. Besides, saith he, I have béene alwayes estéemed as a Poet, for I can make Verses, and chatter them out so fast that you would wonder at it, and I can tell you the Commonwealth of birds have much de∣lighted in my Songs and Ditties, being excellent Rhyme with some reason, and therefore I thinke they have reason to applaud me: and for proofe of my skill you shall heare some of my Verses. Although I am no Iackedaw, Nor house Crow that crieth Caw, Yet I am a Magpie, That can make sweete melody, And sing so in my mother tongue, That all birds shall admire my song. And no sooner had he spoke these Verses, but the Magpie seeing the birds laugh at him, he swore they were very good lines, and that they had no more wit then Wood∣cocks, or else they would have prais'd them. The Morrall. BEcause this Morrall will be offensive to some Magpies in the world, I will deliver the Morrall to two
Verses, out of Persius the Poet, entreating of the same matter. Corvos Poetas, & pöetrias picas, Cantare credas, Pegaseium melos. Crow Poets, and Poeticke Pies. Doe thinke they make sweete Melodies. The Speech of Anser the Goose. AFter this Anser the Goose, and Coby the Cocke, ha∣ving by chance heard the Proclamation as they were standing under a hedge, they came flying thither, but being not able to light upon a trée, the Goose and the Cocke stood at the bottome of the trée; which when the Eagle perceived, he came downe to them, and all the birds sate round about upon the ground. Then the Goose began to speake in this man∣ner. Albeit I am estéemed a cowardly bird, because when I goe under a barne dore I stoope downe my head, yet I can speake much in my owne behalfe: for to begin with former times, I, onely my gagling voyce sav'd the Capitoll of Rome, from being taken by the enemy, as I know your Eagleshippe hath read in histories; besides, if I come unto these times, how could the Lawyers Clarke or Scrivener make the poore countrimen pay for their Law, unlesse I lent them quills to write their bills and bonds. So that I thinke the Graygoose wing may be as much feared now, as in the old time when they headed their arrowes with my feathers, for then many times they lost lives, and now their lands, while the shéepe affoords the parchment, and I afford the pen, with which the Prodigall sets his hand to the seale, or Morgage of his whole Patrimony. Besides, I have a great many two legg'd kindred in the world, who yet scorne to acknw∣ledge me, but the world knowes them to be Géese. And therefore considering how necessary I am, I hope you will give me preheminence above the other birds: After him the Cocke spake as followeth. Coby the Cocks speech. I Am Coby the Cocke, or the bird of Mars, I fight single combats, and from the Cockpit I beare away the bloody victory: I am the Country Clocke, and tell the Maides when tis time to rise, I call up the labourer to his worke, and
proclaime day-light over the whole world. I am loving to my hens, respected of my Dame that kéepes me, and fed with the best barley she can get, and in requitall I tread her hens lustily, and make them lay egges. To conclude, I am come of a generous kinde, being the true Embleme of valour, and so necessary that the world could not tell how to doe for Egges at shrovetide if the Cocke should faile. And there∣fore if the matter might be decided by voyces, I know the Country wives would desire to have me made King, for they doe all love a good treading Cocke. The Iackdawes Speech. THough I am last to take boldnesse to speake, yet I hope you will consider that I am an excellent Linguist, and have the knowledge of many Languages, so that when we Iackdawes are got together about a stéeple, we make a chattering noise like so many Welchmen. Besides, I have some rich treasure which lies hid in the crowne of a trée, as namely, beades, tagges of points, pewter spoones, and di∣vers other things, which I meant to present unto your Eagle∣ship, for it is my nature to hide whatsoever I finde. Besides, for my Language (as I said before) I can speake Latin, Gréeke, Hebrew, French, Italian as easily as my mother tongue, but indéede few can understand me, and therefore I doe lose that praise which I deserve. However, I hope you will consider my worthinesse, and place me as your substi∣tute, during the time that your Eagleship shall be absent in the Desart of Arabia. And so ends Iackdaw, praying for your long life, and to give you a taste of my Languages. Levat le Roy  foelicissimum. CHAP. IIII. How the Eagle having heard the Birds severall speeches did make a Speech to them againe, and at last made his Cosen Rapax the Hawke Viceregent in his absence. THe Eagle like a wise King having all this while colected the chiefe matter of their spéeches, he began to speake unto them in this manner. My loving Subiects, I have
heard what you have spoken in the behalfe of your selves. You Robert have pleaded well for your selfe, and so have you Lady Philomel, and all the rest, whose names for brevity sake I omit. But yet you have not shewed me any vertues worthy of royall dignitie. For in that Philo∣mel was a Kings daughter, and Mavis the Pye was some∣time a King, yet these are but the fictions of Poets, and I had rather have you make it appeare that your brests are filled with Iustice, Temperance, Magnanimitie, Mercy, and such other Vertues, which are required in a King. For to boast of Parentage, or gifts of Nature, as your faire white feathers, or of Art, as Languages, Learning, and the like, they may be estéemed ornaments to private men: but Princes should have Power to make them fear'd, and Ver∣tue to make them be beloved▪ but in none of you I finde thefe qualities: and therefore since you have all spoken your mindes, I would faire know why my Cosen Rapax the Hawke hath sate mute all this while. The Hawke hearing himselfe named by the Eagle, answered thus. May it please your highnesse. I know that my former offences, and bloody murthers are so odious and hatefull in the sight of the birds, that I dare not open my beake to pronounce a syllable in my owne behalfe. But yet might it please them to remit and for∣give my former offences, and pardon what is past, I would promise (if so be your Maiesty should make me your Sub∣stitute) to rule over the Commonwealth of Birds, with Iustice, temperance, and equitie, instéed of killing and slaying them with my Talents, I would protect them from the inuiry of Owles and other bloud suckers, who in the Winter evenings doe pull the small birds out of the bushes, and so prey upon them Then they should spend their dayes peaceably, sléepe securely, sing swéetly, féede plentiful∣ly, and live merrily. And besides, as I have power to sway the Empire, so I promise to rule over the Commonwealth of Birds, with Iustice and equitie, and to give them the better assurance that I will not prove a Tyrant, I am willing to have my Talents pared off. Therefore if the birds doe like of my offer, to shew their consent thereunto let them clappe their wings. Which was no sooner heard, but the Birds on condition that the Hawkes talents should be pared off, they
all cryed with one voyce: Fiat Rex Rapax. Let the Hawke be King. The Morrall. A Cunning dissembler will alwayes cover his Vice with the death of Vertue, as may be seene by the Hawkes speech, who promising to ride with Iustice amongst them, got so farre into the opinion of the birds, that they were content to chuse him King, to avoid farther strife amongst themselves. Take heede therefore of faire speeches, for all their words are mingled with dissimulation. CHAP. V. How Rapax the Hawke had his talents paed off, and how the Eagle had resigned his Scepter unto him, and made him King of the Birds. AFter the birds had consented to the Hawkes spéech. The Hawke, because they had no edge tooles amongst them, put his talents into the clift of a trée, and so never left pulling, till hee had pulled them quite off, and yet the hope of Soveraignety was so swéete unto him that he felt no paine therein Being thus unable to hurt The Eagle rose out of his seate, and caused the Hawke to sit therein, and afterward delivered his Scepter unto him, and put his Crowne upon his head, and then charged him to remember his promise, which was, to have a care of his subiects, and be loving unto them; as also to heare their complaints, to redresse their greevances, and to yéeld them reléefe. And this see you performe, as you tender or respect your owne life; for if at my returne from the Arabian Desart. I finde that you have wrong'd my Subiects, you shall be sure to die for it. The Hawke answered, that he hoped his Maiestie should commend him at his returne, and not finde any iust cause of punishment, for though I have béene heretofore counted cruell, and have plumed upon the Carkasse of many a small bird, as Larkes, and Spar∣rowes, and sometimes upon Doves, Partridges, Quailes, & the like, yet now your subiects shall finde me full of mercy, for indéede I was then enforced to be cruell by necessity▪ At these words the Eagle tooke wing, so taking some few birds of note with him, he flew away, and when these birds
had accompanied him some part of the way, he sent them backe againe, charging them to be carefull to obey the Hawke in all things. And so flew on to the Desart of Arabia. The Morrall. THe nature of man is given to seeke honour, which hee thinkes to be a sufficient reward for all his sufferings, as may appeare by the Hawke, who could endure to plucke off his owne Talents, in hope to be made King. CHAP. VI. How the Hawke behaved himselfe after the departure of the Eagle, and how he requited Cawwood the Rooke for teaching him to make away the Buzzard, as is shewed in the first Chapter. THe Eagle being gone, the Hawke behaved himselfe very lovingly for the first wéeke; as Nero, the first five yeares of his raigne was counted the best of Kings, but af∣terward he proved the worst of Tyrants: so the Hawke dis∣sembled his nature for a wéeke or fortnight, but afterward he had a great desire to shed blood, and therefore he began to thinke how he might put Cawwood the Rooke to death, and requite him for his former kindnesse in betraying the Buz∣zard, and making him stand blinde folded with a clout about his head, till one came by and shot him with a birding-péece. Now to bring this to passe, he called many of the little birds together, and told them, that what cruelty he had formerly committed, was by the encouragement of the Rooke, who made him beléeve, that seing nature had allotted him no other foode, it was lawfull for him to prey upon all sorts of birds, and that now he was afraid least he should put into his mind, the same bloody principles againe, and therefore to avoid suspition. My loving Subiects saith he, if any of you can ac∣cuse him of any hainous crime, (as I know he is guilty of many) I will grant you a day of hearing against him, that so, if he cannot cleere himselfe, he may suffer the punishment of death, which is due unto his desarts: no soner had the Hawke spoken these words, but presently they told his Ma∣iestie, that they had every one cause to complaine against
him, and therefore if he were once summoned to the Court, they would be all ready to accuse him. The Morrall. THey who employ others in wickednesse never love them any longer, untill their owne purpose is effected, as may appeare by the Hawke, who sought the life of the Rooke, after he had us'd his invention to make away the Buz∣zard. So that he which furthers a mans vice, is belov'd while it is doing, but is hated when tis done. CHAP. VII. How Cawwood the Rooke was called to the Court to an∣swer for himselfe, and how all the small birds brought in their accusations against him. THe Hawke began now to make knowne his blooddy na∣ture, and therefore sent Corvino the Crow to summon the Rooke to appeare at the Court of Sylvia, who according∣ly came at the day appointed, not doubting to receive any iniury from the Hawke, being alwayes his friend, and there∣fore not fearing that now being made King, he would use his power to his destruction, but it proved far otherwise, for no sooner was Cawwood come unto the Hawkes presence but the Hawke commanded him to stand forth and answer to such matters as should be laid against him, for saies he, friend Rooke there are many complaints made against you, and I must doe iustice as I promised the Eagle at his de∣parture. When the Rooke heard this, he began to change co∣lour, and his feathers began to stand up on end, what thought he shall I be betrayd by a Traytor, yet at last séeing no re∣medy, he was faine to stand to it, while the Birds gathered round about him, béeing all ready to complaine against him; and first Rubert the Robert began his enditement. The Morrall. TYrants doe alwayes pretend an outward shew of justice, as may be seene by the Havvkes speech to Cawvvood the Rooke, who being affraid thereof, does shew that a guil∣tie conscience is a thousand witnesses.
CHAP. VIII. How Rubert the Robin complayned against Cawwood the Rooke. I Am glad that we small Birds have now frée liberty to shew our wrongs and gréevances, which we have received from Cawwood the Rooke, who upon a time brought me in danger of my life, for one day as he and I were walking in a field by a hedge side, we chanced to come where there was a turfe set up with two stickes, and a little hole digged un∣derneath it; I began to aske him what it was. O sayes hée doe you not know what this is, then you have lost many a faire worme, for it is never without one or two, and therefore (saies he) if you hop into the bottome of it, you shall finde my words true, but quoth I is there no danger in it? O no (sayes he) Ile warrant you for danger, whereupon I beléeving him, leapt upon the forked sticke, and no sooner was I lighted thereon, but presently the turfe fell upon my head, so that I was made close prisoner in the Pitfall, and there I conti∣nued, till at last a waggish boy, who had made the Pitfall came and tooke me out, and with great ioy carried me to his mother, but she telling him that it was ill lucke to hurt a Ro∣bin, at last the boy was content onely to cut of my tayle and let me flye, whereby I escaped the danger that the Rooke had brought me into, and therefore I desire that we may have iustice on him. The Sparrowes complaint. WIth the same malitious minde, though not in the same manner, Cawwood the Rooke brought me in danger and perill of my life. For one frosty morning there being a great many Limestrawes set on a dunghill, Caw∣wood the Rooke went amongst them and spying mee upon the top of a Barne, called me downe unto him, and hid me come to him, for there were a great many Wheate eares scattered on the ground, whereupon I being somewhat hun∣gry, by reason of the could frosty weather came flying to him, and no sooner had I begun to pecke on one of the eares, but straight the end of one of the limed strawes caught me by the backe, and another under the wing, so that I had much a doe
to get from thence, for when he that watcht the strawes saw me limed and taken, he came running out to catch me, but then with all the strength I had, I made towards a hedge, and having gotten into the bottome thereof escaped the fow∣lers hands. Thus I was betrayd by Cawwood the Rooke, and I thinke there is no Bird but hath some accusation a∣gainst him. The Complaint of the Woodcocke. MAy it please you, I was once comming through a Wood with this Trayter Cawwood the Rooke, and as we went, there was two or thrée stickes set iust crosse the path, with one great bended sticke, whereon was a noose of haire. And as we came to them I asked the Rooke what this meant, why sayes he it is a swing, whereon I am wont many times to stretch my selfe, at these words like a Wood∣cocke as I was, I went to take hold of the great sticke, and thought to have swong upon it, but no sooner had I set my foote upon the Bridge but the Spring flew up, and caught me by one of the legges, so that there I lay upright, and look∣ing every houre when the Fowler would come to fetch me, and if the haire noose had not broken, I had certainly long ere this béene rosted, and served up to some rich mans Table. The Woodcocke had no sooner ended his complaint, but there came in a Thrush and a Starling like maymed Soul∣diers hopping upon one legge, and séeing Cawwood the Rooke standing at the barre. The Thrush, because she was the better speaker began to tell their case; how that Caw∣wood the Rooke made them beléeve that a Birding-péece was but a pipe which men used to play upon, whereupon one morning a Fowler comming towards us with a Péece, we thinking to heare his pipe safe still, so that he taking his ayme discharged against us, and shot me into the legge, and my brother Starling into the wing. Thus hath the Rooke with his craft deceived us many times, and many a bird hath hee brought to untimely end by his cunning. We beseech the Hawke therefore (who we heare is left substitute in the Ea∣gles absence) that he would punish the cruelty of the Rooke.
CHAP. IX. How Cawwood the Rooke, would have answered for him∣selfe, but that Rapax the Hawke would not suffer him, but condemned him to perpetuall banishment. WHen Rapax the Hawke had heard these accusati∣ons against the Rooke, he was very glad thereof, And yet (as it is the nature of cunning trechery) he séemed to pitty his calamitie, and told him he was sorry to heare so many foule matters urged against him. I have alwayes (saies he) had a good opinion of you, but I sée how much we may be deceived. And I wish that some other might give judgement on your crimes and offences, but yet since it hath pleased the Eagle to give me all power, and to put the Scepter of justice into my talents, there shall no respect of friendship sway me, and therefore you must looke for no more mercy at my hands, then iustice will permit. For al∣beit you are my friend, yet I must prove my selfe a loyall subiect to the Eagle, who hath put me in trust to see rewards and punishments equally distributed amongst his subiects, and this I take to be the true nature of Iustice. At these words the Rooke began to prepare himselfe, and would faine have answered the obiection of his adversaries, begin∣ning to shew that it was not his craft, but their folly which brought them into danger; for (saith he) if Rubert the Ro∣bin will néeds be péeping into a Pitfall, who can helpe it? or if the Woodcocke will take a Springs for a Swinge it s not my cunning but their simplicitie which brings them into danger, which by escaping they have learned more wit, and so ought in iustice to give me thankes, for now they know how to avoide the like perills hereafter. Besides all this, you that sit to condemne me, ought not to séeke my life, but to save me from my enemies, for you know how for your sake I contriv'd an excellent device to make away Fliwell the Buzzard. But at that word the Hawke commanded them to stop his mouth, and that with a noose of haire they should forthwith strangle him. When the Rooke saw there was no way but death, he began to intreat for mercy, whereupon the
Hawke considering better with himselfe, pronounced this sentence against him. In regard that thou Cawwood the Rooke hast highly transgressed and offended against the Commonwealth of Birds, by deceiving Phillip the Sparrow, Rubert the Robin, and Longbill the Woodcocke, I doe here banish thée out of the Country, and send thée to live for ever in the Citie. Since which time the Citie hath béene al∣wayes full of Rookes. For no sooner was the sentence gi∣ven but the Parliament of Birds broke up, and the Rooke flew away to the Citie, where he hath ever since remained, there being divers sorts of Rookes, as for example, your chea∣ting Gamester is a Rooke, and your fellowes that cheate Countrymen are Rookes, the Tapster that fills not his pot is a Rooke, and he that drinkes with you and slips away when the reckoning comes to be payd is a Rooke. And to conclude there are so many sorts of Rookes that I cannot reckon them, for sometimes your Rooke will be in the shape of a decayd gallant, sometimes in a thredbare Cloake wai∣ting at Bowling Allies, sometimes in a blew Ierkin like a Countryman, and sometimes in the Market in the shape of a Cutpurse. And therefore I would have Countrymen buy this Booke, for though it be The History of the Rooke, yet it will not cost them so deare, as the acquaintance of these City Rooke. The Morrall. CRafty fellowes, albeit they scape a great while, yet at last are brought to ruine and disgrace, for if they come once to publicke tryall, then all their enemies are ready to accuse them, as appeareth by the Rooke, who after all his cunning trickes was at last banished to live in the Citie; so that your Rooke is borne in the Country, and bred in the City, and this is the concluding Morrall of this Chapter. FINIS.
