4884.5 S4581 23586843 26742
A Table Alphabeticall, con∣tayning and teaching the true writing and vnderstanding of hard vsuall English wordes, borrowed from the Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, or French, &c. With the Interpretation thereof by plaine English words, gathered for the benefit and help of all vnskilfull persons. Whereby they may the more easily and bet∣ter vnderstand many hard English words, which they shall heare or read in Scriptures, Sermons, or else where, and also be made able to vse the same aptly themselues. Set foorth by R. C. and newly corrected, and much inlarged by T. C. Legere, & non intelligere, neglegere est. As good not to read, as not to vnderstand. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Edmund Weauer, and are to be sold at his shop at the great North dore of Paules Church. 1609.
To the right honourable, Worshipfull, vertuous, and godly La∣dies, the Lady Hastings, the Lady Dudley the Lady Mountague, the Lady Wingfield, and the Lady Leigh, his Christian friends, R. C. wisheth great prosperitie in this life, with increase of grace, and peace from God our Father, though Iesus Christ our Lord and onely Sauiour. BY this Table (right Houourable and Worshipfull) strangers that blame our tongue of difficultie, and vncertaintie, may hereby plainely see, and better vnderstand those things, which they haue thought hard. Hereby also the true Orthographie, that is, the true writing of many hard English words, borrowed from the Greeke, Latine and French, and how to know one from the other, with the interpretation thereof by plaine English words, may be learned & known. And children hereby may be prepared for the vnderstanding of a great number of Latine words: which also will bring much delight and iudgement to others, by the vse of this little worke.
Now when I had called to minde (right Ho∣norable and Worshipfull) the great kindnes, and bountifulnesse, which I found in that vertuous and godly Lady, Lucy Harington, your Honors and Worships mother, and my especiall friend in the Lord. When, and at such time as the right Worshipfull Sir Iames Harington Knight, your Ladiships Brother, was my Scholler (and now my singular benefactor) when I taught the Grammer Schoole at Okeham in the County of Rutland: In consideration whereof, and also for that I acknowledge my selfe much beholding and indebted to the most of you, since this time, (being all naturall Sisters) I am bold to make you all ioyntly Patrons hereof, and vnder your names to publish this simple worke. And thus praying, that God of his vnspeakeable mercies, will blesse both your Honours and Worships, I do with all good wishes to you all, with all yours, as to mine owne soule, humbly take my leaue. Your Honours and Worships, euer ready in Christ Iesus to be commanded, Robert Cawdrey.
To the Reader. SVch as by their place and cal∣ling (but especially Preachers) as haue occasion to speake pub∣liquely before the ignorant peo∣ple, are to bee admonished, that they neuer affect any strange inkhorne tearmes, but la∣bour to speake so as is commonly receiued, and so as the most ignorant may well vnder∣stand them: neyther seeking to be ouer fine or curious, nor yet liuing ouer carelesse, vsing their speach as most men doe, and ordering their wits as the fewest haue done. Some men seek so far for outlandish English, that they forget altogether their mothers language, so that if some of their mothers were aliue, they were not able to tell or vnderstand what they say; and yet these fine English Clearkes will say they speake in their mother tongue; but one might well charge them for counterfay∣ting the Kings English. Also, some far iour∣nied gentlemen, at their returne home, like as they loue to goe in forraine apparrell, so they will pouder their talke with ouer-sea language. Hee that commeth lately out of France, will talke French English, and neuer
blush at the matter. Another chops in with English Italianated, and applyeth the Italian phrase to our English speaking, the which is as if an Orator, that professeth to vtter his minde in plaine Latine, would needs speake Poetrie, and far fetched colours of strange an∣tiquitie. Doth any wise man thinke, that wit resteth in strange words, or else standeth it not in wholsome matter, and apt declaring of a mans minde? Doe wee not speake, because we would haue others to vnderstand vs? or is not the tongue giuen for this end, that one might know what another meaneth? There∣fore, either wee must make a difference of English, and say, some is learned English, and othersome is rude English, or the one is Court talke, the other is Country-speech, or else we must of necessitie banish all affected Rhetorique, and vse altogether one manner of language. Those therefore that will auoid this follie, and acquaint themselues with the plainest and best kinde of speach, must seeke from time to time such wordes as are com∣monly receiued, & such as properly may ex∣presse in plaine manner, the whole conceit of their minde. And looke what words we best vnderstand, and know what they meane, the
same should soonest be spoken, and first ap∣plyed, to the vtterance of our purpose. Ther∣fore for this end, foure things would chiefly be obserued in the choyse of wordes. First, that such wordes as wee vse, should bee pro∣per vnto the tongue wherein we speake. A∣gaine, that they be plaine for all men to per∣ceiue. Thirdly, that they bee apt and meete, most properly to set out the matter. Fourth∣lie, that wordes translated, from one signi∣fication to another, (called of the Grecians Tropes,) be vsed to beautifie the sentence, as precious stones are set in a ring, to commend the gold. Now such are thought apt wordes, that properly agree vnto that thing, which they signifie, and plainly expresse the nature of the same. Therefore, they that haue re∣gard of their estimation and credite, doe wa∣rily speake, & with choise, vtter words most apt for their purpose. In waightie causes, graue wordes are thought most needfull, that the greatnesse of the matter, may the ra∣ther appeare, in the vehemencie of their talke. So likewise of other, like order must be taken. Albeit some, not onely doe not obserue this kinde of aptnesse, but also they fall into much fondnes, by vsing words out
of place and applying them to diuers mat∣ters, without all discretion. If thou be desirous (gentle Reader) right∣ly and readily to vnderstand, and to profit by this Table, and such like, then thou must learne the Alphabet, to wit, the order of the Letters as they stand, perfectly without booke, and where euery Letter standeth: as (b) neere the beginning, (n) about the mid∣dest, and (t) toward the end. Now if the word, which thou art desirous to finde, be∣gin with (a) then looke in the beginning of this Table, but if with (v) looke towards the end. Again, if thy word begin with (ca) looke in the beginning of the Letter (c) but if with (cu) then looke toward the end of that Let∣ter. And so of all the rest, &c. And further vnderstand, that all such words as are deriued and drawne from the Greeke, are noted with this letter (g.) And the french are marked thus (§) but such words as are de∣riued from the Latine and others, haue no marke at all.
A Table Alphabeticall, contayning and teaching the true wri∣ting and vnderstanding of hard vsuall English words, &c. (k) standeth for a kinde of. (g, or gr.) standeth for Greeke. The French words haue this (§) before them. A § ABandon, cast away, or yéelde, vp, to leaue or forsake. Abash, blush. abba, father. abatement, taking from, lessening. § abbesse, Abbatesse, Mistresse of a Nunne∣rie, comforers of others. § abbettors, counsellers. aberration, a going assray, or wandering. abbreuiat, § abbridge, to shorten, or make short. § abbut, to lye vnto, or border vpon, as one lands end méets with another. abecédarie, the order of the Letters, or hé that vseth them. § abet, to maintaine. abdicate, put away, refuse, or forsake.
abhorre, hate, dispise or dis daine. abiect, base, cast away in dis daine. abiure, renounce, deny, forsweare. § abolish, abolited, make void, destroy, deface, or out of vse. abortiue, borne before the time. abricot, (k) kind of fruit. abrogate, take away, disanull, disallow. abruptly, vnorderly, without a preface. absolue, finish or acquite. absolute, perfect, or vpright. absolution, forgiuenesse: discharge. absonant, vntuneable, absurd. abstract, drawne away from another: a little booke or volume gathered out of a grea∣ter. abstruse, hid secret, difficult. abstersure, cleansing. abstemous, very temperate in diet. abstinent, forbearing, temperate. absurd, foolish, irksome. academie, an Vniuersitie, as Cambridge, or Oxford. academicke, of the fect or wife and learned men accent, tune, the rising or falling of the voice.
accept, to take liking of, or to entertaine willingly. § acceptance, an agréeing to some former act done before. accesse, frée cōming to, or a way to a place. accessary, partaker in the same thing. § accessory, an accident, or addition. accident, a chance or happening. accidentall, falling by chance, not by na∣ture. acclamation, showting, giuing of approbati∣on, or disliking by crying out. accommodate, to make fit too, or conuenient to the purpose. § accomplish, finish, or make an end of. accommodating, lending. § account, reckoning. § accord, agréement betwéene persons. § accost, draw néere vnto. accurate, curious, cunning, diligent. § accrew, grow, increase, goe to. accumulate, to heape together. accurate, curious, cunning. § acertaine, make sure, certifie. acetositie, sharpnesse, or sowernesse. § achieue, to make an end off. § acquitall, discharge.
acquisition, getting, purchasing. acrimonie, sharpnesse, sourenesse. § action, the forme of a suite. actiue, nimble, ready, quick. actuall, in act, or shewing it selfe in déede. acute, sharp, wittie, quick. adage, an old spéech, or prouerbe. adamantine, as hard as Diamont addicted, giuen too, appointed too. adhaerent, cleauing to, or taking part with. § adiew, farewell. § addresse, prepare, or direct. adiacint, lying too, adioyning too. adiunct, an accidentall qualitie, or any pro∣pertie, that is not a substance. § adiourne, deferre, or put off till another time. adiure, make to sweare, or to deny. adiuvate, to helpe. adle, ill or diseased. administer, gouerne, serue, or order, or doe seruice vnto. administrator, one that doth businesse for an another. admire, maruell at, or be in loue with. admiration, wonderment, reioycing. § admirall, chiefe by sea, worthy.
admission, receiuing, or leaue to enter into a place, accesse. adopt, to take for his chiide, fréely to choose. adore, worship, or reuerence. adorne, beautifie, apparrell, prepare. § aduance, preferre, lift vp to honour. aduent, the comming. aduerse, contrary, or backward. § aduertise, giue knowledge, aduise, or coun∣sell. adulation, flattery or fauning. adulterate, to counterfait, or corrupt. aduocate, a spokesman, atturney, or pleader. aduousion, patronage, or power to present, or giue a liuing. adust, burne. Ae, see E. affable, ready, and curteous in spéech, gra∣cious in words. § affayres, businesse. affectation, curiositie, desire to please. affect, to desire earnestly, or to minde. affected, disposed, inclined. affinitie, kinne by marriage. affirme, auouch, acertaine. § affiance, trust. § affianced, betrothed.
affixe, ioyned vnto. afflict, vexe, trouble, torment. § affranchise, set at liberty. agast, afraid. agent, dooer, steward, or commissioner. aggrauate, make more grieuous, and more heauy. aggregate, gather together. agilitie, nimblenesse or quicknesse. agglutinate, to ioyne together. agnition, knowledge, or acknowledging. agnomination, alluding to ones name. agitate, driuen, stirred, tossed. agonie, (gr) heauie passion, anguish, griefe. § aigre, sharpe, sower. alabaster, (k) stone. alacritie, chéerefulnesse, liuelinesse. alarum, a sound to the batteli. alchymie, (g) the art of turning other met∣tals into gold. algeates, euery way, or howeuer it be. § alien, a stranger. alienate, to estrange, or withdraw the mind or to make a thing another mans. aliment, nourishment, suffenance. § all haile, all health, God spéede. alledge, bring proofe.
allegation, excuse, bringing of testimonie. allegorie, (gr) similitude, a mysticall spéech, more then the bare letter. § allegiance, obedience of a subiect. allevate, asswage, or make more easie and ght. § alliance, kindred, or league. allusion, meaning and pointing to another matter then is spoken in words. allude, to speake one thing that hath resem∣blance and respect to another. § aloofe, a farre off. alpha, (gr) the first Gréeke Letter. alphabet, (g) order of letters in the crosserow. alter, chaunge. altercation, debate, wrangling, or conten∣tion. altitude, height. amaritude, bitternesse. ambage, long circumstance of word § ambassadour, messenger. ambition, desire of honour, or striuing for preferment. ambodexter, one ye playeth on both hands. ambiguous, doubtfull, vncertaine. § ambushment, priuie traine, lying secretly to trap by the way.
§ amerce, amercement, fine, or penalty. amiable, louely, or with a good grace. amitie, friendship, loue. amorous, full of loue, amiable, § amorte, dead, extinguished, without life. ample, large. amplifie, enlarge, or make bigger. analogie (gr) conuenience, proportion. analysis, (gr) resolution, deuiding into part anarchie, (gr) when the land is without  prince, or gouernour. anatomie, (g) cutting vp of the body. anathema, (g) accursed or giuen ouer to the diuell. § angle, corner. § anguish, griefe. angust, straight, narrow. animate, encourage. adnimaduersion, noting, considering, or ma∣ing. anales, Chronicles of things from yéere  yéere. annex, to knit or ioyne together. annihilate, make voyd, or bring to nothing. anniuersarie, a yéers time, or done and com∣ming yearely.
annotations, notes, markes, obseruations. annuall, yéerely. antarticke, (g) towards the South. anthem, (g) song. antecessour, an auncestour, or predecessour that goeth, or liueth in the age or place before vs. § antedate, a fore date. antichrist (g) against, or contrary to Christ. anticipation, preuenting, foreknowledge. antidote, (g) a remedie against poison. antipathie, (g) contrarietie of qualities. antipodes, (g) those that goe with their féet opposite to ours. antiquitie, auncientnesse. anticke, disguised. antithesis, (g) repugnancie, or contrarietie. antiquarie, a man skilled in, or a searcher of antiquities. anxitie, care or sorrow. aphorisme, (g) generall rule in phisicke. apocalypse, (g) reuelation. apocrypha, (g) not of authoritie, a thing hid∣den, whose originall is not knowne. apologie, (g) defence, or excuse by speach. apostatate, (g) a backslider. apostacie, (g) falling away, backsliding,
rebellion. apostle, (g) an ambassadour or one sent. apothegme, (g) short wittie sentence, or spéech. apparant, in sight or open. appall, feare. apparition, appearance, or strange fight. § appeach, accuse, or bewray. § appeale, to séeke to a higher Iudge. § appease, quiet, or pacifie. appendix, hanging, or belonging to another thing. appertinent, appurtenance, belonging vnto another thing. appetite, desire to any thing. applaude, to shew a liking of, as it were, by clapping of hands. application, applying too, or resorting too. appose, to aske questions, oppose. apposition, adding, or setting too. apprehension, conceit, and vnderstanding. approbation, allowance, or liking. appropriate, to take, and kéepe to, and for himselfe alone. approue, allow or make good. approch, come nigh. apt, fit.
able, that is or may bée tilled. biter, bitratour, a Iudge in a controuersie betwixt men. § arbitrement, iudgement, censure, award. arch, (g) chiefe. ch-angell, (g) chiefe angell. chbishop, chiefe bishop. chitect, chiefe builder. tick, (g) northward. dent, hoate, earnest. dencie, heale, earnestnesse. gent, siluer, coyne. gue, to reason ditie, drinesse. stocraticall, (g) gouernement of a king, dome by the peares and nobility. thmeticke, (g) art of numbring. ke, ship or chest. armorie, house of armour. omaticall, of a swéet smell. rrerages, debt vnpaid, or things left vn∣one and duties comming behind. rrest, stay, or lay hold of. ide, to please well, to content. ariue, uall, come to land, or approch. ogate, to claime, or challenge.
arrogant, proude, presumptuous. artifice, skill, subtiltie, or a cunning péece of worke. artificer, handicrats-man. artificially, workmanlike, cunningly. articulate, ioynted, set together, or to point out, and distinguish. artichock (k) herbe. § artillery, engines or instruments for war. § artisan, a handicrafts-man. ascaunce, aside. ascend, goe vp, or climbe vp. ascent, a going vp. ascribe, giue to, adde to, attribute vnto. askew, ansquint, looking aside, or awry. assassinate, spoile, murther § assay, proofe or tryall. assent, agréement, or consent. assertaine, assure, certaine. assentation, flattery, speaking faire. aspect, looking vpon, beholding much sight aspectable, worthy, or easie to be séene. asperat, rough, sharpe, or vnpleasant. aspiration, breathing. aspersion, besprinkling. aspire, climbe vp, or labour to come to.
§ assault, to set vpon, or to proue. § assaile, § assemble, gather together. assemblie, company. assertion, affirming, auonching of any thing asseueration, earnest affirming. assiduitie, continuance, diligence. assigne, appoynt, ordaine. assignation, appointment. assimulate, to make like, to compare with. assistance, helpe. assotiation, ioyning together in fellowship. associate, to accompany, or follow. assumption, taking. stonish, put in great feare. § assoyle, excuse, cléere. astipulation, an auouching, or witnessing of a thing, an agréement. astrictiue, astringent, binding, or ioyning together. astronomie, (g) knowledge of the Starres. astrologie, (g) astrolabe, (g) an instrument to know the motion of the starres. atheist, (g) atheall, without God, or beléeuing that there is no God, or de∣nying any of his attributes.
atheisme, (g) the opinion of the Atheist. atomie, (g) a thing so small that it cannot bée deuided. § attach, sease vpon, rest, or hold. § attaint, conuict of crime. § attainder, a conuiction, or prouing guiltie of a crime or fault. § attempt, set vpon, or take in hand. attendance, watching, staying for, or way ting vpon. attentiue héedie, or marking. attenuate, to make thinner or weaker, to lesson. attest, to witnesse, or call to witnesse. § attrap, ensnare. attribute, giue to, or impute. auarice, couetousnesse, or inordinate desire of money. auaunt, forward. auburne, (k) colour. audience, hearing, or hearkning, or those that heare. audacious, bold, rash, or foolish hardie. auditor, hearer, or officer of accounts. audible, easie to be heard. § auer, auouch, call to witnesse, proue. auert, to turne from, or kéepe away.
augment, to encrease. auguration, augure, guessing, or coniecturing at things to come. § avowable, that which may be allowed and affirmed. § avouch, affirme with earnestnes, defend. auoke, to call from, or pull backe. auricular, in the eare, playning to the eare. auspicious, betokening good successe. auxiliarie, that come to help and aide. austere, sharpe, rough, cruell. authenticall, (g) of authoritie, allowed by authoritie: the originall. autumne, the haruest. axiome (g) a certaine principle, or generall ground of any Art. ay, euer, at any time, for euer. azure, (k) of colour. B BAinbate, beare or cary like a porter. baile, suretie, witnesse. ballance, a paire of scales. § balase, grauell, wherewith ships are poy∣sed to goe vpright: or weight. bang, beat.
bankerupt, bankrout, water. banquet, feast. § band, company of men, or an assembly. baptisme, (g) diing, or sprinkling. baptist, (g) a baptiser. barbarian, a rude person. barbarisme, rudenesse, a corrupt forme o writing or speaking. § barke, small ship. barnacle, (k) bird. barrester, one allowed to giue counsell, o to plead: barreter, a contentious person, quarreller, or fighter. § barter, to bargaine, or change. baud, whore. bauin, a fagoot, or kid. bashfull, blushing, or shamefa. basis, (g) foundation, ground. § battrie, beating or striking, bay, (k) trée, beadle, officer. beagle, (k) hon. beatitude, blessednesse, happinesse. beliue, anoe. belt, girdle. benediction, praising or blessing.
beneficiall, profitable, liberall. beneuolence, good will, or . benigne, fauourable, curteous, gentle. benignitie, , or kindnesse. § benisson, blessing. bequeath, bereft, depriued, alone, voyde, od. § besiege, . betrothed, affianced, or promised in mariage § beuuerage, drincke. bewaile, mon complaine. § biue, welcome. § biere, a cophin wherein dead men are carryed. bigamie, (g) twise married, or hath had two wines. biparte, deuided into two parts. bisket, bread. bishop, ouer-, or prelae. bissextile, the leape yeare. § blason, report publish, shew forth. blasphemie, (g) to speake ill of God. blattering, vaine babling. § blanch, to make white. bleate, cry. blisse, oy, or blessednesse. blith, merry.
blinck, looke aside. § bonnet, hat, or ap. bob, beae. § bouge, stir, remoue from a place. boate, ship. bode, a messenger, or fydings. boote, helpe. bourne, a water springing out of the earth. braule, wrangle. brachygraphie, (g) short writing. § bragard, fine, trim, proude. § brandish, to shake, or cast with orce. breviarie, briefe, collection, short oll. breuitie, shortnesse. brickle, brittle, easily broken, lymber. § brigand, a théefe or robber by the high way side. § brigandine, coate of defence. § brigantine, a small ship. brothell, kéeper of a house of baudry. § brisque, quicke, liuely, fierce. brooch, iewell. § bruite, report, noyse. bucolike (g) pertaining to beasts or heards∣men. buggerie, coniunction with one of the same kinde, or of men with beasts.
bugle, glasse. buglasse (k) hearbe. bullyon, coyne or lumpe of siluer. butte, border vpon, lye ouer against. § burgesse, a head man of a towne. § burglarie, robbing of houses. buxomnesse, plyablenesse, or humble stoop∣ing, in signe of obedience. C CAbin, cottage, poore lodging. cadence, falling, properly the ledging of corne by a tempest. calculate, cast account, reckon. calefie, make warme, heate or chase. calligraphie (g) faire writing. calliditie, craftinesse, or deceit. calumniation, a discrediting by word, or a false accusation. camphire, kinde of gumme. candidate, a suier for, or one elect for a place canine, dogged hungry. § cancell, to vndoe, des, crosse out, or teare. canon (g) law, or rule. canonise (g) make a saint, to examin by rule.
canopie, couering. canticke, a song. capacitie, largenesse of a place, conceit or receit. capitall, deadly, or great, or worthy of shame, and punishment. capable, wise, apt to learne, bigge or fit to receiue. capitulation, distinguishing by parts, bring∣ing to heads. captious, catching, deceitfull, subtile. captiue, prisoner. captiuate, make subiect, or a prisoner. captation, procuring, purchasing. § capuchou, a hoode or oule. § carbonado, meat broyled on the coales. cardinall, chiefe, or principall. carminate, to card wooll, or deuide. carnalitie, fleshlinesse. carnall, fleshly, pleasing the flesh. carpe, take exception against, or wrangle. § cassere, dismisse, put away, or out of office castrated, gelded, diminished. casualtie, chance or hap. castigation, chastisment, blaming, correction catalogue (g) beadrole, or rehearsall of words, or names.
catastrophe (g) the end of a thing, ouer∣throw. category (g) an accusation. catechiser (g) that teacheth the principles of Christian religion. cathedrall, chiefe in the Diocesse. catarre, a flowing of humours from the head. catholicke (g) vniuersall or generall. § cauallerie, horse men. caue, hollow place. cautelous, circumspect, warie, craftie. cauill, to iest, scoffe, or reason subtilly. cauterize (g) to seare, burne. caution, warning, putting in minde, or ta∣king héede. celebrate, holy, make famous, to publish, to to commend, to kéepe solemnely. celeritie, swiftnesse, hast. celestiall, heauenly, diuine, passing excel∣lent. cement, morter, or lime. censor, a corrector, a iudge, or reformer of manners. censure, correction, or reformation. centre (g) middest of any round thing or circle.
centurion, captaine of an hundred men. certifie, giue to vnderstand. ceruse, white leade, or painting that wo∣men vse. cessation, rest, idlenes, leauing off. cessement, tribute. chanell, sinck. chaos (g) a confused heap or mingle mangle. § chapelet, a garland. chaffare, buying and selling. character (g) the fashion of a letter, a marke or stampe. § champion, wilde field, also a challenger. chambering, lightnesse, and wanton beha∣uiour in priuate places. charter, a grant of any thing confirmed by seale. § chastise, correct, punish. § chaunt, sing. § cheualrie, Knight-hod. § cheualier, man at armes. cherubin, order of Angels. chirograph (g) hand writing. chiromancie (g) telling of fortunes by the lines in the hand. chirurgion (g) a Surgeon. choller (g) a humour causing anger. christ (g) annoynted.
chronicler (g) chronographer, History wri∣ter. chronicall (g) returning at certaine times. chronologie (g) story of times past. cibaries, meates, nourishment. cider, drincke made of apples. circuit, compasse about. circular, round. circumcise, to cut the priuie skin. circumference, the round and vtmost circuit or compasse. circumligate, blinde about. circumscribe, to compasse about with a line, to limit. circumspect, héedy, quick of sight, wise, and doing matters aduisedly. circumlocution, a speaking of that in many words, which may be said in few. circumstance, a qualitie that accompanieth▪ any thing, as time place. &c. circumstant, things that are about vs. circumuent, to close in, to deceiue, or intrap craftily. cite, alledge, call as witnesse, to summon to appeare. citadell, the fort of a towne. citron (k) ruit.
ciuill, honest in conuersation, or gentle in behauiour. § clame, title, right, challenge as his owne. clamorous, making a great noyse. classick, chiefe, and approued. clarifie, make cleare. claritude, cléerenes, renowne. clemencie, gentlenesse, curtesie. cleped, called. clenched, fastened. client, he that is defended. climate, a portion of the world betwix North and South. climactericall (g) that which ariseth by de∣grées, as the sixtie third yeare, is climac∣tericall of seauentie, also dangerous. clyster (g) medicine. coaction, compelling. coagulate, congeale, come to a curde. coadiutor, a fellow helper. coble, amend. cockatrice, a kinde of beast. coction, boyling, digesting. coequall, like, euen. caenation, supper, a place to sup in. cogitation, thought, musing. cognition, knowledge.
cohaerence, ioyning, & vniting together. § coin, corner. collect, gather together. colleague, companion, fellow in office. collaterall, on the other side, ouer against, as two lines drawne equally distant one from another, in due place. § collation, a short banquet. § collogue, flatter, speake faire. collusion, deceit, cousonage. § colonell, the Generall of an army. columne, one side of a page of a booke. combae, fight, strife. combine, couple together. cōbination, a ioyning, or coupling together. combure, burne, or consume with fire. combustible, easily burnt. cōbustion, burning or consuming with fire comedie (k) stage play. comicall, handled merily like a comedy. commemoration, rehearsing, or remem∣bring. § commencement, a beginning or entrance. comet (g) a blasing starre. commentarie, exposition of any thing. commerce, fellowship, entercourse of mar∣chandise.
commination, threatning, or menacing. commiseration, pittie. commixtion, commixture, mingling together. commodious, profitable, pleasant, fit, commotion, rebellion, trouble, or disquiet∣nesse. communicate, make pertaker, or giue part vnto. § communalitie, common people, or Com∣mon wealth. communion, communitie, fellow∣ship. compact, ioyned together, or an agréement. compassion, pittie, fellow-féeling. compell, to force or constraine. compendious, short, profitable. compensation, a recompence. compeare, like. competent, conuenient, sufficient, apt. competitor, hée that sueth for the same thing, or office that another doth. compile, gather together. complement, perfecting of any thing. complete, fulfilled, finished. complexion, nature, constitution of the body.
§ complices, fellowes in wicked matters. compose, make or ioyne together. composition, agréement, a making or min∣gling together. comprehend, comprise, to con∣taine. compremise, agréement made by parties chosen on eyther side. compremit, iudge. compte, fine, decked, trimmed. compulsion, force, constraint. computation, an account or reckoning. compugator, one that comes to purge or frée another. compunction, pricking. concauitie, hollownesse. conceale, to kéepe close. conception, conceiuing in the wombe. concinnate, made fit, finely apparrelled. concise, briefe or short. conclaue, inner parlor, closet. conclude, make an end. concoct, to digest meate. concord, concordance, agrée∣ment. concrete, ioyned or congealed together. concubine, harlot or light huswife.
conculcate, to tread vnderfoote. concupiscence, desire. concurre, agrée together, runne together or méete. concurse, running together of many to a place. condensate, make thicke. condigne, worthy. condiscend, agrée vnto, or consent. condite, swéetned, sawced, seasoned. condole, to be grieued, or sorrowfull with another. conduct, guiding, or hyring. confabulate, to talke together. confection, compounding, making, or min∣gling. confederate agréeing peaceably together by couenants made. conferre, talke together. conference, communication, talking toge∣ther. confidence, trust, hope. confine, to border vpon, to compasse in. confirme, establish. § confiscation, forfeiture or losie of goods. conflict, battaile, strife fight. conforme, to make like vnto, consent.
confound, ouerthrow, destroy, mingle to∣gether, or disorder. confront, oppose, compare one to ano∣ther. confuted, out of order. § conge, leaue, farewell. congeale, to harden, or wae hard, or fréeze together. congestion, an heaping vp. conglutinate, to ioyne together. congratulate, to reioyce with another for some good fortune. congregate, gather together. congruence, congruitie, agréeablenesse, or likenesse. coniecture, gessing. coniunction, ioyning together. coniure, to conspire together, to sweare by. connexion, ioyning together. conniuence, suffering, or winking at. conquest, a complayning, victory. consanguinitie, kindred by blood, or birth. consecrate, make holy, to dedicate or giue vnto. consectarie, that followeth vpon any other thing.
consent, agréement. consequence, consequent. following by order. conserue, kéepe, saue or maintaine. considerately, wisely and with aduise. § consistorie, place of ciuill iudgement. consociate, company with, or ioyne a com∣panion vnto consolation, comfort. consonant, agreeable, likely. consort, a companion, or company. conspicuous, easie to bée séene, excellent. conspire, agrée together for to doe euill. constellation, a company of starres. constitutions lawes or decrées. construc, expound. consul, a chiefe gouernour among the Ro∣manes. consult, take counsaile. consummate, accomplish, fulfill, or finish. contagious, that which corrupteth, or in∣fecteth. contaminate, dele, or corrupt. contemptible, worthy to be despised, not to be set by. contemplation, meditation, or musing. contend, wrangle, striue.
contestate, to call to witnesse. context, the agréeing of the matter going before, with that which followeth. contiguous, touching one another. continent, modest, abstaining, chast: also the firme land where no ile or sea is. contingent, happening by chance. contract, make short, also a bargaine, or co∣uenant. contradiction, gaine saying. contribute, bestow vpon, or giue vnto. contribution, a bestowing of any thing with others. contributorie, giuing his part to any thing. contrite, broken, sorrowfull. contrition, sorrow, sadnesse. contriue, make. contumacie, stubbornnesse, contempt. contumelie, slander, reproch. contusion, bruise. conuent, bring before a Iudge. conuenient, fit, well beséeming. § conuenticle, a little assembly, conuerse, company with. conuert, turne, change. conuexe, hllow, binding downe on euery side.
conuict, proued guiltie, ouercome. conuince, to ouercome, confute, or proue manifestly. conuocation, an assembling, or calling to∣gether. § conuoy, a waiting vpon, or kéeping com∣pany in the way. connulsion, a pulling, or shrinking vp. copartner, fellow partaker, or companion. cophin (g) basket, or chest for a dead body to be put in. copious, plentifull, abounding. copulation, ioyning or coupling together. cordwainer, shooemaker. cordiall, comforting the heart. § corriuals, competitors, louers of, or uers for the same thing. cornuted, hauing ornes. carnositie, full of flesh, grose. coronation, crowning. corporall, bodie. corporate, hauing a body. § corps, dead body. corpulent, grosse of body, fat, or great. correspondent, answerable. correllatiues, when two things are so linked together, that the one cannot be without the other.
corrigible, easily corrected. corroborate, confirme, or strengthen, or make strong. corroded, gnawd about. § correlarie, ouerplus, that is more then measure. corrosiue, fretting. cosmographie (g) description of the world. costiue, bound in the body. § couch, bed, lie downe. couen, fraud deceit. § couert, hidden place, secret. § counterchange, to change againe. § counterfaite, make like, séeme that it is not § countermaund, commaund contrarie. § countermine, vndermine one against an∣other. § countermure, to build one wall against another. crasie, weake, sickly. crassitude, faes or thicknesse. § counterpoise, make leuell, or to weigh as heauie as another thing. § counterscarpe, a rampire to a wall. cowslip (k) hearb. § counteruaile, of equall valew. couth, owen.
credence, beliefe. § curbe, restraine, kéepe in. credible, which may be beléeued. § couerture, couering. creditor, he which lendeth, or trusteth ano∣ther. credulous, readie to belieue. credulitie, rashnes in belieuing. § creuas, rift, chinke, cleft, § crible, sifted. criminous, criminall, faultie, that wherein is some fault. crisped, curied, or frisled. criticall (g) which giueth iudgement of sick∣nesse, &c. crocodile (k) beast. crone, an old prating woman. crucifie, fasten to a crosse. crude, raw, not ripe, not disgested. crupticall (g) hidden or secret. chrystaline (g) cléere as glasse or christall. cubite, a foote and a halfe. culpable, blame-worthy, guiltie. culture, husbandry, tilling. cunne, to discerne, also to giue. cunstable, the stay and support of the king. curiositie, picked diligence, greater careful∣nes,
then is séemely or necessarie. curtall, cut short. cursorilie, swiftly, or briefely. curuefie, bowed, or make crooked. custodie, kéeping, or looking o. cymball, an instrument of musick, so called. cynicall (g) dogged, froward. cypher (g) a circle in numbering, of no value of it selfe, but serueth to make vp the number, and to make other figures of more value. D § DAmage, losse, hinderance. damnable, not to bée allowed. deacon (g) prouider for the poore. demoniacke (g) possessed with a deuill. deambulation, a walking abroad. § debate, strife, contention. debar, let. debilitie, weakenesse, faintnesse. § debonnayre, gentle, curteous, affable, decalogue (g) the ten commandements. decacordon (g) an instrument with tenne strings. decent, comely, or beséeming.
decease, a departing, or giuing place too. decide, to determine, or make an end of. decipher, describe, or open the meaning, or to count. decision, cutting away. declamation, an oration of a matter feyned. decline, fall away, or swarue from. decoction, liquor, wherein things are sod for phisicke. decorum, comlinesse, decrepite, very old. decurion, a captaine ouer ten. decretals, decées, constitutions. dedicate, to giue for euer. deduct, take or draw out, abate, or diminish. § deface, blot out, stain, bring out of fashion. defame, to slaunder, or speake ill of. defect, want, fayling. deferre, put off till another time. § defie, distrust. define, to shew clearely what a thing is. deflower, dishonest, rauish, or disgrace. deformed, ill shapen, ill fauored. § defraude, deceiue, beguile. § defraye, lay out, pay, discharge. degenerate, be vnlike his auncestours: to grow out of kinde.
§ degrade, vide disgrade. dehort, moue or perswade from, to aduise to the contrary. deiected, cast downe, brought low. § deigne, vouchsafe. deiie, Godhead. deifie, make like God. delectable, delightfull, pleasant. delectation, delight or pleasure. delegate, an embassadour, or one appointed in anothers place. deliberate, to take counsell. delicte, fault, small offence. delineate, to draw the proportion of any thing. delicate, daintie, giuen to pleasure. delude, deceiue, or laugh to scorne. § deluge, great floode, or ouerflowing of waters. delusion, mockerie, a deceitfull thing. demaund, request, aske. § demeane, behaue. demerite, deseruing, worthinesse. democracie (g) a common-wealth gouer∣ned by the people. § demolish, cast downe. demonstrate, shew plainly or openly, to point out or manifest.
demenour, behauiour. § demurre, to stay, to linger or vse delayes. § demer, a penny. § deison, free borne. denounce, declare, or giue warning of, or proclaime. denomination, a naming. deusated, made thicke. depend dependance, hang vpon. deplore, to lament or bewaile. deplume, to pull off the feathers. deportation, carrying away. depopulate, spoyle, or wast. depose, put away, depriue, or put downe. depraue, marre or corrupt, or make worse. deprecation, supplication, or requiring of pardon. depresse, to kéepe downe. depriue, sée deose. depute, account or estéeme. deide, mocke, or laugh to scorne. derision, mocking. deriue, fetch from. depriuation, taking away from some other matter. derogate, to take away, or to deminish.
§ desastrous, vnluckie, vnfortunate. descant, variation of the ground of a song. descend, goe downe. describe, to write forth, to coppy out, or to declare. § deseigne, § deseignement, an appointing how any thing shall be done. desert, wildernesse. desertion, a leauing or forsaking. designe, to marke out, or appoynt for any purpose. desist, leaue off, or stay. desolate, left alone, or forsaken. desperate, without hope, or past hope. despume, ome, or cast vp a scumme. detect, bewray, disclose, accuse. destinated, appointed. destituted, forsaken. detest, hate greatly or abhorre. deteined, with-holden, or kept back, determine, resolue conclude. detract, take from, or backbie. detriment, losse, hurt, hinderance. detrude, thrust out, or from. deuise, inuent, finde out. deuote, to giue vnto, to appoint vnto. deuotion, holinesse.
§ devoyre, dutie, endeauour. dexteritie, aptnesse, nimblenesse. diabolicall (g) diuellish. diademe (g) a Kings crowne. diapason (g) a concorde in Musicke of all parts. diet, manner of foode. dialect (g) the manner of speach in any lan∣guage, diuers from others. dialogue (g) conference, or talking together. diameter (g) a ne crossing the midst of any circle or figure. didacticall (g) full of doctrine or instructi∣on. diffamation, a slaundering, or speaking ill of. different, vnlikely, disagréeing. difficill, difficult, hard, vneasie, dangerous. diffident, mistrustfull. diffuse, poure out. digest, bring into order, to deuide, & destri∣bute things into their right place. dignitie, worthinesse. digresse, turne from, goe away. digression, departing from the matter in hand.
dilacerate, to rent in sunder. dilapidation, wastefull, spending, or suffer∣ing to goe to decay. dilate, enlarge, spread abroad, or to dis∣course vpon largely. dilemma, (g) a forked kinde of argument, which on either side entrappeth. dimension, measuring. diminish, make lesse or take from. diminution, lssening. diocesse (g) iurisdiction. diocesan, that hath iurisdiction. dire, cruell, cursed, damnable. direct, guide or rule: right, straight, also to order. disable, make vnable, or finde fault with. disabilitie, vnablenesse. § disaduantageous, hindering much. disanull, make voyde, or bring to nothing. disarme, pull off armour. § disbure, lay out money. discent, comming downe from another. discerne, know, put one for another, or put difference. discide, cut off, or in péeces. discipline, instruction, or trayning vp. disciple, scholler.
discipher, to lay open, or make plaine. disconsolate, without comfort. disclose, discouer, vtter or manifest. § discomfiting, putting to flight. discontinuance, absence. discord, disagréement, variance. § discouraged, made afraide, or out of hart. § discouer, lay open, finde out. discretion, wise choise of one from another. discusse, examine, debate, or search nar∣rowly into. § disdaine, to scorne, despise. disfigure, bring out of shape. § disfranchis, take away fréedome. disioyne, vnioyne or seperate. disiunction, a diuiding, or seperating. § disfranchised, depriued of liberty. disgorge, spue v, cast out of the stomacke. disgrade, to discharge of his orders, or de∣grées. § disguised, counterfaited, séeming that it is not. dislocation, setting out of right place. § disloyall, one whom it is not good to trust, vntrusty, traylerous. § dismember, to pull and part one péece from another.
dismall, vnluckie. dismisse, let passe, send away. disparagement, hurt, hinderance, or dis∣grace. dispatch, make an end. dispense, to giue licence vnto, also charges, cost. disperse, scatter or spread abroad. dispeople, to vnpeople a place. displant, to pull vp by the rootes. display, spread abroad, dispose, to set in order, to appoint. disposition, naturall inclination, or setting in order. dispoyle, take away by violence, or rob. disputable, questionable, or doubtfull, that may be reasoned of. dissent, disagrée, to be of a contrarie opini∣on. dissimilitude, vnlikenesse. dissimulation, dissembling, hiding, cloaking. dissipation, scattering abroad. dissolue, vnloose, or melt. dissoluble, easie to vnloose. dissolute, carelesse, retchlesse. dissolution, breaking, vnloosing. dissonant, disagréeing.
distance, space betwéene. distemperature, besides the meane, or due proportion. distended, stretched out, or out of ioynt. distick (g) a double méeter, or two verses of one matter. distinguish, put difference, deuide, or point out from others. distillation, distilling, dropping downe by little and little. distinct, differing, or deuided. distinction, a difference, or separation. distracted, distraught, drawne into diuers parts, al∣so out of his wits. distribute, deuide in sunder, or to giue in sundry parts. distribution, diuision, or laying out by parts. disturbe, disquiet, let or interrupt. disswade, to perswade to the contrary. dittie, the matter of a song. diuert, turne from, to another. diuine, heauenly, godly, also to gesse, con∣iecture, or prophesie. diuinitie, heauenly doctrine, also god-head. diuision, parting or seperating. diuorce, diuision, separation.
diureticall, that prouoketh rine. diurnall, daily, belonging to the day. diuulge, diuulgate. publish, or make common. docilitie, easinesse to be taught. document, doctrine, learning, or instruction. docked, cut off. dogmaticall, that giueth instructions. dolor, griefe, sorrow, or paine. dolorous, grieuous, or sorrowfull. § domage, losse, harme, or hinderance. domesticall, at home, belonging to houshold. dominere, rule, beare sway. dominion, domination, rule, lordship, or maistership. donatiue, a gift, in monie or other things. § dose, the quantitie of medicine the Phisi∣tion appointeth. doughtie, vertuous, stout. draule, to speake with difficultie. drerie, heauy, sorrowfull. drenched, drowned or dipped. droope, fainte, hange the head or wings. drudge, toyle. dulcimu, dulcimar, (k) instru∣ment.
duarchy, the equall raigne of two princes together. duplicitie, double kinde of a thing. driblets, small debts. dulcifie, swéeten. durable, long lasting, or of long continu∣ance. durance, hold, lasting. E EArst, first. eche, encrease. eclipse (g) failing of the light of the Sunne or Moone. eccho, a sound, resounding back againe. ecclesiasticall (g) belonging to the Church. eden, pleasure, or delight. edict, a commaundement from authoritie, a proclamation. edifice, building. edifie, to instruct, or builde vp in know∣ledge. edition, putting forth, setting abroad. education, bringing vp. effect, a thing done, or to bring to passe. affectuall, forcible.
effeminate, wamannish, delicate, wanson. efficacie, force, or strength. efficient, working, or accomplishing. eftsoones, forthwith. effusion, powring, or running forth. egge, prouoke. egest, to cast, or carry forth. eglogue (g) a talking together. egregious, singular, passing good. egresse, forthgoing, or passage out. eiaculate, cast out. eiection, a casting forth. elaborate, done curiously or diligently. election, choise. elect, chosen or picked out. elegancie, finenesse of spéech. element, the first principle or beginning of any thing. elench (g) a subtill argument. elevate, litt vp, or heaue vp. elocution, good vtterance of spéech. eluish, froward. emerods (k) of disease. § embark, imbark, to ship a thing, or load a ship. emblem (g) a picture shadowing out some thing to be learned.
eminent, appearing higher, or further out, excelling. § emmot, pimire. emphasis (g) a forcible expressing. emperick (g) he that hath all his skill in phi∣sicke by practise. § empire, gouernement, or kingdome. emulatiou, enuie, inttion, desire to excéed another. enarration, declaration, expoing. enigmatical (g) ful of hard questiōs, obscure. § enchant, bewitch. encounter, set against, or to méete. § enchrochment, when the Lord hath got∣ten and seised of more rent or seruices of his tenant then of right is due. § endoffe, t on the back, or write on y• back enduce, moue. engender, beget. enimitie, enmitie, displeasure, or hatred. enflame, burne set on fire. § enfranchise, make trée. § engrate, pre vpon. § enhaunce, to lift vp, or make greater. § enlarge, make bigger, set at libertie. § enoble, make noble, or famous.
enormious, out of square, vnorderly. § ensigne, flagge for war. § enterfier, to strike one another. § enterlace, to put betwéene, intermingle. § enterprise, begin, take in hand. § enterre, lay in the earth. § entrals, inward parts, as hart, liuer, &c. enthymeme (g) an vnperfect sillagisme. enucleate, declare, make manifest, § enueloped, wrapped. § enuiron, to enclose, or compasse about. epha, a hinde of measure. epicure, giuen to pleasure. epigram (g) a sentence written vpon any for praise or dispraise. epilogue (g) conclusion. epilepsie (g) the falling sicknesse. episcopall (g) bishoplike. epiphanie (g) appearing. epistle, (g) letter sent. epitaph (g) the writing on a tombe or grane. epithite (g) a name or title giuen to any thing. epitome (g) the briefe copie of a booke, &c. epitomise (g) to make an epitome, or to bring a ke  a leer volume.
equalize, match, make equall. equinoctium, when the dayes and nights are equall. § equipage, furniture. equitie, right, lawfulnesse. equiualent, of equall valew. equiuocate, to speake doubtfully. eradicate, pull vp by the rootes. erect, set vp, or lift vp. ermite (g) one dwelling in the wildernesse. erre, mistake, goe wrong. erronious, full of errour, and wandring out of the right way. eruction, breaking of winde vpward. erudition, learning. § essay, tryall what one can say, or doe in any matter. § escheat, forfeit. § eschew shun, auoid, escape. § espoused, promised in marriage. essence, being of any thing. § essoine, excuse for any cause, delay. § establish, confirme, make strong. estimate, estéeme, value, or prise, thinke or iudge. eternall, euerlasting, without end. ethnick (g) an heathen, or gentile.
etymologie, (g) true expounding. euacuated, made voyde, cleane taken a∣way, or emptied. euangell (g) the Gospell or glad tydings. euangelist (g) bringer of glad tidings. euaporate, to breath out. euasion, escape, shift. euent, chaunce, or that which followeth any thing. euict, ouercome by law. eucharist (g) a thanksgiuing, the Lords supper. euitable, that may be shunned or auoyded. eunuch (g) gelded, without stones. euert, turne vpside downe. euident, easie to bée séene, playne. euocation, calling forth. exact, perfectly done, or to require with extremitie. exaggerate, heape vpon, amplifie, to make a thing more then it is. exaltation, lifting vp. exanimate, make afraide, or trouble in minde. exasperate, whet on, to vexe, or make more angry. excauate, make hollow.
excaecate, to make blinde. excessiue, too much, more then inough. § exchequer, office of receits. exclame, bray, or cry out. exclude, thrust, or shut out, or kéepe out. excogitate, to muse, or deuise exactly. excommunicate, to thrust out of company, or fellowship. excoriate, pull the skinne off. excrement, dung, offall, refuse, or dregs. excruciat, to bepe, or torment. excursion, a skirmish in warres of some few running from their company. execrable, cursed, horrible. execute, performe, or exercise some charge. exempt, frée, priuiledged. exemplifie, enlarge, or declare by examples. exhalation, a breath or sue rising vpward. exhaust, drawne out, or emptied. exhibite, put vp or bestow, to offer, or set abroad for all men to sée. exiccate, to dry vp. § exigent, necessitie, extremitie. exile, banish, driue out. existence, being. exorable, easie to be intreated. exorbitant, out of order, measure or place.
exorcist (g) coniurer. § exorde, beginne. exordium, a beginning or entrance. exoticke, outlandish, brought out of ano∣ther country. expect, looke for. expedient, fit, méete or beséeming. expedition, hast, spéede. expell, put out, or thrust out. expend, onsider or muse vpon. expence, cost, or monie laid out. experiment, a proofe, or tryall. expert, skilfull. expiation, pacifying with satisfaction, pur∣ging by sacrifice. expire, to dye, or giue vp the ghost, to de∣cay. explane, to make manifest, or declare, explicate, declare plainely. explicite, made manifest, vnfolded. § exploit, enterprice, act, déede. expose, to offer, or lay open, to hazard. expostulate, to reason, or chide with, to com∣plaine. expresly, fitly, manifestly. exprobration, vpbrayding, casting in ones téeth.
expugnable, to be wonne or ouercome expulse, driue out, or thrust out. exquisite, perfect, fine, singular, curious. extant, appearing abroad, shewing it selfe. extasie, a traunce, or sowning. extemporall, extempore, suddaine, without premeditation, or study. extemporarie, extende, spread forth, prolong, or make lon∣ger, to inlarge. extenuate, lessen, inish, or make lesse. externall, outward, strange. extimulate, prouoke, prick forward. extinguish, put out, or quench. extinct, put out. extirpate, to pull vp by the rootes. extoll, aduance, or praise highly, to lift vp. extort, to wring out, to wrest from by vio∣lence. extract, draw out. extrauagant, wandring out of order. extraordinarie, besides, or more then com∣mon custome. exult, bragge, triumph, or leape for ioy. exulcerate, to make sore, or corrupt.
F FAbricate, make, fashion. fabulous, fained, countersaited, much tal∣ked of. facete, merry, conceited. fact, déede. facilitie, easines. faction, deuision of people into sundry parts and opinions. factious, that maketh deuision, contenti∣ous. factor, one that doth businesse for another. facultie, licence, power, aptnesse, abilitie. fallacie, deceit, falshoode. falsifie, to forge, to forge, to countersait. § famine, hunger, dearth. fame, report, common talke, credit. fanaticke, madde. fantacie, imagination. § fantastique, conceited, full of deuises. § farce, to fill or stuffe. fascinate, to bewitch, or disfigure by inchant∣ment. fastidiousnesse, lothsomnesse, or disdainful∣nesse.
§ faschious, grieuous, or inducing to an∣ger. fatall, mortall, appointed by God to com to passe. § fealtie, faithfulnesse. § feature, fashion, shape. fecunditie, fruitfulnesse. feffe, indue. felicitie, happinesse. § female, feminine, the shée in mankinde, or other creatures. fermentated, leauened. feruently, hotely, hastely, earnestly. feruide, hote, scalding, burning. festination, hast, spéede. festiuitie, mirth, pleasantnesse. festiuall, merry, pertaining to holy dayes. feruent, hote, chased, very angry. fertile, fruitfull, yéelding much fruit. feuer, ague. figment, fiction, a lye, or tale. fidelitie, faithfulnesse, trustinesse. frend, inell. figuratiue, to shavow, or represent, or to counterfaite. figuratiue, by figures.
filiall, like, or belonging to a sonne. finall, pertaining to the end. finite, hauing an end, and certaine limits. firme, sure, stedfast, strong, constant. fissure, rift, cleft, or pertition. fixed, fastned, sure, fast. § flagon, great wine cup, or bottle. flagrant, burning, hot. flexible, easily bent, pliant, or mutable. § flote, swim aloft. fluxible, thin and running easily downe like water. fluxe, disease of scouring. § feeble, weake, lacking strength. foe-men, enimies. fomentation, an ass waging, or comforting by warmth. forraine, strange, of another country. forruall, following the common fashion. foraminated, holed, or bored. fordoe, kill, ouerthrow, vndoe. formidable, fearefull, to be feared. foreslow, neglect. fornication, vncleannesse betwéene single persons. forrage, fodder, also to prouide meate. fortification, strengthning.
fortitude, valiantnesse, or couragiousnes, strength. fortunate, happie, hauing good successe. fragilitie, brittlenes, or weakenesse. fragments, reliques, broken meates, péeces broken off. fragrant, swéetely smelling. § franck, liberall, bountifull. fraternitie, brotherhood. § franchise, libertie, fréedome. fraudulent, deceitfull, craftie, or ful of guile. frequent, often, done many times, ordinarie, much haunted, or goe too. friction, rubbing, chasing. frigifie, coole, make cold. friuolous, vaine, trifling, of no estimation. § frontiers, the forepart. frontlet (k) attyre for the forehead. § frounce, wrinckle, put out of order. fructifie, to make fruitfull, or bring foorth much fruit. frugall, thriftie, temperate in expences. fruition, inioying, possession. frustrate, make voyde, deceiue. fugitiue, runnagate, or starting away. fulgent, glistering, or shining. fuluide, yealow.
fume, to yéeld smoke. function, calling, or charge, or trade, and place wherein a man liueth. funerall, buriall, mourning, pertayning to a buriall, or mourning. § furbush, to dresse or scoure, or make clean. § furniture, all things necessary to vse. furious, raging, or mad. future, that which shall bée héereafter. G GAlliard, lusty, frolicke. § garboile, hurly burly. § gardian, a kéeper, defender, or tutor. gargarise, to wash the mouth, and throate within, by stirring some liquor vp and downe in the mouth. garnar, granar, corne chamber. § garison, defence. § garnish, trime, deck vp, make fine. § gay, fine, trim. gem, a precious stone. gentilitie, generositie, gentry, nobilitie, gentlemanship. genesis (g) beginning.
gentile, a heathen. generation, ofspring. genealogie (g) generation, or a describing of the stocke or pedegrée. genitalles, priuities. genuine, peculiar, or naturall. genius, the Angell that waits on man, be it a good or euill angell. genitor, father. geographie (g) the describing of the earth. geometrie (g) art of measuring the earth. geomancie (g) sorcerie by circles and pricks in the earth. germane, come of the same stocke. gesticulate, vse much or foolish gesture. gests, things done, or noble acts of princes. gibbocitie, crookednesse. giglot, strumpet, a fliering wench. giere, grin or laugh. § giftes, places to lodge in. giues, fetters. glandulous, full of kernels. glee, mirth, gladnesse. gospell, glad tydings. globe, any thing very round. glorifie, to giue honour, praise and com∣mendation to any body.
glosse (g) a tongue, or exposition of a darke speech. golit, gullit, a throate. gloze, dissemble, flatter. gorge, stomacke. § gourmandise, deuouring, gluttony. glutinate, to glue, or ioyne together. gnible, bite. gnoffe, miser, foole. gnomen (g) the stile, or cock of a diall. gradation, steps, by little and little. graduate, that hath taken a degrée. § grande, great. § grapple, take holde. graspe, catch fast. gratifie, to pleasure, or doe a good turne in way of thankfulnesse. gratis, fréely, without desert. gratitude, thankfulnesse. gratuitie, gift fréely bestowed. gratulate, to bée glad for anothers sake. graue, waightie, sober, sage, discréet. grease, fat. grecisme, the custome of the Grecians. greete, salute, also wéepe. grisly, fearefull, gastly.
§ guerdon, a reward. § guidance, gouerning, or direction. § guise, fashion, shape, custome. gulfe, déepe poole, or pit. gustation, taste. H HAbilitie, bilitie, ablenesse or suffiiencie. § habiliment, clothing, furniture. habitable, that may bée dwelt in. habitacle, habitation, a dwelling place. habite, apparell, fashion, custome. habitude, disposition, plight, respect. § hagard, wilde, strange, contrary. § hale, pull, draw, lift vp. halauiah, prayse the Lord. halcyon, quiet, peaceable. hallucinate, to deceiue or blinde. harmonie (g) agréement of diuers sounds in musicke. harrie, pull violently. § hautie, loftie, proud. § hazard, venture, chaunce. § herault, kings messenger.
heathen, see Gentile. hebrew, from Hebers stocke. hecticke (g) inflaming the hart, and sound∣est parts of the body. hemisphere (g) halfe of the compasse of hea∣uen, that we sée. helmet, head péece. heriditarie, comming by inheritance, or suc∣cession. heritage, inheritance, possession. herbinger, sent before to prepare. heriticall (g) hereticke (g) one that maintayneth heresies. hermite, sée ermite. heroicall (g) beséeming a noble man, or magnificent. hestes, will, commandements. § hideous, fearefull, terrible, great. hierarchie (g) the gouernment of priests, or holy gouernance. hymne (g) kinde of song to the praise of God. hipocrite (g) such a one as in his outward apparell, countenaunce, and behauiour, pretendeth to bée another man then hée is indéede, or a deceiuer. historicall (g) pertayning to historie.
historiographer (g) a writer of historie. § homage, worship or seruice. § homicide, a man killer, or the killing of a man. homilie (g) a spéech or sermon. hononimie (g) when diuers things are sig∣nified by one word. horror, fearefull, sorrow, feare, terrour. horizon (g) a circle deuiding the halfe of the firmament, from the other half which wée sée not. hosanna, saue now. hospitalitie, good entertainment for friends and strangers. § hostage, pledge. hostilitie, hatred, enmitie, or open wars. humane, belonging to man, gentle, curte∣ous, bounteous. humide, wet. humiditie, moysture. humiliation, humbling. hush, husht, peace, or be still. hyperbolicall (g) beyond all credite, or likelihoode of truth.
I IDeall (g) proper. idiome (g) a proper forme of spéech, ideot (g) vnlearned, a foole. Iehoua, Lord almightie. ientation, breakefast. ieopardie, danger. Iesus (g) Sauiour. ignoble, of low and base birth. ignominie, reproch, discredit, slaunder. ignorance, lack of knowledge. illegitemate, vnlawfully begotten, and borne. illiquinated, vnmelted. illiterate, vnlearned, without knowledge, illustrate, to make plaine, to declare. illuminate, to enlighten, or make plaine. illusion, mockery, iesting or scotting. imbecillitie, weaknesse, féeblenesse. imbarge, imbarke, sée em∣barke. imitation, following, doing the like. immaculate, vnspotted, vndefiled. immature, vnripe, or out of season.
immanitie, beastly crueltie, or hugenesse and greatnesse. immediate, next to, not hauing any other betwixt. imminent, at hand, ready to come vpon. immoderate, without measure, excéeding great, or excessiue. immortall, euerlasting, that dyeth not. immunitie, fréedome from any thing, or li∣bertie. immure, to shut vp, or inclose within wals. immutable, constant, still the same, vnchan∣gable. imparitie, vnequalitie, vnlikenesse, diffe∣rence. § impart to make partaker of, to tell to. impatience, lacke of sufferance. § impaire, diminish, lessen. § impeach, accuse, hurt or hinder. imped, grafted. impediment, let, or hinderance. impenetrable, that cannot be pierced, or en∣tred into. impenitent, vnrepentant. imperated, commanded, or ruled ouer. imperiou, desiring of rule, full of comman∣ding, stately.
imperfection, vnperfectnesse. imperiall, belonging to the crowne. impertinent, not pertaining to the matter. impetrate, obtaine by request. impetuous, violent. impietie, vngodlinesse, cruelty. implacable, that cannot be pleased or paci∣fied. implement, stuffe. implicite, hidden, wrapped vp together. imply, to signifie, or make manifest. § imploy, bestow, spend. implore, to desire with teares. implume, to pull off the feathers. impose, lay vpon, or put on importance, valew, force, or worth. § impost, tribute. imposutre, falshood, deceit, impotent, weake féeble. importune, to be earnest with. importunate, requiring earnestly, without being satisfied, till the request be obtey∣ned. imprecation, cursing or wishing euill vn∣to. § impregnable, vnuanquished, not able to be ouercome, strong.
impression, printing, marking, or stam∣ping. improper, vnfit vnséemely, common. impropriation, a thing accounted proper, which is not indéede. improbable, that cannot be proued. improuident, carelesse, not foreséeing, or taking héede before hand. imprudent, ignorant, rash, carelesse. impudent, shamelesse. impugne, resist. impunitie, lack, or omission of punishment. impuritie, filthinesse, vncleannesse, dishone∣stie. impute, reckon, or assigne, blame, or to lay to ones charge. inabilite, want of power or abilitie. inamored, in loue with. inartificiall, without art or skill. inaugurate, to aske counsell of soothsaiers. incarnate, taking flesh vpon him, or to bring flesh vpon. incense, kinde of offering made by fire. incend, kindle, burne, vexe, or chase, to in∣cense, to stirre vp, or to set on fire, or to anger. incessantly, earnestly, without ceasing.
incest, vnlawfull copulation of man and woman within the degrées of kinred, or alliance, forbidden by gods law, whether it bée in marriage or otherwise. inchaunt, betwitch or charme. inchoate, beginne. incident, happening or chauncing. incision, cutting or searching of a wound. incitate, to moue, or prouoke. incline, leane vnto, or towards. include, to shut in, or containe within. incommodious, hurtfull, vnfit. incommunicable, that cannot bée imparted to any other, or proper to one person, and none other. incomparable, that hath not his like. incompatible, insufferable. incomprehensible, that cannot be conceiued or vnderstood. incongruencie, want of agréement. inconsiderate, rash not taking counsaile. incontinent, liuing loosely, or vnchastly. incontinently, presently, disorderly or with∣out moderation. incredible, marueilous, such as cannot bée beléeued. incorporate, to graft one thing into the body
of another, to make one body or substance of two or moe, to mixe or put together. incorruptible, vncorruptible, vnperishable, or not subiect to corruption. incredulous, hardly brought to belieue. inculcate, to vrge or repeate one thing often. inculpable, without fault, blamelesse. incurable, past cure, a wound that cannot bée healed. incurre, runne into. incedent, not comely or beséeming. indeere, make bound to one. indefinite, without rule or order, not deter∣mined. indemnitie, without losse. indignitie, vnworthinesse, vnséemely vsage, infamie or disgrace. indignation, anger, chafing. indicate, shaue. indisseluble, that cannot bée vnloosed or vn∣done. § indte, to signifie, or giue in ones name. indiuisible, indiuiduall, that cannot be deuided or parted. induce, to moue vnto, or allure, or draw. indulgence, sufferance, too gentle intreating, also pardon.
induction, bringing in. induate, harden. industrie, diligence or labour. ineffable, vnspeakable, y• cannot be vttered inequalitie, vnlikenesse. inestimable, that cannot be valued, or ac∣counted of as it deserueth. ineuitable, that cannot be auoyded. inexorable, that cannot, or will not be in∣treated. infallible, vndeceiueable, vnbeguilefull, tru∣sty. infamous, ill reported of, or defamed. § infanterie, the footemen of an armie. infatuate, to make foolish. infection, corrupting. infernall, belonging to hell. inferre, bring in, to alleadge or signifie. infidelitie, vnfaithfullnesse. infinite, without number or end. infirmitie, weaknesse. inflamation, inflaming, or setting on fire. inflexible, that cannot be bended, vnruly. inflict, to lay vpon. influence, a flowing in, also vertue, informe, giue notice, to teach, to beginne to instruct.
infringe, to breake, to make weake, or fée∣ble. infuse, to poure in, or séepe in, § ingage, lay to pledge, binde himselfe. ingenious, witty, quick witted. ingeminate, double, make twise so much. ingenerate, bred, or grafted in naturally. ingine, engine, an instrument to doe any thing with. ingot, a wedge of gold, also the trough wher∣in it is molten. ingratitude, vnkindenes, or vnthankfulnes. § ingraue, carue. ingresse, ingredience, entrance in. ingurgitate, to deuoure vp gréedily. inhabite, dwell in. inhabitable, that cannot be dwelt in. inhaunce. raise the price. inherent, cleauing fast vnto. inhibit, forbid. inhibition, forbidding. inhumane, cruell, vncurtuous. iniection, casting in. iniquitie, wicked or vniust dealing. iniunction, commanding, rule or order. initiate, to begin, instruct, or enter into.
iniurious, wrongfull or hurtfull. innauigable, that cannot be failed vpon. innouate, make new, young begin. innouation, making new, an alteration. inoculated, grafted in. inpriuate, sodaine, vnthought vpon. inordinate, out of order, disordered. inquinate, to defile or disgrace. inquisitiue, desirous, and diligent to finde out by asking. inquisition, searching, or inquiring. insatiable, that cannot bée filled or conten∣ted inscience, lack of knowledge. inscription, a title or note written vpon any place. inscrutable, that cannot be searched into, or throughly knowne. insensible, that cannot be felt or perceiued. inseperable, that cannot be deuided. insert, to put in, or graft in. insinuate, créepe into ones fauour cratily, also to signifie. insipidde, without ast, vnsauory. insist, to stay vpon. insociable, that will not kéepe company. insolent, proud, disdainfull.
inspection, view, search, looking into. insperge, sprinkle, or cast vpon. inspire, breath, blow into. instable, inconstant, not steddie. § install, admit to a place of office, or honor. instant, earnest, importunate. instauration. repayring▪ renewing. instigation, prouoking, or mouing forward. instill, to put in, or drop in. instinct, inward motion, or stirring. institute, appoynt, ordaine, begin, or go in hand with. insult, to triumph, or vaunt ouer. insupportable, not able to be borne. insurrection, rising against. integritie, purenesse, innocencie. intelligence, knowledge from others. intemperate, without measure or meane, vnmodest in behauiour. intend, to purpose, or thinke. intentiue, earnestly bent, and musing. intercession, going betwéene, or making in∣treatie for another. intercept, preuent or take before. interchange, exchange. intercourse, mutuall accesse, or passage one to another.
interdict, to forbid straitly. § interest, loane, right, also a part in any thing. interlace, mixe. interline, draw a line betwixt, or to blot out with a penne, and to write be∣twixt. interlocution, interrupting of anothers spéech. intermedle, deale with. intermingle, mixe or mingle with, or a∣mongst. intermission, foreslowing, a pawsing or breaking of. interpellate, disturbed, hindered. interpreter, expounder. interprete, open, make plaine, to shew the sense and meaning of a thing. interre, to bury. interrogation, a question, or asking. interrupt, breake of, or let. intestiue, that which is at home, or belong∣eth to the inward parts. § intire, whole, sound, vncorrupt. intestate, that dyeth without making a will intimate, to declare or signifie. intised, drawne, allured.
§ intituled, called, noted, written on the be∣ginning. intollerable, that cannot be borne. intoxicate, poysoned. intractable, vnruly, troublesome. intricate, in wrapped, doubtfull, hard to be knowne. introduction, entrance, or leading in. intrude, to thrust ones selfe into the compa∣ny of others, or enter in violently. inuade, to set vpon, to lay hold on. inuectiue, railing, speaking against. inueigle, intice, or deceiue by subtiltie, to in∣trap. inueigh, to raile vpon bitterly, § inuentorie, table of goods. inuention, deuise, or imagination. § inueloped, wrapped in, intangled. inuersion, turning vpside downe, turning contrariwise. § inuest, to adore, or decke, or grace. inueterate, of long continuance, growne in custome. inuincible, not to be ouercome. inuisible, that cannot be séene or perceiued. inuiolable, that cannot be broken. inuite, vid, request.
invndation, an ouerflowing of water. invocation, a calling vpon any thing with trust in the same. iordan, a chamberpot, or vrinall. inure, to make plyable, or acquaint with. iocund, merry, pleasant. irefull, very angry. irregular, out of rule or order. irchin, a hedgehog. irksome, wearisome. ironie (g) a mocking spéech. irreligious, vngodly, wanting religion. irreprehensible, without reproofe. irreuocable, not to be recalled, or not to be withdrawne. irritate, to make angry. irruption, breaking in. § issue, euent, or successe, or end. iterate, to repeat, or doe a thing often, or a∣gaine. iubile, yéere of ioy, which hapned to the Iewes euery fittie yéere. iudaisme, worshipping one God without Christ. iudicious, that hath a good iudgement or vn∣derstanding. iudiciall, belonging to iudgement,
iurisdiction, authoritie, to make, or execute lawes in any place. iustifie, approue, or make to bée accounted good and iust. iustified, made or accounted for righteous, cleane. K KEene, sharpe. kindell, bring forth young. knarry, knotty, stubbie. L LAborinth, a place so full of windings and turnings, that a man cannot finde the way out of it. laborious, painfull, full of labour. lacerate, teare. § lance, cut, or icke. § language, a ongue, or spéech. languishing, piing, consuming, wearing away with griee or sicknesse. lapidarie, one skilfull in precious stones or iewels. § lard, bacon.
§ largesse, liberalitie. lasciuious, wanton, lecherous. lassitude, wearinesse. latitude, breadth, largenesse. lauacre, a bath or font. lauish, to spend extraordinarily. laund, a plaine place betwixe trées. laud, praise, or commendation. laudable, worthie of prayse. laureate, crowned with Lawrell, or wea∣ring a garland of Bayes. laxatiue, léese, purging. § league, agréement, or couenant of peace. § leake, runue out. lecherie, vnchastnesse, and vnlawfull lust. lecture, reading or sermon. ledge, laye. § leete, court. § legacie, a gift by will, or an ambassage. legate, ambassadour. legends, tales. § legeirdemaine, lighthandednesse, cratie flights, and conueiance. legible, that may bée read legion, ost. or band of souldiers. legitimate, lawfull, according to law, and good order.
lenitie, gentlenesse, mildnesse. lenitiue. that easeth or all wageth paine, lethall, mortall, deadly. lethargie (g) (k) a drowsie and forgetfull disease. leuell, right, straight. leuitie, lightnesse, inconstancie. libertine, loose in religion, one that thinkes hée may doe what hée listeth. libell, a writing or . librarie, a studie, a great number of bookes. licentious, taking libertie to doe euill. ligate, bun, tyed. ligament, the string tying the bones toge∣ther. limaile, dust that commeth of seling. § linage, stocke, kinred. imitation, appointment, how arre any thing shall goe, yning. limme, pollish, amend. limpidde, cléere, pure. limber, britle. limit, bounds, border, or land marke, also to set such bounds, &c. liniament, a forme, or proportion by lines, that are rawne. lineall, direct, in a right line.
lingell, shooemakers thred. linguist, skilfull in tongues. linquish, to leaue or forsake. lint, cloth. liquide, moist, melted. literature, learning. lither, idle, lazie. litigious, quarrellous, full of strife. § lienetenant, deputie in anothers place. lithernesse, flthulnesse, idlenesse. liuelihood, meanes to maintaine life. loame, earth or morter. logicall (g) belonging to reason. lollar, a breaker of fasting dayes. longitude, length. lore, law, knowledge, lossell, a crafty fellow. § lotarie, casting of lots. § lourdin, rude clownish. § loyall, obedient, trustie, constant. lumber, old stuffe. lunatick, wanting his wits, at a certaine time of the age of the Moone. lumpish, sad or sw countenance. lustre, glistering, shining, glosse. luxurious, riotous, and excessiue in plea∣sure and wantonnesse.
M MAcerate, to séepe in water, or make leane, also to disquiet. madefie, dip, make wet. maffle, stammer, or stut. magicke, inchanting, coniuring. magistrate, gouernour. magitian (g) one vsing witchcraft. magnanimitie, valiantnes, courage. magnificence, sumptuousnesse. magnifie, to toll or praise highly. magnitude, greatnesse. maiestie, the stately port and honorable re∣nowne of any. § maladie, disease. § malecontent, discontent, displeased. malediction, staundering, ill report, or back∣biting, or cursing. malefactor, an euill doer. § malepert, sawcy, proud, sappish. § maligne, to hate with purpose to hurt. § malignitie, naughtinesse, malice. malicious, hating or enuing. manmon (g) riches. manchet, fine white bread.
mandate, a charge, or commandement. § manger, to eate. maniacque, mad, braine sick. manicle, a setter for to binde the hands. manifest, opened, declared, or reuealed. manuring, dung, tilling. § mannage, handle. mansion, an abiding place. manuall, done with the hand. manumisie, to set frée, or at libertie. maranatha (g) accursed. § marche, goe in aray, or goe forward. margent, edge, or brim of any thing. § marte, a faire. § massacre, kill, put to death. massie, heauy, heaped together. martiall, warlike, or valiant, or taking pains and delight in wars. martyre (g) witnes, one suffering death for the faith of Christ. matriculate, to register or inrole. materiall, of some matter, or importance. matrimonie, mariage, wedlocke. matrixe, wombe. matron, an auncient, sober, and discréete woman. mature, ripe, perfect, spéedy.
§ maugre, despight, against ones will. maxime, a principle, or sure ground in any matter. § meagre, leane. mechanicall, mechanick, (g) hande, craft. mediaour, aduocate, or surety, or one ma∣king peace betwixt two. medicine, remedie, or cure. mediocritie, a measure, a meane. meditate, muse vpon, bethinke. meditation, the earnest minding or thinking vpon a thing. melancholie (g) blacke choler, a humour of solitarinesse, or sadnesse. mellifluous, swéet as hony, yéelding much hony. melody (g) swéet sounding, or swéet musicke. membrane, a thinne skinne. mendicant, begging. memorable, worthy to be remembred. § menace, to threaten. menstruous, defiled, or foule. mentall, belonging to the minde. mercinary, seruing for wages, an hireling. meridian, pertayning to none tide.
meritorious, that deserueth, or set for ad∣uantage. messias, annointed, or sauiour. metamorphosis (g) a changing of one shape or likenesse into another. metaphor (g) similitude, or the putting ouer of a word from his proper and na∣turall signification, to a forraine or vn∣proper signification. meteors (g) elementarie bodies, or moyst things, ingendered of vapours in the aire aboue. method (g) an order, or ready way to teach, or doe any thing. methodized (g) brought into order. metropolitane (g) chiefe of the citie. mickle, much. microcosme (g) a little world. militant, warring, or being in warres. § mince, cut in small pieces § mignion, wanton, feate, fine. ministration, ministring, or seruice, or charge to doe a thing. minoritie, a mans time vnder age. minutly, smally. miraculous, meruailous or wonderfull. misbode, wrong.
§ mirrour, a looking glasse. miscreants, infidels, misbeléeuers. § misprission, concealement of a mans own knowledge. misknow, is mistate purposely, to be igno∣rant of. mitigate, asswage, qualifie, or paie. mixion, mixture, mingling, or tempering together. mobilitie, mouing or stirring. § modell, measure patterne. moderate, temperate or kéeping a meane. moderation, kéeping due order and propor∣tion. § moderne, modest, sober, dmure. § moitie, halfe. molestation, troubling. mollocke, earth, donge. mollifie, make soft. momentanie, that which lasteth but a while. moment, weight or importance, also a short time. monarch (g) one ruling all the kingdomes about him. monarchie (g) the rule of one prince alone.
monasterie (g) colledge of monkes, Monasticall (g) solitarie. monitor, an informer, or ouerséer. monopolie (g) a licence that none shall buy and sell a thing but one alone. monument, a remembrance of some notable act, as tombs. moosell, to fetter. § moote, argue, or dispute a case in law. moralitie, ciuill behauiour. morall, pertaining to manners, behauiour, and life among men. § morgage, lay to pawne. morigerous, well mannered, obedient. mortall, that endeth, hauing an end, and dying, deadly. mortifie, kill, or make dead, and sencelesse. mortuarie, dutie paid for the dead. motiue, cause mouing, or the thing, and rea∣son, that moueth to doe any thing. § moultre, make small, turne to dust. § mulct, a fine, penalty, or punishment. multiplicitie, varietie, or diuersitie of sorts. mundane, worldly mundifie, to make cleane. munition, defence, supportation, or strength and plentie of weapons, to resist in war.
municipall, priuately belonging to a frée∣man, or burgesse of a cittie. murke, darke. muses (g) goddesses of learning. musicall, that loueth or hath skill musicke. § mustaches, the hare of the vpper lippe. muster, take view of men, or armour. mute, dumbe, silent. mutable, changeable, wauering. mutation, change. muthologie (g) expounding of the tales of the Poets. mutilate, wanting some part, maimed. mutinie, tumult, sedition. mutuall, one for another. § micher, a streaking fellow, a hedge crée∣per. myrrhe (g) swéet gummes. mysterie (g) a secret, or hid thing. mysticall (g) that hath a misterie in it. N NAturalize, make frée, deuison. narration, declaration, or report. nationall, belonging, or consisting of a na∣tion, or kingdome.
natiue, where one was borne, or naturall. natiuitie, birth, or the day of birth. nauigable, where ships may safely passe, or that may be sayled vpon. nauigation, sayling, or passing by water. nauseous, lathing or disposed to vomit. necromancie (g) blacke art, or coniuring, by calling vpon spirits nectar, a pleasant drincke, which is feyned to bée drunke of the Gods. nefarious, wicked, detestable. negatiue, that denyeth. negotiation, trafficke or businesse. neotericke (g) one of late time. § nephew, a sonne or daughters sonne. nerue, sinew. § nete, fine, cleane. neutrall, neuter, of neither side. § nice, slow, laysie, foolish. nicholaitan (g) an heretike, like Nicholas, who held that wiues should bée common to all alike. nominate, to name, or appoint. § nonage, a childs time, vnder age. nonresidencie, vnnecessary & wilful abscence of any one from his place or charge.
§ nonsuite, not following, or the ending & giuing ouer of a suite. notable, worthy, méete to be regarded and estéemed. notarie, Scriuener, or register. notifie, to make knowne, or to giue war∣ning of. notion, inward knowledge, or vnderstand∣ing. notorious, knowne to all, and made plaine and manifest. noyance, hurt. noxious, noysome, hurt∣full. nullitie, nothing. numeration, numbring. nuncupatorie, telling, or declaring any∣thing. nuptiall, belonging to marriage. nutriment, nourishment. O Obdurate, harden, or to make more hard § obeisance, obedience. obiect, laide, or set against, or that where∣on any thing resteth, or that wherein
any thing is occupyed, or set a worke. obiure, binde by oath. oblation, offering. oblectation, recreation, delight. obliged, bound or beholden. oblique, crooked ouerthwart. obliterate, blot or scrape out. obliuious, forgetfull. obloquie, euill report. obnoxious, faultie, subiect to danger. obnubilate, to make darke. obscoene, bawdy, filthy, ribauldrie. obscure, darke or clowdy. obsequious, seruiceable, ready at hand. obseruant, dutifull, full of diligent ser∣uice. obsession, besieging, or compassing about. obsolete, olde, past date, growne out of vse or custome. obstacle, hinderance or let. obstinate, froward, stubborne, or stiffe in his owne opinion. obstruction, stopping, repressing. obtestate, humbly to beséech, or to call to witnesse. obtrectation, slaunder euill report. obtrude, thrust with violence.
obtuse, dull or blunt. occidentall, belonging to the west. occluding, shutting fast. § occurrences, occasions, things that offer themselues by the way. ocean (g) the maine sea. odious, hatefull, disdainfull. oder, smell, sent, or sauour. odoiferous, swéet smelling. oeconomicke (g) things that pertaine to houshold affaires. offensiue, giuing offence, offering wrong, or displeasing. officiall, belonging to an office. officious, dutifull, diligent, very readie or willing to please. oligarchie (g) a Common-wealth where the gouernment is vnder a few persons. oliue, place of Oliues. § ombrage, shade, harbor, or bower to rest vnder. ominous, that signifieth ome good, or ill lucke. omit, let passe, ouerslip. omnipotent, almightie, great, or high. omni-present, present in all places. omni-scient, knowing all things.
onerous, burdenous or chargeable. onust, loaden, ouercharged. operation, operatiue, working, or effect. opinionate, hauing a good opinion of, or standing on his owne opinion. oportunitie, fitnesse to any thing. oppidaue, a townesman. oppilation, stopping. oppose, against. opposite, contrary, or set ouer against. oppressed, grieued, or violently wronged. opprobrious, reprochfull, to taunt, reuile or vpbraid with bad spéeches. oppugne, to labour against, or resist. option, choosing or wishing. oracle (g) a spéech or answere giuen from God. oratorie, eloquent spéech. ordination, ordeyning, appointing. § ordure, dung, th. orifice, mouth, or hole of any thing. originall, the first, or such as it was at the beginning. organe (g) an instrument to doe any thing with. ornament, a decking, adorning, or trimming
orphant (g) a childe without parents. § ostages, pledges giuen and taken. ostentation, boasing. orthographie (g) true writing. § ouert, paine, open. § ouerplus, more then néedeth. § outragious, fierce, vnreasonable. P PAciie, to make quiet. paction, a couenanting or bargayning. pagan, of the country village. page, the side of a lease. § palatine, belonging to a Princes Court, or pallace. palinodie (g) a recanting, or vnsaying of any thing. § pallisade, a place enclosed with pales. palliate, cloake, or lightly heale. palpable, that may be felt, manifest. pamphlet, a small treatise, or booke. pander, a man baude to a whore. parable (g) similitude, or an applying of some thing to our matter, fily alleaged, for some likenesse which it hath to our purpose.
paradise (g) place of pleasure. paradoxe (g) maruaos, or strange spéech. § paragon, patterne, example. paralelles (g) lines, or other things as farre off from one another, in one place as in another. § paramour, an amorous louer. paraphrase (g) exposition of any thing by many words. parasite (g) a base flatterer, or soothing com∣panion. parenthesis (g) a clause contained in ano∣ther sentence. parget, to plaster. paricide, a murderer of parents. paritie, equalitie, likenesse. § parle, spéech, or conference. parsimonie, thriftinesse, sparing. participate, partake deuide, or distribute, to giue, or take part. particularize, to deuide into parts, and to handle euery particular. partition, deuision. passeable, that may be passed ouer. passeouer, one of the Iewes Feasts, in re∣membrance of Gods passing ouer them,
when he flew so many of the Egiptians. passion, suffering, griefe. pastoral, belonging to shepheards. patheticall (g) vehement, full of passions or mouing affections. patriarke (g) chiefe father. patrimonie, fathers gift, or goods left by a father. § patronage, defence, protection. patronise, defend. paucitie, fewnesse, or small number. pause, thinke, stay, or rest. § pauillion, ent. peerelesse, worthy, vnmatchable. peccaui, I haue offended. peccant, offending, doing amie. pectorall, that belongeth to the breast. peculiar, proper, or specially belonging. pecuniarie, coyne, money. § pelmell, confusedly, all on a heape. § pedant, one that hath the ouersight of chil∣dren. penetrable, that may be pearced. penitentiarie, one repenting, or doing pen∣nance. penti, losse, punishment, fine. § pension, payment, yeerely .
§ pensiue, sorrowfull. pencost (g) Whitsontide. penurie, want or extreame néede. perch, sit vpon a pole or branch. peregrine, strange of another land. perambulation, walking about. peregrination, iournying in a strange land. peremptorie, resolute, short, deadly, perforatio, hole, or pierce through. perfidios, traiterous, vnfaithfull. perfricated, rubbed much. perillous, dangerous. periclitation, ieoperdie, or hazarding. period (g) the end of a perfect sentence. periurie, forswearing, or breaking of ones oath. permanent, continuing, or abiding till the end. permission, sufferance, leaue. permit, suffer, giue leaue. permutation, change. pernitious, dangerous, hurtfull. perpendicular, directly, downe right. perpetrate, to commit, or due. perpetuitie, continuance for euer. perplexitie, trouble, griefe, distresse, doubt∣fulnesse.
persecute, trouble, afflict, or pursue after. persist, perseuer, continue, constantly, and resolutely. personate, to counterfait anothers person. perspicacie, quicknes of sight, vnderstanding perspicuous, euident, cléere, that may bée séene through. pertinacie, obstinacie, stifnesse in opinion. perturbation, disquietnesse, or trouble. peruerse, froward, mischieuous. peruert, ouerthrow, or turne vpside downe. § pese, to waigh. peruiacie, obstinacie, stifneckednesse. § pesant, downe. pester, filled. pest, the plague, or pestilence. pestiferous, pestilent, contagious, hurtfull. petition, prayer, or request. § pettigree, stocke, or offpring. pettilasserie, stealing of things of no great value. petulancie, wantonnesse, saucines. phantasie (g) imagination. phantasticall, idle headed, foolishly conceited. phylacteries (g) scroles of parchment, wher∣on was written the ten commandments.
physiognomie (g) knowledge of a mans nature by his visage, and countenance. phisicke (g) medicine, helping or curing. phlebothomie (g) letting bloud. phrase (g) forme of speach. philosophie (g) studie of wisedome. phrensie (g) madnesse. pietie, godlinesse, holinesse. § pillage, spoile in war, and sacking of the enimies. pinguiditie, fatnesse, or greasinesse. § pilot, maister, guider of a ship. § pionner, digger, or ditcher. piramis (g) piramides, a stéeple, or other building, or a pillar broad beneath, and sharpe aboue. pistated, baked. § pirate, a robber on the sea. § pittance, short banquet. placable, easie to be pleased. § placards, writings from higher powers. planet (g) wandring starre. § plaintife, the party complayning. platforme, the mould & fashion of an house. plausible, pleasing or receiued ioyfully, and willingly. plenarie, full.
plenitude, fulnesse thicknesse. § plonge, dip, or put vnder the water. plume, feather. pluralitie, more thn one. poeme (g) verses of a poet. poet (g) a verse maker. poetesse, a woman poet. pole (g) the end of the axetrée wheron the astronomers fain the heauens to be turned. pollicie, a wittie shift. poligamie, (g) hauing moe wines then one. polish, to deck, or make faire, smooth, éeke, or shining. pollute, destle, or distaine, or make filthy. pomegarnet, or pomegranet (k) fruite. pompe, the countenance of things in furni∣ture, & setting forth to the outward shew. ponderous, waightie, heauie. pontificall, lordly, sumptuous, bishopliks. portable. that may be carried. popular, séeking the auour of the people by all meanes possible. populous, full of people. popularitie, pleasing the people. portend, signifie before it happeneth. position, a question to be dispsed of. posteritie, they that come after by birth, the age after vs.
postscript, written after. potent, mighty, able. potion, drincke. § pourtraie, draw the forme, or proportion of a thing. pructicall (g) practique, practising. pragmaticall, a busie body. § preamble, forespéech, a flowrish, entrance, or assay. precedent, going before. precept, a rule giuen, an admonition, or commandement. precinct, compasse appoynted. precipitate, cast downe headlong. predecessor, one that was in place before another. predestinate to appoynt before. prediction, afore telling, or prophesying. predominant, ruling. preheminence, excellencie, rule, authoritie ouer others. preface, a spéech before the matter it selfe. prefigurate, foreshew by a figure. prefixed, set in the forepart appointed before pregnant, witty, substantiall, with childe. preiudicate, giuing his iudgement, before
he knoweth the man, or matter. preiudice, hindering ones cause, sentence, or opinion deliuered before knowledge of any thing. preludium, an entrance to any thing. premeditation, thinking of a matter before hand. § premunire, forefeiture of goods. preoccupation, a preuenting by spéech or other wayes. preordination, appointing before. preparatiue, that which maketh sit or pre∣pareth. preposterous, disordered, froward, topsitur∣uy, setting the cart before the horse, as we vse to say. prerogatiue, priuiledge, or authoritie before another. presage, to tell before, to betoken, to foresée. presbitarie (g) eldership. prescience, foreknowledge. prescript, decrée or assignement. prescription, limitation, or appointing a certaine compasse. preseruatiue, that which desendeth. president, a chiefe ruler next vnder the highest.
§ prest, readie. presuppose, saine a thing to be before it is. pretermit, to passe ouer, to forget willingly. preterlapsed, passed, or gone past. pretence, pretext, excuse, colour. preuarication, collusion, or betraying of a cause or matter, for want of more ear∣nest spéech. primitiue, primarie, first, or formost, or excellent. primate, chiefe gouernour. prioritie, being in the formost place, or in greater excellencie and superioritie then another. pristine, old, wonted, or accustomed. priuation, depriuing, vtter taking away. or withdrawing. priuiledge, prerogatiue, or liberty, more then others haue. probable, that may be easilie proued to bée true. probation, alouance, tryall, probleme (g) proposition, or sentence, in manner. proceede, goe forth, or goe forward. processe, proceeding, passing forward.
procliuitie, inclination to any thing. proctour, a factour or solicitor. procrastinate, to deferre or delay. procreate, begotten, or bring forth. prodigall, too rioous in spending. prodigious, wonderfull, giuing an ill signe. prodition, betraying, treason. produce, bring forth. profane, vngodly, not consecrated, or vnhal∣lowing that which was holy. profound, déepe or high. profligate, ouerthrow, put to flight. profundie, déepenesse. profusion, powring out wastfully. profuse, immoderate, wastfull. progenie, opring, generation, or issue of children. progenitor, a forefather, or grandfather. prognosticate (g) to know or giue out be∣fore hand, or to tell afore hand what shal happen progresse, a going forward. prohibit, to forbid or giue straight charge to trary. proiect, a plot, or wise contriuing of any thing, or casting orth. prolixe, tedious, long, large.
prolocutor, a speaker for another. prologue, a preface or forespéech. prolong, stretch out, or defer. promerit, desert. promiscuous, confused, mingled promote, to honor, or aduance to greater dignitie and higher place. prompt, ready, quick. promulgation, publishing openly, or prolai∣ming. pronowne, that is set for the name of a thing prone, ready, or inclining. § prowesse, valiantnesse. propagate, to enlarge or multiply. prophecie (g) foretell, or expound. prophet (g) he that prophecyeth. propitiation, a sacrifice to appease Gods displeasure. propitiatorie, that which recōcileth, or which purchaseth mercy, at the mercy seate. propitious, not displeased, fauourable. proportion, equalnesse, measure. propose, propound, set before or shew. proprietie, propertie, owing or challenging as his owne, and none others. prorogue, put off, prolong, deferre. proscription, a condemnation, or banish∣ment proclaimed, or an open sale.
prose, that writing which is not verse. proselite (g) stranger conuerted to our reli∣gion and manners. prosecute, follow after, or finish. prospect, a sight a farre off. prostitute, set open for vncleannesse, to set foorth to sale. prostrate, to cast downe, or fall downe flat on the ground. protect, defend saue or couer. protest, to affirme, or declare openly. protract, deferre, or prolong, or draw out at length. prouident, foreséeing with wise considerati∣on, and prouiding aforehand. prouinciall, iurisdiction, belonging to a pro∣uince, or out country. prouocation, prouoking, enforcing, vrging, pressing or alluring. § prouost, chiefe gouernour. prudence, wisedome, wittinesse. publicane, a farmer, or cōmon man of a citie § puiney, younger borne. puluirisated, baten, or broken into dust, or powder. pupill, that is vnder a tutor, a ward. purgation, purging, cleansing.
purifie, purge, scoure, or make cleane. § pursuit, following after. puruie, prouide. putrifie, to waxe rotten, or corrupt as a sore. pusillanimitie, faint hartednes, cowardlines § puissant, strong, valiant. pyxe (g) a boxe. Q QVadrangle, foure cornered. quadrant, quadrate, foure square, or a quarter. quaint, strange. qualme, griefe. quartane, belonging to, or comming euery fourth day. queane, a barren old cow. queasie, weake, séeble, not well digesting. § queach, thicke heape. quelle, trouble, torment, destroy. querimonious, full of complaining and la∣mentation. § quintessence, chiefe vertue, drawne by art out of many compounds together. quondam, heretofore, in times past. § quote, cite, preuent. quotidian, daily, that happeneth euery day.
R RAcha, fle, a note of extreame anger, sig∣nified by the gesture of the person, that speaketh it, to him that he speaketh to. radicall, pertayning to the roote, naturall. radiant, shining bright. § rallie, gather together men dispersed, and out of order. ranke, rotten, stinking. rancour, hatred, malice. § range, set in order. § rampar, fortification, or trench. rapacitie, rapine, violent taking away, extorcio or pillage, or rauening. rarifie, make thinne. raritie, scarcenesse, sewnesse. rathe, earely, spéedy. ratifie, establish or confirme. rationall, that hath reason. § rauish, take away by force. § raunged, ordered, or put in order. reall, substantiall, or that is indéed subsisting reassume, take againe. rebell, rise against. recantation, an vnsaying of that which was before said.
recapitulation, a briefe rehearsing againe of any thing. recensed, repeated, rehearsed, named. recklesse, rash, carelesse. receptacle, a place to receiue things in. reciprock, or reciprocall, that hath respect backe a∣gaine to the same thing. recite, rehearse, or repeat. reclaime, to gainsay, or call back againe. § recognissance, acknowledging, or a signe of acknowledging, and confessing any thing. § recoile, goe backe. reconcile, bring into fauour, or to make peace betwixt. records, writings laid vp for remembrance. recreate, refresh, comfort. recourse, a running back againe. rectifie, to make right or straight. redeeme, purchase, buy againe, or ransome. redemption, a buying againe. redound, erflow, fall vpon. § redresse, correct, amend. reduce, to bring back againe. reduction, a bringing backe. redundant, ouerflowing, or abounding too much. reduplicated, doubled.
reedifie, build vp againe. reestablish, to settle againe as before. refection, a refreshing, or recreating. refell, to confute, or proue false. reference, a pointing at, or alluding to. referre, put ouer, or, to report himselfe vnto. refine, repaire, renue, or amend. reflection, casting backe, or owing, tur∣ning backe againe. reforme, amend. refractarie, wilfull in opinion, obstinate. § refraine, abstaine from, kéepe in. refuge, succour, or place of safetie. refulgent, shining bright. refute, to disproue. regall, princely, like a King. regenerate, borne againe. regeneration, a new birth. regent, a Gouernour, or Ruler. regiment, gouernment, guidance, rule, or dominion. register, kalender a reckoning booke. regrator, huckster, or one that buyeth any thing, and trims it vp to make it more salable. regresse, returning back againe. regular, made according to rule and order.
reiect, fling, cast away or reuse. § reioynder, a thing added afterward, or is when the defendant maketh answere to the replication of the plaintife. reiterate, to doe or repeate againe the same thing often. reke, smoke. relapse, backsliding. relate, report, rehearse or declare. relation, respect, rehearsing. relatiue, hauing relation vnto. relaxation, refreshing, releasing. release, frée, qu § reliefe, ayde, helpe, succour, food. reliques, the remainder. relinquish, to leaue, or forsake. elish, tast. remarkable, able or worthy to be marked a∣gaine. remisse, loose, negligent, or dull, or too fa∣uourable remit, forgiue, release, or acquite. § remorse, pricke of conscience. remote, set a farre off. remuneration, rewarding, or requiting. rendre, yéelde, restore. renouate, forsake or repaire.
renounce, forsake, or resigne. § renoume, credit, fame, report. reparation, a renewing. § repast, foode, nourishment. § repeale, call back againe. repell, to put or thrust back. repercussiue, striking or rebounding backe againe. replenish, fill. replete, filled full. repleueying, redéeming of a gage, or any thing in prison. replie, to confirme a spéech before vttered. § repose, rest, also to put. represent, expresse, eare shew of a thing. represse, put downe, to let or stop. reprobate, a cast away, out of fauour, a for∣lorne person, and one past grace. § reproch, shame, disgrace. republicke, a common-wealth. repugnancie, contrarietie or disagréement. repugnant, cary. repugne, to re oppose, stand against. repulse, to put or driue back, also denyall. repute, account, or estéeme. requisite, required as necessary. rescue, defend.
resemblance, likenesse. reserue, to kéepe for the time to come. resident, abiding or continuing in his place resignation, a yéelding vp, or restoring of a∣ny thing. resigne, giue ouer to another. resist, withstand. resolue, to vnloose, to satisfie, to purpose con∣stantly. § resort, accesse or comming to. respiration, breathing. § respite, defer, delay the time to breath in. resplendent, shining bright. responses, answeres. restauration, restoring, or reuiuing. restitution, restoring, satisfaction. restrained, being helo in, or bridled. resume, take againe. § retire, to giue backe, or go back. reteine, kéepe back. retort, to turne, or wrest backward. retract, recant. § retreit, going back. retribution, reward. retrograde, going backward. § reuell, play the wanton. reuerberate, eate backe.
reuerend, worthy of reuerence. reueale, lay open, disclose, or make knowne a matter of secret. reuert, to returne. § reuenew, rents comming in. reuise, to looke on, or read againe. reuoke, to call backe, or draw back. § reuolt, forsake one, to goe to another his enimie. reuolution, turning back to the same place. reuolue, to tosse vp and downe, to deter∣mine well of in the minde. rhetorician (g) learned & skilfull in rhetorick. rhetoricke (g) art of eloquence. rhume (g) a distilling of humours from the head. rhythmicall (g) made in méeter. ridiculous, that deserueth to bée laughed at in scorne. § riffle, search, take away by violence. rigorous, cruell, and hard. § rinse, wash, make cleane by washing. § riuall, one suing, and striuing for the same thing that another oth. riueling, turning in, and out. rome, walke, wander. § royaltie, gouernment, rule, authoritie.
rebrick, a law, or title. rude, ignorant, vnskilfull, rusticall. rudiment, first instruction, or principle. rubicunde, red, or ruddie. ruinous, ready to fall. ruminate, to chew ouer againe, to studie earnestly vpon. rample, wrinkle. runnagate, one that runneth away, and wandreth abroad. rupture, breach, or bursting. rurall, rusticall, clownish, vplandish, or churlise and vnmannerly. ruth, pittie. S § SAcking, spoyling. saboth, rest. sacrament, holy signe, oath, or mysteri. sacred, holy, consecrated. sacrifice, an offering. sacriledge, church robbing, the stealing of holy things. § safeconduit, ae kéeping or safe guiding. sagacitie, sharpnesse of wit, wittinesse. salarie, stipend, wages.
saint, holy one. § sallie, to step out from the rest of the ar∣my, to make a skirmish. salow, white. saluation, a sauing. salubritie, wholesomenesse. sanctifie, hallow, make holy, or kéepe holy. sanctification, sanctitie, holinesse. sanctimonie, sanctuary, holy place. sandals (g) stippers. sanguine, bloudy, or of the colour of bloud. sanitie, health, or soundnesse. sapience, wisedome. satiate, filled, satisfied. satietie, fulnesse, plentie. satisfaction, a making amends for wrongs, or displeasures. satisfactorie, that dischargeth, or answereth for. saturate, filled, or glutted. saturitie, fulnesse, or plentifulnesse. § sauage, wilde, cruell, or rude. satyre (g) a nipping and scoffing verse. satericke, belonging to a scoffing verse. saricall,
sawe, saying, word. scandalize (g) to ffend, or giue occasion to mislike. scandall (g) an offence, or stumbling block. § scarifie, to launce, or open a sore. scath, harme, damage. § scedule, obligation, or bill of ones hand, also a briefe. schisme (g) breach, or diuision in matters of religion. schismatick, that maketh a schisme, science, knowiedge, or skill. scripture, writing. scruple, doubt, difficultie. scrutiny, diligent search, inquirie. scrupulous, full of doubts. scurrilitie, sawcie, scoffing, railing. seclude, shut out, or put a part. sectarie, one whom many other doe follow in opinion sect, a diuersitie in opinion from others. section, a diuision, or parting. secular, worldly, of the world. secundarie, the second, or of the second sort. securitie, carelesnesse, feare of nothing. sediment, that which sinketh to the bottome. seditious, making contention.
seduce, deceiue, or deuide, or leade aside. sedulitie, iligence or carefulnesse. § segniorie, Lordship. segregate, to set a part, or seperate. § seize, to forfaite to the prince, also to lay hold on. select, to choose out from others. § semblable, like. semicircle, halfe a circle or compase. seminarie, a nurserie, or séede plot for young trées, or grafts. senator, alderman, or counsailer. sense, féeling, or perceiuing. sensible, easily felt, or perceiued. sensuall, brutish, peraining to the flesh, and bodily sense. sententious, full of fine sentences, & spéeches § sentinell, watching by night. seperation, deuiding, seuering, or parting one from another. sepulcher, graue or tombe. septentrionall, belonging to the North. sequele, following or that which followeth sequester, to put into an indifferent mans hands, to diuide, kéepe or iudge of. serious, earnest or of waight, & importance. serpentine, of, or like a serpent. seruile, lauish.
seruitude, bondage, or slauery. seuere, sharpe, curst, or cruell. seueritie, sharpnesse, roughnesse. sex, kinde. shackle, fetter. shent, blame, spoyle. significant, plainely signifying, or shewing by tokens. sikerly, surely, truely. similie, or similitude, likenesse, or re∣semblance. § simonie, when spirituall matters, are bought, and sold for money. simplicitie, plainenesse. sinister, vnhappy, bad, vnlawful, or contrary sincere, pure, vncorrupt, vnmingled, or without dissimulation. singularitie, a being like no body else, in o∣pinion, or other wayes. sithen, after. skinke, poure out. situation, setting, or standing of any place. sleight, guile, craft, subtiltie. sleeuelesse, vaine. shiuer, a parcell. smatterer, somewhat learned, or one hauing but a little skill.
snatch, to take hastely. snipperings, payrings. § soare, mount high. sociall, or sociable, fellow like, one that will kéepe company, or one with whom a may easily keepe company. societie, fellowship, companie. sodometrie, when one man lyeth filthylie with another man. § soiourne, remaine in a place. solace, comfort. solemnize, to doe a thing with great pomp, reuerence, or deuotion. solecisme, false latine. § solicite, moue, or intreat earnestly. solide, sound, heauie, not hollow. solitarie, alone, or without company. soluble, loose in body, going often to stoole. solsticke, when the Sunne is at the highest or lowest. solution, vnloosing, or paying. sooth, truth. sophister (g) cauiller, or craftie disputer. sophistication, sophisme, a cauilling, deceit∣full spéech. soporiferous, that causeth sléepe. sordide, base, beastly, vnhonest.
sordidated, dimmed. § otte, foole, dunse. § soueraigne, chiefe, or highest in authority. § source, waue, or issuing forth of water. § soile, filthy, or durtie. spannew, very now spaious, large, wide or broad. specifie, signifie, or declare particularly. specke, spot or marke. spectacle, a thing to be looked at. sperme (g) féede. sphaere (g) round circle, or any thing that is round. spicerie, a place to kéepe spice in. splendent, glistering, shining. splene, . spleniticke, that is sicke of the splene. spongeous, like a sponge. spousals, betrothings, or contracts. spume, ome or froth. stabilitie, surenesse, ceraine, strong. stable, sure, stedfast. stablished, sure, confirmed, or made strong. § stampe, printe, marke. § stanch, stay, sake. starke, stiffe. station, a standing place.
statue, an image of woode, or any other matter. stature, height, bignesse. sterilitie, barrennesse. steward, stéed-man, the kéeper of the place. stigmaticall (g) knauish, noted for a lewde naughtie fellow, burnt through the eare for a rogue. stile, manner or forme of spéech, or writing stillatorie, a distilling place. stipendarie, one that serueth for wages. stipticall (g) that stoppeth or bindeth. stipulation, a solemne conenant. stomacke, to hate, enuie, disdaine. strangle, kill, choake, throttle. stratageme, a pollicie or wittie shift in war. strangurie (g) making of water with great paine and very hardly. strict, strait, seuere, or sharpe. strictnes, narrownesse or smalnesse. structure, building, setting in good order. studious, diligent, desirous of learning. stupefice, to astonish. stupiditie, astonishment, dulnesse. suasorie, containing counsaile & exhortation subalterne, succéeding, following by course and order.
subdued, kept vnder or brought into subie∣ction. subiugate, subdue, bring vnder the yoake. sublimitie, height, highnesse. sublie, set on high, lift vp. submisse, lowly, humble, brought in subie∣ction. § suborne, to procure false witnesse. subscribe, write vnder, or to agrée with an∣other in any matter. subsequent, following hard by. subsidiarie, that is giuen or sent to aide an∣other. sbsist, to abide or haue a being. substitute, a deputie or one set in place of an other. substract, subtract, take from, withdraw. subtill, craftie, wily, deceitfull. subuert, to turne vpside downe, to destroy. succeede, follow, to come in anothers place. successor, he that comes in place of another succinct, short or briefe or close girt vp. suggest, prompt, tell priuilie or put in mind of. suffixed, fastned vnto. suffocate, to choake vp, strangle or stop the breath.
suffragane, a Bishops deputie, or helper. suffrage, consent, or voyce or helpe. suggest, to put in minde, to tell. sulphure, brimstone. § summarie an abridgement or thing drawn into a lesse compasse. ummarilie, briefely, in few words. § summon,  cause to appeare. § sumptuous, costly, rich. supererogation, giuing more then is re∣quired. superabundant, superfluous, néedelesse, vnnecessarie, ouer much, that which runneth ouer. superficies, vpper side, or outside. superficiall, belonging to the outside and vppermost part. supernaturall, beyond the order of nature. supernall, from aboue, that is one high. superioritie, place aboue another. superscription, writing aboue. superstitious, fearefull in matters of religi∣on without cause, one giuen o false and vaine religion. supplant, ouerthrow, or trip with the foote, roote out. supplement, that which maketh vp, or ad∣deth that which wanteth in any thing.
§ supple, make soft or gentle, supplication, request or prayer. § suppliant, humbly intreating. support, beare vp, or conuay vnder. supposition, supposing, thinking, iudging, or imagining. suppresse, kéepe downe, conceale, or kéepe supreme, the highest or greatest. (secret. supremacie, chiefedome, or highest place in authoritie aboue all others. § surcease, to giue ouer, or cease. § surcharge, ouercharge, hurt. § surmount, § surpasse, éede, or goe beyond. § surplusage, more then inough. § surprise, to come vpon vnawares, and to take of a suddaine. § surquedry, presumption. § surrender, to yéeld vp to another. § surrogate, a deputie in anothers place. § suruiue, ouer liue, or liue after. suspense, doubt, or vncertaintie. sustained, suffered, or endured. suture, a seame, or ioyning together. swaine clowne. swarth, darke, or blackish. swarue, g ary, rr▪
sycophant (g) tale bearer or false accuser. symball (g) créede. symm-rie (g) a due proportion of one part with another. sympathy (g) fellowlike féeling. symphonie, harmonie and consent in tune. symptome (g) any grief or passion following a disease. synagogue (g) place of assembly. synode (g) a generall assembly or méeting. syntaxe (g) construction and order of words. T § TAblet, little table. tabernacle, a tent or pauillion. tacite, still, silent, saying nothing. taciturnitie, silence or kéeping counsaile. tangible, that may be touched. § tapish, lye downe, hide it selfe. tade, late tantologie (g) repeating one thing twise. taxed, seised, appointed to pay a subsidie. tedious. trouble ksome, wearisome. teeme, beare children, empty. temerarious, rash vnaduised or harebraind. temeritie, rashnes, vnaduisednesse. temperance, sobrietie, moderation.
temperate, kéeping a meane, moderate. temperature, temperament, temperatenesse, meane, or due proportion. tempestuous, boystrous, or stormie. temporall, that which indureth but for a certaine time. temporarie, for a time. temporise, to serue the time or to follow the fashion and behauiour of the time. temptation, tryall. tenacitie, nigarinesse. tenuitie, smalnesse, or slendernesse. § tenure, hold, or manner of holding a pos∣session. tergiuersation, going back, or leauing a sute. termination, ending, finishing, or bounding. terrifie, make afraid. terrene, earthly. § territorie, region, or the country, lying a∣bout the citie. tertian, belonging to euery third day. terrestriall, earthly. testament, last will. testification, witnessing. testimonies, records, depositions, or witnes∣sings. textuall, cunning in the text.
tetrach (g) gouernour, or prince of a fourth part of a country. theater, a common place of playes & showes. thech, thriue. theme (g) matter proposed to be written or spoken of. theologie (g) diuinitie, the science of holy things. theorie (g) the contemplation, or inward knowledge of any art. threpe, affirme. throne (g) a Kings seate, or chaire of estate. throle, strangle, hang, or orment. § thwart, crosse, or mocke. tiar, ornament for the head. timerous, fearefull, abashed. timiditie, fearefulnesse. tincture, a colour, dye, or stayning. titillation, ickling. tollerable, that which may bée ffered. tone (g) a tune, note, or accent. totally, wholy, altogether. § trace, finde out by the foote steps. tractable, easie to handle, or easily entreated. , a treatise, or booke, handling any (matter. § tracte, a space, or length. tradition, a deli from  another.
traduce, to slander, reproach, or defame, to bring in, or draw from one to another. § traffique, bargayning. tragèdian, a maker, or player of a tragedie. tragedie (g) a solemne play, describing cru∣ell murders and sorrowes. tragicall, cruell, sorrowfull like a tragedie. § traine, followers, company. tranquilitie, quietnesse, or calmnes, or rest. transcendent, climing ouer, mounting vp. transferre, conuey ouer. transforme, transfigure, change from one fashion, to another. transgresse, breake, offend, or goe ouer. transition, passing from one thing to another § transitorie, soone passing away, not long lasting. translation, altering, chaunging. transmigration, a passing from one place to dwell in another. transmutation, a change from one place, to another. transome, lintell ouer a doore. transparent, that which may be séen through. transport, carry ouer, from one place to an∣other. transpose, change, or set out of order.
transubstantiation, a changing of one sub∣stance into another. traue, a place to shoe wild horses in. § trauerse, strike, or thrust through. triangle, triangular, thrée cor∣nered. tribe, a company, ward, or hundred. tresses, lockes of hayre broyded vp. § tribulation, trouble, sorrow, anguish tribunall, iudgement seate. § tributarie, that payeth tribute. § tribute, rent, pension, or subsidie. trice, instance. trinitie, the number of thrée. triobolar, little worth, of no estimation. triplicitie, of thréefold. tripartite, thréefold, or deided into thrée parts. triuiall, common, of small estimation. triumph, great ioy outwardly shewed. triumphant, reioycing tor the conquest. § trompe, deceiue. troncheon, stake, or billet. trophee, a victory, or any thing set in signe of victory. tropickes (g) circles in the heauen which when the Sunne comes to, begins to re∣turne againe.
§ troupe, company, or band of men in an armie. § truant, loyterer. truce, peace. truculent, cruell, or terrible in countenance. tuition, defence, looking to. truncheon, weapon. tumult, vprore, hurly burly, or insurrection. tumultuous, turbulent, troublous, disturbing, or disquieting. tyranize (g) vse crueltie. type (g) figure, example, shadow of any thing. V VAcant, voyde, or emptie. vacation, a time of ceasing from labor. § vagabond, runnagate, one that will stay no where. vagarie, running vp and downe. validitie, strength, force, or value. valour, force, courage, or strength. value, price, or estimation. § vanquish, ouercome, preuaile, conquere, or ouerthrow. vapor, moisture, aire, hot breath, or reaking. variable, changeable. varietie, change, or diuersitie.
§ vassall, slaue, clyant. vaste, emptie, huge, great. § vantgard, the forefront of an army. § vaunt, brag, boast. § vauntcourers, forerunners. vbiquitie, presence of a person in all places. varnish, shine, set a glosse vpon. vegetable, springing, or growing as hearbs. vehement, earnest, strong, forcible. veile, couering. vendible, saileable, easie & readie to be solde. venemous, full of poyson. venerable, worshipfull, or reuerend. veneriall, venerous, fleshly, or lecherous, giuen to lecherie. veniall, that which may bée pardoned. vente, sale, vtterance. ventricle, the stomack whichreceiues yt meai venuste, faire, beautifull. verball, full of wordes. verbatim, word by word, perfectly. verbositie, much talking, and pratling. § verger, one that beares a siluer rodde in our cathedrall Churches. veritie, truth. verifie, to proue to bée true. versifie, make verses.
vertigiousnes, lightnes, or a swimming of the head. vestall, a Nunne, vowing chastitie. vesture, vestiment, garment, attire, or clothing. § viand, victuals. § viceroy, one set as a deputie in the Kings place. vicinitie, neighbourhood. vicegerent, one that supplyeth the place of another. vicious, faultie, or full of vice. victorious, that hath gotten many victoryes. viewe, behold, marke, or consider, or looke vpon. vigilant, watchfull, diligent. vigour, strength, courage, or force. vile, base, nothing worth. vincible, that may be wonne, or easily ouer∣come. vindicate, frée from danger. vineyard, orchard of grapes. violate, to transgresse, defile, deflowre or breake. violent, forcible, cruell, iniurious. viperine, like a viper, or of a viper. virago, a woman of a manly courage.
virulent, full of poyson, venemous. § visage, face, forme, or shape. vision, sight, apparition, or a phantasie. visible, that may bée séene. visitation, going to sée. vitall, liuely, or pertayning to life. viate, to corrupt, or destower, and defile. viuificent, liuely, or full of strength. viuifie, to quicke, or make aliue. vlcer, bile, or botch. vlcerate, to blister, or make full of ores. vmbrage, vide, ombrage. vmpire, iudge. vnconceaueable, not able to be conceiued. vnaccessiuely, that cannot bée come to. vnanimitie, one consent of hart and minde. vnction, annoynting. vndecent, vncomely. vndermine, graue, dig vnder. vnneath, vneasie, scarce. vnkouth, vnknowne, strange. vnguent, an oyntment, or fat iuyce. vnitie, vnion, peace, or concord. vnitie, to make one thing of two, or moe, to couple, or ioyne. vnsatiable, not content.
vniformitie, one and the same fashion. vniuersall, generall, common. vocall, with the voyce, or pertayning to the voyce. vocation, calling, estate, or trade of life. vnsatiable, that neuer hath inough, neither can bée satisfied. vnteeming, barren, past childe earing. vnweldie, not able to moue, lumpish. volubilitie, switnesse, or inconstancie. voluntarie, of the owne accord, without be∣ing taught, or vrged. voluptuous, giuen to pleasure. § vpbraid, rise in ones stomack, cast in ones teeth. vrbanitie, curtesie, good manners, or gen∣tlenesse. vrgent, earnestly calling vpon, forcing. vrine, water of man or beast. vrne, a pot or pitcher. § vsurpe, take vnlawfull authoritie, or to vse against right and reason. § vtensiles, things necessary for our vse in house-kéeping, or in a trade. vtililie, profit. vulgar, common, much vsed.
W WArish, ease, deliuer. welde, moue. walter, wallow. wene, thinke. welken, skie. wend, goe. wote, know. wonne, dwell. wimple, hoode, muffler. wist, knowne. wood, madde. wreke, reuenge. Y YElpe, prate, talke. yene, desire, take griefe, also to deserue. yode, went. yore, before, long agoe. Z ZEale (g) earnest desire to a thing. zodiack (g) a circle in the heauen, wher in bée placed the 12. Signes, and in which the Sunne is moued. Zonet (g) circles in the heauens, deuiding the world into fiue parts. FINIS.
