6498 99840977 5527
THE Double PP. A Papist in Armes. Bearing Ten seuerall Sheilds. ENCOVNTRED By the Protestant. At Ten seuerall Weapons. A Iesuite Marching before them. Cominùs & Eminùs. LONDON, Imprinted by T. C. and are to be sold by Iohn Hodgets, at his shop in Paules Church-yard, 1606.
TO ALL THE Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry Of Great Brittaine, True Subiects to King Iames. TO you that (like the sollid wheeles of Fate) Giue sweete or troubled Motion to a State: To you that bath our soules in Sacred streames, (In which they thriue as you grow Hot or Colder:) And last, to you, the Kingdomes beames. (All, strong Collumnes that vphold her.) O let me not seeme bolder Than my country zeale requires, If these weake (but hallowed) fires Offer vp This Sacrifize, Which vpon the Altar lyes Of my hearts Deuotion. Since so strange Commotion. (Now) with giddy base Alarmes Puffes the Romist vp in Armes, That he dares his Cullors vant Gainst th'vnmeling Protestant: O You, that our Chieftaines are, Giue not o're this holy warre, Fight it out. You cannot fall, God being sworne your Generall. That your Triple darts may hit, All your Nerues together knit, And shoote'em with an English hand, So shall your Heires and Houses stand (Like Pillers) on fme Bases. So Great Brittaine shall grow greater, and her Land Enlarge as Wee these Lines: your Peace shall flow Cleere: High: and smooth: So The Seauen Hills shall fall,
THE DOVBLE PP. A Riddle on the double▪ PP. VPon the double PP. badder fruits grow Thā on al letters in the Christ-Crosse-Row; It sets (by reason of the Badge it weares) The Christ-Crosse-Row, together by the eares: The reason is, this haughtie double PP. Would clyme aboue both A. B. C. and D. And trample on the necks of E. F. G. H. I. (Royall K.) L. M. N. O. and Q. Threatning the fall of R. S. T. and V. The Resolution. PP.-PaPa.-the PoPe. Christ-Crosse-Row,Christendome. A. B. C. D. E. &c. the States of the land: As Archbishos, Bishops, Councellors, Dukes, Earles, &c. K. the King. Q. the Queene. R. Religion. S. State. T. Truth. V. You all.
THE PICTVRE of a Iesuite. A Harpye face; a Foxes head: (In Lamb-Skins closely couered) A Mandrakes voice, whose tunes are cries, So peircing, that the Hearer dies; Mouth'd like an Ape, his innate spite Being to mock Those hee cannot bite: Neckt like a Crane, hee chawes a Crowne, But choakes before hee gets it downe:
A Camels back, (that Slaue-like) beares Castles, that Rome vpon him reares: Goate-bellied: rather then heele leeze His Lust, heele browze vpon his knees. For Legs, two Engines hee does vse, Which turne (to any coast) on Skrewes, Or, like the vaulting horses legs His, are made long (by Iron pegs) Or shoter, as his mind best fits him, To cast, or cary him that sits him; At the worst hand, hee buyes in Rome His heart: his Hands from Turky come.
Which in Their Blood hees sworne to bath, That are Defenders of the Fayth. All the Garments that hee weares Are the Turnd Skins of Wolues and Beares: And yet (yet then hee bloodiest proues) Hee's sometimes fetherd like to Doues. When hees a Gallant, then hee vailes His Bonnet, plum'd with Peacocks tayles: And those hee weares, because their eyes (Stuck in his front) may serue as Spies: Nor does his Shape keepe still these Fashions, But puts on seuerall Transmutations
When Church or Church-men he misvses, A Rookes or Martins nest hee chooses: Else hee's that prating bird that owles, The (now Vn-trid) bald head of Powles. And is so bold that hee dare presse To'th Eaes of Bishops Pallaces: Where, harsh and vn-religious notes Hee singes against their Reuerend Coates. When faire Court-flowers hee does espy, Hee turnes into a Butter-flye, And striues to beate his filmy wings Against th'Annointed heads of Kings.
Yet when the searching winter comes With the Drone-Bee away he hums; For hee's a Swallow, and is seene, Neuer, but when the woodes are greene; Or if the Maine-land hee forsakes, A Sea-pies body then hee takes, And goes a fishing; All his feeding Being where the Fry has fattest breeding▪ Or (if hee spy a lustie Sayle,) Hee turnes to a Deuowring Whale, Yet at the least blow giuen does roare And beates his boistrous selfe on shoare:
Sometimes hee's neither beast, nor man, Nor Bird, nor a Leuiatan, But an Essentiall diuell, and varies More cullors than the Rainbowe caries, Hee's Brown, hee's Gray, hee's Black, hee's white, Hee's Any thing. A Iesuite. If you desire to behold him in more shapes, I will be∣stow vpon you the picture of Him, drawne like a Trauailer, by the hands of a forrein Painter (in these cullors.) Iesuita. Seductor Seco▪ Gallo Siarius; Anglo Proditor; Imperio Explorator; Daus bero; Ital adulator; Dixi teres or suitam. Hanc Iesuitae effigiem decerpimus Ex quodam Libello De Fratribus Iesuitis, Eorumque discipulis. Nuper edit: per Carū Molinum &c. Impress: Typis Rostochensibus. 1605. Altred by vs into these proportions.
Sweden. Of Him, that subtile threds does weaue,Seductor Sueco. To catch the Polack and the Swee: And of such wydenes would build Rome, That it should hold, All Christendome. France. Of Him, that is a Guizian Leaguer,allo Sicarius. And (for the Church) does Massacre The church it selfe, whilst France does flame, And then cuts Throates to quench the same. England. Of Him,Anglo Prditor. that (whereso'ere hee's bred) Is Enuies heart, and Treasons head, For, England bout the neck hee clips, And kisses. But with Iudas lips.
Germany. Of Him,Imperi Explorator. that vnder Zeales pretence, From Belgia sucks Intelligence, And posts it o're, yet lies in waite, To cleaue the Seauenteene-Headed State. Spayne. Of Him,Das. Iber. that to the Spanish strond Creeping but like a Vagabond, Pues a Court-card, is painted braue, And wins strange tricks by being the Knaue. Italy. Of Him,Ita . that drinkes Italian healthes On seruile knees, and (by base Stelthes) Gets into'a Pope, and waites vpon (As Bawd) the VVhore of Babilon. Behold, I write: Of all these Hims, no Hymnes I write, Can any praise the Iesuite. Non Cum Iesuitis, Qui itis cum Iesuitis.
But because you shall haue him don to the life, here bee other Peeces wrought with the same Pencill. Seductor Sueco. A Sedcer of the Seuian. It is fresh in the memorie of Time, that Sigismond King of Polonia & Suecia, comming to receiue his Right there, after the decease of his father; the Iesuites swarmd about him like Lo∣cuts, working (priuately) in his eare, and (by publick Sermons) in the eares of the Cōmons, for the Vnder∣myning and blowing vp of that Religion which there they termed Lutheran Heresie: and so far durst they venture, that they perswaded Sigismond to be hot in he vtter Extirpation thereof, albeit it should cost the destruction of his Kingdome, because (as they told him) Heen was laid downe to be won by him at that cast. Gallo Sicarius. A Cut-throat to the Frenchman. If you looke vpon that Truculent, Barbarous and Diellish torturing of Frenchmen (by those that spoke no other language than French) in that Their Vniuersall Guizian Massa∣cre, setabroach by Iesuiticall Instruments, and executed by The Holy League, the Iesuite, cannot be angry, to haue that name of Sicarius bestowed vpon him. To shut vp which French Tragedy, what blacke Art did they practize to coniure vp a diuell in the likenesse
of a Frier (Iaques Clement) whom these Exorcists armde to kill Henry the third, the last of Valoys; and now since what Fencing Trickes haue they not deui∣sed to draw blood of this present French King: for playing of which parts, they haue bin so exploded, that they are (Renouato Edicto proscripti) banished out of the Kingdom, are hld to be, & so proclaimed Parri∣cides, and liue in such base reputation, that euen their Grand Signior (the Pope) is halfe ashamde to acknow∣ledge them for his children. Anglo Proditor. A Traytor to the Englishman. The Chronicle of Ti∣burne can witnesse it: A Catalogue of all those Iesuited English, that shot their Romaine darts at the Head of the late Queene of England, would fill a Muster-book. How often did they labour to sowe Sedition in her Dominions, and to sell her Crowne to the Spaniard? To preuent which and the like mischiefes, they haue bin likewise Proscribed, by our Soueraigne King Iames. Imperio Explorator. A Spy to Germany. We need'no more'examples than of those Fugitiue English, that for many yeeres toge∣ther haue liu'de in the Low Countries, practizing by themselues, and (by reason of the short passage be∣tweene them and vs) giuing quick and dangerous Intelligence to their owne Faction here) of any Ro∣maine
Plots against the state of their natiue Country: None being more bloody, nor more thirsting for her ouerthrow, than They. In this Germaine Nest was this Diabolicall, horrid, and most impious late Con∣spiracy hatcht; damnably begotten, miraculously pre∣uented. Dauus Ibero. A crafty Knaue to the Spaniard. Phillip the late King of Spaine might call him so, vpon good experi∣ence. For the Iesuite so infeoffd himselfe (by subtile Insinuation) into those Territories, that (vnder cullor that all his Actions, and practises were onely bent to amplifie the Spanish Kings Greatnesse,) he seemde ra∣ther to bee a Soueraigne then a Subiest. Their chiefe cunning being (out of diuers Nations) to allure dis∣contented yong Gentlemen & others, to fly to them (from their owne countries) with hopes of golden mountaines, whom afterwardes they send abroad, and abuse to their owne destruction.
Italo adulator. A Sicophant to the Italian. In the Sea of Rome do these Italian Pirates hope to get the richest prizes: Needes therefore must the Pope, and his Coledge of Cardinalls, be much pestred with them: and by reason that Om∣nia Venalia Romae, (no penie, no pater-noster there) they must of necessitie flatter and fawne vpon their Italian Maisters, that by the warmth of their wings they may bee fledgde, and get store of feathers on their backs, to fly vp and down, and (like Grashoppers) to deuoure and spoile the fruits and fieldes of Chri∣stendome. Or if they returne home, (which seldome happens) that then for their good seruice, they may be entertained as poore vassailes, to waite vpon their Great Italian Madona (Antichrists daughter) that rides vpon the Beast with seuen Heads.
THE Romish Army. A Papist Couchant,—or the Fawner. A Papist Passant,—or the Plodder. A Papist Passant-Gardant,—or the Spye. A Papist Variant,—or the Chngeling. A Papist Volant,—or the Run-away. A Papist Seminant,—or the Popes Husband∣man. A Papist Saliant,—or the Ambusher. A Papist Rampant,—or the Cutthroat. A Papist Vmbreant,—or the Vnderminer. A Papist Pendant,—or the Hanger-on.
A PAPIST IN ARMS, bearing ten seuerall Sheildes. The First, A Papist Couchant. OR The Fawner. A Papist Couchant is thus shap'de: A man Whose brow doth kisse his knee at euery beck, He weyes his Houres, Words, Lookes, & closely can Creepe into credit, and eschew the Check: And (by his Spaniell-fawning) saue his neck, Hee sleepes with open eyes; his Armes thus part, One to embrace, t'other to Stab your heart. Hee will not argue of Religion, Nor State: (for on his lip his finger lyes) When treason is vnmaskde he will be One Shall first spit in her face. To Temporize Is all his Art: close villany hee buyes, And layes it vp for a eere yeere: Meane time, Hee frets: would pull down Stars, but feares to clime.
A Papist passant, OR The Plodder. A Papist Passant is of other cullor, For hees not nice to let his zeale be showne, And that his works may make his glory fuller, Through ecchoing Mouths (like trumpets) are they blown: He keeps the laws, & twice a yeere is known To sit it' Church, why? for Religion! No: But that gowing safe, he may be let to grow. Hee texts will cite, and wrest: to Church and State Heele giue by-blowes, but sue to giue no bruize; And of the Kings proceedings wildely prate, But warily, that none shall him accuse; Or (if he fall ith Snare) he will abuse Euen his owne Conscience to get forth: forsweare The Pope; his coate heele change 1. times a yeere.
A Papist passant Gardant. OR The Spie. THe Passant Gardant Papist, thus I lym, Hee comes to Court, then to the Presence goes, And (by the warrant of good cloathes) doth swim In greatest streames; and where State-matter flowes, There layes he close his eare, yet dreading blowes Tyes vp his tongue, and getting safe from thence, To Rhemes or Rome sailes his Intelligence. His guilt (at each step) back doth skrew his head▪ He tarts to see a Pursuiuant: and curses The earth that bears a church which doth not sped The Romaine-ensigne. At his brest he nurses A brood of Vipers: and sends out the forces Of all his Wishes, gainst his Prince and State, And shifts oft, hating to Communicate.
A Papist Variant. OR The Changeling. PArty perpale, a Papist Variant, Goes in pide coates, (for, as the Moon he varies) Hees Papist, Puritane, and Protestant, In one Kings raigne. Vnder that wing hee taries That best him couers, and that least miscaries. Hees like an Instrument of sundry strings, Not one in tune, yet any note he sings. When Mary rules, he blowes the Martirs fire, And when her Sister, gainst the Masse hee railes, But when your Royall selfe, was to aspire, To that which was your owne, hee flagd his Sailes, Watching what wind turnd next, to which he vailes His Surly top. But playing many parts, Hee cannot but haue many dangerous hearts.
A Papist Volant, OR The Run-away. A Papist Volant is that Fugitiue, That flies the Realme, and sweares his cōscience sends him, When tis grosse Treason: Better does he thriue At Loayne then in London, for Rome lends him A free tongue there, and for his voice cōmends him, Tho Hell roares through it: after he has flowne All Kingdomes o're, onely hee files his owne. Like to a ball of wilde-fire does he run Frō land to land, his countries same down burning, And Soereignes honor: yet the flames being don, Hees trod out like a Snuffe: hees neuer mourning But at the death of mischiefe: Kingdomes turning Is the maine-tyde he followes; and if warre Wast his own feildes, than he none bloodier are.
A Papist Seminant, OR The Popes Husbandman. A Papist Seminant, springs from the brood, Of th'arrogant Iesuite, and Sowes Seditio in mens hearts▪ dreynes from their blood All pure Allegance; and where Gentry growes Most pliant to be wrought, his Chares he throws: Hee deales with Willowes rather than with Oakes, Bending (with words) the subiect, not with stroakes. A Fencer, yet a coward: for hee teaches Others to kill their Soueraignes, yet hee dares not Venture vpon a King himselfe: hee preaches Close in your eare▪ To cleaue a State▪ he cares not To make his head the wedge: & therefore spares not His own blood, more to shed; proud of this doome, A yburne Traytor is a Saint in Rome.
A Papist Salliant. OR, The Ambusher. A Papist Salliant thus creepes vp: hee's sicke Of Sloth and selfe-opinion, and (being poore) Turnes to a male-contented Catholick; Railes at the State, cause it regards no more Men of his ranck, and vowes hee will steale o're And doe! oh! yet staies still: he sets vpon The Court with Libells: Stabbing it, hees gon. ee loues the Leeshore well, for there he lyes And houers (all vnrigd in Sight) to stay Till ciuill, or vnciuill tempests rize, For then sallies he forth, then is his day: Rapes, robberies, and sackt Cities are his prey; To feede his owne lust, hee'le his father choake, Yet laps all this within Religions Cloake.
A Papist Rampant. OR The Cut-throat. A Papist Rampant is a furious beast▪ Hee sets vpon a King: and holds heauen won To suck the Annointeds blood: the Rampants nest Hatches Inasion: bred at home, they run, To dambd Conspiracies, In which are spun Kings, Queenes, & Princes deaths; & (as with Thunder) Whole Empires at one blow they ride in under. This Beast hath many heads, and hands and feete, Some short, some long (all armde to execute) Vpwards tis like a man, in count'nance sweete, The lower parts weare such a ciuill sute, It seemes Man too, But (puld off) some dispute That tis a Diuell: how-ere this they tell, Where ere it liues, It was begot in Hell.
A Papist Vmbreant. OR The Moldwarp. A Papist Vmbreant (like a Skreech-owle) sits All days vnseen: but when the sorcerous night Spreds her deepe Spells, hee coniures vp his wits, Giuing his soule to Treason▪ hee's a Sprite That deales in Fire-workes▪ Vaults are his delight, Where for his close Traynes, hell does him prefer To be ArchEnginist to Lucifer. His walkes are shades & mines: his thoughts still bea∣ting Vpon a Kingdomes ruine, which he ventures Staking his soule: And whilst the Irons are heating, Damnation drawes twixt him and her Indentures, To which he seales: But ere this hel-hound enters Vpon the Land he couets, See! Gods arme With a weake blow in sunder breakes the Charme.
A Papist Pendant. OR, The Hanger-on. OF those Nine seuerall Coates, when none can it, (For some mislike the making, some the fashiō) This Tenth (both for the stuffe and for his wit, That cutts it forth) is pleasing to our Nation, And thats the Pendant Papis. His vocation Is not to meddle; vp he well is bred, or when he has don ill, he hangs the Head. 1 2 3 He neither Fawnes nor Prates, nor is a Spy, 4 5 6 Changeling, nor Fugitiue, nor Seminary, 7 8 9 Nor Wolfe, nor Lyon, nor Mold-warp: to clime hye And to be proud (for on no ground heele tary) Are all his faults. And though he oft miscary, Yet this good turne hees sure off, when the Rest Are all held Bad, the Pendant is the best. Summa. Of Couchant, Passant, and of Passant-Gardant, Of Variant, Volant, and of Seminant, Of Saliant, Rampant: Vmbreant and Pendant, Summe vp th'Account, the Total thus will fall, Not one good Subiect breathes amongst them All.
The Encounter. AS these Ten Monsters (with the Antique Race Of Gigants) claime a breeding in this Isle, In Lawes, Language, and State, to leaue it base; To turne out Forme: to make Religion vile: To haue Kings Names no more hung on the Fyle Of blest succession: But with fires (from Rome) To rak't vp quite at the Generall Doome. So, Second Brute, with ten stout Combatants, Encounters Those, & (with most god-like Charmes) Vncurles their Snaky Kots, their Eyes so inchants They turne to Stones with wonder: false Alarmes These know and laugh at; & from Lightnings harmes So guard the Tree of Peace, that in her Sunny And silent Shades, Wee feede on milke and hony.
THE SINGLE, P. A Riddle on the single P. THe single P. makes all the Letters grow In goodly Ranks vpon the Christ-crosse-Row: And (by the reuerend, holy Badge it weares,) The Christ-crosse-Row, from giddy Faction cleares, The reason is, this (Honest single) P. Lowly submits to A. B. C. and D. Yet fights in the defence of E. F. G. H. I. (Roial K.) L. M. N. O. and Q. And runnes through FireMarter∣dome. for R. S. T. and V. The Resolution. Single P.-Protestantisme. Christ-crosse-Row-Christendome. A. B. C. & D.-the states of the land as Archbishops, Bishops, Councellors, Dukes, &c. K.—King. Q.—Queene. R.—Religion. S.—State. T.—Truth. V.—You all.
THE PROTESTANT Army. The Nobilitie. The Councell of Estate. The Cleargie. The Iudges of the Land. The Vniuersities. The Martialists. The Merchants. The Mariners. The Husbandmen. The Artificers.
THE PAPIST Encountred. THE PROTESTANT Combatants. The First. Dynastes. OR The Nobleman. THe first goes armde from head to foote in iles O glorious Acestry▪ hee's the CourtIe▪ The Princes, Hee, all others are his Foles, Hee's a rich stone stuck in the Diadem: A graft so wrought into the Royall Stem▪ Alike both suffer: thunder smiing Him, (For nought else can) the Weale does loose a limb. Since he Repblick therefore is his blood, His office is to saue it: to haue eyes Quick, piercing: not to be more great than good: For of that norishing flame (In whose heate lyes A Kingdomes life) Hee's soule: It liues or dyes In him: of that free light when hee's be reauen, ô pittie! then a Star drops out of heauen.
Apolectos. OR Councellor of Estate. THe second Champion, thus abilimented Enters the Lists, her Gorgon-shield, her Speare, And Pallas-Helme,A three be∣ing Emblems of Prouidēce, Wisdome, Fortitude. are his▪ his Arme is extensed O're Seas and Land: the Kingdome with His eare, And His oraculous voice doth speake and heare: Hee holds her vp from sinking, and beates downe All tempests: Counsell best does steere a Crowne. His eyes are (like the Watches of the night) Set to all howers: His thoughts are searching streams, Labouring to cut the shores (vneuen) right▪ And Romish Conspirations, slight as dreames, (Like Moaes discouered by the heau'nly beames,) The Colledg'de Cardinall hates Him▪ and , For This as soone breaks, as Hee weaues the reason.
Antistes. OR, The Bishop. THe third that in Romes face throws braue defice Carries Christs Standard; and to Peters word Drawes Peters word: Angels are his Alliance▪ Kings his nurse-children: at heauens counsell-board Hee tunes his voice vnto so sweete a Chord, Hee winnes mens very soules: and is therefore sent To be the Speaker in Gods Parliament. Hee's the Lands gardner, and doth Schismes supplant To make Religion grow: nor plucks hee hearts Vp by the rootes (as doe theIesuite. .) But (Champion like) throwes his Spiritall dat A Miterd Heads, and those that are their parts▪ TheGospell. . Gos-spell. Holy-spells by Him to Subiects spread, Fasten the Kings Crowne closer to his head.
Dycastes. OR, The Iudg. THe fourth that stands this Quarrel, is more strong In Scarlet then in Stele: looke how the Moone Betweene the day, So Hee twixt Right and Wrong Sits Equall Empire: like the orbed Moone Empires by him swell hye, or fall as soone, For when  ights,  on foot-clothes ide, Al and so left, is like a rauisht Bride. The Regall Chaire would downe be thrown: Religion Take Snctuary: No man durst be god, Nor could be safe being bad: Confusion Would be held : and (as in the The world was couerd) so would all in blood If Iustice eies were closde: No man sleeps, speakes, Nor ates but by Her: Traitors nets, she breakes.
Academicos. OR The Scholler. OVr Academick Warrir next does tread This Ciuil March: with Art strong Arguments Fighting where those Ten Squadrons gather head, Whose Rankes he breaks; cuts off, and circumuents Their Ambushes: yea driues them to their Tents: Till Learnings seauen-fold shield does Truth aduāce, And beates downe Roes vsurping ignorance. Hee's, Honors beautie, and the Statists honor: The Churches piller, and the Lawes exponder: Hee serues (A lack the while) vnder Wants banner, Yet Crozier-ses triue to be his : (Sick parts must faile, when we cu ff the ounder) At Him, They therefore strike: Take  away▪ Men are but painted loame, and gilded clay.
Stratiotes. OR The Souldier. THe Drums & Clarions sound, and now behold Our Souldier; Rampant like, no Vbreat like Bloodily tearing Princes throates for Gold, Or playing the Moale: His sword does fairly strike. Hee talkes with Canons mouthes, and by his pike Measures out Peace (peace is wouen out of warre) Hee's paralelled with Kings; kings, souldiers are. Vpon his head grow Bayes (proofe against Lightning And thundring terrors:) on his heart, a Rock, Which giues to his own Nation, strength, & Height∣ning, To others, Ship-wrack. Hees the waking Cock: The Dlphick Oracle, to which we flock When Hard Things happen: Hee's whē (dangers call) The Courts Guard: Countries ulwark: Cities wall.
Emporos. OR The Merchant. THe Seauenth (in our Decem virate,) one Nation Colleagues with t'other: for the Merchant marrie, Kingdome to Kingdome by Negotiation: And as great volummes shrinke to Cometaries, So in a small Ship, Hee a Country carries, Transporting hence, his Owne, to forren Climes, And bringing al things frō Them, (but their Crimes.) This is that Husbnd Oeonmicall Tha giues a Citie, order, Wealth, and State, And (like a Cedar) growes so faire and Tall, That from Him▪ springs The  Magistrate. "So, little brkes (going on) incorporate "Themselues with iuers, And (So) Riuers can "In time doe serice to the Ocan.
Nautes. OR The Sea-man. NOw spred we all our Sailes: this Champion rides On the Foure Windes. Terror to proud Inuasion: And (from but wodden batlements) deides The braues, the bullets, of the bloodiest Nation, For being at mortall few'd (in deadliest fashion) With Aire and Water, tis no humane charme, Can breake his courage, or his faith disarme. A progresse does Hee take from Realme to Realme, With goodly water-pageants borne before him, The safetie of the Land sits at his Heme, No dāger (Here) can touch, but what runs ore him: But being in heau'ens eye still, It does restore him To liuelier Spirits; to meete death with ease, "If thou wouldst know thy maker, search the Seas.
Arotes. OR The Plough-man. THe Earthes hard-hāded Heire comes next to the field And claims a Kegimēt: He treads on Fres And yet receiues all darts on his tough Shield, (Shot frōWinter. Sommer. Autumne. Spring. Foure Quarters at him,) Blunt he appears But what he wants in Tonge, he payes inCorne. Eares: The oxe and Hee are fellowes; and haue sence Of equall paine, with equall patience. All feedes vpon the labour of his brow, Whilest Hee his own sweate drinkes: is all his glory To see gay Haruest (like as great Lordes bow To Thrones) to bend to Him: hees neuer sory But when his The Eearth. ells a fruitles story: Yet (vnderneath his yoake) this note hee sings, Hees Natures Iourny-man, but workes for Kings.
Technytes. OR, The Artificer. THe Reare-ward last aduances vp, being led By the industrious, thriuing Artizan, The waies of Science needes hee well must tread, For seauen yeares goe to make Him vp a man, And (Then) by all the lawfull steppes hee can, Climes hee to wealth: Enough is His hee vaunts, If tho he hoard not much, hee feele not wants. Hee's th'Arme vnto a Citie: to a Realme The Nervous strings that fortefie the heart: No ough beyond-sea-stormes can ouer-whelme His Loialtie, or make his bosome part To let in Romaine Bandes, tho all their Art Be drawne to cleaue his faith with forked Shafts, Yet hee's not subtile, (But in Handi-crafts.)
The Battaile, AND Retrayte. COnfronted are both Armies (breathing quick And hostile Flames,) The One is puissant, But wilde, and Headles, the false Catholick: Fairely Arrainged comes the Protestant, Squard: Military: Few, but valiant: Led brauely, brauely followed, All Lion like, And yet so spare of blood, They (First) neuer strike. For Mercie beares their Guydon, and does grieue At Fall of any: Should not Iustice stand Close by her, (with The Sword Vindicatiue,) The haught Invader would or'e-run the Land: But (now) Battalions gainst Battalions band: The Aluerado sounds, they Fight, and Fly, Ours is the Feild, Gods is the Victory. FINIS.
