6793 99851296 16567
A lamentable new Ballad vpon the Earle of Essex his death. To the tune of, Essex last goodnight. ALL you that cry, O hone O, hone, come now and sing, O Lord with me, For why our Iewell is from vs gone, the valiant Knight of Chivalry: Of rich and poore beloued was he, in time an honourable Knight: When by our Lawes condemned was he, and lately tooke his last good-night. Count him not like to Campion, (these traiterous men) or Babington, Nor like the Eale of Westmerland, by whom a number were vndone: He neuer yet hurt mothers son▪ his quarrell still maintain'd the right, Which makes the teares my cheekes down run when I thinke on his last good-night. The Portingals can witnesse be. his Dagger at Lisbone gate he flung: And like a Knight of Chivalry, his Chaine vpon the same he hung: Would God that he would thither come, o fetch them both in honor right, Which thing was by his honour done, yet lately tooke his last good-night. The Frenchmen they can testifie, the Towne of Gourney h tooke in, And march'd to Roane immediately. not caring for his foes a pin: With bullets then he pierc'd their skin, and made them flee farre from his sight, He at that time did credit win▪ and now hath tane his last good-night. And stately Cales can witnesse well, euen by his Proclamation right: He did command them all straightly, to haue a care of Infants liues: That none should rauish Maid nor Wife, which was against their order right, Therefore they pray'd for his long life, which lately tooke his last good-night. Would God he had nere Ireland knowne, nor set his feet on Flaunders ground: Then might we well enioy our owne, where now our Jewell will not be found, Which makes our woes still to abound, trickling with salt teares in our sight, To heare his name in our eares to sound, Lord Deverevx tooke his last good-night, Ashwensday on that dismall day, when he came forth of his chamber doore Vpon a Scaffold there he saw. his headsman standing him before, The Nobles all they did deplore, shedding their salt teares in his sight, He said farewell to rich and poore, at his good-morrow and good-night. My Lords, quoth he, you stand but by, to see performnce of the Law, It's I that haue deserued to die, and yeeld my life vnto the blow▪ I haue deseru'd to die▪ I know, but nere against my Countries right, Nor to my Queene was neuer foe▪ vpon my death at my good-night. Farewell Elizabeth my gracious Queene, God blesse thee and thy Councell all: Farewell you Knights of Chivalry, farewell my Souldiers stout and tall, Farewell the Co great and small, into the hands of men I light, My life shall make amends for all, for Essex bids the world good-night. Farewell deare wife and children three, farewell my young and tender son, Comfort your selues, mourne not for me, although your fall be now begun: My time is come the glasse is run comfort your selues in former light, Seeing by my fall you are vndone, your father bids the world good night. Derick, thou knowest, at Cales I sau'd thy life, lost for a Rape there done, Which thou thy selfe canst testifie, thine owne hand three and twenty hung, But now thou seest my life is come, by chance into thy hands I light, Strike out the blow that I may know, thou Essex lou'd at his good-night. When England counted me a Papist, the works of Papists I defie, I nere worshipt Saint, nor Angell in heauen nor to the Virgin Mary I, But to Christ, which for my sinnes did die, trickling with sad teares in his sight, Spreading my armes to God on high, Lord Iesus receiue my soule this night. FINIS. Printed at London For Cuthb Wright.
