8076 99847320 12351
❧ By the Queene. FOrasmuch as within these few dayes there haue been certaine infamous Libels full of malice and falshood spread abroad, and set vp in sundry places about the Citie and Court, tending to se∣dition, and dishonourable interpretations of her Maiesties god∣ly Actions and purposes, and especially inuented of cankred ma∣lice colourably, to the destruction or ruine of some of good esti∣mation and fidelitie to wards her Maiestie, by lewd persons not worthy to enioy the benefit of this her Maiesties quiet gouern∣ment, no more then euill and corrupt limmes, which for lacke of speedie remedic may infect more of the body; The sufferance whereof cannot but breed a further disorder to the good quiet∣nesse of her Maiesties most peaceable gouernment. And because her Maiestie would haue such villanous, treasonable and seditious attempts both repressed and punished, and also would come to some certaintie for the discouering of the Authors thereof, whereby she would not enter into any scruple of suspition of any other manner of person then the of∣fenders or their partners: Therefore her Maiestie willeth, that whosoeuer can, and will discouer the Authors or partners of those Libels, and will open it to her Maiestie, or to some Attendant about her Person, the same shall be rewarded in this sort: If the partie that shall discouer the same be vnder the degree of a Gentleman, he shall haue foorth with fortie pounds; and if he bee a Gentleman, he shall haue one hundred pounds: And if here∣after it shall be prooued, that any person hath been in any wise priuie hereto, and shall not now very shortly after this Proclamation discouer it, the same shall at no time hereafter be thereof pardoned. And furthermore, her Maiestie chargeth all manner of persons that shall hereafter at any time finde any such seditious Billes, to bring the same to the Lord Maior of London, or to some speciall officer of London, or of any other Towne where such shall be found. And if the same shall be found in or about the Court, then to be secretly brought to some of her Maiesties Councellers, or other her faithfull seruants at∣tendant about her Person, vpon paine, that if any bee found remisse herein, then the same to receiue such like punishment as the Author of sedicious Libels ought to doe. For her Ma∣iestie cannot thinke that these things are so much giuen out in respect of any priuate persons as they are in contempt of the present gouernment and proceedings, wherein her Maiestie cannot but find her selfe touched. Giuen at her Maiesties Palace of Westminster, the 26. day of March 1576. in the xviij. yeere of her Maiesties Reigne. God saue the Queene. ❧ Imprinted at London by Richard Iugge, Printer to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
