8162 99853502 18886
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ❧ By the Queene. THe Queenes Maiesty being giuen to vnderstand, that sundry lewde and sedicious bruites haue bene lately spread and caryed abroade in many Shires of the Realme by some vnquiet and factious spirits, who, vnder diuers false and colourable suggestions, put into simple Billettes in writing, & tending to the disturbance of common peace, haue trauayled her good and louing subiects in diuers partes of her sayd Realme, by Huies and cries followed from place to place, with∣out warrant or direction from any Iustice of peace, or name of any speciall Officer resident within the sayde Shires, who in such cases ought to haue bene informed thereof. Albeit her Maiestie doe greatly commende the loue, care and affection of her good subiectes, who haue shewed so great a readinesse to imploy their trauayles vpon this occasion in the respect of her seruice, pretended by such writinges and bruites: yet finding the same to proceede originally from the meere practise of some sedicious instruments, disposed to lay holde vpon any pretexte that may be offred them to trouble the peace of her said Realme, by stirring vp such of their owne humours as are apt to tumult and alteration, Her Maiestie hath thought good to notifie & declare to all her louing subiects, that as shee doth most ly hold the inuentors thereof worthie of extreme punishment, so doth she also condemne the sprea∣ding and carying of the sayd bruites in the next degree, both tending to the disquiet and trouble of her said realme and subiects. And therefore by this her proclamation, her Maiestie doth expressely com∣mand all Lieutenants of Shires, Sherifs, Iustices, and other her Maiesties, Offices and Mini∣sters, both in townes corporate and all other places whatsoeuer, to whome in this case it may apper∣tarne, that they do not onely take present order for the speedie ceassing of all such bruites and rumors, with the hewes and cryes, and the extraordinarie watches growing thereof, within the Countries and circuites vnder their seuerall charges, but also cause forthwith diligent inquirie to bee made of the Authors of the same: and if any such be found, seuerely to punish them as seditious perturbers of the common quiet. And that all Constables hereafter that shall first receiue any such report or charge for making of such hewe and cry, or for setting of such extraordinary watches, take care to stay the first author to be answerable thereto as there shalbe cause, vpon payne of beeing otherwise puni∣shed himselfe, as the first author and inuentor thereof. Giuen at our Manour of Greenewich, the vi. day of of Februarie, 1586. in the nine and twentieth yeere of our raigne. God saue the Queene. Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most ex∣cellent Maiestie.
