A145 12015840 52527
An Abstract of the Treaty of Peace, Concluded between the most Potent and Serene Prince, WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, &c. and the most Potent and Serene Prince, LEWIS the Fourteenth, King of France, &c. at Riswick, September 20. N. S. 1697. 1. THERE shall be a Perpetual Peace and inviolable Friendship be∣tween the most Potent and Serene Prince, William the Third, King of Great Britain, &c. and the most Potent and Serene Prince, Lewis the Fourteenth, King of France, &c. 2. There shall be a Cessation of all Injuries, Violences, and Hostilities, be∣tween the Subjects of the said Princes. 3. There shall be a perpetual Oblivion of all Injuries, Violences, and Hosti∣lities. 4. The Subjects of the said Princes shall have a free Distribution of Justice, that all injuries may be redressed. 5. There shall be a free use of all Commerce, as it was in time of Peace before the Denuciation of the present War. 6. And for the advancement of Commerce and Navigation, it is agreed that Commissioners shall be appointed on both sides, who shall have a full Power to propose and conclude such Articles, as they shall think proper for the advancement of Trade. 7. The most Christian King shall restore to His Majesty of Great Britain all Countries, Islands, Forts, and Colonies, which the English possessed before this present War; and vice versa, the King of Great Britain shall restore to his most Christian Majesty, all Countries, Forts, &c. the French possessed before this present War. 8. All Letters of Mart and Reprisals shall be annulled, and none here after granted, unless Justice be manifestly denied by the Prince whose Subjects the Aggressors are. 9. All things taken within twelve days in the British and North Seas; in six Weeks from thence to the Cape of St. Vincent; within ten Weeks from thence to the Line, and within six Months all the World over, after the Ra∣tification of this present Treaty, shall remain Captures. 10. If any Subject infringes any Particulars of this Treaty, he shall be pu∣nished according to the Laws of Ntions. 11. In case of Rupture, six Months shall be allowed to all Persons to retire with their Effects. 12. The Principality of Orange shall be restored to His Majesty of Great Bri∣tain, according to the Separate Article concluded on the 10th of August, 1678. between his most Christian Majesty and the States General at Nimegun. . All Kings, Princes, and States, shall be comprised within this Treaty within four Months after the Ratifications are exchang'd. 14. And that this Peace may be firm and inviolable, the most Christian King promises for himself and his Successors, that upon no pretence watsoever he will disturb King William the Third, of Great Britain. Whereupon he pledges the Honour, Parole, and Faith of a King, never directly or indirectly, to aid or assist the Enemies of the said King William, and never to encourage or abet any Treason, Conspiracy, and Rebellion, against him the said King William of Great Britain, &c. And to that end his most Christian Majesty promiseth, That he will never assist any Person whatsoever with any Arms, Ammunition, Shipping, or Money, &c. that shall disturb or molest any of the Dominions of him the said King William, &c. London: Printed for Richard Baldwin in Warwick-Lane. 1697.
