A159 13405556 99405
THE ACADEMY OF PLEASURE. Furnished with all kinds of Com∣plementall Letters, Discourses, and Dialogues; with variety of new Songs, Sonets, and witty Inventions. Teaching all sorts of Men, Maids, Wi∣dows, &c. to Speak and Write wittily, and to bear themselves gracefully for the attain∣ing of their desired ends: how to discourse and demean themselves at Feasts and merry-Meetings at home and abroad, in the com∣pany of friends or strangers. How to Retort, Quibble, Jest or Joke, and to return an ingenious Answer upon any occasion whatsoever. Also, A Dictionary of all the hard English words expounded. With a Poeticall Dictionary. With other Conceits very pleasant and delightfull, never before extant. LONDON, Printed for John Stafford at Fleet-bridge, and VVill. Gilbertson in Giltspur-street. 1656.
The Academy of Pleasure. The first Book. A Letter of Courtship to  Mayd. Beauteous Virgin, THose that believe Cupid to be blinde, are (undoubtedly) blinde of all their senses; he could never ayme his Darts so right, nor his so sure if he were not clear-sighted as an Eagle. The last time I saw you he took his stand in your faire eyes, and thence directed an Arrow to my heare, which is now because but one flaming lamp of Love: a Love (bright Virgin) as unstained as thy vertues, and as immaculate as the soule of expi∣ring Martyrs; what plea, then, could you finde should you be summoned to Venu; Barre; if your cruelty bereave him of life, who has no longer to live than your goodnesse shall grant him a Beeing; since, then, your smiles are my heaven, and your frowns my hell, and that you are my Fats, and  or destroy  and can damn or save me, let me know my Doom, that I may
prepare my self either Blisse or Torture; better to fall once, than be ever falling; send me my Sentence (dear Mistresse) as sperdily as may be, since the worst that can happen will be the highest happinesse, Which is to die, Your Martyr. SONG I. The languishing Lover. [Tune is, When Love with unconfined wings.] 1. WHen first my eyes perus'd thy parts, (Thou best of woman-kinde) Love drew his bow and thril'd his darts, Into my wounded minde. The cruell Archer emptied all His Quiver in my brest, And now does triumph in my fall, While I lie slain jest. 2. I burne in immateriall fire Such as the Ghosts below Doe bathe in, yet doe ne'r expire; Come Thames, or silver Poe, And quench these never-sading gleams That scorch my panting heart, Or else receive me to your streams, That Life and Love may part.
A complemental Discourse between a young Man and a Maide the first time of their meeting. He. SWeet Lady, I was never happy till this mi∣nute, nor ever had cause to thinke my selfe one of Fortunes Favourites till now; when I have the felicity to behold a beauty so matchlesse as yours. If the word [Stranger] doe not fortifie your brest with flint, I shall have hope that the humble pro∣stration of a loyall loving heart will not hang clouds on that heavenly face. She. I Perceive (Sir) you are well skill'd in Court∣ship, and know how to rank and file your com∣plements; but I wonder what you should see in me that might incourage you to so hold a confidence to talke of Love and Loyalty; You have not known me (Sir.) He. No Lady; I have lived bitherto in a darke corner of the world, my Hemisphere has en∣joyed no Sun; some duskish false and foolish fires I have seen, but now I behold the true Venus in her full brightnesse: you may (perhaps) censure of Vanity, and rank me with these that take a pride to manifest what Masters of Wit they are, while they
glut the ears of their Auditors with oylie Phrases, and varnished Discourses; but could you behold my heart, you would there finde a reality equal to any of the Ages past, when Love was not linked to sinister ends. She. SIR, you might be pleased to preserve your Courtship for Her, you either are, or may be moe intimate with, than you are ever like to be with me; You much mistake my temper (Sir.) I must have ample experience of that man; vir∣tue, whom I afford so much as a look: there are those (no doubt) that will be proud to receive your Rhetorical Addresses; but my selfe am of a clean contrary inclination, who if I cannot beg your si∣lence, as to discourses of this nature, shall be com∣pelled to quit your company. SONG II. The Wanton. [Tune is, Fair idelia tempt no more] 1. STay, (my dear Eliza) stay, Aurora yet has not usher'd in the day, Lie still my dearest, What is't thou fearest? Let's kisse, and take our fill of Venus play: Hark; what  doe greet our ears? (While the Doves Sigh our Loves) Tis the musick of the spheres:
Then let's mingle soules, And mount above the Poles, Those active swees Between the shees, Loves highest fame inroles. 2. This great world must peopled be, And therefore Mayd doe sin most monstrously; Hang tedious wong, He must be doing That means to boast a numerous Progeny. Come then (Dearest) let's advance, Never fear This career Will either break or split my lance; Sweet, this is no more Than thy mother did before, Love's sacred Rices Require these nights Forty times ore and ore. 3. While we thus in love combine, (I the stout Oalre, and thou the tender Vine) See where the graces Smile in our faces, And hand in hand in  rro joyn. Jove, I doe not envy thee, While I sip From her lip Nect farre more brisk and free, Than that which hum's thy head, Fill'd out by Gayed, In her all pleasures, And all treasures Are summ'd and centered.
A queint Jeer. SIR, THose cleathes fit you as well as if they were made for you; sure you can conjure, and have the Devil for your Tayler: you could never have such a peculiar elegancy of habit else, a method that no man in Town is master of, your spruce finified self excepted, you doe not use to starch your beard (Sir) doe you? The Retort. Troth Sir, THese poor ornaments found creation, as the world did, when it lay like a lump; I spake but the word and all was fitted to my hand; but to tell you the Fashioners name. I confesse I cannot, onely by circumstances, (I mean, comparing his person with yours) I guesse him to be that very thing that got you, you are his very picture Ile as∣sure you Sir, and may passe for the same slack∣sinew'd Tayler were your hayre more gray, and cloathes more gawdie. A wanton Letter to a witty Gentlewo∣man, desiring her company such a day at such a place. LADY, I Know I have made my selfe but the Ladder that your wit must mount upon by this Ad∣dresse,
but I shall beseech you (for credit of your own clemency) to whip me onely with Rods and not with Scorpions: I have had experience of the tart∣nesse of your temper, and doe perfectly know that six more such as your self are able to jeer a horse to death but I shall hope my businesse will not deserve your anger while I onely beg your company tomor∣row at two after Noon at Mr. Gimes his house, where Tom Shallow and my self are resolved to sacrifice as much Sack as would turn a Mill, to Mirth and Beauty; you must be our Venus, the Oblation will not off else: your incomparable beau∣ty must irradiate the Templ where we mean to Tipple, our Devotion will be as cold as Scythian Ice else. Thus humbly and earnestly begging that you would not faile, I kisse your lilly hands, and remain, Your eternal Servant: The Answer. SIR, YOu are excellently well skill'd in Metaphors I perceive, a shrewd Similist believe me, to compare your selfe to a Ladder; doe you thinke I shall ever take the Hangmans Trade out of his hands, and throw men off the Ladder for thirteen∣pence-halfpenys? but had your wit a visible body, I am confident it were more easie to strangle a Cat at Tyburne, than to rob that lythe light thing of
life with a Rope; doe you think that I use to string my whips with Scorpions upon such triviall occa¦sions? a besome of birch will be sufficient to sweep away Legions of such Lapwings as those, who tra∣vail'd with their Tenements upon their heads. Six such as my self you say are able to jeer a Horse to death; but I must tell you, you are but an Asse for saying so: for my conversation never extended to a Dialogue with a Dromedary. What a beastly Quibble was this? to come to the matter, you will sacrifice as much Sack as would turn a Mill. Oh rare! You mean that Windemill in your brain, which would be of no use if it were a Watermill: for there is not so much moisture in that pitifull pan of thine as would bdw a clout: You beg that I will afford you my company to morrow, two after Noon, and you prattle of Temples, Oblations, and Irradiations; will you never leave your Eloquence till the Carre-men curse you; but I shall be with you, if it be but for Mr. Shallows sake, Till when and ever Yours verily.
SONG III. A Dialogue between two Lovers. [Tune is, Phil Porters Rant] He. 1. VVHy dearest Mol, art thou so coy? Why dost thou flie my love? Fie, fie! a maydenhead is but a toy, As thou wilt shortly prove: Come then my Darling, Cease further parling, We spend the time in vain; Accept that duty I owe thy beauty, Over and o're again. She. 2. OFie upon dissembling men! That will cog, and swear, and lie Till they attain their ends; but then Bid the Lasse they lov'd God b'uy: Ere she's a mother They'r for another, Never true to one; Therefore Ile take care Who has my were, And all allurements sh in. He. 3. What though some perjur'd knave (my Dear) Has sacred Love abus'd, Shall he that doth most truly swear For his sake be accus'd:
By all things binding, And worth the minding, By thy beauty bright, (With words unfeigned, And thoughts unstained) Thou art my souls delight. She. 4. Here, then, we'll knit those holy bands That joyne two hearts in one, God Cupids selfe doth guide our bands, No more Ile lie alone: Thou (Sweet) shall sway me, I will obey thee Till Death shall drive us hence: Then (in our shrouds) Wee'l meet i'th clouds, And new-found joyes commence. A Flout. Directed to a Mayd, or Widow, more proud than proper, and more coy than comely. FAire Lady, methinks you are not Mistresse of so much beauty as might make you proud; a Gentlewoman of ginger-bread (for ought I know) may make a better Bedfellow; what are good cloaths when the face is wanting, but like small beer in a silver goblet; a meer Mercers Lucifer, but not a Rag of Natures Wardrobe about you.
Her Retort. SIR, YOu are a strange Gentleman, and something desperate to talke thus to one you know not; my name was never yet served up at Ordinaries, nor belcht abroad in Taverns by any such Royster as you seem to be; I should think my self the most unhappy of all my sex, if there were any thing in me that might merit the respect of such a Satyr as your self. SONG IV. [Tune is, There were three Cheaters.] 1. COme Francelia, come away, Why doe we waste so bright a day? Let's make haste to yonder grove, There I'le give th' earnest of my love, On a bed of Daysies thee Ile throw, Every pretty Virgin should doe so. 2. Then we'll sit and sport a while, And with tal the time beguile, Till bright Sol begin to shrink As if he meant the Sea to drink: Then unto Isngton wee'l go, Every pretty Virgin should doe so. 3. There with cares and cream wee'l feast, While my Host does break a Jest.
Nut-brown Ale that cures the weak, And can compell a Cat to speak: There will we laugh, and kisse, and wooe, Every pretty Virgin should doe so. 4. And when the envious Night comes on Over the Fields we will begon, There I le give thee as we passe A Gown as green as is the grasse, For which thou shalt owe me a kisse or two, Every pretty Virgin should doe so. 5. Then towards London (though't be late) Wee'l come and view thy Fathers gate, Where (Oh sad Face!) that I must leave thee, Thy Fathers servants will receive thee: But we shall meet again I trow, Every pretty Virgin should doe so. 6. Thus having parted with my Sweet, I like a shadow passe the street; For why? my soul is left with thee, Keep it (Francelia) charily: Or fix it fast on Cupids Bow, Every pretty Virgin should doe so. The Lover Courts the Mayd to mediate for him to her Mistresse. Lover. SWeet Sarah, I know your kindnesse can excuse my boldnesse, especially when you have put on,
this Toy upon your finger; nay, by Venus, you shall not refuse it: I know you hold your Mistress in your power, you are her Counsellour, and she puts not a Flea to death without your privity: will you indeer me to her esteem, and procure me such addresses as may be fit and opportune? you know my meaning. Mayd. TRuly (though you may not know it) I have al∣ready mentioned your praises, and with some vehemency; may, and which is more, she lends a listening ear to all that she hears concerning you; I could tell you something. Sir, that would rejoice you: let it suffice, she never hears your name but her colour comes and goes; to my knowledge, she has a good opinion of your person and your parts. Lover. But is it possible (my dear Sarah) that we may converse by Starre or Moon-light? Mayd. I dare promise you, Sir, but meaning no harm Sir. Lover. Doe but accomplish what thou hast spoken, and command me, though to the losse of fame, of trea∣sures, and of life; nay, chain me as thy slave. So farewell sweet Sarah. Mayd. Your faithfull Servant, Sir.
SONG V. A Dialogue between two Lovers. [Tune is, Fain I would if I could, &c.] He. 1. I Would ain Once again Fold thee in my armes, Why shouldst thou shun What we have done, Ere now on equall terms? Can love that's grounded die? Why art thou then so shie? Come, prithee let me try, And put on all thy charms. She. 2. While you were My onely Dear, I car'd for none but you; Tis your own fault Has made the halt, You false, shall I prove true? You first did break the Truce By offering Love abuse, Nor can you finde excuse, Therefore (good Sir) adiew. He. 3. Did never none But I alone Suy Loves snowy vest? You'l finde there's more By many a score, Like me, have sinn'd in jest, You onely I preferre, Although  urted her; Your name, alone, I wear, Lodg'd in a loyall brest.
She. 4. Custome and art Has taught your heart How to dissemble finely, Your every thought Is worse than nought, Yet you can prate divinely, But Ile believe no more, One perjur'd ore and ore: Go, get you to your W— Sleep on in sin, supinely. He. 5. By all that can Oblige a man, I swear (my dearest Dear) My future love Shall fully prove, I move in virtues sphere. I loathe what I have done, And shall such Syrens shun Thou all my heart hast won, And shalt sit Regent there. She. 6. The love that I Did really Professe to you of late, So swayes my sense I want a Fence To keep out Love and Fate. Look down ye heavenly powers On this new league of ours From your immortal Towers— —Let's kisse and supplicate.
A Letter from some Gentlemans Creature, to a poor (but beauteous) Gentlewoman, &c. Fair Mistresse, THough I am not so wise to know how you will palliate my proposall, yet probability bids me believe you will not be angry with him that has projected a way for your profit: I saw you in a place the other day, and could not but pity you; and withall, curse these squint ey'd Times; that expose so much beauty as you are mistresse of to so extreme penury: I know you doe not goe so poor on purpose to manifeft your modefty, so that by you I perceive that glorious births (such as I am con∣fident yours is) are made infamous by rags, and base births are made glorious by gorgeous appa∣rell: if you shall please to hearken to my advice. I shall prescribe you a way how to become the Mi∣ftress of a better fortune than at present you are, I have a Master Squire D. by name, that will make you his Danae, and court you, like another Jupiter in a golden shower, provided you will but old up your lap to receive it: doe not five hundred in this Towne thinke you (though with worse faces than yours) doe worse than this? no woman that bears a brave minde will refuse any thing that is good. Virtue (i this Age of ours) will not feed you; or loathe you. Thus desiring your serious and sudden Answer by this Bearer, I commit you to your pro∣table thoughts, and remain Your devoted Servant.
The Answer. Sir, BUt that I would not bring my own name in question, I would proclaim to the world what a five perswasive Pimp you are; but Sir, you ought to know that I had rather lodge under a poor thatcht Roose with honesty, than under carved Seelings as a Prostitute: I know the price of Ills too well, and what th confusions are in whom they inhabit; how soon Women are won to their ruine, and for a minutes pleasure eternally undoe themselves; though I am poor my honour is pretious, and it is a Devils consequent, that because we are wanting, therefore we must be wicked. I cannot be carried away with a cast of manchets, a bottle of wine, and a custard: no, nor with a sattin gown. musick, coaches, and midnight revels: you have a leaprous soule whoever you are, and deserve the gallows more than a murtherer, but I shall remember your name and trade and tell the world accordingly. So wishing you a more honest heart, together with a more manly imployment, I commit you to your crimes, And am, &c.
One Friend ingratiates another into the acquaintance of a third, &c. 1. Friend. Sir, Let me prefer this Gentleman unto your know∣ledge, he will deserve your notice. 2. Friend. I Thank you dear Sir, no friend of your choice can deserve lesse. 1. Friend. Sir, I shall thank you for any friendship shown to him,  if it were done to my selfe. 2. Friend. You may command me any thing. Sir, your humble servant: give me your hand. It is not my manner to use much Courtship▪ but I will proise to be friend you in all things that are in my power, and perform it too, Sir. 3. Friend. Sir, I Shall be happy to call my selfe, Your humblest Creature: your kinde proffer claims a just power over my belief.
SONG VI. The willing Prisoner. [Tune is, Bow Bells.] 1. VVHen first my heart Felt Cupids dart, I ftrove (but all in vain) its force to break; The blinde God laugh'd And sent a shaft To second t'other, thinking 'twas too weak; Then to earth I sell, All mortals bow to mighty love, & his most poent spell. Now am I the Victors prize, Being shickell'd with gold-crisped wires, A slave unto two Sun-like eyes Burnt up with invisible fires. At once I am bound, and yet free too. Mortal and immortal at once; I'm healthy and sound to see to, Yet sicknesse has seized my bones. 2. Oh gentle God! Take off thy rod, I yeild, and row to serve thee all my daies; Temples He build, And offerings yeild, Penning peculiar Hymns unto thy praise; But be pleas'd great power To send one Arrow tipt with gold from thy fair mothers bower
That may wound my Amadine, Who's deaf unto all my laments, Pierce her heart like unto mine Untill the stern Goddesse relents: So shall I sing thv glory, And mention thy praises each day, While those that doe hear my story Shall stoop to thy soveraign sway. 3. Why Cupid, why Dust: hou not try To tempt some Poet to restore thy eyes? And with thy nature To stretch thy statute, Who art the strongest of the Deities. Has not Jove by thee Been thrown from heaven to earth to court mortality? To behold thee Phoehm turns His coach in his fullest carere; Neptune in the water burns, And Pluto is wounded with fear: All creatures doe cringe to thy Quiver, Beasts, Birds, and what Theris contains, Who art the Olympical Driver; No mortall can flie from thy trains. 4. Then let us twine Sweet Amadine, Platonick Lovers we at first will seem, But when that dies Wee'l wantonize, 'Tis active love alone, that's worth esteem:
Wee'l contract our blisse Those other sweets that should wait on the tincture of a kisse. Then shall eithers joyes increase, Renewing their youth with the day, When my flames thou shalt appease, And take this hot humour away. Then like to Saints expiring Wee'l breathe our souls in each other, And having gain'd strength by retiring, Ile make thee (my dearest) a Mother. To a Rivall. A complementall, yet threatning Letter. SIR, CAnnot your friend purchase a little fire to thaw his appetite by but must you that have been daily sing'd in the flame, be as greedy to be∣guile him of it: how can this appear other than a piece of malice? if I indure this, you may eare—bore me for your slave, but you shal find my temper not so tam as (perhaps) you imagine; for, since you neither savour of good breeding, nor bringing up, I am resolved to slice your hamstrings but I will make you show mannerly; my fire is not so hot that I need a screen before it, 'tis but newly kind∣led; yet if it were risen to a flame, I should not suffer my best friend to stand before me: You are an intelligent man, and I need say no more, but that I am, (If you  fie) Your true Friend.
The Answer. SIR, I Am sorry that you will needs ingrosse Hell to your self; Heaven forbid that you should not suffer a stranger to come in, the Devil himselfe is not so unmannerly: You thinke now, that I will beg an office there before you, and keep you out. Now God forgive you for your huge mistake. I am none of those guilded flies that will light upon such strange flesh; I may use Courtship, or so, but dare not thrust my hand into another mans fire: I have no minde to surfeit away my name and state in swinish riots, sleep away my youth, and awake a grey-bearded Beggar. Take your Toy to your self (Sir) never doubt that I shall attempt to supplant you, not but that if I had a will I durst stand your fury were you armed with thunder, and could manage an Oake like a Bull-rush. Thus Sir, I hope I have given you a plenary satisfaction as to your Scolopendra, you shall finde me upon all scores at your own appointment either for sincere friendship, or utter enmity, And alwaies, &c.
A short Courtship. A Dialogue between two Lovers. She. TRuly Sir, you think your self much a Master of my modesty, you would never give me such continuall cause to blush else; I could finde courage (I am confident) to chide you for it, but that I would not administer any cause that might justifie your departure from me. Where I have hope my prayers and innocence shall detain you till the full consummation of our loves. He. I Confesse I have more of Mars than Minerva in me, I never suckt the ayre of France, and therefore you must not expect fine language from me; yet I can tell you (with truth for warrant) that he that hopes for better felicity in the other world, than what I injoy in your blest society, must fast, pray, and live very severely to attain it. She. Sir, I perceive that you willingly mistake, you make me proud with your similitude, but whilst that I gain by it, your inference is at a losse; but this is because you know you have as great a priviledge to injure me as to abuse your self.
He. Shall I be heard then when I speak, and be listned unto chearfully, that so I may recover my sick hopes by degrees? She. I know you cannot lose your virtue (Sir) and then you may assure your selfe my courtesies will never fail; if I should promise you more, your selfe would deem me too pdigall of that which in noble∣nesse you cannot recive. SONG VII. The forsaken Lover. [Tune is, Frankin  ed away] 1. SInce then thy vowes (false Mayd) Are blown to ayre, And my poor heart betray'd to sad despaire; Within some wildernesse I will my griefs expsse, And thy false-heartednesse, On cruell faire! 2. Have I not grav'd thy love On ev tree In yonder verdant Grove, Though false to me: Was not a solemn oath Plighted betwxt us both? Thou thy faith, and I my troth, Reall to be.
3. Some gloomie Nooke Ile finde, Some balefull Glade Where neither u nor Winde Ere entrance made: There will I curse that Fate Gave me so false a Mate, Then thou'l repent too late (Dsoyall Mayd.) 4. Wilde fruits Ile make my meat, And drink the spring, The earth shall be my seat, For covering, Ile have the Scarry-skie My corps to cancpie, Till my soule from me flie To heavens King. 5. No Grave doe I desire, Or Obsequies, No Groans or Funerall fire, No warry eyes: The courteous Red-brest, e With leaves will cover me, And sing my legie In Ruhfull wise. 6. But when I soul-lesse am Ile visit thee, Thou most obdurate Dame, Whose cruelty Has slain the truest heart, Ere pierc'd by Cupids dart, Not Death my love shall part, Nor Destiny.
A Letter from one crafty Citizen to ano∣ther concerning a fine businsse. Mr. L. I Have a taske worthy the pregnancy of your spi∣rit, an exercise for your pointed wits (wondrous in a Citizen) to worke upon; give me a man that even out of his recreations can cull advantages, that dives into seasons, and never walkes but thinks of something tending to his profit: know then I but lately made a journey into Sussex, where I perused a fair Lordship belonging to one Mr. G. his Father, but newly dead, and himselfe now in Town, and come on purpose hither to learn the fashions of London; he is already become ac∣quainted with some Hectors of note, resorts to Gaming aswell as Bawdy-Houses: this young N∣vice lately bought some cloath of me, and my Wife being in the shop he tooke an occasion to court her, and finding (as I had strictly injoyned her) that he was not scorned, but rather courted both by her self and me, he every day visits my house, and I thinke will one day drown us all with good Sherry, in re∣ward whereof, I am resolved to murther his E∣state, and sti his Right; there are means and wayes enough to hook in such Gentry: you shall come acquainted with him, and while he is busie about my Wife, I will be as busie about his Lands.
To be a Cuckold is but for one life, When Land remains to me, my Heir, or Wife. I will ingratiate you into his company, take sure notice of him, he is fresh and free, shift your selfe speedily int he shape of a Gallant, Ile swell your purse with Angels, keep foot by foot with him, outdare his expences, flatter Dice and Brothell to him, give him a sweet tast of sensuality, train him to every wastfull sinne that he may quickly need health, but especially money. Ravish him with a Dame or two, be his Bawd for once. I will be your forever. Come to me anon in the Evening when we will conferre together about this weighty busi∣nesse, till when and ever Yours all over, &c. Exquisite Nonsense. LIke to a Church with thirty Chimneys in't Or like the entrails of a Cabbage Min Or like a Childe born both with Teeth and Beard Or like the green-blew Garter of a Lord Or like a Mayd with Childe that nere knew Man Or like the dancing of a Dripping-pan Or like a Man that Sings without a Tongue Or like two Adamants together clung Such, such is he that never had a Mother Ye boasts two Sisters and a younger Brother.
He. Dear Mistresse, WHy will you loss so much time? those Lil∣lies and Roses that Nature has planted in your blooming Cheek will one day fade and wi∣ther, your odour and your pretious Colour must yeild to time. She. THe losse will not be much mourn'd for Sir, since it will very hardly be discerned. He. Sweetest, you remove your understanding a great distance from my words, and make that of no use which tends to perswade you to a present injoy∣ment of this pleasant treasure, while it lasts; why are you still inclosed like an Anchoresse, and why doth your nicety barre your chamber door, when if the Priest were but payd for a few ceremonious words, I might be licensed to your bed and your bosome too. She. Our marriage Sir, may promise all you can ima∣gine, but till then you must give me leave not to admit of such opportunities, as may give breath to ill reports. He. Nay, be not angry (my Dearest) nor censure any thing I have spoken with an unkinde belief; heare but my vowes.
She. Not now Sir, you have a greater power to raise my sorrow than my choller. He. Yet please to remember, that I have your heart, by a sacred plight, our wedding day is not now farre off. She. I shall never finde the way to break my faith, but till that hour you talke of is come, I shall desire that our converse may be more remote; you know how liable Lovers are to the lash of lewd tongues. A Complement. One taking acquaintance of another, as his friends friend. 1 Gent. I am bold to salute you Sir, you know not Mr. S. 2 Gent. Yes indeed Sir, most entirely well; he is a Gentleman I am much obliged to for many favours: He is second to my bo∣some. 1 Gent. I shall keep Christmasse with him, where your Health shall undoubtedly be re∣membred: I would sue for your name Sir.
2 Gent. Your suit shall and in one Term Sir, my name is B. 1 Gent. Kinde Mr. B. your deare acquaintance, I must needs present you with a glasse of sack. 2 Gent. Sir, Your servant; I shall retalliate your love. SONG VIII. The contemplative Lover. [Tune is, She lay all naked in her bed.] 1. UPon her couch Marina lay, A thousand Cupids by her, Like new-falne snow melting away While I stood wondring nigh her; The baulmy incense of her breath Unto the rooffe ascended, Able to drive away grim Death With all his Train attended. 2. Her flesh more pure, more white, more soft Than skins of Etmins are, Before by surly Hunters caught In a delusive snare; Chacte as the rare Arabian Bird That wants a Sex to wooe, O grief for which I want a word, She ne're yet learn'd to doe.
3. O that, that ice at length would melt That friezes up her veines, That as she's seen she might be felt, And knew-Lovers pains: Poor pottage Flowers shut up their leaves When Sol drives to the West, But Roses the Night-Dew receive, As that which pleases best. 4. O open those celestiall eyes That doe enlighten mine, Yet stay, their splendour will surprize, And scorith me wih their shine: Her fragrant breath doth claim that power By odoriferous art, It will transform me to a Flower Fashioned like a Heart. A Friend comforts a Widow, who weeps for the death of her Husband. Friend. Save you sweet Widow, I suffer for your heavinesse. Widow. O Sir, I have lost the dearest Husband that ever woman did injoy. Friend. Yet let me tell you Widow, if all tongues
speak truth he did not use you so well as a man ought. Widow. Nay, that's true indeed, he never used me so well as a woman might have been used, that's certain. Introth it has been our greatest falling out, and though it be the part of a Widow to shew her selfe a woman for her Husbands death, yet when I remember all his unkindnesse. I cannot weep a stroak, and therefore wise∣ly did a great Widow in this Land com∣fort up another: Go too (quoth she) leave blubbering, thou thinkest upon thy Husbands good parts when thou sheedest teares, doe but remember how often he has layn from thee, and how many haughty slppery turns he has done thee, and thou wilt never weep for him I warrant the. You would not thinke how this counsell as wrought upon me, so that I cannot spend one tear now if you would give me never so much. Friend. Why I count you the wiser Widow, it shewes you have discretion, when you can check your passion; Farewell sweet Wi∣dow, may your threshold gran with the weight of approaching Lovers like Hops or Harlots.
Widow. How doe you mean? why doe you couple them? Friend. O very aptly, for as the Hop well boyled will make a man not stand upon his legs, so the Harlot in time will leave a man no legs to stand upon. Widow. You are a merry Gentleman; will you please to walke in and take what a Wi∣dows solitary Mansion shall exhibit. Friend. Not now Widow: I must into London with all speed: another time I will come and dwell with you for two houres, so farewell blyth Widow. Widow. Adiew sweet Sir. A Letter from a smug Youth to a lively Lasse. Sweet Thomazin, IF your favour doe not pay my Ransome, I vow I must continue a Captive till death, though one comfort will be (in case you deny your ayde) my life will be of no lasting dte, your lookes have wounded me, and will kill me if Quarter be not given; but you are no Amazonian Lady to put n steely armes and manage the sword and shield, though your head be hiden in a cambrick helmet, and therefore I shall hope that the softnesse of your
oule will not suffer you to become my Murthe∣resse: you are my Venus, make me your Anchy∣es, my souls life and light. I protest by all things sacred that my love to you is of such ardency, that men that are newly listed in some black conspiracy that are in despair, or (which is worst of all) in want, doe injoy more quiet sleeps than I doe. Your Idea is alwaies before me; to multiply your prai∣ses I know would rather win your anger than your applause, though I would say (with immaculate truth for warrant) that you are fairer then Hebe, wiser than Pallas, and more continent than Pene∣lope, it is my unhappinesse to know that a creature o such exquisite perfection live, and yet not to know whether my loyall service may finde accepta∣tion; you are the true Venus, (Lady) make me your Priest, the office will become me. However (deare Cherubine) let me not faile of an Answer by this Bearer since I can live no longer then you shall allow me to call my self, Your voted Votary.
Her Answer. Sir, THe little experience I have hither to had of you commands me to esteem you no lesse than a friend to vertue, but you doe ill to talke so pas∣sionately, and thinke so coolely, you men can play the Proteu at pleasure, and (with the Chameli∣n) thange your selves according to the colour you look on, be (seeming) Reallists here, and palpable Dissemblers in another place; this day deveut A∣mori, to morrow sullen Stoicks; yet will I thank you for that love you make me believe you beare towards me, and what ever your heart is I shall not blush to tell you that I dare meet your love halfe way, provided it be honourable, and not glew'd to sinisler cogitations: this Sir, you may believe and accordingly determine of me, who am Yours in all civill respects, &c. Two Lovers complement at parting. He. LEt me containe thee in my armes yet a little longer. She. I Would stay, dearest G but you know what a severe hand my Father holds over me, if he should know we were together, it were as much as my liberty is worth.
He. How sad and dismall does the farewell of true Lovers sound, why should my Destinies deny me thy injoyment, when shall we meet again? She. To morrow night at Mistress C. her house, Ile steale forth in the Evening, my absence will be but short, consider that, which will make our next meeting the more sweet and musicall. He. Thou pretious Darling of my heart; doe not we two part like Birds, who when they see that the Sun forsakes the world, lay their little pensive heads beneath their wings, as if they would ease that weight which is added to their grief by his de∣parture? She. But when they see that bright perpetuall Travailer to return, they start up and sing their gratitude——Faile not to morrow night. He. Bid me to shun poyson, or not to refuse heaven were a Messenger sent from thence on pur∣pose to proffer it me, one kisse and then farewell.
SONG IX. The Ravished Lover. [Tune is,] Tell me ye wandring spirits of the ayre. 1. TEll me ye Angels of the highest sphere, Have you not seen my faire Larissa there? Has not great Jove to make his blise more great Ravisht my Love unto his starry seat? If that a brighter than his Spouse you see, Or Venus self, or Venus self believe it, that is she: 2. Search from the East unto the weeping West, And plunder Flora of her flowry vest, Search Rheas store, and Thets wealthy womb, Ravish the Web from off Arcnes loome, If you one fairer farre than Cynthia see, O Hebe's self, or Hebe's self believe it, that is she. 3. When she was born old Saturns mighty Son Summon'd the Gods, who met him every one, Meaning to make a new Panor, he Himself thus spake to every Deitie; Bestow (quoth he) on this rae silver Dove, Each somthing that may make her more than Queen of Love 4. This said, wing'd Mercury bestow'd his wit, Phoebus his skill, choice Songs and Odes to fit, Venus resign'd her beauties ('gainst her will) But Paas freely did her sweets instill; Juo her state, and Jove to crown them all, Confirm'd, confirm'd her the sole glory of this earthly Ball.
5. Let then no rude, prophane, or Dare seize that Temple where her Altars stand drown'd in the sea. Lest that he   what Ax found of ore, When he disgrac'd Minerv's saced Lore, Her power is equall, if not farre beyond, She can both heaven, she can both heaven and earth, and seas command. 6. Let none be Priest unto thy hallow'd Shrine, But I (dear Goddesse) hug no Love but mine, So shall thy name not fear the teeth of Time, Thy lasting Fame being guarded by my Rime. And when together unto heaven we go, There but one quarter, there but one quarter, thou shalt finde it so. James an Apprentice, with Jane his Ma∣sters Daughter in the darke. Jane. I swear James I will wake my Father and Mother if you offer these rue tricks; I wonder how the candle went out. James. Sweet Mistresse Jane, be not angry, I scorn to offer you any incivility but I hope you will not be angry if I say I love you. Jane. Love me little and love me long, you are short of your time James; four years yet to serve, think on that James. James. I could serve four hundred years methinks had I but hope to win your love at last, the
of you dispells all sad thoughts , and I am as free as the Ayre I breath in, while I can frequently gaze on that celestiall face of yours. Jane. You have an English Expositor in your box James, and therefore I doe not wonder that you talke so fluently: besides, you write Verses now and then, I liked those wondrous well that you made of our boar-Cat that fell into the House-of∣office. James. I made one Copie to day at the request of a new married man, you know him I am sure Mistresse Jane, T. S. the Millener by the Stocks. Jane. Let me hear them good James, he that puts a snaffle of Verses into my mouth may lead me  where he list, I mean still in the way of honesty James. James. I know that Mistresse Jane, the Verses are these: A modest Wife is such a jewell, Every Goldsmith cannot show it; He that's honest and not cruell Is the likeliest man to owe i. How doe you like them Mistresse Jane? Jane. Now by my Maydenhead exceeding well; God bodykins we are undone: my Fa∣ther knocks I swear.
James. One kisse deare Mistresse Jane. Jane. Take halfe a dozen but make no delay, you know my Father is a hasty man. A Letter to a Friend, desiring he would enter into Bond with him. My noble friend, THe cordiall love which upon all occasions you have manifested, obliges me to think, that I shall not finde you backward in a businesse that so much concerns me: my occasions at this time are unspeakably pressing, so that if I doe not procure an hundred pounds by to morrow this time, my credit will receive a mortall wound, and my repu∣tation be stabbed to the heart, you are a man whose estimation (and that worthily) is high in the hearts of all men, and whose very word were sufficient (though I should not suffer it did you preffer it) without bond or obligation to furnish me with such a summe, I shall onely desire your name with mine, and may Hell take me if I faile in the Premisses, thus begging your positive Answer by this Bearer, I rest and remain, Yours infinitely obliged.
The Answer. Worthy friend, YOu were pleased to mention a matter in your last Epistle, which I protest by all things sa∣cred I would not meddle withall were it for the Redemption of my Heir out of the Turks Galleys, enter into bond; I would as soon (with Empedo∣cles) leap into Aetna, marke but this Note and you will not much blame my aversenesse; he that enters into Bond ought to imagine he Christens a Childe, and takes the Charge of it too: for as the one the bigger it growes the more cost it requires, so the other the longer it lies the more charge it puts you to, onely here is the difference, a Childe must be broke and a Bond must not; the more you break Children the more you keep them under, but the more you break Bonds the more they leap in your face, and therefore to conclude, I would never undertake to be Gossip to that Bond which I would not see well brought up. For 'tis a truth, come better dayes or worse, So many Bonds aboad, so many Boys at nurse. Therefore sweet friend excuse me; any thing but this; a small summe (either to lend or give you) is at your service, but this I neither can nor dare, so wishing you all felicity. I assure you that I am Yours unfeignedly.
SONG X. The conceited Lover. [Tune is, Honours but Ayre, &c. vulgarly, New the Tyrant has stollen, &c] 1. COme my Clarissa Why art thou so shie? Why hast thou that face, That foot and that thigh, But to doe as thy Mother When she willingly lay, While thy Father did discover Loves beaten road way. 2. That beauty by Nature Was never ordain'd To be gz'd at with wonder, Bag to be obtain'd A px of the feeble Platonicall way, Which none that were able Did ever obey. 3. To fit and to simper Like soap-suds (in sooth) Does argue nor wisdome, Nor beauty, nor youth. To kisse the fair forehead, And sometimes the cheek, To me is most horrid That would doe and not speak.
4. I love to couple The genuine way, When both parties are supple Loves Rites to obey, Thus Babies are gotten With pleasure and ease, To live when we are rotten, But not with a disease. 5. Great Plato (like Gato) Kept a plump brown Wench, For he lov'd a Belly Aswell as a Tench: In the high street at Athens By Diana's Temple The old Sage sung Loves Mattens, And wrore Verses for sample. 6. And Diogenes selfe That fasted so much Was an old pockey Elfe, And of the French had a touch: His life was severe, For he took the Diet In that very now called Corneli Tub by the mistake of some unlearned Apothecaries. Tub where On his Roots he did Riot.
7. Then hang up the nicenesse Of grey bearded fools, The Tenents that we own Were not known to the Schools: Let the sowre men drink Whig While we tipple Nctar, And dance the Paphian Jig To a rare Curtain-Lecture. 8. Come then let's dally And daintily doe, Though Routed we will Rally In spight of the Foe, And charge with joynt motion, Though not without losse, Cupid's pleas'd with such a portion While the blankets we tosse. 9. He that's still saying Grace, And nere falls to the meat, Is at best but an Asse, And deserves not to eat: But were he as eager After warm meat as I, He'd not lie so long Leager Till his conscience cry, Fie 10. Then clip me Claissa While I thee intwine, We'l be incorporated Without Church-discipline,
And vouch our Reality Spotlesse and faire To any man of quality Except my Lord Mayor. A Letter of Complement to a Mayd or Wi∣dow, the Lover excusing himselfe that he met not according to promise, &c. Dear Mistresse, HAd I not a hope that your immaculate can∣dour can whiten the swarthiest crime, I should chuse rather to sacrifice my life to incessant sorrow, and consequently to inevitable death, than adde to my guilt by apollogizing for a sin that can not be remitted: by Loves Bow and Quiver by Venus Shrine, nay by your faire selfe from whose bright eyes the blinde God fetches his Paphian fire, and whose sacred bosome is the true Temple of divine Love, I could not (though I indeavoured it with the hazard of my life) meet you according to promise, some lucklesse Planet (without doubt) had governance over that ominous day, I confesse it were but justice to cast me off as a thing me worthy your future notice, who have contemned (though not wilfully) such a happinesse as Kings could have been proud to purchase with the price of their Diadems; you may doom me to death, I have deserved it, and am so clogg'd with guilt
that I have scarce confidence enough to beg your pardon, if any penance might expiate this black oversight, I should think you more than courteous in appointing me to Row upon the Thames for twelve Moneths, or to personate Iack Pudding up∣on the Ropes the whole term of time that makes up a Bartholomew-Fair: so that were I so much a Brute (as History makes Brutus to be) I should (undoubtedly) signe my owne Passe for the other World. Determine of me (dear Lady) out of hand, it is some happinesse (though a killing one) that the Malefactor is sensible of the worst that can happen. Thus begging your speedy Reply, I hum∣bly take my leave, and remain Your afflicted, but affectionate Servant. Her Answer. Sir, YOu doe very aptly imitate those Children, who having tyed strings about the legges of their Birds, sometimes suffer them to gain liberty to a great distance, but when they please twitch them home againe; there is no dallying with Loves Tools, his Arrows are sharply pointed, and apt to wound a wanton hand, can you think me so shallow to conceit that all the businesse in the world should
have blockt up your way to one you affected with a cordiall regard, and what fine Powers you call to witnesse with you that this Traditiae could not be vaded, a blinde Boyes Bow, a blunt Dart, and a leaden Shrine. Well Sir, you know what command you have ver me, and that a slender excuse will serve where the injury is pardoned ere committed; all the penance I shall impose is this, that you afford me a visit at my Mansion to morrow in the morn∣ing about the houre of ten, where you shall finde Your faithfull Friend. A complementall Dialogue betwixt a Shop-keeper and a Scholler. Scholler. Are you busie Sir? Shop-keeper. Never Sir to you, nor any of your Goat:  confesse I was but a dull slave before I conversed with Schollers, not worthy to tread upon the earth before I fell in love with learning, and what fresh hopes it has put into me, I doe in∣tend shortly to biggar all the bawdy Writers, especially him that wrote the Mock Poems of Hero and Leander; nay, I will build at my own charge an Hospitall, to which shall retire all dis∣eased
Opinions, and all halting Poets, as the venerable Humphrey Crowch, Laurence Price, and Sam. Smithson. Scholler. Sir, ye are a man made up of ingenuity, very charitable, more piously inclined than Sir Paul Piodar, you are a true pattern for the City Sir. Shop-keeper. Sir, I have been informed by Re∣velation (without the belp of Arise E∣vans) that their shop-Books cannot save them. Scholler. O Sir, much may be done by Manu∣script, there is a kinde of Spell in bad paper, watrish inke, and worse sense. Shop-keeper. The Muses favour me, as my in∣tents are vertues, will ye be my Tutour Sir, I have read Greens Groats worth of Wit, the Spanish Rogue, the Authen∣tick History of Amadis de Gaule, and Tullies Love written by the Master of Art. Scholler. You are excellently well read, Sir, you are my friend, and a friend to all that pro∣fesse good Letters. Shop-keeper. Sir, you are very honest, and yet you have a kinde of modest fear to shew it, doe not darken your own worth with too much bashfulnesse, men of parts should proclaim themselves, the world will still
remaine ignorant of their worth else. Scholler. Sir, you almost make me blush as red as those stockings you weare, I thinke they are of Naples. Shop-keeper. I thought you Schollers had known all things, you are beside your Text there, I must tell you; they are compoun∣ded I confesse of the finest wooll, and crea∣ted in Iersey. Scholler. Pardon my judgment Sir, we Schollers seldome use any other objests but our Books. Shop keeper. I doe confesse it Sir, provided al∣waits they are Licensed ones, and have some worthy hands set to them for pro∣bation. Scholler. Sir, I must intreat your company to the Canary shop. Shop keeper. With all my heart Sir, I am of late become a great lover of sacke, and can make shift now and then to cut out a Copie of Verses, I can tell ye as simple as I stand here, not a bit of Prose sometimes will down with me, but les away; Boy, have a vigilant care of my shop, the Times are dangerous, and if there come ever a Scholler in black let him speaks with me, for my own part I doe begin to doat upon Books, and am very strangely
taken with strange Verses, and howso∣ever we are all accounted dull-brain'd Asses by Gentlemen, yet there are those that merit renown for their parts and performances even amongst us Shop-keepers, witnesse Murford, Mercer, and Scot. I doe love a Scholler with my heart, for undoubtedly very marvailous things may be atchieved by Art, I have read something though I say it that should not: Why Sir, there are those Schollers in Town will tell you what is become of Horses and silver spoons, and will make Wenches dance naked to their beds, I had a Sister was served so; I am yet unmarried, and because some of our neighbours are said to be Cuckolds, I will never be married without the consent of some of these Schollers that know what will come of it. Please Sir, to lead the way. Scholler. Nay, I shall wait on you Sir. Shop-Keeper. Phoebus forbid it Sir, that were a fine jest Ifaith, let Learning lye behinde me, I have been better brought up than so Sir. Nay I know my postures I war∣rant you Sir, and have been drunke at Court more than twice in the dayes of old King Charles Ile assure you Sir.
Scholler. You will manifest what command you have over me Sir, I shall be obedient for once my capacious Citizen. To a Mayd in love with a young Man, but ashamed to shew it. STill will you languish; see, here's pen and ink, Write to him; let your heart and seale expresse Such marks, as on his very soule may sink And shew y'are blest although with heavinesse; May your Paper seem as fair As your self when you appear, May the Letters which you write Look like black-eye-lids upon white, And may your charmed Pen such fancies bring (Being adorned with your Hand and Scale) As if your Quill were pluckt from Cupids wing, And so the riches of his soule may steale. A Letter to a false Friend, queintly quipping him. IF I thought it could be possible to finde out that race of men that Pliny talks of, whose heads stand in their brest, who scarce can tell a smooth lie, because their hearts are joyned so near to their lips, I would instantly depart this Nation and travail to those well-meaning men, there I should
forget the calumnies of deceitfull tongues, and no more remember that I once prized the amity of so false a man as thy self, happy are those soules chat sit in the Elysian shades, who being freed from fleshly clogs, have so clear an understanding of each other, that there is no need of eares or tongues; words were first made to reveale our meaning, but by a strange inversion they now serve to conceale our intents. I have spelt your hollow heart Sir already by joyning three or four actions, but if those lent me no light, the reading of the whole Sentence gives me perfect assurance, you can no longer delude my sense Sir, your well∣spoke wrongs are like hurtfull words writ in a gracefull hand, or a bloody sword sheathed up in velvet: so wishing your conversion, or—I will not say confusion. I close all with this truth, That I am for ever lost to your love.
SONG X. The forsaken Virgin. [Tune is, For in my freedome's all my joy.] 1. I Am a poor forsaken Mayd By a perfidious Youth betray'd, After so many oathes and vowes While Myttle Garlands gyrt our browes Where shall I finde a place where I May weep my self away and die: Death's the best cure, Death's the best∣cure of misery. 2. Come O thu with thy Lute and play me Thar very solitary, Ah me, Which for thy love thou didst compose When that thy heart-strings gave the close, A greater grief than thine have I Destroy'd by black disloyalty: Death's the best cure, &c. 3. Come then ye pretty Nymphs and Faieries From your faire Meadows and your Daieries, Come Venus deck my sable pillow With blasted Myrtle and with Willow, Let the rude Satyrs showt and crie 'bout her that slights my Monodie: Come courteous Death, come courteous Death and end my misery.
4. O false unconstant othlesse Lad, Will not my Murther make thee sad When swift report salutes thine care, That I am layd upon the Biere, An ashey Victim unto thee? Here let me die and buried be: Come courteous Death, &c. 5. Like cruell Theseus dost thou leave Thy courteous Ariadne so, Like perjur'd Paris wilt thou grieve Aenone. Her that has shielded thee from woe, Here will I moan, and waile, and crie Till like a soul-lesse lump I lie: Come courteous Death, &c. 6. While fervent love did fill each brest, Hast thou not oft these words exprest, Let heaven showre vengeance on my head, And Joves dire Thunder strike me dead When ere I prove unkinde to thee; But these were spungie Vowes I see: Come courteous Death, &c. 7. My Ghost will tell sad tales below, And let all loyall Lovers know That here such monstrous men there are Whom the griev'd earth does sweat to beare False perjur'd and unkinde like thee; Come courteous death, &c.
8. If there be just vindictive Powers Residing in the heavenly Towers, If there's a Righteous Providence Which but to doubt were insolence, Worthy those plagues belong to thee, Then look for punishment for me: Come courteous death, &c. 9. Mean time (as dying people doe) Ile prophesie what shall ensue This wicked impious change of thine, Not caus'd by beauty, coine, or wine, But by thy own inconstancy Which by the Gods chastis'd shall be: Come courteous Death, &c. 10. Thou of thy Helen now hast joy, But shalt tast woes like him of Troy, When thy light heel'd and gayrish Bride Shall love another man beside, Then (all too late) thoul't think on me, And I will laugh below at thee: Come courteous Death, &c. 11. My Ghost shall triumph in thy Fare, And in those pleasant shades of blisse Where each true Lover clips his Mate, (A happinesse I'm sure to misse) Ile clap thy fall when thou shalt be Riveil'd with meagre grief like me: Come courteous Death, &c,
12. And now methin's I feel kinde Death Reaching his hand to stop my breath, Thrice welcome thou best friend to those Whose fierce Fate makes um their own Foes, Thy dulcid Dart oh let me try, And passe to immortality. Come courteous Death. &c. 13. But when my Soul has gain'd the Ples Journying to the Judge of Souls, If that my body finde a grave, This Epaph oh let me have, Bena  this stone a Mayd des lie Murther'd by Loves inconsiancy. Come courteous Death, &c. A Complement from a Stranger, di∣rected to the Lady or Mistresse of the house upon his entrance. Gentleman. Are you that beauty (Lady) whose lustre gives light to this methodicall mansion? Gentlewoman. Sir, you have given my face a more speciall regard by your good lan∣guage than theseblack brows can merit. Gentleman. You are pleased to set a triviall rate upon your selfe; you are wondrous faire—you have a very moving lip.
Gentlewoman. Prove it again Sir; all the poor means I have left to be thought grate∣full is but a kisse or two, and ye may reap them Sir. Gentleman. Tis still the same, you weare Di∣vinity about you, another kiss will make me immortall—How farre may ye hold the time to be spent Lady? Gentlewoman. Tis now Sir about the time when Mortalls whet their knives, some on thresholds, others on bricks, and some on the soles of their shoes. Gentleman. You are very Metaphoricall, Ma∣dam; you mean it is almost Dinner∣time, if it might be without the trouble of your house, I would stay till your Husband comes, I have some earnest businesse with him. Gentlewoman. I shall be proud of your society Sir, I beseech you stay Dinner, a piece of Beef Sir, and a cold Capon. Gentleman. I have greater businesse then eat∣ing; but am truly happy in having your commission to wait your Husbands approach. The end of the first Book.
THE ACADEMY OF PLEASURE. The second Book. Printed in the Year, 1656.
The Academy of Pleasure. The second Book. SONG I. The eloquent Lover. [Tune is, Pritbee die and set me free, or else be, &c] 1. PRithee why must we no more, As before, Venus and her son adore? Prithee why has that faire front Clouds upon't? Prithee be as thou wert wont, Lovers ever should persever, Frank and free, Frank and free, but dogged never.
2. Prithee (Deare) no more expresse (By thy Dresse) Such a killing sullennesse, Prithee (Sweet) unfold thy beams Whence there streams Beauteous and celestiall gleams, Tell me how I have displeas'd thee, Ile not cease, Ile not cease till I've appeas'd thee. 3. O speak (my Goddesse) else I die, Murther'd by Those sharp poniards in thy eye, Speak, or else I faint away With dismay, I have no businesse bids me stay Here on earth save to implore thee, And to cringe, And to cringe to all adore thee. 4. Come, lets walk to yonder Grove Where our love Every plant that's there will prove Where thy most delicious name To thy fame, I have engrav'd the wildest Wolves to tame, At thy name (as is their duty) They doe bow, They doe bow unto thy beauty.
5. Sylva and his shggy crew When they view Thy lustre yeild all veneration due, When we last time sported there Thou didst fear Lest some wilde beast should draw neer, Did not beasts and Satyrs pay thee Fealtie, Fealtie proud to obey thee. 6. Did not Panthers creep to greet Thy fair feet, Seeming humbly to intreat, And the Genius of the place Smoothe his face, Hoping to obtain thy grace While his train with flowers did strow thee To make known, To make known what love they owe thee. 7. Di not cold Diana strain To obtain (With her Arrow-loving Train) That thou should'st have equall sway Night and day With her whom all the shadie woods obey, But oh thy goodnesse nere flow higher Than that time, Than that time thou didst deny her.
8. Thou wert born (my dearest Love) To approve What the plyant Graces move When they lead thee to the sport In such sort As if Jove should thank thee for't, Foolish nicenesse does betray thee Unto age, Unto age that will decay thee. 9. When those Roses shall in scorn Not adorn Thy cheeks now ruddier than the Morn, When she leaps from Tyons bed Wearied As sh'had been but ill bestead, When those haires that now are brighter Than the gold, Than the gold with age grow whiter. 10. Then surrounded with despair And harsh care, Thou wilt igh, I bave been fair, And wish that thou hadst been more free Unto me Who suffer by thy cruelty, And doe finde thou dost but quibble With my pain, Thy heart being smooth, but hard as pibble.
The Master being angry that his Ap∣prentice makes love to his Daugh∣ter, thus schools him. Master. Syrrah, you shall know that you are my servant, my Apprentice bound and in∣rolled, though I have often intrusted thee with all I am master of at home and abroad, yet I doe not remember that I ever gave my consent that thou shouldst court my Daughter, and just in the nick of time too, when she is on the very Prick of Preferment as they say, when I had found out a wealthy Hus∣band for her, but I shall break the neck of your designe, and marre your matter of Matrimony. Serv. Sir, I acknowledge my self your creature, a thing that is wholly at your disposal. yet give me leave to say, that I have not been carelesse of that which concerns your profit, nor have I lavished and wasted your stock by my unthriftinesse, I never wore your gains upon my back, or exhausted your treasure by my riots, but for your Daughter if her love have the least relation to me I shall not en∣deavour to stop it, though I were sure to
be broken upon the Wheele in case I neglected it, nor indeed am I able to frown upon her fair wishes, whose love I durst own to the teeth of torture, nor will you (I hope) have a thought of matching her to that lame piece of Letchery— Master. Tis very well, I shall receive instructi∣ons from you to whom I shall wed my Daughter, but I shall discharge your wisdome from any such imployment; I doe here discharge you my house, take your own liberty, and when I know not where to finde a Son in Law I will send for you; Begone Sir, I doe freely free you my service, you are your own ma∣ster now, but shall never be my Daugh∣ters Hasband. Thanks for a Welcome. FOr your good looks, and for your clarret, For often bidding, Doe not spare it, For tossing glasses to the top, And after sucking of a drop, When scarce a drop was left behinde, Or that which nick-names Wine, even winde, For healthy mirth, and iusty sherry, Such as made old  merry, Such are our thanks that you may have In blood the clarret which you gave, And in your service shall be spent The Spirits which your sack hath lent.
SONG II. The flattering Lover. [Tune is, Prince Rports March.] 1. NAy Dearest doe not leare Him that so much does adore thee, Whose life has its dependance on thy smile; Why shouldst thou make him grieve Who on his knees does implore thee To let him live thy servant for a while: Can such sweet beauty Be deaf to complaint, And despise the duty Done to his Saint; Forbid it gentle Boy, thy dart Can cure this dire anoy that thus Excruciates my heart. 2. Those eyes of thine speak love, Why then should my hopes be frustrate That are upon an honest Basis built? Would thou have my fancy rove Thy exquisite parts to illustrate Untill the sacred Muses blood be spilt, Ile storm the mountain Untill I come neer The holy Fountain And drink't off sheer, That not one Rhiming whelp From Hypocrene least help Shall have His flie-blown skill to save:
3. Ile fixhy glorious name If that thou wilt command it With curious art and industry upon The lips of thundring Fame, Nor shall strong Time withstand it, Bathing my self in happy Helicon; All former beauties Shall stoop to thee, As is their duties Swearing Fealty; Thy shrine Ile deck with gems Of price, Which she that rules the Thames Shall throw up in a trice. Two faithfull Lovers complement; each other meeting accidentally. She. Sweet, &c. Welcome, not Dido was more joyfull when Aeneas landed on the Car∣thaginian shore than I am to meet thee thus happily. He. Thrice blessed be that kinde Fate, which conducted me to this place, where I have the sight of her who is the sole comfort that I have on earth. She. You may see how much Fortune is our friend. He. They say that Fortune is onely courteous to Coxcombs.
She. By that rule (my Dear) you should not be overwise. He. Nay, sometimes the slie Goddesse affords a glance, or so even to those that are me∣riting, but that it is very seldome, and at best but to show her mutability, not that she a friend to worth—What sayes my Dear unto that faithfull love which I have ever fervently profest. She. I shall not dissemble, though I blush to ac∣knowledge it; that very blind Boy who has wounded you, has also lodged an Arrow in my brest, I love you dearly; and may those Powers who govern all things terrestiall, grant not onely the fruition, but the felicity that all loyall Lovers merit. He. You make me happy above humane thought, my brest is too narrow to comprehend those numerous joyes that throng about my heart. She. My Father you know will doe his utmost to hinder what God and Nature I hope has decreed, I mean, he will use all the stratagems that can be imagined to dis∣solve this sacred Union; he swears I shall marry a man of wealth, and of his chusing, or he will not own me for his Childe, but I scorn Mammon and his
mines, the goods of the minde are the things that I prize, yet I would have you use your utmost skill (if it be pos∣sible) to obtain my Fathers consent. He. I shall be guided by thee, my Faire one, were the venture more perilous than that of Jason for the Golden Fleece, thou art my chaste Medea, and being armed with thy oraculous councell, I shall not feare to force my way though opposed by millions of dangers. She. Thanks my gentle Love; but lest that my Father (whose jealous head is haunted with more doubts than Argus was fur∣nished with eyes) should suspect our conference, I will presently leave you, Farewell dearest friend untill our next meeting. He. Adieu my love, let the fairest Fortune at∣tend thee, I will resort to your Father to morrow to implore his consent, I have a hope to prevail upon him.
SONG III. A Dialogue between Strephon and Daphne. Strephon. COme my Daphne, come away We doe waste the crystall day: Tis Strephon calls. Daph. What would my love? Streph. Come follow to the Myrtle Grove, Where Venus shall prepare, New Chaplets for thy haire. Daph. Were I shut up within a tree, I'd rend my bark to follow thee. Streph. My Shepherdesse make haste, The Minutes flie too fast; In these cooler shades we'll lye Blinde as Cupid kiss'd thine eye, On thy bosome will I stray. Daph. In such warm snow who would not lose his way? CHORUS, Strephon, Dapne, together. Wee'l laugh and leave this world behinde, And Gods that see Shall envy thee and me, But never finde such joy When we embrace a Deitie.
POESIES for Bracelets. He that sent this is faster bound Then what about thy wrist is wound. When you put on this little band Then think (my Dear) I kisse your hand. Go, keep that hand from Cupid free Till Hymen link her heart to me. When this silk Twist Adorns thy wrist, Let us two twine My Cherubine. On a Neck-lace. Here he hangs alive in chains Who late was slain with lingring pains. Cupid take heed (by me beware) How thou art taken in this snare, For Love himself if he flie neer Is sure to be intangled here. On a Gyrdle. While that thou dost her waste imbrace Be sure keep others from the place, Nor can thy duty be orepast Untill my arme ingyrt her waste.
A Letter to a friend with money. Dear Friend, IAm sorry that you should be exposed to so much penury, as to want so small a summe as—shil∣lings, and good faith my condition was never so tattered as it is now, but I have sent you the mo∣ney; I would beg of you to take some setled course, you have a good wit, and must stirre in the world if you wish for a prosperous condition: but how∣soever you are crossed by Fortune, you have a re∣tiring place: come home to me, and be as welcome as my own soule, but be a good Husband as I am, which is to say, wear ordinary cloathes, eat the best meat, and drink the best drinke; I know this doctrine is not disgustfull to you. Let me see you as soon as may be, for assure your selfe, there is no man more entirely affects you than Your true friend.
On a Blister on a Gentlewomans lip. CHide not thy sprouting lip, nor kill The juicy bloom with bashfull skill; Know it is an amorous dew That swells to court thy corrall hue, And what a blemish you esteem To others eyes a pearl may seem, Whose wary growth is not above The thirsty size that pearls doe love, And doth so well become that part That chance may seem a seeret art. Does any judge that face more faire Whose ender silk a mole doth beare, Or else that eye a finer net Whose glasse is ring'd about with jet? Are apples thought more sound and sweet When honey-specks and red doe meet, Or will a Diamond shine more clear If in the midst a foile appear? Then is your lip made fairer by Such sweetnesse of deformity. The Nectar which men strive to sip Springs like a well upon your lip, Nor doth that show immodesty, But overflowing chastity, And who will blame the fruitfull trees When too much sap or gum he sees? Here Nature from her store doth send Onely what other parts can lend: If lovely buds ascend so hie, The root below cannot be drie.
A Dialogue betwixt Will and Jone. Will. Come Jone, we are toward marriage, let us talke of that ill doe us good, What will thy Granam give us towards House∣keeping? Jone. Marry two platters, a pot and a pan, two dishes and as many spoons, a sheet and two slannell blankets. Will. This pretty well indeed la, let me see: We must be as  in the Market place next Tuesday, and weel be married presently. Jone, I-faith my honey sweet Combe, Have thee, weel have a whole noise of Fidlers, though I pawn my patticeate for't; come Will, let us his us , weel make a bag-pudding to supper. Will. Come away Chuck.
SONG III. A Tavern Rans [Tune is, Stay shnt the gate, &c.] 1. STay noble hearts, T'other quart, what dull Fate is this That parts Our communion? But just now we were Resolv'd to stay here Till Phoebus dissolved our union, Is he gone to tipple (Boyes) and shall we choak here? Is he hemm'd with vapour, and shall we not smoke here? Here 3 quarts not toucht yet that we have bespoke here. 2. Boy, fill the glasse, Here's a health to each man here And his taffe; Fill't up higher, Or give me a Bowle (For I me thirsty at soule) Whose top to the roof may aspire. Theres no harm in good sherry, good faith none at all boys, It raises us up again, though we doe fall boyes, And makes ev'n a Pigmey Gygantick and tall boyes. 3. See, Bacbus pleads That you light Beavers, And your heavier heads Might be parted, Bring haplets of Flowers For those Temples of ours, He's a Coxcomb that needs will be carted. Boy, bid all our Hackney-men drive from the door, But besure they have sack enough though on the score, Though they suck up more seas than would swallow the shore.
4. See, now we are Oblig'd alike To prosecure the warre, On-ships burned, We must now fight it out, For if they give us the rout On a hard bench each Heroe is urned. Lets break through their ranks (the Foe sparks & smiles) And be the sole Lords of the Canary Isles, Inricht with Rubie-faces, Joves Sons richest spoils. 5. Now we are glorious, And shall prove (In spight of Fate) victorious, Charge agen, The half-emptied Cask Shall prove that our task Had halted by half witted-men. Though the Foe have strong Rampires he trembles with∣in, If we storm but his out-works hee'l ne'r turn agen, Yet in taking him Prisoner much danger we win. 6. But ere the skie Be painted With Aurore's saffron die Home wee'l march boyes And there in our beds Clap new Helms on our heads, Though our faces we fashion with starch boyes. For he is the onely true genuine Good-fellow, Who though sometimes Bowzie and thorowly mellow, Will let no body know that he sees green or yellow.
A wealthy Clown courting a witty Gentlewoman. He. Mistresse E. God speed you. She. That's more than I need at this time, for I am doing nothing Sir. He. I were as good say a good word as a bad: but if you will have it more complementice∣tically as they say, than thus, How does your faire and beauteous worship? She. Sir; tis more wisdome to say nothing at all than to speak to no purpose. He. My purpose is to Wive you. She. Very good; but I have a purpose too Sir, and that is never to wed you. He. Belike you are in love with somebody else. She. No, but I am lustily promised. He. Make em your Worships man, I can deo ma∣ny things I can tell you, else there are lies abroad. I have heard very well of you Mistresse E, and so has my Father, who has sent me a wooing to you: nay, and I have a Copie of Verses (cost me six pence, and a double jag of Mother Red-Caps Ale) made by our Vicar, I have been conning them this four long houres by the clock, you shall heare me read them.
She. I for Phoebus sake Sir, I love good Verses as I love good meat or witty company. He. First I doe beg your Worships good relief, (For I intend to show my minde in brief) I call to you if that you can afford it, I care not at what price, for on my word it Shall be repayd again although it cost me More than Ile speak of now, for Love hath cost me In surious blanket like a Tennis ball. And now I rise aloft, and now I fall, Thus doe I still continue without rest I'th' Morning like a Man, at Night a Beast, Roaring and bellowing my own disquiet, That much I fear forsaking of my diet. How does your beauteous Worship like our Vicars Verses? She. O rarely well! By the soul of Martin Parker your Vicar has an ingenieus Soull; I am mightily taken I confesse with your Poe∣try: but say I should set my affections upon you, how will you maintain me? He. Marry with my land and living my Father hath promised me. She. I have heard much of your wealth, but I never knew your manners before now. He. I have no Manours, but a pretty Homestall∣and we have good store of Oxen and
Horses, and Carts, and Plowes, and houshold-stuffe bomination, and great flocks of Sheep, and flocks of Geese, and Capons, and Hens, and Ducks: Oh we have a fine yard of Pullen, and thanke God here is fine weather for my Fathers Lambs. She. I cannot live content in the midst of discon∣tent, for as it is impossible for that mu∣sick to delight the care where all the parts of discord come to composition, so the marriage life will still consist of jars where there is no sympathy in the condi∣tion of the wedded Parties. Pray Sir, rest your selfe contented with this An∣swer, I cannot love you. He: I, I, tis no matter what you say, my Father told me thus much before I came that you would be something nice at first, but he bad me like you never the worse for that, I were the liker to speed. She. You were best then leave off your suit till some other time, and when my leisure shall serve me to love you Ile send for you. He. I shall be sure to pay the Messenger, and so I take my leave of your beautifull Wor∣ship.
An Invitation to Mirth. HE that's contented lives for aye, The more he laughs the more he may, Nere meets with Acher in the bone, O Catharres, or griping stone, O lingringly his Lungs consumes Into Feavers, Gouts, or Rhumes, Never he his body brings, Cause he ever laughs and sings, He that would his body keep From Diseases must not weep, Let each man keep his heart at ease, No man dies of that disease, Tis Mirth that fills the veins with blood More than wine, or sleep, or food. SONG IV. The Convert. [Tune is, For now the Butter-boxes begin for to vpour, &c.] 1. COme sweet Clarinde My joy and my life, I have left the Whore Dulinda And thou shalt be my Wife, For now I finde the folly of quaffing and whoring That ends in confusion and horrible woe, He have no more drinking, nor drabbing, no scoring, That dries up the body, and dams the soule too.
2. I have been in Venice Amongst the brave Laes In Madrid, in Paris, and Pad too Have had conversation, With wise men and Asses, With the taffry  and Coventry blew, Yet all's done 'tis madnesse And grief and despair That ends in confusion and horrible woe, Their black gloomy prisons With outsides most faire That drie up the body, and damn the soul too▪ 3. Come then fair Temperance, True Image of heaven, Thee will  worship Iminaculate Mayd, By thy bright selfe Alone Ile be shriven For cursed Accrasia Too long I've obeyd, Ile now (with Dioclesian) Plant herbs and sweet flowers, And think my self greater Than Spixe's mighty King, And sing ore the Song Of the witty Ephesian Unto a Key equall With Flaccu fine string
4. What is the Camp, But a company of Conts? What is the City. But a Family of Fools? What is the Court, But a huge hive of Hornets, Moles, Mad-men and Mercenaties, Monsters and Mules? Thrice happy is the Hermit In woods that converses, And lives on what Nature Affords without toyle, And sings his Makers praise In Theological Verses, Free from the Clie The Camp or Court coile. A Letter to a Mayd or Widow. Lady, IN your stern beauty I can plainly see Tose wonders that in Aena b, If coales out of that Mountains top do se, Consuming i mes gush from your eye; If frost doe there lie on the ground below, Your brest is white and cold as snow; Those fiey sparks that set my heart on fire; Refuse to melt your own desire, The frost that doth binds up your chilly brest With double fire as  opprest: Just so the hearth his proper staine withstand. When ice it self heats others hands.
A Lover that would be, finding his Mistresie alone, thus courts her. He. Save you sweet▪ Mistresse, How comes it to passe that you are alone? She. Because Sir, I desire no other company but my own. He. Would I were your own then, that I might keep you company. She. O Sir, you and he that is my own are farre asunder. He. But if you please you may be nearer. She. That cannot be mine own is nearer than my self, and yet alas I cannot call my self my own; thoughts, fears, and despairs are onely mine, and those doe keep me com∣pany. He. I must confesse your Father is too cruell to keep you thus in a manner sequestred from the world, to spend your prime of youth in obscurity, seeking to wed you to a very Foole that knowes not how to use himself, but could my deserts be answer∣able to my desires, I swear by all things powerfull that my heart could wish no higher happinesse than to be graced with your love, I cannot play the dissembler as some doe, nor hang my love at my tongues nd.
She. Sir, I shall consider of your suit. He. Doe, and make me eternally happy: A Marriage Song. 1. REmember (Bridegroom) as thy Bride is faire How many Nights of care Waited thy honest lust, Thy timerous distrust, Thy conflict in the question now recall Her easie threats, thy aier tears and all That amorous tory Which made thee glad and sorry, How the slie Mayd At sundry times betrayd. And oft denyde her Mitresse now at last When thou hast liberty thy joyes to tast Thou canst not put off wishing, but must woe For kisses while thou kill'st; tie her shoe As glad to see it sack, and feare to lose Makes thee imbrace her with a stronger close. 2. On to the Chu ch, let Hymen passe before, Sing mihfull Paens: Io ore & ore. The Spring (to save me Poetry) Has spread with curious industry The way with Violets where she must tread Fetcht from Flora's fragrant bed, Else would a birth stand up commanded by One touch of he though Nature knew not why, Perfumes upon her lips the Graces scatter, Her lips which nor her Mayd nor Glasse can tter. Now bathe thy soule in blisses And mel thy selfe in kisses: he will return thee love for love Ile warrant, And bring thee eery year an Heir apparant:
Ralph courts Madlin. Ralph. Faith I h been in a fair taking for you, a bots on you, for tother day after I had seen you, my elly began to rumble; what's the matter thought I? with that I bethought my self, and the swet comport∣nance of that same swet round face of thine: out went I, and I'le besworn was never so taken, for I was faine to cut all my points; and dost heare Maudlin, if thou dost not grant me thy good will, in the way of marriage, first and formost I'le run out of my cloathes, and then out of my wits for thee. Maudlin. Nay Ralph, I would be loth you should doe so for me. Ralph. Will you look merrily on me and love then? Maudlin. Faith I care not greatly if I doe. Ralph. Cre not greatly if I doe! what an An∣swers that? If th wilt say, I Maudlin take thee Ralph to my spce Husband. Maudlin. Why so I will, but we must be cryde at the Market-Cose, and have more com∣pany for Witnesses first. Ralph. Nay, we will not want for company. Maudlin. Why then here's my hand.
Ralph. And here's a bsse, I long to be in bed with thee my sweet orsell of Mayds flsh. A Letter from a Batchelour or Widower to the Mayd or Widow that he is sure to. My Dear, dear, SInce the heavens have so much favoured me that your consent walks hand in hand with the serious proposals of my lawfull love, I cannot but expresse those joyes that crowd about my heart, and tell you that as I was never happy till now, so I shall never finde any felicity but in your blessed company, who are more to me than the Mines of Mxico or Peu, your face affording the fulnesse of beauty, your body the summum of all blsse, and your bosome the basis of all perfection, and rest con∣fident that the Sun shall sooner shine without af∣fording either at or light, the Sea cease ebbing and flewing, and the Earth be void of Inhabitants r my firm fixed affection fall from that bright Zenyth where my cordiall zeale has placed it; I am providing as fast as may be for the Solniza∣tion of our Hymeneall Rites, my true love gives wings unto my haste, for I long to fold thee in my armes, and to lose my lusty youth in thy imbraces who art my light and life, and to whom I shall ever prove my self Sincerely ffctionate.
Her Answer. Sweet Friend, I Kindly thanke you for your last Let∣ter, and thinke my selfe the happiest she in the world who have the sincere and unbyassed affection of a man so accom∣plished as your selfe: nor shall I faile to retribute your cordiality with the re∣turn of a true and unfeigned zeale, my heart is wholly yours, you sit as sole so∣veraigne there, and command each thought ere I can call it mine; my sub∣jugation to you is (in my opinion) the most immense tranquility that can possi∣bly wait on Mortality; command me (deare Friend) as soon as you please, for the griping Miser is not more desi∣rous of Mammon, or the hungry man of meat, than I am to prost ate all I call mine to your commands, to whom I shall ever manifest my selfe. A loyall Lover.
A new Letanie. FRom a Nose that ne'r met Fo, And from a Sword that ne'r struck blow, From a Red-breech to make a show With one Copper-lac or two, From a Belt of leather enough Hung with Tobacco pipes to puffe, And from a Brawle to take in snuffe. Libera nos Domine. From a new Hat without a Band, From an Heyre that his no Land, From a face at Plymouth and, From him that wears a Feather in's Cap, With new white Boots without a Top, And payd for too by wondrous hap, With a painted Quean upon his lap. Libera nos &c. From a new Beard with Dogs-turd trimd, With a new Lo e-lock, lac'd and limbd, From a new favour snatcht or nimd, From him that walks as if he swimd. Libera nos Domine.
The Lover being out of hope ever to gain his Mistresse affection, thus takes his farewell of her by Letter. Discourteous Dance, HE that first folded his armes, lookt pale, walks disconsolately, and sighed his sor∣rows in a pensive tone, was he that first taught Women how to be cruell and relentlesse: most inexorable Woman! have I so long courted thee with all the reality of serious love? have I lckt thy spittle from the earth, and prostrated my selfe at thy feet as thy foot-stool, offering up more pray∣ers at thy Shrine than in the Temple, and will no∣thing mollifie thy obdurae heart? what excuse canst thou make for such contemptuous scorn? am I another Hyponax, or mis-shapen Thyrsites? or has Time yet stampt the Characters of Age upon my brow? or is my estate so mean that I cannot maintain thee in more pomp than thy pride can dictate? if none of these can be charg'd upon me, let the world judge of thy wisdome; for me, I have found my errour, and will appoint my self the strictest penance: in the mean time I gaze upon my quondam absurdities (in reference to thee) as prodigies that predicted ruine but by heavenly appointment are turned to good. So farewell fond and cruell Mistresse, and may both Ples meet be∣fore thy love and my affection, which is the firm resolve of Thy mortall Enemy.
SONG VI. The willing Prisoner. [Tune is, Wee'l go no more to the Old Exchange, &c] 1. HAve I not lov'd thee pretty one A whole moneth and a day, And is't not now time to be gone I prithee Wanton say? I that untill I view'd thy face Have laught at Cupids power Nere knew what amorous worship was Above a single hour, Am now in slaved by thy smiles And thy alluring postures, Nor am I weary of thy wiles, doe upon thy gestures. 2. Sure thou haff some Circean char, Some spell the so attracts me, Yet am I happy in my harm, And blest by that which wracks me. So loyall Prisoners kisse their Gyves And Martyrs play with fire. I would not part for thousand lives With thee my souls desire. Then Cupid grace thy Convertite With Pageants and Procession, And I such favour to require Will trumpet my profession.
3. O thou art all so sweet, so faire, I lose my self in wonder, And Jove himself would quit his Chair, And throw aside his Thunder. But to obtain one kisse from thee, But Jove's self shan't supplant me, For while I boast thy amitie His fire-balls cannot daunt me. Then come my Dearest, let me clip Thy body most divine, And suck Nepent from thy lip, Which yeilds immortall wine. 4. It is thy glory (Dearest sweet) Thy fight-lesse Archer never Did with a Dart my bosome gree, Thy eyes supply his Quiver. Had Homer or Museu seen Thy rare resplendent glories, Hellen and Hero ne'r had been So famous in their stories. Thou hadst fill'd up the mouth of Fame And if my skill may raise thee, Ile rear such Trophies to thy name That after times shall praise thee.
5. Thou art that Ve which didst rise Out of the foaming Ocean, While all the tumid Deities Did wait upon thy motion. Since then thou art that Goddesse kinde That rules the Babie Getter, Let thy belov'd Achyses finde How thou his limbs canst fetter. A brace of young Aeneas his I Shall every year finde being, While I like eel-bact Hercules My flesh am alwaies freeing. A Letter from a Woman (heaven knows) being forced to woe some obdurate young Man. Sweet Sir, I Cannot but tax you of too much harshnesse and dissnanty, who flie her who so entirely af∣fects you: must Daphne follow Phoebus? fi Sir! can you be so uneasie, can you freez in so hot a Summers day, certainly it is your mistake that occasions this scorn: I have youth and some beau∣ty, else my glasse is treacherous, and all that cen∣sure me are meer Calumniators; I doe confesse I am too pliant, 100 much Woman yet I can frown & ip the passions of others even in the bud. I can tell
others that they court our Sex onely to please their present heats, and then it is their pleasure to leave us; I can hold off, and by the Chymicall power of my countenance draw whole Rhees of Sonets and Madrigals from the brain of a wping Lover; yet to you (dear Sir) who are my beter self, I put off all those necessary niceies, and contrary to cu∣stome doe that office which no way befits a Woman, and intreat a Man to love, if you are humane, and have blood and spirit you cannot chuse but relent; though you are as hard as marble, yet I believe you are no Image; is it not deplarable that a thing of so exact a form shap't out with so true a symetry, that has all the organs of speech belong∣ing to a man should render all those but livelesse otions that walke upon wi: then (dear Sir) leave off what you have been, and be what God and Nature intended you for, a Man, and imbrace that reall love which is unfeignedly prostrated by Your affectionate, &c. A Souldier complementing a young Mayd. Souldier. I am a Souldier and a Batchelour, Lady, I could love such a Wife as you infinite∣ly, they that use many words are com∣monly
deceitfull; but the truth is, I long to be a Husband, a good Husband: I finde my self given to my ease a little, I am young you see, and for my abilities you need not question them, if you are diffident, trie me before you take me. Mayd. You appear to me Sir, so honest and so ci∣vill, that I dare bid you welcome without a blush. Souldier. You have made me a bountifull amends for your strict carriage when you saw e first, you will not be angry Lady if I ask you one question. Mayd. Any thing Sir. Souldier. Are you a Mayd? Mayd. You make me blush to answer you: I was ever accounted so, and durst confirm it Sir, with an oath. Souldier. Then would I counsell you to marry pre∣sently, for every year you lose, you lose a Boy, together with a Beauty. Mayd. I am not so strict Sir, nor so much tyde unto a Virgin solitarinesse, but if an ho∣nest and noble Souldier, (such as I e∣steem your self) should professe a sincere affection, I think I should accept it, but first I must have good assurance of his love; I know well how to be command∣ed, and how to be obeyed if occasion re∣quire
it, nor is my Riall of lesse worth when tis spent, if spent by my direction for my Husbands advantage, and I doe hold it as indifferent in my duty to be his Mayd in the Kitchin, or his Cooke if necessity command it, as to know my self the Mistresse of the house in the Hall or the Parlour. Souldier. Faith Lady, let's not linger, but be married on the sudden. Mayd. And as suddenly you will repent your bar∣gain. Souldier. The sooner I shall blesse my Fate. Mayd. You are a Flatterer; but to speak truth, the first time that I saw you I found something in that noble face, that com∣manded my notice. Souldier. I am all yours Lady. Mayd. You have the art to cozen me, but I shall venture for once, Hymen has sometimes shewn himself.
SONG VII: A Pastorall Dialogue between Lalus and Melissa. [Tune is, Didst thou not once Lucinda vow, &c] Lalus. HOw long (Melissa) shall thy scorn Make Lalus curse his fate, And wish that he had ne'r been born To perish by thy hate? Melissa. Fond Shepherd, why art thon distrest, Have I not often said Lalus, No more thy self molest, In vain thon crav'st my ayd. Lalus. What is't that renders me despis'd? My Flocks are neither few Nor lean; my love is highly priz'd By all the Nymphish crew. Melissa. Ask me not why I shun thy love, I can no reason yeild, Great Phoebus could not Daphne move, Love cannot be compell'd. Lalus. Then for thy love, O cruell Mayd! I must resigne my breath, Melissa. The Destinies must be obey'd, I doe not wish thy death. Lalus. So sinking Mariners doe pray To Storms, and so they hear I will not live another day To feed on grief and fear.
Melissa. I would my power walkt hand in hand With what I could desire, But Fate no mortall can withstand, Farewell, I must retire. Lalus. Farewell, thou tinty-hearted Gyrle, Thou wilt repent too late, When tarling Fame abroad shall hurl The rigour of my Fate. A new-married Wife thus discards her quondam Lover by Letter. Sir, COuld not your own discretion tell you that when I was married I was none of yours: is it not time Sir, to become vertuous? I hope you will forget our past follies, and neither talk of our intimacie, or cherish a thought of our future fami∣liarity; your eyes are now commanded to look off me, I stand now on the marriage circle safe and secure; nor can all your Spells, Charms, or Incar∣tations be of force to remove me; it is the highest sacriledge to violate Wedlock you rob two Temples at once, and so make your self doubly guilty, while your uie hers, and bespatter her Husbands honour, but I have hopes of your conformity & that for the time to come you will love me vertuously, chastly, and modestly, so expecting, nay imploring your compliance, I take my leave, and am Yours in all civil service.
A conceited complementall Dialogue. A waggish Wench and a new wounded Lover. She. Did your wisdome conceit, that I was in love? I wonder where I first began to suck in that unnaturall heat, I am sure not from those two leaden eyes of yours, that sight is no way piercing; I confesse they would be very lovely ones if the balls stood right, and there is a leg of yours (to your praise be it spoken) made out of a dainty Staffe, and yet God be thanked there is Calfe enough. He. Be pleased to pardon him Lady, who though once refractory, is now become soft and soluble, you see what miracles your beau∣ty can work. She. Alas! has it been wounded of late? prickt at the heart Ile warrant, with a forked-Arrow. He. Let my true unfeigned penitence procure a pardon for my former follies, I doe ac∣knowledge that dread powerfull Deitie little; great Cupid, and his all-quick∣ning heat burns in my brest, I confesse I am he that once wronged your honour, that termed you unchast and impudent,
and yet I am he that now doe beg your love, my Contrition is as true as my Al∣legation was false; I am now all love, and all your creature, nor can I live un∣lesse you will deigne to love me. She. Well Sir, I shall consider of your suit, your Confession, and Contrition has something wrought upon me. He. I am at your disposall. SONG VIII. The inspired Lover. [Tune is, Gerards Mistresse.] 1. APpear Thou true Aurora, suddenly appear, The world to chear; For till thou shin'st all things doe languish here: Diffuse Those lucid glories, oh diffuse thy beams To guild Loves streams, Where Cupid Anchors in a Ship of Dreams: Too long th'hast been secluded When those fulgent Rayes of thine Can cloathe this Globe In such a Robe Shall Cymbia's self out-shine.
2. Let ou Humeous Poets flatter rottennesse and paint, And call her Saint, Making a Quean a Queen with language quint, And call Those Ladies beautecus, whose sunk watry-eyes, And rivell'd thighs Would daunt Deaths self, meaning to make them prize. Let them still dawb and varnish Old Hecub, and call her fair, While we doe know 'Tis nothing so, She sheds her nails and hayre. 3. But thou Great Natures Goddesse, glory of thy kinde, Where shall we finde One like thy self for person and for minde? Thy true, Yet Roseat colour that exceeds all art, And fires my hear, Those rare perfections lodg'd in every part. That hie-bult Iv'ry forehead, That melting lip, and speaking-eye, And such a tongue Ingag'd in Song Would slave a Deitie.
4. I doe Not envie Phoebus with his Lawreate Love, Nor would I prove Saturn's Pylyra, or the Wife of Jove, Let Bacchus Court his Madam in a kindly grape. Let Saturne's rape, Beautous Almena in Ampbitrio's shape, I have more than heaven, Earth, or Neptune's Empirie, Angels and Men Fall prostrate then Adoe this Deitie. 5. When I First perused that Celestiall face, In such a place, Where Flora tript it with her Nimphish race. Did not The chearfull Goddesse and her Rose-crown'd crew All flockt to view, A mortall creature but of heavenly heiw. Did they not each fall pro∣strate as sweet Ver in charge had given A flowry Wreathe Each did bequeath To thee the joy of Heaven.
6. I am Not perplxd at the great Turks store, Or that the Oe Of hallowed Shrines serves to adorn his Whore. The migh∣ty Sultan's greatnesse, or the Persian pride, I can abide; And view the great Iberian Monarch ride In his Golden Charriot Studded with most pretious Gms, In thee (my Dear) I have what ere The mightiest Prince esteems. A Jeering, ironicall Epistle. Sir, I Have so much care of your health, that I can∣not but intreat you (as the Welch Philosopher sayes) to take very many heeds, that your brains bring not your body to ruine. I hear you have un∣dertaken all City-Feasts, Poesies for Chimneys and Ghambers, and Entertainments whensoever, and wheresoever, at the perill of your own invention; tis a very noble resolve I confesse, but you must consider that the misery of Man may fitly be com∣pared to a Divedapper, who when she is under water past our sight, and indeed can seem no more
to us rises again, and does but shake her self, and is the very same she was: even so (beloved Sir) is it still with transitory Man. You have learnt the names of the severall Liberall Sciences, and have written Epistles congratulatory to the Nine Mu∣sess, and are indeed one of the Water-Bayliffs of Hel con. But what then? Poverty is the Patri∣mony of the Muses; those that have seen the sad Exit of many a famous Poet, have made that old Law into a new Maxime: you are not to be taught that no man can be learned of a sudden, but let not your project for Poetrie discourage you, what (probably) you may lose in that you may get again in Alchymie; but what ever happens, you must remember that the chief note of a Scholar is to govern his passions; keep your hat on, the block salute few bare-headed, especially in Winter there is much danger in it. The Poet Aeschilus while he was complementing with his hat in his hand had his brains beaten out by a shell-Fish darted from an Eagles claw, who took his balld-pate for a white Rock: I know you bruise your brains and con∣fine your self to much vixation, I know also that eight and twenty severall Almanacks have been compiled, and all for severall years since first that fabrick of yours was indued with breath, and eight and twenty times has Phoebus Carre run out his yearly course since your creation. I need not play the Aedipus, or say you are eight and twenty years
of age; so wishing you long life, I rest and re∣maine— Yours verily. A Love-Song, Between Amintas and Cloris. 1. CLoris sigh'd, and sang and wept, Sighing sang, and singing slept; Awakes, sighs, sings, and weeps again For Amintas [Amintas!] that was slain. Oh! [oh!] had you seen his face quoth she, How weet, how full of majestie: And there she stopt, and then she cryde, Amintas! Amintaas! and so she dyde. 2. Cloris dead! Amintas came, Whilst the Eccho sounds his name; A false report had noy'd him slain, Which makes her death a double pain. Gone! [gone] is my Love, my life, (quoth he) The mirror of true constancy: And then he rests, and kiffing cryes My Cloris, my Cloris! and by her dyes.
SONG IX. COrinna false! how may it be? Let me not hea't again, 'tis blasphemy; She's Divine, Not the Shrine, Where the Vectall flame doth shine, Holds a Light more constant, pure than she: Next shall the Night Out-burn that Tapr-light Which consumes the One-Ey'd day, Phoebus rayes Shall not gaze Titan in his clearest face; Snow shall burn, Floods return To the Springs their funerall Urne, Shall enlive its ashes e're her loves decay. 2. 'Tis said Corinna, how may it be? As false as my affections true to thee; That thou art How my heart Fears such terrors to impart Not what thou was wont to be to me: This! this destroyes My late triumphant joyes
Which swell'd when in her armes entwin'd, Love's best wreathe, You did breathe Vowes to be my life till death; Robb'd that blisse, Leaving this, With sighs, and every word a kisse, Whilst that our poor souls are with love com∣bin'd. 3. Last Night I walk'e into a Grove, Where chast embraces did oft expresse a love, Pure as fire, Whose desire Might but with our souls expire, This I vowed since your sad remove: The Nightingale Hast hush't her pretty tail, Now leaving her dities to the Owle, When we spie From the Skie Falling-Starres, our miserie, They assigne If you shine In any Obe of love but mine, Come, come Corinna and revive my soul.
The Muses Expositor: OR, A Poeticall Dictionary, For Information of the meer English Reader. A. Ajax. AJax sirnamed Telemon, who (vanquished by Ulysses invincible Oratory, who in despight of him obtained Achilles's Celestiall Armes) slew himselfe, out of whose blood sprang a Flower with these letters on the leaves, A. J. which are the first letters of his name, signifying griefe, and dolour: Ajax in Greek signifying Ahlasse.
Achilles The Son of Peleus and Thtis, the greatest and most excellent Warriour among the Greciau; the Poets will have him to be Invulnerable, only his heel might be pierced; which (say they) was proved by Paris, who wounded him with an envenomed Dart (in the Temple of Apollo) in that very place, whereof he died. B. Bellerophon, As some will have it, the Son of Neptune, as others of Glaucus King of Epire, an all-accom∣plisht young Prince; he residing in the Court of Petreus King of Argos, the Kings Wife (Athia) became passionately in love with him, insomuch that (forgetting of what Sex she was) she offered him her body, but being re∣jected by this frigid Hypolitus, and diffident of his secresie, with her heire dishelved, and on her knees she besought the King her Husband, to wipe off her stain with spunges made of his heart who had ravisht her: Petreus, though highly incensed, would not immediatly destroy him, nor permit his stinghter in his Palace, but contrived his ruine thus, He wrote Letters to his Father-in-law, Jobaras King of Lycra; ma∣king Bellerophon the Messenger, intimating that upon receipt of those he should immediately
kill him (Bellerophon) as his deepest enemy, the Prince thus dispatched with the message of his own murther, repaired to Lycia, and was mag∣nificently treated by the King for the space of twelve dayes: which expired, Jobaras inquired the welfare of his Son and Daughter, with the present estate of Epire, demanding if he had no Letters that might hint his desired solution. Bellerophon presently pull'd forth his Packet, which the King receiving and reading, became much astonished; but dissembling his displea∣sure, he began to cogitate how he might deliver over Bellerophon to death by some wilie strata∣gem, and therefore using him with all honour for some few dayes, he began at length to ex∣presse more intimacy, often discoursing with him of Prodigies, Monsters and Serpents, a∣mongst the rest he mentioned the Chymera, a most hydeous monster-, informing him, that whosoever should destroy that beast should have Temples erected to his honour. Bellero∣phon, whose magnanimity was sufficient to ani∣mate him to any adventure, (though never so dreadfull) readily undertook the incounter, vanquishing this more than monster thanks to his plumed palfray; for which deliverance, Jobaras not onely altered his sanguine resolve, but gave him one of his Daughters, called Cas∣sandra in marriage, with part of his Territories.
C. Cassandra, A Prophetesse, Diughter to Priam King of Troy: Antiquity relates that Apollo was much enamoured on this Sybill, who for a long time remained deafe to his demands, to the great grief of that God, as is sweetly hinted by the famous French Poet Ronsard in one of his most excellent Sonets (translated, and almost fitted for the Presse) to his Mistresse, whom he sha∣dows under the name of Cassandra, Son. 22. So sacred Phoebus up and down did rove On Zinchus banks (by Illion swiftly running) While rivers, woods, and flowry-meads did move, Wailing (with him) Cassandra's cruell cunning: In vain the pensive God his Harp did plie, (Mingling his briny tears with Zanthus stream) In vain he taxt his Ladies cruelty, Wasting his vitals in an amorous Dream. As thou great God of Science, and of Light, Gold-hayr'd Hyperion were't once perplexed; So am I stabb'd with delours day and night, With griping care, and sullen sorrow vexed, &c. Yet at last this love-sick Deity got a grant of his wishes, on this condition that Phoebus should furnish her with such Prescience, that she should
be able to foretell the Fates of Men, Nations, and Cities for Ages to come. Phoebus granted her desire, but claiming her promise, she gave a scornfull negation: At which Apollo being in∣censed (since it was impossible to seize what he had already conferred for the Gods (say the Poets) cannot revoke their promise) added this, That though she prophefied never so truly no man should believe her, the reason that though she foretold the calamities that must inevitably follow if Helen were not restor'd, yet none hearkned to her advice. Calais, The Brother of Zetes, both Sonnes to Boreas; the two brothers being imbarqued with Jason, and the other Argonauts, for the conquest of the Golden Fleece, hapned to cast Anchor in a Haven of Bythinia, then under the Scepter of Phineas King of Bythinia and Paphlagonca, (a man most skliful in predicting future accidents) who, for divulging the secrets of the Gods, ha∣ving been honoured with their councels, was not onely struck binde by Jupiter, but most strangely tormented by Harpies, i. e. monstrous Birds, having faces like Virgins, their hands mis-shapen and woudrous large, furnished with great bellies and insatiate appetites, these so soon as Phineas was set down to meat
were constant Intruders, either devouring all, or in case any dish escaped their rapacity, they defiled it with loathsome excrements. Phineas having foreseen the approach of those noble Adventurers who were now landed in his Do∣minions, furnishing himself with a Guide, re∣sorted to their Harbour; relating his misfor∣tune, and imploring their assistance, adding, That he was neer allyed to them in blood, ha∣ving married one of their Sisters calld Cleopatra, also that he had a long time expected their approach, as appointed by heaven for his deli∣verance. The Sons of Boreas (whose shoulders were adorned with wings like Birds) and their fellow-Adventurers being moved with com∣passion, associated him to his Court, where at the houre of Dinner they were sumptuously feasted, but scarce had they tasted the Vyands, when behold the Harpies (with hideous noyse) invaded the meat, filling the room with a noy∣some stench: then the Sons of Boreas presently taking wing, fell upon the Harpies with such courage that they forced them to flie, when a voice was heard from heaven, forbidding their further pursuit, and assuring that the Harpies should no more infest Phineas, Appollonius, Valerius Flaccus.
Castor, The Brother of Pollux, the two Sons of Laeda, the first by Tyndarus, the second by Jupiter; they were born in Aebalia, called also Laconia; Castor being slaine by Meleager his Brother, Pollux, (who challenged the right of Immor∣tality, as the Son of Jove) so infinitely loved him that he prevailed with his Father Jupiter that his Immortality might equally be shared betwixt them; which being granted, they live and are in heaven by turns. D. Delphes, Where Apollo's Temple once stood, on the Hill of Parnassus, a Rock every where hanging over it, where stood a City not defended by Walls but by Precipices; the middle of the Rock did open it self into the form of a Theater, by rea∣son whereof the clamour of men and the clan∣gor of Trumpets when they were sonnded, was heard more multiplied by the Reverbera∣tion; which strook the men of that Age (be∣ing ignorant of the naturall cause) with great terrour, adding a reverend amazement to their admiration: here this Devil of Delphos a long time gave Oracles, much about this hollow of the Rock, on the middle of the height of the
Hill, there was a little Plane, and in it a deep Hole, out of which the Oracle proceeded, which being a cold breath driven up (as it were) by a winde, did possesse the mindes of the Priests with a madnesse, who being filled with the God (or rather the Devil) he did inforce them to give Answers to those that demanded them. E. Empedocles The renowned Scicilian Philosopher, he consti∣tuted two principles of all things, viz: Vacancy and Repletion, and was of opinion that of those Attoms congregated in one bulk; all this great ALL took beeing, that he might be thought a God, he leapt into Aetna, as was confirmed by the ejection of his brazen shooes. F. Faunus, One of the Wood Gods, sometimes taken for Rebin Good-Fellow; one of that name King of the Latines, who first erected Temples, was worshipped with Divine Honours, of whom all Temples were called Fanes.
G. Gorgons. Phorcus the Son of Neptune had six Daughters, three whereof were called the Aged, because they were born with white hayres covering their bodies like a garment; the other three were named Gorgons for their horrible shapes. Gorgon in Greek signifying terrible: they feign thee these three had but one Eye to see with, and one Tooth to eat with, which they mutu∣ally injoyed by turns. Medusa being mortall, but the other immortall: they had their heads periwigg'd with scales of Dragons, their teeth long as those of a wilde Boare, having wings wherewith they flew; moreover qualified with this excellent property, that whoever looked upon them were immediately converted to stone, for so the Poets and Grammarians (as well Greeks as Latines will have it) but to speak truth, and with Authentick Authority for warrant they were indued with such excel∣lent beauty that all that gazed upon them were surprized with amazement: thence came the Fiction, that they were converted into stone, Nat. Comes Mithol, lib. 6.
H. Hymen The God of Marriage, he was born in Athens. It hapned that the chief Virgins of the City sporting themselves in an Evening by the Sea∣shore were surprized by Pyrates, and with the rest, Hymen (who to enjoy the company of his Beloved had put himself into the habit of a Woman) was brought on boord, but at mid∣night this masculine Mayd cut the throats of all the Pyrates while they were soundly sleep∣ing; and running to the City, demanded of the Citizens what they would give to him that should restore their Daughters? They being surprized with joy, promised him all they were masters of. He onely requested the immediate possession of his Mistresse; which being con∣firmed unto him by oath, he immediately gave every man his Gyrle, and receiving his dearest Dear to his imbraces, that marriage proved so fortunate, that after his decease it was the con∣stant custome of the Greeks to Invoke Hymen at every Nuptial Feast; and from them the Latines received that Ceremony, long time in use amongst them.
I. Iô, The Daughter of Inachus, transformed into a Cow, and Bull'd by Jupiter; at which, Juno be∣ing angry, created a Flie called the Aestrum, which so stung poor Iô that she became mad, and afterwards brought forth a Son to Jupiter, called Epaphus Aesehylus. L. Laomedon, Father to Priam, he intending to build the City of Troy, Neptune and Apollo (degraded of their Rule) indented with him for an Annual Salary to afford their utmost ayde: This proffer was cheerfully imbraced by Laomedon, but his work finished, he not onely denyed to make good his agreement, but threatned in case they departed not his Territories to cut off their eares and banish them into some barren Island: this brace of Deities thus injuriously dealt with were ex∣tremely incensed, and resolving to castigate this perfidious Prince, Apollo shot his Arrows (hea∣ded with pestilence) into the Town, while Neptune thundred his rage in impetuous Tor∣rents that passed over the walls, threatning an utter devastation by water, Laomedon being thus plagued with fire within, and water with∣out,
resorted to the Oracle, inquiring the cause and cure of these evils: Answer was given, That the inraged Powers could not be appeased but with the yearly Tribute of an immaculate Virgin made choice n by Lot, and bound to a Rock adjoyning to the Sea-shore there to be devoured by the Mon∣sters of the Sea. Laomedon returning to Troy, summoned the Grands of the City, to whom he related the harsh Doom of the Oracle: they (of two evils, willing to chuse the least) give their consent, but with this caution, that the Sortilge should impartially passe: the Lots were immediately cast, and (by the appoint∣ment of Fate) fell upon Hesione the Kings Daughter, who was immediately taken, and her silken limbs fastned to a Rock with iron∣chains; as this naked Princesse was bemoaning her captivity, every minute in expectation to be buried in the bowells of a monstrous Orke. The great Hercules passing that way, being moved with compassion to hear her laments, gave her deliverance, by slaying the monster. Laomedon falling at the feet of Hercules, manifested his joy, proffering him thirty Horses lately given him by Iupiter. Hercules gave him thanks, but refused the gratuity (being now on his journey for the atchievement of the Golden Fleece) till his return, which was in a few dayes after: but demanding his Horses, Laomedon denyed that
he ever made such a Proposal: at which mon∣strous ingratitude Hrcules being justly inraged, sacked the City of Troy. Valerius Flaccus Ap∣pooius, lib. 3. M. Medea, The Wife of Jason, for whose sake she betrayed her Countrey, ew her Brother, and lastly, her her own Children. N. Nereides. Nymphs of the Ocean, waiting upon Thetis: they are said to be fifty in number. O. Orpheus, The Son of Apollo and Calip: or, as others say, of Oxger a Mountaine in Thrace and Po∣lymnia. He is said by the sweetnesse of his me∣lody to attract the affections of Trs and Stones to calm the Windes, and stop the cour∣ses of Rivers; his Wife Euridice dying, he took his journey to Hell, where he obtained such fa∣vour of Pluto, (for it seems the very Devils de∣light in musick) that his Wife had leave to re∣turn with him to the Earth; but in case he looke back till his arrivall there, the favour should be frustrate. He (who doated upon his Wives countenance) forgetting the Injunction
of the Acherontick God, must needs look over his shoulder, and so in a moment lost his dear & long attempted purchase; therefore return∣ing to the earth he spent his dayes in the seve∣rest solitude, and yet his mourning occasioned mirth, for, 1. While Orpheus sweetly did complain, Upon his Lute with heavy strain, How his Eudic was slain; The Trees o hear Obtain'd an ear, And after left it off again. 2. At every stroke and every stay, The boughs kept time, and nodding lay, And listned, bending all one way; The Astn-Tree As fast as he, Began to shake, and learn'd to play. —being finally (after a tedious languishment, become a Woman-eater) he was slain by Thra∣cian Women as the very enemy of their sex.
P. Philmel, Or the Nightingale, the Daughter of Pandion King of Thrace, who to be revenged on her Husband Tereus (who had deflowred her Sister, and cut out her tongue to prevent discovery) slew her own Son Iris, and feasted his Father with his limbs, and was transformed into a Bird called a Nightingale. Strada has an excellent copy of Verses, containing a contention between this mellifluous Choriter and a skilfull Lint, which for the Readers delight (as they were lately translated) shall be here inserted. Now the declining Sun'gan downwar'd bnd From higher heaven, and from his locks did send A milder flame, when nr to Tybers flow A Lutinist allay'd his carefull we With sounding char, and in a greeny seat Oth' shady Oake took shelier from the heat. A Nightingale oreeard him, that did use To sojourn in the neighbour-Grove, the Muse That fill'd the place, the Syrene of the wood, Poor harmlesse Syren stealing ner, she stood Close lurking in the leaves, attentively Recording that unwonted melody. She conn'd it to her self, and every strain His fingers play'd, her thrat retun'd again.
The Lutinist perceiv'd an answer sent From th' imitating Bird, and was content To shew her play; more fully, then, in hast He tries his Lute, and giving her a tast Of the insuing quarrel, nimbly beats On all his strings— —As nimbly she repeats, And mildly ranging ore a thousand Keyes Sounds a shrill warning of her after Layes. With rolling hand the Lutinist then plies The trembling threds, sometimes in scornfull wise He brushes down the strings, and kems them all With one even stroak, then takes them severall, And culls them ore again; his sparkling joynts With busie descant, mincing on the points, Reatht back with nimble touch, that done he stayes. The Bird replies, and Art with Art repayes, Sometimes as one inexpert, or in doubt How she might weild her voyce she draweth out Her Tone at large, and doth at first prepare A solemn strain, not weav'd with winding ayre, But with an equall pitch and constant throat Makes clear the passage for her gliding note, Then crosse division diversly she playes, And loudly chaunting out her quickest Layes, Poyses the sound, and with a quivering voyce Falls back again.— —He wondring how so choice. So various harmony could issue out
From such a little throat does go about Some hrder lessons, and with wondrous art Changing the strings, doth up the Treble dart. And downward smite the Base, with painfull stroke He beats; and as the Trumpet doth provoke Sluggards to fight, even so his wanton skill With mingled discord joynes the hoarse and shrill. The Bird this also tunes, and while he cuts Sharps, notes with melting voyce and mingled puts Measures of middle sound, then suddenly She thunders deep and juggs it inwardly With gentle murmurs, clear and dull she sings By course as when the Martiall warning rings. Beleive't the Minstrell blusht, with angry Inflam'd quoth he, thou Chauntresse of the Either from thee Ile bear the prize away, Or vanquisht break my Lute without Inimitable accents then he strains, His hand flies ore the strings in one he Farre different numbers, chasing here and there, And all the strings belabours every where, But she when practise long her throat had Induring not to yeild at once doth set Her spirits all at work, and all in vain, For while she labours to expresse again With Natures simple voyce such divers Keyes, With slender pipes such lofty notes as thse, Orematcht with high designes, orematcht with wo, Just at the last incounter of her foe.
She faints, she dyes, falls on his Instrument That conquer'd her, a fitting Monument. R. Rhea, Called also Cybells, the Mother of the Gods, Wife of Saturn, the Father of Jupiter. S. Salmacis, A Nymph in love with a Sullen Youth, whom she one day found bathing in a christaline River, and stripping her self, accosted him naked; but he still refusing her love, she clasped him about the middle, and invoking the heavenly powers that they might never part, they were incorpo∣rated. T. Telephus, The Sonne of Hercules King of Mysia, being wounded by Achilles with an Axe (when land∣ing with his forces on his Continent, they were opposed by the Mysians, being now on their journey for Troy) could not be cured in eight years after: resorting to the Oracle to inquire what were best to be done. He received answer, That he who gave the wound, alone could cure it. He therefore coming to Achilles was by him stricken again with that very Axe in the same
place as before, and was immediately cured, a cure both swift and strange. V. Venus. Or the Sea-born Goddesse, her story is thus: Saturn, the Son of Heaven and Earth, by the perswasion of his Mother, cut off his Fathers Testicles, throwing them into the Sea, from the sapour whereof Venus had beeing, whence she is called by Lycophron, —[Lover of the Privities.]— The first place where she landed was Cythera, from thence she set sayle for Cyprus, whence she is called Cytherea and Cyprides. The An∣tients printed her (as newly arising from the Ocean) naked, sayling in a shell. Alexander the Great commanding Apelles to give her Effigie, afforded him his own Paramour (all naked) as his pattern; but the Painter having finished his piece, was as much surprized with this living, as Alexander with that dead Venus, and by Alexanders license, received her as the reward of his Industry. On this subject the Poet Baif has an Ode, which (because it was never yet Englished) I will here insert:
Behold her hayre, yet moyst with brine, Platting her locks with artfull care, The Sea-born Venus (all Divine) To Cyprus Island doth repair. A Shell's her Ship, no sooner born But Incense does her Shrine adorn. The End of the Muses Expositor
A playster for Priscians pate. AN APPENDIX TO The Academy of Pleasure. Containing An Alphabeticall Explanation of Hard Words, For Instruction of the Weaker sort of Capacities. A. ADulate] flatter, or cogge Abreviate] make short Aihilate] make void Abandon] forsake, Acherontica] relating to Hell Adulterated] corrupted, altered from its genuine purity
Abdicated] thrown downe Absolved] forgiven Abhominate] hate deadly Alienated] estranged, or lost to former knowledge Anagram] a Divinion by names, cal∣led by the Antients Onomantia; the Greeks referre this Invention to Ly∣cophron, who was one of those they called the Seven Starres, or Pleiades; afterwards (as witnesses Eustachius) there were divers Greek Wits that disported, themselves herein, as he which turned Atlas for his heavy burthen in supporting Heaven into Talas, that is, wretched. Some will maintain, that each mans Fortune is written in his Name, which they call Anagramatism, or Metragramatism: Poeticall liberty will not blush to uso E for E, V for W, S for Z. That amarous Youth did very queintly sus, resolving a mysterious expression of his Love to Rose Hill, when in the border of a painted cloath e caused to be painted as rudely as he had de∣vised grosly a Rose, a Hill, an Eye, a Leaf, and a Well, that is if you spell it, I Love Rose Hill.
Accost] salute Accrew] gain by industry Apocriphal] doubtfull Assume] take to himselfe Alacrity] chearfulnesse Allusion] relating to another matter Amiamble] fair or lovely Amicable] friendly Arbitrate] decide, or end a controversie Alternate] constantly in motion Agile] nimble Abstersive] See the deseription of Byr∣tha's bed in Gondibert, Commenced on by E. R. Canto 2. The Posts were of Abstersive Ebony, Though no Abstersivenesse in Posts we finde. In Powder tane (the Learned not deny) It cleanses Choler, and in Pills Breaks winde. B. Beatificall] blessed Barbarity] cruelty Bi-fronted] double-faced Boysterously] rudely Bestiall] unmanly Burse] Exchange Borean] blustring
Barter] traffick one commodity for an∣other Brutish] swinish Bottle] apt to be broken Bleak] cold Blythe] merry or sportive Baneful] destuctive Blissfull] happy Barathrum] Hell Bromtus] a name of Bacchus Bumpkinly] clownish Bordering] neer adjoyning C Capacious] witty or apprehensive Candid] of a clear temper Captions] tetchy or quarrelsome Contempuou,] undervaluing, or despi∣sing Concis] brief Contemporary] equall in time Conspiouous] visible Commemorate] call to minde a thing past, or party deceased Consanguineou] allyde by blood Confligeate] set on fire Cast-gate] chastise, or cerest
Consummate] finish Co-adjutor] fellow Aydar Cataracts] fallings of the River Nyle in Aegypt Coroborate] increase in power by a con∣stant addition of strength Contemplate] serious thinking Completion] finishing Combustible] apt to take fire Commence] take a degree Chalybers] tamers of steel Connexion] joyning together D Delusive] deceitfull Devastate] lay wast Depopulate] destroy a people Delineate] make evident at large Denude] strip bare Dethronize] thrust a lawfull King out of his Throne Decapitate] behead him Donour] a Giver Donation] by gift Diabolicall] Hellish, devilish, or damn∣able Decollation] beheading
Dissimulate] hide an intent Dislocate] disjoyn, or take in pieces Debilitated] weakned Deride] sceffe at Disconsolate] melancholy, sad, or joy∣lisse Despicable] worthlesse, not worth mind∣ing E. Ebriety] Drunkennesse Epicedium] a Funarall Song Encomion] gratulary Verses Epithalamium] a Marriage Song Epigram] a short, but pitby kinds of Poesie, very delectable. The best that ever wrote in that kinde were, Mar∣tiall, nsonine, Owen, Harrington and our famous Ben Elegant] neatly phras'd Elaborate] accomplished style F. Fallacious] deceitfull Frontiniack] a kinde of Wine very plea∣sant to the tast
Fraternity] Brotherhood Facetious] smooth, polite Fidelious] trusty G. Garulous] talkative Gygantick] big of stature Gerion] a Monster with three heads Ganymed] Jove's Cup-bearer Garbage] raffe, or refuse Glaciate] congeale to Ice H. Hyems] Winter Hymen] said to be the God of Mar∣riage Harrast] weakened with tedious toyle Harpocratos] pourtrayed with his finger on his mouth; sayd to be the God of silence Hyacinth] a Boy beloved of Phoebus, by him unfortunately stain and turned in∣to a Flower
I. Insaniate] mad out of ones wits Infranchise] release Invulnerable] not to be wounded Implacable] not to be pleased, rude of soule Insinuate] flatter himselfe into friend∣ship Internall] belonging to Abysse Irradiate] beautifie Incorporated] made one Indulgent] loving  ardently than wisely Indocible] not to be taught K. Kalendar] an Almanack L. Lascivious] given to VVomen Loquatious] talkative Landgarth] the name of an Amazon Laudable] praise-worthy Litigious] vain, idle Lurk] lie hid
Laura] the name of a Woman immor∣talized by the pen of the famous Pe∣trarch Lapidary] one that has skill in the ver∣tues of Stones Lynceus] said to be so quick sighted that he could pierce through the Globe of the Moon Lunacious] Moonish Lycanthropia] la Disease causing those that are infected therewith to imagine themselves to be transformed into Wolves M. Morosity] sowrenesse, sullennesse Maternall] motherly Morpheus] said to be the God of Sleep Menstruous] putrid, defiled Mitigate] lessen the matter
T. Tantalize] to view the thing desired, but not being able to attain it Tattarus] Hell Tarnish] Eclipse or dim a lustre V. Venereous] sensuall, wantonly inclin'd Vituperate] maligne, slander, &c. Vivacious] lively, lusty, &c. Varnsh] wash over rottennesse with pleasant colours Virago] a masculine woman Warlike] addicted to Armes, desirous of Military imployment FINIS.
