A204 R1741 12957187 96047
AN ACCOUNT OF DUNDEES Rendezvouse, AND THE FRENCH, & IRISH, LANDING Place IN SCOTLAND. Viz. The North, and West, High-Lands, with an Acount of the CLANS. Licens'd, July 17th, 1689. LOchaber, the present Retreat of that Rebel Dundee, was Originally and Properly called Abre, which according to the Judg∣ment of the Learned Buchanan, signifies a Harbour, for that the Sea comes in there into a large Bay, which resembles a standing Pool, or rather a Lake; whence those of the Low-Lands that speak English, call not only that Bay of the Sea, but likewise the whole Country round it, impro∣perly by the name of Lochquhabre. It is bounded with the Deucaledonian Sea on the West near to the Shire of Ross, on the North Baldenoch, and Port of Murray on the East, and part of Athol, Broadalbine, and Lorn from the South, to the South West Parts; yet a Country as fertile as any in those Parts, pro∣ducing plenty of Corn and Pasture, and very pleasant, by reason of shady Woods, and store of Rivers, and Springs, It is as plenteous in Fish as most Countries in Scotland, as well River Fish as Sea-Fish. It has ridges of almost inaccessible Moun∣tains along it; so that 'tis an easie matter for a few Persons to defend themselves there against a great Number af Persons who are Ignorant of its Avenues. It has been for many years a Nest of Thieves and Robbers, who used to go in Bodies together, into several of the Neighbouring Coun∣tries, and drive away all their Cattle, and take with them what they could easily carry. And because some People here are at a loss, when they meet with the Word CLAN, I shall briefly inform the Reader, that the Import of that Word is no more than Family, or Tribe; and the Chief of it is Worshipped by the Inferior sort of People, as if he were a Demi-god. And in∣deed formerly they had great reason to stand by him, for if he was Attainted of Rebellion, all his Vassals and Tenents were forfeited with him, as if they had been guilty of the same Crime, tho' they were never so Innocent of it. But the Convention of Scotland hath of late, (to their unspeakable Commendation,) Repealed that Act as unreasonable, which has prevented a great ma∣ny's going in to Dundee, who, had the former Act been in being, would have been necessitated to fol∣low their Chief, seeing they had no other ways to preserve their Estate, but their Chiefs over∣coming his Enemies. And this may well be sup∣posed to have been the reason why none of Duke
de Gordon's Vassals and Tenants joined him, they being mostly Protestants, and so by that Act of the Convention freed from all the hazard of be∣ing forfeited, which they were formerly under, upon their Superiors being declared a Traitor. The most considerable of the Clans that joined him, were the Macklenes, and the Mackdonalds; the former, 'tis well known, have lived in Rebel∣lion and Robbery for a great part of the late King Charles's Reign. And as for the latter, they are all, or most, Roman Catholicks, and 'tis well known, they would do any thing to advance Mo∣ther-Church's Interest. But it may not be amiss to give a brief Description of these Two Islands, which these Two CLANS possest. The Mack∣leans Live in the Isle of Mut, 'tis towards the Southermost parts of Lockguhabre, is Twenty Four Miles long, and of the same bredth; it is Crag∣gy, and very Fruitful in Corn; it has many Woods, and great Numbers of Deer, and a safe Harbour. On the West it has Two Rivers that abound in Salmon, with others smaller, and Two Lakes, in each of which is an Island with a Ca∣stle in it. The Sea runneth in it, and maketh Four Bays, all which are well stored with Her∣ring. This Island lies not far from Argile-shire, which is a Barren Countrey, and bad for an Ar∣my to subsist in. The other Island, in possession of the Mackdo∣nalds, lies off of the Northern parts of Lockguha∣bre, it is called the Skie; that is to say, a Wing; but by the Ancient Scots it was called Skianack, i. e. Winged; for that the Promontories, between which the Sea runs in, represent Wings displayed. It is the greatest of all the Islands about Scotland, being Forty Two Miles in length, and in some places Eight, in other Twelve, in bredth; it a∣bounds in Mountains, and these with Woods, and the Woods abound in Pastures; the Valleys are Fruitful of Corn and Cattle, and especially with Horses. It is Watered with Five Rivers that are replenisht with Salmon, together with se∣veral little ones. The Sea entring it maketh ma∣ny Bays, Three great ones, and Thirteen smaller, which afford plenty of Herrings. It has likewise a Lake of sweet Water, and Five Castles. For the rest that joined him, they are ve∣ry inconsiderable, and Persons who have no Principle at all, but only that they may have occasion to Plunder the Countreys where they come, it being the delight of many of those sort of People to Plunder the Countreys where they Live; and were never so sevearly look'd after, as in Oliver's time, tho' it cost him some time, and more Men, before he could Re∣duce them. They are all in general a Barbarous sort of People, and have little or no sense of Re∣ligion, and if any, it inclines to Popery; they have much the same Language with the Native Irish, there being no greater difference betwixt them, than betwixt the English and Scotch Low-Landers. They are Persons that will not stand the shock of a Battle in their own Countrey, because they know how to make their escape by those Avenues where strangers cannot so easily follow them, especially Horse; and as for Foot, few are able to pursue them, they being very swift in Run∣ning. We doubt not but we shall quickly hear of their Defeat; for the Earl of Argile is gone from the West High-Lands with a Detachment of their Majesties Forces, and a great Number of his Vas∣sals and Tenants to Hem them in on the West. LONDON, Printed for W. Brown on London-Bridg, 1689.
