A41 12796572 93982
THE ALAMODE MUSICIAN Being a new Collection of Songs Compos'd by Some of the most Eminent Masters, & Ingrav'd from the Originalls, with a through Bass for the Harpsichord, or Bass-Violl and for the easier playing ye Trebles upon the Flute, each Song is transpos'd (where necessary) to a Key proper for that Instrument. Sould by Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple Chainge Fleet Street, 1698
A new Song set by Mr: Forcer. Farewell my useless Scrip, & poor unheed'd flocks, No more you'll round me trip, nor cloath me with your Locks, Feed by you purling Stream where Jockey, where Jockey first J knew, J only think J only think, J only think on him, J cannot, cannot, cannot think on you. Farewell each Shepherdess the bonny Lads adieu, May each his Wish possess and to that Wish be true, Your Oaten Pipes cou'd please but Jockey then was kind, Your bonny Tunes may Cease the Lad has Chang'd his mind. For the Flute Sould by Henry Playford at his Shop in ye Temple-Change Fleet-street (num̄ 5)
A Song in the Comedy call'd the Town Vnmask'd Set by Mr. Iohn Eccles Sung by Ms. Bowman All things seem deaf, seem deaf to my Complaints, All things seem dea╌f to my Complaints, in Vaine J roa╌m the groves a¦lone, in Vaine J roa╌m the groves alone; Hear me, hear me Ye Loves, ye Lo╌ves departed Swains, that to Eli╌zyan Shades are gon, hear me, hear me Ye Loves depa╌rted Swains, that to E╌li╌zian Shades are gon Jf to my faithfull Celadon J prove not true, if to my faithfull
Celadon J prove not true; Let it be both our dooms, let it be both our dooms, let it be both our dooms, let it be both our dooms never to com to you, never to com to you, let it be both our dooms, never to com to you, no no no no no no no no no no no no no no never never never never never, no never to com to you, no never never never never never, no never to com to you For the Flute Sold by Henry Playford at his shop in ye Temple Change Fleet-street
A new Song set by Mr: Barrett. How wretched, how wretched is our Fate to Love, when doom'd, when doom'd to Love in Vain, or Sigh & Tears suc╌cess╌less Prove, & in the fair no Passions move, but hatred and Disdain. Ah dear Sibersa, Did you, did you, did you know what Torments J endure you more Compassionate wou'd grow, & som kind tender pitty show, my Wild dispair to Cure, my Wi╌ld dispair to Cure. To you my Heart J've Sacrifis'd, to Sigh, to bleed, to bleed, to burn. For you the World J have despis'd, you as my Goddess Jdoliz'd, and am by you by you undone, & am by you, & am by you, by you, by you undone. Sould by Henry Playford at his Shop in ye Temple Change Fleet-street (num̄ 7)
A new Song set by Mr: Ieremiah Clark Sung by Ms: Campion at the Theater in Dorcet Garden Long has Pa╌sto╌ra rul'd the Plain, long, long, long has Pa╌sto╌ra rul'd the Plain, the Day╌ly Song, the Day╌ly Song of every Sighing, every Sigh╌ing Swain, in Softest notes, in Softest notes all tell their Tender Love, each Stri╌ves╌in Vain, each Stri╌ves╌in Vain Pasto╌ras Brest to move, Ah happy, happy Nimph, Ah happy, happy Nimph, whose
Charms such Ma╌gick have, can Chain a World, can Chain a World and force Mankind your Slave. Wou'd you Improve and Still much brighter Shine, Oh do but Love and You'l be all Divine, Oh. Oh, Oh do do but Love and You'l be all Divine. For the Flute Slow Sold by Henry Playford at his Shop in ye Temple Change Fleet-street (Nū. 2)
A new Song upon a lost Heart, the words by Mrs. Child Set by Mr. Wilford. Return, return thou wand╌ring Guess return return to thy forsaken Breast, forsaken Breast, fond Heart why dost thou Still pursue, a fate which will thy peace undoe, fond Heart why dost thou Still pursue, a fate which will thy peace undoe, thy peace undoe. How ill have Strngers treated thee, with va╌rious kinds of treachory, Yet thou as pleas'd with thy undoing dost vainly fly╌ to meet thy ruine
Oh dost thou hope at last to find a Breast that's Constant Soft & kind if that a lone crowns thy desire, then to thy own thou must retire, if that alone Crowns thy desire, then to thy own thow must retire, end with the first Strain. For the Flute. first strain again end with the first strain Sould by Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple Change Fleet-Street, (Num̄. 3)
A new Song in the Fatall Deuorse, set by Mr: Daniel Purcell, Sung by Ms: Linsey. O╌ O╌ Hymen must we must we allway's see. Perjur'd Man thus faithless be, and still still securely sli╌ght. Securely slight our Deity, must Vows & Oaths to us be Swore, and then be never, never, never, then be never, never never, never, never, never thought on more, must Vows & Oaths to us be Swore, & then be never, never, never, never thought on more. Jn Vain, in Vain, Jn Vain, in Vain our Votrys Seek our Aid, Jn Vain, in Vain, Jn Vain, in Vain, Jn Vain, in Vain ╌ our Votrys Seek our Aid; Jn Vain, in Vain our Votry's Seek our Aid; Jn Vain, in
Vain ╌our Votrys Seek our Aid, if thus, thus, thus, if thus, thus, thus they Still must be betraid if thus thus thus if thus thus thus if thus, thus, thus they Still must be betraid, if thus, thus, thus, if thus, thus, thus, if thus, thus, thus, they Still must be betraid. For the Flute Sould by Henry Playford at his Shop in ye Temple-Change Fleet-street (Num̄ 4),
A New Song the words by Capt. Walker set by Mr. Courtevill, The Charms of bright Beauty so Pow╌erfull Are for that wee make Peace and for that wee make War. then tell me no more, no more, then tell me no more, no more of Reli-gion and Laws, your Cant of Jn justice your good and bad Cause, your Con╌quest your Con╌quest your Conquest and Tri╌umphs your Captives and Spoyles, cou'd
never incite me, no never, cou'd never incite me, cou'd never incite me, to Hazardous toyles, cou'd never incite me, to Hazardous toyles. To be great wise and wealthy, J never wou'd chuse, Shou'd the Nymph J adore shoud the Nymph J adore her Favours refuse. But let my Eugenia be faithfull, and kind, il'e weather the Winter and weary the wind, il'e Ra╌vage the Seas, il'e Ra╌vage the Seas the Earth and the
Air and Com╌bate for Her even Death,╌even Death, Death and Dispair, For the Flute Slow Sould by Henry Playford at his shop in the Temple Change Fleet-street (Num̄ 6)
