B1146 R24840 8609435 41463
CHRISTS Gratious Message from the Throne of GRACE, To all the Prisoners of HOPE. ZACH. 9.11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy Priso∣ners out of the pit, where there is no water. By TIMOTHIE BATT, Physitian. Printed in the yeere, 1644.
TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, King of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland, &c. AND TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in the High Court of PARLIAMENT. Grace and Peace bee multiplyed from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ whom he hath sent. SIRS, THough it might seeme In∣gravity that the Sprouts in Libanus might attinge or touch the tops of the Cedars in
Libanus. Notwithstanding, it is the most princely dignity, and the high∣est honour to the highest Cedars of Libanus; to overshadow & defend the lowest sprouts. Was it honora∣ble in King Agrippa, Felix and Fe∣stus, to lend audience to Paul a chay∣ned Prisoner? And will it not bee counted an honorable thing to your Highnesse, and to Your Honorable Lords to countenance the Contem∣plation of your Prisoner concerning the Prisoners of Hope? Were the gleanings of Ephraim better then vintage of Abiezer? and is not our Contemplation concerning Christs Prisoners, more fruitfull then the Vine with its fullest clusters? the Starres which are obscured in the presence of the brightest Sunne, are profitable in his absence, giving their light to the sublunarie travi∣lers: Howsoever the light of these our Contemplations for the present may seeme as darkenesse, yet if
through your Princely favour, and your Honours protections these may be allowed; they will give a glimmering light to the poorest soule, and most distressed spirit: It will bee to them as the flowing springs of Solace, and as the plea∣sant influence from the highest starres. How will they sing of love because of the Fathers dearest love? how will they speake of glory in Christ the prince of glory? when they shal understand that they are set free by the blood of his Covenant out of the pit where in there is no water. Zach. 9.11. As for thee also, by the bloud of my Covenant, I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. When they shall finde that their Lord was anoynted to set thē loose out of the Dungeon of death and darkenesse: and that hee was the chosen Redeemer to breake the barres of death, throw upon the gates of hell, and knap in
sunder the chaines of the Devill. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. The high and ho∣norable are not ignorant, that the greatest prince under heaven, and the mightiest Monarch in the sub∣lunarie world are poore prisoners of hope unto Christ mediatour of the covenant, King of his bought & Redeemed. Is the Earth beholding to the watery clouds? and the low∣est plants to the highest planers? & are not all Terren & earthly Princes beholding to Christ King of Kings and Lord of Lords for ever. The Prisoners of hope in this state and Kingdom are almost infinite in num∣ber. How many thousands lye sicke at the poole of Bethesda? how ma∣ny thousands of mourning and drooping hearts waits for Christs springs of love more then David did for the waters of Bethlehem? I might say, how many Millions wounded in their consciences, blee∣ding in their bloods; lies waiting at
this houre before the throne of grace for the sweete and cleare countenance of God the Father, therefore they sigh and groane for his assurance through his Adoption of children, for his liberty through the Redemption from Eternall bonds, for his righteousnes through his presentation glorious, and for his joyes and consolation through the law of the Spirit of life and ob∣signation: as they have found under your Highest, Noblest and worthi∣est fauours, a gratious defence and loving protection, so they doubt not, but that two wings and two shadowes will be one wing and one shadow for their prosperity & pro∣tection: Considering, that there is such a neerenesse of union between the Princely Head, and the Hono∣rable shoulders of this Royall state and Kingdome. I with the Priso∣ners of Hope had neither gold nor silver, riches nor treasures, pearles
nor jewells to present unto His Highnesse, or to the Honorable Assembly; save these lines of love for acceptation: Not doubting, but our present will bee as rich as the Queene of Shebaes was in Ierusalem; and as Benjamins and Judahs was in the sight of Joseph, sith the pre∣senter with the Prisoners of Hope, presents nothing else but a present concerning the Love of God the Father, the rich treasures and the righteousnesse of Christ Mediator, of the joyes, love and peace concer∣ning the Spirit of glory our comfor∣ter: knowing that is not conveni∣ent for the meanest to be offensive to the highest, and the weakest trou∣blesome unto the Honorable: We by generall petition, desire and re∣quest that His Majesty with your Honours, might honour the poorest with your shadow and vindication, and we in generall shall bee bound by an everlasting obligation, to wish
all peace, all unity and concord be∣tweene His Majesty and your Ho∣nours for ever. Oh that the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah would not only crowne the Lyon with strength and fortitude; but also honor his poo∣rest Prisoners with peace and sweet tranquility. Oh that the King of Kings might shine gloriously upon the head of His Majesty, and the Prince of Princes might shine favo∣rably upon the Nobles of this Kingdome. Oh that the gratious fa∣vour of him that was in the Bush, and the deare love of him that was upon the Crosse might compose these differences, put an end to these great distractions, and make two one in this our Native Country. Whilst we thus desire and wish the welfare, prosperity and dignity of this State and Kingdome; we shall waite for His Highest and Princely acceptation, and your noblest and worthiest approbation of this Trea∣tise
concerning the Prisoners of Hope, sith it is no lesse then the mes∣sage of the King of Kings unto a King, an Ambassage from the Prince of glory unto Princes: and a Contemplation of the Throne of grace to all that waits for grace in Israel. Therefore silence shall constraine us, whilest we wish for the highest glory the richest mercy, for the dearest bounty, and for the greatest love that flowes from the Thron of grace to fall upō you, that your dewes may be more soft then the dewes upon the tender herbs, that your light may bee more splen∣derous then the sun in the Meridian, and that the stability, firmenesse and glory of this State and Com∣monwealth may be faster fixed then the celestiall Orbe. Amen, Amen, Amen. Then shall the sonnes of Sion sing a song of Melodious, the daughters of Jerusalem make a har∣mony victorious, and the poorest
Prisoners of Hope shall sit under your shadows most joyous, each gi∣ving glory, praise, honour, truth, and thankesgiving to him that sitts upon the Throne now and for ever∣more: Recording that sentence memorable throughout all ages and generations. Apoc. 4. last. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power: for thou hast cre∣ated all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Your Majesties most humble sub∣ject, and welwisher to your Roy∣all Crowne and dignity; As al∣so to your Honorable Lords and Commmons, sate in High Court of PARLIAMENT. TIMOTHY BATT.
❧ An Epistle to the Pri∣soners of Hope, beloved of the Father, and bought by the blood of Christ their blessed and deare Redeemer. IS the knowledge of the vn∣searchable riches of Christ made knowne to the Priso∣ners of miserie? and shall not I direct my speech to them in the rarest Elegancie? Are rare things spo∣ken concerning the citie of God? are ex∣cellent thing spoken concerning the streames that make glad the Citie of our God? And are not rare and ex∣cellent things spoken concerning the Prisoners of our God? J had rather my mind should forget its high conceive∣ment, J had rather my affection should loose it sweet contentment, then J should
forget my sentence concerning their solace and delightment. How should J forget them whom our dearest Lord hath not forgotten? Why should J not set them before mine eyes, whom hee hath presented in his gratious presence. For whom was he annoynted? if not for his distressed flock? For whom was hee wounded? if not for wounded concien∣ces and poore distressed catives? For whom was his bloody Crosse, his bitter Agonie? if not for his dearest ones and Prisoners of great calamity. Will our Lord leade his captives into captivity? No, Will he relinquish his gasping and gronings hearts? No, they are more pretious to him then the rarest gemms, they are more beautifull in his eyes then the beautifull diadems, and more choise to him then the choysest treasure. Who are written betweene his breasts? if not they, who are charactered upon his heart? if not they, or who are coun∣ted or esteemed above all Terrene or Earthly treasures? if not they, For
they are beloved of the Father from E∣ternitie, they are bought by the Prince of grace and glory, they are seale a by the spirit of life and liberty: O ye Pri∣soners of Hope! are you not as deare to your dearest Lord in the day of tribula∣tion as in the day of salvation, in the day of temptation, as in the day of recon∣ciliation, in the day of affliction, as in the day of Adoption. J know you have bin wounded by the darts of Satan, bin accused by the accuser of the brethren, you have had warre with the flesh and corruption, and have been bruised like the bruised reede, and broken like the Potters vessell. I know that the sunne should bee as darkenesse, if that you should not behold the Sonne of righte∣ousnesse, that the morning starre should be obscure, if the morning starre should not appeare in puritie, and the face of ten thousand Angels should appeare as dimnesse, if that you should not be∣hold the face of the Angell of the Cove∣nant in gratiousnesse. Hence I am as∣sured
the word of grace, of life, of hope, f peace, of salvation, of reconciliation, f justification, and of glorification will be as deare to you as the apple of your yes, as pretious as your owne lives, and s neare unto you as your owne soules; herefore as the morning starre is to the travellers in the wildernesse, as the orientall sunne to them that sit in dark∣nesse, as the rarest jewells to them that have no riches: So will this message be to you his bleeding Prisoners. There∣fore J cease to crave acceptation, sith these of you are lovingly accepted, ever wishing you grace from your loving Father, blessednesse and hope from your blessed Redeemer, to whom bee given glory and honour in the Churches for ever and ever, Amen. T. B.
VVHen I in blood involved was, cast out to open shame: His dearest love did then appeare, to everlasting fame. Before I saw the Sunne of light, the sunne did shine one me; Before the morning starre arose, all darkenesse I did see. But when the Sunne and morning star, appeared in the day: All darkenesse vanisht from my sight, I saw a glorious way. Of love, of peace, of grace, of hope, of rest and great glory, Free from all wrath, debate, and jarres, from malice and envie.
n love the Saints doe praises sing, unto his glorious name, The glorious riches of his grace, in joys they doe declaime. While they were chain'd in fetters strōg under the power of hell, His riches bountie did appeare, free mercy did excell. For he redeemed them from chaines, from fetters set them free; By dearest love and pretious blood, procuring liberty. That they might have accesse by faith, unto his highest grace: And live by faith which is in him, in his most holy place. Hence are the gemmes of rarest worth, appearing in his sight: Beholding his most glorious face, his everlasting light. When clouds of darkenesse did beset, their soules incompast round: Overwhelm'd were they by hellish fiends, they woe and sorrow found.
Then shin'd he forth in the sweet face, of Christ the Prince of peace: When he by death did reconcile, all enmitie did cease. That they might stand compleate in robes, more pure then the gold; More rich then gemmes and pretious stones, a hundred thousand fould. When they were naked and unrob'd, impurest in his sight: In vestments pure cloth'd he did, in them he tooke delight: Sith he presented them most pure, compleat in Christ to be: Whilst he gave them to be in Christ. their great felicity. When they were sons of wrath & death shut out of hope most sure: He gave to them inheritance, amongst the Saints most pure. That they might have a lott and hope, amongst the Saints most deare: All glorying hearts in praises high, with Saints that doe in feare.
When they were fare from Christ the vine, of peace and pretious love: His gratious face on them did shine, his bounty they did prove. When they were made one with the vine, to be in him for aye: In-joying springs of pretious joyes, in the eternall day. When they were prisoners of his hope, involv'd in dust below: His throne of freest grace imbrast, to hell he did not throw. Their bleeding hearts and drooping minds, involu'd and wrapt in blood: By freest grace and dearest love, bought to eternall good. That they in love might prayses sing, unto his glorious name: Rich glorious praises of his grace, they might to Saints declaime. Shall they surcease exalting praise? singing free grace for ever: His bounty will they not record? to Saints that faileth never.
Praise, glory, now perpetually, from his abundant store: Oh honour that most glorious name, both now and evermore.
WHilst that my Muses, upon high object bent, High thoughts poss'd, but to what intent; Let Prisoners view, and these sweet lines peruse, Peruse in love, and faultie lines excuse, The piercing power, of my intellect, My lowest thoughts, to highest did erect, Memory Retaind, thought of a subject rare, Queene will consenting, somewhat to declare, Affection joynd, with those in combination, High thoughts conceiv'd, in my contemplation. And conscence paralells, affection strong, Its rarest plea, I must my theme prolong,
Sith that no obiect, to the view or sight, Gives such sweet solace, to the soules delight, And graces power, grants its free consent, That all my theame, of Christ was congruent, That pen might stay, and I might cease my verse, Of Christ in prose, the more I might rehearse.
Christs gratious Message from the Throne of Grace, to all the Prisoners of hope. ROM. 8.1, 2. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walke not after the flesh; but after the Spirit, For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Je∣sus, hath made me free from the law of sinne and death. WHen we look upon the Sun, Moone and Starres, and be∣hold the wisedome, mercy, and power of the Father towards humane generati∣on; it makes us to stand amazed, and astonished, so when wee looke and be∣hold the wisedome, mercy, and power of the Father shining forth in Christ the morning Starre, the Sonne of ever∣lasting
grace and bounty, it makes us to wonder and admire at that which shi∣neth forth to us in the morning starre, and glorious Sonne of righteousnesse. That which shineth to us by in and by the Creature, is not comparable to that which shineth toward us in and through the Lord Jesus. What is the brightnes of the morning starre to Christ the morning starre? or what is the beauty and glory of the sunne, to Christ the Sun of glorious righteousnesse? or what as the beauty of things terrene & earth∣ly to things sublime or heavenly? hence the Apostle memorates and records the excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ by the priviledge the Saints received in and by him, according to the Text. Now then there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walke not af∣ter the flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom. 8, 1. Beloved, our manner is by way of ex∣position or contemplation; Now then there is no condemnation? They have been cast out to the open shame of their faces, they were not swadled in the day of their Nativity, but troden in their blood, and overwhelmed with the dee∣pest miserie, they have beene alienated
from the throne of grace, estranged from the mercy seate, and have lived without God in the world, they have beene in the blacke swadle bands of the Devill, under the claves of the roaring Lyon the Devill, and have beene chil∣dren of wrath as well as others. The truth of the premisses is granted: not∣withstanding, there is no condemnation to them, sith the being of the Saints in Christ frees them from all the gulfes of horrid miseries whatsoever: They have many sinnes, many infirmities, iniqui∣ties and transgressions, they are an of∣fending and erring people out of the way as well as others: they have beene silenced before the throne of Justice, they have sinned and shot their arrowes below the glory of the Father, the truth of the premises is granted: Notwith∣standing, there is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, sith the Father of eternall mercy hath given un∣to them an absolute Nonimputation of offences in the Lord Jesus, in whom hee hath reconciled his beloved Saints and peculiar: in the act of Justification hee hath given to his Saints a generall ac∣quittance, freeing them from sinne, in∣iquity
and transgression by the blood of the Lord of life and glory, and by the death of him who was the onely belo∣ved of his bosome; hence comes in those rare sentences of divine testimo∣nies. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that justifieth, who is it that shall condemne? it is Jesus Christ that is dead, yea, rather that is risen againe, who is at the right hand of God making interces∣sion for us. Rom. 8.33, 34. To them is given the priviledge and dignity of uni∣on, they are branches to Jesus Christ the blessed and fruitfull Vine of his Church. I am the Vine, ye are the branches, John 15.5. they are members to Jesus Christ their blessed head and reconciler, to wit, Members of his flesh & of his bones, Eph. 5.30. they are the choise pretious and dearest spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ. My beloved is mine, amd I am his; he feedeth among the Lillies, Cant. 6.3. they are not onely deare to Christ because he hath bought them, but they are neere to Christ, because they are made one with him; The glory that thou gavest me, I have given to them, that they may be one as we are one. John 17.22. What Devill therefore shall accuse? the
accuser of the Brethren is cast out of the heavenly places. And I heard a great voyce out of heaven saying, Now is come salvation, and strength and the Kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of the brethren is cast downe, which accused them before our God day and night, what hell shall terrifie? sith the Lord Christ hath triumphed over hell, death, the devill and all Evills. O death where is thy sting, oh grave where is thy victory. The sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the law. But thankes be to God, which giveth us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. shall the law adjudge us? noe, sith wee have a gratious Mediatour who ever presents us glorious in the sight of his gratious and heavenly Father; hence it is spoken by the holy Ghost, that Christ entred into heaven to appeare in pre∣sence of God for us. For Christ is not en∣tred into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it selfe; now to appeare in the pre∣sence of God for us. Heb. 9.24. shall death amaze or trouble us? no, for by the death of Christ wee are delivered from the servitude and slaverie of death. That
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devill, and deliver them who through feare of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. Heb. 2.14, 15. What though the ve∣namous Serpent seeke to sting thee? yet be not thou dismayed: what though the Law morrall would accuse, artaigne or condemne thee before the barre of justice? yet be not discourged: what though death with the sting thereof would amaze thee? yet bee thou not a∣mazed, sith there is no Condemnation to thy soule or conscience, sith thou art in Christ Jesus, and he pleades thy cause at the right hand of the Father saying, This my people stands righteous before thee in my righteousnesse, holy through my holinesse, and pure through my pu∣rity and integrity: am I not their Lord of pure and divine righteousnesse? am I not their prince of glory who hath presented them pure, spotlesse and in∣tire in thy sight? Am not I the Media∣tour of thy everlasting grace & mercy? who was made not onely unto them wisedome and redemption, but also righteousnesse and sanctification? was
not I arraigned at the barre of Pontious Pilate, that they might not be arraigned at the barre of justice, accused of my na∣tive countrymen, that they might bee excused in thy presence, condemned by their injudiciall sentence to free them from condemnation. I stood in the place of Manasseth, that Idolater, in the roome of Paul that Blasphemer, in the stead of Peter, that denier, when mine could not beare the heate of thy burning wrath and indignation; I stood and beare their iniquities, when they could not tread the winepresse of thy fury, I trode the winepresse for them, thou laydst the sins of mine upon my shoul∣ders, thou didst cast thy darts through my sides, I was wounded, I was chasti∣sed, I was broken to peeces for them, be∣ing made sinne for them, who being thy sonne knew no sinne, that they might bee made the righteousnesse of God in mee. Now there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Rom. 8.1. I have made death temporall a bed of downe, a place of rest, and a sweete passage to my glory, did Israel
passe through the red sea and the waters did not overwhelme them? did Judah and Rheuben passe through the waters of Jordan & those did not offend them? and shall not mine passe through the gates of death, and shall that destroy them? no, I have taken away the death of death spiritual, I live in mine by hope, I have made them to cast Ankor in the throne of my grace and dearest mercy, in whom wee have an Ankor of the soule, safe and firme, entring into that which is within the vaile. Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an Ankor of the soule both sure and steadfast, and which entreth into that within the vaile. I live in them by love, I have made them live in Me by my love: So that there love to me is above treasures, riches and honours, above Father, Mother, wife and children, above bonds, chaines, and fetters, above temp∣tations, anguish or tribulation, above the malice of the Divell, the terrours of the law, the horrours of hell, the darts of the world, and the warres of the flesh. I have made them to leave all thinges terrene and earthly, and to pitch on those things which are high and hea∣venly;
My love to them in their value and estimation is above Rubies, Saphi∣res, pretious gemmes, carbuncles and pretious Iewels, ten thousand moun∣taines of gold in their sight are under∣valued. I am the chiefest of ten thou∣sand, the loves of men and women are disaccounted, sith my love to them is above the loves of Jonathan and David. The freenesse of my love hath made them love me intirely and freely, and the eternity of my love hath made them love Me eternally, hence have I spoken of them. John 17.28. And I have made knowne to them thy name, and will make it knowne, that the love wherewith thou hast loved me, may be in them, and I in them. I have made them live the life of faith, though their faith overcoms the world, and this is the victory that overcommeth the wold, even your faith. 1 Joh. 5.4. though their faith repulseth the fiery darts of Satan, above all taking the shield of faith, whereby ye shall bee able to quench the fiery darts of Satan, Ephes. 6.16. Though their faith is more pretious then gold that is tryed in the fire; That the tryall of your faith being much more pretious then of gold that perisheth, though it bee tryed
with fire, might bee found unto praise and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.8. Notwithstanding it is mine, I make them to beleeve in my Father, and in my selfe whom hee hath sent. I made them my beloved, injoyers of e∣ternall life, glorie and beatitude. I made them to abide in me by faith, whilst I abode in them by love, the truth there∣of, is witnessed by my Apostle. I am crucified with Christ, neverthe∣lesse I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, and the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the sonne of God, who loved me, and gave himselfe for me. I also have taken away death eternall, for I have reconciled mine to the Father by an everlasting reconciliation; I have brought with mee the everlasting robes of righteousnesse, I have taken away all their sinnes, iniquities and transgressions by my blood most pretious: I have made them one by union, that they might enjoy a being in Me and in my Father. Hence the second death shall have no power of them, I my selfe have spo∣ken it. Apoc. 20.6. Blessed and holy is hee
that hath part in the first resurrection, on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be Priests to God, and of Christs, and shall raigne with him a thousand yeares. What hath the world to say to my people? true it is, they have beene drun∣kards, persecuters, blasphemes, they have beene alienated from my glory, e∣stranged from my love, and without my presence in the world, but I have wash∣ed them in the purest fountaine, I have made their scarlet die whiter then the snow, their bloody crimson whiter then the wooll; are they defiled like the Menstruous cloath? no, are they leprous as was Naaman the Assirian? no, they are purer then the purest Na∣zarene. What hath the flesh to pleade against mine? true it is; before I came to live in them, their minds were clou∣ded with Egyptian darkenesse, there wils resisted my words of reconciliation, their affections were involved in things terrene and sublunarie, their hearts har∣der then the rockes or milstone; and their consciences were the habitation of the blacke fiends of darkenesse; but since I tooke up my rest in them, I appeared the glorious light of the Gospel of life
and redemption, I have removed their darkenesse, I have made them confor∣mable to my sacred and holy wil, I have set their affections aloft in the heavenly places, I have softened their obstinate and obdurate hearts, and have clensed their consciences from sin by my blood most pretious. Now old things are past away, and all things are become new: now they are my workmanship created in Me to good workes, that they should walke in them. Now my peace, my joy, my love, my grace, and my liber∣ty dwells in them. Am I not King and Lord commander in the soule? Am I not prince and Lord defender of the conscience? Am I not Master and gover∣nour of the affections? yea, though sinne is in their flesh, yet my grace is in their spirits, for I am in them both grace and glory; therefore there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit. What can the world say against those that are my redeemed and reconciled? They will take away their good name, I suffer the Angels of light to bespot their garments, I permit the legalists to de∣fame & to blemish their conversations,
but the servant is not greater then his Master, nor the Disciple then his Lord. If they take away their name, I have given them a name which is written in the booke of life, & charectered it upon my breast for ever. If they take away their liberty, yet have they alwaies li∣berty to the throne of my hevenly grace and highest mercy, if they take away their goods, yet are they enriched by my heavenly grace and treasure of wis∣dome; if they take away their vest∣ments, yet stand they cloathed with my garments of everlasting righteousnesse: And if they take away their lives, yet their lives are hid in me & in my Father. Therefore there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, which walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.1. There is a threefold ground why there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. The first ground is this, sith the Eter∣nall justice of the Father is satisfied. I argue thus; if the eternall justice of the Father in and by Christ is satisfied, then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: But the Eternall justice of the Father is satisfied in & by Christ,
therefore there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. That the ju∣stice of the Father is satisfied in and by Christ, is evident: first upon denomi∣nation. Christ is called the Sonne of the Father, in whom the Father is well plea∣sed; so the holy Ghost hath related in the Evangelist. Mat. 3. the last. This is my beloved Sonne in whom I am well plea∣sed. As if the Father should speake thus to his people, Let all my people know that I know of justice no more, of wrath no more, of indignation and vindicati∣on no more, true, it is my pleasure to hide my face, my joy, my peace, my rest, my glory, and the rarenesse of my communion from mine; notwithstan∣ding such hath beene my divine and ra∣rest pleasure, that my delight alone is in the Sonne of my bosome, my glory in the prince of grace and glory, and my rest is in him whom I have constituted and appointed to bee Mediator of the Covenant of grace and bounty amongst the Saints triumphant, none are accep∣ted to dwell in my presence but in and through my beloved: amongst my Saints and warriours Militant, none are welpleasing in my sight but in and
through the Son of my bosome, hee is the sweet smelling sacrifice most grati∣ous & acceptable before Me, I my selfe have spoken it. Eph. 5.2. And walke in love, as Christ hath loved us, and given him∣selfe an offering: a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour. The Mirhe, the Aloes, and the Cassia are not sweet in my pre∣sence, the sweetest gumes, the frankin∣sence, and pleasant oyntments are not pleasant in my nostrills; nothing is plea∣sant before me but the first begotten frō the dead, and prince of the Kings of the earth, I have undervalued al my Angels, respecting none but the Angels of the e∣verlasting covenant, though my pleasure was to give them a song of praise for e∣ver, counting them worthy of the light of my countenance, dignifying them with the honour of messengers & pro∣tectors, notwithstanding they could not answer my purity, nor satisfie my justice I have disesteemed the sonnes of men, though I made them Lords over my creatures, the noblest of my worekman∣ship, and gave to them both purity and innocency; notwithstanding they can∣not answer my demands, nor appease my wrath nor furie. I have disaccounted
of the bodies of bulls, of beasts, of goats; and I have prepared a body by and for my selfe, I my selfe have spoken it. Wherefore when he commeth into the World, he saith, sacrifices and burnt offerings thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared. Heb. 10.5. Hence I have accepted of the body of the Lord of life for my people, of the blood of the prince of glory for the children of death and misery, of the death of him that is the Mediatour of of the Covenant of life and promises, for the curse and death of my peculiar. Now then there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, which walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.1. The second ground why there is no Con∣demnation to them who are in Christ Jesus. Because the law is satisfied, the law is satisfied actively and passively, my be∣loved was to present my people com∣pleat, pure and holy, without spot or wrinkle, unblameable, unreproveable and righteous, to make of unrighteous righteous, of unholy holy, of impure and defiled, pure and undefiled, which in
and by him was performed, when hee fulfilled all righteousnesse, when he an∣swered every jot and title of my law re∣quired, when hee was made sinne for mine, that they might bee made the righteousnesse of God in him. 2 Cor. 5. the last. He answered my law passively, for he was wounded, bruised and bro∣ken to peeces, who but your Lord was led as a Lambe to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer as dumbe? who but your Lord, cried out upon the Cross, my God my God, why hast thou forsa∣ken me? who but your Lord sweat wa∣ter and blood in the day of his passion? beloved, thou cammest short of the glo∣ry of God, yet thy deare Lord bought thee, the prince of glory sought thee, & the shepheard of the covenant came and performed all for thee, hence, he is the end of the law for righteousnesse sake. Rom. 10.4. Christ is the end of the law for righteousnesse sake, to every one that be∣leeves; therefore there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walke not aftert the flesh but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.1.
The third Ground why there is no condem∣nation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Because they are united to the Sonne of my love, had they not beene united to the vine of rarest vertue, the Lord of richest wisedome, the bridegroome of sweetest love, then might they have bin condemned, but because of their union, they injoy communion in him and with him: by their union they injoy a three∣fold voice. The first is the voice of Reconcilia∣tion. The second the voice of Adoption. The third, the voice of Justification and Redemption. Of the first, to wit concerning the voyce of Atonement or reconciliation, the day hath been that the wall of sepe∣ration hath beene betwixt thee and the Father, the hand writing of ordinances against the conscience, the blacknesse of darkenesse had overclouded the soule, thy sinnes, iniquities, and transgressions had separated between me and thee, and the whole heavens were overcast with the mists of dimnesse, till I speake of
rarest love in the Sonne of my love, till I speake of peace in the reconciler of my Redeemed, till I spake of Rest to all your restlesse soules under heaven, be∣cause my Sonne hath reconciled mine through his pure and pretious blood, hence I have nothing against them that are washed in his blood; because I have made an attonement in and through him who hath beene my choise and be∣loved servant: therefore I have no charge against them who have beene children of wrath and enemies against my Majesty. As my love, my grace, my peace, my glory rests in him; so my peace abides in him: hence hath he left the Legacie of dearest and pretious love. My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave unto you, not as the world giveth, give I un∣to you; Let not your hearts be troubled nor feare. Therefore there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Rom. 8.1. The second voice of Christ, is the voice of Adoption; As our Justification, our Redemption, our Vnion, our Re∣conciliation, our vocation and Glorifi∣cation are in Christ. So our sonneship
or Adoption is in Christ: If the Father of glorious mercy account thee a branch, it is because thou art in Christ the vine, if hee account thee a member, it is because thou art in Christ the head, If hee account thee one of the espou∣sed, it is because thou art in Christ the Bridegroomed, If he account thee a son, it is because thou art in his deare and welbeloved Sonne; hence I come to draw thy soule to me, I make to thee thy priviledge. According as I have re∣lated by my servant Iohn. 1 Ioh. 3.1. Be∣hold how great love the Father hath given to us, that we should bee called the Sonnes of God. That though thou wast a slave of hell, a vessell of wrath, a child of perdi∣tion, a bondslave to the law, and under the ridged and severe tyranny of the de∣vill: notwithstanding, I have chosen thee to be one of mine by the covenant of my freest grace and bounty, I have redeemed thee for my selfe, and called thee by my name, I have adopted thee to be one of my sonnes and children by adoption, when I tooke up my rest in my beloved: I preached peace to the peacelesse, liberty to the bondmen, grace
to the gracelesse, riches to the poore, and assurance of sonship to them who are and have not beene my sonnes by adoption: hence though no creature pitty thee, though Angels shut their eyes against thee, and all the sublunarie Creatures should bid thee adew and far∣well, notwithstanding I come to im∣brace thee, and to love and delight in thee for ever, since the day that I adop∣ted thee, have I not filled the soule with the joyes, comforts and solaces of my spirit? have not I sealed thee to the day of Eternall redemption by the seale of Adoption? have not I given thee the spirit of prayer and supplication? have not I given thee the assurance of life and salvation? Now then there is no condem∣nation to thy soule which art in Christ Jesus, for thou walkest not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Thirdly, the voice of God in Justifica∣tiō; how in justificatiō? yea beloved, this is the Admirable worke of the spirit of glory, that we are assured that we are re∣deemed by the blood of Christ imcom∣parable, that wee are reconciled by the death of Christ unspeakable, & that wee are assured that wee are justified by the
righte∣ousnesse of Christ undeclarable, I being justified in Christ, how should I injoy any thing but salvation? Am I not made compleate in him that is the head of all principalities and powers? Am I not cloathed with the righteousnesse of the Sonne of righteousnesse? more bright then ten thousand Sunnes? Am I not washed, purified and clensed in the purest, rarest and most pretious foun∣taine which is in the Kingdome of the deare Sonne of God? hence I shall en∣joy the horne of salvation the great, free and eternall salvation in Christ. Now then there is no condemnation to me that am in Christ Jesus, who walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Moreover these three things preserves the Saints from death and condemna∣tion. 1. The love of Christ. 2. The power of Christ. 3. The glory of Christ. What said I the Love of Christ? yea: search the hights above, sound the depths beneath, extend thy thoughts a∣broad to all the parts of the sublunarie
Orbe, and thou shalt finde no love like the love of Christ: is the love of a mo∣ther so deare to her child? is the love of a husband so deare to the wife of his bo∣some? as Christs love is to his Church? no: with the same love wherewith the Father hath loved Christ, with the same love hee hath loved the Church and chosen: the Father loved Christ from eternity, Christ hath loved the Church from eternity; the Father through his tender love did not leave his beloved in the day of his Crosse, when he cryed out My God my God why hast thou forsa∣ken me; Thou wilt not leave my soule in grave, neither wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Psal. 16.10. Loe the Lord Christ will not leave his poore servants, his dearest jewels & his pretious Saints in the dayes of greatest miserie and calamity. Psal. 9 10. The Lord is a refuge to the poore, a refuge in due time, in the day of trouble. The Fathers love to the Lord Christ was so great, that he set him above prin∣cipalities, above might, above power, and above all things; that all things in heaven & earth might bow & bend be∣fore him: Wherefore God hath exalted him,
and given him a name, above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, of things on earth, and of things under the earth. Phil. 2.9.10. The love of the Lord Christ is: so deare to his, that hee hath exalted them above all, to him that overcommeth, I will give to sit with me in my throne, as I have overcome, and sit with my Father in his throne. Revel. 3.21. The Father loved Christ so intirely, that hee filled him with the riches of righteousnesse, the treasures of wise∣dome, and the plenitude of all heavenly excellencies; Christ loves his Church so affectionately, that hee fills her with heavenly joyes, & he enriches her with all spirituall and heavenly gifts, blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with spirituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ, Eph. 1.3. there¦fore through my love there is no condemna∣tion to mine, they not after the flesh but af∣ter the Spirit. Rom. 8.1.
Secondly, Because of the power of Christ, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. His power is not onely the cause of our vivification from the dead, of our Collocation in the heavenly places, of our faith in his name, But also of our conservation to eternall life and salva∣tion. John 17.2. He defends thee by an internall and efficatious power, when thy spirit says that thou art overcome, the spirit saith thou art more then a conquerer through him that loved thee, every day thou art a conquerer through his blood, a victoret through his death, a tryumpher through his righteousnes, neither the darts of hell, the fire bales of the Devill, the strength of the law, the warres of the flesh, nor the puissant strength of the world can vanquish thee: for thou art defended by a strength in∣vincible, thou art protected by a power unconquerable, thou art invioned by a might insuperable and thou art garded with a force inexpugnable, Am I not thy Rocke, thy shield, thy Buckler, & defender? Am I not thy Sun thy shaddow, thy horne of Salvation & deliverer? Am I not he that carries thee
above one Eagles wings? that breakes the bow, the speare and sheild and van∣quisheth, overcommeth and concul∣tateth under my feete all the enemies of thy salvation? my strength is above powers, my might above dominions, my glory above principalities, and my Puissancie above all the opposers of thy life and addoption. Hence there is no condemnation to thee, for thou art kept by my power to salvation, not walking after the flesh, but after the spirit. Thirdly, the glory of Christ is the cause why there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, that walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Christ speakes after this manner to his Saints. Beloved, I have written your name upon my breast, I have in graven them in the booke of life, I have presented your cause in the presence of my Father by my blood most pure, by my death most victorious, by my righteousnesse most acceptable, there∣fore for the glory of my grace, I will not leave you. I that am the Lord of life, the welspring of living waters, that eternall and everlasting life given of my
Father: I have layd up your lives in the throne of my grace, I have treasured them, up in the throne of my mercy and for the glory of my mercy I will not de∣sert you: have I bestowed so great cost as to adventure my life, bloud, my death, my righteousnesse and my glory for thee? did I leave my height of glory to fetch thy Soule from the lowermost hell, from the gates and barres of eter∣nall death, from the black clawes, clutches and swadle bands of Sathan? have I given thee communion with my Father, and with my selfe in all the trea∣sures of heavenly righteousnesse, and made thee one of my members, one of my branches, one of my espoused and dearest friends? and shall I now forsake thee? I am that faithfull, Yea and Amen, and will keepe my promise, I will bee with mine to the end of the world. Mat. 28. verse last. There is therefore no con∣demnation to mine, they walke not after the flesh but after the spirit. Wee proceede to the second part of the text which walke not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. The blessed Apostle argues by eve∣dent
arguments; that there is no con∣demnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. The first Argument is, If that to the Saints victorie over sinne and death is given to them by Jesus Christ, then is there no condemnation to them that are in Christ. But to the Saints victorie over sin and death is given to them by Jesus Christ, therfore there is no condemnati∣on to them. Rom. 7. the last. I thanke God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, with the minde I my selfe serve the law of God: but with the flesh the law of sinne. If the law of the Spirit of life hath freed us from the law of sin and death, then is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: But the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath freed us from the Law of sinne and death, therefore there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the Law of sinne and death. If God hath sent his Son to redeeme his owne from sinne, and that sinne was condemned in the flesh of Christ for there sakes, then is their no condemna∣tion to them; But God sent his owne
sonne to Redeeme them, and that sinne might be condemned in his flesh, there∣fore there is no condemnation to them. Rom. 8.3. For what the Law could not doe, in that it was weake through the flesh, God sending his owne Sonne in the likenesse of sinfull flesh, and for sinne condemned sinne in the flesh. If they who are in Christ Jesus walke not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit, then there is no condemna∣tion to them; But they that are in Christ Je∣sus, walke not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit, therefore there is no condemnation to them. Rom. 8 1. There is therefore now no con∣demnation to them which are in Christ Je∣sus, who walke not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Those that are in Christ Jesus walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. They live the life of faith, of love, of hope, of peace, of grace, of mercy & consolation, through their union they live the life of freedome, & liberty in the state of grace, the life of praise and prayer to the thron of glory through their Redemption, they live the life of assurance, of Mercy, grace and peace, through there Adop∣tion,
they live the life of purity, bold∣nesse and joy through their justification, they live the life of holinesse, of chasti∣tie and sobriety through their Sancti∣fication. My branches walk through the strength of sweetnesse, my members walke in the power of my wisedome, my spouses walke in the joyfulnesse of the light of my Countenance. Since the day that I washed them in my blood most pure, they will not polute their bo∣dies, since the time that I gave them assurance that they were the sonnes of God, they doe walke as deare and love∣ing Children: since the moment that they have beene fild with my joyes, my comforts, my consolations, my influ∣ences of divine grace and solace: they are filled with praises, honorings, and praisings of my holy name: My Spirit leades them into all truth; when the Spi∣rit, of truth shall come, he shall teach you all truth. Iohn 14.26. He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remem∣brance, whatsoever I have said unto you; My Spirit leades them into all obedi∣ence: For as many as are lead by the Spi∣rit of God, are the sonnes of God: Rom. 8.14 My spirit leades them not to conten∣tions,
to backbitings, to slanderings, to railings, to whisperings, to lyings to re∣proachings, to Envie, Malice, hatred cō∣tempt, Disdain & Revenge. But to mild∣nesse, gentlenes, curtisie, Meeknes & leni∣ty, to joy, to peace to love, to gratiousnes of spirit & sobrietie. Gal. 5.18, 19.20, 21, 22, 23. But if ye are led by the spirit, ye are not under the law: Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adul∣tery, Fornicatiō, uncleannes, laciviousnes, &c But the fruits of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith, meekenesse, temperance, against these there is no law. There is not a prayer from my grace, to the throne of grace, but my spi∣rit hath beene the cause thereof, there is not a praise from the praise of my glory, but my spirit is the instrūent ther∣of. If they call my Father their Father, it is by the spirit of Adoption, Rom. 8 15. For ye have not received the Spirit of bon∣dage again to feare, but ye have received the spirit of Adoption, wherby we cry Abba Fa∣ther, If mine groanes with sighes and groanes with unspeakable and unuttera∣ble, it is by my Spirit of Sanctification. Rom. 8.26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also hel∣peth our infirmities, for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self make intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered, and hee that search∣eth the hearts knoweth what is the minde of the Spirit: because he maketh intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. If mine are consolated through consolati∣on, it is by Spirit of consolation. 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. who comforteth us in at our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them that are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our con∣solation also aboundeth by Christ. Doe my people incounter with hell, sinne, the law, death, the Devill and all evills with∣out my presence? no, doe my people Navigate upon the mighty seas of mi∣serie, doe they saile over the vast Ocean of calamity without my assistance? no, I am not onely their Lord victorer to triumph over hell by heaven, over death by my life, over sin by my blood, over the law by the law of the Spirit of life, over the flesh by my spirit, over the De∣vill by my death, over the world by my glorious and triumphous victorie, I am not onely their Lord acquirer of glory by relinquishing of my glory, of righte∣ousnesse
by fulfilling all righteousnesse, of peace by the peace of my crosse, of love by the losse of the sence of love, but I am there Lord conducter and leader to my heavenly glory. What morning starre conducts them to rest, but I the morning starre? what sonne of beauty leades them to the light of felicity, but I the sonne of righteousnesse? I am the sunne by day, and the cloud by night: I am the only captaine of my redeemed and purchased; I am the day starre that alwais appeares in the hearts of mine; Therefore there is no condemnation to them which walke not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Rom. 8.1. A sweet Contemplation. Oh the depth of the sweet love and mercy of my Lord that bought Mee! what no condemnation to me? No, I am washed in the blood of the lambe immaculate, I am presented spotlesse in spotlesse robes, I am Redeemed from a∣mongst the prisoners of no hope, I am united to the sonne of God, and injoy communion with him. My soule who shall condemne thee? shall death, shall hell shall the law, shall the Devill, shall the world, shall the flesh? no, for they
are not in thy beloved; what though London England and the whole world band themselves against thee, what though Legallists, the Angells of light, the world and all the rable of hell shall beset thee on every side? what though the nearest and them which should be dearest to thee, raise lies, slanders repro∣ches, rebukes, ignominies and all evills against thee? yet be not dismayed; for there is no condemnation to them who are in Christ; Now thy thoughts shall be continually upon thy free redempti∣on, thy rich justification, thy sollid sanctification, thy glorious Adoption, thy wonderfull union, and thy eternall glorification; now thy spirit is full of love, of praise, of glory; saying with the Apostle, Rom. 8.1, 2. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus, who walke not after the flesh but after the spirit. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Iesus, hath made mee free from the law of sinne and death. The Philosopher saith, there is a hid∣den and secret vertue in the starres and planets; not in consonant to Scripture: canst thou restraine the sweet influences of Pleiades? And that there is a hidden
vertue in gemms and pretious jewells that none can understand but those that are skilfull lapidaries: So there is a hidden and inclosed excellency in Christ the Lord of life and Prince of glory, and who can restraine the influences of his goodnesse? or who can understand the richnes of his love, but those who have knowne him by experience, who can speake of the glorious robes of righte∣ousnesse, but those that are cloathed with the glorious robes of righteous∣nesse? who can make mention of the rarenesse of Adoption, but those who have obtained inheritance immortall and immarcessable? or who can de∣clare concerning the liberty of grace and glory, but those that have accesse to the throne of grace by the spirit of glo∣ry? hence came the rare experience the blessed Apostle found in and through the hand of the Mediator, who delivered him from the law of sinne and death by the glorious and indissoluble Law of life according to the Text. Rom. 8. 2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Iesus, hath made me free from the law of sinne and death. The law in Scripture is taken seve∣rall waies.
First, Sometimes for the rule of mer∣cy and peace, because from it the Saints injoy Mercy from the bowels of mercy in God the Father, & from Jesus Christ Mediatour of the Law or Covenant. Gal. 6.16. As many as walke according to this rule, peace be unto them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Secondly, sometimes it is taken for the law of faith, sith in and by that wee doe not onely beleeve the pardon of sins through the blood of Christ, the non Recordation of iniquity through the mercy of the Father, and the free injoy∣ment of God to be our God and heaven∣ly Father in that Covenant of life peace and Adoption, but also because that we by that Covenant are under the com∣mand of the Father, the mind and will of the Lord Christ the gratious media∣tour of the law of life & reconciliation. Rom. 3.27. Where is boasting? excluded, by the law of workes, nay, but by the law of faith. Thirdly, Sometimes it is called the New Testament, not onely in oppositi∣on to the old; but because the Father of dearest mercies hath beene pleased to reveale and testifie a more full fruition
and Communion of his love in the re∣mission or condonation of iniquity in the blood of his deare Sonne, Luke 22.20. Likewise also he tooke the Cup after Supper, saying, this Cup is the new Testa∣ment in my blood which is shed for you. Fourthly, Sometimes it is tearmed the new Covenant, to denote that high dignity, great Prerogative and wonder∣full priviledge that is given to them un∣der this Covenant: sith, in this he becomes their God and bountifull Father, Remembreth their iniquities no more, Writes his law in their hearts, And teacheth them the high and deepe truths of the Gospel. Jeremiah. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. Behold the dayes come saith the Lord, I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, Not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my Covenant they breake, al∣though I was an husband unto them saith the Lord. But this shal be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those dayes saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: and will be their God and they
shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord. For they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them: saith the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquities, and I will remember their sin no more. Fiftly, Sometimes the everlasting Co∣venant, sith God, doth not only become our God and Father; But our God and Father to eternity. Not only forgiving and pardoning sinne, but forgiving and pardoning sinne and iniquitie for ever and evermore: Not only writing the law of life and love in the hearts of his people, but he Characters it in their hearts by a Character that cannot be de∣leted or extinguished. Isay 55.3. Incline your eare and come unto me, heare, and your soule shall live. And I will make an ever∣lasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Isaiah 54.10. For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills shall be removed, But my kindnesse shall not de∣part from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee. Sixtly, And in the text it is called the law of the Spirit of life.
1. Not only because it gives eternall life to the sonnes of Adoption. 2. Because that it frees the sonnes by Adoption from the Law of sinne and death: But also because it is established in the hand and breast of the Lord of life. Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the Law of sinne and death. 2 Why is it termed the Law? 1. To answer, The truth of prophe∣cie which hath beene delivered by the Holy Ghost. Isaiah 2.3. And the people shall say, come yee, and let us goe up to the Mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: and he will teach us of his waies, and wee will walke in his pathes. For out of Sion shall goe forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. 2. To distinguish it from the Law of Nature, The Law Ceremoniall and the Law Morrall. Jer. 31.33. But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those daies saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People. 3. Metaphorically or Respectively, as the Lawes in France are not the
Lawes of Spaine, nor the Lawes of Spaine, the Lawes of England: So the Law of the spirit of life is not the Law of Sinne and Death. 4. To denote that although the Saints are not under the Law of accusa∣tion, arraignment, execution, and con∣demnation: Neverthelesse they are un-the Law of grace, Faith, Peace, Mercy and Reconciliation. Rom. 6.14. For sinne shall not have dominion over you, for yee are not under the Law but under grace. Thirdly, Why the Law of the Spirit. First, Because the Spirit reveales it. John 15.14. He shall glorifie me, because he shall receive of mine and declare it to you. Secondly, Because the Spirit of God ingraves it in the hearts of all those that are in Covenant with the Father and Je∣sus Christ, whom he hath sent. Thirdly, Because the promise of the Law or Covenant is consonant to the fruits and workings of the Spirit of life and glory. Gal. 5.22. But the Fruits of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffe∣ring, Gentlenesse, Goodnesse, Faith, Meek∣nesse, Temperance, against such there is no Law. Fourthly, Why in Christ Jesus? Not
without grave consideration. First, If all heavenly divine and excel∣lent blessings are in Christ Jesus, then the Covenant or Law of life is in Christ Jesus: but all heavenly divine and excel∣lent blessings are in Christ Jesus, there∣fore the Covenant or Law of life is in Christ Jesus. Ephes. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Fatther of our Lord Jesus, who hath blessed us with all spirituall blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 1.0. But of him are yee in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisedome, and Right∣eousnesse, and Sanctification, and Redemp∣tion. Is wisedome without him that is the treasure of wisedome? No: Is Righteousnesse without the Lord of Righteousnesse? No: Is Redemption without our blessed and most gratious Redeemer? No: Is Sanctification with∣out him that Sanctifieth his by his blood most deare? No: Or is the Co∣venant of Grace and life without the Lord of life? No: In man there is not only the excellency of memory, the rarenesse of affection, but also the high∣nesse of understanding: in the Sunne there is not only beauty, splendor, but rarenesse of efficacie: So there is not on∣ly
Redemption, Justice, Sanctification, and Wisedome: But also the Covenant and Law of life and mercy. Secondly, This Covenant or Law is established by the death of Christ Me∣diator: Therefore it is meet and expe∣dient that it should be in Christ Media∣tor, Heh. 9.15. And for this cause hee is Mediatour of the New Covenant or Testament, that by meanes of death for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the the promise of eternall inheritance. Heb. 12.24. And to Jesus the Mediatour of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinck∣ling: which speaketh better things then that of Abell. Thirdly, Because that he hath per∣formed all that the Morrall Law requi∣reth, the Morrall Law required of thee, absolute compleat and intire Righte∣ousnesse, it demands of thee exact per∣fect and strickt obedience, it binds thee over that thou shalt not speake one word before the barre of Justice, that thou shoote no arrow below the glory of God, & that thou answers eternall in∣finite & equall commands of the Father,
but thou art come too short of his glo∣ry, thy obedience is not answerable to his requires, and thy arrowes are on this side the throne of grace and mercy: but the Lord Christ became the surety, he hath payed all thy debts; though more in number then the sand upon the Sea shore, he hath borne the sence of anger, of wrath, of heate and justice, when thou stoodest quivering before the barre of justice then he answered for thee. When Angels stood wist and silent, sith they could not beare the heate of everlasting burning, nor answer the severity and and purity of infinite and eternall Ju∣stice, when men were whist and silent, sith they were involved in their blood, clothed in old rotten raggs of Righte∣ousnesse: and could not answer the pu∣ritie and Righteousnesse of the God of Righteousnesse: when all Creatures might give in their voice we have Gold, Silver, Brasse, Tinne, Lead and Iron: We have Pearles, Jewels, and rare Treasures; the beautifull Diamonds, the costly Rubies, and the richest Sa∣phirs, Yet all these cannot redeeme one from the Pitt, Justifie one in thy pre∣sence, bring one to the riches of Inheri∣tance,
or to answer thy exact demands or requires: but we all confesse the truth of him as it is written of him; and not of us. Psalm. 40.7, 8. Then said I loe I come, in the volume of thy booke it is writ∣ten of me: I delight to doe thy will O God; yea thy law is within my heart. Fourthly, It hath beene expedient that the Law of life should be placed in the Lord of Life: as the old Covenant or the law of Death was placed in the Loines of Adam. It was not convenient that the Law of Faith should be in the Children of Incredulitie, that the Law of love and mercy should be in the Chil∣dren of Wrath and Furie, that the Te∣stament of life and Reconciliation should be in the Sonnes of Death and Condemnation: had this Covenant beene made with us; as the old Cove∣nant was made with Adam, we had broken this Covenant as well as Adam. Therefore such hath beene the eternall wisedome of the Father to establish the Covenant in Christ sith he was the sonne of Mercy, the sonne of Love, the sonne of Grace and Bountie: He was he that was able to make us at once with the Father, to naile our sinnes to the Crosse,
to burie them in his grave, to cast our sinnes into the Sea of Oblivion, he was he that was able being the mind of the Father to reveale the mind of the father: being the sonne of the bosome, to make knowne what hath beene in his Fathers bosome, being the treasures of wisedome, to manifest hidden Knowledge and Wisedome. Hence the Law of the Spirit of life is said to be in Christ, and not in us according to the Text. Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the Law of sinne and death. Fiftly, Why freed Me? not only be∣cause of manifestation to the Churches of Christ, that he had interest in the Li∣berty and Redemption by Jesus Christ, but also that he might have great con∣solaion in the midst of all sorrowes and tribulations, as if he had said, though the Law hath made Warre against me, hath slaine me, hath found me polluted, sinfull, and defiled: and made me cry out who shall deliver me from the body of this death, notwithstanding, from that I am rescued and delivered accor∣ding to the text. Rom. 8.2. For the Law
of the spirit of life in Christ Iesus, hath made me free from the Law of sinne and death. Why saith hee from the law of sinne ? some understand this to bee law ceremoniall, but I understand this to bee the law morrall; that it is not proper to call the law ceremoniall, the law of sinne and death, I prove it thus. First, That which was the only cause of death to the Beasts, and the figurative imposition upon them to signifie eter∣nall life to the redeemed and reconciled, that is not properly called the law of sin and death to us, but the law ceremoni∣all was the onely cause of death to the beasts, and the figurative imposition to signifie eternall life to them that are re∣conciled and Redeemed. Ergo. Secondly, That which by the Holy Ghost is not called the law of sinne and death, is not the law of sinne and death, but the holy Ghost hath not called the law ceremoniall the law of sinne and death; therefore it is not the law of sin nor death: The Holy Ghost hath at∣tributed this to the morrall law. Rom. 7.11. For sinne taking occasion by the com∣mandement deceived me, and by it slew mee. Rom. 3.20, 21. Therefore by the deeds of
the law there shall no flesh bee justified in his sight, for by the law is the knowledge of sinne, but not the righteousnesse of God without the law is manifest, being witnessed by the law and the Prophets. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? the sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the law. That law which figures out eternall life, Redemption & reconciliation, that cannot bee the law of sinne and death, but the law ceremoniall figured out eter∣nall life Redemption and reconciliation, therefore that cannot bee the law of sin and death, the ground is this, because the figure really answereth to the thing figured, the end of Heave offerings, sig∣nified the exaltation of our Lord upon the Crosse, the peace offerings, the re∣conciliation by Christ in the day of his Crosse, the burnt offerings, the satsfy∣ing of the justice of the Father, to witt, the appeasement of wrath in the time of his crosse; If I should speake of the Che∣rubims, they signifie nothing else but mercy, in that they were covered with gold designes the riches of Christ, in that they spread their wings one to∣wards another, denotes the faith of the
Saints towards the throne of grace and mercy, in that the mercy seate was pla∣ced above the arke of presence, signi∣fies that Christ the Lord of life and sal∣vation is exalted above all things, and that his presence extends it selfe to his poorest and meanest servants, in that God answered from the mercy seat be∣tweene the Cherubims mkes knowne to the Saints Adopted, that they are to receive answer of prayers from the breast of Christ to their poore soules. The Law. The gleanings of Ephraim, was better then the vintage of Abiezer, the law of life and reconciliation, is better then the law of death and condemnation, the one accuseth before the barre of Justice, the other excuses before the thron of grace, the one arraignes before the throne of Gods tribunall, the other acquits before the mercy seate, the one condemnes the soule and conscience of sinne, iniquity, and transgression, the other frees the soule from sinne, iniquity, and trans∣gression; the one is the cause of curse and execration, the other the cause of
blisse and benediction; the one affrights, amazeth, and consternateth, the other comforteth, refresheth and consolates: one made the children of Israel flee from mount Sina, the other makes us approach neare to Mount Sion. Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. For ye are not come to the mountaine that might be touch∣ed, and that burned with fire, not unto black∣nesse and darkenesse, and tempest; which voyce they that heard, intreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more, for they could not indure that wch was com∣manded; and if so much as a beast touch the mountaine it shalbe stoned or thrust through with a dart: And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly feare and tremble: But ye are come unto Mount Si∣on, and unto the City of the living God, and heavenly Ierusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the generall assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and God the judge of all, and to spirits of just men made perfect: and to Iesus the Mediatour of the new Cove∣nant, and to the blood of sprinkling that spea∣keth better things then that of Abell. O ye prisoners of hope, weigh, con∣sider and ponder, whether the Law of sinne and death, is like to the law of
peace and life, hath it revealed redemp∣tion to bondmen? Adoption to slaves of hell and children of the devill? re∣conciliation to those that shooke and quivered in my presence? justification to those that were found unrighteous in my sight? sanctification to those who have beene unholy before me? and glo∣rification to those that were shut out from the blessed fruition and commu∣nion of my Kingdome? what mention hath it made of the death of the Lord of life, and the incomparablenesse there∣of, of the blood of my dearely beloved sonne, and the richnesse thereof; of the crosse of the prince of glory, and the conquest thereof? If I speake of rest to my restlesse prisoners, it is by the Gos∣pel of Adoption, If I speake of peace to Captives, it is by my word of reconcilia∣tion; If I speake of grace to them that are bound in the black chaines of darke∣nesse, it is by my message of grace and & salvation. Is the voyce of my servant Moses, like the voyce of my beloved sonne no, he was slow of speech, my son is swift to deliver my minde of grace to my people, he was not eloquent, but my beloved he hath the rarest sentences of grace and bounty, Aaron his brother
spake for him to Pharaoh but my be∣loved for all in matter of Mediation, and to al in the matter of reconciliation, hee was unwilling to speake to and for my people, but my beloved hath beene willing to speake for my chosen and Adopted. John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me. Heb. 5.7. Who in the dayes of his flesh offered up prayers and sup∣plications with strong crying and teares unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared. I gave to Moses the law of terrours to terrifie them that are wilfull sinners, the law of horror to smite a horror into them that are incorriggable transgressors, of severe equity to pronounce woe and miserie to them that live in sinne and iniquity; I have honoured my sonne above my ser∣vant. Heb. 3.5, 6. And Moses verily was faithfull in all his house as a servant; for a testimony of those things which were to bee spoken after, but Christ as a Sonne over his owne house, whose house are we, if wee hold fast the confidence and the rejoycing of the hope firme unto the end. Heb. 5.5. So also Christ glorified not himselfe to be made an high Priest, but he that said to him, thou
art my son to day have I begotten thee. The Son by eternall generation is above the son by Adoption. I thought non worthy in heaven above, in the earth below, o under the earth worthy to deliver my minde, my will, my pleasure to my peo∣ple, but him whom I have made king & Lord over my people: there is none fit ot declare the words of eternall life, but the fountaine & welspring of life, the words of peace Attonement & reconciliation; but he that by his blood hath purchased peace, attonement and reconciliation, the words of liberty, freedome and re∣demption, but hee that acquired by his death, liberty, freedome & redemption. Apoc. 5.9.10. And they sung a new song, saying, thou art worthy to take the booke, and to open the seales thereof, for thou wast slaine, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, & tongue, & people, & na∣tion, and hath made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, & we shall raigne on the earth. The words of protection, justification and sanctification by his death, blood and righteousnesse, sith hee hath pro∣tected his, justified them through righteousnesse, and sanctified them tho∣rough his words. John 17.17. hee hath
spoken of peace, that procured peace. John 14.26. But the comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom my Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, what∣soever I said unto you. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world giveth, give I it unto you, let not your hearts be troubled, neither let it be affraid. Words of life and victory, that obtai∣ned life and victory. Apoc. 1.18. I am he that liveth, and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and I have the keyes of hell and death. Words of joy and consolation, being the pretious ri∣ver and welspring of consolation. John 16.22. And ye now therfore have sorrow, but I wil see you again, & your heart shal rejoyce, & your joy no man taketh from you. Who can speake words of my gratious & glo∣rious presence but Jmmanuell my pre∣sence? who can speak words of life, but him that is the spring of eternall life, and Lord of life by conquest from the dead? or who can speak words of liberty, free∣dom & redemption, but him that I have appointed to be the deliverer of my peo∣ple? the Doctors have wondered at his sentences, the people admired at his gra∣tious
speeches, & the Churches delecta∣tion was in the rarenss of his voice. Cant. 5. the last His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely; this is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Ierusalem! If he speake from the throne of my grace and bounty, his words are onely grace and bounty; If hee speake from the throne of mercy and pitty, he speakes nothing but of grace and pitty: is it not thus re∣corded. Mat. 12.18, 19, 20. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soule is well pleased; I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew judge∣ment unto the, Gentiles: he shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall my man heare his voice in the streets: a bruised reede shall hee not breake, and smoaking flax shalhe not quench, till he send forth judgement unto victory. His words are life to the lifelesse, grace to the gracelesse, pitty to the pittilesse, and truth to the hopelesse; his words are freedome to the bound, health to the sick, healing to the wounded, binding to the broken, and riches to the poorest under heaven. The words of Achito∣phel were like the words of an Oracle. But the words of my beloved are Ora∣cles: his words surpasseth the words of
Solomon, he spake of the nature of trees, of plants, of hearbs, and of all subluna∣rie things from the Cedar in Lebanon to the Hysop upon the walls: The words of Christ are of grace, of mercy, of peace, of truth from the highest mercy to the deepest miseries: all were happie that might stand at the footsteps of Solomon, to heare his wisedome, but they are happie that may stand at the feet of Christ to heare the wisedome of Christ; the Queene of Sheba came from the South to heare the wisedome of Solomon; The Prisoners of Hope de∣parts from the barre of Justice to heare of the riches and glory of Christ; Solo∣mon was the wonder and admiration of the times because of his wisedome and discretion: Christ the wonder and ad∣miration of his Churches because of his speeches and declaration. My soule, he that is thy peace, thy rest, thy love, thy mercy; he shall be thy cōmander: he that is thy prince of glory, thy Lord of life, he is thy gratious protector, hee that is thy vine, thy head, &c thy bridegroome, he shall be thy leader & rule: for grace and peace came by him when the Law came by Moses. Ioh. 1.17. Redemptiō, Ju∣stification
and Reconciliation came by him when Condemnation adjudica∣tion came by Moses, Consolations com∣forts joyes and springs of solace came by him, when terrors, horrors, feares and servitude came by Moses. Therefore thou shalt glory and expresse the praise of glory concerning the words of free∣dome and liberty. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Iesus hath made me free from the law of sinne and death. 2. The Law of the Spirit of life It hath beene said of Paradise; that it was the rarest place in the habitable world: in respect of Altitude, in respect of Amaenetie, in respect of Profunditude, and in respect of Jucunditie: the same may be spoken concerning the Spirit of life and glory; it is extolled in respect of Altitude, sith it is in Christ who was placed in the high and heavenly places, of Amaenetie, sith it is the delight of the beloved Saints and peculiar, of Profun∣ditude, sith, it soundeth the lowest and deepest misery, of Jucunditie, sith it makes the drooping soule most joyous and chearefull. Therefore the same that was the joy and glory of the blessed A∣postle,
is the joy and glory of the droo∣ping soule; joying and glorying in the words of the Apostle. Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the Law of sinne and death. The Law of the Spirit of life. Pretious are the gifts and graces which come from the Father of everlasting light, rare are the treasures which come from the Lord of life and peace, rare and pretious is the Law of life which is from and of the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. What is so jucundious? what is so amaenious? or what is so joyous? as the spirit of Adoption? which sealeth the soule up to the day of eternall Redemp∣tion; or what can be so pleasant, so de∣lightsome or joyfull as the spirit that consolates the soule in the midst of all distresses? or what can be so rare, so wonderfull and admirable as the law of of the spirit of life? that frees us from the law of sinne and death, the seale of the spirit doth rejoyce thee in the day of thy Adoption, the disconsolated are conso∣lated in the day of Consolation, the wanting & vacuous are filled with joys in the day of impletion, and the soule is
filled with all fulnesse and sweetnesse in the day of liberation, hence comes in our joyfullnesse and fullnesse; that as we receive our peace from the Prince of peace, our righteousnesse from the Lord of righteousnesse; so we receive the law of life from the spirit of life in Christ Je∣sus. If thou hast the revelation of the mistery of the Kingdome it is by the spirit. Mat. 16.11. He answered and said unto them, because it is given unto you to know the misteries of the Kingdome of Hea∣ven, but to them it is not given. If to thee is given to know the deep and profound things of God, it is by the spirit. 1 Cor. 2.10. But God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit, for the spirit searcheth all things, yea the deep things of God. If to thee is given to know the mind of God be∣fore the world was, it is by the spirit. Ephes. 4.7. But to every one of us is given grace according to the gifts of Christ. Ephes. 3.5. That to other Generations hath not been known to the sonnes of men is now revea∣led to the Apostles and prophets by the spirit. So if there is a revelation of the mistery of glory to Babes and Sucklings and de∣nied to the learned Doctors and Rabbies of the world it is by the spirit. Mat. 11.
25.26.27. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thanke thee O Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou hast hide these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to Babes, even so Father for so seemed good to thy sight. All things are delivered unto me of my Father, and no man knoweth the sonne, but the Father, nei∣ther knoweth any man the Father but the sonne, and he to whom soever the sonne will reveale him. None can write the law of God in the hearts of the Saints but the spirit of Christ, as none can seale to the Conscience the everlasting love of God the Father, and the precious treasures of Jesus Christ, but the spirit of glory: as none can give the spirit of oration to them that cannot pray, the spirit of consolation, to them that sit in mour∣ning weeds but the spirit of Comfort: so none can write the mind of God in the conscience, or the will of Christ in the spirit of the Saints, but the spirit of assu∣rance or obsignation. Hence it is recor∣ded by the Apostle. 2 Cor. 3.3. Yee are our Epistles, written in our hearts, which is known and read of all men manifest to be the epistle of Christ, &c. The same spirit that reveales unto
the Saints the unsearchable riches of Christ, that engraves the heavenly and gracious mind of the Father in the con∣sciences of the Redeemed; the same quickens the soule by the mighty power of life and vivification, when we lay dead in sinnes and trespasses, when wee were troden in our bloods by the Hors∣men of Hell and Death, when we were involved in the depth of the gulfe of mi∣series, then by the same spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead, we were quickned, therefore not without cause is he called the spirit of life. First, In the respect of Christ? Secondly, In respect of the life that the Saints receive through uniō by the spirit. Thirdly, In respect of that life the Saints receive through Faith, Love, and hope by the spirit in the act of com∣munion. When our Lord was in the grave, neither hell, nor death, nor law, nor justice, nor all the force of the creature could retaine him: for he shewed him∣selfe the Lord of life by rising from the dead Apoc. 1.18. I am he that liveth and was dead, I am alive forever more, Amen, and have the keyes of Hell and death. Lord
over sin by the blood of his crosse. Col. 2.14.15 Blotting out the hand writing of ordinan∣ces which was against us, which was contra∣ry to us, and tooke it out of the way, nailing it to his crosse, and having spoiled principa∣lities and powers, he made a shew of them o∣penly, triumphing over them all. Conque∣rer over the Divill by the power of his death. Heb. 2.24. For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himselfe tooke part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death; that is the Devill. Vi∣ctorer over the law and over all accusa∣tions by his intercession. Rom. 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifieth, who is it that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea ra∣ther that is risen againe; who is even at the right hand of God: who also ma∣keth intercession for us. Triumpher o∣ver Captives, and leading captivitie captive by the power of his assention. It was impossible our Lord should be retai∣ned by the bonds of death, the barts of hell, and the power of the Devill: not only because it hath beene the determi∣nate counsell of the Father, not to leave his soule in grave, nor suffer his holy one
to see corruption. Acts 2.27 Because thou wilt not leave my soule in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Be∣cause of that pittie he had to his beloved Spouse, his dearest members, & his ten∣der branches; Ephes. 2.6. And hath raised us up together, & made us sit together in hea∣venly places in Christ Jesus, because of the dignity of himselfe, being King of his Church Lord of life, & Mediatur of the Covenant Acts 2.24. Whom God hath raised up; ha∣ving gloosed the paines of death because it was not possible he should be houlden of it. But al∣so because of the mighty and infinite power of the spirit of glory, which rais'd up our Lord of life & Prince of glory. O my soule! consider, consider what the spirit of life hath done for thy foule! Had not our Lord been raised from the dead by the spirit of life; sinne would have crusht thy conscience to the lowest gulfe of misery; the Devill like a roaring Lion would have devoured thee, the law of terrors would have bound thee to the barre of eternal justice to eternitie death would have delivered thee to the second death forevermore, and all evills would have ceased upon thy spirit for ever and ever. Thē mightest thou have said with
the Psalmist, The sorrowes of death had compassed thee, and the evills of hell had found thee, thou foundest woe and sor∣row then mightest thou have spoken with Hezekiah; That thou wast forsaken as a Shepards Tent, that justice would have beene as a Lion to breake all thy bones, thou mightest have mourned as a Dove, & chattered as a Crain to the dayes of eternity. Saying That thou should'st behold his gracious face no more, be∣hold his gracious countenance no more, but remaine in everlasting chaines un∣der darkenesse for evermore. Shouldest thou have beene so happie as Jonah? no, he was but in the bellie of the Whale, but thou shouldest have beene in the bellie of hell, he was in the depth of the sea, but thou shouldest have beē in the depth of the bottomlesse pit, the waves of the sea and the bellowes there∣of incompassed him, but the waves of greatest sorrowes and bellowes of excee∣ding wrath should have incompassed thee; he was heard out of the bellie of the Whale and his prayer came into his holy temple, but thy prayer should have beene shut out from his glorious presence and should not have appeared
before the throne of grace, a Goard was provided for him to hide his head from the heate of the Sunne, but no shelter nor shadow had beē provided for thee to hide thy soule frō everlasting burnings. Where had beene the glorying of the Saints, had our Lord not beene raised from the dead? we should have had no cause to glory in the blood and death of his crosse, no cause of triumphing in a glorious presentation, in a hapy recon∣ciliation, in an absolute abolition of the hand writings which were written a∣gainst us. Where had been our redemp∣tion from death, and the feare thereof, from the grave and the sting thereof, from out of the hands of the Devill, and and the slavery thereof, from the law and the execration thereof? where had been our royall Robes of Righteousnesse? our garments of glorious salvation & justifi∣catiō in his glorious presencs? if the holy one had seen corruption: the branches of the rarest vine should have withered, the members to the head of purest gold would have perished, and the spouses to our blessed and dearest Bridegroome would have been clothed with shame & reproah for ever. But blessed, thrice bles∣sed
be that name is blessed forevermore, sith, he hath raised the head and the members, the branches & the vine, the bridegroome & the spouses together. He that left not our Lord in the grave hath not left the Redeemed of the Lord in the pitt of distruction, he that suffered not the sonne of the bosome to see cor∣ruption, will not suffer the sonnes by a∣doption to be swallowed up by ever∣lasting perdition. Therefore you sonnes & daughters of men, we will not only glory in Christs incarnation, in Christs crucifixtion, in his grave, buriall & glo∣rious assention, but also in his victorious & triumphous Resurrection. The risse of the son of righteousnesse is more to us then the sun of morning light, that de∣lights the eye & sence of sublunaries, this the soules of distressed consciences: that causeth the hearbs, plants & trees to rise out of the earth, this causeth the bran∣ches spouses & members of Christ to rise out of the lowest pitt, that removeth darknesse & bringeth in a light Diurnal, this removeth darkenesse & bringeth in a light eternall. That is the plenitude a∣bove, and the riches of the earth beneath, this is the riches of the Church Militant, and the plenitude of the Church Tri∣umphant.
Therfore will we glory in the spirit of life, according to the Text Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sinne and death. The spirit of life. Sweet and pleasant is the expression of Job, Will the wilde Asse roare when he hath grasse? or will the Oxe low when he hath fother? or will the dead soule mourne for life? when it hath the spirit of life? Noe, it will joy it selfe in the spi∣rit of joy, and consolate it selfe in the spirit of consolation, triumphing with the Apostle, because the spirit of life hath freed it from the law of sinne and death: according to the Text. Rom. 8.2. For he law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of sin and death. Secondly, It is called the spirit of life, sith that the spirit is the cause of union with the Lord Jesus, by which the Saints receive both life spiritual and life eternall. My prisoners of Hope, and Bond men to the throne of mercy: know and con∣sider, that it is not in your powers to in∣joy union with me and Jesus Christ whom I have sent, the spot of your sin,
the blott of your transgressions, and the impurity of your iniquities hath preven∣ted, the exactnesse, rigidnesse and per∣fection of my law most pure hath hinde∣red, the eternitie, the infinite and the pu∣rity of my divine justice letteth. Could your darkenesse bring it selfe to my glo∣rious light? I dwell in the light unacces∣able. 1 Tim. 6.16. Who only hath immor∣tality, dwelling in the light whom no man hath seene, nor can see, to whom be honour, and power everlasting amen. Can your im∣purity reach my infinite and eternall pu∣rity? I am a God that can behold no ini∣quitie. Haback. 1.13. Thou art of pu rer eyes then to behold evill, and canst not looke on iniquitie; wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal trechearously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then he. Can thy death atting and touch my life & being from eternitie to eternitie. I am alone the fountaine of living wa∣ters. Jer. 2.13. For my people have com∣mitted two evills, they have forsaken me the fountaine of living waters, and hewed them out Cisternes, broken Cisternes that can hold no water. Or can your lownesse and profunditie: reach the highnesse of my
sublimitie? I dwell in the high and the holy place. Isaiah 57.15. For thus saith the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eter∣nitie, whose name is holy; J dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spi∣rit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Could Dives passe the gulfe of hell to the bosome of Abraham? No, can a bird without wings reach the hight of the sunne? No, can a man with∣out eyes behold the highest orbs? No, or can thy soule that is involved in the law of horrid iniquitie unite it selfe to me? No, this way of union was not found in the habitable world, but in my habitation of glory: this was not found in the depths below, but in the heights a∣bove: this was not found in thy breasts and invention, but in my breasts of hea∣venly compassion: well saith the scrip∣ture. Man knoweth not the price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living, the depth saith it is not in me, and the sea saith it is not in me, God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place thereof. Therefore this was my wisedome to give this Glory to my beloved sonne, John 17 22. and the glory which thou gavest
me, J have given them, that they may be one even as we are one. That by his blood he might make them which are afarre off nigh to me. Ephes. 2.13. But now in Christ Jesus, yee who sometimes were farre off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. That by the death of his crosse he might make of two one. Ephes. 2.15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmitie, e∣ven the law of Commandements, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himselfe of twain one new man: so making peace. And that he might bring them to me that never knew the riches of my grace. Ephes. 2.18. For through him we both have an accesse by one spirit unto the father. Untill I came to live in my people to make thē a habi∣tation & dwelling place, till I made them habitations of glory for the spirit of my glory, they were as farre from me, as my dwelling place is from the lowest hell, as the clearest light is from the greatest darkenesse, and the barre of my Justice from the throne of mercy. But my spirit gives them a being in the heavenly pla∣ces, my spirit removed all the letts be∣twixt me and my people, my spirit gives them to injoy a being reall in me and in the dearest of my breast 1 Thes. 1.1. Paul
and Silvanus and Timotheus to the Church of Thessalonica, which is in God the Father; and in the Lord Jesus Christ: grace be un∣to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Hence all the branches, receive their life from the vine Christ Jesus; hence also the members receive their vitall motion from their head Christ Jesus, hence the spouse re∣ceiveth her being from the bridgroome Jesus Christ through and by the spirit of life, therefore comes in the glorying and expression of my people according to the text; For the law of the spirit of life in Christ, hath made me free from the law of sinne and death. Thirdly, because of the life of Faith, and love, and hope which is given thee by the Spirit of life. It was not the shadow of Peter that healed the sick and weake, but the over∣shadowing grace from the throne of e∣ternall mercy: it was not the handker∣chiefes and neckcloathes of Paul that drave out devills, but the omnipotent power of the eternall mediatour; it was not the water in Baptisme that washeth away sinne, but the blood of Christ: so it hath not been in the purity & strength
of the sonnes of death to free themselves from the Law of sinne and death; but in the power of the law of life according to the text. Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Iesus hath made me from the law of sinne and death. You that have been Prisoners without hope, as by the blood of my Testament, I have sent you out of the pit where there is no water, so by the law of my life I have freed you from the law of sin & death. I have made you to live the life of faith, when I hide my face, the light of my dearest love and gratious countenance, when I covered my selfe with darknesse, and wrapt my selfe in a clowd; when I seemed to bid farrwell, as though I would see you no more, then I made you to live by faith which was in mee, when as my servant Ionas was in the depth of the Sea, in the gulfes beneath, invironed in the mighty waters, and in the bellie of the devouring whale, I made him to call upon my name, and to looke towards my holy Temple: when thou wast in the depths of the sea of mi∣series, in the ocean of miserable iniqui∣ty, notwithstanding I have made thee looke to the throne of my grace and
bounty, & highest mercy: when I suffe∣red thee to be mocked, scoffed, derided, scorned, to be stoned, deprived of bread convenient, shutt out from amongst the dearest and nearest friends, bringing thee to the gates of deepest miseries, and to the prison where thou shouldest have lost thy liberty; notwithstanding, I have made thee live by faith which is in mee, I have brought thy faith into Christ; there thou livest, there thou de∣lightest, there thou restest, there thou dwellest, there thou joyest, and there abidest; as the seate of the Eagle is upon the rock undervaluing all inferiour pla∣ces, so thy habitation is in Christ the rocke of righteousnesse and thou under∣valuest all sublunarie and inferiour things. As I have made the promises yea and Amen to the praise of my glo∣ry; so I have made thee to rest upon those promises to eternall glory. As I am becom thy most benignous and gra∣tious Father in my Covenant to perpe∣tuitie, so will I make thee live by love through my Covenant to Eternitie. If I have taken up my rest, my content∣ment, my acquiescence and complacen∣cie through atonement: If I have filled
the sonne of my love with the treasures of hidden wisedome and science, the treasures of pure and unspotted righte∣ousnesse, it is because thou mightest live by faith which is in me: at that time thou maiest answer the words of my faithfull Apostle. Gal. 2.20. I am crucifi∣ed with Christ, neverthelesse I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, is by the faith of the sonne of God, who loved me, and gave him∣selfe for me. If thou hadst beene with Noah in the Arke, thou wouldest have lived above the waters. If with Daniel, in the Ly∣onsden, thou would'st have lived by the strength of the Lyon of the Tribe of Ju∣dah. If with Shadrech, Meshech and A∣bednego in the fierie furnace, thou woul∣dest have lived by the fire of love and by my promise of deliverance out of the fire. Isaiah 43.2. When thou passest tho∣rough the waters, I will bee with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not bee burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Out of the eater comes meate, and out of the strong comes sweetnesse: from love comes love to
Christ againe, We love him because he loved vs first. 1 Ioh. 4.19. and out of the strong∣nesse of Christ comes the pleasantnesse and sweetnesse of the Saints. Ephes. 3.20.21. Now unto him that is able to doe ex∣ceedingly and abundantly above all we aske or thinke, according to the power that wor∣keth in us, unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages world without end Amen. Hence they are filled with glorious expressions, expressing the love of Christ in their freedome and li∣beration according to the text. Rom 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Iesus, hath made me free from the law of sin and death. Till I appeard in the rare ex∣pression of my love, thou lovedst the vanities, the treasures, the glory, the ri∣ches and power of the Creature before me; till I powred out the savour of my sweet oyntments, and caused my fran∣kincence to smell in thy nostrills, thou lovest thy self above me, till I let my fin∣gers drop the myrhe, the sweet distilling mirhe; thou sattest at rest and soughtest not after me, but in the day of the effusiō of my sweet oyntmēts I made thee love me. Cant. 1.2, 3. Let him kisse me with the kisses of his mohth, for his love is better then
wine, because of the savour of thy good oynt¦ments, thy name is as oyntment poured forth, therefore doe the virgins love thee: in the time of the distillations of my mithe, I made thee seeke after me. Cant. 5.4 5, 6. My beloved put in his hand into the hole of the doore, and my bowells were moved for him. I rose up to open to my Beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of the locks. I opened unto my beloved, but my beloved had with-drawne himselfe and was gone, my soule failed when he spake, I sought him, but I could not finde him, I called him, but he gave me no answer. Assuredly thou didst account of the treasures of the mountaines, above the riches of the hea∣venly places, the riches of the seas, above the riches of the sea of sure mercies, thou didst value the riches of Kingdomes, a∣bove the riches of my heavely kingdom, and thou didst prize the earthly jewels above the jewell of jewells and the preti∣ous jemmes, above the pretious stone, the foundation of my Redeemed, when my love appeared above women, then thou didst love me above women; when my love appeared to thee above riches, treasure, honours, kingdomes & provin∣ces,
then thou lovedst mee above King∣domes and provinces, above riches, treasures and honours, thou wast not sick of love till my love made thee sicke of love. Cant. 5.8. I charge you O daugh∣ters of Ierusalem, if ye finde my beloved, tell him that I am sicke of love. Thou wast not overpowred with the overpow∣rings of my Love, till I overpowred thee with my pretious love; can the waters from below water the fruitfull and bar∣ren soile without me? or can the raine droppe showers from the clouds with∣out me? or can the soule have the over∣flowings of love without my spirit? no. Rom. 5.5. And hope maketh not ashamed because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. Canst thou know that supereminent love of my sonne without I shew my grace supereminent? no. Ephes. 2.6, 7. And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in the ages to come, he might shew forth the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindnesse towards us through Christ Jesus. Ephes. 3.19. And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God.
Or couldest thou have known the height, the depth, the length or breadth of my dearest faviour without my spi∣rit? No, Ephes 3.16.17, 18. That he would give you according to the riches of his glory, to be strenghened with might by his spirit in the inner man: that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith that yee being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth and height, and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge. Hence thy experience wit∣nesseth, that the spirit of life is thy life of love and freedome. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made thee free from the law of sinne and death. What is the light of the Candle to the light of the Moone? or the light of of the Moone to the light of the sonne? or what is the light of the Sunne to Christ the sonne of glorious righteous∣nesse? when by the light of his glori∣ous countenance he shines upon the soule by giving to it the life of faith in God. Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turne them from darkenesse to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they
may receive the forgivenesse of sinnes and in∣heritance amongst them which are sanctified, through faith that is in me. The life of love in Christ. Ephes. 1.15. Wherefore I also after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints. And the life of hope in the promise. 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen: nuto the glory of God by us. Heb. 11.1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seene. Hence we glory not only in the spirit of life but in the law of the spirit of life. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of sinne and death. I gave to thee the life of faith, faith is my guift. Ephes. 2.10.8. For we are his workemanship crea∣ted in Jesus Christ unto good workes, which God hath before ordained, that we should walke in them. For by grace are yee saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God. I gave to thee the life of love, when I gave the sonne of love. Joh. 3.16. for God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten sonne, that whosoever be∣leeveth one him should not perish, but have everlasting lif. I gave to thee the life of hope, when I gave to thee the lively hope through the resurrection from the
dead 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God & the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundance mercy, hath begotten us a∣gaine to a lively hope, by the resurection of Jesus Christ from the dead. When I have made mine to walke in sheepe skins, and Goates skins in dennes and caves of the earth for my names sake, I gave them hope of everlasting righteousnesse raig∣ning by grace unto eternall life. Rom. 5. last. For as sinne hath raigned unto death, even so might grace raigne through righte∣ousnesse unto eternall life by Jesus Christ our Lord. When I gave them neither favour Love, nor Footsteps in or amongst the Creature, I have given to them a Citie whose maker and builder is my selfe. Heb. 11.16. But now they desire a bettter Country, that is an heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he hath prepared for them a Citie. When I made them undergoe Shipwracks, Sto∣nings, Defamie, Reproach, Disdaine, Contempt, Malice, Wrath, Envie, Back∣bitings, Slanderings, Scornings, by them that under the profession of my praise and glory; are enemies to the throne of my praise and glory. I gave them hope in the eternall waight of my
glory. 2 Cor. 4.17.18. For our light afflicti∣ons whcih is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding & eternal waight of glory, while we looke not one things that are seen, but one things that are not seen, for the things which are seene are tem∣poral, but the things which are not seen are eternall. Hence they expect a new hea∣ven & a new earth, in which is righteous∣nesse. 2 Pet. 3.13. We waite for a new hea∣ven and a new earth, in which is Righteous∣nesse. Hence they expect the light of my presence, and pleasures for evermore Psalm. 16. last. Thou wilt shew me the path of life, in thy presence is fullnesse of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for ever∣more. Hence they looke for the Crowne of glory, the Crowne of life, and the Crowne of righteousnesse. 2 Tim. 4.8. Hence forth is laid up for me a Crowne of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righte∣ous Iudge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto them also, that love his appearing. And not without cause, sith I have not only given unto them my oath and promise, but the law of the spi∣rit of my life to free them from the law of sin and death. Heb. 6.18, 19. That by two immutable things in which
it was impossible for God to lye, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Which hope wee have as an Ancor of the soule, both sure and stedfast, and which en∣treth into that within the vaile. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Je∣sus hath freed them from the law of sin & detah. The Father hath given to Christ the highest sublimitie, and shall I cease to mention so great a dignity? as the pleni∣tude of sentence to conceivemēt is misti∣call, so Christs kingly dignitie is unutte∣rable, though the rationalls cannot be∣hold the Sun with full spectation, yet the Sun must not hinder them from behold∣ing, though of Christ the Lord of life we make no full dimention, yet the excel∣lencie of the law of life must not hinder us from declaring; hence admirable hath beene the expression of life from the law of life, sith by that wee are freed from the law of sinne and death. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made us free from the law of sinne and death.
The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. It was said of Jonathan and Saul that they were lovely and amiable in their lifes, & were not devided in their deaths. It may be said of Christ that he was A∣miable & lovely being the Lord of life, and that his love was not seperated from his death; for in his death he abolished sinne totally, overcame the divell victoriously, and stopped the mouth of the accusing law wonderfully, in his life we injoy eternall life, a life spirituall in the heavenly places. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made us free from the law of sinne and death. The rarenesse or pretiousnesse of the covenant consists in three things. First, In the freenesse of the Covenant. Secondly, in the eternity of the Cove∣nant. Thirdly, in the place or collocation of the Covenant. The rarenesse of this Covenant or law of life in Christ is in that it is a free covenant or law of life in Christ: The effects of my covenant are free, I be∣came
a God freely to mine in covenant. What beauty? what glory? what splen∣dor? what righteousnesse? what holi∣nesse? what performances have I seene in them? the best of their righteousnes were menstruous cloathes and defiled garments. Isa. 64 6. But wee are all as an uncleane thing, and all our righteousnesse are as filthy ragges, and we all doe fade as a leafe, and our iniquities like the winde have taken us away. The purest of their robes are no better then rattered raggs of the old Adam, the rarest of their purities, im∣purities, of their righteousnes, unrighte∣ousnesse, and of their godlinesse, ungod∣linesse. It was I that washed them from their blood in the bloud of my deare sonne, when they were involved in their blood. Apo. 1.5. And from Jesus Christ who is the faithfull witnesse, and the first be∣gotten of the dead, & the prince of the Kings of the earth, unto him that hath loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his owne blood. It was I that cloathed them in the robes of pure righteousnesse, when they were cast out naked to the shame of their faces. Ezek. 16.8. Now when I pas∣sed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was the time of love, and I spread my
skirt over thee, and covered thy nakednesse, yea I sweare unto thee, and entred into a co∣venant with thee saith the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. It was I that looked upon mine in the daies of shame and re∣proach, when neither men nor Angells did regard them. Eze. 16.5.6. No eye pittied thee to doe any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field to the loathing of thy person in the day that thou wast borne: and when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine owne blood, yea I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood live; Had they ob∣tained mercy, before I by mercy became their God & Father by covenant? No, Hosea 2. the last. And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them which were not my people, thou art my people, and they shall say thou art my God, Were they my people before I said they shall be my people? No. Rom. 9.25, 26, As he saith also in Osea, I will call them my people, which were not my people, and her be∣loved which was not beloved, & it shall come to passe that in the place where it was said un∣to them ye were not my people, there they shall be called the Children of the living God. Or
were they espoused to me for ever, be∣fore I espoused them to me for ever. Hos. 2.19. And I will betroth thee unto mee in righeousnesse, and judgement, and in loving kindnesse, and in mercy. Let mine behold the freenesse of my love in the pardon of sinne through the Covenant of grace and mercy. If I had not pardoned their sinnes, had I not cast them out of my presence as I cast Adam out of Para∣dise? Had I not cast them out from the communion of my glory of blessednes, as I cast out my Angells from the fruiti∣on of my glory and happinesse? Had I not caused hell to swallow them as the earth did Corah, Dathan and Abiram? when all the fountaines were shut, I ope∣ned to them a pretious fountaine in the sides of my dearest Sonne. I gave the blood of the most pure, spotlesse, and undefiled, without spot, wrinckle, and unstained, incomparable, inestimable and unutterable, though I judge the worth of his bloud above the worth of a Thousand worlds, above the price of ten thousand jewells, above the riches of all the celestiall wights, yet I gave that for mine, that they by that might bee clensed, and I might see sinne no more,
that they by that might be reonciled, and I might remember sinne no more, hence have I blotted out their sins & ini∣quities as the thickest cloud. Isay 44.22. I have blotted as a thick cloud thy transgres∣sions, and as a cloud thy sins, returne unto me, for I have redeemed thee. Hence I deleted their transgressions for my names sake. Isay 43.25. I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions for my owne sake, and I will not remember thy sinnes. Hence I cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea. Micah 7.18.19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and psseth by the transgression of the remnant of his heri∣tage, he retaineth not his anger for ever, be∣cause he delighteth in mrcy? he will turne againe, he will have compassion upon us, hee will subdue our iniquities, and thou wilt cast all their sinnes into the dth of the Sea. In my Covenant of free grace I have given Christ to be mediatour, what is more pretious thē gold? or what is more excellent then light? or what is of grea∣ter value then his intercession in the be∣halfe of my redeemed Is it a small mat∣ter for the son of a King to mediate in the behalfe of trayterous and rebellious subjects? or it is a small matter that hee
that is King of Kings should become mediator in the behalfe of poore distres∣sed sinres? As I have commended my highest love that hee should shed his blood for sinfull wretches. Rom. 5.8. But God commendeth his love towards us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. So I have commended my dearest love that hee should be mediatour for wofull transgressions. 1 Tim. 2.5. For there is one God and one Mediatour betweene God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Whilst neither Angells Cherubins nor celestiall wights were able to present my people one how er spotlesse in my sight & pure presence, he is able to the dayes of eternity to pre∣sent all the prisoners of my hope intire before the light of my countenance, for he hath washed them in his blood most pure & undefiled. He hath set them be∣fore mee in the heavenly places, & they are in his brest without spot presented, I can behold none but the son of my love, being the God & father of love. I can be∣hold none but the Lord of Righteous∣nesse, sith I am the God and Father of Righteousnes: when I looke upon him who was my delight before the world was, how can I chuse but delight in them
who were sons of wrath and children of the devill. When I cast mine eye up∣on him that was the Complacencie of my breast & bosome, I cannot chuse but have effection towards them who have beene distant from my bosom. Whilst I fixe mine eye upon the mediatour of the Covenant, I will not hearken to the clamours of the world, the roarings of the devill, the accusations of the Law, the terrors and complaints of the consci∣ence, nor to any evills whatsoever. I will alone hearken to his plea and Medi∣ation, (he saith) my death is sufficient to redeeme and ransome mine from e∣ternall death, my bloud incomparable to remove all iniquities, my passion able to remove thy terrible indignation, had I not made a full and intire reconci∣liation, had I not obtained the throne of grace and mercy, had I left either sinne, spot, wrinckle, staine, blemish, or de∣filement unremoved, had not the value of my blood beene above all bloods, the worth of my death above all deaths, and price of Atonement above all Atone∣ments, then thy wrath, thy furie, and in∣dignation might have broken out a∣gainst my chosen as the inundation of
the mighty waters, but now I know thou lovest mine, whom I have purcha∣sed, and delightest in mine whom I have ransomed. My mediation surpasseth the mediation of Aaron, that was the sonne of man, this by me the sonne of God, hence I sit at the right hand of God to make intercession for mine. Rom. 8.34. Who is he that condemneth, it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen againe, who is even at the right hand of God, who also ma∣keth intercession for us. Aaron entred into the holy of holiest below, but I enter in∣to the holy of holiest into the heavenly places. Heb. 9.24. But Christ is not en∣tred into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it selfe, now to appeare in the presence of God for us. Aaron was annoynted with oyle made with the confection of the Apothicary, but I was annoynted with the oyle of gladnesse above my fellowes. Heb. 1.9. Thou hast loved righteousnesse, and hated iniquity, therefore God even thy God hath annointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse above thy fellowes. Aaron he on∣ly killed beasts for burnt offerings, for peace offerings and heave offerings, but
I was slaine for the peace of my people, that I might bring mine to injoy everla∣sting fruition and communion of my Fathers love and glory. Acts 2.23. Him being delivered by the determinate councell and foreknowledge of God, yea have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slaine. Aaron dyed and another succee∣ded in his place, but I live for ever to make attonement and entercession for my reconciled. Heb. 7.2.5. wherefore he is able to the uttermost to save them which come unto God by him, seeing he ever liueth to make intercession for them. Aaron neither entred into the land of Canaan, nor brought others into the land of Canaan. But I have entred into my Fathers king∣dome & provided that for the children of the kingdome. John 14.2, 3. In my Fathers house are many mantions, if it were not so I would haue told you, I goe to pre∣pare a place for you. And if I goe, and prepare a place for you, I will come againe, & receive you unto my selfe; that where I am, there you may be also. Aaron had the names of the Children of Jsrael ingraven in pre∣tious stones, and wore them upon his breast that hee might present their names and cause in the presence of my
Father I have the names of mine ingra∣ven upon my breast, that I may ever present the cause of the Israel of God in my Fathers presence: hence it is said of of me, that I might appeare in the pre∣sence of God for mine. Heb. 9.24. For Christ it not entered into the holy places made with hands which are figures of the true, but into Heaven it selfe now to appeare in the presence of God for us. ut supra Secondly, The Father hath given. Christ to be the object of Faith through the Covenant, according to that thy eye beholds, so is thy mind affected, according to that the eare heareth, so is the spirit delighted, accor∣ding to that thou conceivest of Christ, so thy soule imbraceth. The lowest thoughts thou hast it as heigh as the heavenly mantion, and the heighest thought thou hast is as heigh as Christ Lord and Mediatour, thou knowest or no mercy, no grace, no bounty, no pit∣tie, no love, no joy, no rest, no hope, no promise, no glory, nor no felicitie with∣out Christ: rest is no rest, if Christ be not thy rest, hope is no hope, if Christ be not thy hope, felicity should be no fe∣licity, If Christ be not thy felicity, and
all things are nothing if Christ be not all things. If thou injoyest light diurnall is it not from the sun in the midst of the planets? If thou injoyest raine from the clouds, is it not from the raine therein contained? If thou injoyest hope, rest & felicitie, is it not because it is in Christ comprehended? all the rivers of the val∣lie wants water, but Christs river. Psal. 46.4. There is a river, the streames thereof shall make glad the Citie of our God. All the Fountains of the world are empty, but Christs Fountain. John 4.14. But who∣soever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up to eternall life. And all the springs upon the earth are vacant or void, but Christs overflowing sprinsg. Psal. 36.9, 10. For with thee is the foun∣tain of life, in thy light we shall see light. Who from the beginning of the world ever heard of reconciliation, but through him? was not he the Lambe slaine from the beginning of the world? who amongst the prisoners of hope ever heard of deliverie without him? was not he the promised deliverer? Isaiah 59 20. And the Redeemer shall come to Sion, and
unto them that turne from transgression in Jacob saith the Lord. Who amongst the poore and bruised of the Saints? ever heard of riches and liberty of the Saints without him? is hee not the anoynted of the Lord? Luke 4.18. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anoyn∣ted me to preach the Gospel to the poore, hee hath sent mee to heale the broken hearted to preach deliverance to the Captives, and re∣covering of sight to the blind, to set at liber∣ty them that are bruised. Did Moses heare of mercy, clemency, bounty, patiencie and of verity in the rocke? and doe not we of the same in the rocke Christ? yea, he is the rarest object. Doth the sunne draw the Comets and Meators from be∣low above? and the Loadstone draw the needle distant to it? and doth not Christ the Sonne of beauty and the pretious stone of glory, draw the soule in misery to his highest mercies? Joh. 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men after me. Hosea 2.14. Therefore behold I will allure her, and bring her into the wildernesse, and speake comfortably unto her. Not onely the savour of his oynt∣ments allures us, not onely his sweet di∣stilling Myrrh affects us, but his strength
of operation drawes us. Uertue and strength went from Christ, whereby the woman was healed, and the vertue and dignity of Christ is that whereby the soule is fixed. Hence saith the Scrip∣ture. John 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and wee beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. Hence, it doth not onely chuse Christ to be its Vine of sweetnesse, its shepheard because of his tender care and pitty, the Lord its rightousnesse because he alone wrought righteousnesse, but also its object of delight and delectation; sith he is the only object of delight and delectation. Hence is the Churches de∣light and delectation. Ostende faciem tu∣am, sonet vox tua in auribus meis: vox e∣nim tua dulcis, & facies tua decora. O my soule pitch thou alone upon the treasu∣res of his wisedome, the storehouse of his mercy, the plenitude of heavenly blessings, upon his abundant grace truth, righteousnesse, goodnesse, clemency, merit, death, and satisfaction, upon his glory, peace, rest and reciliation, upon his liberty from slavery, his freedome from bondage, and everlasting redemp∣tion,
upon his hope, blisse, felicity and eternall benediction. If thou brayest as the hart brayeth after the rivers of wa∣ter, it shall be after Christ. Psal. 42.1, 2. As the heart panteth after the water brookes, so panteth my soule after thee my God, my soule thirsteth for God, after the living God, when shall I come and appeare before God. If thou thirsteth, as the thirsty land it shall be after Christ. Psal. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seeke thee, my soule thirsteth for thee, my flesh longth for thee in a dry and thirsty land where no water is. If thou wishest after any in heaven above or in the earth below, for him shalt thou wish. Psal. 73.24, 25. Thou shalt guide me with thy councell, and afterward receive me to thy glory. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I de∣sire besides thee. Hee is thy meate, thy drinke, and thy all things, thy water, thy wine, thy fire, and all things, thy being thy welbeing, thy life, and thy althings. Hence shalt thou rejoyce in the power of the law of life, sith Christ in that is become thy life. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made thee free from the law of sinne and death. Thirdly, The father hath given the
Lord Jesus Christ to bee the shepheard of his flocke through his Covenant of life and mercy. Elkanah gave to Penninah and her chil∣dren portions, but to Hannah hee gave a double portion, Abraham gave to the sonnes of Keturah gifts, but to Jsaack he gave the possession, though to others the Father gives riches and honours, notwithstanding he gives to his everla∣sting Beatification. Not only in con∣donation of transgression, in peace of conscience through Christs intercessi∣on, but also by giving them into the hands of the great shepheard of his sheep, that they might injoy an eternall tuition & protection. All we were wan∣dering sheepe, we had lost the image of God, and beare the Image of the devill, deprived of the title of eternall life, being bound with chaines to eternall death, bound to beare the burden of iniquity, to undergoe the dreadfull and terrible sentence of the morall law, wee were blinde without sight, naked without cloathing, spoiled and bereft of all the rare and noble injoyments which wee injoyed: poore sillie sheepe wandering upon the craggie mountaines of iniqui∣ty,
the rockes of misery, the desert and wildernesse of calamity. Was the groat lost? & not we amonst the lost? were the sheepe gone out of the way, and we not gone astray? Notwithstanding, such hath beene my tender mercy, my superemenent grace, my yearning bow∣els of compassion towards you: That I have sent the great and gratious shep∣heard of Israel, to seeke the lost sheepe of the house of Israel, the Lord of life, to seeke the sons of death, and the son of my love, to call and seeke the Chil∣dren of wrath. Eze. 34.16. I will seeke that which was lost, and bring againe that which was driven away, and will binde up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick, but I will destroy the fat and the strong, I will feede them with judgement. Rather then mine should rest upon the lofty mountaines of impurity, my beloved shall seeke them up by the word of reconciliation, rather then mine should abide upon the craggie rockes of iniquity, my beloved shall seek thē up by the word of great salvation. Rom 10.7, 8. But the righteousnesse which is of faith, spea∣keth on this wise, Say not in thine heart who shall ascend up into Heaven, (that is) to
bring down Christ from above, or who shall discend into the deep (that is to bring up Christ againe from the dead. But what saith it? the word is neigh the even in thy mouth and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which wee preach. Ther is no such Shepheard as the Shep∣heard of Israel he loves his sheep to the death. Hath it been recorded that any King hath layd down his life for rebel∣lious Subjects? Hath it been inrowled that any Bridegroome hath lost his life for his Bride? or any Shepheard hath layd down his life for his sheep? but my beloved, the King of my Church & cho∣sen, the Bridegroome to his beloved spouses, and the great shepheard of his sheepe hath layd down his life for his wandring sheepe. John 10.18. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of my selfe, I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it againe, this commandement have I received of my father. He is the care∣full shepheard of my flock: neither the heate of the day, nor the cold of the night hindred Jacobs care of Labans flock: the heate of my wrath, furie and indignation, nor the coldnesse of the effections of his peculiar, can prevent his
care over my scattered and dispearsed flocke. Were the shepheards carefull of their flock in the day of Christs com∣ming? and will not Israels shepheard be carefull of his flocke after his comming? he is not only as a father to mine to car∣rie them in his armes. Cant. 2.6 His left hand is under my head and his right hand doth imbrace me. As an Eagle that beares them upon his wings. Deut. 32.11.12. As an Eagle stireth up her nest, fluttereth with her wings, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beares them upon her wings. So the Lord alone did lead him, and their was no strange God with him, But as a shepheard who carries his upon his shouldiers to the fould of grace and glory. John 10.16. And other sheep I have which are not of this fold, them also J must bring, and they shall heare my voice, and there shall be one fold & one shepheard. Whilst mine are subject to chances and all evils, he is their defen∣der, whilst they are subject to goe a∣stray, he is their gatherer, hence he an∣swereth my Commission. Mat. 15.24. But he answered, and said, J am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of Jsrael. The poorest and meanest of his flocke by him are sustained, the strongest and fatest of his
flocke by him are supported, he leads them by his precious promises, clothes them with his heavenly grace, and gives them a rich inheritance amongst his Saints. Ephes. 1.18. The eyes of your un∣derstanding being opened, that yee might know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints. If they are scorched by the heate of tribulations, he is their cloud of preservation, if they want light in the darkest night, he is their fire by night for consolation. Isaiah 4.6. And there- shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heate, and a place of refuge, and for a cover from storme and from raine. For thou hast been a strength to the poore, a strength to the needy in his distresse; a re∣fuge from the storme, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storme against the wall. His sheep are neere to him through union. John 27.23. J in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one: and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them as thou hast loved me. They are deare to him through redemption. 1 Pet. 1.18.19. For as much as yee know that ye were not re∣deemed with corruptable things as silver and
gold from your vaine conversation, received by tradition from your fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as a Lambe without blemish and without spot. They are preci∣ous to him through donation. John 17.9.10. J pray for them, J pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me, for they are thine, and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. And they are gracious in his sight and presence through acceptation. Ehes. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved, They are precious Jewells in his account and estimation, they are his tender flocke in his account and compu∣tation, are their deaths precious in his sight, and are not their lives precious in his presence? Is the vine tender ever its branches? the King loving to his Sub∣jects? the spouse acceptable to the bride∣groome? and are not his flocke precious & deare to the great shepheard of Israel? neither the Foxes by their cunning, the Wolves by their ravening, the Lions by their roaring, the Tigers by their de∣vouring shall be able to plucke them out of his hand. John 10.28.29. And I give unto them eternall life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any man plucke them out of my hand, my father which gave them me is greater then all, and no man is a∣ble to plucke them out of my fathers hand. As they have beene acquired by an eter∣nall power, purchased by an infinite va∣lue, so they are conserved by an eternall power and omnipotencie: to the King∣dome of blisse and felicitie. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. Ephes. 1.19. And what is the exceeding greatnesse of his power, to us ward who beleeve, according to the working of his mighty power. O my soule, be cer∣tainly assured that nothing shall befall thee but that which shall be good for thee. If death, the sting of that is remo∣ved, if life, thy life is written in the book of life, If perill, conservation by the hope in Christ, If famine, thou hast the bread of life, if want of water, thou hast the fountaine of living water, if sicknes, thou hast healing to the wings of Christ, if temptation, thy faith shall be to thee more precious then gold that is tried in the fire, if want of freedome, thou hast libertie through redemption, if losse of the love of the nearest in thy bosome,
thy Lord & shepheard is nere and deare to thee, and if want of defence, thy Me∣diatour will be thy sunne and sheild Psalme 84.11. For the Lord God is a sunne and sheild, the Lord will give grace and glo∣ry, no good thing will he with hold from them that walke uprightly. Rom. 8.28. And we know that all things worke together for good to them that love God, to them that are the called according to his purpose. Oh! my soule if thou gloriest thou shalt glory in such a shepheard, is he not the great shepheard able to make thee perfect in every good worke? Heb. 13.20.21. Now the God of peace that brought againe from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepheard of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Cove∣nant: make you perfect in every good worke, to doe his will, working in you that which is well pleasing to you through Jesus Christ to whom be glory for ever, and ever amen. Hath he not fountaines above all fountains? springs surpassing all springs? and pa∣stures more pleasant then all pastures Ezek. 34.23. And I will set up one shep∣heard over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David. He shall feed them, and he shall be their shepheard, 14.15. verse. I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the
high Mountains of Israel Shall their fold be, there shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the Moun∣taines of Israel, I will feed my flocke, and I will cause them to ly down saith the Lord God. His voice will I heare, his word will I obey, to his call I will subject, I know the difference between his voice and the voice of strangers, they set up mans inventions, makeing linsey woolsy garments, and set up mans posts by Christs posts: they advance mans right∣teousnesse, set up legall doings and po∣pish performances, they throw the Lord Jesus Christ out of his thron, and plucke him out of his chaire, and set up the creature worse then nothing. But the voice of Christ is to speake of the praise of his owne righteousnesse, of the pretiousnesse of his own blood, of the triumph of his owne death, of his love to his beloved Church, of the near∣nesse of that union the saints have with his father, and of the pitie he hath to the broken spirits. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavie laden: and I will give you rest. And of the gift of eter∣nall life to his adopted. John 17.2. And thou hast given him power
over all flesh, that he should give eternall life, to as many as thou hast given him. Of the praise, of the glory, of the honour, of the dominion, of the power, and of the love of his Father. John 17.23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may bee made perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them as thou hast loved me. Of the revela∣tion, teaching, direction, convincement and comfort of the spirit. John 15.26. But when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the father, even the spirit of truth which proceedeth from the father; he shall testifie of me. Therefore as thou givest praise because hee is thy mediatour, thy King, thy Bridegroome, thy vine, and thy beloved: so thou shalt give praise, sith hee is become thy eter∣nall, carefull, deare and loving shep∣heard: rejoycing in the law and cove∣nant of life in Christ that is blessed, yea a thousand times blessed for evermore. Rehearsing the words concerning the Law of life in Christ Jesus. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Je∣sus, hath made thee free from the law of sinne and death.
Secondly, In respect of Eternity. The Celestiall body is more excellent then other bodies, in foure respects. First, Because it is a Cause Universall. Secondly, Because it is carried about with a circuler motion. Thirdly, Because of heavenly light, and fourthly, because it is incorruptible. So the Covenant or law of free grace, is not onely excellent, because the light of the fathers countenance shines in that Covenant, because it is conferred upon the sonnes of miserie and calamity, be∣cause it is the cause of all divine graces and mercies given to the Saints, but also sith it is everlasting and eternall. My Covenant is not as the small dew upon the tender hearbs, not as the fading leafe and withering hearb, not as the fraile life of the sublunarie creatures. I made the first Covenant with Adam, and it was momentanie, I have made the se∣cond in Christ, and it is to perpetuity; when I espoused mine to me to the praise of my glory, I espoused them to me for ever through my mercy. Isa. 54.7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken
thee, but with great mercy will I gather thee, in a little wrath I hide my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindnes will I have mercy upon thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. Whence once I become their God, I am their God to eternity, when once I become their Father, I am their Father to perpetuitie, as there is no end of the blood of the covenant of my grace, as there is no end of the death of the Covenant of my peace so there is no end of my loving kindnesse in the co∣venant of grace & peace. Though I have made a covenant it is not l ke the first covenant I made in mount Sinai. Ier. 31.31. Behold the day is come saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Jsrael and with the house of Ju∣dah Not according to that I made with their Fathers, &c. Hence my people may glory in my Covenant, had I made a Covenant with them to be their God to day, and their enemy to morrow, to blot out their sinnes to day, and to re∣member them to morrow, to write my law in their hearts to day, and blot it out to morrow, to give righteousnesse, peace, rest, grace, truth, hope, joy, peace, love, reconciliation, redemption,
and Adoption to day, and to take these away to morrow, my people should not had cause of glorying in the eternity of my favor: but now have they great cause of glorying in my covenant: sith it is as fast as the day and the night, though all things fade and waxe old as a garment, though the heavens should depart as a scroule, though the hills should flee, and the mountaines be removed; notwith∣standing this covenant must needs stand for ever. Jsay 54.10. For the mountaines shall depart, and the hils shall be removed, but my kindnesse shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace bee removed saith the Lord, that hath mrcy on thee. Had I made the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres, the pla∣nets like the fading herb, grasse or trees, where had beene their rarenesse? If I had made the gold, the gemms, the pre∣tious Jewels like the drosse of yron: where had beene their richnesse? If I had made my second covenant of peace, of grace, of love and mercy like the first of terrors, of dreads, of horrors and decaying, where had beene the preti∣ousnesse? But my people glory not on∣ly because I have made a Covenant, but
because I have made a covenant ever∣lasting, they glory not onely in righte∣ousnesse, but in everlasting righteous∣nesse, not only in treasures, but in eternall treasures, not onely in life, but in eter∣nall life, not only in peace but in perpetu∣all peace, and attonement. So they glory not only in the covenant of life and peace: but also that it is the etarnal cove∣nant of life & peace. Hence they glory with the Apostle. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made us free from the law of sinne and of death. Thirdly, Because it is placed in Christ. The Sunne is placed in the midst of the planets, from whence all the planets receive their purest lights, the heart is placed in the midst of man, that all the parts from thence might receive their vitall motion: the law of life and grace is placed in Christ Jesus, that from thence the Churches might receive their happinesse. Happie, O thrice hap∣pie are the Churches tha they have such a Lord, and such a law, not of sin and death, but of grace and life. Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus hath made them free from the law of sinne and death. The earth was undecked and undor∣ned, till I adorned the earth with beauty, the heavenly orbs were not beautified, till I beautified them with the Splendor of the Sun, of Moone and Planets. The old law was inglorious by curse, execra∣tion and condemnation; but I have made a new, glorious through life, hope and benediction. In whose hand is it blessed? if not in the hand of the blessed mediatour, in whose breast is it happi if not in the breast of him that is a gra∣tious Redeemer? and in whom can that be glorious? except in him that is King of Kings, and Prince of glory: It would not have stood with the glory of my wisedome, If I should have made my covenant of life with the slaves of the devill, bondslaves to hell, and children of death: it would not have stood with the honour of my wise disposement, should I have placed my second cove∣nant in them that brake my first, and have shott their arrowes as farre distant from the throne of my grace as the highest place is from the lowest hell. I should have lost the dignity of my
grace, had I made it with Angels who pittied not the prisoners of my hope, neither could they answer the require and severity of my Justice. As I have placed the purest light in the lightest Sunne, and the rarest vertue in the purest gemmes, so I have placed my law of ab∣solute and intire purity in the Sonne of my rarest excellencie. I have made my Covenant to Christ. Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seede were the promises made, he saith not, and to seedes: as of ma∣ny, but as of one, and to thy seede which is Christ. I have made my Covenant with Christ, sith none could satisfie my ju∣stice or fulfill my righteousnesse but him alone. I made my Covenant in Christ. 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises are in him, yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. I made him the Covenant of life and Salvation. Isay 42.6, 7. I the Lord have called thee in righteousnesse, and will hold thine hand, and will keepe thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentils, to open the blinde eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkenesse out of the pri∣son house. He was the Character of my person, and the effulgencie of my glo∣ry,
hee was the appointed King, and the Lord commander of my purchased and acquired, the Mediatour to and for my Redeemerd and Reconciled, the prince of the kings of the earth, the first begot∣ten from the dead, and the only one and beloved of the bosom: therefore my co∣venant is to him, with him, and in him. I tooke up my habitation in him from eternity to eternity, my dwelling and delectation is in him from the beginning to the ending: hence, my Covenant of eternity rests in the bosome of eternity, from whence should the espoused have their Commands but from their bride∣groome, I have not married them to the law, but to Christ. Rom 7.4. Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law, by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. From whence should the subjects have their ordinance but from their King? I have not made Mo∣ss their king, but Christ King of his Church. Psal. 45.11. So shall thy King greatly desire thy beauty, for hee is thy Lord and worship thou him. From whence should the redeemed of the Lord have
their rules & precepts but from Christ? I have not made Moses their Prophet, but Christ their Prophet. Deut. 18.18. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, &c. O my soule, if I glory, I will not glory in that which is written in tables of stone, but in that wch is written in the fleshly tables of thy heart, not in that which is the ministry of death, but in that which is the mini∣stry of life; not in the ministry of con∣demnation, but in that which is the mi∣nistry of salvation, not in that which gendreth to bondage, but in that which tendeth to libertie, not in that which hath a vaile and darkenesse, but in that which hath light and glory; not in that which disconsolates and discomforts the drooping conscience, but in that which consolates & comforts the droo∣ping spirit. Thou gloriest in the preti∣ousnesse of his riches, in the rarenesse of his promises, in the beauty of his righte∣ousnesse, and shalt thou not glory in the pretiousnesse, rarenesse & riches of the law of life in Christ? did David desire the waters of Bethlehem above all wa∣ters? did Abraham desire a sonne above the Land of Canaan? and shalt thou not
desire this law of life above all lawes? if others pitch their tents by Sinai, thou shalt pitch thy tent by Sion, if others fol∣low Moses, thou shalt follow Christ, if others delight in that which drives them from God, thou shalt delight in that which drawes thee neere to God. The law of sinne and death hath not freed thee from the law of sinne and death, the law of curse or execration, hath not freed thee from the law of death and condemnation, the law of terrours and horrors hath not freed thee from the law of terror & horrour, but the law of life by wch thou art dead to the law that thou mayest live unto God. Gal. 2.19. For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. Hence thou therefore shalt hearken to the Com∣mission of the Father. Mat. 17.5. While he yet spake, behold a bright cloud oversha∣dowed them, and behold a voyce out of the cloud, which said, this is my beloved sonne in whom I am well pleased heare ye him. Who hath the words of eternall life but he? John 6.68. Then Simon Peter answe∣red him, Lord, to whom shall we goe? thou hast the words of eternall life. Into whose lips hath grace been infused but into his?
Psalme 45.2. Thou art fairer then the children of men, grace is powred into thy lyps, therefore God hath blessed thee forever. Or who hath the words of peace and reconciliation but he? Ephes. 2.17. And came and preached peace to you which were affarre off, and to them which were nigh, Hence will I glory in the glorying ex∣pression of the Apostle Paul Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Je∣sus, hath freed them from the law of sinne and death. Hath freed me. Israel had ten portions in the King, when Judah & Benjamen had but two, but it cannot be spoken according to that tenour of the saints beloved, for they have a like inheritance in God and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, sith they are chosen by one Lord, redeemed by one Christ, sealed by one spirit of life, injoying the law of life being freed from the law of sinne and death. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Je∣sus, hath freed me from the law of sinne and death.
Christ is then operative in the soule, when by faith he is particularly applied. The transcient passage of the beauty or splendor of an object, is through the eye unto the mind, the passing consola∣ble delectation which is in Christ, is through a Christians application to the soule, in Christ are treasures passing the treasures hid in the sands, the emenency and superemency of all heavenly and di∣vine compassions; passing the compassi∣ons of humaine generation, the excelen∣cy, yea, the superexcellency of worth, merit, and value, passing all the valuable things which are wrapt up in the breast of things terrestiall. But what are those treasures passing treasures, the eminen∣cy, the superemency of those heavenly and divine compassions, the excellency the superexcellency of that his merit, worth and value without a speciall or particular applyment. The comfort of the eye is in seeing, of the eare in hear∣ing, of man in moving, the comfort of the soule is in applying. What joy is there to a Rebell to thinke there is a King∣dome, and yet out of that he shall be ba∣nished? what comfort is there to a man
to know there are rich treasures wrapt in our mother earth, and he of those shall be deprived? or what joy or com∣fort can come to the soule or conscience though there are all excellencies wrapt within Christs bosome, if they of him shall not be injoyed? other creatures were before man was created, light over∣spread the earth, before light in the sun was placed: but comfort to the faithfull doth not arise before that Christ by faith is applied. Our sad houres, our dolefull dayes, our gloomsome times are then removed: when the vertuall efficacy of Christ through faiths application is re∣ceived: our comfort till we come to heavens City, our joy till we come to heavens felicity, and our solid refresh∣ment till we come to heavens glory is through faiths applying Christ ours all in all. Though the waves of iniquitie doe roare, the floods of transgression fall, the wind of bitter affliction blow heard upon us, yet if once by applying we cast anchor into Christ: solid joy doth invi∣ron the heart and conscience, as light doth incompasse the body of a rationall, then the terrible, the dreadfull, the ie∣full God against sinne and transgression
appeares most bounteous, most benig∣nous, most clementious through his marvilous compassion, then the cove∣nant of eternall grace and mercy puts to repulse the law of death and miserie, then the worth and merit of Christ pleads redemption from the foule black jawes of the Devill, reconciliation be∣tween the God of infinite purity, and man who through sinne hath procured an infinite miserie, and justification in the sight of our heavenly and compassi∣onate father. Anchor being cast in Christ, all becomes a Christians his wise∣dome, his death, his blood, his power, his spirit, and his Kingdome. If the Brid∣groome be the Brides by combination: then his lands, his livings, his jewels, his gold, his silver, is hers. If Christ be ours, then his heavenly benedictions, his spirituall blessings, his superabundant, and heavenly treasure are become ours also. All are yours, and yee are Christs, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22. O my soule apply whole Christ particularly, that thou mayest injoy him fully. Was he deprived of all, before Pilate, accused of the Souldiers buffited, of the high Priests disdained, and not for thee? he indured
that which thou shouldest have sustai∣ned, he suffered for that which hadst deserved, Oh what did he sustaine? Oh what hath he not sustained? Oh what did he suffer? Oh what hath he not suffered! did he not undergoe the burthen of thy sinne which was insufferable, by a strength and power invincible? at what time the vaile of the temple rented, at that time the heavens opened, at what time the earth trembled, at that time through his satisfaction he removed thy trembling estate and condition, at what time the light of the sunne was obscu∣red, at that time the merit of thy Savi∣our shined, the glory of the sunne of righteousnesse, and the beauty of the sunne which is collocated in the midst of the planets at one time were darkned, in which time Christ stood in thy place, and for thy sake hath suffered. What might I mention concerning Christ, the more the mind conceiveth, the more the tongue relateth, the more the soule by faith apprehendeth, the more the mind is elevated. The Moone is below the sunne, the sunne below Sa∣turnee, Saturne below the Primum Mo∣bile, the Vegitive creature is be low the
sensitive, the Sensitive below the Rati∣onall, and the Rationall below him that lives by faith in the Lord Jesus. How divine is such a Christian in contempla∣tion? how heavenly in Mediation? how rare i declaration? how sweet in conversation? never a speech comes from such a Christian, but it is inflamed with the fire of the Holy Ghost, hence all his words are in extolling Christs righteousnes, advancing Christs goodnesse, valuing Christ blood, Christ hath drawn his mind to a high pitch of conceivement: hath the sunne the power of exalation, the splendor of a Diamond in the drawing of the affecti∣on, & is ther not enough in Christ which drawes the Christian to high meditati∣on. Though thy mind did rest like the Cocke upon the dunghill of this world, though thy affection was as fast inclo∣sed in the creature as a mould in the earth, yet from so low a condition a Christian is brought, when once Christ by his vertue in the conscience takes pos∣session, then not honoures, but Christs honour, not riches, but Christs riches, not righteousnesse but Christs righte∣ousnesse, alone for a Christians presen∣tation,
the eie is distant from the sunne, the eye neverthelesse by the light there∣of is drawn to behold his beauty, though Christ is distant from a Christian, yet by his efficacy he drawes the eye of faith to behold his glory, what only to behold the glory of his victory tryumphant, the glory of his mediation delectant, and not the glory of his session magnificent? applying faith is never below the throne of grace and glory, it is never below the seate of Gods eternall mercy, where there is not faiths applycation, death of spirit hath domination, our life by Christs treasures of wisedome, by the vertue of his death and rising againe from the dead: is through faiths apply∣cation. Let a Christian observe the death of spirit in the hearts of Justiciaries, and inquire the reason, why it is so? and he shal find that it is because they apply not whole Christ to their consciences. Some thing they will have of their own righ∣teousnesse in Justification, some thing of their owne performances in matter of reconciliation, let us speake of Christ freely and bouldly, and they stand as people agashed, and amazed. I deny nt that they have a name to live; But as
sure as the sunne shines in Europe when it is come to the Meridian, so sure are they dead, yea as a tree twice plucked up by the rootes, through the hand of the workeman. He that hath the life of faith, he applies all the excellencies of Christ unto himselfe, what saith such a beleeving christian? hath Christ redee∣med others, and not me? reconciled o∣thers, and not me? justified others, and not me? Surely if any be redeemed, if any justified, if any reconciled, then I am one of that number. Through apply∣ing faith the soule is sicke of love, at the very sight of his riches, of his wisedom, of his righteousnesse, of his graces and consolations, it cries out, O my beloved, my well beloved, where rests? where re∣maines? where abides my welbeloved? is the love of a woman so to her hus∣band, of a father to a child, of a subject to his Prince, comparable to that love of the soule to Christ? who hath found in Christ al the kinds of sweetest consolati∣ons, this applyment of Christ makes the soule desire more of Christ, he who hath felt the sweetnesse of the hony combe, he desires to tast of the sweetnesse of that againe, he who hath seen the light
of the sunne, desires to see it againe, he that once hath tasted of the sweetnesse in Christ through application, desires to tast thereof againe. Hence are the out∣cries of such beleevers. O that I might feele the vertue of Christs blood in my conscience more efficatiously, that doht purge my conscience from dead workes to serve the living God, The blood of Christ, which through the eternall spirit was offered without blame to God, shal purge your consciences from dead workes, to serve the li∣ving God. Heb. 9.14. O that I might feele more effectually the power of that re∣conciliation which once upon the crosse he fully perfected and finished: that he would give me to understand more ful∣ly that I have all my sinns pardoned and remittted. Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation by faith in his blood, to demon∣strate his righteousnesse, by the forgivenesse of sinnes which are past through his long suf∣fering. Rom. 3.25. O that I might be more assured that Christs righteousnesse is mine, then should I injoy the sweetest peace of conscience, sith I should be ful∣ly assured that God with me should be well pleased, and that I should be found worthy to abide in the City of our God
for ever: there to praise and honour him for ever more. They washed and made white their robes in the blood of the lambe, there∣fore they are before the throne of God, and worship him day and night. Apoc. 7.14.15. O that I might be replenished with the fullnesse of his grace, then should my empty pitcher bee filled with joy, and my mournfull heart with consolation, and yee are now in heavinesse. But I will see you againe, and your heart shall re∣joyce, and your joy shall no man take from you. John 16.22. O that I might have his spirit to dwell in me, then should I be a∣ble to call and cry Abba Father, to make my petitions strongly to my heavenly father, to know assuredly that I am one of those who are purchased with the pretious blood of Jesus Christ. Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if the spirit of God dwell in you, but if any man have not the spi∣rit of Christ, he is none of his. Rom. 8.9. O that I might feele the mighty power of the death of my saviour and redee∣mer, then should I dye to sinne, and live to righteousnesse, as the Phenix by the Sunne is consumed, and by vertue of the beames thereof is revived: so if I feele the power of the death of my Re∣deemer,
death shall be abolished and the life of righteousnesse in me by the life of Christ renewed. Ye are buried by Baptis∣me into his death, that like as Christ is raised from the dead unto the glory of his father, so we also may walke in the newnes of life. Rom. 6.4. O that I might feele the mighty o∣peratiō of Christs mediatiō, then should I behold God most propitious and cle∣mentious, then should my faith cleave fast to the mercy seate for mercy, and to the throne of grace for grace, thereby should I rejoyce abundantly, the singing birds would not so rejoyce when winter is gone, and summer doth approach; as I shall rejoyce in receiving delectation from Christs mediation: then should I not runne from God with Adam, but have accesse to God as Ester had to A∣hashuerosh. By whom also through faith, we have accesse unto his grace, by which wee stand and rejoyce under the hope of the glory of God. Rom. 5.2. O my soule give glory to God thy heavenly Father, and to Je∣sus Christ thy gratious Redeemer, and to the holy Spirit who sealeth unto thee sure mercies which will never faile thee in the greatest extreamities. Gods eter∣nall favour in Christ established, the ef∣ficatiousnesse
of Christs merits and va∣lue, the sealing thereof is not in thine owne power, but in the power of the holy Spirit. Hee that lookes upon the Creature, he concludes that the Creature made not it selfe, but it was made by the hand of the Creator, he that minds how great a matter it is to have the eternall love of God, and the merit of Christ to his conscience sealed, will conclude it is not of himself, but through the work of the Spirit, who is our sealer; And ye are scaled by the holy spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance, to the obtaining of Redemption unto the praise of his glory. Ephes. 13.14. but to draw unto a con∣clusion, least many lines may be offen∣sive unto thy patience, Christian Rea∣der, only chuse thou Christ O my soule, that when thy heart failes thee, hee may be thy strength and thy portion for e∣ver, is not thy Saviour better then tenne thousands, all things are valued, but his value is invaluable, all things are estee∣med, yet his worth is inestimable, many things are uttered, yet his excellency is unutterable. Am I not ravished when he is my contemplation? Am I not o∣verjoyed when hee is my Meditation?
doth not my valley abound with plea∣sure when the vertue of his grace takes in me possession? is the morning sunne so joyous to a traviller, as Christ is to me: when I thinke of him in the mor∣ning, hee is more to thee O my soule then riches, then honours, then gold, thē silver, yea then pretious stones? if thou hadst a kingdom, and wast not assured of his kingdome, what would that profit thee? if thou hadst a world, if thou hadst no interest in that blood wch purchased the world to come, what would that availe thee? if thou hadst all the joyes and pleasures under heaven, if thou hadst not the joy of his spirit, what would that benefit thee? if thou hadst al the gay apparrell in the world, if thou hadst not Christs righteousnesse to defend thee from the wrath of God, what fruit would that bring ūto thee? if thou hadst all to plead for thee, if thou hadst not Christ to excuse thee in the day of the Lord, what joy could possesse thee? it is good for thee to rest where Christ is, so shall he be to thee a resting place, it is good for thee to dwell where hee is, for there are joyes for evermore. O my soule feare not what man can doe unto thee, if they take away thy name, re∣member
thy name is ingraved upon his breast, he bare thy name upon the crosse, he beareth thy name now in the sight of thy gratious Father. Though thy name is extinguished, yet not extin∣guished, though not remembred, yet remembred evermore. Let Justiciaries cast their Arrowes by day, and their fie∣rie dars by night, yet know that through thy saviour thou art able to repulse the fiery darts of Satan, much more theirs. Let them take away thy life, thy life is hid with Christ in God. Col. 3.3. For ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God. Let them conclude that thou art vaine glorious, thy glorying expression shall be of Christ thy Lord of life and righteousnes, sith if any in heavē or earth are bought to God by our Lord of life & glory, then thou art one of that com∣pany, whilst thou as a poore pilgrim wanderest towards heavens City, make thou a heavenly dimention of his glory; Worthy is the Lambe, who was slaine to re∣ceive power, & riches, and strength, & wise∣dome, and honour, and glory, and blessing, and to him that sits upon the throne, and un∣to the Lambe, be ascribed blessing, and ho∣nour, and glory, and strength for ever and e∣ver,
Amen. Revel. 5.13.13. From the law of sinne and death. O my people! what have I done for you? as Reconciliation to God my Fa∣ther through my blood and death is the greatest mercy, as my Adoption by my Spirit of glory is the highest love, so my Redemption from the law of sinne and death by the Law of the Spirit of life is the freest bountie. Have you not come short of my glory and the glory of my Father Rom. 3 23. For all have sinned & are come short of the glory of God. Have you not been under the curse and execration of the morrall law? Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the the workes of the law are under the curse: for it is written, cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the booke of the Law to do them Have not your Spirit been silen∣ced, and your mouthes stopt before my Fathers presence. Rom. 3 .19. Now wee know that what things soever the Law saith, it saith to them that are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. Hath not Moses accused you before the barre
of justice? John 5.45. Doe not thinke that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one that accuseth you even Moses in whom ye trust. Was not the same Law that was made for ungodly, wicked and in∣corrigable siners made for you? 1 Tim. 1.10. For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for men∣stealers, for lyers, for perjured persons, and if there bee any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine. But I have delivered you from the law of Condemnation by the law of Salvation, from the law of execration, by the Law of benediction, from the Law of accusation, by the law of life and reconciliation, and from the law of adjudication, by the law of hope and Redemption. When that I saw that ye were come short of all righteousnes, fulfilled al righteousness. Rom. 10.4. For Christ is the end of the law for righteous∣ness sake, to every one that beleeveth. Whē I saw that you were accursed, I became a curse for you, having undertaken to die the cursed death of the Crosse. Gal. 3.13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, cursed is every one that hangeth up∣on a tree. I saw that you could not stand
just in the sight of my Father, I gave you another righteousnesse by faith which is in me. Phil. 3.9. And being found in him, not having mine own righteousnesse, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousnes which is of God by faith. Now as you are not the sonnes of death, but children of life, so you are under the law of life: Now as you are not the children of ser∣vitude, and bondage, but the children of liberty and Adoption: & are under my law of liberty and Adoption. Gal. 4.1.2. Now I say that the heire as long as hee is a child, differeth nothing from a servant though he is Lord of all, but is under Tu∣tours and Governours: untill the time ap∣pointed of the Father. Gal. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and bee not intangled a∣gaine in the yoake of bondage. Now are you not children of unbeleefe and diffidence, sith I dwell in your hearts by faith which is by me. Ephes. 3.16.17. That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to bee strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, being rooted and grounded in love. Now you are not
slaves of hell and wrath, but the dearest and choysest ones through my grace and tender compassion, therefore you are not under the law, but under grace. Rom. 6.14. For sinne shall not have domi∣nion over you, for ye are not under the law, but under grace. Therefore you shall walke as my dearest, my choisest and my redeemed, as my peculiar, my jew∣els and reconciled? Doe I make my branches stately through my union? do I make mine fruitfull through my bles∣sed Communion? and doe I not make mine subjective through the law of life and benedicton? Now they will live the life of faith in me, the life of love through me, the life of obedience by me. I have not given them the rule of mercy and peace; to walke contrary to the rule of mercy and peace. I have not gi∣ven them the law of faith, to call in que∣stion the faithfulnesse of my Fathers love, and the pretiousnesse of my dearest blood. So I have not given to them the fruits of the Law of life, that they should walke as a dead people, but that they should live by my fountaines of living waters, by my nearest union and rich∣ness of communion through spirit of
life and Adoption; ever triumphing, re∣joycing and glorying in my law of life; by which they are freed from the law of sinne and death, according to the text Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath freed them from the law of sinne and death. JOHN 16. verse 22. And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will see you againe, and your hearts shall re∣joyce, and your joy no man taketh from you. THe sad complaint of Israel, (was) mine eyes runneth down with wa∣ter, because the Comforter is farre from me, he that should releeve my soule will not looke upon me, my bowels are trou∣bled, the enemy hath prevailed over me: this is the relation of the Israel of God, mine eye powreth downe with waters, my comforter is not farre from me, hee that will releeve my soule will looke up∣on me, my bowels are refreshed, the chariots of hell hath not prevailed a∣gainst me, therefore though I am pos∣sest
with sorrow, because I possesse not what I shall possesse; neverthe∣lesse, I shall see his face, my heart shall re∣joyce, and my joy shall no man take from mee. And ye now therefore have sorrow. What the Saints beloved? are they not delivered from the power of darke∣nesse and translated into the kingdome of my deare sonne? have they not the spirit of joy and delightfull solace? are they not crowned in Sion with everla∣sting joy upon their heads? doe they not rejoyce in the garments of Salvati∣on and perfect robes of righteousnesse? Have they not the oyle of joy and glad∣nesse in stead of the garments of heavi∣nesse? and shall they not sing praise for ever and ever more unto mee which am blessed for evermore? notwithstanding they are invirond with great sorrow and heavinesse. Who lives amongst Tygers, Wolves, Lyons and Beares, if not they? who are counted the basest of the creature, the vilest of the earth, the terror to the sonnes of men, and the scumme of the world, if not they? who
encounters with the Devill, makes war with the flesh, fights against sinne and all evills, if not they? if the roaring Ly∣on the devill seeke to devoure them, doe they not seeke to me the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah? if the flesh doth burthen them, say they not with Paul who shall deliver them from the power of death? if sin doth defile them, do they not desire to be washed in my pretious blood? and if the law of terror affright them, doe they not fly to the law of life in Christ Jesus? mine would sinne no more, of∣fend no more, but praise me evermore: Sith I have made them new creatures, formed them according to my Image, and made them conformable to my mind and pleasure. (True it is) I imbrace them, I love them, and I delight in them to dayes everlasting: yet my di∣vine pleasure hath been to hide my face for a moment, to obscure my selfe for the twinckling of an eye, as though I would take my leave or farwel of them: notwithstanding, I have done it for their consolation, to shew my might and power in conservation, and my su∣peremenent bounty and love in their be∣atitude and glorification. I that hid my
glory, I that gave them not a footstep for habitation, have given to them my heavenly mantion, and though I depri∣ved them of my personall presence, yet my blessed presence shall shine upon them in my heavenly Citie. What though for a moment they doe not pos∣sesse me in the fulnesse of communion, in the blessednesse of my beatification, in the plenitude of hope and benediction, Yet I will see them againe, their heart shall rejoyce, and their joy shall no man take from them. But I will see you againe. If I come to mine, who am my Churches King of glory, I will bring her to the habitation of my heavenly glory, if I the loving bridegroome come to my beloved Church and choysest Spouse, I will make her glad with my heavenly and gratious countenance, I will remove away her teares though thousands, her forrowes though infinite, and her La∣mentations though as the sands upon the sea shore, then shee that was wrapt in the dust below, shall sing glory and praise to me on high, for I that take a∣way
all teares, will wipe away teares from her face, For I will see her againe, her heart shall rejoyce, and her joy shall no man take from her. I will. What I will? it was my pleasure to excercise mine under tribulations, tenta∣tions, and tryalls, afflictions, calamities and miseries, under penurie, shame and reproach, under bonds, fetters and chaines, under shipwrack, death and tortures, that their faith might be much more pretious then gould, their love then the purest gould, their patience an∣swer my commmission concerning pa∣tience, and that they might prize my deliverie and redemption, when I shall deliver and redeeme them from tri∣bulation. For I will see them againe, their heart shall rejoyce, and their joy shall no man take from them. I will see you againe. This was Josephs charge, see my face no more unlesse you bring your yonger brother with you, this was the charge
of David to Abner, thou shalt not see my face unlesse thou bringst with thee Micall Saules daughter: This is the charge of the drooping spirits to the watchmen of Israell, let us heare your voice no more, let us see your face no more, unlesse you tell us where we may behold the countenance of our beloved: whilst the watchmen saith they see him not, Christ saith he will see his own. I will see them againe, their hearts shall rejoyce and their joy shall no man take from them. Have I not looked upon you when no eye beheld you? have not I respected you when none respected you? when neither Levit nor Priest had compassion on you in the day of your wounds, then I healed you by my death, blood and righteous∣nesse. I exalted you by my resurrection, assention and mediation, and I comfor∣ted you by my adoption, union and justi∣fication, as my father beheld his Israell in Egyptian tyrannie, to give them de∣livery: So I beheld you in bond-sla∣verie, to give you my richest bountie. As I have looked upon you being the morning starre that first rose in your hearts: so I will shine upon you as the morning sunne that first appeared in
your soules. For I will see you againe, your heart shall rejoyce, and your joy shall no man take from you. I will see you, The face of Esau was deare in the eyes of Jacob, he counted it as the face of an Angell, the face of Jesus Christ is deare in the sight of the saints, they count it more gratious then the countenance of all the Angels. was there an acceptation of Jacobs presents, a safety of the lambs, the children and the aged through Esaus favour? and is there not an acceptation of the offerings of the Saints, and a deli∣ry from death and destruction by the face and favour of Jesus Christ? there∣fore they are ravished with the joy of my countenance, saying O joy of joyes! O solace of solaces! O consolation of consolations! that flowes from me their dearest Lord that brought them! when I shall see them againe, my countenance. will be to them most deare and pretious. What sun like me that am the sonne of righteousnesse? what starre like me that am the morning starre? the starres are darkenesse, the sunne is dimnesse, the
moone is obscurity, when I appeare in glory, heaven should be no heaven if my countenance should not be in hea∣ven, the celestiall places should be a denn of Dragons, if I had not beene in the ce∣lestiall places. If glory be in the soule, it is because I am the hope of glory, if glo∣ry be in the heavenly place, it is because I am the prince of glory. What beauty hath the firmament without the sunne, moone, and starrs? what ornament hath the earth without grasse, hearbs, trees and plants? or what excellencies hath the soule without my gratious counte∣nance? therefore my dearest servants waite for the time of my appearings Is not my countenance more deare to them then the face of Esau was to Jacob? sith in the sight thereof there are plea∣sures for evermore, deliverie from the blacke chaines of darkenesse, righteous∣nesse to eternall life, hope of the fruition of my felicitie, and praises from the be∣ginning of my grace unto eternitie, For I will see them againe, and their hearts shall rejoyce, and their joy no man shall take from them.
And your hearts shall rejoyce. In the day of Tyre, it was said of Tyre, that she was the fame and glory of the world, because her delights were the delights of paradice, she walked in the midst of the stones of fire, she had e∣very precious stone as the Topaze, the the Carbuncle, the Saphire, the Onix: in the day of the Churches glory, it may be said of the Church, that her delights surpasseth the delights of paradice, that she walkes triumphing in the midst of fierie tribulations, and that Christ her precious stone is more to her then all pretious stones, he that is to her the choysest stone of delightment, is to her the streame of rare contentment. O what citie like the citie of our God? O what streames are like the streames that refresh the citie of our God? as the fountaine is only delectable, so the streames are absolutely delightfull, for my joyes are the joyes of my people, my rivers of solace their sole delight, and my fountaine surpassing all the fountaines under heaven, if they want comfort, I make them rejoyce in the robes of pu∣rest
righteousnesse. Isai. 61.10. I will greatly reioyce in the Lord, my soule shall be ioyfull in my God, for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath co∣vered me with the robes of righteousnesse, as a bridegroome decketh himselfe with orna∣ments, and as a bride adorneth her selfe with her iewels. If they want solace, I make them to injoy the holy Ghost the com∣forter, John 16.7. Neverthelesse, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I goe away, for if I goe not away, the comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will, send him unto you. If they are clothed with the garments of heavinesse, I give to them the oyle of joy & gladnesse. Isa. 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, be∣cause the Lord hath anoynted me to preach good tydings unto the meeke. To appoint unto them that mourne in Sion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oyle of ioy for mourning, the garments of praise for the spirit of heavi∣nesse, that they might be called the trees of righteousnesse, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. And if they are crowned with sorrow and lamentation, I cause everlasting joy to spring out of the wells of salvation, Isa. 12.3. There∣fore with ioy shall yee draw water out of the
wells of salvation. Shall my people hang down their heads like bulrushes, lowre like the Hypocrites, and wear sackcloth and mourning weeds? No, I would have my people dwell by my fountaines, my waters are not bitter as the waters of Marah, I would have mine refresh them∣selves with my rivers, my waters passe the waters of Abanah & Pharpar rivers of Damascus. Have I not left to them the words of full consolation? John 17.13. And now I come to thee, and these things I speake in the world, that they might have my ioy fulfilled in themselves, Have I not removed their feares and perturbations? John 14.1. Let not your hearts be troubled, yee beleeve in God, beleeve also in me. Have not I wished them to rejoyce through exhortation? Phil. 4.4. Reioyce in the Lord alway, and againe I say reioyce. What is my bloody crosse, my victori∣ous death, my comfortable resurrecti∣on, and my powerfull mediation But joy to the drooping? what is the cove∣nant of my freest grace, my highest love, my richest mercy, and tender compassi∣ons but comfort to the mourning? What is the spirit of adoption whereby mine call my father Father, the spirit of
obsignatiō wherby mine injoy an inhe∣ritance among them which are sanctifi∣ed, the spirit of sanctification, whereby mine are sanctified in the day of their Communion with mee their vine and royall bridegroome; but consolation to the lamenting? as my springs of grace are in the throne of my grace, so I have filled them with the fruits of my grace, as the fountaine of my love is in the throne of love, so have I filled mine with my dearest love, when I dwell in their hearts by faith which is in mee, when I rule in their consciences by peace which is from mee, when I shall lodge in their soules through my spirit of glo∣ry, I shall change their garments of la∣mentation into garments of salvation, their mourning weeds into glorying expression, and their sighes and groanes unutterable into the sweetest oration. For I will see them againe, and their hearts shall rejoyce, and their joy shall no man take from them. The rivers that flowed from paradice are not comparable to the streames that makes glad the city of our God, those were water, these welsprings of living water, those flowed from the earthly
paradice, these from the heavenly and celestiall paradice, by some of them was Bdelium and the Onix stone, in these are eternall glory, nearenesse of union, and the fruition of eternall life and felicitie, those were appointed to water the Gar∣den of Eden, these are ordained to water and refresh the Church of Christ belo∣ved, those were placed in paradice by the wisedome and love of God the Fa∣ther, these were placed and appointed in the Church of Christ redeemer: there∣fore they admire at the love of God the Father, and the superemenent grace of Christ Mediator. Saying they shall heare the thing they never heard, they shall see the things they never saw, and they shall understand the things they never understood. Their joy in that day shall not be from the influence of the starrs, my influence excelleth the influence of all starrs, they shall not injoy the com∣fort of the Moone, but the comfort of mee whose glory is above Sunne and Moone. What shall mine injoy in that day? they shall fully see the throne of grace, fully behold all the hidden, unut∣terable and unsearchable excellencies that are in me. What shall they possesse,
when they shall possesse me that filleth all in all things? what shall they com∣prehend, when they shall be compre∣hended and invironed with my glorious presence and the light of my counte∣nance? therefore though the heavens and the earth should bee silent, the moutaines and the vallies should be still, yet mine will glory in me their loving prince and effectionate bridegroome. Sith I will see them againe, their hearts shall rejoyce, and their joy shall no man take from them. And your joy no man taketh from you. O the love of our loving and glorious father! O the kindnesse of our Lord our deare and gratious Redeemer! if mine admire at my love, my love is admirable love, if mine contemplate of my grace, my grace is superemenent grace, when they were in the vast and roaring wil∣dernesse, I allured them, and brought them into a wildernesse, and there I spake comfortably unto them. Hosea 2.14. Therefore behold I will allure her, and bring her into the wildernesse, and spake comfortably unto her. When mine were
tossed like a ship with the roaring waves, reeling like a drunken man, were welneigh dashed in peeces by the crag∣gie rockes and shelves, I laid a founda∣tion for them of pretious Stones and Saphires. Isa. 54.11. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest and not comforted, I will lay thy stones with faire colours, and lay thy foundation with Saphirs. When they wanted joyes, I gave them joyes firmer then the earth upon its center, more fixed then the fixed starres, more stable then the sublunarie creatures. Is my righteousnes, everlasting righteousness? & is not my comfort everlasting? is my deare hearts blood of an eternall value? & is not my consolations eternall? is my communion and blessednesse for ever and ever? and are not my joyes for e∣ver and ever? If mine have life, their life is hid in me, if mine have peace, then their peace is treasured in me, if mine have joy, their joy is joy in me. Hath the mists taken away the light of the Sunne? No: Hath the mortality of the body taken away the immortality of the soule? No: Or can any take away the consolation of my Redeemed? No: Had I not given to my Redeemed ever∣lasting
righteousnesse, eternall life, an inheritance immutable, then their joy had beene momentanie and transitorie: but because I have given them an ever∣lasting righteousnesse. Dan. 9.24. Sea∣venty weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy citie, to finish the trans∣gressions, and to make an end of sinnes, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, & to bring in everlasting righteousnesse, and to seale up the vision and prophesie, and to annoynt the most holy. Eternall life. John 10.28. And I give unto them eternall life, & they shall ne∣ver perish, neither shall any man plucke them out of mine hands. An inheritance immor∣tall and immutable. 1 Pet. 1.4. There∣fore their joy is not transitory and mo∣mentanie. After once I bring my redee∣med to the inheritance immortall and incontaminate, they shall sing nothing but praise, honour, glory, power, might, truth, mercy, strength and thanksgi∣ving to my Father blessed for ever; and to me blessed for ever more. They shall know of no sinne in the flesh, they shall not heare the accusations of the law be∣fore the tribunall seate of justice, they shall not hearken to the temptations of the devill, they shall not feele the burden
of sinne, nor be affrighted at the feares of death and hell, but they shall injoy an immediate communion and fruition of my glory to everlasting. For I wil take away their heavines, their heart shall rejoyce and their joy no man taketh from them. JOHN 15.12. This is my Commandement, that ye love one another as I have loved you. RAre is the Sunne in respect of beau∣ty, light and operation, rare are the pretious jewells in respect of richnesse, vertue and estimation: so rare is the love of Christ to us through gifts, gra∣ces and communication, as the myrrh and the drops thereof, as the sweet raine and the showers thereof, as the bedew∣ing dew and the overspreading thereof, so is the influence of Christs freest grace, and the expression of his dearest love, according to the text. John 15.12. This is my Commandement, that ye love one another as I have loved you. Nothing is so pretious as Christs blood, nothing so victorious as his death, nothing is so pure as his righte∣ousnesse;
so nothing is so tender as the love of our dearest Lord that bought us; who hath left the highest throne of glory for the bondslaves of miseries? but the prince of glory? who hath stood be∣tweene light and darkenesse, betwixt heaven and hell, betwixt eternall justice, and the children of unrighteousnesse: but the Lord our righteousnesse? 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also hath once suffered for sinne, the just for the uniust, that hee might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickned by the spirit. Who hath beene surety for mine in respect of the acquirie of Redemption, to make up the breach of union, to answer the righte∣ousnesse for justification, to atchieve glorious communion, beatification, be∣diction, felicitie and the fruition of my presence; but he that shall stand for e∣ver mediatour and intercessour in my presence? or who hath indured that mocking, that buffeting, that scorning, that arraigning, that condemning but he in whom there is no condemnation but eternall life and salvation. Act. 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. He
hath laid downe his life for them that were deprived of the hope of life, hee spilt his dearest blood for them that were involved in their blood, hee hath ventured his death for the lives of them that were the children of death, had a child of wrath died for a child of wrath, that should not have been excellent, had a child of death, dyed for a son of death that should not have beene superexcel∣lent, but for the beloved of the father to die for miserable catives and captives, that is transcendent. The death of mee the Lord of life is more then a thousand Lords, the death of mee the prince of peace is more then the death of tenne thousand princes, the death of mee who am King of Kings is more then the death of all the Kings and Monarches under heaven. I looked and behold the Angels hid their faces, all creatures hid their heads: Sith none could make up the breach of union, a glorious pre∣sentation in my fathers presence, con∣quer death through death, overcome the devill through power, blot out im∣purity through righteousnesse, remove sinne through blood, make peace through atonement, and by grace and
glory bring the poore soule to eternall glory. Isay 59.16. And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessour, therefore his arme brought sal∣vation unto him, and his righteousnesse it sustained him. 2 Cor. 3. last. But wee all with open face, beholding as in a glasse the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Out of my love I give rare gifts and graces to my Saints and servants. Who hath opened the treasures of wisedome and knowledge? if not I; who hath broken open the treasure-house of heaven, opened the throne of grace, unlocked the mercy seate? if not I; who hath placed the heavenly minds in the heavenly places, blessed the peo∣ple, delivered from the curse with spiri∣tuall blessings, and made them that have tasted my love attaine to the height of my love? but I. I powre my water up∣on the thirsty; I give my bread to the hungry, my cloath of righteousnesse to the naked, and my dearest mercy and love to the lovelesse. I power out my spirit upon my servants, shew my visi∣ons to the young, and give my dreames to the old. Acts 2.17. And it shall come
to passe in those dayes saith the Lord, I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sonnes and your daughters shall prophesie, and your yong men shall see visions, and your ould men shall dreame dreames. My gifts are not of gold, but of that which is more pretious then the gold of Ophir, my gifts are not jewels, gemmes, and pretious stones. But that which is more rich then jewels, gemmes and pretious stones. My gifts are not earthly trea∣sures, morrall righteousnesse, worldly, wealth, and things terren and subluna∣rie: but heavenly treasures, and heaven∣ly righteousnesse, celestiall wealth, and things sublime, and heavenly. Hence mine receive abundance from me, the the fulnesse of the Godhead dwelt in me bodily. Collosians 2.6. verse For in him dwelleth all the fullnesse of the Godhead bodily. Hence mine receive grace and truth from the fulnesse of grace and truth: as I have spoken, and mine confesse. John 1.16. And of his fulnesse have wee all receiued and grace for grace. Out of my love, I will not forsake mine in the midst of all their tribulation and temptations, though the heaven should frowne, and the earth should
lowre, the conscience should terrifie, justice should amaze, death should trou∣ble, sinne should burden, the Devill should roare, the flesh should assault, all evills should environ: notwithstanding I will not forsake my peculiar: though principalities, though powers, though death, though famine, though perill, though sword, though hell, though law, though sinne, though the grave, and all evills should beset mine, yet will I not leave them. I love them in wants as if they had abundance, in tribulation as if they were free from tribulation, in temptation as if they were free from temptation, And in sheep skins and goats skins as if they had cloath of gold beset with the rarest jewels. What if they are stoned for my name sake? what if they be banished for my testimony? what if they should be wracked for the witnesse of the word of my truth? what if they had not a hole with the fox nor a nest with the birds? yet I will not shut them out of my presence. Have I not given a testimony concerning them. Heb. 11.36, 37, 38, 39. And others had triall of cruell mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment, They
were stoned, they were sawne asunder, were tempted, were slaine with the sword, they wandered about in sheep skins, and goats skins, being destitute, afflictet, tormented: of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in the desarts, and in mountains, and denns and caves of the earth. And all these have obtained a good report through faith, receiued not the promise. When Paul and Silas my servants were in prison, did I not make them sing songs of my dea∣rest love? When Peter was in prison, was not the Angel of my presence by him? when my servant Steeven was sto∣ned, did I not make his face to shine as an Angel? and when my servants were in the fire furnace, have I not delivered them from the furnace of fiety afflicti∣ons? I am the rock, when there is no rocke, I am the refuge, when there is no refuge, & I am their hope and horne of salvation, when there is neither hope nor horne of salvation. Hence mine may conclude with my servant. Psal. 18.18. They prevented me in the day of my calamitie, but the Lord was my stay. Out of my love I have loved them freely. I regarded neither their righteousnesse, their holynesse, their performances, nei∣ther
their prayers, their doings, nor their excellencies, neither their purity, their innocency, nor their integritie, I have lo∣ved my redeemed, and my justified free∣ly, I have respected my reconciled free∣ly, and I regarded my adopted and my glorified freely. Though thousands should have pre∣sented to me the vertue of the sonne the moone and starres, the riches of seas of mountaines and of the vallies, or the free will of the freewillers: notwithstanding I would refuse it. If I lay downe my life for my sheep, is it not out of the freenesse of my love? John 10.11. I am the good shepheard, the good shepheard giveth his life for his sheep. If I give my life for my Church, is it not out of my tender and deare affection? Ephes. 5.25. Hus∣bands love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church and gave himselfe for it. If I give to mine the riches of hidden trea∣sures, the glory of the heavenly manti∣ons, and the sure and firme mercies which are treasured in my breasts, is it not love of my tenderest care and love? Hence out of my love, I expresse my dearest & tenderest love given to mine, which eye cannot see, which eare
cannot heare, nor mind conceive. 1 Cor. 2 9 But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, eare heard, neither hath entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath pre∣pared for them that love him. I have loved them so dearely, that I will be their glo∣ry in grace, their eternall glory, and their expression of glory, who was their hope and glory. Col. 1.27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mistery among the Gen∣tils, whsch is Christ in you the hope of glory. Who makes them to rejoyce under the the hope of glory? If not I. Rom. 5.1.2. Therefore being iustified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have accesse by faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and re∣joyce in hope of the glory of God. Who makes them passe one from glory to glory? If not I. 2 Cor. 3. last But we all with open face, behoulding as in a glasse, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory: even as by the spirit of the Lord. Am I not their glory and crowne of life? Am I not their glo∣ry and crowne of righteousnesse? Am not I their glory and crowne of mercy. Psal. 103.3, 4. Who forgiveth all thine ini∣quities,
and healeth all thy diseases, who re∣deemeth thy life from destruction, who crow∣neth thee with loving kindnesse, and tender mercies. The glory of my love is tyed to the sweetnesse of my peace, the glory of my grace to my acceptation: Ephes. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the be∣loved. The praise of my glory to the choise of my election. Ephes 1.12. That we should be to the praise of his glory who first trusted in Christ. The assurance and seale of my redemption to the praise of my glory. Ephes. 1.14. Which is the ear∣nest of our inheritance, untill the redempti∣on of the purchased possession: unto the praise of his glory. The collocation in the hea∣venly places to the honour of my super∣emenent grace. Ephes. 2.6.7. And hath raised us up together, and hath made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kind∣nesse towards us through Christ Jesus. What beatitude? What communion? What benediction? What frution? What felicitie? Or what glory can any injoy without me the effulgencie, the character and glory of my father? hath
the rivers waters without the foun∣taines? No, Hath the ayre light with∣out the Sunne? no, or can any possesse glory without my glory? no. Hence I have tould my choise and dearest ones. John 17.22. And the glory which thou ga∣vest me, J have given them, that they may be one even as we are one. And because I have given them this first glory, they sing of my second glory, worshipping me that lives for ever, & falling down be fore my throne of glory. Apoc. And when those beasts gave glory & honour & thanks to him that sate on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever. The foure and twenty Elders fall downe before him that sate on the throne and worship him that liveth for ever and e∣ver; and cast their Crownes before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power, for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. And they sing not onely of my love in word, but also in deede. Answering my command, lo∣ving one another as I have loved them. John. 15.12. This is my Commandement that ye love one another as J have loved you. The Philosopher saith, that the first
moveable is moved by Angels, and all secundarie motions are moved by the first motion or moveable, it is affirmed by the spirit of glory, that the love of the saints to God the Father and of each to∣wards each other, is from that love the Father hath shewed towards them. Joh. 1.4.10.12. Herein is love, not that we lo∣ved God, but that he loved us: and sent his sonne to bee the propiciation for our sinnes. No man hath seene God at any time, if wee love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us. If they are deare in affection, is it not through my union? they are deare members, pretious bran∣ches, and loving spouses, sith I have joy∣ned the members to mee their head, I have ingrafted them into me their vine, and I have espoused them to me their bridegroome, if they injoy fellowship one with another, it is not through my Covenant? I have not only given them communion with my Father to injoy fellowship with my Father, communi∣on with my selfe o injoy an inheritance in my treasures, but I have given mine communion & fellowship one with ano∣ther; that they might have joy and de∣lectation each with other. 1 John 1.3.
That which wee have seene and heard, de∣clare we unto you, that ye also may have fel∣lowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the father, and with his sonne Jesus Christ. Hath the aire light and not from the sunne? hath the hand and foot mo∣tion and not from life? and hath mine fellowship, and not through my fellow∣ship? as I have given them the glory of eternall fruition, the honour of perpe∣tuall conservation. John 17.11. And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee holy father, keepe through thine owne name, those whom thou hast given me, that they may bee one as we are. So I have given mine the glory of union, hence I have made them one as I and the father are one. John 17.22. And the glory which thou gavest me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as wee are one. I am not only glorified in mine by faith that is in mee, by hope which is by mee, by affection towards me, but also by their love towards my choisest people. John 17.10. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. When I sit Lord and King of the conscience, is there not peace and sweetnesse? when I sit Lord
commander of the will? is there not peace and lowlinesse? when I sit onely overswayer over the affection, is there not the tenderest and dearest delectati∣on? so when I throw out the black King of death and darkenesse, is there not love, delight and delectation? when I raigne king of peace and love in the spi∣rit, I remove envie, hatred, malice, wrath, furie, debate, strife, backbiting, slanderings, whisperings, grudgings, re∣pinings, murmurings, for when I fill mine with joyes above all sorrow, with loves above all loves, and with my rest above all rests, are they not amiable? when they apprehend my death victo∣rious, my resurrection triumphous, my mediation efficatious, and my crosse glorious: are they not peaceable? my Father dwelleth in them, his love abides in them, and rules in them; doth not his free love remaine in the conscience? doth not his rich love abide in the heart? and his strong love in the affections? hence comes in the witnesse of the spirit. 1 John 4.17. Herein is our love made per∣ct, that wee may have boldnesse in the day of Judgement? because as hee is, so are wee in this world. Therefore my people are
a quiet people, for they are of the kingdome of my peace and patience. Apoc. 1.9. I John who also am your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdome and patience of Jesus Christ: was in the Isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimonie of Jesus Christ. I turne Lyons into Lambs, Tygers into Sheepe, Woolves into Doves, and Serpents and Ravenous Beasts into Turtles, therefore they feede together without killing and slaying one another. Isay 35.9.10. No Lyon shall bee there, nor no ravenous beast shall goe up thereon, it shall not be found there, And the ransomed of the Lord shall returne and come to Sion, with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads. They shall obtaine joy and glad∣nesse, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Isay 65.25. The Wolfe and the Lambe shall feede together, and the Lyon shall eate straw like the bullocke, and the dust shall bee the Serpents meate, they shall not hurt nor destoy in all my holy Mountaine, saith the Lord. I will neither admit of wolves, of Ty∣gers, or ravenous beasts, of Lyons or de∣vouring dogges to joyne with my peo∣ple and peculiar. Mine shall not fight with sword or speare, with shield nor
buckler, with Helmet nor Habergion, they shall not overcome hell, death, the devill and all evills with the heeles of great horses: but with my dearest blood, and the word of my Testimony. Apoc. 12.11. And they overcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of their testimo∣ny: and they loved not their lives unto the death. I know the power of my love binds them, the power of my grace con∣straines them, the power of my mercy leades them, to learne meeknesse of me their Lord and master. Mat. 11.29. Take my yoake upon you, and learne of mee, for I am meeke and lowly in heart, and yee shall find rest unto your soules. As my king∣dome is not meate, drinke, or cloth: but joy, & peace, & love by the holy Ghost: so my people, the inhabitants and dwellers in my kingdome are not dis∣cordious, contentious, quarrelous: but loving, peaceable and joyous. Rom. 14.17. For the kingdome of God is not meate and drinke, but righteousnesse, and peace, & joy in the Holy Ghost. I have redeemed them from the earth and made them the first fruits to my Father? I have set them in the heavenly places, have I taken away all enmitie betwixt my Father & them:
that they should not live in wrath & dis∣cention. It is my gratious pleasure that mine should love one another, as I have loved them. I would have their affecti∣ons so deere, their loves so tender, that they should out of their dearest affecti∣on, and tenderest love live one with a∣nother. What shall the Citizens of my heavenly Jerusalem bee as strangers? what shall they that are of my Fathers family be as Alians? or they that bee so neare to me as members to the body branches to the vine, as the espoused to the bridegroome, live as a people Alie∣nated and estranged? No. Where is their care over each other? where is their glorying in each other? when they neither see nor behold the sweet and gratious disposition of each other? wherein am I glorified whilst their af∣fections are as farre remote as their ha∣bitations, and their loves as farre distant as their dwellings. What breaches? what discontents ariseth, when the world makes warre, the legalists slan∣ders, and the Angels of light casts false and bitter aspersions, my love hath been so deare and tender towards them, that I have made them temples of the Spirit
of glory, in which I might expresse my glory: Did my father fill the Temple with his glory? and doe not I fill mine with my glory? whilst I in them am the hope of glory. Col. 1.27. To whom God would make knowne what is the mistery of this glory among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory. I have made them a dwelling place, a habitation of dwelling by my spirit. Ephes. 2.21, 22. In whom all the building fitly framed toge∣ther, groweth unto an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit. I have made them Tabernacles fit for my love and favour. John 17. last. And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou hast loved me, may bee in them, and I in them: And shall not mine live as my choysest & dearest ones? what difference between the children of Sinai, & the childrē of Si∣on? what difference between the daugh∣ters of the bondwoman, and the daugh∣ters of Jerusalem? if they live not as my Saints at Jerusalem? Oh what honour? what glory have mine attained? and grace have they atchieved? whilst of them in record it is recorded. Acts 2.44.
And all that beleeved were together, and had all things common, the last verse. Praise∣ing God and having favour with all the peo∣ple: and the Lord added to the church dayly such as should be saved. I have loved mine with an everlasting love, hence I passe by their sins, their weaknes, their infirmities, and all their evills. Though they were tossed like the lofty and roaring waves of the sea: I gave to them a rich and sure foundation. Isaiah 54.11.10. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with faire colours, and lay thy foundations with Saphirs, and I will make thy windowes of A∣gates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pretious stones. Though they were left as a widow forsaken, and as a virgin relinquist, I have not left them nor forsaken them. Isay 54.6.7. For the Lord hath called thee as a woman for¦saken, and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth when thou wast refused saith thy God, For a small, moment have I forsaken thee but with great mercies will I gather thee, Though they were not accounted wor∣thy of a being upon the face of the earth, I have given them a heavenly habitati∣on. 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if our
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissol∣ved, wee have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternall in the hea∣vens. And shall not mine love mine for ever? I will not have my bruised quast, I love the smoaking flax, and the bruised reed, I will not have my broken dis∣esteemed, my wounded despised, my sicke neglected, my prisoners not visi∣ted, my feeble unrefreshed, my poore begging bread, and my distressed con∣sciences uncomforted. To what end doe I commit them to my Churches care, to belie, slander, backbite, and speake evill of my people? No, to frowne, lowre, and pet against my weake ones? No, that they might breake, bruise and tread under foot my weakest servants? No, but that they should refresh, comfort, solace and refo∣cilate my weake ones, and my poorest servants: as their names, their lives, their liberties, their consciences are deare to me: so I will have their names, lives, liberties, and deaths pretious in my peoples sight. What rarer then the influences of my grace from my superemenent grace? Yet that have I bestowed upon my jew∣els,
what is purer then the garments of my salvation? Yet that have I given to my choisest ones? and what more preti∣ous then my dearest blood? yet that I give to my dearest saints. As I cause the sweet influence of the Plejades to rest upon and in the plants of the feild, so I cause the sweet influence of my grace to rest and abide in my peculiar people, and shal not mine distribute their goods, make known their gifts, and spend their lives each for other? 1 John 4.10.11. In this was manifest the love of God towards us, bacause that God sent his only begotten sonne into the world, that we might live through him, herein is love, Not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his sonne to be the propiciation for our sinnes, Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one a∣nother. I have loved mine with a faithfull love, am I not that faithfull witnesse? I witnesse faithfully, are my promises yea and Amen, and am not I yea and Amen? doe I sanctifie mine with my truth? and am I not the truth it selfe: If mine have infirmities and failings, I tell it not in the gates of Gath, nor in the streets of Aske∣lon, I carrie not the failings of my people from the throne of my grace to the barr
of my justice, but I free them from the barr of justice, and accquite them before the throne of grace. And shall not mine love mine, with a faithfull love, and an intire affection? what in word, in tongue, in lookes, in shadowes? No, But in sin∣cerity of spirit, and faithfullnesse of heart, not speaking evill of mine, as Doeg did of David, not uncovering the shame of mine as Ham of Noah, but speking gratiously of mine as Jonathan of the Lords anoynted. Answering my Com∣mission. 1 John 3.18 My little children let us not love in word neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. I have loved mine freely. They were vessells of wrath, bound under the chaines of hell, death and darkenesse, under the black clawes of that roaring Lyon the Devill, not withstanding, I looked upon them in mercy, I regarded not the multitude of their performances, the beauty of their righteousnesse, & the excellency of their gifts, I made the beggar to sit amongst Princes. 1 Sam. 2.9. He raiseth up the poore out of the dust, & lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them amongst Prin∣ces, and to make them inherite the throne of
glory: For the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he hath set the world upon them, I make the ofscurings of the earth through my blood, Kings and Priests to God my father, Apoc. 1.5.6. And from Jesus Christ who is the faithfull witnesse, and the first begotten from the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth unto him that hath loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his owne blood. And hath made us Kings and Priests unto God and his father, to him be glory & dominion, for ever & ever Amen. I made the distressed vallies of death and darkenesse, to injoy an inheri∣tance amongst my sanctified by faith that is in me. Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turne them from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive the forgivenesse of sinnes, and inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by faith that is in me. And shall mine not love mine? in sheep skins & goats skins, as if they weare the cloth of gould beset with Diamonds? if they were upō the dunghil, as if they were the greatest, the honourable the richest, and the noble. Shall they not eye the weake, the meanest and the poore of my redee∣med
flocke, as well as the fat, & lusty of my flocke beloved? Jam. 2.3, 4, 5. And yee have respect to him that wearrch the gay cloathing, and say unto him sit thou heare in a good place. And say to the poore stand thou there, or sit here under my foot∣stoole, are yee not partiall in your selves, and are become judgers of evill thoughts. Hear∣ken my beloved brethren: hath not God chosen the poore of this world, rich in faith, and heires of the kingdome which he hath promised to them that love him. I have lo∣ved mine so dearely, that I have layd down my life for mine, I might have reasoned and said, these are Rebels a∣gainst my glory, Traytours against the throne of my grace, Transgressours of my divine and purest law, they have undervalued my word of gratious re∣conciliation, they have despised the word of my sanctification, and they have disrespected the doctrine of free and plentious redemption. Who have advanced their owne righteousnesse a∣bove my righteousnesse? if not they, Who hath set their posts by my posts? if not they, Who hath disesteemed the blood of my covenant? if not they, and
shall not mine love mine to the death? yea, if I the great shepheard, the tender Bridegroome, the pleasant vine and King of my Church have layd down my life for my Church, shall not the sheep, the spouse, the branches and sub∣jects of my kingdome lay downe their lives for each other? O my people, I am the searcher of the hearts and tryer of the raines, I walke in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, to see what love is or should be in the midst of my people. I see my sick not visited, my poore de∣based, my naked unclothed, my hung∣rie and thirsty not satisfied, my dearest Jewells slandered, my pretious servants defamed, and those that speake the truth disdained. In stead of patience, prudence, gentlenesse, mildnesse, and gratiousnesse of spirit, there is backebiting, lying, cry∣ing and slandering in every corner of the City. But have they not cause to tender one another dearly? are they not fellow Citizens and of the houshould of of my father? Ephes. 2.19. Now there∣fore yee are no more strangers and forreners, but fellow citizens with the saints and of the
houshould of God. Are they not my bran∣ches whom I esteeme most deerely. John 15.5. I am the vine, ye are the branches, he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same brin∣geth forth much fruit, for without me ye can doe nothing. Are they not they that are called to communion with mee that am their deare Lord and Master. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithfull, by whom yee were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. They are not base but noble, all the Kings and Monarches under heaven are not comparable to one of the Kings that I have made to God my Father through my blood most pretious. They are Kings of earthly Kingdomes, mine of heavenly and celestiall Kingdomes: They are Kings by a Royall progenie, mine are Kings through my blood un∣defiled, they have crownes of pure gold & pretious stones, mine have crowns of life and righteousnesse, they have guards of men to attend them, mine guards of Angells & the beloved saints. Heb. 1 last. Are they not all ministring Spirits; sent forth to minister for them who shall bee hei∣ers of Salvation. Their cloth is better
then the cloth of gol their riches bet∣ter then the riches of jewells, and their wealth more excellent then the wealth hid in the sands. Though the devill would devoure them, I will save them, though the flesh make war with them, I will support them, though death would destroy them, I will give them my salvation. Haback. 3.13. Thou wen∣test forth for the Salvation of the people, even for Salvation with thine anoynted, thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck Selah. I am their King, and shall not I command them? their Bride∣groome, and shall not I will them? their loving Mediatour, and shall I not wish them to love on another? I know, if I cōmand them to endure bounds, chaines & imprisonments for my sake, that they will obey me, I know if I cōmand them to endure poverty for my poore, penu∣rie for my distressed, miserie for my af∣flicted, that they will subject to me. My voice is as deare to them as heaven, my commands as acceptable as my joyes; and my wishes. As my love, my glory
and my righteousnesse. Therefore they will answere my command of love: as it is recorded. John 15.12. This is my com∣mandement, that ye love one another, as I have loved you.
A CONFESSION OF OVR FAITH, According to the Order of the GOSPEL. First. WEE beleeve that Jesus Christ is the Eternall Sonne of God, who was with the Father be∣fore the world was; Appointed by an Eternall Election Mediatour, Redeemer and Reconciler of all those whom the Father out of his Eternall and free love had ordained unto Eternall Life. John 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and wee beheld his glory, the glory as of the onely begotten Sonne
of the Father full of grace and truth. John 1.18. No man hath seene God at any time, the onely begotten Son which is in thy bosome of the Father, he hath declared him. John 17.3. And this is life Eternall, that they might know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. Secondly. VVE beleeve that it was the Fa∣thers divine pleasure to or daine Jesus Chr st to bee King over his Church, & peculiar, and the sole & only Prophet from which the Church should receive all her treasures of Divine & ra∣rest wisedome. Ephes. 1.21, 22, 23. Far a∣bove all principalitie, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is na∣med not only in this world, but also in the world to come. And hath put all things un∣der his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all. Deut. 18.18. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. Col. 1.3. Wee give thnnkes to God and the
Father of Jesus Christ our Lord praying al∣waies for you. Thirdly. WEE beleeve that the Church of Jesus Christ was freely chosen and selected out of the free and eternall love of the Father resting in the bosome of Jesus Christ: to the end that it might be partaker of all the heavenly treasures of divine grace and righteousnesse, made conformable to the will of God the hea∣venly Father, and to the minde of Jesus Christ the blessed and glorious Redee∣med. Ephes. 1.4, 5. According as hee hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that wee should be holy and without blame before him in love, having predestinated us unto the Adoption of Sonnes by Jesus Christ to himselfe, according to the good pleasure of his will. 2 Pet. 1.4. Wherby are given unto us exceeding great and preti∣ous promises, that by these you might be par∣takers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. Rom. 8.27. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the spi∣rit,
because hee maketh intersession for the Saints according to the will of God. Fourthly. WEE beleeve that Jesus Christ the Lord of life and salvation laid downe his life in speciall for her ac∣cording to the absolute and divine ap∣pointment of the Father, to the intent that hee might confirme upon her the supereminent riches of glory, the excee∣ding riches of mercy, and the marvilous dispensation of his marvilous Kindnesse which proceedes alone from his free and divine pleasure. Acts 20.28. Take heede therefore unto your selves, and to all the floke over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feede the Church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood. Rom. 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how should he not with him freely give us all things? Eph. 5.25. Husbands love your wives even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himselfe for it. Apoc. 5.9.10. And they sang a new song, saying; thou art worthy to take the booke, and to open the seales thereof, for thou wast slaine, and hast redeemed us to
God out of every kindred, tongue, and peo∣ple, and nation, and hath made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall raigne on the earth. Col. 1.27. To whom God would make knowne what is the riches of the glory of this mistery among the Gentills which is Christ in you the hope of glory. Eph. 2.7. That in ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindnesse towards us through Christ Jesus. Fiftly. WEE beleeve that the Church which hath beene redeemed by the pretious bloud of our Lord and Ma∣ster, that she hath received the spirit of Adoption, Glory, Sanctification and ob∣signation: to the intent that she might be absolutely assured of everlasting glory of God the Father, the pretious riches of grace in Jesus Christ, and the promi∣ses which are in Christ yea and Amen. Vnto the praise and glory of the Father. Rom. 5.2. By whom also we have accesse by faith into this grace, wherein we stand and reioyce in hope of the glory of God. 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus who
of God is made unto us wisedome, and righte∣ousnesse, and Sanctification and Redemption. 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen unto the glory of God by us. Sixtly. WEE beleeve that Jesus Christ having paid an Eternall price and ransome to his Father in the behalfe of his Church and peculiar, therefore the price in it selfe being eternall, infinite and unmeasurable, doth comprehend in it selfe a remedie for the miseries of All mankinde whatsoever. Mat. 20.28. Even as the sonne of man came not to bee ministred unto, but to mimister, and to give a ransom his life for many. 1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave himselfe a ransome for all to be testified in due time. Seventhly. WE beleeve that the Gospel of Je∣sus Christ is a Gospel universall, and is to be preached, amongst all crea∣tures whatsoever: to the intent that the
Father of eternall love and mercy might single out his people out of the world, shew forth the dignity of his owne Son, manifest the marvilous riches of his owne glory, and leave the Creature without excuse. Mat. 28.19. Goe yee therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. Col. 1.23. If ye continue in the faith, grounded and setled and bee not moved away from the hope of the Gospel which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven: whereof I am made a Minister. Eph. 2.12. That at that time ye are with∣out Christ, being Aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Co∣venant of grace, having no hope. And with∣out God in the world. 1 John 5.10. He that beleeveth me the sonne of God, hath the wit∣nesse in himselfe, he that beleeveth not God, hath made him a lier, because hee beleeveth not the record that God gave of his Sonne. John 3.18.19. Hee that beleeveth one him, is not condemned, but hee that beleeveth not is condemned already, because hee hath not beleeved in the name of the only begotten son of God. And this is the condemnation that
light is come into the world, and men loved darkenesse more then light, because their deeds were evill. Eighthly. VVE beleeve that the Church be∣ing called by the word of life and salvation to participate of the glori∣ous riches of Christ, is bound by an e∣verlasting bond of love, and favour to yeeld all loyall obedience and subjection to Jesus Christ her Lord and Master. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithfull, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Sonne Jesus Christ our Lord. Rom. 12.1, 2. I be∣seech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God which is your reasonable sacrifice, and be not confor∣med to this world, but bee transformed by the renewing of your minde, that ye may prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. Ninthly. VVEE beleeve that the Church of Jesus Christ is presented glori∣ous
in the sight of God her heavenly Fa∣ther through union with Jesus Christ, and her interest in her royall robes of righteousnesse. Phil. 3.9. And being found in him, not having mine owne righteousnesse which is of the Law, but that which is tho∣rough the faith of Christ: the righteous∣nesse which is of God by faith. Isay 61.10. I will greatly reioyce in the Lord, my soule shall be ioyfull in my God, for hee hath cloa∣thed me with he garments of Salvation, hee hath covered me with the robe of righteous∣nesse as a bridegrorme decketh himselfe with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her selfe with her Jewells. Tenthly. VVE beleeve that neither sin, the Law, nor Justice is any cause of her chastisement; onely the free and deare love of her deere Father; to the end that he might teach her the way to glory, weaken the power of the flesh, and make her live by faith and love be∣fore him all her dayes. Heb. 12.6. For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every sonne whom hee receiveth. Apoc. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke
and chasten, be zealous therefore and repent. Psal. 119.6, 7. Then shall I not bee asha∣med, when I shall have respect to all thy commandements: I will praise thee with uprightnesse of heart, when I shall have lear∣ned thy righteous judgements. 2 Cor. 12.7. And least I should be exalted above mea∣sure through the abundance of revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, least I should exalted above measure. 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. where∣in ye greatly rejoyce, though now for a season if neede be ye are in heavinesse through ma∣nifold temptations, that the triall of your faith being much more pretious then of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honour, and glory at the appearing of Iesus Christ. Eleventh. WE beleeve that although her God and father is in every place, and beholds all things, and by consequence seeth sin as it is in the flesh: not with∣standing, having presented her just by the act of Reconciliation through the blood of the Sonne of God. Justified her through the none imputation of iniqui∣tie,
and made her stand in Christ for e∣ver through union with him; hence she stands in his sight for ever without spot or wrinckle. Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open unto him with whom we have to doe. 2 Cor. 5.17. Therfore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Old things things are past away, behold all things are become new. Col. 1.22. In the body of his flesh through death, to pre∣sent you holy, & unblamable, & unreprove∣able in his sight. Ephes. 5.27. That he might present to himselfe a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without ble∣mish. Twelfe. VVE beleeve, that though in the dayes of Adam we with Adam stood under the old Covenant; yet that Covenant is wholy abolished, and that now injoying the law of faith, mercy & peace; we stand for ever under that cove∣nant which hath beene proposed in Christ, hence it comes to passe, that we are freed absolutely from the law of sin and death, and are brought under the
Law of freedome and life. Jer. 31.32.33. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day when I tooke them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which Covenant they brake, although I was a husband unto them saith the Lord. But this shall be the Cove∣nant that I will make with the house of Isra∣el after those dayes saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Heb. 8.6. But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant which was established upon better promises. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sinne and death. Thirteenth. VVE beleeve that the Saints are to be a deare, a tender, and a lo∣ving people, from the love that is given them in and through Jesus Christ, and are bound to walke in the bond of Love, to the intent that they may shew them∣selves children of light, hold forth the love of Jesus Christ, and the glory of
God their heavenly and dearest Father. John. 15.12. This is my Commandement that ye love one another as I have loved you. John 17.22. And the glory which thou ga∣vest me, I have given them that they may be one; even as we are one. Fourteenth. VVE beleeve that the expressions of this love stands not onely in in the communion of gifts, but also of goods, insomuch that is it possible they are to live in one body as one common wealth; nothing differing from the state of the Churches in the City of Je∣rusalem. Acts 2.44, 45. And they that beleeved were together, and had althings common, and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men as every man had neede. Fifteenth. THe Saints are to be a quiet peacea∣ble and loving people, sith they are of the Kingdome and patience of Jesus Christ, God hath called them to peace, having given them a command to have
peace with all, and love towards all men. And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people, and they shall beate their swords into plowshares, and their speares into pruning hookes, Nation shall not lift up swords against Nation, neither shall they learne warre any more. Isay 65.25. The Wolfe and the Lambe shall feede to∣gether, and the Lyon shall eate straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpents meate, they shal not hurt nor destroy in all my moun∣taines saith the Lord. Apoc. 13.10. He that leadeth into captivity shall goe into captivity, he that killeth with the sword, must be killed with the sword; Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints. Apoc. 12.11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. Sixteenth. VVEE beleeve that those that are to enter into a Churches estate, are to make known to the Church their experience of the Spirit and faith in Je∣sus Christ, insomuch that none are to bee admitted into a Churches state but such as are cordiall in their faith, and ex∣perementall
through communion with the Lord Jesus. Acts 8.37. And Philip said, if thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou mayest, and he answered and said, I be∣leeve that Jesus Christ is the Sonne of God. Acts 10.47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized which have received the holy Ghost as well as we. Acts 9.26, 27. And when Saul was come to Je∣rusalem, hee assayed to joyne himselfe unto the Disciples, but they were all affraid of him, and beleeved not that he was a Disciple, but Barnabas tooke him and brought him to the Apostles, and declared unto them how he had seene thk Lord in the way, and that hee had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus, &c. Seventeenth. VVEE understand that although their ought to be an especiall love of the Saints one towards another, notwithstanding, they are to shew them∣selves loving, courteous, and gentle to all that are without; not reproaching but praising, praying and blessing God for all that hate them. Mat. 5.44, 45, 46. But I say unto you, love your Enemies, blesse
them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, and pray for them which dispite∣fully use you, and persecute you. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven: for he maketh his Sun to rise on the evill, and on the good, and sendeth raine on the just, and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Doe not even the Publicans the same? FINIS. TRust ye not in a friend, put ye not confi∣dence in a guide: keepe the doores of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom. Ther∣fore I will look unto the Lord: I will waite for the God of my salvation, my God will heare me. Isa. 50.6, 7. I gave my backe to the smiters, and my cheekes to them that plucked off the haire: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord will helpe mee, therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. VVE judge no man. If any man is contrary minded, God shall re∣veale it according to his Divine Love and rarest Mercy in the beloved.
