B3476 12212813 56340
VVIT A SPORTING In a pleasant GROVE OF NEW FANCIES. By H. B. LONDON, Printed for W. Burden, and are to be sold at his shop in Cannons-street, near London-stone, and by S. L. at the sign of the Book-binders in Shoo-lane, 1657.
THE AUTHOR, TO THE READER. WHen as our English Poets, those happier men That can drop wonders from their fluent pena Have with their miracles of Poetry Feasted thy eares, and satisfi'd thy eye; Then turn aside; and 'mongst the vulger things, Place what my new-born Muse abruptly sings.
Which though it be but meane (as tis confest) 'T hath ventured hard to pleas thee, since tis prest: If thou smile on it, I shall think my braine Hath labour'd for this issue not in vain, If otherwise thou do contemn my layes. My pleasur's more to me, then all thy praise.
A Pleasant Grove of new Fancies. On a Lillie in his Ladies hand. BLest in thy happy bed fair Lilly lye, To shade thee from the Sun of her bright eye; But do not in a wanton pride prefer Thy self, as adding whiteness unto her, Alas what glory could in thee appear So eminent, if not transplanted there? But see, thou fad'st already, poor proud flowr Whose fate is limited to one short hour; And since thou wouldst for such a beutie vie, Thy conquerd envie makes thee pale & die. Come sit thee down, & with a myslin charm Ceaze my incircled arm, Till lockt in fast, imbraces we discover In every eye a lover,
Then lost in that sweet extacy of blisses, Wee'l speak our thoughts in kisses. In which wee'l melt our souls, and mix them so, That what is thine or mine, ther's none shall know: Rare mystery of love, and wondere too. Which none but we can do: Nor shall the leaden spirits of all those, Who speak of love in tame prose: Believe our joyes: but duly cesure us, Onely for loving thus. Ah! how I smile, that doubtly blest, we do Injoy our selves, and all their envy too. His Choyce. WHat care I though she be faire Hair snow-like, or Sun-like eye, If in that beauty I not share, Were she deformed, what care I. What care I though she be foule Haire, swarthy hand, or Sun-burnt eye, So long as I enjoy her soule, Let her be so, why what care I. Dim sight is cozened with a glass,
Of gaudy govvn or humerous haire, Such gold in melting leave more dross Then some unpolish't prices share, Be she faire, or foule, or either, Or made up of all together, Be her heart mine, haire, hand, or eye Be what it will, why what carel. To his Mistress when she was going into the Country. YEs, yes, it must be so, but must there be, When you depart, no memory had of me, My soule being rack't as large a distance too To meet you there, as I must be from you, While the glad spring for joy you shall be seen Meet your approach, and cloath her self in green. And the fresh morning to salute your rise, Bedevves the ground from it's o're joyed eyes, For joy like grief, vve knovv, sometimes ap∣peares, Writ on our cheeks, vvith characters of tears.
Go and be happy, go, and vvhen you see The trusty Ivy clasp it's much loved tree, And vvith it's amorous intvvinings cover The vvelcome vvaste of it's imbraced lover: Think it our Embleme then, and prov'd to be The happy shadow of my love and me, Go and be happy, and when some svveet brooks (Calme as thy thoughts, and smooth as are thy looks) Show thee thy face, then let thy thoughts supply And though I be not, think that I am by; For if the heart be taken for whole man, I must be by thee, be thou where thou can. Go and when some pretty birds on some smal spray, Neer to thy window welcome in the day: Awake, and think, when their sweet notes you heare, I was before-hand, and had sung them there. Go, and whate're thou chance to heare or see, Be it bird, or brook, or shade or tree; If it delights thee may my soule in it Move thy true joyes under that counterfit. So, aske not how I do when you are there,
For at your mercy well or ill I fare For now me thinks my heart so high doth swell, It must inforce a breath, farewell, farewell. The Knell. When the sad toling of my bell you heare, Think tis some Anfels trump, and judgments neere, Then if but to repent, you take the paine, Your judgments past, lie down and sleep againe. The Perfume. Not that I think thy breath less sweet than this, Thy breath, in which no pleasant sweets I miss, Not that I think thy white, than this less faire, Thy white, to which all whites but blackness are: Not that I think thy heart, then this less pure, Thy heart, which no dull mixture can indure, Send I this to thee, but as gold well try'd, Admits allay when it is purifi'd, So by this foile I would to thee in part What is thy breath, thy whiteness, and thy
Thy breath, all perfumes, doth as far out go, As doth thy whiteness, the descending snow; The snow descends, but by the winds being blown, Thy sweetest breath, & whiter snows, hine ow: Thy heart less mixt than the sole Phoenix bed, Proclaimes thee mistress of a Maiden-head, And so there were no ashes after fire, Would that ware conquer'd in my loves desire, But if hre be, why can it not suffice? That one being dead another Phoenix rise. Thy maiden-head being gone, we still shall prove; Both being one unparallell'd in love, But I have ridd'd, let me now unfold, What is the perfum, what the snow, what gold; All this, and each of these, thou know'st thou art, And I should know more, did I know thy heart. To his Mistress on her scorne. Resolve me dearest, vvhy two hearts in one Should know the sin of separation. Must the sweet custome of our oft stolne kis∣ses,
Be lost, and we live empty of those blisses: Or do the frowns of some old over seer Nourish thy feare, or make thy love less steer? Why did'st thou suffer me those sweets to steale, Which but thine own, no tongue can e're reveale, And prompt me to a daring to believe, That my sad heart should finde no cause to grieve, Yet now at last hast mocket my hope so far, That I have not a cloud, though meant a star Well, take thy tryumph, study but to be True to thy selfe, as thou art false to me. And thou shalt meet a conquest, yet when I Have groan'd unto the world my Elegy, And thy unjust disdaine, perhaps I shall Obtaine this honour in my funeral. Thy poysonous guilt mixt with thy purged breath, May make thee wither with me unto death. So shall I triumph in my ashes too, In that my innocence hath conquer'd you, And then my eye rejoyce, in that I have Thy scorne, to be a mourner at my grave.
The Question and Anwser. WHen the sad reins of that face In i's own wrinkles buried lyes, And the stiff pride of all it's grace By time un tone, falls slack and dyes: Wilt not thou sigh, and wish in some vext fit, That it were now as when I counted it. And when thy glass shall it present, Without those smiles which once were there, Shewing like some stale monument, A scarce departed from it's haire, At thy selfe frighted wilt not stare and sweare That I believed the, when I call'd thee faire? Yes, yes, I know thou wilt, and so Pity the weakness of thy scorne That now hath humbled thee to know, Though faire it was, it is forlorne, Loves sweets, thy aged corps, embalming not What marvel if thy carkase beauty rot Then shall I live and live to be Thy envy, thou my pity; say
When e're thou see me, or I thee, (Being mighted from thy beauties day) Tis he, and had my pride not wither'd me I had, perhaps, been still as fresh as he. Then shall I smile and answer: true thy scorne Left thee thus wrinkled, slack't, corrupt, for∣lorne. To his Worthy friend and Mistress. I charge thee by thse eyes of thine, Give me my heart: Those eyes that stole it out of mine, I felt the smart. And least the theft you should deny, Look where you keep it in your eye. And now I have espy'd it there, Thinking to catch it, You chaine and winde it in your haire, But still I watch it And so got loose from thence, it flyes, And sports agen upon your eyes. Though now to cozen me you seek. Thinking to hide Yet in the dimple of your check
I have discry'd: How now discovered it doth skip Twixt the soft prison of each lip. Yes, yes, I see it stealing, go Least I should find it, Through the long gallery of sow, And still I minde it. How you have shufled it between Your breasts, not thinking it is seen. See, see, I see it creeping in (neer you I feare) Through the small crannies of your skin to shelter there. As if that vaile could cosen me, Alas, I know things I not see. But if not eye, nor haire, nor cheeks, Nor lip, nor breast, nor heart it keeps: Give me them all, for evry part Thou hast, has part of me; my heart. To his Mistress. While as the locks of time, and smoother far Than sliding streames skin and tresses are. Sweet as Arabian Odours, when in fire
Their strugling spirits upwards do expire. (VVhen as the courteous wid doth court our sence, And nourish it with sweet intelligence) Is thy pure breath; only this difference know, That sent is forc', but thine is natur so Soft as the plury moss but over spreads The tender circle of young Turtle heads, Are thy two breasts, which envioust; do swell To think that that shoud this, this that excell: And yet asham'd such strife their pride hath bread, Both blush and tip themselves with bashfull red. Typs, locks, streams, odours, down, nor blushes are So red, so sweet, so smooth, so faire. Anagramme. I value my Learning, Well mayest thou value at the highest price That plant and makes the braine a Paradice: To hose rare excellent the Iems most bright But cloudy are, and sollid gold too light.
Maides and Wives. Maides are white papers, which no hand di∣bind. But Wives are blotted bookes, and interlind A drunken brabler. Who onely in his Cups will fight, is like, A Clocke that must be oyl'd well, ere it strike Loves Motion. Kind Love, whose motion deepe affection showes. From th' outward sence to th' inward Cen∣tre goes. On Church bells. Some Novellists, that conscience most pre∣tend, With Caps and Surplisses themselves offend; Others dare raile at other matters else, As at the Ring, but few against the Bells: Which should they taxe, the Ropes would undertake. To answer for them, and all quiet make.
Fooles Paradise, or Reason Bewitcht. —& apta Spicula sent nobis puris— mple as are the Elements unmixt, Stedfast as is the earth, whose footing's fixt; Untainted like the silver suite of Swan, Alone like truth, well ordered like a man, Like these in each of these was I, untill Upon a time, Reason fell oule with Will, Who back't with sence, that it might bat∣taile move, Implor'd the ayde of all commanding Love, Love by his mother taught, doth soone comply, To be an Actor in this treachery. The battell's wag'd, and reason fleye the field, While Sence and Will to Love the Conquest yeeld. I now, loves subject, am inforclt to doe What ever his designes commands me to do; See, see (quoth hee) do you behold that maid, Whose equall doth not breathe; and there he staid, To draw fresh aire, So quicke was he to give
Mee notice that I must no longer live, In my, owne selfe, but her whom when spy'd, Mee thought I had been happy to have dy'd Since I at once saw severally in one, What joyn'd together made perfection. This was Florella that bright shining starre, Who might have caused a second Trojan warre, Were there a second Paris, for her face; The world might strive, but then there sate a grace So chast that might expell each spurious thought, Such as foule Hellen to her Paris brought▪ There I might read in my Florella's lookes, (Such are indeed beauties most perfect bookes) Loves pleasant Lecture where I might espie How Cupid once sought entrance at her eye Whom she repell'd, like snow and chast and cold Could not admit a Sympathy to hold, With his hot flames, but melting quite put out That ardent fire which warm'd her round about. Cupid denied of this did backward start,
And ran for hast to hide him in her heart, Where he renewed fresh flames, and by delay, So scorcht his wings he could not fly away Thus force perforce in her my conquer'd breast Is the poore Inne of such a God-borne guest, Whom while I harbor, it is hard to tell Whether his presence be a Heaven or Hell. Such pleasurable paine, such painfull plea∣sure Sometimes below, and sometimes above measure. Mars on a time forsook his Venus bed, Protesting he no longer would be led To these embraces, which like Circles charmes, Made him forget th' Heroicke use of Armes. Venus heard this whiles halfe in anger shee Did thrust her darling Cupid off her knee. Downe falls the youngster and in falling so Broke all his Arrows, quiver and his bow, His grandame Nature pittying the mis∣chance, Wipes the wagges eyes, told him she would advance Him to his former office: for a dart
That should transfixe the most obdurat heart. She would create an eye, and for a bow She'd make a brow, whose art inclining so, Should shoote such shafts, that deity should yeeld Themselves glad prisoners in the maiden field, When streight she made Florella, such a maid, Who being nam'd, need there ought else be said? 'Tis not long since that I heard Lovers whine At whose deep wounds, which from their Mistris eyne They bleeding had ceceiv`d cause they could winne No mercy from them, whilst I thought some pinne Had scratch'd their tender hands, till I too late Grew sensible they were unfortunate In their lost loves, 'cause when Florella fround, Shee like a Commet strucke mee to the ground, Till shee was pleas'd to cleare her glorious eyes, Which summon'd mee from death to life to rise. Wherefore you speedy Merchant doe you runne
Beyond the bounds of the all-bounding Sunne, To seeke for Rubies, Pearle, and Ivory, Adventuring hazard both of Land and skie, When my Florella can afford all this Without your search in the tumultuous Seas. Rubies and Pearle, her lips and teeth, her skinne, Like hollow Ivory, lockes those gems within, For which you fondly up and downe doe rome When you may better find this wealth at home, What would the Northerne Climate hold too deare To purchase my Florella to live there? That where the niggard sute denies to shine, They might receive more lustre from her eyne. But that I know she loves Religion best, She had long since, seene India the West, But least those Pagans who adore the rise Of the bright Sunne, should doate upon her eyes, She was resolv'd to stay; wo had I bin Had she gone thither to encrease their sinne. East India nothing holds that's worth her view,
There's nothing there, that shee can take for new, Their aire-persuming spices, pretious gum, Their fragrant odors, pleasants, Cinamum All these and sweeter farre, shee breathes whose smell Doth all things but it selfe, highly excell: Once to my friend I did these lines rehearse, Who streightway smil'd and did applaud my verse But Ah! I feare 'twas my Florella's name That brib'd his tongue, so to belie my fame. Once, and but once I chancd to have the sight Of my Florella, who makes darkness light: When leaden Morpheus did her sence sur∣prize, In the lock't casket of her closed eys, Faine would I steale a kisse, but as I strove, Those scarlet Judges of my sleeping love Did swell against my pride, and angry red, Charg'd mee stand back from her forbidden bed: While they her precious breath did seem to smother. Each privately did steale a touch from the other, I envious at their new begotten blisse Was bold on her soft lips to print a kisse. At which she wak't: And have you ever seene
How faire Aurora, heavens illustrious queene. Shakes off her sable Robe, and with a grace Smiles in the front of a faire morning face. Just so my love▪ as if night had beene noone, Discards the element of the uselesse moone: And from her glorious tapers sent a fire, To light the darkest thoughts to quicke desire. While thus from forth her rosall gate she sent, Breath form'd in words, the marrow of content. And have you Sir, at such a tempting time Bettayd my honour, to this welcome crime, By stealing pleasure from me, 'twas thy Love I know, that did thee to this trespasse move For I have prov'd thy faith which since I finde The trusty Inmate of a loyall minde, Of force I must except it; and in part Of recompence, afford thee all my heart, Thus having ceaz'd my prize; I told her, sweet, As by no fouler name we ere may greete, So what is mine I tender, all, my selfe, The poorest part of thy unvalued wealth.
Thou hast won much in this, thy mercy showne, That thus at last thou dost receive thy owne Least they who after me like fare shall prove, Should say, See what it is to be in Love. I am i prtu. Loves Apostacy to his friend Mr. E. D. Tut, let her goe, can I indre all this, Yet dye, to doate upon a maydens kisse? Is there such Magicke in her lookes, that can, Into a foole, transfigurate a man? Didst thou not love her? true: and shee disdaine To meete thy vertue? let her meete her shame. Were she as faire as she her selfe would be, Adorn'd with all the cost of bravery: Could she melt hearts of flint, and from her eye Give her beholders power to live or die. I'de rather begge she would pronounce my death, Then be her scorne, though that preserv'd my breath
Rise heart! and be not foold; S'foot what a shame Were it for thee to re-incence one flame From the declining spark! dost thou not know As shees a woman, her whole Sex doth owe To thine all honor? her false heart & pride Dare not oppose thy faith; then turn high tide, And let her (since her scorn doth so disease thee) By her repentance strive again to pleas thee. The broken-heart-song. COunt the sighs, and count the tears, Which have in part my budding yeers; Comment on my woful look, Which is now black sorrows book. Read how love is overcome, Weep and sigh, and then be dumb. Say it was your charity To help him whose eyes are dry. Here paint my Cleora's name, Then a hurt, and then a flame; Then mark how the heart doth fry When Cleora is so nigh: Though the flame did do its part, Twas the name that broke the heart.
Peace no more, no more you need My sad History to read. Fold the Paper up agen And report to other men, These complaints can justly prove Hearts may break that be in love. Women are mens shadows. 1. FOllow a shadow, it flies you, Seem to flie it, it will pursue. So court a Mistris, she denies you, Let her alone, she wil court you. Say, are not! women truly then Stil'd but the shadows of us men? 2. At morn and even shades are longest, At noon they are, or short or none: So men at weakest, they are strongest, But grant us perfect, th'are not known. Say are not women truly then Styl'd the shadows of us men.
Women are not mens sha∣dows. E. Contra. 1. THe Sun absented, shadows then Cease to put on the forms of men: But wives their husbands absent, may Bear best their forms (they being away) Say, are not women falsly then Stil'd but the shadows of us men. 2. Shadows at morn and even are strong, At noon they are, or weak or none: Women at Noon are ever long, At night so weak they fall along. Say, are not women falsly then Stil'd but the shadows of us men? 3. As bodies are contracted, shadows so Contract themselvs to forms as bodies do:
Let men be bounded nere so close, I wist, Women wil rove and ramble where they Say, are not women falsly then Stil'd but the shadows of us men? An Epigram. To himself of his Mistris. WHat though thou merit not? why know there lies Vail'd in the courteous candor of her eyes, A saving mercy, that can lend a wing For dul despair to mount on, tis a thing Beyond the common reach, to know how sweet He lives, that doth in death a pardon meet. But thou art poor; true, but her better part Nere lookt upon the habit, but the heart. Shee that has vertue cannot dote on those, Whose best perfection is a sute of clothes. Who court th' attracting beauties of the age With some con'd stuff brought from the Cockpit stage: Or gull their Mistris by some Poeme shown,
Which, 'cause they paid for, they dare call their own, When, if their brains were ransackt, you might know They nere commenc't beyond their Criss∣cross-rowe. Then hope (poor heart) and strongly that shee will At last imbrace thee, for she hath the skill To school thee first with frowns, that so her favor May, when she smiles, last with the greater savour. Another Epigram. To his Superlative Mistris. COmpare the Bramble to the stately Pine; The fruitles Thistle to the vertuous Vine; Compare the Charcole to the snow-white Down, The wreath of Rushes to th' Imperial crown. Compare the Raven to the turtle Dove, The Moors of India to the queen of Love.
Compare the Candle to the splendent Moo▪ The fogs of night, to Phoebus eye at noon. Compare the Kite to sweet-breath'd Philomel, The Lerman Lake to th' Helliconian Well, If these admit comparison, then she That can admit of no equalitie, May find a parallel; but let some men Rack their dul brains to praise their Mistris [when The utmost of their language they have spen Let them sit down and sigh, and be content Their Idols eyes to Sunbeams to compare, Or by the rose her blased lips declare. My Mistris must beyond their Saints, survive▪ In that unequald height, Superlative. Of one Mary Frail, who lay with Mr. Reason. MAry was long desirous for to marry, And vow'd that past fifteen she would not tarry; I am sure this vow of modesty did saile;
To quaver on her lips even in her song. Or if one touch the Lute with art & cunning, Who would not love those hands for their swift running? And her I like that with a majesty Folds up her arms, and makes low courtesie; To leave my self, that am in love with all, Som one of these might make the chasest fall: If she be tall, she's like an Amazon, And therefore fills the bed she lies upon. If short she lies the rounder, to say troth Both short & long please me, for I love both. I think what one undeckt would be, being drest, Is she attired, then shew her graces best. A white wench thralls me, so doth golden yellow, And nut-brown girls in doing have no fellow. If her white neck be shadowed with black hair, Why so was Leda's, yet was Leda fair: Amber trest is she, then on the morn think I My Love alludes to every History: A yong wench pleaseth, & an old is ood, This for her looks that for her wonn-hood. Nay what is she that any man loves, But my ambitious ranging mind approves.
The new Petition. APollo once disdained not to keep, So he might keep, his love Admet sheep: The distaff Hercules did excercise, T' extract a smile from his deare Ladies eye Olympick Ioan disdained not to take A bulls effigies for Eutopus sake: Achilles fitter far to deale with steel, Did labour for his Mistress at the reel. Love spar'd ander his pledg'd faith to save Died, hugging in his armes the murdring wave. Whil'st a new death his Heroe doth devise, And drownd her selfe ith Ocean of her eyes By Pyramus, the world did understand That love and life, lay linked hand in hand. When one was lost in This be, th other flew, Through the peire't portals of his wound, yet new. Which when his This be saw, tis hard to say, VVhose spirit posted fastest on the way. Thus some dejection, others did invade Great oposition, and have willingly laid, Their lives at needless hazzard, some have died,
nd so have to the utmost satisfied hat tyrant love could force, & beyond this, he great and true non ultra fixed is. et happy this, since whatsoe're they tried, as on their Mistress part regratified. h who would, when he saw an equal flame f love in her he lov'd, owe so much shame s to esteem his life, if her least grief, id but invite his blood for her reliefe ut this forenamed courteous Ghost can bear e witness, I have shed full many a teare, poke the best language, Rhetorick affords. mb'd out my heart even to the life in words, Would, what they did, did like occasion proffer, And till that, do I can no more, but offer. And yet for all my sufferings, she that is, f I dare reach to call her so, my bliss, ights all my sorrows; Oh weat eye could now Forbear to yeeld a tear, when seeing how love, I am neglected weep with me All you that read my wrongs, so if you be Compationate, perhaps your tears may move The frozen Mercy of my ice-white love.
Which if they do, if you at any time Shall want a drop, I'le lend you some mine: Methinks I see you weep dear Mistress, th Behold a Noble sea of pittying men Doth waft me to your favour, it you daig Yes now at last to ease me of my paine, This glory shall unto your mercy rise, That you haue wip't all tears from lovers ey The Widdow Bride. To the accomplish'd Lady of his thoughts. Feeding I famish, fired by the eye, Which makes me dying live, and living die. FAire shall I name thee, to express thy worth! Nay, thou hast something else to set the forth,
Then thy externall beautie, which no time Shall ere deface, and that is truly thine. Though outward white, gra'd with an in∣ward faire, Vnite in one, exceedeth all compare. For what may glorious Saints, whose divine feature Immortalis'd above an human Creature, Appropriate unto themselves save this, Though they're invested with the roabe of bliss! Pure is their Store, the State of innocence, Full be their Lamps of divine influence, Complete's their Amour, and their order too, Thus they attend the Lambe where ere he go. And thou terrestriall Angel, who canst give, (Though young) example to the old to live, Divines what thou shalt be: for I do see, All sacred Craces treasured in thee; As in some curious artful Cabbinet, Where Patience shines as a rich ewellet Set in a precious , which may be best▪ Allusion have to thy unspoted brest, Where vettues have their Mansion: should  speak More freely of thy Merits? I wil seek
No modern Model to conform the State Of my affections, or will imitate, Any with affectation, but that grace which thou reserves in action, speech & pae. Honor of ages, what a Sympathie. Of soul inthroning vertues works in thee, To make thee more affected! Where desire Of moderation tempers the heat of ire; Content all self-repining, and delight To see another prosper, that base spite Which worldly Moles express from day to day In seeing others flourish more then they. No, thou art earthly Sainted, & canst taste What fruit's in Mundane pleasure being past, When this same Circle of our humane bless Quite ran about, shal end with wretchednes; And is not this above th' conceit of man, That thou the weaker Sex shold seem to span This abstract of thy life, with such respect Unto thy soul form'd by that Architect, Whose glory is thy aim? Nay, that thy prime Scarcely arriv'd at the freshness of her time, Should so disvalue earth, as to bestow Thy heart on heaven thy frayler part below. Where life like to a shade, whose vading glory Sun's up our discontents as in a Story, Gets disesteem with thee, fixing thine eye
Upon a more transcendant Emperie. But that which shal extend thy days more long Then time can limit, is thy suffring wrong, Smiling at injuries, as if thy brest Were of that temper, griefs could not molest, Nor soil her glorious Mansion, but appears More eminent by th' injuries she bears. I've heard indeed, som womans nature's such As they can hardly ever bear too much; The sense whereof, hows'ere our Criticks take it, May be confirm'd in thee; for thou dost make it The Trophy of thy triumph, and the crown Of all thy conquest, to be onely known Thy self in thy affliction, where relief In Souls sole solace gives receit to grief. For Palms prest down do ever rise the more, And Spices bruis'd smel sweeter then before: So as this sentence verifide may bee, Thou tryes afflion, nt affliction thee. Mirror of women, what a triumphs this, When there is nought, how great soere it is, That can depress thy mind below the Sphere Where it is fixed! For tis this I swear, And only this which moves me to affect Thy self far more then any light respect, Drawn from the tincture of a moving faire,
Which to mindes Beautie's short above compare. For I have known the smoothest sleekest skin Solid with the blemish of so foul a sin, As Beautie lost her lustre by that stain, Which once made black could nere be white again, But thou in both complete, art such an one. As without assentation there is none May glory more of what she doth possess, Though on my Knowledg none doth glory less. And happy he if he had known his hap, Who might repose in such a Ladies lap. Secure from cenusre; but how weak is sence When Reason's darkned through concupis∣cence. Alas of error, that our humane eye, Expos'd to lust and boundless libertie, Should derogate from man; where if we knew How woman's to expect from man her dew, As man from woman; we shold straight infer `To think of a strange beauty is to err. He who did till those flowrie fields, which lay Like Adons grove neer to the milkie way, If he had known what happiness it is In mutual love t`injoy a mutual bliss, Where tvvo dividuate souls do selfly move
By one united Sympathie in love; He vvould have thus concluded sure I am, Who dotes on more then`s own is less then man. But novv to thee my lines their love extend, Making thy self their Centre vvhere they end. `Thou mildest mould of matron modesty, `Live as thou liv'st, and gain eternity; Patience shall give thee convoy, same, re∣novvn, Both vvhich contend to reach thee triumphs crovvn.
The true, and happy state of Love. VVHat I have, that I crave, Frank I lost, yet Frank I have; Happy am I in possessing Of her that gives love a blessing: Blessed love have earthly rank, Stated in my style of Frank, Happy style that thinks no shame In respect of nature, name, Form, affection, and in all To be Frank, as we her call. Yet so Frank, that though she be Free, it's in such modestie, As no Creatures are, have bin, Can, or may tax her of sin. Pure in love, sincere in heart, Fair by Nature, not by Art. Crimson blushes which display, Reddest even makes clearest day; Clearest, where like Ida's snow Lillies on her cheeks do grow; Yet so mixt with true delight,
As the red contends with white; Yet or'comm'd with Modesty, Red or white gets victory. Thus two Franks in beauty one, Yeelds enough to dte upon; qal both in favou, feature, honour, order, name and natu; Both inclining o one stature, qua' by no earhly creature. erif I should paint thm out, From the head unto the , I shuld make you ther confess They were earthly Goddesses: And that Nature made these two, As those Mirrors which might show Her perfection and her store, Challenging, who could give morel Thu▪ both equal in one letter, One to either, neither better; Twin-like seem as Time had ixt them, As two sphres not one betwixt them; Yet if needs one t' best do crave, In my thoughts it's she I have: She, whose vertues do excel As they seem imparallel; Modest, yet not to precise, Wise, yet not cnoceiued wise; Still in actior, yet her will
Give being to my vows; I will much ingage my heart, if when I say she's mine, youl say Amen. Such kindness to our true love showne Shall bind us doubly then your own. A trick for your Learning. TWo Schollars in Thames-street were drinking hard, And late; to whom a Constable repair'd, And taxt them for't: Invited yet to drink, He turn'd up glasses, till both nod and win At greatest faults he would; when sleep at last Did bridle up his bruitish senses fast. Mean while the waggish Mercuries conspire T'abuse him, and two water-men they hire To take him naping, & transport him thence Th`way of all fish; who nere recover'd sense, Nor from his dead sleep found himself alive, Till both his Charons at Graves-end arrive. To all harsh Magistrates a warning faire, That they of too much wine and wit beware.
The Vsurer. HE puts forth Money, as the Hangman sowes, His fatal Hemp-seed, that with curses growes. So growes his damn'd wealth in the De∣vils name, That doth in hel the Harvest home proclaim; For which deep reason my poor Muse pre∣ferrs This sute, that Poets nere prove Vsurers. To a Detractor. THou still art darting (like a Porcupine) Thy quils against me, saulting every line That my hand draws, and with the frost∣like power Of thy benummed verse, would nip the slower
A Complaint of his seperati∣on from his Mistris, cau∣sed by his frinds injun∣ction: DEar heart, remember that sad hour, When vve vvere forc`t to part Hovv on thy cheeks I vvept a shovvr, With sad and heavy heart; About thy wast my arms did twist; Oh! then I sight, and then I kist. Ten thousand fears and joys in one, Did such distraction frame, As if the liveless vvorld vvould run To Chaos back again. Whilst my poor heart amidst these fears, Lay bathed in my milk-warm tears. Ah then I thought, and thinking vvept, Hovv friends and fate did lower, On thee Leander; hovv they kept
Thee from thy Heroes Tower; VVhile thunder groand, & heaven did vveep To rock thy sence in silent Sleep. But Fate must unresisted stand; Oh vvho can it oppose? Neessity`s a Tyrant; and No mean in mischief knovvs; Els might my fairer Love and I Unseverd live till one did dy. Just so the hungry inant from His mothers dug is ane, When his weak arms yet spread along: More dulcid mulk to gain; And nothing brings the babe to rest, Until he sleep upon her breast. Thus being banisht from my love, And oret to leave her sight, No thoughts but those of her can move In me the least delight; But like true steel my heart doth pant, To touch the longd or Adamant. Oh let no storm of discontent Be clouded in your brows, Dear friends that have my being lent,
Is so pure it ne're acts ill; Virgin-modest, yet delights To discourse of Hymens rights; Yet she blushes when she heares, Ought that's light sound in her eares; And with skarlet-die displaies What to women yeelds most praises: For praise-worthy' tis in women, To blush at that Act is common; Since in speech those actions show Ill, which modest are to do; For a Maid should be afraid, Hearing th' loss of Maiden-head. With this Poem, and a Pearl Sent to Frank my faithful Girle; I conclude with friendly vow, To my Frank her neighbours too.
An Elegiack Sonnet. If I onely had been he, hat had stood so far aloofe, Or had been such Armour proof, Dide I had not as you see, Shot by womans Iealousie. Wretched Woman why should Thou Dote so much on Idol beauty, Deeming only fit to sue thee When it is not one nor tw, Nor a thousand more will do? Yet love loves not these exchanges, Love is constant, firme and pure, Drawn by no eye-charming lure; It is last that onely ranges, Where new love old love stranges. What is life then but a farm, And the best a farmer is Of this life he counts a bliss, Whree true love sustaines no harme, Nere engag' to Fancies charme!
Of thy sweet Poësie. I wish thee show More favour to thy self, than thus to blow Sparks in thine eyes. Art thou not (slave) afeard To pluck a couchant Lyon by the beard, That rouzd will rend thee? thou but shootst in vain Thy bolts of folly, that rebound again From my unpierced Muse, whose lofty rim Shall (Dial-like) stand in the face of time, And look it down, when thou and thine shall lie Damn'd up with dust in blind obscuritie. To the Slanderer. COuld I but work a Transformation strange, On thee, whose malice pricks & rankles so I would thy Carrion to a Thistle change, Which Asses baite upon, & Rusticks mow.
That he is love sick and can∣not write Verses. Ettie, it doth not me delight Verses as before to write, Quite thorow thrust With deeply wounding lust. ith lust, the which doth me desire ove all men else to set on fire! Or for young boyes, Or for some female toyes. This the third winter off as tore The forests dres, since I forbore To pine away For my Inachia. Though town O what a sport was I? (For I am sham'd at such foolery) And I repent My feasting-merrimens;
In which my grief and silent tongue, And sighs from my hearts botom sprung! Argued me Inamorate to be. And mourning to thee, I did cry, A poor mans canded ingenie VVas all but vain To stand against her gai; VVhen as, the uncivil power Of raging wine, had from its bower My secret thought With stronger liquer wrough But in my breast if free rage boile, That to the winds it may assoil My sighs ingrate Which my sore wound can't b When my modestness cast by Shall give over presently To strive so long VVith rivals over strong. When (vext) I to you had enlarg'd These things, to hie me home being charg'd Along I went
VVith fearfull impotent, To those posts (ah) unkind to me, And dores (ah) full of cruelty, Where mightily My Ioyns and sides bruisd Lyciseus love me now doth press▪ Boasting that he in tenderness Dos far surpass Any young married lass. VVhence nor the free-spent consultations, Nor the rigid increpations Of my friends ere Me off again shall tear: But some other flame, in sooth, Of some fair maid or some plucy youth, Knitting up fair His long grown head of haire:
The bag of the Bee. ABout the sweet bag of a Bee, Tvvo Cupids fell at odds, And vvhose the pretty prize should be, They vowed to ask the gods: Which Venus hearing, thither came, And for their boldness stript them, And taking from them each his flame, With rods of Mirtle whipt them; Which done, to still their wanton cries, When quiet grown she'd seen them, She kist, and wipe't their dove-like eyes, And gave the bag between them. To his Mistris. CHuse me your Valentine, Next let us marry: Love to the death will pine, If we long tarry:
You have broke promise twice, Dear to undo me; If you prove faithless thrice, None then will wooe you. His Protestation to his Mistris. NOon, day, and midnight shal at once be seen, Trees at one time shall be both red and green. Summer and winter shall at one time show Ripe ears of corn, and up to th' ears in snow: Seas shall be sandless, Fields be voyd of grass, Shapeless the world, as when all Chaos was; Before my dear sweet Love, I will bee False to my Vow, or fall away from thee.
Vpon Love. LOve scorcht my finger, but did spare The burning of my heart, To signifie that love my share Should be a little part: Little I love, but if that he Would but that heat recal, That joynt to ashes should be burnt, Ere I would love at all. To his Mistris. SHew me thy feet, shew me thy legs, thy thighs, Shew me those fleshly principalities; Shew me that hil where smiling love doth si Having a living fountain under it. Shew me thy wast, then let me therewithall (By the ascension of thy Lavvn) see all.
On himself. LOve-sick I am, and must indure A desperate grief that finds no cure: h me! I try, and trying prove No herbs can cure the power of Love: Only our soveraign salve I know, And that is death, the end of woe. To the Virgins to make much of time. GAther your Rose-buds while you may, Gold time is still a flying, And that same flower that smiles to day, To morrow may be dying. The glorious lamp of heaven, tehsn The higher he's a getting, The sooner will his race be run,
And neerer to his settin That age is best which is the First, When youth and old are warmer, And being spent, the worse and worst Times still succeed the former. Then be not coy, but use your time, And while you may go marry, For having lost but once your prime, You may for ever tarry. Vpon Cupid. AS lately I a garland bound, 'Mongst Roses I there Cupid found, I took him, put him in my cup, And drunk with wine, I drunk him up. Hence then it is that my poor brest Could never since find any rest.
Vpon her Brests. DIsplay thy brests (my Dear) there let me Behold that circummortal puritie, Between whose glories there my lips Ile lay, Ravish't in that fair Via Lactica. Vpon himself. MOpe-cy'd I am, as some have said; Because Ive lived so long a maid, But grant that I should wedded be Should I a jot the better see? No, I should think that marriage might Rather then mend, put out the light.
Draw-Gloves. AT Draw-gloves weel play, And prethee lets lay A wager, and let it be this, Who first to the Sun Of twenty doth run, Shall have for his winning a kiss. To he Rose. Go happy rose and enterwoove, With other flowers bind my love, Tel her too she must not be Longer Loving, long free That so oft hath fettered me. Say if she's fretfull, and I have bands Of Pearl and Gold to bind her hands, Tell her if she strugle still
have myrtel Rods at will, or to tame, though not to kill. Take thou my blessing; thus go And tell her this, but do not so. est a handsome anger sly ik a lightning from her eye, And burn thee up as well as I. How Violets came blew. LOve on a day, wise Poets tell Some time I wrangling spent, Whether the Violets should excel, or she in sweetest scent: But Venus having lost the day, Poor girls she fell on you, And beat ye so, as some do say, Her blows did make ye blew.
Counsel not to love. HE that will not love must be My Schollar, and learn this of me: There be in love as many fears As the Summers corn hath ears. Sighs and sobs, and sorrows more Then the sand that makes the shore. Freezing cold and fiery heats, Fainting swoons and deadly sweats, Now an ague, then a fever, Both tormenting Lovers ever. Wouldst thou know besides all these. How hard a woman tis to please? How cross, how sullen, and how soon She shifts and changes like the Moon. How false, how hallow shees in heart, And how she is on her left part: How high shees priz'd, and worth but small Little thou't love, or not at all.
On the Willow-tree. THou art to all lost love the best, The only true plant found, Wherewith young men and maids distrest, And left off love are crown'd. When once the Lovers rose is dead, Or laid aside forlorn, Then willow-garlands about the head Bedeau'd with tears are worn. When with neglect the Lovers bane Poor maids rewarded be For their love lost, their onely gain Is but a wreath from thee. And underneath thy cooling shade When weary of the light, The love-spent youth, and love-sick maid Come to weep out the night.
To his Mistris to command him any thing. BId me to live, and I will live, thy servant for to be; Or bid me love, and I will give A loving heart to thee. A heart as soft, a heart as kinde, A heart as sound and free As in the whole world thou cast finde, That heart Ile give to thee. Bid that heart stay, and it will stay, To honor thy decree; Or bid it languish quite away, And it shall do it for thee. Bid me to weep, and I will weep While I have eyes to see: And having none, yet I will keep A heart to weep for thee. Bid me despair, and Ile despaire
Under that Cyprus tree, Or bid me die, and I will dare Even death to die for thee. Thou art my life, my love, my heart, The very eyes of me: And hast command of every part To live and die for thee. A Hymne to Venus. GOddess I do love a girl Ruby-lipt', and tooth't like Pearl, If so be I may but prove Lucky in this maid I love, I will promise there shall be Myrtels offered up to thee.
The good night to the Bride▪ BLessings in abundance come To the Bride, and to her Groome, May the Bed this short night Know the fulness of delight: Pleasures may here attend you, And ere long a boy Love send you. Curld and comely, and so trim, Maids in time may ravish him: Thus a dew of graces fall On you both; Good-night to all. The Willow-Garland. A Willow-garland thou didst send Perfumed last day to me, Which did but only this portend, I was forsook by thee: Since it is so, Ile tell thee what, To morrow thou shalt see Me weare the Willow after that, To dye upon the tree.
To a Teltale. Thy glowing eares, to hot contention bent, Are not unlike red Herings, broyl'd in Lent. To Baull, the Cryer. In thy rude Parish (as thou dost profess) Thou'rt like the Baptist in the wilderness: Yet ere for conscience off thy head should go, Tou wouldst not cry Oyes, but roare out No. On deaf Joan, the Ale-wife. he prates to others, yet can nothing heare, Just like a sounding jugg that wants an eare.
To Zounds the Swaggerer▪ What dost thou mean to revel, roare, ar spend▪ To drink, and drabble, and swear so? wil thou rend Thy way to Hell? The Devil will spy day At a small hole, and snach his Chuck away. To the same. What Gulf's within thee, that thou swal∣low'st so? It is to drown all thirsts before thou go To that Infernall hat-house? such a ground▪ Of reasons deeper than I list to sound.
To his Mistris. WHat conscience say is it in thee When I a heart had one To take away that heart from me, And to retain thy ovvn: For shame and pity now incline To play a loving patt, Either to send me kindly thine, Or send me back my heart. Covet not both; for if thou dost Resolve to part vvith neither, Why yet to shevv that thou art just, Take me and mine together, On Love. I Held Loves head vvhile it did ake, And so it chanced to be The cruel pain did him forsake, And forthvvith came to me, Ah me, how shal my grief be still'd,
Or where else shal we find, One like to me who must be kild For being too too kinde. To his Mistris. Tis evening, my sweet, & dark, let us meet, Long time we have been a trying; And never as yet, that season could get, Wherein to have had an enjoying. For pity or shame, then let not loves flame, Be ever and ever a spending; Since now to the Port the path is but short, And yet our way has no ending. Time flies away fast, our hours do waste, The while we never remember, How soon our life here, grows old with th yeer That dies with the next December.
The Fairies. IF ye will with Mab finde grace, Set each platter in its place; Rake the fire up, and get Water in ere Sun be set: Wash your pales, and clense your Daries, uts are loathsome to the Fairies; Sweep your house, who doth not so ab will pinch her by the toe. Cherry-Pit. IUlia and I did lately sit Playing for sport at Cherry-pit, e threw, I cast, and having throwne, got the pit, and she the stone.
To Robbin Redbrest. When I'me led out for dead, let thy last kind∣ness be With leaves and moss-work for to cover me: And while the wood-nimphs my cold corps inter, Sing thou my Dirge sweet warbling Cho∣rister, For Epitaph in oliage next write this, Here, here the tomb of William Redley is. His Vision to his Mistris. I Dream'd we both were in a bed Of Roses almost smothered; But then I heard thy sweet breath say, Faults done by night will blush by day; I kist thee (panting) and I call The night to record, that was all; But ah! if empty dreams so please, Love give me more such nights as these.
Charon and Philomel, A Dialogue sung. PHIL. CHaron, O gentle Charon, let me woo thee By tears and pity now to come unto me: Ch. What voice so sweet & charming do I hear; Say hat thou art; Ph. I prethe fist draw neer: Ch. A sound I hear, but nothing yet can see; Speak where thou art: Ph O Charon pity me, I am a bird▪ and though no name I tell, My warbling note will say, I'm Philomel. Ch. What's that to me? I love not ish or fowls, Nor eats fnd bird, but onely humane souls. Ph. Alas for me: Ch. Shame on thy witching note That made me thus hoyst sal, & bring my boat; But Ile return, what mischief brought me hither? Ph. A deal of love, & much grief togther. Ch. What's thy request? Ph. Tha since she's now beneath, Who fed my life, I'le follow her in death. Ch. And is that all? I'me gone: Ph. By love I pray thee.
Ch. Talk not of love; all pray, but few souls pay me. Ph. Ile give the vows and tears. Ch. Can tears pay scores For mending sals, for patching boat and oars? Ph. I'le beg a peny, or I'le sing so long, Till thou shalt say, I've paid thee with a song. Ch. Why then begin, and all the while we make Our sloathful passage on the Stigan Lake; Thou and I'le sing, to make these dull shades merry, Who else with tears would doubtless drown my Ferry. To his Mistris. I could but see thee yesterday Sung by a fretful Bee, And I the Iave in snatcht away, And heal'd the wound in thee. A thousand thorns, and briars, and stings I have in my poor brest, Yet ne're can see that salve which brings My passions any rest,
s love shall help me, I admire How thou canst sit and smile To see me bleed, and not desire To stench the blood the while. If thou compos'd of gentle would, Art so unkind to me; What dismal stories will be told Of Trose, that cruel Bee. To his Mistris, on the Day-break. By the next kindling of the day, My Julia, thou shalt see, Ere I've Mary thou canst say, Ile come and visit thee. Yet ere thou counsellest with thy glass, Appear thou to mine eyes, As mooth an: nak' as she that was The Prince of Paradise. If blush thou must, then blush thou through A lawn that thou maiest look
As purest pearls and peebles do, When peeping through a brook. Stool-ball. At Stool-ball, Lucia, let us play For sugar, cakes, and wine; Or fo a Tansey let us pay, The loss be thine or mine. If thou, my Dear, a winner be At trundling of the Ball; The wager thou shal have, and me, And my mis-fortunes all. But if my Sweetest I shall get, Then I desire but this; That likewise I may pay the bet, And have for all a kis. The May-pole. The May-pole is up, Now give me the cup,
Ile drink to the Garlands around it: But first unto those Whose hands did compose The glory of flowers that crown'd it. A health to my Girls Whose husbands may Earls Or Lords be, granting my wishes: And when that ye wed To the Bridal bed, Then multiply all like to fishes. To his Mistris. Thou saiest, Thou lovest me▪ I say no: But would to Love I could believe 'twas so. Pardon my fear (Swee) I desire That thou b righteous found, and I the liar.
Charmes. Bring the holy Crust of bread, Lay it underneath the head; Tis a certain charm to keep Hogs away, while children sleep. Another. Let the superstitious wife Neer the childs heart lay a knife; Point b up, and hast he down, While she gossips in the Town. This `mongst other mistick Charms Keps the sleeping child from hrms. Another, to bring in the Witch. To house the hag you must do this, Commix with meal a little piss
Of him bewitched, the forthwith make A little wafer, or a Cake; And this rawly ak`d will bring The old Hag in, no surr thing. Another Charm for Stables. Hang up hooks and sheers to scare Hence the hag that rides the Mare Till they be all over wet With the mire and the sweat; This observ`d, the Mains shall be Of your horses all knot free. Upon Cupid. Love like a beggar came to me With hose and dblet torn, His shirt bedangling from his knee, With hat and shoes out-worn. He askt an almes, I gave him bread And meat too for his need.
Of which when he had fully fed He wish`t me all good speed, Away he went but as he turnd In faith I know not how, He touched me so, as that I burn, And am tormented now, Loves silent flames and fires obscure, Then crept into my heart, And though I saw no bowe, I me sure His finger was the dart. A Vow to Venus. HAppily I had sight Of my dearest Deer last night; Make her this day smile on me, And Ile Roses give to thee. Charms. THis Ile tel you by the way, Maydens when ye Leavens lay,
Cross your Dough, and your dispatch Will be better for your batch. Another. In the morning when you rise, Wash your hands and clense your eyes, Next be sure ye have a care For to throw the water far; For as far as that doth light, o far keeps the evil sp'rit. Another. If ye fear to be affrighted, When ye are by chance benighted, In your pocket for a trust Carry nothing but a crust; For that holy piece of bread, Charms the danger, and the dread.
St. Distaffs day, or the mor∣row after Twelf day. PArtly work, and partly play, Ye must on St Dist ffs-day. From the Plow soon free your teame, Then come home, and fother them: If the maids a spinning go, Burn the Flax, and fire the towe; Scorch their Plackets, but beware That ye singe no maiden-haire; Bring in pales of water then, Let the maids bewash the men; Give St Distaff all the right, Then bid Christmass-sport good-night; And next morrow every one To his own Vocation.
On Poets. These Darlings of free Nature want no vi∣gour Of brain, and therefore to grow richer liker Than weaker heads, and might be blest with Angels, (For which the souldier fights, and Lawyer wrangles) Did not their lofty ancies 'bove the welkin Still sore, whilst others are▪ or Treasures dil∣ving But fle, my verse is foundr'd, all this time. I dreamd on riches, I but rav'd in ime. Of Warr. War's like a curst wife, whence a man may cull Some fruits of goodness, (though of mischief ull:)
For those land-surfefs wanton peace both breed, Warr by incision cures, when Kingdoms bleed. On Josephs Cloke. The Snake his slough, the Dove her plumes cast, (Whose innocence & purdence hold we fast As Ioseph left his garment, yet retain'd A jewel, which once lost is ne're regain'd. Thou stone-cold chastity far off doth flye, And Lust assumes the Cloke of modesty.
DREAMS. The first Dream. WEnt I this Morn in cruel sport To fright the poor Hare from her fort? Vp-rouze her from the solemn Cel With horrors of a Fun'ral-Knel? Did Tyrant-I seek others prize? My self now made the Sacrifice? Fates, you are equal, and thou ove, Like mercy I [just Talio] prove As meant to others; Torture, Pain, Dire scourge! tis my reward again. 'Twas she the Huntresse was, by th'way, That ayr'd her so, like beauteous May, (Her Mistris rather) round bestowing Such Beauties sweets; dull winter shewing
Fresh-cheek'd turnd Sommer. O, what raie Then strook our eyes? what wonders blaze Sweetst, Lightnings? what Soule rapes, divin Confusions? that th'ore flowing shine Spak't Heavenly Vision: if Earths race, Then Womn, lovelyst woman 'twas; Or rare I know not-What: she's ll Men xcellenc perfection call Hey shot day-light Beam-supplyes, While h Sun cloud muffled seemd, close lyes Asham d on's gaudier blazing so, Those Cop-rayes to hers in shew; Or't may be Love- feard, least he By th'jealous Man forsaken be; Or, indeed struck, with amorous head Jogd on, and so went sick to Bed: The World not needing beg th'old Sun Since they in her have two for one. No Christal frost-work deckt the ground T'intice her foot, whose Beamings round That Mor disperst, perhaps ore-awd The glaz'd Earth, Congelations thawd: Her Pace Court-measure, graceful'st showd While th spic't ayr through her breath or good, Purgd wholsom seemd: as Gobls light, Fg shun her Puerity, take flight. Ten thausand Cpids came along
Playing in her Eyes, her cheeks, or hung O'th Brest, Lips, Hayr; incamp'd appear In Bright and lovely'st Musters there; As with their quiverd Hoast would pierce All Hearts, and conquer th'Vniverse: A moving world of wonder shewing; A Heaven of flesh all oyes bestowing. Twas fairely-sweetly cruel she That chas'd and seiz'd my liberty: That let a Mnt of lightnings ly Heap of Granadoes from her Eye, Dart-magazine that shot through mine; I saw their flaming point to shine All th'way they came, when through tht Eye Th' Heart bled in kindest simpathy: I Sigh, Fca, Muse; what wonders press Through these glaz'd Organs, Souls possess! On Phillis Close Nun-like Retirement. SAy beauteous Fillis why's so long Adjournd our Day-break till all's slung With Greenland-curse? O why (ole-fashion)
Pore we on Clods, this dull Creation Thou our Gem hid? with whom's inshrind, The longings, blisses of Mankind: Is't for our sins, that righteous Heaven Hath us this Plague 'mongst others Given. This Judgment sent (ala) that we Mus lose thy Presence, and want Thee? Or did we too prophanely slight That blssing, meanly rate thy Sight Enjoyd? when thou (more justly-nice) By nant dost please t' inhanceyth Price: An angry absence must alone Make thee more reverenc't, and moreknown. Or last; was't Charity divine T' our errors, fraylties, did consine Thee to thy Chamber, Prayers t' implore And attone for us? O restore That Face back, fayr Example t' us; We shall grow good, less criminous. Rare euties were not made at all For cloystring, and live-burial, Though Bats, Owls be: those glorious Seve The unwasted Lamps of Earth and Heaven. (Sky-brooches) lo, they were not thrust To corners, log d in Rubbish, dust, But shine to th'world, and traverse by Sphears blazing Pgeants: whilst hid lye (Earth-chested) Gold, Gems, wher's thei glory:
Sight's all; that magnifies thy story. Sometime tis wholsom, purest Maid▪ To ayr thee through the field and shade; When from some Hill fayr-map'd does ly Small Europe, travaild by thine Eye: And th'amazd People gazing round, As though another Morn were found. For as through sight thou Physick'st us: And our dross-spirits refinest thus To suttle Fire this Earth Ayr grown, Pure uintessentiall: whilst (anon) The Bloods too revel't in each Veine So thou dost Physick thy Selfe again. Mays Sovereign, delicious ayr, Twil make that Cheek more snowy-fayr (If possible,) those Brests of spice Thus fan'd more, Beds of Paradice: Twill make that Angell-shape to strike Our eyes with motion Angel-like, Quick, sprightly; improve that daynti'st Frame So lively, as if all Soul became: Then shew thee oft deare Cordial; thus Thou physickst both thy self and us.
Phillis Nun-like Coyness. PHILLIS, Fayrest, why so coy So daynty-nice? when but t'enjoy One favour such a task doth prove, Herculean Labou: tell me Love; What though that dainter Hand touch mine, (Of spoless Allablaster-shine) Would't shew less fayr, and sulli'd be? Or lose the fashion, if by me But kindly prest? though never I Their sacred white do come so nigh But with washt hands, nor touch their Down But reverentiall fear does crown The Devout Palm: your Glove all day May freelier touch; your Seizers may, Silk, needle, lawn, nay, meaner thred: Then is my Hand more vile indeed Then these? or say, you purify Those things by Touch, like Chimistry May these course hands sublime, refine. Or say those dayntier Lips touch mine, Are they impoverisht in their store? Or wast their Delicates the more
By often giving [since they are A lastig sweetness] or less fair, Oughtose their colour Ruby excelling? The more they'r kiss`d, more red and swelling. The wanton ayre with  play May touch them, and the tawny Ray Of Phoebus Toys, which often pleas; Then are my  more base then these? The Fly may buzzing kiss, nd touch [Unblam`d] those Cherries; min`s ut such. `, can you chde and frown when I [Nye starv`d] do beg the chariy Th` Als of o kiss? twas never yet Held sin for Starvlings to crave meat; That`s free: would you not life bestow Where your self nre the poorer grow? Ny sweetest, wr`t love-elish`d, this, You would seem richer by a kiss: Love`s first-course, second Minage tis.
The second Dream. Twas Fresh-cheek'd May with all her pride And Progress bravery beautii d; , persumes, and ems of price, To take that sxe more daynty, nice, When -World (late fullen) now all, stampd one whose brow when froz'd Men (Not snayls alone) seem d Live agen: Forth went he Nimph, whose eyes fayr ray Had  turnd to May, And spru't the poor-clad earth howere With Flowrs, though Flora banished the yeare: Forth Phillis tript; whilst I alone Ingross'd the blessing, th'honour won T' attend her Walks chief Favourit, Sole Guardian to my Souls delight: Cal d by her as if Heaven had cal'd To Ioyes, wherein blest Saints instal'd, (Who would not glory?) Champion thence To weak, yet purest Innocence: For well my PHILLIS knew that I
Would not hurt, but protecting dye; And (though, Temptation all, her shape) Would punish, not commit a Rape. Thus, though no morning-star am borne, Yet was I Vsher to the Morn; Or rather Sun-companion shew, Whose hand inrich'd mine with its snow. Naught envying now Great Turk; Mogor, Tartarian Chinabugbear or Black Southern Prince; thus septer'd I Durst boast a fayrer Monarchy. Each Object as we tract below, With rival-courtship seemed to wo My Heavenly Fair; and bred in me A kind of sportive jealousie: Birds chant love-songs, Gales whisper soft Kind tales, steal kisses, whilst (methought) Herbs, Flowers hung their love-sick heads, Or bowd with reverence from their beds: Hills animated seemd rejoyce; And (wanton) cho back her Voice: O pregnant Soul say, what does prove So all breeding as that Womb of Love? Here, whilst I sacrificd chast Vows, Sigh-, (made unspotted those Blest Hands the Alters) either care Thus PHLIIS breathd; O, breath'd sounds were
Seraphic Musick! (words' be gone That poor Term) Thus she seemd to own— Hold Fondling, don't expose abroad Such sweetness to h' Ayrs common Road; Bewise: th' Harmonious touch oth' Sphears Not Musick is the Vulgar ears: Repeat the Blisses to thine own; Tell Venus, or Loves-self alone: And feed you Lickerish eares, (reviv'd Your dear Joyes,) Fancy makes new-liv'd: Whilst Cupid scores up all, each word (Th'Hour, Minute) in's chast Loves Record. PHILLIS her Lute. SIght, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling, all be gone; And leave with me th'officious Eare alone: Go Slumber, (or th`whole Covent) loytrers play; Thou only attend (Souls Favourite) this way: Bless, bless thy self and me, till seem transla∣ed To new divine Joyes, by that Hand-Created.
List, list with reverence; devoutly O Hearken; th `Orbs Minstrelsy`s sham`d here below: While PHILLS gives Life to her sencless Lute, And warbling language to what late was mute. Heark, what delicious strains and Heavenly∣rare Do as twer sweeten, and inrich the Ayr! Phebean Has Great Master finds his skill Scornd by th `Olimpicks, and but slighted still When thou once playest; all listening unto thee; T`whom mean hands like to Winds rude blustrings be, Or th'note of bubling Brooks: All Musick is Untun'd harsh Discord, and but noyse to This. Away all dumpish cares, all pulling sorrow, [You Cloud-drove] fly my vvorld, pack til the morrovv; Let me forget I`m Earth, or burdened am VVith dross of flesh, but t`Elemental flame Seem rarifi`d turn`d Spirits (air does shevv Poor, languid) dance my blood; your veins oreflovv
In gad tides; vvhilst those highst Soul-facul∣ties Frame all a Masque: that Lute Soul-revels please. O, there`s a svveetly, svveetly-solemn strain Has laid all in a slumbering trance again. And charmdall to amazement; view but round How strange a Metamorphosis theres found; Men stand by th`Walls, and furnish out the Room Like Arras-pictures, or as to some Tomb Belong`d for Monuments; whilst only flyes A glimpse of Life or Twilight from their Eyes: All`s turnd a Sepulcher, so whist and dead A silence raigns; the sweet death welcomed: O, let me thus expire and melt away To dissolution, Nature that Debt pay of Vapour-breath, that else a boyling Fea∣ver, Stone, Poyson, sturdy Cout, or stab might sever: Sweet killing PHILLIS, thus the soul to stray To Heaven `twete t` have Heaven by the way: Such death were but to live; the Gasps to this
Ore-ravishing Delights, too powerful bliss: And then I dye a Martyr by thy ha, Though not in wrath, but [spight of coun∣termand] As fleeting souls last Farwell must kiss That beauteous Hand, first Fool! Alls spoild by this.
PHILLIS Hand and Glove. FAir Phillis, my ambitious Muse Through its aspiring zeal w'd hose Rather to charm thy hand then Glov, Court that Diviner form, my Lov; T'whom Snow with th'Alablaster mine Great Style of Whiteness only assign: Where azure streams in purling measure Make Cupids Isles and Place of pleasure. But this eclipses vails their light, And pleads Commission for't; worse spight; Whilst [cas'd up] beautcous they appear Like sacred Twin-like Relicks there: Worth 'bove all Romes; like cloysterd Nun, Or silver Orb involved Moons: Not nak'd to each unworthy eye Or the Suns bolder kisses lye, [Sight fit'st for King] but then devest, Break forth like Morns their dusky East, When silk and gold as touch more fine; Some Needle-Miracle design;
VVhere laid to th' eye small new Creation, Birds, Beasts so near inanimation; So true that Natures self does start; Halfe mothering that meer Child of Art: Mock'd by this Landskip, ye mistakes For her own work th' Hills, Plants, and Lakes. Sweet'st Recluse-payr! you meanlyer-chòice Beauties triumph it now, rejoyce, Let coorser Hands now boldly shew, Seek t'enamour with worse Snow. Your Gloves kind pardon, if I seem Transported here with whats their Gem, Chief Riches, Glory; wherefore spight Should not ore-long debar my sight: Since I love these too, even in this Fine, Pittyest, winning beauty is; Both as it self, and as 'is thine: So dainty-shap'd, Symmetrick, fine, Pure-white withal, that i might stand A rude-drawn Picture to that hand: VVherein (methinks) breath highest sweets VVhose sublimation Iuno fits: This Pattern seems for the best of gloves (As that for hands) like th' Queen of Leves. O Cupid wouldst ordain that I Under that form might hug so nigh That loved Hand; [miraculous feat!] But ah, I fear my Youthful Heat,
Sighs soft-breath'd whispers, joyful Dance Oth' panting-Heart, then colder Trance With fervent raven us kisses, soon Would blab the Cozenage; all undone: W en I'm cashir'd eternally: Whereas that Favourit-Glove laid by Recloaths that Beauty; exalted is To its late Paradisiah Bliss.
His third Dream of FIL∣LIS Evening Walk and Voice. FIllis and I (O, fondly'st-kind, Indulgent Stars! thus still you bind;) Fillis and I in Evening fair Stole forth to take the Garden-air; That sweet'st and mildest age of Day, When Sun does sprinkle a kinder Ray; Nor begets head-ach, whilst Goodnight Sends from Far-West with drowsie light The Morn, That, plac'd like pauses sweet Tween th'Aguish fits of Cold and Heat. Those harmless Gales were only straying Which dance the leaves with nicer playing, Nor whisper, whilst with kind of bliss Mays Flowry beauteous strangers kiss In sign of welcom: toyling oft With Fillis Curles; when us'd (methought) Reverence too, least through its sin One curle disturb'd, or spoyld had been. Th'Ayrs Concave still'd to quiet rest
Like Fillis gentle Maiden-brest. Who, mask'd and vaild, (that else had soon) Traversd a gloomy Thick design'd With Love-maze Laborynth, where inshrin'd Th'Worlds beauty appeard: twas ambush∣plot To bear the Nightingales small throat, Highst, strong'd to boot; (that, prais to be The Shades prime Songster, harmony) With rest oth Noise, who begun, As if toth' then departing Sun Would chirp a merry shril Goodnight, And so long sing as he gave Light: Which heard (the fine mirth jollity) To smiling, pleasure, by and by Fillis puts in toth'warbling quire: Fair Goddess lo, which seemd t'inspire Those little creatures with their skill; Who now chant Anthems t'her praise still: The ruder Place seem'd Chaos-wise Turnd to a new drest Paradice, Earth-Heaven, so well that face and tongue Might to sweet Cherubins belong. Gods (wrapt, with joy oth' creation) T'affairs divine held strait Vacation, Breaking Heavens Parliament asunder To see, to hear this Mortal wonder, (The air trac'd in measures) while cros-armd
Some sate, inamourd shewing, Love-charmd; Consulting all her soon translation From this base earth to th'starry station As their Quires Mistris, while She-powrs Or praisd, or envi'd from their Towrs, Wood-satyres skipping wildly round: This masque at least my Fancy found. Lo th'All of Rapture, sweets how high! Best Joyes the ears capacity Could reach to, onely those above, The dear Soul-melting Sounds of Love. Her Lute was rare though dead the sound, This living therefore rarer erownd: That, was but hollow Timbers noise, This, sweet, warm, lovely Womans voice: Religion swayd, else I had nigh Been guilty of Voice-Idolatry.
FILLIS and the Nightingale. RAre charming Voice! but [O] how rare Breath'd by that She so only fair! Whose face and bodies beauties be Compos'd with so rare Symmetry (Heavens choice design) so sweetly accorded, One Heavenly Consort all afforded, And were the Harmony o'th Eye, Seem'd Natures silent Melody: Nere man so doubly-blest; th' eye, ear! Record it Love, twas only here. Each trembling Noat those Corals wrought (VVhen born) seem'd swaddled, wrapt me∣thought, And (as soon dying) Embalm'd within So sweet breath, as perfum'd't had been; Came flying in a precious air Of Odors, 'bove Arabian far: The same sweet noats you would have deemd The several souls of Musick seemd; VVhilst the whole Song rare sweetst com∣pound,
VVherein th'Ear's Sugar, Sytrop found. O could I've caught and kept alive Those precious sounds beyond reprive Those Spirits of Sweetness as they flye, So t'have had constant Melody; Nay Phillis self still by me in those: Her Breath, preserv'd and relick'd close Had servd for soveraign protection Gaínst poysnous Plagues, and all infection. If that famd Harp, could Rivers cause To stand at wanton gaze and pause; Beasts. stubborn Rocks, and burly Trees, Made dance in Antique Revels thess; Her voice must greater Magick prove And make them court her fall in Love. VVhile Fillis breath'd and closd her song, Behold a pritty vvonder sprung; Th' ambitious Nightingale replyd, Through pertest emulations pride; [Chief Chorister I 'th feathered Court To th`Royal Eagle fam`d] in sport VVould sing her part, and nimbly runs Her fine-poiz'd quaint Divisions: Novv Fillis, then the Nightingale, Novv she then she, vvhich should prevail: The Chirper falls to earnest novv, No more must jesting strains allovv: Tis sober Duel, no idle play,
Sharp brest-conention for the day: Till the poor Bird presumes still higher▪ As life vvould forfeit and expire. VVhich pittying, I vvas fain to intreat Her softer heart vvould make retreat, And end the dangerous strife so nigh By yeelding a false Victory: This quarrel must not the loss prove Of such a voice to th' Spring and Grove: Her Mercy rather should reprive [Double honors Trophie] keep alive. VVhen loth to stifle yet my blisses, I silenc'd those svveet lips vvith Kisses: Though but th' ears airy joyes transfer' To th' solid touch; so, sav'd the Bird.
His fourth Dream of Cres∣sas Funeral, the Love of Difloris. IS any Pastors care so deaf to Fame, That has not heard of fairest Cressas name? [So us'd to bleatings] whom that Funeral∣knel. Which groand this Nimph to earth, did hearts congeal. Hath not arriv'd to? happy sure's that He In this, since knows not th' common Misery; Distresd Arcadias loss [with whom does share Nature, Grand Mourner] her beloved fair Cloyster'd in dust: nor [without company] Dy'd she alone, a hundred seemd to dye In Sorrow with her: The Suns self was gone Fast from her Funerals, and Night came on To bring her Sables. O what new-rais'd Train Of Goblns strook my sight? which rov'd the plain
With such dire ceremony, ruful guize, As each did his own Funeral solemnize. Lo, Deaths March twas; First went young swains by pair Each crownd with mournful Cipress, Usherer To th solemn Herse: Those four next to' that le Bare Shieldes, where pictur'd on a cole-black be A pale dead Virgin lay, prepar'd as twere To Bridals and which beauteous did appear Even in death; by deaths black arms imbract▪ And over, in white Characters was plac't, This▪ this my Lover, this my Bridal: So All pass'd along. But following th' Hers did go A single Swain; how dismal-lookt slow pac't▪ Trust bulk of wretchedness, ore whose face cast A meer Life-damp; seem'd Ghost to th' Corps before; Sighs storm'd about him, whilst he drench'd their shore His torrent eys; and thus would needs excel, Surpass in grief: About his Hat mix'd wel Forsaken Willow, Cipress; where above This written, Deaths my Rival. Next does move
he Virgin-train in white, which Censers bear ark-vail'd like Dooms-day Planets▪ Torch∣light there orc't frightful Noon. And thus they softly trace ire measure! how unwilling!) to th sad place here they must leave their slumbring Nimph behind ' enrich the Covetous Earth; which (half struck blind) he Youth beheld, never spake Sorrow more Then now in silence: different Passions store; ere sighs, there tears, pale looks there, yet all one Consort in Grief: This, general alone, All look'd their utmost, til now lost the sight, With whom their eyes seemd as 'twere bu∣ry'd quite; And (blind to upper things in earth beneath Are following her, as if in spite of death Would stil enjoy: with many a pitying muse, The rude ore churlish mold should so abuse That daintiest Body, which (though one more nice) Las, now complain'd not; but death-tranced lyes.
What Maiden adiews; what tears! Swain kiss'd the Place; All saying, Richer-gem'd Earth never was. Epitaph. HEre Chastity it self doth lye, And Beautie's self; whom never eye Nor tongue could tempt as yet love; Till Death his violent dart did prove; And (powerful'st) wou unto his Bed: Though She was even then Ravished.
PHILLIS Complaint. WHy was I born, Or not born blind? Though thence the scorn Of whol mankind, Their Pity, or Wonder; That so I'd Womans Shape nere known; seing had I mist but one, But Thine alone; We only kept asunder: then kinde Heavens you had blest A Soul of Anguish, That's now condemn'd to sad unrest And endlesly must languish. Yet check my Heart, no more These Plaints give re: Since thou hadst rather die, through her rejection Then not have seen so rare perfection▪
On his retired Lady. I. VVHen you were born, sure nature mea some other thing: Whose  (by your discontent) Youl'd peevishly to ruine bring. The Sun doth shine, the stars hold forth, And so should you expose your worth▪ II. Why should a face, whose Magick may weak, seuls recruit, The  and the veils obey? Or wherefore should that tongue be mute, many to mortal ears, Sins igh and sweeter then the Sphears? III. Each for her Contreys welsare, came into the earth.
Part of her best pats we may claim; As truly forfeit at her birth, Yet since forc't bons are not so kinde, We'l beg your face, and vertuous minde. IV. As did Medusa by her eyes, to stones convert Each daring look; so thine surprise; But 'tis not with Medusa's art: As flesh to stones transformed she, So stony hearts are broke by thee. V. Thy sacred lips, where cherries grow, set round with spie, Whence loves Eletars freely ; Why in recess constrain'd so nice? Sure he shall die unblest that iffes The famou ooty of your kisses. VI. Will thy bright beams be ere the less for lighting me?
thy comliness? thy dignity? no longer in the Mines: and yet she shines. VII. Pray what vails Diana's tower? Or what consent Is couched in the golden shower, While she receives imprisonment? The life of beauty's by resort, Not in the prion, but the Court. VIII. cheeks abroad, no more Those Gms each  would applad, with a  adore. your self and we in this greate share in bliss.
