B4238 R24218 8076457 40801
The Loyal Prophet: A SERMON Preached in St. Peters in York, upon Monday the 13. of July, at the Summers Assizes, Anno 1668. By William Bramhall Rector of Golds∣brough, and one of his Majesties Chaplains. The King by Judgement establisheth the Land, Prov. 29.4. God standeth in the Congregation of the mighty, he judgeth among the gods, Psalm 82.1. . Imprimatur. Ioh. Garthwait, Reverendissimo in Christo patri, ac Dom. Dom. Richardo, Archie∣piscopo Eboracensi, à sacris Domestics. Iuly 29. 1668. Printed at York, Anno Dom. 1668.
To the Right Honourable Baron Turner and Baron Rainsfordes; The Right Worshipful Sir Richard Mauleverer Knight and Baronet, High Sheriffe of the County of YORK; Richard Hutton Esq; of Goldsbrough, my honoured Patron, Safety here, and Salvation hereafter. Honourable and Worthy, THE Design of the Preacher in committing that to the Press in this censorious and critical age, under your Patronage and Protection, which was delivered before you from the Pulpit, s not out of any crafty or undermining Po∣licy, for self ends and Interests, but meerly upon the account of honesty and loyalty,
for the common and publique good, for the advancing the honour and glory of the King of Kings, the promoting the safety of our Soveraign and his Kingdomes, the preserving of the honour and credit of our Religion, as it is professed and practised in this Church of England, and the perpetuating the memory of your great Fames and good Names to succeeding A∣ges and Generations. This, this is the design of him, who is and shall ever be Your Honours and Worships faithful ser∣vant in all Christian Observance WILLIAM BRAMHALL.
Daniel VI.XXI. O King, live for ever. NEver did that Prophet sanctified in his mothers Womb, more plead his weakness and insufficiency, for the Discharge of that weighty work and imployment whereunto God called him,Ier. 1.5, 6. as wanting both gravity & ability, then I have done mine, for the declining of this duty and service; but at last their importunity prevail∣ing, whose Authority might have com∣manded me, it was no small trouble to me to pitch upon a Subject every wayes suitable and fit, for such an Honourable, Reverend, Learned and Religious Assembly, till at last my divi∣ded & almost distracted thoughts like the
weary Dove, fell and setled upon this Ark of safety and sacred ground in this Text. For when I considered that happy Government under which we live, a Monarchy, and such a Monarchy, whose Royal Prerogative doth not enterfear with, or entrench upon the liberty and priviledge of the Subject, nor yet the liberty and privi∣ledge of the Subject, doth in the least cloud or eclipse the Beams and lustre of the Royal Prerogative. When I considered the Kings several Coun∣ses:Cokes In∣stitutions lib. 1. pag. 110. 1. Commune Concilium regni, the Court of Parliament. 2. Magnum Concilium Regis, the Peers of the Realm, either in or out of Parliament. 3. Privatum Concilium Regis, the Kings Privy Counsel. And if I may give a name to the fourth, Regium Concilium Legis, the Kings learned Counsel of the Law, the Judges,Prov. 15.22 Surely in the multitude of these Counsels and Counsellers, the king∣dome is established.
Again, When I considered our Courts of Judicature, supreme and subordinate, superior and inferior, of Equity and of Law, and all our wholesome Laws and Statutes; which indeed in comparison of the Laws of other Nations, deserves that Cha∣racter (which a learned and honest Judge of this Countrey, Sir Richard Hutton of precious Memory) hath observed out of a Dialogue and Dis∣course that passed betwixt that fa∣mous Sir John Fortescue Serjeant at the Law, and Lord Chancellour of En∣gland, and that unfortunate Prince Edward, the only Son and Heir of good Henry the sixth, in the time of their exile in France: The Prince being too much addicted to Martial Affairs, was by the Chancellour perswaded to the study of these excellent Laws, and was brought to this Resolution and com∣mendation of them,Fortes. Dial Lex ista mihi sem∣per peculiaris erit inter caeteras leges orbis,pag. 132 inter quas ipsam lucere conspicio, ut Lu∣cifer inter minores stellas, This Law shall be ever peculiar unto me, above
all the Laws of the World, amongst the which, I see it shine, as Luciter the bright morning Star, amongst the stars of a lesser Magnitude, of which Laws, if I now should presume to shew the Antiquity and Excellency of them before these learned Sages and Students of the same, I might justly be taxed of the like indiscretion and folly, which sometimes we read the Philosopher Phormio at Ephesus was,Plutarch. when the great famous Cap∣tain and Carthaginian General came in∣to his School with King Antiochus of Asia, who leaving off his Lecture of Philosophy, began a Discourse De Arte militari, whose presumption re∣ceived no small check from that expe∣rienced Commander Hannibal, in an elegant Oration concerning the same, wherein he made it appear, that the Discourse had better beseem'd him who had brandished his bloody sword in the high places of the field, then an obscure Philosopher, that only flourished with his pen in the Schools: Yet give me leave, to remember you
of a double benefit, that this daye Prospect presents before you. 1. When you view these honou∣rable Brethren and noble Barons, you may conceit you see so many Daniels prefer'd to the places and seats of Ju∣dicature, because an excellent spirit was found in them;Dan. 6.3. against whom their Enemies could never yet find any oc∣casion, as matter of accusation, they being famous for their observation of the Law of their God,Verse 4. as for their Administration of Justice, according to the Laws of their King: nay more you may conceit, you see Samuelem redivivum, not one but two aged Sa∣muels going their Circuit, to Bethel,1 Sam. 7.16. and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, to judge this Northren part of our Israel. 2. When you view the several Tribes here assembled, the Nobility and Gentry, the Clergy and Com∣monalty of these parts; you may conceit you see them enjoying those benefits and priviledges which some∣times Gods antient people the Jews en∣joyed, who were the first people of
the world, to whom any written Law was given, whose Judges sat in the gates of their Cities, where they did pronounce their Judgements, equally and impartially administring Justice unto all, to the end that both all men might see the indifferency of their Proceedings, and that no man should need to go out of his way to seek justice: This is the happiness of our condition at this time, Foelices nimium bona si sua, &c. O happy England, if thou knew'st thine own happiness? we cannot but proclaim it, and in way of gratitude ingenuously confess, That we have greater cause to pray for our British, then ever Daniel had for the Median and Persian Monarch. O King, live for ever. But because it is not only the custome, but also absolutely necessary for the Preacher to implore the di∣vine Assistance; and long Prayers be∣ing displeasing to some, and short Prayers offensive to others: That I
may not offend either, O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise: Lord hear our Prayers, and let our cry come unto thee, &c. Dan. 6.21. O King, live for ever. Darius was king of the Medes and Persians, upon that sacrilegious Princes Fall, (who caroused his drunken healths in the sacred Plate of the Sanctuary) he is advanced to the kingdom of the Caldeans too:Dan. 5.2.30.31. Upon his advancement he prefers Daniel, above all his Presidents and Princes, because an excellent spirit was found in him. And happy is that Kingdom, blessed is that Church, where pre∣ferments are confer'd, according to mens Worth, Parts and Deserts. The Princes and Nobles of Babylon en∣vying Daniels honour, maliciously confederate and conspire to work his Ruine, in his Trust and Charge, in his Life and Manners, they could fasten nothing upon him, or object any thing against him: In his Religion,
(& especially that part thereof, his de∣votion) they thought they should, know∣ing that Daniel would lose Honours, Offices, and Life also, rather then transgress the Law of his God: Now by their fraudulent and crafty under∣mining policy, they procure from the King an unjust Decree, injurious both to the King of Kings, and King Da∣rius himself: Hereby Gods holy Pro∣phet is ensnared, and his life exposed as a prey to the cruel paws, and hun∣gry, and devouring Jaws of the Lyons: Here was a malicious and mischievous combination; but see the issue and event of it, in a miraculous preser∣vation, God was with his Prophet in the Den, restrained the fierceness and fury of those Creatures, shut the Ly∣ons mouths,Dan. 6.22. that so they could not fasten upon his Anointed, upon his holy Prophet; And here you have the thankful acknowledgement of Gods preservation of him, and it is to the King, who had too rashly condescend∣ed (being circumvented by his Court-Parasites) to that wicked Decree, and
by whose sentence he was unjustly condemned, Then said Daniel unto the King, O King, live for ever; which is a religious and loyal salutation and supplication for the Kings safety, Live for his salvation hereafter, Live for ever: In which, (as in all salutations) we may observe, 1. The person sa∣luted. 2. Saluting. 3. The Salu∣tation it self. 1. The Person saluted; Darius, a great King of three Kingdoms; Media, Persia and Chaldea. 2. The Person saluting, Daniel, a great Prophet, famous for his wis∣dom, piety and devotion. 3. The salutation, a loyal prayer for his Soveraigns safety and prosperity here; a religious one, for his salva∣tion, consisting in the enjoyment of an happy Eternity hereafter: Live for ever. From these three parts arises three poynts: 1. All Kings must be honoured by all their Subjects, by the best and ho∣liest, as well as the greatest & meanest
2. Gods best Saints, should be the Kings most faithful Subjects. 3. He is a faithful Subject, whom in his prayers desires, and in his acti∣ons endeavours, the safety of his So∣veraign here, and his salvation here∣after. For these three points, there are these three Reasons. 1. Institutio divina. 2. Religio Christiana. And, 3. Gratitudo huma∣na: The Ordinance of God, the ho∣nour of our Religion, and the duty of Gratitude, under the Kings go∣vernment we enjoy safely, and the means of Salvation; so that we re∣ceiving by him what we desire, should return unto him what we owe, our prayers and endeavours for his safety here, and salvation hereafter, giving all his kingdomes cause unanimously to joyn with us, in this loyal and religi∣ous Supplication, O King, live for ever. OBSERVATION I. All Kings must be honoured by all
their Subjects, by the best and holiest, as well as the greatest and meanest; by Gods choice Saints and holy Prophets, as well as by their Nobles and Princes, and common Subjects: so did good Da∣niel here great Darius; O King! a speech of affection, of honour natu∣ral and civil,Dan. 2.4. not only used by hea∣thens, but also by the people of God. Thus the greatest, the Queen her self honoured King David,1 Kings 1.31. bowed with her face to the earth, and did reve∣rence to him and said, Let my Lord king David live for ever: She addressed her∣self to him as a loving wife, and as an obedient subject; and no less respect shew'd she (when Queen-mother) to her son Solomon, when advanc'd to the Throne of his father. Thus did Nathan the Prophet,1 Kings 1.23. bow∣ing himself before the King with his face to the ground: Not the nearest Conju∣gal, or maternal Relation, not the Prophetical function, exempts any from civil subjection. Thus did good Nehemiah,Nehe. 2.3. when he desired only to promote the good of
Gods people; he gave evidence of that great respect and honour he had for King Artaxerxes his Master. And I said unto the King, Let the King live for ever. Thus doth the greatest Commander, as well as the meanest Souldier: All the Congregation bowed down their heads,1 Cron. 29 20 and worshipped the Lord and the King: The same word is attributed to God and the King, yet in a different respect, God with a religious and divine ho∣nour, the King with a civil reverence and worship: So when Solomn sat on his royal Throne, called The Throne of the Lord, because all Kings bear the Image of the Lord, by whom they rule. Cron. 29 24. It is said, That all Israel obeyed him, even all the Princes and and mighty men, (that is, all that had Command of Souldiers, all that were eminent for Honour and Wealth) and all the sons likewise of King Da∣vid submitted themselves unto him, though born of royal mothers, yielded to the Will of God therein by some external rite, as bowing the head, or
kissing the hand, gave signal testimonies of their Fealty and Subjection to him. And thus did good Jehoiada: The Le∣vites and all Judah, the Captains of Hundreds; and all the people pray at the Coronation of King Joash, who had been detained from his Right by the usurpation of Athaliah, and who only of the seed Royal had been mira∣culously saved from her rage and cru∣elty: They clap'd their hands; A visi∣ble expression of their great joy, and said, God save the King. Heb.2 Chro. 23.9, 10, 11. Let the King live, an usual acclamation at the Coronation of Kings. But what honour is due to them by the new Testament? The Apostle in one place prophesies of Perillous times,2 Tim. 3.4 and that which made them so, was, That amongst other sins, there should be sinners of the greatest magnitude, , that is, Traytors, Heady: And speaking of those in ano∣ther place,Iude v. 8. . They do dispise domini∣ons, speak evil of Dignities, reject not only the Governours, but the go∣vernment,
revile and reproach Magi∣strates,2 Pet. 2.10 even subordinate and supreme too, who are dignities, Persons of Honour, aod so ought to be esteemed: Therefore in their Epistles, they do put them in mind of that, which they are too apt to forget: Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers:Titus 3.1. under which words are comprehended all civil Powers. And who must be remembred of their Duty? the same Apostle tells you, Every soul: Let every soul be suject,Rom. 13.1. the holiest, the greatest; as Chrysostome descants, though an Apostle, though an Evan∣gelist, though a Prophet: The Pope too, (as one said well) except he will be excluded out of the number of all souls. But who are these higher Powers to whom they must be subject? Kings, and all that are in Authority: says St. Paul, that is,1 Tim. 2.2. The supreme and subordinate Magi∣strate.1 Pet. 2.13 says St. Peter, , To the King, who is the high, the ex∣cellent Authority, and to Governours that are sent by him.
As in nature the Sun is Commander in chief among the Planets, whose light is communicated to them from that body: Thus in body Politick, God hath set Kings, Nobles, Judges, still in a descent,1 Pet. 2.1 and those powers are of God; so that if there be any fear of God, there will be an honouring of the King, and of those that are sent by him. REASON I. INtitutio divina; It is Gods Insti∣tution, he requires it; Monarchy is the vent to Theocracy, and God himself never instituted any other form then Monarchical. He himself vouchsafed to be King of his people, and gave them first Moses as his Viceroy, for he was King in Jessurun;Deut. 33.5. and when the people multiplied, and the burden of Government was too heavy for his Shoulders, according to his Father-in-law (Jethro's advice) he provided able men, such as feared God, men of truth, hating covetous∣ness,
to be his Assistants,Exod. 18.22. (as our Judges are the Kings learned Councel) to judge the people at all seasons, and God himself avowed his authority, in the just and miraculous punishment of those presumptuous Rebels; so that when the Government was Paternal,Num. 16.32. Patriarchal under a General, their valiant and victorious Joshua, yea Judi∣cial under those famous Judges, it was still Monarchical; and therefore in that acterregnum you have declar∣ed the miserable condition of a State, and People, who live in an Anarchy, every one doing that which was good in their own eyes, because there was no King in Israel;Iud. 17.6. then must every Mi∣cah have his Idol, and his Priest too: then shall the most notorious unclean∣ness and Sodomitical filthiness, be not only committed, but countenanced by a whole Tribe, But afterwards God gave them a radicated succession of Kings,Deut. 17.14, 15. according to his promise; So that the Scepter departed not from Judah until Shiloh came, according to that ancient Prophecy; and when he did come,
he himself was the King of the Jewes,Gen. 49.20 (though his kingdom was not of this world) for he owned Caesar, in working a mi∣racle to pay him Tribute, and his An∣swer to the captious Question was, To maintain the civil power,Mat. 22.21 as well as Re∣ligion, to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, as unto God the things that are Gods; And his Apostle ad∣vises all believing Christians,Rom. 13.5 to be subject for conscience sake, and for the Lords sake; so that it must needs be , a divine Order or institution.1 Pet. 2.13 Though some object, that St. Peter calls it, , an Ordinance of man; as if the Magistrate was an humane Creature, and as a King cre∣ated by man; yet the ready Answer is, Monarchy is , secundum sub∣stantiam:  secundum modum & finem; call'd there an humane Ordi∣nance, not because it was invented by, or hath its Original from men, but be∣cause man was the subject of it, hu∣mane Affairs the Object, and God as the Author and Efficient, instituted it for the good of mankind; For as our
natural Parents bear the image of Gods power, who are the instruments of our being, & beget us; and our spi∣ritual and ecclesiastical Parents, bear the image of Gods wisdom and know∣ledge, who are the instruments of our spiritual and wel-being, to teach and instruct us: So our civil Parents, who bear the image of Gods power and authority, are Gods instruments for our civil being, to govern and protect us. In them Gods Soveraign Majesty shineth brightly, in their Crowns and Scepters, the beams of his favour are most apparent; for he investeth them with his robes of Majesty, armeth them with his own sword of Justice, adorneth them with his own Diadem of royal dignity, & graceth them with his own style of Deity: I have said, ye are gods, and all of you children of the most high;p 82.6 above all others therefore, we owe duty and rerpect unto Kings; as here Danil did to Darius.
USE. NAy we have more cause to do it, if we consider what Darius was, Ecclesiae inimicus, Author perditionis: He was an heathen Prince, an enemy to Gods Israel, Church and people, he kept the servants of God in capti∣vity: he assum'd unto himself religi∣ous Worship, he was the Author (in humane probability) of Daniels De∣struction, though his Lord advised him to it, yet it was his Law ensnared him, his power condem'd him, his ommand cast him into the Den, his ignet sealed the stone, and yet Daniel onours him, prayes for his prospe∣ity here, and eternity of life here∣fter. Religion doth not exempt us from honouring our Superious, though they e enemies to the Church. Dominion  and Soveraignty are the ordinances of God, instituted upon earth by him, as he is the Author of mankind, not as the God and Author of Grace; for
Cyrus is Gods anointed; even Pilate himself hath his power from above:Mat. 22.21 no wrong, no injury can exempt or ex∣cuse us from honouring them. Daniel was injured, was wronged sufficiently, and yet how respective? Infer we then, and conclude hence our Duty, What honour is due to good Kings? If to a heathen, what is due to a Christian King? If to an Enemy of the Church, what to a nursing fatherr of the Church? If to one who assumes religious worship to himself, What to him who is a true Worshipper of God himself? and enjoynes us to worship the God of our Fathers. If to him who is an in∣strument of our death, what to him who is under God, the greatest Pro∣tector of our lives and liberties? un∣der whose government we duly fre∣quent Gods house, and quietly enjoy our own: so that this Scripture is an Argument of no small force, to re∣solve the consciences of those, that doubt in these dayes, Wether a law∣ful Soveraign may be honoured and
obeyed, if he be an Heretick, (as they call those that are of another opinion) He may, he must, though he be of a false Religion; How much more, when he is of the true, and the King; Our King commands no false Worship, as Darius did,Dan. 6.26. but the Worship of the God of Daniel, and en∣joynes no other worship, then accor∣ding to his own Laws, the undoubted Register whereof is the sacred word: This honour God himself requires in his Law, Christ in his, the Law of Grace. Let us see what the Laws of the Land says to it? Mr. Henry Bracton, who lived in the time of King Henry the third, saith, Rex sicut Dei Vicarius & Minister in terrâ potestatem juris ha∣bens, The King is Gods Vice-gerent,9. & 10 chap. and Minister upon earth, having pow∣er of the Laws. Henry the Lord Beaumont was for his unreverent peeches to King Edward the second, ommanded out of the Councel house, hough it be said therewithal, that he was juratus de magno & secreto Consilio
Regis, sworn of the great and privy Councel of the King; and our fa∣mous Sir Edward Coke saith,1 lib. Instit. pag. 7. our Kings were honoured with the stiles, Of So∣veraign Lord, Leige Lord, Highness, and Kingly Highness, that Grace was attributed to King Henry the fourth; Excellent Grace, to King Henry the sixth: Majesty to King Henry the 8th. and since that, the King and Queens Most Excellent Najesty; so that now for those that canonize themselves for Saints, and pretend to have a more excellent spirit then Daniel, as attain∣ed already to a higher degree and pitch of sanctity and Piety, and yet do speak evil of dignities,Iude 8 revile the Rulers of the people, do prove them∣selves to be the spawn of those filthy Dreamers and Blasphemers, having only ,2 Tim. 3.2 5 a mask and vi∣zor of godliness for their true piety and fidelity to God, ought to be evi∣denced by their loyalty and honour of their Soveraign, as holy Daniel was here, which brings me from the per∣son saluted, to the second part.
OBSERVATION II. 2. The Person saluting, Daniel; and then, Gods bests Saints should be the Kings most faithful Subjects. Daniel was a person of no ordinary rank and quality, of no ordinary size or pitch of Piety; he was prefer'd by three great Monarchs, by Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, and lastly by Darius. He was chief of the Trium viri or Pre∣sidents; Thus still is unity sought af∣ter, as best for Peace in State and Church; and Parity avoided, as tend∣ing to Disorder and Confusion in the one, and Schism and Division in the other. Daniel was a rare person, fa∣mous, 1. For his Wisdom by a com∣mon proverb, He was set as a pattern thereof in Babylon:Ezek 28.3. The King of Tyre who thought himself so wise above others, is taunted, Behold thou art wiser then Daniel. 2. He was fa∣mous for Prayer and Sanctity, and joyned therefore as a fit intercessour with two Worthyes, to divert Gods
wrath;Ezek. 14.14.20 Noah a just man and perfect: Job a man perfect and upright, that fear∣ed God and eschewed evil: He was great∣ly beloved of the Lord, as the Angel Gabriel told him; and unto him did Gd make known his Will.Dan. 9.23. 3. He was fa∣mous too for his Fidelity and Loyal∣ty; even his enemies gave thi testi∣mony of him, That though they sought to find occasion against him, yet they could find none, no subject matter of accusation, no colour or suspition of negligence or unfaithful∣ness in him, or his doings. He was faithful to the King in the Affairs of the Kingdom, as he was also to his God: So that persons eminent for their Piety and Holiness, ought to be eminent also for their Loyalty and Faithfulness: Caesar had Saints in his houshold, who was obedient to him, & to God too, otherwise the great A∣postle would not have so lovingly sa∣luted them.1 Cor. 1. 26 Obadiah was a faithful Courtier to wicked King Ahab, and yet true to his God, as appears by his affection to the Lords Prophets
Nehemiah was faithful to his God,Nehem. 2.1. and yet an obedient servant to his master, when Cup-bearer to the great King Artaxerxes: So was Daniel here in the acknowledgement of Gods miracu∣lous delivery of him, he pleads his own innocency, Before thee, O King, I have done no hurt.Dan. 6.22. Gods dearest Saint and servant proves here the best and most faithful Subject. REASON II. CHristiana Religio; the Honour, the Credit of our Religion en∣joynes it; for our honouring of Ma∣gistrates, and obedience to them, must be out of obedience to God, and Conscience of Duty, who hath or∣dained civil Magistracy, and enjoyn∣ed subjection unto it; for so is the Will of God, that Christians should stop the mouths of Unbelievers,Titus 3.1. which are opened against our Religi∣on, because of the Professors disobe∣dience to their Rulers. He that tru∣ly fears God, the great King of hea∣ven,
will cordially and conscionably serve these earthly gods, Kings of the earth; for Conscience (that poor neglected thing) is the strongest tye of Subjects hearts unto their Sove∣raign, which neither man nor devil is able to dissolve, and will support all loyal hearts erect and unshaken in the greatest storms and confusions: Now the honour of Religion should be very dear to one that feareth God. Let the world say what it will, Reli∣gion is a friend to Magistracy, com∣manding civil Duty by a sacred bond and obligation.Eccles. 8.2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God; not only out of fear to them, because of their sword, but because of Conscience to∣wards God,Rom. 13.5 and of those vows that are upon us, which obliges to faith∣fulness. Those that are faithful to God, I shall expect them to be faithful to me, said the father of Constantine the great: Certainly none ought to live so sweet∣ly under the same government,Euseb. lib. 2. de vita Constan. as those that are united in the same faith,
and cemented together with the same blood of Christ. The Protestant Doctrine alwayes taught, That Reli∣gion was an enemy to Rebellion; always cry'd down, (saith Hugo Grotius) Ar∣matum Evangelium; alwayes cry'd up, Obedience, Honour and Reverence due to them; teaching good Magistrates must be obey'd as God, those that are ad for God. USE. AND if at this Touch-stone we try those that would have been accounted our modern Saints, by heir Loyalty and fidelity, we shall not find this vertue in them: They could not be religious unless they were ebellious; They could not fear God, nless they dishonoured their King: or obey their heavenly father, unless hey disobey'd their earthly: That uch counterfeit Saints there was and s: That such a generation,prov. 30.12 pure in their own eyes, &c. Such spirits that will be under no other Law or Rule, but their
own lusts and interests: That it hath been and is still on working, none can be such a stranger in our Israel as not to know. That roaring and thun∣dring (not only crying) sin, the murder of our late dear and dread Soveraign, had been the greatest Scandal and dishonour to our Religion, had not that glorious Martyr by his royal pen dash'd it out; when he writ, That scarce any one who had been a Begin∣ner, or an active Prosecutor of the late Ware against the Church, the Laws and his royal person, either was or is a true Lover, and Embracer, or Pra∣ctiser of the Protestant Religion, as it is established in England; which nei∣ther gives such Rules, or ever before set such Examples. Had not our gracious Soveraign, who now is, in his royal Proclamation declar'd, Those that had a hand in that unpara∣lel'd sin of the greatest magnitude, That they were as far from being good Protestants, as they were from being good Subjects: Thanks to the roy∣al Pen! True it is, our Adversaries
in both extreams do clip the wings of Monarchy: The one denying the Kings Supremacy in Causes Ecclesi∣astical: The other (if their power were equal to their Wills) compel∣ling the royal golden Scepter to bow down to the Scepter of Christ, and good reason if it were so) as they are pleas'd to call their classical Consistorian, Power and Authority: Of which di∣scipline one prophesied not amiss, when it was newly broach'd in the Church, and was commended to the liking of another Nation, Timetur al∣era Tyrannis. Novus Pontificatus, a new Popedome was the judgement of nother; but whosoever peruseth the Doctrine of the Church of England,, s it is expressed in the 39, Articles,Act. 37. and her Discipline as contained in the Cannons and Constitutions, may with∣out partiality, conclude,Can. 1.2. The Pro∣essors thereof are the truest, fastest riends to Monarchy; amongst whom God hath his faithful servants, and he King his most loyal Subjects; They eeping the good old way;Ier. 6.1. the golden
mean betwixt Tyranny on the one hand, and Popularity and Parity on the other. True it is, sometimes confcionable Christians have been falsly accused, as Daniel here, for not keeping the Kings Laws, Christ was accounted an enemy to Caesar, and so his servant Jeremy a seeds-man of se∣dition: Luther a Trumpet of rebelli∣on: So Francis King of France desiring to excuse to the Protestant Princes of Germany, his cruel persecution of the Lutherans in his Kingdom, wrote to them, That he looked upon them all, as Anabaptists and Enemies to civil govern∣ment, and therefore used such severity a∣gainst them. This caused Calvin to write his Institutions, and elegantly in his Preface to it, repeats the objections, Sceptra Regum è manibus extorquent, riunalia judicia{que} omnia precipitant, subvertunt ordines omnes & politias, paem & quietem populi perturbant, leges mnes arogant, They wrest the Scep∣r out of the Kings hand, they over∣urn all Tribunals and Courts of Ju∣dicature, confound all humane orders
and Societies, disturb the Peace and Quiet of the People, and abolish and abrogate all Laws. By the spirit of Propaccy calculated for our British Sectaries, but no wayes true of the Gallicane Hugenots. And sure I am, they cannot be accounted or esteem'd true Christians, who are for such a li∣berty, as owes no subjection to Magi∣strates; We may say to such as St. Barnard hath done before us, Ubi ti∣mor mentis, rubor frontis? Where is either Conscience towards God, or reverence to his Anointed? Tertulli∣ans Apology for the Christians in the time of the heathenish persecuting Emperors, was, Nos non sumus Ni∣griani, nec Cassiani, We are no Tray∣tors, no Rebels, we fill all your Ci∣ties, Islands, Towns, yea your Pa∣lace and Senate: What were we not able to do? If it were not more a∣greeable to our Religion to be killed, then upon any pretence to kill: And if these Saints were good Subjects to bad Princes, surely it concerns us Christians, to shew our Religion to
God, by our Loyalty to our Soveraign, who is Nutritius Ecclesiae, Defender of the Faith, the Preserver of our Peace, who delights in our prosperity, and therefore we should pray for his Safty, as Daniel doth for Darius, O King live for ever: which brings me to the third Salutation it self: OBSERVATION III. IT is the duty of a good Subject in his Prayers to desire, and in hi actions to endeavour the safety of the King here, and his Salvation hereaf∣ter; his temporal prosperity here, and a happy Eternity hereafter: Thus did Daniel, here was the tryal of his Worship; he was thought to be  factious man, seditious, but here he shew'd himself a faithful Subject in his Prayers to God for him. The Israe∣lites expressed their affection to David their King, in that unnatural rebellion of Absolons, they prefer'd his safety before their own,2 Sam. 18.3 Thou shalt not g forth, and gives the reason, Thou ar
worth ten thousand of us, better it were that many of us should miscarry, then that the light of Israel should be ex∣tinguished, thou that the least hurt should befall him, who was the stay of them all, in whose safety consisted their safety; For as Kings are called The Anointed of the Lord, so the breath of our nostrils:Lam. 4.20. Breath is necessary to our being and life, so is a King to our well-being and preservation of that life. It must be acknowledged, that the Original of all our happiness is from heaven, yet it must be confest withal, that the golden pipes through which blessings are convey'd to a Na∣tion or a people, is the supreme Ma∣gistrates Government, our peace is from his Wisdom, our Plenty from our Peace, our Prosperity from our Plenty; Our Safety, our very lives are by Gods providence wrapt up in his welfare; whose precious life, (as the Orator speaks) is Vita quaedam publica: Why should there be any murmuring or complain∣ing in our streets for those necessary
Taxes, to support his Government, which supports us all, therefore are Kings called the foundation of the earth,  quasi ,psal. 82.5 a phrase borrowed from a building, whereun∣to the Kingdom is compared; for the body Politick is like the body natural, the foundation of it stands upermost. The Prince seems to rest upon the people as the head on the body; but indeed the people do rest upon him, and if it were not for the influence of the Soveraign heads Government, the members of the body politick could not sustain themselves: To conclude this point, The benefit and use of Mo∣narchy and Magistracy, is hyerogliphy∣cally and excellently set forth by the Tree that Nebuchadnezzr saw in his Vision,Dan. 4.10, 12. Under which the beasts of the field had shadow, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it; signifying unto us, the dignity of a King, whom God ordains to be a defence to all kind of men,. 6. 24. and whose state is profitable to mankind. A wise King is the uphold∣ing
of the people, and therefore a wise people will uphold the King. It is recorded in Apocryphal, but the sense thereof often taught in canonical Scripture: The Reason, Gratitude humana, the Duty of Gratitude per∣swades unto it; For what is Loyalty? but gratitude to Princes, as Religion is gratitude to God: it concerns us to defend them, who are the Defenders of the Faith; to save them, who are the breath of so many thousand nostrils: This is but gratitude; we rest secure from birds of prey, under the Eagles wings, we are kept from heats and storms under the shadow of these trees; defended from oppressi∣ons at home, from invasions abroad;Prov. 29.4. The King by judgement establisheth the Land: Why should not the Land establish his Throne? O let us not be like the ungrateful, the murmuring Israelites, Quid nobis cum Davide? What have we to do with this son of Jesse? That even when God himself was pleas'd to order their civil affairs, repined and were not contented even
when they had Manna as when they wanted it; But I hope we are Chri∣stians of a better alloy: It beseems not us of all others to be so injurious to God, who hath selected us out to be a happy people: It beseems us not to be unthankful to our Soveraign, un∣der whom we enjoy those blessings: There is a civil ambition and cove∣tousness in the members of every Kingdom, and each man would de∣vour his brother; Ephraim against Manasses and Manasses against Ephraim,say 9.21. and both against Judah, until the king∣dom of Israel be laid waste: for in every state there are powerful and poor, the wolf and the sheep, the Lyon and the Lamb, cunning and simple, strong and weak: That the powerful do not oppress the poor, that the crafty do not circumvent the simple,Iug 17.16 that the strong doth not offer violence to the weak: The reason is, There is a King, otherwise every man would be his own judge, and do that which was right in his own eyes. What then remains, but that our gratitude
should result from all to make our happiness compleat: his safety shall be dear to us, under whom we en∣joy Safety: nay more his salvation too, under whom we enjoy the means of salvation: let us pray then, that he may live for ever, have a long and prosperous Reign upon earth, a blessed end and life everlasting: It was the Motto of the Emperour, when he had one Crown on the sword, and ano∣ther Crown upon his head: Tertiam in caelis: the third he had in heaven: and the famous Dr. Rodley the great Benefactor to the University of Oxford, gave for his Armes three Crownes with this motto. Quarta perennis erit: the fourth shall be Eternal. God hath honoured our Gracious Soveraign with three Crowns here, when God is pleased to take off these from his Royal head, let us pray that God would set on a fourth: (a Crown is the Emblem of eternity) a Crown of life, an immarcessible, an immortal Crown, that he may goe from one kingdome to another, from a king∣dome
on earth, that hath been ofte shaken, to a kingdome in Heaven, that cannot be shaken, that he may be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand of our God, and soe Live for ever. In a word, to conclude this poynt I hope we need not much perswasions to the performance of our duty, if we either respect Gods institution or ordinance, the honour and credit of our Religion, or the duty of grati∣tude for our own safety and preserva∣tion:sa. 4.23. It was Gods promise. Kings should be nursing Fathers to the Church, and the Poets calls them,  the Shepherds of the people. How should the impotent Child live without a Nurse  The sheep would be a prey to Wolves and Foxes, to Heretickes and Schismatickes, were it not for the Shepherd. That we may fit under the shadow of peace and teach our Children to know the Lord, that the lmps of our lives be not snuf∣fed out with violence, that our devoti∣on be not molsted with schismes and
faction, that our temperal eat be ept in liberty, and our spiritual estae improved with piety, let us bless the Kings of Kings for such a King of men, nd let us once more pray as Daniel did here. O King Live for ever. And now I have done, with this Loyal Salutation and Religious Suplica∣tion, yet something by way of ap∣plication must be added, that so this Text may be fitted to the busines in hand. Daniels course in the first place is commeded to you (right honour∣able) or rather you are to be com∣mended for walking in Daniels steps and following his Course: He was a Deputy under King Daris to the Jewes, soe are you under Carolus se∣cuudus our Gracious Soveraign in these parts. He in his deputation was faith∣ful to God and his Prince too: and let me speak it before ll (and with∣out flattery) I never heard you taed by any (Nobles or Commons) for un∣faithfulne, either to your God or to your Soveraign. I shall first there∣for drop down the oyle of my Ex∣hortation
upon your Reverent and antient heads, and then upon the skirt of your cloathing, all that have any thing to doe in the weighty affairs of this grand Assize, for thouh all be not Daniels, prefer'd to the seats of Judicature, to sit upon the Bench to judge, yet ought they all unani∣mously to concurre, for the producti∣on and bringing forth of the sacred act and child of justice, that judgement may run down as a stream, and righ∣teousnes as a mighty water. I shall give therefore a word of Exhortation, and a word of Caution 1. A word of Exhortation, to you (right Honourable) I need not set Daniel the Presedet as a pattern be∣fore you,Ruth 4.11. bu your selves to your selves: so do at this Assizes, as you have done formerly, to doe wotthily still in this our Ephratah. And to that end give me leave to use to you those lofty and sublime expressions, which concern indeed Christ mistically and principally (as all Interpreters agree) but King Solomon and his Judges, and
inferiour Magistrates literally being composed as an Epithalamium, at the celebration of the Nuptials, betwixt him and Pharaohs daughter. Gird your sword upon your thigh:psal. 45.3, 4. ride prosperously because of truth, meeknes and righteous∣nes and your right hand shall teach you terrible things; for the Scepter of this kingdome is a right Scepter. The quiet state of a kingdome standeth not in worldly pomp and vanity, but in truth meeknes and justice; but oftentime truth & meeknes would be oppressed if the sword of justice, was not some∣times drawn out for their releif, as the King therefore hath girded it upon your thighs, yet let me tell (your honours) the iniquity of the times, calls for the unsheathing of it; when Gods lawes writ at the first upon Ta∣bles of stone, are quite ras'd out of the fleshly tables of Mens hearts, and the lives and conversations of men are nothing, but one continued act of re∣bellion against God, and our duty to him, contained in the first Table, against man, and our duty to him,
exprest in the second Table, it is high time for you that are keepers of both, to bestirre your selves: Up and be doeing as God tould Joshua, when Israel had sinned. The more sinners; the more speed must the Magistrate make, with his sword of justice, to ent off immedicabilia vulnera, those gangred members of the state, that could not or would not be cured with∣out it; upon which sword methinkes I read the Motto, which was engraven upon the sword of Charles the great Utriusque tabulae csts Carolus. Charles is Lord Keeper of both Table: and it is my duty at this time to set an edge on it, that it may be like that, Romphae bis acuta, non solum ictu sed tactu penetrans, like that two edged sword of the spirit which will pierce, not only with a stroke, but a touch, and how can I better doe it, then by shewing how both tables are broken:  The first Table by damned Atheisme, desperate unbeliefe, by the despisers of God and his word, resisting his spi∣rit, neglecting his worship and service
by vain immagination, and heretical opinions,  by the omission of Gods true worship, by the invention of false worship.  By profanation of Gods ever blessed name, titles and atri∣butes,  By perjury, vain rash mali∣cious and false swearing: By profa∣nation of the Lords Day, by forsak∣ing and neglecting the assemblies, by frequenting unlawful meetings and Conventicles, which are against Law, denyes the King to be the de∣fender of the faith. Unlawful we may call them, the persons frequenting them, and even when we are per∣forming the great act of charity for them, that God would be pleased to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred and are deceived, discharging their vollies of bitter malice against us, blaspheming God and their King, revileing all Rulers Civil and Eccle∣siastical, all Pastors and Teachers, as the grandest Cheaters and Imposers: Pudet haec opprobia nobis, et dici potuisse, et non potuisse refelli: Other profane persons there are in another extream,
converting or rather perverting,B. Andrews Sab∣batum domini, in Sabbatum asini, vituli, aut Dialoli, spending the day either idly, or wantonly, eating and drink∣ing and rising up to play, or lewdly in gaming, rioting and drunkenness, whereby as one sayes well, God is more dishonoured, and the devil better served, then on all the six dayes besides.  The second table, By subjects diso∣bedience to the Lawes and Magi∣strates, By servants unfaithfulness to their Masters,  By the peoples ingra∣titude to their Pastors, and by Chil∣dren dishonouring their Parents: By murder of the heart, envy, hatred and malice; of the tongue, by maledicti∣on, commination and detraction; Of the hand, by Manslaughter, wilful Murders, Treasons and Abortions;  By Uncleaness of heart, speeches and gestures, By lightness, painted faces curling and crisping, wanton gestures and daliances, By Fornication, Adul∣tery, Incest, and unnatural lusts:  By sacriledge and inward theft of the heart, By Roberry and Stealing the
open These of the hand:  By lies and equivocations; by false Rumors and unjust Accusations; by Lie-tellers and truth-Concealers; by those that plead in bad causes, register false Acts, and suborn false Witnesses;  by the dis∣conted and coveting others Estates and Goods; by those Stallions that the Prophet speaketh of, who are alwayes neighing after their neighbours wives,Ier. 8 5 Humano capiti cervicem jungere equum. by those sinful Ahabs who are sick for their Neighbours Vineyard, house or lands: so that considering all those trangressions of the Law, we have just cause to renew the complaint, Help Lord, for the goldly ceaseth, the faithful fail from among the children of men:psal 12 1 we need not wonder for some years past, great Britain hath been all in black, when those grand Scourges was up∣on us at one time, the destroying An∣gel with his sword cutting down old and young in our great and famous Cities, the tender mother with the
Sucking infant,Rev. 6.5 and the sword of an enraged enemy threatning of us at our ports: We have seen the pale and the red horse and their Riders; God grant (for our ingratitude and repining at our plenty, who is now as Canaan for fruitfulness; & now sor our murmuring at Magistracy when we are as Salem▪ for peace, we do not see the black horse with his Rider, and so have our judgement compleated, as sometimes God did upon Samaria and Jerusalem, which the Prophet Jeremy most passionately lamented: To pre∣vent which,Lam. 4 you (right honourable) like Noah, Job and Daniel, must stand in the gap, to divert so great wrath: for when mens affections run wilfully in a course of sin, as the horse rusheth into the battle,Ier. 8.6. they ought to be held to their duty by the bridle of the law, which is , the Judge power and authority, being to settle every man in his regular course of life, and so you become instruments of the King and Kingdomes safety: The famous Chancellor Fortescue in
that excellent Dialogue, informing us, Imperatoriam maestatem non solum armis decoratam, sed & legibus oportet esse armatam; That it concerneth the Imperial Majesty, not only to be guarded with arms, but to be armed with Laws: intimating, that Judges are the Kings guard in times of peace, as Souldiers are in time of Warre; Though we must confess, all sorts of Togati (as well as the long Robe) must and are bound in duty, to be his guard, and of the life guard in time of Rebellion, according to that,Tertul. In laesae Majestatis reos omnis homo miles est: But in times of Peace Judges are especially; If they do Justice and judge∣ment, it shall be well with him,2 Chron. 7.17, 18 and with his Kingdom too, For by them his throne is established. To all of us it is safety, and to your selves salvation: for where Justice and Judgement is kept,Esa. 56.1. Gods salvation is near: And Justice as it must be executed, so it must be spee∣dily, against those that will not do (obstinate sinners,Ezra 7.26 not weak offenders) the Law of the Lord, thy God and the
King, then Judgement must be execut∣ed without delay: Impunity makes such men grow sensless and shameless, con∣nivency is a bad and cruel nurse, it nourishes up sin from a brat to a mon∣ster, till it be as strong as Leviathan, that it breaks all hooks of Law, all bonds and cords of Justice, and so brings nothing but a Chaos of disorder and confusion into the Church and Kingdom; therefore it is very dange∣rous to be prodigal of mercy: a little severity in time, prevents the letting of a greater quantity of blood. And as Justice must be executed speedily, so impartially; There must be no respect of persons in judgement: There is but one Law pro parvo & magno:Deut. 1.17 The precept and example of him who is both our Saviour and our Judge must be followed. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judge∣ment, and this will be accounted unto you for righteousness,Iohn 7 24 and to your seed after you. But whilst I plead for justice, do not judge or censer me, as though I were against
Mercy. O Mercy, mercy! the choisest Attribute (in respect of us) in the King of Kings, and the most re∣splendent vertue in his Vicegerents upon earth: And let mercy and truth (as well as justice) alwayes preserve our King, and all in authority under him;prov 20▪ 28 for by it his Throne is upholden. The merciful Judge is of Chancellors For∣tescues opinion, who confessed, Mallem reverâ viginta facinorosos mortem eva∣dere,Forte. Dial pag 62. quam justum unum injuste condem∣nari: I had rather twenty guilty per∣sons should escape the stroke of Ju∣stice, then one innocent should fall by it. And amongst guilty persons, it must be the Judges discretion, to dis∣cern who they are that deserve the stroke of Justice:Dallin A∣phor The State Apho∣rism is to punish rather the motion of the head, then the actions of the hand or foot; the Seducer rather then the seduced; Plus peccat Author quam Actor.Fleta▪ To spare the silly sheep is Mercy, but to spare the Wolfe, (though he be in sheeps clothing) is cruelty: Judgement and Mercy
must be rightly tempered, yet so, that Mercy do not hinder Judgement, and yet that of the two, Mercy re∣joyce against Judgement. And now I have done with the word of exhor∣tation, I proceed to a word of Cauti∣on:Use of Caution 1. To the Lawyers, Take heed of Envy and Injury, which commonly go together: 1. Envy at your Superiors, Gods Daniels, who are prefer'd to places of dignity befor you, a dange∣rous sin. It was Envy that threw DanielDan. 6.4 into the den of Lyons: The Presidents and Princes, out of ambiti∣on, could not brook the preferment of such a stranger: The wicked cannot abide the graces of God in others, and therefore maliciously slander him with great ingratitude, as if for his Ho∣nours confer'd upon him, he returned Contempt and Rebellion. It was Envy in the sons of the Patriarch,verse 13 that made them so unnatural to their bro∣ther: When men are conceited of themselves,Gen. 37.4. they storm that others are prefer'd before them, whereas
we should conder, that God is the great Master of the Scenes, that pre∣sents the world with a new Stage of Acts and Actors:1 Sam. 2.7, 8 The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich, he bringeth low, and lifteth up: He is no Leveller, he will have some upon the Throne and Seats of Judgement, and we must sub∣mit to his over-ruling Providence: The Planets and Stars in the heavens, the bruit beast on the earth, and Fishes in the sea, continue all in the same estate wherein they were first created, not complaining against, or envying one the other: Why should man in honour have no understanding,psal 49.20 and be not only like, but worse then the bruits that perish. 2. Take heed of Injury: for my self, Nemo vestrûm mihi injuria cogni∣tus, I know no hurt by any of your Profession: I know many worthy per∣sons that are grave, honest, learned and religious men, and I hope and pray, that the rest of that noble pro∣fession may be so: The way to pre∣serve the decency and gravity of the
Law, is to do nothing of partiality, to proceed not according to opinion or appearance,Exod 23.2, 3 but according to Right and Justice; in Charity to have re∣spect unto a poor mans necessity, but in point of Justice and Equity, to re∣gard neither the Power and Autho∣rity of the rich, nor the misery or Penury of the Poor, but his Right only. A good Lawyer must have an heart without affection, an eye with∣out lust, and a mind without passion, otherwise wrong and wrested Judge∣ment may proceede to the Prejudice of the most righteous Cause: And if wrong Judgement do proceed through your means, you have cause to fear the Lyons. But what Lyons? 1. The Kings Throne, like Solomons, is supported with Lyons, men of courage, who will not be afraid to punish wrong doers; and the Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lyon,prov 19 12 a Messenger of death. But i you escape these, there are others you cannot: The Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, who though at his first coming was a Lamb, at his second
will be a Lyon, a just Judge, who at the general and great Assizes, will sit upon his Throne of Judicature, where the Charge shall e read,psal 50 21 and sin set in order before you; and if you be there found guilty, and have the sen∣tence passed on you, Ie maledicti, de∣livered up to the Executioner, Car∣nifex irae divinae, that roaring lyon, that goes about here dayly seeking whom he may devour, but there shall actu∣ally devour, but not absolutely de∣stroy to all eternity. If there by any that forget God, or his Justice, let them consider this, Lest he tear them in pieces, when there is none to deliver them. 2. To the Jurors: Take heed of i∣merity or partiality: The lives and goods of men are refer'd to your dis∣cretion and honesty. Darius was much to blame, for rashly conde∣scending to Daniels Destruction: Da∣vid was to hasty to give Mephilosheths goods upon his servant Ziba's forged and false accusations; you bind your selves to God by an oath,2 Sam 16.4 and there∣fore
you must deal as in his sight; you have a Rule to walk by, Mutum Ma∣gistratum, the Laws of the Land: you have the Interpreters of these Laws, Leges loquentes, the honoura∣ble Judges and learned Counsellers, to direct you in this way; you can∣not plead ignorantiam juris, the igno∣rance of the Law for an excuse; and if you remember your oath, and set the fear of God before your eyes, it will make you bold as a Lyon to do justly. I have read in Cokes Institutes,Lib. 3. That none should be returned as Jurors, but honest and good men, of good degree and quality, substantial persons for Estates and Ability, such as need not be afraid to speak their conscience and do justice, nor yet to stand in need to be brib'd, to wrong their conscience and pervert Justice: which crooked paths that you may decline, weigh all things with judge∣ment and deliberation in statera legis, & trutina conscientiae, linguae calamum in corde tingentes, in the ballance of the Law, Scales of the Sanctuary, and the Court of your own conscience:
Let not the pen of your tongue utter any thing, before it hath been dipt in the ink of your heart. The punish∣ment of Perjury in Jurors for a false Vrdict, (if it be inflicted) is severe by the common Law, but the punish∣ment due to it by Gods Law, is far greater, Pejurii poena humana dedecus, divina exitium; with man it is usual∣ly disgrace, but with God destruction and everlasting confusion of face, such an expectation must be, as the Apostle saith, , a fearful expectation of Judgement:Heb. 10.27 21 I beseech you therefore in the fear of God, to consider, that sincerity is the Attribute of the oath of God; Re∣member his eye () is up∣on you; an Act of Justice is a service acceptable unto him; Do your parts, God will not be wanting in his: when the great Assizes of the world shall be kept, That which you have done in secret for him,Mar. 6.6. shall be rewarded open∣ly. 3. To Accusers and Witnesses, to joyn you both together, Take heed of
Perjury, Remember Daniels false ac∣cusers escaped not the punishment: The Lyons mouths that God shut for the preservation of his innocent ser∣vant, he opened for the destruction of his malicious enemies:Dan. 6 24. Here was Lex talionis on Gods part: Thus did their mischief return upon their own pate, they sunk down in the pit that they had made: The Lord is known by the judgement which he executeth,psal 7 15 & 9.15, 16 when the wicked is snared in the work of their own hands. Thus are all Gods Creatures his hoast to do his Will for reward or punish∣ment: Innocency finds protection with savage Lyons, when the guilty find their ruine and destruction. I might give you many examples of this nature, I shall but mention one. Narcissus that famous Bishop of Je∣rusalem,Euseb. Eccl histor. who was an austere man, and of upright life and conversation, was falsely accused by three debauched persons (that feared to suffer justly for their misdemeanors by his autho∣rity) to be guilty of some great crime notorious and capital; and to per∣swade
the people (who had a great respect for the good Bishop) the soon∣er to believe it, they endeavoured to confirm their forged accusation with oaths and strange imprecations upon themselves. The first, If I lye, let me burn to Ashes. The second, If I report not the truth, let me be tormented and pine away with some lingring disease. The third, If I bear false witness, let me be smitten with blindness. The good man was sore troubled at this aspersi∣on unjustly cast upon him, that he re∣tired himself, and liv'd obscurely for many years. But observe how God clear'd the innocency of his faithful servant, and catch'd those Conspira∣tors, bringing the same curses upon them that they had imprecated upon themselves: A small spark fell in the night upon the house of the first, which broke out into such a fearful flame and fire, as consum'd himself, house and family to ashes. A most filthy disease ceas'd upon the body of the second, which miserably torment∣ed him, and put a period to his mise∣rable
and wrethed life: The third seeing the terrible end of the two for∣mer his lewd companions, and being convinced of the sin, freely confessed unto all their compacted combination and conspiracy against that holy man, and did soe afflict himselfe with pene∣tential sorrow, and shed such rivers of tears, that he lost his sight, and soe in mercy escap'd eternal, though not temperal judgement; was judged Chastned here of the Lord, that he might not be condemned with the world, exemple tristia sed salubria: sad examples, yet very useful and instructive. Cor 11.32. These may astonish all false accusers, and witnesses, perjured persons, These may▪ strike with terrour the profan∣est sinner, suborners, Knights of the post, (as they call them) and like the body of Amasa wallowing in his blood, make them stand still at these gashly sights in the midway, and stop them in their course of sin; you know the false witnesse by Gods law, is to be punished lege talionis.Deut. 19.16 Thou shalt do to him as he thought to have done to his
brother. By mans Law, before the conquest, it was punished sometimes by death, sometimes by banishment, and sometimes by corporal punish∣ment.Cokes: Justic: lib. 3: c: 74: Afterward it came to fine and ransome, and never after to bear tstimony. Atrox injuria est quae om∣nium nobilium amissionem confert. An hainous offence certainly that was pu∣nished with the loss of all moveables.Fleta. lib. 2: cap: 1: It is good to remember mans, but much more Gods judgement; for as the Apostle speaketh, Knowing these terrours of the Lord, we seek to perswade men.2. Cor: 5.11 4. And lastly, To all in general: As we tender the safety of our King, and the prosperity of the kingdome, Let us all take heed of Iniquity, espe∣cially of those crying sins which of late years have reigned in this land, damn'd Atheism prodigious intempe∣rance, notorious uncleanness, Luci∣ferian pride, bloody oaths, and trea∣cherous combination and conspiracy, not only against the supreme Magi∣strate, but the subordinate, such as
Daniel, for which God hath had a controversie with this land, and hath already smitten us: The sins of the body of the people hath an influence of the Soveraign head: For the trans∣gressions of the Land many are the Prin∣ces thereof. Good King Josiah died in peace with God,pro: 28.. tho slain by the sword of an enemy in the bloody field of Vegiddo, and then was lamentation made for his fall, by vertue of an ordinance in Israel.2 Chro 35.25. And sure I am, we have great cause annually to renew our sad lamentation for the untimely fall of our good Josiah, not only our Pro∣phets and our Priests, but our singing men and singing women, (those who are most addicted to mirth and mu∣sick) With a Woe unto us that we have sinned.Lam: 5.16. But it concerns us now to bless God for his mercy restored unto us, that Wisdom and the true Religion, (yea Justice and Judgement) doth now again cry in the chief places of concourse,Pro: 1.21: in the opening of the gates, that in the City she utters her words, Let us bless him likewise for his govern∣ment
who upholds it, and to our Hallelujah's, to matter of gratulation and rejoycing, let us all joyn Hosan∣na's, matter of supplication and prayer for our dear and dread Sove∣rign, as here Daniel did for the great Darius: so shall we end as we begun shall we pray as the Syrick Poet? for his Macenas the great Augustus. Sus in coelum redeas Carole, diuque laetus in∣tarsis populo Britannico. Give him a long life here O Lord, to reign over his British Subjects, before thou giv∣est him everlasting life, to reign here∣after with thy glorious Saints. Or shall we offer our united devotions, as Tertullian in his apology informs us, the Primitive Christians did for the Roman Emperours: that God would give him: Regnum tutum, vitam pro∣lixam, Senatum fidelem, exercitum for∣tem, populum probum & orbem quietum▪ a safe Empire, a long Life, a faih∣ful Councel, valiant Armies, an o∣bedient People and a quiet world: nay more; Give me leave to turn an antient prophecy into a Prayer. The
Prophecy was. The Scepter should not depart from Judah, until Shiloh came, and the Prayer is: Lord (if it be thy blessed will) let not the Scepter of these Kingdomes depart from our gracious So∣veraign and his Line, till Shiloh come again: And now Lord establish his throne by righteousnes here, Exalt his Crown with honour, his Scepter with power, preserve his person that he may live in safety here, and crown him with thy salvation hereafter, that so he may live for ever. And Let all the people say: Amen, Amen. FINIS.
The POSTSCRIPT. Pro captu Lectoris habent suafata libelli. I had no sooner (in vita Minerva) appear'd in the Pulpit, and the Ser∣mon after that desired to be published, but some of my good friends infor∣med me of some learned Censors, who presently judged me Oriontalium linguarum rudem: To whom I reply, with the great Doctor of the Gentiles, We know but in part,1 Cor: 12.9. &c. and in the Church had rather speak five words, with my understanding, that by my voice I may teach others also, than ten thousand words also in an unknown tongue:1 Cor 14.19. Give me leave therefore to propound three Quaeries to the Super∣cilious Aristarchus, the conceited Gno∣stick, and backbiting Zoilus. 1. Whether, this Salvation, O King live for ever, and that, God save the King, be not Synonima's? 2. Whether our English Transla∣tion be not authentick, and according
to the Septuagint, and the learned Doctor Wallons (our la Lord Bishop of Chester)  The Syriack, Chaldea, and Hebrew tongues bea∣ing the same sense with it. O King ve for ever. 3. Whether Daniel wrote the book part of it in the Syriack, another part that cean'd the ffair that fell under the Chaldean Monarchy in the Chaldee tongue, and the third part, which concerned the Jewes in his own tive tongue, the Hebrew? Dic mihi q ling, si ori mihi magnus Apollo.
