C1729C R221852 31354945 110293
Certain Propositions Relating to the Scots Plantation of CALEDONIA, and the National Address for supporting thereof, breifly offered to Publick View, for removing of Mistakes and Prejudices. I. THAT the Scotch Planters have entered upon Caledonia by Warrant, and un∣der Security of an Act of Parliament, and Letters patent from his Majesty under the Great Seal, and most strictly within the Terms and Conditions thereof; otherwise there had needed no more to Ruine them, than a De∣claration of their having Forfeited their Act and Charter. II. That their Right is confirmed by Invitation from, and League with the original free Natives of that Country, who only can have the primary Natural Right to the Soil, and from whom the Spaniards have, contrary to all Justice, Faith, and Contract, u∣surp'd what they now prossess in America, having obtain'd their Possession by Fraud and Force and Barbarous Cruelty, and by the Popes Donation upon certain Condi∣tions, which they have not in the least observed, as is fully made appear by Bartholo∣mew de las Casas Bishop of Chiapa, one of there own Missionaries. III. That the place chosen by the Scots was never inhabited by the Spaniards or any other European, and consequently the Scots have the same freedom to take Possession of it, as the English to possess any part of the Coast from New-England to Florida, the French in Canada and Messasippy, the Portuguez in Brasil, and the Dutch in Suranam, being all upon the same Continent, which the Spaniards from Columbus's discovery, do chal∣lenge to themselves. And indeed it is evident, That the Crown and Kingdom of Scotland hath not a better Title, nor a more just Right to any Scots Territory from the Mule of Galloway to the Week of Cathnes then to Caledonia in America. IV. That not only have the Scots the sole unquestionable Right to this Important Place: But likewise, albeit they have been hitherto debarr'd from all Benefit of free Trading in other Plantations, yet they have very frankly offered both to the English and Dutch, their Protestant Neighbours, a reasonable Share in all the Advantages of Caledonia, which for Natural Wealth and Strength, and conveniency of Trading, is without Dispute, the most considerable in the whole World. V. That if the Scots be forced to abandon their Plantation, the French will undoubt∣edly seize upon it, not only for the sake of Trade, Gain, and Empire; But likewise in Zeal for rooting out the Northern Heresy, both from America and Europe, which may be easily foreseen, both by the vast occasion of Power and Wealth, that so impor∣rant a Post will bring to the French Greatness, and by the keen Resentment that all the Popish Courts, and particularly the Court of Rome have testified against the Scots pos∣sessing thereof, and by the no less unpolitick than cruel Persecution that, at this day rages in France against the poor Remnant of Protestants, who cannot comply with their Superstition and Idolatry. VI. That there is such an hopeful appearance of propagating the pure Gospel a∣mongst an Harmless, good Natur'd People in the Neighbourhood of Caledonia, who seem well disposed to receive it, as ought to excite Reformed Protestants to contri∣bute thereto with the greatest Vigor; and to strengthen themselves against the Ro∣mish Power; especially when Popery prevails so mightily over all Europe, and the Papists compass Sea and Land to gain Proselites; Nor doth the Remotness, Danger and Barbarities of China, Japan, Tartary, and all the back parts of the English Plantations discourage or faint their Zeal. VII. That therefore, it is the undoubted Interest and Duty of all Protestants, to sup∣port this Colony in the Scots hands, who have the only just Right thereto; and in whose Possession, it must certainly prove more beneficial to all other Protestant King∣dom and States, than any other more wealthy and powerful Kingdom or State would suffer it to be unto the rest, if they did possess it alone. And it must be the unquestion∣able duty of all true hearted Scots Men to endeavour by all Just, Legal, and orderly ways, the Preservation of their own Colony. VIII. That whatever has been the Cause of the late Disaster of Caledonia, yet most Evident it is, that the Colony cannot now be preserved to Scotland,
unless the Force and  of the West-India Proclamations be taken off, and that ob, very speedily, si  is undeniably manifest, that the Company under teir pre∣sent hard Circumsta, and now sadly redoubled Misfortunes, are not able to sup∣port the same, and vigio the very speedy Assistance of a Parliament, not only must so Great and Honour  Enterprise fall to the Ground, but the remaining Persons, and the Treasure empld therein must Perish, to the Irreparable Less and Dis∣honour of the Nation▪ IX. That the only  and effectual Way for Remedy, is (in imitation of the Dutch-East-India-Compa ho having been unsuccessful in their two first Voyages, were supported by th -General) in all Humble and Dutiful Manner, to Address the King for the Meeti  the parliament; which having been already done by the Company, and his Majesy having been pleased to regret their and the Kingdoms loss, and to promise that th iament shall meet, when the Good of the Nation does require it; There can  othing more Natural, than for the Nation themselves to acquaint his Majesty  e urgent Necessity of the Parliament's speedy Meeting, upon so weighty and sing a Juncture, and of so Universal a Concern to the whole Nation. X. That the Natural at of Petitioning, in a Legal and Orderly Wa being revived and asserted by  Claim of Right, the Happy Purchase of the late ricus Revolution: And His Majesty, our Great De under God, having alw esti∣fied a just Regard to the oresaid Right of Petiti  en in that Proction that forbids Illegal Meth; However His Majesty  me things, h een mis-informed, to the Price of this His Ancient King  Yet it is nev  be imagined, but that wher  understands their true Good from themselves,  ill Graciously grant their Je and Necessary Desires, and with  n Countenance, and take e of their Righteous Cause. XI. That tho it be Diyal for any Man, to doubt of the Kings granting  ¦liament, when sought by  considerable a part of the Nation: And to doubt o  Parliament's supporting donia, is unworthy of a Scots Man; Yet if the Question  ask'd, What is to be don case of Refusal? The Answer is plin, That first, the N¦tion shall have the Satisfaion of having done their Duty; and next, they shall have the Melancholly Advante of knowing, that further Attempts for an American-Plantation must at present ease, so as they need not fruitlesly throw away more Men and Money to be lost in oubtful Expectations, but must gather up their Shipwrack, and call Home what ns. XII. That in a Cas  Universal and Pressing Concern, as Persons of differ Interests have been in  o enter into the Trading Society, so it ought to frigh none from their Duty  omoting this Address, because Persons of the same di¦ring Interests joyn in it; nce the Address it self is National, Loyal and Protestan, and one of the best Securities to the present Government; and so also is the Design, in which all doth Center. XIII. That albeit some ill Minded Persons bestir themselves in blowing about In∣sinuations, Surmises and Jealousies, to raise Dust and blind Peoples Eyes, yet these are so weak and groundless, and are convincingly found to be so very idle Stuff, that they deserve the utmost Contempt, since Persons of all Ranks engaged in the Ad∣dress, do on all Occasions openly disown all Intentions of Disquieting or Prejudging the Government in Church or State, as now by Law established, and declare their only Design to be His Majesty's true Honour, and the Good of the Countrey, which are inseparable, and the Christian Glory of the Church, in the Propagation of the Gospel by the Protestant Presbyterian Ministers of the Church of Scotland. Besides, that, there is an absolute Impossibility, if Matters be duly pondered, that it should be otherwise; or that an Address for the Meeting of that Parliament, which effectuated the late Happy Revolution, and for the Support of Caledonia, can have any other Tendency. XIV. That the General Assembly, by their Acts, and the Commission, by their Letter to the Colony, their Mission in Summer last, and their late Recommendation to Presbyteries, have testified so peculiar a Regard to the Caledonian-Undertaking, and so just a Sense of the great Interests of Religion therein, That no Minister of the Gos∣pel, who will not blindly truckle to a Party, or is not misled by the Power of Preju∣dice, can hesitat upon the Necessity, much less upon the Expediency of so Dutiful and Loyal an Address, when the Countries Good, and the Service of the Nation, doth so urgently require it. GLASGOW, Printed in the Year, 1700.
