C1897 R40320 18846753 108426
A LETTER TO Mr. BRAINE Br. of Divinity. Concerning an Administrator of Water-Baptisme. SIR, UNless Disputes were syllogistical, and then to a Mo∣derator, your Apprehensions are too nimble, and your Learning too great, and your Discourse too fluent, to debate our difference by a multitude of words; for either we our selves, nor the Auditors, do receive satisfaction. I thought good therefore to proceed in writing, not repeating what either you or I said in heat or anger; but to take the Question de Novo. You enquire after an Administrator, which enquiry, nor so much as the word it self is found in all the Scripture, but is a new found word, lately used to disturb the Ordinances of God. But we may find the sum of the question in these words, By what Authority dost thou these things? Sir, th is the sum of your question, and this Sir, was the Pharisees Question. Mat. 21.33. and might receive a like Answer, by way of Question, By what Authority dost thou demand these things? The question was propounded by Pharisees, men learned, men of epute and Honour amongst the People, men in humane Au∣hority; for they were Priests and Levites, and Rulers of the
People. John 1.19.24. John 3.1. & 7.32.45.47.48. & 9.13. & 11.47.48.57. & 12.42. & 18.3 I cannot say they were Mi∣nisters, but Commanders. They asked this question to Christ, the Anointed of the Lord, the Son of God: yet in the eye of men, a Samaritan, a Car∣penters Son, of no humane Learning; yea, one that was esteem∣ed to have a Devil. (John 8.48. Samar:) (Mat. 13.55. Mark 6.3. Carp.) Mat. 13.54.56. whence?) John 8.48. Mat. 10.25. Mark 3.22. Luke 11.15. a Devil Beelzebub.) This question was the question in the Bishops dayes to all that sought the wayes of Christ, or endeavoured to propagate the Truth. This question is the great question, the main question of the Church of Rome, and is yet the question amongst us; in∣timating that there is no Authority, but what cometh from Man, or is successively by Man. Alas poor men! The workings of the spirit are invisible to humane sight. The spirit bloweth where it listeth. John 3. and Christ is a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck.Heb. 5. Shall we ask Authority of Man to be wise, or honest, or just? This was the folly the Parlia∣ment first ran in, when those corrupt men were in it, that cost so much blood. When they asked leave of the King to dis∣charge their Consciences, to make just Lawes to discharge their Trust, and ease the grievances of the People, for which they were called. Well, Christ answers them with a question. The Baptisme of John, was it of God or Man? Verse 26John had Authority from God, but they knew it not, and (propably) had they not feared the People would have affirm∣ed his Baptisme to be his own presumption and heresie. For the Word came to John in the Wilderness. (Luke 3.2.) and John wrought no miracle. (John 10.41.) yet the People (whom the Pharisees judged accursed, (John 7.) and the Publicans ju∣stified God,, in being baptized of him; But the Pharisees and Lawyers are said to reject the Counsel of God against them∣selves, in being not baptized of him. (Luke 7.29.30.) yet Sir, there was no written word for Johns Authority to baptize. Only an obscure Prophesie which they could not understand,
nor any but by the immediate spirit of God, or the Son of God to interpret. The voyce of one crying in the Wilderness, &c. (Isay 40.3.) there is nothing but a voyce, and that in the Wilderness. Yet this voyce in the Wilderness sets up an Ordinance, the Ordinance of Baptisme, for the remission of sins, (Luk. 3.3.) justified by sinners,Rom. 102. Phil. 3.6. condemned by zealous and learned Phari∣sees and Lawyers. Luke 7.29.30. The People stood not capi∣tulating with John about his Authority, or how he could prove that the Word came to him in the Wilderness, and who made him an Administrator. Nor did they cavil at him for striking at their chief and main priviledge,Luke 3.8. of being Sons of A∣braham, which they and all the world knew they were. But the People asked him, saying, what shall we do then? (verse 10.) They considered, that what he spake was honest and rea∣sonable, and full of Piety and Holiness. It was fit that men should repent; for their Conscience told them they had sin∣ned: and finding the substance true, they never quarreld with the circumstance of Authority, yet they had then a visible Au∣thority amongst them ordained of God. Annas and Caiphas were High-Priests, and the Priests lips were to preserve know∣ledge. Sir, I come near home, you have ingenuously and publickly acknowledged Water-Baptisme, an Ordinance of Christ, and that it is necessary, and it is only due unto Believers; but you allow no Administrator, because there hath been no visible succession. I beseech you in the love of Christ to abate of the earnestness of your spirit, in what you have been so long endeerd unto, and now the more by having been heated therein by Disputes. Look upon the business de novo, as if you never had heard, or been engaged to either side. And the Lord in mercy to your soul, and to his Church, to the which you might be so bright and shining a Lamp, (if once perswaded of the truth) grant you a clear and impartial understanding of his will and pleasure. Sir, God had a Church in the World, though in the Wil∣derness. And the Church was a Church, a visible Church in it self, though in the Wilderness, and our from the manifest and stately Cities and Buildings of men. And the Church was fed
in the Wilderness,Rev 12.14. Mat. 16 18. (though the Habitation of wild Beasts.) And the Gates of Hell neither were, nor shall be ever able to prevail against it. If in the Wilderness, where form, and order, & decency could not be, much more in the City, in heavenly Jerusalem, (the Mother of us all. Gal. 4.26.) where God is our light, Rev. 21.23. The God of Order, 1 Cor. 14.33.) Therefore, whe∣ther in City or in Wilderness, there is a Church, and she is fed; yea, and some out of the Wilderness, whilst she her self is in the Wildernes. Rev. 12.17. (a Remnant of her seed.) And such are they who keep the Commandemens of God, and have the Testimony, (not of Men) but of Jesus Christ. (ibid.) When the Israelites murmured for want of water, and that Moses gave it them out of the Rock, they asked not whether they should drink in sanctified Vessels, or stayed till Moses gave them every one their proportion. They would not let the wa∣ter run by them so in waste. When we read the word of God (and not of man) that tells us Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, Jo: 3.1 Tim:) and he is for salvation to the ends of the Earth. Acts 13.47. And that whosoever believeth and is baptized, shall be saved. Mark 16.16. And that unless a Man be born of Water and of the spirit, he can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Jo: 3.5. And that we finding experi∣mentally that we can be baptized if we will, there having ne∣ver been any restraint in the word upon the Baptizer. We can∣not but hear the voyce of Christ, John 10.2. We cannot neg∣lect so great salvation, we cannot belie the abilities and provi∣dence of God offered unto us. It is not said, whomsoever ye baptize; but whosoever is baptized, Mark 16. Whosoever worketh Righteousness is righteous,1. John 3.7. Rom. 6.17. not he that saith L.L. but he that doth the will of the Father. (Mat. 7.21.) His Servants ye are to whom ye obey. Not the Commands of God, but our Obedience makes us his Servants. If therefore ye ask by what Authority we obey the Commands of God? I answer, it is by the Authority and power of God. For the word of God came to John in the Wilderness, and the word of God is come unto us, whether in the Wilderness, or out of the Wilderness, and you do not deny it to be the word of God. All power is of
God. (Rom. 13.2. Jo: 19.11.) If therefore we are baptized, and it is his Command we should be baptized: what do we question the Authority of his Command? The hair of the ead falls not to the ground without his providence, (Mat. 10.30.) Christ is with us to the end of the world, (Mat. 28.20.) He hath not left us comfortless, (Jo: 14.18.) Blessed are they that believe and have not seen, John 20.29. We cannot but have Authority to be honest, to be just, to be righteous, to be faithful, to be obedient. It is ridiculous to affirm the contra∣ry. Every man that is wounded hath Authority to stanch his  a blood, or to do the like charity to another, (if he can) without a Surgeon. The word of God declareth the Command  Teaching and Preaching, and disciplining in the Active, (Mat. 1.19.20. Mark 16.15.Acts 2.41.) But of baptzing in the Passive, or in articiple, (ibid. verse 16. Act. 16.15.33. and 18.8. & 8.1. &c.) If Preaching be more then Baptizing, then whosoever may ch, may Baptize. But Preaching is more then Baptizing, as may appear, 1 Cor. 17. Act. 10.48. for the liberty of preaching, whether , or . You may read it in Act. 8.4.5. & 9.20. as  as ever Paul was baptized, and 15.21. and Phil. 1.14.15.Acts 18.26.28. 1 Cor. 14.31. (Act. 4.31. and 5.30. ) the A∣s did  as well as  and false Brethren, Jewes did  (Act. 15.21. Phil. 1.15.) as well . truth is, every man hath Authority to speak truth, and peak that Truth which God will have published to the e World. And if man will not do it,Luke 19 40. the very stones of eet will. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the ent sheweth his handy-work, Psal. 19. so that their  is gone out to the uttermost ends of the Earth. Rom. 10. one can preach unless he be sent. Rom. 10.15. If we then  we are sent; for none can come unto Christ, unless the  draw him, (Jo: 6.44.45.) and all that the Father hath  Christ shall come unto him, (Jo. 6.37.) for the Gospel
is hid to none but those that are lost. 2 Cor. 4.3. And as with∣out Christ we can do nothing, (Jo: 15.5.) so we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, Act. 4.20. The voice of the Creation hath spoken to us, the voice of Providence, the voice of Conscience, the voice of his Word, (the voice of God.) What, should we boast of Visions of Revelations, of Dreams, of Chastisements, of Sufferings, of Miracles, of Providence, of Prayers? yet we have a more sure word of Prophesie, 2 Pet. 1.19. And Christ himself saith, that if ye believe not the Scriptures, how shall ye believe my words. Jo: 5.47? Words which shall judge us in the last day. Jo: 10. Words so un∣changeable, that Heaven and Earth shall passe away before one jot shall passe. Mat. 5.18. That whosoever addeth, the judge∣ments and plagues of the Revelation shall be added, and who∣soever taketh away, his Name shall be taken out of the book of life, (Rev. 22 18.19.) yea though an Apostle, or an Angel shall preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. Gal. 1.8.9. This word of God saith, Whosoever believeth and is baptized, shall be saved; and whosoever believeth not, shall be damned, (Mark 16.16.) Shall this word have any more Authority, be∣cause this or that Minister confirms it? Man cannot make the word of God true, nor can the Sonnes of man, give Authori∣ty to the Word of God. But whomsoever the word of Go emboldeneth, empowereth to be a Witness, a Messenger,  Preacher, though a Child, (Mat. 21.16.) though an Earthe Vessel. (2 Cor. 4.7.) though a fool. (1 Cor. 3.18.) thoug a thing of nought. (1 Cor. 1.28.) He will by them perfec prayse, distribute his heavenly Treasure, confound the wisdo of the World, and bring to nought things that are. If we the for obeying the Command of God, are this day accused, wh shall be said to those that obey not? to those that forbid tho Commands? to those that oppose and speak evil of that ¦bedience? Sir, I beseech you make hast, and bring in that Treas Christ hath intrusted you with into the publick Stock of  Church. And by how much you perceive any weakness in
by so much the more do you hasten to strengthen us, that I may ever be, Learned Sir, Your very faithful Servant in the Lord, PETER CHAMBERLEN. . August, 1650. POSTSCRIPT. The Heavens and the Earth were brought forth by the word of God, (Gen. 1.) Man liveth not by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. (Mat. 4.) The word of God hath made us, and we are the workmanship of his hands. (Ps: 100) The word hath said, that wheresoe∣ver two or three are gathered together in the name of Christ, he is there in the midst of them (Mat. 18.20.) If therefore any are assembled by the power of that word testified, in that they therefore do it, and not by the Traditions of men or Cu∣stome, is not that an Assembly of Christ? And if ought were wanting of a circumstance, hath not he promised that what 2. shall consent so on earth his Father shall do it for them? (Mat. 18.19.) Hath he not powred of his spirit on all flesh? Act. 2.) Is his Arm shortned, or his promise broken? Consider & obey, I beseech you resist not the power and spirit of God, whereby we are sealed. What Authority was there for those that were dispersed to preach, or for Philip to baptize. Acts 8. FINIS.
