C3788 12072222 53504
THE ANGLER'S Vade Mecum: OR, A Compendious, yet full, DISCOURSE OF ANGLING: DISCOVERING The aptest Methods and Ways, exactest Rules, properest Baits, and choicest Experiments for the catching all manner of fresh-water Fish: perused and approved by many exquisite Ang∣lers, together with a brief Discourse of Fish∣ponds: and not only the Easiest but most Pala∣table ways of Dressing all sorts of Fish, whether belonging to Ponds or Rivers. By a Lover of Angling. Per varios usus Artem experientia secit. Inter verba laudantium sive vituperantium ad men∣tem & experientiam recurrendum est. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bassett, at the George near S. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street. 1681.
THE Preface. Courteous or Uncourteous Reader, WHichsoever you are I value not, knowing that kind Words in a Preface are never Charms a proof to anticipate Censure; a Fate all Wri∣ters (especially on so inconsiderable a Sub∣ject) cannot but expect; yet if a Brother of the Angle reads and tries, better For∣tune may be hoped for; as to others, the Book is not only useless, but they indiscreet that Judge and pass Sentence on what they understand not, Tractent Fabrilia Fa∣bri. The common objection I know will be raised by the Ignorant, that is, what needs any more Writing in this kind?
since Markham, Walton, Venables, Cotton, and others, have with so much ingenuity bestowed no small pains herein: (to whose labours and industry I acknow∣ledg this Tract not a little beholding.) Now the old and trite Answer to this Ob∣jection must needs be return'd, that a Pigmy mounted on the Shoulders of a Giant may see further then its Supporter; also all Arts are capable of Improvement, none yet being arriv'd to an absolute per∣fection, and some affirm, that Angling like Mathematicks can never be so fully lear∣ned, but that there will be still more new Experiments left for the Tryal of others that succeed; besides those Authors have discoursed something generally on Ang∣ling, whereas this descends to the meanest perticular any ways relating thereunto. I purposely forbear to speak any thing (as is usual) in praise of Angling, or any ways celebrate it, by telling you what Holy and Illustrious persons have been practisers thereof, or spoken in its commendation: neither shall I ennumerate the advantages it has of other Recreations, especially by the smallness of its expence, and its creat∣ing
a Calm and sedate temper of Mind; that being an unworthy way of raising its reputation by reflecting with detraction on other Sports, neither could I ever observe that Harangues of that nature ever caused any person to be enamour'd thereon, unless there be a natural propensity in his own Genius thereunto, Anglers like Poets be∣ing Born with an innate affection to Ang∣ling, as Poets with an inclination to Poe∣try. As for this little Treatise many persons have contributed much Oyl to its Lamp, else it would never have been able to af∣ford so great a Light; and (without va∣nity I hope I may say) there are very many things herein never yet published, and not vulgarly known, as also all that ever has been materially Printed concerning Angling, and that in so concise, regular and brief manner deliver'd, as will not onely render this the usefullest Book, but the most perfect of that kind. You'l find herein no vain or superfluous digressions more apt to inflame the price, than inform the Reader. Be pleased to remember, That
many of the Rules herein, are general and ad∣mit of some exceptions, yet the Angler may make from thence beneficial Deductions, which if well consider'd will discharge any Indictment of Falsity, the Angler other∣wise might be incited to prosecute against me; besides, somthings are proposed for him to experiment, and not as infallible Truths; likewise the Countries, Soils, Rivers, Seasons, Winds, and qualities of the Year are not alike, but differ almost in every place; to whose great variety the defect or imperfection that appears in any rule ought to be ascribed, especially in Artificial-fly-Angling: yet if the Rea∣der, peruse this Book deliberately and be but endued with consideration and some Judgment to be gain'd only by practise, the Parent of perfection, hee'l not deny but that all things herein are sincerely Writ∣ten, and so as on his own frequent Essays hee'l find true, and that the price of this Book is not cast away, since it will in the highest degree conduce to the perfect Knowledg of the exactest way of the Pra∣ctical part of this Art, for which its onely design'd, and not to fill or perplex the An∣glers
Head with Speculative, Fancyful, Idle, or fabulous notions of Fish or Ang∣ling. The Style is plain, and fitted to the meanest Capacity, which I esteemed would best become a Work of this Nature; neither indeed if I would, could I other∣way's have done, because I cannot pretend to be the Master of any Eloquence. Now, but that 'tis usual to follow the beaten path, and that the Printer perhaps would be put out of humour, there had been no need of a Comendatory Preface to Court any into a good opinion of it; its own Worth will abundantly justify the Work, which on serious perusal and carefull experiments, I doubt not, but the Buyer will be ready and willing to testify for the Vindication as well as Satisfaction of the Author, who hath for∣born to annex his Name, not that he is a∣shamed to own it, but wishes the Reader would regard things, more than empty Names, which if all would do, many would not so long labour under such Veils of Ig∣norance as they do. Permit me therefore the common Liberty of being at this time an Anonymus, many dayly taking it for worse Ends. Novemb. 17. 1680. Farewell.
ADVERTISEMENTS. NEwly Reprinted The History of Romish Treasons and Ʋsurpations, together with a particular Account of many gross Cor∣ruptions and Impostures in the Church of Rome, highly dishonourable and injurious to Christian Religion: To which is prefixt a large Preface to the Romanists. Carefully Collected out of a great number of their own Approved Authors. By Henry Foulis B. D. late Fellow of Lincoln Colledge in Oxford. To be sold by T. Basset at the George in Fleet∣street. The choicest Hooks are made by Mr. Charles Kirby, in Globe Court in Shoe Lane, London.
THE Anglers VADEMECƲM, &c. CHAP. I. Of the Angle Rod, and its materials. When, and what materials to provide for Angle Rods. 1. GAther the materials to make Rods on, as the Hasle, small Crab-tree, Black-thorn; and Yew switches, &c. at the 10th. of December, that being the only time, and get the stocks and tops especial∣ly taper, or rush grown, streight, smooth, and
free from knots the pieces of each rod to suit each other in an exact Symetry, otherwise they'l neither cast nor strike well; Bind them in bundles, in the middle whereof put some streight Pole, to keep them from warping or crookning, and let them rest 15 months at least, before used. Best Rod for ground line in muddy wa∣ters. 2. For the ground Angle, especially in muddy waters, the Cane or Reed Rod is best, which should be 4 yards and 9 inches of Cane, and a top of Hasle, and Whalebone of one Yard and half, or an Ell long at least; the stiffness of the Cane is helped by the length and strength of the top, the proportionable bend∣ing whereof preserves the Line chiefly, having got a Hasle top an Ell long, cut off 5 or 6 inches at the small end, then piece neatly to the re∣maining part, a small piece of round, smooth and taper Whalebone, and whip it to the Ha∣sle with waxed Silk; all which will make the Rod to be long, gentle; and not so apt to break; let not the Whalebone be above 6 inches long, and thereunto whip a narrow, but strong noose of hair to put your Line to. 3. If your Hook fasten on Wood or Stones in the water, take out the top, and instead thereof put a stick of Hasle, which hath 2 grains and follow the line therewith until you come
to the Hook, (the line running betwixt the grains) and it will loosen the Hook, then take out the stick, and put in the top again. Best Rod for sly and running line, in cleer water. 4. A Rod for fly Angling, or running line in a cleer water, for Trout or Grayling, should be of Hazel 6 inches of Whale-bone, 5 yards and half, or 6 yards long; the Hazel of several pie∣ces, taper and proportionably fitted to each o∣ther, so neatly piec't together, with sine wax thread below and silk above, as to make it taper, and rush-grown like a switch, and ply with a true bent to the hand. But the neatest Rod is thus made: get a white Deal or Fir board, that's thick, and free from knots and frets, and ten foot long, let the Arrow maker divide this with a Saw into seve∣ral breadths, then with his Planes let him shoot them smooth and rush-grown, or taper-wise, and one of these will be 10 foot of the bottom of your Rod, all in one piece, then piece to it a Hazel 5 foot long, proportioned to the Fir, yet rush-grown (the Hazel may consist of one or two pieces) then to the Hazel piece a piece of Yew, 20 inches long, and to the Yew, a piece of small, round smooth whale-bone, 5 or 6 inches long & this will be a curious Rod, if artificially work't, be sure that the Deal for bottom be strong; now the whiteness of the Deal, or Fir will scare away
Fish; but you must colour the Fir in this follow∣ing manner, To colour the Fir-stock. viz. warm the Firr bottom at the fire, when finished by the Arrowmaker; then with a Feather dipt in Aqua Fortis, stroak the Rod and with your hand chase it into the Fir, and it will make it a pure Cinnamon colour. Roch, &c. Rod. 5. Rods for Roch, Dace, Tench, Bream and Carp, &c. should not have the top so gentle as one for fly; therefore make their tops pretty stiff, that so the Rod may exactly answer the motion of your hand; for Roch and Dace only nibble, and if you strike not just in that very moment, especially if you Fish with Paste, or any very tender bait, you miss them: because a slender top folds and bends a little with a sudden Jerk. 6. In droughts, steep your Rod in water, a little before you begin to Angle. 7. At top of the Rod or Fin, fix with Shoo∣makers Wax and Silk, a noose or loop of hair, not large but strong, and very streight to fix your Line to. Rods length. 8. Generally length of Rod, is to be govern∣ed by the breadth of the River you Angle in, but always use a Rod full as long as the River will bear, and let the same be very well mount∣ed.
I never use a Rod under 5 yards and a half long, and I find more advantages by it, than I need to trouble you with here, by telling them, and although I generally Angle in a small Ri∣ver, yet I use one of that length constantly. Running Line top. 9. Your top for running line must be gentle, that the Fish may more easily, and (to him∣self) insensibly run away with the Bait, and not be scared with the stiffness of the Rod, and if you make your top of Yew and Whalebone, as before is directed, it will conduce much to this purpose; the Yew though much bended, will quickly return to its former standing. To preserve Rods. 10. To preserve Hasles whether stocks or tops from Worm-eating, or rotting, twice or thrice in a year, as you think fit, rub them all over with Sallet Oyl, Tallow or sweet Butter, which was never salted, and with much rubbing chase the same into them, and keep your rod dry, least it rot, and not too near the Fire, least it grow brittle.
CHAP. II. Of Hair and Lines. What hairs to elect for lines. 1. ELect your hair not from lean, poor or dis∣eas'd Jades, but from a Stone-horse or Gel∣ding at least, that is sat, strong and lusty, and of 4 or 5 years old, and that which groweth from the inmost and middle part of his Dock, and so extendeth it self downwards to the ground, are commonly the biggest and strongest hairs about the Horse, and better than those upon the upper part of, or setting on of the tail, ge∣nerally best Horses have the best hair. Colour of hair for lines. 2. Hair of a sorrel or Chess-nut colour is best for ground Angle, especially in muddy waters, that being the colour of Gravel or Sand. The white and gray, or duskish white hair for the Fry, and running line in clear Rivers. The pale watery green, but not a deep green, for weedy Rivers in the Summer; a black may do well for Rivers that immediately flow from Mosses, and are thereby very black. 3. Some (although I never do) dy their hair of what colour they please, which for a Brown, is thus done, viz.
Boil Walnut leaves, and a few Marigolds in Chamber-ly, or in stead thereof water and some Allum in it, and when cold steep the hair there∣in. Some say, that the Inner bark of a Crab tree, boild in water with some Allum, makes a pure yellow Colour, which is only (if at any time) good when the Weeds rot. 4. If you'l have a palewater green, take a pint of strong Ale, half a pound of soot, a little quantity of juice of Walnut leaves, an equal quantity of Allum, put all together in a pot, pan or pipkin, boil them half an hour, being cold put the hair into it, and it will make the hair of a glass colour, or pale green Colour, the lon∣ger it lies the deeper's the colour; but if you'l have it rather a deeper green: Take a Pottle of Allum water, a large hand∣ful of Marigold leaves, boil them till a yallow scum arise, then take half a pound of green coperas, as much Verdigrease, beat them into sine pouder, put those into the Allum water, set all to cool, then put in the hair, and let it remain till its deep enough colored, about 12 hours, then take it out, and lay it to dry: Note, that the lon∣ger you permit hair to be in it, it will be deep∣er colored; Some put in the hair while the li∣quor is hot, but I doubt, that weakens the hair, and indeed so, I think, does any dying. How to order choose and keep hair. 5. When you get any good hair, immediate∣ly
steep it 12 hours in cold Spring Water, then wash and rince it very well from dirt, without straining any hairs; then hang it up to dry 3 or 4 daies in a Kitching, but far off from the Fire; when perfectly dry, put it in a bag, or case made of Parchment, or Paper, which lay in a box or desk plac'd in a upper room. How to make Lines. 6. When you make Lines, especially 4 or 5 of the lowermost links, lengths, gildards or toughts (for they are stiled by all these name, in different places) let them be of the best hairs and choose out of the hair such as are of equal bigness, even, round, clear, free from galls, scabs and frets; for such a hair will prove as strong as three uneven, scabby hairs, that are ill chosen, and full of galls, or unevenness: for such commonly stretch altogether, or break altoge∣ther, which hairs of an unequal bigness never do, but break singly, and betray the Angler that relies on them, therefore where you get good Hair be choice and sparing of it; and you may make the top of your line, and indeed, all the line, except two yards next the hook, of a courser hair. 7. Never strain or stretch hairs before they be made into a line (as some do) for then they will shrink when used, the strongest and best are easily elected by the Eye. 8. To make the line handsom, and to twist
the hair even and neat, gives it strength, for if one hair be long and another short, the short one receives no strength from the long one, and so breaketh, and then the other, as too weak break∣eth also: therefore twist them slowly, and in twisting keep them from entangling together, which hinders their right pleighting, or bedding together, and twist the hairs neither too hard, nor too slack, but even so as they may twind, and couch close one within another, and no more, without either snarling, or gaping one from an∣other; your links may be tyed to each other with a Fishers knot, or as some call it, a water∣knot, which any Angler will teach you to make: the mixing hair and silk I esteem no wayes ad∣vantagious to lines. 9. When you have twisted your links, lay them in cold water for one hour, then twist them over again before you tye them into a line, otherwise a hair or two will shrink, and be shor∣ter than the rest at first fishing with it, which is so much of the strength of the line lost, for want of first watering, and then twisting it. 10. Do not arm, six or whip Hooks to any Line, either for ground or fly Angling, that consists of more than three or four links, at the most, but if the hair be long, and the lower∣most link consists of three hairs, then you may whip to one that consists of two links only: the top of the uppermost link having a small water noose or loop, you may to any line put the same, and as easily remove it.
Length of Dub-fly Line. 11. Your Line for Dub-fly, Cast-fly, or Ar∣tificial-fly (which are all one and the same) should be almost twice the length of the Rod, if the River be not encumbred with wood or trees on its Banks, if so, let it be shorter, but longer than the Rod, and let the hair be a white, or a darkish white colour. Thickness of Cast-fly Lines. 12. To Angle for Trouts, Graylings, and Salmon-Smelts, (no bigger than a very large Gudgeon) with the Dub-fly, let the two first links next hook, be but of one hair a peice, but the hair must be strong and of the thicker ends on∣ly, and chosen for the purpose, the next link of two hairs, and next to that must consist of three hairs, at top whereof have a water noose or loop to put to your line, whose low'rmost link consists of three hairs, and has another Water-noose at bottom, to six your fly of three or four links too, then let your next link of your line be four hairs, and so proceed by encreasing one hair un∣til you come to six or seven hairs at the top, let the single hair and the two next links be of a white or darkish white, or rather a white blew colour. 13. But many think this too small, especial∣ly where there are very large Trouts, and there∣fore
for Cast-fly Angling, constantly advise two of the first link next Hook, to be of two hairs a piece, the next above them of three hairs, to which have a water noose, then two or three hairs a piece, and then proceed with four, five and six to the topmost. 14. Others there are, and good Anglers too, that advise the two links next Hook, to consist of three hairs a piece, then one of four, at top whereof to have a water noose, then four, five, six and seven to the topmost link, which I like very well, if the River abound with large Trouts, and the water either be clearing after Rain, or be very full, or swelled more than usu∣ally. Now since you have all directed, make choice according to your skill, practice and dex∣terity; most when they Angle with three hairs next Hook, make a water noose on the top of the second link. Your Lines thus made, will cause the Rod and Line, to be in a manner taper, from the very hand to the Hook, and the line to fall much better and streighter, and cast your fly or bait to any certain place your Hand and Eye shall di∣rect, with less weight and violence, that would otherwise circle the water and fright away Fish. Length and thickness of a line for run∣ning worm in a clear water. 15. Anglers differ in opinion about the length
of Running worm line in a clear water, for Trouts or Graylings, some would have it lon∣ger than rod, others length of rod, and a third sort, a yard shorter than rod, which I, by my own Experience, best approve of; although each of these lengths of line may in some Rivers and seasons be more proper than other: as the line longer than rod, when the water is ex∣ceeding bright, and low is best: for thickness, let the 2 or 3 lowermost links or lengths be of one hair a piece, Vide Sect 12. of this Chap∣ter. and then pro∣ceed as is before directed for cast line: but let no part of this line be above 4 hairs in thickness in any one link. Let the Colour of the hair be a white blew color or a white du∣sky color, not perfectly white. Length and thickness of Running line for mud water. 16. Let the Line for running worm in mud∣dy water, the 3 lowermost links, at least, be of Chesnut or Sorrel colour, and from hook up∣ward, the thickness of the line before directed at the 14 Section of this Chapter, and but half length of Rod. Float or Cork lines length & thickness. 17. The Line for Float Angle should be made as that directed at the 14 Section of this
Chapter for thickness, but should be as long or rather longer than the Rod for Rivers, but shorter then the Rod for Pitts, Ponds, Meares, and standing Waters, and the colour of three or four lowermost links, according to the colour of the water, that is a Chess-nut or Sorrel co∣lour, for a muddy water, but a white or grey for cleer waters. Dibbing line. 18. Dibbing line should be of the same length, and thickness of a line for running worm, in a muddy water, and the hair of a white colour, or it may be a hair or two thicker, because lit∣tle of the line comes in the water, and some∣times it may be as long as the Rod, or near it. 19. I have often for Ground Angle made my links of three Hairs, to consist of two hairs of a sorrel or chesnut colour, and one of white, sometimes 2 white hairs and one of Chesnut or sorrel colour and do like it very well. 20. At the bottom of every line have a small water noose or loop, that you may hang a Hook of any size, whipt to a line, consisting of two or three links, or change your Hook and two or three lowermost links as you please: If it be a line of one hair next Hook, let the noose be at a link of 3 hairs, if a line for 3 hairs next Hook, let the water noose be at a link consisting of 4 hairs. I have been the more precise in describing the Lines; because many Anglers understand
them not, and to their prejudice are not a little careless therein. Trowling Line. 21. Let the Trowling line be made of 4 or 6 fold of Hemp Yarn, finely spun, of the best Hemp, and let the folds be neatly twisted together, its length should be 15 or 16 yards, and have also 2 yards next the hook of strong silk and neatly made. CHAP. III. Of Hooks, Floats, Leading Lines, Plums, and the rest of the Anglers Tackle. THE best Hooks are made by one Mr. Den∣ton, that lives about Barnsley in York shire, and by John Perkin and William Perkin, that live in Sadleworth in York-shire, which 3 per∣sons are very excellent Trout Anglers. Hooks. The Wyer of the Hooks should be small and such as will not stretch, the points so well
temperd, that they will not become dull with Fishing, but still preserve their keeness, all which Dentons Hooks will perform. The London Hooks are of too thick a wyer, and of a compass that may suit a River abound∣ing with Weeds, by reason of their compass or bent, they may more easily be loosed when en∣tangled with Weeds, which is all they are good for. I totally reject them in fishing with Dub∣fly or in stoney Rivers, by reason they will quickly become dull. 2. Let the Hooks be long in the shank, and of a compass somewhat enclining to roundness, but the point must stand even and straight, and the bending must be in the shank, for if the shank be straight, the point will hang outward though when set on it stand right, yet it will af∣ter the taking of a few Fish, cause the hair at the end of the shank to stand bent, and conse∣quently the point of the Hook to hang directly upwards. 3. Whether you Angle at top or bottom, pro∣portion your Hooks for strength and compass, to the number of the Hair or Hairs you Angle with next Hook. Whipping Hooks. 4. When you set on the Hook, which is stiled (arming, fixing or whipping of Hooks) do it with small but strong silk, well rubbed with Shoomakers Wax, and lay your hair on the in∣side
of the Hook, for if on the outside, the silk will cut and fret it asunder, and it is not so apt to strike Fish; and to avoid the fretting of the hair by the hook on the inside, smooth all the hook on a whetstone, from the inside to the back of the hook sloop-ways, and from a straws bredth below the top of the hook, wrap the silk about the bare hook until you come to the top of the shank, then lay your line on the inside and whip with your silk downwards until you arrive almost at the bent of the hook, and then cut off the end of the Gildard, and faffen. Whip your hooks, for Angling with Worm, with red colored silk, but for paste, cod-bait, and other whitish baits, with white colored silk, and some do it with a white or red hair, and some with flax, or hemp: but strong and small silk I like best. How to arm a bristled hook, you will see hereafter, when we discourse of Cod-baits. Proportion of Hooks. Hooks for Dub-sly generally should be small, so for Cod bait; but larger for worm, yet I like not Angling at worm, with so large a hook as some do. Floats. 5. Floats should evermore be of Cork for Rivers, but quill and Pens are best for Pits,
Ponds, and standing waters, (being not able to bear the strong streams in Rivers) and Ang∣ling near top in very flow Rivers, and especi∣ally with Paste or tender Baits. 6. Obtain the best Cork you can without Flaws or holes, bore the Cork through with a small hot Iron, then put into it a quill of a fit proportion, neither too large to split it, or so small to slip out, but as it may stick in very closely: then pare (either with a sharp Pen∣knife or Rasor) the Cork into the form of a Pyramid, small Pear, Egg or Nutmeg, and in∣to what bigness you please, then upon a small Grindstone, or with a Putnice stone, make it compleat, for you cannot pare it so smooth as you may grind it: have Corks of all sizes. 7. After you have shaped your Cork, bore with a small hot Iron, a hole from end to end, through the midst thereof, into that hole thrust a quill, and cut the Quill off even with the Cork at each End, and through the Quil draw the line, and fasten them both together with a wedg of the uppermost hard end of the Goose Quil, the feather being stript off, let the Wedge be two inches long, and white, which will be best discernable; then place the smaller end of the Cork towards the hook, and the bigger towards the rod? that the smaller end sucking down with the hook, the bigger may float aloft, and bear the Wedg directly erect, which when pull'd under the furface of the Water, is the certain signal of the fishes bi∣ting,
unless by accident the hook or line become entangled, or stayed by some stone, piece of wood or weeds. 8. Cork in form of a Nutmeg, or Egg being big∣gest in the middest, and small at each end, is a lit∣tle apter to sink, and will not carry so weighty a plum of Lead, yet on clear bottoms, and An∣gling with bait some distance from ground, in flow Rivers, it will do very well and better than others. 9. Furnish your self with Corks and Quills of all sizes, and let the Cork be so poised with Lead on the Line, that the Quill which is in it, being almost 2 inches long, will swim upright, and so equally ballanced with the Lead, that the least bite or nibble will sink the Cork. Leading Lines. 10. For leading Lines, I account the small round pellet or Lead-shot best, especially for stony Rivers and running Line, let it be cloven and neatly closed about your Line, and let not above two plumbs be on the Line at once, an inch and a half, or two inches distant from each other, and the lowmost plumb 9 inches distant from the Hook, for a running Line either in a clear or muddy water, but a foot of hook for a float line: but if the River run on a sandy bot∣tom, and be full of Wood, with few Stones, Plumbs or Lead in shape of a Diamond, or of a Barley Corn, or of an Oval form is best, the
ends smooth and close laid down, either for a muddy water or float Angling, many when they Angle amongst weeds, place their Lead on the shank of the hook, and conceive it not so apt to entangle on them. 11. When you Angle with the running line, let the line have as much Lead as will fit the Stream and River in which you Angle, and no more, viz. more in a great trouble some water than in a smaller that is quieter, as near as may be, so much as will sink the Bait to the bottom and will keep it still in motion, and no more; This Rule is also to be observed in float Angling in Rivers. Some cover their Lead on float Line with Shoo-makers Wax as thin as may be. 12. As the day encreases, your pellet or plumb may be lesser, for that will carry readi∣ly at 5 a Clock in the morning at running line, which will sink and fasten the Line at 9 a Clock: for in droughts Rivers generally abate, as heat encreases. Lead Plummet. 13. In a Pistol Bullet, make a hole through it, and put therein a strong Thread twisted, and when occasion is, hang this on the hook to try the depth of the River or Pond, especially when you Angle with the float, and the Bait is to be near the bottom, or but just touch it.
Whetstone. 14. Procure a little Whet-stone about two inches long, one quarter of an inch square, which is far better to whet or sharpen Hooks on than a File, though never so fine or good, for it either will not touch a well-temper'd hook, or leave it rough but not sharp, and we always to avoid the fretting of the hair by the Hook, smooth all the Hook upon a Whetstone, from the inside to the back of the Hook slope∣ways. 15. Get a Case made of red Leather like a Comb Case, with 12 or 14 partitions therein, made of the finest thin Parchment, with a flap to cover over the edges to prevent loosing any thing out of them, in the several partitions keep Hooks ready whipt to Lines of 2 or 3 gil∣dards in length, and leaded likewise, spare links, lines of all sorts, silk of all sorts and colours, hair and single strong hairs, hooks. These Cases contain much, and lye in a small room in the Pocket; in one of these Cases you may put all your tackle ready fixt for the running line in muddy and clear water, in another all the tackle for the ground Angling with sloat, in a∣nother the Angling tackle for great Fish, as Chub, Barbel, great Salmon, in another which must be made large, your Angling tackle for Pike; so that when you Travel from home you may Angle any where for most sorts of
Fish at ground, if you carry but a good Rod with you, made of Hazel, and the pieces put in∣to each other, and will serve for a walking staff, which you may buy ready made in London, and other places. How to keep Cod-baits, &c. 16. Bags of Linnen and Woollen, to keep and carry all sorts of Baits in, also a piece of Cane with holes bored therein, to keep Catterpillars, Palmers, Woolbeds, natural Flies and Bobs in, a Horn for Gentles. Boxes of divers fizes to carry Hooks, Silk, Lead, Thread, Corks, floats of Quills, Shoo-makers Wax, Dub-flies, and also have a sharp Pen Knife. The following way is esteemed a Secret, and the best way to carry and keep Cod-baits, Catterpillars, Clap∣bait, natural Flies and Oak-worm in; for to give Cod-baits water, is soon to rot them, be∣cause they are as well kept in a piece of withy Bark, that some of them will live therein to be turned to Flies: 'tis thus, Cut a round bough of fine green barkt Withy, about the thickness of half ones Arm, and taking the Bark clear off, about a foot in length, turn both ends together from the middle, and let them enfold within each other, and then tie it with a string on the top, and stop it with a Cork or piece of Stick: in this put the aforesaid Baits, and every Night lay it in the Grass, and use it next day, or let it lie until you have occasion for them: the Dew
preserves them, and makes them scour and thrive; thus you may keep Cod-baits, Grass∣hopers, &c. for the moisture of the Bark con∣tributes much to their preservation, but bore small holes in it for their better respiration, notwithstanding the Bark is very porous. Landing Net. 17. Have a small long Pole, made with a loop at the end, like a water-noose, to which fasten a small Net to Land great Fish, without which you will be in danger to loose them: but if you Angle for Pike, Barbel, Chevin, get a large Hook, called a Landing Hook, with a serew at the end to skrew into a socket, sixed at the end of a long Pole, to strike into the mouth or any part of the Fish, to draw them to Land: You may also fit to the same socket and pole, 2 other hooks, one sharp to cut Weeds away, the other to pull out Wood. Panier. 18. Let the Panier be light, made of peel'd Willow Twigs, neatly wrought. Materials for the Angler to carry with him. 19. Carry with you all sorts of Hooks, Lines, Links ready twisted Hair, Silk of divers co∣lours,
small but strong, Thread, Leads, Plumets, Floats of all sorts and sizes, Shoo-makers Wax, Pen-knife, Whet-stone, Line Cases, Worm-bags, Boxes, Hooks ready fixt to Lines of 2 or 3 gildards or lengths, Rod, Baits, Flies, Panier, Dubbing bag, Horn for Gentles, a small but sharp pair of Scissors. CHAP. IV. Of BAITS. 1. HAving instructed our Angler with what Tackle to be accoutred; the next Discourse directs him how to find, order, ma∣nage, keep and preserve all sorts of natural Baits: First, he is to observe that Earth worms are a general Bait for all sorts of Fish whatsoe∣ver, and that they and Gentles continue in sea∣son the whole Year, the Earth-bob from Mar∣tynmas until almost May-day, and the Cow∣turd-bob from May-day until Michaelmas, Flies, Palmers or Wool-beds, Catterpillars, Cod∣bait, Worms bred on Herbs or Trees, as the Oak-worm, &c. all Summer, and know that when one sort of Baits come in season, the pre∣ceeding are not useless, and whensoever you Angle at ground in clear water, have both Earthworms, Cod-bait, Gentles and Bobs with
you, and in more likelyhood Success will at∣tend your Labours: But if you go to Angle for Trout in a muddy water, with running Line, you need only take Brandlings, Gilt-tails, Tag∣tal and Meadow-worm with you: if the three last are not to be easily got, then Brandlings only, and you may have some scowred only in moss and water, others as is directed, with Rid∣dle, and others with Grave earth; for some∣times they will take the Worm kept one way, and sometimes the other, and that all on the fame day, and in 2 hours space. Of Worms there are divers sorts, some bred in the Earth, and therefore called Earth-worms, or Worms simply without any addition, such are the Dew-worm, Red worm, Brandling, Gilt-tail, Tag-tail and Meadow worm; others are bred on Herbs, Plants or Trees, as Palmers or Wool beds, Catterpillers, Oak worm, and Cabbage or Colewort worm: Others on Excrements, or some dead Flesh, as Gentles, &c. of all which this Chapter treats. Dew worm, Garden-worm, Lob-worm or Twatchell. 2. Are but one Worm, although called in different places by all the said names, and its the principal Worm for Salmons, Chevins, Trouts, Barbels and Eels that are of the great∣est size, but for smaller Fish, tho' of the same species, its not so proper; of these, some be
called Squirrel-tails, which has a red head, a streak down the back and a broad Tail, and these are esteemed the best, because they are toughest, most lively, and live longest in the Water, for with a dead Worm you are in all probability to catch little or nothing. This Worm is found in a Garden or Church-Yard, late in a Summers Evening, with a Lanthorn. Brandling, Gilt-tails; and Ged-worms, 3. Are the principal Worms for all sorts of Fish, and are generally to be found in old Dung∣hills, or some very rotten place near to them, but usually in Cow Dung, or Hogs-Dung ra∣ther than Horse-durg, which is somewhat too hot and dry for them, but the best are to be found in Tanners bark, which they cast up in heaps after they have used it about their Lea∣ther. These, especially the two first, are the prime Worms Anglers use for Trouts, Gray∣lings, Salmen smelts, Gudgeon, Flounder, Pearch, Tench and Bream; These 3 last take the red-Worm well scoured, very well: The Brandlings and Gilt-tails are taken by Trouts and Graylings, both in muddy and clear waters, but the red worm best in muddy waters. Some say the Branding is the best Worm for a Trout, others the Gilt-tail; but if you Angle with two Worms on the Hook at once, as is generally used for Trouts in muddy waters, then put
both a Brandling and Gilt-tail on the Hook at once, the Gilt-tail the latter. Marsh or Meadow worms 4. Are got out of Marsh ground, or the fertile banks of Rivers, and is a little blewish, and should be well scowred, and then its both tough and sprightly. 'Tis a choise Worm in March, April, and September, for Trouts, Sal∣mon Smelts, Gudgeon, Grayling and Floun∣der. Tagtail 5. Is a Worm of the colour of a mans hand, or a pale flesh colour, with a yellow tag on his tail, about half an inch long; They are sound in Marled Lands or Meadows, after a shower of Rain, or in a morning in weather that is calm, not cold, in March and April, its a very good Worm for Trouts, and there are Anglers that affirm that there is not a better Bait in the World for a Trout, if you Angle with them whilst the Water is discoloured by Rain; some commend it likewise for a Grayling. 6: Note, that Dew-worm, Red-worm, and Meadow-worm will abide more scowring than any other of the before mentioned Worms, and are better for long keeping.
How to Order, keep, and scour Worms. 7. Put your Worms into very good long Moss, whether white, red or green is not much material, but the soft white Moss that grows on some Heaths is best (but it is difficult to be found in some Places and Countreys,) wash it well, and cleanse it from all earth and filth, wring it very dry, then put your Moss and Worms into an earthen Pot, cover it close that they crawl not out, set it in a cool place in Summer, and in Winter in a warm place, that the Frost kill them not; every third day in Summer change the Moss, once a week in the Winter: The longer you keep them, especial∣ly the Log-worm, Marsh-worm and Red-worm, before you use them, the better: Some mingle Camomil or Fennel with the Moss. Clean scowring Worms, makes them redder, clearer, tougher, sprightlier, live long on the Hook, and keep colour, and consequently more desi∣rable by Fish. If you be in hast, a little Bole armoniack put to them will further your de∣sire, and make them scour in a short time: Or you may put the Dew-worm and Red-worm 4 or 5 hours in water, and they will scour them∣selves, but be very weak, yet a few hours in good Moss will recover them. Then observe when the knot near the middle of the Brand∣ling begins to swell, he's sick, and if not well looked to, is near Death; but lest they Die,
you may seed them with crumbs of Bread and Milk, or fine flower and milk, or the Yolk of an Egg and sweet Cream coagulated over the Fire; give them a little and often. Or if you be in haste, put your Bradlings, Gilt-tails, &c. into Moss that is exceeding wet, and it will quickly scour them, but not keep them long, but when you go to Angle, remove them into Moss out of which the water is well wrung or squeczed. Some wet their Moss very well in sweet Milk or Alewort (in which there hath been no Hops,) and then squeeze it pretty well, and over-night put the Worms therein they in∣tend to use the next day, and think Fish like them better; but the Worms must not rest long in Moss thus wet in Milk or Alewort; in regard it will much swell them, and in 24 hours spoil them; but if you put them in fresh Moss and Water it will well revive them. Others, and expert Anglers keep them in Moss and good store of Earth cast out of a Grave; the less time the party hath been Bu∣ried the better, and put them in fresh Moss and some of this Earth when they go to Angle, and those that use this much, boast of its ex∣cellency in alluring Fish. I know some ingenious Anglers, that in the Spring, and for a muddy water, use to shave Riddle or red Oker (with which people in Lan∣cashire use to mark their Sheep) into the Moss they keep their Worms in, and sometimes those
baits will be taken eagerly, when the brighter, (that is those kept in Moss and Water only) will not at all be taken, and perhaps within an hour again the bright ones will be taken, and the radled worms refused. Now since all ways are discovered to you for keeping and ordering your Worms, elect that way which Experience assures you to be the best; only this let me observe, That if I could otherwise help it I would never have my Brandlings and Gilt∣tails kept in Moss, and the water well squeezed out of it (which way I only use) less than 48 hours, or above 8 days, but I often Angle with them when they are not scoured above 16 hours, but 'tis not so good. Palmer worm, Palmer fly, and Wool-bed. 8. Are all one Worm, bred on Herbs and Trees, and is, if not a perfect Catterpillar, yet a species thereof; These are rough and woolly on the outward parts, hence by some called Wool-beds, and are good Baits either for Trout, Chub, Grayling or Dace, Palmer fly and May-fly are the very ground of all Fly Angling.
Catterpillars, Oak worm, Cabbage-worm, Colewort-worm, Hawthorn-worm, or Grub, Crabtree-worm, or Iack, Are Worms bred on Herbs or Trees, and may be kept with the Leaves of those Trees, or Herbs on which they are bred, by renewing the Leaves often in a day, and putting in fresh in∣stead of the old ones; the Boxes they are kept in should have a few small holes bored therein to let in the Air: But you may keep them best as is already directed, cap. 3, sect. 16. in Withy Bark. These are good Baits for Chub, Roch, Dace, Trout, &c. and fish bite much better at the Oak-worm, or any Worm bred on Herbs or Trees, if you Angle with the same when they shew themselves on the top of the water (as with the natural Fly) than if you use it under: for when a gale of wind shaketh the Trees, the Worms fall into the water, and presently rise and float on the top, where fish rise at them as at Flies; and indeed they sink not, till tost and beaten by the Waves or Stream, and so they dye and lose their native colour, and then the fish (as you may perceive by those on your hook) value them not, although these sort of Baits are taken by Roch, Dace and Chub well at the top of the Water, yet you may Angle 18 inches or lower within the water, and they
do very well, or you may put one on the point of a dub-Fly hook, and dib with it, or dib with the Ash-Fly and one of these on the point of the Hook for Trouts. The Oak-worm is a very good Bait, and of a fine green colour, and in Ponds is a Murtherer of Roch and Dace. To get these Baits, beat on an Oak, Crabtree or Hawthorn that grows over an High way or bare place, and they'l fall for you to gather; or go to Cabbages, or Coleworts, &c. and there seek for them. Some think the Palmer-worm, Carerpillar, &c. are bred from a Dew left on the leaves of Trees, Herbs or Flowers, Coleworts or Caba∣ges, which being condensed by the Suns genera∣ive heat, do in three days become living Crea∣tures, of several shapes and colours, some be∣ng hard and tough, some smooth and soft, some re horned in their head, some in their tail, ome have none; some have hair on them, some one; some of them are bred of the eggs or pawn of the Catterpillars, and in time turn to e Butterflies; and generally all Flies being red of putrefaction, receive Life or vivifie as e Suns heat furthers or disposes the Seminal ertue, by which they are bred unto anima∣on. Bobs 9. Are of two sorts, the one found or bred mellow, resty, heathy, sandy, light soils, and
gathered after the Plow, when the Land is first broken up from Grazing (and is call'd the Earth-bob, White Grub and White bait. white-grub or white-bait,) and is a Worm as big as two Maggots, hath a red head, and is all soft and full of whitish Guts; you may easily know in what ground most are, for there the Crows will be watchful, and follow the Plow very close, or you your self may dig one spade graft deep for them in sandy, heathy ground that has lain long rest from the Plow, and find sufficient of them. These are a choice Bait from the 1 of No∣vember, until after mid April for Chub, Roch Dace, Salmon smelts, Trout, Bream and Carp. When you gather these, put them into a Po or Firkin, with sufficient of the Soil they were bred in, to preserve them, then stop the Ves∣sel exceeding close, or all will spoil, set i where neither Wind nor Frost may offend them and they will keep all Winter for use. Some, in the morning they go to Angle, boi those they intend to use that day, in Milk o Water, one or two minutes, and then pou them on a Sieve; but they'l not keep afte boyling above 2 days: in like manner yo may boil the brood of Wasps, Horners, Hum∣ble Bees, &c. some put these Baits in a littl Earth and Hony the day before they Angl with them for Carp or Breain, which boylin makes them tough, plump and white.
Cow-turd bob, or Clap-bait. 10. The other Bob is found under a Cow∣turd (from about May day, until about Mi∣chaelmas) that rests on such a ground as the other is found in, and is also called a Clap-bait in some places; 'tis an excellent Bait for Trout if you Angle with it as a Cod-bait is used on the top of the water with a bristled hook, only you may sometimes put a pair of Wings and head, such as is used for Dub-fly, on the top of the Hook. This Bait is almost like a Gentle, but bigger and is kept in wet Moss, but above 3 or 4 days it will not keep, it may be kept as Codbait is, at chap. 3. sect. 16. in withy Bark. Fish of all sorts likewise take the Clapbait within water, as the Chub, Trout, Grayling, Roch, Dace, Carp, Tench, &c. I think for Trout and Smelt, you may imitate it with yellow Wax. Codbait, Cadisworm, Cadbait or Case-worm 11. Are all one and the same Bait, and of these there are two sorts, some say 3, one bred under Stones that lie a little hollow in shallow Rivers, or small Brooks, in a very fine Gravel∣ly Case, or Husk, these are yellow when ripe; the other in Pits, Ponds, flow running Rivers, or Ditches, in Cases or Husks of Sticks, Straws,
or Rushes. Both are excellent for Trout and Grayling, and most sort of Fish, as Carp, Tench Chub, Roch, Dace and Bleak. The green sort bred in Pits, Ponds, and Ditch∣es, are found in March before the yellow ones come, the other yellow sort come in May, or the end of April, and are out of season in July, a third sort, but smaller, come in again in Au∣gust. 12. These Codbaits cannot endure the Wind and Cold; therefore keep them in a thick wool∣len bag with some Gravel amongst them, wet them once a day if in the House, but oftner in hot weather; when you carry them forth, fill the bag full of water, then hold the mouth close that they drop not out, and so let the wa∣ter run from them; thus they have been kept three weeks; or you may put them in an earth∣en Pot full of water, with some Gravel at the bottom, and take them forth into your bag as you use them, but the best way of keeping them is as before is directed at cap. 3. sect. 16. Various ways of Angling with the Cod-bait. 13. One may Angle several ways with Cod-baits, either at bottom with a float, or within a foot of the bottom, at mid-water or at top: but if in a clear water for the Trout or Grayling, use fine and smallest Lines almost length of Rod, and very light Leaded, if within
water. Sometimes you may (when you use a float) put on 2 or 3 together, and sometimes Cod-bait to very great effect is joyned with a Worm, and sometimes to an Artificial Fly to cover the point of the Hook; sometimes its put on the point of the Hook after an Oak fly, and then they dib with it, or, which I like bet∣ter, to let them sink 9 or 10 inches within the water, continually raising, and gently moving it. And some say Cod-balt when used by it self is always to be Angled with at the bottom, and with the finest tackle, and that it is for all times of the Year the most holding Bait of all other whatever, both for Trout and Grayling: Others there are that affirm The best way to Angle with Codbait, is to Fish with it on the top of the water for Trout or Grayling; as you do with the Fly, and it must stand on the shank of the Hook, as doth the Artificial Fly (for if it come into the bent of the Hook, the Fish will little or not at all value it, nor if you pull the blew gut out of it) and to make it keep that place, This is called a bristled hook when thus ar∣med or whipt. you must when you set on or whip your Hook, fasten a stiff Horse hair, or Hogs Bristle under the Silk with the end standing out about a Straws breadth at the head of the hook, from under the silk, and pointing towards the Line, and this will keep it either from stipping totally off, and from fli∣ding back into the bent of the hook, by which means your Whipping would be left naked and
bare, and is neither so sightly, nor so likely to be taken, to remedy which (because it often so falls out) some always whip the Hook they design for this Bait with the whitest Horse hair, which it self will resemble and shine like that bait, and consequently do more good or less harm than whipping with Silk or any other co∣lour; Thus used its an excellent bait for a Trout. You may if you please place a small slender Lead upon the shank of the Hook, to sink the bait, and draw the Codbait over the Lead. Artificial Codbait. You may make for Trouts and Salmon smelts, an Artificial or Counterfeit Cod-bait, by making the body of yellow Bee Wax, and the head of black Silk, and a little dubbing black; This you must be often raising from the bottom and let it sink again, or you may do it by making the body of yellow Wash-Leather, or rather Shammy or Buff, and the head of black Silk. In a muddy water, Trouts will not take the Codbait, therefore only Angle with them in clear waters. Codbait is a very excellent Bait both for Trout and Grayling, and likewise for other Fish, as Chub, Roch, Dace, Salmon smelts, Pearch, Carp, Tench and Bleak; Some persons make the counterfeit Cod∣bait of yellow Bees-Wax, and an ar∣tificial dubb'd head, and a pair of wings at the head, and An∣gle therewith as at dub-fly. if you imitate the Cod-bait with yellow Bee-Wax, and make the head of
black dubbing, and black silk, and perform the same very artificially, its an in∣comparable Bait for Trouts and Salmon smelts: some make use of a piece of a small yellow Wax Can∣dle to imitate the Cod-bait, and put a dubt head and wings on top of the Hook. Bark-worm or Ash-grub 14. Are all one and the same; and is plump, milk-white, bent round from head to tail, and exceeding tender, with a red head resembling a young Dore, or Humble Bee; its in season all the year, especially from Michaelmas until mid May or June. Its the most proper Bait save any but the Fly and Cod-bait for the Gray∣ling; but Chub, Roch and Dace will likewise take it. Its found under the Bark of an Oak, Ash, Alder or Birch, especially if they lye a year or more after they are fallen: likewise its found in the body of a rotted Alder; if you break it with an Ax, but be careful only to shake the Tree in pieces with beating, and crush not the Worm, you may also find it under the Bark of the Stump of a Tree, if decayed. He is very tender, therefore to be baited on such a bristled hook as before is directed for the Cod-bait, and hee's to be baited thus, viz. the hook is to be put in under the head or chaps
of the bait, and guided down the middle of the belly, without sustering it to peep out by the way, (for then it will issue out water and milk, till nothing but the skin remain, and the bent of the Hook will appear black through it) till the point of the hook come so low, that the head of the bait may rest and stick on the bri∣stle that comes out to hold it, by which means it can neither slip of it self, neither will the force of the Stream, nor quick pulling out on any mistake, strip it off. This bait is usually kept in bran, and thereby grows tougher. For Grayling you are to Angle with this bait with the smallest Lines, How to Angle for a Grayling with an Ash-grith. such as is directed for a Trout, with a running line in a clear water, and you are always to use a small Float, and the least weight of plumb or Lead you can, that will but sink, and that the swiftness of the Stream will allow, and your Bait is always to be 5 or 6 inches from the bottom; but for other Fish, as Chub, Roch, Dace, you may use Lines and Tackle proper for them, and Angle as is suitable for their humor. Flag-worm, or Dock-worm 15. Are all one, to find them do thus: Go to an old Pond or Pit where there are store of Flags (or as some call them Sedges,) pull some up by the roots, then shake those roots in the
water, till all the mud and dirt be washed away from them, then amongst the small strings or fibres that grow to the roots, you'l sind little husks or cases of a reddish or yellowish, and some of other colours; open these carefully with a Pin, and you'l find in them a little small Worm, pale, yellow or white as a Gentle, but longer and flenderer, with rows of feet all down his belly, and a red head. This is an exceed∣ing good bait for Grayling, and likewise for Tench, Bream and Carp. If you pull the Flags in sunder, and cut open the round Stalk, you'l also find a Worm like the former in the husk, but tougher, and in that respect better: both these Worms are to be kept in bran, and baited on the bristled book as the Ash-grub, and when you Angle for Grayling with them, use a Float and the smallest Lines, and the bait to be 5 or 6 inches from ground. A Trout rarely takes either Ash-grub, or Flag-worm. Gentles, or Maggots 16. Are kept with dead Flesh, beasts Liver or Suet, or which is better, keep, cleanse or seour them in Meal or Wheat-bran. You may breed them by pricking a beasts Liver full of Holes; hang it in the Sun in Summer time, and set under an old course barrel or small Ferkin with Clay and Bran in it; into which they will drop, and therein cleanse themselves, and be always ready for use, and thus Gentles may be
created until Michaelmas, but if you would fish with them from Michaelmas to May-Day, then get a dead Cat, Kite, or other Carrion, at the letter end of September, and let it be Fly-blown, and when the Gentles begin to be alive, stir, or creep, then bury it, and then in soft moist Earth, deep in the ground, that the Frost kill them not, and they'l serve to use till March or April following, about which time they'l turn to be Flies. Gentiles are sometimes added to a Worm, and sometimes put on the point of a Dub-fly Hook, for Salmon Smelts, but most common∣ly they are used by themselves; when you go to Fish with Gentles, put them in a Horn (where∣in are small holes bored to let in air) with some Wheat-bran only. And some shave some of a Barbers Sweet Wash-ball into the bran. Others anoint the Horn wherein the Gen∣tles are in bran, with Honey, and others per∣sume the Horn wherein they are kept with Musk and Civet, you may imitate a Gentle with white Jersey Wooll, if you be mindful to joyn it to another bait or fly, for Salmon-Smelts. Gentles are very good baits for Roch, Dace, Chub, Carp, Tench, Barbel and Bleak. Sheeps Blood. 17. Dry it in the Air upon a board or
trencher, till it become pretty hard, then cut it into small pieces, proportioned for the fize of the Hook, some add a little Salt to it, which keeps it from growing black, and say, it makes it not worse but better, its a good bait for Chub, Roch, and Dace, if rightly ordered. Grain, Wheat, Malt. 18. When you use Grain, as Malt, Wheat, &c. boyl it soft in milk, or which is liked bet∣ter, in sweet Wort, and peel off the outward rind, which is the bran, and then use it, or if you will, you may then fry it in Honey and Milk, or steep it in some strong scented Oyls, as Amber, Spike, Polypody, Ivy, Annise, Tur∣pentine, &c. For Fish can smell, else Nature had bestowed Nostrils in vain on them, which were ridiculous to think. Grain is a good bait either in Winter or Summer, for Chub, Roch, Dace and Bleak. Ant-Fly. 19. When the Ant-fly is plentifullest (which is in the end of June, July, August, and most of September) go to the Ant-Hills where they breed, take a great handful of the Earth, with as much of the root of the Grass that groweth on those Hillocks, put all into a large glass bot∣tle, then gather a great quantity of the black∣est Ant-flies, their bodies and wings unbruis∣ed
put them into a Bottle or Firkin, (if you would keep them long) first washed with Honey, or Water and Honey, these in any stream and cleer Water, are a deadly bait for Roch, Dace, and Chub, and you must Angle with them un∣der the Water, no less than a handful from the bottom. Take an Ant-fly or May-fly, sink him with a little Lead to the bottom, near to the Piles, posts of a bridge, Post of a Weir, or any deep places, where Roches lye quietly, and then pull your Fly up very leisurely, and usually a Roch will follow your bait, to the very top of the water, and gaze on it there, and run at it, and take it, least the Fly escape him. Ant fly may be kept alive, as is directed two or three Months. Young brood of Wasps, Hornets and Humble-Bees. 20. Dry them upon a Fire-shovel or Tile∣stone, or in an Oven, cooling after baking, lest they burn, and to avoid that, lay them on a thin board or chip, and cover them with ano∣ther, so supported as not to crush them, or else clap two cakes together, this way they will keep long, and stick on the Hook well: if you boyl them a minute or two in water or milk, they grow black in a few days, but are good for present use, these are singular good baits for Roch, Dace and Chub, and you may try them
for Carp, Tench and Bream, which I fancy will scarce refuse them. Salmon Spawn 21. Is a very good bait for Chub. Take the Spawn and boil it so hard as to stick on the Hook, and then use it, or not boiled at all is u∣sed by some; others take the Spawn and put good store of Salt to it, and hang the same in a Linnen bag in the Kitchen, but far off the Fire, and it will be hard, and then they steep it the night before it is used in Strong Waters, Some exspert Anglers preserve Salmon-Spawn from pineing with Salt, or discolouring with moisture, by laying it upon Wooll in a pot, one layr of Spawn and another of Wooll, to the sil∣ling of the Pot, and tis a lovely bait for the Win∣ter and Spring, especially if used where Sal∣mons use to Spawn, for thither the Fish are ga∣thered, and there expect it. Minnow Loach and Bull-Head 22. Are baits for Pike, Pearch, Chub, Eel, and great Trout; The Trout takes these baits, about a Foot within water, and sometimes low∣er in the deeps, in March, April and Sep∣tember, when the Wind is in the South, or Southwest, and bloweth strongly, curling the Waters and raising high waves, in Summer∣months, he takes them not in the day time, un∣less
the day be dark and the Wind high; and then you must add some Lead to the Line, and sink these baits to the bottom, for the Trout will not take them at mid-water, in a cleer water in Summer, and although these baits are only taken by Pike and Trout in a cleer water in the day time, yet you may bait night Hooks with them, and they are an excellent bait ei∣ther for Chub, Pike, Trout or Eel, in the night Minnows of a middle size and whitish are the best, tho the Minnow is a very good bait for Jack, Pearch and Trout, yet Experience tells me, that a small Loach or Bull-Head, his guil fins being cut off, are better than Minnows by many degrees. When you Angle with Min∣now, small Loach or Bull head for Trout, be sure the bait turn quick, and be always in mo∣tion. Lamprey, Pride or Seaven Eyes 23. Are all one, and like unto small Eels, no thicker than a straw, and may be found in sandy muddy heaps in Rivers near the side, almost as easily as Worms in a Dung-hill, and are good baits either by night or day for Chubs and Eels, so are small Eel-brood for Chubs. Snails. 24. Both the white and black Snal, his belly slit that the white appear, are good baits for
the Chub, very early in the morning, but in the heat of the day he cares not for them, like∣wise Trouts and Eels will take them at the night-Hook, in the night. Grass-hopper. 25. Fish take them best, in the latter end of June, all July and August, cut off their Legs and outwards wings, the middle size are best. For Trout or Grayling, you may Lead your Hook on the shank, with a slender plate of Lead, made narrowest and slenderest at the bent of the Hook, that the plate may come o∣ver it, then draw him over the Lead, after put a lesser or a Cod-bait on the point, and keep your bait in continual motion, lifting it up and sinking again, pull off the Grashoppers upper∣most Wings, a Chub will likewise very well take this bait. Others, and very expert Anglers too, use with good success, only the Tail or half of the Grashopper, putting on the Hook first a young Beetle, or Sharn-bud, which is found in a Cow-turd, of a day or two old, and they take of the higher hard Wings, and then she puts forth a long pair, coloured like those of the Pad Fly; this in a close water, and which breeds a large Trout, is as killing a bait as any what∣ever, but tis not so good in a shallow, cleer and open River, by the opinion of many, you may dib with the Grass-hopper, either for Chub or Toout.
Water-Cricket, Water-Lowse or Cree∣per 26. Are all one, and are excellent good for a Trout in March, April or before, 'tis found under hollow-stones in the Water, and you may fish within half a foot or a foot off the bottom, others let it drag on the ground, and others and expert Anglers too affirm, that if you dib∣ble in the streams about noon, on a Sun-shiny day, and so for two or three hours therewith in the Month of April for Trouts, that 'tis a Mur∣thering bait; 'tis always to be used in a cleer water, and is not found in every River. These creepers always turn into Stone-flys about May. Lip-Berries 27. Whose true name is Aron-Berries, or Berries of Cookow-pints or Wake-Robin, these berries proceed from the Herb Aron, and are ripe and fit for use in July and August, and are of a lovely Red or Orange colour, and transparent, and are good baits for Roch, and especially Chub. Any Apothecary will shew you the Herb in the Spring, and do you look for the berries or fruit in July and August. Cherries, Ras-berries and Black-Ber∣ries 28. Are baits for Chubs, and they will take
them best in Ponds or Rivers, where such trees grow near the water, and such fruit customa∣rily dropt into them, sometimes a Carp will take them. Oat-Take or Cheese 29. Are good baits to Angle with for Chub, Roch, Dace and Barbel, when you use a ledger bait, your Cheese may be kept a day or two (if it be now new which it ought to be) in a wet linnen Cloth, or steeped a little in Honey. To keep baits for Pike. 30. Carry baits for Pike, as small Roch, Dace, Gudgeon, Salmon Smelt, Minow, small Trout, and small Eels in Bran, which will dry up the slimy moisture, that is on them, and so keep them longer, and cause them stick more firmly on the Hook, besides there is a green watery substance, that issu∣eth out of Fish, which will infect and rot them, but the Bran dryeth up the same, and preven∣teth that mischief. Oak-Fly, Ash-Fly, or Woodcock-Fly. 31. Is call'd by all these names, in different places, and is a very good Fly, from the begin∣ing of May, until the end of August, its a brownish fly, and found on the body of an Oak,
or Ash, and stands frequently with his head downwards, towards the root of the Tree, tis very proper for a Trout, and the best way to use it, is to put one on the Hook, and sometimes two, and at the point of the Hook a Cod-bait, and let them sink 6 Inches or a Foot into the water, and then raise it again gently, having a short dubbing Line, and it is a deadly bait for a Trout in a cleer water, and sometimes in stead of a Cod-bait use an Oak-worm, or green grub got of an Haw-thorn: some dub it with black wooll, Isabella coloured Mohair, and bright brownish Bears hair, wrapt on with yel∣low Silk, but the head of an Ash colour. Others dub it with an Orange tawny and black ground. Others with blackish Wooll and gold Twist about it; the wings must be the brown of a Mallards Feather, if you could but once dub it aright, there would be no need of the natural one. Stone-Fly and green Drake. 32. I shall say nothing of them here, be∣cause I shall exactly Describe them when I come to Dub-fly Angling. Hawthorn Fly 33. Is a black fly, to be found on every Hawthorn bush, after the leaves are come forth,
and is a Fly to be used for dibbing in some Ri∣vers. Fish-Eyes. 34. Pull out the Eyes of those-Fish you catch, and put them on the Hook, and they are an excellent bait for most sort of Fish. A Rule about Baits. 35. Fish take all sorts of baits most eagerly and freely, and with the least suspition or bog∣ling, when you present the same unto them in such order and manner as Nature affords them, or as themselves ordinary gather them; and some are peculiar to certain Countries and Rivers, of which every Angler may in his own place make his own Observation; as some of the foregoing baits will be taken in some particular Rivers, and not in others, and are sound in some Rivers and not in others, and the same baits are taken earlier in some Rivers than others, and sooner or later in some years than others, according to the quality and season of the year; although in general ground∣baits are useful and certain, almost in every River, yet so is not the Fly, which varies in co∣lour, kind or proportion, almost in every Ri∣ver, nay in the very same River at 5 or 6 miles distance.
CHAP. V. Of PASTS. THIS Chapter Treats only of Pasts, which might have been comprehended under the general Notion of Baits, yet since they are Artificial ones, and to be Angled with at ground or within the water, I judg'd it best to Discourse of them distinctly, in a Chapter by themselves, and although there are or may be as many and distinct Pasts, as the luxuran∣cies of every fancy will suggest, yet the subse∣quent are of best Estimation. Pasts. 1. Take bean flower, and if that be not to be got, then wheat flower, and the tenderest part of the leg of a young Rabbet, whelp or catling, as much Virgins Wax and Sheep Suet, beat them in a Mortar till they be perfectly incor∣porated; then with a little clarified Honey, temper them before the fire into a Past: some omit the Bean and Wheat-flower. 2. Take Sheeps Kidney Suet, as much Cheese, fine flower or Manchet, make it into a Past, and allay its stiffness with clarified Honey.
3. Take Sheeps-blood, Cheese, Fine Man∣chet, Clarified Honey, make all into a Past. 4. Take Cherries (the stones being taken out) Sheeps-blood, fine Manchet, and Saffron to colour it with, and make a Past. 5. Take the fattest old Cheese, and strong∣est of the Rennet, Mutton-Kidney Suet, Wheat flower and Anniseed Water (and if for Chub add some reasted Bacon) beat all very small into a fine Past. 6. Take the fattest old Cheese and strongest of the Rennet, Mutton-Kidney Suet, and Turmerick reduced into a fine pouder, work all into a Past, add the Turmerick only till the Past become of a very fine lovely yel∣low colour, this is excellent for Chevin. Observations on Past. 7. In September and all Winter, when you Angle for Chub, Carp and Bream with Past, let the bait be as big as a large Hazel Nut; but for Roach and Dace, the bigness of a large Pea, or ordinary Bean is sufficient. 8. You may add to any Past, Assa fetida, Oyl of Polypody of the Oak, Oyl Ivy, or the Gum of Ivy, and many other things, and try whether they will encrease the Sport. 9. Into all sort of Pasts whatever, beat Cotton Wooll, shaved Lint, or fine Flax into it, which will make it stick well on the Hook, and not wash off; and if you would have the Past
keep long, put Virgins Wax and Clarified Ho∣ney into it. 10. When you Angle with Past, have a small Hook, quick Eye, a nimble Hand and Rod, and that somewhat stiff too, or both bait and Fish are lost, and you must strike at the very first time you perceive them bite, and Past is to be used in Pits, Ponds, Mears, slow running Rivers, or standing waters: only Note that this Rule is General, and holds in all ve∣ry tender baits. 11. Past is a very good bait for Chub, Roch, Dace, Barbel, Carp, Tench and Bream and Bleak. 12. When you Angle with Past, or any very tender bait, use a Float of Quill, rather than of Cork. 13. Some pound strong Cheese with fresh Butter and Saffron (to colour it) in a Mortar, and make a Past thereof. 14. Take Flower made of fine Manchet, and Butter, and Saffron to colour it, and make a Past, and you'l find it an excellent Bait for Reck and Dace, &c.
CHAP. VI. Oyntments to Alure Fish to the Bait. NEXT follow Oyntments and Receipts, which I have read and been informed of, by several knowing Anglers, for the better furtherance of this Sport, some whereof I have Experienced, and tho I found them advanta∣gious to my Recreation, yet far from so high a degree as has been pretended to me; never∣theless I shall present you with them, and if you'l be at the expence and labour of a Tryal, you may Elect those for your daily use, which on your own Experience you find to be the best, and the first shall be one highly comend∣ed by Monsieur Charras (Operator and Apo∣thecary Royal to the present French King, Lewis the 14.) in his Pharmacopoeia, printed at London, part the second, f. 245. 1. Take Mans Fat and Cats Fat, of each half an Ounce, Mummy finely poudred three Drams, Cummin-seed finely poudered, one Dram, distilled Oyl of Annise and Spike, of each six Drops, Civet two Grains, and Cam∣phir 4 Grains, make an Oyntment according o Art, and when you Angle, anoint 8 Inches of the Line next the Hook therewith, and keep
it in a pewter Box, made something taper, and when you use this Oyntment, never Angle with less than three Hairs next Hook, because if you Angle but with one hair, it will not stick on. 2. Take Gum Ivy, and put thereof a good quantity into a Box made of Oak (such as A∣pothecaries use of White-wood, and long for Pills) and chase and rub the inside of the box with this Gum, and when you Angle put three or four Worms therein, letting them remain but a short time (for if long it kills them) and then take them out and Fish with them, put∣ting more in their stead out of the worm-bag and Moss, and thus do all day. 3. To get Gum-Ivy, at Michaelmas or Spring, drive several great Nails into large Ivy stalks, and wriggle the same till they become very loose, and let them remain, and a Gum will issue thereout. Slit in the Spring and at Michaelmas several great Ivy stalks, and visit them once a Month to see if Gum flow from the wounded part. 4. Take Assa-faetida, half an ounce, Cam∣phir two Drams, bray them well together with some drops of Oyl Olive, and put it in a pew∣ter Box, and use it as the first Receipt of this Chapter; some instead of Oyl Olive, use the Chymical Oyl of Lavender and Camomil, and so ne add the quantity of a Nutmeg of Venice Turpentine to it. 5. Take Venice Turpentine and best Hive
Honey, and Oyl of Polypody of the Oak drawn by Retort, mix all together, and use it as the first Receipt of this Chapter. 6. Take Oyl of Ivy-berries, made by ex∣pression or infusion, and put some in a Box, and use it as is directed in the second Receipt of this Chapter. 7. Dissolve Gum Ivy in the Oyl of Spike, and anoint the bait therewith. 8. Put Camphir into the Moss, wherein are the Worms the day you Angle. 9. Dissolve two ounces of Gum Ivy, in a gill of Spring water, then mix these together in the like quantity of the Oyl of Sweet Almonds, then take what quantity of Worms you intend to use that day (first well scoured in Moss) and put them in linnen Thrums, first well washed in Spring water, and squeez'd, then wet the same Thrums in this Composition, and put the Thrums and Worms into a Linnen bag, and use them. 10. Take Assa faetida 3 Drams, Spikenard of Spain one Dram, put them in a Pint of Spring-water, let them stand in a shady place 14 days in the ground, then take it out, and strain it through a linnen cloth, and put to the liquor one Dram of Sperma Cati, and keep it close in a strong glass Bottle, and when you go to Angle take what quantity you intend to use that day of Worms (first well scowrd in Moss) and put them upon a pewter Sawcer, and powr a little of this water upon them, then put them
in the Moss again and use them. 11. Take Juyce of Camomil half a spoonful, Chymical Oyl of Spike one Dram, and Oyl of Comfrey by Infusion, one Dram and an half, Goose Grease two Drams, these being well dis∣solved over the Fire, let stand until cold, then put it into a strong Glass Bottle, which let be unstopt 3 or 4 days, then stop it very well; when you Angle anoint the same there∣with. 12. Take a handful of Housleek, half a handful of inner green bark of the Ivy stalk, pound these well together, and press the Juyce thereout, and wet your Moss therewith, and when you Angle put 6 or 8 Worms therein, out of the other Worm-bag, and when spent by fish∣ing, do the like. 13. Some use the Juyce of Netles and Housleek, as the last, and some only the Juyce of Housleek. 14. Some anoint their bait with the Marrow got out of a Herons Thigh-bone. 15. Take the Bones or Scull of a Dead-man, at the opening of a Grave, and beat the same into pouder, and put of this pouder in the Moss wherein you keep your Worms, but others like Grave Earth as well.
CHAP. VII. General Directions and Ob∣servations. LET the Anglers Apparrel not be of a light shining or glittering colour, which will re∣flect upon the water; and affright away the Fish, but let it be of a sad dark colour, and close to his body: for Fish are affrighted with any the least sight or motion, therefore by all means keep out of sight, when you Angle in a cleer wa∣ter, either by sheltring behind some Bush or Tree, or by standing as far off the Rivers side you can possible; to effect this the better, a long Rod at ground, and a long Rod and line at ar∣tificial Fly, are absolutely necessary. Neither ought you to jump on the banks next the wa∣ter you Angle in, for of all Creatures there is none more sharp sighted, or fearful than Fish, especially Trouts, Chubs and Carp. 2. When you Angle at Ground, in a cleer Water, or dibble with natural Flies, Angle go∣ing up the River, but in a muddy water, or with Dub-fly, Angle going down the River. 3. Before you set out to Angle, see that your haits be good, sweet, fine, and agreeable to the River and Season, and likewise your Tackle sui∣table, for if otherwise you had better stay at home.
4. Use Shoomakers wax to the Tread or Silk with which you make or mend either Rod or Fly: for it holds more firmly and sticks bet∣ter then any other. 5. When you have hooked a good Fish, have an especial care to keep the Rod bent, least he run to the end of the Line, and break either Hook or Hold. 6. Angle for all sort of Fish whatever in that part of the River, where his haunt is described to be. Fishes general Haunt. 7. Where any Weeds Roots of Trees, Stones, Wood or other rubbish, its often good, but ve∣ry troublesom Angling: for to such places Fish∣es resort for warmth and security; so likewise in Whirl-pools: for they are like pits in Rivers, and are seldom unfirnished of good Fish; like∣wise at Weirs, Mill-streams, piles, posts, and pillars of Bridges, Flood-gates, Cataracts and Falls of Waters, the Eddies betwixt two Streams, the returns of a Stream and the side of a Stream, are good places generally to Angle in, and in Summer all Fish generally lay in the more shallow part of the River, or in a strong, swift or gentle stream, except Carp, Tench and Eel in Winter, all fly into the deep still places: where it ebbeth and floweth, Fish sometimes bite best, in the Ebb most usually, sometimes when it floweth, rarely at full water, near the
Arches of bridges, Weirs or Floot-Gates. 8. When any Fish have taken the Hook from you, if it be not swallowed into their Gorge, they will live, either the water will cause it to rust, and in time wear away, or the Fish will go to the bottom, and there root like a Hog on the Gravel, till they either rub it out, or break the Hook in the middle. How to feed Fish. 9. Into such places as you use to Angle once a Week at least, cast in all sorts of Corn boyled soft, grains steeped in blood, blood dryed and cut into pieces, Snails, Worms chopt into peices, peices of Fowl or Beasts Guts, Beasts Livers, Cheese chewed; especially for Carp, Tench, Chub, Roch, Dace, Barbel and Bream, you cannot feed too often or too much; this course draweth the Fish to the place you de∣sire, and there keeps them together, cast in a∣bout twenty Grains of ground Malt, or Beans ground, now and then as you Angle, or chew∣ed Oat-Cake or Cheese: but by no means when you Angle in a stream, cast them in at your Hook, but something above where you Angle, least the stream carry them beyond the Hook, and so instead of drawing them to you, you draw them beyond you. 10. If you Angle at any place you have twice or thrice baited, and find no sport, if none has been there before you, or no grand
Impediment in the Season or, Water appear; be assured Pike or Pearch (if they breed in that River) have there taken up their quarters and affright all other Fish thence, for fear of being made a prey: your only remedy is presently to Angle for them, with suitable Tackle and baits, and when they are caught, the others will repossess themselves of their former station. To know what Bait and Fly Fish take. 11. The first Fish you catch, rip up his bel∣ly, and you may then see his Stomach; its known by its largeness and place, lying from the Gills to the small Guts, take it out very ten∣derly (if you bruise it your labour is lost) and with a sharp Pen knife cut it open without bruising, and then you'l find his Food in it, and thereby discover what bait at that instant the Fish take best, Flyes or Ground-baits, and so fit them accordingly, and if you have a magni∣fying Glass, you may (with some pleasure to you) easily discover the very true colour of the Fly, and some can do it pretty well without a Glass. 12. Keep the Sun (and Moon if Night) be∣fore you, if your eyes will endure it, at least be sure to have these Planets on your side: for if they be on your back, both your self and Rod will with its shadow oftend much, and the Fish see further and clearer, when they look towards those Lights, then the contrary; as
you may experiment thus, in a dark night if a man come between you and any Light, you see him clearly, but not at all if the Light come betwixt you and him. 13. All Fish whatever that swim in Rivers are wholesomer, pleasanter, and far better tast∣ed than those of the same kind that live in Pits, Ponds, Mears and standing waters. 14. A Hog back and a little head, either to Trout, Salmon, or any other Fish, are a sign they are in Season. 15. Let all baits and Flyes whatsoever fall gently first into the Water, before any other part of the Line, and with as little of the Line as possible, and without any distubance, plung∣ing or circling of the water, which mightily scares Fish. 16. Some Fish are said to be Leather mouthed, that is their mouths are so tough, that if they once be hooked they seldom break the hold; such are the Chub, Barbel, Carp, Tench, Roch and Gudgeon: But the Pike, Sal∣mon, Pearch, Grayling, Trout and Bream are very tender mouthed, and their hold often breaks after they are hooked. 17. Roch and Dace or Dare recover strength, and grow in season within a fortnight after spawning, Barbel and Chub within a month, Trout in 4 months, and the Salmon in like time if he get into the Sea, and after into fresh water. 18. Angle always if you can on the Lee∣shore,
and note that Fish lie or swim nearer the bottom, and in deeper water in Winter than in Summer, and also near the bottom in any cold day, and then gets near the calm side of the water, and in the Winter are caught best at the mid-time of the day, and in Sun-shiny weather. 19. When you put any living bait on the hook, torment or bruise the same as little as possible that they may live long on the hook after baited. 20. Let him that would be a compleat Ang∣ler, spend some time in Angling in all sorts of waters, Ponds, Rivers swift and slow, stony, gra∣velly, muddy, chalky and slimy; and observe all the differences in the nature of the Soils, on which they run or stand, and likewise the na∣ture and humour of the Fish, waters and baits, and so he will become a perfect and judicious Artist, and be able to take Fish whereever he Angleth, and will find much difference between swift and slow Rivers. Likewise let the Angler observe when he takes store of Fish, the age of the Moon, the temperature of the preceeding night, and the darkness, brightness or windiness of it, season and nature of the morning and day, together with the temperature of the air and water, and all other precedent, concomitant, natural or adventitious advantages that could any ways conduce to his sport, and enter them in a Book with the day of the month, &c. hereby with a
little practice he'l be able to raise Conclusions for the improvement of this Art. 21. In all sort of Angling, be sure to keep out of the Fishes sight, and as far off the Rivers bank as possible. 22. Several Countries alter the time, and almost the manner of Fishes breeding, but doubtless of their being in season, as in the Ri∣ver Wye in Monmouthshire, Salmon are in sea∣son from September to April, but in the Thames and Trent and most other Rivers they are in season almost all the 6 hot months. 23. Gather or get all forts of materials to make Angle Rods on, as the Hasle, Blackthorn, Ewe, &c. at the Winter Solstice, or at least be∣tween the last day of November, and the 20 flay of December, because all sort of Wood then is the most free from Sap; it not ascend∣ing with that vigour from the root into the ball and branches, by reason of the coldness of the eather, and the Suns small stay on our Hori∣zon, which renders its influence feeble. 24. Trouts, Salmons, Pikes Pearches and Eels have large mouths, and their Teeth there∣n, but most other Fish have their Teeth in heir Throat. 25. You may much advantage your self in asting your Lines, especially the artificial Fly ine, by making the uppermost link or gildard o consist of 12 or 9 hairs, and one or two hairs ess in the next link, and so abate proportiona∣ly in every Link, until you come to the Hook
it self; by this means a very Bungler will cast a Fly well, and if you chance to fasten your Hook, and cannot come to loosen it, you will not loose above one gildard or two at most, though you pull to break it, because the Line is so strong at the upper end. CHAP. VIII. Seasons generally improper for Angling. 1. IN great droughts when the Rivers are small, or in the heat of the day in Sum∣mer, although there be no drought (ex∣cept cooled by Wind, or shadowed by Clouds) you'l find small sport, especially in marly, chalky, slimy, or very shallow and clear wa∣ters. 2. In cold frosty or snowy weather, or where store of Snow brother is in the River, its to little purpose to Angle; when there happeneth in the Summer or Spring, especially any sinall hoary Frost, all that day after the Fish will not rise kindly and freely, except in the Evening and that prove pleasant. 3. If the Wind either be Easterly, or so high that you cannot guide your tools; its to little
purpose to Angle, for there is a secret malig∣nity in the East Wind, that generally abates the Fishes desire of baits and appetito. 4. Sharp, bitter, nipping Winds blowing from the North, but the East especially, blast the recreation. 5. After any sort of Fish have spawned, they'l not bite to any purpose, until they have reco∣vered their strength and former appetite. 6. When any Clouds arise that will cer∣tainly bring a shower or storm (though in the midst of Summer) they will not bite, and if they bit well before, yet at the approach there∣of they will cease biting. 7. When the Nights prove dark, cloudy or windy, and that the Moon shines not at all, next day there will be little or no sport, except at small ones: For Trouts and great Fish then range about to devour others and seek Food, so that when the nights are dark or windy, the next day rarely proves successful to the Angler for great Fish, especially Trouts. 8. In small, clear and shallow Brooks, where the Mills stand and keep up the water, you will neither catch Fish at ground or fly at that time; for Fish, especially Trouts, then dare not come out of their Hold. 9. When people wash their Sheep in Sum∣mer, at the first time only Fish bite well, be∣cause the Filth draweth them together as to a baiting place, but after they have glutted
themselves 4 or 5 days, they will not bite again till washing time be over. 10. Thunder and Lightning are very offen∣sive, and spoil the Anglers sport. CHAP. IX. Seasons generally proper for Angling. 1. IN general esteem, the best hours to An∣gle in betwixt the Equinoxes, are from Sun-rising, until half an hour after 10 a Clock and from 2 a Clock in the Afternoon until 6. 2. If the day be dark, close and lowring, or have a gentle whistling Wind playing on the water, or a fine misling Dew of Rain falls gen∣tly without violence, Fish will bite. So when Trouts leap out of the water, and Pikes shoot in pursuit of other Fishes, they will bite well, if you Angle with tackle and baits proper for the Season and Fish. 3. Calm, clear (or which is far better) cool, cloudy weather in Summer, the Wind blowing gently, so as you may guide your Tools with ease, in the hottest months the cooler the better.
4. When a sudden violent shower hath a lit∣tle mudded and raised the water, then if you go forth immediately after such a shower, and Angle at ground in the Stream or sides thereof with Brandling, Gilt-tail, Tag-tail, or chiefly Red-worm well scowred; if there be store of Fish, you'l have Sport to your own satisfa∣ction. 5. When Floods have carried away all the Filth that the Rain had washed from the high∣er grounds into the River, and that the River keepeth his usual bounds, and is of a Whey, Chesnut, brown, or Ale colour, then its good to Angle at ground. 6. After Floods are gone away, and Rivers come within their own banks, their first clear∣ness recovered, and the water pure, then its good to Angle. 7. A little before any Fish spawn, they come into the gravelly, sandy Fords to rub and loo∣fen their Bellies, and then and there they bite well. 8. When Rivers are raised by Rain, and yet are within their Banks, Fish seek shelter and ease in little and milder currents of small Brooks that fall into larger Rivers, and at the sides or ends of Bridges that defend a small space of ground from the impetuousness of the Stream, or in any low place near the River∣side, Fish rest and secure themselves from the rapid Stream, in such a place not too deep, you'l find Sport.
9. At the conflux of Rivers, and where it Ebbeth and Floweth, Fish sometimes bite very well, in the Ebb most usually, sometimes when it floweth, rarely at full water. 10. In February, March, beginning of April, September, and all Winter Months, Fish bite best in the Sun shine, warmth and mid∣dle part of the day, no Wind stirring, the Air cleer; In the Summer months, mornings and evenings are best, and dark, windy, cool or cloudy weather: if you can guide your Tools and find shelter, no matter how high the Winds be, so they be not Easterly. 11. Fish rise best at the Fly after a shower, that hath not mudded the Water, yet hath beaten the Gnats and Flyes into the River, you may in such a shower observe them to rise much, if you can but endure the Rain. The best Months for Fly, are March, April and May; in cooler months, Angle in the warmth of the day, in warm weather about 9 in the morning, and 3 a clock in the afternoon, are the very chief times to Angle in, if any gentle Gale blow, sometimes in a warm Evening, if the Gnat play much. 12. In calm, clear and Star-light Nights (especially if the Moon shine) great Fish, Trouts especially, are as wary and fearful as in dark windy days, and stir not, but if the next day prove cloudy and windy, and the wa∣ter in order, you may be sure of sport, if there be store of Fish in the River: for having ab∣stained
from food all night, they are more hun∣gry and eager, and the darkness and windiness of the day makes them morebold to bite. 13. In small clear Brooks, if you come in, or immediately after a shower that hath rai∣sed the water, or take it just as any Mill Water begins to come down, and so go along with the course of the water, Fish especially Trouts, will then bite well, for then they come forth to seek Food, which they expect the water to bring down. 14. In May especially, and generally all Summer, if the morning prove extream cold, as sometimes it doth (although there be no Frost,) Fish bite not to any purpose, until the day become warmer, and if it prove cold all the day long, they bite best where the Sun shines, but not at all in the shady parts of the River. 15. If the day be dark and cloudy in the Sum∣mer, no matter how high the Winds be, so they be not Easterly, and you be able to ma∣nage your Tools. 16. After the River is cleared from a Flood, Fish rise very well, being glutted with ground-Baits, they then covet the Fly, having wanted it a time. 17. Morning and Evening are best for ground Line, for a Trout or other Fish, in clear weather and water, but in cloudy wea∣ther or muddy water, you may Angle at ground all day.
18. Great Fish, as Trouts, feed most in the night, especially if it be dark or windy, and then bite not next day, unless dark or windy it prove, and then a little in the afternoon. 19. The Wind blowing from the South or West, is good to Angle in, the North Wind is but indifferent, but the East very bad. 20. All Fish bite keener and better, especi∣ally in Summer, in swift, rapid, stony Rivers, than in those that run gently, and glyde on slime and mud. CHAP. X. Observations on the Trout. MY next Discourse shall be of the several sorts of Fish, wherein I shall only tell you of little more than their Haunts (which is the place proper to Angle in for them) their particular times of Biting, Spawning, Season and Baits, omitting much that might be said of each Fish; because this is intended to be a Sum∣mary of the Anglers Art, and more for Pra∣ctise than Theory; and for that the Trout is the most Excellent Fish, by the Vogue of the most curious Palats, my first Discourse shall be of him. His Haunt. 1. A Trout loveth small purling Brooks or
Rivers, that are very swift, crystal and cleer running on Stones or Gravel, he feeds whilst strong at the swiftest Streams, and more usu∣ally in the side of the Stream than in it, some∣times in the deepest part of it (especially if he be a large one) and near the Banks, or behind a Stone, Block, or some Bank that shoots forth with a point into the River, upon which the stream beareth much, and causeth a whirling of the water back by the banks side, much like the Eddy of the Tide, and he the more willingly maketh choice of this place, if there be a shade over his Head, as a bush, soam, or hollow hang∣ing Bank, under which he can shelter him∣self, or behind a stone, log, or some small bank that shoots into the River, which the Stream beareth upon, where he'l ly watch∣ing for what cometh down the stream, and sud∣denly catcheth it up, sometimes in the Eddies betwixt two streams, and in the returns of a stream he lyes, his Hold is usually in the deep, under a hollow place of the bank, root of a Tree or Stone, which he loves exceeding∣ly, and sometimes, but not often, he's found in Weeds, in the Spring and latter end of Sum∣mer hee'l ply at tail of a Stream, but in Mid-May at the upper end (and so do most Fish) if his hold be near hee'l stay long in a place, as he grows stronger he departs from the dead still Waters into the sharp Streams and Gra∣vel, yet the best Trouts often in Summer, in excessive Droughts, are driven out of the small
and shallow Streams, and retire into the plain Deeps, where you may catch them with dib∣bing, or on a cloudy windy day with a Cast∣fly. 2. If there be great store of Chub in the River, you shall only catch Trouts in the Streams, in March, April and September; because in the 4 hot months, Chubs come in∣to the Sreams, and then drive out Trouts, by the Opinion of very good Anglers. Spawning time, Season, &c. 3. Trouts, contrary to most Fish, spawn a∣bout Martynmas, in some Rivers a little carli∣er or later: but most other Fish spawn in the Spring or Summer, he's in season from begin∣ing of March until Michaelmas, but his chief season is the end of May, the Female hath a less Head and deeper body then Male, the best are usually red or yellow, and some white, yet good, but those rarely sound, some Soils nou∣rsh them better than others; for in the same River you shall in one Field catch one lank, lean, and with a great Head, and in the next Field one full, thick, lusty, fat and with a small Head: they dye quickly after taken, but the Eel, Carp and Tench, live long out of their proper Element, they and Salmons will mira∣culously pass thorough and over Weares, Wood-gates, small Cataracts, and Fish garths, they are a greedy, devouring and ravenous
Fish, and in their season nimble, quick and strives long and vigorously for their lives; and will run among roots, weeds, or any thing to entangle the Line, or break it, and when struck will endeavour to run to the end of the Line, they like a large Bait at ground, and his ground-bait must drag on the ground, flyes they take most at top of the water, or within 3 or 4 inches of it, with Minnow or Loach, he's caught within a foot off the surface of the Water, and sometimes lower by trouling, they are no long-lived Fish, at full growth they decline in body, and grow in the Head until death. Baits for the Trout. 4. Principal Baits for Trouts at the ground, are Worm, Brandlings, Giltails, Tag-tail, Meadow and Red-Worm, but for a mighty Trout the Dew-Worm; the two first are the principal Worms for him all the year, both in clear and mud∣dy waters, the others for waters discoloured with Rain, then a Cod-bait, which is either for top or bottom, so is the Clap-bait, and the Water-cricket, he takes the Palmer-fly, or Wool-bed, and all sorts of Flyes both natural and artificial at top of the Water, especially the Palmer-fly, Water-cricket, stone-fly, green Drake, and Ash-fly; he will likewise take a Cod-bait and Clap-bait, that are Counterfeit∣ed with yellow Wax, Shammy or Buss, as be∣fore
is directed, sometimes he takes the Oak-worm, and Haw-thorn-worm, at top of the Water. The Menow, Bull-head, his Guil Finns cut off, and the Loach especially, are excellent baits in a cleer water for great Trouts, in March, April and September, about midwa∣ter, to troul with, in the Streams, or on Windy days in the deep▪ He will also take all sorts of Bobs, Palmers, Caterpillars, Gentles, Dores, the young brood of Wasps, young Humble-bees, Hornets, Bee∣tles, their Legs and uppermost Wings cut off, and Grass - hoppers, his Leggs and outmost Wings cut likewise off, as the Brandling, Gil∣tail, Tag-tail, Meadow-worm, Red-worm, and Dew-worm, are the best Worms for the ground Angle, to be suited respectively to the Tem∣perature and colour of the River (although the Brandling and Giltail, are for either mud∣dy or cleer waters, and perhaps the best) so is the Cod-bait, Clap-bait, Water-Cricket, Pal∣mer-worm, stone-Fly, Green-Drake, Oak-Fly, and Artisicial Fly, the best for the Trout at the top of the Water when cleer. Dibble with the Water-Cricket, Stone-Fly, Green-Drake, Grass-hopper, and Sharn-bud, as they severally come in Season, dib also with the Oak∣fly and a Cod-bait at point of the Hook, and let them sink half a foot or a foot, within wa∣ter, and its a dead bait for a Trout, also a Clap-bait and artificial Head and Wings, with
a bristled Hook, as Cod-bait is used is excel∣lent for top. Of each of these particular Baits, see more in the Chapter of Baits. The ways to Angle for them. 5. The way to Angle for Trout, at ground, is with the running line, without any float, or he's caught by Float-Angling at ground, at mid-water by Trowling, at top of the water by dibbing and the cast-fly; of all which ways, see more hereafter. Biting time. 6. A Trout bites best in a muddy, rising water, or in a water that is clearing after a Flood; or in dark, cloudy or windy weather, early in the morning, from a little after Sun∣rising, till about half an hour after ten, and from about two a clock in the afternoon till six, and sometimes in the evening, but 9 a clock in the forenoon, and 3 in the afternoon, are his chiefest and most constant hours of biting at Ground or Fly, as the water suits either: March, April, May, and part of June are his chiefest Months, tho he bites well in July, Au∣gust and September: After a shower in the eve∣ning he rises well at Gnats. When he takes Minnow and Loach, Vide Antea. 7. In little Brooks which fail into large Ri∣vers, where it libbs and Flows, only in fresh wa∣ters
or a little brackish, if you begin at the mouth of such Brooks, just as the Tide cometh in, and goeth up the Brook, with the Head of the Tide, and return with the Ebbing of the water, you will take good Trouts, and have much sport; and if the Tide do not muddy the water, they will also rise at the Fly at such a time. 8. Vid. Cap. 9. Sect. 12.17. and 18. 9. In small clear Brooks, if you come in or immediately after a shower that hath raised the water, or take it just, as any Mill water be∣ginneth to come down, and so go along with the course of the water: Trouts will then bite well: because they expect the water will bring down food with it, and they come forth to seek it, but in small Brooks, when the Mills stand, and keep up the Water, you'l have little or no sport at ground especially, and but little with Fly, for the Trout at such a time is fearful, and dares scarce venture out of hold. 10. When you Angle for Salmon or Trout, and all day long have had little or rather no sport, either at ground or fly; next night es∣pecially at the beginning of it, and until mid∣night or near it; they will not fail to bite ei∣ther at ground or fly (as the season or water suits best for either) freely and eagerly, if the weather be not nipping cold or frosty. 11. When you Angle for Trout with fly, or ground-bait, you need not make above 3 or 4 tryals in one place: for he will then either
take it, or make an offer, or not stir at all. 12. When Rains raise the Rivers, and al∣most continually keep them equal with their banks or above their ordinary height; Trouts leave Rivers and larger Brooks, and fly into such small Brooks as scarce run at all in Sum∣mers that are dry; in such Brooks Angle for them: Trouts generally quit the great Rivers at Michaelmas, and go into small Rills or Ri∣vulets to Spawn, and are frequently there de∣stroyed by idle, loose and disorderly fellows, with groping or otherwise; which does more injury to the breed of Fish than all the Sum∣mers Angling; for then they take all the Spawning Trouts. Thus I have known a Ri∣ver very plentifully stored with Trouts, in 3 or 4 years utterly spoiled. 13. When you Angle for Trout or Salmon with Worm or at ground, let your Bait drag on the ground as little as may be, but touch the ground it must, especially for Trouts, but Mr. Cotton advises when you Angle with a float to let the bait be as near the bottom as you can, but not drag, which perhaps may do well, but the experience of the running Line contradicts his Opinion; for therewith the bait always drags, and there is no better way at ground yet known for the catching of Trouts, than the running Line; Yet I confess if you Angle ei∣ther with Cod-bait, Clap-bait, or water Cric∣ket at Float, that the bait swimming very near the bottom as may be, but not touching it, may do best.
14. When you Angle for Trouts and only catch Minows, be assured that there are no Trouts there, therefore remove to another place. CHAP. XI. Observations on the Salmon. Nature, Season, and Spawning time. 1. THE Salmon is called the King of fresh water Fish, breeds in Rivers relating to the Sea; yet so high as admits of no Tincture of it; they Spawn in the end of August or September, having delighted him∣self all the Summer in the fresh water (into which he comes at Spring,) in October he re∣turns to the Sea, where he lives till Spring, and grows exceeding large, but in the fresh water he only grows fat in the Summer, and if a∣bout Michaelmas he chance to be stopt by Flood-gates or Weirs from going to Sea, and enforced to take up his Winter quarters in the fresh water, he grows sick, lean, unseasona∣ble, kipper, insipid and tasteless; and in one year pines away and Dies. Their Age is a∣bout 10 years, and their growth is very sud∣den after they get into the Sea, as quickly as
a Gosling becomes a Goose: is about 5 months out of season after Spawning. Haunts. 2. Salmons love large swift Rivers where it ebbeth and floweth; yet sometimes they are found in lesser Rivers high up the Country, chiefly in the latter end of the year, when they come thither to Spawn: He likewise delights in the swist and violent Streams, and the clear∣est gravelly Rivers, usually with Rocks or Weeds. He stays not long in a place (as the Trout will,) but is ambitious still to go nearer the Spring head; nor does he ly (as the Trout and many other Fish do) near the water side, or bank, or roots of Trees, but swims in the deep and broad parts of the Water, and usual∣ly in the middle and near the ground, but the small Salmon smelts commonly lye in the rough and upper part of a gentle Stream, and in the middle thereof. Biting-time. 3. Salmons best biting time is 9 a Clock in the forenoon, and 3 in the afternoon in a clear water, and when some wind bloweth against the Stream; when struck he usually falleth to plunge and leap, but does not ordinarily en∣deavour to run to the end of the Line, as the
Trout will, young Salmons are very tender mouthed. Baits. 4. For a great Salmon, the principal ground bait is the Dew-worm well scowred, and for the small Salmon smelt about bigness of a Trout, the Brandling and Gilt-tail are the best ground baits. They will likewise take exceeding well the Bob of both sorts, the Cod-bait and Water∣lowse, and the counterfeit Cod-bait also in clear water. For Flyes he takes the same that the Trout generally doth, whether natural or artificial, but the natural bait he generally takes better than the artificial fly, especially by the small ones. If you put a Cod-bait or Gentle, either na∣tural or artificial, but natural better, at point of your dub-fly hook, they will take the dub∣fly better, especially the Salmon smelt. Flyes made for the great Salmon, are better being made with 4 wings than with 2 only, and with 6 better than with them of 4, and if behind each pair of Wings you place a different colour for the body of the Fly, it is much the better, which argues that he loves to have several Flys on the hook at once, for the Fly looketh as if it were divers Flies together. The Wings must be made standing one be∣hind the other, whether 4 or 6, also he de∣lights
to have both body and wings of the most gaudy colour with long wings and tails: Silver twist and Gold twist are good to use in dubbing the bodies; he's caught at ground with running line or float, the bait touching, or as near the ground as possible, and sometimes he bites well lower than mid-water at ground baits. He's caught with dub fly and the Cod-bait. Clap∣bait, water-Cricket, and the counteifeit Cod∣bait at top of the water. CHAP. XII. Observations on the Umber or Grayling. Haunt and Season. 1. UMber and Grayling disser only in name, they delight in marl, clay, clear wa∣ters, swift Streams and far from the Sea; Dove, Trent and Derwen in the Counties of Derby and Stafford are best stored with them of any Rivers in England; the biggest is not a∣bove 18 inches long, they are in Season all the year, but their principal Season is Decem∣ber, at which time he's black about head, gills and down his back, and has his belly of a dark grey dapled with black spots; his Flesh even in
his worst Season is firm, and will easily calver, and is excellent meat at all times, but when at best, little inferiour to the best Trout. He's a very nimble Fish, swist swimmer, but dead hearted after hooked; has his Teeth in his Throat, is eager and biteth freely, and will of∣ten bite at the same fly, if not prickt, he's ten∣der mouth'd, and often lost by breaking hold. 2. When you Angle for him within water, his bait by no means must drag on the ground, he being a Fish that usually swims nearer the middle of the water, and lies always loose, and more apt to rise than descend even to a ground bait: therefore let your bait be about 6 or 9 Inches from the bottom, and use a float of Cork rather than a running line, if you An∣gle particularly for this Fish; but if for Trout and Grayling then a running line. Baits, 3. His principal ground baits are Brandling, Giltail, Tag-tail, Cod-bait, Bark-worm and Flag-worm, and at top he's taken either with the natural or artificial Palmers and Flies (es∣pecially the Camlet Fly, and a Fly made of light tawny hair Camlet) as the Trouts are.
CHAP. XIII. Observations on the Pearch. Haunt. 1. HE loves a gentle Stream of a reasona∣ble depth, seldom shallow, close by a hollow bank, and although Salmon, Trout and Pearch delight in clear and swift Rivers, stony, gravelly and green weeds, yet Pearches are sometimes found, but not in such plenty and goodness in slow, stimy and muddy Rivers; as about Oxford, and he frequents Creeks and hollownesses about the banks. He's a very excellent, good, wholesom, and well casted Fish, (especially the River Pearch) a bold biter, ravenous, and great devourer of other Fish, of flow growth, and not usually above 14 inches, and oftener about 10 or under. Biting-time. 2. He'l not bite at all Seasons, being very abstemious in Winter, only in the middle of the day (as other Fishes then do) he'l then bite; in Summer he biteth all the day long in cool, cloudy, or windy weather; yet principal∣ly from 7 in the forenoon until after 10 a
Clock, and from about 2 in the afternoon till a∣bout 6, and sometimes later, especially in hot weather and middle of Summer: He is strong, and will contend hard and long for his Life; they accompany one another in Troops, and if there be 30 or 40 in a hole, they may at one standing be catcht one after another; be sure you give him time to bite, for he's often mist for want of that. Spawning time. 3. He Spawns but once a year, and that a∣bout February or March, and carries his Teeth in his mouth, which is large. Baits. 4. His principal Baits are Brandling, Dew-worm and red-worm, all to be well scowred, and the Menow: He also takes Bobs, Oak-worms, Gentles, Cod-bait, Wasps, Colewort-worms, and sometimes any Bait but the Fly, which he never meddles with. He's best caught with a Float, your bait being about 6 inches from the ground, sometimes at mid∣water or lower, and some will suffer the bait to touch the ground, especially the Worm, and judge it best.
CHAP. XIV. Observations on the Pope or Ruff. POPE or Russ is like the Pearch, both in na∣ture, disposition and shape, but lesser, being no bigger than a large Gudgeon; is a better Fish and pleasanter tasted than a Pearch; a greedy biter, and commonly abundance of them lie together in one reserved place, where the wa∣ter runs deep and quietly, and one may catch 40 or 50 at a standing. His bait is the small red-worm or Giltail, and you are to use a float and bait to be about mid-water or lower. CHAP. XV. Observations on the Gud∣geon. Haunts. 1. OF Gudgeons the whitest are best, he de∣sires sandy, gravelly, gentle Streams, and small Rivers rather than Brooks. In the eat of the Summer they are usually scattered p and down in Companies in the shallows of
every River; but in Autumn when the Weeds begin to grow sower or rot, and the weather colder, then they gather together, and retreat into the deeper parts of the River, and are to be Fished for there with a Float, and the bait must always touch or drag on the ground. 2. They are a wholesom and pleasant Fish, breed 3 or 4 times a year, and always in Sum∣mer when you Angle for them in Shallows, stir or rake the Sand or Gravel with a Pole, and they'l gather to that place and bite better. Biting time and baits. 3. He bites from March till Michaelmas, in or near a gentle Stream; but will not bite when very cold, nor immediately after a shower or Land-flood; but will bite well in hot weather, his best baits are the Giltail or Brand∣ling, then a small red-worm, and he'l take Cod-bait, Gentles or Wasps sometimes. CHAP. XVI. Observations on the Carp. Haunts. 1. CARP soeks mud, and the deepest, stil lest place of Pond or River, and gre
weeds which he loves exceedingly. If you cut weeds in a River, the better to make a place clear to Angle in for Carps, they will not (al∣though they before haunted the place very much) come there again for 2 or 3 months, nor will they come near a Boat that you go in on a large Pond or River to Angle in for them, although Rushes or Weeds interpose: they are so wary, fearful and subtil, therefore stiled the Fresh Water Fox, and by others the Queen of Rivers. Spawning time. 2. They breed better in Ponds than Rivers, but not at all in cold Ponds, in others 4 or 5 times a year, as their encrease is wonderful for their multitude; so is their decay misterious all being often gone, and none knows how, they live 10 or 20 years, and are better for Age and bigness, and the largest is rarely above 18 inches long, they are a sweet and soft Fish, the Male better than the Female, and the white better than the yellow, and are at best in March, and will live long out of water, they begin to spawn at 3 years old; they'l feed on Grass in the Pond, or sides thereof. Biting time. 3. They bite very early and late in April, May, June, July and August, and in the Sum∣mer
all night in the still part of the water; keep quiet and out of sight when you Angle for them, when you strike him; if you give him not play hell break all, for he's strong, will struggle long and stoutly. He's caught at mid-water, sometimes lower, sometimes high∣er, as the weather is, and use always a float: when a large Carp takes the Bait, he runs to the farther side of the River. Baits. 4. Best baits for him are Gentles, Flag-worm, or Cod bait, and all sorts of sweet Pasts, then Marsh-worm or Giltail; Mr. Walton ad∣vises to dip a piece of scarlet breadth of a Die in Oyl of Peter or the Rock, and put it above the Hook, having a bait of Gentles below. CHAP. XVII. Observations on the Tench. Haunts. 1. HIS Haunts and times of biting are the same generally with the Carp; yet I have known them in April, on a cloudy, misting rainy morning, the Wind South or West, and warm, bite very well until 11 a Clock He likes
Ponds better than Rivers, and Pits better than either; in some Pits they breed only, and ne∣ver thrive to any bigness, and in others they'l thrive and never breed, and like the Eel, he loves muddy Ponds. Spawning time. 2. They Spawn about the beginning of July, live long out of water, and by some esteemed the Physitian to other Fish, having a medicinal Balm on his skin, their best Season is from the end of August until May day. Biting time. 3. Carp and Tench bite from Sun rise until 8 a Clock, and from 4 in the afternoon until after Sun-set, but in the hot months from Sun set all night. Baits. 4. Angle for them with a Float about 2 foot within water, sometimes more sometimes less. His best bait is Gentles, Cod-bait, Flag-worm, Marsh worm, and Red-worm well scowred; and as you use your Worms, put them by themselves in a little Tar a little before used only, and try whether it advantages your Sport, which many affirm it do's, but I could never observe any advantage by it.
CHAP. XVIII. Observations on the Bream. Haunts. 1. BReam is a large and stately Fish at full growth, is dangerous to eat by reason of bones, and is a kind of flat Carp. Breeds both in Rivers and Ponds, but in the latter bet∣ter; if he likes the Water and Air he'l be ve∣ry fat; is long in growing, yet a great breeder. Some say Breams and Roches mix their Spawn together, and so there becomes a Bastard breed of Breams; they swim in Companies and he likes a gentle Stream, and deepest and broadest part of a River or Pond. He's caught from Sun-rising till 8 a Clock in a muddy, slimy wa∣ter, a good gale of Wind, and in Ponds the higher the Wind, and where the Waves are highest, and nearer the middle of the Pond the better; 3 a Clock and 4 in the afternoon are likewise good times to take them. He Spawns in June or beginning of July, is easily taken, for after one or two gentle turns, he falls on one side, and so is drawn to Land with case. Baits. His baits are Red-worm and Giltails well
scowred, Paste, Flag-worm, Wasps, a Grashop∣per his Legs cut oft, and Flies under water: when he bites, he'l draw the bait towards the farther fide of the River, Angle with a Float, and let the bait touch the ground. CHAP. XIX. Observations on the Barbel. Haunts. 1. BArbel in Summer lives in the strongest swifts of the water, and under the shades of Trees, they much delight in the shal∣lowest and sharpest Streams, and lurk under weeds, feeding on Gravel against a rising ground, where he'l root and dig in the Sand with his Nose like a Hog, and there nests him∣self, yet sometimes he lies about deep and swift waters, at Bridges, Floodgates or Weirs, where he'l remain among Piles or hollow places, and the swiftness of the water is not able to force him thence, at the approach of Winter he for∣sakes the swift Streams and shallow waters, and by degrees retires to those parts of the River that are quiet and deep.
Spawning time. 2. He's none of the best Fish, either for wholsomness or taste, they Spawn about April, and the Spawn is very unwholsom, almost Poy∣son, grow in season about a month after Spawning. Biting time. 3. Bites early in the morning until 10 a Clock, and late in the evening from the end of May, all June, July and August; and is a cunning, wary, subtil and strong Fish, will strug∣gle long, and unless dexterously managed, breaks both Rod and Line, they flock together like Sheep, and are at worst in April. Baits. 4. His baits must be sweet, clean, well scow∣red, and not kept in musty, sowr Moss, and his bait must touch the ground, and to be Angled for with a Float. His prime baits are Gentles not too much scowred, so is new Cheese Pasts. Red-worm and Dew-worm well scowred, he'l often nibble or suck the bait off the Hook, and yet avoid the Hooks coming into his mouth.
CHAP. XX. Observations on the Roch, Dace or Dare. Haunts. THey like Gravel and Sand, and the deepest part of the River, under shades of Trees; are Fish of no great esteem, very simple; be∣come in Season within 3 weeks after Spawning; the Dace or Dare Spawn about the middle of March, and the Roch about the middle of May; he's called the Fresh Water Sheep for his Simplicity, and is caught in Ponds within 2 foot or less of the top; but the Dace should have his bait within 6 inches of the bottom, and sometimes to touch the bottom, best baits for them are the Earth bob, Gentles, Cod-bait, Clap-bait, Oak worm, and the Fly, especial∣ly the Ant Fly but within the water; and any Worm bred on Herbs or Trees, as Hawthorn-worm, Colewort and Cabbage-worm, Paste. Sheeps-blood, Lip-berries, Grain, Wasps, and small white Snails, &c. Angle for them in Ponds under water Dock leaves; they will likewise take Giltails and Brandlings, especial∣ly if the water be discoloured with Rain.
CHAP. XXI. Observations on the Chub or Chevin. Nature and Spawning time of the Chub. CHub is no good Fish, timorous although large, must be eaten the same day he's caught, his Head is the best part of him, his Spawn is good, and he Spawns in March, and becomes in Season a month after Spawning, and is in season from Mid-May until after Candle∣mas, but his best season is Winter. Haunt. 2. He likes sandy and clay bottoms, large Rivers and Streams shaded with Trees, in Summer you'l find many together in a hole, sometimes floating on the top of the water, they may be then caught by dibbing, and in hot weather he's caught near the mid-water or top, in colder weather nearer the bottom, or a bottom by a Ledger bait, that is, when the bait rests on the ground in a certain or firm place.
Biting time. 3. They bite from Sun-rising until 8 a Clock, and from 3 in the Afternoon till Sun set. After struck he quickly yields if a large one, but the lesser struggle briskly and longer. Baits. 4. He'l take almost any fort of bait; but his best baits are seven eyes, and Eel brood, each about thickness of a Straw, also the Red-worm and Dew-worm well scowred, the Earth-bob, and brains of an Ox or Cow, Cheefe, Paste, and the Pith or Marrow of an Ox or Cows back bone, tenderly and carefully take off the outward tough skin, and be sure you leave the inward and tender white skin fase and un∣touched, or your labour is lost, which are very good baits for the cooler months. In the hot months he takes all sort of baits bred on Trees or Herbs; especially the Oak-worm, Crab-tree worm, Palmers, Catterpillars, Cod-baits, Gen∣tles, the young brood of Wasps, Horners and Humble Bees, Beetles their Legs cut off, Dores, Grashoppers, Clap-baits, white Snails and black Snails their belly slit that the white appear, these Snails he takes very early in the morning, but not in the heat of the day. He likewise takes Lip-berries, Colewort worm, Cabbage-worm, Fern fly, and likewise a Moth with a
great head like an Owl, with whitish wings and a yellow body, they fly abroad in Summers evenings in Gardens; he loves a large bait, as a Wasp and a Colewort worm, and then a Wasp all on the hook at a time, and he would have divers fort of Flies on at once, and a Fly and a Cod-bait or Oak-worm together. He'l likewise take the great brown fly, which lives on an Oak like a scarabe. How to Fish for him. 5. He's caught by a Float at mid water or lower, at top by dibbing, and at bottom by a ledger bait; when Cattel in Summer come in∣to the Fords, their Dung draweth Fish into the lower end thereof, at such time Angle for Chub with tackle and baits suitable, and you'l have Sport. Take off the Beetles legs and uppermost Wings when you use him. CHAP. XXII. Observations on the Eel. Their Kinds. 1. THere are four forts of Eels, the Silver Eel, the greenish Eel, the blackish Eel which hath a broader, flatter and larger head
then ordinary, and the Eel with red Fins, the blackish Eel is the worst. They live about 10 years, and after they get into the Sea they ne∣ver return: They are always in season, and the older the better; They are impatient of cold, for in the 6 cooler months they stir not up and down, neither in Rivers or Ponds, but get into the soft earth or mud, and there many of them bed themselves together, they seldom stir in the day time, unless the water be mud∣ded and raised a little by rain, but is most usu∣ally caught in the night. Haunts. 2. In the day time they hide themselves un∣der some covert, roots of Trees, Stocks, Stones, Boards or Planks about Floodgates, Weirs, Bridges or Mills, or in holes in the Rivers bank; they are a pleasant and delicate Fish, and one may easily Surfeit on them: their best season is Winter, although they be always very good. Baits. 3. Best baits are the Dew-worm, Red-worm and Lamprey that's very small, Menow, Loach very small Gudgeon and small Roch, a Hen r Chickens Gut, the Dew-worm, Red-worm nd small Lamprey are proper for him either  the day or night, but the rest are to be used
with night-hooks only; as also is Beef or Horse∣flesh, and sometimes in the day time an Ee will take the young brood of Wasps. Ways of catching Eels. 4. He's caught in the day time by a ledge bait, by singling or brogling and bobbing, an by night with laying of night-hooks. Singling or brogling for Eels. 5. Brogling or Singling is thus performed get an exceeding strong and long line, and small compassed Hook, baited with a well sco∣red red worm, hold one end of the line in you hand, then place the upper end of your hoo very easily in the cleft of a long Hasle stick, tha it may easily slip out: With this stick and hoo thus baited, search for holes under Stone Timber, Roots, or about Floodgates or Weir and put the bait leasurely therein. If there a good Eel, give her time and she'll take it, b be sure she hath swallowed it, then very l surely draw her out. Bobbing for Eels. 6. Bobbing for Eels is thus; Take the la¦gest Garden worms well scowred, and with Needle run a strong Thread through the from end to end; take and use so many, as
last you may wrap them slackly about your hand a dozen times at least, then tye them fast with the two ends of the thread, that they may hang in so many long boughts or hanks; then fasten all to a small strong Cord, and some∣thing more than a handful above the Worms, tye the Cord on a knot; then get a Lead Plumb 3 quarters of a pound weight, shaped like a Py∣ramid, and bore a hole through the middle of this Lead from end to end, The knot on the Cord should be about 6 inches distant from the Worms. so as the Cord may easily pass to and fro; then put the upper end of the Cord through the Plumb (the thicker end of the Plumb being downwards) and let the Plumb rest on the knot above the Worms, then six the upper end of the Cord, which should not be above 2 yards long, to a strong and long Pole; Thus prepared, Angle in a muddy water, and you'l feel Eels tug strong∣y at them, when you think they have swallow∣ed them as far as they can, gently draw up your Worms and Eels, and when you have them near top of the water, hoise them amain to Land, and thus you may take 3 or 4 at once, and good ones too, if store there be. These 2 ways of Singling and Bobbing, are proper only to Eels, no other Fish being to be caught so.
CHAP. XXIII. Observations on the Pike. Nature of Pike. 1. HE's a better Fish than the Carp, but a great devourer of other Fish, whereby he acquires the name of Fresh Water Tyrant or Wolf. He's long lived, as to live 20 or 30 years, others say, but 10; the Eel and Carp are better for Age, so is not the Pike, the middle size are best; his bites are venomous; he al∣ways swims by himself and not in company; he breeds but once a year, and that in Febru∣ary or March; he's a bold and greedy biter, and is not afraid of a shadow or seeing people. His Haunt. 2. He loves sandy or clay bottoms, still Pools, full of fry and shelters (the better to surprise his Prey unawares,) himself a∣mongst Bulrushes, Water Docks or Bushes, and often he bites about the middle of the Ri∣ver, and always about mid water, the bait generally being in a continual gentle motion.
Biting-time. 3. In April, May, June and beginning of July he bites best early in the morning, and late in the evening; and seldom to any purpose in the night of all the year; at 3 a Clock in the afternoon in July, August, September and O∣ctober in a clear water and a gentle Gale in still places, or a gentle Stream. In Septem∣ber and all Winter months he bites all the day long, especially about 3 in the afternoon, the water being clear, the day windy. Baits. 4. He takes all sort of baits, except Fly, but his principal baits are Gudgeons, Roches, Da∣ces, Menows, Loaches, young Frogs and Sal∣mon smelts that are small, fresh, sweet and well fastned on the hook; for they are very tender, so is a young Trout, young Jack, Pearch his ack Fins cut off, and a piece of an Eel good aits likewise for the Pike. 5. He's caught 4 manner of ways, viz. by a Ledger bait, by Snap, Snare and Trowling; of all which you'l see hereafter in this book, ut however procure some Angler the first ime you Angle to accompany, and shew you he way.
CHAP. XXIV. Observations on the Flook or Flounder. FLOOK or Flounder is a Sea Fish which wanders far into fresh Rivers, and there dwells and loses himself, thriving to an hands bredth, and almost twice so long; is a pleasant Fish, and makes the Angler great Pastime, and although greedy biters, yet crafty, for they will nibble and suck at a bait some time before they swallow it; and if they perceive the hook fly from it; therefore let your bait be alway in motion, and it will make them more eager they commonly lie in the deepest and stilles place of the River, and near the bank, and i a gentle Stream that is brackish: His best bai are small red-worm, and especially the Mea∣dow or Marsh-worm well scowred, your bai touching the ground, and the young brood Wasps.
CHAP. XXV. Observations on the Bleak. BLeak is no wholsom Fish, because in Sum∣mer they go mad by reason of a Worm in their Stomachs, but the Sea-bleak is a good Fish. He's a very eager bitor, and you may Angle for him with as many hooks on your line as you can conveniently fasten on it: He takes Gentles the best, and likewise the same baits that Roch does, but they must be lesser; also the Dub-fly, which should be of a very sad brown colour and small, and the hook so too; he's caught at mid-water or top; he is almost always in motion. The Variatae or Sea-bleak thanges its colour with every Light and Ob∣ject having firm and wholsom Flesh, and is as good as any Carp, and its called the Sea-Camelion.
CHAP. XXVI. Observations on the Menow, Loach and Bullhead or Millers Thumb. Menow. THese Fish are of little consideration, only sometimes they are caught to make baits on for other Fish; else they are only Women and Childrens Sport. The Minnow appears first in March, and continues until Michaelmas, and then betakes himself to the mud, weeds or wood in Rivers, to secure himself from Floods, devouring Trouts, and other Fishes of Prey. He least frequents deep, still places or holes where Trouts or great Fish ply, neither stirs in the night nor in dark windy weather, for fear of becoming a Prey to the Trouts and other Fish; his most usual time is from an hour after Sun-rising (if the day prove fair) till an hour before Sun-set. His baits are chiefly small Worms, Giltail, Brandling, Cod-bait, &c. and is caught either at mid-water, or near or close to the bottom.
Loach and Bulhead. Loach is a pleasant Fish, breeding and seed∣ing in clear, swift Brooks or Rills living in the sharpest Streams, and on the Gravel, and of∣ten under Stones; he something resembles an Eel in shape, and both Loach and Bullhead being of one nature and humour, their Fe∣male are in Summer often full of Spawn, they are always caught on the bottom, the bait touching the ground, and their best bait is the small red-worm and giltail. The Menow, Loach and Bullhead (his Gill fins cut off) are very good baits for the Trout in March, April and September, and for the Pike and Pearch all the year, and for the Eel from March till Michaelmas to bait night hooks therewith. CHAP. XXVII. Various ways of Angling, and of the Running Line. ALL sorts of Fish take baits at the ground sometimes, although all will not take the fly at top of the water; and the Running Line without any float thereon, is the most proper way
How to Angle with the Running Line in a muddy water. 1. The running Line in a muddy water, or one discoloured by Rain, should be half length of Rod, and the two lowmost links of 3 hairs a piece, then one of 4 hairs, at top whereof have a loop or waternoose to put it to another link of four hairs, having likewise a water∣noose or loop at bottom; and then proceed with 5 and 6 to the topmost; the 3 low∣most gildards should be of a Sorrel, Brown or Chesnut colour; and have a Cane-rod with a top neither too stiff nor too slender, but in a mean, and 5 yards and a half long at least. 2. The Line should have so much and no more Lead than will fit the water you Angle in, viz. more in a great troublesom, rough Ri∣ver, than in a smaller that's quieter, as near as may be so much as will sink the bait to the bot∣tom, and permit its motion without any great hesitation, and in Angling carry the top or point of the Rod even with your hand gently downwards, (for you must begin at the head of the Stream) the Lead dragging and rowling on the ground, no more of the Line being in the water then will permit the Lead to touch the bottom (for you must keep the Line as streight as possible, yet by no means so as to raise the Lead from the ground) and when they have bit, you'l both feel and perceive by the
point of your Rod and Line, and strike gently and streight upwards, first allowing the Fish (by a little flackning the Line) a small time to take the bait. But some strike at the first biting, but that is in a clear water for Trouts or Salmon smelts, which may do well: Your bait should be a red-worm well scowred, or, which is better, a Brandling or Tagtail, or which I like best, both a Brandling and a Giltail on the hook at same time, to be baited as is hereafter directed to bait two worms to be on the hook at once: and note, that you are often to renew your bait, and generally in a muddy water I Angle with two Worms on the hook at once, as 2 Brandlings, 2 Meadow-worms or a Brandling and Giltail on the hook at once; when I Angle for Trouts unless I use the Dew-worm, a Trout takes the bait dragging on the ground, but a Grayling 9 or 12 inches from the bottom, and had rather rise than descend even to a ground bait. As for the Leading of the running Line with Plumbs, you are before taught at chap. 3. sect. 10.11, 12. To bait a great Dew-Worm. 3. If you Angle for a great Trout with a well scowred Dew-Worm in a muddy water, or a water discoloured by Rain, bait it thus, viz. way to Angle for the Trout with Worm, ei∣ther in a muddy or clear water at ground.
put the hook in him towards the tail somewhat above the middle, and out again a little below towards the head, then draw him above the whipping or arming of the hook, then put the point again into the head of the Worm, till it come near the place where the point of the hook first came out, then draw back that part of the Worm that was above the shank or arm∣ing of the hook, and so Fish with it, the Hook should be pretty large. How to bait Worms. 4. But if you Angle in a muddy water for Trouts of the usual size, then have 2 Brandlings or two Meadow-worms, or a Brandling and Giltail on the hook at once, and you are to bait them thus, viz. run the point of the hook in at the very head of the Brandling, and so down through his body till it be past the knot, and then let it out, and strip the Worm above the whipping (that you bruise it not with your fingers) till you have put on the other, by run∣ning the point of the hook in below the knor, and upwards through his body towards the head, till it be just covered with the head, which being thus done, slip the first worm over the arming again, till the knots of both worms meet together. Any 2 Worms may be thus baited.
How to bait a single Worm proper for running line in a clear water. 5. But if you Angle with one Worm only on the hook (which is most proper for a Trout, Salmon Smelt or Grayling in a clear water) it is to be baited thus, viz. put the point of the hook in at the top of his tail, and run up his body quite over all the whipping or arming, and still strip on almost an inch upon the hair, the head and remaining part hanging down∣wards, and covering the point of the hook, but some let the head hang downwards, and the point of the hook to be bare, and so Angle with it. But others cover the point of the hook with the Worms head, as aforesaid, but nip off the very tip end of the Worms head, and so Angle with it. How to Angle in clear water with run∣ning Line. 6. Thus you are to bait the Brandlings or Giltail, and onely one to be on the hook at a time well scowred, your hook being small, your lines should have 2 or 3 of the lower most links or gildards to be of one hair a piece, then one or two links of 2 hairs a piece, and then one of 3 hairs, and so proceed with 3 and 4 to the topmost link: the hair should be white, or
rather a duskish white or grey colour, and the line 2 yards shorter than rod generally, Vid. before cap. 2. sect. 12.15. and leaded with a small pellet of shot for plumb, (vid. cap. 3. sect. 10.11, 12.) thus tackled and baited, Angle always in the Streams, evermore in a clear, rather then troubled water, and al∣ways up the Stream and Rivers, still casting out the worm before you with a light one hand∣ed rod (5 yards and a half long at the least,) like an artificial Fly; where sometimes it will be taken at the top, or within a very little of the superficies of the water, and commonly before the light plumb can sink it to the bot∣tom, both by reason of the Stream, and that you must always keep your hand in a motion, although slowly, by drawing still back towards you, as if you were Angling with a Fly. The Rod must be light, pliant, long, true and finely made, and its the best way of Angling for Trout, Grayling and Salmon smelts with Worms in a clear water (but others had rather use with like Tackle and Worm, Ash-grub or Dock-worm, a float of Cork for a Grayling: because he takes his bait best 6 or 9 inches from the ground,) now if your Constitution would endure to wade into the tail of a shallow Stream, and so keep off the bank, you may almost take what Trouts or Graylings you can desire.
CHAP. XXVIII. Float ANGLING. Float Angling. 1. FOR Float Angling your Line is to be longer than rod by 2 or 3 foot in a Ri∣ver, but shorter than Rod in Pits, Ponds, and Mears. When you Angle for Trout or Grayling in a clear water, then but one hair next hook, and such a Rod and Line as is dire∣cted for a Trout with Running Line in a clear water, but for most other Fish, and in a muddy water, three hairs at least next hook, and of the thickness as before is directed, cap. 2. sect. 14. and 17. and let it be leaded as is directed cap. 3. sect. 10, 11, 12. 2. The bait must be proper for the Fish you Angle for, your Plumbs sitted to the Cork, your Cork to the condition of the River, that is to the swiftness or flowness of it, (vid. be∣fore cap. 3. sect. 5.6, 7, 8. and 9.) and you must cast the bait up the River, and let it run downward as far as the Rod and Line will suffer. In a clear water when you use worms, bait but with one in a muddy or discoloured water, bait with 2 Worms at a time, as is be∣fore directed. 3. This way you may Angle for most sort
of Fish, and the bait must drag on the ground for some sorts, especially the Trout, Gudgeon, Bream, Barbel, Flounder and Salmon, but for Grayling and Poarch 6 or 9 inches from the bottom, but the Pike, Ruff, Carp, Tench; Roch, Dace, Bleak at mid-water, sometimes lower and sometimes higher, the Chub is often taken at the bottom, sometimes at mid-water in hot weather, sometimes at top; some let the bait touch the ground for Pearch, Tench, Roch and Dace, especially in Rivers, and like it best, al∣though others disallow thereof. Mr. Cotton directs to Angle for a Trout with Float as near the bottom one can, so as the bait drag not, which is dishcult, if not impossible to be ob∣serv'd, by reason of the declivity of the bot∣tom, and unevenness thereof in most places, and the experiment of the running line shews that a Trout will take the bait at bottom well e∣nough. The Eel is never to be Angled for with a float, but always with the ledger bait, singling or bobbing. 4. Let your Lead neither be so heavy as to sink the Cork, nor so light, as not with the smal∣lest touch to make the Cork dip under wa∣ter, the infallible signal of a bite, unless the bait stop on Wood, Stones or Weeds, or the line be entangled.
CHAP. XXIX. Angling at top with a Worm. FOR this way you must use a Line longer than the Rod, and a Brandling or a Giltail Worm, without Float or Lead. Drawing your bait up and down the Stream at top as you do a Cod-bait for Trout: In a clear water and day, perhaps you may thus take more Trouts and Salmon smelts than otherwise. CHAP. XXX. Night-Angling. 1. IN the night usually the best Trouts bite, and will rise ordinarily in the still deeps, but not so well in the Streams; and although the best and and largest Trouts bite in the night (being afraid to stir in the day time,) yet I account this way of Angling both unwholsom, unpleasant and very ungentile, and to be used by none but idle pouching fellows; therefore I shall say nothing of it, only describe how to lay night-hooks, which if you live close by a River side, or have a large Moat or Pond at your own house, will not be unpleasant some∣times
to practice; but as for damming, gro∣ping, spearing, hanging, twitchling, firing by night, and netting, I will purposely omit them, and them esteem to be used only by disorderly Fellows; for whom this little Treatise is not in the least intended. How to lay Night Hooks. 2. Let him that would lay night hooks, pro∣cure a small Cord 16 yards long, and there∣unto at equal distances tye 5 or 6 Hemp lines of the thickness of a trowling line, 2 foot long a piece, (but tye them so to the Cord, as you may easily remove or put them to again;) to each of which whip a hook, and bait the same with a Menow, Loach or Bulhead, his Gill-sins cut off, or for want of them a small Gudgeon, small Roch or seven eyes, and put the point of the hook in at the tail and out at the mouth, the head of the Fish resting in the hooks bent, and cover the point of the hook with a small worm, and then to one end of the Cord fasten a stone or lead weight, and throw it cross the River in some still deep, or at the tail of a Stream that's deep, and the other end fasten to some Bough or stick on the water bank you stand on, and in the morning you'l not fail to find Fish caught. This way you'l take Eels, Chubs, large Trouts and Pike, but if you lay for Pike, let not your bait go to the bottom, but with a
float keep it from the bottom about a foot; for the other Fish let the bait touch the bottom, which Lead will cause. Your great Lob-worm is as good a bait as any for night-hooks, only if you lay them in Rivers, perhaps the small Fish may pull your bait off, and miss being taken. CHAP. XXXI. Observations on Mid-water or Ground-Angling. 1. WHen you Angle with Running Line, (which is always to be without any float) keep your Line so streight that it only permit your Lead to touch the ground, and thereon rowl, and no more, so in float Angling keep your Line as streight as possible, suffering one of it to fall or lye in the water but what is evitable; because it as well scares Fish, as hin∣ers the nimble jerk of the Rod when you strike, ut if, as sometimes you cannot avoid, but some ittle will lye in the water, then keep it in the Stream above the float, by no means below it; nd let your bait always fall gently into the water without any disturbance, circling or lunging in the water as little as you possibly an.
2. When you Angle at ground for small Fish as Gudgeons, or at mid-water for Roch and Bleak, put 2 or 3 hooks on your line, the one 9 inches lower than the other, which you may do, by having 2 or 3 gildards armed or whip with hooks, and tyed at the lowermost water knot: Thus you may put on 2 or 3 different baits, and you'l try with more ease and les time which is best taken, and often catch tw or three at once, but if your bait be to run o the ground (as for Gudgeon,) you must hau a fair, sandy bottom, free from Wood, Ston and Weeds; your Lead is always to be on th lowermost link. 3. Give all Fish time to take and swallow th bait, especially Pike, Gudgeon, Pearch, and i a muddy water Trout, being not over hasty unless you Angle with such tender baits as wi not endure nibling at, but must upon every touch be struck at, (as Pasts, Sheeps blood, Flies &c. which are taken away at the first pull of th Fish,) and therefore at first pull oblige you t try your fortune. 4. Angle for all sorts of Fish in their haunt and places they most frequent and are describ' to be: and at the proper seasons and times  biting (which you may see in the particul Chapter of each Fish,) and with suitable tackl and baits. 5. When you Angle with Worm in a clea water, sometimes put after the Worm, and
the point of the hook a Codbait, Bob, or Gentle. 6. When you use Pasts or very tende baits, have a small hook, quick eye, nimble rod, a little stiff, and a ready hand, or all will be lost, both bait and Fish, which must in such case be struck, at the very first touch. 7. Many when they Angle for Trouts and Smelts in a clear water, strike as soon as they have bit, which is easily perceived by motion of the Rods point or Line. 8. When you Angle at ground for Salmons, put 2 or 3 Garden Worms well scowred on your hook at once, and dispose your self as when you Angle at ground for a Trout. 9. If you Angle for Pearch or Trout, and atch Menows, be assured that neither Pearch or Trouts are there, because they are great devourers of those Fish. CHAP. XXXII. Angling with a Ledger bait. 1. SOME persons (especially when tyred, and mindful to rest their wearied Limbs) etake themselves to Angle with a Ledger bait, which is, when a bait always rests in one fixed r certain place; and is so called in opposition to other baits that are always walking, or in mo∣tion,
thence called walking baits; the manner of the Ledger bait is thus. Take off your Cork from your float-line, it being leaded as usually, and within half a yard of the top of the line, wrap about it a thin plate of Lead, one inch broad, and an inch and half long, then put your line to your rod, and bait your hook, and cast the same into a very gentle Stream, or still slow draught, and there let the bait sink and rest on the bottom, you either firmly holding the Rod, or sticking the thick end thereof in the River bank, and either standing or sitting by it, will perceive by the mo∣tion of the Lead on the Lines top when they have hit. This way you may Angle for a manner of Fish whatsoever, especially the Chub and Eel. CHAP. XXXIII. Natural Fly Angling. Dibbing. 1. ANgling with the natural Fly (called Dibbing, Dapeing or Dibling) is fir to be spoken to, and it will serve as an intro∣duction to Angling with the Artificial Fly. 2. Dibbing is always performed on the su¦face of the Water, or sometimes by permittin
the bait to sink 2, 4, or 5 inches into the wa∣ter, but that seldom, unless you join a Cod∣bait or Clap-bait with the Oak-fly for Trout or Chub. 3. This Dibbing is principally performed with the Green Drake or stone-fly, or with the Oak-fly and Cod-baits, or with Cod-baits, Clap-baits, Cankers, Palmers, Catterpillars, Oak-worm and Hawthorn-worm or Grub, and sometimes with an artificial Green-Drake or Stone-fly. 4. The Salmon, Trout, Grayling, Bleak, Chub, Roch and Dace are the only Fish that will take Flies, the 4 first take the natural Fly no better than the Dub-fly, except in very hot calm weather, at which time its most proper to dib; the rest take natural Flies either at top or under water, and sometimes a Dub-fly, if a Cod-bait, Oak-worm, Clap-bait or Gentle be joyned with it, and put on the point of the hook with it, but that rarely. Dibbing for Trout or Grayling. 5. Dibbing for Trout or Grayling is per∣formed with a line about half length of Rod, if the Air be still, or with one almost as long as Rod, if there be a Wind to carry it from you, (have 4 hairs next hook, but 5 for the Chub,) wherein always have the Fly play or fly before you up and down the River as the Wind serves and Angle as near as you can to the bank of the
side whereon you stand, although where you see a Fish rise near you, you may guide your quick fly over him, whether in the middle or on the contrary side, and if you are pretty well out of sight, either by kneeling or the in∣terposition of a bank or bush, you may almost be sure to raise and take him too, if it be pre∣sently done; the Fish will otherwise peradven∣ture be removed to another place, if it be in the still Deeps where he is always in motion, and roving up and down for Prey, tho' in a Stream you may always almost, especially if there be a good Stone near, find him in the same place. You may likewise Dlb with the Water-Cricket, or Creeper, in the Streams in the month of April, above an inch of your line is not to be in the water, therefore you may be stronger tackled. How to bait the May-fly for Dibbing. 6. The Green-Drake and Stone-fly all al∣low to be May-Flies, therefore take one of them, (for commonly two are used,) and put the point of the hook into the thickest part of his body, under one of his Wings, run it dire∣ctly through, and out at the other side, leaving him spitted cross on the hook, then taking the other, put him on after the same manner, but with his head the contrary way, in which po∣sture they will live on the hook, and play with their wings a quarter of an hour, and let them
but just touch the water, but if you Dib with an Oak-fly or a Cod-bait, put the Oak-fly on length ways in under his head and out at his tail, and a Cod-bait on point of the hook, and let them sink a little into the water, and they are a killing bait, especially in some Riyers. Dibbing for Chubs. 7. In hot weather you'l find Chubs floating near or on the top of the water; then get se∣cretly behind some Tree or Bush, standing as free from motion as possible; let your hook hang a foot short of the water, to the end you may rest your Rod on some Bush or Bough of a Tree, and the Chub in all probability will sink down towards the bottom of the water at first sight or shadow of the Rod, and would so do if a Bird fly over him, yet presently rises to the top again, soaring there till frighted again by some shadow; look out the best, moving your Rod as gently as a Snail to that you intend to catch, let your bait fall gently on the wa∣ter 5 or 6 inches before him, and he'l seldom refuse the bait; you may Angle thus with Cat∣terpillars, Oak-worm. Ash-fly and Cod-bait, Clap-bait, Crab-tree-worm, Wasps, young Humble Bees, Fern-flyes, Grashopper, Bee∣tles, &c. and have 2 or 3 sorts of bait on at once, as a Fern-fly, Clap-bait or Wasp, and if on side of a Stream let the bait sink a foot.
Rules for Dibbing. 1. You may Dib with the Green-Drake both in Streams and Stills, all hours of the day, but the Stone-fly is most proper for the Streams only, and that early and late, and not in the mid-time of the day: but if there be a whist∣ling Wind in the evening, Dib in the still deeps with an artificial Stone-fly, where and when it will murder, and the best Fish then and there rise, no matter how late so you can see the Fly. 2. When you bait any sort of Fly let your Fingers be dry, and nor wet or moist, lest you spoil the Fly, especially if tender. 3. Keep out of sight if possible; for to Fish fine and far off is the great rule in all manner of Fly Angling; for if a Fish be coming to∣wards a Fly, and perceive one, he'l turn short, therefore keep your Fly gently moving on top of the water as if it were alive, your self out of sight. 4. When you Dib for Chub, Roch, Dace, move not the Fly swiftly when you see the Fish coming towards it, but rather after one or two short and flow removes, suffer the Fly to glide gently with the current towards the Fish, or if in a standing or very slow water, draw the Fly flowly, not directly upon him, but slopeing and sideways by him, which will make him more eager least it escape him, for if you move
it nimbly and quick, they will not (being Fish of flow motion, follow as the Trout will. 5. When Chub, Roch and Dace shew them∣selves on the top of the water on a Sun-shine day, they are easily caught with baits proper for them, and you may almost choose from amongst them which you please to take. 6. Chub, Roch and Dace sometimes take an artificial fly with a Cod-bait, Oak-worm or a Clap-bait at point of the hook, and the Oak-worm when they shew themselves, is full as good on the top of the water as under, or then the Fly it self, and more desired by them. 7. Trouts, Graylings and Salmon Smelts will take an Artificial Fly very well at Dibbing, particularly best the Green-Drake, and likewise the Stone-fly early or late in the evening, and if you could but hit the colour of the Oak-fly a∣right, and joyn a Cod-bait either natural or artificial, there would be no need of the natu∣ral Oak-fly; if you Dib for Salmon smelts with the Dub-fly, put on a Cod-bait, Clap-bait or Gentle at point of the hook. 8. In a calm you will not have so much sport even with Dibbing, as in a whistling gale of Wind, both because you then are not so easily discover'd by the Fish, and also then but few Flies can lye on the water, for where they have so much choice they will not be so eager and forward to rise at a bait, that both the shadow of your body, rod, nay very line, in a hot, calm day, will in spite of your best caution, ren∣der
suspected to them, but even then in swift Streams with the Green-Drake or Stone-fly, by sitting patiently behind a bush you may do exe∣cution. 9. All Fish take the Fly sometimes best on top of the water at another time much better a little under the superficies of the water, therefore if they will not rise at the top, try them a little under, but Chub, Roch and Dace will frequently take the Fly within water. 10. Fish never eagerly rise at any Fry until that kind come to the Rivers side, which all Flies do before they die to moisten their wings, and from the bushes and herbs skip and play up∣on the water, where they are snapt up by the Fish. 11. To know what Flies Fish take, beat on the Bushes on the Rivers bank, and see what Fly falls and Fish take best, and that use, vid. cap. 7 sect. 11. cap. 4. sect. 35. CHAP. XXXIV. Artificial Fly Angling. NOW I shall treat of artificial, Dab-fly or Cast-fly Angling (for so its stiled in se∣veral places) and herein I find it no small dif∣ficulty by written directions perfectly (altho' I shall attempt it) to teach any (tho as inge∣nious
as may be) how to make an artificial or dub-fly, therefore the best and readiest way is to procure some skilful Fly Angler to let you see one made, and by observing the fol∣lowing Rules, and then your own Experience and Observations in a short time will make you a perfect Artist. The great difficulty is to obtain the right colour of the Fly Fish then take, which none can make a general descripti∣on of, because several Rivers and Soils produce several and divers Flies, as the Mossy and Boggy have one sort particular to them, the Clay, Gravelly and Mountainous Country and Ri∣vers others; and the mellow light Soil diste∣rent from them all; but much earlier in some places than others, nay in Wales and other Countreys there are peculiar Flies proper to the particular place and Country: And my own Experience has abundantly satisfied me, that almost in every River the Flies vary in co∣lour, kind, shape or proportion, and that in all places the same Flies are taken much earli∣er in some Rivers and Years than others; nay, in the very same River and Year I have known the Stone-fly taken a month earlyer at 5 or 6 miles distance lower than higher up the same River; therefore the Angler having observed and found the Fly Fish most affect at the very present time, let him make one as like it as pos∣sibly he can in colour, shape and proportion of body and wings, and for his better imitation, let him lay the natural Fly before him, and try
near art can come unto, or dissemble nature by an equal symetry and commixture of colors. The better to attain which end, the Angler must always have in readiness a large Maga∣zine Bag or Budget, plentifully furnished with the following materials. Bears hair. 1. Bears hair of divers colours and shades are the most excellent Dibbing, as Grey Dun, light coloured, sad coloured and bright shining Bears hair. Camels hair. 2. Camels hair, sad, light, and of an indif∣ferent colour. Badgers hair. 3. Badgers skin hair, that is the brownish soft Fur which is on some part of the Badgers skin, is very good dubbing after the skin is tewed. Spaniels hair. 4. Spaniels soft Fur and hair of divers co∣lours and parts of the Spaniel, as on the Ear, &c. as brown, sad brown, light brown, blackish and perfect black.
Dogs hair. 5. Get the like colours from a black wa∣ter Dog, and from a long coated Cur, and a smooth coated Cur. Hogs Down. 6. Be sure to procure from Butchers or o∣thers, black, red, whitish and sanded Hogs Down, such as is combed from the roots of the hair, or bristles of Hogs of those colours, or of spots on them of those colours. Sheeps Wool. 7. Sheeps Wool of all colours both natural and artificial, get the courfest Sheeps Wool, and the Dyer (especially the Silk Dyer) will make it you of any colour you judge convenient, and such as will best abide in the water, for your colours should have that property. Mohairs. 8, Mohairs of all colours, especially the fol∣lowing, viz. black, blew, purple, white, violot coloured, and Isabella and Philomot coloured Mo-hairs.
Cows hair. 9. Get soft hair and Furs from the Flanks and other soft parts of a black Cow, red Cow and brindled Cow, and of these have brown, sad brown, light brown, and perfect black hair and furs. Camlets. 10. Get pieces of Camlets both hair and worsted of all colours, especially the following, viz. blew, yellow, dun, brown, dark-brown, light∣brown, red, violet, purple, tawny, black, dark brown shining Camlet, dark violet, horse flesh, pink and Orange coloured. Abortive Colts and Calves hair. 11. Resort to a Skinners Lime-Pit, and there get hair of various colours, and you may get most excellent Dubbing of Castling skins of Calves and Colts that are tewed, and several colours and shades of one skin. So of Cushi∣ons made of such skins that have been neatly tewed in the Skinners Lime-Pit, so of Abor∣tive skins of Colts and Calves at Skinners Lime-Pits tewed, &c.
Furs. 12. Furs of the ensuing Animals, viz. Furs of Squirrels, and Squirrels tail, black Cats tail, yellow dun-Cat, Hares neck fern-colour white Weesels tail, Mole, black Rabbet, yellow Rabbet, Down of a Fox Cub ash-coloured at roots, Fur of an old Fox, blackish and brown soft Fur, and hair of a Badgers skin that has been tewed in a Skinners Lime-Pit, Marterns Fur, Filmers Fur. Hackles. 13. Hackles (which are Feathers about a Cock or Capons neck, such as hang dangling Bown on each side next a Cock or Capons tail) of all colours as the red, dun, yellowish, white, Orange coloured, and perfect black; these are of special use to make the Palmer fly or insect, called by some Wool-beds. Feathers. 14. Feathers of all sorts of Fowls, and all colours, as feathers on a Mallards back, brown Hen, Partridge, Throstle, Feathers got from the quill out of a Wing of the Shepstare, Stare or Sterling, Peacock herle, Herons neck, top or cop of a Plover or Lapwing, the black Fea∣ther of an Ostridge or Estridge, and those of
various Died colours, which Children and o∣thers wear in Caps, the black Down of a was ter Coot, sad brown Feather of a Kite, feather of a Felfare Quill, feather of a Crow quill, an feathers of all other colours and Birds. Cadows and Blankers. 15. Of outlandish Cadows and Blankets o divers colours are very often got excellen Dubbing, so of Cushions made of Aborti Calves and Colts skins, and Badgers ski and Calves skins tewed. Silk. 16. Silk of all colours, small but ver strong. Twist. 17. Silver twist, Gold twist. 18. A sharp and neat pair of Scissars. How to make a Dub-fly. These materials being ready, you may mak your Fly after the following manner, bein the most exact way of all others, and its per∣formed thus, viz. You are first to hold the hook fast betwixt the Fore-finger and Thum of your left hand, with the back of the shan
upwards, and the point towards your Fingers end; then take a strong small Silk of the co∣lour of the Fly you intend to make, Wax it well with Wax of the same colour too (to which end you are always to have Shoo ma∣kers Wax of all colours about you) and draw it betwixt your Finger and Thumb to the head of the shank, and then whip it twice or thrice about the bare hook, which you must know is done both to prevent slipping, and also that the shank of the hook may not cut the hairs of your tought Gildard or line, (which some∣times it will otherwise do,) which being done, take your line, and draw it likewise betwixt your Finger and Thumb, holding the hook so fast, as only to suffer it to pass by, until you have the knot of your tought almost to the middle of the shank of your hook on the inside of it, then whip your Silk twice or thrice about both hook and line, as hard as the strength of the Silk will permit, which being done, strip the feather for the wings proportionable to the bigness of your Flie, placing that side down∣wards which grew uppermost before, upon the back of the hook, leaving so much only as to serve for the length of the wing of the point of the plume, lying revenst from the end of the shank upwards, then whip your Silk twice or thrice about the root end of the Feather, close by the arming, and then whip the Silk fast and firm about the hook, and tought un∣til you come to the bent of the hook, but not
farther (as some do, and so make a very un∣handsom, unnatural and shapeless Fly) which being done, cut away the end of the tought and fasten it, and then take your Dubbing which is to make the body of the Fly, as much as you think convenient, and holding it lightly with your hook, betwixt the Finger and Thumb of your left hand, take your Silk with the right, and twisting it betwixt the Finger and Thumb of that hand, the Dubbing will spin it self about the Silk, which when it has done, whip it about the arm'd hook backward till you come to the setting on of the wings, and then take the feather for the Wings and divide it equally into 2 parts, and turn them back to∣wards the bent of the hook, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side of the shank, holding them fast in that posture be∣twixt the Fore-finger and Thumb of your left hand, which done, warp them so down as to stand and slope towards the bent of the hook, and having warpt up to the end of the shank, hold the Fly fast betwixt the Finger and Thumb of your left hand, and then take the Silk be∣twixt the Finger and Thumb of your right hand, and where the warping ends, pinch or nip it with your Thumb nail against your Fin∣ger, and strip away the remainder of your dubbing from the Silk, and then with the bare Silk whip it once or twice about, make the Wings to stand in due order, fasten and cut it off; after which with the point of a Needle
raise up the Dubbing gently from the Warp, twitch off the superfluous hairs of your Dub∣bing, leave the Wings of an equal length (o∣therwise your Fly will never swim true,) and the Work is done: thus you are to make the Dub-fly, but your Palmer fly is made of a Capon or Cocks hackle, twirled on Silk and warpt about the hook, and without any Wings, and sometimes a little Dubbing under. Rules for Dub-flies and its Angling. 1. In making Dub-sties chiefly observe and imitate the Belly of the Fly, for that colour Fish most take notice of, as being most in their eye, and let the Wings of the Fly always be of an equal length, else the Fly will not swim right and true. 2. When you try how to fit the colour of the Fly, wet the Dubbing lest you be mistaken; for although when dry, they exactly suit the colour of the Fly, yet the water alters most co∣lours, and will make them brighter or darker. 3. Always make your Dub-flies on a Sun∣shine day, and to know the exact colour of your Dubbing, hold the same betwixt your eye and the Sun, and you'l far better discover the true colour of the Dubbing, then only by looking on it in the hand in the house, dark day or a shady place. 4. Never let the tail of the Dub-fly descend lower than until you come to the bend of the
hook, and not into the hooks bent, as they ge∣nerally do in the South, and so make very in∣artificial and unnatural Flies. 5. When Trouts often shew themselves at your Fly, and yet do not take it, be assured that either the day or water is improper for Fly, or which is far more probable, your Dub-fly is not of the right colour of shape they then cover. 6. Some always advise to Dub with Silk of the most predominant colour of the Fly, but we generally dub Duns with yellow Silk, and our Browns with red Silk, and at September with Violet Silk, or Horse-flesh coloured Silk. 7. Flies made of the hair of Bears, Hogs, Squirrels tail, Camels, Dogs, Foxes Badgers, Cows, Calves skins tewed; abortive Calves and abortive Colts skins tewed, out landish Cadows are more natural, lively, and keep colour bet∣ter in the water, then Flies made of Crewels and many sort of Worsted Stuffs which are of a dead and dull colour in the water. 8. The feather got from the quill of a Shep∣stare, Stare or Starlings wing is the best Fea∣ther generally to be used in dubbing, and bet∣ter than the Drake feather. 9. The Stone fly, the green-Drake, Thorn∣tree fly, green tail Dun-cut, yellow dun, dan brown, early bright brown, later bright brown great dun, little whirling dun, great whirling dun, Badger-fly, Ant-fly, black May-fly, yellow May-fly, Camlet-fly and the Palmer-fly, Sil∣ver Hackle and Gold Hackle are Flies sufficie
to be furnished with, the Hackles and the Stone∣fly being the very ground of all Fly Angling. 10. When you Angle with Dub-fly it must be in a River either clear, or almost clear af∣ter Rain, or in a Moorish River discoloured by Moss or Bogs, or else in a dark, cloudy day, when a gentle gale of Wind moves the water, but if the Wind be high, yet so as you may guide your tools, they will rise well in the plain Deeps, and then and there you'l commonly kill the best-Fish, but if the Wind be little or none at all, you must Angle in the swife Streams. 11. Keep your Dub-fly in continual motion, tho' the water or day be dark or wind blow, otherwise tho Fish will discern and refuse it. 12. Angling in Rivers discoloured by Rain or passing through Mosses or Bogs or if the wa∣ter be dark or very full, use a larger bodyed Fly than ordinary. 13. If the water be clear and low, use a small bodyed Fly with slender Wings. 14. If the day be clear, use a light coloured Fly with slender body and wings. 15. In dark weather as well as dark water, the Fly must be dark. 16. As Summer approaches and water clears, Flies generally are made smaller and brighter. 17. When you Angle with Dub-fly, your Rod should be no less than 5 yards and half long, and the line twice so long, unless the wa∣ter be encumbred with Wood or Trees.
18. Same advise for every Fly to have 3, one of a lighter colour, another sadder, and a third the exact colour of the natural Fly, by which means you may the better adapt them to the colour of the Water and Sky. 19. Fish rarely take the Dub-fly in any flow River, whose bottom or ground is slime or mud; for in great droughts Fish bite but lit∣tle in any Rivers, but nothing in slimy Rivers whose Mud is not cool'd by the swiftness of the Currant, but in sandy, gravelly, stony or rapid Rivers, you may catch Fish at that time. 20. You must have a quick eye, a nimble Rod and Hand, and strike with the rising of the Fish, or they find their mistake, and putteth out the hook again; others are of Opinion never to offer to strike a good Fish, if he do not strike himself, till first you see him turn his head after he has taken the Fly, and then say they, The tackle will not strain in striking, if moderately you strike. 21. When you cast the Fly, wave the Rod with a small circumserence about your head, else the Fly will be apt to jeck or snap off. 22. When you see a Trout rise, cast the Fly behind him, and then gently draw it over his head, and, if of the right colour, you scare him not, he's your own. 23. In casting the Fly do it always before you, so that the Fly may first fall upon the water (otherwise it will scare the Fish,) and as little of the Line with it as possible, and
without circling the water, though, if the wind be stiff, you will then be compelled to drown a great part of the line to keep the Fly in the water, and endeavour to have the Wind on your back, and Sun in your face if you can, but the windings and turnings of the River will ren∣der that impossible. 24. When you Angle in slow Rivers or still places with the Dub-fly, cast your Fly ever cross the River, and let it sink a little in the water, and draw him gently back again, so as you break not the water, or raise any circles or motions thereon, and let the current of the Ri∣ver carry the Fly gently down with the Stream, and this is the best way in slow, slimy bottom Rivers for the Dub-fly. 25. Stand always as far off the bank as the line will give leave; for to Fish fine and far off is the great Rule in Fly Angling. 26. In Frost and Snow, or excessive cold weather in the Spring, Angle with the smallest Gnats, Browns and Duns you can make. 27. For stony, clear, crystalline Rivers, Flies generally are made with slender body and wings, but in dark, discoloured and full wa∣ters the contrary. 28. When you know not certainly what Fly is taken, or cannot see Fish rise, then put on a small Hackle, if the water be clear, but bigger, if something dark, until you have taken one, then order the matter as you are dire∣cted cap. 7. sect. 11.
CHAP. XXXV. Artificial Fly Angling. I Did once determine to have wholly omit∣ted any particular description of Dub-flies for the reasons already deliver'd in the be∣ginning of the 34 Chapter of this Book. Yet I think it not amiss to insert a Catalogue that will serve as a Basis for any person with dis∣creet variations and Observations to raise a superstructure for his own particular Country and use in any part of England; and will afford no mean light to the perfect understanding and attainment of the Art of Dub-fly Angling; which is as delightsome a way of Angling as any whatsoever, if the River you frequent be but plentifully stored with Fish: And I will begin with February, that being early enough for any Gentleman to enter on this Recreation, by reason of wetness and coldness of the wea∣ther: The first of March being commonly as soon as I ever begun to Angle, and Michaelmas day the time of the year I deflst from that Sport.
Dub-flies for February. Little red brown 1. Is made of the Fur of the black spot of a Hogs Ear, (because there its softest) warpt on with red Silk, wings of the male of a Mal∣lard almost white. Palmer-Fly, or plain hackle 2. Is made with a rough, black body, either of black Spaniels Fur, or the whirle of an E∣stridge Feather, and the red Hackle of a Ca∣pon over all. Silver Hackle 3. Made with a black body also, Silver twist over that, and a red Feather over all. Great Hackle 4. The body black and wrapped with a red feather of a Capon untrimm'd; that is, the whole length of the Hackle staring out (for sometimes we barb the Hackle feather short all over, sometimes barb it only a little, and sometimes bath it close underneath) leaving the whole length of the Feather on the top or
back of the Fly, which makes it swim better, and on a whirling round water kills great Fish. Gold Hackle. 5. The body black, rib'd over with Gold twist, and a red feather over all, do's great Ex∣ecution. Great Dun 6. Made with Dun Bears hair, and the wings of the grey feather of a Mallard, near unto his tail, the very best Fly for this month, and makes admirable Sport. Great blew Dun. 7. Dubbing of the bottom of Bears hair next to the roots, mixt with a little blew Cam∣let, the wings of the dark grey feather of a Mallard. Dark brown. 8. Dabbing of the brown hair of the flank of a brindled Cow, and the gray feather of a Drake for Wings. These Hackles are some for one Water and Sky, and some for another, and accordingly the size and colour are alter'd, and use a small Hackle if the water be clear, or a bigger if
something dark, and when you cannot know certainly in this month or any other, what Fly is taken, put on a small Hackle if the water be clear, but bigger if something dark, and the first Fish you take, proceed with him as you are directed, c. 7. sect. 11. Dub-flies for March. Use all the same Hackles and Flies with February, but make them less. Little whirling Dun 1. Made of the bottom Fur of a Squirrels tail, and the wing of the grey feather of a Drake. Early light brown 2. Made either of brown of a Spaniel, or of hair of a red Cows flank with grey wing. Whitish Dun 3. Made of the roots of Camels hair, wings of a Mallards gray feather. Thorn-tree Fly. 4. Dubbing of an absolute black, mixt with 8 or 10 hairs of Isabella coloured Mohair, bo∣dy
as little as can be made, wings of a bright Mallards feather, an admirable Fly, and in great repute for a killer. Blew Dun. 5. Comb the neck of a black Greyhound with a small tooth Comb, and the Down that sticks in its Teeth is a fine blew, wherewith Dub this Fly, the wings can scarce be too white, and its taken from the 10th. till the 24. Little black Gnat 6. Is taken from the tenth, until almost the end of this month; made either of the Fur of a black water Dog, or the down of a young black water Coot, the wings of the Male of a Mallard as white as may be, the body as little as you can possibly make it, and the wings as short as body. Later bright brown. 7. Taken from the 16 to the 10th of April, Dubbing to be got out of a Skinnors Lime-Pits, and of the hair of an Abortive Calf, which the Lime will turn to be so bright as to shine like Gold, wings of the feather of a brown Hen is best.
Green-tail. Is taken in March and part of April made of pale brown fur got from a Spaniels ear, and a little Willow green Wooll mixt at the tail, wings of the feather of a Shepstares Quill. Dub-flies for April. All the same Hackles and Flies that were taken in March will be taken in April also, with this distinction only concerning the Flies, that all the browns be lapt with red Silk, and the Duns with yellow Silk. Small bright brown 1. Made of Spaniels Fur with a light grey wing in a bright day and clear water is very well taken. Little dark brown 2. The Dubbing of dark brown and Violet Camlet mixt, grey feather of a Mallard for wings. Great whirling Dun 3. From the 12 of this month is taken all the month through about mid-time of the day,
and by Fits from thence to the end of June, and is one of the best Flies we have, its com∣monly made of the Down of a Fox Cub, which is of an Ash-colour at the roots next the skin, and rib'd about with yellow Silk, the wings of the pale grey feather of a Mallard. Violet Fly 4. From the 6th. to the 10th. of this month is taken, made of a dark violet stuff, Mallards grey feather for Wings. Yellow Dun 5. Dubbing of Camels hair and yellow Camlet, or yellow Wool of a Blanket well mixt, (and some add Bears hair) and a white grey wing. Horse-flesh Fly 6. Is taken best in an Evening, and kills best from 2 hours before Sun-set until twi∣light, is taken the month through: Dubbing of blew Mohair with Pink coloured, and red tam∣my mixt, a light coloured wing and a dark brown head. It begins to be taken best about the 20 of the month.
Dub-flies for May. All the same Hackles and Flies, the Hackles only brighter and the Flies smaller that are ta∣ken in April, will also be taken in May, and likewise all Browns and Duns. Next follow 7 of the very prime Flies for May, and indeed of all the year, especially the Green-Drake and Stone-fly, and then 9 of small esteem in comparison with the first se∣ven, yet such as will kill Fish too. 1. Dun-cut Is the first of the seven, its Dubbing is of Bears Dun, with a little blew and yellow mixt with it, a large Dun-wing, and 2 horns at the head, made of the hairs of a Squirrels tail, and is a very killing Fly. The next are 4 Flies which contend for the Title of May Fly, but the Green Drake which is taken both in Streams and Stills, and that at all hours of the day whilest in season, and the Stone-fly taken early and late, but not very well in the mid-time of the day, have the pre∣heminence of the black May Fly, and little yellow May-fly by the general vogue of Ang∣lers.
2. Green Drake. At full maturity his Wings stand high and closed exact upon his back like the Butter-fly, and his motion in flying is the same, his body is in some of a paler, in others of a darker yel∣low, (for they are not all exactly of a colour) rib'd with rows of green, long, slender and growing sharp towards the tail, at the end of which he has 3 long, small whisks, of a very dark colour, almost black, and his tail turns up towards his back like a Mallard; from whence he has his name of Green-Drake. Green Drakes Season and Dubbing. He comes in about Mid-May, and is taken until Midsummer in Mountainous stoney Ri∣vers; far earlier in others, and that at all hours, as aforesaid, and is made thus, viz. on a large hook the Dubbing Camels hair, bright Bears hair, the soft Down Combed from a Hogs Bri∣stles and yellow Camlet well mixt together, the body long and ribb'd about with green Silk, or rather yellow Silk waxt with green wax, the whisks of the tail of the long hair of Sables or Fitchet, and the wings of the white grey feather of a Mallard died yellow, which is died thus, viz. Take the Root of a Barberry Tree, and put to it woodyvis, with as much Allum as a Wal∣nut,
and boil the feathers in it with Rain-water, and they will be of a very fine and curious yel∣low. You may try whether the inner bark of a Crab-tree boil'd with some Allum in water will not do the same, and make a fine yellow, which I am informed it will, but never experi∣enced it. 3. Stone-fly described. Lies under hollow Stones at the Rivers side, his body is long and pretty thick, and as broad at the tail almost as in the middle his co∣lour a very fine brown, ribb'd with yellow, and much yellower on the belly than on the back, he hath 2 or 3 whisks also at the tag of his tail, and 2 little horns on his head, his wings when full grown are double, and flat down his back of the same colour, but rather darker than his body, and longer than it, though he makes but little use of them, for he rarely flies though often swims and paddles with se∣veral feet he has under his belly upon the wa∣ter without stirring a wing; but the Drake will mount Steeple height into the Air, tho' hee's found upon Flags and Grass too; and indeed every where high and low near the River. Stone-flies Season. The Stone fly comes in about middle of April, and continues until the end of June or
Midsummer; Its proper for Streams rather than Stills, and taken best early and late, but not so well at mid-time of the day; if there be a whistling wind then it may be taken in the deep stills of the River; Stone-flies dub∣bing. its a very killing Fly, and made of Bears Dun with a litle brown and yellow Camlet very well mixt, but so placed that the Fly may be more yellow on the bel∣ly and towards the tail underneath than in any other part, and you are to place 2 or 3 hairs of a black Cats beard on the top of the hook in the arming, so as to be turn'd up when you warp on your Dubbing and to stand almost upright, and staring one from another, and note that the Fly is to be rib'd with yellow Silk, and the wings long and very large, of the dark grey feather of a Mallard; or (which I intend to try) o the brown soft feather of a Kite. 4. Black May Fly. Is the next May Fly, made with a black body of the whirle of an Ostridge feather rib'd with Silver twist, and the black Hackle of  Cock over all, and is a killing Fly, but not  compare with the green Drake and Stone fly. 5. Little yellow May-fly Being the last of the 4, of the same shap of the green Drake, but a very little one, of a
bright a yellow as can be seen, made of a bright yellow Camlet, wings of a white grey feather died yellow. 6. Grey Drake Is in all shapes and dimensions perfectly the same with the green Drake, but quite al∣most of another colour, being of a paler and more livid yellow, and green and ribb'd with black quite down his body, with black shining wings, diaphanous and very tender, Cobweb like, it comes in, and is taken after the green Drake, and in a Dub-fly kills very well. Its made of the whitish Down of a Hogs bristles, and black Spaniels Fur mixt, and rib'd down the body with black Silk, the whisks of the tail of the hairs of the Beard of a black Cat, and the wings of the black grey feather of a Mallard. 7. Camlet Fly. Is taken from Mid-May unto the end of June, is in shape like a Moth with fine Dia∣pred or water wings, and made of a dark brown shining Camlet, rib'd over with very small light green Silk, and the wings of the double grey feather of a Mallard, and is a ve∣ry killing Fly for Graylings and small Fish. ☞ I had thought here to have put a period to the Description of any more Flies for May, yet since there are 9 Flies of small esteem
comparatively with the foregoing 7, I will in∣sert them for the Readers sake, who is at li∣berty either to use or reject them, as his fancy is. 8. Turky Fly, Dubbing ravell'd out of some blew stuff and lapt about with yellow Silk, the wings of a grey Mallards feather. 9. Yellow Palmer, Made with a yellow body, rib'd with Gold twist and large Wings of a Mallards fea∣ther died yellow, with a red Capons Hackle over all. 10. Black Fly, Dubbing of a black Spaniels Fur, and the wings of a grey Mallards Feather. 11. Light brown, Made of a light brown with a slender body, the dubbing twirled upon small red Silk and raised with the point of a Needle that the ribs or rows of Silk may appear through, the wings of the grey feather of a Mallard. 12. Little Dun, Dubbing of Bears Dun whirled upon yellow Silk, wings of a Mallards grey feather. 13. White Gnat, With a pale wing and a black head.
14. Peacock Fly, Body made of the whirl of a Pea∣cocks feather, with a red head, and wings of a Mallards feather. 15. Tow-Lady, A little fly, the body of a Peacocks feather, the wing of a red feather, or strips of the red hackle of a Cock. 16. Cow-turd fly, Dubbing light brown and yellow mixt, the wings of the dark grey feather of a Mal∣lard. Dub-flies for June. From the 1 to the 24 are taken the Green-Drake and Stone-fly, and all the month the Camlet fly. 1. Owl-fly Is taken from the 12 to the 24 late at night, dubbing of a white Weesels tail and a white grey wing. 2. Barm-Fly, Dubbing of the Fur of a yellow dun Cat, and a grey wing of a Mallards feather. 3. Purple Hackle, Made with a Purple body, whipt about with a red Capons feather. 4. Purple Gold Hackle, Made with a Purple body, Gold twist over that, all whipt about with a red Capons feather.
5. Flesh fly. Dubbing of black Spaniels Fur and blew wool mixt, and a grey wing. 6. Little fiesh Fly. The body made of the whirle of a Pea∣cocks feather, and the wings of the grey fea∣ther of a Drake. Peacock Fly. 7. The body and wing both made of the feather of that Bird. 8. Ant-fly. Dubbing of brown and red Camlet mixt, with a light grey wing. 9. Brown Gnat. With a very slender body of brown and violet Camlet well mixt, with a light grey wing. 10. Little black Gnat. Dubbing of black Mohair, and a white grey wing. 11. Green Grashopper. Dubbing of green and yellow wool mixt, rib'd over with green Silk, and a red Capons feather over all. 12. Dun Grashopper. The body slender, made of Dun Camlet and a Dun Hackle at top. 13. Brown Hackle. Made of the light brown hair of a fat Colt, with a red hackle over all, wrapt with Ash coloured or hair coloured Silk.
Dub-flies for July. All the small Flies taken in June, are also taken this month. 1. Badger-Fly. Dubbing of the soft brown Fur of a Badgers skin (that has been tewed in the Skin∣ners Lime-Pits) twirled upon red Silk, with a red head and a sad grey wing of a Mallards feather, an excellent Fly for this month in many Rivers, its also taken in many Rivers in March and April. 2. Orange Fly. Dubbing of Orange Wool, and the wing of a black Feather. 3. Little white Dun. Body made of white Mohair, and the wings blew of a Herons feather. 4. Wasp fly Made either of dark brown dubbing, or else the Fur of a black Cats tail, rib'd about with yellow Silk, wings of the gray feather of the Mallard. 5. Black Hackle. Body made of the whirle of a Peacocks feather and a black hackle feather on the top, there is also another made of a Peacocks herle without any wings. 6. Shell-fly. Dubbing of yellow green Jersy Wool, and a little white Hogs hair mixt.
7. Black blew Dun. The Dubbing of the For of a black Rab∣bet mixt with a little yellow, the wings of the feather of a blew Pidgeons wing. Dub-flies for August. First, all the same Flies with July, also all browns and duns are taken that were taken in May. 1. Late Ant-Fly, Dubbing of the black brown hair of a Cow, some red warpt in for the tag of his tail, and a dark wing: a killing Fly. 2. Fern-fly, Dubbing of the Fur of a Hares neck that is of the colour of Fern or Brackin, with a dark∣ish grey wing of a Mallards feather: a killer too. 3. White Hackle, The body of white Mohair, and wrap∣ped about with a white Hackle feather. 4. Harry long Legs, The body made of Bears Dun and blew wool mixt, and a brown hackle feather over all. Dub-flies for September. This month the same Flies are taken that were taken in April, and also the 1. Camel brbwn-Fly, The Dubbing pull'd out of the Lime of a Wall whipt about with red Silk, and a dark∣ish
grey Mallards feather for wings. 2. Late Badger Fly Made of the black hair of a Badgers skin, mixt with the yellow softest Down of a Sanded Hog. The same Flies are taken in October that were taken in March. Thus have I inserted a Gatalogue of about 65 Flies proper for Trouts, Graylings and Salmon smelts in Mountainous, Stony Rivers, which although the List be large and nume∣rous, yet 20 of them will serve all the year for almost any River. I had almost forgot to acquaint the Angler, That those very Flies that use to appear about and on the water in one month of the year, may the succeeding year come almost a month sooner or later, as the same year proves cold∣er or hotter; for Sun-shiny weather and warm Springs brings them earlier, but in cold wea∣ther they are later. Sometimes Fish change their Fly (but not usually) once or twice in one day, but ordinarily they seek not for ano∣ther sort of Fly, till they have for some days even glutted themselves with a former kind, which is commonly when those Flies are near Death and ready to go out; for Fish contemn them until the Flies be at the best, and have the greatest appetite for them when most plen∣tiful, and when that sort grow old and decay, and another kind or sort cometh in abundant∣ly then they change.
Its very good to Dib in the evening of a hot day which may be performed either with natural or artificial Flies. CHAP. XXXVI. Angling for Trout with a Menow or Loach. How to Angle for the Trout with a Menow or small Loach. YOU may Angle with a Menow or small Loach thus, to be baited on a large sized hook, viz. put the hook in at his mouth, and out at his Gill, then having drawn the hook 2 or 3 inches beyond, or through his gill, put it again into his mouth, and the point and beard out at his tail, then draw your line streight, so that the body of the Minnow will be almost streight on the hook; and close his mouth that no water get in, which you must avoid, or you may stitch up his mouth, or you may (when you set on the hook) fasten some bristles un∣der the Silk leaving the points above a Straws breadth and half, or almost half an inch stand∣ing out towards the line, which will keep him from slipping back; this done try how it will turn by drawing it cross the water or against a Stream, and if it do not turn nimbly, then
turn the tail a little to the right or left hand, till it turn quick, otherwise you'l catch nothing; You must also have a Swivel or Turn (which makes the Menow play better, and preserves the Line from snarling by turning) placed about a yard or more from the hook; you need no Lead on your Line, you must conti∣nually draw your bait up the Stream, within half a foot or a foot of the superficies of the water. In the same manner Angle with a small Loach or Bullhead his Guil Fins cut off. CHAP. XXXVII. Various ways of Angling for Pike. The several ways of Angling for the Pike. TRowling for Pike is very pleasant, and the Trowl may be bought ready made, only let it have a Winch to wind it up withal. Trowlidg tackle. For this Fish your tackle must be strong, your Rod must not be very slender at the top, where you must place a small slender ring for your Line to run through. Let your Line be Silk for at least 2 yards next the hook, and the rest 4 or 6 folds of the very best and neatliest spun Hemp Yarn and curiously twisted 16
yards long, your hook double and strongly ar∣med with Wire for above a foot, How to bait the Pike hook. then with a Probe or Needle you must draw the wire in at the Fishes mouth and out at his tail, that so the hook may lye in the mouth of the Fish, and both the points on either side; upon the shank of the hook fasten some Lead very smooth, that it go into the Fishes mouth and sink her with the head downwards; as though she had been playing on the top of the wa∣ter, and were returning to the bottom, your bait may be Gudgeon, Menow, small Trout, small Roch or Dace, small Salmon smelts, Perch, his upper most back-fins cut off, Loach or sometimes a Frog, your hook thus baited, you must tye the tail of the Fish close and fast to the Wire, or else with drawing to and again, the Fish will rend off the hook, or which is neater, with a Needle and strong Thread stitch through the Fish on either side of the Wire, and tie it very fast. How to Troul. All being thus fitted, cast your Fish up and down in such places as you know Pike fre∣quents, observing still that he sink some depth before you pull him up again, when the Pike cometh (if it be not sunk deep) you may see the water move, at least you may feel him, then slack your line, and give him length e∣nouh to run away to his Hold, whether he'l go directly; and there pouch it, ever begin∣ning
(as you may perceive) with the head, swallowing that first, thus let him lie until you see the line move in the water, and then you may certainly conclude he hath pouched the bait, and ranged abroad for more, then with the Trowl wind up your Line (which should always be 16 or 18 yards long at least) till you think you have it almost streight, then with a smart jerk hook him, and make your pleasure to your content. Some use no Rod at all, but holding the Line on links on their hand, using Lead and Float. Others use a very great Hook with the Hook at the tail of the Fish, and when the Pike cometh they strike at the first pull. Others use to put a strong String or Thread in at the month of the bait and out at one of the gills, and so over the head, and in at the o∣ther gills, and so tye the bait to the hook, lea∣ving a little length of Thread or String be∣twixt the Fish and Hook, that so the Pike may turn the head of the bait the better to swal∣low it, and then as before, after some pause strike. Some use to tie the bait hook and line to a bladder or bundle of Flags or Bullrushes, fast∣ning the line very gently in the cleft of a small stick, to hold the bait from sinking more than (its allowed length) half a yard, and the stick must be fastned to the Bladder or flags, to which the Line being tied, that it might easily unfold and run to its length, and
so give the Pike liberty to run away with the bait, and by the Bladder or Flags recover their Line again; you must observe this way to turn off your Bait with the Wind or Stream that they may carry it away, or some use (for more sport, if the Pike be a great one, and in a Pond) to tie the same to the foot of a Goose, which the Pike if large will sometimes pull under water. Angling for Pike at Snap. When you Fish for the Pike at Snap, you must give him leave to run a little, then strike, but be sure strike the contrary way to that which he runneth; a double Spring hook is principally if not only useful in this way of Angling, and much to be preferred before all other hooks, for the Pike will usually hold the bait so fast in his Teeth that you may fail to pull it out of his mouth and also strike him, whereas with a Spring hook though he hold it never so fast, the Wire will draw through the bait, and so the Spring will open, and you will very frequently hook him on the out-side of his mouth: Angling with the Trowl is a furer at least a more easy way for a Learner to pra∣ctise (who wants an instructer) than the Snap, besides the Snap is chiefly useful to take a Pike, which often pricking with the Trowl hath made wary and cunning (for one that hath not been scared will swallow the bait boldly) such an one is taken best at Snap.
How to bait for the Snap. In this way of Angling, put on your bait thus, make a hole with the point of your Hook or Probe in the Fishes side as near the middle as you can, put in your armed wire, and draw it out at the mouth, and with a Needle and Thread sew up the Fishes mouth. Others use the Probe to draw the arming wire under the skin only (not the Ribs by any means) and out at the bone behind the gills, then again under the gills & our at the mouth: this latter way is much better, because there is only the skin to hinder the drawing and piercing of the hook, whereas the former way, if the Pike hold fast (as commonly he doth) all the Flesh on the out-fide of the Fish will be drawn into a heap or lump, so thick that the hook (except very large) can hard∣y reach through it to pierce the Pikes chaps. Rules for Pike Angling. 1. After he hath taken your bait, if he move slowly and make no stop, give him time, nd you'l seldom miss him. 2. Or, if he lie after he hath taken the bait as sometimes he will) gently move your and, to try which way his head lieth, if you annot discover that, then strike directly up∣ards, otherwise you may (instead of hook∣ng him) pluck the bait out of his mouth. 3. If he take it upon the top of the water, nd lie still, you see which way his head lieth, nd may order your self accordingly.
4. At the Snap your Tackle must be stron∣ger than for the Trowl, in regard you must strike much more forcibly. 5. At Snap you must give 2 lusty Jerks one after the other, and be sure you ever strike contrary to the way his head lieth, lest you pull the bait from him only. 6. Fasten your swivel to the end of your Line, and hook your armed Wire upon the Swivel. 7. For the Snap cast a piece of lead hol∣low, and so wide as to go over the wire and the end of the hook, which you draw within the Fshes mouth; let it lie there to sink his head downwards, make it so rough that it slip not out, or sew up the Fishes mouth, which is bet∣ter than to place the Lead upon the Line (as some use) for the Lead will often slip further, and also entangle the bait and line together. 8. Both at Snap and with Trowl cut away one of the Fins close at the gills, and also be∣hind the vent, another on the contrary side, the bait will play better. 9. In casting with Trowling or at Snap, be sure to raise your hand a little when you see the bait ready to fall into the water, this will prevent that the bait dash not violently into the water in its fall, which affrights the Pike (tho he be a bold Fish) when it falls behind and near unto him. 10. Make your Lead for the Trowl four square, and much thicker and shorter than
most use, the square will keep the hook in the same place as you set it, and the thick short Lead, sinks him with his head downwards, so that he will not shoot sloopwise, as he doth when the Lead is long. 11. Join your wire links together with a Steel Ring, the bait will play and sink better, if it lye only in the baits mouth, it will not entangle in the line so often. 12. A larger bait doth more invite the Pike, but a lesser takes him more surely, as soonest gorged, and the hook cortainly taken into his mouth both at Snap and Trowl. 13. Use a large white Menow put on with the hook in his mouth, Angle with him for a Pike, as you do for a Trout, and let your hook be small, use not a great hook with a small bait. Angling for Pike with Minnow. Get a single hook long and slender in the shank, put lead upon it, as thick near the bent as will go into the Menows mouth, place the point of the hook directly up the face of the Fish, let the Rod be as long as you can handsomely manage, with a line of the same length cast up and down and manage it as when you trowl with any other bait, if when the Pike hath taken it, he run to the end of the Line before he hath gorged it, do not strike, but hold still only, and he will return back and swallow it; but if you use that bait with a Trowl (some esteem it the very best for Pike.)
Snaring young Pikes or Iacks. In May, June and July Pikes soar on the waters surface, or near it; then six a Snare of Wire to the end of a strong Packthread, a yard and half long, and the other end of the Packthread to a long Pole or Goad; your Snare being open, you may observe Jacks to lye on the top of the water, and you may easily put it over them, andwith a quick and smart jerk hoist them amain to Land. Hooking Pikes in Ditches. Or you may take a line of 7 or 8 foot, and thereunto arm a hook of the largest size, and lead the shank of the hook neatly, that the weight may guide it at pleasure, and you may strike the Pike with the bare hook where you please, when they go a Frogging into Ditches, in May, June and July, and you see them soaring on the superficies of the water. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Fish - Ponds. 1. WHen the ground is dreined and the Earth made firm where the Ponds head must be, in that place drive in 2 or 3 rows of Oak or Elm-Piles, and lay Faggots of smaller Wood betwixt them, and Earth be∣twixt and above them, very well rammed; and then set another row of Piles as the first
which should be about the height you intend to make the Sluice or Flood-gate, or the vent conveying the over-flowings of your Pond in any Flood that may endanger the breaking of the Ponds Dam. The depth of the Pond should be about 7 foot, except at some one end or fide it be very shallow, which is ne∣cessary for the preservation of the Spawn and Fry of Fish. 2. Plant Willowes or Alders about it, and cast in some Faggots in sandy places, not far from the side for Fish to Spawn on, and defend their Spawn and young Fry from Ducks, He∣rons, Frogs and Vermin; especially the Spawn of Carp and Tench. 3. Contrive the Pond so as the water may be continually renewed by some Rill or Rain∣water, which inclines Fish both to breed and feed better, and makes them be of a better and pleasanter taste: So Pools that are large have gravelly bottoms and shallows for Fish to sport themselves on, make them purely tasted, so hollow banks, shelves, roots of Trees, preserves them from their Enemies, and Shades defend them in Summer from heat, and in Winter from cold. But many Trees growing about the Pond is ill for Fish; because the falling and rotting of the leaves makes the water stink and sowr, and the Fish ill tasted. 4. Carp loves gravelly, stony, sandy grourd and breed best in Marle Pils, or Pits that have
clean clay bottoms, or in new Ponds, or Ponds that lye dry a Winter season, and in old Ponds full of mud and weeds, that are warm and free from wind, and have Grass growing on the bottom, or sides whereon in the hot months they'l feed and eat; and would like∣wise have Willows grow on the sides of the Pond; Tench and Eel love mud; cleanse and drain your Ponds every 3 or 4 years; letting them lye dry 6 or 12 months to kill the wa∣ter weeds, as Water-Lillies, Caudocks, Reat and Bulrushes that breed there, and as these Die, sow Oats, and let Grass grow on the bot∣tom and sides of the Pond, for Carps to feed on; and observe what kind of Fish either feed best, or thrive in the water of the respective Ponds and suit them accordingly. 5. Often feed the Fish by throwing into them Chippings of Bred, Grains, Curds, or the in∣trails of Chickens, or of any Fowl or Beast that you kill for your self. So Garden Earth and Parsly thrown into a Pond, recovers and refreshes sick Fish. When you store a breed∣ing Pond, put in 2 or 3 Males for one Fe∣mole, but in a seeding Pond take no care whe∣ther there be more Males or Female Carps; others, and more rationally, advise to put in two Females for one Male into the breeding Pond. 6. Carps and Tench thrive and breed best when no other Fish is but with them into the same Pond, for all other Fish devour their Spawn.
7. Pike, Pearch and Roches may be put into one Pond, the two first will feed on the Roch, which is a great breeder, likewise put with them Dates, Gudgeons, Mennows. 8. In Winter break the Ice, if a great Frost, and make several holes in the Ice, for Fish to breath at, and throw Bean-straw into the Pond, if you suspect a hard Frost to approach, and kill and destroy all Herons, Seaguis, King Fishers, Water-Coots, Water-Rats, Water-Mice, Bltterns, and Otters that fre∣quent the Pond, and suffer not much Shoot∣ing at Wild-fowl; for that affrightens, harms, and destroys Fish. CHAP. XXXIX. Manner of Dressing Fish. ALthough I cannot pretend to the least Skill in Cookery; yet I will not deny, but that (as the times phrase it) I understand somthing of Eating, and very well know that the Angler when from Home, and would Pleasure his Friends with the fruit of his Re∣creations, frequently meets with such ill Hus∣wives at ordinary Inns or Ale-houses (being often enforc't to take up his quarters at such places for the conveniences of the River he Angles at) as renders by their ill Dressing,
the most dilicate Fish, not onely ingrateful to the Palate, but even nauseous to the Stomach; to obviate which inconvenience, I will here furnish the Angler (out of Mr. Walton, inge∣nious Mr. Cotton, and others) what the easiest, and best ways of dressing fresh water Fish; so that upon such stress, he may direct his Land∣lady so well, as (if shee'l observe him) nei∣ther to shame her self, nor spoil a good Dish of Fish; and I will first teach you how to dress the Chub: he being a Fish that has lost much reputation for want of good dressing. How to dress a Chub. 1. First scale him, and then wash him clean, and take out his Guts, and to that end, make the hole little and as near to his Guils you may conveniently, and especially make clean his Throat from Grass and Weeds that are usual in it (for if that be not clean it will make him tast sowr) having so done, put some sweet herbs into his Belly, and then tye him with a or 3 splinters to a Spit, and roast him, basted often with Vinegar, or rather Verjuice and Butter, with good store of Salt mixt with it. This way drys up the fluid watry humor with which all Chubs do abound. A Tench may be thus drest like wise. Another way to dress a Chub. 2. When you have scaled the Chub and cut of his Tail and Fins and washed him very clean, then chine or slit him through the mid∣dle, as a Salt Fish is usually cut, then give
him 3 or 4 cuts or scotches on the back with your Knife and broil him on Charcoal, Wood∣coal, or Coal that are free from Smoak, and all the time he's broiling bast him with best sweet Butter, and good store of Salt mixt with it, and to this add a little Thyme cut exceed∣ing small or bruised into the Butter. Drest in this manner, the watry tast is taken away for which many except against him: they are to be eaten the same day they are caught, and forget not to wash his Throat very clean, and his Body must not be washed after gutted; as indeed no Fish should be, but wiped clean with a linnen cloath. After this manner, you may dress other Fish as Trouts, Barbels, &c. Another way to dress a Chub. 3. Set a Kettle over the fire with some Beer Vinegar and Water, so much as will cover the Fish, and therein put Fennel and good store of Salt, and when the water boils put in the Chub (he being first scald, gutted and throat made clean) and when boil'd e∣nough, take him out and lay him on a board, for the water to run from him, having so rested one hour, pick all the Fish from the Bones, and lay it on a Pewter dish, which set on a Chafing-dish of Coals, and put good store of Butter to it, which when the Fish is very well hot, serve it up, and eat it as min∣ced Veal. To dress Trouts the common way. 4. First with a Knife gently scrape all the
slime off them, then wash them in Salt and Water, then gut them, and wipe them very clean with a linnen cloth, then flower them with Wheat-flower, and fry them very well in Sweet-butter, until they be brown and crisp; then take them out of the frying-pan, and lay them on a pewter dish very well heated be∣fore then Fire; then pour off the Batter the Trouts were fryed in, into the Grease-pot, and not on the Fish; then fry good store of Parsly and young Sage in other Sweet-butter, until they be crisp, then take out the Herbs and lay them on the Fish; but put not any of the Butter, wherein the Herbs were fried, on the Fish. Then beat up some Sweet-butter, with three or four spoonfuls of boiling hot spring-water (an Anchovis being first there∣in dissolved, if you can easily have them) and pour it on the Fish, and serve it up, garnishing your dish with Straw-berry or other green leaves. Graylings, Pear∣ches, small Pikes or Jakes, Roch, Eel, Gudgeon to fry. This is the way to fry Trouts or Salmon, Smelts, under a Foot-long, or Gray∣lings, Roches, Dates, Breams, or Gudgeons, their Scales first scraped off, and you may thus fry small Eels, after they are flead, gutted, wiped clean and cut into pieces of four or five Inches long. You may also fry this way Pearches and small Pikes, &c. The best way of dressing a Trout. Take the Trout, wash and dry him with a
clean Napkin, then open him, and having ta∣ken out his Guts, and all the Blood, wipe him very clean within, but wash him not, and give him three scotches with a Knife to the Bone on one side only. After which take a clean Kettle, and put in as much hard stale Beer (but it must not be flat or dead) Vinegar, and a little white wine and water, as will cover the Fish you intend to boil, then throw into the Liquor a good quantity of Salt, the rind of a Lemon, a handful of slic't Horse Radish root, with a handsome little Fagot of Parsley, Rose∣mary, time and Winter-savory. Then set your Kettle, upon a quick fire of Wood, and let your Liquor boil up to the height, be∣fore you put in your Fish, and then if there be many, put them in one by one, that they may not so cool the Liquor as to make it fall; and whilst your Fish is boyling, beat up the butter for the Sawce with a Ladle full or two of the Liquor its boyling in, and being boyled e∣nough, immediately powr the Liquor from the Fish, and being laid in a Dish, powr your Butter upon it, and strewing it plentifully o∣ver with shaved Horse-Radish, and a little pounded Ginger, garnish the sides of your Dish and the Fish it self with a slic't Lemon or two, and serve it up. In the same man∣ner you may dress a Salmon-Moat under half a yard long: Grayling, Carp, Bream, Roch, Pike, Pearh, Salmon, Moat, likewise a Grayling, Carp, Bream, and large Roch may be drest after the same man∣ner,
only they are to be scal'd, which a Trout never is, and that must be done very lightly and carefully with a Knife for bruising the Fish, also a Pike may be thus drest, the slime being first well scourd off with Water and Salt: so likewise may a Pearch be drest, but before you powr on the Sawce, blanch off the Pearches Skin. To Dress Salmon. 6. You may fry pieces of Salmon, or a Chine of Salmon, as you are directed for the Trout, at Sect. 4. of this Chapter. To Stew Salmon or other Fish. 7. Take a Salmon, draw it, scotch the back; put it whole or in pieces into a Stew∣pan, and thereunto put some Beer-Vinegar, white Wine and Water, as much as will cover it, put also to it some whole Cloves, large Mace, slic'd Ginger, a Bay Leaf, a bundle of the tops of Rosemary, Time, sweet Marjo∣ram, winter Savory, add pick't Parsly, some whole Peper, Salt Butter, and an Orange in halves, stew all leisurely together, and when well stewed, dish them with carved Sippets, lay on the spices and slc'd Lemon, run it over with Butter, beaten up with some of the Li∣quor it was stewed in, garnish the dish with fearsed Manchet, &c. Thus you may stew any other Fish, as Carp, pike, Bream, &c. The best way to boyl a Carp. 8. Take a Carpy (alive if possible) scour him and rub him clean with Water and Salt,
but scale him not, then open him, and put him with his Blood and his Liver (which you must save when you open him) into a small Pot or Kettle, then take sweet Marjoram, Time and Parsly, of each half a handful, a sprig of Rosemary and another of Savory, bind them into two or three small bundles, and put them to your Carp, with 4 or 5 whole Onyons, twenty pickled Oysters, and three Anchovies, then pour upon your Carp, as much Claret Wine as will cover him; and season the Claret well with Salt, Cloves, brui∣sed Mace, slic'd Nutmeg, and the rinds of O∣ranges and Lemons, that done, cover the Pot, and set it on a quick fire, till it be sufficiently boyled, then take out the Carp and lay it with the broth in the Dish, and pour upon it a quarter of a pound of good fresh Butter, mel∣ted and beaten with half a dozen spoonfuls of the Broth, the Yealks of two or three Eggs, and some of the Herbs shred; Garnish the Dish with Lemons and so serve it up. If you be not willing to be at the charges of the Wine, you may, in its stead, put good Sider, and for want of that, some white Wine, good Beer-vi∣negar and Water will serve very well, instead of the Claret, you may also omit the pickled Oysters and Anchovies, and it will, notwith∣standing such omission, eat very well. In the same manner you may dress other Fish, only you must for others omit the Blood and Liver: As Pike Bream, Trout, Pearch,
Grayling, &c. Those that have scales being scal'd, and put them into the Liquor before it boyls. The common way of boyling Fish, is to draw, scale them, if scales, and wipe them clean, and then to set over a Kettle with as much water as will cover the Fish, and to put therein some Beer-Vinegar, good store of sweet Fennel and Salt, and when the Liquor boils very well up, to put in the Fish, and when boyled enough, let the water run off, and lay them on a hot Powter Dish, and serve them up with beaten Butter, and some shred Parsly boyled by it self. How to Fry Eels. 9. First take the Eel, flea him, gut him, and wash him clean, then cut him into the lengths of three or four Inches a piece, then set over water in a skellet, and let it boyl, wherein you must put good store of salt, and some Fennel or Rosemary, when this water boils, put in the peices of Eel, and let them therein be almost half boyl'd, then take them out, putting them into a Cullendar, then flower and fry them, and proceed farther, as you are instructed to fry a Trout, at Sect. 4. of this Chapter for a Trout. The best way of Dressing a large Eel. 10. First wash the Eel, (which should be a large one) in water and salt, then pull off his skin below his Vent or Navel, and not much farther: having done that, take out his guts
as clean as you can, but wash him not, but wipe him clean within with a linnen Cloth, and then give him three or four scotches with a Knife, then put into his belly and those scotch∣es sweet Herbs (which are the tops of Rose∣mary, sweet Marjoram, Winter-savory, strip∣ped Time, and picked Parsly) an Anchovy and a little Nutmeg grated or cut very small, the Herbs and Anchovys cut small and mix∣ed with good Butter and Salt; having done this, then pull his skin over him, all but his Head, which you are to cut off, to the end you may tye his skin about that part where his Head grew, and it must be so tyed as to keep all his moisture within his skin: and having done this, with Tape or Pack-thread tie him to a Spit, and Roast him leisurely, and bast him with Salt and Water till his skin breaks, and then with Butter, and having roasted him enough, let what was put into his belly be mixed with beaton butter for the sawce. Note, That when you put the Herbs and Anchovy into his Belly, they are first to be cut very small before they be put into the Eels Belly and mixt with Butter and Salt, and if you omit the Anchovy, yet the Eel will eat well enough. To roast Eels. 11. Take Eels, flea, gut, and wipe them clean, and cut them in pieces four or five Inches long, put them on a small spit cross∣ways,
and between each piece put some large sage leaves, or Bay-leaves: then roast, and bast them, and when enough, serve them up with Butter beaten up in 3 or 4 spoonfuls of boiling-water, and the yolk of an Egg or two, if you like Eggs. Spitch Cock or broiled Eels. 12. Take a large Eel, splat it down the back, and joint-bone, being drawn, and the Blood washed out, leave on the Skin, and cut it in 4 pieces equally, Salt them, and bast them with butter, broil them on a soft Fire, and being finely broild, serve them on a clean dish with beaten butter. Stewed Eels. 13. Draw them, flay them, and wipe them clean, and cut them in pieces 3 or 4 Inches long, and put them into a Posnet or Skillet with fair water, a little White-wine, Verjuice, or instead thereof Beer-Vinegar, as much as will well cover them, butter, some large Mace, Pepper, a quarter of a pound of Currans, Salt, two, or three Onions, three or four∣spoonfuls of Yeast, and a bundle of Sweet∣herbs. Stew all these together leasurely till the Fish be very tender, then dish them, and put to the Broth a quarter of a pound of But∣ter, pour it on the Fish, sipped it, and serve it up. In like manner you may stew them in an Oven, cutting them in peices, and setting them an the end in an earthen pot. boing first sea∣soned
with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Nutmeg, sweet Herbs chop'd small (Currans, Butter,) but instead of the Currans and Butter, some only put in 2 or 3 spoonfuls of fair water, and 4 or 5 Cloves of Garlick, and so bake them and serve them on Sippets. To Collar Eels. Take large Eels, slay, draw and wipe them clean with a Linnen Cloth, part them down the back, and take out the back-bone, then take Thyme, Parsley, sweet Marjoram, and a little of the tops of Rosemary, mince them small, and mingle them with Nutmeg, Gin∣ger, Pepper and Salt; then strew them on the inside of the Eels, then rowl them up like a Collar of Brawn, and put them in a clean Linnen Cloth tied at both ends, and boil them tender with Beer-Vinegar, Water and Salt, but let the Liquor boyl before you put in the Eels; when boyl'd enough, take them out of the Liquor, and let them and the Liquor be cold, and put them in again, and you may therein keep them 3 or 4 days or more, and you may serve it either in Collars, or in round slices with Sawcers of Vinegar. To Roast a Pike. 14 First open your Pike at the Gills, and if need be, cut also a little Slit towards the Belly, out of these take his Guts, and keep his Liver, which you are to shred very small with Thyme, sweet Marjoram, and a little Winter Savory, to these put some pickled
Oysters and two or three Anchovies, both these last whole (for the Anchovies will melt, and the Oysters should not) to these you must add also a pound of sweet Butter, which you are to mix with the Herbs that are shred, and let them all be well Salted (if the Pike be more than a yard long, then you may put into these herbs more than a pound of But∣ter, if he be less, then loss will suffice) these being thus mixt with a blade or 2 of Mace, must be put into the Pikes Belly, and the Belly so sowed up, as to keep all the Butter in his belly, if it be possible, if not, then as much of it as you possibly can, but take not off the scales; then you are to thrust the spit through his month out at his tail, then take 4, 5, or 6 Split-sticks or very thin Laths, and a conve∣nient quantity of Tape or Filleting, these are to be tyed round about the Pikes body from his head to his Tail, and the Tape tyed some∣what thick to prevent his breaking or falling off from the Spit, let him be roasted very lea∣surely and basted often with Claret Wine and Anchovies and Butter mixt together, and al∣so with what moisture falls from him into the Pan, when roasted sufficiently you are to hold under him (when you unwind or cut the Tape that ties him) such a Dish as you purpose to eat him out of; and let him fall into it, with the Sawce that is roasted in his Belly, and by this means the Pike will be kept unbroken and compleat, then to the Sawce
which was within, you are to add a fit quan∣tity of the best Butter, and to squeeze there∣in the juyce of 3 or 4 Oranges; lastly, you may either put into the Pike with the Oysters 3 or 4 Cloves of Garlick, and take it whole our, when the Pike is taken off the Spit, or to give the Sawce a hogo, let the Dish (into which you let the Pike fall) be rubbed with it; the using, or not using the Garlick is left to your discretion. 15. Whensoever you do Butter for Fishes sawce, let it be very well beaten up with 3 or 4 spoonfuls of boyling Spring water, and if you desire it to be thick, dissolve a Yolk of an Egg therein well beaten with the Butter, and if you desire the Sawce to be better relished than ordinary, put an Anchovy in the water, and let it dissolve before you beat up the But∣ter, or boil Parsly by it self, and shred it, and eat it up with the Butter and Water, and its a good Sawce. Trouts, Chubs, Carp, Bearch, Bream, Roch, Gudgeon and Grayling should be eat the very same day they are caught, else they are worth little. Finally, let me tell you, That in the course of my Observations, I know amongst all sorts f Fish, none differ amongst themselves in taste more than Eels, for I have eat of them, taken ut of above 30 several Rivers, and amongst he rest of the Thames, Severn and Trent Eel; et none that I ever met with, were to be com∣ared for goodness (although not large) and
deliciousness of Taste to the Eels caught in a small River in Lancashire called Irk, which is composed of 3 small Brooks that have their conflux near unto Middleton Hall, where it assumes the name of Irk, and thence descends through Blakely and Crumpsall, &c. to Man∣chester; where under Chetham's Hospital, it mingles its waters with the Irwell, and there∣unto pays the Tribute of its Name. Neither are the Inhabitants on its Bank partial in their Judgments, by reason of their vicinity; but its highly applauded for its excellent taste, by persons meer Strangers, and such as had the estimation of curious Palats, and having often enquired of the Neighbouring People to it, what might be the reason, they have unani∣mously ascribed it to the numerousness of Fulling Mills that stand on that River, and say that the Fat, Oyl and Grease scowred out of the Cloth, make the Eels pallatable and fat, above other River Eels. FINIS.
The TABLE. c. signifies Chapter, and sect Section. ANngling at Float c. 28. At Dubsly c. 34. At running-line, both in clear and muddy water c. 27. At top with a worm c. 29. In the Night c. 30. Rules for ground and midwater Ang∣ling c. 31. With a leager Bait c. 32. With natural Fly c. 33. With a Minnow for Trout c. 36. for Pike with a Minnow c. 37. With Trowl for Pike c. 37. with snap c. 37. with snare c. 37. For an Eel c. 22. by boboing, broyling, and sningling, and ledger bait, idem. A. Ashgrub c. 4. sect. 14. Anesty c. 4. sect. 19. Ashfly c. 4. sect. 31. B. Bleak c. 25. Blackberries c. 4. sect. 28. Blood c. 4. sect. 17. Bags c. 3. sect. 16. Baits c. 4. c. 7. sect. 11. Bobs c. 4. sect. 9.10. Barkworm c. 4. sect. 14. Bull-Head c. 4. sect. 22. c. 6. Barbel c. 19. Bream c. 18. Brandling c. 4. sect. 3. Bobbing for Eels c. 22. Brogling for Eels c. 22. Beetle c. 4. sect. 25.
Codbait c. 4. sect. 11.12.13. c. 3. sect. 16. Case-Worm c. 4. sect. 11.12.13. c. 3. sect. 16. Cadizworm c. 4. sect. 11.12.13. c. 3. sect. 16. Creeper c. 4. sect. 26. Cherries c. 4. sect. 28. Choose c. 4. sect. 29. Carp c. 16. Chub and Chevin c. 21. and c. 33. Claphait c. 4. sect. 10. D Dockworm c. 4. sect. 15. Directions general c. 7. Dace and Dare c. 21. Dow-worm c. 4. sect. 2. c 27. sect. 3 Dibbing c. 33. Dubfly c. 34. Depth of water to try c. 3. sect. 13. Dressing of Fish. c. 39. E. Eyes of Fish c. 4. sect. 34. Eel c. 22. F. Fishponds c. 38. Flagworm c. 4. sect. 15. Float Angling c. 28. Floats c. 3. sect. 5.6.7.8.9. Feeding Fish c. 7. sect. 9.10. Fly natural to Angle with 33. Fly Artificial c. 34. Fishes general Haunt c. 7. sect. 7. Flook and Flounder c. 24. G Gentles c 4. sect. 16. Grain c. 4. sect. 18. Grashopper c. 4. sect. 25. Green-drake c. 4. sect. 32. Garden worm c. 4. sect. 2. Grayling c. 12. Gudgeon c. 15. Giltgil c. 4. sect. 3.
H. Hair c. 2. Hooks c. 3. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. Hornets and Humble Bees c. 4. sect. 20. Hawthorn sly c. 4. sect. 33. Haunt general of Fish c. 7. sect. 7. L. Lamprey c. 4. sect. 23. Lines c. 2. Leading lines c. 3. sect. 10, 11, 12. Line Cases c. 3. sect. 15. Loach c. 4. sect. 22. c. 26. Lip-berries c. 4. sect. 27. Ledger bait c. 32. Lob-worm c. 4. sect. 2. M Magots c. 4. sect. 16. Minnow c. 4. sect. 22. c 26. c. 36. Marsh or Meadow worm c. sect. 4. Mulberries c. 4. sect. 28. N Net c. 3. sect 12. Night Angling c. 30. O Oak-worm c. 4. sect. 8. Oak-fly c. 4. sect. 31. Oyntments c. 6. P Posts c. 5. Plummet c. 3. sect. 13. Pannier c. 3. sect. 18. Palmer Fly or Worm c. 4. sect. 8. Pride c. 4. sect. 23. Pike c. 4. sect. 30. c. 23. c. 37. c. 39. Pearch c. 13. Pope c. 14. R Rods for Angling, c. 1. Rosberries c. 4. sect. 28. Receipts c. 6.
Ruff c. 14. Roch c. 20. Running Line and Worm c. 27. Redworm c. 4. sect. 3. S Sheeps blood c. 4. sect. 17. Salmon, c. 11. Salmon spawn c. 4. sect. 21: Snails c. 4. sect. 24. Stone-fly c. 4. sect. 32. c. 34. Seasons proper for Angling or not c. 8. c 9. Swivel c. 36. Snap and Snare c. 37. Singling for Eils c. 22. T Trowling c. 37. Trout c. 10. Tagtail c. 4. sect. 5. Tench c. 17. Twatchell c. 4. sect. 2. W. Whetstone c. 3. sect. 14. Worms c. 4 sect 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. How to bait c. 7. sect. 11. c. 27. Wool-bed c. 4. sect. 8. White grub and White Bait c. 4. sect. 9.10. Wasps c. 4. sect. 20. Water-Cricket and Water-Louse c. 4. sect. 31. FINIS. Courteous Reader, YOU may be pleased to take notice. That at the Sign of the Three Trouts in St. Pauls Church-Yard, on the North side, you may be fitted with all sorts of the best Fishing Tackle, by John Margrave.
