C481 12278157 58557
THE UNCERTAINTY Of the ART OF Physick, TOGETHER With an Account of the innume∣rable Abuses practised by the Profes∣sors of that Art. CLEARLY Manifested by a Particular Rela∣tion of the Original and Progress thereof. Also divers Contests between the Greeks and Arabians concerning its Authors. Written in Italian by the Famous LIONARDO di CAPOA, And made English by J. L. Gent. LONDON: Printed by Fr. Clark, for Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey. 1684.
TO THE HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE, Esq THE Fame of Your sublime, and more than Humane Wisdom hath begot You many Admirers; and Your rare and incomparable Inventions, makes all men confess, That You are He, who by Your New Di∣scoveries have given Light to, and greatly improved the Ingenious in their Curious Inquiries into the Se∣crets of Nature. This incourages me to Address my self to You, Imploring Your Protecti¦on for this weak Essay of Mine, which now adventures to appear in Publick; not doubting, but that as You have al∣ways
been pleased to let me enjoy a constant Influence of Your most esteemed Favour, so You will like∣wise at present pardon the Boldness, and with Your wonted Goodness pass by the Defects, which You may possibly meet with in this Attempt of Honourable Sir, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, John Lancaster.
Don Carlo Buragna TO THE READER. NOT many months since, by Order of the Vice-Roy of Naples was held a Consult of several Physicians, for the putting of some stop to the Abuses and Errors daily committed in the Practice of Physick. They, after some discourse thereabout, judged it most convenient for a thorough-examination of the Rea∣sons already propounded; and yet far∣ther to be propounded, that every one should set down his Opinion in writing. Signor Lionardo di Capoa, who was one of the aforesaid Consult, was obliged therefore to write his Opinion in this Affair; and it seeming to him, that
this could not be done to any pur∣pose without a diligent consideration of, and search into the nature of the thing to be treated of, viz. Physick; he ac∣quitted himself of his Obligation with so much Learning, Eloquence and Eru∣dition, that his Manuscript falling in∣to the hands of certain learned Men, and other Friends of his, appeared to them rather composed for the Ʋniversali∣ty of those that take delight in the su∣blime Mysteries of Literature, than to be kept up amongst a private and small company, as if the Author in the writ∣ing thereof had purposed to himself no other end, but to satisfie the Command imposed upon him. They were there∣fore of Opinion, that a work of such excellency ought to be published in Print: and for that purpose so laboured with Signor Lionardo, that they at last pre∣vailed with him to give them a Copy thereof, and to condescend, that this at least, of the many and different Tracts which he has lying by him, should be committed to the Press. And herein
they regarded not only the pleasure, the Learned and Curious will take in per∣using this Treatise, but the Profit also, that may thence result to all sorts of Persons, especially to those that are wary and judicious: Since by seeing therein the variety of Opinions and Sects, with the divers, and oftentimes contrary ways of Curing, practised amongst Phy∣sicians, they may, without entring into the more subtil Speculations of the Phi∣losophers, easily perceive, with how great Reason others believe and are perswad∣ed, that a Profession, so doubtful and uncertain in it self, has neither Learn∣ing nor Principles, upon which others may lay any firm Foundation; and how perilous a thing it is for men to see themselves in the hands of those, that will have it so, especially when Health and Life lie at stake. Moreover, who does not perceive how advantageous this Treatise may be to such young men, as follow Physick, since by the reading of this alone, they may arrive at a more exact knowledg of its Nature, than by
turning over the great Volumes of the most reputed and solemn Masters there∣of, and may in an hour understand what way in the Method of Curing is to be taken by him, who, laying aside cozening Tricks & Cheats, intends, as his profession obliges him, to honour himself by the help he brings to such Patients as come un∣der his hands. Nor, shall they, or any else that apply themselves to better Stu∣dies, fail to see how many there formerly have been, and at present are, who both in Medicine and other Arts melt their Brains in the pursuit of that, which ei∣ther is not, or not to be found; and as our Dante has it, Trattando l'ombre, come cosa salda. Treating of shadows, as substantial things. But without my enlarging any farther herein, the Reader may of himself by the perusal of this Treatise sufficiently per∣ceive how useful, and full of exquisite li∣terature it is, and that its being com∣posed
without intention of having it pub∣lished, hinders it not from agreeing with the Fame of its Author, and with the O∣pinion, that all judicious and under∣standing men have of him. Farewel.
The Uncertainty of the Art of Physick, clear∣ly manifested by a par∣ticular Relation of the beginning and Progress thereof. THERE is not indeed, Gentle∣men, any Undertaking that makes the Majesty of a Pru∣dent and Valiant Prince ap∣pear so worthy of Regard, as his acting in such a manner, That by his Wisdom and Valour, the people committed to his care, may be assured not to be assailed by foreign Arms, or miserably out-raged without Revenge. Nor, is it in my opi∣nion an Action any whit less generous and laudable to secure them from the De∣ceits of domestick Enemies, who then u∣sually
do the greatest mischief, when they most craftily cover themselves with the Veil of Benevolence and Charity, and counterfeiting themselves full of Huma∣nity, and greatly touched with Compas∣sion for the Misfortunes of others, lay af∣terwards for them such treacherous Snares, as can seldom or never be eschewed with∣out mortal danger. And indeed, what Advantage would it be to a man to come off safe and secure from the manifest Pe∣rils of War, and afterwards unwarily to fall into dangers, the more hidden they are, the worse? And this indeed ap∣pears so much the more worthy of Com∣passion, as the Mishaps of that Ship are to be judged more grievous and lamen∣table, which, having escaped many storms at Sea, miserably perishes at her very entrance into the Port. The pious and prudent Fore-sight therefore of our most excellent Vice-roy cannot suffici∣ently be commended, who, having with wonderful and incredible Felicity accom∣plished the first, and defeated the De∣signs and Attempts of those proud and cruel Fleets, which, infesting our Seas and Coasts, threatned us with Fire and Sword, and having likewise cleared the High∣ways and Roads of those Robbers and
Murderers, that disturb'd the Kingdom, and prey'd upon the Villages, does at pre∣sent make it his whole study diligently to prevent us, whom he has rendred se∣cure in the enjoyment of our Fortunes, from being ill treated in our persons by the misusage of Physick: Which, be∣cause every one has need thereof, as it may, when kept within the limits of ex∣perience, and our (although weak) Reason, be perhaps of some help to the publick. So on the contrary, when∣ever it happens to decline to a sinister path, it proves more dangerous and destru∣ctive to Mankind, than Diseases them∣selves. And no sooner were the unhap∣py Accidents that had befaln some sick persons, and for which the Chimical Me∣dicines were accused, made known to his Excellency, but he immediately ordered, That we should with the greatest dili∣gence imaginable apply our selves to search out a Remedy for such Misfortunes, and also to prescribe unto Physicians (where there is need) certain, secure, and solid Rules to be observed in their Practice. But whenever, ruminating with my self, I reflect upon the Numerosity and Quality of the Difficulties there are in such an Attempt, finding likewise as many
in my self, I remain confused and at a stand, either because it so happens in all other affairs of great Consideration, or that the nature of this Art not bearing it, it seems exceeding hard and difficult to give Laws to the things appertaining there∣unto. I should therefore rather chuse, without any more ado, by my silence, to free my self from trouble, did I not know, that I should thereby contravene his Commands, whose not only Requests, but even Signs, I ought without any Re∣ply, and with awful Reverence to obey: By which, as also by the Benefit that may perhaps thence redound to my Country, being incited, I willingly enter the Lists. Now to the end every Deliberation or Resolution that is to be taken in this mat∣ter, may not prove altogether vain and unprofitable, I shall employ all the strength of my weak Understanding; Discour∣sing, in the first place, of the Difficulties, whereinto, not only Princes and Magi∣strates, but also the wisest and most in∣telligent Physicians have oftentimes fallen in giving permanent and certain Laws to Medicine, an Art, of its own nature in the highest degree uncertain, dubious, and inconstant. Then afterwards, gradually
and with sober advice penetrating more inwardly, we will purpose (as far as the Nature of the thing will suffer) the way to make a good Physician and a better Chimist. Nor do I at present remember any other Remedy, that may be able and fit to repair the perpetual and almost fatal Calamities of Physick. And to begin with the most ancient Memoirs, setting aside how short a time continued in India, Babylonia, and Assyria, their device of lodging the Sick on the most frequented Roads of the Country to have them cured by Travellers. In Egypt where all the Arts and more Noble Stu∣dies first came to light and flourished, only the Kings, Priests, and some few of the chief Nobility were permitted to give Physick to the sick, whence by Ma∣nethon were reckoned amongst the Physi∣cians of most profound Judgment Antotides, the second King of the first Dynasty, of the Tinites, who wrote some Books of Anatomy, and Tosoretrus of the third Dynasty, which was that of the Memphi∣tians. But afterwards in process of time this Profession grew common also with the Multitude, and so much was the Number of Physicians increased, that for every Distemper there was appointed a
particular Physician, who was permitted to cure no other, as is testified by Herodo∣tus, Father of the Greek History, in these words; Medicine with them was di∣vided, every particular Disease, and no more, having its Physician: whence all the Country is pestered with Physicians. For some are appointed to cure the Eyes, others the Head, others the Teeth, others the parts of the Belly, and others internal and hidden Distempers. The Egyptian Physick re∣maining only amongst private persons, it is not easie to believe, how, falling from its ancient Splendor, it changed through the Laziness and Ignorance of the new Physicians, who were of such small parts, that, as the but-now-mentioned Herodotus saies, The chiefest of them at the Court of the great King of Persia, when he had dislocated his Foot, knew not how to cure it, but with their Arguments reduced him to a very bad condition. Therefore we ought without doubt to believe, That in Egypt the Physicians were, as Diodorus relates, prohibited to depart from the Pre∣cepts of the ancient Masters; from which, if any one happened to swerve, and his Patient thereby grew worse, he was se∣verely punished for it. For, saies he, if after they had directly followed the acknow∣ledged
Laws of the sacred Book, they sail'd of curing the Patient, no Charge could be laid against them. But if they went con∣trary to the written Rules, they underwent the Judgment of Death. And really it was no small good Fortune of Galens (to say nothing at present of Hippocrates and others) that he was not born in those times, and in that Countrey: For he would not so easily have escaped Punish∣ment, if contemning, as it were, the re∣verend Authority of the Law, he should have had the boldness to utter these words, I observe this not only in the writings of Hippocrates, but in all the Books of the Ancients, that I am not easily drawn to believe what any one of them has left written, un∣til I have first well examined by the Test of Experience and Reason, whether, what they have delivered, be true or false. And that he was well versed in Logick, is seen by such Weapons as he used to de∣fend himself withal, as Commenting up∣on the Ancients, and reporting their O∣pinions intangled and obumbrated, to the end they might not contradict his own. A Custom, which those Physici∣ans that tread in the same steps, have fol∣lowed, and still do follow, and which does in such a manner deform his sayings,
and also those of Hippocrates, that they oftentimes clearly appear to have written quite contrary to their first Determina∣tions. And perhaps the Egyptians, deri∣ding their own Law, acted maliciously in the same manner, according to the Pro∣verb; Fatta la legge pensata la Malizia: No sooner is the Law made, but ways are found out to evade it. And to such a pitch peradventure did their neglected Boldness arrive, that their usual falling presently to Purgations, and for the most part with ill success, forced them (their first Law being antiquated) to remedy it by publishing a new one, as Aristotle re∣lates in these Words; The Physicians may after the fourth day stir the humors, but if they will do it sooner, at their own peril be it. Which Simplicity, I believe found not many Abettors, if they considered, how often Diseases happen, that on the very first day need violent Remedies. But what a Fool would that Physician have been, that should have procured a∣nothers Life with his own death? The Grecians, who out-went all other Nations, as in Arts and Sciences, so like∣wise in Civil Prudence, having regard perhaps to such inconveniences, would not impose any positive Laws upon Phy∣sick,
or those that professed it, chusing rather, that Infamy should be the punish∣ment of those Physicians, by whose fault the Sick should miscarry: For saies Hip∣pocrates, There is no penalty set upon the Pra∣ctisers of Physick, only in these Cities, but that of Infamy. Which to those that take their Reputation to heart, is more grie∣vous and tedious, than any other Tor∣ment. Which Custom is manifestly shewn by Philemon, when he saies, . That is to say, Only the Physician and the Judge are permitted to kill others without being put to death. This also pleased the divine Plato, who thus or∣dered in his Common-wealth; The Physi∣cian shall not be subject to any Penalty, if a Patient, taken in hand by him, dies con∣trary to his best endeavour. To which o∣pinion Lucian comes very near, where he saies: By how much the Art of Physick is worthy of greater honour, and more benefi∣cial to Life than others, by so much should the Professors thereof have greater Liberty; and it is convenient that it should enjoy some priviledge, nor ought a Doctrine, consecrated
to the Gods, and the Exercise of the most intelligent men, to be restrained, or subju∣gated by any power, or brought under the servitude of the Laws, or under the fear and penalties of Tribunals. And altho' among the Grecians the Athenians alone prohibited Women and Servants the Stu∣dy of Physick, yet is not such a Statute worthy of much praise, not to say, it de∣serves much blame; Because, as hereaf∣ter shall be declared, the Understanding of worthy Women has been seen, contra∣ry to their Expectation, to undertake the most sublime Studies, and Nature has of∣ten granted to Servants Courage and Wit fit for a Philosophick Liberty; therefore did they, not without Reason, a while after revoke this Law. Hyginus saying, That the practise of Physick was allowed to Midwives for necessity and decency sake. Much less ought we to believe, that the Sottishness of Seleucus took place, for so we may well call his Law, whereby, as if it had been mortal Poison, he prohibited upon pain of Death, all the Sick Persons of Locris to drink Wine, unless they had at first obtained a Licence from their Physicians: If any of the Epizephyrian Locrians drank wine contrary to the Physi∣cians direction, tho' he escaped, Death
was his punishment, because he did contrary to what was prescribed him. The Roman Commonwealth, which far excelled all Greece and the Barbarous Nations not on∣ly in Military Government, but also in Politicks, thought it not convenient to commit, without restraint, the Care of mens Lives to the Custody of Physicians; and therefore by a Plebiscitum, first made by Aquilius a Tribune of the People (whe∣ther it were Gallus, or another of that name, I know not) and afterwards re∣corded amongst the Roman Laws it was decreed, that some punishment should be inflicted on their Failings, whereby they might be rendred more circumspect and cautious in their actings. We may never∣theless well believe, that this Law, or Plebiscitum, altho' made, was never put in Execution, otherwise Pliny would have been to blame to cry out in this manner against the Physicians; Furthermore no Law punishes capital ignorance, no example of Justice done. To which he adds, They learn by our dangers, and gain experience by our Deaths: And at length concludes, Only the Physician is allowed to kill a man unpunished. But there is something yet in the same Author that touches more to the quick; The Ignominie of the Physician
passes away, and Intemperance bears the blame, while they that perish are accused of their own misfortunes- And for this rea∣son, I suppose, did those renowned Law∣yers that were by command of the Em∣peror Justinian employed in compiling the Pandects, purposely pass by that over∣severe and cruel Sentence of Paulus upon the Cornelian Law against Murderers; If a man die of the Medicine given him for his health or the recovery of his Distemper, he that gave it, were he of Quality, shall be ba∣nished; if of meaner Condition, let him be put to death. Which Sentence in the judgment of that great Soul of the Civil Law, Jacobus Cujacius, could not properly be reduced to the aforesaid Cornelian Law; forasmuch, saies he, as the Physician sanandi, non nocendi animo dedit. And altho' the same Law∣yers registred both in the Institutes and in the Digests, not only the aforesaid Head of the Aquilian Law, but also the follow∣ing words of Ʋlpian; Tho' the event of Mortality ought not to be imputed to the Phy∣sician, yet what he commits out of igno∣rance, is to be laid to his charge, neither is the Deceiver to go unpunished under pre∣tence of humane frailty. Yet were these Statutes nevertheless rarely executed, al∣tho' not only Pliny, but very many also
after him, renewing in a more bitter man∣ner the same Complaints, brought Accu∣sations against them: Amongst whom the most learned Angelus Politianus in an Epistle of his to Leonicenus writes thus; I have again bewail'd the folly of mankind, that has so long suffered besotted Ignorance to reign, and all the while buys the hope of life from them, who are the real causes of certain death. Ludovicus Vives also cries out thus, Their Miscarriages and Errors, speaking of the Physicians, not only go unpunish'd, but are also recompenced with Fees. Baptista Mantuanus likewise has these words of them His, etsitenebras palpant, est facta potestas Excruciandi aegros, hominesque impune necandi. Tho' blind with ignorance, yet scot∣free they The Sick torment, and men (unpu∣nish'd) slay. And an Italian Satyrist sporting with the Title Doctor, saies to the same purpose of the Physician, Ma poiche un talci puo donar la morte Senza punizione, e senza pena, Forzae, che fi gentil titol riporte.
Since Doctors have free liberty to cause Our death, not fearing Punishment or Laws, Our Hangman may this noble Title bear. And our Academick in his most choice Dialogue saies in like manner of Physi¦cians; Hoc tamen ipso securi, quod nulla sit lex quae puniat inscitiam capitalem; im∣movero cum mercede gratia referatur. And another; Carnifici Medicus par est; nam caedit uterque Impune, & merces caedis utrique datur. Hangman and Doctor herein alike fare, Both kill unpunish'd, both rewarded are. And another Author, Si quaecunque sua plectuntur crimina lege, Quas, Medici, maneant modo vestra pi∣acula poenas? Qui plerumque ipso facitis medicamine morbum, Et diro ante diem aegros demittitis orco? Scilicet hoc vobis indulsit opinio, rerum Ʋna potens. Clades inferre impune per orbem,
Mercedemque alieno obitu, laudemque pa∣rare. If to each Crime its punishment be due, What pain, Physicians, is enough for you? Who with your Drugs Diseases fre∣quently Do cause, and th' Sick before their time to dy? This hath Opinion, which the whole World sways, Indulg'd to you, by others harms to raise Your selves, and by their deaths, to merit Praise. And altho' Maximinus condemned to death all his Physicians, because they had neither wholly healed him of his wounds, nor eased him of the pain, yet cannot the example of such a Tyrant give vigor to any Law; nor was he less blamed for this, than for his other Cruelties, by the Writers of that Age, as also Alexander was deservedly stiled cruel, for having unjustly caused Glaucias the Physician to be slain, through a suspicion, that he had not been diligent enough in curing his dearest Friend Hephestion. As on the con∣trary,
the Clemency and Humanity of Darius Hystaspes, King of Persia, is high∣ly commended, who freely permitted the Physicians, already condemned to dy, for having reduced him to a bad Condi∣tion, to be set at liberty by Democides a famous Physician of Crotona. But let not any one therefore believe, that the Phy∣sicians gained such a liberty by transgres∣sing their Rules; for it proceeded rather from the utmost necessity of the publick, and is, as it were an effect of the Art of good Government: for I am verily per∣swaded, that even the memory of the Mystery of the Medicine would have been utterly extinguished, if Physicians had been proceeded against according to the rigor of Justice. And what man in∣deed, unless he were exceeding dull and stupid, or extreamly rash, would ever have vainly spent his Time and Endea∣vours in the pursuit of an Art (if Me∣dicine, which has not any certain and fix∣ed Rule in its operations, may possibly be so called) in it self displeasing, and hard to be obtained, and in its Events very du∣bious? I say displeasing, for what can be more offensive and disgustful, than continually to converse with sick persons, and daily to see and heal the Miseries of
others, and that many times without being any ways able to remedy them? It is also difficult to undertake, and al∣ways uncertain in its success; because in the curing of the Sick, not only the skill of the Physician, but also Fortune and Chance claim their share: from whence arose this common Proverb; A Physician had need be born under a fortunate Con∣stellation. And O how exceeding often does it happen, that contrary to all hu∣man expectation, as Celsus writes; Ex∣pectation is likewise frustrated, and that man dies, of whom the Physician was secure be∣fore. And Hippocrates himself, although esteemed a most profound and skilful Physician, yet confesses, That he gained more Reproach than Commendations by his Profession. And therefore it is exceed∣ing difficult, or rather impossible always to judge, whether the unhappy success of of distempers proceeds from the sottish∣ness of the Physicians, or from the Na∣ture of the disease, or from some other internal Cause, into which no humane Wisdom or Knowledge can penetrate. Most uncertain always and obscure are the Symptoms of diseases, especially of the acute, according to Hippocrates: wherefore Celsus also said; It behoves us
also to understand, that in acute Diseases the Symptoms of life and death are much more fallacious. Besides that in the Bo∣dies of Animals are wont to be ingendred poisons, and that oftentimes presently, by sudden precipitation and Coagulation; and the man, whom not only others, but even Appollo and Aesculapius them∣selves would have judged most sound and healthful, may have within him Im∣posthumes, and other secret distempers, which, when he least thinks of it, may be able to cause his death, and that at the very Instant when the Medicins are prepared: wrongfully therefore are the Remedies blamed, and not the evil qua∣lity of the distemper. And besides this, some Medicines which are esteemed good, and conducing to the Health of man, may oftentimes occasion such disturbance with∣in the Patients body, as may bring on his death, before we with our shallow Un∣derstandings can prevent it, as Celsus testi∣fies. It will not therefore be the Physici∣ans fault, if sometimes his Patient grows worse by his Remedies; nor can Laws e∣ver determine any thing herein. But come, let us grant, that a method of Cu∣ring may by Law be prescribed to Phy∣sicians, how can they be punished for
transgressing it? or how can the Crime be so clearly manifested, that they may be proceeded against in form of Law? And who does not sufficiently know, how all Physicians are of contrary Sects, and per∣petually disagreeing in their Sentiments? Wherefore being either always stimulated by open Enmity, or which is worse, by se∣cret Envy, or else allured by the love and Benevolence of their own party, they will, without any respect to Truth, re∣present the matter to the Judge quite otherwise, than in Justice they ought, and make him, as the Italian Proverb has it, See the Moon in the Well acccording to their own desire. Besides that, the fear of pu∣nishment, which the Physician may easi∣ly incur, will always keep him suspend∣ed and dubious in taking his Resoluti∣ons, even when he intends to operate most effectually; and thus being terrified and confounded, he will, for fear of hazarding his person, in the greatest Ma∣ladies stand, as it were, fettered, and with his hands bound behind him, or else, not to depart from the common opi∣nion of the Vulgar, however false and contrary to the distemper, will oftentimes make use of vain and dangerous Re∣medies. A thing which, as it is well ob∣served
by Cardanus, is oftner wont to befal the Physicians of Princes, than any others, who not only for fear of Infamy, but also of greater Mischief, forbear mak∣ing use of great and unusual Remedies. It will not be far from the matter to bring here an Example taken from the art of War, not much differing truly in the uncertainty of its success, from that of Medicine. The Roman Magistrates ra∣ther pitied, than punished the Errors of their Captains, and it is well seen to what a height the Empire of Rome ascended thereby; as on the other side, every one knows to how wretched a Condition the Carthaginians were reduced, by always taking contrary measures. And this was yet nearer to our times manifested by the Venetians to their exceeding great da∣mage, and with the almost Universal Ru∣ine of their Republick, when they un∣justly beheaded Carmagnuola for his care∣lesness, by which, Liviano afterwards be∣ing dismayed, and following the Opi∣nion of the unwary Proveditors, lost the day at Vicenza, and was miserably with his whole Army discomfited and cut in pieces. And perhaps the putting of Vi∣telli to death, was one of the principle Occasions, that the Florentines betrayed
by Baglione, sadly afterwards lost their liberty. And here some one may not without reason object, That as well the Aquilian, as all the other Laws of the Romans, by us related, were not made for able Phy∣sicians, whether Methodical, Empirical, or Rational, but only for such popular Empiricks, as are Quacks and Mounte∣banks; the Name of Physician being not only given to such vulgar Empiricks, but even to those also that were wont to castrate little Children, as may be easily seen in the Digests and Code, as well of Theodosius as Justiman. And certainly it is to be believed, That in them alone the Ignorance of the Art took place, through occasion whereof, the Laws against Physicians were ordained in Rome. But this foolish sort of Physicians ought indeed to be severely punished for rashly intermedling in a Mystery of so great im∣portance, as is the art of Healing, and blindly ordaining Remedies at the peril of their Patients Lives. Therefore I think it very wisely enacted in many Countreys of Europe, that such Fellows are under very great penalties forbidden to practise, tho' these Edicts are seldom or never exe∣cuted. And indeed, with great reason
does Anneode Roberti say of them, what Tacitus heretofore said of Astrologers, That they are A Generation of people un∣faithful to the Enquirer, and fallacious to those that hope; always forbidden in our City, yet never expell'd. And the Compa∣rison of Roberti is but scarce enough, That the Knavish Astrologers do nothing else, but entertain the Curious with their Jargon, feeding them with most vain hopes; and the vulgar Empiricks do ei∣ther with their silly Secrets, and idle prat∣ling, hinder the Sick from taking Reme∣dies of able Physicians, which Neglect costs them their Lives; or else they do themselves kill them with most pernici∣ous Medicines. And justly, perhaps, were those pal∣try Knaves first degraded, and after∣wards condemned in France, who, in∣stead of curing King Charles the Sixth, reduced him with their Remedies to such an Estate, that there was scarce any hopes of his Life. But in my opinion, that valiant King was not over-considerate, or too well advised, to hazard his Life in the hands of such Quacks and Cheats; and he should, at their first offering to cure his Distempers, immediately, and without Experimenting their Remedies, or re∣garding
their promises, have punished them for their Temerity and foolish bold∣ness; if it were not the ill Will, and Craft of the spiteful Physicians of those times, which made things go so ill with those wretched Creatures. But how should it ever be possible for either the people, or Magistrates, who, for the most part understand little or no∣thing thereof, to settle the practise of Physick by firm and durable Laws, when the wisest and skilfullest Physicians, who with long Study, and much pra∣ctise have searched far into it, could ne∣ver arrive thereunto? The Inventor, as 'tis thought, or at least the most ancient Writer of Physick was Aesculapius, and he, as testifies Hippocrates, or whoever else was the Author of the Epistle to De∣mocritus, prescribed many Rules to be observed in the practise of Healing; but soon finding them not to be exact, most gently dispensed with them. , saies the Epistolizer of Aesculapius, . Therefore we may say with the Toscan Lyrick, that he Solchi onde, in rena fondi, e sriva in vento.
Plows th' Waves, builds on the Sand, and writes i' th' Wind. Who vainly wearys himself with la∣bouring after the establishment of such Rules. And if any one shall desire to have this made clear unto him, I shall with the best ordered Discourse I can, en∣deavour to demonstrate to him the Rea∣sons thereof. The Art of Medicine is at this day so greatly increased and advanced, that it seems to strive for Superiority with the most illustrious and most noble Studies, its Jurisdiction to penetrate even into the most remote and extreme Confines of Nature; whereas it was at first re∣strained within the narrow Limits of a few Plants, as (to say nothing of others) is acknowledged by the ancient Interpre∣ter of Homer, : whereunto agrees our Seneca; Medicina quondam pancarum fuit Scientia Herba∣rum. Thus in that pleasant, and above all others, happy Age, —When Milk for food Had the Infant World, whose Cradle was a Wood.
And then those first men lived free from fear Of scorching Feavers, tho' as yet by Herbs, Or Physicks skill they unassisted were. Either because they had then little need of Physick, Firmis adhuc, solidisque cor∣poribus, & facili cibo, nec per artem, vo∣luptatemque corrupto: Or, because Medi∣cine, as all other (even the greatest) things here below was to take its rise from very weak beginnings; men at that time using such Remedies as they found out either by chance, or by observing the brute Beasts, or by their own Industry. Whence it is rationally to be believed, That Agenor and Chiron, held by some for the most ancient of all Physicians, made use only of Plants in their Cures: The Tyrians preserve their first fruits for Age∣nor, the Magnetians for Chiron, said to be the first that ever practised Physick: For that by the use of Roots and Herbs they cured the Sick. And of Chiron, the Fin∣der out of the Chironian Panacea, or All-heal, The healing Root was Centaure, so call'd From the fain'd Centaure Chiron, Sa∣turn's Son, Who found it first on snowy Polion.
Eustathius declares, That being wound∣ed in the Hand, or as Pliny would have it, in the Foot, he found out the way of Curing by Herbs. And to say nothing of Mercury, who taught Ʋlysses, as Homer sings the use of the herb Moly, This said, from th' earth a Medicine Mercury Dig'd up, and taught the use thereof to me. It appears, that Hercules, from whom the Herculean Panacea took its Name, cured only with Plants; as also did Isis and Osiris, and Apollo, and Arabus, and Cadmus, and Bacchus, by whose means, as Plutarch tells us, that most powerful and pleasant Medicine, Wine, was first found out, and brought into esteem; and the great vertue of Ivy of marvellous ef∣ficacy in repairing the Evils caused by the too excessive use of Wine, was made known to the World: Bacchus, saith he, was accounted an Excellent Physician, not only because he found out the use of Wine, a most pleasing sort of Physick, but for that he also taught the use of Ivy, and caus'd his Followers, in the midst of their Cups, to crown their Temples with it, as being that,
which by its coolness repels the Vapors from the head. Herbs alone were likewise made use of by Aesculapius, the Inventor of the Asclepian Panacea, with which, as Ni∣cander sings, he Cured Iolas the Son of Iphicles, The Phlegyan All-heal first Paieon took, As on the banks it grew of a black Brook, Which he to cure Amphitruo's Grand∣child us'd. And as his Commentator relates, he was wont to use it in the Cure of his other Patients: Asclepius was said to make use of this herb (meaning All-heal) who was the Son of Korones the Sister of Phlegys, the Physician Aesculapius. And so did Ami∣thaon and Melampus, who, as we read in Dioscorides, made use of Hellebore in Curing the Daughter of Proetus, King of the Argives. Nor did Podalirius or Ma∣chaon use any thing but Herbs to heal the Wounds of the Grecian Army; and be∣fore the Trojan War, Medea, as Diodorus relates, cured with Herbs the wounds of Json, Atalanta, Laertes, and the The∣spiades: Jason, Laertes, Atalanta, and they who were called the Thespiades, all
these they report were cured by Medea with certain Roots and herbs. And Tryphon, according to Plutarch, highly extolled and praised the Ancients, . Whence they, having very often tried and proved their Medi∣cines, gave, as Manilius sings, the first be∣ginning to the Art of Curing, Experience through divers chances brought Forth Art, the way first by example taught. But as Medicines were at first but few and simple, so also few and simple ought the Rules of Physick then to be: whence by reason of the Errors, whereinto Ex∣perience might easily fall, it was neces∣sary, that such Rules, altho' very few, should frequently change, the first Me∣dicines daily changing and growing bet∣ter. Thus began the Art of Physick at the very first to manifest its Inconstancy. But it did not long thus remain in the hands of simple persons, ere Philosophers began by degrees to put in their fingers; who at first, as is to be believed, were drawn thereunto by meer Curiosity, and a desire of searching out the cause of Me∣dicines; but by little and little advancing
and going forwards, they arrived at length to this, that blaming, as incon∣stant, and perilous, the ancient simplici∣ty of Curing, they laid the first founda∣tion of rational Physick. And although Eustathius makes Podalirius the first In∣ventor thereof, yet it seems, by what E∣risimachus in Plato relates That this Ho∣nour ought to be attributed to his Fa∣ther Aesculapius; Our Fore-father Aescu∣lapius (as the Poets say, and I believe was the first that ever methodized the Art of Physick. And therefore the whole Art of Physick is governed by that God. And he had also said before this, The knowledg of what agrees with the Body in reference to Fulness and Emptiness, and he that distin∣guishes in those things the good and bad agreement, he is the most skilful Physician. And he that makes such a change, that for one Agreement there shall be another; and where there is not a Sympathy, which ought to be, knows how to cause one, and take away that which was there before, he is to be accounted a good Artist. For whatever Contraries there are in the body, ought to be made to agree one with another; Cold with Heat, Bitter with Sweet, Dry with Moist. Yet for all this, did not the Mutations and Uncertainties of Physick
hereby cease, but rather multiplied more and more: and as the Practitioners were various and disagreeing, so it self also be∣came various, and divided (as it were) into a thousand parts. But in the mean time Rational Physick was in the strictest manner so conjoyned to Phlosophy, that it was (as Celsus avers) by the wisest and most prudent Estimators of things adjudged to be a part thereof: and thus (it seems) it continu∣ed to the time of Herodotus, mistakenly by some called Prodicus. Now he, as may be collected from what Plato relates in his Discourse of the Gymnasium, where∣of he was Master, and first Minister, ca∣sually falling sick, through the necessity, he had at that time, applied himself with great fervency, and the utmost of his en∣deavours, to the cultivating of Physick, and joyning it to the Gymnastick, and prescribing it some Rules, which he first found out by Reason and Experience, be∣gan (it seems) before all others to give it some form of Art. And then it came by little and little to lose its ancient Familia∣rity with Philosophy; altho' Celsus and some others are of opinion, that this first hapned through the means of Hippocra∣tes. And from Herodicus it seems, that the
now-mentioned Hippocrates, his Scholar Eu∣ryphontes, and others learn'd the custom of treating separately from Philosophy, the things that belong to Physick. And altho' some thought this a very good act, and of great advantage to Physick, yet can it not but appear to him, who shall strictly look into the truth of things, that grea Harm ensued thereby. Forasmuch as th Philosophers not at all regarding to meddle with Physick, and the Physicians discours∣ing grosly of its affairs, there remained little or nothing of Rational, but the Name. And to such an height did that blameable Custom arrive, that their Suc∣cessors pertinaciously set themselves with all their might to defend it; and being ob∣stinate in their belief, endeavoured to make all others give credit to it. And Galen durst say of Hippocrates, That he had certainly shewn great Wisdom, in that he would never intermeddle, as Pla∣to afterwards did, in investigating the Nature and Generation of the Qualities of those four first Bodies, whereof the whole Mass of the World, with all things therein contained, is judged to have been framed and composed; saying, that such a Dispute belonged particularly to the Philosophers, and not to the Physicians;
who have then sufficiently complied with their Duty, when they arrive to know, that the Healthfulness of Bodies is ingen∣dred of the Temperament or Mixture of Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Drought. But what could ever be imagined more hurtful and destructive to Physick, than this? Thus in tract of time the Love of Wis∣dom decaying by degrees in those Phy∣sicians, that called themselves Rational, the Contests about the ill-managed Phy∣sick sprang up more fierce and outragi∣ous than before: for whereas at first their contrasting one anothers Sentiments, aim∣ed only at clearing the Truth, now be∣ing wholly plunged into Factions, and obstinate in their designs, they never cea∣sed contending, brawling, and reviling one another, and railing in such a man∣ner, that the very first Masters and Inven∣tors of the Art were not secure from their Reproaches. Apollo esteemed heretofore the God of Physick, was now scoffed at by the foolish people, and vulgar Troop of Physicians, who openly accused him of having been a Pratler, and a Boaster; and above all they taxed him with Ingratitude; because that having gained the Know∣ledg of Medicine from the Humanity and
Courtesie of others, he afterwards de∣meaned himself so proudly and arrogant∣ly, as if he had by his own Industry with∣out any assistance first found it out. Thus this crafty Cozener, to gain the greater ap∣plause, and the more to advance his Glo∣ry, having learn'd the art from Glaucus, who was an old Fox, began to play his Pranks, and to act the Astrologer, open∣ing a way to those Tricks and Cheats, by which the Multitude have ever since been deceived. Others railed against Aesculapius, who was himself also a God of Physick, for his Inconstancy, and little Firmness in curing; and not a few Cur∣ses were also bestowed upon him for his insatiable avarice: Forasmuch as he first of all, as 'tis reported, profaning the ve∣nerable and sacred Art of Physick, drawn by filthy Lucre to cure for a price, sold to a sick Prince a few Herbs and Roots for an infinite Sum of money, whereby he justly merited to be afterwards Thunder∣struck and burnt by Jupiter for leaving to posterity so unfitting and abominable an Example. And besides this they say, That in all sorts of Jugling Tricks and Cunning Feats, he far out-strip'd his Fa∣ther Apollo, and was therefore afterwards believed by every body to preside over
Auguries and the art of Divination. They farther also add, That by a thousand Im∣postures and subtil Artifices he perswaded others, as he did his Father, That he could raise people from the dead; wickedly thinking thereby to procure to himself the Title of Divine. But to be brief, they in fine concluded, That Apollo knew little or nothing of Medicine, and his Son Aesculapius much less: wherefore doubt∣ing, that he could not perfectly teach his Son his own Art, he caused him for a long time to be instructed therein under the Discipline of Chiron. And he, after he had spent so much Time and Study, grew so skilful, that in curing a little Tooth-ach he was in danger to lose his Reputation, had he not in fine with a quick deliberation set himself to draw them, which if not performed, who knows what might have befaln the Pati∣ent. And for his great Master Chiron, how could he cure others, who was not able to cure himself; but being acciden∣tally wounded by Hercules, resolved wholly to resign his Life and Immortali∣ty to Prometheus, and so bravely to rid himself out of all his Troubles? And hence we may plainly understand, what Truth there was in those so wonderful and in∣comparable
actions, which lying anti∣quity boasts of them. Thus peradven∣ture do the spiteful Contradictors fable of these first Masters; and that I also may at present speak, what I think, it does not seem to me very dubious, That the first Inventors of Physick among the Greeks were certainly but very small Profici∣ents therein; since that in after-ages, when the World with Time advanced in every Art and Study, their witless Dis∣courses about it, demonstrated, that their skill was yet little enough. And altho' they gained a great deal of Fame and Re∣putation in all parts, yet ought we not therefore the less to persist in our Belief, judging, that at the first appearance of Arts to the simple and growing World, the first Operations of Physick appeared wonderful and Divine Inventions. And this was much more easie for Physicians, than for any other Inventors; because all their most considerable Mistakes and Errors being, as one saith, buried in the same Grave with those that were slain by them; and on the contrary, nothing ap∣pearing of them, but their Experiments, how mean soever, on the living by them cured, they might without any great op∣position easily acquire immortal praise
and honour. Besides that, this certainly happens in the most wicked and infamous persons, who as they are crafty and ma∣licious, procure themselves every where Favourers and Partakers; and being far from true Wisdom, leave no Deceit or Cheat untried, whereby they may gain esteem amongst the Dregs of the people. It is therefore certainly to be judged, That they, whose Fame was so much trumpet∣ted about, were most crafty Juglers and Mountebancks. It is not here my Inten∣tion to alledge those numerous Examples, which I could bring both from ancient and modern Records; I will only not leave unrelated, how it was anciently re∣ported, that Acron of Agrigentum once freed the City of Athens from a mortal Plague, by the great Lights and Fires, which he caused to be kindled therein. But that Fire alone cannot produce any such effect, our own Eyes have certainly and sufficiently taught us. The same thing is Hippocrates said to have done in his time. And Toxares also had after his death Statues erected, and Sacrifices offer∣ed to him with other Divine Honours; because that (as Lucian tells us) at a time when Athens was more than ever annoy∣ed, and even dispeopled by a raging Pesti∣lence,
he is said to have appeared to Ar∣chitele, the Wife of a certain Areopagite, and to have assured her, That, if the A∣thenians would sprinkle all their Streets with Wine, the Plague would presently cease; which they having done, it sud∣denly fell out, as he had promised. But here I find his usual prudence wanting in Lucian, who foolishly believes it, and phancies, That this might proceed from the Vapors of the Wine, which, mix∣ing with the Air, purged it, and freed it from those pestilential Qualities that in∣fected it. But good God! if these Plagues ceased not, till that, after a long Destru∣ction and Mortality of the people, the Malady had quite spent it self; why must we say, That this hapned through the means of vain and helpless Remedies, and not rather through the weakness and di∣minution of the Evil? therefore it is cer∣tainly to be judged, that the most crafty and subtile Quacks, knowing that the Fury of the Distemper was already spent, and that it was in the wane, to gain them∣selves Fame and everlasting Renown, cun∣ningly prescribed a Remedy, that so the peoples deliverance might be rather at∣tributed to them, than to the Nature of the Infection. An Artifice, which is even
at this day continually practised by Phy∣sicians. But as for Aesculapius, he may well rest contented with that Glory, which, for his having been the first that taught the World the Art of Tooth-draw∣ing, is rationally given him by the Ro∣man Orator, when he saith; Aesculapius was the first that invented the drawing of Teeth: Altho' the Cures wrought by him are said to have been so rare and won∣derful, and those in so many different ways related, that as Sextus the Empi∣rick wisely reflects, they may hereby have been concluded to have been wholly Fa∣bulous: For our Historians going upon false Suppositions, report, the Captain of our Science, Aesculapius, to have been touched with Thunder, not contented with a Fiction, which nevertheless they variously transform. Stesichorus reports, That Aesculapius a∣scended to the height of his Glory by ha∣ving, with his Medicines, restored to life some of those that died at Thebes. But Polyanthus says, That Aesculapius grew fa∣mous, for that some, who were by the anger of Juno struck with Madness, did by his means recover their Senses. And Parrhasius recounts, That he gained his chief Repute by recalling Tyndarus from death. And Staphylus affirms, That his
greatest Renown was gotten by his joyn∣ing together, and enlivening the scattered Limbs of Hyppolitus, whom his frightned Horses had torn into an Hundred pieces. But Phylarchus avers, That all his Esteem and Honour was derived from his curing of their Blindness the Sons of Phineus. And Telesarchus in fine will have him placed among the Gods, because he at∣tempted to raise Orion from the dead. But what Artifices, how loathsom and abo∣minable soever, did he leave untried, to be held diligent and circumspect in curing? He (saith Celus Rhodiginus) would (where∣in he was also imitated by Hippocrates) even taste the Excrements of the Sick, as if that were necessary to the finding out the Causes of Distempers; for which he was afterwards by Aristophanes in his Plutus wittily called , or Excrement-eater, and we may better hit him home by saying with our Actius Sincerus, Esse idem poteris Merdicus & Medicus. But above all, highly advantagious to Aesculapius, were Riddles, Sorceries, Ora∣cles, Sacrifices, and many other Supersti∣tions and jugling Tricks, which he made use of to impose upon the Belief of the
silly multitude, feeding the Sick with cer∣tain hopes of their recovery, when he only held them in suspense with his Talk. An usual Custom at that time of every one, who would with any Commenda∣tions practise Physick. And to say no∣thing of Medea, and many others, Me∣lampus by such foolish Artifices and Flim Flams, besides the great Fame he obtained from a poor Fellow, as he was, together with his Brother, became most Rich Prin∣ces and Soveraign Lords of two parts of the Realm of King Proetus, marrying his Daughters, by him cured, whose names (saies Apollodorus) were Lysippe and Iphi∣anassa; but Aelian calls them Elea and Celene, who, either through the over∣much use of Wine, or by the procurement of the Queen of Cyprus falling mad, went together with their Sister Iphinoe, who died before she could be cured, feeding on Grass, and lowing like Cows about the Valleys of Morea, and other Countreys. Of these Virgil saith in his Bucolicks; With Lowings vain th' Praetides stark mad, Fill all the neighbouring Fields, &c.
But a Remedy was found out for their Madness by Melampus, who, as Dioscori∣des will have it, cured them with Black Hellebore; altho' Galen on far better Grounds, judges that it was White Helle∣bore which wrought the Cure. This Me∣dicine Melampus first learn'd from the Sheep, saith Theophrastus, or rather from the Goats, which, as Pliny writes, he kept, who purge themselves by feeding on Hel∣lebore. Altho' some are of opinion, that Melampus cured those distracted Ladies, not with Hellebore, but with the Milk of Goats, first fed therewith; and others say, that it was not Melampus the Goatherd, who restored them to their Senses, but another Melampus called the Soothsayer. And Polyanthus, as it is related by Sextus the Empirick, and Eudoxus a most ancient Geographer in Stephanus attributes this to Aesculapius. But however this be, it is not to be doubted, but Melampus, after many long Ceremonies accompanied with Sacrifices, and other Superstitions, caused these distracted Ladies to be first washed in that famous Fountain of Arcadia, cal∣led Clitorius; wherefore in memory there∣of there were engraven in Marble those witty Verses, related by Isogonus a most ancient Writer, concerning Waters.
Wherefore after this, a Debate arose amongst Writers, differently judging of this Cure: Some attributing it only to the Sacrifice and Bath, others to the Hel∣lebore; but certainly, as far as we can per∣ceive, that both the Medicines were made use of by Melampus: Pythagoras say∣ing thus in Ovid: Who once has quench'd his draught at Clitro's Well, Flies Wine, and drinks unmixed water still. Whether the water bear a secret Feud To Wine, or as the Shepherds there re∣port How Amithaon's Son, when from the Harms Of raging Madness, he by herbs and Charms Had free'd, he flung th' Infections of their mind Into the Well, where it has still remain'd behind. To which Custom, the Homer of Fer∣rara perhaps had respect, when he made Astolfo several times wash his mad Or∣lando in the Sea, before he gave him to drink the Liquor he had received from Heaven to cure him.
Astolfo caus'd him to be seven times wash'd, And under water to be plung'd seven times, So were his face and all his members cleansed From that same filth, that had him so befrenfied. But Melampus not content with these silly Tricks only, to render his Cures more famous and remarkable, brag'd, as may be seen in Synesius, that he was skilled in the Interpretation of Dreams, proceed∣ing thence to Soothsayings, and giving all men to understand, That Apollo had en∣dowed him with the Art of Divination, and that he having bred up in his house certain Serpents, they had in the dead of the Night, when he was asleep, lick'd his Ears, whereat he, suddenly waking for fear, found at Day-break, that he understood the Language of all Birds. As Apollodorus, relates, speaking of Me∣lampus. Not any Art then had ever, I believe, so much Commerce with Lyes, Fraud, and Superstitions, as the Mystery of Physick, which so manifestly appears to every one, who has but the least In∣sight therein, that it is not necessary for
me at present to trouble my self any farther about it. Yet will I not forbear to glance a little at the strange and ridicu∣lous Ceremonies, which the Ancients used in gathering of Plants, to the end that by the ignorant people their Medi∣cines might be esteemed more wonderful and regardable. Piony could not be ga∣thered in the day-time, for fear of losing presently their Sight, if they should chance to be seen by a Jay. He that would dig up Mandrakes, was obliged to have a care of a contrary Wind; and before he be∣gan to dig for it, he made about it three Circles, and afterwards pluck'd it out of the ground, holding his Face towards the West; but while he pulled it up, another was to go round about him, skipping and sneering, and uttering, I know not what, undecent and obscene Speeches; as Theo∣phrastus relates in these words, They who go about to cut the Mandrake, let them take care of a contrary wind, and make three Circles first with a Sword, then let them dig looking to the West. But with far greater Ceremonies was the Baara, which some will have to be nothing else, but the very same Man∣drake diged up by the Ancients. They first threw upon it the menstruous Blood
or Urine of Women, then having remo∣ved the Earth from round about it, they tied a Dog to the Root, who, being cal∣led by his Master, in running, pluck'd it up, and presently fell down dead. This is thus related by Josephus the Jew; That part of the Valley which encompasses the City to the North, is called Baaras: That place bears a Root of the same Name: In Colour it is like the flame of Fire; and in the Evening casts forth a kind of Lightning. It will not be touched by those that go about to pull it, but flies away; nor is there any way to stop it, but by casting upon it either the Ʋrine or Menstruum's of a Woman. And then also it is death to them that handle it, unless by fortune the person that carrys the Root, so carrys it, that it may hang down out of his hand. But it is taken up another way without any danger, and that is this: They make a Circle about the Roots, for the hidden part of the Root is the shortest; then they tye a Dog to it, who, when the Ma∣ster calls him away, easily pulls it up: But the Dog immediately dies, as being a kind of Revenge for offering violence to the Root, for after that, there is no danger to any body that takes it up. An Account much like to this is given by Elian in his History of Animals, con∣cerning
the digging up of the Cynospastus. The name of the Plant is Cynospastus, which is also called the Bright-shine. Now you must know, that all day this Plant is not to be seen, but at night it shines like a Star, and glitters like Fire. Therefore marking the place diligently in the day time, they go away, and come again the next night, and then seeing the mark which they left there. But the Root is neither to be cut nor pull'd up; for they report, That the first, who, through ignorance of its Nature, touch'd it, soon after perished, Therefore they take a Dog that has been kept hungry for nine days together; which done, they bring the Dog to that part of the Root next the earth, and then fasten the Dog and the Root together, with a Rope tyed with a strong Knot: then returning a good di∣stance off, they throw upon the ground seve∣ral morsels of Meat, which the Dog smel∣ling, and press'd by hunger, pulls with all his force to get at the Meat, and so at last plucks up the Root. But if it happen, that the Sun see the Root, the Dog dies immedi∣ately, and they bury the Dog in the same place, using certain sacred Ceremonies over the dead body of the Dog, as having died for their sakes; for then they may be bold to touch and handle the Plant, and carry
it home; where, as they report, they make use of for many profitable Advantages. Nor less vain and ridiculous were the Superstitions, used by the Ancients in digging up the Panacea, as Theophrastus relates. And of Ellebore and many other Plants there is such a number of Fables re∣ported as well by the same Theophrastus, as by Dioscorides and Pliny, that if I would relate them one by one, I should scarce come to an end. But above all to be admired were the most tedious and vain Ceremonies, used by the Priestess of the Isle of Lemnos, in gathering the sealed Earth, as they are related by Galen, who being an Eye-wit∣ness, made an Elegant Description there∣of. To which Artifices also the most witty Ariosto alluding, introduces the chast Isabella, making the drunken Sara∣cen believe, that she had a never-sailing Se∣cret for the rendring a man invulnera∣ble, and to gain the more Credit to her assertion, envelloping it in abundance of Cautions and Conditions in this Discourse to Rodomont: I know where an herb grows, which I have seen, VVhich being boild with Ivy and with Rue
Over an easie Fire of Cypress-wood, Then press'd between a spotless Virgins hands, A Liquor yields that hard'ns so the skin, That neither Fire nor Steel can do it harm. Three times anoint your body with this Oyl, And you shall be a month invulnerable. But then the Vertue ceases, then again You must again anoint, &c. But leaving these things to persons more at leisure than my self, and return∣ing to our former Discourse, it is almost incredible, how the first Inventors of the Art were slandred and back-bitten by the Envy and Malice of those Physicians, who more than the rest wounded the Reputation of Melampus, giving out, that he was the first, who, to the Ruine of the World, brought forth the evil and troublesom use of Purges; and that, if it fell out well for him in the Cure of Proe∣tus's Daughters, it was more by good Luck, than any prudent Fore-sight of his. But to let alone Melampus for the present, and to return from whence we digressed, it is likely, perhaps, that long before He∣rodicus's Medicine was separated from Phi∣losophy, since we read in Herodotus, the
Prince of the Grecian History, That there were exceeding ancient Schools of Phy∣sick in Cyrene and Crotona, to which the often by us mentioned Democides gave very great Repute, by whose means, as the same Author relates, the Crotonians gained the Honour to be esteemed the most excellent Physicians in the World. But it is to be believed, that Empirical Physick was at first taught in those Schools; and that likewise there divided into diffe∣rent Opinions, causing divers Factions. The same thing also hapned in Rhodes, in Coos, and Gnidos, where Eurifontes, or whoever else it was, published those fa∣mous Sentences, that were afterwards cal∣led Gnidian, which Hippocrates opposing in his Writings, there arose the first Con∣test, that was ever seen upon paper be∣twixt Physicians, or at least the first that afterwards came to our Knowledge. And as for the other Disputes of those times, Hippocrates gives us an Account of some of them in these words; In acute Diseases so various are the Sentiments of Physicians, that often times what one pre∣scribes, as most helpful, others forbid as harmful: And for this reason the Art of Physick ought to be esteemed very like to that of Divination, because the Physicians behave
themselves just like to Soothsayers, some of which will have the same Bird, if appearing on the right hand, to be an Augury of good Luck; but if on the left, of bad. But others again hold the contrary. Now who∣soever desires to be more fully informed concerning such Disputes and Contests among Physicians, let him read the Com∣ment of Galen upon the aforesaid Test of Hippocrates, and I question not, but he will there find abundant satisfaction. Nor ought we here to pass by unobserved what Hieronymus Cardanus suspects, that the Book, which goes under the name of Hippocrates, concerning the bringing forth of Children in the seventh Month, is, as he saies, Forsan Eurifontis, nulla ex parte Hippocrate inferioris, si ex unguibus Leonem, ut in Proverbio est, cognoscere mihi conces∣sum est. Hippocrates then must needs have rallied all his Forces, when he contended with one, between whom and himself there was, if we may believe Cardan, In value none, or little difference. And perhaps with several others, of no less parts than Eurifontes; of whom by reason of all-devouring time, which has Consum'd their bodies, and their Works conceal'd,
I cannot at present give any account. But the famous Hippocrates published his Works in that place, who, although he shewed so much Virtue, as made some think, that Nature and Art strove toge∣ther to perfectionate in him the Idea of a most skilful Physician, yet could they not render his Doctrine so clear and warrant∣able, but that it was sifted, depressed, and confuted first by Diocles, and afterwards by Plistonicus, by Praxagoras, by Erophi∣lus, by Philotimus, by Eudemus, and chief∣ly by Chrysippus, and his Scholar Erasistra∣tus, who was held in such esteem for Phy∣sick, that he was by many able men judg∣ed equal to Aesculapius. And certainly from those few Fragments, which by some, who have written against him, have been preserved out of his many Works, it is sufficiently clear and mani∣fest, That Erasistratus was no less a most subtil Philosopher, than a most Excellent Physician. He was exceedingly free in philosophizing, and so great a lover of the Truth, that he often preferred it before his Grandfather Aristotle, & his School, openly saying, that the Peripateticks had establish∣ed nothing solidly about Natural Things. Wherefore his Opinions were for some Ages received with greot Esteem and Ve∣neration
by Philosophers and Physicians of more than ordinary worth. And al∣tho' they did not use much Blood-letting (which is wont not a little to diminish the Esteem of Physicians amongst the Vulgar) yet their Fame never stagger∣ed, insomuch that even in the time of Ga∣len and afterwards, their Sect was held in far greater Repute, than any other. Yet was not all this sufficient to restrain the Rage of other Factions, that rose up against it under the Standards of Nesithe∣us an Athenian, of Cienus, called also Prusias, and of many others, all esteemed in their times excellent Heads, and Foun∣ders of divers other ancient Sects of Rati∣onal Physick. In the mean time the never sufficiently praised Empedocles, no less sublime a Poet, than Philosopher, doubting, that he should not otherwise be able to infuse into Acron his Scholar, evident and indis∣putable Arguments for the Mutations of Nature, wholly forsook the Rational, and with his utmost Endeavours applied himself solely to advance the most ancient Empirical Physick; which was afterwards brought to perfection by Philinus, Sera∣pion, and other most famous Physicians, whose Followers always strove to ruine, and reduce to nothing all the other Sects.
Nor must I conceal, that some are of Opi∣nion, That Acron gave the first Beginning to Empirical Physick, whilst others say, That Philinus the Son of Erophilus, and some yet, That Serapion was indeed the Inventor and Founder thereof: Thus by degrees were the different Companies of Physicians multiplied, eve∣ry one with all his force contending to defend his own Party, and overthrow the rest, when in the time of Pompey the Great, there sprang up with Asclepiades another most famous, and most illustrious Faction. This not only ascended to a sublime degree of Eloquence, as some vainly think, but prevailed much also both in Philosophy and Physick, as may well be gathered from the Writings of Celius Aurelianus, and others, who report some of their Sentences. But I my self am at last grown weary of turning over so great a variety of Fa∣ctions and Schools; which since I have purposed to recount, passing over at pre∣sent the less Famous, I shall only touch upon the more considerable, as I have hi∣therto done; and in the mean time I must beg your excuse, if to bring my intent, I shall be somewhat long in my Discourse. I say then, following my begun Harangue,
That not far from, or even in the very time of Pompey the Great, against both the Empirical and Rational Physick, started up Themison with his new Inven∣tions, who, as he rejected the Sentiments of all others, so would also give his School a different Name, calling it from his brief, clear, and well-ordered Discourse, Me∣thodical. But this also did the most Eloquent An∣tonius Musa, the Scholar of Themison, no less by his own Learning and Industry, than by the Authority of Octavius Caesar, cause, Proteus-like, to change its Form. Yet was it not long for all this, ere the Methodical Sect got up again by the as∣sistance of Vectius Valens, Physician to the Emperor Claudius, and Gallant to his Wife the Empress Messalina. Afterwards it mounted to an exceeding height, being in a great measure restored by Thessalus, Physician to Nero, who would therefore have arrogated to himself all the Glory of inventing it, as may be seen in that Epi∣stle, which he writes to the same Empe∣ror, wherein he begins to say thus; I ha∣ving now established a new Sect, which alone has first discovered all Truth: forasmuch as all those, who have heretofore practised Physick, could not find out any thing that
was available either for the curing of Disea∣ses, or the preserving of Health. And in fine, this Sect was not long after com∣pleated, and brought to perfection by So∣ranus of Ephesus. But of how happy a wit, and of what profound Knowledg the Inventors of this sort of Physick were, with the whole Company of innumerable Followers, we may partly perceive by what is related in those Books of Celius Aurelianus, that are come to our hands; and also by what Galen, and other Authors have written of them, tho' sparingly enough. And cer∣tainly Themison was sufficiently commend∣ed by Pliny, and his Name adorned with the glorious Adjunct of Chief Physician. And Thessalus by his Sagacity and Advi∣sedness wrought himself so far into the good Grace and Favor of the Emperor Nero, a Prince (tho' extream cruel, yet) very intelligent, that he became his inti∣mate and familiar Friend; and got so much the better of the Physicians, his Con∣temporaries, that he deserved to have en∣graven on his Sepulchre that famous In∣scription . And a famous Physi∣cian of our time, altho' a Rational and Galenist, could not (as it is related by Prosper Alpinus) forbear in speaking of
him, to say thus much to his Commenda∣tion, I could wish the Books he wrote de Com∣munitatibus & Synchreticis, were now ex∣tant: for by the Fragments which some have cited, he appears to be a most acute and learned Author. But whither I do find my self trans∣ported, without having made mention of the most famous Clinias of Marseilles, who, in despite of Thessalus, and all other Methodists, gave beginning to another sort of new Physick, never before heard of? And why amongst such an heap of Physicians do I let pass the most wary Charmis, who was also of Marseilles, and Founder of another new and strange way of Curing. This man was endowed with such high and noble parts, that he intro∣duced his new and marvellous Doctrine into Rome with most happy Presages, and to such an height arrived the Belief of his rigorous and strange Inventions, that in a small time the chief of the Senate were at his disposal. They governed Fate, saith Pliny of the said Physicians, Into which City suddenly Charmis got, coming from Massilia, and not only condemned the former Physicians, but also perswaded his Patients to bathe in cold water in the midst of winter:
(O the Efficacy of the Art of Medicinal Perswasion, to which all other force of Eloquence must of necessity give place) He plunged his sick Patients into Lakes of cold water; and we have seen ancient per∣sons of Consular dignity shivering and chat∣tering with their teeth, even to ostentation. Thus sprang up, and continued Physick until the time of the most curious Clau∣dius Galen of Pergamus, whose Fame is known to every one. He, joyning to his natural disposition, Geometry, Astrono∣my, Logick, and all other Sciences, which he judged either useful, or necessary to a Physician, and being encouraged by the perswasions of his Father, who, as he himself tells us, was stimulated there∣unto by various Dreams and Visions from the Gods, underwent most grievous fati∣gues by reason of his continual Labours and Watchings, undertaking long and difficult Voyages, subject to many, and those not ordinary Dangers, that he might attain to a more than usual Eminence in that Art, wherein he caused himself to be instructed by the most famous Masters of those times, if we will give credit to his own Relation about it. But he indeed was not crafty and malicious, as some other Greek Physicians, but sincere, and
of very great Morality. In matters of Philosophy he would never tye him∣self to the opinions of any other, always declaiming against that Custom, as blame∣able, and unworthy a Philosopher; and protested, That in following the do∣cuments of Hippocrates (whom he always regarded as the chief and principal Ma∣ster of the Art) that he did not look up∣on his words, as proceeding from a cre∣dible Evidence, but from a Demonstra∣tor only, that is, That he did not give any Credit to the sayings of Hippocra∣tes, but to the Reasons brought by him. And therefore, where he could conveni∣ently do it, he failed not now and then maliciously to discover some of his ble∣mishes; blaming him sometimes, as no great Observer of the propriety of Lan∣guage; and other whiles as extremely dark, and obscure, saying, That he often entred into Labyrinths without knowing the way out again, and that by his te∣dious and vain Stories he sometimes re∣peated the same thing over and over again, not observing the ordinary Method of Discourse: and in fine he forbore not to say, That he was mean, and pittiful, and confused in his Talk. Nay, so great an affection he always bore to Truth, that
where it was convenient for him to do it, he snarles, and carps at as well the anci∣ent Physicians, as those of his own time, altho' they were of very great Repute, and notwithstanding some of them had been before very highly extolled by him∣self for their skill and Knowledge. He unmeasurably jeers Asclepiades, calling him the VVonder-talking Physician, Empty∣pate, teasty, and obstinate, saying, That he understood Logick and Philosophy as much as the Ass and Ox do playing on the Bag-pipe, and that he was sometimes plainly out of his wits. He accuses Archigenes of words, saying, That he often roams about, never keeping to his matter; and that he is always childishly busying himself in the idle Toys of Definitions. He exceedingly bespatters Herophilus, whom he calls Coz∣ner, Jugler, and riotous fellow. And in the like manner he deals with Erasistratus, affirming him to be obscure and confused in his Sentiments. But this is nothing to the Blows he gives Thessalus and Julia∣nus; calling the first Mad-man, and Thes∣salian-Ass, saying, That he was bred up by his Father amongst Women, who card∣ed Wool; and giving the second, whom he makes another Thersites, the Title of Apish-fellow, and brazen-fac'd Conjurer,
likening him in fine to Aesops Ass. And so far did he suffer himself to be trans∣ported with this vain blast, that he brake forth at last into most horrid and impious Blasphemies, foolishly depriving GOD of his Omnipotency, and sharply repre∣hending Holy Moses for having attribut∣ed it to him; ridiculously scoffing at the Doctrines of Moses, and our ever blessed Redeemer CHRIST JESUS, and impudently daring to equallize the Ob∣stinacy of the Medicinal Sects to the lau∣dable and invincible Constancy of the Christian Saints; and yet Galen lived in an Age, when there was scarce any place in the World, but was continually illu∣minated by the Miracles, which were eve∣ry where wrought by the Teachers of our Holy Religion: Nor could he but have heard of that most famous Victory, obtained by Marcus Aurelius over the Marcomanni through the most fervent Prayers of the Christian Legion, called afterwards from the Effect, that followed their Petitions, Legio fulminans: whence it proceeded, that by the Imperial Edict a stop was put to the cruel Persecution of the Christians, and severe Penalties ap∣pointed to be inflicted on those that should accuse them, or inform against them;
upon which account also was erected that famous Turret or Column in Rome, which reserving even to our days the Records of signallized Virtue, is admired by all a∣mongst the Wonders of that glorious City. This Conradus Gesner Considering, could not (however unreasonably parti∣al for him) forbear saying; Rashly and impiously does Galen refuse the Schools of Christ and Moses, as founded upon no De∣monstration, as if the Miracles which are both numerous and divine, of which we read both in the old and new Testament, did not ex∣ceed all Demonstration. Nor doth he here make a stand, but proceeds with many other very grave Expressions to reprove him. But to return from whence the zeal of Piety and Religion had trans∣ported me. After Galen, But few or none so far advanc'd in Fame. Few or none of any great repute were seen in Physick: forasmuch as within a little while after the true and perfect Method of Philosophy, which already began by de∣grees to decay, fell totally from its pristine splendor, and swerving from its right path, those Bastard-philosophers set at naught the true Knowledge of the Causes of Na∣tural Events, and contenting them∣selves
only with simple Logick, or to say better, with witless Sophistry, foolish∣ly followed the phantastical Chimera's of Terms, and prattle, wherewith casting, as we use to say, dust in the eyes of the Multitude, they made them think Glow-worms to be Lanthorns, and would make every one believe, That they knew all, when in Natural things, it cannot certain∣ly be affirmed, that they knew any thing. But in fine this vain shadow of Philoso∣phy, sinking together with the Majesty of the Roman Empire gave the last plunge, drawing with it also Physick, as may be seen in the Books of Oribasius, Paulus, of Aetius, Alexander Trallianus, Actuarius, Philotheus, and other Authors, who scarce did any thing else, but col∣lect, compile, and sometimes unskilful∣fully translate the Writings of others. But in them we may yet see, altho' not so much at large, the usual Contests of the Art, especially in Trallianus, who, being bolder than the rest, more than once manifestly opposes Galen, and be∣sides, prudely enough avers, That it is indeed a wicked thing, not to contradict Galen, when the Truth requires it.
And it has always been observed, that as men have been more or less addicted to Philosophy, proportionably more or less frequent have been the Contests and Wranglings of Physicians; which is a ma∣nifest sign, that these Controversies pro∣ceeded from mens more or less examining the defects of the Art. But at last through the extreme Negli∣gence of the Greeks, who took no care to copy them, together with the choicest pieces of Philosophy, and other Sciences, were lost the most excellent Volumes, till that time extant of Physick; which were in the time of Galen grown to such a number, that the very Reading, as he tells us, of the good and useful Books of Medicaments would have employed a man all the days of his life. And the same disaster did then happen to the Books of Physick, as the Great Bacon of Virulam observes to have befaln those of Philoso∣phy, which being carried along by the rapid stream of time, as by an over-flow∣ing River, the lighter only swam on the top, whilst the weightier, and those of greater value sank down to the bottom. Thus together with Philosophy did Phy∣sick remain depress'd, when the Arabians, who having forsaken their ancient Faith,
to follow the impious doctrines of Mahomet, and rebelliously withdrawn themselves from the Jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, had with victorious arms taken and ran∣sack'd very many rich Provinces of Asia, Africa, and Europe, finding by chance amidst the prey and spoil they got in Greece, some Books, applied themselves with more than ordinary fervor, to the Study; and lighting on the Works of Aristotle, and some of his Commentators, as also on those of Hippocrates, and Galen, they equally attended to profit themselves both in Philosophy and Physick: But being somewhat of a servile and superstitious temper and disposition, they durst scarce ever look into the Book of Nature, and searching therein for the Truth of natu∣ral Things, curiously examine and en∣quire, whether, what they had them∣selves experimented, did punctually agree with what those learned men had before described; but like a poor flock of Goats, they unwisely, if not madly followed them as Guides, blindly retaining all the parts of Physick, and especially Anatomy, just as they found it: whence through the fault of the Translators, or perhaps of the Originals themselves, they ran into many Errors. Notwithstanding from those
small and dusky Lights of Philosophy they contracted so much Spirit, that they dared ever in matters of very great im∣port to front both the Grecian Masters; on one side, to say nothing of other mat∣ters, restraining the use of Phlebotomy, and on the other as much enlarging it by letting even Children blood, little or no∣thing regarding that Galen and Hippocra∣tes had manifestly taught the contrary; against whose Sentiments also they used Purgations, where there were no Inflam∣mations, the Humors in the Distempers being yet crude. Besides this, they made use of Sena, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Rheubarb, and other new Drugs not here∣tofore known to the Ancients. They in∣vented new ways of compounding Me∣dicines, and having, I know not whether from Egypt, or elsewhere gotten some Vo∣lumes of the most ancient Chimistry, en∣deavouring according to their ability to restore it, they enriched the Shops with many strange and unusual Compositions; and some of them also with the same Art attained to philosophize about the things appertaining to Physick. Whence their Prince Avicen departed so far from the steps of Galen, as occasioned Pietro Messia (not without reason) to say; That the
Practise and manner of curing used by Avi∣cen, is so far different from that of Galen, and the Ancients, that it seems quite ano∣ther thing. But the Arabians not content to have deviated from the path, kept by the Gre∣cian Masters, often also assaulted Galen with the same Weapons of Reproaches and Contumelies, as himself had former∣ly used to vilifie and disgrace the most an∣cient Physicians. And amongst the rest Avi∣cen in Terms certainly villanous, and bar∣barous, saies, That the discourse of Galen is contrary to that of Hippocrates, and that it is full of infinite Errors, and im∣pudent Lyes; and that he cast his Eyes only on the Branches and Sprigs, never prying into the Roots of Sciences; that he had little or no Wit, or Sagacity in any thing; and that professing himself a Philosopher, he nevertheless used childish and vulgar Reasons. Whereupon that famous Galenist Vallesius exclaims thus; Avicen in many things on purpose differs from Galen, contradicting him arrogantly, not only in contemplative, but practical Opi∣nions. After him followed Averroes, who not only blames, and vituperates Galen, but also severely reproves his own Country∣man
Avicen, exceedingly wondring at his having taken for his Guide a Grecian Babler, who was not of parts sufficient, ever to arrive at the Knowledge of Na∣tural things. Whereunto he adds, That Galen was so weak and unskilful a Lo∣gician, that Syllogisms framed by him, were often found false in their principles, and faulty in their figures, and that his discourse was like to the idle Talk and Quibbles of Buffoons and Jesters. Nor were the Arabians less contentious, and divided among themselves, than the Greeks had formerly been, altho' they did not after the manner of those, separate themselves into parties, as may be easily discerned in the Works of Rhasis, Avicen, Averroes, and other their Writers. And thus they went continually on, philoso∣phizing, and advancing in their Studies, when by the command of the Caliph, and other Mahometan Princes, their Schools were all shut up, and good Learning pro∣hibited; and this by reason of the barbarous Government, they having long observed, that the Sciences, especially Philosophy, opening the Eyes of the peoples Mind, made them easily perceive the ridiculous Forgeries, and childish Simplicities of the Alcoran: Wherefore with Philosophy,
Physick also decayed in an instant among the Arabians, and all Literature gave up the Ghost. But before this came to pass, by the means and diligence of the Em∣peror Charles the Great, the Arabian Au∣thors together with those few Greeks, which were then published in Arabick, were Translated into Latin, however bar∣barous and unpolish'd, such as was used in those most unhappy times. And thus in afflicted and desolate Italy began the in∣terrupted, and decayed Studies of Physick to rise up again. But how violently then of a sudden the Contests and Disputes of the Italian Wits were awakened, he that is desirous to know, may read in Pietrod' Albano, Gentile da Foligno, Taddeo, and Nicolo Fiorentini, Dino, and Tomasso dal Garbo, Giacomo da Forli, Ʋgoda Siena, Giacomo delle Parti, and may other Wri∣ters. But afterwards the purity and elegancy of the Latin Tongue being in more quiet times arrived at first in our most delight∣ful Countrey of Italy, and then in the other provinces of Europe, and the mel∣lifluous Greek Language coming about the same time from Greece, then for the most part subjugated and harrassed by the Ottoman Princes, Physicians began by
little and little to read the Greek Authors in their primitive Idiom, faithfully tran∣slating them from their Original into La∣tin. And then more fiercely than ever sprang up the Contests of Physicians, which grew exceeding hot between those, who on the one side would follow their Galen and Hippocrates, and others, who on the contrary in defence of the Arabi∣ans vigorously opposed the Grecian Au∣thors. And because there are yet to be found in the hands of the Curious some of their detracting Writings, I have thought it not amiss, out of one of them, intituled, Nobilis Socii Salodiensis praecertatio pro Arabum, & proborum medicorum tutela, as briefly as I may, and by way of Abridg∣ment to rehearse some things, which may serve as a Sample of the rest. This Treatise, altho' it undertakes the defence of the Barbarian Physicians, yet appears not in the least to be barbarously written; and the Author thereof seems to me to be an able man, and very well seen in the Doctrines of Galen and Hippocrates, whereof joyning together many Senten∣ces, he with exquisite artifice frames long, and well-ordered discourses. He begins ingenuously, and with a mind free from passion, induced, as he saies, by the love
of Truth alone to contend with certain Physicians of his own Time, who, either to shew themselves skill'd in the Learning of the Greeks, or through the over-much affection they bare the Grecian Authors, or to let others see, that they walked not in the common Road, made it their pro∣fession to oppose, as the Proverb has it, the Pandects, and vilifying, and contume∣liously treating the Arabian Physicians, endeavoured on the contrary with the highest praises to extol the Grecians unto Heaven. And it seems, that their first Motive thereunto, was only the secret ill Will, Anger, and Spight, which they bore towards most barbarous and foreign Nations; which they so far improved, that contrary to the express Laws of good Manners, and the precepts of their own Master Hippocrates, they impudent∣ly belched forth against them the greatest Villanies, that the Malice of such silly Wretches could invent, calling them now Cheats, anon Shallow-pates, and often branding them with like Imputations. Having prefaced in this manner, he pro∣ceeds to his discourse, what is by these men in behalf of the Greeks objected against the Arabian Physicians: viz. That the clear and overflowing Fountain of
Physick was at first preserved pure and without mixture by its Authors, but fal∣ling afterwards into the hands of these, soon became troubled and muddy; and that those were the true Masters and In∣ventors of that Art, and these Barbarian Caitiffs only Translators, who without taking any pains, vainly boasted of other mens Works, as if they were their own. Then going on, he saith, That they ac∣cused the Arabians, for that in translating the Greeks from their Originals, not well comprehending their Sentiments, they filled their Writings with Confusion and Contention; and in Conclusion, he adds, That the Censurers of his time, prosecut∣ing the Followers of the Arabians, as standing upon most weak and unsure Foundations, or being only covetous af∣ter mony, accused them for inventing so many, tho' rich and costly Syrups. But the aforesaid Author, desirous by a strict Examination of them, to refel these Accusations, brought against the Arabians, first explains the meaning of that Saying, to wit, That the Greeks were indeed the Masters, and the Arabians no more but Scholars, and Translators in physick. Hereby, saith he, they either mean, that the Greeks were of all Nations
the first Inventors thereof, and the Ara∣bians only Builders upon the old foun∣dation, which, as he tells us, needs far∣ther Confirmation before it be granted, since he manifestly proves by the Autho∣rity both of the Greeks themselves, and of the Latin Writers, That they, to wit, the Greeks, first learn'd it from the Aegypti∣ans, or some other people; or else their opinion is, That the Greeks by putting the last hand to it, brought it to such a degree of perfection, that it is impossible to ad∣vance it any higher. And this said, he fell again anew to distinguishing, telling us, That hereby they intended, either that by every one of the Greeks, physick was raised to the utmost height whereun∣to it possibly could arrive; or that they had all of them contributed their assistance thereunto; or that some one amongst so many Masters had performed this Ex∣ploit. The first he avers to be manifest∣ly false, and to have been in many pla∣cs confess'd so to be by their Prince Galen himself. The second, he saies, can never be granted to be true, by many and evi∣dent reasons demonstrating it to be most false, which were it otherwise, yet would it be exceeding difficult, nay even impos∣sible ever to learn from the Grecian
Masters the most confused Art of Physick; there being so many Volumes differently written by them, that a man cannot run them over with his Eye, much less atten∣tively study them, tho' he should employ therein every day of his life. It remains then to say, That one alone amongst so many Greeks has brought Medicine to its chiefest Splendor, and forasmuch as we are assured by the Authority of Galen, that all others before him were often en∣tangled and misled: and therefore, as be∣ing imperfect, and without much Know∣ledg, not greatly to be regarded. This most magnificent Honour and dignity must be attributed therefore to the most profound and more than human Wit of Claudius Galenus of Pergamus, esteemed commonly the chief amongst all the Gre∣cian Masters; and that, not only by the Universal Consent of his Partizans, but also in his own proper Judgment, which he was not ashamed in many places vain∣gloriously to affirm. Here our Censurer, losing his patience, makes his Avicen brisk∣ly enter the Lists against Galen. He in∣troduces the Greek, exposing his reasons, and declaring his honourable Quality, and this he does in Galens own Words, col∣lected and tack'd together out of his own
Writings, in which he extremely glories of his Birth, Education, Studies, extraor∣dinary progress in the Encyclopaideia of all Sciences, and divine Knowledg in phy∣sick, relating in fine, what he with Gre∣cian, and infinite Brags, vauntingly tells us of his own Qualifications. On the con∣trary with simple, modest, and humble words he declares the Life, Manners, and Studies of his Avicen: and as he makes the Arabian far exceed the Greek in Birth, and good Qualities, so not at the first glance alone, but by penetrating farther into the matter, he will plainly let us see, which of the two excels in Knowledge. And here he begins strictly to sift and examine Galens Works: And altho' he tells us, That he will elsewhere clearly and di∣stinctly discover his Errors and Impo∣stures, promising to collect them into one entire Volume, yet since he judges it ne∣cessary to his present purpose, he proceeds to give an account of some of the greatest and most conspicuous, saying, That how∣ever gross and palpable they are, yet will not the Galenists discern them, when for the least Straw that lies in their way, they presently take snuff, proudly vilifying and reproaching poor Avicen.
He says then, That Galen, however esteemed a most profound and acute Phi∣losopher, yet in that part of Philosophy which is deservedly held to be of greatest import, and value, to wit, the Moral, he had as little Judgment and Understand∣ing, as a Blind-man has in Colours; and that this was the reason he so little practis∣ed it. First he demonstrates him to have been most ungrateful to his parents, and not being ashamed to lay open to the whole World the Faults and evil Qualities of his Mother, saying, That she was so proud and peevish, that often falling into excess, she used unmercifully to outrage her Servants; and that she behaved her self more frowardly, and cross-grainedly to her Husband, than ever did Zantippe to the most patient Socrates. Hereto he adds, That he is extremely vain-glorious, and an unmeasurable Boaster of his own Excellencies: and this may without any other proof be easily learnt from his writ∣ings, he having filled them all with Praises and Encomiums of himself. And indeed, what greater vanity, and pre∣sumption can there be, than to affirm, as he doth, That none can fully compre∣hend the meaning of Hippocrates without the assistance of his most profound Com∣ments?
and that he alone had given phy∣sick its ultimate perfection? and that the Gods, as if they were concerned, and zea∣lous for his Honour, had taught him many Medicines, as he brags, when he treats of the Nerves of the Eyes, and of the Cure of wounded Nerves in general? and that he could discourse for a whole day on the most obscure and difficult Que∣stion, having often done it to his great commendation, when taken on a sudden? But of what Honesty, Constancy, or Justice, can he ever boast, having, as he himself tells us, given a sick Child a Me∣dicine, which according to his own Do∣ctrine, and Opinion, must have undoubt∣edly kill'd him, as it did? Certainly he cannot but be infinitely blamed for so do∣ing by any one, that has the least sense of Humanity and Compassion. Nor does it any whit avail him to cover this barbarous action with light excuses, as that he did not herein follow his own Inclinations, but was forced thereunto by fear; since he ought, couragiously resisting, and refu∣sing so to do, to have acted according to Justice and Reason. But our Author, having thus shewn him to be blame-worthy for his want of Morality, proceeds to acquaint us with his
Learning, saying, That he was as well skill'd in Logick, as a Tortoise in flying, or a Cow in dancing. For setting him∣self, at his beginning, to divide Words into significative, and insignificative, and alledging for the latter the common Ex∣ample of Blictri and Syndapsus, he imme∣diately subjoyns, that these are no words. And besides this, all Logicians acknow∣ledging rationality to be the ultimate diffe∣rence that constitutes man in his Essence, he on the contrary stifly holds, that Babes are not rational, but in time will be; which in good earnest is to say, that they are not true Men, but hereafter will be so: which most notorious Error he fell into, for that seeing them prattle confusedly, the Sot had not the Wit to consider, that Ra∣tionality did not necessarily imply Dis∣course in actu, but in potentia only, as the term is. Nay, what is more, this great man could not arrive to comprehend, That Rational and Irrational are terms absolutely contradictory; and therefore he foolishly and childishly affirms, That the Brute Beasts, which are all of them undoubtedly void of Reason, are more or less partakers thereof, calling man Ra∣tional only by way of Excellency, or per , as he has it. And from this
ves another Error, no less gross  excusable, nay, perhaps greater than  ormer: That Asses, altho the dullest and sluggishest of all Beasts, have yet full and perfect knowledg of this most difficult Aphorism of the Physicians, Contraria contrariis curantur. But who, for Gods sake, is there among the Logicians, which does not fully approve the saying of Ari∣stotle, That from Truth follows only Truth; whereas from Falsity Truth and Falsity do equally proceed? And yet the most acute Galen, manifestly opposing it, gives us cause to believe that he did not sufficient∣ly understand it. But what praise did he gain by that his most ingenuous Invention of the fourth Figure, gloriously found out by him to the shame of Aristotle, and the other Master in Logick? Certainly it has by all Logicians been disapproved, and with reason rejected, as confused and un∣fit for Disputation. From these frivolous Toys of Logick our Censurer proceeds to examine him in matters of greater import, such as is Natu∣ral Philosophy. And he thinks Galen to be in Philosophy more thick & muddy than puddle-water; and this he manifests by ma∣ny proofs: whereof I shall rehearse only a few, not to deviate too far from my prin∣cipal
intent. Galen then says, and con∣stantly affirms, that Plants have full and intire Sense, and an internal principle of Motion within themselves; that Motion cannot be comprehended of us by the corporal Senses, but by Reason only; that Crabs and Beetles have no heads, those Animals only in his opinion, having an Head, which have soft Eyes, and not those, whose Eyes are covered with an hard and cristalline shell; and yet the contra∣ry is manifestly seen in Grashoppers, Lo∣custs, and such like Creatures. Besides this, he says, That the Head is not made by the Brain, that in Volatils the Neck and Feet are equally distant from the Heart; that the brain in Animals has need of somewhat to move it, which are the Feet, and that the Feet on the contrary have need of Sense, which is given them by the brain; and that the one without the other is of no use or value; not obser∣ving, that Eels, Lampreys, and such like Fish, altho' they have no Feet, have yet Brains. And here the wary Champion of the Arabians opportunely retorts upon Galen the same Weapons wherewith the other thought to have wounded Avicen: And since, saith he, mention begins to be made of the Brain, before we leave that dis∣course,
we shall add, that Galen (in the same manner as they reproach'd Avicen) wanted Brains himself. But how expert Galen was in Philosophy, any one may easily discern from his discourse concerning Hair; he observing, that the Hairs of the Eye-lids and Eye-brows are always at a stay, and do not encrease and grow, as do those of the Head, and other parts of the Body, and willing to give a reason thereof, saies, That, as it happens in dry and barren grounds that the Grass does not grow for want of sufficient Moisture, so the Hairs of the Eye-lids and Eye-brows by reason of the little or no Nourishment, which they draw from the other parts, cannot come to any great length. Now who in God's Name, does not see, that, if this were the cause thereof, the Hairs of the Head must much less increase and grow, as being root∣ed in an harder and drier skin, than that of the Eye-lids? And it appears to our Author, that the nourishment of these Hairs insensibly exhales and evaporates through the exceeding small Pores of the Eyes. The most sharp-sighted Galen like∣wise saies, That provident Nature has given us Hair for an Ornament to our Body: But if it were so, to what purpose do they grow in those parts, which Mo∣desty
obliges us not to name? Besides that Nature would greatly have injured Wo∣men by depriving them in some parts thereof. And in fine, Galen, contrary to the Opinion of all Philosophers, holds, That Flame, besides its natural Motion, which is always upwards, has also another which makes it sometimes encline down∣wards; not considering, that Flame ne∣ver has any such Motion, but when it is forced and constrained thereto by Art. Nor does the Censurer of Galen stop here, but passing on, examins his Do∣ctrine, where it seems of greatest weight, that is, in things appertaining to Physick. And here he proves, That altho' Galen seriously employed all his Industry and Wit therein, yet he penetrated so little in∣to it, and committed so many Errors therein, that it would be impossible to reckon them up distinctly. And setting aside how much his ill Nature obliged him to leave no way untried, that he might obscure the Fame of the Great Hippocrates, saying, That he observed not the signs of the Pulses, nor made any mention of many Feavours, with other like frivolous and vain Objections, where∣with he does not so much, as in the least, rase his skin, altho' he thought to have
grievously wounded him; that which seems to be most important, is, that set∣ting himself designedly to comment on the Writings of Hippocrates, he seems in many places not to understand them, often and in many places entangling himself, as the Censurer distinctly shews, tho' I, not to be over-tedious, pass them over. He sometimes refutes the Discourse of Hippo∣crates, but afterwards giving himself the Ly, elsewhere commends it, thus mani∣festly shewing his little Firmness and Con∣stancy. He brags moreover, That he had given certain and sure presages for the Knowledg of all Diseases: but if others will, yet his most cautious Reprover will not in the least believe him herein. For from those few Cures, which, that his Fame might thereby live for ever, he relates himself to have performed, it is manifestly seen, that he never aim'd aright, but was rather greatly mistaken in the Knowledg of the Distempers, and their Causes: as in that of the Wife of Boetus, and of the Youth, to whom, contrary to the advice of Hip∣pocrates, he foolishly gave Meat in the Augmentation of his Feavor, to the Pa∣tients mortal danger. But peradventure he shewed himself more silly, and mad-man-like,
when to regulate the Cure of certain Diseases, he foolishly sought after the Interpretation of idle Dreams. But above all his other Follies that seems the greatest, which he committed in Curing the Wife of Boetus; and it is a wonder, that he met not with that Eternal disgrace and Reproach, which he but too much deserved for having shewn himself so childish and ignorant, running perhaps into as many Errors, as he divised Me∣dicines. And finally this sage Writer concludes against Galen, That if the great Number of his Volumes were sifted, there would in this vast Bulk be found more Bran than Flower; all that he writes, being paltry Stuff, and idle Prattle, full of vain and high Boastings, often intermix'd with di∣gressions and Tales, void both of Wit and Sense; and that they are in fine a confu∣sed Miscellany of unwarrantable Do∣ctrines, wherein he often enough re∣peats over the same thing, altho' he open∣ly protests, that he would never do it. I pass over many other, even infinite Er∣rors, whereof Galen is found guilty by his subtil Accuser, because I think enough has been said to make it easily compre∣hended what, and how great were the
Contests between the Followers of the A∣rabians, and those of the Greeks. But whilst the Disputes of the Physici∣ans were prosecuted with the greatest heat, on a sudden rose up the most inge∣nious Theophrastus Paracelsus, who, re∣newing the most ancient Method of Phi∣losophy, which had for a long time been laid aside, began attentively to read the great Book of Nature, that he might therein learn the reason of Natural Eve∣nements. He, intermixing Chimistry, wherein he was very skilful, with Phy∣sick, and therewith, as with an useful and fit Instrument, searching into the choicest of Natures Secrets, very success∣fully undertook to cure the most despe∣rate Diseases with Remedies which he had found out by his Knowledg in this Art. It cannot easily be believed, to what an height within a certain space of time his new Sect arrived, either through the new and most curious way opened by him to true Philosophy, or through the agree∣able Pleasantness and Efficacy of his power∣ful Medicines, or through his happy suc∣cess in Diseases till that time thought in∣curable. And the Fame of his skill being now generally spread over Germany, France, and other Provinces of the Chri∣stian
World, his Doctrines were fervent∣ly embraced by men well versed in Scien∣ces. And without doubt the advance of his Glory would have been greater, had he not purposely wrapt up and concealed his Doctrine in obscure Aenigmes, and ambiguous Allegories usual with Chimi∣cal Authors. What and how great were afterwards the Contests and Debates, as between those that were only Galenists and only Paracelsians, so between those who may be called Paracelso-Galenists, and Galeno-Chimists, is peradventure so well known to every one, that I may well for∣bear to say any thing thereof. And tho' the Galenists had enough to do with their extern Enemies, yet were they not, as the Books of that Age testifie, very well united, but oftentimes turned their Ani∣mosities upon themselves, biting and tear∣ing one another, like so many mad Dogs. But whilst Paracelsus happily introdu∣ced vital Anatomy both into Philosophy and Physick; the Anatomy also of Ani∣mals was again brought to light out of the Ruines of Oblivion, wherein it had for a long time lain wholly buried. And the first Restorer thereof was Andreas Ves∣salius of Bruxells, a man certainly worthy
of Immortal Fame. He, questionless a greater Anatomist than Herophilus, having accustomed himself from a Child to dis∣sect Rats, and other small Creatures, be∣ing come to years of more maturity, by degrees search'd into the several parts of human Bodies, and relying upon no other Testimony, but what was given him by his own Eyes, and his own Hands, clearly manifested to every one, in what great Errors the ancient Anatomists had lived, and above all, Galen, whom he taxes with an hundred and an hundred Faults. It is strange and wonderful to hear, how unmeasurably he was therefore persecuted and outraged by the Physicians, his Con∣temporaries; and how the Disputes in Physick thereby more and more increased, there being some, who would right or wrong defend and maintain the most evi∣dent Faults of their Master Galen, not at all regarding, that they thereby thwarted and went against his first and principal Sentiment, who rather chose to incur the danger of Erring with his own Senses, than blindly to give credit to what he had found related concerning human Bodies by the ancient Anatomists, whom he some∣times, tho' wrongfully, blames for their Observations about the Entrals of men,
because he had seen it otherwise in those of Monkies. But amongst the fierce and implacable enemies of Vessalius, that famous Parisian Physician Jacobus Silvius would needs sig∣nalize himself, and desirous to contend with him, violently assaults him, changing his name Vessalius into Vaesanus, that is, mad, sti∣ling his book a most unworthy, villanous and perplex'd Miscellany of Errors, and an abominable Dream of filthy and wicked Instructions. Then turning to the Readers, he with Prayers and Protestations exhorts and conjures them furiously to tear it in pieces, and burn it. He beseeches also the Emperor then being, severely to pu∣nish the Author, whom he terms a Monster of Folly and Ingratitude, an Exemplar of Insolence and Villany, base∣ly born, and worse educated in his Court, saying, It would be a deed of Charity, if he totally made him away, and strangled him, that he might not with his poison∣ous and pestilential Breath to infect and corrupt the Remainder of Europe. Now what more, I pray, could he have done, had poor Vessalius been guilty of High-Treason not only against Monsieur Galen, but even against Caesar himself; or if he had betrayed and sold Buda, or Alba Re∣galis
to the Turks; or if his Writings had been like to those of Philip Melancthon and impious Luther? yet so far did the Calumnies and Diffamations of the envi∣ous Silvius, and other rascally Galenists prevail with the Emperor, who was in all things else a most just Prince, that in fine Vessalius unfortunately lost his Favour, and was banish'd the Court. Thus was that Saying verified, which Dioclesian, not yet advanced to the Purple, often had in his mouth; Saepe bonus, saepe cautus decipitur Imperator. Not long after it appeared, that the Frowardness and Spite of Silvius passed into Andreas Laurentius, which made him thus also break out against the innocent Vessalius; Against this man let us, as they say, put on the Lyons skin, and tame all those monsters, which he has brought forth out of a Spirit of Contradicti∣on, so let him undergo the due reward of his Arrogancy and Ingratitude against his Master Galen. And perhaps that our Reader of Physick, who put into his printed Conclusions these most elegant words, The Circulation of the Blood, to∣gether with Harvey the Author, we utterly reject and explode; would, if it had been in his power, have done as much for the great Harvey with the King and Parlia∣ment of England.
But other learned men little or nothing regarding the disgrace befaln Vessalius, but rather as is usual with all great and generous Souls, in whom it is always seen, that Difficulty whets desire. being rendred more couragious and eager by the opposition, set themselves with their utmost endeavour to follow the same Track, such as were Felix Platerus, Gasper Bauhinus, Gabriel Fallopius, Volcherus, Coi∣ter, Realdus Columbus, Fabritius de Aqua pendente, Adrianus Spigelius, and many other most skilful and industrious Ana∣tomists, who seemed to have arrived to the highest pitch of that Art, nothing remaining for a farther search. When behold Gasper Asellius and William Har∣vey (who by the universal Consent of all learned men is reckoned amongst the greatest, and most expert Anatomists of our, or former Ages) published their new and glorious Inventions, being followed by the noblest Company of Physicians that ever were in the World, of whom I must not omit the most famous, as Jo∣annes Heurnius, Giovanni Picchetti, Thomas Wharton, Ludovicus Bilsius, Nathanael
Heighmore, Francis Glisson, Thomas Bar∣tholinus, Regnerus Graaf, Carlo Fracassa∣ti, Richard Lower, Lorenzo Bellini, and many others, whom for brevity sake I pass over, all worthy of immortal praise and Renown. Yet must I not but make mention of the most ingenious Marcellus Malpighius, The chiefest glory of Felsinian streams. who thirsting after Honour, does so accu∣rately practise Anatomy in Plants, that nothing more can be desired in that Art. And in my opinion, it may freely be con∣fessed, that within the narrow compass of a few years there have been more Won∣ders discovered in the bodies of Animals, than were formerly known in the long course of five and thirty Ages: without my taking the boldness to say, That the finding out alone of the Circulation of the Blood, first discovered in this our Italy, which has always (O great Infelicity of ours) Fruitful in bringing forth, in cherishing ungrateful— of her Children, and afterwards fully
established and divulged in England, far exceeds the Invention of all Antiquity put together. But of the Questions, Quarrels, Contentions, Debates, Disputes, and Skirmishes, that did thereupon arise amongst Physicians, I do at present for∣bear any mention; because I well know, we do still with our Eyes behold them. And perhaps it is manifest to every one, how that Primerose, Parisani, and Riola∣nus Junior (who was in all things else an acute Anatomist) pertinaciously main∣taining the Non-circulation of the Blood, being scoff'd at, and baffled by the most famous Scholars of Europe, were forced at last shamefully to recant their Follies; and that Vopiscus Fortunatus Pemplius, hav∣ing first briskly opposed the Circulation of the Blood, being afterwards convinced and refuted by the Great Renatus des Car∣tes, and John Wallis more accurately pub∣lishing his Works anew, he finally sang this famous Palinody; At first the Invention pleased me not, as by my Discourses and Writings I have publickly testified: But the more I laboured to refute and condemn it, the more I condemn, and refute my self; his reasons being not only so perswasive, but com∣pulsive. I know very well, that there are at this day some, who, considering the reproach and dishonour that befel Prime∣rose
and Parisani, and seeing all those learned men, which either publish Books in Print, or with esteem read Lectures in their Universities, unanimously do admit of these Modern Discoveries, and therefore not daring in the presence of Scholars to contradict any of them, do yet amongst those, who are wholly ignorant of Ana∣tomy, covertly mutter and murmure, im∣pudently presuming to say, That so ma∣ny different things cannot any way be in the bodies of Animals; that, if they were there, their Galen was not so simple or foolish, but that he, long before these Modern Inventors appeared in the World, would distinctly have discerned and de∣scribed them: forasmuch as being most accurate and ingenious, and having given all Physick its last and perfect Comple∣ment, it is not credible, that he should in this alone have so grossly erred: wherefore it is not necessary for us to beat our Brains about these new Inventions in Medicine, seeing we ought to rely upon his Labours, and satisfie our selves with a full under∣standing of his Sentiments, Reasons, and Oracles, so they call his most Witless and vain Expressions. And in fine they con∣clude, That we ought blindfoldly to be∣lieve Galen, and some other ancient Au∣thors, even tho' our Senses sometimes op∣pose,
that these are often wont to deceive us, which those men will not do, who, having spent their whole life in Study and Experi∣ence, have all along been by every one reput∣ed as the Gods of Physick. But for my part, I shall not, to convince, and undeceive them, give my self the trouble manifestly to shew them (as I could well do) that do give more credit to authority & rea∣sons, than to our Senses, is the most foolish Obstinacy that could ever fall into the mind of man: forasmuch as I imagine that to get clear of such Straits, they would reject the clearest Demonstrations of the Modern Phi∣losophers. I shall therefore only briefly let them know, how little they understand the very Sentiments of their Masters. And per∣haps they never much regarded that most true Saying of their own Aristotle; That we ought to give credit to Reason, if the things of Reason agree with Experience: Nor yet that other Saying of the same Author; That to forsake the Guidance of our Senses, to be blind¦ly led by Reason, is a great Argument of the weakness of our Wit. And was not Galen also of the same mind? See here his own Words; all those are rather to be esteemed foolish, than wise, who being able fully to com∣prehend, and perceive things by their Senses, will yet avow, that we cannot learn but by De∣monstrations alone. And in another place
the same Author saith; The Doctrine of those that rely upon the Sayings of others, is tyran∣nical, and full of Confusion and Debates. And in Gods Name let them read also the same Sentiment in their Avicen; and if they be not yet satisfied, let them go, and learn of the Prince of Divines, Joannes Scotus, where he saith, That all those who will not credit their Senses, justly deserve to be burnt. And let them know farther, that whoever has the least spark of Reason, of what Sect so∣ever he be, must needs say, as doth that great Light of Galenical and Hippocratical Physick, Nicolaus Leonicenus; We ought not so far to foregoe our own Judgments, as always to follow the foot-steps of others, and to be certain our selves of nothing: For this would be to see with other mens Eyes, to hear with other mens Ears, and smell with other mens Noses, and to under∣stand with other mens Intelligence, and to be∣lieve our selves no other than meer stones, to commit all things to the assertions of others, and not to believe our selves able to make any true discussion in doubtful matters And another of Galens Followers exceed∣ingly condemning this same pertinacy, relates a very pleasant adventure, to wit, That a cer∣tain publick Reader, long time versed, and grown old in the Books of Aristotle, being one day by chance present at an Anatomy, and clearly seeing, that the Vena cava takes
its Original from the innumerable Threds or Roots which are in the Liver, full of wonder and astonishment, As one that never beheld a thing incredible. confess'd indeed, by what his Senses shewed him, the Vena cava must descend from the Liver; but that he ought not therefore by crediting his Senses to contradict his Master Aristotle, who constantly affirms, all the veins in mans body to have their beginning from the Heart; because, said he, it is much more easie for our Senses to be sometimes deceived, than for the Great and Soveraign Aristotle ever to have faln into any Error. And so much Power had his Obstinacy over him, that being in the company of certain learned men, shewn by one of them a little Suet a∣bout the Heart, which melted by the faint heat of a Candle, to defend his Aristotle, by whom this is denied, he durst to say, that what he saw, was not Fat, And certainly pleasant enough is that al∣so which is related by the most famous Re∣di, that one, who was deeply read in the Writings of the Peripateticks, because he would not be compell'd to confess, that the Stars, and other new things discovered in the Heavens by the great Galileo, were true, re∣fused the assistance of the Telescope; and that another, yet more obstinate, would not con∣descend to see him open one of those little
Frogs, which in Summer are seen in the dusty High-ways, for fear of being obliged to confess, that they are not engendred in the instant of the Drops being incorporated with the Dust. But where shall I have room to relate the Disputes and Contests which grew up in Rome about the Medicinal Do∣ctrine of that famous Physician Prosper Martianus? Who being endued with un∣common Learning, and prudent Sagacity, and gloriously employing the utmost of his Ability and Industry in searching into the Doctrine of Hippocrates, manifestly shews, that Galen oftentimes either did not, or would not comprehend the true Sentiments of that venerable old man. And Petro Castel∣li, avouching the same thing, tells us besides, That Galen took the same course in explain∣ing the most learned Opinions of the divine Plato: Galen either understood not, or would not understand Hippocrates or Plato, to give the greater esteem to his own Writings. Then he defends the most wise Old Man from his Reproofs and Taunts, especially about the Causes of Feavers, constantly affirming, not only that Hippocrates never prescribed the letting of Blood in Feavers, but where the excessive internal Inflammation required it, as was also before him fully observed by Hie∣ronymus Cardanus; but farthemore asserting, That according to the Doctrine of Hippo∣crates,
a Feaver is one of those Distempers, which in nowise admits of Phlebotomy. These and other good and sound Doctrines the learned Martianus wisely manifesting, revived with them the decayed, and almost extin∣guish'd Sect of his dear Hippocrates. But I know not how I have hitherto for∣bore to mention one, who, altho a woman, deserves yet to be reckoned amongst the greatest Scholars, I mean the Lady Donna O∣liva Sabuco, She childish sports, and Female Exercise Ev'n from her tender years did still despise To spin, or to the Needle set her hand, Of masculine learning studious, she disdain'd. Now she being abundantly furnished with more than masculine Wit, and Understand∣ing, couragiously imployed both her Brains and Mind in the Investigation of Natural things; and advancing in her Studies, she set her wits upon things of greatest use, and to the end Spain, and the Whole might receive some benefit thereby, she wonderful∣ly gave beginning to a new and most inge∣nious way of Curing. And writing a Letter to the most august Monarch Philip the Second, of Eternal and Glorious Memory, she thus displays her Wit. It is as plain as the light of the Sun, That the ancient Physick was in an Er∣ror, according as it is read and practised in its principal Fundamentals, for that the ancient
Philosophers and Physicians neither understood or reach'd the true nature upon which Physick is founded, and from whence it draws its original; of which, not only the understanding Christian Physicians may be Judges, but also those that have any prospect into other Faculties, being persons of Wit and Judgment. And a little after. He that cannot comprehend or understand it, let him leave it to others that are to come, or let him believe Experience, and not the ancient Physick. Therefore my Petition is just, that these my Followers may be approved for one year, since they have tryed the Rules of Galen and Hip∣pocrates for these 2000 years, and have found the Effect so inconsiderable, and the Ends so un∣certain, as is to be seen every day, and was late∣ly observ'd in the past Epidemic Catarrhs, Spot∣ted Feavers, Small Pox, and Pestilences, and many other Infirmities; in the Cure of which, that sort of Physick is so ineffectual, that scarce two in a thousand live out the natural Limits of life; but all die violent deaths of some Disease or other, without any Remedy from ancient Physick. And in her Dialogue of True Physick: You cannot deny (Mr. Doctor) but that the Physick you use, is uncertain, various, and fallacious, and that its End and Effects are false and du∣bious, whereas we see the ends and effects of other Arts to be certain, and true without variation; as in Arithmetick, Geometry, Musick, Ascro∣logy, &c. which bring to pass the end and bene∣fit
which they purpose. Which end fails, as you see in Physick, being so deceitful, uncertain, and various. Whence it must follow, that this Art fails in its first grounds and foundations, because it produces not fruit conformable to what it pro∣poses; so that when we expect Currans, and deli∣cious Apples, it brings forth nothing but Galls and Medlars. And a little further, maintaining the same Opinion, she saies; You cannot deny, Mr. Do∣ctor, the Inconstancy of Physick, and how many alterations have been made in it, and that the Art was for a long time forbidden in Rome, where those wise people gave no credit to it, nor would seek for Cure from the hands of the Phy∣sician, for the reasons I have said, which are of great efficacy. Neither did the Saracens, nor those of China admit Physicians. And those grave and ancient Authors themselves Cry out, that Life is short, Art long, Judgment difficult, and Experience dangerous. And Hippocrates, That no certain and perfect assurance in Phy∣sick can be attained to. Nor can you deny, Mr. Doctor, but that they were men as we are, or that their Sayings were not above the Condition of Men, but that they spoke according to Nature, which aspired no higher than what the com∣mon sense of man could reach. Therefore, saies Pliny, there is no Art in the World so inconstant as that of Physick, which changes every day. The Lady Donna Oliva goes on farther,
whose excellent parts is not my intent now to sum up, and reckon, since the doing thereof would hold me o∣ver long. I shall content my self therefore to mention, that some of the most famous Authors have laid claim to many things, falsely boasting, themselves to have been the first Discoverers of them (as about the manner, which Nature uses in distributing the Aliment to all the Parts of an animated Body) whereof she had full know∣ledge long before, and gloriously publish'd them in her Books. After her there arose in our Italy a new System of Ra∣tional Physick, which was the laudable Invention of that famous Philosopher, and Doctor in Divinity, Tho∣mas Campanella. He never practised Physick, but yet would search into the most secret Arcanum's thereof: And as it was easie for his more than ordinary Wit to separate his Philosophy from the vulgar, commonly taught in the Schools: so also he wanted not skill with specious Doctrines to establish another Invention of Rational Physick, from whence again followed many various Disputes and Contentions in the Art. But O how far were they in our days out-strip'd by that Great Hermes of the lower Germany, John Baptist van Helmont, who, being endued with more sublime and noble Parts, attempted a great Enter∣prise, whence Debates and Oppositions mightily in∣creased. He, accompanying the Vivacity of his Wit with a singular Morality, and curiously applying him∣self to Chimistry, wholly bent his Studies to the solving of Natural Bodies, and sparing no sort of Pains or Charge, surmounted to such an height, that leaving far behind him the glorious steps of Para∣celsus, he never stopt, till he had happily arrived to finish a wonderful, and never-before-heard-of System of Rational Physick. And in like manner have we seen in our Days the famous Thomas Willis with his new System of Rational Physick advancing apace along the path of
Immortality and Glory: Nor is it easie to believe, with what Diligence he endeavoured to collect all that he deemed necessary for so Noble a Work; nor yet what Pains he took, what Watchings he underwent, and what Eagerness he used to bring it to its entire Perfection. Nor was less Trouble un∣dergone, or less Industry used in a like Uundertak∣ing by Silvius, famous for the innumerable Multi∣tude of his Followers, as Glisson Helvetius, Messonier, Travagino, and other illustrious Scholars of this Age: Many of which, I know not for what reason, have not yet publish'd their Conceptions. I say nothing at present of those able men who yet sweat at the work, and hope, by the Assistance of the Modern Anatomists, and new Natural Philosophy, to bring a∣bout their generous Designs concerning various Sy∣stems of Rational Physick. And I pass by also those who ingeniously empty themselves in devising Sy∣stems of Experimental and Methodical Physick, but such as greatly varies, and differs from that of the Ancients. But how much the Quarrel of Physicians are thereby encreased, to the overturning and ob∣scuring all Medicine, is not necessary to be named at present, since we plainly see it before our Eyes. Wherefore if the most Eloquent Pliny were living in these our days, he would certainly more angrily than ever cry out; Mutatur Ars quotidie toties interpel∣lis, & ingeniorum flatu impellimur, not indeed by the Wits of Greece, now lying idle, and servile under the Yoak of the Barbarians; but the most famous ones of England, and other Provinces, by him in his time esteemed Barbarous. But I now at last see my self encompass'd about with a most innumerable Troop of Physicians, by whom Physick is divided into so many Factions, and shivered, as it were, into so many pieces, that it is impossible for the Wit of man to part it into more. And these are all men, who will not follow the
steps of either Greek, Latin, Barbarian, or other Fo∣reign Writer, whether Ancient or Modern, nor be always tied to the Sentiments of any; but being free, and disengaged, swiftly over-run the most vast Kingdoms of Nature, and then oppugning the most difficult and obstinte Diseases, with Arms gotten by their own Labours d not borrowed, or taken from the Arsenals of ots, nor unskilfully managed, know how to render their Names eternally illustrious by their glorious Undertakings. Thus crediting nothing but what they perceive by their own Senses, or have approved by most certain Experience, they will look into all, penetrate all, and with a curious Eye nar∣rowly examine all, not allowing any Reason for ven∣dible, but only what agrees with the Sagacity of their own Understanding. And thus being contrary to all Sects, and not wholly Enemies to any of the Secta∣tors, they protest, that they herein follow the steps of Hippocrates and Galen more, than their most ob∣stinate Defenders. And forasmuch as I think it per∣tinent to our purpose, to see whether such a Liber∣ty ought to be permitted them: I beseech you, Gentlemen, at our next Meeting to hear their Rea∣sons, since what I have already said, may suffice for the present. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. THis is the first Discourse of Signor Lionardo di Capoa, who hath writ seven others upon the same subject: which according to the acceptance this meets with in Publick, shall likewise be Englished.
