C5696 19524690 108956
CONCERNING THE CONSTITUTION OF AN AIRE INFECTED. And how to know Plague-sores and Carbuncles. In tantâ calamitate magnus est sumendus animus, quaerenda trepidis solatia, demendus ingens timor. Nullum malum sine effugio. Sen. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Vniversity. 1644.
Concerning the Constitution of an Aire in∣fected; and how to know Plague-sores and Carbuncles. IS this Constitution of the Aire pesti∣lentiall? Hippocrates gives a Description of a Pestilentiall Constitution. Carbunculi in Cranone aestivi, circa Arcturum pluviae multae flante Au∣stro. Much Rain about the middle of August, the South-winde blowing; a Southerly Constituti∣on and much Rain, the Spring before; the Winter before that Southerly and moist, thence Carbun∣cles and hot Blisters. I thinke the Seasons of this Yeare have not been such. 'Tis true that in Epi∣demicall Diseases, which take many away, some are Pestilentiall, some onely Maligne of an ill Na∣ture; yet their ill Seminaries easily become veno∣mous.
So Maligne spotted Feauers may precede Pestilentiall; yet a Pestilentiall Feaver may be without a Plague, and a Plague without a Pesti∣lentiall Feaver.1. De differ. Feb. So Galen sayes. A Plague followes all Diseases, and may strike you suddenly without a Feaver. The last Yeare more died of those spot∣ted Feavers than now, as our Sextons say. These Feavers now are Pestilentiall, from the putrefaction of the humours in a high degree, which the Tumours and Sores witnesse: the Plague then is in the humours now, as earst it was in the spirits, in the sweating sicknesse which was Ephemera pestilens, according to the best Physiti∣ans. Now putrid humorall Feavers may be either Maligne or Pestilentiall, according to the severall degrees of putrefaction in the humours. And the Ancients, sayes Galen, not knowing the great cause of corruption in the bloud; referred it to the Gods for their sinnes: 'twere well if we did so too; for a high degree of corruption in the hu∣mours is argued by Plague-sores; yet all that die here, die not of the Plague. Publique Authority hath carefully provided for it, even in their care to lessen our feares: and we must be heedfull not to encrease them, by thinking that each man dies, to die of the Plague. Though this Town be
infected, which I deny not, yet we must not in∣crease the Infection. The Spots last Yeare were contagious, yet none shut up for them, I hereby perswade none to stay here, but rather advise them to answer their feares and be gone. Aescu∣lapius his Temple was out of the City; and a re∣cesse thence may be for health, especially when feare exposes the heart to danger, and betrayes the Fort: onely the extent of our apprehensions in dangers may be rightly bounded, considering by the true signes, whither the affliction which hap∣pens to particulars be pestilentiall or otherwise. Valesius sometimes Physician to the King of Spaine,In Epid. Hip. a learned man, carefully considers of hu∣moral Feavers, whither they be Maligne or Pe∣stilentiall. In rotten pestilentiall Diseases, now Nature would disburden herselfe, and therefore would vent those putrid matters by the common sinkes; it appeares in Sores in the glandulous parts, the Groine, the Arme-pits, yet Tumours in these parts are not alwayes pestilentiall. Some quickly come up, and increase, are red, and sup∣purate quickly; a true signe of an inflammation onely. So it may not perhaps be uselesse to describe what Sores are truly pestilentiall.
There are either large blackevulgarly Tokens. Spots in the Plague, or pestilent Tumours in the glandulous parts, as Groine, Arme-pits, &c. for so Bubones pestiferi are designed to be, or Carbuncles. Pestilent Tumours are worse than Carbuncles according to Ficinus,Bubo pestifer. for the expulsion of the matter into the Tumour argues the principall parts to have been charged with it: but if it be a criticall Tumour, Nature is eased by it. Bubones in Febribus male exceptis diariis.Hip. If in colour they be yellowish, livid, or blacke, they are the worse; if they go backe they are most dangerous; those under the Arme-pits, are worse than elsewhere; next those in the necke, and under the eares. 1.Signes. Sudden faintings in the beginning of a conti∣nued Feaver, without any manifest Cause is a true signe of Infection, bleeding, vacuations, want of sleep, sadnesse, feares, are evident causes. 2. If with these Tumours and Carbuncles li∣vid and blacke Spots appeare, with blacke excre∣ments, and excessive thirst, 'tis evidently pesti∣lentiall. 3. The body seemes not to be hot, neither pulse or urines bad, yet they are unquiet and burne in∣wards. As it was in the Plague Thucidides de∣scribes: 'tis so in all pestilentiall Constitutions.
Some would have these Tumours to be the same with the Carbuncle, but men experienced distinguish them. The more there comes forth of those Tumours the better it is; but this holds not in Carbuncles. A Carbuncle (Ignis Persicus, Pruna) hath in the middle a crust like a Coale, and thence 'tis so cal∣led: 'tis a fire and burnes the circumjacent parts. The crust is not alwayes blacke, but sometimes a blackish yellow, so Galen; the blacke colour is with a kinde of shining; so Paulus Aegin. It hath a pitchy colour in the brightnesse: the pain is so great that the Patient thinkes himselfe girded with irons: some finde an itching in the middle part of it, and scratching, a pimple arises, under which the flesh is burnt, and of a livid colour: and if it be pestilentiall he nauseates and vomits: Lesser Carbuncles are worse than greater, harder and livid, worse than soft. Those in the upper parts above the other former Tumours are worst of all, neare the heart and stomacke. The farther off from the principall parts the lesse dangerous: so Celsus. A delirium is an ill signe, when the Car∣buncle is in the upper parts, for the membranes of the brain may be inflamed. The plainest Cure for these Swellings is to apply Cupping-glasses to
them, then the bare breech of a Pullet, for it drawes the poyson: after the death of the Pullet, scarifie the place. Some cautenze it. Some use this vulgar Causticke, they wrap a few ashes in a linnen cloath, and boyle it in oyle, and rub the Tumour with it a good while; when it is suffi∣ciently burnt, they cure it as they do a Carbuncle. They suppurate the Crust with Mallowes, Lilly∣rootes and Butter: they keep it open as long as possible, and cleanse it with juice of Smallage, and honey of Roses. Sometimes these Spots, Tumours and Carbuncles appeare in dead men, which in their sicknesse did not appeare, as 'twas observed in a Plague at Lyons. If they be driven backe, the Spots are brought again if the Body be washed with hot water. FINIS.
