C6558 R37667 16999393 105682
THE COUNTRY-MANS Physician. WHERE Is shew'd by a most plain and easie manner, how those that live far from Cities, or Market Towns, and cannot have the advice of Physicians, may be able of themselves, by the help of this Book, to Cure most Diseases happening to the Body of Man. A Work very useful and necessary for all that understand not the Learned Languages. LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1680.
TO THE READER. I Am not Ignorant, that there are several Practi∣ces of Physick, alrea∣dy Published in the English Tongue: but truly they are al∣most all of them so stuft, ei∣ther with hard terms of Art, and difficult Descriptions and Definitions, or the Receipts, (the chief thing design'd in∣deed
for the Buyer) all in the Latine Tongue; that I can∣not at all perceive any, or very little difference from their being continued in the Learn∣ed Languages they were writ∣ten in; so that they must ne∣cessarily be something of Scho∣lars to understand those Books, and so of little or no use to those that are none: Where∣upon taking the Premises in∣to serious Consideration, I thought I should do a very ac∣ceptable piece of Service to my dear Country-folks, that understand no more than their Mother-Tongue; if I should write a very plain method for them, whereby they might be
able by the help thereof to Counsel and Administer to themselves, and their friends, and neighbours, fitting and per∣tinent Remedies for all man∣ner of Curable Diseases, when and where they cannot conve∣niently have the advice of the Learned Physician or Chyrur∣gion, living perhaps remote from any Market Town, or City where such commonly inhabit. For the Book it self, I can say that, as the old Pro∣verb is, good Wine needs no Bush; so I am confident thou wilt find it will be able to commend it self, it being a choice Collection of almost infallible experiments from the
most Famous Printed Authors, and curious Manuscripts; and I have (for the Reasons be∣fore specified) made it so plain and easie, that any though no Scholars, nor at all vers'd in the Learned Languages, can∣not erre in following these di∣rections in this Book.
A TABLE OF THE DISEASES & CURES, Treated of in this BOOK. CHAP. I. OF the Diseases of the Head, whether caused from Heat or Cold, where likewise of the inveterate pain of the Head, Page 1.
CHAP. II. Of the Diseases and Pains of the Eyes; where of the Chataract. p. 2. CHAP. III. Of the Diseases of the Nose, as stink∣ing Ʋlcers thereof; where of the bleeding at the Nose. p. 13. CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of the Ears, viz. Ʋl∣cers, Wormes, noise in the Ears, and Deafness; where also how to Cure the Pain in the Ears. p. 19. CHAP. V. Of the Diseases of the Mouth, as the Ʋlcers thereof; where of a stinking breath; of too much and too little spitting; likewise of the Diseases
and Pains of the Teeth, and of the Cure of the Quinsey. p. 22. CHAP. VI. Of the Diseases of the Breast, as the Coughs shortness of Breath, Spit∣ting of Blood, and of the Ptysick. p. 27. CHAP. VII. Of the Diseases of the Side, as the Plurisie, and of the Pains of the Side. p. 33. CHAP. VIII. Of the Diseases of the Heart, as the feebleness thereof, and the beating of the Heart, and swooning away. p. 35. CHAP. IX. Of the Diseases of the Stomack, and first
of the weakness thereof, whether from a hot or cold cause, of nause∣ating meats, and loss of taste, and appetite; where of the Wind in the Stomack, whether before or after eating, and of the Hiccop. Of stay∣ing Vomiting, whether from an hot or a cold cause, and of provoking Vomit if there be occasion, and to comfort the Stomack, after Vomiting, and lastly of the pains of the Stomack. p. 37. CHAP. X. Of the Diseases of the Belly, and first of the Diseases of the Liver, whether from hot or cold causes, viz. from Choler or Phlegm, &c. Where of its ob∣struction. 2. Of the Spleen, of the Di∣seases; where of its obstruction like∣wise, and also of the Cure of the three sorts of Jaundies; that is, yellow, green and Black. 3. Of the Cholick and Iliac passions. 4. Of the pain in the Kid∣neys, and difference between that and the Colick; as also of the Cure
of their Gravel and Stone, and like∣wise of the Cure of the Stone in the Bladder, and difficulty and heat in voiding of Ʋrine. 5. Of the Cure of the Three sorts of Flux∣es of the Belly, viz. Lientery, Diarrhaea, and Dissentery. 6. Of the Dropsie and Wind, and Grip∣ings of the Belly. 7. Of the both sorts of Hemorrhoids, viz. inward and outward. p. 42. CHAP. XI. Of the Diseases belonging to Women, as of the stopping and provoking their Monthly Courses, and of the Curing of the Fits of the Mother, as also of the falling down of the Womb: Of their Barrenness like∣wise, and of how to prevent mis∣carriage, and how to cause easie Delivery of Women in Child-birth, and to ease their Pains after Tra∣vel; and lastly how to cause plenty
and scarcity of Milk in Women that give Suck. p. 52. CHAP. XII. Of breeding of Wormes and Teeth in Children. p. 59. CHAP. XIII. Of the Cure of Feavers, whether con∣tinued Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartane. p. 61. CHAP. XIV. Of the Cure of the Pestilence, and its Symptoms. p, 64. CHAP. XV. Of the Cure of the Gout, whether in the Hands, or Feet, or Knees, or Hipps. p. 66.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Cure of outward pains in any part of the Body. p. 68. CHAP. XVII. Of the Cure of bruises in any part of the Body. p. 70. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Cure of Green Wounds and old Ʋlcers in any part of the Body. p. 71. CHAP. XIX. Of the Cure of all sorts of swellings in any part of the Body, whether they be hot or cold, hard or foft. p. 78.
by excessive heat or cold; and often from the infirmities of other Members, in which is contained the Cause of the pain in the head; as the Stomach, the Kidneys, Liver, Spleen, Womb, &c. Now the pain is greater in the fore∣head than elsewhere when it proceeds from Blood; behind when from Flegm; when from Choler, the pain is most on the right side the head, and on the left when from Melancholy, where∣upon Medicines are to be imploy'd to the purpose, by opposing hot Re∣medies to the cold, as Flegm and Me∣lancholy, and cold to the hot Causes; as Blood and Choler. The manner to cure the pain from a hot Cause, is first to let Blood in the Arm; then to apply Linnen Cloaths dipt in Plantain and Rose Water, and Vineger, or in the Juice of Lettice with Rose-water and Vineger: Or Oil of Roses and Poppies, and make a Pultis of Bole-Armenac white of Eggs a Roasted Apple and Vineager, and
apply it to the head and forehead and temples, and wash the head with warm water wherein have been boil∣ed, Sage Leaves, Roses and water Lilly-Flowers; and wash the feet with the same, if he have no motion of the rheum; or a Bag of Roses dipt in Rose-water: or Cloaths dipt in the whites of Eggs, very well beaten with Rose-water. Let them drink Cichory, Endive, Purslain-waters, &c. mixt together, or one alone; or Barly-water with a little Liquorice Boil'd in it. And to the intent that your Remedies may be the more Be∣neficial, you must keep the Belly loose by Glisters, or Suppositories, or loosening Medicines, as Syrups of Violets and Roses of each half an ounce, or so; or Cassia, Lenitive Ele∣ctuary, or Diaprunes, or Catholicon, &c. For a cold cause apply to the fore∣head and jaws, wild Time, or Ver∣vain, or Rue, steept or dipt in Vi∣neger and Honey of Roses; or To∣bacco,
or Mint; or water-Cresses, or rub the head with Asarabac-leaves, or the Juice of Melilot mixt with Vi∣neger and Oil of Roses. To drink wa∣ter wherein Betony hath been boil'd; applying the Leaves to the Temples. To snuff up into the Nose the juice of sow-Bread, or Gith steept in Vi∣neger, and Powder of Pellitory of the Wall to make Sneeze: and make a Bag with hot Herbs and Flowers, as Melilot, Sage, Betony, Rosema∣ry; of white Snakeweed; the said Herbs and Flowers having been Perfum'd with the Vapors of Betony and Balm, put upon a Plate of I∣ron, or hot; and cast thereon Vi∣neger and Rose-water: Perfume likewise the head with dry things, as Roses and Mastich; or with Red-Roses and Salt, but it must be when the spitting comes not; for then for (fear of stopping the breath) you must be content to Perfume the head Cloaths only, applying them hot to
the head; and if the pain ceases not by these Remedies then use hotter things, as Bags made of Marjoram, Rue, Bays, Juniper-Berries; or a fomentation of the decoction of the said things; or else anoint the head with Oil of Camomile and Dill, one or both together; or Oil of Rue, Spike, Castor, adding to them a lit∣tle Pepper, or Mustard Poudred; to draw up into the Nose, the Juice of Marjoram, or Fenel, is an Excellent Remedy; After the Application of these Remedies before spoken of, you must make a Cap of Taffaty doubled, lined with Cotton, which you shall stuff with Flowers of Mar∣joram, Camomile, Red-Roses, Rose∣mary, Cinamon, Nutmeg, Cloves, &c. finely Poudred: and if there be a Catarrh, use Mirtle Berries, Frank-incense, and the Gum of the Juniper Tree. The Inveterate pain of the head is cured by Roasting a piece of the
outer pill of an Onion under the Cindres, and steeping it in Oil of Bays and Roses, and put into the Ear where the pain of the Head is; Bleeding and Purging first; and you must alwayes keep a Temperate diet without which all is in vain. Eat no windy nor salt Meats; be quiet in his mind, not Write, nor Read, but bear patiently his pain. CHAP. II. Of the Diseases of the Eyes. FOr the Diseases of the Eyes you must purge the Brain, forasmuch as the greater part of the inward Dis∣eases proceed from the Brain, distil∣ling its superfluous and malignant Hu∣mors upon them, or the lower parts furnishing with Causes, whereby the sight is diminished and the Eye pain∣ed; and this is the Physicians business
to discern the particular Humors that cause the Diseases; and to evacuate them by proper Purgations, as Pills, Glysters, Potions, &c. And for what concerns the outward means you must keep the Head dry and clean, rubbing it well behind every morning, by that means diverting the Humors which fall from the Brain upon the Eyes; it makes much like∣wise for the preservation of the sight to keep the Feet dry, moderately hot, and not moist; 'tis likewise good for the same purpose not to sleep in the day, nor hold the Head much down; to be bound in the Bel∣ly is bad for the sight, wherefore you must keep it soluble, you must shun the Wind, the Cold, Heat, too much looking upon the Sun, and much Light, or great Fire; much Reading and Wri∣ting, Weeping, to Sleep or Wake much. As to Eating and Drinking, you must Eat Meats of good nourish∣ment, not Windy, Salt, nor Spicy,
little or no strong Drink. The use of Eye-bright is very good against all maladies of the Eyes, Boiled in Pottage, or Drink the Pouder, or Boil it in the Drink? The Film or Cataract is Cured by the Pouder of Sugar-Candy, Tutty, white Coperas, mixt equal parts and searc'd, and put into the Eye, Night and Morning; the Pouder alone of white Beans hath the same Property. To this end serves likewise a Water made of half an Ounce of Tutty, a quarter of an Ounce of Mace, Pou∣dred and Infused in white Wine and Rose-water of each half a Pint; put∣ting them in a Glass and let them stand in the Sun, in Summer, about a Month, keeping it from Rain and Dew; shaking the Glass often. Another for the same purpose; Take a couple of new laid Eggs, Ro∣sted hard under the Cinders, take a∣way their shells, cut them in the mid∣dle and take away the Yelk, and fill
up the place with Sugar-candy and Tutty equal parts, then joyning them together with a thread, steep them in Rose-water, in a little Vessel: when they have stood twenty four Hours, Strein and Press them through a Linnen Cloath; of which Liquor drop a few drops into the Eye Night and Morning. The Distilled Water of these things following cures the Cataract likewise; Plantain, and little and ten∣der Pomegranate flowers, red Roses, sprigs of Fenel, of each an handful, crums of white Bread, hot out of the Oven, one Pound, mix them toge∣ther, and steep them six hours in white Wine, then Distill them. To the same purpose Distill this Water. Take of Fenel, Rue, Verben, Eye-bright, Endive, Betony, red-Roses, Venus-hair, equal parts, steeping them before twenty four Hours in white Wine, the Liver of a Buck, three
Ounces, Distill them thrice in Balneo Mariae; and the last Water will be very proper for Cataracts, and all o∣ther Maladies of the Eye, preserving the sight to Old Age. Another very Excellent one. Take Snails and Distill them in Balneo Ma∣riae, washing them well first; and in eight Ounces of their Water infuse one of Tutty prepar'd, Sugar-candy, white Dung of a Lizard, dryed Bones, two Drams of each, red Co∣ral, Aloes, Sal Armoniac, of each one Dram; being all well Poudred and put into the Water, must be put into an Alimbec, and the Water that comes from them serves Effectually as before, and also to clear the Eyes of all spots, and Redness; preserving the sight so well and so long, that Anti∣ent People have seen as well as if they had been but 30. This Unguent following is ve∣ry good for the Eyes, Curing their in∣flammation and Redness, staying the
sharp Defluxions which make them Blear-Ey'd, Annointing them Night and Morning. Take half an Ounce of Tutty fine∣ly Poudred in a Bel-metal Morter, then Grind it on a Marble with Rose-Water, as Painters do, then dry it in the Sun; then Grind it again, with fresh Rose-water; do thus seven or eight times, then mix it with the same weight of fresh Butter; and your Ointment is made. Another singular Unguent for pre∣servation of the Eyes is thus made. Take two Ounces of fresh Porks Grease, steep it in Rose-water six Hours, then wash it again twelve times in the best white-Wine, for the space of five or six Hours; then add to this Grease Tutty well prepar'd, and very finely Poudred one Ounce, Lapis Haematites well washt, one scru∣ple, Aloes well washt and Poudred twelve Grains, Pearles Poudred three Grains, Incorporate them all well
together with Fenel Water, and make an Unguent, whereof put a little into the corners of the Eyes. The last Remedies to divert the importunate Humor from falling from the Brain upon the Eyes, are Caute∣ries and Setons; which must be done by the Surgeon by advise of the Phy∣sician, or you may try Blisters drawn behind the Neck, or behind the Ear; make them with Leaven, Pigeons Dung, Spanish-flies, and Brandy, mixt well together. Now to Cure the pain of the Eyes and redness that follows come from a blow; Apply a rotten Apple there∣to; the Blood drawn from the Wing of a Pidgeon: Also the Decoction of Fenel, Camomile, and Melilot made with Water and white-Wine; Applyed with Linnen Cloaths. But above all other Remedies, Agrimony alone, as hath been Authorized by often Experience, rubb'd between the Hands, and put upon the Eye
hurt; and roul it on, Cures it in a short time, though very red with bruised Blood and the sight darkned, it brings it again: For want of the Herb take the Water Distilled in the season of the year. To abate the redness of the Eyes, the first time that you drink every Day, it must be a full Glass of clear Water, and so continue till you be Well. CHAP. III. Of the Diseases of the Nose. THe Diseases of the Nose are divers likewise, inward and out∣ward, as for the inward you must alwayes remove the Cause, by the Advice of a Learned Physician; and for the outward employ these Reme∣dies following. The ill scent of the Nose is Cured by washing it with a Decoction made
of white-Wine, Ginger, Penny-Roy∣al, Cloves, Calamus Aromaticus, of each equal parts, and after put Pou∣der of Pellitory into the Nose or drawing up the Nose often, Wine wherein Nutmeg hath been steeped four Hours; or Anointing the No∣strills Night and Morning, with Oleum Nardinum; wherein have been Boil∣ed Clove-Gilliflowers, wood of A∣loes, with a little Musk; or with this Composition, or else to make Tents thereof, and put them in the Nose, to wit, Ginger, dryed Roses, wood of Aloes, of each two Oun∣ces, Myrrh, Calamus Aromaticus, of each one Dram, mix them well with good Wine, and reduce them to a Paste; adding thereto six Grains of Musk, and make Pills of the big∣ness of a Pea, dipping it in Oil of Nard when you use it. The Nose being stopt by some Humor that hinders Breathing, is opened with Juices of Beets and Mar∣joram
incorporated in Oil of bitter Almonds, and drawn up the Nose; also by the smoke of Tobacco only taken at Mouth, and make it go out at the Nose. To provoke sneezing, blow up the Nose, Pouder of Pepper, Pellitory, and Orris Roots, or mix the Pou∣ders with some Liquor, and anoint the Nostrils therewith. To stay the sneezing scratch the Soles of the Feet and Palms of the Hands; rub the Eyes and Ears; smell to white Lilly, and Bath your hands in warm Water. To Cure the Ulcers and Itchings of the Nose, take the Juice of Ivy, and sour Pome-granates mixt toge∣ther; also the Anointment made of Ceruss, Ashes of wake Robin, and Honey of Roses. The Phlegm that runs from the Nose like Snot is stay'd by proper Remedies for the Cure of the Brain, whereby the Spring of such Noisome Humors is dryed. Im∣ploy
then to this end Frictions, Per∣fumes, Caps, as before; and beside, use some proper Syrup to correct the ill scent of the Snot's abundance, and thinness; as Syrup of Pop∣pies, Diacodium, &c. Also to this purpose you must hold in your mouth little Pills made of Bole-Armenac, Terra-Sigillata, Amber, Dragons Blood, Cloves and Musk. The Blood flowing disorderly from the Nose is stopt by a Frontal made of the Pouder of Sanderac, made in∣to Paste with the whites of Eggs, and applyed with a Linnen Cloath; by the Juice of Onions, mixt with Vi∣negar, put into the Nostrils with Cotton, by drinking Mint Water, by Anointing the forehead with an Oint∣ment made of Dragons Blood, Ma∣stich, Frankincense, and whites of Eggs; by Camphor mingled with the Seeds of dead Nettles, Juice of Plan∣tain and House-Leek put into the No∣strils, by Pouder of red Coral, or
Terra Sigillata drank; by Bathing the palms of the Hands and soles of the Feet with Cloaths dipt in Vine∣ger of Roses, and Plantain water; by Bathing a mans Stones and a wo∣mans Breast with Fountain or Com∣mon water; this is of great efficacy according to experience: You may stay the Bleeding at Nose also by putting to the nuque of the Neck a Bag wherein is Toads Pouder; which must be made of a great Toad, that is Bred upon the Earth, not the Water; the which you must put in an Earthen Pot alive, and put it in∣to the Oven with Bread, and then Pouder it. And the same Pouder will serve in the Bloody-flux, or Womens Fluxes, and to stay the Bleeding of Wounds, applying it to the opposite of the hurt part. The like Virtue hath the Seed of Flix∣weed, Poudred and taken a Dram thereof, either in Wine, or with an Egg, or Broth; it serves also to
loosen the Belly, and to make great Bellyed Women gayly bear their Burthen. But contrarywise the Herb Millefoil put into the Nose provokes Bleeding, it being sometimes necessa∣ry for discharge of the Brain. But this by thrusting it in the Nose, the point formost: for the contrary hap∣pens if you put the Stem first in. The Smelling corrupted, or al∣most lost, is regained by the often handling and smelling of Mint, also a Perfume made of the Leaves of Southernwood, Rue, Juniper, min∣gling Gith-seed therewith.
CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of the Ears. FOr the pain in the Ear, put into it some drops of Oil of Roses, and Vineger, or the juice of Hen∣bane; besides it will be convenient to apply thereto a Bag stuft with Camomile, and Melilot Flowers: the juice of dwarf Elder and Rue is ve∣ry good; making the inward part of the Ear first clear from filth. The water of Honey Distill'd; Milk with a little Saffron. The like Vir∣tue hath the Perfume of the Deco∣ction of Camomile, Dill, and Ste∣chas, made in Water wherein hath been put warm Vineger, wherein burnt Nitre, and Sal-gemm have been dissolved, put in the Ear with a Fun∣nel.
The Ʋlcers of the Ear are Cured by Instilling Oil wherein have been boiled white Leeks, and Earth Worms, to the Consumption of the third part, or by the Oil of Eggs alone. Against the Wormes in the Ears the Milk of the Fig-tree and the figs alone are very proper; also the juice of Capers, of Wormwood, Calamint, Centaury, Germander, juice of the Peels of Walnuts, or the Bark of the Tree; alone or together. Against the noise in the Ears pro∣ceeding from wind or other Causes, 'tis good to put into the Ear a tent dipt in Oil of Rue, Castor, or Spike, with juice of Leeks; also in a Morn∣ing fasting, 'tis very healthful to re∣ceive the Vapor by a Funnel putting into the Ear, water wherein hath long boiled, Marjoram, wild Mint, Sage, Camomile flowers, Aniseeds, and Fenelseeds, and a Coloquintida Apple, and to the end the Vapor pe∣netrate
the further, let the Patient have some hard thing between his Teeth, as Pease or Beans, chewing them with force; the same will be good at Night going to Bed; and having received it put in the Ear one drop of Oil of Coloquintida, then stop the Ear with Cotten dipt in the said Oil, and lye down there∣upon. Deafness is cured by means of an Unguent made of two Ounces of Goose-grease melted with a gentle fire, and two drams of Aloes Socco∣trine in Pouder incorporated, apply∣ed with Cotton, putting it into the Ear; or the juice of Radishes mixed with Oil of Roses; or with the fat of an Eel and Oil of bitter Almonds, or the juice of an Onion, mixed with Honey, or by the Pouder of Aloes dissolv'd in white wine, Instill'd warm into the Ear, and after make him sneeze with some Pouder of Tobac∣co, or by the fume of the wood of
Oak which you may do by lighting a stick at one end, and putting the other into the hollow of the Ear, but you must have a branch of a ten∣der one of one years growth, with∣out knots. CHAP. V. Of the Diseases of the Mouth. THe Ʋlcers of the Mouth are Cured by washing the Mouth with a Decoction of the Herbs of Mouseear, Consound and Golden Rod; or Pomegranate flowers, Su∣mach, Plantain, Agrimony and Ro∣ses, adding a little Alum towards the end, or with Wine wherein have Boil'd Aniseeds and Cloves; or with the Distill'd water of Scolopendrium; or with Treacle water, and the like quantity of Rose-Vineger, and Bran∣dy, wherein hath been dissolved a
little Bole-Armenac; or with Honey of Roses, by rubbing the Ulcerate places of the Palate or the Tongue. The Decoction of the Herb Speed∣well, in Wine, gargariz'd dryes the Ulcers of the Mouth, and wash there∣with in fevers: And for a singular Remedy touch the Ulcer with a drop of Oil of Vitriol. The Super abundance of Spittle is corrected by using astringent and dry∣ing Gargarisms, made by boiling Ro∣ses, Pomegranate flowers, Plantain and Alum in Water and Wine; 'tis also good to Eat Bisquet, and dry Rosted meats, and Mustard; to eat Cubebs and green Ginger: On the contrary to provoke Spitting; chew Sage, or Mastick, or Tobacco, fast∣ing or at other times. For the Curing a Stinking Breath, from what Cause soever, wash the Mouth with Vineger of Squils, or a Decoction of Mint, Balm, Fenel and Aniseed; chew Nutmeg, Cloves, O∣ris
Root: hold in the Mouth a Pill made as followeth; Gum-dragon one Ounce, Dragons Blood two drams, steep them in Rose-water for two dayes, then put them in a Mar∣ble Morter with six drams of Sugar, three of Cinamon, five of Starch, a scruple of Musk; all dissolv'd in Rose-water, mixt together with a Pestle; after it is dry make Pills to hold in the Mouth. To take away the smell of Onions or Garlick, &c. chew Cloves, Aniseeds, Fenelseeds, &c. or wash the Mouth with Rose-water, &c. The Diseases of the Teeth spring from divers causes, hot and cold; if from cold do as followeth, wash them with one of these Decoctions; Wormwood boil'd in strong Vine∣ger, the Leaves of Ivy in red Wine, with Lavender, Sage and Marjoram; Cypress Leaves and Nuts, and Juni∣per-Berries, Roses, Mirtle Leaves in white-Wine, Oil of Cloves, Sage
&c. are good dipt in Lint or Cot∣ton to put into the Tooth if hollow. If the pain proceed from a hot cause, then apply the Oil of Poppy, Man∣drake, Henbane, or their Decoctions in Wine; or Henbane root boil'd in Rose-water and Vineger; or hold Vineger in your Mouth wherein hath been boiled Camphor. And from what cause soever the pain proceeds it will be appeas'd by the Oil of Hen∣baneseed; made after this manner. Besprinkle Henbaneseed with Brandy, then put it in a Glass Viol, which stop very well, and make this boil in a Pot of water twenty four hours, then take off the Phiol, and pour out the Seeds, while it is yet hot, put them in a Cloath, and strain them with a Press, and so your Oil is made. Hold Milfoil-root between your Teeth, or Pellitory, or Agrimony, or chew Mastick incorporated with new Wax.
To preserve the Teeth, wash your Mouth every Morning in fair water, if they be loose rub them with this Pouder, Compos'd of Myrrh, Cina∣mon, Alum burnt, Pumice stone burnt, all in equal parts apart; finely Pou∣dred and mixt. Crums of Bread with Salt, after Eating to rub with, and then wash them with fair water and a little Vineger, or red-Wine, Perles, both Corals, Ivory, Crystal, white Marble, Alabaster, Cubebs, Harts∣horn, Mastick, dryed Bones, Tartar, white Copporas, Sal-gemm, Crabs Eyes, Eggs-shels, Snails-shels, Oi∣sters-shels, dry'd Roses, Orris, Ta∣maris, Spikenard, Dragons-blood, Venice-hair, Pomegranate-flowers, Sumach, &c. all Poudred apart, and mixt. For the Quincey, 'tis good to gar∣gle the Mouth with water of Speed∣well distill'd in Balneo Mariae, or its Flower boiled in Vineger and Honey, or Mint, Sage, Rue, and Coriander,
boil'd in Cows or Sheeps Milk; or the Decoction of Figs and Cinquefoil in Water, dissolves the Tumor, or the ashes of a Swallows Nest burnt with the young ones, made into a Pultis, with Oil of Camomile and sweet Almonds is excellent: Peach-Gum boil'd in Vineger, with a little Saffron, or a Liniment made of Bores Teeth Poudred with Linseed Oil, or to drink a dram of the Pouder in Carduus Benedictus water: Here you must send for a Chyrurgion and the first thing you do let Blood, it may be, more than once. CHAP. VI. Of the Diseases of the Breast. FIrst, when one speaks low and with pain, take at Night going to Bed two Ounces of Wine where∣in have boil'd, Figs and Raisins, with
Sugar, Cloves and Cinamon, and the Tablets of Diarios given Morning and Evening clears the Voice; and Syrup of Iujubs. So doth the deco∣ction of Enula Campana, or Oximel wherein Liquorice hath been boil'd. For a Sovereign Remedy is this Li∣quor taken at Night going to Bed; put an Ounce of Pouder'd Sugar in a Porringer, and pour thereon as much Brandy as will cover it, or a little more; put it upon the Coals, then light your Brandy with a Paper, lighting as often as it goes out, till it will take fire no more, then let the Patient take it all at once. To Cure a Cough, the Remedies before are good, but especially these, boil in water, Raisins and Figs, Hy∣sop, Anise and Fenel-seed till the third part be wasted, and of this give Night and Morning, two hours before meals 2 or 3 spoonfuls after eating a Tablet of Diaireos, or Diapenidion, or take Night and Morning a spoonful of Su∣gar-Candy
Poudred, and as much of Diaireos, and a quarter of an Ounce of Liquorice, and drink three Oun∣ces of Hysop or Scabious water after. Or Syrup of Liquorice and Hysop taken Night and Morning with Pti∣sane, adding a few Anise and Fenel∣seeds, and Nettle Seeds; when the Cough presses, 'tis good to take Tea∣sels confected with Sugar, Conserve of Roses, and taking often one or other, or Lohoc Sanans, or de Pino taken with a Liquorice stick, swal∣lowing them by little and little, or take two or three hours in the Morn∣ing before Eating, the juice of Quin∣ces, boil'd half away with Honey or Sugar, sweating after it, or an Ounce of this drink two or three hours be∣fore Eating; take Cassia newly drawn, two Ounces and an half, Di∣acarthamus six drams, new Penids and Diaireos simplex, of each half an Ounce, Conserve of Violets three Ounces, sweet Almonds and Liquo∣rice
Pouder, of each half an Ounce, Syrup of Violets two Ounces; dis∣solve these in Pullit Broth; and you must remember that you must Eat no sharp, or salt things, &c. Against shortness of Breath call'd Asthma, these Remedies are good besides those for the Cough; a Lohoc made of an Ounce of Raisins stoned, two great Figs, one Date, dryed Hysop, Venus hair, Liquorice, Fox Lungs prepar'd, Scabious water of each one dram, Penids two Ounces, and Syrup of Liquorice as much as will thicken it; the which take with a Liquorice stick, two or three hours before or after meats. And as the Asth∣ma surpasses the Cough in malice, so you must be more observant in your diet; Eating not Sharp, or Salt, or Spices, but Eating Barly boil'd in Almond Milk and Sugar, Eating Pul∣lets and Pidgeons, and rosted Fowls; Figgs and Raisins, Dates, Almonds.
Against Spitting Blood, give the Pouder of red Coral in Distill'd wa∣ter of the tops of Oak; or Terra si∣gillata, with Plantain or Knotgrass water. Ambar in the Decoction of Consound. Harts and Goats horn in one of the Waters. For the Ptisick, let the sick drink every Morning four hours before Eating, two or three quarts of Asses Milk, or red Cows, newly drawn, putting in each time a Spoonful of Sugar of Roses in Pouder. Taking often Conserve or Sugar of Roses, or Diatragacanth, 'tis good to drink each Morning fasting, a good Glass of this Distillation, of the Herb ass∣hoof; the great Consound, Venus hair, Hysop, equal parts with Snails dis∣charg'd of their shels, and well washt. The water if alone is as good, and for all lean and dry Bodies, use Ta∣blets made of two Ounces of Pim∣pernel in Pouder and Sugar, every Morning, dissolv'd in three Ounces
of Pimpernel water. This Pouder is very salutary, taken two drams in the Morning, and two Spoonfuls of Syrup of Jujubs after it; or Colts∣foot water, or Ptisane. Take three Drams and a half of each of the four cold seeds which are Gourges, Ci∣truls, Melons, Cucumers, and as much of Quince seeds, five drams of white Pepper seeds, Juice of Liquo∣rice, Hysop, Starch, Gum-Arabick, Diatragacanth, of each one Dram and an half, Penids the weight of them all, Pouder all apart then min∣gle them.
CHAP. VII. Of the Diseases of the Sides. THe most dangerous of all is the Pleurisy, and most difficult to Cure, for it will soon kill if not soon cur'd. To know it, the Pati∣ent hath a burning Fever, a great Cough and short Breath, and a great pain in his side, by reason of fiery Blood hath inflam'd the membrane that covers the Rib inwardly, which is mighty sensible; now without de∣lay let him be let Blood on the same side; and give to drink a dram of Bores tooth prepar'd with some Pe∣ctoral Syrup, as Violets, Coltsfoot, Hysop, &c. If he find no abatement and full of Blood, Bleed again. Then give this, Take three Ounces of Car∣duus water, a Spoonful of white-Wine, six sperms of new lay'd Eggs,
a dram of Bores-tooth, a scruple of red Coral Poudred, give all together warm. To open the Aposteme if there be occasion, take an Apple cut in two and the Kernels taken out, fill it with Frankincense, or Mastich, tye it with a Thred, Rost it under the Cinders, and give it to Eat, and to void the matter, Drink of the decoction of red Poppies, or a dram Poudred; with Scabius, and Pim∣pernel water, and Syrup of Hysop; if the Fever be not great, else Vi∣olets.
CHAP. VIII. Of the diseases of the Heart. FOr these your Remedies must be according to the causes; the weakness of the Heart coming from heat, give every Morning some Wine and water and Sugar, with Troches of Camphire, one dram; or Diamarga∣riton Frigidum; and Eat often Con∣serve of Borage, Bugloss, Violets, alone, or with water of Wood-sorrel. If the cause be cold, with sadness and fear, take every Morning, the Ele∣ctuary call'd Diamosch, one dram in good Wine, and keep his Breast warm; and once a week take a dram of Venice Treacle, in Wine; or half a dram of Confectio Alchermes, and to have Cloves and Mace and Nutmeg boil'd in his drink and diet. For the beating of the Heart, advise
with the Physician about Bleeding and Purging, if he have a Fever drink Syrup of Limons, Violets, Sor∣rel, with Rose or Borage, or Bugloss∣water, or the Syrup with Purslain∣water, &c. 'tis good to smell oft of Roses, Violets, and Rose Vineger; if without Fever give Aqua-Mirabilis, Caelestis, or so, or good Wine, let him smell to Benizon, Storax, Musk, &c. For Swounding, first of all throw cold water in the Face, tie the Legs, Arms and Thighs very hard, and rub them hard, pull by the Hair; then give Wine to drink, and hold Vine∣ger to his Nose. But if from the Womb, let her smell stinking things, as Assa Faetida, Castor, Partridge Fea∣thers burnt, &c. and contrarily Per∣fumes below with Benzoin, Storax, Musk, Ambar, Civet, &c. but if it come from loss of Blood, sweating, Flux, &c. then nothing like good Wine, and comfortable nourishment as Gellies, &c.
CHAP. IX. Of the Diseases of the Stomach. WEakness of the Stomach pro∣ceeds oft from Flegm descend∣ing from the Head like Rheum, and being cold Digests not meat, but with great difficulty; to that the first Remedy must be moderate absti∣nence, but if Pain press, you must Vomit, with an Ounce of Crocus Metallorum, if a woman, and never above ten drams to a man, and after drink Wine; or Hippocras, &c. and sometime Purge the Stomach with Pilulae Hierae cum Agarico, or Stoma∣chicae cum gummi, and taking two or three Night and Morning; keep his Stomach warm with Cloaths or Emplasters. If from an hot cause, they will be dry, and little appetite, Head-ach, sowr Belchings and offers
to Vomit, then give Syrup of Roses, Sorrel, &c. or Quinces in Endive or Cichory water, &c. The Disdaining of diet comes from too many Cholerick or gross and clammy Phlegmatick humors, always dry, sometimes Vomiting yellow Choler; first let Blood, and Purge the Choler with Diaprunes, Catholi∣con, &c. then give two or three spoonfuls in the Morning of the De∣coction of Wormwood or Mint in white Wine, &c. The Windiness of the Stomach from the Mouth before eating comes from clammy Flegm, or waterish, to Purge with Extractum Rudij, two Scruples, and Pilulae Stomach. cum gummi one, mixt, take three Pills at Night, and three in the Morning, and you need not keep within doors if it be not extreme cold: then take for three or four Mornings two Spoonfulls of Syrup of Wormwood or Mint fasting.
The Windiness after eating comes from heat of the Stomach, and being weak cannot digest the meats; for this take Annise, Fenel, Cummin and Carway seeds Poudred with Sugar, or Aromaticum rosatum, Dianisum, or Diacyminum, fasting, drinking a little Wine after, or two ounces of Wine wherein the seeds before have been boil'd; remembring alwayes to keep the Stomach warm as before, eat no raw fruits, or windy meats; and sleep not in the day time. To Cure the Hiccup, hold the Breath as long as may be, sleep long, sneez, spit, stir, tell them sad stories, and frighten them, it proceeds some∣times from fulness, so they must be moderate in diet; But if it come from weakness of the Stomach after long sickness, or flux of Blood or Belly, &c. you must nourish careful∣ly with Gellies, Eggs, &c. The Stomach Vomits sometimes by the benefit of nature, easily, what
offends it; but when by its weakness, it causes violent motion, and the Pa∣tient is in pain, as those that have a little and straight Stomach, long Neck and Breast, or weak sight; you must then help nature by giving some warm water and Oil, &c. put your fingers, or feathers dipt in Oil as low as you can; on the contrary to stay exces∣sive Vomiting, caused from an hot weak Stomach, drink Syrup of Ro∣ses, Quinces, &c. with water well boil'd and cold; if from cold keep the Stomach warm as before, and let him Vomit with Crocus Metallorum, and see before. To comfort the Stomach after Vo∣miting give Syrup of Mint, &c. for all pains in the Stomach from any cause, take half a pint of Rose water and a quartern of Brandy, an Ounce of Cinamon Poudred, with enough Sugar, let them steep six hours in the Liquors, and give it to drink. Great pains of the Stomach have been ap∣peas'd
by applying a great Cupping Glass upon the Navil, sticking on an hour; and with hot bread dipt in Oil of Camomile applyed to the pain. Drink an hour before eating a glass of good Wine wherein hath steeped two drams of Diacyminum, or Dianysum, or Mastich in the de∣coction of Mints, with Aniseed, or Cumin; or a little Castor in good Wine.
CHAP. X. Of the Diseases of the Belly. THe humors which nourish the members of the Body are made by eating and drinking, and digested by the natural heat of the Liver, aid∣ed by that of the Heart; but is some∣times hindred to perform its Office through too much heat, with much pain coming upon the superfluity of Blood and cholerick humor, or through diminishing of the natural heat, when flegm which is cold, a∣bounds. Red Urine, quick Pulse, spittle sweeter than ordinary shew Blood is the cause, if choler 'tis yel∣lower and clearer than usual; dry, and hotter than before, and less ap∣petite; if Phlegm, the Urine that's whitish and thick causes a heaviness about the Liver, the face is pale.
Now for the Remedies; from Blood let Blood in the Arm, drink cool drinks, as Ptisan, &c. keep the Bel∣ly loose by Clysters, or gentle Pur∣ges, and abstain from flesh, but eat meats boil'd with fenel and purslain, &c. Almond Milk, Pease rosted or sodden Apples, Prunes, &c. if Cho∣ler cool also, take a week together an Ounce of Syrup of Endive or Vi∣olets in Ptisan, Morning and Night, or of Endive, Cichory or Sorril wa∣ter, each an Ounce, then take half an Ounce of Cassiia new drawn, a dram of Rhubarb, infus'd all Night in Whey or Endive water, or an Ounce of Syrup of Violets, instead of Cassia; or a Bolus of half an Ounce of Cassia, as much Electuary of the Juice of Roses, or a dram of Rhu∣barb; or dissolve it in Whey or En∣dive water. After he may take eve∣ry Morning two or three spoonfuls of this Iulep, half a pint of Rose water, a quartern of Endive, five Ounces of
Sugar, and to cool more, two Oun∣ces of Vineger; who hath the Liver cool'd by Phlegm, must for a week take fasting Oxymel compound with the Decoction of Parcely and Fenel, then Purge with an Ounce of Diaphe∣nicum, or Diacarthamum in the de∣coction of the roots of Parcely and Fenel; he may drink strong Ale or Bear, or Wine, and eat Spices; when the pain of the obstruction of the Liver comes from the Stomach, 'tis cured by laxative medicines; and when 'tis accompanyed with pain of the Reins and Back by openers, as Syrup of Venus hair, &c. and deco∣ctions of Parcely and Fenel Roots. Oft obstructions come to Women by reason of stopping of their motnhs, then bleed them in the Arm first, af∣ter in the Foot if need; and take for a week opening decoctions as before, with as much white Wine, added. The Spleen is the receptacle of Me∣lancholy and clearer of the Blood ma∣king
one jocund, but if it be obstru∣cted by too much melancholy, all the Body becomes dry, 'tis known by a pain in the left side after eating, and a blackish colour of the face, and sadness; and cured by letting blood in the Arm and Haemeroid Veins; and if the pain be accompanied with drought, and loss of tast, it shews it proceeds from an hot cause, then be∣sides bleeding give cool things as be∣fore, or decoction or Syrup of Scho∣lopendria and Endive; then Purge with half an Ounce of the Juice of Roses, and three Ounces of the de∣coctions of the roots of Capers and Scholopendria; with Cassia and Dias∣senna of each half an Ounce. The Jaundies proceed from the Diseases of the Liver and Spleen, and as their Diseases are divers, so are the Jaundies, to wit, Yellow, Green, and Black, the last from the Spleen, the other from the Liver. For the Yellow and Green, drink in the
Morning Syrup of Violets with House leek water, or Syrup of Endive with Cichory water, then Purge Choler as before, in the Liver; let the ordinary drink be Ptisan made with Barly, Li∣quorice and Prunes, or Tamarinds; Earth worms wash'd and Poudred and given in white Wine, is good: also the waters or decoction of Venus∣hair, or Queen of the Medows; For the Black Jaundies, after all as before, clap a large Cupping glass to the Spleen, often Night and Morn∣ing. The Colic is a Violent pain all o∣ver the Belly, for which first drink a good draught of Scabious water with a little Treacle, then give a Clyster made of Mallowes, Mercury, Violet leaves, with Anise and Cassia, Hony and Salled Oil, and this often, and a Purger of Choler as before; when 'tis caus'd of wind it runs up and down, then give to drink Wine or Ale where∣in Anise and Fenel and Cumin Seeds
have been boil'd; or the water or decoction of Camomile, also the Pouder of old Acorns or Ches∣nuts in white Wine. The pain of the Kidnies which comes from the Stone or Gravel is like the Colic, in that in both is Vo∣miting, and binding in the Belly, and wind: but the Colic begins in the lower part of the right side go∣ing to the higher part of the left side of the belly, inclining more before than behind; but the Reins begin contrary, and the pain is stronger be∣fore than after eating; the contrary in the Colic: and it commonly comes suddenly but the reins by degrees, with a pain of the back, and difficulty to make water: To cure which use open∣ing things to void the stone, if little; for there are no Medicines in the world to break it; but first loosen the belly by an ounce of Cassia, and Clysters made with Mallows and Marsh-mallows and Beets, giving Sy∣rups
and Decoctions thereof also at mouth; Turpentine Pills taken with White-wine, or the Decoction of Ca∣momil flowers in wine and water. Difficulty of Ʋrine is cured by the same means; and Heat of Urine by a Bolus of an ounce of Cassia, and a dram of Prunel and drinking cooling Emulsions of the four cold Seeds and Almonds with Barley water: and note that in all these distempers of the Reins, and almost in all other, the cure depends for the most part chiefly upon a good order of Diet. The Fluxes of the Belly are three, whereof the most dangerous is called Lienteria, which is when meats are voided in the same sort they were ta∣ken at mouth, with very little al∣teration, and without any stink; and Diarrhaea, when there is a Flux of flegmy and waterish humours only: Lastly Dissenteria, when blood is voided alone, or with excrements. For the first, you must quickly con∣sult
the Physician; in the mean time, let only comfortable things be given, with Syrup of Woormwood, Mug∣wort, with Honey of Roses, of each a spoonful, or dissolved in Betony, Fenel, or Mugwort-water, or pro∣voke vomiting by taking an ounce of Oxymel of Squils, and as much Syrup of Wormwood, or two ounces of Oxymel; then take Marmelad of Quinces before he eat, or Aromati∣cum Rosatum. For the Diarrhaea note it is some∣time beneficial to nature, when it is without Fever, and quickly gone, and Bloody-flux not feared; so that you may let it alone for three or four days; then if you shall spie a few drops of blood threatning a Dissen∣tery, or the Patient be feverish, then give astringent Clysters made of Sage, Mint, Borage, &c. In the strein∣ing put some juice of the Shepherds purse, or Bole-armenac, without any Sugar or Syrup, and in little quantities.
For Dissentery in the beginning let blood in the arm, and give lenitive Clysters made of milk wherein steel hath been quenched; or with two or three yelks of eggs; give three or four a day; then purge with a dram of Rubarb, infus'd in Endive or Cy∣chory-water strein'd, and putting thereto half a dram of torrified Ru∣barb; then eat Marmalad of Quin∣ces, Rice-milk, Sheeps and Calves feet, and Red wine alone, or with Steel-water. The Dropsie is a moist swelling be∣ginning in the feet, then the legs and thighs, then in the belly, and if neg∣lected mounts to the heart: It is known by pressing the part with your fingers, and if a mark remain it is the Dropsie, else not: For cure you must purge first, for which nothing is bet∣ter than Jalap, a dram more or less in pouder with White-wine; then drink White-wine with Anniseeds poudred; eat bisket and meats dry
rosted, drink as little as may be, for∣bearing all broths and fruits, and li∣quid meats; sleep as little as may be, walk much, rise early. For Gripes and Pains in the belly drink of the decoction of Mint, worm∣wood, Camomile, Roots, Herbs and Flowers, in White-wine and water, or each alone. Here note for a general rule, that if you boil any things in white or other wine, you must infuse them first over hot coals, letting them boil a walm or two first, and so stand, then boiling them very little again, strein them out; for the wine loses its virtue by boil∣ing. Touching the Hemorrhoids, they are inward, or outward; flowing or not. For the inward swelling apply a Cataplasm of the white bread and milk, with two yelks of eggs, a little Safron, and Ʋnguentum Populeon: but above all other a Pultis made of Verbaseum and Trifolium Hemorrhoi∣dale,
with fresh Butter, whether they be inward or outward: If you will have them flow apply Horse-leeches; and if they flow too much apply a Pultis of the white of an Egg and Bole-armenack, or burnt Paper, or Tinder, or pouder of red Coral a dram, in Plantan water or Red-wine inwardly; or the decoction of Yar∣row and Rest-beef. CHAP. XI. Of the Diseases belonging to Wo∣men. TO provoke Womens Courses drink a dram of yellow Am∣bar poudred fasting, in White-wine: use moderate exercise; drink a dram of the pouder of the root of Dittany in the decoction of the herb, a dram of the Troches of Myrrh in White-wine:
These will do ordinarily, but if not, you must consult the learned Physician: To stay their too much flowing, what I said in Bloody-fluxes may be good here; or drink a dram of the troches of white Amber in Plan∣tan-water and Beer; You must not stir much, but sleep much; rub the arms and shoulders well; apply Cup∣ping-glasses to the dugs; eat little and often; keep the belly loose. For the Fits of the Mother, rub and tye the thighs and legs well; let her smell stinking things, Wooll, Par∣tridg feathers burnt, Assa soetida; but below sweet perfumes of Civet, Roses and Musk, &c. Give her Mithridate to drink dissolved in Wormwood-water or Peony-seeds poudred in White-wine. For the Falling of the Womb, use contrary Remedies to cause it to re∣mount to its place, to wit sweet scents at nose, & stinking ones below for the Womb; and so quite contrary in all
the rest. Vomiting is here requisite; afterwards give pouder of Harts∣horn or Bay-leaves to drink in Red-wine. But because from the Womb proceed most diseases in women, in any difficulty neglect not to advise with the learned Physician; as like∣wise in case of Barrenness of women in time of fertility, for conservation of Man∣kind under the benediction of God; and forasmuch as their barrenness pro∣ceeds for the most part from cold causes, we will begin with that, leav∣ing the search of other causes both of men and women to the Physician. After she hath been well purged, the Womb must be fomented and perfu∣med with the decoction of Mugwort, Wormwood, Savin, &c. the day af∣ter take Electuar, Aaromatick, Nut∣meg, and Sugar of each one dram; or take night end morning in good wine a Tablet of the pouders of Mug∣wort, roots of Bistort, Nutmeg, in∣corporated
together with Sugar dis∣solv'd in Balm-water. The women accustomed to mis∣carry ought to use often the Con∣serves of Orange and Sage-flowers, Marmelade of Quinces, Dates, &c. As soon as she perceives the least sus∣picion of miscarrying, apply to her navil a hot loaf new out of the oven out in the middle, dipt in Malaga wine, and sprinkled with pouder of Cloves and Nutmegs, and bind it close on; apply to the loins this Plai∣ster, Mastick two ounces, Labda∣num three drams, Bistort root, Dra∣gons blood, Bole-armonack, Goats∣horn burnt, of each half a dram, Terra sigillata one dram, Frankincense, li∣quid Storax, Gum-arabick, of each one dram and half; Red Coral two scruples, Wax wash'd in Rose-water, and Turpentine two ounces: beat all in a Mortar with a hot Pestle, pouring on oil of Myrrh and Turpen∣tine, stirring it still with a hot Pestle
till it be thick enough, then spread it upon leather, and apply it to the reins and loins. You must take off the Plaister every day, and wash the loins and reins with equal portions of Rose-water and White-wine, and lay it on again. The Time of Delivery being come, and it be with difficulty, give her presently a drink made of two scru∣ples of fine Cinamon, Wood-cassia Bark, Troches of Myrrh of each one scruple, round Birthwort root half a scruple, Confectio Alchermes half a dram, syrup of Mugwort an ounce, Waters of Mugwort and Motherwort of each two ounces; or the decoction of Mugwort, Rue, and Dittany; or the juice of Parcely drawn with Vi∣negar or White-wine: Hypocras is good, or the decoction of Harts-horn and Ivory: It is good to make her sneeze, with fine pouder of Pellitory of Spain, and Tobacco, Oris, &c. For the Pains after Travel, the
Oil of sweet Almonds is very good to prevent them, and being come is cu∣red by distilled water of Peach flow∣ers; or this pouder in White-wine, roots of great Consound, Nutmeg and Ambar, finely poudred, with a little Ambergris added. Too much milk sometimes troubles them newly deliver'd, for which a Pultis of the great Celendine, Rue, Mint, Fenel, boild in water and vine∣gar, will be good: If the dugs be inflam'd anoint them with oil of Poppies, or Henbane, and the next day apply a Pultis made only of Bean meal and Vinegar, anointing the dugs and parts about with an Ointment made of an ounce of Bole-armenac, Bistort root as much, with oil of Ro∣ses and Myrrh, and Vinegar. This Pultis is very proper, made of two small handfuls of dried Mint, one of Wormwood, boiled a good while, then add Bean, Lupines, and Orobe meal of each one ounce, with oil of
Lillies. If the blood be clotted dis∣solve it by this Pultis; take four ounces of Smallage, Oxymel simple two ounces, Red chices meal two ounces, as much of Lupins: If it will not dissolve, and that the kernels of the dugs are hard, and tend to ripen, take Marsh-mallow and white Lilly roots of each four ounces, twenty figs, boil them till they be soft, then add fresh Porks grease, or Butter enough for a Pultis. Now if you would procure a great quantity of milk, boil Barley and a little Fenel-seed in her broth, or Posset-drink.
CHAP. XII. Of breeding of Worms and Teeth in Children. AS in the diseases of Women the Womb is for the most part concerned, so are Worms in Children the greatest enemy; wherefore 'tis good in all their diseases to add some Medicine contrary to the vermin: so that it is to use Children betimes to take Medicines, to the end they may the more easily be cured of their diseases; then you must not wait till the worms be grown, but prevent them by giving them every new Moon some Wormseed in a Fig, or Honey, or Treacle, or pap of an Apple; the Juice of Orange is good with its Rind poudred, giving one or other apart with a spoonful of Salad-oil. Syrup
of Limons kills the worms; so doth Harts-horn poudred mith Sugar; Mint poudred with Wine; Corian∣derseed with the Juice of Limons or Pomegranates: but Rubarb is very effectual given in fine pouder in Sca∣bious water; or to little Children a scruple in Milk, or a little Honey of Roses. The great worms that are voided by Children, dryed and pou∣dred are excellent to drive out the same, drank in milk, wine or broth. Outward applications serve much to this effect; such are Wormwood bruised and fryed and applyed to the stomach, and mole of the head. Here note that Syrup of Cichory with Rubarb is not only excellent in this case, but in all other diseases of In∣fants. Children are apt to vomit, for which let them wear upon their sto∣mach an Emplaster of Mastick thus made; spread some Virgins wax up∣on leather, and in the middle make a hole, wherein put melted Mastick.
For Teeth rub them with Butter and Honey, &c. if nothing will do, open the gums with a Groat or Lancet. CHAP. XIII. Of Fevers. HItherto of Remedies for certain particular diseases; now for those proper against Fevers that afflict the whole body. For the cure of a Continued Fever let blood if you can presently, then eat very little, and drink Ptisan or small Beer, giving cool Clysters, as you may see before; to abate great drought wash his mouth with Vinegar and Rose-water, and chew Sorrel leaves, or drink the juice. The Quotidian Fever is combated with before the fit with the Juices of Betony and Plantan mixt, or the de∣coction
of Cinquefoil, Scolopendria, Middle bark of Elder, Betony leaves, roots of Smallage, Parcely, Raddish, &c. For the Tertian Fever the Proverb is found true, Ill luck is good for something; two or three fits thereof being good to purge the body of su∣perfluous humours in the Spring, but more are prejudicial; and dangerous in the Autum, for fear it turn to a Quartane: You may lose your Ter∣tian Fever by these Remedies, Take the Bark of a young Walnut-tree, that next to the wood; bruise it in a Mortar, and steep it in White-wine eight or ten hours, strein it and drink it oft; this is for strong bodies. Likewise steep in White-wine, Plan∣tane, and Monks-Rubarb; give it when the fit's upon them. The juice of Plantan, Purcelan, Pimpernel are good apart: And in all Fevers re∣member it is a chief matter to let blood, and keep the body loose by
gentle Purges or Clysters, &c. as Catholicon, Lenitive Electuary, Dia∣prunes, &c. For the Quartane Fever many things are given, but few to purpose; these following are found good from experience; The seeds of Dwarf-Elder, one dram finely poudred for weak bodies, a dram and a half for strong ones, and half a dram for Chil∣dren, steeped an hour in White-wine or Claret, and given when the fit sei∣ses; or dried Nutmeg upon the hot pan and poudred, half a dram given every morning; but on the Fit day in White-wine; or bind Pidgeons cut in two to the soles of the feet. In this Fever you must not drink water but wine, with very little water or strong drink.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Pestilence. IN time of such miserable calamity two things are to be done, to wit to preserve ones self as much as may be from the disease, and to seek, under God, for a cure, if possest therewith. The most assured way of preservation is not to communi∣cate with the infected, but dwell in a sound place, the air cold and dry, rather than moist and hot; and to remember the commands of our An∣cestors, citò, longè, tardè; that is, to go quickly from the place infected, and to go a long way to a healthful place, from whence to be slow in re∣turning till all danger be past: But if they must remain in an infected place, then to prevent, if possible, the
Disease; you must Bleed and Purge, and Sweat, and keep all things sweet and clean, and good Diet; keep Fires by night if in Summer, and all day in Winter; burn Frankincense and Benjoin, and Storax; never go out fasting. Take Pill. Ruffi, 3 or 4 or 6 Pills going to Bed, for cure and prevention; and Mitridates his Remedy composed only of one Figg and Walnuts, and Rue six Leaves, and a little Salt beaten together: comfortable Wines, and Waters, and Brandy are good, having a care there be not a great Feaver; then you must give Juice, or Syrrup of Lemmons with Barley-water, &c. in Bleeding, you must have a care not to Let Women Blood in their last Moneth, or newly Delivered, or weak and decrepid Folks, or those that have Swellings: In lieu of Bleed∣ing may be used Cupping-glasses to the Shoulders and Thighs; after Bleeding give Cassia or Manna the
next day: Now for outward appli∣cations you must here use no re∣percussive Medicines: After Bleed∣ing apply to the Bunch a Pultis made of Figgs, Raisins stoned, and Leven beaten together with Oyl of Camo∣mil, or Bread and Milk, and Lilly Roots boiled together, or Diachilum cum Gummi, or Paracelsus Plaister, or Ammoniacum, or Galbanum, and open the Aposteme before it be quite ripe; then dress it with Ʋn∣guentum Basilicum with Tents from first to last. CHAP. XV. Of the Gout. FOr the Gout, whether in the Hands or Feet, or Knees, or Hips, the chief remedy is to Let blood in a hot cause more than once if occasion be, & purge gently as you have been taught be∣fore,
if they be Feaverish, and give Clysters, and then cool drinks as in Fevers, then use Ointments to ap∣pease the pain; and Cataplasms, and Plaisters, and Oyl of Roses and Lillies, & a Pultis of Whitebread and Milk, and Oyl of Roses; and to boil Hemlock and Henbane in Milk, and make a Pultis with Whitebread and Ʋnguentum Populeon, Ʋnguentum Anodynum, and bathe with Milk and warm Water, and apply Diapal∣ma Plaister softned with Oyl of Lillies or Roses; and Emplastrum de Ranis; or if from a cold cause use Paracelsus Plaister, and Oxycroceum, Diachylon cum gummi, cicuta, & Oint∣ments and Plaisters of Tobacco are excellent in all Gouts and Sciatica's, so is Oyl of Exeter, and Oyl of Spike and Turpentine.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Cure of outward pains in any part of the Body. FOr pain o'th Members the Oyl of Dwarf-elder is very proper, anointing the place first therewith, if it be from a cold cause, and then apply hot Emplaisters, as Paracel∣sus, &c. as before in the Gout. Also Brandy and fresh Butter, or Pork∣grease, never forgetting if the Pati∣ent have need to Let blood i'th Arm, more than once if there be oc∣casion, and to purge gently two or three times together; as you have been taught before sufficiently if you be ingenious. The Oyl of Elder-flowers, and Earth Worms mixt to∣gether are excellent good, and this following; take Pitch and Rosin,
new Wax, of each half an Ounce, fresh Butter half a Pound; melt them gently over the Fire in an Earthen Glazed Vessel, all but the Rozin, which is to be cast in, in small pieces when the other have boiled a little, or begin to boil; then stir them well with a Wooden stick to incorporate them; with this composition being warm anoint your parts pained, and rub them as long as they can endure it, then lay an Emplaister of the same thereon, and so roul it up, if it be in a place that may be rouled; after it hath lain on twenty four hours, take the Plaister off, and anoint and rub it again, and lay it on again, and do so every twenty four hours till they be well. The Ointment and Plaister of Tobacco hath done great good to many.
CHAP. XVII. Of Bruises in any part of the Body. FOr Bruises, whether from blows, or falls, or any other cause, these remedies following are very good: Lupine-meal boil'd a little in Wine to the consistence of a Pultis; Bean-meal boil'd in Vinegar, Radish∣es beat with Hony takes away the marks of the Bruise. The leaves of Consound mixt with Oyl of Saint-Johns-worth, dissolves the clotted Blood in any part of the Body that comes from Bruises. This Oyl fol∣lowing is excellent good for all Bruises, and shrunk Sinews also. Take a young fat Fox, take off his Skin, then open him, and take ou his Garbage, then boil him who
in common Oyl with Bay-berries, and Sage-leaves, and Marsh-mallow-roots till the Flesh part from the Bones; and after you have broke the Bones put them into the Vessel again, to boil the Marrow out, and let them boil a little, then press all hard out and keep it in Earthen Glazed Vessels for your use. CHAP. XVIII. Of green Wounds and old Sores. FOr Wounds from what cause so∣ever you have several cheating Mountebanks that go up and down the Country, promising you Infal∣lible Cures by their Balsomes for∣sooth. But if the Wound be of any moment, you'll find them most com∣monly deceive you, and so you have work made for the Chirurgion, and that which perhaps if at first ar∣tificially
handled, might with ease have been Cured, becomes it may be desperate, or difficult, with hazard of Life or Limb: So that I thought good to give you this caution, and withal to give you the most approved way of Curing green Wounds, and Ulcers, and old Sores. First, Then if any one happen to be wounded, be sure to have in a readiness always i'th house, that most incomparable Balsom called by the name of Linimentum Arcei, to be had at the Apothecaries, and if the wound be not hallow, spread some of it upon Lint, and apply to the wound, and bind it up; but if it be hollow, you must melt it in a Spoon, and pour it warm into the wound, or dissolve some in Oyl of Turpen∣tine, and pour it in, or inject it in with a Syringe, or you may make this Sovereign Balsome your self, thus. Take Gum Elemi and Turpentine,
of each an Ounce and a half, Rams Suet old and tried two Ounces, old Hogs Fat tried one Ounce; the manner of making this Liniment is this, dissolve the Gum in Sack, and let the Sack cimmer away gently o∣ver the fire, then put in the Fats, and lastly the Turpentine. Others make great esteem of To∣bacco in the Cure of green Wounds and old Sores; either boiling the Leaves, or Juice alone thereof in Wine and Oyl, or by adding Tur∣pentine, Wax, and Gum, and Rosin; and so making Balsoms, and Un∣guents, and Emplaisters thereof for the said use; as for example, take this Receipt from the Colledge of Physicians of London, of an Unguent of Tobacco. Take two pound of the Leaves of Tobacco bruised, let them steep all night in Red Wine, and in the morning boil them with a pound of Pork Grease till the Wine be wast∣ed;
then strein it, and add to the streining half a pound of the Juice of Tobacco, Rosin four Ounces; then boil them again to the wasting of the moisture, and towards the end sprinkle in, of the roots of round Birthwort poudered finely, two Oun∣ces, and as much Wax as will suf∣fice to make it of the consistence of an Unguent. Or this way. Take four pound of the Juice of Tobacco, and boil it in a Skillet or Glazed Pipkin, with half a pound of Oyl-Olive till the Juice be wast∣ed; then put thereto of Rosin and Bees-wax, of each half a pound; when they are melted and mixt together, take them off the fire, and stir them continually with an Iron Spathula, and adding thereto half a pound of Venice Turpentine, put them again over the Coals, and stir them very well together; lastly take them off the fire, and pour them into a Glazed Earthen Vessel, and let it stand till it
be cold, then stop it and cover it close, and keep it for the uses afore∣said; this will last for many years. Another Balsome of Tobacco. Take the Leaves of Tobacco, as many as you can hold between your two Hands, clean them well with a Linnen Cloth Leaf by Leaf without washing them, beat them in a Marble Mortar, with a Wooden Pestle, then strein the Juice through a Linnen Cloth, the which put into a Posnet or Glaz'd Pipkin, with Rosin and Burgundy Pitch, of each a quarter of a pound, half a pound of Bees∣wax, as much fresh Porks Grease: all these mixt together shall be put up∣on a gentle fire, for about the space of an hour, skimming it alway with a Scummer, or till it be boild e∣nough, which you will know by dropping a little upon a Board, and if it be of the consistence of boiled Honey it is enough; then take it off the fire, and add thereto four Oun∣ces
or half a pound of Venice Tur∣pentine, then mix it over the fire, and so pour it out as before. Or thus, Take three Ounces of new Bees∣wax, and as much Rosin, melt them in a Posnet or Pipkin, as before, over a Charcole-fire; when they be∣gin to boil, throw in a pound and a half of the Juice of Tobacco, boil them altogether over a gentle fire, for five or six hours, in which time the moisture will be consumed, then strain it through a strong Linnen Cloth, and put it into the Pipkin a∣gain, adding thereto half a pound of Turpentine, mix them over the fire, and so keep them for your use as before: The simple Balsome of To∣bacco may be made this way, Take what quantity of Leaves of Tobacco you will, bruise them as before, and put the Juice into a thick Glass Bottle, with as much Oyl of Olives, and put the Glass well stopt
into Horse-dung, and deep covered for forty days, at the end take it out, and you will find a Balsome swimming o'th top, the which pour very gently off from the dreggs, and keep it in a Glass for your use. These Compositions of Tobacco, are likewise good for Bruises and old Ʋl∣cers, and cold Tumours, &c. Another excellent Balsome: Put into a glazed Earthen Veffel, Brim∣stone finely Poudred and Salted, pouring thereon as much Oyl as will swim above the Brimstone four fingers breadth; put them i'th Sun and let them stand till they be thick, by stir∣ring them once or twice every day, then pour off the clearest for your use. Another excellent Oyntment for green wounds: Take an Ounce of Oleum Petroleum, half an Ounce of Venice Turpentine, and as much Oyl of Olives, two drams of Mastich; mix them all together, and boil them
over a gentle fire, till they come to the consistence of an Oyntment or Balsome; and keep it in an Earthen Glazed Vessel close stopt for your use. CHAP. XIX. Of Swellings and Apostumes. FOr any new Swelling, apply pre∣sently a Pultis made only of the Crums of White-bread, boil'd in Milk, and when it is boil'd to the thickness of a Pultis, add some Oyl of Roses, or fresh Porks Grease, or fresh Butter thereto: or Marsh-mal∣low and white Lilly-roots, and Figs boil'd in Water with Oyl, fresh Butter, or Pork Grease as before, will break it if it must be broken. Also Bean and Barly-meal boil'd in Hony and Water, dissolves Swel∣lings, and brings them to Ripeness.
The Leaves of wild Clary, steept in Vinegar, and applyed with Hony resolves Apostumes. If these do not you must Advise with the expert Chirurgeon, and remember always to roul the part swell'd with Linnen Roulers. Those kind of Apostumes we call Felons, may be ripened and softned by these means following: Take Wheat-flower, and Pork Grease, Hony, and the Yelk of an Egg, mix them hot over the fire, and ap∣ply it to the Felon. Or this, take Bean∣meal, Leven, Figgs, Raisons ston'd, mix them together as before, and apply it; or Plantan Leaves beaten in a Mortar with Oyl of white Lil∣lies, and apply'd thereto; or Sheeps Dung steept and mixt with Vinegar. To conclude this Chapter, I will give you the Receipt of a most excel∣lent Plaister of Tobacco, against all kinds of Cold and hard Swellings what∣ever, and to heal old Ʋlcers.
Take half a Pound of the Juice of Tobacco, of the Juice of Worm∣wood three Ounces, Oyl of St. Johns∣worts simple, Oyl of Elder, of each an Ounce and a half, of the Leaves of Wormwood, Consound, and Fig∣wort of each one handful, White∣wine a quarter of a Pint: Let the green herbs boil in the Juices, and Wine and Oyls in a Posnet, stirring them continually with a wooden Spathula to the bottom, that they burn not to; but let them not boil till they be too thick and no moisture left; then taking them and streining them hard with your hands or a Press, dissolve in that Liquor you streined, four Ounces of Bees-wax, and two Ounces of Bucks Grease or Suet; then take it off the fire, and Incorporate therein two Ounces of Venice Turpentine, Frankincense, Mastick and Myrrh, of each one Ounce, finely Poudred apart, and so when 'tis cold enough, make it
up into rowls of plaster, to be spread upon leather when you have occasi∣on to use it. CHAP. XX. Of Burnings and Scaldings. FOr any kind of Burning or Scald∣ing, whether directly by Fire or boiling Water, or Oils, Pitch, Fats, or scalding Lead, or Gun-powder, &c. these Remedies following you will find to be profitable, and pro∣per for the purpose: First of all you must see to take out the fire that is in the burnt part, as well to advance the cure, as to prevent blisters and crusts which may follow, without proper remedies, and indeed the marks of the burn that appear after the cure. First then, as soon as 'tis burnt a∣noint it with Salad-oil and Water beaten well together, and strew
thereon Wheat-flower; and dip Lin∣nen clothes or Flax Tow in the said Oil and Water, and lay them on; or Rose or common water with the whites of Eggs beaten to water, and oil of Roses, or Lillies, or Poppies; or for all use Snow-water if you have it; and indeed you should never be without it. If notwithstanding all this through the malice of fire bli∣sters shall arise, you must then cut them with Cisers, and lay thereon fresh butter boil'd, oil of Roses and yelks of Eggs beaten together: The Ʋnguentum Basilicum will cure them perfectly, or this Unguent follow∣ing: Take half a pound of fresh But∣ter well boil'd and strein'd, Ceruse and Tutty, washed both in Plantan or Rose-water, of each half an ounce, burnt Lead a quarter of an ounce, with four yelks of Eggs, mix them all together to the form of an Un∣guent. A Pultis made of the leaves of Bur-dock with the whites of Eggs
cures burns; also Hen-dung mixt well with hony of Roses, or oil of Roses: The decoction of Mallow leaves and fresh Butter beaten a great while together, and applied in man∣ner of a Liniment, with a Cole∣wort leaf, a little warm, is good to separate the burnt crusts, if any: so are yelks of Eggs with oil of Vio∣lets mixt together. To appease the pain coming from burns, imply this Unguent; Take old Bacon grease melted in an earthen glazed Vessel, and pour it into Rose-water, then strein it through a linnen Cloth, then wash it five or six times in Plantan-water; to four ounces of Lard so prepar'd add two yelks of Eggs, and make them into an Ointment. The oil of the yelks of Eggs is singular to appease the pains; and that the marks of the burn may not be seen after the cure, you must wash the part often with Plantan water, with a little Allum dissolved therein. To
remove such Cicatrices likewise a Liniment made of the herb call'd Porks bread, beaten with Housleek is very proper. CHAP. XXI. Of a Scald-head. THis is a loathsome disease, and requires skill to cure it well. Out of many sound Experiments make use of these following: Take two handfuls of the herb Celandine, four ounces of Bay salt, and as much quick Brimstone finely poudred; beat the herb well in a stone or wooden Mor∣tar, with a wooden Pestle; that done boil them in sweet Oil altogether; then take them from the fire, and strein them through a Linnen Cloth, to extract their substance; where∣with anoint the head of the Patient night and morning.
Another Remedy. After having wash'd the head with Beef Piss, and rubbing it therewith till blood come almost, then lay on the pouder of Hens-dung dried in the Oven, and thereon an Emplaster made of the Soot of a Furnace mingled with strong White-wine Vinegar. Another is this. Take two ounces of common Turpentine well wash'd first in common water, then in Fu∣mitary water, fresh. Butter one ounce wash'd in Rose-water, Bay-salt half an ounce, two Yelks of Eggs, the Juice of Limons and Oil of Roses, of each one ounce, a scruple of Cam∣phir, and mix them together, and make an Ointment. Another for the same is made of Roch-allum, Vitriol, and Verdigreese, and quick Brimstone, Soot of a Fur∣nace, of each three drams, Camphir two drams, Oil of sweet Almonds, and Porks Marrow of each half an ounce; incorporate them well toge∣ther,
and make them into an Un∣guent. Sometimes it happens that we search for that a great way off which is nigh at hand; and that Me∣dicines of a small price do as much good as dear Drugs; or as we say in the English Proverb, Far fought and dear bought is good for Ladies; as may be seen in this matter; for Ju∣niper-berries boil'd in Vinegar and Honey, and apply'd in manner of a Pultis, is excellent good. In Infants it is much more easie to cure the Scald-head, than in those of riper years; and in these more easie than in old folks, the time rendring it in∣curable; wherefore it is very con∣venient to distinguish between age and age, and remedy and remedy, to go artificially to work; that is to say, for the young use gentle remedies, and to others stronger. Note here that in little children this Disease is commonly healthful, it delivering them from the Falling,
sickness and Convulsions, and other fearful distempers, by purging them from the impure blood they con∣tracted in their Mothers womb. The difficult sort of Scald-heads are distinguished into dry ones and moist ones: For the dry one begin with this decoction: Take two hand∣fuls of Fumitary, Monks-rubarb, and roots of Mallows, flowers of Meli∣lot and Camomile, of each two small handfuls, Linseed, Beans and Lupines, of each a quarter of a pound; boil them in Lee made of the ashes of a Vine-tree, or Fig-tree; bathe and wash the head therewith twice a day, then anoint it with this Unguent fol∣lowing: Take a pound of Lard, Fu∣mitary, Monks-rubarb, and Ivy, one handful, slice them very small; then add two ounces of oil of Bays, four ounces of oil of Mastick, half an ounce of Turpentine, four ounces of the juice of Colorts; beat all these well together, and then let them steep
twenty four hours, then let them boil till the juice be consum'd; then strein it, and anoint the head there∣with, laying on after a Colewort leaf. For the moist Scald-head wash and bathe it with a decoction, as before, wherein you have dissolv'd Roch-Al∣lum; then anoint it with the Unguent call'd Ʋnguentum de minio, to be had at the Apothecaries; then take Ver∣degreese, with Allum, Honey, and Vi∣negar, of each two ounces, a dram of Arsenic, two of Sublimate, all in pouder; boil them together till they begin to be thick enough for an Oint∣ment, and you will find this a mira∣culous Ointment. Here you must remember to cut the hair close, or shave it away first of all: some apply a Cap of pitch to tear it up by the roots.
CHAP. XXII. For the Scabs and Itch in the hands. FOr these in the hands the water of a Smiths Forge to wash and bathe the hands well in is good; or Allum-water, or the juice of Limons alone, the brine of salt Bacon, or brine of Pickle-herring, or Anchoves, the Lee made of Oak-ashes: then a∣noint with Ʋnguentum Nicotianum, or Enulatum cum Mercurio, or flower of Brimstone mixt with either of them: and so if the whole body, letting blood first, and purging, use those Ointments to anoint withal, using a temperate diet, and drinking as little strong drink as may be.
CHAP. XXIII. Of the Tetters and Ring-worms. THey are an unhandsom sight, and therefore to quit your self of them, note that against them are employ'd divers Remedies, ac∣cording to the diversity of the na∣ture of them: those that are not re∣bellious may be cured with gentle and mild remedies, but the rebelli∣ous and malignant with more diffi∣culty, by application of more vio∣lent and stronger remedies, as in the Chapter before. For the not rebel∣lious do thus; wash and bathe them in the decoction of Beans and Wheat in Vinegar: or take a thin slice of Veal, Beef, or Mutton, lay it upon the coals or Gridiron, then beat it with Vinegar and Mustard, and ap∣ply
this to the Tetter. Or take Fran∣kincense, Oil of Roses and Vinegar, and make an Ointment and anoint: Now if these will not do, being first applyed to rebellious ones, then ap∣ply your self to these following; First wash and bathe them with a decocti∣on of Lupines and Marsh-mallow roots, made in Vinegar to the con∣sumption of half; or with Plantan-water wherein hath been infused white Vitriol and burnt Alum. Or make an Unguent of two drams of Aloes dissolv'd in distill'd Vinegar. Oil of Wheat alone is excellent for this purpose; it is made by putting Wheat between two hot irons and the Oil will drop out; or else thus; Take some Wheat beaten and put it into a glass Vessel, and stop it close, and put it into a Kettle of water up∣on the coals, to keep the water hot, and not to make it boil, and so let stand three days together; at the end thereof take out the pouder and
you will find it moist; the which put into a Linnen Cloth, and press the oil hard out. CHAP. XXIV. Of Corns in the feet and toes. THese often hinder people from going in ease; and so ought to be considered, and to have remedies laid down for their help: for which are divers used, but these following may prove most effectual: some bathe and wash them first in a Decoction of herbs, and then cut them with a sharp Penknife, or Razor, as far as they can possibly go, then apply a Plaster of soft Wax red or green, ha∣ving been first steep'd 24 hours in strong White-wine Vinegar; for the Cinabar and Verdigreese, wherewith these Waxes are coloured, will kill
and take away the roots of the Corns. The same will these remedies follow∣ing do effectually, sometimes one, sometimes another, according to their divers properties; of which you may choose which will be best for your purpose, and make use of them, Gal∣banum and new wax mixt together; some take Lilly roots well boil'd, and then beaten with Porks marrow and apply it: some use onely Emplastrum de ranis cum mercurio. CHAP. XXV. Of the Ruffness and Chops in the hands and lips. THe Chops in the hands and lips coming from cold winds, or other causes inward or outward, are cured by these Remedies following; having first washed them with Barly-water,
then anoint them with Ʋn∣guentum rosatum, or Pomatum at the Apothecaries, or Capons Grease, or Oil of Wax is excellent, for it will cure them in a short time. CHAP. XXVI. Of Warts in any part of the body. THe juice of Limons kill Warts in any part of the body; or the same juice distill'd, or distill'd Vinegar; or the juice of the leaves and flowers of white Mullein: Oil of Vitriol & Brimstone are infallible, but you must use them warily: The juice of the stocks of Purselain and Housleek bruised in a Mortar with Bay-salt, and the Warts rub'd there∣with often, cures them in three or four days. FINIS.
