D289 12233461 56653
A COMPENDIOUS CHRONICLE OF THE KINGDOM OF PORTUGAL, FROM Alfonso the first King, to Alfonso the Sixth, now reigning. Together with A Cosmographical Description Of the Dominions of PORTVGAL. By JOHN DAUNCEY. LONDON: Printed by Tho. Iohnson, for Francis Kirkman, Henry Brome, and Henry Marsh, and are to be sold at their Shops. 1661.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr EDWARD HIDE, Earl of Clarendon, &c. Lord High Chancellor of ENGLAND. Right Honorable, THe Glories of your Name, make me ambitious to give you a testimony of my duty & observance. There be some whose vain-glory prompts them to think they by Dedi∣cations
honor their Patrons, but the whole world will judge me free from such va∣nity, when they shall perceive I have made my addresses to a Person, who besides his height of Nobility, is arrived at such a sublimity of Worth, Vertue, and Learning, that not onely the greatest Wits of the Age are bound to honor him; but must confess they receive their splendor and lu∣stre from him. Yet thus (my Lord) I make my self guilty of an almost in∣excusable presumption: the wisest of men may as well pre∣sent
somewhat worthy a De∣ity, as I any thing which may deserve your LORDSHIPS thoughts. It is not fit a Pigmy should call down a IOVE to protect him; but where there is so much worth, there must needs be an insuperable good∣ness; nor can he be justly bla∣med who onely aspires at the influence of a benevolent Star. I want the confidence to be∣seech your Lordship to ap∣prove this VVork, the honor will be sufficient if you accept it, as a pledge of that obser∣vance which all men are bound to pay you. I know your
Lordship not only to be vers't in all History, but (to your glory be it spoken) to have always studied the most wor∣thy Authors. And History is indeed a Treasure not onely enriching mens mindes with noble thoughts, but enanima∣ting them to great and Hero∣ick Actions. Your Lordships endeavors to make an Alliance between the two Renowned Crowns of England and Portugal, may justly claim all that can be said of that Kingdom, as a due Offering. This, though but a Breviate of the Story
of it, may perchance contain somewhat, though not at all worthy your Lordship, yet not wholly unworthy observa∣tion, which I hope may per∣swade your Generosity and goodness to grantit protection. England, my Lord, and every member of it, are be∣holding to your Lordships great wisdom; but should I undertake to praise all those noble Vertues for which you deserve their loves, that Ju∣stice which ballances all your actions; that Prudence which a whole Nation hath admi∣red; that Magnanimity which
hath rendred you unalterable in all the frowns and smiles of Fortune; that Liberality which hath made you King∣like, and that Temperance which shown in the height of Heavens, and Heavens-Vice-gerents favours, hath made you God-like, I should be enforced to unite the lar∣gest Encomiums, and lay them down as a due tribute, at the feet of your thrice-re∣nowned Fame. But (my Lord) I dare one∣ly reverence your Vertues, they must rather be the sub∣ject of my admiration than de∣scription.
Let it suffice then, that whilst all strive to offer up their labors to this Shrine, it will be sufficient excuse of my ambition to present this Mite, and amongst the num∣bers that thus sacrifice to your Worth, to be thought wor∣thy of that honorable Stile of being esteemed the meanest of Your Lordships most humble Servants, JOHN DAUNCEY.
TO THE READER. CUstom rather than my own Genius or Fancy, inclines me to make this address. Good things are but made worse by excuses, bad things never a whit the better: 'tis base and dis-inge∣nious to court a Reader to a good opinion of ones Work, and indeed a kinde of an endeavor to anticipate his judgement; which to the wise proves a fruitless la∣bor, and to the fools was altogether needless. I despair not but wise men may read this Book, the truth is, I desire all fools would let it alone: if it be unworthy the sub∣ject 'tis writ of, the disgrace will be less to be censured by an understanding per∣son, and the faults, I presume, fewer; for those of less judgement will be subject to attribute even the litteral errors of the ress, to the Authors ignorance.
Though I dare say thus much in Vin∣dication of this COMPENDIOUS CHRONICLE, That it is extra∣cted out of those Authors who have been udged by many to have writ best concer∣ing the Kingdom of Portugal, yet I will not presume to clear it of all errors; Ne∣o nostrum non peccat, homines sumus, on Dei: Tis impossible to be mortal, and not erre: yet all lapses cannot be accoun∣ted faults. Though I doubt not but to meet with those spirits which will make hem Crimes; for such is the depravity of the present age, that many men led on by atheistical Tenents, and blinded with self-conceit, dare adventure to censure even the Actions of the Deity. But I shall run into that error I promi∣sed to eschew, and though I beg not the Readers good opinion, endeavor to re∣strain or affright his clearer judgement: et every man say or think his pleasure of the Work; for therefore was it made pub∣ique, and if it be my fortune to fall under any rigid censures, where they are made with reason, I shall entertain them with espect, where without cause, laugh at hem with scorn.
The present Affairs were sufficient motives for me to publish it, both to clear the right King Iohn the fourth, had to the Crown, and Dominions of Portugal, and justify that Title which some mens ignorance or self-will would make deficient, terming a noble Redemp∣tion of a Nations Liberty, black and igno∣minious Rebellion: and methinks the joy at the Restoration of King ohn to the Crown of Portugal, doth so aptly quad∣rate with our's a the blessed return of our Gracious Soveraign Lord King Charls the Second, that I think it not im∣pertinent to conclude with a wish, That as our joy then corresponded with theirs, so all the Subjects of England would show the same examples of Loyalty to His Ma∣jesty, which Ferdinando Paceica did even to the memory of his King and Master, Sancho the Second. J. D.
The general Heads of the ensuing HISTORY. I. HEnry Duke of Lorain, Earl of Portu∣gal. page 3 II. Alfonso the First, first King of Portugal. ibid. III. Sancho the First, second King of Portugal. 10 IV. Alfonso the Second, third King of Portu∣gal. 15 V. Sancho the Second, fourth King of Portugal. 19 VI. Alfonso the Third, fifth King of Portugal and Algarve. 25 VII. Dionisio, the sixth King of Portugal, &c. 29 VIII. Alfonso the Fourth, seventh King of Por∣tugal. 29 IX. Pedro, eighth King of Portugal. 40 X. Ferdinand, ninth King of Portugal. 43 XI. John the first, tenth King of Portugal 45 XII. Edward, the eleventh King of Portugal. 50 XIII. Alfonso the Fifth, twelfth King of Portu∣gal. 52 XIV. John the Second, thirteenth King of Por∣tugal. 54 XV. Emanuel the First, fourteenth King of Por∣gal 56 XVI. John the Third, fifteenth King of Portu∣gal. 60 XVII. Sebastian, sixteenth King of Portugal. 61 XVIII. Henry, seventeenth King of Portugal. 64
XIX. Philip, the second, third, and fourth of that name, Kings of Spain, and 18; 19, 20, Kings of Portugal. page 69 XX. John the Fourth, One and twentieth King of Portugal. 88 XXI. Alfonso the Sixth, Two and twentieth King of Portugal. 182 XXII. A Cosmographical Description of Portu∣gal. 193 XXIII. Of Algarve. 198 XXIV. Of the Azores of Tercera Islands. 199 XXV. Of the Portugals Possessions in Asia. 204 XXVI. Of the Portugals Possessions in Africa. 207 XXVII. Of Brazile. 208
IF any person please to repair to my shop at the Sign of Iohn Fletchers head, on the back side of St. Clements without Temple-bar, they may be furnished with al Plays that were ever yet Printed; as also with several sorts of Romances, and Hi∣stories; more especially with the books hereafter mentioned, of which, though not printed for me, I have sufficient num∣bers, viz. The History of Independency compleat, being the 1. 2. 3. 4. and last part; which may be had single by such as have bought the others. Blood for blood, or Murthers Revenged, lively set forth in 35 Tragical Histories, some whereof have been the product of our late Times, published by T. N. Esq. Venus undrest: or the Practical part of Love, ex∣tracted out of the Extravagant and Lascivious Life of a fair, but subtile Female. That useful Book for Gentlemen and Travellers, being an exact Description of the several Counties and Shires in England: by Ed. Leigh, Esq. The Fanatick in his Colours: or the rise, height, and fall of Faction and Rebellion from 1648. unto 1661. with an Apendix concerning Allegiance, Government, and Order, by T. F. Summum Bonum: or, A Plain Path-way to Happiness, conducting the Soul to its Haven of Rest, through the Stormy passages of worldly troubles; to which is added a short Dialogue of that excellent vertue of the Submis∣sion of Mans will to the will of God. The Rudiments of Grammar, the rules composed in English verse, for the greater Benefit and Delight of young beginners, by Iames Sherley Gent.
A short view of the Life of the Illustrious Prince Hen. D. of Glocester, and May Princess of Orange, Brother and Sister to His Majesty of great Britain, lately Deceased, by T. M. Esq. Scutum Regale; the Royal Buckler; or, Vox Legis, a Lecture to Traytors. &c. Playes. The Beggars Bush, a Comedy written by Fran. Bea∣mont and Iohn Fletcher, both in folio, and in quarto. The Humerous Lieutenant; a Comedy, in folio. The Scornful Lady; a Comedy The Elder Brother▪ a Comedy. Philaster; or Love lies Bleeding, a Tragi-Comedy, &c. A King and no King. A Comedy. The Maids Tragedy. The Night-walker: or little Theif, a Comedy all writ∣ten by the same Authors, in quarto. The Qun of Arragn. A. Tragi-Comedy, written by William Habington Esq in folio. The Maids Revenge. A Tragedy, written by Iames Shirley, in quarto. Loves Mastriss. A Masque written by Tho. Heywood, in quarto. The City Night-cap. A Tragi-Comedy, by T. B. in 4. The Obstinate Lady. A Comedy, by Sir Aston Cockain Knight, in 4. The Obstinate Lady, and Trapolin, supposed a Prince, both Comedies; and several other Poems, all written by Sir Aston Cockain Knight, in octavo. Plutus: A Comedy in 4. Troades a Tragedy, Translated out of Seneca, by Sam. Pordage. Gent. in 8.
A Short and Compendious HISTORY Of the KINGDOM Of PORTUGAL THe Spaniards have a Proverb very vul∣gar amongst them, terming the Portu∣gueses, Pocos y Locos, few and fools, spoken I suppose rather out of derision, and disdain of that Nation, then that its peo∣ple and inhabitants really are so, for whosoe∣ver shall read their actions, will judge them to be managed with as much prudence, as the Spaniards can boast of; nor will any one believe that they could bring to perfection so great At∣chievements as they have done with onely a simple valor. 'Tis true, I believe them to be less numerous then the Castilians, and yet I am not of the opinion that they are so few, or their Kingdom
so inconsiderable, as the Spanish Proverb seems to make them, which one may easily imagine, when one considers that the Romans accounted Lusitania (that is Portugal by it self, when its bounds did not extend so far as now they do, and without the addition of Algarve, or Regnum Algarbiorum) to be one third part of Spain; much less can we think it so now, when not onely its proper bounds are enlarged, but like∣wise the Kingdom of Algarve added, besides the Island in the Atlantick sea, and their great conquests in Asia, Africa, and America. But to return to the Kingdom it self, and its original various fortunes after the decay and de∣clension of the Roman Empire, was it subject unto, before it was setled under a Prince of its own. The Alani were the first that preyed upon it, and endeavored to plant in it, but had scarce begun to do so, but themselves were dri∣ven out by the Swemans, and constrained to go seek another habitation; these for some time enjoyed it peaceably, making Braga their Impe∣rial City, till in the general Inundation of the overflowing Gothes and Vandals, they with the rest of that part of the continent, which is cir∣cumscribed by the sea, and the Pyrenean Moun∣tains, became vassals to these irresistable Con∣querors, who living a long time in quiet, en∣joyed their conquest, and were the first that in these parts entertained the Christian Religion, till the Moors like a more violent flood, fell in upon them, and with the greatest part of Spain, possessed themselves likewise of that Kingdom.
But some parts of Spain, after many years sla∣very, strugling for their liberty, this Kingdom was in part recovered by the King of Castile, and by them enjoyed, till at length it gained a King of its own, the maner thus: Henry the second Duke of Lorrain, whom some affirm to be Nephew to Godfrey of Bolloi∣gne, (though others differ both in the person and his alliance to him) flying from the fury of Henry the fifth Emperor, came into Spain, where (moved with a generous emulation of his Uncle, who was gone to the conquest of Ierusalem) offered his service the subjection of the Moors, and in short time arrived by his valorous atchievements against those enemies of the Christian Religion, grew into so much repute with Alfonso the 6. King of Castile, that he gave him his base daughter Teresia in marriage, with his whole ac∣quists in Portugal for her dower, though with no other title then that of Counte, or Earl, some further addition he made to his Dominions, and in the year 1094. had a son, who after his grand∣father was named Alphonso, at last overborn with the burden of seventy seven years, he died in the year 1112. ALFONSO the I. First King of Portugal. ALfonso his son, who from his very child∣hood had been bred up under his father
in Military excercise, after his death valorously prosecuted his victories against the Moors, and against the Kings of Leon; which Wars he ma∣naged with so much courage as was admirable in a Prince so young. The Count of Trastama∣rense despising his youth, took to wife his mo∣ther Teresia, and from that marriage drew occa∣sion to wage War with him; Alfonso to vindi∣cate his sleightings, cheerfully encountred him, and after the diverse accidents of several bat∣tels took him prisoner, and forced him to re∣gain his liberty to give him to wife his sister Uracca, with that part of the land for her Dower, which had been the occasion of the War. Yet some there be that differ both in the occasion of the marriage and the contest. Alfonso likewise fought several battels with his Grand-father Alfonso the 6. King of Castile, and in one battel took him prisoner near one of his Castles called Arcos del val de vez, upon whose release he had conferred upon him the title of Duke of Portugal; he afterwards im∣ployed his forces against the Saracens, from whom he took Leirida, Torre Naova, and seve∣ral other places. Whereupon the King Ismaurus, who was the most powerful amongst all the Mauritamans, calling to his assistance four other Kings, with an Army of four hundred thousand men, inva∣ded Portugal, but his fortune corresponded not with his numbers, for Alfonso encountring this great power with a small Army, overthrew them, and slew, or took prisoners all the five Kings;
in memory or which ignal Victory, Alphonso bore five Escutchions in his Arms though others are pleased to affirm it was in memory of the five wounds of our Savior, seen by him in a Vi∣sion just before the fight. The soldiers made proud with this exraordi∣nary success, thinking the title of Duke too low for their Commander, saluted Alphonso with the tile of King, which Alphonso accepted; and returning home enriched with spoils, addi∣cted himself to the exercise of his Regal power, by calling a general Council of the three E∣states, to wit, the Clergy, Nobility, and Com∣mons, for the better establishing (by the con∣sent of the whole people) that Crown upon his head, which the Soldiers love had conferred up∣on his merit. This general Assembly being met in the City of Lamego, and in the Church of St. Almacave, the King came thither, and seating himself upon the Royal Throne, but as yet unadorned with his Ensigns of Majesty, according to ap∣pointment the King▪ Deputy Don Lorenzo Ve∣negas, spake to the Estates as followeth, You are here assembled by the Authority of King Alphonso, to see the Popes Letters and Re∣solve, to confirm him for your King: Whereat the whole Estates with one voice cried, We will that he shall be our King. Upon which the Deputy demanded, shall he only be your King, and not his sons after him? They all answered, he so long as he lives shall be our King, and after his death his sons shall succeed. Give him
then the Royal Ensigns, said the Deputy. They answered, we give them in the name of God, and therewithall the Arch-Bishop of Braga pla∣ced the Crown upon the Kings head, and gave him the Scepter in his hand, with all accustomed Ceremonies; which done, his Majesty rose up, and drawing his sword spake to this effect, Blessed be God that hath been my helper, with this sword I have delivered you, and overcome our enemies, and now that you have made me your King, let us make Laws for the government of the Kingdom. They answered, so we will, dread Soveraign, we will make such Laws as shall seem good and convenient to you, and we and all our children and posterity will be wholly at your command. And accordingly several Laws were then and there immediately made; the sum of which were: 1. That King Alfonso should be Master of the Kingdom, and that after him there might be no troubles in the choosing of a King, his Son should reign after him, his Grand-childe, and so from Father to Son in secula seculorum. 2. That if the eldest Son should dye during the life of the Father, the next brother should be King, and so forward. 3. That if the King should dye without issue, having a brother he should succeed, but not his sons without consent of the Estates. 4. That if the King should have onely daugh∣ters, the eldest should be Queen after her father, upon condition that she be married to a native of the
Kingdom, and that he be a Nobleman, who should not have the power to take upon him the name of King, until he had a son born, nor should he till then wear a Crown on his head, or take the right hand of his wife. 5. That it should be for ever held for a Law among the Portugals, that the Kings eldest daugh∣ter should marry a Native of the Country, that so the Crown might never descend to Forreigners, and that in case she should marry a Forreign Prince, she should be excluded from her right of succession, for they would not have that Kingdom, which themselves by their own valor, and by the effusion of their own blood, without the aid or assistance of any strangers, had made, so go out of the race of the Portugals. The Crown by these Laws and Statutes con∣firmed, Alfonso as he was advanced in Title, so he addicted himself to higher and greater en∣terprizes, in five moneths siege he added the great and populous City of Lisbone to his Crown, not without the loss of thousands of valiant sol∣diers, and as many hazards of his own life; some affirm that in this War the number of the slain amounted to no less then two hundred thousand men. This magnanimous King likewise made innu∣merable acquists both of one side and the other of the Tagus, he slew both the Kings of Leon, and Castile, but at length wounded in a battel, he was no longer able to follow the Wars in person, for what with his wound, and what with age, being now sixty six years old, he had
not strength enough to mount on horseback, he therefore bequeathed his command over his Armies to his eldest son Sanctius or Sancho, but still reserving to himself the superintendency of all. Having thus relinquished the Wars, he ad∣dicted himself wholly to works of piety, and to endeavor the flourishing of the Christian Re∣ligion; he built within his Kingdom one hun∣dred and fifty Churches and Monasteries, all which he enriched with great revenues. Amongst the rest he built that at Conimbria, from whence that famous University, called, Academia Conimbricense had its Original. In this Monastery, called that of the Holy Cross, he died, at ninety one years of age, on the 9. of December Anno 1185. and here he remained, buried in a little Tomb, scituated in an Angle of that Church, till such time as King Emanuel, affected with the Fame of his Sanctity, erected for him a most stately Monument, which is at this day to be seen. By Uracca his first wife, daughter to the Count Trastamarense, he had no children, where∣upon at fifty two years of age, and in the seventh year of his reign, he took to wife Mafalda, sister to Amadeo Earl of Morenna, by whom he had many children, Henry the first died in his child∣hood; Sancho who succeeded him in the King∣dom; Uracca who was married to Ferdinando King of Leon, though this match was again made void, the Pope not approving of it; Therasia, whom some Historians have likewise called Ma∣tilda,
married to Phillip the first Earl of Flan∣ders. He had likewise diverse natural children, amongst whom one named Alphonsus, who was great Master of the Knights of Rhodes. King Alphonso was certainly a great soldier, a valiant Captain, and a magnanimous King; in all his words and actions there appeared a kinde of Majesty, and sublimity of minde; his liberality and justice made him feared by his enemies, and adored by his subjects; strength of body, and greatness of minde, concurred in him to make him the most worthy and admired of the age he lived in; he never undertook any War, but either to right his injured subjects, or to propagate the Christian Religion; amongst his greatest facts of Arms he never forgot acts of piety, but always before any battel used with vows and prayers, to beg the protection of hea∣ven. He died, having arrived at the highest pitch of glory, wept for by his people, and la∣mented by the very Moors themselves, who ha∣ted him; thus topt with all triumph, happy in a numerous and as generous an issue, weary of worldly vanities; he departed this life, in hopes to receive in heaven the reward of his piety and vertue.
SANCHO the I. Second King of Portugal. SAncho his eldest son (indeed the onely legi∣timate son he had living) succeeded to Al∣phonso, he was born at Conimbria the 11. of November Anno 1154. where he was likewise educated until the fourteenth year of his age in all those studies and exercises, which are proper for a Prince born to command; he afterwards profited under his fathers tutorage in the Art Military, in which emulating his fathers valor, and greatness, he did things worthy of himself, gaining love from the soldiery, and respect from the people; he accompanied his father in three Victories, in which he nobly adventured his life. His father being dead, he took upon him the government of the Kingdom, and was Crowned the 12. of December 1185. three days after his fathers death, being aged two and thirty years, and finding the Kingdom at the beginning of his reign freed from the incursions of the Moors, he applied himself wholly to make the peace en∣joyed by his Kingdom, profitable to his sub∣jects; he caused a multitude of fields to be til∣led, most of which were before a receptacle for wilde beasts, and part of them laid waste by the late Wars, with so much diligence did he addict himself to these things, that by the vulgar he
was called the King of Husbandmen. He applied himself afterwards with the same industry to restore publique edifices and stru∣ctures, he rebuilt all Castles which had either been destroyed by the Moors, or spoiled by other accidents of the War; he restored the Cities, Towns, and Fortresses, to their pristine splendor, enriching them with new edifices, and supplying them with new inhabitants; he gave likewise great Revenues to all the orders of Knight-hood, but principally to that of Saint Giacomo. Whilest thus he took care of his subjects good, and the increasing the Revenue of his Crown, there were driven by contrary winds and raging seas into the Port of Lisbone a fleet of thirteen sail of ships belonging to several Christian Prin∣ces, going to the Holy War, with the assistance of these King Sancho, invaded the Kingdom of Algarve, then possessed by the Moors, making this compact with the Christian Princes that commanded the Navy, that they should enjoy the whole spoil of the enemy, whilest he reserved for himself onely the Cities and the glory. The Impress proved not very difficult, al∣though the City of Sylva the Metropolis of the Kingdom, made a long and obstinate resistance, for at length it yielded; but he enjoyed not quietly the possession of this Kingdom for the Moors, uniting themselves to revenge the in∣juries done to their Nation, he was constrain'd to flie to a defence of himself so much the more dangerous, by how much the more unequal; and
had with the kingdom of Algarve lost likewise his native kingdom of Portugal, if God of his mercy had not bridled and curbed the fury of the Moors by a merciless devouring Pestilence, which made them with the loss of two hundred thousand soldiers, return flying home. But King Sancho was no sooner freed from these dangers, but another almost over-whelm∣ed his kingdom, by continual rains, most part of the land was overflown, by reason of which it not being possible to till the ground, a famine ensued, and that at length brought forth the plague, so that the whole kingdom was almost destroyed, the Cities and Towns were depo∣pulated, the Country remained unmanured; nor was there to be seen over the whole king∣dom other but spectacles of ruine and misery. This sad condition of the Christians made the Moors once more adventure in the field, and without any resistance possess themselves of the greatest part of the Kingdom of Algarve; the City of Sylva was rendred at discretion, whilest the necessities of the King forced him to buy five years of truce, or cessation, upon low con∣ditions. In the mean time he would have sent assi∣stance of ships and men to the Christian Princes, who fought against the Saracens in Palestina, but the miseries of his kingdom would not per∣mit him, yet he assigned to the Knights, Tem∣plars, and Hospitallers, who were sometime before come into Portugal, great Revenues,
giving unto them many Castles and Lands. The truce was not yet expired when the King either finding, or taking occasion to break it, in the midst of winter assaulted the Cities of the Moors with so much fury, that the Barbarians not expecting so sudden an assault, were easily driven, not onely out of the Confines of Portu∣gal, but out of the best part of the kingdom of Algarve. King Sancho had for wife the daughter of Ra∣mond Berengario, Count of Barchinona, called Aldonsa, by her he had nine children, of whom eight outlived their father, to wit, three sons and five daughters, the sons were Alfonso, who succeeded in the kingdom; Ferdinando, who for his singular vertues was called into Flanders to marry the Countess Ioanna; and Pietro who was Count Iregelense, and Lord of the Bateares. The five daughters were Therasia, Mefalda, Sancha, Bianca, and Beringhella; Therasia was married with Alfonso King of Leon her Cousin∣german, but this marriage not being assented to by the Pope, was esteemed void, so that after having born three children, she was forced to re∣turn into Portugal, where being shut up in a Monastery, she spent the rest of her life in pious meditations: it is reported by some that her Sepulchre being opened in the year 1617. her body was found whole, and as it were incorrupt∣ed, and that many who were sick, or otherwise had incurable diseases, by vowing to her, and touching her corps, were healed. Mafalda was espoused to Henry the first, King
of Castile, although allied to him in a forbid∣den degree, wherefore this marriage was like∣wise declared void; and she emulating her si∣ster built a Monastery of the Cistercian Order, and is reported likewise to have done many Mi∣racles particularly in the year 1627. when her Tomb was opened. Sancha the third daughter became a Nun of the Order of St. Francis, who lived about this time. Bianca and Beringella died young, and were buried in Conimbria, right against their fathers Tombe, though some write otherwise. After the death of the Queen Aldonsa, which happened in the year 1138. King Sancho gave himself over to the love of diverse Ladies, a∣mongst whom he had many children, who pro∣ved most of them his greatest vexation and dis∣quiet, for the pleasures of the senses do not ter∣minate but in the sence of grief. At last arrived at the age of 57. years, in the 26. year of his reign, oppressed in Conimbria by an incurable disease, he took leave of this world. He was buried in the Church of the Holy Cross, on the left side of the Altar, in the great Chappel, where King Emanuel built him a Sepulchre, like to that of his father, he left in∣finite riches, which by his Will he divided a∣mongst all his children, making no difference between the legitimate and the illegitimate; he by his Will supplicated Pope Innocentius the fourth to be his Executor, for which he left in Legacy a hundred weight of Gold, a gift with∣out doubt worth his pains.
King Sancho was for vertue and for goodness singular in his age, a worthy son of so renow∣ned a father; he proved fortunate in the utmost events of War, and then did his triumphs flow in upon him when he dispaired of Victory; he left it yet in doubt whether he were more wise, or more valiant; he always snowed himself so great an enemy to sloth and idleness, that to avoid it he would not disdain sometimes to throw down the Scepter, and hold the plow; Fortune who was his friend in War, was his foe in Peace, for then, besides the vexation that he could not vex his enemies, he was likewise enforced to bear the injuries of the Land, Sea, and Skies; in sum, he was a King worthy the greatest Incomiums, if he had not too much drowned all his other vertues in illicite Loves. ALFONSO the II. Third King of Portugal. ALfons the second succeeded to Sancho the first, he was born in Conimbria on St. Georges day anno 1185. At 27. years old he was Crowned King with the envy of his brothers, who little younger then he, could hardly con∣fine themselves within the bounds of Allegi∣ance, and to their discontents did the Legacies left by Sancho, give new motives for Alphonso, either out of avaritious desire of riches, or out of obstinacy, detained from them a great part
of what was left them by their father. These sinister thoughts of the then Prince Alphonso, were discerned by his father before his death, which made him leave to the brothers, beside some Cities and Castles, five hundred thousand Crowns in gold. But scarce was his father dead, but he began to contend with his brothers and sisters about their inheritance, and because his brothers were re∣tired into Elginera and Alenquar Fortresses, gi∣ven them by their father, he under pretence that they could not be allienated from the Crown, gathered together an Army to possess himself of them, which he easily performed, his brothers wanting money to hire soldiers, and so not being able to make the least resistance. His brothers thus driven out of the kingdom, fled to the Pope for redress, then in great vene∣ration, because he then pursued no other interest but justice, who commanded Alfonso to remit the difference to indifferent Judges, who neces∣sitated to obey, chose rather to accommodate the business with indifferent Judges, then to run the hazard of a sentence. He employed himself afterwards by the ad∣vice of Matthew Bishop of Lisbone, to fight against the Moors, and though these came assisted with ninety five thousand men, yet were they forced to yield the Victory to him, with the loss of thirty thousand soldiers, and four Kings who were slain in the battel. Alfonso for some years prosecuted this War, but in time he grew so extream fat, that he
was unable to perform, not only those great ex∣ercises incumbent on a soldier, but every sim∣ple motion of the body; yet for all that he cea∣sed not to apply himself with extream diligence to prosecute the greatest affairs of State, and where he could not in person he present, to send such commands as shewed him to be both of great experience and wisdom. He married with Uracca daughter to Alfonso the eighth (or as others say the ninth) King of Castile, and Leonora, or Elinor, daughter to Henry the second King of England, by her he had divers children, the first was Sancho, who succeeded his father in the kingdom. Alfonso the second son, whom by right of his wife, was chosen Duke of Bologna, and afterwards came to be King of Portugal. The third son was cal∣led Ferdinand, who obtained the principality of Serpa, and married Sancia Fernandez, daughter of Ferdinand Count of Castile. The fourth died a childe, called Vincenzo. The last was a daugh∣ter, called Leonora, and was married to the King of Dacia. Alfonso arrived to the eight and fortieth year of his age, and one and twen∣tieth of his kingdom, when in the year 1233. he was constrained to pay the last debt to na∣ture. He was buried in Alobaccia in a little Church built by himself, more for devotion then magnificence. But after many years the Abbot Giorgio di Melo causing that little Church to be demolished, carried his bones to that of St. Vincenzo, where they now repose in a most sumptuous sepulcher.
Under this King (as many affirm) lived for certain time St. Antonio, Protector of the City of Padona, a Saint held in great veneration among the Roman Catholiques, he was a native of Lisbon, not so much esteemed for the No∣bility of his birth, as for his holy life. Alfonso, taking away his extream fatness, was a man of a very comely presence, and of singular eloquence, his nature did make him pleasant with all, but onely those of his own blood, which fault in him did much diminish his subjects love, and that general respect was due to him; though he was a man noted for covetousness, yet he oftentimes gave great gifts to his friends, and always consumed the greatest part of the revenue of the kingdom. The Portugueses while his father was alive, did extreamly desire him for their King but did not at all now lament his death; either because new things always please the people, or else because he after his fathers death, shewed himself indifferent from him∣self, or from what they thought him; whereup∣on not being wholly like his Progenitors, he re∣newed in his subjects their grief for their loss.
SANCHO the II. Fourth KING of PORTVGAL. SAncho the second, who succeeded his father Alfanso, was born in Conimbria the eighth day of September 1207. bringing from the womb such mortal infirmities, as made most believe he would sooner arrive at the grave then the Crown, his mother having tried all humane remedies, applied her self to divine, making a vow to God that if he lived past his adolescency, she would make him pass the hood of the Reli∣gion; which vow she afterwards inviolably per∣formed, whence he was by the vulgar as ridi∣culous in words, as judgement, called Sancho Cucullato, or the hooded Sancho. He took upon him the administration of the Scepter at twenty six years of age, not follow∣ing the footsteps of his Predecessors, in studying ways to govern the kingdom, but spending all his time either in Hot-house, or in a Bath, or inventing other ways to recover his health. Thus his infirmity having rendred him unapt to command, and the weakness of his body having likewise weakned his wit and judge∣ment, he left both the rule of the kingdom and of himself to Ministers, who governing accord∣ing
to their proper affections, let him enjoy no more then the bare name of King. He joyned himself in marriage with Messa Lopez, who although she were of blood Royal, yet was by much too inferior a match for King Sancho, so much the rather in that she was widow to Alvaro de Castro, a Cavalier of an ancient and Royal family, but not to compare with the Kings of Portugal. And he himself assented to this match, more to satisfie his favorites, then to any affection that he had to it; which made the new Queen either to show her self grateful to those had wish'd her so well, or rather because she nurst in her bosom some dishonest desire, applied her self extreamly to favor the favorites of the King. And these made proud by the love both of the King and Queen, omitted no way to op∣press the subjects, to the prejudice of justice, to the destruction of the State: many of the prime Nobility made their complaints to the King, representing to him the calamities of the people, the oppression of the Nobles, and the ruine of the kingdom, if he did not with a resolute hand put a stop to the rashness of those wicked men, who were bringing a deluge of miseries upon his Dominions. The King at these complaints was extreamly moved, and overcome by the goodness of his own nature, had resolved to chastise to publick a crime with a publique punishment; but the Queen with her Artifices easily changed the
opinion of her husband, and made him believe that those accusations proceeded from envy, not from truth, whereupon laying the complaints of the other aside, these State-mothes onely triumph in his love and in his faith. This made several Prelates incontaminated with their own interest, but moved out of a real affection to their Country, acquaint the Pope with the weakness of the King, and the plots of the Queen, adjoyning that the mar∣riage was celebrated in a prohibited degree, there being between them too near consanguini∣ty, and that nevertheless they had not sought to the Apostolick seat for a dispensation. Hereupon Gregory the ninth, with exhortations and admonitions prefixed a time to king Sancho to free himself from his wife, and withall to this purpose sends as his Legat Apostolique, the Bishop of Sabina. At the appearance of the Bi∣shop the King made show of an humble and ready obedience; but he being returned, he again receives his Queen into his embraces, from whence the simple believed that he was either bewitched, or had had some amorous potion ad∣ministred to him. The Queens favorites now again restored, gave themselves over to exercise the greatest insolencies imaginable, they despoiled the peo∣ple, disposed Offices at pleasure, made Justice it self follow their humors, nor did there remain any thing either humane, or divine, which was not contaminated either by their cruelty, or avarice.
Hereupon a great part of the Commonalty no longer able to comport their insolencies, led on by Rannondo Viego, took Arms, and coming in a tumultuous maner to the Palace, forced a∣way the Queen, carrying her prisoner to a Ca∣stle upon the confines of the kingdom, where they did not fear neither the authority, nor force of the King. And because not onely the licentiousness of the Queen, but the weakness of the King, did concur to the destruction of the kingdom; some Prelates had again recourse to the Pope, who in a Synod then sitting, with the consent of all, decreed, That Alfonso brother of the King, should be called from Bologna to govern the kingdom, and to remedy those disorders which had near brought it to utter destruction. Alfonso comes, and with Arms in his hand, possesses himself of the greatest part of the king∣dom, whilest Sancho seeing himself abandoned of all, and hopeless of any help from the Casti∣lian Army, cast down in minde, he gives leave to those few soldiers which were with him, to depart, and retires to Toledo, where addicting himself wholly to devotion, with an admirable patience, seems to rejoyce at his private life. Being setled in Toledo, he dispences with a large hand to the poor those riches he had brought from Portugal; he builds a little Tem∣ple wherein day and night with uninterrupted supplications, he recommends himself to God, and implores his mercy; there never issuing out of his mouth a word of resentment, or grief, for
his change of condition; and although provo∣ked by the insolencies of some who despised Royal Majesty without a kingdom, he never ex∣pressed himself but in words of mildness and goodness. Whilest he in Toledo exercised these actions of true patience, many of his Subjects did demon∣strate signs of as great fidelity. The Governors left by him would never abandon his service, nor yield up those places they had received in charge from him, neither could the prayers of their fellow-subjects, nor the spiritual thundrings of his Holiness the Pope, nor the vigorous Arms of Don Alfonso, remove them from their reso∣lution; with a generous faith they sustained all the Dangers and Disasters of long and tedious Sieges, till they received Advice of Sancho's Death. The one of these was Ferdinando Paceico, who resolved to die before he would render up the Fortress to him consigned. The other named Martino Freira, who after a years being besie∣ged in Conimbria, being advised by Alfonso of his brothers death, he desiring a Truce, posted to Toledo, and causing the Sepulchre of King Sancho to be opened, put the key of the Castle into his hand, and afterwards returning, gives it to Alfonso, excusing himself that he could not before show the desires of his heart to serve him, he being obliged to what he did by his oath, and by his faith. Alfonso perceiving this noble ge∣nerosity in him, confirmed him in the Com∣mand, without seeking any further of him than
an inviolable Sacrament: Martino returned thanks to the king for his so great love, but re∣fused the Government. King Sancho the Second, died in the year 1245. at 39 years of age, having reigned thir∣teen; He was a man of a most noble aspect, carrying in his face, and in his eyes, no ordi∣nary Majesty; his nose was somewhat of the biggest, yet did not at all disfigure him, he was very curious in trimming his beard, which some∣what inclined to red; his countenance was some∣what earthy, his continual indispositions having made a paleness inherent to him. His piety was his principal ornament, nor was there any crime which did more incense his goodness, than that which was dyed in blood. There wanted nothing in him to render him worthy the greatest Encomiums, but health and the counsel of prudent men, by whom he might have been served without design, and without self-interest. Want of these two things were the occasion that a most just man, wholly com∣posed of goodness, fell into those miscarriages which made him in the conceit of men impious and unjust. He was buried in that Regal Chappel built by himself at Toledo: True it is, that most Writers disagree whereabouts his Tomb was placed, be∣cause the Chappel being rebuilt and made grea∣ter, the Sepulchres were over-turned, and pla∣ced on the side of the wall without Elegies or Epitaphs, so that you can have no other then mens opinions for that, without any certain foun∣dation.
ALFONSO the III. The Fifth KING of Portugal and Algarve. ALfonso the Third, who succeeded Sancho the Second, was born in Conimbria the 5. of May, An: 1210. he was by his father, by reason of his brothers uncertain health, educated with great diligence in those studies which might a∣dapt him to Command; but Sancho's life decei∣ving the vulgar opinion, he was called by the Queen of France thither, who obliged him to marry Matilda, Countess of Bologna, then Wi∣dow of Fillippio Crispo, and Daughter of Fillippio Augustino: Alfonso was at the time of his mar∣riage twenty seven years, and being of stature great, strong of body, and of an invincible courage of minde, he was by the Pope elected Captain of those Knights of the Cruciada, who from France and other Provinces, were thought worthy to carry their valor to the Holy War; but he was diverted this Honor, by the necessity of his return into Portugal, to put an end to those Troubles, which were moved by the ambition of some, who presuming upon Sancho's pliable nature, were to act a fell Tragedy upon the Stage of the kingdom. At his first arrival he appeased those Tumults
of the people raised against the wickedness of the evil Ministers, who by reason of his brothers weakness did what they list, and having after his death reduced all the Forresses of the king∣dom to his obedience, he addicted himself by severity, to purge away those vices which be∣fore ruled even in the most potent Personages. This made him envied and maligned of many, but the glory of his fame did divert all opponent Factions, and made him triumph over the im∣prudence or obstinacy of the most disobedient. Home-bred stis being quite pacified, he gave his minde to the increasing and adorning of his kingdom; many places destroyed by continual Wars with the Moors, he peopled with noble Colonies, re-edifying many decayed Towers, and building many new Edifices: He likewise with an extraordinary liberality, erected most stately Temples and Monasteries: He instituted for the increasing of Commerce with his Neigh∣bor kingdoms, several solemn Fairs, delighting much in Traffick, and for the encouragement of it, remitting his Customs. But these singular vertues of Alfonso were darkned by a thick shadow of lust, not abstain∣ing for to satisfie his sense from seducing the most noble to his pleasures. Interest of State making him afraid to repudiate his wife, he con∣tracted a most nefarious Marriage with Beatrice the illegitimate daughter of Alphonso the Ninth king of Castile, and his Concubine Maria Ville∣nia. This Beatrice was brought up with greater love, charge, and attendance, than any of Al∣fonso's
children. Alexander the fourth then Pope, moved with the tears of the Countess of Bologna, the complaints of her friends, and the indignity of the action it self, admonished him first by Letters to remember both his wife and his duty as a Christian, but those saving docu∣ments prevailed nothing with the shut ears of deaf Alfonso; whereupon the Pope fulminated forth an excommunication against him and his kingdom, prohibiting divine service throughout all his Dominions, hoping that these celestial arms might soften Alfonso's obdurate brest; but it prevailed nothing, till at length the death of the Dutchess procured his pardon, which Urban the sixth granted, rather to satisfie the clamors of the people, then out of his own genius, or that Alfonso desired it. Beatrice now Crowned Queen, and the suc∣cession confirmed by the birth of two children, Alfonso had a desire to prosecute a War against the Moors; but Lusitania having no confines upon Mauritania, he procured to be invested King of the confining Countries, still posses∣sed by the Moors, and that done, he drave them from the Confines, increasing his kingdoms glory, and his own reputation. Alfonso had by Beatrice three sons, Dyonisio or Denys, who succeeded in the kingdom; Alfonso who married with Violanse daughter of Prince Emanuel, son to Ferdinand the third King of Castile; the third son called Ferdinand, died in his infancy, he increased the number of his children by his amorous conjunctions, those
thus begot were Egidius and Ferdinand, made Knights Templars; Alfonso, Dionysio, or Denys, married to Maria Rivera; and lastly Leonora, wife to Count D. Gazzia de Souza, a man no less potent by his great riches, then friends. Alfonso was blest with a most comely counte∣nance, sparkling eyes, a most comely propor∣tion of body, but so large that it struck no small admiration into the King Sebastian, when he made him be taken out of his Sepulchre; yet was not his body more large then his soul was sublime; he was extream profuse in gifts, which made him beloved by those who found them∣selves benifited by them; his prudence was by all admired, and amongst his vertues there was nothing wanting but a more serious veneration of Religion, greater gratitude towards his first wife Matilda, and less dishonesty in his loves; in his latter days he was extreamly troubled with the gout, which so tormented him, that impatient of his pain, he permitted himself to be transported by excess of passion. He died in Lisbon in the year 1279. at sixty nine years of age, and in the two and thirtieth year of his reign, not accounting till the death of his brother Sancho, he was buried in the Church of St. Dominica, from whence his body was removed to that of St. Vincenzo, and laid in a great, but no curious, Tomb; on the other part of the Church is to this day to be seen the Sepulchre of his Queen Beatrice, whose body preserved by Balsoms, is to be shown in the Chappel, looking so firm as if it had but lately yielded to death.
DIONISIO, The sixth KING of PORTVGAL. DIonysio or Denys his son, succeeded to Al∣phonso, who was born in the year 1260. and called Dionysio because born on the day con∣secrated to that great Areopagite; when he ar∣rived to age fitting, he was instructed in those Sciences which are necessary to adorn a Royal minde; he could perfectly speak many forreign Languages, but applied himself chiefly to La∣tine Poesie, and may be said to be the best Poet of any King; he endeavored to reduce the Por∣tugal Muse, before rude and inharmonious, to a smooth and sweet verse; he published many Elegies and Epigrams, which as they attest to posterity his Kingly learning, so they stirred up in others a glorious emulation. He was about twenty years of age when his father died, and was immediately admitted to the government, to the great displeasure of his mother, who was in hopes to have been made Queen Regent, and was either, because she thought, that she who by her pains and dili∣gence had united several Cities to the Crown of Portugal, was slighted, or because she feared lest her son being unexperienced, should either
perswaded out of a youthful folly, or drawn by the flattery of Courtiers, consume with an un∣beseeming liberality the riches of the kingdom. Yet her anger could not move him to admit her a share in the government, for he was often used to say, That man was blame-worthy who be∣ing past eleven years of age, could not moderate himself without the help of others; but that of all things it was most base to desire the assistance of a woman. The forces of Alphonso King of Castile, father of Beatrice, could not prevail to make him change his opinion; but between mother and son these discords were easily accorded, and she at length being brought to the utmost pe∣riod of her life, he piously went into Castile to visit her, and comfort her at her last gasp. But though he accorded with his mother, he did not so easily adjust things with his brother Alfonso, and with Sancio King of Castile, with whom he fought many battels; the War out∣lasting Sancho's life, but from those cruel con∣tests at length a happy peace was produced, which to render perpetual, Ferdinand King of Castile took for wife Constanza daughter to Dio∣nisio: and on the other side Alfonso espoused Beatrice ster to Ferdinand. The discords between the Kings of Arragon and Castile were remitted to this Kings pru∣dence; in composing of which, and making those kingdoms happy in peace, he showed admirable effects of his wisdom. His liberality gained him the love of all men, and made him equally respected both of subjects
and strangers; he commanded that the waste fields should be distributed amongst the poorest Country people, assenting that it should be freed from all taxes: there were none poor but such who were not able to gain their living, ei∣ther weakned by age, or some other infirmity, and these were maintained at the Kings char∣ges. He never oppressed the subjects either with tribute or taxes, yet left to his heirs a full Ex∣checquer: he made many Laws, which to this day are in force, his Successors after him form∣ing them into Statutes; amongst other things he made a Law for the preventing tediousness in Law suites, assigning certain prefixed days to end all differences, both taking thereby away a great unnecessary expence of time and money, for which very act this King is to this day reve∣renced among the vulgar. In his time the Order of the Knights Templars was extinct, whereupon in stead of them, he instituted another under the name of the Order OF CHRIST, to whom he gave many Ca∣stles and Lands for their maintenance; their Roab was a black Cassack under a white Sur∣coat, over which a red Cross stroaked in the middle with a white line; their duty was to ex∣pel the Moors out of Batica, the next adjacent Country, they have since been famous for many memorable acts. He first instituted the University at Conim∣bria, called Academia Conimbricense, which he enriched with the most learned men of that age.
He took to wife Elizabeth daughter to Peter King of Aragon, who among all the Queens of Portugal was most memorable for her San∣ctity; of this marriage was born Alphonso, who succeeded his father in the kingdom, and Con∣stance who was married to Ferdinand King of Castile: he had likewise another son, but illegi∣timate, whom he named Alphonso Sancio. This bastard son was affected by his father with such a tenderness of Love, that he prefer∣red him before all his other children; which the Prince Alphonso ill comporting, there grew at first a hatred between the brothers, in which the fathers indulgence taking part with the base son, so exasperated Alphonso, that it raised a ci∣vil War between him and his father. Dionisio had many other sons by diverse Moor∣ish women, they with feminine glory boasting themselves great with childe by the King, one amongst the rest was Peter Count of Barcello, who writ a book of the chief Portugal families; others there were who grew up to the disturbance of the kingdom, the oppression of the subjects, and discontent of their father, in his old age re∣duced to a low estate, and afflicted with the ci∣vil Wars, he was forced by the Prince his son to flie as it were an exile into Castile: with his departure the dissentions seemed to cease, but Alphonso's heart was not at all mollified towards his brother, not being able to comport the ge∣nerosity and courage of Alphonso Sancho's spi∣rit. The King Dionisio was tall of body, of chesnut
coloured hair, his eyes black, but he withall pale and livid, and more conspicious for the Majesty of his countenance then the beauty; he was pleasant, humane, and without pride; after he had reigned 46. years, he died at 84. years of age in the beginning of the year 1325. At the end of his life he left by will one hun∣dred and forty thousand Ducats to be distribu∣ted amongst Religious men, Pilgrims, and un∣portioned children; he left likewise mainte∣nance for five hundred Cavaliers, who were enjoyned in his name to fight against the Turks in the Holy Land: he was buried in Lisbone in the Cistercian Monastery, dedicated to St. Dio∣nisius the Areopagite. His Queen Elizabeth, lived near eleven years after his death, retired into the Monastery of St. Clara in Conimbria, begun to be builded by her husband, and perfected by her: here laying aside her State, she ed a holy life, and is re∣ported to have done many Miracles.
ALFONSO the IV. Seventh KING of PORTVGAL. ALfonso the fourth, seventh King of Portugal, who succeeded his father Dionisio, was born in Conimbria, in the year one thousand two hun∣dred and ninety, before he came to the govern∣ment of the kingdom, he was married to Bea∣trice daughter to Sancha the fourth King of Ca∣stile, and in the seventh lustre took into his hands the reins of the Government. In the beginning of his government he ruled his subjects with great negligence, addicting himself wholly to the sport of hunting, and thereby giving his Ministers liberty to Tyran∣nize at pleasure; some who loved him, and ha∣ted flattery, did publiquely advertise him, not to abandon the government of men, for the de∣lights of killing wilde beasts, that he was desti∣ned to hear, govern, and judge his people, and hat whilest he did so, they would not fear to suffer for him any danger, nay they would en∣counter death it self for his sake: that it would redound little to his glory to have killed thou∣sands of Wild-Boars, or to have taken ten thousand Stags, but much to have administred Justice, & sustained his Scepter with reputation.
These advertisements more free then secure, stirred up the fierce nature of Alphonso, and ready he was to have 'chastised their freedom, who would be governed by a King, and not by a Huntsman; but at length considering with him∣self the truths they had spoken, he pardoned the liberty of their Speech, and took them into the number of his dearest friends. And that he did esteem them so, appeared by his taking their counsel, wholly leaving off his hunting, and addressing all his endeavors to the government of the kingdom: the first of his impresses were against those who had furiously armed themselves against his father Dionisio: and because those affections good or bad which have once had growth in the minde, are very hardly rooted out, the hatred that he bore to his brother Sancho whilest he was Prince, now re∣newed whilest he was King. For whilest his brother was absent, he caused several wicked men, who flattered the fortune of the King, to testifie against his brother, and charged him with all the imagined thoughts of soul, as crimes committed, during his fathers life; upon which Sancho was by the Judges, in complyance to the Royal will, deprived of all his honors in Portugal, banished the Country, and all his goods confiscate. Sancho was at Castile, when hearing of this sentence, he by Letters intreats his brother to restore him to his grace, promising that he would serve him not onely as his brother, but as his King. But his prayers not at all softning his obstinate
brother, he getting assistance from the King of Castile, takes Arms, resolving to force that rea∣son and justice with his sword, which his suppli∣cations could not obtain: In fine, after a long continuance of War, in which the subjects were made subject to infinite oppression, he made with his brother a peace more necessary then se∣cure. About this time D. Iuan Emanuel, son to the Prince Emanuel the Nephew of Ferdinando, sur∣named the Holy, was famous among the Span∣jards, both for his great Nobility of birth and riches; this Iuan Emanuel had a daughter cal∣led Constance, who not yet marriagable, was pro∣mised to King Alphonso the eleventh of Castile, but this King offended by certain secret occasi∣ons, broke his vow to her, and espoused Mary daughter to Alphonso King of Portugal: after a little time passed, the King of Portugal thinking Constance to be a fit match for his son the Prince Pedro, first writ to his son in Law Alphonso, and soon after began to treat with Iuan Ema∣nuel, both the one and the other returned an∣swer to his messages, the King of Castile with dissimulation, and Emanuel with sincerity offer∣ing his daughter. The King of Castile either out of vexation that she whom he had repudiated, should still be a Queen, or envying to the Prince Pedro the possession of so worthy a woman, after many artifices to hinder the marriage, put himself in Arms to hinder the passage of Constance into Por∣tugal.
From this War happened infinite destructi∣ons and murders, which after the effusion of a sea of blood, were ended by the Authority of Pope Benedict the XII. and Constance was mar∣ried to Prince Pedro. About the year 1340. Albacen that potent Miramamolin of Morocco and Granata, with a mighty Army of four hundred and seventy thou∣sand men, came against Alphonso King of Ca∣stile, threatning indeed the ruine of all Spain, when Alphonso by the advice of his Councel, sent to desire assistance of his father in Law the King of Portugal, and that he might the better speed, he made his wife the daughter of Alphonso the messenger: who willingly heard and listned to the Ambassie, and not onely promised assi∣stance of men to further this expedition, but to go himself in person. Being arrived according to his promise, it was determined that they should on both sides assault the Moors, which accordingly they did, and that with so prosperous success to the Chri∣stians, that after an innumerable slaughter of the Saracens, they gained one of the most rich and most glorious Victories that has been in the memories of man, so great quantities of silver and gold found they in the Moorish Tents, that one would have imagined all the riches of Africa had been transported into Spain. The reason of the Barbarians transporting over so great Treasure, was supposed to be out of the assurance of Victory, which they flattered themselves withall; they had designed Spain
for their Country, and thereupon all those who had thoughts of planting there, brought over all that could either better, or conserve their for∣tune. This Victory was gained nigh to the River of Saledo, the two Kings gave part of their spoils to Pope Benedict, who then resided in Avignion, giving him likewise four and twenty Colours ta∣ken from the enemy, among which was the pro∣per Standard of Alboacen King of Marocco, with many horses, and many Moorish Princes, taken prisoners in the battel. For his own portion of the prey, Alphonso King of Portugal brought home the son of King Iulinenza, made prisoner with his proper hand; he likewise with his own hand placed five Co∣lours taken from the enemy, in the Church of St. Vincenso, that posterity might behold them as a memorial of his valor and glory. Scarce was he returned into Portugal, but he permitted himself to be overcome by certain evil Councellors, and be perswaded unjustly to take away the life of Agnesa di Castro, by whom his son Pedro had had divers children. After the death of Costance, the Prince kept her like his wife, and it was publiquely believed that he would one day make her his Queen: This accident was the occasion of cruel Tragedies in the kingdom, for it stirred up a civil War be∣twixt the father and son; but all ascribed it to a just judgement of God upon Alphonso, who suffered the same injuries from his son, which he had done to his father.
The Queen Beatrice bore Alphonso the fourth, six children, three sons died in their infancy, and Pedro who was the fourth, succeeded; the other two were daughters, to wit, Maria, who married Alphonso King of Castile, and Eleanora, who was espoused to Piedro the fourth King of Arragon. King Alphonso the fourth of Portugal, over-loaden with the burthen of seventy seven years, in the month of May in the year 1356. depart∣ed this life, after he had exercised the Kingly Office thirty years and a half, he was buried at the going into the Cathedral at Lisbon, toge∣ther with his wife Beatrice, having left to the Priests of that Church rich Revenues, not onely for the expences of his sepulchre, but for the celebrating continual Anniversary Masses for their souls. He was equally strong and valiant, nor was it ever known that the greatest danger strike terror into his undaunted minde, he ob∣served with a strict punctuality the rules of honesty and justice, and towards God he with ordinary piety was both zealous and rever he made several Laws for the benefit kingdom, which are still continued among the Statutes of that Realm. If he had not taken Arms against his father, or if he had moderated his hatred to his or if he had not imbrued his hands in the blood of Agnesa, envy it self coul have found out any subject of blame in the course of his life, he resembled his
many vertues, but was much inferior to him in liberality; his death happened to him in that condition when he had little reason to desire longer life, for it was when he saw his actions of glory forgotten though he was yet alive, for his subjects began onely to remember his faults, which being fresh in memory, made his loss the less lamented. PEDRO, The Eighth KING of PORTVGAL. PEdro the first of that Name, who succeeded his father Alfonso in the kingdom of Portu∣gal, was born at Lisbon, in the year 1325. two years before his father came to sit at the hem of government, at the time of his being Crown∣ed, he was about the age of three and thirty years. He was the onely male-childe that lived of four, and some danger there was of him in his youth, he being very sickly till he arrived to about eighteen years of age, which made his father to be assured of a Successor for his Crown, to defer the marriage of Leonora his youngest daughter to Pedro King of Arragon, till he per∣ceived him in a perfect measure of health.
He was about the age of one and twenty years married to Constance daughter to D. Iuan Ema∣nuel, by whom he had onely one son named Ferdinand, who succeeded him in the kingdom, and she, as if she had onely come into the world to bear him, and having performed that task, died. After the death of the Infante, D. Pedro fell in love with Agnesa de Castro, a most beautiful woman, and descended of the blood Royal, by her he had many children, amongst whom one was Iohn, who afterward was the first of that name King of Portugal: this Lady being accused to King Alphonso at his return from his great Victory over the Moors nigh the River Saledo, was by him (for what crimes is unknown) put to death, which so incensed Pedro that he took up those Arms against his father, which he laid not down till his death. As soon as he was come to the Crown, he brought to condigne punishment those who had wrongfully accused and counselled the Lady Agnesas death; he afterwards renewed the old War betwixt his father and the King of Castile, about the stopping of his espoused wife Con∣stance. But because the Pope had before made up this breach, he by his Letters commands Piedro to desist from further prosecuting the War, which he for the present obeys: but soon after upon a slight pretence, again enters into Castile with his Army, whereupon an excommunica∣tion was thundred out against him, which forced
him to retire, and to gain his Pardon, turn his Army upon the Moors, from whom he took the strong Port Town of Pharo, in the kingdom of Algarve. At his return home he fell sick, and in the tenth year of his kingdom, and about the three and fortieth of his age in September 1367. he died, he was buried in the Cathedral of Lisbon, not far distant from his father, having caused before his death three Tombs to be ere∣cted on each side, he caused the bodies of his wife Constance, and the Lady Agnesa, to be laid, reserving the middle one for himself, where he was accordingly buried. He was a man of as comely a personage as any whatsoever of the Kings of Portugal, of a sweet and affable disposition, nor did he want any of his fathers vertues, but one vice they both had, which overshadowed all their vertues, war∣ring against their fathers.
FERDINAND, The ninth KING of PORTVGAL. FErdinand the first of that Name, succeeded his father Pedro, in the kingdoms of Portu∣gal and Algarve, he was born at Lisbon, in the year one thousand three hundred forty se∣ven, and was the onely childe of Constance, daughter of D. Iuan Emanuel: He arrived at the Crown at the age of about two and twenty years, in the year 1369. as soon as he had fini∣nished the Ceremonies of his Coronation, he prosecuted the War his father had begun against the Moors, and in several battels drove them quite out of Algarve; he built a Monastery upon a Promontory of Land, called Cape St. Vincent, now by us the Southern Cape, which stretcheth it self out into the Atlantique sea. He addicted himself to the planting and peo∣pling of that kingdom, distributing the waste Lands among the Inhabitants, he repaired many Cities, Towns and Castles, which had been de∣stroyed by the fury of the War; he built several Churches and Monasteries in that kingdom, all which he enriched with great Revenues, but particularly a Monastery for Franciscan Friers, erected in Silva, the chief City of that Territory.
About this time it was that Pedro, son of Al∣phonso, the eleventh king of Castile, having committed several tyrannical outrages, intol∣lerable to his subjects, oppressing and destroy∣ing his subjects, putting away and after mur∣dering his wife, daughter to Peter Duke of Burbon, was by his bastard brother Henry, cha∣sed out of his kingdom, and forced to live an exile. He at first seeks for aid to Ferdinand King of Portugal, but in vain; he next addresses himself to Edward the black Prince of Wales, who was then at Burdeaux with an Army of thirty thou∣sand men; he consents to assist him▪ and encoun∣tring Henry on the borders of Castile with near one hundred thousand men, utterly discomfits him, and establisht Pedro in the Throne, who shortly after falling again to his former tyranni∣cal courses, is deserted by his subjects, taken by his brother Henry, and put to death. Ferdinand had but one only daughter that sur∣vived, named Beatrice, who was married to Henry King of Castile, and thereby excluded from the right of succession, according to the Law made in the first Assembly Estates held at Lamgo, in the reign of Alfonso the first King, so that in this King ended the legitimate Line of Henry, Duke of Lorrein. This King had now reigned 18. years, and lived forty, when seized by a violent sickness, he gave up the ghost, in the year of our Lord God, 1387. and was buried by his Ancestors in the Cathedral Church of Lisbon.
JOHN the 1. Tenth KING OF PORTVGAL. JOhn the first, bastard son to Pedro the first, by Agnesa de Castro, who succeeded Ferdinand in the kingdom, was born in Lisbon in the year 1356. he was in his minority educated in the fa∣mous Conimbricense University, where he ad∣dicted himself to all those studies which became a Prince, though 'tis to be supposed at that time he thought not to have arrived at so great height as to be King of Portugal. When he was grown to the age of about three and twenty years, he was by his brother made a chief Commander of his Armies, in which Military imployment he behaved himself with so much courage and magnanimity, as was ad∣mirable; his valor soon gained the love of the soldiers, and his courtesie and affability the af∣fection of the people; the very Moors his ene∣mies would applaud him, as both a perfect sol∣dier, and a Courtier. His brother being dead, and his Nephew, Bea∣trice uncapable of succession by reason of her having married a forreign Prince, he claimed the Crown, as next of the blood, but his claim was at first made void, by reason of his being
illegitimate, when afterwards the Councel of Estates, finding that if they should refuse him, they might perchance choose one less deserving, conferred the Crown upon him, yet so as he should receive it not as his indubitable right by birth, but as given him by election. Yet some Writers there be that affirm, that there were several legitimate sons of his father King Pedro then alive, who all laid their se∣veral claims to the Crown, as of right belong∣ing to them before him, but that he being at the time of his brothers death General of the Armies in Algarve, and having gained so much upon the soldiers and people, presuming up∣on their affection, and his desert, laid claim to the Crown, which they being no way able to resist, were forced to rest content, and permit him to enjoy what was likewise willingly con∣ferred upon the people, so that he came to the Crown partly by force, and partly by election. But howsoever he came by it, enjoy it he did, and entred into his government about the two and thirtieth year of his age, and in the begin∣ning of the year 1388. received with great ap∣plauses by the whole kingdom, as a Prince from whom they expected great and good things, ha∣ving already had so large experience of him. Soon after his Coronation, he married Philip∣pa, daughter to Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lanca∣ster, which match he the rather inclined to, because Henry the bastard King of Castile, in right of his wife Beatrice, pretended a title to the Crown of Portugal,, which he hoped he
might the better oppose by matching into that amily, which had equal, if not more indubitable ight to the kingdom of Castile. For Iohn Duke of Lancaster having married Constance, the eldest daughter to Peter, the de∣posed and murthered King of Castile and Leon, claimed a right to, and was a great stickler for those kingdoms, yet never enjoyed any other but the bare title. King Iohn having setled his kingdom, applied himself to the prosecuting the War against the Moors, who being quite driven out of his con∣ines, he resolves to follow into their own coun∣try, and be the first King of his Nation that ever past the sea: to this purpose he mans out a potent fleet, and having fraighted it with a sufficient Army, puts to sea, and lands in Mau∣ritania, where in several battels he discomfits the Barbarians, wastes their Countrey, burns their Villages, and possesses himself of a Sea∣port Town, called Seplene, or Ceta, whereby he gained both a retiring place, and an in-let in∣to the Country when he pleased. By his Queen Phillippa, King Iohn had a no∣ble and numerous Issue, first Edward (so na∣med from King Edward the third of England his God-father) who succeeded in the king∣dom; secondly, Ferdinand, a man of so great abstinence, and so devoutly religious, that the Portuguese added him to the Calender of their Saints; he was in the Wars against the Moors taken prisoner, and during his captivity behaved himself with such an admirable pa∣tience,
as worthily deserves our wonder, never murmuring to be linckt together with one of his meanest servants, and with him forced for his living to grinde in a Mill, though such was the piety of the servant, that if he could he would willingly have performed the task himself, and excused his Lord from the toil, if it had been possible; at length he was ransomed, and re∣turning ended his days in a recluse; the third son of King Iohn was named after his own name; the fourth Pedro; but the fifth who most wor∣thily deserves to be recorded, was the Infante Henry. This Prince, whether emulating the great acti∣ons of his father, or out of a natural inclination in himself, was the first that encouraged the Portugueses to affect forreign Voyages, he first set out with a great fleet in or about the year 1425. and made discovery of the Islands in the Atlantique sea, which at first were called from their being newly found out Insulae Novae, or, the New Islands, afterwards, and now vulgarly called the Azores; he likewise in many other Voyages made discovery of the Islands of Ma∣derae, Holy Port, and Capo Verde, and sailing farther along the Coast of Africa, was the first that found out the way by Sea to Guiana, at length wearied with travel, and overpressed with age, he retired, and lived upon Cape St. Vincent, which place he choose, because of the constant sereness of the Air, being a great lo∣ver of Astrologie, and the Mathematiques; he died about the year 1465. and was buried in
the Chappel of that Monastery built by Ferdi∣nand the first. King Iohn reigned in all forty seven years,H. . having from the King of England received the honor of being Knight of the Garter; as like∣wise did his two sons Prince Edward, and the Infante Henry. He died in the year 1436. lea∣ving the World full of his glory. He was a Prince in whom all Vertues seemed naturally to flow, endowed with all imagina∣ble Ornaments, both of body and minde, of a tender and affable Nature, yet in the field as Valiant as the fiercest; though 'tis by some observed, that he was never perceived upon any charge given upon the enemy (many of which he made in his own person) to change countenance, or shew any sign of discomposure from his constant temper.
EDWARD the I. Eleventh KING of PORTVGAL. EDward the first of that Name, King of Por∣tugal, was born at the City of Braga, in, or about the year of our Lord one thousand three hundred ninety and two, he was educated du∣ring his youth in all those exercises befitting a a Prince under the tutorage of the Arch-Bishop of Lisbon, in which he profited so, that in his most tender years, his great judgement was de∣servedly wondered at: after he had past his mi∣nority in studies, he several times accompanied his father in the Wars of Africa, where he showed great proofs of his magnanimity and cou∣rage. He came to the Crown at the age of forty four years, or thereabouts, some report that being to have the Ceremonies of his Coronati∣on performed, the same morning that the Crown was to be put upon his head, a Jew, one of his Physicians, and a great Student in Astro∣logie, came to him, and falling down on his knees, very earnestly begged a boon of him; the King demanded what it was? He answered, that his Majesty would be pleased for some days to defer his Coronation: The King wondring at
o strange a request, demanded, what it did con∣ern him? To which he answered, that it did ot onely concern him, but all his Majesties aithful subjects, and the whole kingdom of Portugal, for that by his skill in Astrology he ad found, that if he then proceeded to the Ceremony, his reign would be both short and nfortunate. At this the King was somewhat artled at first, and seemed as if he would con∣der of it; but after very little deliberation, ither out of magnanimity, or mis-belief of that Art, he commanded the Ceremony to pro∣ceed. Whether this were true, or no, that he was hus forewarned, cannot be confidently affirm∣ed; but most certain it is, that in that short time of five years reign, he was very unfortu∣nate, loosing several battels to the Moors in Africa, and was in very great probability to ave utterly lost what ever his father had gained pon that Coast. He was married long before he came to the Crown, and had four children, to wit, two males, Ferdinand, who died an Infant; Alfonso, who succeeded him in the kingdom; and two emales, Ioane, married to the King of Castile, nd Leon; and Leonra, married to the Empe∣or Ferdinand, and mother to the Emperor Maximilian. He died, after he had reigned five years, and those with such bad success, that it was thought y many to have accellerated his end: He was ndifferent tale of stature, of a reserved coun∣tenance,
and as reserved in his minde, very wlful in his resolves, and refusing any counsel, but most extreamly outragious when he was thwarted in any thing he had designed, though with never so apparent symptomes of reason, which many have attributed to be the cause of all his disasters. ALFONSO the V. The Twelfth KING of PORTVGAL. ALfonso the fifth, his son, and the twelfth King of Portugal, who succeeded, was born at Lisbon, in, or about the year of our Lord 1420. a Prince in whom appeared evident tokens of courage, greatness, and magnanimity, even in his youngest years; he came to the Crown about the age of one and twenty years, in the year of our Lord 1441. and was no soon∣er setled in his kingdom, but rigging out a Po∣tent Fleet, with an Army of about Thirty thou∣sand men, he passed into Barbary, to prove if by his better fortune, he could regain that ho∣nor which his father most unfortunately had lost. Nor was his success less then his desires, o then what his valor merited; for having in several battels overthrown the Moors, he a
ength per force took from them the strong Towns of Tanger, Alcazar, and Arzilla, which he strongly fortified, and engarisoned with Por∣uguese Forces. During his reign several Voyages were made to the new Islands, or Azores, where the Por∣ugals now began to fortifie, and inhabit, as they did likewise in the Islands of the Madera, Holy Port, and Capo Verd; thus began this Nation by degrees to grow famous at sea, by reason of their new discoveries, and of the great Traf∣fique they began to have. King Alfonso left behind him several children, two of which came to be Kings after him, to wit, Iohn his eldest son, who succeeded him, and Emanuel his second, who reigned after his brother. He was a Prince of a very affable and courte∣ous disposition, milde to all men, and if he were not too merciful, a man scarce guilty of any fault, yet in the Wars he was as magnanimous as a Lion, and fierce as a Tyger, being often observed to hazard his own person somewhat too desperately. He died at Lisbon in the forty third year of his reign, and sixty fourth of his life, in the year of our Lord 1484.
JOHN the II. The Thirteenth KING of PORTVGAL. JOhn the second, succeeding to his father Al∣fonso the fifth, was born about the year 1456. and entred into the Government of his kingdom at the age of about twenty eight years, a Prince who being educated under his fathers arms, could not but be partaker of some of his ver∣tues; an honorable emulation of which he show∣ed in his first coming to the Crown, by a pro∣sperous expedition against the Moors. At his return from Barbary Crowned with Victory, he set out two Armata's to sea, the gallantest and best accounted that ever Portugal had before that day seen, the one directed his course to the Azores, which Islands were now indifferently well peopled, and began to afford a Traffique to the Portugal Nation; from thence this fleet was to go and touch at the other Islands discovered by the Infante D. Henry, in the Atlantique sea, and supply them with ne∣cessaries. The other fleet more Warlickly fitted and supplied with all sorts of necessaries, both for War and Peace, as designed both for a Con∣quest and Plantation, steered its course along
the Coast of Africa to Guiny, where landing its Soldiers and Planters, they soon drove away the heathenish Inhabitants, fortified themselves, and made an absolute Conquest of the Realms of Congo. The fleet afterwards made discovery of that Coast, as far as the Cape of Good-hope, planting and fortifying as they went. King Iohn having now reigned fourteen years, with happy success in all the enterprises he un∣dertook, by an unfortunate accident came by his end; for very much delighting in hunting, which sport he was very eager at, pursuing a Stag, his horse leaping over a ditch, gave him a violent fall, of which in three days he died, in the forty second year of his age, and fourteenth of his reign, leaving his kingdom by reason of his dying without any legitimate Issue, to Ema∣nuel his brother. He was of a very swarthy complexion, but withall of a pleasant countenance, affable and courteous, a great lover of Justice, and more inclinble to severity then mercy; he was espe∣cially careful in seeing the Laws against murder rigorously put in execution, being often used to say, that he who pardoned a murther, did commit ; his great love to hunting made him not altogether so diligent in State-affairs as he ought to have been.
EMANUEL the I. Fourteenth KING of PORTVGAL. EManuel who succeeded him, was born in, or about the year 1462. he took possession of the Crown of Portugal at the age of about thirty and two years; a Prince who had been bred up in all sorts of learning, that might make him either a Divine, or a States-man. At his first entrance in the Government, he addicted himself so wholly to Religion, that he took little care of the management of the king∣dom affairs, so that whilest he was never from Churches-duties, both Church and State was likely to go to ruine by the evil administration of those Ministers whom he had entrusted. The Arch Bishop of Lisbon, who foresaw the ruine which approached to the kingdom by the Tyranny of the Officers of State, presumed freely to tell the King, that though  could not blame his zeal and devotion towards God, yet he must needs advise him, that God had placed him as King and Governor over his people, that the Divine Majesty would be better pleased if he would with his prayers to the Almighty for their welfare, add his care for their protection; that it was a duty incumbent upon him to pro∣vide
for his subjects felicity, as of parents for their children, whilest according to the Apo∣stle, He that does not take care for his family, was worse then an infidel; that for want of his superintendency the kingdom was posting into the road of destruction, by reason of the ill ad∣ministration of his Ministers, that according to his duty he could not but advise him to free them from oppression, &c. These Speeches of the Arch Bishop extream∣ly stirred up the Kings affections to his people, both because he was sensible of the great love the Arch Bishop bore him, and because he knew what he had spoken was truth; he there∣fore takes the Helm of State into his own hands, calls those unjust Steward to account, frees the people from their oppresses, where he finds cause punishes them severely, and finally, makes several Laws for the good and benefit of the people, whose affections he in short time so far gained, that they surnamed him the Good. And having thus setled his kingdom to the content of his subjects at home, he next applies his minde to the aggrandising of it, to which purpose in the year 1500. he fitted out a great number of ships, which he divided into three Fleets, sending one towards the East, the second towards the West, and the third towards the South, to make discoveries. That, which steered their couse towards the East, were the first Christian Fleet that ever pas∣sed the Cape of Good-Hope, and found out the passage by Sea into the East-Indies; that towards
the West, made discovery and took possession of Brazile in America; that towards the South, reinforced and added to their former Conquests in the kingdoms of Conga. and Angola. These happy discoveries thus made at the re∣turn of the fleet from the East-Indies, a more potent was sent out with a convenient Land Ar∣my, to take possession of some places in the Country; these discomfited the great Armies of the Turks and Sultan of Egypt, possessed themselves of the Island of Ormus in the Persian Gulf, an Island so rich and well situated, that the Arabians used to say, that if the whole world were a ring, that would be like the Dia∣mond in it; many other Forts and Places upon the Sea-coast they likewise subjected, and for∣tified, and returned home richly laden. Thus were the riches of India, which before had been brought over the vast Arabian deserts upon the backs of Camels, to Grand Cairo in Egypt, and from thence by Sea transported to Venice, and so dispersed over these parts of the World, were now brought home by Sea, a longer, but less chargeable and far quicker way. Emanuel, while his Fleets were performing these glorious services abroad, governed his kingdoms in peace and prosperity at home, bles∣sed with a noble and numerous Issue, to wit, six sons and two daughters; the sons were first, Prince Iohn, who succeeded him in the king∣dom: secondly, the Infante D. Lewis: thirdly, the Infante D. Alfonso, who was after a Cardi∣nal, Arch-Bishop of Lisbon, and Abbot of Al∣cobaza:
fourthly, the Infante D. Henry, Car∣dinal and Arch-Bishop of Braga: fifthly, In∣fante D. Fernando: sixthly, the Infante D. Ed∣ward. The daughters were first the Infante Isa∣bella, who was married to Charles the fifth that famous Emperor, and King of Spain: and se∣condly, the Infante Beatrice, married to Ema∣nuel Duke of Savoy. Emanuel having long governed this Nation to his great glory and renown, at last in the se∣venty third year of his life, and forty first of his Empire, yielded to fate at Lisbon, in, or about the year 1435. and was buried in the Ca∣thedral of that City amongst many of his Ance∣stors. He was a Prince in whom the Divinity seem'd to have been at a strife, whether his body or minde should be made more amiable, for the features of his face were worthily to be admired, yet his outward part could not boast more beau∣ty, then his soul could, that imbellisher of man, vertue; I can not well say whether he was more severe, or merciful, but where he met with offences that he could not pardon, he was always pitiful; in sum, he so lived, and so ru∣led, that he deservedly merited that Glorious Name of Emanuel the Good.
JOHN the III. Fifteenth KING of PORTVGAL. JOhn the third of that Name, who succeeded his father in the kingdom, was born in the year 1504. and educated in the University of Conimbria, in all those Sciences befitting a Prince, he arrived at the Crown at the age of one and thirty years, Heir as well to his fa∣thers vertues, as kingdoms. He prosecuted those discoveries made by the Fleets of his father in the East and West Indies, in the first of which he took and possessed many Islands and Towns, his Armies encountred and overthrew the potent and formidable kings of Bengala, Pegu and Siam, and likewise obtained many signal Victories over the Moors of Ma∣lacca, Sumatra, and Molucco, who were as well provided of Artillery as any Princes of Europe: His Armies in West Indies had no worse suc∣cess, taking and fortifying divers places, no was fortune less favorable to him in Guiny. During his fathers life-time, being about the age of three and twenty years, he was married to Catherine, sister to Charles the fifth Emperor, and King of Spain, by whom he had Issue Prince Iohn, who died during his reign, but left behind
him a son named Sebastian, who succeeded this Iohn his Grand-father in the kingdom. Iohn the third reigned in all eight and thirty years, making many Laws for the increasing and encouragement of Traffique, to the great enriching of his subjects; he died in the sixty ninth year of his age, and in the year of our Lord 1573. being buried in the Cathedral at Lisbon. SEBASTIAN the I. Sixteenth KING of PORTVGAL. SEbastian, Grand-child of King Iohn the third, was his successor in the kingdom, which he entred into at about three and twenty years of age. Scarce was he well seated in his Throne, or had sat in it much above a year and a half, when he was by Ambassadors from Muly Mahamet, then turned out of his kingdoms of Fesse, and Morocco, by his Unkle Abdemelech, implored to aid him in the recovery of his kingdom, with promise that if by his means he could drive out Abdemelech, he would freely resign to Sebasti∣an the kingdom of Morocco, and content him∣self with that of Fesse.
Ambition of glory, and hopes to propagate the Christian Religion, makes Sebastian rea∣dily undertake the enterprize, and to that pur∣pose makes all possible speed to levy Men and Arms, he sends to Phillip the second King of Spain, who promises him the assistance of ten thousand men, but fails; yet Sebastian not dis∣couraged, resolves with his own forces to pro∣ceed, to which by an accident he got some ad∣dition, for as he was almost ready to go, Stuke∣ley an Englishman, created by the Pope Mar∣quis of Ireland, as he was going with a small fleet of ships, and about six thousand Italian soldiers, to assist the Irish Rebels against the Queen of England, was by tempest driven into Lisbon, him with much entreaty he perswades to desist from his intended design, and accom∣pany him into Barbary. Thus set forth, he arrives at Tanger with an Army of about thirty thousand men, here he meets Muly Mahamet, with a very small ad∣dition of forces, and much less then he expect∣ed, yet he marches forwards towards Abdeme∣lech, who by letters would have advised him to have returned in peace, but in vain; so the two Armies meet in the plains of Alcazar, where Sebastian is utterly discomfited, himself, Muly Mahamet, Stukeley, and several persons of quality slain, three Kings fell in this field, for Abdemelech was killed in the hottest of the battel, this was fought in August 1578. Yet some there be that have affirmed that Sebastian was not slain in this battel, but that
for shame and sorrow he returned not home, but wandring from one place to another, was at last found out and known at Venice, and from thence carried to Naples, where he was kept three days in a dark and dismal dungeon, with∣out any sustenance but a knife and a halter, that he was after by the command of the King of Spain sent thither, where he died miserably. That whether this were the true Sebastian, or no, was not certainly known, but that he was so like him, that the Spaniards used to say, if it were not he, it was the devil in his likeness; but however, he being thus lost to the Portugals, they Crowned in his stead Henry the Cardi∣nal.
HENRY the I. Seventeenth KING of PORTVGAL. HEnry the Cardinal, third son to Emanuel the first, who succeeded Sebastian in the kingdom, being both by reason of his age, to wit, 67. years old, and his function (being a Church-man) deprived of all means to give the people any hopes of Issue, it was during his short reign of his years, the whole discourse and debate, not onely of Portugal, but of all Christendom, who of right ought, and who probably might succeed King Henry in that Crown and Kingdom, several pretenders there were, whose several Titles the ensuing Table will make clear.
Emanuel the first, had eight children. 1 Iohn, King of Portugal, who had Issue Iohn, Prince of Portugal, who had Issue Sebastian, King of Portugal. 2 Lewis, Infante, who had Issue Don Alfonso, the Ba∣stard. Christopher, and others. 3 Infante D. Alfonso, died without Issue. 4 Henry, the Cardinal, King of Portugal, died wirhout Issue. 5 Fernando, Infante, died without Issue. 6 Edward Infante, who had Issue 1 Mary, wedded to Alexander Far∣nese, Prince of Parma, a forreigner. Reinuce, Prince of Parma. 2 Katherine, married to Iohn, Duke of Bragance. 7 Mary, married to Charles the fifth, King of Castile, and Emperor, who had Issue Phillip the second, King of Spain. 8 Beatrix, married to Charles, Duke of Savoy, had Issue Philbert, Duke of Savoy.
The several claims to the Crown were in eight, and all the pretenders endeavored by the most weighty arguments they could to jstifie their several Titles; first the people clamed Iure Regni, a Priviledge to Elect the own Kings; but it was soon answered, th until the Royal Line of a kingdom were qui extinct, they could claim no right in the Elction, for if they could, they might by the sam reason at any time depose the lawful Heir. Popes challenge to be Iure Divino, Arbitra (if not Donour) in all controversies of Crown but especially in this, because Alphonso the King, to obtain that Title, became tributary the Sea of Rome, was slighted and dis-regarde The third claim was that of Antonio, the bstard son of Lewis Infante, who alledged, th his mother was lawfully wedded to his fathe and endeavoured by all means to clear aspersion of his being illegitimate; some struglings he made for the Crown, as hereafter sha be spoken more at large. Catherina de Medice the widow of Henry, the second King of Franc was the fourth that pretended a Right and to the Crown, as being descended legitimatel from Alfonso, the third King of Portugal, chaging all th had raigned since to be usurpers To this it was readily answered, that all Lawyer had ever allowed one hundred years, sufficien to clear and make firm the Title of any kingdom, and that there being the prescription three hundred years against her, her claim utterly void. The fifth that pretended to
Crown was Philibert Duke of Savoy, as son to eatrice the younger daughter of Emanuel, hough it is to be supposed that he laid not his laim out of any hopes to prevail, whilest he was descended but of the youngest daughter, and Phillip the second of Spain of the eldest: but is rather to be thought that he was incited to ut in his claim by the rest of the pretenders▪ who knew that of the claimers who were not Natives, he was the fittest person of all others o resist and annoy. King Phillip not onely by eason of his personal valor, but also because of his Countries bordering upon the Dutchy of Millan, which with the assistance of the French, is neighbors on the other side, and pretenders o that Dukedom, he might with ease at all imes invade. The sixth who-presumed a right to this king∣dom, was Reinuce the young Prince of Parma, who demanded it in right of his mother the el∣dest daughter to the Infante Edward, alledging that Iure Primogeniturae, the male Line was to be erved before the female, so that until the Line of his Grand-father Prince Edward, were wholly extinct, neither Phillip the second, nor he Duke of Savoy, could have any pretence to that kingdom. Catherine, Dutchess of Braganza, and young∣est daughter to the Infante Don Edward, was the seventh that laid claim to this Crown, who alledged, that in all successions whatsoever, these four qualities were to be considered, viz. the Line, the Degree, the Sex, and the Age; that
the better Line ought in justice first to take place, although others should have advantage in the other three qualities; that in all succes∣sions of Crowns, the last possessor was to be succeeded ure hereditatis, which allowed the benefit of representation; that she represent∣ing the Infante Don Edward, the better Line did by representation preceed Reinuce (the Law never allowing a Grand-child that benefit) and that by her better Line she did exclude King Philip, who descended of a daughter, but especially by the prime and fundamental Laws of the kingdom, (put in execution against Ba∣trice, daughter of Ferdinand the ninth King of Portugal, who having married out of the king∣dom to the King of Castile, her right of succeed∣ing was utterly lost, and King Iohn chosen in her stead) she was to be preferred before all other claimers whatsoever, in regard of her both being born and married within the king∣dom. But Phillip the second, King of Spain, who was the eight pretender, having employed all the best wits in Christendom, to confute and disprove all other claimes, and prove and main∣tain his, wanted not some objections against this; alledging, That the successions of Crowns were to be decided by the Law of Nations, not of the Empire, upon which onely her jus repre∣sentandi Patrem was grounded, that the nearest male in degree to the late possessor ought to succeed; that the Infante Don Edward being deceased before his brother Henry was King,
could have no right in himself, and therefore could derive none to his posterity, for nem dat quod in se non habet, that it was very unreaso∣nable that Catharine should be less prejudiced in her self for her sex, then King Phillip should be for his mother. PHILLIP the II. II. III. IV. of that Name KINGS OF SPAIN, And 18. 19. 20. KINGS of PORTVGAL. BUt it was no Arguments could confute, or annul the certain and indubitable right of the Dutchess of Braganza, which was clear to the World, both by her descent, and by the fun∣damental Laws of the Nation, and this King Phillip knew well, and therefore, though he car∣ried on his affairs very candidly to the eyes of men, and seemed unbyassed with proper Inte∣rest, by offering to submit his Title to a dispu∣tation, ofessing that the Laws of Portugal were more favorable to him, then the Law of Castile, and openly acknowledging, that if he
should chance to die before King Henry, his el∣dest Son being a degree farther off, would come behinde some of the pretenders, of whom him∣self had the precedence. Though, I say, he car∣ried himself thus fair to the world, yet he clan∣destinely wrought with Father Leon Henriques a Jesuite, and Confessor to king Henry, and Fer∣dinando Castillo, a Dominican, and of the Kings bosom Councel, to endeavor by all means pos∣sible to divert all Designs in prejudice of his Claims, and especially that Catherine Dutchess of Braganza might not by Henry be declared to be the next Heir apparent; which he conscious of the justice of the Title, was very willing to have done. And whilest these two Fathers prosecuted his interest there with the old, and almost doting King Henry, the vigilant Phillip provided an Ar∣my in readiness, with which he resolved to enter into Portugal, and with his sword make good his disputable Title, as soon as that old Kings death should give him the Warning piece to fall on. Yet when that was given, and Phillip ready to march with an Army of twenty thousand men into Portugal, he had like to have been preven∣ted; for Pope Gregory the Thirteenth pretend∣ing still his right to Dispose, or at least to Arbi∣trate all Difference concerning that Crown, had sent Cardinal Riario Legat Apostolique, with Order to disswade the Catholick King from rai∣sing Arms, and that done, to pass int ortugal, and in his Holiness name, and behalf, to Arbi∣trate the Right between all Pretenders; which
designs of the Popes, this crafty Spanish Fox circumvented, for having pre-advice of it, and resolving to pursue his own intentions of assu∣ring to himself the kingdom of Portugal, and yet approve himself an obedient Son of the Church, he gave order in all places where the Legat was to pass, he should be most magnifi∣cently entertained, so that by such sumptuous Treatments, the time might be dexterously pro∣tracted, and he possessed of that kingdom be∣fore the Legat arrived at Court; which was ac∣cordingly done, and the Legat returned thanks for his magnificent Entertainments, though he was displeased at the ill success of his Nego∣tiation. But to proceed to the maner of his possessing himself of this kingdom: No sooner did the News arrive at the Spanish Court of the death of King Henry, but Ferdinand de Teledo, Duke D' Alva, was commanded with an Army of twenty thousand men to march toward Lisbon, and in the Name and Right of his Catholick Majesty, to make Conquest of the kingdom, if he found opposition. But all the appearance of opposition which he found, was made by Don Antonio the Bastard Son of Lewis the Infante, who having got into Lisbon in the Head of a tumultuary Rabble, ra∣ther than a well-formed Army, endeavored at first to make some resistance, but was soon dis∣comfited, and the suburbs of Lisbon being sac∣ked to satisfie the soldiers, the City was surren∣dred to him, whither soon after the King came,
and so by a mixt Title of Descent and Arms, took possession of the kingdom, Anno 1510. Kathe∣rine Dutchess of Braganza being enforced to surrender to him all her interest and preten∣sions. The Nobility and People of Portugal were without doubt extreamly amazed to see them∣selves so suddenly surprized, and made subject to a Forein Prince, and especially to a Prince of that Nation against whom they had a natural Antipathy: but finding themselves in a condi∣tion not able to make any resistance, they thought they should gain more by submitting freely to that King, than by being forced to it; and therefore they made their humble submission, which Phillip met as it were half way, and con∣descended in the General Assembly of Estates to be sworn to these Articles▪ or Capitulations following. I. That the said Phillip King of Spain, &c. should observe all the Laws, Liberties, Priviledges, and Customs granted to the People by the former Kings of Portugal. II. That the Vice-king, or Governor, should be al∣ways the Son, Brother, Uncle, or Nephew of the King, or else a Native of Portugal. III. That all chief Offices of the Church, or State, should be bestowed upon the Natives of Portugal, and not upon strangers; likewise the Governments of all Towns and Places.
IV. That all Countries now belonging to the Portu∣gal, should so continue, to the comodity and benefit of the Nation. V. That the Portugal Nation should be admitted to all Offices in the Kings House, as well as the Ca∣stilians. VI. That because the King could not conveniently be always in Portugal, he should send the Prince to be bred up amongst them. These Articles were shut up, or concluded, with a blessing upon such kings as should observe and keep them, and a curse on those who should break or violate them. And some Authors like∣wise affirm, that there was another Clause ad∣ded to them, signifying, That in case (which God forbid) that the King which then was, or his Successors, should not observe this Agreement, or should procure a Dispensation for this Oath, the three States of the kingdom might freely deny sub∣jection and obedience to the King, without being guilty, either of Perjury or Treason: Though these Articles were thus sworn to, and the Cardinal Albertus Archduke of Austria son to the Emperor, and Nephew to the King of Spain, appointed Vice-king of Portugal, Phillip the second durst not inperson yet leave the king∣dom; for he perceived by their murmurs and visible discontents, that their submission to him proceeded more out of fear then love, and that
as he had in a moment gained that kingdom, so he should as soon loose it; if he should but give them the least opportunity. For that the people were highly discontented, might easily appear by their attentive listning after old prophesies, among which was one of an old Hermit who told Alphonso the first King of Portugal, of the great victory that he should ob∣tain over the five Kings of the Moors, that he and his posterity should reign happily King of Portugal, but that in the sixteenth generation his line should fail, but that God at length should have mercy again upon them, and restore them. Others had respect to a Letter written by St. Bernard to the same King Alphonso, (the original of which is reported to have been given to the Portugal Embassadors, by Lewis the Thirteenth, King of France, Anno 1641.) the substance of which was to this effect: That he rendred thanks to him for the Lands bestowed upon him, that in recompence thereof, God had declared unto him, that there should not fail a Native of Por∣tugal to sit upon that Throne, unless for the greatness of their sins, God would chastise them for a time; but that this time of Chastisement should not last above sixty years. Other Prophesies there were of this nature, and to this effect, which put the people in hopes of a Deliverance; and many of them flattered themselves that Don Sebastian was yet alive, and would come and deliver them; nay, so foolish were some of them, that though they believed him slain at the battel of Alcazar in Barbary,
yet they thought he should live again, and mira∣culously come to redeem them. But that which most of all expressed the peo∣ples Discontents, was what was publickly spo∣ken by the mouthes of their Orators the Priests, in their Pulpits, who would ordinarily in their Sermons utter speeches much in prejudice of the Spaniards Title, and in favor of the Dutchess of Braganza, nor were they sparing to do so in the presence of the King himself, who would therefore often say, That the Portuguez Clergy had made the sharpest war with him. Father Lewis Alvarez a Jesuite, preaching one day before the Vice-Roy, took his Text, Surge, tolle Grabatum tuum, & ambula, and tur∣ning himself to the Duke, said, Sir, the meaning of that is, Arise, take up your pack, and be gone home. But above all this, might the Discontents be perceived in the Noblemens Chappels, espe∣cially in the Duke of Braganza's, where they were wont to sing the Lamentations of Ieremy, applying all the scorn and reproach of the Israe∣lites to themselves, as Aquam nostram pecunia bibimus, because of the Excize put by the Spa∣niards upon Wine, and other necessaries: And that, Servi Dominati sunt in nos; and that, Ce∣cidit Corona Capitis nostri, most commonly end∣ing with this Invocation, Recordare Domine, Quid acciderit nobis Intuere & respice opprobrium nostrum: Haereditas nostra versa est ad alienos. Yet did king Phillip bear all these Affronts with an incomparable patience, dissembling with an admirable prudence his passion (if he had
any) for these Discontents; for he knew the onely way to win this Nation to an obedience and complyance, must be lenity at first, what ever he intended to practice afterwards, and that he had by his exact keeping of his Word and Oath, won much upon this people, appears in that during his whole Reign, and the Reign of his Successor Philip the Third, who followed his fathers foot-steps, though not with that craft and dissimulation, they made no attempts, nor were inclinable to a Revolt, which the ensuing Story will evidence. Don Antonio Prior of Crato, the base born son of Lewis the Infante, who had by the tumultua∣ry Rabble, on the Death of King Henry, been elected King, being expulsed Lisbon by the For∣ces of the Duke D' Alva, fled from thence into France, to the protection of that Queen, who (in regard that her Claim was exploded both by the Spaniard and the Portugal, as an outworn Title, and injurious to all the kings of Portugal ever since, as unjust Possessors) had long endea∣vored to excite Queen Elizabeth of England against the Spaniard, and to forewarn her and other Princes to beware of his increasing power, who now enriched with the addition of Portugal, East-India, and many Isles in the Atlantique sea, might in time overshadow all his neighbo∣ring Princes, and therefore advising that it be∣hooved them to think of some way to curb his Ambition betimes, and restrain his too far ex∣tending Power into some reasonable limits. Which advice of hers, Queen Elizabeth easily
listned too, being always providently careful of her own, and her Subjects safety, fore-seeing how dangerous the over-swelling Power of that Prince would be, both to Her and her Domini∣ons, and therefore though she then entred not into a present War with him, yet when Don An∣tonio came over to her with Recommendations from the French Queen, she bountifully relie∣ved him, which she then thought she might do without offence, considering that she acknow∣ledged him her Kinsman, descended of the Blood Royal of England, and of the House of Lanca∣ster; nor was there ever any promise made in any League between the English and Spaniard, that the Portugals should not be received into England. Here then Don Antonio resided, till (the Wars breaking forth between Spain and Eng∣land) after the Spaniard had received that nota∣ble Overthrow of his Invincible Armado, to whose power and puissance the whole World thought England would have been but a morsel. Queen Elizabeth judging it more honorable to assail her Enemy, then again to be assailed by him, suffered a Fleet to be set forth against Spain, which Sir Iohn Norris, and Sir Francis Drake, with some other private persons, to their eternal honor, rigged and set out at their own charge, requiring nothing of the Queen but some few Ships of War; and she granted to them, that the Ships and spoils taken should be divided amongst them. The Hollanders likewise to this Fleet joyned some Ships, so that the number
of the whole Fleet was about eleven thousand Soldiers, and fifteen hundred Mariners. With this Fleet Don Antonio, with some few Portugals set Sayl out of England, having before loaden the English with great promises of the re∣covery of this kingdom, assuring them that the Portugueses would be ready upon his appearance to revolt from the Spainiard, and that Muley Hamet King of Morocco, would assist him with twenty thousand men. The first place that the English Fleet put in∣to, was the Groyne in Gallicia, the base town of which they easily took, but attempting the higher town were twice repulsed, and forced to raise their siege, upon advice, that the Condy di Andrada had gathered Forces at Burges Bridge, and that the Condy di Altamira was coming with more, purposing to besiege them in the base town, and so cut off their way to their ships; which Norris resolved to prevent, and therefore with a sufficient force marched against them, overthrew them, and had the slaughter of them for three miles together, and two days after having burnt and pillaged the vil∣lages, they put to sea, steering their course towards Portugal. But whilst they laboured with contrary winds, plying to and fro at Sea, Robert Earl of Essex fell in amongst them, who being very young, had out of the heat of Military glory, hatred of the Spa∣niards, and commiseration of Don Antonio, decli∣ning the pleasures of the Court, and committed himself to Sea, without the knowledge, and ab∣solutely
against the Queens mind, in hopes by reason of the influence he had over most of the Commanders of the Land-Forces, to be made their General. Two days after his being joyned with them, they with much trouble arrived in Penicha a town of Portugal, which with the loss of some drowned in landing, they became masters of the Castle, being likewise immediately rendred to Don Antonio. Hence the Land-forces under the Command of Sir Iohn Norris marched directly, and with all possible speed towards Lisbon, about Sixty miles distant, Drake promising to follow with the Fleet by the way of the River Tagus. The Army being arrived at Lixbon, though they had before at a Councel of War, determined to en∣camp on the East-side of the town, the better to bar succours from coming out of Spain, now con∣trary to their own resolutions, sat down before St. Kathermes suburbs on the West-side, where as at first they found no resistance, so they found little help, but what the prayers of some few dis∣armed men gave them, who now and then cried out, God save the King Antonio: and indeed other help they could not afford him, Albertus Arch∣duke of Austria the Vice-Roy having before dis∣armed the Portugals. The next day when the English, weary with their long march, betook themselves to their rest, the Spanish Garison sallied out upon them, who were at first resisted by Bret and his Com∣panies, till more coming up to their assistance,
forced the Spaniards to give back the valiant Earl of Essex, chasing them to the very gates; but the English had several Commanders of note, and no small quantity of private soldiers slain. In sum, when they had now stayed two days before the town, and perceived that the Portu∣gals, notwithstanding the great brags and fair promises of Don Antonio, did not at all incline to a Revolt, and that no advice came of any assi∣stance from Muley Hamet King of Morocco; but that instead of them, fresh Forces flocked in great numbers from the East parrs into the City, whilst their Army was lessened by a violent sick∣ness, their Provision and Amunition failed, and their great Guns for battery arrived not, they raysed their siege, and took their way towards Cascais, a small town at the mouth of the river, the Spaniards following them at a distance, but not ever daring to fall into their Rear. The town of Cascais they took, blew up the Castle, and so, notwithstanding all the intreaties of Don Antonio, set Sayl for England, firing in their way Vigo a Port-town deserted of its inhabitants. This and some small bustles with one or two Counterfeit Sebastians not worth mentioning, were the onely storms, that hapned in this king∣dom during the reigns of Phillip the second, and third; for they keeping their words in most things, though some of their priviledges they in∣fringed, had almost brought the people to a wil∣lingness to be their slaves, whereas Phillip the fourth committing the whole charge of the Go∣vernment
to Count Olivares, (who though with∣out doubt an able Statesman, yet would seem to have a way in policy by himself, which no body else could understand the reasons of) lost the whole kingdom, and all its Territories. For such was the new rigorous ways which he would prescribe in the Government of Catalo∣nia and Portugal, both people very tender of their Priviledges, the least breach of which should have been seconded by a potent Force to have suppressed them, in case they should attempt an Insurrection, when in stead of having such power in readiness, the Catalonians had ra∣ther opportunity given them to rebel, and spurs to provoke them to make use of the opportunity; for some soldiers being scatteringly quartered among them, but too few to curb them, they looked upon that as a greater intrenchment upon their Liberties than any before, and a design utterly to enslave them: wherefore converting their patience into fury, they took Arms, massa∣cred those soldiers, slew their Viceroy, and put themselves under the French Protection. This Revolt of the Catalonians was a president to the Portugals, who had extreamly suffered under the breach of their Priviledges: for con∣trary to the second Article sworn to by King Philip the Second, which said, That the Viceroy or Governor, should be either Son, Brother, Uncle, or Nephew to the King of Spain: The Infanta Margarita di Mantoua, who had no relation at all to the kings of Castile, was made Governess, which they might, and perhaps would have born,
had they not been incensed by a more feeling in∣jury Anno. 1636. when the Tax of a fifth part was imposed upon all the Subjects of that king∣dom; an intollerable grievance, and thought so insufferable by the Southern parts of the Na∣tion, that they rose in Arms to oppose it, and had set the whole kingdom in a combustion, had it not been timely quenched by the timely care and industry of the then Governess, the Infanta Margarita of Mantoua. Yet this small stir gave an Item to the Court of Spain, of the readiness of the people to revolt, which made Olivarez endeavor by all ways pos∣sible to cut off the means of their being able to do, but whilest he endeavored to prevent them, he gave them the means to do it, though he fai∣led not to make use of those courses which in probability might ensure that kingdom; the chief of which was, the endeavoring to allure from thence the Duke of Braganza, whom the people of Portugal looked upon as the person who of right ought to be their king, and who was the onely Native of the kingdom who might restore again the Line of Alphonso; besides, he was a Prince, who for Power, Riches, and Number of Tenants, not onely exceeded all the Nobles of Portugal, but even of Spain it self. And indeed the Duke of Braganza was one of the most glorious Subjects in Europe, being allied to most Kings in Christendom; which made the Kings of Spain, though they were Competitors for the Crown of Portugal, treat this Family with more honor than any other of
his Grandees, receiving them almost with as much respect, as if they were Sovereign Prin∣ces; which appeared in Philip the Second, who most of all desired to abase this Family, yet would always when the Duke of Braganza came to visit him, meet him in the middle of the room, and not permitting him to kiss his hand, seat him with himself under the Canopy of Estate. To draw him therefore out of that kingdom, Olivarez first politickly offered him the Govern∣ment of Milan, a place of great trust and honor, but he modestly refused it, as not in a condition at that present to undertake so great a Com∣mand, and indeed expressing an unwil ingness to go out of Portugal. But his unwillingness to go from thence, made the king of Spain, and Count Olivarez the more willing to draw him from thence, it was therefore given out, That the king himself was resolved to go in person to reduce the revolted Cataloni∣ans, and that therefore all the Nobility should be in a readiness in four moneths time to attend his Majesty in that Expedition. But the Duke of Braganza being suspicious of the Spaniards, because he knew himself suspected by them, and likely to be whilest the Portugueses so much af∣fected him, to assure himself of the ones love, and to avoid, if possible, the others suspect, re∣tires himself to his Countrey-house at Villa Vi∣tiosa, and there follows his sports of Hunting, &c. not at all regarding matters of State, withal sen∣ing
an Excuse to Count Olivarez that his affairs at present were in so low and mean a condi∣tion, that he could not appear to attend his Ma∣jesty in that pomp and splendor that became a Person of his quality, and that therefore he should do his Majesty more service in staying at home, when the other Nobles were abroad, then he could possibly do by attending him. This Plot thus failing, made the Court of Spain more suspicious of the Duke then ever be∣fore; Count Olivarez therefore resolves to im∣ploy his utmost art of dissimulation to entrap him, which he sets upon by a fetch so far about, that to the eye of reason it might put the Duke into ambitious thoughts of endeavoring to as∣sume his Throne, and in a way to accomplish those thoughts, rather than any way prejudice him: but it appeared afterwards that Olivarez design in so far trusting the Duke, was onely be∣cause the Duke should trust him. In answer to Braganza's Letter of Excuse, the Conde assures him that his Majesty was very well satisfied with his reasons of not attending him in the intended Expedition against Catalonia, and that he was very sensible of his good inclinations to his service; That for his own part, he was verry sorry that his affairs were in so low a con∣dition, for he could not but commiserate his in∣terest as his own. That his Majesty, to let him know how great confidence he reposed in his fi∣delity, had appointed him General of the Mi∣litia of that kingdom, and had for his present supply sent him Sixty thousand Crowns, lea∣ving
it to his choice to reside in what place near Lisbon he pleased. This strange confidence put in the Duke by the king of Spain, much amazed the greatest Politicians, who thought it reasonable that the Spaniard should have permitted the Duke still to have kept retired in the Countrey, rather then have given him such a Command, and cal∣led him to Lisbon into the continual view of the people, who looking upon him as the Heir of that House which had been ever represented to have the onely right to the Crown, might easily be enflamed with a desire to have a king of their own. And these things was the Princess of Mantoua very sensible of, and therefore continually soli∣cited the King to know his reason, or to desire him to remove those apparent opportunities which he had given the Duke of Braganza to ef∣fect a Revolt. But she not onely received in∣tricate and enigmatical Answers from the King and Duke D'Olivarez, but likewise had the for∣mer actions seconded with one, which made her of opinion that his Catholick Majesty had a mind to toss the kingdom into Braganza's hands whe∣ther he would or no; for on a sudden, without any notice given to her, all the Spanish Garison in St. Iohns Castle, which commanded the City of Lisbon, and indeed upon the strength of which the whole safety and security of the kingdom de∣pended, were suddenly drawn forth, and the Castle left to the disposure of Don Iohn of Braganza.
But this was the last act of Count Olivarez confidence in the Duke; for by trusting him so much, he now thought that he could not but reci∣procally repose confidence in him; and therefore next Summer Anno 1640. he again by Letters sollicites him to leave Portugal, and come to Madrid, first telling him, that his Catholick Majesty gave him many thanks, and greatly ap∣plauded his Loyalty in the Exercise of the Of∣fice of General, and was very sensible of the good effects which his Authority had wrought over the Portugals: Next he represented unto him the present declining condition of the Spa∣nish Monarchy, not onely by reason of the dis∣orders in Flanders and Italy, and the preparations of the Turk, but more especially for that their most potent Enemies the French, were now in assistance of the revolted Catalonians, entred in∣to Spain: That it highly concerned his Catho∣lick Majesty to drive these out of his Territo∣ries, which could not be effected but by a very powerful Force; that he being one of the prime Grandees of the Kingdom, might by his presence in the Head of a good number of his Tenants, encourage others to a sutable assistance: That to that purpose his Catholick Majesty expected him every moment, having designed for him great Honors, Priviledges and Dignities, suitable to his merit. But as cunning an Angler as Olivarez was, yet he failed of his mark, the bait would not yet hook in the Fish; for though the Duke of Bra∣ganza was accounted no very great Politician,
yet his own safety taught him to know that all these Trusts, and fair promises were but gilded Allurments to draw him to his destruction; Having therefore supplied the King with a con∣siderable number of his Tenants and friends, he found excuses for his own not going in person; and to take off all suspicion of jealousy or thoughts, that he had any design against the State, he retired again to his country house. Thus did these two great personages, by craft and dissumulation endeavour to supplant each other, onely the one strove the others destructi∣on; the other onely studied his own safety and preservation: During all these passages, the Vice-Queen Margarita of Mantoua was very vigilant in her Government, & foreseeing what in reason might be the issue of these proceedings, wrote very importunately to the king, assuring him, that if it were not suddenly prevented, the kingdom would infallibly be lost. To which his Majesty re∣turned her no answer: and Olivarez in his (sligh∣ting her judgement, as fitter to govern a private house then a kingdom,) desired her, that if her Capacity would not reach to the height and drift of those mysteries of State, yet that her wisedom would prompt her not to discover them. Yet without doubt Olivarez was inwardly perplexed to see all his plots thus fail, and foul means he durst not openly attempt, such was both the Dukes potency, and the great love the people bore him, he therefore at last has recourse
to treachery, and to that intent gives secret ad∣vice to Don Lopez d'Ossis, and Don Antonio D'O∣quendo, that when they had relieved Flanders with men and mony, they should with the whole Fleet put into Portugal, and then as soon as the Duke should according to the duty of his new place and office come aboard, they should immediately set Sail, and bring him away to Callis; but this plot was by a strange divine pro∣vidence prevented, for that Fleet was totally routed by the Hollanders upon the Coast of England. JOHN the IV. The One and twentieth KING of PORTVGAL. NOw was the time come wherein, according to St. Bernards prophecy, the kingdom of Portugal was to be released from the tyranny of strangers, and restored again to the Govern∣ment of a Native King, to which all things seemed so well to quadrate, that we cannot ima∣gine there was less then a divine hand in it; for though (all Plots failing against the Duke of Braganza,) the Spaniards beginning to fear somewhat, drew out as many of the Native soldiers out of the kingdom as conveniently they
could, thinking thereby to lessen the ill hu∣mors which begn now to appear, yet they did thereby onely the more stir up and enflame those discontents which were taken at Vasconsellos managing all Affairs of State. For although the most Illustrious Infanta Margarita of Mantoua was a Princess of great judgement and knowledge in State-affairs, yet she permitted her self to be so much over-ruled by Vasconsellos Secretary of State, or at least was so much over-ruled by him, whether she would or no, that he either by some secret consent of his Catholick Majesty, or led on by his own am∣bitious spirit, confiding in the great favour he had at Court, never permitted the Infanta to en∣joy other then the title of Vice-Queen. And insufferable was the Government of Vas∣consellos to the Portuguesses, who as much hated his obscure birth, as they did his evil Customs▪ he was a man wholly composed of pride, cruelty, and avarice, that knew no moderation but in excesses: small lapses were by him made capital crimes, chastising with all severity those whom he did, but suppose dissatisfied with his Govern∣ment; And exercising with all rigor the Spanish Inquisition, punished not onely the actions, but the very thoughts of men. The infringing of the greatest priviledges of the Portugal Nation seemed to him but a trifle; which continued oppressions, in the end so exasperated the whole people, that animated by the knowledge of their own strength, by the many diversions of the Spanish Nation, by the late example of the Ca∣talonians,
and incited by the absolute ruine which they saw hung over their heads, whilst six thou∣sand of them were yearly listed and forced to serve the Spaniard in his forreign wars, they re∣solved to loose his yoke from off their Necks, and to disclaim his obedience, by the election of a King of their own. Some have been of opinion, that this con∣spiracy was at least of ten years standing, agreed and assented to by most of the Grandees of Portugal: I dare not affirm it, nor deny it; for such great actions of State do resemble light∣ning, which once past leave but the greater darkness: the Air of State-mysteries is not to be flown in by less then Eagles, I shall therefore omit to search into so great a Privacy, and one∣ly recount the publique action. On Saturday the first of February, Anno 1640. (and Saturday's have been often observed to be propitious to the Portugal Nation,) all the Nobility of the Kingdom, led on by the Mar∣quesses of Ferrera, & the Count of Vimioso, took Arms, and accompanied with a great multitude of the inhabitants of Lisbon, and some Por∣tuguese soldiers came to the Castle, which sci∣tuate in the middest of Lisbon, serves both for a Palace and a Castle: this was the residence of the Vice-Queen, and hither assembled all the Magistrates for Governing of the Kingdom, the guards which were two Companies of Spaniards and two of high Dutch, either before gained by secret intelligence, or frighted with the great numbers of the Portugals, or desire of Novelty,
or else perhaps unwilling to make resistance a∣gainst those to whom they were most of them joyned by friendship or marriage, without the least opposition, abandoning their post, gave them free admittance. Whilest these things had happened, the Se∣cretary Vasconsellos was in the Chambers of his Office (upon some reasons he had by the Dis∣contents of the people, to suspect an Insurre∣ction) at that instant writing into Spain, of the Alienation of the mindes of the Nobility from the Spanish Government, and earnestly pressing that some rigorous Resolution might be taken to prevent it; which Letters afterwards taken, did sufficiently demonstrate his ill will to the Por∣tuguese Nation. Whilst he was thus busied, the confused noise of the Soldiers pierced his ears, at which won∣dring not so much at the tumult, as at what should be the cause of it, being accompanied onely with a Dutch man, and another of the Guard, he would have gone down, but was hin∣dred by the Portugals, who came running up, crying, Kill the Traytor, Kill the enemy of our Blood; whereupon not knowing where to save himself, he fled, with those two accompanying him, into an inner chamber, and there with his sword in his hand, accompanied and assisted by those two that were with him, disposed himself to sell his Life at the dearest rare he could: but his valor stood him in no stead, for those two who endeavored to defend him, being slain with two Musquet-shot, he seeing it vain to defend
himself there longer, leapt desperately out of the window, rather to seek his death, than out of any hopes to save his life; for no sooner was he down, but numberless swords were embrued in his blood, the very women and children run∣ning to tear in pieces his dead body, with the same alacrity as he used to torment them, when alive. In the mean time the Marquess of Ferrera was gone to secure the Vice-Queen, whom ha∣ving committed to the Guard of two hundred Musquetteers, he calls a Council, and in a short Discourse sets forth the miseries the king∣dom had endured whilest it lay subject to the Spanish Government, who had sought no other end but their destruction: Then putting them in minde of the Valor and Merits of their Na∣tion, he exhorts them to condescend to the Election of a New King, nominating to them the Duke of Braganza, as the most worthy of the Crown, not so much for his Power, Riches, or the greatness of his House, as because the kingdom was his indubitable Right; he being the onely Person left of that Stock, which for so many years had gloriously governed Portugal. A long Discourse was superfluous to those who were before perswaded. A publick shout interrupted the Marquesses Speech, all of them crying with a loud voice, That they would have John Duke of Braganza for their King. In the whole multitude there was not a face, much less a voice that did gainsay this general Vote; ei∣ther because they did all really rejoyce to see
that they should again have a king of their own Nation, or because none could without danger oppose themselves to the torrent of so a publick Will. The Duke was at this time at his Countrey-house at Villa Vitiosa, whether by accident, or because he would always have had occasion to excuse himself, if the business should not have succeeded, I cannot guess: but by reason of his absence they thought fit to make choice of two Governors, whom, to avoid the pretences of others, they nominated to be the Archbishops of Lisbon and Braganza. These began immediately to exercise their Command, and were obeyed with so much qui∣et, that in all that great and populous City of Lisbon there was none slain, but onely those be∣fore-mentioned; the prisons were opened nor was there any that suffered any wrong, either in their goods or life: All the Shops were opened as if there had not happened any Change of Go∣vernment. Onely the house of Vasconsellos was sackt, with so much anger and despite, that they did not pardon the very Doors and Windows; nay, such was the fury of the people, that had they not been hindred by the soldiers of the Guard, they had levelled it with the ground. As for his car∣case, it suffered all those disgraces which a people wronged both in their liberties and estaes, could inflict: they ran like mad men to express living sentiments of Revenge upon his dead and sense∣less Corpse, vaunting who could invent the
newest ways of disgrace and scorn, till at length almost wearied with their inhumane sport, they left it in the street so mangled, that it did not seem to have the least resemblance of a man; from whence it was the next day carried by the Fraternity della misericordia, and thrown into the Burying-place of the Moors. The Marquess of Alemquer, after he had by command from the Governor assured the stron∣gest posts of the City, sent several Soldiers into the streets, crying, Long live King John the Fourth; which the people hearing, distracted as it were with very joy, leaving their Trades, ran up and down proclaiming him with voices of Iu∣bilee, the greatest part through excess of passion, not being able to refrain from tears. The Messengers did not run, but flie to the Duke of Braganza, to give him notice of his promotion to the Crown: The first arrived on Sunday morning before day; he feigned a great alteration at this Advice, whereupon some have presumed to say, that he had not any knowledge of the Design. He seemed at first not to believe it, but told the Messengers, that though he might have desert, and a spirit fit for the Crown of Portugal, yet he had neither will nor ambition to desire. That his enemies wronged him, by tempting him with Stratagems as far from his Genius, as his Faith. But at the arrival of the Count of Monte Santo, who came to accompany him to Lisbon, he seemed of another minde; and having been with him in private discourse for the space of about two hours, without any fur∣ther
delay, then what the relating the business to his Wife, and to the Prince his son, made, he departed with the Count from Villa Vizosa, ac∣companied with about five hundred persons. Yet others there be that affirm, that he was not onely acquainted with the design of the Re∣volt, but of Council about it, and that some time before the Nobility having had a private Meeting at Lisbon, it was at first propounded, That they should reduce the kingdom into the form of a Commonwealth; but that not being approved of by the major part, the Archbishop of Lisbon stood up, and in a most eloquent Speech having laid before them the miseries they had endured under the Spanish yoke, recom∣mended unto them Iohn Duke of Braganza, as the indubitable Heir of the Crown, and their rightful Soverign. This Motion needed not to be seconded with many Arguments to induce a general Consent, they all most willingly assented to it, and con∣cluded to send Gaston Cotigno, a man of a fluent and voluble tongue, to acquaint the Duke with their intentions, and to perswade him to accept the Crown, and free his Countrey. Gaston being arrived, with many well-coucht words acquaints him, That there was now a pregnant opportunity offered to recover the in∣dubitable right of his Ancestors to the Crown of Portugal: That the Nobility and Clergy were wholly inclined to redeem themselves from the tyranny of the Castilians, by securing the Crown upon his head: That the universal odium of the
whole people to the Spanish Government, the present low condition of the House of Austria, distracted on every side with War; the assured Assistance that France and other Nations, emu∣laing the greatness of Spain, would lend, were as so many Motives to perswade them not to let slip so fair an opportunity to regain their liberty: That if he by refusal, should be the sole enemy to his Countreys freedom, they would effect it themselves, and reduce it into a Common∣wealth; with many other Arguments used he, which his love to the House of Braganza, his hatred to the Castilians, or his own ingenuity prompted to him. The Duke's amazement permitted him not to return a sudden Answer: but after a little pause, he replied, That he was highly obliged both to him and all the Nobility, for their affections to him, but that this was a Business required great deliberation: That there was no Medium between a Throne and a Chair of Execution, that therefore he would first advise with himself, and not rashly attempt so hazardous a business. He therefore communicates the whole busi∣ness to his Dutchess Donna Lucia, sister to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, a woman of a noble, heroick, and masculine Spirit, with her he con∣sults whether he were best accept of the Propo∣sitions of the Nobility, or to prevent all hazards go to Madrid: and being anxious what course to take, his wife nobly told him: My friend, if thou goest to Madrid, thou dost incurre the danger of loosing thy life; and if thou acceptest the Crown,
thou dost no more: consider then whether it be not better to dye nobly at home, then basely abroad. These words of his Ladies (say some) ainma∣ted him to a resolution to accept the Crown; so he returned Gaston in answer, That he would conform himself to the councels of the Nobili∣ty, resolving to live and run all hazards what∣ever with them, for the regaining of his coun∣tries liberty. In the mean time the Marquess of Ferreira used his utmost endeavors for the reducing of those Castles which still heldout for his Catholique Majesty. The first day the Castle of Colline was rendred, which for its situation was judged in expugnable, yet the Captain of it no sooner saw it besieged, but moved either with Gold or fear, he delivered it up on Articles. The tower of Belem, and that De la Cabera were suddainly surprized before they within had any notice of what was done; The strong Fortress of Saint Giuliano, a modern Fortification, and built to defend the mouth of the river, was ready to sur∣render, when a Castellane, who was there a pri∣soner, and under sentence of death, for the sur∣rendry of a Fort in Brazile, shut out the captain, who was gone to parly with the Portugueses, and resolved to defend it many days: he might have held it out the siege, but finding neither ammu∣nition nor provision, consumed, as was believed, on purpose by the Captain, who unwilling to have the blot of a Traytor cast upon him, for so suddain a delivery, thought it fitter to be forced by necessity to open the gates to the Marquess.
After the surrendry of Fort San Giuliano, the Marquess of Ferreira in the name of the King, gave the Sacrament of Fidelity, or an Oath of Al∣legiance to all the Orders, to wit, to the Clergy, Nobility and Commons, which was received with so much readiness, that had not the Mar∣quess seen the necessary orders observed, the people had run into certain inconveniences, so much they strived to prevent one another in willingness to perform this duty. On Thursday the sixth of February, His Ma∣jesty made his entrance into Lisbon, with all these applauses that a beloved King can expect from his most loving Subjects. The rich Liveries given by the Nobles, the Triumphal Arches, the Streets hung with Tapestry, the multitudes of the people flocking to see him, and the excellent Fire-works, (which were so many that a Spaniard cryed out, Es possible que se quita un Reyno a el Rey D Felippe, cun solas Luminarias & vivas sin∣mas exerci in Poder, Gran senal y efeto sin Duda del Brazo de dios todo Poderoso! Is it possible that King Phillip should be deprived of a Kingdom, with onely lights and Fire-works without a powerful Army! certainly this is an evident to∣ken that 'tis the Almighty hand of God,) were the least demonstrations of that Cities love and joy: so great was the concourse of those that floc∣ked to see their new king, that though his Majesty entred into the City by Noon, he could not through the throng arrive at the Palace till two hours after Sun-set: curiosity and love which usually have the force to stir up all affections,
made this people flock so fast to the sight of their Prince. And because it is prudence in a publique joy, to accomodate ones self to the will of the most, even those who either for envy, or some o∣ther cause, hated the house of Braganza, did not cease to make some demonstration of reverence and mirth, and by how much the more they thought themselves observed, by so much the more they strove to seem other then they were. His Majesty being arrived at the Palace, in∣stead of reposing himself, addicted himself whol∣ly to consult about carrying on the war; knowing well that onely labour produces true rest. The first consultations were concerning the expugna∣tion of the Tower of St. Iohn, which of all the Forts in the kingdom only held out for the Catho∣lick King. To reduce this Cittadel, the Marquess of Ferreira was sent in person with a numerous Army, though for the most part tumultuary, and ill ordered; but what they wanted in discipline they supplyed in affection, not refusing to en∣gage themselves in the extreamest dangers: for two days the Marquess found strong resistance, but on the third day it yeilded, as it is supposed, forced rather by bullets of Gold, then of Iron. Don Antonio de Mascarendas, with a Portuguese garrison was appointed commander of this For∣tress, which he very diligently repaired, not one∣ly of the dammages now received by Battery, but with other necessary fortifications, to bring it to greater perfection. The Kingdom thus suddenly reduced to the devotion of King Iohn the fourth, the several
Governors were commanded to their Countries to levy Forces, who listed the inhabitants indif∣ferently from the age of Eighteen to Sixty; in whom they found so much disposition, that many offered their estates, and their lives, and would follow the Colours, although they had licence to depart. On the 25 of the same month, followed the a Coronation of His Majesty, accompanied with all those applauses and demonstrations of joy, which could proceed from a people of infinite Riches, who weary of the Command of stran∣gers, were consequently ambitious of a King of their own Nation. In the publique Place before the Palace upon a most sumptuous Theater, was erected a great Stage, and upon that a less, upon the top of which but three steps higher, stood a Chair of State un∣der a Canopy, all covered over with Cloth of Gold. About noon His Majesty came forth of his Palace Royal in a Suite of Chesnut colou∣red Velvet embroidered with Gold, and buttons richly set with Diamonds: about his neck was a Collar of great vallue, whereunto hung the badge of the chief Order of Knight-hood, called El Ordine di Christo. He was girded with a gilt Sword, his Robe was Cloth of Gold lined with white wrought with Gold and flowers, the Sword was born before him by Don Francisco De Alello Marquis of Ferreira, High Constable of the Kingdom; and before him was the Kings Banner displayed by Fernando Telles de Meneses Earl Marshal, before him went D. Manrique De Sil∣va,
Marquess of Govea, Steward of the Kings Houshold, and so in order his Nobles and Gran∣dees of the Realm one before another, before all went Portugal King at Arms, with the Her∣alds Pursevants, &c. His Majesty being ascended the Stage, and having placed himself in the Chair of Estate, had the Crown set upon his Head, and the Scep∣ter delivered to him, with the accustomed Cere∣monies by the Archbishop of Lisbon; which done, he spoke to His Majesty to this effect. Behold, O most Sacred Majesty, these your Subjects who do more rejoyce to see this day, then of all the days of their lives: They rejoyce to see the Crown of Portugal, returned into its Ancient stock, they rejoyce to have found a Father who will govern them like Children, not Tyrannize over them like slaves. They here, Great SIR, offer their estates, their lives, and oblige themselves to run through all the accidents of fortunes, to establish that Crown upon your Head, which now with so much devotion, with so much readiness they have placed upon it. They cannot sufficiently express their af∣fections to Your Majesty; could they bring their hearts, and lay them down at your Majesties feet, they would not refuse to do it, so sure are they that they have found a King all goodness, all love, who will not let slip any means for the Establishing of the Crown, for the quiet of His Subjects, for aug∣menting his Dominions, and for the conservation of those priviledges which have been written with the blood of our progenitors: Be your Majesty gracious∣ly pleased to accept this common resentment ex∣pressed
pressed by my mouth, there being nothing that more comforts the mindes of good Subjects, than the plea∣sing of their Prince. The good old Prelate spoke these words with so much feeling, that the tears of his eyes testified the affection of his heart. To this speech of the Archbishops, His Ma∣jesty returned answer, in expressions equal to his love and greatness: That the weight of the Scepter, and subjection to the Crown, were things always dissonant to his Genius; That he had of late years given them sufficient testi∣mony of it, whilst they were not more affection∣ate in offering, then he was ready to deny the taking upon him the weight of the Kingdom. That his now condescending to their desires, was onely to provide for the kingdom, which had been acquisted, and agrandized with the blood of his Predecessors, and to take it from the hands of those, who besides their unjustly possessing it, had rendred themselves unworthy of it, by endeavouring by all means to ruine it: in sum, he concluded with thanks for their love, offering himself ready to adventure his health, and life, for their preservation, the redeeming them from slavery, and maintaining of their priviledges. This short discourse ended, His Majesty went to the great Church in the same order as before, where being set in a Chair of Estate, raised up∣on a Stage for that purpose, with a Christal Scepter in his right hand, at which stood the Lord Constable, and behind him the Lord Cham∣berlain,
there was placed before him a Table Covered with Cloth of Gold, and a Cushion thereon, upon the Cushion lay a Gold Crucifix and a Messal. Here the Archbishops of Lisbon and Braga, administred the ensuing Oath to the King. WE swear and promise by the grace of God, to rule and govern you well, and justly, and to administer justice as far as humane frailty will permit, to maintain unto you your Customs, Priviledges, and liberties, granted unto you by the Kings our Predecessors. So God help us God, and this his holy Gospel. This Oath being administred, the three Estates, to wit, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons, took the following Oath of Allegiance to his Ma∣jesty, one for every one of the Estates, pronoun∣cing these words. I Swear by this holy Gospel of God, touching corporally with my hand, That I receive for our King and lawful Soveraign, the High and Mighty King Don John the fourth, our Soveraign, and do homage unto him, according to the use and cu∣stom of his Kingdoms. This, and the Ceremonies attendant ended, his Majesty, accompanied with all his Nobles, returned to his Palace, whether notwithstan∣ding it was a very great rain, all the Grandees went bare-headed, where there was a most sump∣tuous Banquet prepared, but his Majesty gave himself wholly to consult of preparations for the
War, shewing thereby that Kings in their grea∣test felicity and delights, should not forget affairs of State, and taking care for the preser∣vation of their Subjects. But amongst debates of the War abroad, there happened one of an affair neer home, concer∣ning the placing or displacing Officers of State; and because His Majesty knew that the charge of such Officers, must needs be with the resent∣ment of many, and that there is nothing more alienates the minds of men, then to see them∣selves undeservedly deprived of their honors, he took away onely the places of two, to wit, that of the Providitore of the Custom-house, be∣cause he was Son in Law to Diego Soarez, and brother in Law to Vasconsellos the late deserved∣ly slain Secretary; and that of the Count of Castanhie, who was President of the Tribunal, or Court of Conscience, because he was too much interessed with His Catholick Majesty. As for the Infanta Margarita di Mantoua, late Vice-Queen, and the Marquess Della Puebla kinsman to Olivarez, the Castle called Pasos de Angiobregas, was assigned them, with fourteen thousand Crowns a year for maintenance. An honorable prison it was, nor could they desire any thing but liberty, which show'd a great nobleness of minde in King Iohn: but Princes always do like Princes, and much it demonstrates the Magnanimity of the mind, to honor our enemies, though they be our prisoners. Nor must we here forget the magnanimous, and couragious Carriage of the Dutchess of
Mantoua late Vice-Queen; during these con∣fusions and distractions, for King Iohn sending to ascertain her; that she should want none of those civilities that were suitable to a Princess of her high birth, provided she would forbear all discourse and practises which might infuse into any an ill opinion of his present Government. She returned thanks to the Duke, (for she would not stile him King) for his complement: but withal fell into a grave Exhortation to those Nobles that carried the message, telling them, That they should lay aside all vain hopes, and not co∣zen themselves, but return to their old Allegiance, according as they were obliged by Oath, which if they did, she doubted not to finde them all pardon. The rest of the Castilians of Authority were confined in the Castle, and all the souldiers took the Portuguese pay, either because they be∣lieved doing so, to be most for their interest, or else because being most of them linkt in paren∣tage with the Portugusses, they believed the Portugal interest to be their own. Shortly after Lucia, now Queen of Portugal, Sister to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, with her Son the Prince Theodosio arrived at Lisbon, who were received with all imaginable expressions of joy: the Queen was soon after solemnly crowned, and the Prince installed, at whose in∣stallation, the Nobles and Grandees of the Realm, took to him the following Oath. WE acknowledge, and receive for our true and natural Prince, the high and excel∣lent
Prince D. Theodosio, as Son, Heir, and Suc∣cessor of our Soveraign Lord the King; and as his true and natural Subjects, we do him homage in the hands of the King, and after the death of our true and natural King and Soveraign of these Kingdomes of Portugal and Algarve, and beyond Sea in Affrica, Lord of Guiana; of the Conquests, Navigations, and Commerce in Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, India, &c. we will obey his Commands and Decrees in all, and through all, both high and low: we will make War and maintain Peace with all those that His Highness shall Command us: And all this we swear to God upon the holy Cross, and the holy Gospel. These Ceremonies performed withal fitting solemnity, the King, to show that the good of His Subjects was his onely care, called an As∣sembly of the three Estates of the Kingdom, who being convened, and the King seated in His Royal Throne, Don Emanuel D' Acugna Bishop of Elvas made a Speech to them, to the follow∣ing purpose. THat one of the first laws of nature was, the uniting of men together, from whence Cities and Kingdoms had their Original, and by which they after defended themselves in War, and main∣tained themselves in Peace; That for that cause His Majesty had called this assembly to consult for the better service of God, defence in War, and Go∣vernment in Peace: That there could be no service of God without union of Religion, no defence with∣out union amongst men, no Regular Government without union of Councils: That His Majesty did
expect to be informed by his loyal Subjects what was for the good of the State; That they were to render thanks to the Almighty, who had given them a king that would govern them by known Laws; That his Majesty did not esteem those Tributes lawfull that were paid with tears, and therefore did from that present, take off from His Subjects all Tributes that had been imposed by the Kings of Castile, because His Majesty would not Reign over their goods, nor over their heads, nor over their priviledges, but over their hearts, hoping that they would find out a sweet expedient, to defend their country a∣gainst their potent enemy, who threatned to make them all slaves, and to destroy, and to annihilate their Nation. That they would therefore, conside∣ring His Majesties goodness and their own honor, manifest at once unto the world, That as never Subjects had such a gracious King, so never King had such loyal Subjects. The Bishop having ended his Speech, the most ancient Officer of the Chamber of Lisbon, stood up, & in the name of all the three Estates, (who stood up likewise,) returned humble thankes to His Majesty, for this gracious boun∣ty, heartily professing that they did not onely offer up their goods, but their lives to His Maje∣sties service, earnestly intreating His Majesty to dispose both of the one and the other, as he plea∣sed. And to manifest that their hearts and their mouths concorded in this free offer of themsel∣ves to His Majesty, they presently voted that two Millions should be immediately raised by the Kingdom: but His Majesty wisely and poli∣politickly
declined the imposing of a Tax upon his subjects, chusing rather to accept of their benevolence; which made every one strive who should offer most; so in stead of the two Milli∣ons, there was in short time brought into the Treasury four Millions of Gold. Nor was this money intended by them, nor employed to any other use then to maintain the Grandezza and Splendor of the King and king∣dom, there being no need of money for the payment of Soldiers, every one offering to serve freely, and at their own charge, against their vow'd enemies the Castilians. But let us for some time leave the Assembly sitting, and give an account how this action was resented into the Spanish Court: Most mens minds were struck with consternation, but Oli∣vares came smiling to the King, saying; Sir, I pray give me las Albricias to hansel the good news, for now you are more absolute King of Portugal then ever, for the people have forfeited all their Pri∣viledges by this Rebellion, besides the Estate of the Duke of Braganza, with all his Complices are yours, by right of confiscation, so that you have enough to distribute among your loyal subjects by way of re∣ward. But however Olivares seemed thus to dissemble his passion; it was believed that this news struck deeper into him then any. The King of Spain upon the first news of the Proclamation of King Iohn, sent a Letter to him to this purpose:
COusin and Duke: Some odd news are brought me lately, which I esteem but folly, conside∣ring the proof I have had of the fidelity of your House, give me advertisement accordingly, because I ought to expect it from you, and hazard not the esteem I make of your self to the fury of a muti∣nous Rabble, but let your wisdom comport you so, that your person may escape the danger, my Coun∣cil will advise you farther; so God guard you. Your Cousin and King. To this Letter his Majesty of Portugal retur∣ned answer: MY Cousin: My kingdom desiring its Na∣tural King, and my Subjects being oppres∣sed with Taxes, and new Impositions, have exe∣cuted, without opposition, that which they had often designed, by giving me possession of a kingdom which appertains to me; wherefore if any will go about to take it from me, I will seek Iustice in my Arms: God preserve your Majesty. DON JOHN the IV. King of Portugal. Thus was this kingdom utterly lost to the Spa∣nish Monarchy, and not onely it, but with it all that they enjoyed by that kingdom in the East-Indies, the Tercera Islands, and other Islands
in the Atlantick Sea, the kingdom of Algarve, Brazile, together with all they had in Africa, except the Town of Cexta, which was the whole remained to the Spanish Nation of all those great Dominions. But that all men might know the greatness of their loss, and what the Crown of Portugal en∣joyes abroad, take here a brief narration: First, those Islands of the Tercera, Madera, and St. Michael, so long time possessed by the Portugal Nation, which though inconsiderable to their other Dominions, yet deserve to be mentioned; next those many strong places of which they have made themselves masters in Africa, as in Guiana, in the kingdoms of Congo and Angola, the great Island of St. Laurence, of Soffola and Mozambique: on the continent thence passing the mouth of the Red Sea, they have setled a Trade with Socatra and Calaite; thence passing the Bay of Persia, to the mouth of the River Indus, they subdued Calecut, Coe∣tium, &c. the Island of Goa, Ciaul, Daman, &c. thence toward the River Ganges, they possessed Ceilam, Malacca, Sumatra, Solon, La∣rantuca, &c. Thence farther they were entred into the kingdom of Pegu, into Iava-maor, and Minor, into the kingdom of China where they fortified Macoa: In sum, the Kingdoms, Provinces, Islands, and Cities, that the Portugal Nation had conquered, and were possessed of abroad, may in some measure be compared to the Antient Roman Empire; nor was their va∣lor much inferior to the Romans, if we consider
the War they made with the King of Cambaia, who for puissance and Military courage, or numbers of men of War, did exceed Xerxes, Da∣rius, or Pyrrhus; the battels they had with Is∣malucco, and Idaliam in the kingdom of Decam, both equal to mighty Kings and their Armies, consisting of the best Warriors of the East; the War they have waged with the Moors of Ma∣lacca, Sumatra, and Molucco, as also with the Kings of Bengala, Peug, and Siam, &c. with many other formidable powers. Many of those places most certain it is, were lost while the Ca∣tholique King had possession of Portugal; but with it he likewise lost, and King Iohn the IV. had possession of above fifty Towns and Forts accounted impregnable, such were, Mozambique, Cuama, Monomotasca, Mombaza, Masiala, Dui, Damam, Bazaine, Chiaul, Onor, Barcelor, Man∣galor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochim Conlan, Negapatan, Meliapor, the Isle of Ceilam, the kingdom of Iafanapalan, the Cities of Manac, and Nombrede Iesu; then more Northward, Azarim, Danue Agazim, Maim Trapor, and many other places, in all which were maintai∣ned Governors and Soldiers, and a Vice-Roy, residing at Goa, with Courts of Justice, &c. hither many Kings of the East used to send Am∣bassadors to maintain amity with the King of Portugal, and to bring Tribute to him; thus the Portugal Trade in the East extendeth it self no less then four thousand Leagues, by which Trade all the Garrisons are maintained, and all the Ships, (whereof they are oftentimes two or
three Fleets) and much wealth sent home every year; besides those aforementioned, the Crown of Portugal has several Towns on the Coast of Africa, so strongly fortified, that the Moors of the Country could never yet recover them, such as Tangeer, &c. In America they possess the famous Country of Brazile, which stretcheth it self one thousand four hundred leagues upon the Sea coast, con∣taining fourteen Governments, and many prin∣cipal Cities, St. Salvador, Pernambuco, &c. Thus great a loss did the Spanish Monarchy suffer by the revolt of Portugal, which the Ca∣tholique King Phillip the fourth was very solici∣tous to recover, and to that end and purpose did not onely consult with the greatest States∣men at home, but likewise with those abroad, from one of whom he to that effect received the ensuing Letter. BY the Letter which your Majesty was pleased to write to me on the 6. of March past, I am commanded to deliver my advice touching the best expedient for the re∣covery of Portugal; Sir, the clemency used by King Phillip the second, your Majesties Grand-father, towards the kingdom of Portu∣gal, was a fatal presage of the present calami∣ties, and future destruction, not onely of Spain, but the whole Spanish Monarchy, be∣cause that kingdom was onely in name, but never really conquered, remaining rich, and abundant with the same, if not greater privi∣ledges
then before: the Grandees and No∣bles at home, the people not at all crushed, and (which is more then all) the Govern∣ment in the hands of Natives, and all his Majesties other Subjects excluded from all places of Power, Honor, or Profit. Sir, the Holy Scripture, which is the mirror and rule of our actions, teacheth, that when Salmanazar conquered the kingdom of Israel, he did carry away, not onely the Royal Family, but trans∣ported all the Nobility and people into divers Provinces of his kingdoms, and into the new Conquests sent new Inhabitants; yet the Is∣raelites were never such inveterate enemies to the Assyrians, as the Portugals with devilish madness have shewed themselves against the Interest and conveniencies of this Monarchy. Moreover in the same Scripture it is read, that Nebuchadonosor having conquered Ieru∣salem, transplanted all that he found in that kingdom, leaving onely a few miserable in∣considerale people to remain there. So Athalia Queen of Iudah saw no other way to preserve a kingdom newly conquered, but by extinguishing all the Generation, upon whom the Jews could cast their eyes in hopes of revolt. And Iehu, King elected by God, extinguish∣ed all the Family of Ahab, together with all his dependants, friends, and acquaintance, not sparing so much as the Priests. These Sir, are the Rules that the Holy Scri∣pture teacheth to be practised upon the fami∣lies
and people that abhor the Dominion of their own Soveraigns. It was, Sir, very fatal to stand expecting and hoping for better times and opportuni∣ties for the securing of Portugal. In the year 1639. observing the ill affecti∣on of that Nation, my advice was, that with∣out any delay that kingdom was to be secured by force of Arms; others were of the same judgements, but fate would have it that (for fear of new troubles) by delays way should be made for Rebellion, then which there could not have been a greater, although that form of Government, which was expedient for the Spanish Monarchy, and was always held neces∣sary for the preserving that Crown, had been put in execution with the greatest violence ima∣ginable. But when a Jewel is gone, the main inquery should be by what means it may be found a∣gain, not how it came to be lost. The first means of recovering that Crown may be (what your Majesties Grand-father made use of) to buy your rights of your own subjects by gifts and promises, wherein your Majesty is to be as Prodigal, as the Portugals are insolent in expecting or demanding, and indeed experience teacheth that that Nation is so addicted to their own Interest, that more may be effected this way, then by a powerful Army: to him will they be subject who will give most, or from whom most can be expect∣ed herein, prodigality will be good husbandry;
for when Portugal shall be returned to the obe∣dience of your Majesty, all that wealth which hath been bestowed amongst them, will re∣turn likewise. The second means is by course of Arms, but this will be difficult at present, by reason of the several engagements of this Monarchy elsewhere; I suppose Sir, that in case Portu∣gal should be conquered by force, all their Conquests in the East Indies, &c. will remain in their hands, for thither will they all flye, and from thence will they be always ready to assist our enemies: wherefore it would be very expedient for your Majesties service, that a Truce were first made with the Hollanders, up∣on condition that they make War upon the Portugal in the Indies, and have what ever they can conquer, whence will arise this com∣modity that they will want the wealth of their Conquests, your Majesty being disengaged with the Hollander, will sooner conquer them at home, and the Hollander will onely come to receive to day at the hand of your Majesty, what to morrow the Portugal must deliver up to them: At the same time the Hollanders and Flemings may scour the Coast of Portugal, and the English may be invited to a more fre∣quent Navigation in the East Indies and China, whereby the Portugal Trade may easily be ruined. The third way is, that the Pope be perswa∣ded to thunder his Excommunications against the house of Braganza, and against the whole
kingdom, as perjured and perturbators of the publique Peace, animating all Christian Prin∣ces to assist in the regaining that kingdom, up∣on pretence of advancing the Catholique Faith. Moreover, diffidencies and jealousies be∣tween the Duke of Braganza, and other peo∣ple, may easily be fomented by means of Mer∣chants, Strangers, and by Flemings and Burgun∣dians, under the name of French. And to effect these diffidencies the better, a Treaty may really be begun with the Duke, which being discovered by the people (though it be before the Duke could know thereof) they will de∣stroy him and all his Family, and in such case the civil dissentions will open a way for your Majesty to recover your rights: desperate evils must have desperate remedies, the kingdom of Portugal is the Canter of the Spanish Monar∣chy; therefore, Ese recidendum: ne pars symera trahatur. Let not your Majesty defer the right remedy, the greatest rigor is here the greatest Charity; and to have no Charity, is to have much pru∣dence; to bury this Hydra in its own ashes, will be triumph enough; to live without this arm, will be better then to have it employed against ones own head: Let your Majesty ne∣ver believe, or hope better of that Nation, then you have seen these 60. years past; never think to keep that Country, if not planted with
other people; the detestation against your Majesties Government, is hereditary. The Interest of the King, Sir, is very ample, and hath no bounds against Rebels, every acti∣on is just and honourable that tends to the re∣covery of the Kings right. Moreover, a Truce is to be made with the Catalonians, whereby they being freed from the tumultuous courses of War, will have time to take notice of the French insolencies, and growing weary of that yoake, will at length eaily embrace the next opportunity to return to their obedience, which once effected, will make the people of Portugal waver betwixt hopes and fears, and beget variety of opini∣ons amongst them, which for the Conquering of kingdoms (the Emperor Iulian used to say) was much more advantageous then the force of an Army, as the Grand-father of your Ma∣jesty found in the Succession of Portugal: To this may be added, that it will be very expe∣dient that your Majesty name Bishops to dis∣pose of all Governments, and Offices of the Crown, to the most confiding persons in that kingdom, for this will beget distrust amongst them all, and the ignorant people not know∣ing whom to trust, will put all into confusion, whereby your Majesties service will be more easily advanced. This in obedience to your Majesties com∣mands, I have imparted my weak advice, wherein if I have erred, your Majesties good∣ness will attribute it to my want of abilities,
not of affection: God preserve the Catholick and Royal Person of your Majesty, as the Christian World, and we your Majesties Sub∣jects have need. But notwithstanding all these endeavors, and these proposed Artifices, nothing prevailed to∣wards the King of Spain's recovery of this king∣dom, nor was it probable that any of these de∣ceits ever should, whilest is considered the ex∣traordinary love and affection which the whole Nation of the Portugueses bore to the Family of their present King, and the inveterate hatred which did, and always have born to the Castili∣ans, which was so exceeding great, that it is believed they would rather have suffered them∣selves to be extirpated and routed out, then again submit their necks to the Spanish yoake. And that ever the Spaniard should again re∣cover it per force, is incredible, if we either consider the Union and unanimity of the Portu∣gal Nation, and their resolutions to undergo the greatest miseries of War can inflict, or the Interest of all the other Princes of Christen∣dom, who may justly suspect the encroaching greatness of the Spaniard, and therefore en∣deavor rather to lop off more limbs from that great body, then suffer this to be rejoyned. But it is now high time to return to a review of the actions of the Grand Assembly of the Estates of Portugal, who next resolved to dis∣patch Ambassadors to all States of Christendom, to enter into confederacies, for the better de∣fence and establishment of the kingdom, and
for the glory and reputation of the King. In the first place the Father Ignatius Masca∣renas a Jesuite, with another Father of the same Order, was sent into Catalonia, to offer them all assistance and supplies for their maintainance, and defence against the Catholique King, for very well did the King of Portugal know that it highly did import his Interest to correspond with them, that so they might joyntly, not onely defend, but also offend the King of Spain, whose Country lying betwixt them both, they might at pleasure invade, or molest it, either by Sea or Land. This Embassie of King Iohn's so rejoyced and encouraged the Catalonians, that the very next day after the Ambassadors had audience, they obtained a most signal Victory in their own defence against the Spaniards, who had assault∣ed them with an Army of twenty five thousand men under the Command of the Marquis De los Veles. Shortly after that the Father Ignatius Masca∣renas was dispatched to the Catalonians, D. Fran∣cisco de Mello, and Don Antonio Caelle Carra∣vallio (persons both of excellent and admired abilities, the one for his great experience and judgement in State-affairs, and the other for his noble Spirit, and eminent knowledge in the Civil Law) to go on a solemn Embassie to the most Christian King Lewis the thirteenth of France. These attended with a Stately and most Ma∣gnificent Train, landed soon after at Rochel,
and on the fifteenth of March 1641. made a so∣lemn Entrance into Paris, being met and condu∣cted in by a great number of Coaches, filled with the Grandees of the Kingdom, besides numbers of the French Nobility, who came to attend them on horse-back. Thus accompanied, they were conducted to the Palace appointed for the Entertainment of the Extraordinary Ambassadors, where they were in a sumptuous and magnificent maner fea∣sted at the Kings charges. From thence they were by the Duke of Che∣vereux, and the Count de Brulon, conducted in the Kings Coaches unto his Majesty then at St. Germains, to receive the first Audience; which was performed with extraordinary shows of love and respect: for upon the entrance of the Ambassadors into the place appointed for their Audience, the King rose out of his Chair of Estate, and went forward three steps to re∣ceive them, nor would he permit them to deli∣ver their Embassie with their Hats off, or to de∣scend so low, as to kiss his hands at their depar∣ture, but in stead of that Ceremony, he affe∣ctionately embraced them in his Arms, promi∣sing them the greatest Assistance his Power was able to give. They were from the Kings presence conduct∣ed to a sumptuous Dinner provided for them, and after that brought to the Queens Lodging, who was set to expect their coming: at their entrance she likewise rose, and advanced three steps to meet them, receiving them with a
cheerful and courteous countenance, and not permitting them to be uncovered. Amongst other Discourses which they had with her, D. Francisco de Mello told her, That he feared his Embassie might not be acceptable, be∣cause the King his Master had deprived her Brother of one of his kingdoms. Whereunto she readily replyed, That though she was sister to the King of Spain, yet she was wife to the King of France. After some Discourse in French, her Majesty began to speak to them in Spanish; which they observing, desired to know wherefore her Ma∣jesty had not vouchsafed them that favor soon∣er, it being a Language by them better under∣stood? To which the Queen jestingly answer∣ed, For fear they should be frighted to hear her speak Spanish; and the Embassador to improve the jest, replyed, Como a tam Grand Signora si, pero como a Castiliano no, that it was true con∣sidering her Greatness, but not her Countrey: The Queen smilingly went on, promising them all assistance possible, and wishing all prosperity to King Iohn and his Queen; and so they ha∣ving delivered her Majesty a Letter from the Queen of Portugal, took their leave. From her Majesty they went to visit his Emi∣nence the Cardinal Richlieu, who being adver∣tised of their coming, came forward to the third Chamber to meet them, where he recei∣ved them with expressions of great affection, and promises and proffers of services, and from thence conducted them to his own Chamber.
Being all three sate, the Cardinal (who was the most experienced and greatest Statesman of his time) discoursed with them of divers affairs of great importance, and they endeavored to explain to his Eminence what was before his sentiment, that it very much imported the two Crowns of France and Portugal to be united by an indissoluble League, considering that it was the chief and principal end and aim of the House of Austria, (whose branches were spread over al∣most all Europe) not onely to be the greatest, but to be the sole and onely Monarch of Chri∣stendom: That to effect those ambitious desires, he had never made scruple to usurp and seize upon Kingdoms and States upon the least pre∣tences imaginable, as had appeared in the king∣doms of Naples, Sicily, Navarre, the Dutchy of Millan, and lately several States in Germany, sei∣zing upon the Valtoline, whereby they had a pas∣sage open to lead an Army of Germans into Italy at pleasure. That considering the vast power and interest that this Family had, not onely in Europe, but also in America, it could not but be confessed that they had a large foundation of their imagi∣nary universal Monarchy; but that nothing gave them so great hopes, as the possession of Portugal. For by the addition of that Kingdom to the Crown of Castile, they became absolute Masters not onely of all Spain, but of all the East-Indies, of all the Eastern Trade of Ethiopia, Persia, A∣rabia, China, Iapan, and all that incredible
wealth that was raised out of the Portugal Traf∣fick, whereby the Austrian Greatness (if not their Monarchy) was principally sustained, that there∣fore it concerned all States whatsoever, not onely to put a stop to the raving Tyranny of this devouring Monster, but to suppress and lessen his Power by all means possible. That to do this, none was more concerned, or more able, than the Kingdom of France uni∣ted with that of Portugal: That this having bin called the Right Arm (as Catalonia the Left) of that great Austrian Colossus, now both being se∣parated from it, and united to France, will be able to do greater service against it, than they were ever forced to do for it, not onely by as∣saulting the Spaniard within his own doors, but by intercepting the Plate-Fleet; which in its re∣turn from the West-Indies, it being necessarily forced to pass by the Tercera Islands, must run in danger of the Portuguez Fleet, or be forced to be at the charge of an extraordinary Convoy. These were the sum of the Ambassadors dis∣courses to the Cardinal: In answer to which, his Eminence made offer, not onely of all the As∣sistance of the most Christian King his Master, but that he would disburse himself for the ser∣vice of the King of Portugal, promising that he would presently send thither a Fleet of twenty Sayl with his Nephew, Admiral and Ambassa∣dor Extraordinary. This Treatment thus ended, the Ambassa∣dors took their leaves, his Eminence waiting upon them as far as the Stairs; which when they
endeavored to hinder, he replyed, That the Ambassadors of the King of Portugal were to be treated with as much respect as those of the Emperor or Pope. Few days after, a Iuncto of the King of France his Council, were appointed to treat with the Ambassadors in the House of the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom, where a Peace was fully concluded between the two Kingdoms of France and Portugal. Other Ambassadors were (about the same time that the afore-mentioned were sent into France) dispatched into England; for it very much concerned the Kingdom of Portugal to maintain a good Correspondence with the Crown of England, both in regard of the Navi∣gation and Commerce of both States, and also the better to break that Amity and good Un∣derstanding which was now held between the Crown of Spain and that State. Hither there∣fore were sent Don Antonio D' Almado, and Don Francisco D' Averado Leilon, both persons of ex∣quisite parts; who, notwithstanding that the Dunkirkers chased them, arrived safe in Eng∣land. And for all the sturdy endeavors of the Spa∣nish Ambassadors, they were received on shore with abundance of respect; yet His Majesty of England would not give them Audience, or ac∣cept of the Ambassage from the King of Portu∣gal, so tender was He of His Honor and Con∣science, till Don Antonio de Sosa their Secretary, had drawn up a Paper, to satisfie him of the
Right and Title of the Duke of Braganza to the Crown of Portugal. The sum of which was: Vpon the Death of King Henry the Cardinal, without Issue, many pretended (together with the In∣fanta Donna Catherina Dutchess of Braganza, and Grandmother to this present King) to the Crown of Portugal; but all their pretences wanting foun∣dation, soon fell, except that of Philip the second, King of Spain, who propt up his with force. King Henry was Vncle, equally near to both, but with this difference; Catherine was the Daughter of a Son named Edward, and Philip was the son of a daughter named Isabella, brother and sister to King Henry. King Philip pleaded, That he being in equal de∣gree with Catherine, was to be preferred for his Sex. Catherine replyed, That the constitution of that Kingdom allowing Females to succeed, and withal the benefit of Representation in all Inheritances, she representing Edward, must exclude Philip by the very same right that her father (if he were living) would exclude Philips mother. This Conclusion is infallible in Jure: whereto Phi∣lip answered, That successiou of Kingdoms descend∣ing Jure sanguinis, there was allowed no Represen∣tation. Catherine destroyed that foundation, alledging, That the Succession by the death of the last King, was derived Jure haereditatis, & non sanguinis, be∣cause the Succession of Kingdoms was to be regulated by that ancient way, whereby all things descended by Inheritance; the other way of Succession being not
known until later Ages, nor ever practised either in Spain or Portugal in such cases. Briefly in behalf of Catherine it was urged, (which by the Castilians can never be denied, or an∣swered) That she was no stranger, but a Native of the Kingdom, to whom alone (according to the Laws of Lamego) the Crown of Portugal can appertain. The King having perused and deliberated upon this Paper, gave immediately order they should be presently conducted to London, which was done withal convenient Solemnity, and they logded in a Palace ready prepared for them: soon after with great ceremony they received audience of His Majesty, in a fair and stately Hall prepared for that purpose, where his Ma∣jesty sat upon a Throne raised two steps, and at the entrance of the Ambassador pulled off his Hat, nor would be covered till they were so too. To the Propositions made in the speech of D. Antonia D' Almoda, concerning a Peace be∣tween Portugal and England, His Majesty re∣plied, That he should be very glad if an expe∣dient might be found out to renew the antient Leagues of friendship between the two Crowns, without the breaking with Spain. Some few days after, the Ambassadors were conducted to give a Visit to Mary Queen of England, who sat in a Chair of Estate ready to entertain them: when they came into the Pre∣sence, She rose out of the Chair, and came as far as the Carpetting, making low reverence as
the Ambassadors bowed; when they came near, Her Majesty made them be covered, but after∣wards they spoke with their Hats off. In con∣clusion the Queen told them, that she much desired to hold Correspondence with Her Ma∣jesty of Portugal. In fine, on the 13th of Iune 1641. a Peace was absolutely concluded with the Portugal, not∣withstanding the earnest endeavors of Don A∣lonzo Cardenas, Leiger Ambassador for Spain, who by gifts and promises, even as far as the re∣stitution of the Palatinate, endeavored to hin∣der it. The Embassadors that were sent to the King of Denmark (notwithstanding the great Traf∣fick and Commerce that had formerly bin held between that Kingdom and Portugal) were not (by reason of the great interest the House of Austria had with those Kings) received; yet the King gave all possible respect otherwise to them. From thence they passed into Sweden, and were magnificently entertained at the yong Queens Court at Stockholm, where a League was soon concluded, and the Ambassadors dis∣missed, according to the custom of that Nation, with Gold Chains, and the Queens Portraicture in a Meddal of Gold. The Ambassador D. Tristano De Mendoza Hurtada, that was sent to the States of the Vni∣ted Provinces, was received with the like magni∣ficence and seeming affection, and a Truce con∣cluded with the Kingdom of Portugal for ten years; for a Peace the States would not assent
to, because they having conquered many places in Brasile, Angola, &c. which belonged to the Crown and Kingdom of Portugal, could not make restitution of them; by reason they now belonged to the West-India Company; nor could the King of Portugal allow the Conquest, as things of right belonging to his Crown, and de∣pending on it. But now we come to treat of a more solemn Embassie, to wit, that to the Pope: Long was it debated in the Assembly of Estates, whether an Ambassador should be sent to Rome imme∣diately, or a more opportune conjuncture of time be expected. Some were of the opinion that the sending an Ambassador without fur∣ther delay, would be a testification of their du∣ty, and incline the Popes Holiness to acknow∣ledge Don Iohn the lawful Heir, and rightful King of Portugal, which would extreamly fur∣ther and advance the Affairs of the kingdom. But others there were who conceived those things rather desirable than feasable, and were of the opinion they should rather stay till a fit∣ter opportunity, alledging, that the King of Spain's present power at Rome, might probably oppose the Reception of their Ambassador: that although the Pope never was in his heart a Spa∣niard, yet he would never yield to show himself an enemy to the Catholick King: That the Spaniards cunningly fomenting the opinion which all the world had entertained, that his Holiness did in all things favor the French inte∣rest, would from such a Reception, draw as much
as ever they could ask or desire. That for this cause the Pope (that he might not seem their enemy) had always granted them whatever they desired; That therefore they thought it con∣venient first to sound his Holiness, before they run the hazard of the disgrace and affront which might fall upon His Majesty, and the whole kingdom; That in case the Pope should decline the reception of the Ambassador, to whom could they repair or appeal to vindicate the injury done to the Crown? That many Popes had been s fascinated to the interest of their own family, that the world had very great occasion to believe, that their designs tended rather to what was best for themselves, then to what was best indeed: That the Portugal Nation, had as much reason to distrust the Sea of Rome as any, whilst they had to their cost had examples how they onely pursued their own ends. As particu∣larly Gregory the thirteenth, who at first seemed so affectionate to the kingdom of Portugal, that he imployed the utmost of his power for the in∣terest of his own family, approved of all that King had done; That there was none who had more to give, or at least who had more to pro∣mise, then the Catholique King, so that in any business of competition he must necessarily gain the better. But notwithstanding all these Arguments to the contrary, upon the promises of the King of France, to be a Mediator at the Sea of Rome, for the reception of their Ambassadors, by the suffrage of some few voices, to make the ma∣jor
part, it was concluded, That Ambassadors should immediately be sent to Rome. And in pursuance of this Vote, the King im∣mediately made choice of two reverend and able persons, to wit, Michael De Portogallo, Son to the Count Vimioso of the blood Royal, Bishop of Lamego, and D. Patableone Rodriguiz, Bi∣shop of Elvas: No sooner was the news arrived at Rome of their being landed in Italy, but the Spaniards in Rome mustred themselves together, with resolution either to oppose their entrance, or at least hinder their reception; whilst on the other side the French, Portugal, and Catalonians, assembled themselves together, resolving to hazard their dearest blood in their cause. His Holiness seeing these preparations on both sides, feared lest his country should be made the seat of a petty war, and considering that in any case the dishonor would accrue to him, if whilst under his command and protection, the person of an Ambassador should be violated, strictly commanded all his Guards to take speci∣al care to prevent the violencies in tended. The Spaniards by this order hindred from what they purposed, their Ambassadors openly protested, that if his Holiness did receive the Portugal Ambassador, they would immediately leave Rome. But notwithstanding these protesta∣tions, and all other opposition they could possi∣bly make, in November 1641. the two Portugal Ambassadors being met by divers Cardinals, Princes, and Cavaliers, well armed, entred into Rome, and were conducted to the Palace of
the French ambassador, who received them with al respect possible, still giving them the precedence. Hereupon several Manifesto's are scattered abroad by the two Spanish Ambassadors, the Marquess De los Veles, and D. Iohn Chiumarrero, labouring to prove that his Holiness ought not to receive the Ambassadors of the Duke of Bra∣ganza, as they stiled him. First because he was a tyrant, and usurper of that Kingdom, which had been in the quiet possession of the Catholick King these sixty years. Secondly, because he was a Rebel, and a perjured person having sworn Allegiance to the Catholique King▪ Thirdly, that the reception of these Ambassadors would animate other Subjects of the Catholique King to Rebellion. But whilst the Spanish Ambassadors are vio∣lently shooting such Paper-Bullets, the Portu∣gueses used all their endeavors, both by them selves, and the French Ambassadors, (who had ex∣press order from the most Christian King his Master to that purpose,) to prevail with the Pope, to give them audience, and admit their Embassy: but his Holiness was so fearful to dis∣please the Spaniard, lest he should afterwards take occasion to revenge himself upon his Ne∣phew's, that he utterly declined their reception, yet not out of any of the Spaniards Allegations, but upon pretence that certain of the Church Rites had been violated in Portugal; the Arch-bishop of Braga, and other Ecclesiastical per∣sons, being kept in durance, though it was for very good reasons, as hereafter shall appear.
Yet the Spaniards were not content with this resolution of his Holiness, but (whilst the Por∣tugals were endeavoring to prove their cause, by both Political and Legal Declarations, Alle∣gations, and Arguments,) fearing lest the Pope might chance to alter his mind, resolved to to make a quick dispatch of the business, and to that purpose two hundred Banditi, were hired to seize upon the Bishop of Lamego, and carry him to Naples, as the Prince of Sans had been before served by them, and there put to death. But this design, themselves at length could not agree upon, for the Marquess De Los Velos, thought it would be better and less dangerous to give the Portugals a publique affront in the City, which was concluded to be put in effect, and to that purpose it was communicated to the rest of the Nation, (whereof upon several occa∣sions there are always many in Rome) who assem∣bled together well armed at the Ambassadors Palace: and so great is the power of Revenge: that to the end they might the better effect their design, and yet not appear as souldiers, though there were many Gentlemen of quality amongst them, they condescended to go under the name of Foot-men to the Marquess. The Popes Holiness hearing of the great pre∣parations of the Spaniard, sent to them to let them know, that he could not but be very much distasted, to see such disorders attempted in a peaceable City, and therefore desiring them for his honors sake to desist, and withal sent a Messenger to the Bishop of Lamego, to assure
him that he need not fear any thing, for upon the word of his Holiness, he should walk the streets undisturbed. But do the Pope what he could, either by threats, desires, or perswasions, the Spaniards were resolved to prosecute their deign, which they put in execution to their own cost, on the twenty of August 1642. On which day the Bi∣shop of Lamego going to visit the French Am∣bassado, one of his retinue observed, that he was dog'd by a Spanish spie; whereupon a Counter∣spy was sent to the Marquesses to bring intelli∣gence what they were doing there, who brought word to the French Ambassadors, that there was great preparations of Coaches and Men: where∣upon the French, Portugals, and Catalonians, as∣sembled, and armed themselves with Pistols and Fire-locks, to convoy home the Bishop. By the way they were met by the Spanish Ambassador, accompanied with about eight Coaches full of Captains and Officers come from Naples, and guarded with about sixty Foot-men, besides divers others of that Nation. No sooner came they in sight of the Bishops Coach, but they cryed aloud, Che si fermassero all' Ambasciatore di Spagna; that they should stop for the Ambas∣sador of Spain: but the Portugals driving on, an∣swered, Che si fermassero Loro, that they should stop. Hereupon both sides with their Swords drawn leapt out of the Coaches, and making a stand, one Gun was first fired by the Spaniards side, and immediately seconded with a brave volley
on both sides; when they fell into Swords point the Bishops side soon getting the better of it, yet there was slain a Knight of Malta, an Italian, and a French and Portugal page, but on the Spanish Marquesses side, there were eight killed upon the place, and above twenty wounded, the Marquess leaving his Coach-horses dead, esca∣ped out of the back of the Coach, which stood upon the place till next day, and got into the next shop without his hat, and trembling for fear, from whence he was carried to the Spanish Car∣dinal Albornoz palace. The Portuguese Ambas∣sador returned first to the French Palace, and from thence went safely home. His Holiness the Pope was extreamly per∣plexed at these disturbances, and therefore to prevent the like for the future, Commanded a guard of Souldiers to be put upon the houses, both of the Bishop and the Marquess. But shortly after, when the Bishop of Lamego had again pressed the Pope, by a large memorial of the reasons why he should be received, and was absolutely refused, he was by his Master the King of Portugal called home: Whilst these things were acting abroad, the Castilians begun to make continual in-roads in∣to the borders of Portugal, which made King Iohn look more narrowly into the defence of his kingdom, fortifie all the Frontiers, and train up his Subjects to military excerises. The Spaniards in one in-road which they made into Portugal, laid waste all before them, sparing neither sex nor age wheresoever they
came, which made the Portugals in revenge, commit the like out rages in, an inroad they made into Gallicia. But these were publick enmities, and therefore more easice to be opposed; but there was a pri∣vate serpent that lay lurking at home, which was so much the likelyer to do mischief, by how much it was more secretly hidden. Some few there were who thought themselves so highly obliged to the Catholick King, as to endeavour the reuniting of the Crown of Portugal to his vast dommions, and again inslave their country to forreigners. The principal of these was the Archbishop of Braga, always a great creature and favourite of the Count Olivares, who had at the beginning of the revolt, show'd himself so opposite to the freedom of his country, that many Gentlemen were once resolved to make him suffer the same fate with Vasconsello's the Secretary; Nor had he ceased ever since to show visible signs of his discontentment at the Government. In this Archbishops head was the whole con∣spiracy first hatch't, and by him communicated to D. Lewis de Meneses Marquess of Villa Reale, and the Duke of Comigna his son, two persons sufficiently ambitious, and both discontented, as not thinking themselves sufficiently rewarded according to their merit: These the Archbishop tampered with, perswading them, That it was a low and unworthy thing, much beneath their birth and greatness, to suffer themselves to be subject to a fellow Subject: That it would be
much more Noble and Generous in them, to re∣turn their Allegiance to the King of Spain their ancient Soveraign, who was able to bestow more upon a person deserving in one day, then the Duke of Braganza could in a hundred years. These & few other arguments were sufficient to draw those, who before out of their envy to the house of Braganza, were inclinable to a change. These made sure, the Arch-Bishop next draws into this Plot a Gentleman of a Noble blood, named, D. Augustine Emanuel, a man of excellent parts, but somewhat necessitated, nor had ever been looked upon, or put into any employment, which without any other incen∣tives, were motives sufficient to move a man to any desperate design. Next him was added to this conspiracy, Pietro Baeza, a lately convert∣ed Jew, whom the Portugueses call Upstart Chri∣stians; he was famous for nothing, but his vast riches; being a great Criado of the Count Oli∣vares, whose favor, he used often to say, would one day advance him to high honor, or to a high pair of gallows, which last proved very true. Many private meetings had these, and some few other Conspirators, where they debated to bring their designs to effect; some were of opi∣nion that before they could bring it to perfecti∣on, more should be acquainted with it, for it was impossible that so few should ever be able to compass it: But in this course there arose many fears and doubts, lest too many being ac∣quainted with it, some should discover it, as
had often happened in designs of that high na∣ture: yet at length it was found necessary to draw more into the Plot, for whilest they were so few, the business onely rested in imagination, but could never be put in execution. Having therefore added some more to the number, their next debates were of the maner how to bring it to effect; some advised that a power of the Catholique Kings was to be got in a readiness, but they then thought that the King of Portugal would raise as great a force, and so prevent a sudden invasion: Yet in answer to that objection, it was by some aledged, That the Spaniard by way of intelligence might be let in, which again seemed as difficult, the Militia be∣ing in the hands of persons most loyal and trusty to the King: Others proposed, that the onely way to effect it was by a sudden and violent ma∣king away of the King; but this advice was op∣posed by most, who inclined to a mediocrity, and would rather have found out a way to make his Majesty renounce his own Right and Title to the Crown, and retire himself from the dan∣gers which should be presented unto him. But whilest they thus wavered in opinions, and inclined to that moderation, which is the ruine of all designs of this nature, they gave the King time and occasion to search out their Plots; for his Majesty having always had a su∣spitious eye upon the Arch-Bishop of Braga, and the Marquis of Villa Real, and having re∣ceived now private notice, that they had had sundry meetings, and were observed daily to
converse with persons as discontented as them∣selves, endeavored by all means possible to know the depth of their Counsel, and at length intercepts some of their Letters to Madrid, which discovered not onely the whole Plot, but even the names of all the Conspirators. The Act of holding correspondence with the Spaniard was Treason in it self, sufficient to take away their lives, being contrary to his Majesties express command, it's being to this in∣tent, made it but so much the more hainous: His Majesty therefore not knowing how far it might have proceeded, made no delays, but presently by the sound of Drum and Trumpet (as the custom is) caused to be proclaimed, That he intended to go forth of the City; upon which all the Nobles and Gentry, according to the usual maner, assembled at the Palace, to accompany his Majesty, who when he saw them all ready, commanded first that a Coun∣cil of Estate should be called, which was done, many of the Conspirators being assistant in it, who being sate, his Majesty without any noise caused them to be arrested one by one, which without the taking of this course, he could ne∣ver have effected; for if the Conspiracy had been detected before their persons had been sei∣zed, they had either been torn in pieces by the fury of the people, or else had some of them escaped. It was very strange that of all the Plotters in this conspiracy, not one should, either by acci∣dent, or otherwise, escape, for the persons of
these now taken, were no sooner imprisoned, but his Majesty published a Proclamation, de∣claring a Free-Pardon to all the Complices in this conspiracy, that should within four days come and acknowledge their fault, and beg it; but the Kings diligence had been such before, that there was not one left to accept of this grace. Shortly after those who had been taken, were arraigned according to Law, found guilty of High Treason, and in maner following executed. On the last day of August, 1641. the Mar∣quis of Villa Reale, the Duke of Camigna, his son, the Count de Armamac, and D. Augustine Manuele, were led along a Gallery to a Scaffold erected for the purpose, with two stories, on the uppermost of which stood two Chaires, on the next one, and on the Scaffold it self the fourth. The first that was conducted forth to Executi∣on, was the Marquis of Villa Reale, who was clothed in a long black Bayes Cloak, and his servants attending him in mourning; being mounted to the uppermost part of the Scaffold, he prayed for a good space upon his knees, and then rising up, asked, if there were no hopes of Pardon? which made the people with one voice cry out, No, let him dye, let him dye for a Traytor. The next funebrious Ceremony of his Execu∣tion, was the Proclamation, which according to the usual maner was made by the Executioner, in these words; This is the Iustice that the King our Soveraign Lord, commands to be executed up∣on
the person of Don Lewis de Meneses, some∣times Marquis of Villa Real, that his throat be cut as a Traytor to his Majesty, Nobility and People of this kingdom, that for his Crime his goods be confiscated, and his memory banished out of the World. Whereat all the people cryed out, Iustice, Iustice. The Marquis thereupon seeing no hopes of any reprieve, with a sober and becoming gra∣vity demanded Pardon of all the Spectators, desiring them to assist him with their prayers to God for the Pardon of this, and all his other sins; then turning to a Father Jesuite his Con∣fessor, he prayed him in his behalf to present himself at his Maesties feet, and beseech him out of his wonted goodness, to forgive him that hainous offence committed against him and the whole kingdom. Having ended this Speech, he very patiently sat down in the Chair, and the Executioner ha∣ving tied his arms and legs, to the arms and legs of the chair, he leaned his neck over the back of the chair, and the Executioner with his knife cut his throat, covering him afterwards with a black Scarf. In the same maner his son the Duke of Ca∣migna came to the Scaffold, his servants all at∣tending him in mourning; as he came to his fa∣thers Corps he kneeled down, and several times kissed his feet, begging of the people the suf∣frage of one Pater nostre for his fathers soul; then after some prayers, and Proclamation made by the Executioner, he received the same punish∣ment.
Next that suffered was the Count of Arma∣mac, in the Chair seated upon the lower story; and after him Don Augustin Manuel upon the Scaffold it self; the Judges would have had all their necks cut behinde, but his Majesty would not consent thereto, as a punishment too igno∣minious for persons of their quality. The same day Pietro de Baeza, and Melchior Correa de Franca, were drawn at a horse tayl to an extraordinary high gallows, and there han∣ged, whilest Diego de Brito Nabo, and Antonio Valente, were executed upon a lower; the quar∣ters of these four were set up at the gates of the City, and their heads placed upon several Frontier Towns. In the month of September following, for the same offence Antonia Cogamigne, and Antonio Correa, were likewise executed; the first of which during the whole time of his imprison∣ment, was an example of penitence, feeding onely upon bread and water, and whipping himself very often, with continual prayers to God for Pardon of that, and all his other sins. As for the Arch-Bishop of Braga, and the Bishops of Martiria and Malacca, and Fryer Emanuel de Macedo, though they were the per∣sons that had the greatest hand in the conspiracy; yet in regard they were Ecclesiastical persons, they suffered no death, according to their de∣serts, but were kept in prison, till the Popes pleasure were known concerning them. Here must not be forgot a great example of humility and repentance in the Arch-Bishop of
Braga, not onely in his life time (when he of∣ten writ to the King, that he might suffer, and others be spared, who were rather drawn in, in complyance and obedience to him, then out of any ill will to the King and kingdom) but also at his death (which happened about three years after his imprisonment) when he gave order that as soon as he was dead, his last Will and Te∣stament should be carried to the King, wherein he humbly intreated his Majesty to Pardon the Treason committed against him, and his Na∣tive Country, and that he would permit his body to be buried without the Church of any Parish of Lisbon, and that without any Inscri∣ption or Tomb-stone, that there might remain no memory of a man who had been a Traytor to his King and Country. This exemplary punishment and rigorous exe∣cution of Justice upon the forementioned tray∣terous Delinquents, established the King in his kingdom, struck a terror into his enemies, and increased his Subjects love and care of him more diligently to watch his Royal Families, and the kingdoms safety. But in the mean time daily incursions were made upon the Frontiers between the Castilians and Portugueses, with the same violence, cru∣elty and animosity, as formerly. But now come we to relate the most shameful piece of treachery ever yet heard of, acted up∣on that most Noble and Gallant Prince the In∣fante Don Duarte, or Edward, brother to the King of Portugal, who had served the Emperor
in his Wars, with much gallantry, and no less success, long before his brother Don Iohn had any thoughts of a Crown; nor did he shew any endeavors to desert the Emperors service, after the news arrived of the Revolt of Portugal, but seemed resolved to continue there, till he was betrayed by Francisco de Mello a Portugal, at that time Ambassador to the Catholique King in the Emperial Court. This Mello notwithstanding he was bound by many strong Obligations to the House of Bra∣ganza, yet like an ungrateful villain, having opportunity offered, now resolves to build his fortunes upon their ruine, or at least displeasure, he therefore earnestly sollicites the Emperor to seize upon the person of Don Duarte, and de∣liver him up to the King of Spain, alledging of what great concernment the securing of his per∣son would be to the Catholique King; that it much behoved his Imperial Majesty to shew his affection to his brother the Catholique King in this particular, which would not onely prove of Interest to Spain, but the whole house of Austria: That this Prince was the onely Prop of the House of Braganza; that this was the onely means which God had left in the hands of the House of Austria to recover the kingdom of Portugal; that it would be a great error both in prudence and policy to let ship so fair an oc∣casion, for that if he should scape out of their hands, and get to the assistance of his brother, both his personal valor and experience in War∣like affairs would very much infest the Catholick King.
The Emperor was not onely not perswaded by this Discourse of Mello's, but extreamly of∣fended at it; returning him in answer, that he did abhor and detest so great a breach of pub∣lique faith, and violation of all Laws of hospi∣tality; that it would be both against the liberty of the Empire, and against his own honor, to im∣prison a Prince who had committed no fault to the Empire, but rather had laid innumerable Obligations both upon it, and himself. Nor was the detestation of the Arch Duke Leopold to an act so foul and shameful, less then that of his brothers the Emperor; notwithstand∣ing all which, Mello was not at all discouraged, but still prosecutes his villanous design, by cor∣rupting with great sums of money the Count of Tratsmandorf, and several other Pensioners of the Crown of Spain; but they were soon weary of so base and shameful and employment; which made Mello think of a more cunning Artifice, which was to perswade the Emperor to hearken to the allurements of one Diego di Quiroga, who of a soldier was turned Monk, and was now Confessor to the Empress: This Father who had often been called to give his judge∣ment in Affairs of State, endeavored by all means possible to perswade the Emperor that he might not onely with a good conscience secure the Infante, but that according to the best rules of Interest of State, he ought to do it. His Imperial Maesty notwithstanding all these perswasions, was very much unsatisfied in the action, and once fully resolved not to do
it; but at length overcome by Mello's importu∣nities, and the Ghostly perswasions of Quiroga, he was as it were constrained to alter his resolu∣tion, and to give order to Don Lewis Gonzaga, to go to the Princes quarters at Leipen, and sum∣mon him to Ratisbone. In the mean time to endeavorto prevent all ll impressions, which an action so hainously wick∣ed, might strike into all bosoms that had either honor or honesty; it was given out abroad, that the Infante Don Duarte was secretly fled for some misdemeanor from Leipen, (when he con∣fident of his own innocency, was in his journey to Ratisbone, according to the summons) and thereupon proposal made of sixteen thousand Crowns, as a reward to any man could bring him either dead or alive; so that the Prince being ignorant of any such thing, very hardly escaped their hands, who out of hopes of the money, had gone in search of him; but missing them, he came to Ratisbone; where he was no sooner arrived, but without any reason given, he was cast into a common goal, and all his servants imprisoned. Don Francisco de Mello having thus far brought his desires to effect, stops not here, but afresh sollicites the Emperor, that the Prince might be delivered into the Spaniards hands, and sent prisoner to Millain: but instead of as∣senting to this, he sends a messenger to the In∣fante, assuring him upon his word, that he would not deliver him into the hands of the Spaniards, but would speedily procure his liberty and in∣franchisement.
Yet notwithstanding these fair promises of the Emperors, Don Duarte's ill usage in prison daily and hourly increased, not could he by any means possible get audience of the Emperor, not without any reason, for, no face is more ter∣rible to the offender then the face offended; which made the Prince make his protestation, calling God and man to witness of the injury done him by the Emperor, to whom he was neither sub∣ject by Obligation, nor Birth; that when his brother was made King of Portugal, he was in the Emperors service, and wholly ignorant of any design of his brothers; that if the King of Spain were offended, he should revenge him∣self upon the person offending; that that busi∣ness no way concerned the Emperor, &c. All these Allegations the Emperor confessed to be true, by a messenger sent to the Infante in prison, again assuring him that he would not de∣liver him up to his enemies, but that he could not release him for some reason of State: which made Don Francisco de Sosa Contigno, Ambas∣sador extraordinary from Portugal to the King of Sweden, in the name of the King his Master, represent at large to the Diet at Ratisbone, the whole proceedings, requiring Justice and liberty for the Infante: But it is in vain to plead against Interest, all the Manifesto's, Protestations, Pe∣titions, and Intercessions made, produced no other effect then the removal of the Infante from place to place, that still as he was the far∣ther off, he might have the harder usage. But hitherto the Emperor seemed immove∣able
able in his resolution of not delivering up the Infante into the hands of the Spaniards, till tempted with what made Iudas betray his ma∣ster, and our blessed Savior to death, Money; he consented to the breach of his resolve, for upon the promise of forty thousand Crowns (contrary to the immunities of the Empire, to the Privi∣ledges of free Princes, to the Law of Nations, and to his word and promise so often reirerated) he consented that that Noble and innocent Prince should be sent whither the Catholique King should think fit; so away he was hurried towards the Castle of Millain, there to remain a prisoner. By the way as he entred into the Spanish Territories, he was received by the Count de Sirnela Governor of that Dukedome, where the Emperors Commissary took leave to return, to whom D. Duarte openly said, Tell thy Master that I am more sorry I have served so unworthy a Prince, then to see my self sold a Prisoner into the hands of my enemies; but the just judge of the world will one day suffer the like dealing towards his children, who are no more priviledged for being of the house of Austria, then my self that am of the blood Royal of Portugal, and posterity will udge of him and me. The Emperor had given instruction to those that convoyed the Infanta, that in case their prisoner made an attempt to escape, they should kill him upon the place: being arrived in Millain he was clapt in the Common gate with all the Rogues and Banditty, having a guard lodged
with him in his Chamber, so rude that they would scarce admit him to take his rest. Thus was this generous, but unfortunate Prince rewarded, for having left his Country, kindred, friends, interest; for having at his own proper cost and charges, served the Empire eight years, for having always, and upon all occasions ventured his life with the most daring, and yet expecting no other pay but thanks, nor other re∣compence but honor. King Iohn was extreamly perplexed at this inhumane barbarism used to his Brother, which he vowed fully to revenge with Arms; but he could for the present do it no otherwise, then defensively, by reason of the continual inroades the Castilians made into Portugal. About the beginning of the year 1642. (not∣withstanding the Truce that had been concluded between Portugal and Holland, and that a great Fleet of Hollanders had been sent to assist the Portugal against the Spaniard) there passed very high Acts of Hostility between the two Na∣tions in Africa and America, beyond the Line; for the Hollanders seeing the disunion of Portu∣gal from Castile, made all speed possible to per∣fect the Conquest of those parts before a perfect Peace should be concluded with Portugal, that so in the Treaty they might pretend reason, that all things should continue in the state they were then found. To this purpose, that is, the expediting their Conquest, the Hollanders treacherously (whilest there was all quiet and peaceable Commerce
held between the two Nations in the kingdom of Angola) surprized the Portugals that were Governors of the place, killed divers, and rob∣bed all of the great wealth they there found; of which perfidiousness, as also of the barbarous usage of the prisoners there taken, complaints were made to the States General at the Hague, but no redress granted; nor was the King of Portugal of ability to force it. In the mean time the affairs in Portugal were a little discomposed by the general discontent and distast taken at the Secretary of State Don Francisco de Lucena: This man had lived a long time in the Court of Spain, till he was by Oli∣varez made under-Secretary to Vasconsellos, his readiness to Proclaim King Iohn, and his abili∣ties in the place, made the King continue him in it, reposing in him so great a confidence, that though some had advertized his Majesty that he kept correspondence with the Court at Ma∣drid, yet the King would not suspect him, nor permit him to be brought to a Trial. But about the middle of the year 1643. the urgent affairs of the kingdom requiring a Con∣vention of the three Estates, they openly refu∣sed all Acts that should pass the hands of Secre∣tary Lucena, positively telling his Majesty, that until he were brought to Tryal, no Acts should pass in the Assembly of Estates, nor any farther proceedings be made. His Majesty was very much grieved hereat, yet prudently resolved to give his Subjects satis∣faction, by delivering up his Secretary to Ju∣stice;
yet resolving he should have a fair Tryal, and o that purpose sitting himself to hear the Witnesses examined. Whilest Process was fra∣med against the Secretary, some secret advice came to his Majesty, which caused the imprison∣ment of the brother, and three servants of the Secretary, together with an English Monck, and a Cavalier of the habit: not long after the Secretary was arraigned and condemned for be∣traying his truth, in holding correspondence with the enemy, and in neglecting timely to advertise the Infanta Edward to retire out of Germany, &c. and according to his sentence exe∣cuted in a publique place in Lisbon, where at his death he protested his innocency touching any treachery towards His Majesty. The death of the Secretray both pleased the people, and satisfied the Assembly of Estates, who now according to His Majesties command met on September 18. 1643 and being all sate, and His Majesty seaed in his Throne, D. Ema∣nuel D' Acugna Dean of His Majesties Chappel, rose up and after reverence made to the King, spake to the effect following. THat in the space of sixty years that that Kingdom was under the power of the Kings of Castile, there had bin but two Assem∣blies of States, the first to inslave, the next to abuse them. But that since they were under the present King, within the space of two years, they had two Assemblies, the former to settle their liberties, the present to beget a right un∣derstanding
between the King and his people, wherein they had all freedom to demand what∣ever was necessary, that the world might see they are now no longer slaves but children, no longer strangers but natives, and that they are under rather a loving father, then a severe So∣veraign. In the former Assembly, said he, his Majesty took all the Customs, and left the defence of the Kingdom to your hands, you ordered what seemed good unto your selves, you made choice of a General Assistance by way of con∣tribution, but in the leaving thereof, the first payment was found ineffectual, the second un∣equal, the third insufficient; whence arose some complaints, some imagining that the fault pro∣ceeded from the unequal division of the con∣tribution, others from the change of value in mony and comodities, and others from the dis∣orderly gathering and disbursing the whole: I may easily say, that if there were any errour committed, yet it might be excusable for that. Never had any weighty affair it's conception and perfection at once: Then shall errours cease to be in Government when men shall cease to be in the world. These things are to be indured with the same patience that droughts, dearths, inunda∣tions, and such other disorders in nature, for the wit of man cannot hold forth a remedy for all diseases. But certainly they will be no ground of reprehension, (though much of admi∣ration) to him that shall consider how His Ma∣jesty entred upon a Kingdom, exhausted by the
Castilians of mony and other necessaries, for offence or defence, and yet how in less then a year and a half, we should want neither Ship∣ping, nor Artillery, nor Horse, nor Arms, nor Fortification, nor Armies upon the Frontiers, three powerful Fleets put to Sea, divers hono∣rable, and extraordinary Ambassages, besides many secret (yet necessary expences) all which will astonish any understanding man. Now to the end that the people may have full satisfacti∣on, His Majesty hath commanded, that (before further proceeding) it be made appear particu∣larly how all the mony received hath been laid out, and then it is expected, and the present state of affairs requireth that we all contribute liberally, considering that these charges are but for a time, but our liberties are for ever: That we shall never have a better opportunity to destroy our enemy. That nature teacheth to hazard an arm, to save the whole body: The Merchants at Sea cast away some part of their goods sometimes, to save the rest; we are now on shipboard in a storm, our Goods, our Lives, our Liberties, our Honor, our Country, are all in danger. Moreover the barbarous usage of the King of Castile towards the Infanta Don Duarte, calls upon this Assembly for revenge, that we spend not onely our mony, but our blood in affection to him, and that we make our enemies spend theirs in satisfaction for him, &c. This speech of the Deans was spoken with so
much affection, that it stirred up and encouraged the States readily to give all assistance imagina∣ble both for redressing of greivances, and for the levying Arms, so that within a small time after, the King was in the head of twenty thou∣sand Foot, and three thousand Horse, marching towards the Frontiers of Castile. Whilst these great preparations for Hostility were made, the Queen brought forth into the world a second Son to His Majesty, but first childe after he came to the Crown, wch added to the magnificence of his christning, he was named Alfonso, and his brother Theodosio dying before his Father, succeeded in the Kingdom, and is at present King of Portugal. Many Skirmishes had passed between the Castilians and Portugueses, many town had been surprized, many lands wasted, but never hap∣pened a set-battel between them till in the year 1644. when both Armies met upon the border of Portugal in a field called Campo Major. The Spanish Army which for the most part consisted of strangers, was under the Command of the Marquess of Forrecusa, and the Portugal Army consisting of natives, and some few Hollanders, were commanded by Macchias de Albuquerque. This fight was maintained with all possible courage and resolution on both sides; but the Spaniards being more numerous, especially in horse, at length put the whole Portuguese Army in disorder, seized on their whole Artillery, and baggage, and slew Albuquerques horse under him, took many prisoners, and assured them∣selves
of an absolute victory. But fortune which had thus favourably smiled upon them in the be∣ginning of the day, frowned as harshly upon them in the conclusion; for Albuquerque being remounted, rallied again his scattered forces, re∣charged the pursuing Spaniards, put them to a to∣tal rout, and pursued the chase for above 3 miles. In this battel the Castilians lost 1600 men upon the place, amongst which were the Lieutenant General, the General of the horse, the Gene∣ral of the Artillery, the Count de Montixo, five Camp-masters, two Adjutants of horse, three Serjeant Majors, three and twenty Cornets, to∣gether with many Knights of the order of St. Iames Calatrava & Alcantara: there were taken about four thousand Arms, and a thousand horse. On the Portuguese side there were not above three hundred slain, among which were two Camp-masters, one Serjeant Major, a Captain of horse, and eight of foot, but many Noble∣men, Commanders, and Officers taken priso∣ners in the first encounter, were carried away by the Spaniards in their flight. It was not long after this Battel, that the Marquess De Montalban, D. George Mascaneras Lord Treasurer, President of the Council of the Indies, and Councellor of Estate, with some o∣thers, were imprisoned upon suspition of a Con∣spiracy against the King of Portugal: but it be∣ing upon Examination found that the suspition was by the Spaniards cunningly raised, to de∣prive King Iohn of his most able Ministers, and to make the world believe the Portuguese Nobi∣lity
were discontented with their King; they were set at liberty, and their Honors fully re∣paired by a Proclamation of the Kings. For the Spaniards ceased not by all means and devices, which the will and policy of the most wicked States-men could invent, not onely to weaken the Portuguese Nation within it self, by breeding discontents (if possible) between the King and the three Estates, but likewise to undervalue them, and make their credit be sligh∣ted and disregarded by other Kingdomes and States, their Confederates and Allies. Yet besides these subtile Ambages, the King of Castile did not desist the endeavoring to op∣press this kingdom by force of Arms; but not onely the resolved and immutable unity of the Portuguese Nation, was a strong Tower and in∣vincible Fortress against the Spanish Power, but so extreamly was the House of Austria involved in wars & disasters on every side, tha that vast Body was rather in a condition to crave help and assistance from others, then indeed to oppress them. For besides the Wars in Catalonia, which had put it self under the protection of the most poten King of France, in the Low-countreys, which had proved so tedious and so chargeable a war to Spain; in Italy, in this Kingdom, and in Germany, there happened several Commo∣tions and popular Tumults in some of the King of Spains Dominions, which not onely robbed that King of a present supply of Treasure, but were otherwise retardments to the prosecution of his Wars in other places.
The first of these Commotions began in the Island of Sicily, where the people gathering to∣gether in a tumultuous maner, forced the Vice∣roy to take off all new Imposts and Taxes which the Kings present necessities had enforced him to lay upon them. This encouraged their neigh∣bors on the adjacent Continent, the Inhabi∣tants of the famous City of Naples, in hopes to rid themselves of their oppressions, to rise in like maner in Arms; which they did encouraged and commanded by one Thomas Aniello, or vulgarly Masaniello, who though of so mean and obscure a birth as a poor Fisher-boy, yet to the wonder of the world for ten dayes commanded this mighty City, and freed it from all Gabels, so that ever since these two kingdoms of Naples and Sicily have rather been a great charge, than any benefit to the Spanish Monarchy. These Troubles, and the Austrian Families being every where encompassed and embroiled in Wars, together with the earnest desire of the King of Castile to prosecute a vigorous War a∣gainst Catalonia, and Portugal were I suppose the motives which perswaded the Catholique King to end those Wars, which had lasted in the low Countries for above ninety years, by owning now at last (what he had so long refused) the united Provinces free States, so an absolute peace was concluded on, and proclaimed at all the chief towns in the Netherlands, on the 5. of Iune 1648. a Peace no less advantagious to the Spaniards, then disadvantagious to the Portugals, by reason of the pretences the Dutch had to Bra∣zile,
and other places in the West-Indies. King Iohn of Portugal about the beginning of the year 1649. thought his Son the Prince Theodosio arri∣ved at an age fitting to keep a Court of himself, Lodgings were therefore appointed for him, divi∣ded from the Royal Palace, and Officers of his houshold nominated and appointed by the King, amongst whom the Earls of Villa nova, of Miran∣da, of Valdereis & Fernando, Tellez de Menezez, (who had formerly been governour of the City of Port,) were entrusted as the principal Gen∣tlemen of his Chamber. The King likewise thought fit to adde a third to the two former Superintendents of his Re∣venue, whom he nominated to be D. Rey de Moure Tellez, whose former Office of Steward to the Queen, was at the same time conferred on D. Antonio de Silva Lord of Billas. Notwithstanding the Truce, the Hollanders still continued their outrages on the other side the Line, but principally in Brazile, where they seized upon many of the Portugal forts, impeded the Traffick, abused and murthered the Sub∣jects, which made His Majesty resolve to call the Earl of Castle Melhor from his charge of being General of the Portugal Forces upon the Fron∣tiers of Gallicia, and committing that to the young Viscount de Villanova de Servera, that the Earl might be imployed as Viceroy to Brazile, to curb the Flemings insolencies, and to secure the Portuguese Merchants Ships from their py∣racies, the King appointed a Fleet of forty Ships of War, and six thousand Men to attend that service as Convoys.
His Holiness the Popes anger as yet continu∣ed towards the Kingdom of Portugal, for he had not onely hitherto refused to receive Am∣bassadors from thence but to supply those Arch∣bishopricks, Bishopricks, and other Ecclesiasti∣cal Offices of the Kingdom, which by the death of the former possessors were vacant: this the King found a great inconveniency in, and there∣fore thought fit once more to attempt his Holi∣ness; and to present him the names of such of his own Subjects, whose piety, learning, or other sufficiencies he thought might make them capa∣of such dignities; as first for the Archbishoprick of Braga, (formerly acknowledged to be the primacy of all Spain, notwithstanding the pre∣tensions of Toledo) he nominated Don Pedro de Lancastro, president of the Justice of the Palace of the house of Ameiro, and descended from Iohn the second King of Portugal. For the Archbishoprick of Evora, His Majesty nomina∣ted D. Francisco Barrez Bishop of the Algarez, Bishoprick he bestowed upon the Father Denis Des Anges an Augustine Monk, and Confessor to His Maesty: for the Bishoprick of Guarda was appointed D Antonio Pobo, great Prior of the military order of St. Iames: for the Bishop∣rick of Lamego D. Antonio de Mendosa Commis∣sary of the Bula de la Croisaida: for the Bishop∣rick of Lerida, D. Deigo de Souza Inquifitor of the holy Office: for that of Conimbria, Don Se∣bastian Casar de Menerez, who was before no∣minated for the Bishoprick of Porto, but that was given by his Majesty to D. Pedro de Menerez,
once named Bishop of Miranda, of which last place D. Pedro de Porros tutor of the Prince D. Theodosio was now named Bishop. These choices of his Majesty, the Pope after sometime confir∣med D. Francisco de Souza, who was sent as ex∣traordinary Ambassador, notwithstanding the opposition of the Spaniards received, not un∣likely out of a fear that they would officiate without his confirmation, and so in a manner renounce the power of the Sea of Rome. But in the middest of this setling of Ecclesia∣stical affairs, Arms were not silent; for upon the borders there happened askirmish between the Castilians and Portuguese about the latter end of April 1649. Lord of Themer Court, Lieute∣nant General of the Portuguese horse, and Mon∣sieur Du Quesne the Commissary General gained a victory over a small Army of the Spaniards, defeating seven hundred of the Spaniards, and taking divers prisoners, amongst whom was the Nephew of the Marquess of Melinguen Lieute∣nant General of the Castilian Army at Badajox, who was after exchanged for the Count Fiesque Lauagna, who for some years past had been prisoner in Castile: in this conflict the Portuguese lost but twenty five men, the chief of which was Sieur de la Touche, a French Captain who had behaved himself most valorously. The commotions of the Parisians against the King of France, had given the Spaniard great hopes of better success then they had many years had, but the middle of the year 1649. happily concluding them, the news of their paci∣fication,
and that of a great victory gained by the Portugueses against the Hollanders in Bra∣zile, caused a general joy over all Portugal; for the King appointed publique thanks to be given, and Te Deum to be sung in all Churches. Hopes to revenge the late defeat given by the Lord Therimicourt, and desire to do some valiant act before he departed from his Govern∣ment, made the Marquess of Leganez governour of the Spanish forces at Estramadura, give an Alarum to the Portuguese Frontiers, and enter into the Country with two thousand horse, and 6000 foot, but the valiant Count of St. Laurence assaulting him, forced him to retire with shame, and excuse himself that he marched out onely to meet the Marquess of Mortare, who was ap∣pointed to succeed him in the Government. Yet this small and worthless Alarum, made the King of Portugal, who knew that too much care could not be had of the safety of his King∣dom, to send Orders to the Governors to look more exactly to the countries committed to their charges then formerly, and strictly to give charge to Don Iuan de Menezez Governour of Porto. The Viscount Ponte de Lima Governour of the countries between Douro and Mimbo, to the Count of Arogna Governor of Trasmontes, and Don Roderigo de Castro Governour of Beira, to repair with all expedition to their several Commands. Nor was his Majesty less careful of his domi∣nions abroad then of those neer home, which made him dispatch the Baron of Alviro to be
Governour of Tanger, and D. Franciso De No∣rogna to Mazagan, both strong Forts in Africa; the last of which had been neer surprized by the Moors of Barbary, but the Commander of that party which assaulted it, being slain by a valo∣rous French-man, they were beaten off with loss, for which service the King bestowed upon the French-man a pension of six hundred Crowns per annum. And whilst His Majesty was distributing his bounties, he could not forget the Lady Dona Maria Manuel, widdow to the some-time be∣fore deceased D. Antonio Coello, D. Caravallio, who had ever since His Majesties coming to the Crown, been one of His Privy-Councellors, and was one of the chief persons that went Am∣bassadors into France, to renew the Alliance, and conclude a firm League between the King of Portugal, and Lewis the thirteenth King of France; His Majesty therefore in consideration of his services, bestowed a valuable pension on his aforesaid widdow. There was almost dayly inroads made upon the Frontiers in some places or other, amongst the rest the Baron of Themericourt entred with a strong party into the Spanish Territories, surpri∣zed the Suburbs of the City of Albuquerque, and brought away a very rich booty without the loss of so much as one souldier upon the place, and not above twenty wounded. The succor of the distressed Subjects of the more distressed King of England, about the year 1650. gave occasion to the King of Portugal to manifest
his affection to the English Nation, which he did by giving assistance to the gallant Prince Rupert, who being by His Majesty of England made Admiral of those few ships which in the year 1648. returned to their Allegiance, had ever since been pursued by the more poent Fleets of the English Rebels, and was now by them driven to seek the protection of his Portu∣gal Majesty, who notwithstanding that the Fleet of the Rebels with threatning Bravado's, deman∣ded the said Kings leave, either to assault them in his port, or to force them to come out brave∣ly, protected them under his Castles. In revenge of which the Rebels of England, who stiled themselves a Parliment, proclaimed an open War with the Portugal Nation, which His Majesty notwithstanding his great engage∣ment at that present, both against the Spaniards at home, and the Hollanders on the other side the Line, resolved to endure, rather then deliver up the faithful Subjects of England into the hands of Murther, Tyranny, and Treason, and therefore in part to cry quittance with the Eng∣lish, who had taken Prize several Ships belonging to this Nation, he made seizure of all the Eng∣lish Ships and goods within his whole domi∣nions, but onely those he had before protected. But at length Prince Rupert finding a clear passage from out his ports, where he had for many months been blocked up, the King by rea∣son of his other large expences in defence of his Kingdom finding himself unable to maintain a War against the English, and nature dictating
us to the preservation of our selves, resolved, more moved out of necessity then inclination, to send an Agent into England to conclude a peace. The person deputed to go on this unpleasant imployment, (viz, to court Rebels) was D. Sua∣rez de Gimeraines, who had for his assistance and interpreter, Mr. Myles and English Merchant, these two embarqued upon a Hamburger hired for that purpose by the King of Portugal, arrived in England in Ianuary 1650. About the begin∣ning of Feburary, D. Suarez had audience, be∣fore a Committee of the pretended Parliament, to whom he made a Speech in Latine to this effect. THe Serenissimo King of Portugal my Ma∣ster, sends me hither to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England that on his behalf, and in his name, having first most friend∣ly saluted you, (as I now do with the greatest affection of my heart that I am able) I may joyntly tender and make known to you, the Royal desire which my Master feels within himself, to conserve and more and more to knit the knot of that Amity which uninterrup∣ted hath ever been between the Serenissimo Kings of Portugals their Ancestors, and this renowned English Nation. It being my part to endeavor what lies in me, to remove all obstacles that may hinder the most vigorous effect of this hearty union, and conjunction of minds, so to preserve inviolably
the ancient peace between us. This I come to continue, hoping and wish∣ing all happy success therein; this I come to in∣timate and offer unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, with that sincere and pristine affection, which hitherto the ex∣perience of many ages hath made manifest. Nor shall you need to scruple the sincerity of my intention and purpose, by reason of the divers past attempts (not to say fights) be∣tween your power and ours, since they have not been such as have broken or dissolved our ami∣ty, nor have had their rise or approbation from the King my Master, nor as we believe from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, but more probably carried on ei∣ther by the impulse of their own private affe∣ctions, or by the defect of that circumspection which in such cases is ever necessary. But as I hope particularly and fully to prove (indeed to demonstrate) this truth unto the Parliament of the Republique of England, so I am assured they will not onely rest satisfied therein, but shall also have accruing to them a newer force, and sence of mutual friendship between us, since the jarrs that happen amongst friends, are oftentimes justly accounted as certain redintigrations of love. And I do admire our enemies have not made this reflection, whilst fed with vain hope, they have thought it in their power to sow and foment discords between us, upon presumption of this trivial innovation.
The King my Master sends me to continue and preserve our common and ancient peace, whereof I am to make a render unto the Par∣liament of the Commonwealth of England in His Majesties behalf, as proceeding from a per∣fect sincerity in his Royal breast, and where∣unto he is chiefly drawn by the motive of his singular esteem and love, he bears unto this English Nation. And this, as the main point I shall recommend unto you, both in regard of your greater good and ours, and as a thing of highest concernment, that we reflect how little it can be pleasing to Almighty God, and how derogatory it must needs be to our reputation on both sides, to give the least beginning of discord between two Christian Nations, so well affected to one ano∣ther as we are. It is manifest unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and to all Europe besides, in how wonderful a manner (such as was onely possible to God, the King my Master was restored to his Kingdoms, and how the di∣vine Majesty (whose handy-work this was) doth by his especial care and grace defend and continue this restoration. Which as it doth dayly more appear by the victories we have over our enemies at home, so again it is seen in our remotest and most di∣stantial dominions in the East-Indies, where e∣ven at a huge distance (His Majesty possessing the hearts of his people, enjoyes that greatest peace in the world, and is secure in Affrica,
relying thereupon his prosperous and happy powers. To conclude, the King my Master, lest any thing should be wanting to render him com∣pleatly happy, hath (according to the wish of an ancient Christian Author, for securing the prosperity of the Roman Empire, a faithful Se∣nate, puissant Armies, and a most obedient people, Fortifications in the judgement of wisest politicians, conducing and necessary both to defend and increase Empires and Kingdoms. Now in this good condition of not onely gaining and conserving friends, but also of van∣quishing our enemies, the King my Master loves and embraces peace, as the chiefest good amongst humane things, holding it forth to all Kingdomes and Commonwealths, but especi∣ally to this of England, with that exceeding good will which he hath hither to born, & shall ever bear unto the same, standing thereunto obliged by such bonds of love and good offices, as shall never be forgotten by His Majesty. For the people of this Nation are the most worthy successors of those their Heriock An∣cestors, who by their just power and Arms came freely to vindicate our Crowns from the Mahumetan oppressions. And are, if not the same persons, at least their children, who in∣flamed with a fervor and zeal of defending the Crown of Portugal, justly did disdain to see it in the unjust possession of a forreign Prince. They are, I say, those who with so mature deliberation and resolution, endeavoured to
snatch away this undue possession from the said Usurper, maugre the concurrence of some ill affected Portugals with our enemies; and that they might archieve this end glorious to them∣selves, and to us emolumental, they are those who covered these as with their Squadrons and Fleets of Ships, ever formidable to their most potent enemies by a new example of an un∣heard of valour (had our unfortunate Stars then given us leave to be happy) come up to the very walls of Lisbon. And this having formerly been between us and them most powerful English-men, and our most loving brethren, now that the Crown of Portugal (for which you have fought so va∣liantly, when it was unlawfully detained, is happily restored to the possession of the natural, and lawful King to whom of right it apper∣tains) who would not admire to see you bend your equal power, (upon no occasion given) against the true and rightful King of Portugal by joyning with, and favoring the same Usur∣per (beaten by us, from whom your selves did heretofore by force of your own Arms in our behalfs endeavor to snatch and wrest away that Crown he had unjustly seized upon, and whom indeed you have hitherto both in desire and effect opposed. It would to all the world seem a thing much removed from the innate generosity and gal∣lantry of this your Nation, and very ill suiting with your Christian justice and equality, as al∣so it would be a very unworthy requital of us
(who have deserved better at your hands, and of that benevolence and affection wherewith the whole kingdom of Portugal is passionately crrying on towards you, wishing unto you the same happiness that we our selves desire to enjoy. Let therefore these imaginary Clouds of dis∣cord vanish, and be quite blown over from our thoughts, as serving onely to Ecclipse with darkness, the clear light of our antient amity, which (with what intention God Almighty knows,) the importune sagacity of our Com∣mon enemy would fain deprive us of. Let all obstactles be removed, and thrown quite away, wherewith the true serving politi∣cians by their inbred ambition of an universal Monarchy do conspire the ruine of us both; aiming at nothing more then to set us together by the ears, that overthrowing each other with our own Wars, we may have brests open, (when our powers are exhausted) to their swords and wounds, with greater advantage against our selves, and less hazard unto them. This new Republique is built upon strong and sure foundations, as also our antient and re∣stored Kingdoms, let us therefore cast our eyes unto the common interest of our cause, joyning hands, and mutual benevolence to such effect, as may render both parties secu∣rity, the greater forbearing, and bewaring above all things, all provocations, or irrup∣tions of War, whereby (besides the inconveni∣ences, and losses which they ever draw after
them,) all our own affairs and safety may be hazarded extreamly, while their councels and endeavours will be promoted, who by hidden and wicked arts, strive to extend their own power, by the common waste they would make in ours. The King of Portugal my Master, hath sent me hither furnished with a firm ample plenipo∣tentiary power, that discussing, and screwing all the just and convenient meanes, I may confer about the conservation of Peace, and (removing all emergent obstacles and scruples) resolve, and establish with the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, whatsoever shall be necessary for composing of our present affairs, and maturely to provide with the grea∣test security that may be possible, for their fu∣ture well being. I therefore beseech the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, that weighing and considering these things which I have exhibi∣ted, they would please to decree whatsoever shall seem to them most convenient and just. To this large Speech of forced and known flattery, if we respect it in relation to the per∣sons it was spoke to, (though most true in those particulars relating to the English Nation whilst monarchical) was answered by the Rebels, with a large Harange of the injuries they supposed done them by the protection of Prince Ruperts Fleet, and seizure of the English Merchants Ships and Goods, concluding that they must have
reparation made for the publique damage of the Commonwealth, which they would be willing to accept of in any honorable manner, and were willing to that purpose, if the Ambassador had sufficient power to treat with him to that effect. In summe, after sometime the Count Del Sa Lord Chamberlain of the Kingdom of Portugal arrived in England, in the quality of an Ambas∣sador extraordinary, who after many Conferences Addresses and large Offers made, obtained a Peace, upon condition to repay great Sums of monyes towards the satisfaction of the losses of the English Merchants. During the stay of this Ambassador, his bro∣ther D. Pantaleon Sa, Knight of Malta, led by I know not what frantick madness, made a great uproar upon the New Exchange in London, where some English were by him and his fol∣lowers murdered; for which several of his retinve were hanged, and himself, notwithstanding the earnest solicitations of his brother, afterwards beheaded upon Tower-hill, when the govern∣ment of England was changed from a strange kinde of Commonwealth, to a stranger kinde of Monarchy, under a Protector. But to return back again to the affairs of the Kingdom of Portugal. The Earl of Castle Mel∣hor who had been sent Vice-Roy into Brazile, had so good success, that with the assistance of those Portugueses before in the Kingdom, he expulsed the Hollanders out of all their Garrisons there, except the strong Fortress of Recif, which
was built upon a Rock wholly invironed by the Sea. This animated the United States of the Netherlands, to endeavour a revenge and reco∣very of that country, and to that end and pur∣pose, a Potent Fleet was set out, and notwith∣standing the very earnest endeavours, and large offers of the Portuguese Ambassador at the Hagne, set sail to reconquer that Kingdom, but not with that success which was expected, for the expedi∣tion proved wholly fruitless, and after so great an expence, the States were so highly disconten∣ted, that the Admiral Wittison was arrested at the Hague, to answer such things as should be objected against him concerning that voyage. It much concerns that King who hath to deal with enemies too potent for him, to strengthen himself with such Alliance, as may most advan∣tage him, and endammage his foe; This consi∣deration made King Iohn of Portugal, about the year 1652. send an Ambassador to the young Duke of Savoy, (who by reason of the scituation of his Country, had good and frequent opportunites to annoy the Catholique King,) and divert him from turning his whole Force up∣on this Kingdom) offering reciprocal Marriage between that Duke and his Daughter, and the young Prince Theodosio and Savoy's Sister. But this his intention, was I suppose diverted, if not wholly hindred by the great power of Cardinal Mazarine in France, who designed one of his Nieces as a fit match for Eugenius young Duke of Savoy. 'Tis not at all safe nor fit for a Subject to
grow too rich, at least not to exceed his Soveraign in Treasure, for he thereby layes himself open to the envy and suspicion of his Prince, nor is it possible that any who hath managed a publique employment, can be so without faults, as that somewhat cannot be laid to his charge to render him at a Kings mercy. Sufficient example of this we have in D. Phil∣lip de Mascarendas Vice-Roy of Goa, in the East-Indies, who having for many years officia∣ted in that high imployment, had gathered up an infinite Mass of Riches, and now being called home, thought in peace and quiet to enjoy what with a penurious and industrious hand he had been many years storing up: but the King being informed that he had indeed such a vaste treasure in Gold, Diamonds, Pearls and other Jewels, as he could not with his own honor or safety per∣mit a Subject to enjoy, easily found out them who were ready to form complaints against him, which were as readily listned to by the Kings Councel, who presently drawing up a charge a∣gainst him, for having used an arbitrary power, oppressed, and abused the Subjects, and Mer∣chants trading thither, &c. caused the Ship wherein he came, with all the riches laden on it, to be seized on for the Kings use, and himself for sometime imprisoned, nor had it been a won∣der if he had made a forfeiture of his life, as well as of the greatest part of his Estate. The strength of the Hollanders at Sea, had been the greatest obstacle to the Portuguese, not wholly regaining there ancient possession in Bra∣zile,
but the Wars wherein the Hollanders had involved themselves with England, proving so powerful a diversion, the Portuguese took the ad∣vantage to reduce Recif, which with several Forts that encompassed it, and some few other, were the onely places that held out against them. Against this therefore with a sufficient Land∣force, came Don Francisco Barreto governor of Pernambuco, (whilst the Portuguese Navy con∣sisting of 65 Sayl blocked it up by Sea,) and first by storm took the Fort of Salines, and thence coming before that of Burracco, found it already abandoned, and blown up be the defendants: he next proceeded to the new Fortress, the next and strongest Fort to that of Recif, and well manned and munitioned. Thus having made a sturdy resistance, was at length forced by the Portugal, which so amazed the Hollanders, that though they had fifteen hundred men, and six months provisions in Recif, yet they agreed to yield it upon honorable tearms on the 26 of Ia∣nuary 1654. being twenty four years after they had taken it from the Portugals. THe conditions upon which this stronge for∣tess was surrendred up, were to this effect. 1. That D. Francisco Bareto should forget all Acts of Hostility made by the Hollanders against the Portugals by Sea and Land. 2. That all persons whatsoever, even the Jews in Recif, and Maurice town, though Rebells against the King of Portugals, should be pardoned. 3. That all Hol∣landers
should be free to carry away those goods they actually possessed. 4. That they should have sufficient numbers of Ships, able to pass the Equine∣ctial Line, with Iron-guns for their transportation. 5. That the Hollanders married with Portugal Woman or Natives there, should be dealt so withal, as if they had married Dutch Women, and should with the consent of the women, have power to carry them away with them. 6. That those who would stay there under the obedience of the Portugals, should be used as well as if they were native Portu∣gals, and as to their Religion, should live as other strangers do in Portugal. 7. That all forts about Recif and Maurice-town, viz. the port of St. Bastions, Boa, Vista, St. Austines, Convent, the Castle of Maurice-town, that of the three Ba∣stions, the Brum, with it's Redoubt, the Castle of St. George, and all others should be surrended to the aforesaid D. Francisco Barreto governor of Per∣nambucco, with all the Ordnance and Ammunition presently after the signing of these Articles. 8. That the Hollanders should be free to remain in Recif and Maurice-town for three months, they surrendring their Arms, which should be restored to them when they took shipping, and in the mean while they should have power to buy them necessary provisions of the Portugals for the voyage. 9. All Negotiations and Alienations should be made during the said three months, according to the pre∣sent Articles. 10. That the Governor should quar∣ter his Forces where he pleased, and that the Hol∣landers should be protected during those three months, and having liberty to end their private
differences before their own Iudges. 11. That they should carry away all their Papers whatsoever. 12. That if they could not sell their goods in the said three months time, they should leave them with whom they pleased under the obedience of the Por∣tugals, to be disposed of according to their own order. 13. That they should have all the victuals in the store houses of Recif, and the other Forts for their voyage. 14. That as to their pretensions against the Portu∣gals, they might sue them at the King of Por∣tugals Court. 15. That all their Vessels should be restored unto them, which they might fit for their voyage. 16. That they might have liberty to advise all their Ships upon the Coast, to come and laid their goods at Recif: And in the last article it was ex∣pressed that upon the demand of the Hollanders, that this might not prejudice any former treaty between the King of Portugal, and the States General, D. Francisco Barreto would not assent thereunto. There were other articles likewise granted to the military Forces, the sum of which were, that all offences and hostages might be forgot∣ten, that all souldiers should go out of Recif with their Arms, Match lighted, Bullet in mouth, Flying-colours; but coming near the Portugal Army, should put out the Match, and lay their Arms in those Magazines appointed by the governour of Pernambucco, to be restored to them at their departure, provided they went to Nants, Rochel, or to some place in in the United Provinces and not to any belon∣ging to the King of Portugal; for security
whereof they should give three hostages, and all Officers and Souldiers should be shipt toge∣ther with General Sigismond Schop, after the delivery of the Forts of Riogrando, Paraiba, and Tamarica. That the General should have twen∣ty pieces of brass ordinance; from four Pound-Ballet to eighteen, withal their furnitures, be∣sides all necessary Iron-guns, for the defence of the Ships that should be afforded them for their transportation, with convenient supplyes of ammunition and provision, according to the thirteenth Article before recited: That General Sigismond, and all his Officers of War, should have liberty to carry away or sell all his or their goods or slaves. That sick or wounded persons should have liberty to stay till they recovered, but the Governour would not condescend to re∣lease those Hollanders which were prisoners be∣fore this surrendry: A general pardon was gran∣ted to all rebells, chiefly to Amboyna, Mendaz, and all other Indians and Negroes, but they were not to have the honor to march out with their Arms. In sum, the supream Councel at Recif, did oblige themselves for the surrendring of these places, upon the signing of these Arti∣cles, and for the delivering up the Island of Farnam, Viaca, Noroga, Riogrand, Paraiba, and Tamarica, upon the same conditions for the in∣habitants, as had been granted to those of Recif. These Articles were signed and delivered on both sides, at the Camp at Taborda, on the 18 of Ianuary 1653. and Conditions on both sides punctually observed. Thus did the Hollanders
loose all their Acquists in Brazile, which so ex∣asperated those high and mighty States, that at the coming into Holland of myn Heer Sigismon∣do Schop, who had there been General of their Militia, they caused him to be imprisoned, and tried for his life by a Councel of War, but not∣withstanding endeavors of his enemies, he was acquitted. Nor were the Portugals at home less for∣tunate against their neighbor enemy the Spa∣niards, for to omit many petty skirmishes, in∣roades made by them withal success desirable in the summer 1654. D. Antonio D' Albuquerque General of the Portuguese horse, taking an ad∣vantage upon a party of Castilians, which lay up∣on the Borders neer Aronches, under the com∣mand of Count D' Amaranthe, set upon them, slew their General Amaranthe, and took six hundred horse; and farther animated with this success, and the knowledge he had that a vigo∣rous prosecution is the onely mother of a true victory, pursued them with a Army of 3000 Foot and 1500 Horse, eight leagues into their own Country, as far as the old and strong Castle of D' Oluce, while encouraging his Souldiers, (made valorous by their former good fortune) he resolved to attacque, and with continued batteries, and storms so wearied out the enemy, that after four days siege they yeilded upon composition, and Albuquerque looking upon it as a place considerable, both for the countenan∣cing of incursions into the enemies country, and keeping in awe the town of Xeres, which is
hard by, having repaired it and placed in it a strong Garison, returned. About the beginning of the year 1655. D. Franciso De Ferrara Rabella arrived in Eng∣land, with Commission from the king of Portugal as Agent, to Oliver Cromwel, who then swayed here under the title of Protector, to make a moe firm confirmation of the Peace with Eng∣land, and to advise, I suppose, about carrying on the War with Spain; which when Cromwel had given some reasons to make the world believe he would commence against that Catholick Mo∣narch, and how much such a War was for the interest of Portugal, none will doubt who have read the foregoing story, which made King Iohn court that English Usurper, with more submis∣ness and complacency, by both harbouring his Fleets, and sending presents to his Generals, then otherwise his Genius would have permit∣ted him to have done, any way in prejudice of Englands lawful KING. In the mean time the death of Pope Innocentius the Tenth, made D. Francisco de Souza▪ Ambassador at Rome for the King of Portugal, make new ad∣dresses to Alexander the seventh his Successor, for confirmation of the Church Officers in that Kingdom, for he had never had any full grant from Innocent; but now the Spanish Ambassadors opposed themselves more then ever, and by meanes of the Queen of Sweden, who wholly imployed her inerest for the benefit of that Nations endeavoured to frustrate even the Por∣tugueses hopes, nay so desperate was the Spa∣niards
malice, that they laid several designs to murther the Portugal Ambassador, but all pro∣ved ineffectual. In sum, after D. Francisco de Souza, had spent some years in the Court of Rome to very little purpose, he was upon the death of King Iohn the fourth, called home to be Governor of the yong King Alfonso. The proffered interchangeable Match with Savoy, not taking effect, father Du Rozaire, a Domincan and Archbishop of Goa, was sent Agent to France, to treat about a Mar∣riage between that King, and the Infanta Donna Catharina, with Proposals of three Mil∣lions of Gold for Her Portion, and that the King of Portugal would for seven Years main∣tain eighteen Men of War at Sea, for the de∣fence and service of the French Crown. Long was this business in negotiation, and by many thought would have taken effect, the Agent being very highly carressed both by the King and Queen mother of France, but whe∣ther by reason of Cardinal Mazarine's dislike of it, or other reasons of State, it was prolonged by continual demurs, till after the King of Portugals death, and then wholly broken off. For King Iohn being now arrived to about fifty years of Age, in the sixteenth year of his Reign, and in the year of our Lord 1656. on the 6. of November, S. N. paid his last debt to nature, having a long time been troubled with an obstruction in the kidneys, occasioned by the stone and gravel, which was so sharp all the time of his sickness, that he seldom urined, and when
he did it, was in so little quantity that it did scarce at all ease him, this violent pain put him into a Burning-feaver, which in ten days over∣pressed his vitals. Before his death, he appointed Donna Lucia his Queen, to be Regent of the Kingdom du∣ring the minority of D. Alphonso her son, re∣comeding to her for-Assistants in the manage∣ment of so great burden as a Crown, the reverend D Emanuel Archbishop of Lisbon, Don Runlio Marquess of Nisa, the Earl of Canvandake, and some others whose abilities, love and fidelity, he had experience of. He had by his Queen Donna Lucia Daughter to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, four Children; onely two of which survived him, to wit, Al∣fonso who succeeded him in the Kingdom, and is at present King of Portugal; and the Infanta Ca∣tharina, who was born the year before her Father came to the Crown, a Princess in whom all ver∣tues seem to flow, that can make her the worthy Daughter of such renowned Parents: her beau∣teous body being amply repleate with her ge∣nerous Mothers spirit, whose magnanimity and prudence, all the world have admired: his other two children were the Prince Theodosio, who was so unfortunate as to die some time before his Father, and a Daughter who died young. He was a person of a very comely presence, his countenance pleasant, but inclinning to swarthiness, his body about a middle stature, yet comely and well proportioned, nor were the lineaments of his mind less becoming then those
of his body, though if ye believe common fame, he was none of the wisest Kings that ever Por∣tugal could boast of: the reason that he left so much of the reins of the Government to his wife, a woman of a masculine and politick spirit, from whence perhaps that jesting Spaniard might take occasion to say; That it was not the Portugal force, but the Spanish policy, that kept that kingdom from the Catholique King, alluding to the Queens being a Spaniard. He was buried in the great Church of St. Vincenza del Foro, with all accustomed and be∣comming ceremonies, lamented by those Kings who had been his Allies, especially be the King of France, who honored his memory with a most magnificent Funeral solemnity, himself (atten∣ded by most of the Nobles and Parliament of France,) gracing it with his presence at the Church of Nostre Dame, where after the singing of Mass, the Bishop of Vance pronounced a Fu∣neral Oration, suitable to so Royal a subject and occasion.
ALFONSO the VI. The Two and twentieth KING of PORTVGAL. KIng Iohn the fourth being thus deceased, his onely surviving Son Alphonso the 6th of that name succeeded, being about the Age of four∣teen years, his Mother during his minority ad∣ministring the affairs of the Kingdom, and cau∣sing him to be Crowned on the 14 of November, eight days after the death of his Father. The whole Kingdom of Portugal was in a kind of amaze at the so sudden death of King Iohn, especially considering the youth of their present King, fearing lest their common ene∣mies should now take advantage of them: but the prudent management of the most impor∣tant business of State by the Queen Regen, soon banished all those fancied fears. The Queen being sensible, that upon this occasion of the Kings death, she should have most occasion to use the Souldiery, by the ad∣vice of her Council, ordered all the Infantry of the Kingdom should have half a years pay, the better to incourage them, who were of them∣selves ready enough to fight against their com∣mon and inveterate enemy, the Castilians. And because she knew that the King of Spain
would loose no opportunity to oppress the King∣dom of Portugal, she thought it imprudence to let any slip where any advantage might be gai∣ned upon him, and therefore all the Spanish Forces being drawn out of Andaluzia to oppose the English, in case they should attempt to land at Cadiz, (for they then blocked up that Port with a Potent Fleet, she commanded four thou∣sand Horse to make an inroad into that country, who plundered, and layed waste all before them, bringing away between forty and fifty thousand head of Cattel, and leaving the whole soil in a manner desolate: This so exasperated the Spaniards, that drai∣ning most of the Garisons of his Kingdom he raised a potent Army, and with ten thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse entred Portugal, and laid Siege to the strong City of Olivenza, which at length they reduced to that necessity that the defendants were willing to capitulate, & sounded a parly, but when they came to treat, the Spaniards would not admit the King of Portugal any other title then that of Dke of Braganza, which made the Portugals renounce any farther treating. But at length the Spaniards condescending to treat, the Town was delivered upon Articles: but so much did the Queen Regent and Coun∣cel of Portugal resent it, that they immediately gave order to arrest the person of Don Mandiol de Saldagna the Governour, who (with several of his chief Officers,) was by the Count de St. Lorenze, General of the Portuguese Forces in
those parts, sent prisoner to Lisbon, there to an∣swer their ill defending of that town, it appea∣ring that at the surrendring of it, there marched our two thousand two hundred well Armed Foot, and one hundred Horse; nor were they re∣duced to that necessity that was pretended, there remaining in the stores of Ammunition and pro∣vision, sufficient to have defended the town a great while longer. The loss of this place was a great blow to the Portugueses, it being a strong Frontier town, and giving the Spaniard absolute command a great way into the Country: but this the King of Spain resolved should be but a beginning of his con∣quest (if possible) of this Kingdom, for he still made all preparations he could to assault it with a greater force, and not onely endeavoured this with might and main to oppress it himself, but by his Ambassadors solicited the States General of the United Provinces to send their Vice-Ad∣miral Opdam with the Fleet he then had before Dantzick, into Portugal, to demand satisfaction for the dammage the Portugals had done to their West-India company in Brazile, and in case the King of Portugal should deny to comply with their desires, to force them to a composi∣tion. The High and Mighty States easily listned to this councel, and Vice-Admiral Opdam with a potent Fleet was sent to Lisbon, carrying with him some Commissioners from the States to make their demands, which the Queen Regent and Council thought so unreasonable, that they
could not return any satisfactory answer to them, whereupon the Commissioners departed. But Opdam still stayed with his Fleet to wait an opportunity of catching the Brazile Fleet in their return home, many of which notwithstan∣ding the care and endeavours of the Portu∣gueses to prevent it, he made prize of, and sent into Holland. By this means was the War which for many years, had been maintained between the Hol∣landers and Portugals on the other side the line, transferred to this side, which the King of France endeavoured by all meanes possible, be∣fore it's eruption to prevent, and afterwards to compose by his Ambassadors Monsieur de Thou in Holland, and the Sieur de Comings in Portugal, but to no effect. Thus assaulted by two potent Nations, both by Sea and by Land were the Portugueses, which yet made them not at all falter in their courage and resolution, the generous Queen Regent causing all possible Leavyes to be made to op∣pose the Castilian, sending into Barbary to buy horses, and by Leagues abroad endeavoring to strengthen the interest of the Kingdom, an Ambassador was sent to that purpose into Eng∣land, to renew and confirm the Amity before concluded on, and many conferences there were between the Archbishop of Goa, who had before been Ambassador in France, and the Sieur de Comings, so that many were in hopes that the Match between the King of France and the Infanta would have gone forward, and an
indissoluble League both defensive & offensive, been concluded between the two Nations. And to joyn force to policy, a gallant Army of about sixteen thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse, al Portuguese, took the field, and in revenge for the loss of Olivenza, laid siege to Mouron, which in three or four days they took by storm, putting 1500 Spaniards to the Sword, and resolved to proceed to the regaining of Ba∣dayox, and Olivenza; and to that purpose mar∣ching without opposition by Caya, (which they left fortified) they came to the Fort of St. Chri∣stopher, the strongest hold of the City of Ba∣dayox, which they several days battered, and thrice stormed, but were beaten off, yet at the length they took it, and so securely entrenched themselves about the whole City. The Duke of Ossima General of the Castilian horse, having notice of this streight siege of the City, endeavoured with sixteen hundred Horse to cut off their convoys and provisions; but the Count del Prado governour of Elvas, receiving advice of his design, sallied out of the City with three companies of Horse, and all the Foot he had to prevent him, by which means Ossima was encompassed on both sides, for at the same time that he was on the other part charged by Don Andrea D' Albuquerque General of the Portuguese horse, and that with so much gallantry that they presently discomfited their enemies, slew four hundred upon the place, took three hundred prisoners, and forced the Duke of Ossima to save himself by swinning.
This happy success encouraged them to re∣turn with more alacrity to the siege, which they prosecuted with all vigor possible, and on the three and twentieth of Iune, stormed and took a Redoubt which was palisadosed, but at length when they had spent much time, blood, and treasure, they were enforced by the power∣ful Army of Don Lewis de Haro to raise their Siege. For the King of Spain exsperated with the loss of Mouron, and fearing likewise to loose Badayox, had rallyed a great Army, which he committed to the care of his favorite Don Lewis de Haro, who not onely with it raised the siege from before Badayox, but likewise so straightly besieged Elvas, one of the Portugueses strongest Frontier-towns, the taking of which might have endangered the whole Kingdom, and reduced it to such necessity, that it was even upon the point of yielding. But the Portugals who knew of how much importance it was to them, had ever been an∣xious for its relief, and therefore having at length bravely recruited their Army, they ad∣vanced with full resolution to drive the Spa∣niards out of their Trenches, nor did they effect it less bravely then they had resolved it, for they totally routed their General, Don Lewis de Haro very hardly escaping; but in this battel the Portuguez lost the worthy Albuquerque General of the horse. And to counterpoise this victory, the strong Fortress of Mounson upon the borders of Gallicia,
was surrendred to the Spaniards; and a Party of the Portugals, not having advice that it was already possessed by the Castilians, going to re∣lieve it, were surprized and forced shamefully to retreat, with the loss of some hundreds, and this Success encouraged the Spaniards under the command of the Marquis of Viana, to besiege the onely City the Portugals were possest of on the River Minho, but it was relieved by the Portugals. The Spaniards likewise gained a sig∣nal Victory over a Party of Portugal Horse nigh Alcantara; for advice being brought to the Governor of that Town, that the Portuguez with a party of four hundred Horse were en∣tring upon the Frontiers in two Bodies, he ta∣king five hundred Horse, and a select Party of Foot went to meet them, and so handsomly managed his business, that he surprized one whole Body, scarce a man escaping  Com∣missary General, five Captains, and several o∣ther Officers being taken Prisoners. But these things were inconsiderable disad∣vantages to the interest of Portugal, in respect of what it was like to feel by the Peace which was treating of between those two mighty Mo∣narchs of France and Spain, which the Queen Regent and Council were sensible of; and therefore dispatcht Don Iohn D' Acosta Ambas∣sador Extraordinary to the French Court, to represent unto his Most Christian Majesty the state of the Kingdom of Portugal, and to in∣sist that there might be a due Consideration had of the Interest of his Master in the concluding
of the Peace with Spain, seeing he had for∣merly approved himself so good an Ally to the Crown of France. But this Embassie could pro∣duce no other effect, than a promise to endea∣vor a Mediation for them with the King of Spain, and procure them good tearms upon Submission, which by the magnanimous Portu∣gueses was rejected with indignation. Nor were they at all daunted with the great power of the Spaniard which he intended to imploy against them, but manfully resolved to endure all hazards, yet would they willingly have concluded a Peace with the Hollanders, and to that purpose Don Fernando Tellez de Faro, Duke of Alvero, was sent Ambassador to the States General, but he like a treacherous vil∣lain, revolted from them to the King of Spain, carrying along with him the papers of his Em∣bassy; for which, according to his desert, his Effigies was executed at Lisbon as a Traytors; his Goods confiscated, his house razed to the ground, and his Children banished and degra∣ded of nobility. His brother Don Deigo de Syl∣a, who had served the King of Portugal in the quality of General at Sea, was likewise upon this occasion commanded to retire to one of his houses, and deprived of all publique employ∣ment. After him was sent Don Henry de Susa Count of Miranda, to negotiate an Accommodation with the Netherland States, yet he prevailed little, for the pertinacious Hollanders were still resolute in their unreasonable demands, com∣puting
their losses in Brazile (where they had no right to be) to amount to no less then thirty millions. The Spaniards in the mean time were forced to give the Portugals some respite in the summer 1659. but preparations were made to assault them, with the whole power of that Monarchy in the Spring 1660. Don Iohn D' Austria being called out of Flanders to be Generalissimo of the Spanish Forces, and having Orders given him in April 1660. to march directly to Merida, on the Frontiers of Portugal, though he went not that Summer. But the Portugueses resolved not to be be∣hind-hand with their Enemies, and therefore made several in-roads into the Spanish Terri∣tories, depopulating all before them, which made the Spaniards to be revenged, resolve to do the like to them; Order was therefore gi∣ven to fall into the Kingdom on all sides, the Marquess of Viana Governor of Gallicia, march∣ing in that way with eight thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horse, and the Governor of Camara invading that part which was adjacent to his government. In this condition was the Kingdom of Portu∣gal when His Majesty Charles the Second, King of England was restored to his Crowns and Kingdoms, welcomed by his Subjects with all gratulatory and submissive Obedience; the News of which was no sooner by advice from D. Francisco de Melo, Ambassador for the King of Portugal in England, conveyed to the ears of
his Master, but he caused all the Guns of the Town, Castle, and Ships in the Road, to be fi∣red, and for three days and nights kept solemn and magnificent Rejoycings; the Portuguese Nation as well as by this their joy at the Resto∣ration of King Charles the Second, as by their sorrow and general mourning at the Death of King Charles the irst, expressing their great affection for the English Nation. But because their joy should be somewhat for their own, as well as our sakes, there at the same time arrived News at Lisbon, that Don Alfonso Turtudo General of the Horse, on the Frontiers of Alentejo, meeting with a Brigade of the Enemies Horse nigh to Badajox, had fought and defeated them, killed and took four hundred of them, amongst whom were four Captains of Horse prisoners. The Spaniards still continued their Leavies against Portugal, being resolved to employ an Army of four thousand Horse and twelve thou∣sand Foot constantly recruited, about the Fron∣tiers of Estramadura, and another of three thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot about Gallicia, and a third of twelve thousand men, to serve as a Reserve to the two former. In this manner were they resolved to assault them by Land, while the Prince of Montesarchio with ten Men of VVar, was appointed to coast up and down before their Ports, and do them what mischief he could by Sea. Thus have we deduced a Compendious Chro∣nicle of the Kingdom of Portugal, from its first
original under Alfonso the First, to the fourth year of the Reign of the present King Alfonso the Sixth, Anno 1660. and are forced now to leave her strugling with Spain for her liberty, which great Monarch, by the prudent Manage∣ment of Affairs by that Sage and Illustrious Queen Regent, she hath hitherto been able to resist, and will without doubt still be able to defend her self against him, especially if the Match with England take effect, as without doubt it will; our Nation being like to prove a better Bulwark than the fickle French, who were seldom or never constant to their Friends, wit∣ness their deserting Queen Elizabeth when she waged VVar with the Spaniards, as they did now the Portugals. FINIS:
A BRIEF Cosmographical Description Of all the Dominions of PORTVGAL. THat part of the Dominions of the King of Portugal, which are upon the Con∣tinent of Europe, contain first the king∣dom of Portugal, and secondly the kingdom of Algarve, or Regnum Algarbiorum. The kingdom of Portugal is bounded on the North, with the Rivers Minio and Avia, which part it from Gallicia; on the South, with the kingdom of Algarve; on the VVest, with the Atlantick Ocean; and on the East, with the two Castiles and Estramadura, from which it is deduced by a Line drawn from Ribadonia, stand∣ing on the Avia to Badayox, on the Anas or Gua∣diana, it extendeth on the Sea-coast from North to South, four hundred miles; the breadth of it in the broadest place is one hundred miles, in the narrowest, eighty; the whole circumfe∣rence is about eight hundred seventy nine miles; in which compass it containeth fourteen hun∣dred and sixty Parishes. It was first called Lusitania, from the Lusitans
its chief Inhabitants, and had the name of Por∣tugal either from the Port of Cale, now called Caia, sometimes a rich Empory or Mart-town, or more likely from the Haven of Porto, a town standing on the mouth of the River Dueries, where the Golls (or French) used to land their merchandize, and so was called Portus Gallio∣rum, and by contraction Portugal. This Town was given in Dower to Henry Duke of Lorain, with Teresa base Daughter to Alphonso the sixth, King of Castile, with the Title of Earl of Por∣tugal, whose Successors coming to be Kings, called all those Countries they gained from the Moors, by the same name. The Air of the Countrey is healthy, the Countrey hilly and bare of Corn, with which it is supplyed from France, and other Nor∣thern parts; yet that which they have is as good, if not better, than any Europe affords. The soyl and people are in all parts not rich alike, for where the soyl is richest, the people are poorest, not benefited by the Trade of the too-far distant Lisbon; and where the soyl is poorest, the peo∣ple are richest, helped by Traffick and Manu∣factures, the chief of which are making Salt and Silk, which they export in great abundance; and where there's want of Corn, that defect is supplyed with abundance of Honey, Wine, Oyl, Alume, Fruits, Fish, Salt, white Marble, and some Mines of Silver, &c. The people are of a more plain, simple beha∣vior than the rest of Spain, and (if we may be∣lieve the Spanish Proverb) neither numerous,
nor wise, but they have found them both. They have a kinde of natural Animosity, if not An∣tipathy against the Castilians, for depriving them of their native Government and Liberties, al∣though they have now recovered both. They were always accounted good Sea-faring men, and fortunate in discovery of forein Countreys. It aboundeth with Rivers of all sorts, having neer two hundred great and small. The chief are, 1. Minius, full of red Lead, and thence called Minium by the Latines, navigable with small Vessels neer a hundred miles. 2. Lethes, now Lavada. 3. Muliadas, now Mundego. 4. Tagus. 5. Duerus. and 6. Anas. These three last, common to all the rest of Spain; Anas or Guadiana passing by Portugal onely for seven leagues, Tagus for eighteen, and Duero for eighty: None of these navigable for any long space, by Ships of any great burthen; all the Rivers of Spain being generally swift of course, restrained within narrow Channels between sharp Rocks, and therefore incommodious for navigation: but that want is supplyed by three excellent Havens, 1. That of Lisbon upon Ta∣gus. 2. Porto upon Duero to the north of Lis∣bon. 3. That of Setaval south of Lisbon, scituate on a Goll, twenty miles in length, and three in breadth, a place of great importance. The principal Cities of this Countrey are, 1. Lisbon, seated upon Tagus, a City famous for Commerce, called by the Latines Olisippo, or Ulisippo, and as some have fabulously imagined, built by Ulysses in his ten years travel. It is in
compass seven miles, and contains upwards of thirty Parishes, in which are at least 20000 hou∣ses, neat and comely Fabricks: There are on the Walls seventy six Turrets and Towers & twen∣two Gates to the Sea-side. Towards the Conti∣nent it is scituate upon five small Hills, betwixt which is a valley which runs down to the River. On the highest Hill stands an ancient Castle, not strong, but by reason of its vicinity to the Pa∣lace, serving now onely for a Prison for great men. The Entrance of the River is defended by the Castle of Cascais, and neerer the City by the Fort of St. Iulians, and the Rock of Belem, muniioned by twenty Pieces of Ordnance: This is the Chamber of the Kings of Portugal, the Sea of an Archbishop, the Staple of Commodities for all the kingdom, and thought more worth than all the Realm besides. 2. The second City of note is Santaren, sea∣ted on the Tagus, so called from Sancta Irene, a Nun of Tomar (a Monastery wherein the old Kings of Portugal used to be crowned) martyred hee by the Moors: this City is called by Ptolomy Scavaliscus, then a Roman Colony. 3. Sintr upon the main Atlantick, at the end of high mountains, called Montes Lunae: hither by rea∣son of the cool refreshings of the Sea, and plea∣sure of the Woods adjoyning, the Kings of Por∣tugal use to retire in the heat of Summer. 4. Corimbra, seated on both sides the River Mondego, a pleasant Scituation among the Vine∣yards, and Woods of Olives, a Bishops Sea, an University, and sometime the Residence of the
Kings. 5 On the north side of the River Duero, betwixt that and Minio, is placed the City of Braga, once the Royal Seat of the Swevian Kings, now the Sea of an Archbishop, conend∣ing for the supremacy with Ioledo. 6. Porto, the Haven of the Galls before-mentioned, standing at the mouth of Duero, now vulgarly called Por∣tuport. 7. Miranda, a Bishops Sea, seated also on the Duero. 8. Bragance, the Dukes whereof now Kings of Portugal, were accounted so great Princes, that it was thought one third part of Portugal were their Vassals, and lived on their Lands: they are originally descended from Al∣phonso natural son to Iohn the First, who was first by his Father created Earl of Borcellos, and after Duke of Bragance, they after came to have right to the Crown by marriage of Katherine, Daughter to Emanuel. 9. On the south of Ta∣gus, and betwixt it and Algarve, is seated in the middest of a large and spacious Plain, the City of Eubora, the Sea of an Archbishop, and an University, the last founded by King Henry the Cardinal. 10. Is Portolegre, a Bishops Sea. 11. Olivenza on the Guadiana. 12. Beja, cal∣led by Pliny anciently Pax Iulia, now Mean, not very well inhabited, but anciently a Roman Colony, and one of the three Juridicial Resorts of Lusitania.
The Kingdom of Algarve. THe kingdom of Algarve lyeth South of Por∣tugal, from which it is divided by a Line drawn from Aschorin, on the Western Sea to Odochere, a Castle on the Guadiana, on the East bounded by Andalusia, on the West and South by the main A lantick; more wilde and barren it is then the kingdom of Portugal, peo∣pled with few Towns, and those not very popu∣lous; hilly and mountanous, but by the benefit of the Sea, yielding a great Trade of fishing, specially of Tunny, of which there is abundance caught. It took its name from its Western scituation, for so Algarve signifieth in the Arabick; the utmost end of it was antiently called Promonto∣rium Sacrum, now Cape St. Vincent, because the bones of St. Vincent, religiously preserved by the Christians, were here burnt, and scatte∣red by the Moors, but now vulgarly by Mari∣ners called the Southern Cape: the Places of most importance in this kingdom, are 1. Niebla, the seat of Abed Mefad, once King of this Country. 2. Sylvia, an inland City, the seat of a Bishop. 3. Villa Maona, scituate beyond the Cape. 4. Tavila. 5. Faro. 6. Lagos, all Haven Towns. This Country conquered by the Moors, with the rest of Spain, in the distractions of their power, was for a time under the Soveraignity
and command of the Kings of Sevil, recovered from the Moors of Sevil, by the Kings of Mo∣rocco: It became subject unto them till they left this Country, and was after parcelled a∣mong many Kings, one of which was Aben Me∣fad, reigning in Niebla, and the parts adjoyning being dispossessed of his Estate by Alfonso the wise, most of the other Towns and Princes sub∣mitted unto him, and became his Vassals: Anno 1257. more absolutely subdued, and made sub∣ject to the Crown of Portugal by Alfonso the third, Anno 1260. to whom the said Alfonso the renth of that Name in Leon, and seventh in Castile, had given the same in Dowry with Beatrix his daughter. The Azores, or Tenera Islands, THe Azores, or Tenera Islands, are certain Islands belonging to the Crown of Portu∣gal, seated in the Atlantick Ocean, directly op∣posite to Lisbon, and distant from it 250 leagues, first found out and subdued by the Portugals, under the Conduct of Prince Henry, son of Iohn the first, scituate between 38. and 40. degrees of the Latitude, and one of them in the first Longitude, which is commonly recko∣ned from these Islands, being the most Western parts of the world, before the discovery of A∣merica. They were called Azores, from the multitude
of Gossehawk, at first found there (Azor in the Spanish Tongue, signifying a Gossehawk) though at this time there are few or none found; they were called also the Flemish Islands, be∣cause first discovered by them, and in the Isle of Faial, one of the chief, there are some fami∣lies still resemble Flemings, both in complexion and habit, and not far from their abode is a Torrent, called by the Portugals, Riberados Fle∣mingos, or the River of Flemings; they were al∣so called Tercera's, from Tercera the chief of them. The Air here is healthful, subject to few dis∣eases; they all abound with flesh; fish, and other necessaries, except Salt and Oyl, supplyed from Portugal, Wines they have for their own use, but not to be transported, by reason of their weakness; of like nature is their Wheat and oher Fruits, which hold not good above a Twelve-moneth; they are subject to Earth∣quakes, their chief commodities for transporta∣tion are Canary birds, Wood for Dyers, Joy∣ners-wok, and Beeves for such ships as come there to be Victualled. The Inhabitants are generally laborious, ex∣cellent husbands of their grounds, insomuch, that they make Vines grow out of the Rocks, much given to Joynery-work, making pretty Knacks; in Customs they conform to the Por∣tugals, having some smattering of the Flemings, which Nation they seem to affect, the Islands are nine in number, having their several names, viz.
1. Tercera, the chief of all the rest, 18 Miles in compasse, well stored with Peaches, Apples, Lemons, and Orenges; and for the Kitchen, Turneps, Cabbages, plenty of Pot-hearbs, and the best Potato roots (the Inhabi∣tants greatest food) in the World: they have great quantity of the best Woad (called hence Island Woad) used by dyers; they have Fowl for the use of man but no birds of prey; the whole Island is begirt with sharp Rocks; the Places of most importance, are 1. Praye, on the Sea∣side, well walled, but not very populous. 2. Sta. Barbara. 3. St. Sebastian. 4. Glalue▪ and 5. Villa Nuova: All Buroughs of good note. 6. Angra, the chief, not onely of this Island, but o all the nine; the residence of the Gover∣nor, and an Arch-Bishops Sea, who hath in it his Cathedral; 'tis fotified with two Castles, the Town likewise well Walled, the only Port Town of the Island, and made safe rather by Art then Nature. 2. St. Maries, so called from the Saint (as St. Georges, and St. Michaels are) unto which it is dedicated, the most Southern of the Isles, and next to Spain▪ twelve Miles in circuit, in∣habited onely by Spaniards, and those much gi∣ven to making Earthen Ware, so naturally hem'd in with Rocks, that it needs no other defence; the chief Town is likewise called St. Maries, giving to, or taking name from the Island. 3. St. Michaels, directly North from St. Ma∣ries, and little distant, the biggest of the pack,
being 20. Miles in length, but the bredth not answerable, much subject to Earthquakes, and fiery vapours; of most note among our mo∣den Geographers, who have removed hither the first Meridian (by which they divide the World into East and West) from the Canaries, or Fortunate Islands, where it was fixed in the time of Ptolomy, and other ancient writers: The chief Town hereof, besides many Boroughs and lesser Hamlets, is called Punta del Gada, seated upon a dangerous Sea, and without any Port, yet more frequented by strangers then the Port of Angra, because here they may go in and out as they please, but not so in the other. 4. Fayal, seventeen or eighteen Miles in length, provided with all things necessary for the use of man, and well furnished with wood, for which commodity, much frequented by the Merchants of England: The chief Town of it is Dorta, defended with a Castle, both Town and Island, taken by Sir Walter Rawleigh, anno 1597. in the famous action called the Island-Voyage. 5. Gratiosa, not above five or six Leagues in compasse, but so well furnished with fruits, that they send much yearly to Tercera, inhabited by Portugals onely, but so poor, that they are not able to bear the charge of a Garrison: the chief Town is called la Plaia. 6. St. Georges, twelve Miles long, about three in bredth, Mountainous and full of Fo∣rests, but those Forests well stored with Cedars, they use them many times for shipping, and
sometimes for fewel, the chief Town is St. Georges, as the Island. 7. Puo, lyeth on the South of the Isle St. George, and took this name from a high Hill, in the form of a Pyramide, which the Portugals generally call a Pike, or Pico, replenished with fruits, some Cedars, and a tree called Teixo, of great bulk, and much beauty, the wood there∣of exceeding hardned within, and much waved, so admirably beautiful, that it is allowed onely to the Kings Officers, the other subjects being interdicted the use of it (but upon special li∣cense) by a publique Edict; in bigness it is second onely unto that of St. Michael, if not equal to it, hardly so much in length, but of greater bredth: the chief Towns of it, 1. St. Se∣bastians. 2. Callota de Nesquin, both upon the Sea, and in the East parts of the Islands. 8. Flores, directly East from Fayal, so called from its abundance of Flowers (as Gratiosa for the like flourishing verdure of it) is in compasse not above eight Miles, but plentifully furnished with Cattel, and good grounds to feed them: the chief Town is Sta. Cruz. 9. Corvo, the least of the nine, not above half so big as Flores, from which it is scituate to the North, and but a little distant, called thus of its abundance of Crows, both very unsafe and miserably poor, by reason of the many Pi∣rates which lie betwixt them, to intercept such ships as Trade to America: These Islands were the last of the Portugal Dominions which held out for D. Antonio, the Bastard, against Phillip
the second, King of Spain; against whom the Island of Tercera was for a while gallantly de∣fended by Emanuel Desylva, with the help of the French, but taken at last by the Marquis of Sta. Cruz, and the French, after promise of life, cruelly murthered in cold blood. The Portugals Possessions in Asia. SO many are the Forts and Places possessed by the Portugueses in Asia, but especially in India, that to give a description of them all, would be impossible, it shall be sufficient to mention so few of the chiefest; and 1. Diu a Peninsula, in the Province of Guzurate, in the kingdom of Cambaia, looking towards Persia, but on the East side thereof near the mouth of Indus; here the Portugals built an Impregna∣ble Citadel, by the leave and consent of King Bacurines, thereby to buy their aid against Ma∣homed the Mogul, who had newly vanquished him: A matter of such consequence to the Crown of Portugal, that Iohn Bottelines confined to India for some crimes by him committed, undertook, in hope by the merit of that service to obtain his Pardon, to carry the first news of it in a small Vessel not above 18 foot long, and but six foot broad (the best which for the present could be provided) which with great courage he performed, and through that large, wide, and empestuous Ocean, came in safety
with his news to Lisbon, to the great joy of the King, but greater admiration of all sorts of peo∣ple; Scarce was it setled in their new possession, when besieged by Solyman Bassa, Admiral to Solyman the Magnificent, with a Fleet of eighty Ships and Gallies, Anno 1537. offended with the Portugals for aiding the King of Persia, but rather for diverting the Spice-trade from Alex∣andria; in which he had such ill success, that having assaulted it in vain with his Land-forces, he was fain to raise his Siege in such haste and tumult, that he left his great Ordnance behinde him. 2. Over against Diu upon the Sea-side they are possessed of Damau, a beautiful and pleasant Town▪ fortified with a strong Castle at the north end of it, of white chalky stone, well planted with Ordnance, opposite whereunto on the south-side of the Town, is a goodly Church edged on the top with white, which with the houses for the most part of the same colour also, afford a pleasant prospect to the Sailors by. 3. The next place of Consequence which they possess, and indeed the chief of all their posses∣sions in India, is the City of Goa in the kingdom of Decan, a Sea-town, scituate in a little, but most pleasant Island, called Tickvarinum, fifteen miles in compass, opposite to the Mouth or Out∣let of the River Mundavo, a noted Empory, and one of the Keyes which unlock the Indies, for number of inhabitants, pleasantness of scitua∣tion, and magnificent building, the chiefest of the Countrey; here the Portugals have their
Arsenals and Harbor for their Indian Fleet, by which they do command these Seas, so strongly fortified, that though beleaguered by the great Idalian with 35000 Horse, 6000 Elephants, and 250 piece of Ordnance, yet he could not force it; made in regard of the convenient scituation and strength of it, the ordinary Residence of the Portugal Vice-Roy, who hath here his Coun∣cil, Chancellor, and other Officers, for the Go∣vernment of such parts of India as belong to that Crown. It is also the Seat of the Archbi∣shop or Primate of the Indian Church, planted by that Nation, who is hence called the Arch∣bishop of Goa. 4. To this we may adde Chiaul a Sea—town, in the hands of the Portugals also, and by them well fortified, insomuch as a Nisamalocco assaul∣ting it at the same time with a very great Army was fain to leave it as he found it. 5. Solsette with a Peninsula about 20 miles in compass, possessed likewise by the Portugals about nine miles distant from Goa, the whole Peninsula containing 30 villages and 80000 In∣habitants, this stands in the Province of Canara. 6. We may adde the Cittadel the Portu∣guese have by consent of the King, built and fortified, nigh the great City of Connonor, with many other Fortresses and places: amongst the rest, the City of Macoa in China deserves men∣tion, a famous and known Empory.
The Portugals Possessions in Affrica. THe Portugals had large Possessions in the kingdoms of Congo and Angola in Affrica, which were first discovered under the Conduct of Diego Can in the year 1486. and had forti∣fied themselves in the kingdom of Angola, from whence and Congo they used yearly to transport 28000 Slaves into Brazile, till by the treachery of the Hollanders they were Anno 1641. or thereabout, dispossessed thereof; for the Por∣tugals having cast off the Spanish yoke, a Cessa∣tion from Hostility with them, was proclaimed in Holland, and not long after a firm Peace made between the two Nations. In the Articles whereof it was conditioned, That this Peace should not begin in the East-Indies till the end of a year, nor in Brazile till the end of half a year from the making thereof; which being ob∣served, they gave Order to their Fleets and For∣ces which were abroad, to make themselves Ma∣sters of any thing belonging to the Portugals, which they could lay hold of; who following the Instructions, and anchoring near the Fort of Angola, were by the Portugals received with joy into their Castle, as their special friends; which presently they possessed themselves of, turning the poor Portugals in a weak Barque to seek new Adventures; nor were they less kind to them in the Island of St. Thomas, and Princes
Island. The Islands of Capo Verde are still pos∣sessed by the Portugals, so called, because sci∣tuate just opposite to Promontorium Capites Vi∣ridis, in the Land of Negroes; they are nine in number, to wit, 1 St. Anthony. 2 St. Vincent. 3 Buena Vista. 4 St. Luci. 5 Insula Salis, or The Isle of Salt. 6 Del Fogo, or The Isle of Fire. 7 St. Nicholas. 8 Maggio, o. Majo. 9 St. Iago. some have added a tenth called Brava. Of these onely three are inhabited, to wit, Majo, Del Fo∣go, and St. Iago; of which the last is the chief, yet but seven miles long, rocky and mountai∣nous, but full of very pleasant valleys▪ and well peopled; the chief town of it called Riblero, or Ribiera la grande, a Colony of Portugals, sci∣tuate on a fine river, and a beautiful Hven, ta∣ken and sacked by Sir Francis Drake in the year 1585. and after by Sir Anthony Shirly, Anno 1596. The Portugals likewise possess the town of Tanger, a pretty Fortification on the coast of Mauritania, scituate about the middle of the straits of Gibraltar. Brazile. BRazile is bounded on the East with Mare del Noort, or the Main Atlantick; on the West with some undiscovered countries, lying betwixt it and the Audes; on the North with Guiana, from which parted by the great river Maragnon; on the South with Paroguay, or the province of Riodeo la Plata. The reason of the name I finde not, unless it come from the a∣bundance
of the Wood called Brazile wood, which was found amongst them, as the famous Isle of Cyprus from its plenty of Cypresses It reaches from the 29th to the 39th degree of Southern latitude, or measuring it by miles. It is said to be fifteen hundred miles from North to South, and five hundred miles breadth from the Sea to the Audes, which must be understood, with reference to the whole extent of it; for o∣therwise all that which is possessed by the Portu∣gals, is so short of taking up all the breadth thereof, that they possess nothing but the Sea Coasts, and some few leagues comparitively within the Land; the greatest part of it being conquered, that it hath not hitherto been disco∣vered. The Country is full of Mountaines, Rivers, and Forrests, diversified into hills and plains, alwayes pleasant and green. The Air for the most part sound and wholesom, by reason of the fresh Winds which reign amongst them, yet in regard of its moisture, it is held more agreea∣ble to old men, then young. The soil excessive fruitful, were it not cloy'd with too much Rain, however it produces Sugar-Canes in such libe∣al quantities, that they yearly bring out of Bra∣zile to Portugal, 150000 Acrobes of Sugar, every Arrobe containing twenty five Bushels of our English measure. There is also infinite quantities of that Red-wood used for Dying, called Brazile wood; the Trees whereof are of that incredible greatness, that whole Fami∣lies live on an Arm of them, every Tree be∣ing
as populous, as the most of our villages. The people are endowed with a pretty na∣turl understanding, yet generally barbarous, the men and women go stark naked, and on high festival days, hang Jewels in their lips Those festival days are when a company of good neigh∣bors come together to be merry over the roasted body of a fat man, which they cut in Collops, called Boucon, and eat with greediness and de∣lectation. They have two vile qualities, as be∣ing mindful of injuries, and forgetful of bene∣fits. They cannot pronounce the letters L. F▪ R, the reason of which one being demanded, made answer, because they had amongst them neither Law, Faith nor Reason. The Country is not divided into Provinces or Counties, as in other places, but into Prefe∣ctures, or Captain-ships, as the Portugueses call them; of which there are 13 in all, from the Province Rio della Plata, to that of Guiana, to wit; 1. The Captainship of St. Vincent, border∣ing on Rio della Plata, inhabited by the most civil people of all Brazil; the chief Towns of which are, 1. Sancto at the bottom of an arm of the Sea, capable of good ships of burthen, but distant from the Main three Leagues, a of no more then 120. houses, yet the best of this prefecture beautified with a Parish Church, and two Convents of Fryers, taken and held two moneths by Sir Thomas Cavendish Anno 1591. since that environed with a Wall, and fortified with two Castles. 2. St. Vincents,
better built, but not so well fitted with an ha∣ven, of about 70. houses, and one hundred inha∣bitants. 3. Isange. 4. Canavea, two open Bur∣roughs, but capable of lesser Vessels. 5. St. Paul, upon a little Mountain, at the foot whereof run two pleasant Rivers, which fall not far off into the River Iniambis, a Town of about a hundred houses, one Church, two Convents, and a Col∣ledge of Jesuites, neighbored by Mines of gold, found in the Mountains called Pernabiacaba. 6. St. Phillips, a small Town on the banks of Iniambis, which there begins to enlarge it self, and passing thence, falleth at last into the River Parana, one of the greatest tributaries to Rio de la Plata. 2. Of Rio de Ianeiro, or the River of Ianua∣ry, so called because entred into that month by Iohn Diaz de Solis, Anno 1515. neglected of the Portugals, it was seized on by the French, under the conduct of Villagagone, employed herein by Admiral Chastillon, a great friend of the Hugontes, to whom it was intended as a place of refuge (as New-England afterwards for the like) but within three years after their first coming thither (Anno 1558) regained by the Portugals, and the French pt to the sword. The Places of most consideration in it, are 1. Colignia, the Fot and Colony of the French, so named, in honor of Gasper Colligni (commonly called Chastillon) by whose encouragement it was founded, scituate on the Bay of the River Iaiero, which the French called Ganabara. 2. Sr. Sebastians, built at the mouth of the same
Bay by the Portugals, after they had expelled the French, and fortified with four strong Bul∣warks. 3. Angra des Reyes, distant twelve Leagues Westward from the mouth of the Bay, not long since made a Portugal Colonie; beside these, there are two great Burroughs of the na∣tural Brazilians, in which are said to be two thousand Inhabitants. 3. Of the Holy Ghost (del Spiritu Sancto) one of the most fertile Provinces of all Brazil, well stored with Cotton, Wool, and watered with the River Parayba, large and full of fish; the onely Town of note in it, is Spiritu Sancto, inhabited by about 200 Portugals, the chief building of it a Church, dedicated to St. Fran∣cis, a Monastery of Benedictines, a Colledge of Jesuites, the chief conveniency a safe and com∣modious Haven, capable of the greatest Ves∣sels. 4. Of Porto Seguro, the secure Haven, so called by Capralis, who first discovered it, when being tost at sea by a terrible tempest, he had here refreshed himself: the chief Towns hereof, 1. Porto Seguro, built on the top of a white Cliff which commands the Haven, of more Antiquity then fame, of more fame then bigness, as not containing fully two hundred families. 2. Santa Cruz, three Leagues from the other, a poor Town, with as poor an harbor: the Patrimony and inheritance of the Dukes of Avero, in the Realm of Portugal. 3. Santo Amaro. or St. O∣mers, once of great note for making Sugars, for which use here were five Ingenios, or Sugar En∣gines,
deserted by the Portugals for fear of the Savages, against whom they had not power enough to make good the place, and the Sugars destroyed of purpose, that they might not come into the hands of the barbarous people. 5. Of Des Iieos, or the Isles so named from certain Islands lying against the Bay, on which the principle Town is seaed, called also Ilheos, or the Isle, the Town consisting of about 150 or 200 families, neighbored by a great lake of 12 leagues in compass, out of which that River doth arise, full of great, but wholesome fish, which they call Monatos, some of which are af∣firmed to weigh twenty eight pounds: This Colony much endangered by the Guaymuri, a race of savages, more savage then any of their fellows, who being driven out of their own Country, fell into this prefecture, and had ut∣terly destroyed it, if some of St. Georges Re∣liques (as the Jesuites say) sent by their Gene∣ral from Rome, Anno 1581. had not stayed their fury, and given the Portugals the better. 6. Of Todos los Sanctos, or all Saints, so cal∣led from a large Bay of that name, upon which it hath in bredth two leagues and an half, eigh∣teen fathom deep, and full of many little Islands, but flourishing and pleasant, and well stored with Cotton wooll: The chief Towns hereof are, 1. San Salvador, built on a little hill on the North side of the Bay by Thomas de Souza, adorned with many Churches, and for∣tified, besides the Wall, with three strong Ca∣stles, the one called St. Anthony, the other St.
Phillip, and the third Tapesippe. 2. Paripe more within the land, four leagues from S. Saviours. 3. Seregippe del Rey, a small Town, and seated on as small a River, but amongst many rich Pa∣stures, and some veins of silver. 7. Of Pernambucco, one of the richest Pre∣fectures for Tobacco, Sugar, and the great quan∣tity of Brazile wood, which is brought hence yearly for the dyers in all this Country, but de∣stitute of Corn, and most other necessaries, with which it is supplyed from Portugal; chief Towns hereof, 1. Olinda, the largest and best peopled of all Brazile, containing above two thousand persons, not reckoning Church-men, nor taking the great number of slaves, which they keep for their Sugar-works in this account; there are in it eight Parochial Churches, five Re∣ligious houses, and some Hospitals scituate near the Sea, but on so uneven a piece of ground, as makes it not capable of a regular Fortification, the Haven being little, and not very commo∣dios, but defended at the entrance by a well built Castle, and that well planted with brass pieces. 2. Amatta di Brazile, ten miles from Olinda, the Inhabitants whereof live by selling Brazile wood. 3. San Lorenzo, a well frequent∣ed Village, but as yet unwalled. 4. Pomair, up∣on a River so named. 5. Antonio de Cabo, near the Cape of St. Anthony, both of good note for the great quantity of Sugars, which are made in each. 6. Garasu, about 5 miles from Olinda, inhabited for the most part by poor and mecha∣nical people.
8. Of Tamaraca, o called from an Ilnd of that name, distance about 5 miles from Olinda, of no great note, but for the Haven, and an im∣pregnable Castle on the top of the hill for de∣fence thereof: This is the least pefecture in Brazile, but with all the ancientest, extendeth three leagues onely in length, and but two in bredth. 9. Of Paraiba, so called from a River of that name, on whose bancks stands Paraiba the chief Town, inhabited by about 500. Portugals, be∣side slaves and Negroes, not walled, but secu∣red by a strong Castle, on the promontory cal∣led Capo Delo, which the Hollanders often in vain attempted. 10. Of Riogrande, so called likewise of a Ri∣ver, but lately made a Prefecture to exclude first the French, and after the Savages from pos∣sessing it, it now enjoys an impregnable Castle. 11. Of Siarra, so called from the Haven of Siarra adjoining, of no great note, being also but lately made a Prefecture, the Portugueses enjoying no more here but a Castle, and about a dozen houses. 12. Of Maragnon, an Island lying in the mouth of the River so called, a prefecture not yielding to any in Brazil, if it were well manu∣red, the sol being very fruitful, and well inha∣bited both by Natives and Portugueses. 13. Of Para, the most Northern Prefecture of Brazile, towards Guiana, so called from the River of Para, supposed a branch of the River of Amazons, which runneth through it, the Ri∣ver
at the mouth of it two miles in bredth, and in the middle of the channel fifteen fathoms deep; on the banks thereof, but on an higher ground then the rest the Portugals have built the Castle of Para, in form Quadrangular, and well walled, except towards the River; the Counry thereabouts inhabited by three hundred Porugueses, besides the Garrison. Thus much for the particular Governments of this Country, for it self in general it has suffe∣red the same fortune with Countries of more antient discovery, viz. to have many Masters, the Spanish, Dutch and Portuguez, all claiming right to it, but the last however worried by the other two, hath hitherto kept the surest foot in it, and is still like to do so. Thus much for a Cosmographical Description of the Portugal Dominions. FINIS.
Books Printed and sold by H. Marsh, at the Princes Arms in Chancery-lane, neer Fleet street. Folio. THe Soveraign's Prerogative, and the Subjects Privi∣ledge, comprized in several Speeches, Cases, and Arguments of Law, discussed between the Kings most Sacred Majesty, and the most eminent Persons of both Houses of Parliament: Collected by T. Fuller, B. D. Leonards Reports— A Compleat History of the Wars of the Greeks; writ∣ten by the learning Polibius, and Translated by Ed. Grimston, Esq. Serjeant at Arms to his late Majesty. The true Portraiture of Dona Catherina, Sister to Al∣fonso present King of Portugal, as it was presented to Don Francisco de Mello, Ambassador of Portugal in Lon∣don. Poems of Mr. I. Crouch Gent. Quarto. The History of Independency compleat, being the 1. 2. 3. 4 and last part; which may be had single by such as have bough the others. A Comical History of these late Times: by Montelion. Richard Hanam's Exploits. The Faihful Lapidary, being a History of all precious Stones, very useful for Gentlemen, Merchants and others Blood washt away by the Tears of Repentance, or the Relation of Butler's murdering of Knight in Milk-street. Rumps Looking-Glass, or a Collection of such pieces of Drollery, as was prepared by several Wits to purge the Rump. A New discovery of the High-way Thieves; by a Gen∣tleman lately Converted. A short View of the Life and Actions of the Ilustrious Iames Duke of York, together with his Character. In large Octavo. Blood for blood, or Murthers Revenged, lively set forth in 35 Tragical Histories, some whereof have been the product of our late Times, published by T. N. Esq. Rebels no Saints.
The English Lovers: a Romance written originally in the English tongue, by Iohn Dauncey in 8. A Compendious Chronicle of the Kingdom of Por∣tugal, from Alfonsus the first King, to Alfonsus the sixth now raigning, with a Cosmographycal description of that Country, by Iohn Dauncey in 8. Venus undrest: or the Practical part of Love, ex∣tracted out of the Extravagant and Lascivious Life of a fair, but subtile Female. Letters of Monsieur de Bulza, 1. 2. 3. and 4. parts, translated out of French into English by sir Richard Baker Knight, and others. Twelve Treatises of Mr. I. Howel Esq. Royal History compleated in the life of his Sacred Ma∣jesty Charles the 2d▪ Iames Duke of York, and Henry D. of Gloucester, with their Restoration, happily concluded by his Excellency the Lord Monck, now D. of Albemarle. That useful Book for Gentlemen and Travellers, being an exact Description of the several Counties and Shires in England: by Ed. Leigh, Esq The Rogue, or the life of Gusman De Alfarach, the Witty Spaniard, the Fifth and Last Edition. Fuller's Treple Reconciler. Small Octavo. The Fanatick in his Colours: or the rise, height, and fall of Faction and Rebellion from 1648. unto 1661. with an Apendix concerning Allegiance, Government, and Order, by T. F. The Raiyes of Turkey, gathered by one that was sold seven times a slave in the Turkish Empire, and now made publique for the benefit of his Country. Summum Bonum: or, A Plain Path-way to Happiness, conducting the Soul to its Haven of Rest, through the Stormy passages of worldly troubles; to which is added a short Dialogue of that excellent vertue of the Submis∣sion of Mans will to the will of God. The Rudiments of Grammar, the rules composed in English verse, for the greater Benefit and Delight of young beginners, by Iames Sherley Gent. A short view of the Life of the Illustrious Prince Hen. D. of Glocester, and Mary Princess of Orange, Brother and
Sister to His Majesty of great Britain, lately Deceased, by T. M. Esq. Modern Policy compleated: or the publique Actions and Councels, civil and military of his excellency the Lord General Monck, under all Revolutions since 1640. to 1660. with the principles moral and political, upon which hey were grounded; Illustrated out of the best masters of policy, ancient and modern. The compleat Attorney, the fifth and last Edition. The History of the Affairs of Scotland, under the con∣duct of the illustrious and truly valiant Iames Marquess of Montrose. Advice to Baalam's Asse, or Momus Catechised in an∣swer to a certain scribler called J. Heydon Author of Advice to a Daughter. The Royal Buckler; or Salmasius in English. The Divels Cabinet-councel discovered, or the plots and contrivances of O. Cromwel and the Long Parlia∣ment, in Order to the taking away the Life of his Sacred Majesty of blessed memory. The crafty Whores; or the mystery and iniquity of Baw∣dy-Houses, with Dehortations from Lust: published for the good of Young men, by R. H. Esq. The Rump, or a Collection of such Songs and Ballad as were made upon them who would be a Parliament, and were but the Rump of an House of Commons, five times Dissolved; Collected by I. B. Esq. Cleavland's Poems.— Montelion's Comical Almanacks for 1660, and 1661. The Baptized Turk; or the Conversion of a Native Turk to the Christian Religion: by Dr. Warmestrey, Dr. Gunning, &c. Dr. Griffith's Sermon. Ascent to bliss, by 3 steps, Philosophy, History, Theolo∣gy, discovering mans true Felicity, whereunto is added that excellent Dialogue of D. Thaulerus with a Poor Begger. Shimeies Curses on King David lighting on himself; or a Parallel between the Sufferings of King David, and his late Majesty. Quarles last Poems. An exact History of the Life and Actions of Hugh Pe∣ters, as also his Diary now in the Press.
Montelion's Introduction to Astrology; a thing long expected, in the Press now printing. Large Twelves. News from the Pulpit, for the present age and Posteri∣ty, by I. Iones D. D. Overbury revived: or a Satyrical description of the vices of our present Times, in Essayes and Characters. Natures chief Rarities: or the secret Misteries of Mans Procreation revealed and made known, together with the exact rules of Physiognomy, on every part of mans body from head to foot, by Michael Scotus, Translated by R. C. Fathers Blessing, or a Legacy to his Son, fitting him to carry himself through the various incounters of this world. Whites Peripatetical Institutions in the way of Sir Ke∣nelm Digby. Hook's Fatal Doom to the Reprobate, or an excellent Comment on the 1 of Cor. 16. 22. Modern Policie. Small Twelves. Reynold's Word of Caution, to the Atheists and Error∣rists of our Times. The Christian Diary; containing the whole Duty of man; by N. Causin. A Physical Discourse of the Cure of Diseases by Signa∣ture; by R. Bunworth. Man in Paradice, a Philosophical Discourse. A New Discovery of the French disease and running of the Reins, their causes, signes, with plain and easie Directions for perfect curing the same; by R. Bunworth, Doctor of Physick, now in the Press, the 2d Edition. In Twenty fours. Lucius Florus. Salust.— Lessius Of Health, with Cornaroes Treatise of Tempe∣rance. Dr. Warmestry on the Sacrament. Playes. A Cure for a Cuckold; a Comedy, written by Iohn Webster and William Rowley in 4. The Thracian Wonder; a Comical History, written by Iohn Webster and William Rowley in 4.
Gammer Gurtons Needle, a Comedy, written by Mr▪ S. Master of Art in 4. The two merry Milk-maids; a Comedy written by I. C. in 4. Tom Tyler and his wife; a Comedy in 4. The Presbyterian Lash; or Noctroft's maid whipt, a Tragi-comedy, in 4. The merry conceited humors of Botom the Weaver, in 4. Hells higher Court of Justice; or the Trial of the three Politick Ghosts of Oliver Cromwel, the King of Sweeden, and Cardinal Mazarine in 4. A merry dialogue between Band, Cuffe, and Ruffe, done by an excellent wit, in 4. Troaydes. a Tragedy, Translated out of Seneca, by Sam. Pordage. Gent. 4.
