F1513 19537871 109059
Grace and Mercy to a Sinner, in a Time of Afflictions. OR The serious Meditations of M. Tho. Ford of Rochester: During the time of his Imprisonment, before his Execution. Faithfully de∣livered from his own COPIE. Together with his Funeral Sermon, Preached by Mr Wil. Sandbrook. P. M. Rochester. Set forth for the strengthning of our Faith, in Jesus Christ; and to arm our selves against Satan. Published for the satisfaction of his Friends, and conviction of his Enemies. By Iohn Plasse. LONDON. Printed by Ioseph Moxon, for Francis Cossinett, and sold at his shop in Tower street, at the sign of the golden Anchor at Minsin lane end. 1657.
To the Reader. Courteous Reader, I Having the Original of this Coppy committed to my hands by the Author thereof, (it being a grand part of his serious meditations, during the time of his imprisonment in Rochester) was desired by many of the Inhabitants and others adjacent, to tran∣scribe the same, that it might be com∣mitted to Presse, thereby to come to the publique view. The Peece it self is but small, yet full of many precious Truths: and altho penned by a Person statned with the guilt of the blood of his own Si∣ster, yet in it thou shalt find so much of Gods glorious Countenance shining out upon him, (after so long a time of Gods with-drawing) which thou shalt find ful∣ly discovered in his last Speech, annex∣ed to this Treatise; that thou maiest conclude with me, doubtless he is now at rest in the arms of a faithful Redeemer.
Iudge charitably, accept of it kind∣ly, and walk thank fully with God for a his mercies: These are the only desire of him, that is Margarets Rochester Ian. 26. 1656. Thine John Plasse.
Several Notes and Observations, collected by me Tho. Ford, for the strengthning of my Faith in my Saviour, the Lord Iesus Christ, and fealing of the assu∣rance of my everlasting salva∣tion. Dedicated to any tender eye that will pardon the mistakes, and cor∣rect the Errors. My entrance by Prayer. MOst high and mighty Lord God, that didst create Man after thine own i∣mage; but he fell from thee, and by his fall made himself despicable and most vile in thy eyes. O Lord we are in his loyns, and
are corrupted in him, so that our origi∣nal corruptions are enough to sink us in∣to Hell, without any actual transgressi∣ons. But ever blessed be thy Name thou didst not leave us in this condition, but didst provide a Saviour the Lord Je∣sus Christ, to randsom us from the thral∣dom of sin and death, that whosoever beleeves in him should not perrish, but have everlasting life. Strengthen me O Lord the greatest of sinners, that I may by sure evidences from thy good spiri working in me a lively faith, receive some crums of mercy from thy Table. Take away O Lord the hardness of my heart▪ the blindness of my understanding, the deadness of my affections: Create in me O God a new heart, and renew a right spirit within me: Make me to hear joy and gladness: Rebuke the Tempter that hath been too strong for me; and while I live here, let me live to thy glory; and before I depart hence receive that bles∣sed and comfortable sentence from thee, Thy sins are forgiven thee, And this I begg of thee for the sake of Jesus Christ my alone Saviour and Redeemer. Amen.
Of God. He is glorious in his Essence, and glo∣rious in his Persons. In his Essence, of an eternal being▪ by himself, without beginning and with∣out end, Iehovah, Elohim. He is glorious in his Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The Father is glorious in his great work of Election. The Son is glorious in his great work of Redemption▪ The Holy Ghost is glorious in his great work of Application. The Father is glorious in choosing the House. The Son is glorious in buying the House. The Holy Ghost is glorious in dwel∣ing in the House. To apply this to my self. Is God so full of glory and Majesty? with what an awfulness and dreadfull reverence of his Majesty should I come before him to beg pardon for my sins? for my sins that have been so sinfull be∣yond measure? the whole course of my
life hath been nothing else but a conti∣nual act of sin; and to all my sins have added Murder, and that not of a stran∣ger, but of my own Sister. Well, Where shall I rest for Com∣fort▪ In the Father? He is full of Majesty and Glory; I cannot. But here must I rely, upon Jesus Christ my Redeemer; that by true repentance for my sins, (principally as they have been an offence against the Majesty and dis∣honour to his Name) joyned by a live∣ly Faith in Jesus Christ: Here must I cast Anchor, and upon this Rock must I be preserved from dispair of Gods mercies.Quest But how shall I come to Christ, that I may find mercy?Ans. 1. Come to him mourning and loath∣ing thy self for thy long continuance in sin, and refusing of him: come with a broken and lamenting heart, for all thy sins; but especially for thy sleighting of Christ, for the shedding of his blood, the renting of his bowels: and if thou canst not come as well as thou shouldst, yet come as well as thou canst come to him, and make thy moan of thy unbeleef and inability to come.
2. Come with this assured confidence, hat those that come unto him he will in to wise cast away;Ioh. 6. 37. and thou being come he will not cast thee away. Let us draw neer with full assurance of Faith, having ur hearts sprinkled from an evil Consci∣nce,Heb. 10. 11 and our bodies washed with pure water. 3. Come gladly and willingly glo∣rifying the grace of God but abasing thy elf.Psal. 45. 15 Come with gladness that thou shalt e brought and enter into the Kings pre∣nce: receive not the grace of God as common thing, but thankfully, and with all thy heart: for the end why the Lord gives Christ to a man, is the glory f his Grace.Phil. 2. 30 If the Lord attain his end, he desires no more: For why should e when he hath his end? The only way and means to obtain pardon from God the Father, by his on Jesus Christ, is set down briefly by S. Iohn thus: If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithfull and just, to forgive us our sins. Make therefore a diligent search of hy heart, by the Law of God: arraign thy self in thine own thoughts before
God, Supposing this were the day o reckoning; rip up thy heart, and lay open all thy known sins without lesning them without excusing them, without hiding them, without taking upon thee to defend them: thus did David Psal: 51▪ 3. 4. thus did Ezra: 9. 6. and then go on to give Iudgement to thy self, I say Iudge thy self, that thou be not Iudged▪ Thus did Daniel in the 9. and the 7▪ Thus did the Prodigall, Luke: the 15 21. One thing is very observable in the Prodigals return to his Father; and that on the Fathers part: the Text saith▪ His Father went and met him: intima∣ting unto us the goodness and infinit mercy of God in the Lord Jesus Christ to humble and penitent sinners; that by hearty repentance come home unto him▪ He is very ready and willing to meet them, to imbrace them in the arms of his mercy, to kill the fatted Calf, to pro∣vide delicates, heavenly delicates for his the bread of life, the food of immortali∣ty, ushered in with the most delightfull Musick,Lu. 15, 10. for there is joy in Heaven over one sinner that repenteth. (That by the way.)
When thou hast judged thy self, then earnestly beg of God pardon for Christs sake, and never leave him off untill he give this blessed answer to thy Consci∣ence, that thy sins are pardoned. The unjust Judge by reason of the importu∣nity of the Widdow, granted her re∣quest;Hos. 14. 3. how much more shall the just God grant the request of his, that pray day and night unto him? Thus did David,Dan. 9. 18. 19. 20. 21. Let thy good spirit lead me. &c. These things are necessary,Psal. 143. 10. if we would be saved: we must not be Cow∣ards in a business of this nature, if we in∣tend to win the field, but we must work our best endeavours, and still hold out wrestling with God, if we intend to win the Victory. Some Captives amongst men, are redeemed by price only, some by power without price; but such is the lamentable captivity of all men, under sin and the severity of Gods Justice, that without the price of Christs blood, and the power of his spirit, there is no deli∣verance from sin and misery: the Lord Jesus Christ having paid the full and ab∣solute price of our deliverance. Ioh 8. 32.
Yet it is with us as with a company of Captives in prison;Read Eph. 1. our sins like strong chains holds us, Satan our Keeper will not let us go:Ro. 11. 32 the Prison doors through unbeleef are shut upon us, and thereby God and Christ are kept our from us: what power now can rescue us that are held fast unto such a power, even after the price is paid? The spirit of God speaketh of a pow∣er in Christ,Hose. 13. 9 Thou hast destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help.Acts. 5 31. As Christ hath redeemed us, so we must go unto him For strength and power, that we may make application of this Redemption to our selves that by his spirit we may find the fruits of it on our own souls: and here consists our comfort, that as Christ was abased to purchase redemption for us, so now he is exalted at the right hand of God the Father, to apply this redemption unto us. Four causes of mans misery, joyned with four acts of Christs power. Mans misery, 1. The ignorance of his own misery. 2. Security and unsenceableness of it.
3. Carnal confidence in their own duties. 4. Presumption or resting upon the mercy of God, by a Faith of their own forgeing. Christs Act, 1. Conviction of sin. 2. Compunction for sin. 3. Humiliation, or self-abasement. 4. Faith. These are the works of Christ on the soul.Isa. 43. 25 There must be an actual deliverance in man,Ezek. 36. 22 wrought by the efficacy and power of the spirit of Christ, as well as a purchased deliverance wrought by the blood of Christ: therefore untill we can find the former wrought in us, we can lay no claim to the latter: until we can see sin in its own colours, with the several aggrevations thereof, and the wages of sin, which is eternal death, we cannot truly hate it, and not truly hating it, we cannot repent of it; and not re∣penting of it, we cannot with a true faith lay hold on the Lord Jesus Christ. Shew me thy Faith without thy work, saith S. Iames;Ia. 2. 18. and I will shew thee my Faith by my works. He that repents
and beleeves shall be saved; but he that beleeves not shall be damned. Thus you see where our rest and rock of comfort for salvation is: only in our Saviour the Lord Jesus Christ. You see the manner how we must come to Christ, so that we may be accepted: we must come loathing and abhorring our selves, out of our selves into Christ, come humbly, come willingly to Christ, as with all thy might and power, as to the only spring, fountain and head of comfort, of wisdom, of excellency; come even as the Bride to the Bridegroom, as the members to the Head, as the bran∣ches to the Vine: and let thy confidence when thou comest, inwardly perswade thee, that Those who come to him, he will in no wise cast away, for we have his promise for it. Behold, saith our Saviour I stand at the dore and knock. &c. Let every be∣leeving Soul then say with Thomas,Ioh 20 28 My Lord and my God. Objection may arise, Is God such a merciful God? and is Iesus Christ so willing to imbrace us when we come un∣to him, and seek to him by those we
which he hath appointed us in his Word? hen what is the reason that he hears t the Prayers of his People, that they t up unto him to be delivered from sin, om some particular sin, which it may is more predominant than any other; against hardness of heart? It may be thou art not humbled e∣ough in thy self;Ans. thou dost not pray as ou oughtest to pray in Faith: or if thou st, God may for present not answer ee according to thy desire, for the try∣ of thy Faith and Patience, to make ee the more earnest suitor unto him. oahs Dove returns not presently with Olive branch of Peace in his mouth: rayer sometimes that speeds well re∣rns not presently for want of compa∣ enough to fetch away that abun∣nce of mercy that God hath to give. he Lord ever gives them that ask in aith: their asking in mony or monies orth, God is long many times before gives, but pays them well for their aiting. Approve thy self to God in all thy aies, for he is an omniscient God: no atter what he world saith of thee:
God is thy Spie, taking notice of all actions, and they are in print in Hea which that great spectator and Ju will open at the great day. Fear thefore to sin in secret, unless thou canst a dark hole to sin where God cannot thee. Have a care of playing the Ath in practice, although thou be not so thy profession; to confesse there is God, yet by thy works to deny hi even if it were possible to unthrone sus Christ: they that pluck the from his throne are as bad or as vile they that say there is no King. But that we may the better understa how sin is remitted by Christ, and him, Consider that in him there three things, that makes Sin exceed Sinfull 1 The Crime of Sin. 2 The Guilt of Sin. 3 The Stain and blot or pollution Sin. The Crimes by which God is offened. The Guilt by which we are liable punishment. The blot or stain which the
ommitted leaveth in the offender. These three are taken away by the erits of Christ. 1 The Crime is taken away by his Obedience. 2 The Guilt is removed by his suffer∣ngs. 3 The blot stain and coruption is hid∣en by his holiness, and the very being hereof, daily diminished by the trength power and working of his Spi∣t. If thou wouldst be saved, this must be y Plea: I Lord have most grieviously ned against thee, even in my best per∣rmances; therefore I beseech thee for Christ his sake to pardon me: And not us, Behold this I have done, thus I have deserved, therefore I require thee f thy Iustice to reward me: for in the work of salvation all merrit and desert f our own is absolutely excluded. How sweetly and contentedly may at soul repose it selfe that hath a testi∣ony of his salvation by Iesus Christ at God is reconciled unto him in Christ, notwithstanding his many and rievous sins the root of corruption eve∣ry
coruption that lyeth lurking in the heart of man. Now for the soul to feele such a change, such a regeneration wrought on the heart, after a true and serious repentance, and the embrace∣ments of a Saviour, the Lord Jesus in his arms ready to receive thee; what a tran∣scendent unspeakable comfort is that soul partaker of! But that we may not flatter our selves with the bare flashes, and as it were, shaddows of comfort, taken from a wrong principle, let us consider, and that seriously, from whence our comforts do arise: Do they arise from an utter ab∣horring our selves by reason of our po∣lution by nature? For until we be wounded, what need can we find of a medicine? Until we can find our selves heart-sick of sin, what need can we find to our selves of a Physician? They that are whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. Is Jesus Christ the chief desire of thy soul? Art thou willing to part with any thing for him, that having found this treasure, canst thou presently hide it in thy heart? Art thou willing to sell all that thou hast to purchase this
Field, this Treasure, this Wisdom? Is thy heart affected with the saving know∣ledge of Jesus Christ? Dost thou eye Jesus Christ by faith? Dost thou see ful∣ness of satisfaction in the merits, death, and passion of Christ? Dost thou feel by the power of Christ's spirit an appli∣cation of all this to thy soul, that thou canst out of a setled assurance conclude these benefits and blessings belong to me? Then my soul, let thy temporal condi∣tion be what it will, as for this life, yet raise up thy affections higher; let thy heart be where thy treasure is, repose thy self upon Jesus, and take care of ex∣empting thy self from those heavenly priviledges which the blood of Jesus Christ is ready to pour down upon thee. These things well considered, are as so many sinews and joynts to strengthen a weak and drooping faith; the Lord give me his spirit of grace, that I may not only write these Truths, but that by his strength they may be applied un∣to my soul. Thomas Ford.
He that broke the heart of Manasseh and Paul after their blood and blasphe∣mies, when they never desired any such thing, he can break thine much more, when thou desirest him to do it for thee. T. F.
To my loving and esteemed Friend, Mr Henry Wright, one of the Serjeants at Mace, within the City of Rochester. Loving Friend, I Present unto you a small quantity of Winter fruit, which hath fell from a Dry Branch: What my purpose is in pre∣senting them, I trust of your self you will conceive it to be no other but this, that they may remain with you as a testimony of mysetled purpose, never to forget your ancient Love:Pro: 18. 24: He that hath a friend, let him shew himself friendly saith the Scripture. Accept therefore this little as from a new Graft upon a corrupt stock, and vouchsafe it some low room in your Meditations; and as you relish it, pro∣mote it; not for any worth in the Gift, but for the integrity of the Donor, who while he lives, will alwaies pray, that after you and yours have served their time here, ye may be made Free-men, and Free-women of the Kingdom of Heaven. Amen Nov. 30. 1656. Your loving and Well-wishing Friend, Thomas Ford, a Priso∣ner in the Prison of the City of Rochester called the Dolphine.
Certain Propositions which (in my Meditations) I have collect∣ed together (in this time which is lent me) out of the 14 chap∣ter of Hosea, and the first verse. The words are these, Oh Israel, Return unto the Lord thy God, for thou hast faln by thine Iniquity. THe words are an exhortation, or a vehement perswasion (which the Spirit of God doth use by the Prophet) to return to God. The whole chapter containing a rousing or stirring up the people of Israel to repent of their ini∣quiries, and to return to God; where∣unto are annexed gracious promises of Gods mercies unto them, in healing their backslidings, and returning unto them: and you may observe what a mixture of repentance and mercy there is in the
chapter: From whence in the general, we may observe the unseparableness of true repentance and mercy; they are linked together as in a chain, even as David and Ionathan, they will not part one from the other. In the words there are five particulars observed: 1. The seriousness of the Prophet's call, perswading our better attention, and as it were a necessity of lending an ear unto this Call, in the Vocative, O! 2. The persons called, Israel: By Israel is meant the people of God. 3. The Act or Duty called unto; Return. 4. The object matter of their return, or the person to whom they should, is, the Lord. 5. and lastly, The grounds and rea∣sons of this their return, laid down in cloze of the words; For thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. From the words you may plainly ga∣ther several points or observations, to wit; 1. That the best and choisest of God's children may decline, and grievously fall from God, as Israel did.
2. That the ways of sin lead us di∣rectly from God. Or thus, That sin is an absolute turning the Back upon God; therefore Return. 3. That God the Father, through his Son the Lord Iesus Christ, is the only shelter and tower of refuge for a penitent sinner. Thy God. 4 And lastly, That it is and ought to be the main scope and aim of the Am∣bassadors and Ministers of Iesus Christ, to disswade from sin, and perswade to re∣pentance. O Israel, Return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquities. First, of the first in order, That the best and choisest of God's Saints and peo∣ple may grievously decline and fall from God. For proof whereof, I need go no fur∣ther then the subject we treat of, Israel; a name whereby God pleased to stile his own people, his elect, his chosen people of Israel;Hos: 4. 6. my people, as he terms them. Nay God is pleased to term himself The King of Israel,Esai. 44. 1. in Isa. 44. 6. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the King of Israel,
and his Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts: We know the prerogative of Kings is to rule over their Subjects, to have the command and government of their sub∣jects, and we know what the duty of Subjects ought to be in yeilding obedi∣ence to the commands of a King, and not to rule over their King; yet this revolting people Israel, this rebellious House, for so God calls them, notwith∣standing his owning them for his people, and challenging a Soveraignty over them, grievously sinned, and fell from God; For, thou hast fallen by thine Iniquity.Esa: 59: 2. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. So to instance in divers other of the saints and people of God. David's Adultery and Murder, 2 Sam. 11. 4 to 18. Peter's Denial, Mark 14. 68. But what are the grounds and reasons that Gods people fall from him by their iniquities? First, The principal and main ground may arise from Original sin, the filthi∣ness
and corruption of our own natures for we are in nature, as we came out o the loyns of our Parents, no better the a very lump of rottenness and corru∣ption. If thou shouldest see a man from th very crown of the head to the soal of hi foot▪Esa: 1. 6. had nothing in him but wound▪ and swellings, and sores full of corrupti∣on, he could not but seem a very lothsom creature unto thee: Yet know this whosoever thou art, be thou never s well descended, never so rich, wise, beautiful, &c. thy soul is through sin thousand times more odious and abomi∣nable before God:Psal. 77. 6. Think well on this▪ Comune with thine own heart about it▪ it will make thee abhor thy self in dus and ashes with Iob,Iob. 42. 6. and with Paul, coun all things to be dung,Phi. 3. 8: that thou mightest win Christ. Reas. 2. That by this means man may see his own frailty and miserable condition by nature, and that seeing his wretched and lost estate in himself, he might be deeply humbled before God, that thereby he might rest in no perfor∣mances of his own; for our best perfor∣mances
are full of sin and corruption. David was humbled to the purpose er he was truly sensible of his sin, when athan the prophet reproved him;2. Sam. 12. 13. I ve sinned (saith he) against the Lord: eter wept bitterly after he denied his aster.Mar. 14. 72. Where the sense of sin, and the wrath God hath a deep impression upon the eart, there it will effect deep humiliati∣n and hearty sorrow. David's sins were alwaies before im,Psa. 51. 3. he could take no rest in Conscience, ntil he found God reconciled unto im; now where sin in the true sense of t hath this working on the Spirit, hap∣y is that soul: But where on the con∣rary there is sin committed in a high na∣ure, yet notwithstanding the heart is not t all moved to compunction and humi∣iation, but rather hardned: woful, and desperate is the condition of that soul. Motives to move us to Humiliation. First may be from Gods Command, O Israel return unto me; turn you from from your evil waies, For why will ye dy O house of Israel? Repent and turn you from all your evil waies, so iniqui∣ty
shall not be your ruine: there m be an universal turning from all sins, a a turning to God with the whole hea My son give me thy heart:Deu. 30. 2. It is Go complaint against the children of Israe after he had brought them out of th land of Egypt, into a land flowing wit Milk and Honey, the joy of all Land▪ Then God said unto them, Obey voice, turn from the evil of your doing for I am the Lord your God: but the rebelled against me and would not hear▪ Shall God call to us to come unto him▪ and shall we reject his call?Eze. 20. 8. shall ou Saviour Iesus Christ beg of us to be re∣conciled unto him, to come unto him to take his yoak? his yoak is easy to those that will ly under it. Hath he pro∣mised to satiate the hungry soul? salva∣tion to the repentant soul? doth he com∣mand us to come unto him and drink i we thirst; not to sip but drink? and shall we reject this cup of Salvation? O let the mercies of God constrain us, and let his kindness draw us unto him. Another motive to perswade us to come, is the mercies patience, and long sufferings of God with us for many
years, it may be our whole life time, we ve lived in sin,and added blood to all our sins the sin of murther and in grievous sins;l God spareth us, to see whether we ll return unto him, and shall we yet revolting and drawing back from od; then considering the infinite mer∣ of God, in providing the Lord Jesus hrist, to be our Phisitian to cure our eakness and imperfections, by his per∣ct righteousness, and to accept of us in d through him. Let these considera∣ons be as so many cords of love to aw us unto God by speedy repen∣nce, and a present return unto God. If we did but consider the blessed e∣te of that soul that is at peace with od, and truly keep in our thoughts e uncertainty of this life, and certainty eternal life to the Godly, and death the unregenerate: certainly we could t be so lazy in our journy to heaven; if reconciliation with God and eter∣tie were not worth the looking after; t we should rather with that Disciple hom Jesus loved out-run Peter, and get rst to the epulchre.Iohn. 20. 4. Let Jesus Christ ve the chief room, yea all the room in ur hearts.
A Prince is at peace, and cease war against a Rebel, a Traitor, yet will not bring the Rebel before him, into his special favour; yet the Lord glory doth both towards us as enemie strangers, rebels, devils in our reconciation with him. O the wonderfull mecy of God in Jesus Christ, that he shou be pacified wholy and throughly wi thee. Out of Christ he is a consumin fire; in Jesus Christ he is a nothing e but Love: and though there may be f therly frowns and chasetisements fro him, though he may for a time hide h face, shut out thy Prayers, defer to fulf Promises; yet all these if thou art reco¦ciled in Christ,Heb. 12, 8, 9. are out of pure love u to thee: and thou shalt see it, and fe it so in  end. Quest.  how must we come Christ, that we may be accepted? Answ. 1. We must come humbl stript of all self performances and dutie resting wholy upon Jesus Christ, as th only means of our redemption. 2. We must return unto him hearti with our whole heart; not keeping part of our heart for sin, and give Chri
e other part; we must come unto him o be our King to rule us, as well as to ave us. In a word, we must come unto im as the Hart to the rivers of waters, s a Spouse to her beloved, with ferven∣y of Love and zealous affections and rdency of spirit, being sick of love for him: so come unto him, as esteeming our selves lost without him, as our rich∣s, our only pearl of great price. 3. Be earnest in Prayer unto God, hat he would grant you his good spirit, that he would mollifie you hard and tony heart, and give you a heart of lesh; pray continually, pray without easing, and pray in Faith, with a con∣fidence that God hears your Prayers, and will in his good time answer them, not for thy sake, but for his sons sake. 4. Attend upon the means of Grace in the ministry of the word, which is the on∣ly way and means God hath appointed for begetting of Faith in us: and search the Scriptures, the Word of God, they are they that testifie of me, saith our Sa∣viour: and as you love your souls take care of disrespecting or sleighting the Word of God, and laying it aside as a
thing not worth the looking into, fo sleighting of it you sleight God himself you are the greatest enemies to you selves in the world, in being ignorant o the word of God, you are utterly dis∣armed against the temptations of Sata when he assaults you. When we go to war against a potent Prince or person, we will not go without our arms, bu in a posture of defence; I beseech you let us consider the strength and power of our adversaries we have to deal with∣all, the World, the Flesh and the Devil, three potent enemies, therefore labour to be well armed out of the Magazine, the word, the Word of God, which is for doctrine, reproof, instruction, &c. and then to your armor that you may be compleat in the principal bag, the sword of the spirit of God: we know a souldier is no body without his sword; no more are we spiritual souldiers without the sword of the spirit; for a man may read and hear all his lifetme, yet if the spirit of God go not along with him, in accompanying him in his reading and hearing it is all in vain, unless the sword of Gods spirit cut asunder our
corrupt hearts and affections, so as to un∣derstand the mistery of the word of God, as well as the history of it barely. The use of this doctrine should be for exhortation to all sorts of men and wo∣men in the world, to beware of sin, and to shun it as the greatest evil in the world, and more especially of those sins which draw away our hearts and affections; and likewise to consider the dangerous consequences of sin, and how dangerous a matter and thing it is to let loose our hearts and affections to Satan. Then it may serve for to admire the wonderfull and unspeakable love of our heavenly Father in Christ,Vse 2 that he will accept of us upon our unfained return un∣to him by repentance that our pardon is already sued forth, if that we can by faith lay hold on it, and esteem of the favour (in some measure) according to the worth of it. It lets us see the miserable condition of them that claim no interest at all in this pardon.Vse 3 Of the comfort of those that can ex∣perimentally conclude (and by the spi∣rit
of God witnessing with their spirits) say,Vse 4 This pardon is sealed unto me, I shall have the benefit of it, tho notwith∣standing my sins reach up unto heaven, and cry mightily for vengeance against me, yet my whole alliance and sole comfort and confidence is in the merrits of Jesus Christ applyed by faith, I shall find mercy, for he that confesseth and forsaketh his sins shall find mercy, but he that hideth them, shall not prosper. I am one of them that confesse my sins, and earnestly desire of God that he would break my stony and hard heart for them; and do without hypocrisie (if my heart deceive me not) unfainedly re∣solve to forsake my sins; therefore I though the worst and greatest of sinners, shall accordingly find mercy. Tho. Ford.
Collossians the 2. and the 6 verse. The words are these, As ye have therefore received Christ Iesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. THe blessed Apostle Paul after Christ had awaked him from his sleep of security,Acts. 9. 4. and unscaled the eys of his understanding,vers. 18. which were before darkened with that mistiness which the Devil like a Jugler cast before him, did immediately after the Holy Ghost had enlightned him,vers. 15. preach Christ, and so like a principall work-man in Christs Church, and as a chosen vessell to bear the name of Christ amongst the Gentiles, did with all vehemency and ardency of spirit and affection, endeavour to build up a spiritual Church to Jesus Christ; and in this Epistle to the Colossians (amongst the rest of his Epistles) he dischargeth his trust as a faithfull Am∣bassador of Jesus Christ. The whole chapter is as it were a glasse wherein we may see the fruit of Pauls Mnistery; the words being a perswasive part moved from a good priniple. For the better explanation of them, consider in them, First the guift recei∣ved;
Secondly, the congratulation thereof. 1. The gift received, Jesus Christ. 2. The congratulation of the Gift, walk in him. The words contain a serious exhorta∣tation, and the reason thereof. The exhortation, Walk in Jesus Christ. The ground and reason thereof, For you have received him. As if the Apostle Paul should have said, you had Jesus Christ preached a∣mongst you, by me and others of my brethren; you are not ignorant of that eternal weight of glory which Jesus Christ hath purchased for you; therefore walk not according to the rudiments of this world, but walk according to the rules of Jesus Christ, for this is all that Jesus Christ requireth of you, that you would manifest your love unto him, in walking obediently before him; If you love me keep my commandments:Ioh. 14. 15. so that the words are in themselves a Proposition, and do speak plainly thus much unto us. That the incomparable love of the Lord Jesus Christ declared unto us in
the word,Doct. and laid open more abundant∣ly in the Ministery of the Gospel, should be a strong perswasion unto us to walk according to the rules of the Gospel. Or thus, That Christs exceeding love unto us, in redeeming us from death and hell, should be a strong ty upon us to love Jesus Christ. Every one that hears me, cannot deny but must needs confess and acknowledge that the point is very rea∣sonable, and (I may say) very seasona∣ble in these apostatizing dayes of ours; that Love deserves Love. Our Saviour speaks of a deserved love as a thing not to be looked on, not worth any reward: For if ye love them that love you,Mat. 5. 46. what thanks have ye? saith our Saviour, Do not even the Publicans the same? de∣noting unto us, that true love is of such an extensive nature that it sheweth it self even to our enemies: this is perfect and true love:Vers. 48, Be ye therefore perfect, even as▪ your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. Now the greatness of Jesus Christs love is shewn in that he loved us when we were enemies unto him, stran∣gers and aliens from the common wealth
of Israel. And how did Christ love us? was his love an ordinary love? That Christ the Son of God, co-equal with his Father, should become man; even the meanest of men (although by Ioseph he was next heir to the Crown of Da∣vid, yet he came in the very declining age of Davids Kingdom, to shew us that his Kingdom is not of this World, as he tells us▪Ioh. 8. 25. My kingdom is not of this World,) and should suffer a cursed death on the Crosse, for our sins, that we might be delivered from eternal mi∣sery, and from his Fathers wrath, and overcome death for us: Will not these considerations work our hard hearts to an humble frame, and perswade us to love God and our Lord Jesus Christ a∣gain? Is not the love of Christ to be e∣steemed by us? in that he being the Son of God, humbled himself, to become a servant to men, to make us Sons and jynt-heirs with himself? and of the children of wrath to make us heire of vation? ret is mens readiness, chiefly in and giddy times, to gaze upon strange and uncouth sights, to run
to see things that are rare▪ and are seldom seen; therefore now let me quicken your desire, to behold a thing without comparison, such a thing as we may with a kind of astonishment and ama∣zedness admire, but the eloquence of no man alive is able fully and effectually to express:1 Ioh. 3. 1 Behold, saith the Apostle, what love the Father hath shewn unto us, that we should be called the Sons of God. Behold, the Son of God made man, to dy for us,Gal. 4. 5. that we might be delivered from the slavery of Satan, and be made the a∣dopted sons of God. I might insist upon this point not out of any hope I have to set out a benefit so inestimable: for the tongue of men and Angels cannot reach it: but as it were (as God said to Moses) to let you see the back parts of that perfect glory,Exod. 33. 23. which the dimness of our minds is not able to behold. Now that we may be the better sen∣sible of Christs love, let us consider how and in what manner the Lord Jesus Christ is pleased to reveal himself unto us in the Gospel: and that in three par∣ticulars.
First, He uncovers and layeth open himself fully and manifestly in the Go∣spel: we have a whole Christ offered unto us; we have his offices, and the whole work of our redemption set down:Ioh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for they are they that testifie of me, saith our Sa∣viour. We do in the Word of God as in a glasse, behold the proportion of Je∣sus Christ, when we compare the Old and New Testament together; for in∣deed it concerns us, and it is most need∣full and necessary in this great work of our salvation (so that our faith may be the better grounded and confirmed) to note and observe the order and agree∣ment of the Scriptures, both Old and New Testament: by this mens Christ himself endeavoured to settle his Disci∣ples Faith: for the Text tells us that he began at Moses and the Prophets, and interpretted to them in all the Scriptures the things which were written of him.Luk 24. 27. We live in an age that men are so backward in following Christs pattern herein, that they are grown contemners and dispisers of the word of God, which plainly appears in that they divide the
New Testament from the Old, making a separation of that which God hath joyned together: they will (it may be) carry the New Testament in their poc∣kets, I and in their pates too, yet sure I am it cannot be near their hearts, when they shall think themselves too wise to read the Old, or give entertainment to it upon which the Patriarchs and our fore∣fathers of old built their Faith, and by the light of which they found the way to heaven. This was Pauls course for the estab∣lishment of his hearers, he disputed by the Scriptures;Act. 17. 2 he said no other things then that Moses and the Prophets did say should come:Act. 26. 22. These and the like sayings we read often that the sayings of the Prophets should be fullfilled;Mat. 26. 56. This is done that the Scriptures should be fullfilled:Mark. 14. 49. which argues the care and pur∣pose the Spirit of God had to ground our Judgement upon the Scriptures, in so much that when we clearly behold those things fullfilled which are recor∣ded in them, we should set the higher esteem on them; comfort our selves in them, and strengthen our Faith by them
Take now a view of Christ in the Scriptures, and see first how he is re∣presented in Zacharïas prophecy; Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,Luk. 1. 67, 68, 69. who hath visi∣ted and redeemed his people: There you have Christ termed the horn of our sal∣vation; a Metaphor taken from beasts, wherein doth ly their chief strenght and power, giving us to understand that our saviour Iesus Christ is of full and abso∣lute sufficiency to accomplish the work of our redemption; for there is no other Name under heaven by which we can be saved;Act. 4. 12 But only in and through the Name and merrits of the Lord Iesus Christ.Co. 1. 19. It hath pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell: would you see Christ promised? read the 28 of Esaiah 16. therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I lay in Syon for a foun∣dation, a stone, a tryed stone, a precious Corner stone, a sure foundation. Psal. 118. 22. Matth. 21. 42. Acts 4. 11. 1 Pet. 5. 6, 7. Esai. 11. 1. Would ye behold Christs Nativity? read Luke 2. 7. 10, 11, 12. Iohn 7. 42. Mich 5. 2. Would you behold his Passion? Esaiah
53, 7, 8, 9. Mat. 27, 35. would you see him Dead and Buried? read: Mat. 27. 50. 60. would you see his Resurrection? read the 28. Math. 6. Iohn 20. 2. 15. 19. 26. Would you see his Assention? read Acts 1. 9. Would you see him at the Right hand of his Father in heaven? read Hebrews 1. 3. Would you see him coming from heaven to Judge the quick and the dead? read Matthew 25. 31. Thus you see in the first place how fully the Lord Iesus Christ is set forth unto us in his word, in himself, which is the Word.Ioh▪ 1. 1, 2. Secondly, Christ doth very friendly perswade us to imbrace him in the Scriptures, and that upon very good grounds and reasons: First, because he came purposely into the world to save us,Mat. 19. 13. he was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, and with his stripes we are healed.Isa. 53. 5. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,Mat. 11. 28. and I will give you rest. Behold I stand at the door and knock,Rev. 3. 20 saith Christ, he hath redeemed us from the curse of the law,Gal. 3. 13 Beeing made a curse for us. Oh every one that thirsteth,Isa. 55. 1. come unto the
waters, and he that hath no mony, come buy, &c. Secondly, Christ doth very friendly perswades us to be reconciled unto him, by his Ambassadors, which he sends a∣mongst us, the Ministers and dispencers of his Word and Sacraments: the Mini∣sters of Christ,2 Cor. 5. 20. they are the Ambassa∣dors of Iesus Christ, which bring his message unto his people; they do the work which they are imployed in by their Master; and Christ is pleased to set men apart purposely for this service, as S. Paul speakes. Paul an Apostle of Iesus Christ,2 Cor. 1. 1. by the will of God &c. and as Christ doth set some apart for this service, so he furnisheth them with gifts suteable to the service: as for example, Zacharias is apointed to prophesy; the business is a weighty business, therefore he is filled with the Holy Ghost,Luk 1. 67 that he may be able to performe that great work. God imploys Moses upon a service of great concernment; I will send thee to Pharoah saith God:Exod. 3. 10. I my Lord? saith Moses, I am not eloquent: the Lord pre∣sently upon Moses seeing his own in∣sufficiency:
Exod. 4 12I will be with thy mouth. Isaiah being in a vision in the presecne of God, and seeing the nature of the ser∣vice unto which he was called; cryeth∣out, woe is mee, for I am undon? after his, one of the Seraphins touched his mouth with a Coal from the Alter:Isa. 6. 5. which gave the prophet a full supply of grace: the same we see in Ieremiah, God alling him, he began to complain of his nsufficiency.Ier. 1. 6. O Lord behold I am a hild and cannot speak: well, the Lord ook away his fear in bestowing a com∣etency of gifts upon him,vers. 9. I have put y words in thy mouth. Christ set apart is Disciples for that office, and gave he Holy Ghost unto them, promi∣ng to make them Fishers of men. So that you plainly see it hath bin Gods way, thorough the whole course of the Scripture, to furnish them which he did mploy, with gifts sutable for the service: ake care therefore I pray you, of sleight∣ng the Ministers of God, or of the Am∣assadge which they bring, for in con∣emning them you contemn and dispise God himself; for what contempt you hew to an Ambassador which repre∣sents
the Kings person, you shew to the King himself. This is a Sin which our Land stands guilty of in a hight nature: we are grown to such a heigt of pride and insolency amongst us, that Gods word and his Ministers are had in least estimation. A faithfull Minister of God is no more countenanced then a thing of nothing, which plainly appeares from our detain∣ing from them their right and just due, even that which the law of God hath a∣lotted and set apart for them: we have every Tradesman now, even meanest of the people, take upon them the high and great work of the Ministery; fomen∣ting and prateing out their nonsence, to the great dishonnor of his word and mi∣nistery. No wise man will send a fool of an errand, who will set a fresh Souldier over an army, or intrust a dumb man with an Ambassadge? it were an odious imputation to the wisest God to think him lesse carefull in the business and discipline of his Church, then men are in their temporal affairs; yet these in∣truders these busie-bodies in Gods busi∣ness, go on with such boldness and im∣pudency
(and the rather because they are cherished and maintained) as not thinking that God will ever call them to an accompt or tax them with that hea∣vy sentence Ieremiah 2. 21. I have not sent them yet they ran.Mat. 22. 12. Or with Friend, how camest thou hither? The Lord a∣waken such sleepy-headed intruders, that they may know what it is to med∣dle with the great things of the Law of God.Hos. 8. 12 Thirdly, Christ is pleased to make known himself unto us by the graces of his spirit, which he workes in us; the spirit of God witnessing with our spirit, hat we are the sons of God: the spirit of God is the key which opens the Ca∣enet of the Scriptures and present it unto us as the Mistery of Godliness; men by nature are stone blind in the hings of God, therefore untill they be egenerated and new born by the spirit of God in the inward, Man, it is im∣possible they should discern the things of God,Ioh. 3. 6. that which is born of the flesh, s flesh, and that which is born of the spi∣rit is spirit. Man by nature of himself, ath nothing in him but corruption, I
was born in iniquit saith David,Psal. 51. 5. and sin was I conceived: we are all unpro∣table servants, all the Children of di∣bedience, and the sons of wrath:Eph. 2. 2. 3. all imaginations of mans heart are evill, and that continually. Now eve regenerate man is by virtue of his ne birth,Gen. 6. 5. a spirituall man, and the new bir is the gracious working of the spir therefore such are called spiritual me the whole scociety of the regenerate a spiritual house:1 Cor. 2. 15. the regenerate man said to be born after the spirit,1 Pet. 2. 5 and to after the spirit of God, being the apli of those precious Promises written the Word of God,Rom. 8, 5 unto the Soul. Take care I beseech you of que∣ching the spirit of God, or stifleing motions of his good spirit within yo▪ Thus you see the manner how Chri communicates himself unto us, 1 By his Word. 2 By his Ministers. 3 By his Spirit. Let us now proceed to the last clau of the doctrine, and let it serve for ex∣hortation in the fear of God to exho and perswade us to walk according t
the rules of the Gospel, to have a more close communion with Iesus Christ then ever we had; doe not reject so great salvation. Hath Jesus Christ purchased heaven for Believers? doth he continually knock at the door of our hearts for entrance, and shall we not let him in? Shall we still persist and go on in sin? in our drun∣kenness, prophaness, contempt of Gods word, of his Ministers? certainly if we do, if we will take no warning, but go on in the waies of the wicked, we shall receive the reward of the wicked:Prov. 22 8. eve∣ry man shall be judged according to his works: he that soweth righteousness shall receive a sure reward; we must use diligence and care in the way to hea∣ven. Who more laborious than the Hus∣bandman, that doth desire to reap the fruit of his sowing? Who ought to be more diligent than a Christian, who in∣tends to reap the hoped for fruit of eter∣nal happiness? we must not be loyterers in the way to Heaven, ways are for tra∣vellers, and not for gazers; therefore go on and see to your steps, let the word
of God be your conducter and leader; estrange not your selves from the word; let it precious unto you. And the good spirit of God help your infirmities, and assist you in your spiritual warfare, that you may like good Soul∣diers, under the banner of Jesus Christ, fight the good fight of faith; so that you may attain the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls, Amen.
The last Speech of Thomas Ford, being penned by himself, and delivered to me, Iohn Plass, his own Brother by the Mother. GEntlemen and Friends, I am yet a living object of your pitty, ere long my soul will be seperated from my body by an untimely, yet a wel-deserved death. Bloud must be recompenced with blood, the Law of God commands it: the law of Man in subordination to Gods Law, hath brought me to the period of execu∣tion. But that I may not minde my Barba∣rism, so as to swallow it down without chewing, give me leave to lay open the heart of the fact, with the chief incen∣diaries thereupon attending, and that on∣ly in two particulars. First, laying be∣fore you the person on whom I acted it, and the sudden deprivation of life in the action. The person upon whom I acted
this bloody tragedy, it was not a stran∣ger, but an acquaintance and friend, not a common acquaintance or friend, but a sister, an only sister, by flesh and blood; and I can shew no reason could incite me to it, except it were for her over tender care and respect to me had, of which I am now truly sensible: o∣ther perswasions were nothing else but the jugglings and delusions of that old enemy of mankind Satan, who hath been a lyar from the beginning. The second Scene in this cruell and bloody Tragedy, which much aggra∣vates the fact, was the suddenness of the action, which robbed her of her life in a moment, without giving her any war∣ning to prepare for heaven, so that as much as in me lay, I did deprive her temporal and eternal happiness, without Gods great mercy. I might blaze this my cruelty with several other colours, but let these suffice to let you know the horridness of the crime. Gentlemen, you know how for a long time my conversation amongst you hath been very inconsistent to the gospel of Jesus Christ; I have plaied the Atheist
in my practice, though not in my pro∣fession; I have acknowledged there is a God, but in my works I have denyed him; and Atheism in practise is the worst sort of Atheism, I have been in the highest nature, a rebel, a traytor a∣gainst the King of Kings, endeavouring to unthrone God by not yeilding obedi∣ence to his commands, and he that plucks the King out of his throne is as bad or worse, than he that saith there is no King. Now that you may be the better sen∣seable how I have idolized my professi∣on, I will give you the Catalogue of sins which our Saviour gives you in the se∣venth of Mark, the 21, 22, 23. verses, for from within out of the heart of man proceeds evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murthers, thefts, co∣vetousness, wickedness, deceit, lascivi∣ousness, an evil eye, blasphemies, pride, foolishness: all these sins, have lain lur∣king, and been rooted in my heart ori∣ginally, (being by nature the child of wrath) and have in some kinde or other been put in execution, though not in the same manner literally, as they lye in the
text, yet circumstantially as they may be considered and applyed. But one main sin which is not here rehearsed, hath been my mother sin, to wit, drunken∣ness and excess, the abuse of Gods crea∣tures, this hath been the engine of this cruelty, and the door and inlet to all my misery. Beware of this Lion-like sin, least it command you to do the same cruelty, give not the least entertainment to it, as a cup and away; for it is the greatest peece of witchcraft, that I know to betray the soul to the Devil. Thus I have given you a glimpse of my wounds, now let me shew you my Physitian. But Gentlemen, I must not forget one sin which was almost slipt out of my memory,This in∣serted but really de∣livered. namely, the sin of uncleanness, I do not mean with a woman; Gentle∣men, there is other uncleanness than that with a woman, and there be some young Gentlemen in company, that looks upon me, which are guilty of the same, and know what I mean. Then stooping to Mr. Rosewell he began upon the breach of Sabbath, say∣ing; Gentlemen, I have lived a long time
amongst you, and indeed frequented the Church, but in all my time never kept one sabbath to the Lord aright, as I ought to do, I beseech you Gentlemen to have a special care of keeping the Sabbath, and slight not the Ministers of God, who are his Embassadours: and truly I see apparently an imminent judg∣ment hanging over the head of this Nation, upon the account of the Mini∣sters disagreeing; for well may the sheep be scattered, and the flock come to de∣struction, when the Shepherds quarrel, and go together by the ears. Well, but now to my Physitian. It hath pleased the Father that in Jesus Christ all fulness should dwell, and if all fulness, then the fulness of power, to effect and bring to pass the work of our redemption; he is the horn, the strength of our salvation: Thus God the Father from all eternity foreseeing mans inability of standing, did provide a remedy for his fall▪ the Son of God, the second person of the Trinity, to take our nature upon him, and to dy a cursed death on the cross, that we might live eternally in heaven, and now he sits at
the right hand of God, making interces∣sion for us, that by a lively faith joined with contrition and mortification of the old man and sin in us, can lay hold of him, the right way to see the aboundant mercy of God in Christ, is to see our own misery by reason of sin, how lost and undone we are without him. Behold what love the Father hath shewed unto us that we should be called the Sons of God. Seemeth it, saith David, (being moved by the Courtiers to entertain the offer of Sauls daughter) a light thing to be the Kings Son in law? and it is registred as a fruit of Moses faith, to prefer the rebuke of Christ before the title of the Sonne of Pharaohs daughter: between God and Saul what comparison? between the King of heaven, and the Daughter of Pharaoh what proportion? David might have been Son in law to Saul, yet not entituled to the Crown. Moses might have been the adopted Son of Pharaohs daughter, yet but a subject still. Seemeth it a light matter to us to be called the Sons of God, or to be the Sons of God, which is all one: this Prerogative which
we have by Christs blood, makes us heirs every one, Not onely sons, but heirs, joint heirs with Iesus Christ: we are all made Kings and Princes by im, all of us intituled to a Crown of lory, an eternal weight of glory, which s laid up for us in heaven, a most nestimable benefit, which the tongue of men and angels are not able to express. O let, I beseech you, the serious Considerations of Gods mercies in Christ, constrein us from sinful courses; et the words of me (a dying man) work n your spirits, that you may speedily xamine your own hearts, how you and affected to a Saviour that offers imself to be yours, on condition you will leave your sins and turn unto him y repentance. Gentlemen, he were a desperate man at being condemned to dy would not ccept of the Kings pardon, if it were ffered. Behold here is a pardon from he King of Kings, here Jesus Christ ffereth his Blood, if we do not wilfully efufe it, in persisting and going on in a ourse of sin. Gentlemen, be perswaded I beseech
you to make your title good to heven; fo temporal things we bend all might and main to make them sure, as in purchasing of Lands, settling of estates: what coun selling and contriving is there? Gentle∣men, it is an estate of immortality, which will not fade away, labour to get a fee simple in this estate: get interest in Jesu Christ, and let him be of inestimabl value in your thoughts. Thus Gentlemen, I thought it a par of my duty to ease my spirits to th world in hinting at particulars. I migh have been abundantly more large; let this be enough to comfort my friend and acquaintance, and the rest of well wishers for eternity, that althoug I am by an igninous death depriv of this temporal life, yet I have goo assurance of eternal life, and that name is registred in heaven, of whic blessedness I shall by and by have taste, and a full consummation at the da of Judgement, when we shall all appe before the Judgement seat of Christ give up our accompts. And I beg God to afford you his Spirit of Grac that you may be kept blameless un
that day, and that you may be assured up∣on good grounds before you depart this world, that your names are written in heaven, and that you may say with the Apostle, blessed be God for this unspea∣kable gift. The two and thirtieth Psalm was in∣tended to be sung, but not sung; himself being desirous to finish his course in this life.
His PRAYER. O Lord our God, high and mighty King of kings, Lord of lords, the only Ruler of Prin∣ces, look down from heaven up∣on us miserable sinners, in and through the merits of the Lord Jesus, pluck us out of our sins and implant us into Jesus Christ; let us be living branches in that vine, li∣ving members of that head: re∣member these nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and in them the principal member thereof, go∣vern thou him, whose right it is to be our Governour, implant thy grace in his heart, let the King∣dome, authority and power of
Jesus Christ in the Gospel, be by him advanced; season his heart with wisdome from above, and de∣fend him from his Enemies: re∣member the afflictions of Ioseph, comfort thy people after thou hast afflicted them, and for the yeares wherein thou hast shewed them tribulation, quench the fire of hine indignation, that is kindling amongst us, and consume us not for thy Name sake: Shew mercy unto Sion, build up the walls of Ierusalem, and love it still. Be with me now that am to dye; Just, O Lord is it with thee to cast me in∣to Hell, but here lyeth my com∣fort, Jesus Christ will receive me nto his bosome, to whom, with thy self, and Comfortable Spirit, be praise and glory, dominion and majesty for ever. And in whose name and words
I further call on thee, as my Sa∣viour hath taught me to pray: Ou Father which art in heaven, &c. Compared with the original Copies and examined by us, VVilliam Sandbrook. P. M. R. Margaret Roch
December the 24. 1656. At the funeral of Mr. Thomas Ford of Roche∣ster. Micah, chap. 7. verse 8, 9. at Margarets Rochester, By WILLIAM SANDBROOKE, P. M. R. MICAH 7, verse 8. Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy, when I fall I shall rise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light un∣to me. V. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and ex∣ecute judgement for me, he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall be∣hold his righteousness. V. 7. Therefore I will look unto the
Lord, I will wait for the God of m salvation, my God will hear me. SECT. I. The Preface. Brethren, YOu know and see, and I do believ are sensible of what the occasion o this sad meeting and assembly is. Time and opportunities of this nature, especi∣ally in so stupendious and astonishing a instance we have in hand, must be mad use of for our good; you all grant th person deceased is no way advantage by this exercise. 1. Except we run to the Alylum o Purgatory. 2. And fly to those rotten shifts o Dirges and Requiems of Rome, which you all I believe know the Church of England, with all other profest Prote∣stants, and the Reformed Orthodox Churches have justly exploded, 1. As the doctrine of Antichrist. 2. As a parcel of Heathenish abomi∣nations. Ergo, This the occasion. Now in the next place, let me also
acquaint you with a paragraphe more in this preface to my work. 2. The occasion of my being limited up to the text. It was I understand, his own request (that it comeing often upon his thoughts) it might be the remembrance of him in his Funerall obsequies, and might be to appeare in this confidence upon the Churches hope, the Lord: Re∣joyce not O mine enemy. I shall make no long surrows upon his back; it is sufficient what hath been already done, and now it is totally in vain for any as∣sistance towards him, Except to rake up the ashes of so great a crime: therefore letting these things passe as well known to you already. Sect 2. The text it self. Wherein Ile not trouble you with dependance. The words are a distinct paragraphe in themselves, and may be kept entire within their own limits, bounds, and con∣fines:
so according to my old method of for exposition of the text, take this. The sum. This is easily resolved in this issue. The sure stay, support and setleness of the Church, and by consequence of every Beleever, in their utmost deserti∣ons greatest declinings from God by transgression against, 1 The apprehension of Divine wrath sincking their spirits for ever. 2 The insolent insulting of adver∣saries. 1 They shall see. 2 God to be light to them. This being the sum of the whole text, take the Analysis of the 8 verse, for that is all: I can or will meddle with at this time. 1 The state of the Church and every Beleever in that condition she is fallen. 2 The successe of this. The adversaries tryumph and re∣joyce. 3 The state of recovery with a secret check to the malicious pride of insolent adversaries. Rejoyce not.
For the rest of the particulars my time nor ability of body, nor strong lunges to keep on in a strong carreer, in a long and vexing winded discourse, will not admit mee, (therefore Ile be briefe) if you expect it. 1 Pardon my inabilities I am aged. 2 Seek it where you know you may have it. These things supposed, let me now come seasonably to my last 4 Theorems. 1 The best of Churches; Saints, or persons, may fall deeply into grosse trans∣gressions. 2 The enemies to the Church and Saints have an akeing tooth and obsti∣nate spirit of insulting and vaporing over the Church and Saints, in their fallings, in this their sadd and deep declining by transgression. 3 In this distresse of falling, and the exultancy and proud insolency of opposi∣tion they shall arise again, and the glory of the Lord shall appear upon them in light. These are the Theorems which I
must prosecute distinctly, therefore pray take this to be the first. 1. Theorem. Saints may fall into grosse and very deep transgressions or sins against God. The demonstration of this Theorem is firm upon these principles. 1 The infinite and indeed unlimited liberty and authoritative power the in∣finite God hath over the creature, to do with it what he pleaseth. Ergo 1 To leave and desert when hee will. Thence 2 To give them up to themselves. 2 The naturall principles of the crea∣ture (being thus left without any limits or bounds to its own propensions) from preservation,Rom. 1. it must follow inevitablely that the springs or sluces of corruption must break forth. Ergo, Churches and Persons, nay Saints may rush into, and act in grosse abomi∣nations. Hence then from these principles le us wind up all into an argumentive form
Argument. 1 Where there is an independant liberty in any cause to sustain, or not to sustain a created being, in a just regulari∣ty to his own will. 2 And strong active principles in an eminent deviation from the eternall rule, there must be (and that unavoidably) a deflexion from that eternall rule. 1 But in the eternall God of Glory in Christ, there is this independant liberty by concession of schooles and Fathers. 2 The creatures acting nothing by their own principles, but opposition to him and his rule and will. Ergo The creature may fall into the great∣est relapses, grossest sins that ever any creature did. Thus I have twisted up my argu∣ment of reason into the forme of a sillo∣gisme in mood and figure: and it being but reason which is dark, let me support faith with Scripture. And for this purpose Ile nominate but two places, which will strongly evince the conclusion it self.
2 Samuel chap. 11. chap. 12. Isaiah 63 17. These two places will joyn in issue to prove my conclusion against any the least opposition. Wee will a little examine both: In the 11 Chapter you find very desperate acts of Davids. 1 His Adultery deflowring Vriahs wife,Vers. 4. Bethseba to bear a child. 2 Murder upon the person of Vriah,Vers. 15. by his speciall comission sent to Ioab the Generall of his army. Now do but observe the severall a∣gravations, and concatinations of other sins lincked together and centred in these two and then Judge. 1 Ingratitude to a faithfull servant and officer in his battles. 2 His cursed hypocrisy, in carrying on his desperate designe.Vers. 6. 1 Vriah must be sent for home, under pretence of favor, but in a reall intention that he might be murdered, or hide Da∣vids shame. But this was but the briding of his designe to the execution of murder upon so faithfull a friend and servant: there∣fore
he goes on. 2 Vriah must goe home to his wife,Vers. 8. to hide Davids shame, that the bastard might be made legitimate by Vriah, yet Vriah stands this attempt out, as unwor∣thy of the spirit of a souldier,Vers. 9. especially a commanding souldier. Yet David in a depth of hypocrisy towards faithfull Vriah, persists (with what brave resolutions and what firm principles Vriah baulked the motion the text cleares,) and yet David hath ano∣ther stratagem upon so faithfull a servant to hide his own shame Vriah, 3 He must tarry but one day,Vers. 12▪ and on the morrow he shall goe: to this Vriah condescends, and abode in Hierusalem that day. 4 David goes on with new stratagems to hide his sin, so adds sin to sin, under the pretence of doing him honor in an entertainment,Vers. 13 he makes him drunk, (cursed hypocrisy) hoping when he was drunk he would do any thing: and now after the transgressions of adultery, and these subtile devices to hide the shame. Next comes the tragedy of poor ino∣cent Vriahs murder.
All full of perfidious deceit and dissi∣mulation in hypocrisy by David. 1 Ioab the Generall must be sent un∣to, to put Vriah upon the forelorn hope, where the Skirmish was hottest, and this by commission from David,Vers. 15. that Vriah might dye expresly. 2 Ioab Obeys Davids severe unjust and desperate command; and the issue is Vriah is slain. But it is not unworthy ob∣servation. David gives commission in his coole blood, and sedate resolutions, that Vriah being in the heat of battell, upon a desperate service, all his forces should retire and leave him naked, in the fury of the enemy (cursed treachery in david: yet Davids sin in this passage goes on to a higher stretch then this; for if you observe the subsequent passage you will find. 3 Ioab to be an obsequious knave, to do any thing that the king commands him against a faithfull servant to Ioab himself:Vers. 11. shall I and my Lord Ioab? 1 To hide his sin and shame. 2 To accomplish his base lust with Bethseba. Ioab sends an accoumpt to David,
that according to Davids command and directions given to him, Vriah is out of the way: these tidings being brought to David, he hath an other shift to his hy∣pocrisy and cruell designe. 4 The sword devoureth one as well as the other.Vers. Yet that he thought all things might be secure aud hidden, he takes her home, and makes her his wife▪Vers.  Well this done, the thing did displease the Lord. Thus far of Davids sin of murder and adultery a∣gainst God. Having done thus farr in the business, the detection of the horrid unparralled villany in Davids sins; the next business is to come in hand. 1 Davids arraignment by Nathan the Prophet: now in this we may consider thus. 1 Nathan is sent to him by commission from the Lord,Chap. 12. the God of Glory, to con∣vince him of his guilt of this his sin. 2. By a wile of a parable, states the question so that David confesseth plain∣ly, he had sinned. 2. Nathan leaves him not in this sad condition, under guilt, but presently ap∣plies
peace, the Lord hath put away thy sin, yet gives him a chastisement tempo∣rall: hence then. Persons under the apprehension of guilt, ought not to be left so: but promises of mercy ought after the detection of guilt to be applied. Now Bretheren the next busines. Isaiah 63. 17. If you observe the connexion of the words, you will find the state of whole Churches under a sad state of dereliction: here in this verse wee find not only 1 Outward transgressions, and those of a deep die, if you compare things with things. 2 Inward opposition, or an habitual frame of spirit: whence, 1 Outward transgressions did flow a hardened heart. 2 And the frame of the spirit cor∣rupted. Out of all these my conclusions I will conclude. The Saints may be deser∣ted and left to great transgressions, and a fearfull frame of spirit. But we must go on to the other conclu∣sions: but the time is almost past, and the time of the year unseasonable,
And now Bretheren (since we have brought our busines thus farr,) let me in∣ferr these few practique Corrolaries. 1 Let him that standeth take heed least he fall. 2 Keepe for the purpose vigilant eye over your own spirits. 3 Pittie those that are fallen, and walk in darkness and see no light. 4 Presume not upon examples: you know not whether Davids restitution may be yours. This is from the second conclusion. Insultansy of spirit over distressed per∣sons, and falling sinners is incident to man, especially enemies. Next take notice of this plaine issue. 4 As presume not to act hainous trans∣gressions. 5 So dispare not under their burden. This is from the last proposition of the three, gathered from the text: and so these three propositions in the first paragraphe are dispatched. Sect 3 The occasion of this business, and ap∣plication, to the remembrance of the per∣son deseased; and herein brevitie be∣comes
the time and season, ergo. Let me acquaint you with these few hints, which possibly you may hear more at large hereafter. The occasion I have told you al∣ready, and so need no further repeti∣tion. The persons condition is now in a∣gitation. 1 His birth and education, with his parts and their improvements you all know, were to be highly approved of, 2 His conversation, and greatly pro∣digious act of sin, in so near a relation, is too well known, for me to trouble your memories or greive your spirits a fresh, These things we grant to the most malevolent spirit, and contradicting spirit, we meet with; yet for his deportment in the time of his confinement sentence and execution, some things must be said. 1 These reverend Divines faithfully that dealt with him, and most in fre∣quency in the time of his confinement, can give a more strict and severe ac∣compt.
When I had the opportunitie to visit him, I found him in a sedate composure of spirit; I hope in the successe of their endeavours, and upon accompt exami∣ned with other things implicitely two great questions resolved, 1 Conviction of guilt of so great a transgression, 2 Yet this was not all but tenderness of contrition for this and other facts. 3 A totall relinquishing of any thing of humiliation or contrition for accep∣tation. 4 Only wrapt up himself in the armes of our Saviour Christ, as the only refuge, Upon this accompt I did what I did and ought to do. Let Momus carpe, Wee will leave him to his own mast∣er, to him he stands, or falls, or suffers; only thus, it was his earnest desire to receive a sealing testimony from Christ in the ordinance, for his sealed con∣firmation of his interest in him, And in this case I will doe it again upon like occasion, when they that ex∣cept are reduced to the like condition,
upon his supposed qualification, let male∣volent spirits say what they will. I say he died a Christian: the testimo∣ny of this shall appeare to the shame of his Calumnators in print from his own hand. I confesse I have the original by me, but will conceale it yet. I am yet confident his grand Adver∣saries do not know what, 1 Hee found of the things of God in Christ. 3 Nor can so exactly compose a peece of a Beleevers spirit, as he hath done, This you know to speake in business of this nature, unusual, yet seeing such pettish foolish impertinances added in by ignorance and malicious beggerly pride I thought fit to acquaint you with my resolutions. Ile justifie it against opposition, let proud malice swell untill it break. February. 20, 1656. Valete
