f2239b 99826745 31151
From our Womens Meeting held at York, the 15, and 16th. days of the Fourth Month, 1692. To every particular Womans Monthly Meeting within this County. DEAR Friends, and tender Sisters? We dear∣ly Salute you in the Love of God, and his pretious truth, wherein he hath loved us, and united us unto himself, and one unto another. And hath concerned us, according to our measure for his honour, and the prosperity of his truth, in and a∣mongst us, liveing praises to him for ever. We being met together in his fear to wait upon him for Wisdome and Counsell to order us, in all our undertakeings, re∣lating to Church affaires: Truth's comly order; and the righteous Goverment thereof, such hath been the aboundings of the love of God amongst us, through the operation of his blessed spirit, that a double obli∣gation is laid upon us to love him, and to serve and obey him while we have a day, and a time, on this side the grave. And many heavenly testimonys hath been born a∣mongst us for our encouragment in the demonstration of the Lords power so that we are well satisfied, that God almighty accepts our service and delights in the care, and exercise, wherein we have been concerned: And diver comfortable testimonys, hath been brought in writing (and read amongst us) from
severall of our
Women Monthly Meetings of the care and concerne of Friends, for truths honour and the prosperity thereof amongst them; And we find it our duty to encourage you, our dear Sisters in every of your respective places and we servently desire your persevering in your dili∣gence and care in keeping your Monthly Meetings in the love and power of the Lord, waiting upon him, for counsell and wisdom to be enabled by him, in all your undertakeings to act for his glory, haveing nothing in in your eye but his honour and the prosperity of the truth, and the preservation of his people therein: And let none who have put their hands to the plow, look back nor who have bowed their necks to the yoak of Christ and their shoulders to the burden, wax weary. And though you meet with divers exercises, yet be not discouraged. but be carefull, to discharge your duty to god, and clear your consciences one unto another in the love of God, and in the spirit of meekness, and in due time you will reap your reward. And therefore be fervent and zealous for the truth, for there is as great need now as ever: For although the Lord hath given us a day of liberty and ease, as to the outward, yet we have and unwearyed enemy, and cuning adversary to Sions pro∣sperity which envyeth our hapyness and is not will∣ing to miss any oppertunity, but useth all his endea∣vours inwardly to captivate the soul and to hinder the groath & dominion of that pretious life, that hath right to rule: and this he attempts to do, by drawing out the minds of such as (in this day of liberty) are not Watchfull in the light of the Lord, into vain customes and the foolish fashions of the world, too much inter∣mixting with the spirit of it, foolishly to be led away into the defiments thereof. And hath prevailed upon others, to be
makers breaches, and sowers o strife and discord, and to become accusers of the brethren, and at length to be led away into a seperation from friends, and the unity of truth once by them received, and be∣seived in. The Lord Rebuke that spirit is our earnest desire, and if it be his will opon the eye of the mindes of such, that they may see the effects of their doings. How the truth by them is reproached, the hearts of the faithfull sadned: And God almighty keep us, near unto himself, and one unto another, greatly valueing, those great mercys and priviledges we have afforded us, in the peaceable Injoying our meetings in the worship and service of our God, according to the manifestation of his blessed spirit in us: And that we labour to make a right use, of every of these opportunitys, put into our hands, Not knowing how soon we may meet with exercises again, nor after what manner they may come, yea, a Winnowing Season, a day that shall burn as an O∣ven, Wherein the proud and those that worke wickedness will be as Stuble. But the wheat will the Lord gather into his ga∣rner, when the Chaffe shall be burnt with unquenchable fire. And therefore Dear Friends every where be warned, to keep low in your Minds For wo will be to the Crowne of pride; Which often goes before destruction and an haughty spirit before a fall. And Dear Friends you whom the Lord hath gathered out of Babilons, Con∣fusion and hath preserved from partakeing with her, of her vain delights and pleasures, and therefore not to partake of her plagues: keep to your antient Rock and strong tower, to which the Righteous in all ages Fled and were safe: For there is refuge and sure hideing place, in all stormes and tempests, And feel that arm and power that gathered you to God in the beginning, that thereby you may be kept little and low before him, of humble minds, of broken hearts
and contrite spirits, trembling at the word of the Lord. And be as watches on Syon walls that when the danger doth approach you may escape and Give warning to those that are wandred and led astray, by the wils of the enemy from the fase habitation, and that as the Lord may direct and lay it on you, you may advise, with ex∣bortation, and reproofe, to hasten with speed to the inward Court and not to be found in the outward where the Gen∣tiles sees must tread: And if the rebellious sleight your Counsell and hate your advice, If such be taken away in their Iniquity you will be cleare, and the Lord will be clear, and their blood will be upon their own heads. And you who are mothers of Children, and in duty to God, bound to order your famliyes aright as be∣come the truth, in the place God alimghty hath set you: See that in your words and actions and in your apparell, and all others things under your concern, you be good examples to your Children and Servants, and Do not Indulge or Connive at any thing in them that may offend the Lord or greie his good spirit, Do not allow or suffer them to wear any thing, that may render them justly deserving those Calamitys, which in Judgment from God, may justly fall upon this ge∣neration of evill doors, for the pride and haughteness of the people thereof, use your endeavours, to hinder their Imitating the proud fantasticall fashions of this world, as high dressed heads with Ruffles and double Gause, and all other▪ things in attire that is superfluous, or any way dishonourable to truth as Stript Gounes, of divers Colours wrapt into a narrow Compass hang∣ing behind them: All which we Judge to be, unbe∣comeing truth, Nor sutable to our holy profession nor the plainness of the Truth we have received and beli∣eved
in. For truth is lowly and plain, and made those a plain people in the beginning who were subject to it, and is not changeable in it self, Nor admites of any Change in us, And therefore we can do no less, but advise you to the plainness of it, Considering the good effects it hath wrought in, and through those who are guided by it: Oh what true fear, what holy zeal, what plain dealing and great care was there in that day, to keep truth clear, on every hand, amongst all who loved it, their Apparell plain, their Countinances solid, and grave, their words weighty few and savory, such as Ministered grace to the hearers: And there is a word further, in our hearts to you young Women, keep in the line of life, and Language of truth, saying one unto another, Arise Virgins Daughters of Sion and shake your selves from the dust of the earth and put on beautyfull Garments, even the Robes of Righteousness the Saints Cloathing, and humble your selves to the Cross of Christ, you who have decked your selves above the simplicity thereof and let that Crucife you, to the World, and the world to you dayly: and be you willing to walk in that narrow path of self denyal; the narrow way that lead, to life, and the Lord will adorn you with a meek, and a quiet spirit, which is with him of great price, and will inwardly make you beautyfull, as the Kings Daugh∣ters; for it is the very labour and travell of our soules that Sion may become the Beauty of all nations, and the praise of the whole earth. And that the wanderes, and the scattered a broad through the letting in of a care∣less and forgetfull mind of the mercys of the Lord un∣to them, in the day of his first love: may be again gathered unto him and into the footsteps of the flocks of his Companions, to enter in at the right door into the fould of rest and safety, and into the perfect peace which God gives and none can take away.
And that you who loves the truth, and are springing up as plants therein, may gradualy grow from strength to strength and from one degree of grace unto another, untill you become as Nurssing Mothers in Israel, in your day and age and (as Deborah) concerned in your measure, of life, and the station God almighty hath placed you, under the Government of Gods power & subservant thereunto to Rule for him, to the praise of him who loved & accounted us worthy. And that (as Dorcas) you may consider the poor and make provision for the Widdows and fatherless, and as other faithfull women in generations gone, which might be mentioned, and many more of this generation removed from us out of the body, worthy to be remem∣bred of us, and the Memoriall of them liveth upon our spirits to our refreshment in the Lord, and to the praise of his worthy name over all: Much might be said, but we Recommend you, with our own souls to the word of truth in every of our own bosomes, which leads into all truth, and if diligently harkened unto will perfectly teach and direct us all in the way of righteousness. Wherein we shall be well pleasing to God, and his delight will be to do us good dayly: renewing his mercys unto us as the morning, in the continuance of his ancient love, in the fresh sence whereof we are concern'd both young and old according to our measures to be true and faith∣full in the work (through Gods help) whereunto we are called, as Co-workers and fellow-labourers in the service of truth, meet helps one unto another in the Lord, and through his power whereunto shall be the praise, as worthy for ever: And let it be remembred by us all: that the woe was, and is to those that doth the Work of the Lord negligently, Therefore dear Freinds, set us be carefull in our age and day, according to the dispensation of the grace of God
committed to us, to serve the Lord in faithfullness with one consent, seck∣ing his honour alone unto whom it doth belong, from henceforth and for ever. And it is desired that this our Testimony, and advice with other Testimonys given forth by us heretofore after once peruseing and reading over, may not be cast by, and lost, but that one of every sort of our papers may be kept in every perticuler meeting in the Coun∣ty, and as Occasion and oppertunity may require they may be read and the advice and Counsell therein contained, may be observed and followed that our Labour and Travel in the truth may be answered, and that Friends in generall may reap the benefit thereof: And that our next yearly Meeting, may be attended: with some faithfull Women from each monthly Meeting to bring in their Testimonys, con∣cerning their care of the good nd comely. Order of truth that we may be comforted together, as at this time we have been by the aboundings of the love of God unto us, worthy to be honoured by us, the days we have to live, unto whome honour doth belong now, and for evermore. Subscribed in the Name and on behalf of the Meeting. Judith Boulbie. Katheren Winn. Elizabeth Beckwith. Margaret Bracking. Sarah English. Jsabell Morris. Elizabeth Moore. Frances Tayler, Mary White. Katherin Ratlife. Dorathy Wells. Anne Allison. Debora Winn. Grace Hemsley.
