H3095 12764202 93549
portrait
A la Ecella, y SERENISSIMA MAGESTAD, DE DOñA CATARINA De BRAGANÇA Infanta de Portugàl, y Reyna de la Gran Bretaña, &c. Que Dios guarde Con acrecentamientos de toda Felicidàd Imaginàble, Segun los mas humildes, los mas Entrañables Dessèos, y Devociònes De Don Diego Howel. En Londres 1662.
A NEW ENGLISH Grammar, Prescribing as certain Rules as the Language will bear, for For∣reners to learn English: Ther is also another Grammar of the Spanish or Castilian Toung, With som special remarks upon the Portugues Dialect, &c. Whereunto is annexed A Discours or Dialog containing a Perambulation of Spain and Portugall, which may serve for a direction how to travell through both Countreys, &c. For the service of Her MAJESTY, whom God preserve. LONDON, Printed for T. Williams, H. Brome, and H. Marsh. 1662.
GRAMATICA De la Lengua Inglesa, Prescriviendo Reglas para al∣cançarla; Otra Gramatica de la Lengua Española o Castellana, Con ciertas Observaciones tocante el Dialecto Portuguès Y un Discurso conteniendo La per∣ambulaciòn de España, y de Portugàl. Que podrà servir por Direction a los que quie∣ren caminar por Aquellas Tierras, &c. Por el servicio de su MAGESTAD Que Dios guarde. LONDON, Printed for T. Williams, H. Brome, and H. Marsh, 1662.
To the Sagacious REDER. HE who will pry well in∣to the pedigree of the English Language will find that shee is of a high Descent, For shee hath the Highdutch (the most ancient German Toung) to her Gran Mother, And the Saxon (the prime dialect of the Highdutch) to her Mother, For the ancient Britains and Hibernians, I mean the Welsh and Irish have no other name for Her (and her Nation) to this day. Shee may be said also to have the French for her Mother-in-law, her Lawes being couch'd therin, for 'tis 600. compleat yeers within five, since the Norman took footing here, who with his Leopards endeavor'd to bring in his Laws and Language.
But whereas Mothers-in-law or Stepmothers seldom use to be kind, yet the French hath bin so to the En∣glish, For shee hath not onely en∣rich'd, but civiliz'd and smooth'd Her with many thousands of words de∣riv'd from the Latin, whereby shee is grown the more copious, nor indeed is ther any Language fuller of Syno∣nymas, in regard shee hath for most things both a Saxon and a French word, as Stout valiant; Bold hardy; Godly devout; Wise prudent; Anger choler; a spit a broche; Board table; Town City, &c. But tis worth the observing that her Monosyllables are all Saxon or Dutch, which made one say, that the Englishman capapiè from top to toe is Dutch in all the parts of his body, in his drinking and eating He is Dutch, at bed and board hee is Dutch; Hee is
all Dutch at Sea, as also when he holds the plough, in his numbers in the daies of the week (not the months) Hee is Dutch; in his clothing he is Dutch, (though French in his fashion) Hee is Dutch in his Fishing, but in Fighting, Fortifying, and Fencing, as also in Hawking, Hunting, and Heraldry, in Dancing, Riding, and Painting, in his Music and Airs he is all French, &c. Add herunto that the English grows every day more and more Copious by an adoption shee makes of the choi∣cest forren Words, which insinuating themselfs into Her by degrees do in tract of time as it were Naturalize themselfs and becom free denisons; In so much that the English may be said to be Dutch embordered with many other Languages. Now, touching this new English
Grammar, let not the Reder mistake, as if it were an English Grammar to learn another Language, as Lillie is for Latin, and Littleton for French, &c. No, This is a meer Grammar of the English it self, for the use of Forreners; With a modest re∣serche into som Solecismes that are in the ortography and speak∣ing. It is a hard task to make a Gram∣mar of a Mother Toung, A harder task to make one of a Dialect, But to make an exact Regular Grammar for all parts of a Subdialect (as the English is) is a task that may be said to be beyond the reach of human understanding, the subject being not capable of it: Mr. Ben. Iohnson a Weighty man, and one who was as patient as hee was painfull in all his
composures confess'd, the further hee waded herin the more he was still gravelled. Concerning the Spanish, The best Gramarians and Artists have bin consulted withall, besides the Au∣thors own observation who breath'd air a long time under that Clime; The Castilian is a cleer and grave le∣surly Speech, it carries a kind of state, and deliberation with it; Therfore it affects long words as what we ex∣presse in one Syllable, the Spaniard hath five or six Syllables, as Nacimiento birth, Murcielago a batt; Levantamiento an uproar, &c. Now, as English may be said to be nothing els but Dutch inlayed with French, so the Castilian Toung is nothing els but Latin inlay∣ed with Morisco words; But the diffe∣rence is, that the English is made the
smoother by association shee hath with the French, But the Castilian Toung is grown more rugged by the admission and mixture of the Morisco words, who coming from the Arabic have a guttural or throaty pronunciation.
The severall parts wherof this BOOK consists. FIrst, a new English Grammar prescribing as certain Rules as the Language will bear for Forreners, (the Spaniard especi∣ally, into whose Toung it is rendred) to attain the knowledg of the English. 2. Of divers superfluous letters that are us'd in writing English which may be well omitted, whereby the language will be more easily for For∣reners to learn: As also of som Solecisms us'd in the common practice of speech. 3. A Grammar of the Spanish or Castilian Toung. 4. Som speciall remarks upon the Portugues Dialect, and how it differs from the Castilian, with a short Dictionary of such words as are meerly portugues. 5. A Discourse by way of Dialog twixt Charles and Philip containing the perambulation of Spain and Portugall, which may serve for a Guide to them who may desire to see those Coun∣treys.
6. A familiar Letter compos'd of above four∣score Spanish proverbs conducing all to one subject, and rendred into English; 7. Another familiar Letter consisting of Eng∣lish proverbs, and tending all to one subject rendred into Spanish.
A New ENGLISH Grammar Rendred into SPANISH GRAMATICA INGLESA Rendida en CASTELLANO.
The English Grammar. GRammar is the Art of Letters, as the Greek word  (whence it is derived) imports: Of Letters are made Syllables, of Syllables Words, and by the coagmentation of letters, syllables, and words, is fram'd Sermocination or Speech, which is one of the eminentst Praeroga∣tives of Mankind above all other sublunary Cre∣tures; for though others (as som volatils) by Art, and hardship are brought to utter som broken words, yet they understand not what they speak, be∣cause they are destitut of the faculty of Reson, Mar. onely being the child of Reson. Of the English letters, with their pronunciation, and som special remarks upon them. Touching the Abcee (or Alphabet) of the English Toung, ther are fower and twenty letters in all which are written in Great and Small caracters; the Great are shap'd thus, ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQ RSTVWXYZ. These great Caracters serve for proper names persons, places and ivers, &c. as Charles Carlos Katherine Catalina, London Londres, Lisbon Lu∣bona
bona, Severn Sabrina, Trent Trenta; som of them are of great account, for they are numerical, as I stands for One, V for Five, X for Ten, L for Fifty, C for a Hundred, D for Five hundred, M stands for a Thousand. The lesser caracters of the Abcee are thus form'd, abcdefghiklmnopqrstvwxyz. Now, what the fower Elements are to all corpo∣real cretures in point of Generation, the same are the letters to all Languages in point of Locution or speech: And as of the Elements, though so few in nomber, such infinit kinds of compounded and dif∣fering mixd cretures are produced, as from their simple and primitive principles; so from so small a nomber of Letters such a world of different words are compos'd, and such an infinity of Volumes penn'd and printed, which is a remark of wonder that hath faln but under the capacity of few. We will now consider all the Letters severally by themselfs, which are the original ingredients that go to the composition of Speech. These Letters divide themselfs into Vowels and Consonants, so call'd because they have no sound at all without a Vowel go before or after; as B hath e after it, F hath e before it to make it pronounce∣able: Of which Consonants fower are call'd Li∣quids, call'd so because they melt as it were in the mouth, and have a softer kind of pronunciation then the rest, which fower are l m n r. The Vowels are 5. in number, viz. a e i o u, Ther
is a word in Spanish which no other Language hath, that comprehends all the five, which is oveja, a Sheep: 'Tis tru that the transcendent eternal name of Iehova hath them likewise together, but that h onely (which is but an aspiration) interposeth. Now, the Vowels deserve to have the precedence of all the rest of the Letters, because no Consonant can be pronounced or is soundable without one of them before or after, (as 'twas said before) therfore are they call'd Consonants or co-sounding. A. The Vowel a is the first letter in all Languages, and it merits the priority of all other, because it is the first and most natural easie motion and ouver∣ture of the lips; it is also the letter of Absolution and comfort, as Cicero hath it. The French have a Proverb that makes much for the honor of A, viz. Il est marquè a l' A, He is mark'd with A; that is, he is right honest man: This may haply be the re∣son why A hath such a large Dominion among the English, for she is a praepositive article (with The) to most Substantifs and Adjectifs, as A man un hombre, A Knight un Cavallero, A sword una espa∣da, A learned man un hombre cientifico, A valiant Knight un Cavallero valiente, A bright sword una espada luziente. A in the English Toung hath two differing sounds, the one open and full, as Abraham, Alaba∣stre alabastro; the other pressing, and as it were half mouth'd and mincingly, as Ale cerveza, Awake despierto, &c. Whereas in Spanish (and other Lan∣guages)
it bears the first open prolation, as Da Dios alas a la hormiga para que se pierda mas ayna God gives wings to the Ant that she may destroy herself the sooner; a Proverb alluding to prowd ambi∣tious men. A, when it comes before lm somtimes drowneth the l and turneth to an u, as Calme is pronounced Caume, Psalme Psaume, Balme Baume, &c. but the a receives thereby a more open sound, and makes as it were one syllable of two. E. E the second Vowel is pronounced in English as in Spanish and other Languages; when it concludes a word it is pronounced carelesly and faintily, as Bare nudo, There allà, Fire, Fuego, &c. as the Spa∣niards also do in combate a Fight, combite a Feast, es∣cabeche Pickle, padre Father, madre Mother, &c. But in the monosyllable article The tis pronounced sharp. Where e comes after l having two Conso∣nants before it, it hath a strange transposition, for it leaps before l, and takes the half sound of i, as Epistle Epistel, epistola; Thistle Thistel, cardo; Little littel, poco; Prickle prickel, espina: e passeth also obscure∣ly, where it ends a word with a consonant, as spoken hablado, broken quebrado, Coffer cofre, brewes sopa, &c. When e also comes before d, to conclude a word, she loseth often her sound by an Apostrophe, as tyred tyr'd, cansado; restrained restrain'd, restreñ∣ido: and so in all Participles of the Preter-tense. When e cometh before a it drowns the a, but makes
the pronunciation longer, as beast bestia, disease en∣fermedad, feast combite, &c. E and I have such a friendship in the English lan∣guage, that they supply one anothers place som∣times, and are us'd indifferently, as Enterchange or Interchange, trueque; her or hir, ella; endure or in∣dure, sufrir; endevor or indevor, diligencia, &c. And 'tis so likewise in Spanish, as mesmo or mismo, the same; pedir or pidir to pray: The Italian also doth it often as refiutare or rifiutare, reputare or riputare; but the Florentine more affects i. I. The Vowel i hath a very peculiar sound in som English words, which differeth from other Nati∣ons; for the Spaniards with others pronounce it as ee in English, as mi tio my Uncle, mee teeo; pimienta Pepper, peemeeenta; cinco five, ceenco: But the English pronounce in most words i as if it were the Dipthong ei, as Pilot peilot, pilota; a pipe peipe, pi∣pa; a hide heide, cuero; licence leicence, licencia: which pronunciation is a pure Anglicisme. I, may be call'd an amphibolous letter, for though she be naturally and by her birth a Vowel, yet she degenerats often into a Consonant, (which she never useth to do in the Hebrew and Greek) which Consonant hath an affinity with g, insomuch that she may claim (like v) two caracters, as having two such capacities, viz. of Vowel and Consonant, as James is pronounced Giames, Diego; Javelin Giavelin, javelina; joy geoy, alegria; Jeffrey Gief∣frey, Godefrido, &c.
O. The Vowel O is pronounced with a rounde: mouth than any other, therfore she hath properly an orbicular figure, and is a letter in English of much change and incertainty; sometimes she is pro∣nounc'd sharp, as Coller collar, corn grano, crosse cruz, Crocodile Crocodilo, &c. somtimes o is pro∣nounc'd flat, as Colour colòr, Cosen primo, mother madre, taking thereby the half sound of u. Upon the u, o soundeth smart, as Round redondo, sound sonido, bound atado, &c. But in the last syl∣lable before n she loseth her strength, as Devotion devocion, compassion compassion, person persona: Be∣fore w also at the end of words she loseth he strength, and becomes an u, as hollow hueco, hollu; Tallow tallu, cevo, &c. When o ends a word she is pronounced strong & clear, as in these Monosyllables, Go and àd, so assi, no no, &c. Before v consonant o hath various pronunci∣ations, open and shut, as Dove paloma, glove guante, grove arboleda, Jove Iupiter, &c. Priscian saith, that som Cities in Italy had not o at all but u, and in other places they had no u at all, but o in the place of it, as in old Writers we read volgus for vulgus, pobli∣cum, polchrum, colpam, for publicum, pulchrum, cul∣pam; and let this suffice for this inconstant letter. V. The Vowel u as well as i hath the privilege to become Consonant very often, which make som call them the mongrel letters: V never endeth any
word in English for the nakednes of it, but cloaths her self with a Dipthong, and at other times hath to follow her, as New nuevo, knew conocia, blu: azùl, true verdadero, &c. The English pronounce oftentimes u like the French, in a whistling manner which sound is quite differing from the Spaniar and Italian, who prolate it in a manner like oo, as un one, oono; usanza use, oosanza, &c. But the Eng∣lish and French pronounce u as if it were the Dip∣thong ew, as Cocu a Cuckold is pronounced as if were written Cokew; Cubit Kewbit, &c. The Ger∣man is subject often to turn b to u, as there is a fa∣cetious tale of a Duchman, who thinking to com∣plement with his French Hostesse said, Ma foy Ma∣dame vous avez veaux enfans, Truly Madame you have Calfs to your children; wheras insteed veaux calfs, he shold have said beaux fair. W. W is pronounced with a larger roundnes of the lips then the letter o, and with far more force if hath h next it, as Whale balena, Wheele rued Whirligigg peonça, &c. but where h doth not im∣mediatly follow 'tis pronounced soft, as Whirlwin remolino, where the first w is far more emphatic then the second. The Saxons or high Dutch themselfs, whence th English derive their origen and language, cannot pronounce this w before h with that vigor, but lieu of What they say Wat, Where were, &c. which shews that the English have stronger lungs. The Spaniard hath no w, nor the Italian an French.
Y. Y, although it be pronounced like i, yet she is more constant to her self, scorning as it were to de∣generat from her first being, and from a vowel to turn consonant; therfore she may well deserve to be call'd the letter of Philosophy, or Phythagoras his letter. In French she is of that weight that she makes somtimes a whole word of her self, as Voulez vous y aller, Will you go thither? and is an Adverb both of person and place: In Spanish she frequently makes a syllable of her self, as yxar the flank, yzar to lift up, &c. Of Dipthongs. Thus much of the Vowels, which may be call'd the ligaments or Arteries that knit the bones or Consonants together, and put life into them, els they were but so many dead trunks. We will now to the Dipthongs, which because they are meerly made of Vowels, 'tis fitting they shold precede the Cononants. Dipthongs are as it were the associating of som Vowels to make them issue forth a joynt sound, so that two sounds may be had in one syllable. The English Dipthongs may be reduced to ten, as ai o ay, as Maid moça, afraid amedrentado, May May, day dia: the second au or aw, as Austere austero, autentico autentico, law ley, awe obedience: the third ea, as East Levante, Earl Conde, seat sede, yea s
the fourth ei, as Weight peso, streight derecho: the 5. ew, as Dew rocio, few pocos: the 6. oi or oy, as Toil trabajo, soil terra, boy muchacho, joy alegria: the 7.00, as Food bastimento, good bueno: the 8. o or ow, as Stout animoso, Toung lengua, now a∣gora: the 9. ui or uy, as Juice çumo, the last uoy, as Buoy. Ther are but three words wherin the Dipthong eo is found, viz. People, Jeopard, Yeoman. The Dipthong ae is not us'd neither in English or Spa∣nish. Of the Consonants. B. B is the first Consonant and second letter of the Abcee; it is the first that brings our lips together after we are born, therfore tis calld the prime labil letter: In English tis pronouncd as in other lan∣guages, but not alwayes as it is in Spanish wher it is promiscuous with v in sundry words, as bisoño a young Soldier, or visoño; vimbrera an Ozier, o bimbrera; in Greek also  is turned often to , which made the Duchman to say as wittily as waggishly, Si beta est veta, tunc bibere est vivere. But the highest commendation of B is, that it is the letter of Innocence, it being the bleating tone of the Sheep, which is the embleme of Innocence. C. Ther are som critical Authors who bear no good will to C, calling it the mongrel androg y nous letter,
nor male nor female, but rather a spirit or mon∣ster; and that by her impostures she trencheth upon the right of s k q, assuming their sounds; that she might be spar'd in our English Abcee because of the identity or sameness of sound she hath often with them three: But surely they are deceived, for how could we pronounce Cheshire cheese, chisel, Chi∣valry, without her? In Italian she borrows also the sound of g, as castigo for gastigo: In Spanish (and French) when she sounds like s she is attended with a train, having a semicircle underneath ç, and then she is call'd C cedilla, as çaratan the Canker, çapato a shooe, çarça a bramble, &c. which are pronouncd saratan, sapato, sarsa. D. D is so dainty a letter in English, that she admits of no other Consonant to be her Gentleman-usher but r, as Dreams sueños, drink bevida, drop gota, dragon drago, drum atambor, &c. She is pronounc'd as in other languages, but in Spanish when she is be∣tween two Vowels, or before any Vowel in the midst or end of a word, she useth to melt into th, as we pronounce them in that or the in English, as Dádivas entran sin taladro, Gifts enter without a Wimble; which are pronounc'd as if they were written, Dathivas entran sin talathro: dd in the Bri∣tish or Welsh agree with the Spanish in this pro∣nunciation, as heb DDuw heb ddiiw, Nothing with∣out God.
F. F hath the honor to make one of the highest notes in Music, and, which is more, to be the first letter of the highest spiritual vertu, Faith; she is pronounc'd as in other languages. G. G hath a diffring pronunciation in the English, one before a, o and u, as Gard guarda, gold oro, gulph golfe, &c. and another before e and i, as Gentleman, hidalgo, German Tudesco, Gibbet hor∣a, Giant gigante, &c. Yet ther be som words when she comes before i, that are pronounc'd as if she came before a, o or u, as giddy vertiginoso, gift dadiva, girdle cinta, &c. H. H is the letter of breath or aspiration, and ther∣fore may be call'd the letter of life, for when the breath is gone, farewel life: Therfore I wonder why the Greeks came to give her no place in their Alphabet. Som call her a spirit, but whether letter aspirat or spirit, the Alphabet wold be breathless without her. Som call her the Queen of Consc∣nants. In som words she is written but not sounded, as in Humor humòr, honor honra, humble humilde, host huesped, &c. which are pronounc'd, umor, o∣nor, umble, oft: The Spaniard also leaves her our in most words.
Th hath two sounds in English, the one strong▪ like the Greek  theta, as Thunder trueno, Thursday Iueves, thousand mil, thirsty sediento, theef ladron, thought pensamiento, &c. but th in other words are pronounc'd gently, like d in Spanish, as in This esto, that aquello, thine tuyo, thither la, thence de la, then entonces, therfore por tanto, thou tu, &c. H after w hath a stronger aspiration in the Eng∣lish then in any other language, as What que cosa, wheat trigo, wheel rueda, when quando, where a∣donde, whore puta, whale balena, &c. Ph is pronounc'd alike in English as in Spanish (and other languages;) but indeed ther's no ph in Spanish or Italian, for they turn it into f, as Philo∣sopher Filosofo, Philip Felipe, phantasie fante∣sia, &c. Ch is pronound in English as in Spanish (and the Italian) as China, chamber cama, cheese queso, cherry ceresa, &c. In which words ch is pronounc'd as the Spaniard does in chico little, chichon a bile, chirlar to chirp: But the French differs very much herein, for he prolates ch as sh, as chambre shambre, China Shina, Cheshire cheese Sheshire sheese, Chiche∣ster Shishester, &c. K. K is so stately a letter, that she scorns to serve either the Spaniard or Italian, nor the Latin or French either, but in the word Kalendae; therfore they make c to be such a drudg to them in her place, but the English makes equal use of them
both; yet k goes in English before no Consonants but n, as Knight cavallero, knowledge ciencia, knave vellaco, knife cuchillo, knee rodilla, &c. L. L hath the honor to make the highest tone in Music, for she hath a kind of gentle melting pro∣nunciation, therfore she is call'd by som , because she seems to sweeten the roof of the mouth. The English pronounce l as the Spaniards do, but where ll is found in the beginning or middle of any word in Castilian, the last l turns to i, as lloro lamentation, calle a street, callar to hold ones peace, lleno full; the Spaniard pronounce them as lioro, calie, caliar, lieno. The Britains or Welsh have also like the Spanish a particular sound of ll, which no other Nation can pronounce unless one be bred there very young; it is so difficult to the English that they are forced to turn it to fl, as Floyd for Lloyd, &c. M. M may be well call'd a labial letter as well as b, nay, tis a question which of them makes the lips meet first in an Infant. We read that the Phrygia child upon whom Ptolomey tryed his conclusion▪ Which language was the most natural, spoke Be first, which signifieth Bread in that language: But the ancient Britains hold that m is the first letter which makes the lips meet, because ther's no other
word for Mother in Welsh then Mam, which all In∣fants, be they born under any Climat whatsoever, use to pronounce articulatly as soon as they come into the world. M is pronounc'd cleer in the beginning, meanly in the midst, and obscurely in the conclusion of a word in English; but tis alwayes prolated with a kind of humming, as Mamalukes Mamaluques, Marjerom Origano, Mamora Mamora, martyrdom martyrio, &c. N. N in English is pronounc'd as in Spanish, (and o∣ther languages;) but in the Spanish toung it hath this singularity, as to have a streight stroke on the top, as for example ñ, and then she must be pronounc'd as if i immediatly follow'd her, as Fue la Negra al baño, y tuvo que Contàr todo el año, The Negre went to the Bath, and she had news enough for the whole Twelmonth; in this Proverb baño and año must be pronounc'd as if they were written banio, anio. This letter n ringeth somwhat in the Nose, and hath three degrees of sounds, full in the begin∣ning, weak in the middle, and flat at the end of a word. P. P may be call'd the third labial letter after b and m, for she also makes the lips meet: In the Italian she is often metamorphos'd to an u, as soprano soura∣no, coperta coverta.
Q. Qhath much encroch'd upon the freehold that k had in former times among our Saxon Progeni∣tors, who scarce knew this bumm letter q, but be∣fore the Norman Conquest they writt kuill for quill, kuire for quire, &c. But the French-Normans brin∣ging in divers Latin words, as question, quantity, quintessence, and others, much trenched upon the Saxon k; yet this q is so beggerly a letter, that un∣less u follow she hath no being in English. R. R. Ther is a most mighty populous Nation next the Sun-rising call'd the Chineses, who read and write perpendicular not collateral, that have not the letter R at all, therfore they call their next neighbour the Tartar, Tata, leaving out both the R's: And it may be the reason is, because R is the Dogs letter, and seems to snarle in the sound, —sonat haec de nare canina litera, This letter sounds of a Dogs nostrill. The French women do often∣times out of wantonnes leave it unpronounc'd at the end of words. In English tis pronounc'd as in other languages. S. S, though it be call'd the Serpents letter because of her hissing sound, as also for her shape, yet she hisseth but gently against the gums; she varieth her powers much in our pronunciation, in the begin∣ning
she hath a quick sound, as Sables z ebeliu Sabbath Sabado, &c. but in the middle and end of words, unless she go doubled, she is pronounc'd meltingly as z, as Rose rosa, wise sabio, gems oyas, rimes rimas, &c. but if the s be doubled, it is pro∣nounc'd hard and sharp, as Distresse, oppresse, lesse, dresse, tresse, &c. T. T hath one constant prolation, except where it precedes i, towards the ends of words, as Genera∣tion, action, nation, faction, generacion, action, na∣cion, faction, &c. and then t turns to c, as those words use to be written in Spanish. X. X hath scarce the account of a letter in the Eng∣lish, because ther's never a word in the whole lan∣guage that begins with it; in the middle it comes often, as Sixty, vexe, perplexe, sexe, &c. And it ends many words, as Pox las buvas, flax estopa, Fox raposa, six seys; which sound as if they were written Pocks, flacks, Focks, sicks: For x hath the prero∣gative to be made up of three Consonants, (which no other letter hath) viz. k, c and s, which being so, the Anagram that was made of Uxor and Orcus was not unwitty,—Uxor & Orcus idem. But x is very frequent in the Spanish, both in the beginning middle, and end of words; which came from the Mores, who for 700. years did almost inhabit the greatest part of Spain, and by so long coalition infe∣cted them with a guttural tone.
Z. Z is the last of all the letters, and tis properly so, being commonly the last sound that one makes in the mouth at his going out of the world, when he begins to throttle: Ther are but two or three words in all the English Toung (besides som Greek proper names) that begin with z, viz. Zeal, zealous, zealot, with som terms of Astronomy, as Zone, Zenith, Zodiac. And so much of single letters. Of Syllabes or Syllables. Having done with the Elements or simples of Speech, we will now proceed to the compounds of letters, and first of syllables. A Syllable is part of a word, which may of it self make a full articulat sound; it is sometimes (as Spanish also) of one letter, as Amazd espantado, quippage aparejo, imagination imaginacion, omino desastroso, usurer logrero; where a, e, i, o and u is the beginning make a syllable of themselfs. A syllable of more letters is made either of Di∣thongs or Vowels only, as Ayder ayudador, auditor audienciero, eating comiendo: Now though a Vo el hath the privilege to make a syllable of her sel yet no Consonant can do so, unlesse it shake han with a Vowel. Syllables with a Consonant are e∣ther of two letters, as No no; or of three, as th which in the English useth often to be written sho∣th
thus, ye; or of more letters, as That, then, with, aquello, entonces, con; which are written short, yt yen wth; of 5. letters, as There, which, alla, que; which are written short, yere wch. Ther are som syllables that have two Consonants to one Vowel, as Cry grido; som three, as Dr ramera; som 4. as Dregs heces; som 5. as Strin cuerda; som 6. as Strength fuerça; som syllabl have 7. Consonants to one Vowel, as Strengths erça; but thats the utmost nomber: And tis obser∣vable what a virtu a little Vowel hath, to give to so many Consonants. But the Pole hath Consonants attending one Vowel, in so much tha when he speaks he hurls his words at ones fa like stones. Touching the position or quantity of syllabl ther is no language, I know of, hath exact rules, re∣straints, examples and cautions to that purpo but the Greeks and Latins; ther is not so much and trouble used in the English or Spanish (or other Occidental Toung) because their metri Compositions, Verses and Rimes are meerly ∣rived from an instinct of Nature, such as Arist speaks of, , viz. Of a volu∣tary and natural free composition, without enslavd so much to the quantity of syllables. were the Greeks before Homer, nor the Roman b fore Livius Andronicus, so curious in observing punctually the length and shortnesse of syllables. It is consentaneous to order and reason, we now speak of the Accents of syllables, which
it were the tuning or the toning of the voice, and the not observing of the Accent may make a word to be in danger of mis-tuning. For ther are multi∣tudes of words which are written alike, and have punctually the same letters, yet have they clea contrary pronunciations, as Désert a wildernes, desierto, and Desèrt mericimiento; tórment tormento tormènt atormentàr; óbject objecto, objèct obje∣ctàr; incense insenso; cónvert convertido, conv convertìr: Now 'tis the Accents duty to make pronounce aright, and where we find the Accen we must give a force and Emphasis to that syllable. In Adverbs commonly the Accent is in the syllable, as Mèrrily alegramente, hèavily tristemente. Dissyllable and trissyllable words have also mo commonly the Accent in the first syllable, as Wìn∣ter Invierno, Sómmer Estio, Síngular singulàr, péssi∣lence pestilencia, pròvidence providencia. Words also terminating in able, be they of 3. or 4. sylla∣bles, have the Accent in the first, as Fàble fabul, sènsible sensible, sòciable amiable: except Abomi∣nable abominable, detèstable detestable, &c. Words terminating in tion or sion, have commonly the Ac∣cent in the syllable next before, as Conténtion con∣tienda, confúsion confusion, abominátion abominaci∣on: But the Spaniard hath alwayes the Accent is the last syllable of such words. All Dissylables ending in ish, ry, er, el, et, or have the Accent in the first syllable, as Slávish ∣clavoso, màrry esposar, hòver meneàr, dàmsel do∣zella, pácket paquete, gámmon pernil, bácon toci
Words ending in nt have the Accent commonly in the last, as Lament lament, contènt contentamiento, extènt extension, &c. We come now to the quality of words, to know whether they are Primitives or Derivatives. Most of the primitive words in the English Toung are Monosyllables; go unto a mans body from top to toe, the parts therof are all Monosyllables, as Head cabeça, heart coraçon, guts entrañas, knee rodilla, foot pie, &c. which clearly discovers her to be a daughter of the High-Duch. The Spanish clean contrary abound and delight in words of many syl∣lables; and where the English expresseth himself in one syllable, he doth in 5. or 6. as Thoughts pensa∣mientos, fray levantamiento, &c. which is held a part of wisdom, for while they speak they take time to consider of the matter. Ther are also simple words and compounded words, as Love amòr, lovely amoroso; man varòn, manly varonìl; wise sabio, unwise necio: And here∣in, I mean in point of composition of words, the English Toung is as happy, and as hardy as any lan∣guage, except the Greek, (which goes beyond all other in that kind:) For the English doth often joyn and coagment two Substantifs together, as cortadòr de bolsas, self-love amor de si mesmo, de molino; and somtimes ther's a Substantifs in one word, as Tap-house-kee▪ bodegonero, a Foot-ball-player ju∣gadora pelota, &c.
Of the Parts of Speech in the English Toung. Ther be Eight Parts of Speech in the English Toung, as in other Languages, viz. Noun, Pro∣noun, Verb, Participle, Adverb, Conjunction, Pre∣position, Interjection; whereunto we adde the prepositive articles The and A, which the Latin only lacks; wherof the first is definit and terminats the understanding, as The sword la espada, the book el libro, which denotes som particular book or sword; the other is indefinite, as A sword una e∣spada, a book un libro, which denote the general Idea of swords and books. Ther is also another difference twixt the articles The and A, viz. that the first may be applied to the plural nomber also, as The swords las espadas; but the article▪ A is ap∣plied to the singular nomber only. Proper names are incapable of these articles. Now of the parts seve∣rally by themselfs. Of Nouns. Nouns are either Substantifs, which can stand and be understood by themselfs, as Church Yglesia, sheet calle; or they are Adjectifs, which signifie no real thing, unless they be applied to som Sub∣stantif, as White blanco, fair lindo, &c. The Eng∣lish Toung hath this singularity above other lan∣guages, (but she is nothing the more commendable
for it) that he useth to put the Adjectif before the Substantif, as Brown bread baço pan, a wise man sabio hombre; wheras other Nations postpose the Adje∣ctif, and say Pan baço Bread brown, hombre sabio a man wise. Noun Substantifs are either Common, as Bridg puente, River rio; or Proper, as Rialto Rialto (a particular bridg in Venice) Severn Sabrina; or Per∣sonal, as Charles Carlos, Katherine Catalina. Ther are five Genders that belong to these Nouns, the Masculin, which comprehends all Males under a masculin Idea, as Bulls toros, men hombres, &c. The Feminin, which comprehends whatso∣ever is of a femal kind, as Woman hembra, Does ciervos. The Neuter gender, whose notion con∣ceives neither sex, under which are compriz'd all inanimat things, as Cities, Rivers and Ships; for though ther be names of other Genders, yet they are spoken of as she's; as Eboracum York, Rhenus the Rhine, the Charles Royal. The fourth is the Epicene or promiscuous gender, which understands both kinds, as dogs, horses, deer; under which words both sexes are intimated, as Hounds and Bit∣ches, Geldings and Mares, Bucks and Does. The fifth is the common or rather doubtful Gender, which hath a near affinity with the former, as frend, gossip, neighbour, cosin, &c. which comprehend ei∣ther sex: But in Spanish (and other languages) they are distinguish'd by their masculin and feminin ter∣minations, as Amigo amiga, vezino vezina, prim prima, &c. which is an advantage the English Toung hath of others.
Diminutifs are proper to all Languages; in Eng∣lish the Diminutifs of som Substantifs end in ell, as Cock cockrell, part parcell, &c. som in ing, as Goose gosling, duck duckling, &c. som in ock, as Bull bul∣lock, hill hillock: som in et, as Baron Baronet, &c. Ther are also Diminutifs of Adjectifs, as Cold cold∣ish, black blackish, green greenish, &c. Ther are likewise divers Diminutifs of proper names in English, both of men and women, as Chri∣stopher Kitt, Gregory Grigg, Richard Dick, Mag∣dalen Maudlin, Katherine Kate, Elizabeth Besse, &c. but ther are som names which bear no Dimi∣nutifs, as Peter, Iames, Stephen, &c. but the Spa∣niard herein hath more Diminutifs and Sub-dimi∣nutifs then any other language, as Simòn, Simon∣cico, Simoncillo, Simoncilillo; Miguel, Miguelico, Miguelillo; Catalina, Catalinica, Catalali∣nilla, &c. The English Adjectifs have their degrees of Comparison, as well as those of other languages; nay, to som words they have two Comparatifs and Superlatifs, which other languages have not; they expresse the one either by the word more, or adding er to the end of the Positif, as Wise more wise or wi∣ser, stout more stout or stouter, &c. so the Superlatif is expressed either by the word most, or adding est to the end of the Positif, as Wise most wise or wisest, stout most stout or stoutest. But from this general rule few are excepted, as goood better best, bad worse worst, little lesser least. Adjectifs which end in ous admit of Comparatifs and Superlatifs onely by the
Words more or most, as Glorious, more glorious, most glorious; so Specious, famous, victorious, &c. The English Adjectifs commonly have no Plu∣ral nomber, but the singular serves for both, which is a great ease to the language, as Stout man stout men, wise man wise men: But the Substantifs have their Plurals, som terminating in s, as King Kings, stagg staggs, park parks, wood woods, &c. Others terminat in n, as Man men, Woman women, Oxe Oxen, hose hosen: As in all other languages so ther are some irregular words, (though they be few) that swerve from the former terminations; as the plural of Mouce is mice, of Louce lice, of Tooth teeth, of Foot feet, &c. Ther are som Substantifs that admit of no plural nomber at all, (and they are weighty ones) as Gold, silver, Brass, Copper, Tinn, and all Minerals; (no more have they in the Spanish, as Oro, plata, bronza, cobre, estaño) with divers other, as rest, bread, &c. these Substantifs have the plural only, as goods, riches, necessaries, &c. where it is observable that necessa∣ries the Substantif, is begot of the Adjective neces∣sary. We com now to the Pronouns, so called because they stand somtimes for Nouns; we will take them in their degrees, and begin with the Persons, I, tho, he, we, ye, they: which are declined thus:
The first Person. Plural. Singular. Nom. I Yo Wee Nosotros Gen. of mee of us Dat. to mee to us Accus. mee us Voc. o mee o wee Abl. with or from mee. with or from us. The second Person. Singular. Plural. Nom. Thou Tu Yee Vosotros Gen. of thee of you Dat. to thee to you Accus. thee you Voc. thou o you Abl. from or with thee. from or with you. The third Person. Singular. Plural. Nom. Hee el ò aquel They ellos Gen. of him of them Dat. to him to them Accus. him them Voc. o he o they Abl. with or from him. with or from them.
There are in English fower Pronouns possessives, My or mine, mi ò mio; my comes alwayes before a word beginning with a Consonant, as My cloak mi capa, my hat mi sombrero, &c. Mine comes al∣wayes before a Substantif beginning with a Vowel or h, as Mine Aunt mi Tia, mine heritage mi hern∣cia, &c. but mine stands oftner by it self for a pos∣sessif, specially in answer to a question, as Whose sword is this? mine; whose Glove is that? mine, The Plural of my and mine is our ours, which also are possessifs. The second Possessif is Thy thine, as Thy house tu casa, thine arme tu braço, thine hand tu mano; and thine as mine come before a word beginning with a Vowel. Thine also stands for a Possessif of it self to a question, as Whose land is that? Thine; cuya a tierra es aquella? la tuya. The Plural of thy thine is you yours, which are also Possessifs. The third Possessif is Her hers, with their Plurals their theirs; as Her Distaf su rueca, her Maiden head su Virginidàd; whose ring is this? hers. But the Spanish (nor the Italian and French) hath not this distinguishing feminin Possessif, but useth su and suyo for both. Which, who and that are Relatif Pronouns, de∣pending on the words before, but which and why properly relate to living things, and that to inani∣mat; as The man which preach'd yesterday, the Lady who passed this way, the stones that went to build Pauls, &c. What and Whose are Interrogative
Pronoun, and so are the foresaid which and wh somtimes. Ther are som compounded Pronouns, as my self, our selfs, thy self, your self, him self, her self, it self, the self same, &c. Of a Verb. VErb is one of the most principal and necessary parts of Speech: nay, it may be call'd the Geni∣us and Soul of Speech, for pack all the words of the world together, no Sentence, whether Interroga∣tive or other, can be made without it; for what Vowels are to Words, the same Verbs are to Speech, they animat both; which makes it have such a latitude in the Latin toung, that the word Verbum extends to all parts of Speech. A Verb in English as in Spanish (and all other languages) hath 3. Tenses or distinctions of times the Present-tence, as I pray or do pray; the time past, as I prayed or did pray; the Future or time to come, as I shall or will pray. The Terminations Verbs in English is the same both in the singular and plural nomber, (except the second and third perso in the singular) as I live, we, ye, they live, &c. not so in Spanish, as yo vivo nos vivimos, &c. in other languages, which is a mighty advantage and ease for the learning of the English language. Ther are in English Verbs Aclifs, Passifs and Neuters, as in other Toungs, as I love yo quiero, Actif: I am lov'd yo soy querido, is Passif by addi∣tion
of the Auxiliary Verb Am, soy: the Neuter verb is where am cannot be added, as I live vivo, I weep lloro, &c. Ther are in English, as in other languages, fower cadences and Conjugations of Verbs: Verbs of the first Conjugation som end in all, as to Call llamar, to fall cayer, to install, to inthrall, &c. whose Par∣ticiples are made by addition of ing and d at the end, as calling call'd, installing install'd, &c. Som end in are, as to dare, to pare, to share, &c. whose Participles also end alike, as par'd paring, &c. Som end in ace, as to chace, to face, to grace, to lace, to trace, to imbrace, &c. whose Participles also are made like the former. Verbs of the second Conjugation som end in eare, as to beare, to sheare, to teare, to weare, &c. whose Participles end in ing and orne, as borne, shorne, torne, bearing, shearing, tearing. Som Verbs end in ease, as to ease, to please, to displease, &c. Som end in ead, as to lead, to knead, to read, to spread, to tread, &c. Som in ind, as to bind, to find, to wind, to grind, &c. Som in end, as to bend, to send, to lend, &c. Verbs of the third Conjugation som end in ite, as to bite, to write, to endite, &c. Som end in ight, as to fight, to fright, to light, to plight, to right, &c. Som end in ell, as to quell, to tell, to sell, &c. Som in ink, as to dink, to sink, to sink, to think, to shrin, &c. Verbs of the last Conjugation som terminat in), as to cry, to dy, to fly, to ly, to try, &c. Som in ire, as
to hire, to desire, to inquire, &c. Some end in ine, as to shine, to dine, to fine, to decline, to uncline, to con∣fine, &c. Among which Verbs it is to be noted, that the Monosyllable Verbs come from the Dutch, the other from the French. Note also that all Parti∣ciples of the Present-tence end in ing, of the Pre∣ter-ence in d, most commonly in all English Verbs, except som Irregulars, which is left to observation. Of the two Auxiliary Verbs, I have yo he ò tengo, and I am yo soy. These Verbs I have and I am are call'd the Auxi∣liaries, and are most subservient to all other Verbs; for without the second ther could be no Verb Pas∣sif, and without the first ther would be no Parti∣ciples of the Preter-tense: Therfore being so useful 'tis requisit they shold be here declin'd at large; and first of I have, because it is also auxiliary to I am. The Conjugation of the Verb I have. The Indicative or declaring Mood. Present tense. I have, thou hast, he hath: we have, ye have, they have. Preterimperfect tense. I had, thou hadst, he had: we had, ye had, they had.
Preterperfect tense. I have had, thou hast had, he hath had: we have had, ye have had, they have had. Future tense. I shall or will have, thou shalt or wilt have, he shall or will have: we shall or will have, ye shall or will have, they shall or will have. The Imperatif or commanding Mood. Have thou, let him have: let us have, have ye, let them have. The Optatif or wishing Mood. Present tense. Oh that I had, oh that thou hadst, oh that he had: oh that we had, oh that he had, oh that they had. Preterperfect tense. I shold have, thou sholdst have, he shold have: we shold have, ye shold have, they shold have. The Subjunctif Mood. Present tense. If or in case that I have, if or in case thou hast, if or in case he had: if or in case we have, if or in case ye have, if or in case they have. Infinitif Mood. To have, aver, Having aviendo.
The Auxiliary Verb I am. The Indicative or declaratory Mood. Present tense. I am, thou art, he is: we be or are, ye be or are, they be or are. Preterimperfect tense. I was, thou wast, he was: we were, ye were, they were. Preterperfect tense. I have bin, thou hast bin, he hath bin: we have bin, ye have bin, they have bin. Future tense. I shall be, thou shalt be, he shall be: we shall be, ye shall be, they shall be. The Imperative or commanding Mood. Be thou, let him be: let us be, be ye, let them be. The Optatif or wishing Mood. Present tense. God grant I be, God grant thou be, God grant he be: God grant we be, God grant ye be, God grant they be. Preterperfect tense. Wold God I were, wold God thou werst, wold God he were: wold God we were, wold God ye were, wold God they were.
The Conjunctive Mood. Present tense. Seeing that I am, seeing that thou art, seeing that he is: seeing that we be, seeing that ye be, seeing that they be. Preterperfect tense. Although I be, although thou be, although he be: although we be, although ye be, although they be. The Infinitif Mood. To be, to have bin, being. Note, that Verbs of all Conjugations in English have their Passifs generally ending in d, as I love yo amo, I am lov'd yo soy amado; I fear yo temo, I am fear'd yo soy temido; I fire yo quemo, I am fir'd yo soy quemado, &c. Except Verbs ending in ell, who commonly have their Passifs ending in old, as I tell I am told, I sell vendo, I am sold soy vendido, &c. As also Verbs ending in ind, who commonly have their Passifs in ound, as I bind ato, I am bound soy atado; I find hallo, I am found soy hallado; I grind molo, I am ground soy molido, &c. As also divers Verbs whose Actifs end in ear, have their Passifs in orn, I swear juro, I am sworn soy jurado; I tear lacero, I am torn soy lacerado, &c. But in Spanish estoy serves to make a Paffif as often as soy, as shall be noted in the Spanish Grammar. Now the diffe∣rence
'twixt ser and estàr is, that ser signifies the essence of a thing, as ser bueno to be good; estàr signifieth the local condition of a thing, as estàr n Londres, To be in London, &c. An Instance for the declining of a Verb both Actif and Passif in English,  may serve for all other. The Indicatif or declaratory Mood. The Present tnse. Actif. Passif. I desire I am desir'd thou desirest thou art desir'd he desireth: he is desir'd: we desire we are desir'd ye desire ye are desir'd they desire. they are desir'd. The Preterimperfect tense. I did desire I was desir'd thou didst desire thou wast desir'd he did desire: he was desir'd: we did desire we were desir'd ye did desire ye were desir'd they did desire. they were desir'd.
The Aorist or Preterperfect tense. I desired I was desired, as before. thou desiredst   he desired:   we desired   ye desired   they desired.   The Preterpluperfect tense. Here the Verb, I am, turns to the auxiliary Verb, I have. I had desir'd I had bin desir'd thou hadst desir'd thou hadst bin desir'd he had desir'd: he had bin desir'd: we had desir'd we had bin desir'd ye had desir'd ye had bin desir'd they had desir'd they had bin desir'd The Future tense. I shall or will desire I shall or will be desir'd thou shalt or wilt desire thou shalt or wilt be de∣sir'd he shall or will desire: he shal or wil be desir'd: we shall or will desire we shal or wil be desir'd ye shall or will desire ye shal or wil be desir'd they shall or will desire. they shall or will be de∣sir'd.
The Imperatif or Mood of command. Desire thou Be thou desir'd let him desire: let him be desir'd: let us desire let us be desir'd desire ye be ye desir'd let them desire. let them be desir'd. The Optatif or wishing Mood. The Present tense. God grant I desire God grant I be desir'd god grant thou desire god grant thou be desird god grant he desire: god grant he be desir'd: god grant we desire god grant we be desir'd god grant ye desire god grant ye be desir'd god grant they desire. god grant they be desird The Preterperfect tense. Wold I desir'd Wold I were desir'd wold thou desir'st wold thou werst desir'd wold he desir'd: wold he were desir'd: wold we desir'd wold we were desir'd wold ye desir'd wold ye were desir'd wold they desir'd. wold they were desir'd.
The Conjunctif Mood. Present tense. Seeing that I desire Seeing that I am desir'd seeing that thou desirest seeing that thou art de∣sir'd seeing that he desireth: seeing that he is desir'd: seeing that we desire seeing that we be desir'd seeing that ye desire seeing that ye be desir'd seeing that they desire. seeing that they be de∣sir'd. Preterimperfect tense. Although I desire Although I be desir'd although thou desirest although thou be desir'd although he desires: although he be desir'd: although we desire although we be desir'd although ye desire although ye be desir'd although they desire. although they be desird. The Infinitif Mood. To desire To be desir'd to have desir'd to have bin desir'd desiring. being desir'd.
According to this Example other Verbs Actif (unlesse they be Irregulars) and Passif may be form'd. There are also in English as in Spanish (and all o∣ther languages) Impersonal Verbs which are not distinguish'd by Persons, as it grives me, it irketh me me pesa, it behoveth me me importa, it concerns me me toca, &c. We have hitherto treted of the principal parts of Speech, we will now proceed to the rest, and first of Adverbs. An Adverb is a word without nomber that is joyn'd to another, and it comes either before or after a word, as well-bred bien criado, better-bred meior criado, ill-bred mal criado, &c. But most Ad∣verbs com after, with this syllable ly, as couragiously animosamente, devoutly devotamente, &c. And as in English most Adverbs end in y, so in spanish and Ita∣lian) they end in ente, as the former examples shew. Adverbs are either of quantity as much much, too much demasiado, enough bastant-emente, toge∣ther juntamente, &c. Or they are Adverbs of qua∣lity, and first of nomber as once, twice, thrice, una vez, dos vezes, tres veces; The second are of Time, as yesterday ayer, then entonces, when quan∣do, presently luego, ever siempre, &c. The third are of Place, as here aquì, there allà where adonde, yon∣der acullà, &c. The fourth are of Affirmation or
Negation, I, yea, yes, si; no, not, nay no; The fift are of Calling, as ho, hola, or exhorting or ap∣proving, as so, so, well, well; Or of Wishing o, if: The sixt are of Similitude, as likewise, so, even so, assi, tambien, &c. Interjections. Interjections are either of mirth, as ha ha ha; or of grief, as Ah, alas, woe is me, hay ay de mignay de mi; or of rejection, as fie, fy-fy, ba; or of scorn, as tuh, &c. st is an Interjection of silence; rr set dogs together by the eares. Prepositions. Prepositions are separable as before delante, be∣hind atras, according segun, among entre, without sin, afore antes, under or below debaxo, against con∣tra, opuesto, enfrente; over sobre, neer cerca, &c. Inseparable Prepositions are they which express nothing unlesse they be annexed to a word, as un∣capable incapaz, undon deshecho, relief alivio, re∣press reprimir, resolution resoluciòn, &c. Conjunctions. Conjunctions are call'd so because words together, as and y, my father and mother padre y mi madre, and this is call'd the conjunction. Som are severing as but
although, though aunque, som are dis junctif as nor, neither, ni, nor I nor you, ni yo ni vos; som are of reasoning, as for porque, because para que; som are of Illation as therefore, wherefore, so that por∣tanto, &c. Of the points of Words and Sentences. The English language as the Spanish (and others) hath her points or Notes of Sub-distinction, of Mid∣dle-distinction, and of a Full-distinction; which are call'd comma, colon, and period: A Sub-distincti∣on or comma is a Note of a short breathing or pau∣sing and is figur'd thus, The Middle-distinction hath a longer time of breathing, and is a perfect part of the period which is figur'd thus: The period is the entire whole sentence, and is Note with a plain single point thus. Ther is also a Parenthesis which is two hal Moons, and is figur'd thus () which though it an included sentence, yet albeit it be omitted the speech remaines perfect. Ther is also a Note of Interrogation, and is fi∣gur'd thus? Ther is likewise a Circumflect which is us'd whe a word is contracted, which goes thus figur'd▪ Ther is besides a Note of Admiration which thus! And lastly, ther is an Apostrophe when a is cut off and is figur'd thus▪ but the Span Toung to her greter commendation hath none this.
Gramatica Inglesa. GRamatica es el Arte de Letras, como la palabra Griega  (de la qual ella se deriva) denòta de letras se ha∣zen sylabas, de sylabas palabras, y de la coagmentacion de letras sylabas y pa∣labras nace el Hablar ò Sermocinacion, lo qual es una de las mas eminentes prerogativas que tiene el Ge∣nero Humano sobre las demas Criaturas subluna∣res; porque aunque algunas dellas por Arte y Du∣reza vengan a proferir ciertas palabras, toda via no entienden lo que hablan por falta de la Facul∣tàd de la Razon, Siendo Hombre solo el hijo de Razon. De las Letras Ingleses, y de su pronunciacion, con ciertas observaciones sobre ellas. Tocante el Abecedario (ò Alfabeto) de la Lengua Inglesa, tiene veynte quatro Letras en todo, las qua∣les se escriven en grandes▪ y menudos Caractéres, los Grandes se figuran assi, ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQ RSTVWXYZ Estos grandes Caracteres se usan por los Nombres propios de personas, lugares, rios, &c. como Charles Carlos, Katherine Catalina, London Londres, Lisbon
Lisbona, Severn Sabrina, Trent Trenta; Algunas dellas son de gran cuenta, porque son numericas, como I haze uno, V cinco, L cinquenta, C ciento, D quin∣jentos, M mill. Los menudos caractéres se figuran assi, abcdefghiklmnopqrstvwxyz. Ahora, lo que los quatro Elementos son en rispeto de todas criaturas corporeas en punto de Generation, lo mismo son las Letras a todos Lenguajes, en punto de Pronunciacion; y como de los Elementos, aunque pocos en numero, tan infinitas differentes species de criaturas son produzidas, como de sus primitivos y simples principios; Assi de tan pocas letras tanta infi∣nidad de differentes Vocablos son compuestos, y inom∣brables Volumes, escritos y imprimidos, lo qual es una especulacion que ha caydo en el entendimiento de pocos. Estas Letras se dividen en Vocales y Conso∣nantes, llamados assi porque no tienen algun soni∣do sin aver un vocal ò adelante ò atras, como B ti∣ene e atràs, F tiene e adelante por hazerse pro∣nunciable: Destos consonantes quatro ay que se lla∣man Liquidas, porque se van diritiendo en la boca, y hazen la pronunciacion mas blanda, las quales Liqui∣das son l m n r. Los Vocales son 5. aeiou, La Castellana tiene
un Vocable (que ningun otra Lengua tiene) el qual comprehende todas las cinco, es a laber oveja; Ver∣dad es que aquella transcendiente eterna palabra Je∣hova las tiene tambien, mas la letra h (que no es otra cosa sino una aspiration) se entrepone. Ahora, las letras Vocales merecen bien la prece∣dencia de todas las demàs, porque ningun Consonante puede ser pronunciado sin que tenga una dellas adelante atràs (como se dezia antes) y por esto se llaman con∣sonantes. A. La letra Vocal A es la primera letra de todas las otras en cada lenguage, y tiene esta prioridàd por ser el mas naturàl movimiento y abertura de los labios; Siendo tambien (segun Cicero n) la letra de Absolu∣cion y de consuelo; El Frances tiene un Refran mu∣cho por la honra de A, viz. Està señalado con A, que quiere dezir es muy hombre de bien: Esta podrà ser la razon porque A tiene tanto dominio entre los Ingle∣ses, porque ella (con The) sirve por articulo preposi∣tivo a los Substantivos y tambien a los Adjectivos, co∣mo a man un hombre, a Knight un Cavallero, a sword una espada, a learned man un hombre cientifico, a va∣liant Knight un Cavallero valiente, a bright sword una espada luziente. A en Inglès tiene dos prolationes differentes, una abjerta y clara como Abraham, alabastro; La otra mas cerrada, y como a media boca: Mas in Españ∣ol (y otros Lenguajes) tiene siempre la primcera
prolacion, como Da dios alas a la hormiga, para que se pierda mas ayna; un Refran que sentiende de los sobervios y ambiciosos. A precedieno lm en Ingles anega la letra l, y se buelue en u, como en calme bonança, que se pronuncia caume, Psalme Salmo Pseaume, Balme Balsam baume; mas a recibe por esto un sonido mas abjerto, y dos sylabas vienen a ser una larga. E. E la segunda letra Vocal, se pronuncia en Ingels, co∣mo en otras lenguas: Quando concluye una palabra ella se pronuncia floxamente, ò con discuydo, como en There allà, Fire fuego, bare nudo: El Español ha∣ze lo mesmo, como Alcayde a Warden▪ combate a fight, combite a feast, escabeche pickle, Azauache Jett, padre father, madre mother: mas en el arti∣culo prepositivo The el ò la, e tiene siempre una pro∣nunciacion aguda. Adonde e viene tras l teriendo dos Consonantes adelante, una estraña transposicion acontece porque ella salta antes de l tomando el soni∣do de i, como epistle se pronuncia epistel, epistola; Thistle thistel, cardo; little littel, poco; prickle pri∣kel, espina, &c. E passa tambien obscuramente quando ella concluye la postrera sylaba de un vocablo con el con∣sonante n atras, como spoken hablado, broken quebra∣do, coffer cofre, brewes sopa, &c. Quando e precede d por concluyr una diction ella pierde a vezes el sonido con un Apostrofo, como tyred cansado, se pronunia tyr'd, restrained restrain'd; quande e viene en el me∣dio
dio delante de a anegala, pero haze assi la syaba mas larga, como beast bestia, disease enfermidàd, feast combite, &c. E y I tienen tal amistàd en Inglès que una supple el lugàr de la otra, y se usan indifferente mente a vezes, como Enterchange ò Interchange, trueque; her ò hir, ella; endure ò indure, sufrir; endevor ò indevor, di∣ligencia: Lo mesmo acontece en Españòl en ciertas pa∣labras, como mismo ò mesmo, pedir ò pidir: El Ita∣liano lo haze amenudo, como refiutare ò rifiutare, re∣ferire ò riferire, reputate ò riputare, màs el Floren∣tino queda mas aficionado a i. I. I tiene un sonido muy particular en Inglès, que es differente de los demàs lenguajes, porque el Españòl (y otros) siempre pronuncia i, como el Ingles sule pro∣nunciar ee, como Mitio mee teeo, pimienta pepper, peemeeenta; cinco ceenco, &c. Màs el Ingles pro∣nuncia i como si fuesse el Dipthongo ei, como pilot pei∣lot, pilota; pipe peipe, sampoña; licence leicence, licencia: la qual pronunciacion es puro Anglicismo. I se puede llamar una letra amfibola, porque annque sea voc. l por su navidàd, toda via ella degenera muy amenudo en consonante, (lo que ella nunca haze en la Hebrea y Grièga) el qual Consonante tiene una affini∣dad con la letra g, de suerte que ella puede pedir dos caracteres teniendo ansi dos capacidades, como James Iago, se pronuncia Giames; Javelin javelina, giave∣lin; joy alegria, gioy; Jeffrey Godefrido, Gief∣frey, &c.
O. La letra vocàl o se pronuncia con boca mas redonda que las demas, por esto tiene una figura orbicular; es letra de mucha inconstancia en Inglès; A vezes tiene un sonido abjerto, como en coller collàr, corn grano, crosse cruz, Crocodile Crocodilo, &c. A vezes ella se pronuncia mas flacamente, como en colour color, Cosen primo, mother madre, tomando ansi el soni∣do de u. Sobre la u, o tiene un sonido rezio, como round ro∣dondo, sound sonido, bound atado, &c. Mas en la postrera sylaba delante de n ella pierde su sonido, como en devotion, compassion, person: Delante de doble ò W, tambien ella quita su sonido naturàl, tomando l de u, como hollow hollu, hueco; Tallow tallu, cevo, &c. Quando o fenece un vocablo se pronuncia rezia∣mente en Inglès, como en estas Monosylabas, Go an∣dìd, so assi, no no, &c. Antes del v consonante o tie∣e varias pronunciaciones, como Glove guante, Dove paloma, grove arbleda, Jove Iupiter. Prisciano dize que ciertos lugares en Italia no tenian o mas u en sulugar, y en otros lugares no tenian u, sino o en su ugàr, como leemos en los Autores antiguos muy amenudo Volgus, poblicum, polchrum, colpam; y asta lo dicho desta letra inconstante. V. La letra vocàl u como i tiene privilegio deha∣erse consonante muy amenudo, por tanto algunos las llaman las letras mestizas: V por su nudeza nunca
fenee algun vocablo en Inglès, màs se fortificà con n Diptongo, y otras vezes toma e por seguirla, co∣mo en estas instancias, new nuevo, knew conocia, blue azùl, true verdadero, &c. A vezes el Inglès pro∣nuncia u como el Francès en manera de sylvàr, el qual sonido es differente del Español y el Italiano, los quales la pronuncian como oo, como uno oono, usan∣za oosanza, &c. Mas en Inglès y Francès u se pro∣nuncia como fuesse un Diptongo de ew, como Cocu cornudo, Cubit codo, se pronuncian como si fuessen es∣critas Cokew, Kewbit. El Tudesco està sugeto de tornàr b en v a vezes, como ay un donozo cuento de un Aleman, qui complementando su huespeda Fran∣cesa dixo, Mà foy Madame vous avez veaux en∣fans, A fe señora teneys hijos muy bizerros, en lu∣gar que avia de dezir beaux enfans, hijos bi∣zarros. W ò doble uu. W ò doble uu se pronuncia en Inglès con mayòr re∣dondèz de los labios que la letra O, y con mucha mas fuerça especialmente si h sigue immediatamente, como whale balena, wheel rueda, whirligigg peonça; pero adonde h no sigue tient una prolacion mas mansa, como en whirlwind remolino, do la primera w es mucho mas emfatica que la postrera. Los Tudescos mismos, donde los Ingleses sacan su Originàl y lenguage, no pueden pronunciar w ante de h por esto dizen wat pr what, were por where, que es sendl que el Inglès tiene mejores livianos en el pecho. El Españòl no tiene esta letra w, ni menos el Italia∣no y el Francès.
Y. Y se pronuncia como i, toda via ella queda mas con∣stante a si mesma como teniendo en disden de degeuer àr de su primero ser, y de vocal haçerse consonante; por tanto ella puede bien merecer el titulo de la de Filosofia, ò la letra de Pythagora. Y en Francês tiene tal peso que ella haze a vezes un vocablo de por si como voulez vous y aller, Que∣reys yr allà, tambien es Adverbio de lugar y persona: En Español ella frequentemente haze una sylaba de por si como en yxar, yzar, &c. De los Dipthongos. Basta lo que dicho es de las letras Vocales que se pueden llamàr los ligamentos ò las Arterias que atan los huessos ò consonantes; y los vivifican que sin esto serian como troncos muertos: Agora passaremos a los Dipthongos Ingleses, y por ser compuestos de los Vocales es bien razon que precedan a los cons∣nantes. Los Dipthongos juntan unos Vocales para que pis∣endan proferir un sonido mesclado, de suerte que dos sonidos se juntan en una sylaba: Los Dipthongos In∣gleses son diez, el primero ai ò ay, como maid moça, afraid amedrentado, May Mayo, day dia: el segun∣do au ò aw, coo austero austero, authentik authen∣tico, law ley, awe obediencia: el tercer ea, como
East Levante, Earl Conde: el quatro ei, como weight peso, streight derecho: el 5. ew, como dew rocio, few pocos: el 6. oi ò oy, como toil trabajo, soil tierra, boy muchacho, joy gozo: el 7. 00, como food bastimentos, good bueno: el 8. ou ò ow, como stout animoso, toung lengua, now agora: el 9. üi ò üy, como juice çumo: el postrero üoy, como buoy. No ay mas de tres palabras en Inglès en las quales se hallan eo por Diptongo, viz. people pueblo, jeopatd riesgo, yeoman labrador. El Diptongo ae no se usa en Inglès ò en Español. De los Consonantes. B. B es el primer Consonante y la segunda letra del Abecedario; ella es la primera que junta los la∣bios despues de nacidos, por tanto se ama la letra la∣bial: En Inglès B se pronuncia como en otros lengua∣ges, mas no siempre como en Español, donde ella se confunde muy amenudo con u en muchos vocablos, como Bisoño ò Visoño a young Soldier, bimbrera ò vim∣orera an Ozier. En Griego tambien  raese tornae much as vezes en , que hizo el Tudesco dezir donosamente, Si Beta est Veta, tunc bibere est vivere. Màs la may or alabança de B es, que ella es la letr de Innocencia, por ser el tono de la oveja, que es em∣blema de la Innocencia. C. Algunos criticos Autores ay qui no quedan aficio∣nado a la letra C, llamandola la letra mestiza, siend
ni varon ni hembra, mas un monstro ò espiritu, que por sus imposturas ella toma los sonidos de sk q, que ella es superflua a causa del mesmo sonido que tiene con ellas; mas sin duda ellos sengañan, porque com podriamos pronunciar Cheshire cheese, chisel, Chi∣valry, y otros vocablos sin ella? En la lngua Italiana ella emprunta tambien el sonido de g algunas vezes, como castigo por gastigo, En Castellano (y Francès) quaendo se pronuncia como s, ella and a suportada con un semicirculo abaxo ç, y entonees ella se llama C ce∣dilla, como çaratan the Kanker, çapato a shooe, çarça a bramble, &c. que van pronunciados como si fuessen escritas saratan, sapato, sarsa. D. D es una tan delicada letra en Ingles, que ella no admite algun otro Consonante de seguilla eceto R, co∣mo dreams sueños, drink bevida, drop gota, dragon drago, drum atambor, &c. ella se pronuncia en In∣glès, como en otros lenguajes, mas en Español quando se halla entre dos Vocales, ò antes qual quier otro en medio ò en la fin de una palabra, ella se va derritiendo en th, como el Ingles las pronuncia en that ò the, como Dadivas entran sin taladro, las quales palabras van pronunciados como si fuessen escritas, Dathivas entran sin talathro: La lengua antigua de los Bretones cor∣responde con la Castellana en esto, porque ellos pronun∣cian dd en la mesma manera, como Heb ddew heb dim, Nada sin Dios.
F. F tiene la honra de hazer uno de los mas altos tonos en la Musica, y que es mas, de ser la primera letra de la mas alta virtud espirituàl es a saber la Fe: Ella se pronuncia en Inglès como en otros lenguajes. G. G en Ingles tiene dos differentes pronunciationes, una delante de a, o, y u, como gard guarda, gold oro, gulph golfe, &c. Otra delante de e y i, como Gentle∣man hidalgo, German Tudesco, Gibbet horca, Gi∣an gigante, &c. toda via muchos vocablos ay que quando ella precede i, se pronuncia como delante de a, o, y u, como giddy vertiginoso, gift dàdeva, girdle cinta, &c. H. H es la letra del aliento ò aspiracion, por tanto se puede llamàr la letra de la vida, porque sin aliento no ay vida; por tanto me ofpanto porque los Griegos no vinieron a dalla lugàr en su Alfabeto. Algunos la llaman un espiritu, màs sea espiritu, letra ò aspira∣cion, el Abecedario scria sin aliento sin ella, otros la ilaman la Reyna de los consonantes. En algunas palabras h se escrive mas no tiene soni∣do, como en humor humòr, honor honra, humble hu∣milde, host huesped, &c. las quales se pronuncian umor, onor, umble, ost.
Th tiene dos sonidos en Inglès el uno fuerte comola Griega θ theta, como thunder trueno, Thursday Iue∣ves, thousand mil, thirsty sediento, theef ladron, thought pensamiento, &c. màs th en otras palabras se pronuncian mansamente, como d en Castellano, co∣mo this esto, that aquello, thine tuyo, thither là, thence de là, then entonces, thou tu, &c. Htras w tiene unamas rezia aspiracion en Inglès que en algun otro lenguage, como what que cosa, wheat trigo, wheel rueda, when quando, where adonde, whore puta, whale balena, &c. Ph se pronuncia en Inglès como en Español (y otras lenguas;) màs se observa que en Español y Italiano no se halla ph, porque ellos la tornan en f, como Philo∣sopher Filosofo, Phillip Felipe, phantasie fanta∣sia, &c. Ch se pronuncia en Inglès como en Español (y Ita∣liano tambien) como China, chamber cama, cheee queso, cherry cereza, &c. En los qualos vocablos ch se pronuncia como el Español pronuncia ch en Chico, chicon, chirlar, Màs el Francès pronuncia ch muy differentemente como sh, como China Shina, Chalupa Shalupa, &c. K. K es traviessa que desdeña servir el Español ò el Italiano, ni el Latin ò el Francès, si no en esta palabra Kalendas, por tanto ellos se sirven de c en su lugàr; màs el Inglès las usa indifferentemente; toda
via k en Inglès no precede algun otro Consonante si no n, como Knight cavallero, knowledge ciencia, knave vellaco, knife cuchillo, knee rodilla, &c. L. L tiene la honra de haçer el mas alto tono en la Mu∣sica, porque ella tiene una prolacion gentily mansa, por esso algunos la llaman , porque ella ablanda el techo de la boca. Los Ingleses pronuncian l como los Españoles, mas adonde se hallan ll en Castellano, sea en el principio ò en el medio de una palabra, la postrera l torna en i, como en lloro, calle, callar, lleno, que se pronuncian como si fuessen escrias lioro, calie, caliar, lieno. Los antiguos Bretones en Ingalatierra tienen tam∣bien un muy particular sonido de ll, el qual ningun otrà nacion puede pronunciàr, si la persona no se cria entre llos muy moço; la pronunciacion es tan difficil al In∣glès, que queda forçoso de tornalla en fl, como Floyd por Lloyd, &c. M. M bien se puede llamàr letra labial con b, y duda ay la qual dellas haçen juntar los labios primera en un . Leemos que el Frigio Infante, del qual el Rey Tolomeo se servia por sober qual lengua era la mas natural al genero umano, produzia primero Bec, que significa Pan en aquel lenguaje: Mas los antiguos Bretones en Ingalatierra tienen que m es la primera letra que haze juntar los labios, porque  ay otr
vocablo por Madre en Inglès que Mam, que todos in∣fantes nascanse debaxo de qualquier Clima que sea pronuncian articulatamente luego que entran en el mundo. M se pronuncia clara en el principio, màs cerreda∣mente en el medio, y obscuramente en la fin de un voca∣blo Inglès, como martyrdom martyrio, Marjerom Origano, Mammalucks Mamaluques, &c. N. N en Inglès se pronuncia como en Español, (y otros lenguajes;) màs en Castellano tiene esta singulari∣dàd, de aver unariga direcha encima, exempli gratia fi, y entonces se deve pronunciàr como si i siguiesse im∣mediatamente, como en este Proverbio, Fue la Negra al baño, y tuuo que contar todo el año; en estas pa∣labras baño y año han de pronunciarse como si fueran escritas banio anio. Esta letra ñ suena algo en las norizes, y tiene tres grados de sonidos en Inglès fuerte en el principio, flaco en en medio, y escuramente en el fin. P. P se puede llamàr la tercera letra labial tras de b y m, car ella tambien hazen los labios toparse; en Ita∣liano ella se transforma algunas vezes en u, como so∣prano sourano, coperta couerta.
Q. Q se hà apoderado del lugar que k tenia en los siglos atras entre los antiguos Saxones nuestros tartar abue∣los, los quales a penas conocieron esta letra culatica {que} màs antes de la Conquista Normana solian escrevir kuill por quill, penna; kuire por quire, coro, &c. màs los Franceses-Normanos trayendo consigo muchas pa∣làbras Latinas, como question, quantity, quintessence, y otras, quitaron el uso de k; toda via q es tan pobre le∣tra en Inglès, que no tiene lugar sin que u la siga im∣mediatamente. R. Ay una Nacion muy populenta y grande hazia el Levante, llamada los Chineses, (los quales escriven y leer perpendicularmente) qui no tienen la letra R en su Alfabeto, por esto llaman los Tartaros sus vezmos màs cercanos Tataos, y la razon puede ser porque la letra r se llama la letra canina ò perruna segun el Poeta, —sonat haec de nare canina litera, Esta letra suena de una nariz perruna: Por esto las mugeres de Fran∣cia la dexan sin pronunciar en fin de palabras muchas vezes. En Inglès R se pronuncia como en Español y otras lenguas. S. S aunque sea llamada la letra serpentina a causa de su chifladura, y tambien por su figura; toda via ella chifla mansamente contra las enzias: ella tiene diver∣sas pronunciaciones en Inglès, en el principio tiene un
sonido agudo, como en Sabbath Sabado, sable zebe∣lina, &c. mas en el medio y fin de vocablos (si no va doblada) tiene un sonido manso como Z, como Rose, wise, gems, rimes; mas donde ella va doblada se pronuncia agudamente. T. La letra T tiene una prolacion constante en Inglès, eceto que quando ella precede i hazia el fin de pala∣bras, como en generation, action, faction, do t tor∣na en c, como se eseriven en Español, generacion, acci∣on, faccion. X. La letra X a penas tiene la estima de letra en In∣glès, porque no ay ningun vocable qui comiença con ella; mas en el medio, y en la fin se halla amenudo, co∣mo en sixty sesenta, vexe congojar, sexe sexo, &c. tambien X concluye algunas palabras, como flax estopa, fox raposa, six seys, que se suenan como si fuessen escri∣tas flacks, focks, sicks: Porque X tiene esta preroga∣tivade ser compuesta de tres Consonantés (que ningun otra letra tiene) es a saber de c K s, loqual siendo assi el Anagramma de Orcus que se hizo de Uxor, era algo ingenioso,—Uxor & Orcus idem. En Espaī ol la letra X se usa mucho en el principio, medio y fin de vocablos, que vino de los Moros, los quales tuvieron la mayor parte de España 700. años, como Xarcias, Xa∣pin, Xarava, &c.
Z. La letra Z es la postrera del Abecedario, y muy propiamente, porque es el postrer sonido que se haze en la boca al salir del mundo; no ay en Inglès mas de los ò tres palabras en todo que comiençan con Z, viz. Zealous, zeal, zealot, con algunos terminos de Astro∣nomia, como Zona, Zenith, Zodiaco, y ciertos nom∣bres Griegos, como Xenefon, Xerxes, &c. Y basta lo que dicho es de las letras senzillas. De las Sylabas. Aviendo tradado de los Elementos de Hablat, or a procederemos a las composiciones de letras y pri∣ero de las sylabas. Sylaba es parte de palabra la qual rende un sonido iculado; se haze a vezes (como assi en Español) una sola letra, como amazd assombrado, equippage arejo, imagination imaginacion, ominous deastro∣ usurer logrero; en los quales vocablos a, e, i, o, u en principio hazen una sylaba enter a de por si. Sylaba de mas letras està compuesta ò de Dipthon∣ ò Vocales solos, como ayder ayudadòr, auditor au∣nciero, eating comiendo; not arse hà que aunque un puede hazer una sylaba, toda via ningun Conso∣te puede hazer lo sin un Vocàl añadido: Sylabas Consonante se hazende dos letras, como no; ò de , como the el, que se suele escrevir corto en Inglès esta manera ye; ò se hazen sylabas de mas letras,
como that, then, with, aquello, entonces, con, que se escriven cortas a vezes, como yt yen wth; sylabas y de 5. letras, como there allà, which que, se escriven cortas assi yere wth. Sylabas ay qui tienen dos Consonantes por un Vocàl, como cry grido; otras tienen tres, como drab puta; o∣ras tienen 4. como dregs heces; otras 5. como string cuerda; otras 6. como strength fuerca; algunas sy∣labas ay qui tienen 7. Consonantes por un Vocàl, como strengths fuerça; lo que muestra quanta virtùd tiene Vocàl de poder dàr vida a tantos Consonantes. El Polacco tiene a vezes diez Consonantes srviendo un Vocal solo, de suerte que se dize que el Polacco quando habla arroja sus palabras como piedras en lal ara. Tocante la posicion ò cantidàd de sylabas, no ay otra lengua, que yo sepa, ecceto la Griega y la Latina, qui tiene algunas reglas ciertas para esto; no ay tanta arte y trabajoen Inglès ò Español, ò algun otro len∣guaje Occidentàl porque sus composiciones metricas, versos y rimas se derivan del solo instinto de la Na∣tura, y como dize Aristoteles, , es a saber de una libre, y natural composicion sin ser cautivado a las cantidades de sylabas. Los Grie∣gos tampoco antes de Omero, y los Romanos antes Livio Andronico, o eran tan curiosos en la observa∣cion de la cantidàd de sylabas. Agora es consentaneo a la razon, que hablemos de los Accentos de sylabas, que son como los tonos de la
voz, y no observando el accento puede ser que una pa∣labra venga a ser muy mal pronunciada, como dèsert eremo, y desèrt mericimiento; tórment tormento, tormènt atormentado; óbject, object, objèct obje∣ctàr; íncense incenso; cònvert convertido, convèrt convertàr: Agora toca al accento de hazernos pro∣nunciàr rectamente, y adonde se halla el accento es menester proferir aquella sylaba emfaticamente y con mayor fuerça. Enlos Adverbios el Accento es ordinariamente en la primera sylaba, como mèrrily alegramente, hèavily ristemente. Las Dissylabas y Trissylabas tienen tambien por lo commun el accento en la sylaba primera, como Wìnter Invierno, Sómmer Estio, Síngular sin∣gular, pròvidence providencia. Vocablos tambien terminantes en able sean de 3. ò 4. sylabas tienen el accento en la primera, como Fable, sènsible, sòciable, àmiable; ecceto abóminable, detéstable. Palabras terminando en tion ò sion, tienen el accento ordinaria∣mente en la sylaba que precede, como conténtion con∣tienda, confúsion confusion, abominátion abominaci∣cion: Màs en Espanol tiene el accento en tales voca∣bles en la sylaba postrera. Cada Dissylaba feneciendo en ish, ry, er, el, et, ò on, tienen el accento en la primera sylaba, como slá∣vish esclavoso, màrry esposàr, hòver meneàr, dàmsel donzella, pàcket paquete, gámmon pernil, bácon to∣cino.
cno. Palabras fenecientes en nt tienen el accento communemente en la postrera sylaba, como lamènt, ex∣tènt, contènt, &c. Agora venimos a la calidàd de palabras, por sa∣bèr si son Primitivas ò Derivativas. La mayor parte de vocablos primitivos en Inglès son Monosylabos; los miembros del cuerpo lo son capapie, como head cabe∣ça, heart coraçon, guts tripas, knee rodilla, foot pie: lo que discubre la Inglesa de ser Hija de la Tudesca. El Español todo al contrario se deleyta en Polysylabas; y adonde el Inglès sexprime en una sylaba, el se sirve de 5. ò 6. como thoughts pens amientos, fray levanta∣tamiento, &c. lo que se estima un punto de subiduria en el Español, porque mientras que habla tiempo toma para pensàr en la materia. Tambien ay en la lengua Inglesa vocablos simples y compuestos, como love amor, lovely amoroso; man varòn, manly vironìl; wise sabio, unwise necio: Y en est a composicion de palabras, la lengua Inglesa es assi tan feliz, y atrevida que qualqueir otra, sacando fuera la Griega, que sobrepuja a todas en este particu∣làr; porque el Inglès suele juntar dos Substantivos, como Cut-purse cortadòr de bolsas, self-love amòr de si mesmo, a Milhorse cavalio de molino, &c. y algu∣nas vezes una junta ay de tres Substantivos en un vo∣cablo, como Tap-house-keeper bodgonero, a Foot∣ball-play jugador a pelota, &c.
De las partes de Oracion en la Lengua Inglesa. Ocho partes ay de la Oracion en Inglès comoen o∣tras lenguas, viz. Nome, Pronome, Verbo, Partici∣pio, Adverbio, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection; a las quales añadimos los Articulos The el ò la, y A un una, que los Latinos no tienen, de los quales el primer Articulo es definito, y termina el entendimiento, como The sword la espada, the book el libro, que denota una particular espada ò libro; el otro Articulo es in∣definito, como A sword una espada, a book un libro, que denotan la Idea general de espadas y libros. Ay otra differencia entre The y A, porque The se puede aplicar al numoro plural tambien, como the swords las espadas; mas el Articulo A se aplica solo al singulàr. Los Nombres propios son incapazes destos articulos. Agora de las partes cada una de por si. De Nombre. Ay Nombre Substantivo y Adjectivo, el primero se puede entender de si mismo, como Yglesia a Church, calle a street, &c. El Adjectivo no tiene realidad al∣guna sin que se aplique a un Substantivo, como Blanco white, lindo fair, &c. El Inglès tiene esta singula∣ridàd sobre otras lenguas, (mas no merece mucho loor por ello) que el Adjectivo precede el Substan∣tivo,
como brown bread baço pan, a wise man sabio hombre; màs otras Naciones postponen el Adjectivo, diziendo pan baço, hombre sabio. Los Nombres Substantivos ò son Comunes, como bridg puente, river rio, &c. ò son Propios, como Rial∣to (particulàr puente en Venecia) Severn Sabrina; ò Personales, como Charles Carlos, Katharine Catalna. Cinco Generos ay que pertenesen a los Nombres, el Masculino, que comprehende las cosas debaxo de una Idea masculina, como Bulls toros, men hombres, &c. El Feminino che comprehende qualquier cosa femini∣na, como woman hembra, Does ciervos. El Genero Neutro cuya nocion concibe ni el otro sexo, de∣baxo del qual las cosas inanimatas se comprehenden, como Civdades, Rios, Navios; porque aunque se lla∣man por nombres masculinos, toda via hablamos dellos en el genero feminino en hiscurso; como Eboracum la cividad de York, Rhenus el rio Rheno, el Carlos Re∣al un galeon. El quarto Genero es el Epiceno ò genero promiscuo, quo comprehende ambos sexos, como dogs, horses, dere, cavalgadura, venado, &c. los quales vocabos significan ambos sexos. El quinto es el comùn ò duvoso Genero, como frend, gossip, neighbour, co∣sin, &c. los quales tambien intiman entrambos sexos: Màs en Español (y otros lenguajes) se van differenci∣ando por la masculina y feminina terminacion, como Amigo amiga, vezino vezina, primo prima, &c. que es una ventaja que la Inglesa lleva sobre las demas Lenguas.
Ay ciertos Diminutivos propios a todas lenguajes; los Diminutivos de algunos Substantivos en Inglès fe∣necen en ell, como cock cockrell, part parcell, &c. otros en ing, coo Goose gosling, duck duckling, &c. otros en ock, como Bull bullock, hill hillock: otros en et, como Baron Baronet. Los Adjectivos tambien tie∣nen sus Diminutivos, como cold coldish, black black∣ish, green greenish, &c. Ay tambien Diminutivos de Nombres propios de hombres y hembras en Inglès, como Christopher Kitt, Gregory Grigg, Richard Dick, Magdalen Maudlin, Katherine Kate, Elizabeth Besse, &c. Màs algunos nombres ay que no tienen Diminutivos, como Peter, James, Stephen, &c. Màs el Espanol en esto tiene Diminutivos, y Sub-diminutivos mas que otros, como Simòn, Simoncico, Simoncillo, Simoncicico, Simon∣cicillo; Miguel, Miguelico, Miguelillo; Catalina, Catalinica, Catalinilla; Francisca, Francisquita, Francisquilla, &c. Los Adjectivos Ingleses tienen tambien sus gra∣dos comparativos, y algunos tienen dos comparativos, y dos superlativos, que otros lenguajes no tienen; expri∣men el uno ò por la palabra more mas, ò añadiendo er a la fin del Positivo, como wise more wise, or wiser, stout more stout, or stouter, &c. Ansi el superlativo sexprime ò por la palabra most, ò añadiendo est ala findel Positivo, como wise most wise wisest, stout most stout stoutest, &c. Mas ay ciertos Adjectivos ecetuados desta regla generàl, como good better best, bad worse worst, little lesser least. Adjectivos ter∣minnado e ous admiten sus comparativos y superla∣tivos
solamente por estas palabras more y most, como glorious, more glorious, most glorious; ansi Speci∣cus, famous, victorious, &c. Los Adjectivos Ingleses ordinariamente no tienen el nombre plural, mas el singular sirve por entrambos, que es una not able ventaja; mas los Substantivos tie∣nen sus plurales unos terminando en s, como King Kings, stagg staggs, &c. Otros terminan en en, co∣mo man men, woman women, oxe oxen, &c. Co∣mo en otros lenguajes ay ciertos Irregulares vocablos (aunque sean pucos) que declinan las dichas termina∣cione, como Mouse mice, louse lice, tooth teeth, foot feet, &c. Algunos Substantivos ay que no admiten el nombre plural (y son de peso) como Gold oro, silver plata, brasse bronzo, copper cobre, tinn estaño, (y otros mi∣nerales tampoco tienen plural en Español) rest, bread, beer, ale, &c. Otros Substantivos tienen el plural solo, como goods bienes, riches, necessaries, do se hà de observàr que necessaries el Substantivo nace del Adjectivo necessary. Llegamos ahora alos Pronombres, llamados assi porque suplen algunas vzes el lugàr de Nombres, y los tomaremos cada uno en su grado començando con las personas, I, thou, he, we, ye, they, Yo, tu, el, noso∣tros, vosotros, aquellos: que se declinan ansi:
The first Person. Singular. Plural. Nom. I, Yo We, Nos ò nosotros Gen. of me, de mi of us, de nos ò nosotros Dat. to me, a mi to us, a nos ò nosotros Accus. me, me us, nos ò nosotros Voc. o me, o me o we, o nosotros Ablat. with me, comigo. with us, con nosotros. The Second Person. Singular. Plural. Nom. Thou, Tu Yee, Vos vosotros Gen. of thee, de ti of you, de vos de vosotros Dat. to thee, a ti to you, a vos ò vosotros Accus. thee, te you, vos vosotros Voc. o thou, o tu o you, o vos o vosotros Abl. from or with thee, de ti ò contigo. from or with you, de ò con vos ò vosotros. The third Person. Singular. Plural. Nom. He, El They, Ellos Gen. of him, de el ò del of them, de ellos ò dellos Dat. to him, a el ò al to them, a ellos Accus. him, el them, ellos ò a elloss Voc. o he, o el o they, o ellos Abl. from or with him, del ò con el. from them, de ellos o dellos.
Ay en Inglès quatro Pronombres Possessivos, my ò mine, mi ò mio; my adelanta siempre una pala∣bra empeçando con Consonante, como my cloak mi ca∣pa, my hat mi sombrero, &c. Mine adelanta un vo∣cablo comencando con Vocal ò h, como mine Aunt mi tia, mine heritage mi herencia, &c. màs mine se halla mas amenudo de por si por un possessivo, particu∣larmente en respuesta a una pregunta, como whose sword is this? mine; cuya espada es esta? lamia. Los Plurales de my y mine son our ours, los quales son tambien possessivos. Los segundos Possessivos son Thy, thine, como thy house tu casa, thine arme tu braço, thine hand tu mano; y thine como mine adelantan vocablos comen∣tando con un Vocàl. Thine tambien es possessivo de si mesmo a una pregunta, como whose land is that? thine. Los Plurales de thy thine son your yours, que son Possessivos de si mesmos. Los terceros Possessivos son Her hers, con sus Plu∣rales their theirs; como her distaf su rueca, her mai∣denhead su virginidad; whose ring is this? hers. Mas el Español (ni el Italiano ò el Francès) no tiene ste feminino Possessivo de distinction, sirviendose de y suyo. Which, who, that son Pronombres Relativos refe∣iendo a las palabras delante; mas which y who refie∣en propiamente a cos as vivas, y that a cos as inanima∣s, como the man which preach'd yesterday, el hom∣e que predicava ayer; the Lady who passed this way, la dama que passava por aqui; the stones that went to build Pauls, las piedras que yvan a fabricar
San Pablo. What, whose son Pronombres Interroga∣tivos, tambien lo son which y who sobredichos a vezes. Ay ciertos Pronombres compuestos, como my self, thy self, him self, her self, &c. Del Verbo. EL verbo, es una de las mas principales y necessarias partes de una lengua: se puede llamar el alma de la Habla, porque aunque todas las palabras del mundo se junten, toda via ninguna sentencia, sea Interrogativa ò qualquier otra se puede hazer sin el: Y como los Voca∣les animan Palabras, assi los Verbos animan sentenci∣as; que puede ser la razon porque tiene tanta latitùd en la lengua Latina, porque la palabra verbum se ex∣tende a todas las partes de la Oracion. Verbo en Inglès como en Español (y otras lenguas) tiene 3. distinctiones de tiempos, el Presente, como I pray or do pray, yo ruego; el tiempo passado, como I prayed or did pray, yo rogava; el Futuro ò el tiempo veni∣dero, como I shall or will pray, yo rogarè. Las termi∣naciones de Verbos en Inglès es la misma en ambos nombres (eceto la segunda y tercera persona en el singu∣lar) como I live, we, ye, they live, &c. no es assi en Español, como yo vivo nos vivimos, &c. ni en otros engajes, lo qual es gran ventaja a los que aprenden nglès. Ay en la lengua Inglesa Verbos Activos, Passivos y eutros, como en Español, como I love yo quiero, es ctivo: I am lov'd yo soy querido, es Passivo añadi∣end
endo el Verbo Auxiliario Am soy: El Neutro es don∣de el Verbo am soy, no puede ser juntado, como I live vivo, I weep lloro, &c. El Inglès como los otros lenguajes tiene sus Conju∣gaciones y cadencias de Verbos: Los Verbos de la pri∣mera a Conjugacion algunos fenecen en all, como to call, to fall, to install, to inthrall, &c. cuyos Participios se haçen añadiendo ing y d, como calling call'd, instal∣ling install'd, &c. Otros terminan en are, como to dare, to pare, to share, &c. Otros en ace, com to chace, to face, to grace, to lace, to trace, to im∣brace, &c. Verbos de la segunda Conjugacion algunos fenecen en eare, como to beare, to sheare, to teare, to weare, &c. Cuyos Participios terminan en ing y orne, como bearing, shearing, tearing, borne, shorne, torne. Otros fenecen en ease, como to ease, to please, to dis∣please, &c. Otros en ead, como to lead, to knead, to read, to spread, to tread, &c. Verbos de la tercera Conjugacion unos terminan en ite, como to bite, to write, to indite, &c. Otros en ight, como to fight, to fright, to light, to right, &c. Otros en ell, como to quell, to sell, to tell, &c. Otros en ink, como to drink, to link, to sink, to think, to shrink, &c. Los Verbos de la quarta Conjugacion unos terminan en y, como to dy, to ly, to cry, to fly, to try, &c.
Otros en ire, como to hire, to desire, to inquire, &c. Otros en ine, como to shine, to dine, to fine, to de∣cline, to confine, to incline, &c. Notarse hàque los Verbos Monosylabos vienen de la Tudesca, los otros de la lengua Francesa. Tambien se ha de notar que los Participios del Tiempo presente terminan en ing, y del Tiempo preterito end, por lo mas, en todos verbos Ingleses, ecto ciertos Irregulares. La Conjugacion del Verbo, I have yo hè. El Modo Indicativo ò declarativo. El tiempo presente. Yo he, tu has, aquel ha: nosotros avemos, vos aveis, aquellos han. El tiempo preterito imperfecto. Yo avia, tu avias, el avia: nos aviamos, vos avia∣des, ellos avian.
El tiempo preterperfecto. Yo uve, tu uviste, aquel uvo: nos uvimos, vos uvistes, aquellos uvieron. El tiempo futuro. Yo avrè, tu avràs, el avrà: nos avremos, vos avreis, ellos avràn. El Modo Imperativo ò de mandàr. Ave, aya el: ayamos, ayed ò ayays, ayan ellos. El Modo Optativo, ò de dessear. El tiempo presence. Oxala. Si yo oviesse, si tu oviesses, si el oviesse: si no oviesse∣mos, si vos oviesses, si ellos oviessen. El tiempo imperfect. Yo avria, tu avrias, el avria: nos avriamos, vos av∣riades, ellos avrian. El Modo Subjunctivo. El tiempo presente. Como yo aya, como tu ayas, como el aya: como nos ay∣amos, como vos ayays, como ellos ayan.
El Modo ayudadoro Yo soy. El Modo Indicativo ò declaratorio. El tiempo presente. Yo soy, tu eres, el es: nos somos, vos soys, ellos son. El tiempo preterimperfecto. Yo era, tu eras, el era: nosotros eramos, vosotros e∣rades, ellos eran. El tiempo preterperfecto. Yo he sido, tu has sido, el ha sido: nos avemos sido, vos aveys sido, ellos han sido. El tiempo futuro. Yo serè, tu seras, el serà: nos seremos, vos sereys, el∣los seran. El Modo Imperativo ò para mandar. Se tu, sea el ò aquel: seamos, sed vosotros, sean ellos ò aquellos. El Modo Optativo ò de dessear. El tiempo presente. Que yo sen, que tu seas, que el sea: que nosotros sea∣mos, que vosotros seays, que ellos sean. El tiempo preterperfecto. Si yo fuesse, si tu fuesses, si el fuesse: si nos fuessemos, si vos fuessedes, si ellos fuessen.
El Modo Conjuctivo. El tiempo presente. Como yo fuere, como tu fueres, como el fuere: como nos fueremos, como vos fueredes, como ellos fuèren. El tiempo preterperfecto. Aunque yo sea, aunque tu seas, aunque el sea: aunque nos seamos, aunque vos seays, aunque ellos sean. El Modo Infinitivo. Ser, haver sido, siendo. Se hà de observàr que los verbos en Inglès tienen sus passivos generalmente terminando en d, como I love yo amo, I am lov'd yo soy amado; I fear yo te∣mo, I am fear'd yo soy temido; I fire I am fir'd, yo yo quemo yo soy quemado: Eceto Verbos en ell, qui tienen sus passivos en old, como I tell I am told, I sell I am sold, &c. Y Verbos en ind, cuyos passivos ter∣minan en ound, como I bind I am bound, yoato yo soy atado; I find I am found, yo hallo yo soy hallado; I grind I am ground, yo molo yo soy molido; con mu∣chos otros tambien que fenecen en orn, como I swear I am sworn, yo juro yo soy jurado; I tear I am torn, yo lacero yo soy lacerado, &c. Mas en Español estoy sirve por hazer un verbo passivo tan amenudo que soy, como se ver à en la Gramatica. Agora la differencia
que ay entre ser y estar es, que el primero significa la essencia de una cosa, como ser bueno; estar significa la condicion local, como yo estoy en Londres, I am in London, &c. Una Instancia para declinar un Verbo Activo assivo en Ingles, que pueda servir por los demas. El Modo Indicativo ò declaratorio. El iempo presente. Activo. Passivo. To desseo yo soy desseado tu desseas tu eres desseado el dessea: el es desseado: nos desseamos nos somos desseados vos desseays vos soys desseados ellos dessean. ellos son desseados. El tiempo Preterimperfecto. Yo desseava Yo era desseado tu desseavas tu eras desseado el desseava: el era desseado: nos desseavamos nos eramos desseados vos desseavades vos erades desseados ellos desseavan. ellos eran desseados.
El Aoristo ò tiempo preterperfecto. Yo desseè Yo fui desseado tu desseaste tu fuiste desseado el desseò: el fue desseado: nos desseamos nos fuimos desseados vos desseastes vos fuistes desseados ellos desseàron. ellos fueron desseados. El tiempo Preterpluperfecto. Donde ser torna en el Verbo Ayudodòr aver. Yo avìa desseado Yo avia sido desseado tu avias desseado tu avias sido desseado el avia desseado: el avia sido desseado: nos aviamos desseado nos aviamos sido desseados vos aviades desseado vos aviades sido desseados ellos avian desseado. ellos avian sido desseados El tiempo futuro. Yo dessearè Ye serè desseado tu dessearàs tu seràs desseado el dessearà el serà desseado: nos dessearemos nos seremos desseados vos desseareys vos sereys desseados ellos dessearàn. ellos seran desseados.
El Modo Imperativo ò de comandar. Dessee tu Se tu desseado dessee el: sea el desseado: desseamos nosotros seamos nos desseados desseed vosotros sed vosotros desseados desseen ellos sean ellos desseados. El Modo Optativo ò de dessear. El tiempo presente. Oxala ò plega a Dios. Que yo dessees Que yo sea desseado que tu dessees que tu seas desseado que el dessee: que el sea desseado: que nos desseemos que nos seamos desseados que vos desseeys que vos seays desseados que ellos desseen que ellos sean desseados. El tiempo preterperfecto. Si yo desseasse Si yo fuesse desseado si tu desseasses si tu fuesses desseado si el desseasse: si el fuesse desseado: si nos desseassemos si nos fuessemos desseados si vos desseassedes si vos fuessedes desseados si ellos desseassen. si ellos fuessen desseados.
El Modo Conjunctivo. El tiempo presente. Como yo desseàre Como yo fuere desseado como tu desseàres como tu fueres desseado como el desseàra: como el fuere desseado: como nos dessearemos como nos fueremos dessea∣dos como vos desseareys como vos fueredes dessea∣dos como ellos desseàren. como ellos fueren desseados El tiempo preterimperfecto. Aunque yo dessee Aunque yo sea desseado aunque tu dessees aunque tu seas desseado aunque el dessee: aunque el sea desseado: aunque nos desseemos aunque nos seamos dessea∣dos aunque vos desseeys aunque vos seays dessea∣dos aunque ellos desseen. aunque ellos sean desseados El Modo Infinitivo. Dessear Ser desseado aver desseado aver sido desseado desseando siendo desseado.
Segun este exemplo otros Verbos Activos (eceto cier∣tos Irregulares) y Passivos se pueden formàr. El Inglès tiene tambien sus Verbos Impersonales, como el Español (y otros) los quales no van distingui∣dos por personas, como it grieves me, it irketh me, me pesa, it behoveth me me importa, it concerns me me toca, &c. Hasta agora avemos tratado de las partes mas principales de la Oracion, procederemos a las demàs, primeramente de Los Adverbios. Adverbio es palabra sin nombre que se junta con ra, y viene adelante ò tras de una palabra, como well bien criado, better bred mejor criado, ill bred criado, &c. Mas los Adverbios por la mayor vienen atràs, como couragiously animosamente, devoutly devotamente, &c. y como en Inglès todos dverbios casi feneen en y, assi en Español (y Italia∣o) fenecen en ente. Los Adverbios ò son de cantidàd, como much , too much demasiado, enough bastantemente, to∣ether juntamente, &c. ò son de calidd, y los prime∣ de numero, como once, twice, thrice, una vez, os , tres vezes: los segundos son de tiempo, como esterday ayer, then enonces, when quando, luego, ever siempre, &c. los terceros son de , como here aqui, there alla, where adonde, aculla, &c. los quatros son de afirmation ò nega∣cion,
I, yea, yes, si; no, not, nay, no: los quintos son parallamar, como hola ola: otros son para amo∣nestar ò aprovar, come so, so-so, well, assi, bien està: otros desséan, como ô if: los seys son de similitùd, co∣mo, as, so, likewise, even so, assi, tambien, &c. Interjeciones. Interjeciones son ò de alegria, como ha, ha, ha: ò de congoja, como ah, alas, wo is me, hay, ay de mi, guay de mi: ò de aborecimiento, como fy, fy-fy, foh, ba: ò de desden, como tush, &c. st es Interjecion de silencio: rr para incitar los perros. Preposiciones. Preposiciones ò son separables, como before delante, behind atras, according segun, among entre, without in, afore antes, under or below debaxo, against con∣ra, opuesto, enfrente, over sobre, neer cerca, &c. Las Preposiciones inseparables no exprimen nad a sin r juntadas con otro vocablo, como incapable incapaz, ndone deshecho, relief alivio, represse reprimir, re∣lution resolucion, &c. Conjunciones. Conjunciones se llaman assi porque ata las pala∣, como and y, my father and my mother, mi pa∣ y mi madre: y esta se llama la conjuncion copula∣va: otros apartan, como but mas, albeit although
anque: Otras son Disjunctivas, como nor, neither ni; ni yo ni vos, nor I nor you: otras proceden de razanando, como for, because porque: otras son de ilacion, como therfore, wherfore, so that, por tan∣to, &c. De los puntos de palabras y sentencias. La lengua Inglesa omo la Castellana (y otras) tiene sus puntos y not a de Subdistincion, de media di∣stincion, y de complida distincion, que se llaman Com∣ma, colon y periodo. Una subdistincion ò Comma es nota do corto aliento, y se figura assi, La media di∣stincion tiene aliento mas largo, y se puedo dezir cum∣plida parte del Periodo, y se sigura assi: Periodo es la sentencia entera, y va figurada de un punto sen∣zillo assi. Ay tambien l Parenthesis, que se figura como dos medias Lunas assi () y aunque sea incluyda en la sentencia, toda via en ometiondola, la sentencia no dexa de ser perfecta. Ay tambien nota de Interrogacion, que se figura assi? Mas desto ay nota de Circumflexion, quando el vo∣cablo va abreviado, y se figura assi▪ Ay tambien not a de Admiracion, que se figura assi! En conclusion ay not a del Apostrofo, quando una le∣rase corta, y se figura assi' Mas la Castellana por su mayor alabana no usa tales Apostrofos,
TOuching the Syntaxis, which is an orderly series and connection of Nouns, Verbs, Adverbs, and other parts of Speech accor∣ding to the propriety of a Language in a due cohaerence, the English toung may be said to have the same that other vulgar Languages and dia∣lects have; But the English being a sub-dialect to o∣ther toungs, as was touch'd in the Epistle to the Rea∣der, and having such varieties of incertitudes, chan∣ges and Idioms, it cannot be in the compas of human brain to compile an exact regular Syntaxis therof, Mr. Ben. Iohnson a great Wit, who was as pati∣ent as he was elaborat in his re-serches and com∣positions, as he was framing an English Syntaxis, confess'd the further he proceeded, the more he was puzzled; Therfore herin we must have recours to that great Mistresse of all knowledg Observation, it being a tru maxime, Quod deficit in praecepto, sup∣pleat Observatio. Concerning the English prosody, the same may be said thereof as was spoken before of the Syntaxis; But touching Poesie and Metrical compositions, the English is as punctual in observing the nomber of feet, syllables, and cadences, as any other vulgar language; And ther are couch'd in Her as strong concepts, and as sinewy expressions, with such high Idaeas and Raptures of Wit and Invention as in any language whatsoever; nor is any so copious of Al∣legoires, and so constant in the poursuit of them; Her ordinary rithmical composures consist of ten feet, wherof I thought good to produce these (yet bleed∣ing) examples.
Vpon His late Majesties Decollation. SO fell the Royal Oke by a wild crew Of Mongrell shrubbs▪ which underneath Him grew; So fell the Lyon by a pack of Currs; So the Rose wither'd 'twixt a knot of Burrs; So fell the Eagle by a swarm of Gnats; So the Whale perish'd by a shoal of Spratts. Indignabundus sic cecinit, J. H.
Vpon CHARLES the First, . If to subdu ones Self, if to obtain A Conquest o're the Passions, bee to Raign, Here lies the Gretest King (who can say more?) Of all can com behind, or went before. I. H.
Of divers superfluous Letters in the English Orthography; And som Solaecisms discover'd in the common practice of the Language. HE may be siad to do his Mother Toung a good office, who makes her the more docible and easy to be learnt by Forreners: Now, ther is not any thing which tends more to the easy attaining of a Language, and to allure a stranger to the study therof, as when the writing and pronunciation of words do both agree. I have known divers Forreners much affect the English Toung, but when they went about to study her, and found such a diffe∣rence betwixt the printed words and the pronoun∣cing of them, (which proceeds from the superfluous letters) they threw away their books in a kind of passion and dislike. The French finding lately this inconvenience, have garbled their Toung of such letters; and under favor (as we imitat the French in all things els) it may well becom the English to follow him in this; to which purpose these few rules may serve. 1. If those words which have the Latin for their Original, wee write them as the Latin doth, not as the French, (and tis the more credit so to do) as Afric, Logic, Physic, &c. labor, honor, favor, &c. wherby the words are as fully pronouncd, as if (after the French) they were written Afrique, Logique;
Physique, labour, honour, favour: and ther are two letters sav'd in the three first words, and one in the second, which makes the words to be pronounc'd as they are written. 2. That in such words as end in inne and unne, the last n and the e shold be left out, as sinne, ginne, pinne, shinne, tinne, winne, &c. gunne, nunne, runne, shunne, sunne, &c. which shold be written sin, gin, pin, shin, tin, win, &c. gun, nun, run, shun, sun, &c. wherby two letters are sav'd, yet they have al∣together as full a pronunciation; but herby stran∣gers will not be subject to make two syllables of them, as sin-ne, pin-ne, &c. gun-ne, nun-ne, &c. 3. That all Adverbs which end in lie, as bodile, merrilie, sadlie, &c. shold be written with y, as bodily, merrily, sadly, &c. wherby a letter is sav'd, and strangers will not be subject to read them bodi∣li-e, merrili-e, &c. 4. That such words as end in tle, kle, sle, &c. shold be written with the e before the l, as for Epi∣stle epistel, twinkle twinkel, whissle whissel; wherb the word retains still its tru pronunciation, and strangers will not be subject to read those words, epist-le, twink-le, whiss-le, &c. 5. That in such words as end in eare the e shold be omitted, as Beare bear, feare fear, deare dea, forbeare forbear, &c. wherby Forreners will not be subject to read them Bear-e, fear-e, forbear-e, &c. As also words 6. That these Monosyllables me, she, be, he, ye, &c. shold be written mee, shee, bee, yee, hee; and
so be read as they are pronounc'd. And that in those words which end in ue, the e also shold be left out, as true, blue, crue, due, &c. they shold be written tru, blu, cru, du, &c. 7. That in words ending in gh the g shold be left out, as Chough chouh, cough couh, trough trouh, &c. wherby the Forrener will pronounce it more easily. As likewise in words ending in ght the g shold be left out, as bright briht, fight fiht, height heiht, might miht, &c. which will render them more easie to the Forrener, and save a letter. 8. That the superfluous p shold be left out in many words, as Consumption consumtion, presump∣tion presumtion, assumption assumtion, &c. and the b also in doubt, and the i in Parliament may well be omitted. 9. C might well be spared when it comes before k, as fickle fikle, pickle pikle, tickle tikle, &c. fr the word retains still its full sound. 10. That in these words some, done, summe, come, &c. e were left out, for forreners read them as if they made two syllables, so-me, do-ne, co-me, &c. As also words ending in arre, as warre, barre, jarre, &c. which may be very well writ, war, bar, jar, &c. 11. In those words which end in tt, the latet may be well omitted, as Witt wit, hitt hit, bitt bit, committ comit, &c. As also most words ending n ll, the later l may be spared, as Bell bel, fell fel, tell tel, mongrell mongrel, &c. and the sound of the wo remains as full. Herunto may be added all Infinitif
Moods terminating in erre, as conferre, referre, de∣ferre, where the last re is superfluous, and may be writ as well confer, defer, refer, &c. 12. That words in eare and in ease shold leave the a, as for Feare fere, for teare tere, &c. for plea∣sure plesure, leasure lesure: and then Forreners will not be subject to read them fe-are, te-are, ple-asure, le-asure, &c. Ther is a Maxim in Logic, that Frustra fit per plura, qucd fieri potest per pauciora, More is too much when fewer will serve: and as this Rule holds in all things els, so it may well do in Ortho∣graphy. They say abroad, that none write better Latin then the English, and none pronounce it worse; This proceeds principally from the odd prolation of i, which all other Nations pronounce like ee, as Nisi neesee, tibi teebee; which the English doth not iu many words, and hee shold not do amisse to frame his mouth in pronouncing Latin after that sound. Ther is a Solaecism us'd in English, in putting the word most before a Superlatif, (as if any thing could be higher then the Superlatif) as most high∣est, most brightest, &c. You is also us'd wher yee shold be, as you Gentle∣men of the Iury, wheras yee Gentlemen, &c. is the tru English; for you in the Nominatif case shold relate but to one person, and yee to many; though you in all the other cases serves for both. The English also is censur'd abroad for putting the
Adjectif before the Substantif, as white bread, &c. as also for proposing Questions negatively, which he shold do affirmatively, as Were you never in France? you have not bin in France, Sir? &c. wheras we shold say, Were you ever in France? have you bin in France, Sir? An affirmatif being held more noble then the negatif. I hope I shall not incur a Praemunire (among the discreeter sort) for my temerity in pointing at these particulars, which, if we could obtain leave of (that great Tyrant) Custom, to reform both in Ortogra∣phy and speking, it wold (humbly under favor) be nere the worse for our Language. The English hath som things (that other Toungs have not) which tends much to the advantage and ease of the Forren Lerner, for all Verbs termi∣nat alike in the singular and plural, through all the Moods, except in the second and third person sin∣gular. Ther be divers words that are both masculin and feminin, without change of any letter, as frend, neighbor, cosen, gossip, &c. The English also hath two Comparatifs, and two Superlatifs for most Adjectifs, (which other Lan∣guages have not) as Devout, devouter or more de∣vout, devoutest or most devout; strong, stronger or more strong, strongest or most strong. She hath also a shorter way of expression in divers words, as once, twice, thrice; which the Spanish, French and Ita∣lian cannot do but by two words, viz. one time, two times, three times, una vez, une fois, una vol∣ta, &c.
Lastly, the English Adjectifs have but one nom∣ber, which is the singular, that serves for both, as a black pudding, black puddings; a fair maid, fair maids; hansom whore, hansom whores, &c. Touching the Premises let the Reder observe this Exampel. The Warre which beganne in Bohemia, foretolde by that fatall Comete in the yeare, 1618. (and by the intemperance of the Calviniste and the Jesuite) was directlie or collaterallie the cause of all the confusions which happened in Christendome ever since; it brought the Swede into Germanie, (like a colde Snake into ones bosome) whoe did soe ha∣rasse the whole Countrey, and soe pittifullie grinde the faces of the poore People, that they have not recovered their right Countenances to this ve∣rie daye in manie places. The same written as 'tis commonly pronounc'd. The War which began in Bohemia, foretold by that fatal Comet in the yeer, 1618. (and by the intem∣perance of the Calvinist and the Iesuit) was direct∣ly or colateraly the cause of all the confusions which happen'd in Cristendom ever since: it brought the Swed into Germany, (like a cold Snake into ones bo∣som) who did so harasse the whole Cuntry, and so pitifully grind the faces of the poor Peepel, that they
have not recovered their right Countenances to this very day in many places. In this short Exampel ther are above 27. letters sav'd, and the words made fit to be pronounc'd by any Forrener being written as they are utter'd: Now, as ther was a hint given before, He doth his native Toung a good office, who finds a way to spread her abroad, and make her better known to the world. And so much (yet) of the English Grammar.
Gramatica DE LA LENGUA EspañolA ò CASTELLANA. Con un Discurso conteniendo la Perambula∣ciòn de España y Portugàl. A Grammar of the Spanish or Castilian Toung. With a Discours containing the Perambulation of Spain and Portugal; which may serve for Directions how to travel throuh both Cuntres.
El Abolengo de la Lengua Española ò Castellana. LA Lengua Española hà la Latina por su madre, y la Arabiga ò la Lengua Morisca por su madrasta: En uno de sui Apellidos toma el nombre de la primera, porque ella se llama Romance, como habla vm Romance, quieredezir Español? y parece gloriar se desta decendencia, porque ella haze sus diligencias cada dia de estrechar la afinidad que tiene con la Latina: Mientras que la Italiana y la Fran∣cesa esfuerçanse de allexarse della, teniendo cierta ambicion de hazerse Lenguas de por si, y no Diale∣ctos: esta es la razon porque sentencias enteras se pueden formar, que serian buen Latino, y buen Espa∣ñol; lo que no se puede haçer en Italiano ò Francès, aun∣que ellas tambien sean hijas de la Latina. La Español se puede dezir de aver la lengua Mo∣risca por su madrasta, porque los Moros, por la infame trayciòn del Conde Don Julian, qui los introduxo pa∣ra vengarse de Don Rodrigo, qui era entonces Rey de España, por aver desvirgado su Hija Doña Cava: digo que los Moros teniendo firme possessiòn de la mayor parte de España cerca de 700. años; Avien∣do tan larga coaliciòn pegaron muchos de sus voca∣blos en la lengua Española; los quales se pueden fa∣cilmente distinguìr de los qui se derivan de la Lati∣na,
porque ordinariamente comiençan con al, x, y z; ò fenecen con x, como Alcalde, Alcayde, Alguazil, Al∣moxarife, Xaràl, Xarcias, Xopaypas, Zorro, Zur∣rana, Zurrador, Guadix, &c. Agora la Morisca bien se puede llamàr madra∣sta a la lengua Española por aver la corrumpido d una pronunciacion mas aspera y gutural, como consta en g, i, x precediendo, ò atrassando tales Vocales; como se hallarà en la Gramatica siguiente. Màs por dezir la verdàd, la primera y mater∣nal lengua de España es la Bascuença, ò la lengua de Cantabria, el qual vocablo denominava toda la E∣spaña en los siglos atras: Yes cosa observable, que ni los Romanos, ni los Godos, ni los Moros pudieron conquistar la Biscaya; por tanto parecen de tener gran correspondencia en muchas cosas con los antiguos Bre∣tones de Ingalatierra, (los de la tierra de Gale) porque como ellos (con su lenguaje) son sin duda ls primeros habitantes de esta Isla, y connaturales con ella; Assi son los Cantabros ò Biscaynos de España: De suerte quando algunos dellos aya de ser Cavalle∣ro del abito, no se haze alguna buscadura ò diligen∣cia si esta limpio de la sangre de Moros, ni de su hi∣dalguia. No ay sobre la redondez de la Tierra alguna len∣gua as llana y facil a aprender, qui la Castellana,
porque pronuncia siempre la palabra entera, sin ad∣mitir algunos Apostrofos: Pero la causa que algu∣nas sylabas son escabrosas y gargantiles fue la mes∣cla, y la conversacion que tuvieron los Españoles con los Moriscos tantos siglos como fue dicho, y esto hà rendido la pronunciacion mas difficultosa al Fo∣restiero: De suerte que estiman a el de aver al∣cançado la lengua qui sabra bien pronunciàr este Refran gargantil: Abeja y Oveja, y Piedra que rabeja, Y pendola tras Oveja, y lugàr en la Ygreja, Dessea a Hijo la vieja. A Bee in the hive, and a sheep in the fold, A stone that doth whirl, and an ear-ring of gold, A place in the Church, is all the boon The good old wife doth wish her son.
The Pedigree of the Spanish or Casti∣lian Toung. THe Spanish or Castilian Toung hath the Latin for her mother, and the Arabic or Morisco Toung for her step-mother: She bears the name of the first in one of her Appellations, for somtimes she calls her self Romance, as habla vm Romance, do you speak Spanish? and it seems she glories to be so well decended, for she endevors daily to have the neerest affinity she can with the Latin; while the Italian and French do labor to eloniat themselfs, and keep at a further distance from the Latin, having a kind of ambition to be Toungs of themselfs, and not Dialects: this is the reson that whole sentences may be made which will be good Latin & good congruous Spanish, (as I have shew'd els wher) which cannot be don in Italian or French, though they also descend from the Latin. The Spanish may be said to have for a kind of step-mother the Morisco Language, because the Moors (by the infamous trechery of the Conde Don Iu∣lian, who brought them over to revenge himself of the then King of Spain Don Rodrigo, for deflow∣ing his daughter Cava,) I say, the Barbarians or Moors having kept firm footing in Spain about 700. years, by so long a coalition they insinuated, or as it were indented and pegg'd divers of their words in∣to the Spanish Toung; which may be easily distin∣guish'd
from those that are deriv'd from the Latin, for they commonly begin with al, x, or z; or end in x, as Alcalde a Judg, Alcayde a Gaoler, Algua∣zìl a Serjeant or Baylif, Almoxarife a Receiver of customs, Xaral a Thicker, Xarcias the tacklings of a Ship, Xopaypas Fritters, Xabon Sope, Zorro a wolf, Zurrana a Pigeon, Zurrador a Tanner, Guadix a Town, &c. Now the Morisco may be well call'd a stepmo∣ther to the Spanish Toung, because she hath corrup∣ted her with a more rugged and guttural pronun∣ciation, as appears in g, i, x preceding, and follow∣lowing som Vowels, as will appeer in the ensuing Grammar. But the truth is, that the first and maternal Toung of Spain is the Bascuence, or the language of Canta∣bria, which word in Ages past denominated the whole Countrey: And observable it is, how nei∣ther Roman, Goth or Moor could conquer Biscay; in so much that ther is a great analogy 'twixt the ancient Britons in England call'd Welshmen, and the Biscayners; for as They (and their language) with∣out controversy are the first inhabitants of this Island, and as it were connatural with Her: So the Cantabrians or Biscayners are of Spain; in so much that when any of that Countrey is to be made Knight of any of the three habits, ther is no scrutiny made of his Gentility, or whether he be cleer of Morisco bloud, as is us'd before others are dubb'd. Ther is not any language among men so plain and easie to be learnt as the Castilian; for she pronoun∣ceth
alwayes the whole word without admitting any Apostrop hes: Now the reason why som sylla∣bles are cragged and throaty, is the mixture and conversation the Spaniards had so many ages with the Moors, as was said before, which hath rendred the pronunciation more difficult to strangers; so that he is thought to have attained the language to som perfection, who can well pronounce this old throaty Adage in Spanish, viz. Abeja y Oveja, y Piedra que rabeja, Y pendola tras Oveja, y lugàr en la Ygreja, Dessea a Hijo la vieja. A Bee in the hive, and a sheep in the fold, A stone that doth whirl, and an ear-ring of gold, A place in the Church, is all the boon The good old wife doth wish her son.
A Grammar of the Spanish or the Castilian Toung. Of the Spanish Alphabet. THe Spanish Alphabet consists of the same, and the same nomber of Let∣ters as the English doth, k onely ex∣cepted, which is supplied by c, and somtimes by q, as Kalendar Calen∣dario, Kintall Quintal. Now the difficulty and difference, which if found in the Spanish Toung, is the pronunciation of these nine letters, b, ç, d, g, j, ll, ñ, x, z; which have a differing prolation in many words. The first is b which often degenerats into v, as Barba remojada medio rapada, A Beard wetted is half shav'd: where the second b is pronounc'd like v, as if it were written barva; bandera or vandera a banner, bobo or bovo a fool, &c. but when b comes before any of the Liquid Consonants, l, m, n, r, it retains constantly the sound of b, as lumbre light, hablar to speak, &c. The second is ç call'd C cedilla, which comes not but before a, o, u, and then 'tis pronounc'd like s, as çampoña a Shepherds pipe, quiça it may be,
lame, çurrador a tanner, &c. and this C cedilla is seldom or never under a great C. The thid is g, which oftentimes degenerats to Ishota, as lenguage lenguaje, a language; page paje, a page; which are pronounc'd both alike superfici∣ally from the Throat, or like the aspiration h, as if they were written lenguahe, pahe; but they have this guttural pronunciation only before e and i, be∣fore a, o, u, they are pronounc'd as in English. And somtimes g turns to x, as tigeras tixeras, a pair of Sheers, &c. The fourth is j call'd Ishota, as jamas never, jeri∣gonça gibberish, joya a jewel, hijo a son, Iuevs Thursday, &c. which are pronounc'd in the throat as the former g. But i in general must be pro∣nounc'd in Spanish, as eè in wèe, thee; as Ni olla sin ocino, ni Sermon sin Agustino, Nor an ollia without Bacon, nor a Sermon without Saint Austin. The fift is ll, which is pronounc'd as in French like ll in fille, the second l turning into i, as En casae llena presto se guisa la cena, In a full house Supper is soon dress'd; where llena is pronounc'd as if it were liena: so in llorar to weep, liorar; llevar to carry, lievar; lluvia rain, liuvia. But great care must be taken that the l and i with the next Vowel be pronounc'd as one syllable, making a kind of Dipthong, as Quien no hà visto Sevilla no hà visto maravilla, Who hath not seen Sevill he hath not seen wonders; wher the last l being turned into an i, as Sevilia, maravilia, the lia must be pronounc'd as one syllable la: and so in Mundo Mundillo na∣cido
en Bilbao muerto en Bustillo, Such is the world, born in Lancaster dead in London. The sixth is ñ, call'd N tilde or contilde, which is pronounc'd as if i also immediatly follow'd, as Viña, niña, peral, y havar malas cosas de guardar, A Vine, a Child, a Pear-tree, and a Bean-field are hard to be kept: wher viña and niña must be pro∣nounc'd as if they were written vinia, ninia. The seventh is u, which often degenerats into a Consonant in Spanish, (as in all other Languages) and then she hath a different clos'd caracter, as v: being still a Vowel u is pronounc'd as oo, as Pan re∣ziente, y uvas, a las moças ponen mudas, y a las viejas quitan las arrugas, New bread and grapes paints young womens faces, and takes away wrinkles from the old; where uvas and mudas are pronounc'd as if they were written oovas, moodas. The next is x, which is pronounc'd also in the throat, as Xaramago y tocino manjar de hombre mes∣quino, Wild Radish and Bacon is the food of a mi∣serable man: Xabonar cabeça de asno es perdimiento de xabòn, To wash an Asses head is throwing away of Sope: where x is pronounc'd in the throat like g and Ishota, as was formerly said. And indeed he that will pronounce well these three letters in Spa∣nish, must pronounce them as  in Greek, which the old Britains in England do pronounce more natu∣rally than any other Euroean Nation: And I have observed, that a guttural pronunciation is the mar of the antiquity of a Language, for the Hebre with her Dialects, the Chaldaic, Syriac and Arabic
with all the Oriental and Southern Languages, be∣sides the Greek, do so. Z is pronounc'd somtimes as the English pro∣nounce it, as azul blu, azemila a great mule; but somtimes she turns to c, and then she is pronounc'd more rudely, as hazer hacer, &c. G coming before n is not pronounc'd in Spa∣nish, as digno worthy, significar to signifie, are pronounc'd dino, sinificar; signar to signe, sinar, &c. Gue and gui, que and qui found in words, are pro∣nounc'd in Spanish as large as the letters will bear, as Aguelo a Granfather, garguero the throat, &c. quento, cinquenta fifty, &c. which the Italian and French do not, but contract them, ghe ghi, che chi: but som are excepted, as quinientos five hundred, quasi almost, which are pronounc'd kinjentos, casi, &c. but especially que and qui, which are pronounc'd ke and ki, &c. The letter d hath a differing pronunciation in Spanish from other Toungs, for most commonly 'tis pronounc'd meltingly, as th in that or the, as Hom∣bre narigudo pocas vezes cornudo, A long-nos'd man is seldom a Cuckold: which must be pronounc'd, Hombre narigutho poca vezes cornutho. HAving don with the Alphabet, we com now to Syllables, and dictions or words, and first of the Spanish Articles, which are subservient to the de∣clining of all words that are capable of declension, for ther is no other means to know the variation of ses otherwise: now ther are in Spanish three
Articles, the Masculin, the Feminin, and the Neu∣ter, which are declin'd thus: The Masculin Article is declin'd thus: Singular. Plural. Nom. El, the Los, the Gen. del, of the de los, from the Dat. al, to the a los, to the Accus. el ò a el, the los ò a los, the Abl. del, from the de los, from the. The Feminin Article is declin'd thus. Singular. Plural. Nom. La, the Las, the Gen. de la, of the de las, of the Dat. a la, to the a las, to the Accus. la ò a la, the las ò a las, the Abl. de la, from the de las, from the. The Neuter thus: Singular. Nom. lo, the Gen. de lo, of the Dat. a lo, to the Accus. lo, the Abl. de lo, from the It is to be observed that this Neuter Article hath no Plural, nor can it be applied to any Noun either masculin or femi∣nin, but it seems to be rather a Demonstratif Pronoun, for ther are no Neuter Nouns in the Spanish.
The Article El is alwayes put before Nouns of the masculin gender, beginning with a Vowel or Consonant, as el libro the book, el pecho the breast, el ayre the air, &c. And somtimes it comes before Feminins, specially before such as begin with a, to avoid too much gaping, as el alma the soul, el agua the water; not la alma, nor la agua; as also to a∣void Apostrophes, which the Spanish hates. This Article el becomes somtimes le at the end of a word, and so is ranvers'd: but it becomes so only at the end of Imperati Moods, as matadle kill him, abraçadle imbrace him; which are pronounc'd matalde, abraçalde, by postposing the d to the l. The Spaniards have a peculiar mode of speking to one in the second person, using this Article el and le insteed of vos you; for they hold vos you, to be a mean manner of speking, and use it towards their Inferiors, and is little better esteem'd then tu thou; as Si el hardesto, if you will do this: quiere cenar comigo? will you sup with mee? wheras the words import, if hee will do this, will hee sup with me: Insomuch that the Spaniard herein is higher in complement then the French or Italian, who commonly use you; in lieu wherof the Spaniard useth frequently the third person hee and him, shee and her. But el is often oitted, being included in the Verb, which is of the third person, as hà comido, have you din'd? wheras it is meant hà el comido. In other cases except the Nominatif le is us'd, as Yo le digo, I tell you, wheras the tru sense is, I tell him.
The Spaniard hath another mode of complement by these two words, vuestra merced your favor, which they generally use insteed of you, and it is a∣bove el the third person formerly spoken; som pro∣nounce it at length, vuestra merced, som vuesa mer∣cè, som vosastè, som vueste; but in writing two letters only stand for it, viz. VM. as Hago brindis a VM. I drink to you: Embio a VM. con el portadòr desta, I send you by the berer herof. Yet the Italian sur∣passeth the Spaniard herin in point of complement, for in lieu of vuestra merced your favor, he useth vostra signoria your Lordship at every word, apply∣ing it to every ordinary Gentleman, as Fo brindesi a vostra signoria, I drink to you; which two words in writing hee expresseth only by VS. as Poco fa chio scrissi a VS. I writ to you lately. The Feminin Article la comes alwayes before feminin Nouns, as la cabeça the head, la yglesia the Church; but el takes place before words be∣fore words beginning with a, as 'twas said before, as el ama the nurse. Lo, though it cannot properly be call'd an Ar∣ticle, because ther are no Neuter Substantifs in the Spanish, yet it comes before Adjectifs, and then it hath the power to turn them to Substantifs, as Lo bueno que yo recebia, the good which I receav'd; lo malo que me hizo dios se le perdone, the ill which you did me God forgive you. It comes also very often before and after Verbs, and then somtimes it is a Relatif, somtimes Demonstratif, as lo digo a VM. de veras, I tell it you in good earnest; or digo lo a VM.
de veras: Tengo de hazer lo de buena gana, I will do it willingly. Of Nouns, and their Genders, and Terminations. THer are in Spanish, Nouns masculins, and Nouns feminins: Som end in Vowels, viz. e or o, as lumbre light, renombre renown, Cielo hea∣ven, Infierno hell: and 'tis observ'd that ther are but two Nouns feminins which end in o, through all the Spanish Toung, which are mano the hand, nao a ship. But most Noun Substantifs in Spanish end in one of these Consonants d, l, n, r, s, x, y, z: those that end in d have the accent in the last syllable, and their Plurals in es, as Abàd an Abbot, abàdes; mer∣ced a curtesy or favor, mercedes; virtùd virtùdes vertu. Som terminat in l, and they also have the accent in the last syllable, and the Plural in es, as animal animales, a living creture; btl a boat, ba∣teles; badil a Frying-pan, badiles; caracol a young inail, caracoles; azùl blu, azules, &c. Som Substantifs end in n, and their Plurals end also in es, as pan bread, almazen a storehouse, cele∣min a peck, sazon seson, Aun the Tunny fish: whose Plurals are panes, almazenes, celemines, sazo∣nes, atunes. And for the most part Subtantifs in n have the accent also over the last ,
specially if they end in on, as devociòn, compassiòn, generaciòn, &c. Som Substantifs end in r, and they also have the accent in the last, and also their Plurals in es, as havàr a Bean-field, havares; mugèr a woman, mugeres; martìr a martyr, martires; açor a hawk açores. Som Substantifs terminat in s, and they also most commonly have the accent in the last syllable, and their Plurals in es, as Diòs God, Dioses; feligrès a parish, feligreses; mès a month, meses; montanès a mountaneer, mountañes. Other Substantifs end in x, and they commonly are Morisco words, but they often change the x in the Singular to ges in the Plural, carcax a quiver, carcages; relox a clock, reloges, &c. Som Substantifs end in y, and they also have their Plurals in es, as ley the law, leyes; rey a King, reyes; buey an ox, bueyes. Lastly, som Substantifs end in z, and they also have the accent at the end, and their Plurals in es, as paz peace, pazes; juèz a judg, juezes; perdìz a partridg, perdizes; toz a cough, tozes; cruz a cross cruzes, &c. Herby it appeers that the Plural of all Spanish Substantifs end in s, and som Singulars end so, but they are very few.
Of the Declensions of Nouns substantifs proper and common. IT is to be observ'd that Nouns proper differ from common in two things; first, they have no Prepo∣sitif article, then they have no plural nombers. Examples of proper Nouns. Singular. Singular. Nom. Carlos Charls Catarina Katharine Gen. de Carlos of Charls de Catarina of Katharine Dat. a Carlos to Charls a Catarina to Katharine Accus. Carlos Charls Catarina Katherine Voc. o Carlos to Charls o Catarina o Katharine Abl. de Carlos from Charls. de Catarina from Ka∣tharine. Instances in common Nouns. Singular. Plural. Nom. el Cielo Heven Los Cielos the Hevens Gen. del cielo of heven de los cielos of the hevens Dat. al cielo to heven a los cielos to the hevens Accus. el ò al Cielo heven los cielos the hevens Voc. o cielo o heven o cielos o heaven Abl. dal cielo from he∣ven. de los cielos from the hevens.
Singular. Plural. Animal a beast Los Animales ganapan a porter los ganapanes pastor a shepherd los pastores relox a watch los reloxes muger a woman. las mugeres. All which must be declin'd according to the ex∣ample of cielo. Of Noune Adjectifs, and of their Declensions. The Spanish Adjectifs have two terminations, one masculin in o, which changeth into a feminin, as virtuoso virtuosa: The other termination is in e, as valiente, and it signifieth both masculin and fe∣minin, as hombre valiente a valiant man, hembra va∣liente a valiant woman, cosa grande a great thing: but heed must be taken to this word grande, for co∣ming before a Substantif that begins with a Conso∣nant, it loseth de, as grancosa, gran Bretaña, &c. but grand becomes a Substantif it self somtimes, as un Grande de España, a high Peer or Grande of Spain, who are permitted to cover themselfs before the King, but when hee speaks to them, or they to him. The same holds in bueno and malo, good bad, in the Masculin gender, and when it comes be∣fore Substantifs of the masculin only, as tiempo bue∣no,
buen tiempo a good time; hombre malo, mal hom∣bre an ill man. This abridgment holds also in tanto and quanto, before Adjectifs and Adverbs, and somtimes before Substantifs, as tan rico so rich, tan glorioso so gloi∣ous, tan tarde so late, tan temprano so early; quan admirable how admirable, quan bien habla vm, how well do you speak? but when tanto and quanto come before these Adverbs mas, menos, more, lesse, they are pronounc'd whole, as also before mayor greter, menor lesser, as Quanto mas yole respeto, tan∣to menos me quiere, The more I respect him, the les∣ser hee loves mee. Before the Nouns Comparatifs they also keep their whole length, as Quanto mejor es el vino, tan∣to mas se beve, The better the wine, the more 'tis drunk: quanto mayor es el hombre, tanto menor es s seguridad, The greter the man is, the lesser is his security. The Spaniards have a peculiar Idiom, to use que tanto for quanto in Interogations, as que tanto es del mes? what day of the months is it? que tanto ay de Londres a Lancastra? how far is it from London to Lancaster? The article lo is joyn'd to Neuter Adjectifs, and then it becomes a kind of Substantif, as seas con∣tento con lo tuyo, y no busques lo ageno, Be conten∣ted with thine own, and seek not what is ano∣thers. Possessif Neuters are made of the Pronouns, lo mio, lo tuyo, lo suyo, lo nustro, mine, thine, his or
hers, ours, yours; as Necio es qui pierde lo suyo, He is a fool who loseth his own: Dios me haga con∣tento con lo mio, God make me contented with mine own. Of the words mucho, poco, harto; much, little, enough. Mucho and poco, though they be Adverbs of quantity, yet they become somtimes Nouns Neu∣ters, as Lo mucho que Dios me hà dado, The much that God hath given mee: Lo poco que le pago, The little which I pay him. They are somtimes Adje∣ctifs before inanimated Substantifs, but only in the singular, as Mucho vino emborracha, much wine makes one drunk: mucho azeyte y poeo vinagre hazen buena ensalada, much Oyl and little Vineger make a good Sallet. But in the Plural nomber they are us'd indifferently before any Substantifs, as Muchos componedores cohonden la novia, Many attirers con∣found the Bride: Portugueses pocos y locos, The Por∣tugueses are few and foolish, &c. Harto enough, is somtimes an Adverb, as Ay harto, si no ay demasiado, Ther is enough, if ther be not too much. Somtimes 'tis an Adjectif, as De∣pues de harta caa Marta, Martha is merry when she hath enough: Hartos ducados tiene qui se con∣tenta, He hath Crowns enough who is conten∣ted.
Of the Spanish Diminutifs. THe Spanish is more copious for Diminutifs then other Languages: Som end in illo illa, ico ica, ito ita; as capitanillo a little Captain, muger∣cilla or mugercita a little woman, loquillo loquilla, or loquito loquita a little fool, &c. Som end in elo ela, as borrachuelo a little drunkard, moço moçuelo a little boy, a little maid. But in proper names they have Diminutifs, sub-diminutifs, sub-sub-diminutifs, and sub-sub-sub-diminutifs, as Simòn, Simoncico, Simon∣cicico, Simoncilillo: Francisca, Francisquita, Fran∣cisquicita, Francisquililla, &c. Of Numerical Nouns, and of their Terminations. Vno One dos two tres three quatro fower cinco five seys six siete seven ocho eight nueve nine diez ten unze or onze eleven doze twelve treze thirteen catorze fourteen quinze fifteen dezieys sixteen diez y siete seventeen diez y ocho eighteen diez y nueve nineteen veynte twenty veynte y uno one and twenty veynte y dos two and twenty, and so taking the single nombers a∣foresaid all along.
Treynta Thirty Treynta y uno one and thirty, and so taking the single nombers a∣foresaid. quarenta forty quarenta y uno one and forty, and so taking the single nombers a∣foresaid. cinquenta fifty sesenta sixty setenta seventy ochenta eighty noventa ninety noventa y uno ninety one, and so taking the single nombers a∣foresaid. Ciento a hundred dozientos 2 hundred trezientos 3 hundred quatrocientos 4 hundred quinientos 5 hundred seys cientos 6 hundred setecientos 7 hundred ocho cientos 8 hundred novecientos 9 hundred Mil a thousand dos mil 2 thousand tres mil 3 thousand, &c. Cien mil 100 thousand dozientos mil 200 thou∣sand quinientos mil 500 thou∣sand un millon or un cuento a million dos millones two milli∣ons, &c. millar a million of mil∣lions. Observe that this word ciento a hundred, being to be put before a word it loseth the last syllable to, as cien millones a hundred millions, cien soldados a hundred Soldiers, not ciento soldados: and som∣times it becomes a kind of Substantif, as un ciento de hombres a hundred of men, but then un goes before.
Numbers are of two kinds, cardinal, as those which went before, and ordinal numbers, which are Adjectifs, as follows: Primero the first segundo the second tercero the third quarto the fourth quinto the fift sexto the sixt septimo or set no the se∣venth. octavo the eight nono or no veno the ninth decimo or dezeno the tenth. Som stop here the ordinal number, and take the cardinal number to go higher, as soldado onze the eleventh soldier; yet these five are admitted, onzeno the eleventh, dozeno the twelf, trezeno the thir∣tinth, catorzeno the fourtinth, quinzeno the fiftinth; but after, the cardinal number, one, two, three, &c. then you must proceed to vieynteno or vigesimo the twentith, treynteno or trigesimo the thirtith, quaren∣teno or quadragesimo the fortith, cinquenteno or quin∣quagesimo and cinquentesimo the fiftith, sesenteno or sexagesimo and sesentesimo the sixtith, setenteno or setentesimo the seventith, ochenteno or octuagesimo and ochentesimo the eightith, noventeno or noventesi∣mo and nonagesimo the ninetith, centeno or centesimo the hundreth. But it is to be observ'd that primo and tercio, not primero and tercero come after vige∣simo and the rest.
Of Pronouns. PRonouns are certain words which supply the room of Nouns, and they serve only to demon∣strat the person or thing without naming of it. Ther are divers sorts of Pronouns, as Primitif, Possessif, demonstratif, derivatif, relatif, and reciprocal Pro∣nouns: the Primitif have three persons, which are yo, tu, de si that hath no Nominatif; yo is thus declin'd: Singular. Plural. Nom. Yo I No ò nosotros we Gen. de mi of mee de vos ò vosotros of us Dat. a mi to mee a nos ò nosotros to us Accus. me mee nos ò nosotros us Abl. de mi from mee. de nos ò nosotros from us. Singular. Plural. Nom. Tu Thou Vos ò vosotros Yee Gen. de ti of thee de vos ò vosotros of you Dat. a ti to thee a vos ò vosotros to you Accus. te thee vos ò vosotros you Voc. o tu o thou o vos ò vosotros o you Abl. de ti from thee de vos ò vosotros from y. The Singular is the same both for masculin and feminin, but os is turn'd to as in the feminin Plu∣rals of nosotros and vosotros, as nosotras as vosotras, but nos and vos by themselfs serve for both genders.
Mi and tu coming before the Substantifs turn to Possessifs Pronouns, as mi espada my sword, tu sombrero thy hat. Nos implying greatnes or dignity, comes before proper names of the singular number, as No Don Carlos por la gracia de Dios Rey dela gran Bre∣taña, &c. Vos us'd in Spanish in speking to a person is held as mean as thou: with a preposition vos is us'd, as no digo mal de vos, I speak no hurt of you; morirè por vos, I will dy for you, &c. but after any other Noun it turns to os, as yo os digo, I tell you: as also coming to the end of a word, as quiero hablaros la verdad, I will tell you the truth. The Pronoun de si himself, hath no Nominatif nor Plural, and is delcin'd thus: Gen. De si of himself Dat. a si to himself Accus. se himself Abl. de si from himself. Ther is an observable phrase in Spanish, Que serà de mi? que serà de ti? What will become of mee? what will become of thee? Mismo or mesmo my self, is us'd after all the three persons through all the cases, adding s to the Plural.
Singular. Plural. Nom. Yo mismo or mes∣mo I my self. Nosotros mismos wee our∣selfs Gen. de mi mesmo of my self de nosotros mismos of our selfs Dat. a mi mesmo to my self. a nosotros mismos to our selfs Accus. mi mesmo my self nosotros mismos wee our selfs Abl. de mi mesmo from my self de nosotros mismos from our selfs Singular. Plural. Nom. Tu mismo thou thy self Vosotros mismos yee your selfs Gen. de si mismo of thy self, and so through all cases. de vosotros mismos of your selfs, and so through all cases. Singular. Plural. Nom. El mesmo hee himself Ellos mesmos they them∣selfs Gen. de si mesmo of him∣self, and so through all cases. de si mismos of them∣selfs, and so through all cases. The Spaniards use proprio or propio insteed of mis∣mo, as yo proprio I my self, tu proprio thou thy self, ella propria she her self, de si propio of himself, &c.
The Pronoun El is declin'd thus: Singular. Plural. Nom. El hee Ellos they Gen. del of him dellos of them Dat. al to him a ellos to them Accus. el him ellos them Abl. del from him. dellos from them. Ella she, and ellas they, are declin'd after the same manner. Of Pronouns Possessifs. Mio Mine, tuyo thine, suyo his, nuestro ours, vuestro yours, with their feminins in a, are call'd Pronouns Possessifs; but before a Substantif they turn to mi, tu, su, as mi capa my cloke, tu guante thy glove, su libro his book. Lo, being put before mio, tuyo or suyo, make them a kind of Substantifs, as mi cuydado es de guardar lo mio, my care is to keep mine own: tu cuydado serà de asseguarar lo tuyo, thy care must be to secure ine own: su amo bien guarda lo suyo, his master looks well to his own. Su is somtimes us'd in Spa∣nish for la, and 'tis only us'd in Spanish, as vi que notenia su firma del Autor, I saw it bore not the sig∣nature of the Author. Cuyo and cuya whose, are Pronouns possessifs, but the Italian and French have none such, and
commonly they are put before Interrogatifs, as cuya ropilla es esta, whose coat is this? cuyo cavallo es aquel, whose horse is that? Cuyo and cuya are also us'd as Relatifs in the middle of sentences, as guay aquel hijo cuyo padre va al Parayso, Wo be to that son whose father goes to heven: saluda la muger a cien passos lexos, cuyos cabellos son roxos, salute a hundred paces off that wo∣man who hath red hair. Ther are Demonstratif Pronouns, as este or esta this, esse or essa that same, aquel or aquella hee, shee or that: ther is also aqueste and aquesse, which sig∣fies the same as este esse, but not so much us'd. Este declin'd. Singular. Plural. Nom. este or estae this Estos or estas these Ge. de este or deste of this de estos or destos of these Dat. a este to this a estos to these Accus. este or a este this estos these Abl. deste or desta from this. de esto or destos from these. Esse or essa, aqueste or aquesse this very same are declin'd alike. No. aquel or aquella that aquellos those Gen. de aquel of that de aquellas of those Dat. a aquel of that a aquellos to those Accus. aquel that aquellos those Abl. de aquel from that de aquellos from those.
Observe that esto this, esso this very thing, aquel∣lo ello that, are Neuters, and so have no Plurals. The Pronouns este and esse are joyn'd often to otro, and then the e is lost, yet they never use the note of Apostrophe, as estotro hombre this other man, estotra muger this other woman: and so essotro is us'd. Ther are two Pronouns which have no singular number, viz. ambos ambas, entrambos entrambas, wherunto one may adde ambos and dos, all which signifie Both or both together: as Querria que en∣trambos veniessen aca, y yo os emoregare entrambos sus obligaciones, pero si no veneys ambos no tengo de darse las, por tanto digo que ambos ambos juntos, que serà por la ventaja de entrambos: I could wish that you both came hither, and I will deliver you both your bonds, but if you com not together, I will not deli∣ver them, therfore I say that you com both of you, and it will be for the advantage of both. Of Pronouns Relatifs. Ther are three other Pronouns Relatifs, viz. quien, que, qual, as quien canta, who sings? que is what or that, que es esto, what is this? el cavallero que yo digo, the Gentleman which I speak of: qual in sense is the same as que, as qual hombre puede di∣gerir esto, what man can digest this? Que hath no Plural, as quien and qual have, as quien es aquel hidalgo, who is that Gentleman? quien es son aquellos mercaderes, who are those mer∣chants?
but quien in the singular is counted more elegant, as quien son ellos mercaderes? Qual hath los or las before it in the Plural, as Las donzellas las quales yo saludava, the maids which I saluted: los soldados los quales yo nombrava, the sol∣diers which I numbred. In lieu of qual what, and como how, these two words que tal are us'd, which is a pure Spanicism, as que tal est à mi hermano, how doth my brother? que tal se halla mi madre, how doth my mother? as que tanto is us'd for quanto, which is also a pure Spa∣nicism, as que tantas leguas ay entre Londres y Glo∣cestra, how many miles are ther 'twixt London and Glocester? que tanto ha que VM. hà buelto del pa∣lacio, how long is it that you have returned from Court? wherof wee gave instances before. To these Relatif Pronouns quien and qual ther is often adjoyn'd quier and quiera, which of themselfs are Verbs, as quienquiera, qualquier whosoever, as Hablarè Castellano con qualquier hombre que sea, I will speak Spanish with any man whatsoever. Som∣times que quiera is us'd for Whatsoever, as que quier a que digan las gentes a ti mismo para mientes, whatsoever they say of thee take heed to thy self Roma es la patria de qualquiera, Rome is any mans county. Of me, te, se, the Reciprocal Pronouns. Me and te serve Vebs oftentimes in the Datif case, as Di me con quien andas, y dezirte h quien
eres, Tell mee with whom thou dost keep compa∣ny, and I will tell thee who thou art: somtimes they serve in the Accusatif, as no me trates en esta suerte, do not use me thus. Se comes also before or after Verbs, as el se va, hee goes away: vase VM. a Londres, do you go to London? no me voy, I go not. Somtimes for a fuller signification me and te fol∣lows se very often, as que se me da a mi, which form of speking is a pure Spanicism, and cannot be eng∣lished verbatim but thus, What have I to do with it, what care I for it? que se le da a el, what doth hee care for it? se me da mucho, it concerns mee much: Deve algo para pascua, y hazerte se ha la quaresma corta, Borrow mony to be paid at Easter, and Lent will seem short unto thee. Se, is very often us'd in the Datif case before the article lo, as Preste me su espada, y yo se la bolvere incontinente, Lend mee your sword, and I will re∣turn it speedily: yo se lo dire, I will tell it you: yo se lo dare, I will give it you: yo se lo embiare, I will send it you. Ther is also another mixture 'twixt se, me and te, and le and lo doth associat often with them, as quien eres que tu te me vendes por tan discreto, who art thou that makest thy self so wise? or according to the words, That sellest thy self unto mee for such a wise man? which kind of phrase is a Spanicism: no se le da nada, he cares not for it: madre mia a donde os me llevan, O my mother, whither do they carry you from mee?
The Particles mi, ti, si, do joyn oftentimes with the preposition con, and with go, as comigo with mee, contigo with thee, consigo with himself, as Cada Fran∣ces lleva un frenetico consigo, Every Frenchman car∣ries a madman about him. Andad comigo oy, & yo yrè contigo mañana, Go with mee to day, and I will go with thee to morrow. Of Verbs. WEE are com now to the Verbs, which may be calld the ligaments or great arteries which tie words and sentences together: Ther are in Spanish three Conjugations of Verbs, the first in ar, the second ending in er, and the third in ir: Ther are also Verbs Actif, Passif, Neuters and Im∣personals, and they are declin'd by five Moods as in other languages; The Indicatif or demonstratif, the Imperatif or Mood of command, the Optatif or wishing Mood, the Conjunctif and Infinitif Mood. Ther are two subservient or auxiliary Verbs, with∣out which no other can be thoroughly form'd, and they are Aver to have, ser to be, therfore wee must first conjugat these two Verbs, before wee treat of the other, but because Yo he I have, and yo tengo I hold, are often confounded, and of the same sense before other Verbs, we will conjugat them toge∣ther.
The Indicatif Mood. Present tense. Yo he Yo tengo I have tu has tu tienes thou hast aquel ha el tiene hee hath nosotros hemos ò havemos tenemo wee have vosotros heys ò aveys teneys yee have aquellos han. tienaen. they have. Preterperfact tense. Yo havia ò avia Tenia I had tu avias tenias thou hadst el avia tenia hee had nos haviàmos teniamos wee had vos aviades teniades yee had ellos avian. tenian. they had. Perfect tense. Yo huve ò uve Tuve I had tu uviste ò o∣viste tuviste thou hadst el huvo ò ovo tuvo hee had nos uvimos tuvimos wee had vos uvistes tuvistes yee had. ellos uvieron. tuvieron. they had.
Perfect indefinit. Yo he avido Tenido I had had tu has avido tenido thou hadst had el ha avido tenido hee had had nos hemos ò a∣vemos avido tenido wee had had vos aveys avido tenido yee had had ellos han avido. tenido. they had had. Future tense. Yo avrè Tendrè ò ternè I shall have tu avràs tendràs ò ternàs thou shalt have el averà tendra ò terna hee shall have nos averemos nos tendremos ò ternemos wee shall have vos avreys vos tendreys ò terneys yee shall have ellos avràn. ellos tendràn ò ternàn. they shall have The Imperatif Mood. Have tu Ten tu Have thou aya el tenga el let him have ayamos tengamos nosotr. let us have haved tengays vosotros let you have ayan. tengan ellos. let them have.
The Optatif Mood. Oxala, plega a Dios que, aunque, dado que, como qui∣era que, puesto que: O that, wold to God that, although, howsoever that, put case that. Yo aya Tenga I had tu ayas tengas thou hadst el aya tenga hee had nos aynos tengamos wee had vos ayays tengays yee had ellos ayan. tengan. they had. The Conjunctif Mood. Si, o si: If, o if. Yo uviesse Tuviesse I had tu uviesses tuviesses thou hadst el uviesse tuviesse hee had nos uviessemo tuviessemos wee had vos uviessedes tuviessdes yee had ellos uviessen. tuviessen. they had. Quando is often us'd in Spanish before the Op∣tatif and Conjunctif Moods, and then it signifies as much as although, or bien que, which is also us'd, as
Present tense. Quando, bien que: Though or although. Yo uviesse Tuviesse I had tu uviesses tuviesses thou hadst el uviesse tuviesse hee had nos uviessemos tuviessemos wee had vos uviessedes tuviessedes yee had ellos uviessen. tuviessen. they had. Perfect tense. Oxala, plega a Dios, aunque, puesto que: O that, I wold to God, although, put case that. Yo ay avido Tenido I may have tu ayas avido tenido thou maist have el aya avido tenido hee may have nos ayamos avi∣do tenido wee may have vos ayais avido tenido yee may have ellos ayan avido. tenido they may have. Pluperfect tense. Oxala, o si, aunque, &c. Oh that, although, o if, &c. Yo uviera Tuviera I had had tu uvieras tuviera thou hadst had el uviera tuviera hee had had nos uvieramos tuvier amos wee had had vos uvierades tuvierados yee had had ellos uvieran. tuvieran. they had had.
Future tense. Quando, when. Yo uviere Tuviere I shall have tu uvieres tuviere thou shalt have el uviere tuviere hee shall have nos uvieremos tuvieremos wee shall have vos uvieredes tuvieredes yee shall have ellos uvieren. tuvieren. they shall have The Infinitif Mood. Havèr ò avèr Tenèr To have aver avido aver tenido to have had estàr por aver. estàr por tener. to bee to have. Thus wee see that tengo I hold, is us'd often∣times for the auxiliary Verb Hè, but tengo alludes to the possession of a thing, as tengo cobrado mi dine∣ro, I have recovered my mony: It comes more of∣ten after digo then any other Verb, as tengo dicho antes, I have said before, &c. dixo me que yo ter∣nia mi dinero mañana, Hee told mee I shold have my mony to morrow: quando yo le diesse todo quan∣to tengo, aun no se contentaria, Although I shold give him all that I had, yet I shold not content him.
The Conjugation of the Verb, Yo soy I am, and of Yo estoy I am or stand, which although they differ in Variations, yet they are alike oftentimes in Signification, as shall be shew'd further. The Indicatif Mood. Present tense. Yo soy Yo estoy I am tu eres tu estas thou art el es el està hee is nos somos estamos wee are vos soys estays yee are ellos son. estan. they are. Imperfect tense▪ Yo era Estava I was tu eras estavas thou wast el era estava hee was nos eramos estavamos wee were vos erades estavades yee were ellos eran. estavan. they were. Perfect tense. Yo fui Yo estuve I was tu fuiste tu estuviste thou wast el fue estuvo hee was nos fuimos estuvimos wee were vos fuistes estuvistes yee were ellos fueran. estuvieron. they were.
Perfect indefinit. Yo he sido Estado I have bin tu has sido estado thou hast bin el ha sido estado hee hath bin nos hemos ò ha∣vemos sido estado wee have bin vos aveys sido estado yee have bin ellos han sido. estado. they have bin. Preterpluperfect tense. Yo avia sido Estado I had bin tu avias sido estado thou hadst bin el avia sido estado hee had bin nos aviamos si∣do estado wee had bin vos aviades sido estado yee had bin ellos avian sido. estado. they had bin. Future tense. Yo serè Yo estarè I shall bee tu seràs tu estaràs thou shalt bee el serà el estarà hee shall bee nos seremos nos estarèmos wee shall bee vos sereys vos estareys yee shall bee ellos seran. ellos estaran. they shall bee.
Ther is a second Future tense that belongs to these two Verbs, (and indeed to most of the rest) with hè or tengo before the Infinitif Mood. The second Future tense of ser and estar. Yo he ò tengo de ser De estar I shall or must bee tu has ò tienes de ser de estar thou shalt or must bee el ha ò tiene de ser de estar hee shall or must bee nos hemos ò te∣nemos de ser de estar wee shall or must bee vos aveys ò te∣neys de ser de estar yee shall or must bee ellos han ò tie∣nen de ser. de estar. they shall or must bee. The Imperatif Mood. Se tu Està tu Bee thou sea el estè el let him bee seamos nos estemos nos let us bee sed vos estad vos bee yee sean ellos. esten ellos. lot them bee.
The Optatif and Conjunctif Moods. Present tense. Oxala, plega a Dios que, aunque, puesto, dado que, &c. O that, wold to God that though, put case that, &c. Yo sea Estè I bee tu seas estes thou beest el sea estè hee bee nos seamos estemos wee bee vos seays esteys yee bee ellos sean. esten. they bee. Imperfect tense. Oxala, &c. O that, &c▪ Yo fuesse Estuviesse I were tu fuesses estuviesses thou werst elfuesse estuviesse hee were nos fuessemos estuviessemos wee were vos fuessedes estuviessedes yee were ellos fuessen. estuviessen. they were. When si if, or o si o if, and quando, when it is ta∣ken for Although, comes before these Tenses, they are declin'd alike.
Future tense. Yo fuere Estuviere I shall bee tu fueres estuvieres thou shalt bee el fuere estuviere hee shall bee nos fueremos estuvieremos wee shall bee vos fueredes estuvieredes yee shall bee ellos fueren. estuvieren. they shall bee. The Infinitif Mood. Ser Estar To bee aver sido estado to have bin siendo. estando. being. The difference which is 'twixt ser and estar con∣sists chiefly in this, that ser signifies the humor or essence of a thing, as yo soy colerico, I am coleric; tu eres valiente, thou art valiant; el es piadoso, he is charitable: and so denotes the quality of the Sub∣stantif. But yo estoy relates most properly to som local posture, or the being in som place, as yo estoy a pie, I am a-foot; yo estava entonces en Lisbona, I was then in Lisbon. Estar is much us'd in salutation, and in reference to health, as como esta mi padre, how doth my father? then answer is made, esta bueno loado sea Dios, he is well praised be God: como esta V M. how do you do Sir? estoy achacoso,
estoy malo, I am sickish, I am ill; wher it is obser∣vable that bueno and malo are us'd in these phrases for Adverbs, viz. for well and ill. The difference 'twixt these two auxiliary Verbs, Yo hè or yo tengo, and yo soy, is this, that the first serve the Participles in the Preter tense of Verbs Actifs, as yo he amado, I have loved; yo tengo al∣morzado, I have broke my fast alredy. Besides, yo he is an auxiliary to it self, as yo he avido, I have had; yo avia avido, I had had, &c. But soy I am, makes Passif Verbs only, as yo soy ensalçado, I am exalted; yo soy querido, I am lov'd. Observe that tengo serving for auxiliary, makes the Participle and the thing to agree in nomber, as Los donayres que yo tengo contados son graciosos, The jests that I have related are plesant: but yo he doth not so, las hazañas que yo he recitado, the exploits that I have recited: But in the Toscan Italian it doth, as Io ho letta la lettera, I have read the let∣ter; Io ho pagati i danari, I have paid the monies, &c. Spanish Verbs have their tern inations in ar, er or ir: They in ar are of the first Conjugation, they in er of the second, and they in ir of the third; whrof ther shall be examples of each, and according to them all other Verbs must bee form'd, except Irre∣gulars which shall be spoken of apart.
The Variation of Buscar to seek, being of the first Conjugation. The Indicatif Mood. Present tense. Yo Busco I seek tu buscas thou seekst el busca hee seeks nos buscamos wee seek vos buscays yee seek ellos buscan. they seek. Imperfect tense. Yo buscava I did seek tu buscavas thou didst seek el buscava hee did seek nos buscavamos wee did seek vos buscavades yee did seek ellos buscavan. they did seek. Perfect definit. Yo busque I sought tu buscaste thou soughtst el busco hee sought nos buscamos wee sought vo yee sought they sought.
Perfect indefinit. Yo he buscado I have sought tu has buscado thou hast sought el ha buscado hee hath sought nos hemos buscado wee have sought vos aveys buscado yee have sought ellos han buscado. they have sought. Plusquam perfect. Yo avia buscado I had sought tu avias buscado thou hadst sought el avia buscado hee had sought nos aviamos buscado wee had sought vos aviades buscado yee had sought ellos avian buscado. they had sought. Future tense. Yo buscare I shall or will seek tu buscaras thou shalt or wilt seek el buscara hee shall or will seek nos buscaremos wee shall or will seek vos buscareys yee shall or will seek ellos buscaran. they shall or will seek.
The second Future. Yo he ò tengo de buscar I must seek tu has ò tienes de buscar thou must seek el ha ò tiene de buscar hee must seek nos hemos ò tenemos de bu. wee must seek vos aveys ò teneys de bus. yee must seek ellos han de buscar. they must seek. The Imperatif Mood. Busca tu Seek thou busque el let him seek busquemos nosotros let us seek busqueys vosotros seek yee busquen ellos. let them seek. The Optatif and Conjunctif Moods. Present tense. Oxala, aunque, &c. O that, although, &c. Yo busque I may seek tu busques thou maist seek el busque hee may seek nos busquemos wee may seek vos busqueys yee may seek ellos busquen. they may seek.
Imperfect tense. Oxala, aunque, o si, si, &c. O that, although, o if, if, &c. Yo bucasse I shold seek tu bucasses thou sholdst seek el bucasse hee shold seek nos bucassemos wee shold seek vos bucassedes yee shold seek ellos bucassen. they shold seek. Pluperfect tense. Oxala, aunque, quando, plega a Dios, &c. O that, although, o if, &c. Yo buscàra I had sought tu buscàras thou hadst sought el buscàra hee had sought nos buscàramos wee had sought vos buscarades yee had sought ellos buscaran. they had sought. The Incertain tense. Aunque, quando, &c. O if, although, &c. Yo buscaria I shold seek tu buscarias thou sholdst seek el buscaria hee shold seek nos buscariamos wee shold seek vos buscariades yee shold seek ellos buscarian. they shold seek.
Future tense. Quando, si, &c. When, if, &c. Yo buscàre I shall seek tu buscares thou shalt seek el buscare hee shall seek nos buscarèmos wee shall seek vos buscareys yee shall seek ellos buscaren. they shall seek. The Infinitif Mood. Bucar To seek aver buscado to have sought aver de buscar being to seek estar por buscar being for to seek buscando. seeking. The declining or sorming of the Verb Holgar to rejoyce or to be glad, which hath most commonly one of these Pronouns me, te, se, mee, thee, him, be∣fore or after it, as yo me huelgo, or huelgome I am glad. The Indicatif Mood. Present tense. Yo me huelgo, ò huelgome I am glad tu te huelgas thou art glad el se huelga hee is glad nos nos huelgamos wee are glad vos or holgays yee are glad ellos se huelgan. they are glad.
Imperfect tense. Yo holgàva, ò holgava∣me I was glad tu te holgavas, &c. thou wast glad, &c. Perfect tense. Yo me holguè, ò holgueme I was glad or did rejoice tu te holgaste thou rejoyc'dst el se holgò hee rejoyc'd nos nos holgamos wee rejoyc'd vos os holgastes yee rejoyc'd ellos se holgàron, ò holgà∣ronse. they rejoyc'd. Indefinit perfect. Yo uve ò avia holgado I had rejoyc'd tu uviste ò avias holgado thou hadst rejoyc'd el uvo ò avia, &c. hee had rejoyc'd, &c. Future tense. Yo me holgarè ò holgarè∣me I will or shall rejoyce tu te holgaràs thou shalt or wilt rejoice el se holgarà, &c. hee shall or will re∣joyce, &c.
The second Future tense, wherof every Verb is capable. Yo he ò tengo de holgarme tu has ò tienes de holgar∣te, &c. I shall or must rejoyce thou shalt or must re∣joyce, &c. The Imperatif Mood. Huelgate tu Rejoyce thou huelgase el let him rejoyce holguemos nosotros ò hol∣guemonos let us rejoyce holgad vosotros rejoyce yee huelguense ellos. let them rejoyce. The Optatif and Conjunctif Moods. Present tense. Oxala, aunque, &c. O that, although, &c. Yo me huelgue I rejoyce or bee glad tu te huelgues, &c. thou rejoyce, &c. Imperfect tense. Oxala, plaguisse a Dios que, o si, &c. I wold to God, though, o if, &c. Yo me holgasse I shold rejoyce tu te holgasses, &c. thou sholdst rejoyce, &c
Pluperfect tense. Oxala, aunque, quando, &c. O that, although, &c. Yo me holgàra I had rejoyc'd tu te holgàras, &c. thou hadst rejoyc'd, &c. Incertain tense. Yo me halgaría ò holgari∣ame I wold bee glad tu te halgarías, &c. thou woldst be glad, &c. Future tense. Quando, si, &c. When, if, &c. Si yo me holgàre If I shall bee glad si tu te holgares, &c. if thou shalt be glad, &c. The Infinitif Mood. Holgar ò holgarse To rejoyce or to be glad aver ò averse holgado to have bin glad aver de holgar for to bee glad estar por holgar. being for to bee glad.
Verbs of the second Conjugation ending in er, whose Participles like the third Conjugation end in ido or ydo. The Indicatif Mood of Entendèr, to understand, Present tense. Yo entiendo I understand tu entiendes thou dost understand, &c. el entiende   nos entendemos   vos entendeys   ellos entienden.   Imperfect tense. Yo entendia I did understand tu entendias thou didst understand, &c.   el entendia   nos entendiamos   vos entendiàdes   ellos entendian.   Perfect tense. Yo entendì I understood tu entendisti thou understoodst, &c. el entendio   nos entendimos   vos entendistes   ellos entendieron.  
Perfect indefinit. Yo he entendido I have understood, tu has entendido, &c. thou hast understood, &c. Plusquam perfect tense. Yo avia ò uve entendido I had understood tu avias ò uviste entendi∣do, &c. thou hadst understood, &c. Future tense. Yo entendirè I shall or wil understand tu entenderas, &c. thou shalt or wilt un∣derstand, &c. The second Future tense. Yo hé ò tengo de entendèr I shall or must understa. tu has de entendèr, &c. thou shalt or must un∣derstand, &c. The Imperatif Mood. Entiende tu Understand thou entienda el let him understand entendamos nosotros ò en∣tendamonos let us understand entendèd vosotros understand yee entiendan ellos. let them understand.
The Optatif and Subjunctif Moods. Present tense. Plega a Dios, aunque, &c. God grant, although, &c. Yo entienda I understand tu entiendas thou understandst, &c. el entienda   nos entendamos   vos entendays   ellos entiendan.   Imperfect tense. Oxala, si, &c. I wold, if, &c. Yo entendiesse I wold understand tu entendiesses, &c. thou woldst understand▪ &c. Plusquam perfect. Aunque, quando, si, &c. Although, if, &c. Yo entendiera I had understood tu entendieras, &c. thou hadst understood. Future tense. Quando yo entendiere When I shal understand quando tu entendieres, &c. when thou shalt under∣stand, &c.
The Infinitif Mood. Entender To understand aver entendido to have understood aver de entender to bee understood ser para entender to bee to be understood entendiendo. understanding. The Verb entiendo is properly to understand, as Dios me de contienda con quien me entienda, God send mee to have to do with him who understands mee: a buen entendedor media palabra, half a word to the wise. But somtimes 'tis taken for to hear, as Entendì que mi padre estava malo, I heard my fa∣ther was sick. According to Entender all other regular Verbs of the second Conjugation may be form'd. Verbs of the third Conjugation ending in ir, have their Participles like the second in ido, exempli∣fied by the Verb Servir to serve. The Indicatif Mood. Present tense. Yo sirvo I serve tu sirves thou serv'st, &c. el sirve   nos servimos   vos servis   ellos sirven.  
Imperfect tense. Yo servia I did serve tu servias, &c. thou didst serve, &c. Perfect tense. Yo servi I serv'd tu serviste thou serv'st, &c. el servio   nos servimos   vos servistes   ellos sirvieron.   Pluperfect tense. Yo uve ò avia servido I had serv'd tu uviste ò avias servido, &c. thou hadst serv'd, &c. Future tense. Yo servirè I shall or will serve tu serviràs thou shalt or wilt serve, el servira &c. nos servirèmos   vos servireys   ellos serviran.  
The second Future tense. Yo h ò tengo de servir I shall or must serve tu hàs de servir, &c. thou shalt or must serve,   &c. The Imperatif Mood. Sirve tu Serve thou sirva el let him serve sirvamos nosotros let us serve servid vosotros serve yee sirvan ellos. let them serve. The Optatif and Conjunctif Moods. Present tense. Oxala, aunque, &c. O that, although, &c. Yo sirva I serve tu sirvas thou servest, &c. el sirva   nos sirvamos   vos sirvays   ellos sirvan.  
Imperfect tense. Oxala, aunque, o si, si, &c. O that, although, o if, if, &c. Yo serviesse I shold serve tu sirviesses, &c. thou sholdst serve, &c. Pluperfect tense. Oxala, aunque, si, o si, &c. O that, though, if, &c. Yo serviria I had serv'd tu servirias, &c. thou hadst serv'd, &c. Future tense. Quando, si, &c. When, if, &c. Yo sirvirè I shall serve tu sirvieres, &c. thou shalt serve, &c. The Infinitif Mood. Servir To serve aver servido having serv'd aver de servir to have to serve estar por servir to bee to serve sirviendo. serving. This Verb Servir to serve, doth properly signifie to serve or obey, as Servir a la mesa, to serve at the table. Somtimes to avail, as de que sirve todo esso,
what purpose serves all this? Sometimes it signi∣fies to be pleas'd, as sea servido de entrar, bee plea∣sed to com in: si Dios fuere servido, Dios ha sido servido, if God bee pleas'd, it hath pleas'd God. The Spanish Toung is full of Irregular Verbs, wherof I shall instance here in the most principal, by giving the chiefest and radical Tenses of them: For their inflections at length, I refer the Lerner to larger Grammars, the design of this being Brevity. Irregular Verbs of the first Conjugation in ar, and their Gerund in ado. Yo cuelgo, I hang Yo huelgo, I rejoyce colgava, I did hang holgava, I did rejoyce colguè, I hung holgue, I rejoyced colgarè, I shall or will hang holgare, I shall rejoyce colgar, to hang holgàr, to rejoyce colgando, hanging. holgando, rejoycing. Yo regueldo, I belch   regoldava, I did belch   regoldè, I belch'd   regoldarè, I shall or will belch   regoldar, to belch   regoldando, belching.  
Irregular Verbs of the second Conjugation ending in er, and their Gerund in ido. Yo quiero, I love queria, I did love quise, I lov'd querrè, I will love querèr, to love queriendo, loving. This word querer to love, in Spanish, comes from the word quaerere in Latin, to seek; for whom we love we are seeking for them ever and a∣non: The compounded Pronouns qualquier and qualquiera, any, any what∣soever, comes from this Verb. Querer also signi∣fies to will, as yo quiero yr a la Missa, I will go to Mass, no quiero yr a la Missa, I will not go to Mass, &c. Yo puedo, I can Yo hago, I do podia, I was able hazia, I did pude, I could hize, I did podre, I shall be able hare, I shall do poder, to bee able hazer, to do pudendo, being able. haziendo, doing. Yo , I know Yo traygo, I carry I did know traya, I did carry new truxe, I carried sabre, I shall know traere, I shall carry saber, to know traer, to carry sabiendo, knowing. trayendo, carrying.
Yo buelvo, I return Yo pongo, I put bolvia, thou didst return ponias, thou didst put bolvì, I return'd puse, I put bolvere, I shall return pondre, I shall put bolver, to return poner, to put bolviendo, returning. poniendo, putting. Yo huelo, I smell Quepo, I contain or am contain'd olia, I did smell cabia, I did contain or was contain'd oli, I smelt cupe, I contain'd, &c. olere, I shall smell cabre, I shal contain, &c. oler, to smell caber, to contain or bee contain'd oliendo, smelling. cabiendo, containing, &c. This word caber in Spanish hath various signifi∣cations, as esto mi cabe por mi parte, this falls unto mee for my share: honra y provecho no caben en un saco, honor and profit do not hold in one sack: esto me cupo en suerte, this happened to bee my lot, &c. Irregular Verbs of the third or last Conjugation end∣ing in it or yr, and their Gerunds also in ido. Yo oygo, I hear Yo digo, I say oya, thou didst hear dezia, I did say oy, I heard dixe, I said oyre, I shall hear dire, I will say oyr, to hear dezir, to say oyendo, hearing. diziendo, saying.
Yo duermo, I sleep Yo muero, I dye dormia, I did sleep moria, I did dye dormi, I slept mori, I dyed dormire, I shall sleep morire, I shall dye dormir, to sleep morir, to dye durmiendo, sleeping. muriendo, dying. The Conjugating of the two Verbs yr and andar to go; they are Synonima's in sense, but with this difference, that yr doth simply denote the action of going or marching from one particular place to ano∣ther, as yo voy a la Yglesia, I go to the Church: But andar signifies an uncertain wandring motion of go∣ing, as yo anday por toda Italia, I went through all Italy: And 'tis us'd somtimes for reproches, as an∣dad para vellaco, go for a rogue; andad para Lutera∣no, go for a Lutheran. Yr is taken in divers senses, as como le va, how goes it with you? que va a mi en esto, what doth it concern mee? mucho va de Iuan y Lilburne, ther is a great difference 'twixt John and Lilburn, a late brain-sick fellow that was never scarce of one mind: como fue a VM. en aquel nego∣cio, how went it with you in that busines? They are declin'd thus: Yo voy, I go Yo ando, I go yva, thou didst go andava fue, hee went anduve yre, I will go andare (not much in use) yr, to go andar yendo, going. andando.
Yo vengo, I com Yo obedesco, I obey venia, I did com obedecia, I did obey vine, I came obedeci, I obey'd verne or vendre I shall com tengo de obedecer, I will obey venir, to com obedecer, to obey veniendo ò viniendo co∣ming. obedeciendo, obeying. It is to be observ'd that when the Participles of yr and andar come before or after the Verb soy I am, they are of the same number, as ydo soy a mi casa, I am gone to my house; ydos somos a la Co∣media, wee are gon to the Play; andado es el tiempo de alegria the time of mirth is past; andados son los dias de mocedad, the dayes of youth are past. Ther is a way of speking in Spanish, and 'tis held eloquent, as to the Futures with he and tengo to joyn me, te, se, le, la, lo, les, las, los, and put the au∣xiliary Verb last, as besar me has, you shall or must kiss mee; reñir te he, I shall or must chide thee; hazerse ha, it shall or must bee don; comerlo has, you shall or must eat it, &c. And oftentimes the Article coms between the Pronoun and the Verb, as Embiarte la he, (making as it were but one word) I shall or must send her unto thee; in lieu of te la embiare. The second person Plural of the Imperatif Mood having after it any of the Particles le, la, lo, or their Plurals les, las, los, ther is alwayes a preferring of the l before the d, as llevadle bring him, is pro∣nounc'd
llevalde; besadla kiss her, besalda; comedlo eat, comeldo; llamadlos call them, llamaldos, &c. When le, la, lo, les, las, los, com before or after an Infinitif Mood, the r (by the figure Antistoi∣chon) is turn'd to l, to smoothen the pronunciation, as soy por dezirle, I am to tell him, soy por dezille, I am to tell him; quiero besarla las manos, I will kiss her hands, quiero besalla las manos, &c. Of Verbs Impersonals. IMpersonals are those that have no persons, and yet are made of the third person of the Indicatif Present tense, and have it before them in English, which the Spanish hath not; A nos pertenece, it ap∣pertains to us; a mi conviene, it is convenient for mee: But oftentimes for a greter Emphasis me and te are added, and os, as Ami me conviene, it is con∣venient for mee; a ti importa, a ti te importa, it concerns thee; a nos os conviene for a nos conviene, it is convenient for us: me pesa I am sorry, a mi me pesa: acontece muchas vezes, it happens often; aca∣ece pocas vezes, it happens seldom. The Spaniards have but one Gerund terminating alwayes in do. In the first Conjugation it is formed of the Infinitif Moo, by putting ar into ando, as hablar to speak, hablando; holgar to rejoyce, hol∣gando rejoycing. They of the second Conjugation are made by turning er into iendo, as bolver to re∣turn, bolviendo returning. They of the third Con∣jugation
are made by turning r alone into iendo, as venir to com, veniendo coming: but in very many words the e that comes immediatly before the r in the Infinitif is turn'd to i, as dezir to speak, dizien∣do speking, not deziendo; sentir to smell, sintiendo smelling. Som other Verbs change i before the Infinitif r into n, as morir to dye, muriendo dying; dormir to sleep, durmiendo sleeping. The Preposi∣tion en coming before the Gerund hath relation to time, as en hablando esto tengo de yrme, as soon as I speak this I will go; yo yre en acabando de comer, I will go as soon as I have din'd. The Spanish Participles have their Genders, sig∣nifications and times, but the Participles of the Present tense have no genders, as Moço or moça cre∣ciente ha el lobo en el vientre, A growing youth or maid hath a wolf in the belly. The Participles of the Preter tense end in do, and are formed of the Infinitif Mood as the Gerund, n left out, as hablar to speak, hablado spoken; buscar to seek, buscado sought, &c. But ther are many Irregulars which are excepted, as morir to dye, muerto dead; dezir to speak, dicho spoken; bolver to return, buelto re∣turn'd, &c. which is left to the studious ob∣server.
Of the Indeclinable parts of Speech. WEE have hitherto treted of the parts of Speech which are declinable, wee will pro∣ceed now to those that are not capable of decli∣nation, and first▪ Of Adverbs. The first are Adverbs of Time, as Oy to day, ayer yesterday, anteyer or ante ayer before yesterday, ma∣ñana to morrow, por la mañana in the morning, ala mañanica betimes in the morning, temprano early, media dio noon, tarde the evening. Note, that the Spaniard hath this singularity in his salutations relating to time, to speak in the plural number, as Buenos dias good dayes to you, buenas tardes good evenings to you, bue∣nas noches good nights to you, huenos años good years to you, buenas Pascuas good Easters to you: but they never use Good morrow. Agora, al presente now; poco ha, poco tiempo ha a little while since; despues since, alguna vez, a ve∣zes somtimes; amenudo often, mucho ha a good while since, muchas vezes oftentimes, pocas vezes seldom, quando when, entonces then, entre tanto, en este comedio in the interim; hasta que untill, mien∣tras while, por adelante, de aqui adelante, en ò por lo
venidero hereafter; entonces thence forward, desde agora hence forward, nunca, jamas never; aun yet or as yet, contino de contino continually, ya alredy, luego, subito, encontinente presently; presto quickly, siempre alwayes, siempre jamas for ever, dende agora from henceforth, hasta quando untill when, hasta tanto untill that, desde que since that, de ay adelante thence forward, despues aca since now, a deshora unwaringly, de aqui a un rato within a little while, cada dia every day, cada rato ever and anon, cada momento every moment, quando quiera when you will, ante, antes, denantes before. Note, that cada, mucho and poco are somtimes Ad∣jectifs, as cada soldado, every soldier; cada qual con su yguàl, every one with his mate; mucho dine∣ro, much mony; poca fatiga es gran salùd, a little toyl is great health. Local Adverbs, or of place. Aqui here, ay, alli there; de aqui hence, de ay, de alli thence; por aqui this way, por ay, por alli that way; acà these parts, por acà in these parts, allà, a∣ulla those parts, lexos far, dentro within, fuera with∣out, do, ado, donde, adonde, where, whence, whi∣ther; de do, de donde, por donde, from whence; de comania hermanablemente, brotherly and in com∣pany.
Separatif Adverbs. A parte apart, aun cabo at one end, a un lado at one side, de tras behind, a escondidas secretly, close∣ly; a hurto, a hurtadas, a hurtadillas stealingly; so∣lo, solamente alone; fuera, excepto, sacando fuero except; no embargante, non obstante notwithstand∣ing; a escuras in the dark, apartadamente by it self, a bueltas besides or above, as a bueltas de ducados me dio un a cadena de oro, Besides or above other things hee gave mee a Gold chain. Adverbs of intention. En todo y por todo altogether, del todo wholly, en∣teramente, de todo en todo totally. Adverbs Personals and Appelatifs. Comigo with mee, contigo with thee, consigo with him, ha señor, hà hermano, ce ce, o là, ò como se llama. Adverbs of election. Mas ayna sooner, primero que rather than, me∣jor better, antes, mas ances rather; as Antes puto que Gallego, Rather an Ingle than a Galician.
Adverbs of haste. Luego, subito presently, suddenly; en un momen∣to in a moment, en un cerràr de ojo in the twinkling of an eye, presto quickly. Adverbs of similitudes. Como, ansi como as, so as; ansi, assi so; de la ma∣nera que insomuch. Irregular Adverbs. De passado, de camino as wee pass'd; al traves athwart, al revès clean cam, a reculas recoyling back, de bruces groveling, a gatas creeping, a tuerto crookedly, embalde in vain, debalde gratis for no∣thing, barato good cheap, a trueque, en lugar in ex∣change or in lieu. Of the Prepositions. Ther are som Prepositions in Spanish that serve for Accusatif and Ablatif cases, which will be di∣stinguished by the Article, and first of those Prepo∣sitions that serve the Ablatif with de. Cerca nere, de of, antes before, acerca touching, erredòr, alderredòr about; entorno round about, fuera without, dentro within, debaxo under, encima upon, ayuso, de yuso, abaxo below; de sus arriba
on high, empos del after him, en frente, de frente a∣gainst or opposite; a la orilla at the bank or brink, a rayz all along. Prepositions which serve the Accusatif. Sobre, acuestas upon or about; ante, contra a∣gainst; por, para for, which way, abaxo, de yuso be∣low, debaxo underneath, arriba, de suso above; a∣tras behind, do quiera, a do quiera, donde quiera whersoever; aquende this side, allende that side. Adverbs of number. Vna vez once, dos vezes twice, and so to cien vezes an hundred times; thence to mil vezes a thousand times, &c. by putting the cardinal nom∣bers which were put down before. Adverbs of quantity. Mucho much, poco a little, poquito very little, harto, assaz enough; demasiado, en demasia too much; de mas de esto moreover; al pie de ciento near a hundred, al pie de mil about or near a thou∣sand, abundantemente, en abundancia, a montones plentifully; tanto quanto, tan quan as much as. Observe that tanto quanto com alwayes before Verbs or Substantifs, tan quan before Adjectifs or Adverbs; as no tengo tanto seso como vos, I
have not so much brain as you: quanto es del mes, what day of the month is it? tengo tan buenos parientes como vos, I have as good kind∣red as you: o quan dulcemente canta, how sweetly do you sing? These three Adverbs mas, muy, mucho serve to make Comparatifs of Positif Adjectifs, as rico rich, masrico more rich, muy rico very rich: mucho is sel∣dom us'd in this kind, unless mas com immediatly after, as mucho mas hermosa much more beautiful: The Superlatifs never have these before them, for they say not mas, muy or mucho riquissimo, hermosis∣simo, for they of themselfs are sufficient to augment the quality. Adverbs of quality. Bien, buenamente well; mal, malamente ill; osa∣damente boldly, atrevidamente audaciously, adrede expresly or purposely, a sabiendas wittingly. When two Adverbs of quality meet, the formost loseth the two last syllables, as locamente y temer ariamente foo∣lishly and rashly, mente in the first is lost, and it must be written and pronounc'd loca y temeraria∣mente. Adverbs of negation. No no not, ni neither, aun no no not yet, tampoco i menos as less, nada, nonada nothing; nunca, ja∣as never; en ninguna manera, suerte, modo, by no means; antes, mas antes rather, but rather; no sola∣ment
not only. Two Negatifs affirm not in the Spanish as they do in som languages, as wee see in no nada, menos and tampoco less, are often simple ne∣gations: and commonly to Interrogations, as tienes dinero? no, hast thou any mony? no: tienes vestidos? menos, hast thou clothes? less: tienes de comer? tampoco, hast thou meat? as little. Of affirmatif Adverbs. Si I, yea, yes; si señor I Sir: si is also an affir∣matif, but in Italian it commonly comes after sig∣nor; as signor si, tambien also, si cierto, si por cierto yes sure; si de verdad yes in truth, verdaderamente truly, assies 'tis so, Amen; ansi es 'tis so, sin duda doutles, de veras in good sooth. Adverbs Optatif, or of wishing. Oxala (a Morisco word) o that, I wold, I could wish; quiera a Dios God grant, plega a Dios God grant, o si o if. Adverbs of admonition. Ea, vaya well then, ther then; ea pues, ora pues, or a sus, sus, arasus, well well, let it pass, let us on: ea alegramente. Demonstratif Adverbs. Hè aqui, Veys aqui look here; ve alli, cataldo a∣qui, cataldo ay, look here, see here, see there.
Adverbs of order. Primeramente in the first place, principalmente chiefly, Imprimis; de nuevo again, al fin, finalmente, al cabo lastly; item item, de tras behind, a la postre late or lag behind, adelante, delante before; entre tanto in the mean while, mientras while. Remissif Adverbs. Poco a poco by little and little, dispacio lesurely, passo, passito gently; quedo, quedito softly; a penas scarce, a malas penas very hardly, casi almost, a pla∣zer at plesure, calla callando secretly and silently, callandico softly without noise. Adverbs of doubt. Puede ser, quiça it may bee; a caso perchance, por ventura peradventure. Interrogatif Adverbs. Para que why, to what end? porque, porque ra∣zon for what reson, why? a que proposito to what purpose? por que causa for what cause. Adverbs Congregatif. Iuntos, iuntamente together; en uno, a la par, a las parejas equally, in one; entrambos, ambos, ambos ads both together.
Separatif or Adverbs of exception. Salvo, excepto, sacando fuera except; segun ac∣cording, junto near, hasta untill, cabe near, tras be∣hind, en in, entre between, hazia towards, aquende allende this side or that side. Por and para do both signifie For, but the first relates commonly to the efficient and final cause, and para relates to the profit or damage of a person, as por amor de Dios, for Gods love; yo muero por ti, I dye for thee; para quien es esta casa, for whom is this house? es para Don Carlos, it is for Sir Charles: Araada sobre el Duero para mi la quiero, Aranda upon the Duero I'le have her for my self: a Pro∣verb of Philip the second, when ther was a suit 'twixt him and one of his Grandes for right to that Town in old Castile: Therfore ther is a Spanicism that para comigo signifies in my behalf, para consigo in his behalf: then it serves often before con, but it makes it more emphatical, and to change its sense, and both of them signifie Towards, as seamos pia∣dosos para con los pobres, let us be pitiful towards the poor: para con todos es affable y franco, hee is affable and free towards all. The Preposition hàzia towards, hath alwayes an accent over the first syllable, to distinguish it from hazia the Verb, who hath the accent over the mid∣dle syllable. The Preposition cabe near, comes alwayes before the Accusatif case, as sientese VM. cabe mi hermana, sit next my sister.
Of Conjunctions. COnjunctions som are Copulatifs, as y and, tam∣bien also, aun yet: Touching y and, for avoid∣ing the ill sound turns somtimes to e, when the next word begins with another y, as Margerita e Ysabe∣la, Francisco e yo andàvamos juntos, Francis and I went together; la mano derecha e ysquierda, the right and the left hand, &c. The Disjunctif Prepositions are ni, o not, as ni el uno ni el otro, nor the one nor the other; O San Pab∣lo o San Pedro, either Paul or Peter. Ther are som causal or conditional Prepositions, as si if, aunque although, dado que, puesto que it being granted, pues que since that, para que to the end that, porque because, mas but, pero but, empèro not∣withstanding, toda via yet for all that, a lo menos at least, con tal if, upon condition; tengo de bever todo esto con tal que VM. me hagarazòn, I will drink all this upon condition you will pledg mee: yrè allà con tal que VM. vaya comigo, I will go thither upon condition you will go with mee. Ther are also Rational Prepositions, as assi que so that, es a saber, conviene a saber, viz. to wit; luego, pues then; por esso, por tanto therfore.
Of Interjections. INterjections are certain words which express the motions or alterations of the mind, according to the accidents that happen, signifying either joy or grief, fear, anger or wonder, as o bueno, hala, gala, o good, o brave; ay, hay de mi alas; guay, guay de mi wo is mee; amargo de mi, desdichado de mi, wretched, unfortunat that I am: Iesus, vala me Dios, Jesus, God deliver mee: valgame la madre de Dios que es esto, the mother of God deliver mee what's this? and these are spoken in admiration. Ther are three sorts of Ay, the first is the Imper∣sonal Verb Ay, as ay barto lodo en las calles, ther is dirt enough in the streets: The second is the Inter∣jection of grief, as ay de mi wo is mee: The third is the local Adverb [Ay] and that hath an accent over the [y] and is pronounc'd as two syllables, as quien esta ay, who is there? Ay esta mi padre, my father is ther. Therfore ther must a great heed bee taken to observe the accents, though in most Spanish Au∣thors the Printers are not so careful herein as they shold bee. The Impersonal ay is very frequent in the Spanish Toung in one rense or other, for it hath all the five in the Indicatif Mood, as Ay ther is, a∣via ther was, uvo ther was, (Perfect tense) ha avido ther hath bin, aura ther will bee.
A Collection of som difficult Words and Phrases which are meer Spanicisms or Idioms of the Castilian Toung. Of the words fulano, hulano, çutano. THese three words are much us'd in Spanish, as Iohn an Okes and Iohn a Stiles in our Law, or Mevius and Titius were us'd in the Latin: they signifie [such a one] or [how do you call him?] as Fulano es gran soldado, such a one is a great soldier: Hulano es muy hombre de bien, such a one is very honest. They have also their Feminins fulana, hulana, but not çutano, which never begins a saying, as hab∣lè a çutano, I spoke to such a one. The word Hidalgo a Gentleman, hath two Ety∣moligies, according to som it is deriv'd of hijo de algo the son of sombody, viz. of a known person; or hija de algo a Gentlewoman, but that is pro∣nounc'd and written at large, not hidalga. Others derive it from hijo del Godo the son of a Goth, for the Goths and Vandals, whence Andaluzia is de∣riv'd, having first planted Christianity in Spain, it was held an honor to bee call'd hijo del Godo, the son of a Goth, contracted to hidalgo. Hideputa on the contrary is a word of disgrace, being deriv'd of hijo de puta the son of a whore, but 'tis us'd for an Interjection of exclamation or won∣der, and most commonly in an ill sense, o Hideputa,
y que Roldan para hazer fieros, O Hideputa, what a Rowland is this to make bravado's? hydeputa ruyn ò hidervin, base son of a whore. Ther are som words, which though they be Sub∣stantifs, yet having en before them turn to a kind of Adverbs, as en cuerpo without a cloke, en piernas without stockins, en carnes, en puras carnes all na∣ked; as pusole en puras carnes, hee stripped him stark naked. En cuero hath the like sense: cuero a skin, is us'd also to another sense, as hazerse cuero, to make himself a skin, that is, to make himself drunk, because in Spain they carry wine in skins. The Verb alcançar hath many significations, as to obtain, acquire and overtake, but it hath one ex∣traordinary sense, Alcançar en la cuenta, to defalk or abate of the account; alcançado de cuenta, that which remains of the account. The Verb armar to arm, hath other significati∣ons, as armar una celada, to provide an ambush; armar un lazo to provide a trap; armar una cama, to furnish a bed, &c. Abaxo below, and aynso under, have remark∣able significations, somtimes as Del Rey abaxo n temo algun alma viviente, I fear none breathing af∣ter or except the King: de Dios en ayuso yo le conser∣vava, after God I preserved him. This word cabo an end, is us'd diversly, as Estoy al cabo del negocio. I understand the busines; rico por el cabo, extremely rich; al cabo estoy, no me diga mas, I know your meaning speak no more. The Verb caer to fall, hath remarkable significa∣tions,
as no caygo en VM. I cannot remember who you are: no puedo caer en ello, I cannot understand it. This Verb dar to give, is us'd diversly, as dar el para bien to congratulat: el demonio me da penar por lla, the devil makes mee torment my self for her: darse maña, to use cunning, &c. The Verb echar to cast, powr or put, is us'd vari∣ously, as se echa de ver, it seems: echar mano a la e∣spada, to draw his sword, &c. The Verb estar to bee or stand, is variously us'd, as Estoy en ello, I understood the busines: estoy mal con Fulano, I am not frends with such a man: quien està mal con Dios nopuede hazer cosa buena, who is not in peace with God cannot do any thing good. The Verb hazer to do, is us'd diversly, as haze frio 'tis cold, haze calor 'tis hot, haze sol 'tis cleer. Hà hee hath, the third person of aver, hath vari∣ous significations, as tres dias hà, three dayes since: cien años hà, it is a hundred yeers: quanto hà que vine a Londres, how long is it since you came to London? dias hà, 'tis a pretty while since: que tanto hà que estays aqui, how long have you bin here? aurà cosa de media hora, about half an hour, &c. The Verbs llevar and traer to bring, lead or car∣ry, are indifferently us'd in som parts of Spain, but not in Castile; but properly llevar is to bring, and traer is to carry, as llevaronme undcado por la he∣chura, they brought mee a Crown for the making: lleveme el cavallo, bring mee the horse: trae una carga muy pesado, hee carries a very hevy burden.
Ther is also another sense of llevar, as buen ca∣mino lleva el negocio, the busines goes well: la eosa no lleva remedio, ther's no remedy for it. Nàdie and ningùno none, differ in that nàdie re∣lates to Persons, and never joyns with a Substan∣tif, which ninguno doth, as no hago mal a nadie, I hurt nobody: quien està ay, who is ther? nadie no∣body. Ninguno joyns with Adjectifs, as obra de una es obra de ninguno, the work of one is the work of none: ninguno loseth o when it comes before a Sub∣stantif, as ningun hombre; but ninguna the feminin keeps a alwayes. Pararmientes is an extraordinary word in Spa∣nish, it is to beware, as tu que mientes lo que dizes para mientes, thou which dost use to lye take heed what thon saist. Pedir and preguntar to ask, differ in this, that pe∣dir relates to a thing wee desire to have, and pre∣guntar to a thing wee desire to know. Recado or recaudo is as general a word as any that's us'd in the whole Spanish toung, somtimes it signifies a Message, yo voy con un recaudo, I go with a message: somtimes it signifieth wherwith to do any thing, as no tengo recaudo para escrevir, I have not wherwith to write: da me recauda para almorzar, give mee wherwith to break my fast, &c.
These Expressions also touching the disposition of the Wether are remarkable in the Spanish. Llueve a cantaros, it rains by whole buckets: es∣campia, y har à buen tiempo, it leaves raining, and wee shall have fair wether: yela tanto que ay ca∣ràmbanos, it freezeth so that ther are Isicles: des∣yela, y haze lodaçares, it thaws and is very dirty: nieva a copos, it rains fleeces of wooll: el tiempo se escurece, que parect boca de lobo, the wether darkens as it were the mouth of a wolf: haze sol con uñas, y llovisna, the Sun is troubled, and it misles: haze lindo y estrellado, it is fair and star-like: haze suzio, y lleno de çarpas, it is foul and dirty: ay lodos hasta la cinta, ther's dirt up to the girdle: frio que haze tiritar, cold that makes the teeth to quaver: hae, muy resbaladero y dislizadero, haze bonança, tis calm. Of the Spanish Accents. Ther is nothing that conduceth more to the right and round speking of Spanish, as to observe how the words are accented, and to give a force therunto accordingly: To which end take these precepts. All words ending in r have the accent in the last syllable as, mugèr a woman, plazèr plesure, mula∣dàr a dunghill, albeytàr a Farrier; All Infinitif Moods, as hablàr to speak, descansàr to rest, desca∣labràr to break ones head, bolvèr to return, appren∣dèr to learn, acontecèr to happen, hinchir to fill,
escupìr to spit, apercebìr to prepare, labradòr a yeo∣man, pecadòr a sinner, oradòr an orator, &c. with Proper names, as Gaspàr, Balthasàr, &c. But al∣càçar a castle, açùcar suger, màrtir a martyr, are ex∣cepted. Words also ending in d have the accent in the last, as salùd health, lealtàd loyalty, humanidàd hu∣manity, &c. Proper names of places, as Madrìd, Vallodolìd, &c. wherunto may be added the second person plural of the Imperatif Mood, as and àd go, embiàd send, embergàd sequester, despavilàd snuff, &c. Words also ending in l have an accent or Em∣phasis in the last, as Españòl a Spaniard, caracòl a snail, señàl a sign, azùl blu, &c. But som are accep∣ted, as cònsul, hàbil able, fertil fruitful, dèbil weak, àrbol a tree, fràgil frail, mòbil moveable, &c. Words also ending in n have the accent in the last syllable, as capitàn a captain, almazèn a store∣house, mastìn a mastiff, compassiòn, devociòn, abomi∣naciòn, &c. but som few are excepted, as òrden or∣der, imàgen image, Orìgen, &c. Words in x also have the accent in the last sylla∣ble, as carcàx a quiver, almofrèx a male or great hamper, relòx a clock, Amoradàx Mariorame. Words also ending in z have the accent in the last syllable, as sagàz wise, Axedrèz a Chesse∣board table, vejèz old age, &c. Ther are som proper names excepted, as Nuñez, Dìaz, Alvà∣rez, Pèrez, Suàrez, Rodrìguez, Sànchez, Gòmez, &c.
Words terminating in ia have the accent over th i, as porfìa, alcanzìa a box, policìa, philosofìa, ale∣grìa mirth, Astronomìa, and other words deriv'd from the Latin. But these are excepted ausencia ab∣sence, blasfemia, clemència, dolència grief, escòria drosse, eficàcia, glòria, indùstria, infàmia, injùria, &c. The Future tenses of Verbs in the Indicatif Moods, have the accent over the last, as buscarè, buscaràs, buscara, I, thou, hee shall seek: And ob∣servable it is, that wher the accent is over the last in the singular number, 'tis over the last saving one in the Plural, buscarè buscarèmos, virtùd virtùdes, capitàn capitànes, mugèr mugères, caracòl caracòles, relòx relòges. Note that wher the accent is found ther must bee a gentle vigor, acutenes and force given to the syl∣lable. Magnìfico the Adjectif hath the accent over the second syllable, but magnifìco the Verb over the pe∣nultime or last syllable saving one. Carta compuesta de ciertos Frasis y Idiòmas, peculiares y propios a la Lengua Castellana. A los 8. de Mayo. MAs de cineo mezes hà que yo no recebi tilde de VM. por tanto estoy con mil desseòs, y no men cuydados de entender que tal se halla mi primo en pun∣to
salùd, y como leva a VM. tambien; Todos quan∣tos por aca dizen que mi Tartarabuelo ha traspassado, por cierto me pesa, porque de mi padre abaxo no quise mas a algun alma viviente; era devoto por el cabo, haga, que yo sepa que tanto avra que murio; se echa dever, que VM. ò està malo, ò muy ocupado, ò que se le da nada de sus parientes por aca; Topè poco hà con Beltran, que parecia en cuerpo, y en piernas, y casi en puras carnes tan belitre era; toda via se avia hecho cuero, y hazia fieros como si fuera Roldan, pensava de dalle palos, si no uvier a hecho divorcio con larazòn. Supplico a VM. que se sirva de dar recaudo a la que va con esta, y si Fulano, &c. Esta por aculla, di∣gale que Hulana esta achocosa; despues de muchos dares y tomares recaudo al fin su dote, que vino a buen recaudo: No soy por mas, si no que con mis besa∣manos a çutano Don, &c. y a los chiquitos sus quita∣pesares, quedo muy de veras, y de todas mis entrañas, su criado mayòr. Fulano. This Letter were it translated verbatim accor∣ding to the literal sense, wold prove nothing but absurdities, therfore it must bee rendered otherwise, as thus:
A familiar Letter made up of certain Phrasis or Idioms peculiar and proper only to the Castilian Toung. The 8. of May. TIs more than six months that I receav'd any thing from you, therfore I am very desirous and careful to understand how my Cosen doth in point of health, and how you also do: All the world here report that my Great-granfather is dead, truly I am sorry, for after my father I lov'd him more then any; hee was devout in an intense de∣gree: I pray let mee know how long it is since hee dyed. It seems that you are either ill or very busy, or that you care not for your Kinsmen hereabout. I met lately with Beltran, who appeer'd without a cloke or stockings, and almost stark naked, hee was such a Rogue; yet hee had got drunk, and did so rant it as if hee had bin another Roldan: I thought to bang him, had hee not made a divorce with reson for that time. I pray be pleas'd to deliver the inclos'd, and if such a one B. bee that way, tell him that such a one M. is sickly, and after many Godmorrows shee recovered her dowry, which came in a good time. No more, but that with my service to D, and to his take away cares, I mean his little ones, I remain in earnest, and with all my bowels, The gretest of your Servants, P. S.
LA PERAMBULACIÒN DE España, y de Portugàl; En un Discurso entre CARLOS y FELIPE. THE PERAMBULATION OF Spain and Portugal; In a Discours 'twixt CHARLES and PHILIP: Which may serve for a DIRECTORY How to Travel through those Countreys.
LA PERAMBULACION DE España y de Portugàl; En un Discurso entre CARLOS y FELIPE. Carlos. DIOS le dè muy buenos dias Señor Don Felipe, años hà que no le he visto; diga∣me si fuere, servido, donde hà estado tanto tiempo? y de donde viene agora? Felipe. Sea vuessa merced muy bien hallado Señor Don Carlos, me huelgo en el alma de velle con falùd, y pues que me manda dirè donde vengo, soy re∣zien-venido de España.
Carlos. De España? valgame Dios, y qual fue la causa (eon licencia) que le hizo emprender aquel vi∣aje? pues dizen es tierra muy trabajosa para los Passageros. Felipe. Señor, la Curiosidad fue la causa; pèro en∣tremos en casa que yo le contrarè por extenso lo que deffeàre saber, princpalmente el modo que hà de tene rel que tuviere gana de yr a ver aquel Reyno. Carlos. Primero hemos de comer, y si vm. mandàe, comeremos juntos en aquel bodegòn, que es casa muy limpia y bien proveyda; y despues me contarà mas de espacio en levantando la mesa. Felipe. Sea en hora buena, que yo accepto la merced que me haze de conduzirme a tan buena posada que mucho ha que no la hallado tal. Carlos. Pues que me dize? es possible que no las aya en su viage, siendo España tan buena tierra, y abundante de todo?
Felipe. Buena por cierto pudiera ser, si la gente no fuera tan perezosa, porque no labran la tercera parte de la tierra, la qual de otra manera es de su calidad harto buena, màs despues de la expulsion de los Moriscos no es tan labrada. Carlos. De manera Señor, que la pereza de los Mora∣dores es causa de la esterilidàd. Felipe. No ay que dudar en esto, porque la Tierra no produze de suyo sin ser labrada, y no lo siendo, falta lo necessario de la provision; Assi que no se halla en las posadas mas que el casco de la casa con un poco de ropa blanca, y a vezes, no ay camas para los Caminantes principalmente esi las Ventas. Carlos. Haga me merced de informarme que quiere dezir Venta? Felipe. Ventas son las posadas que se hallan en la cam∣paña, y por les caminos Reales, adonde si se en∣cueutran les Caminantes a hazer jornada han de llevar las alforjas, bien proveydas de todo lo necessario; Que de otra manera bien podrian
acostarse sin cenàr, porque no se halla otra cosa en ellas si no cevada, y paja para las Cavalgadu∣ras, y si ay algo serà un poco de pan, de vino, al∣gunos huevos, tocino, o longanizas. Charlos. Pues por vida suya cuente me el discurso de su Viaje por donde entrò en España, y lo que passò principalmente en los lugares mas Seña∣lados, para que yo sepa Governarme si a caso me viniere gana de yr allà algun dia. Felipe. Señor, al salir de Francia yo passè el Rio Dordona, que la divide de España, que es cerca de Iròn no muy lexos de Fuentarabia, tuve el medio dia en el dicho lugàr de Iròn, y la noche ganè San Sebastiàn primera tierra fuerte de Bis∣caya, y puerto de Mar. Carlos. En aquellos lugares fronteros no se hallan Guardas que miran a los Passageros? Felipe. Si ay, es verdad que al entrar en España no me dieron algun impedimento; pero una cosa se hà de hazer en llegando a Iròn, y es, que se hà de manifestàr todo lo que la persona lleva, Ropa y joyas si tiene algunas, y aun el propio dinero que tiene por los gastos del camino, y todo se hà∣de
de Registàr, y pagar lo que es tassado por los Aduaneros, y despues le dan una cedulilla que llaman Albaràn o Alvalà que es tanto como passa∣porte para que despues, las Guardas no le quiten lo que lleva a falta de averle Registrado. Carlos. Y se haze esto a todo genero de personas Estrangeros y Naturales? Felipe. No perdonan a nadie, y lo que peôr es, las Guardas que estan alerta al salir por la otra pu∣erta si se les antoja os haran apear para mirar y buscar, por todo si llevays alguna cosa que no estè en el Albarn; pero el mejor remedio que ay para escusar esta importunidad es echarles un Real de a quatro o un de a ocho segun la calidad del passagero. Carlos. De manera Señor que saben quanto dinero lleva un hombre acuestas, y essi corre peligro de ser seguido por los caminos y robado, y quiça aun peòr. Felipe. Esto no se hà de temer, porque en España no se habla de ladrones de camino, o salt eado∣res, si no es en Catalunia por ser la Provincia mas frequentada de passageros, que otra ninguna;
Porque passan por ella todos les que van y vienen de Italia, o de aquellas partes de Francia para la Corte, demas que es la tierra mas poblada de toda España. Carlos. Pues al partir de san Sebastian adonde se en∣caminava? Felipe. Tomè el camino per Navarra, adonde vi a Pamplona Villa principal de aquel Reyno, y en ella el Castillo muy famoso el quai parece mucho a aquel de Anveres. Carlos. Y no es el Reyno de Navarra del Rey de Francia? Felipe. Aquel Reyno se divide en dos partes, la que està deste lado de les Montes Pyreneos pertenece a la Froncia, y la que està del otro lado es del Rey de España, que es famosa tierra, la gente muy luzida, y no mal aficionada a nuestra naciòn Francesa. Carlos. Y de alà por donde fue um. pues a mi pa∣recer avia dexado el camino ordinario de los que van a Madrid.
Felipe. Assi es verdad, que dexè el camino de Victo∣ria, y el puerto de sant Adrian, y entrè por Logroño (harto buena tierra) puesta sobre el Rio de Ebro cerca de una Montaña adonde an∣tiguamente estava la Ciudad de Cantabria, la qual do el nombre a la Provincia que agora con∣tiene la Biscaya, Navarra, Guipuzcoa, y otras par∣ticulares de cuyos nombres no me acuerdo a∣hora. Carlos. Pues no dexe vm. atràs otros lugares del Reyno de Navarra, que yo hallo en la mappa∣mundo. Felipe. Bien haze en hazer me acordar desso, pues se me avia olvidado dos Lugares muy señalados; El uno Fstella de Navarra que la universidàd de aquel Reyno, y està situada la Villa en n lugar muy ameno; El otro es La puente de la Reyna, y demas de aquellos dos ay otro llamado Viana nombre corrompido de Diana, porque antiguamente avia alli un Templo consecrado a aquella Diosa. Carlos. Passe vm. adelante y no repare en estos Lugar∣citos de poca consideracion, porque yo creo que vm, tiene una larga jornada que hazer.
Felipe. Pues vm. gusta dello yo harè un salto desde Legroño hasta santo Domingo de la calçada que es lugar en la Rioja, cerca de los montes de Oca, en el qual lugar se veen cerca de la y glesia un Gallo, y una gallina vivos de la casta de aquel∣los, que ya estando aslàdos tornàron a vivit por milagro. Carlos. Por ventura seran de los del milagro de aquel moço peregrino Francès que fue ahorcado en aquel lugar por ladron, cuyos padres bolviendo de cumplir su viaje de Santjago, y passando cerca de la horca adonde estava colgando le hallaron vivo. Felipe. Dzen que de aquellos mesmos son, y la costumbre es, que los peregrinos que passan en Romeria por ailà traigan en sus sombreros unos bordoncillos con plumas de aquellas aves, y si no fuera tan larga la Hstoria yo se la contaria, pero quedese para otro tiempo. Carlos. Toda via supplicò a vm, de proseguir lo començado, que sea en hora buena.
Felipe. Pues vm. lo manda, y que gusta tanto dello lo harè de Santo Domingo passay a Burgos Ciu∣dad principal de Costilla la Vieja, entre la qual y Toledo hà avido grandes porfias por la prece∣dencia. Carlos. Assi tengo leydo, pero en unas Cortes que juntaron en Toledo, el Rey Felipe el segundo aparigiuò la contienda muy cuerdamen te por entonces, que aconteciò assi; Los Represen∣tantes de ambas Ciudades estando en las Cortes porfiavan quien avia de hablar primero, la por∣fia vino a ser algo caliente, quando el Rey se levantava subito, y dixo, Hable Burgos, que por Toledo hablarè yo. Felipe. Era un passaje muy señalado, y si no suera por otra cosa Felipe el segundo merecia el atri∣buto de prudente (que le dan) por esto solo; mas prosigamos, en Burgos ay un Monasterio fuera de la Ciudad adonde està aquel milagro∣so Crucifixo, cuyas uñas y cabellos van crecier∣do cada un mes: La yglesia mayor de Burgos, es un edificio muy pomposo; Tambien ay un Castillo pero de poca confideraciòn.
Carlos. Y con su licencia, de Burgos para donde se encamino sù merced? Felipe. A Valladolid, linda villa, y bien poblada, adonde està una de las Cancillerias de España. Carlos. Pues llama vm, Valladolid Villa siendo un Lu∣gàr tan grande, y adonde la Corte Catolica residio tanto tempo? Felipe. Si señòr, Villa es, pues no està cercada de muros, y tambien dizen allà communmente, Villa por Villa, Valladoid en Castilla; como Ciudad por Ciudad Lisboa en Portugal. Carlos. Bien, no nos detengamos mas en est lugàr, vamos adelante si vm. fuere servido. Felipe. De alli me fuy a Medina del campo harto buena Tierra, donde ay famosas Librerias; Passè alli ala tardecica, y a la mañana siguiente tomè el camino de Salamanca; Tierra muy grande, y la mas illustre Universidad de toda España, yo vi alli los Colegios que son en gran
numero, y muy bien fabricados; Tambien la puente hecho por los Romanos, y el Toro que està a la entrada del qual habla Lazarillo de Tormes. Carlos. Vio vm. alli por ventura la casa de Celestina? Felipe. Señor, bien me apuntaron el lugar adonde estava, mas no tuve tanta curiosidad que suera a vella, y tambien me parece que es cosa fin∣gida. Carlos. He oydo dezir, que una vez se hallaron en Salamanca quinze mill estudiantes y licenciados que me parece cosa estraña, siendo España tan poco poblada, y teniendo 16 Vniversidades mas. Felipe. Bien puede ser, porque Salamanca està puesta casi en el centro de España donde acuden mas facilmente de todas partes los Estudiantes mas la major parte son Opidanos qui tienen posadas fuera de los Colegios. Carlos. Tengo leydo un refran, en Salamanca mas vale un maravedi que una blanca; mas passe vm. ade∣lante.
Felipe. De Salamanca tomè el camino de Segovia fa∣moso lugà por muchas cosas; que alli se veen, Lo primero el Monasterio de Parral que està fuera de la Ciudad; Despues, La Casa de la Moneda; Tras esto el famoso Aleàzar, y lo que llaman la puente de Segovia que no lo es sino un Aque∣ducto hecho de piedras de maravillosa grandeza, y lo que es de notàr los paños finos de lana que alli si texen. De Segovia passè el puerto de Guadarrama aviendo visto de camino un grand edificio que se llama la casa del Campo harto buena metida entre los bosques, y passado el dicho lugàr de Guadarrama fuy al Escurial el octavo milagro del mundo; Mas porque seria menestè un volume entero para hazer la descripcion tanto de la yglesia, de la Libreria, de los patios, de los quartos, y los alojamentos del Rey, y de los Frayles, como de las aguas, jardines, y fuentes famosos que ay alla, yo lo remito a la diligen∣cia, y curiosidad de los que lo quisieren saber mas por extenso. Carlos. Pues yo tengo esperança de vello todo algun dia si Dios me diere la gracia; mas grandosa casa es, que una casa sola tenga un Monastero, un Palacio Real, y una Vniversidàd.
Felipe. Partido del Escurial fuy a Madrid, passando antes por la casa del prado adonde el Rey reside muy amenudo. Carlos. Pues que avemos llegado a Madrid que me dirà vm. de la Corte del Rey Catolico. Felipe. No le dirè otra cosa a vm. sino que es una Corte muy corta. Carlos. Como es esto, que siendo el Rey de España tan gran Monarca, no tiene una Corte corres∣pondiente a su grandeza? Felipe. Vm. hà de saber que ay mucha gravedàd y estado en la Corte Catolica, mas poca gente y ruydo; siendo antes Monasterio que Corte Real. Carlos. Desta manera poco gasto haze el Rey de España. Felipe. Tan poco que yo osarè apostàr que el Rey
de Francia gasta mas en Pages, y Lacayos que el de España gasta en todos sus Officiales. Carlos. Es possible esso? Aunque si bien lo miro, pareceme que el acierta mas, Porque excusa mucho trabajo, y la confusion que ay en la Corte de Francia; y allende desto es mas el desperdicio que se haze en aquella, que lo que buenamente se gasta. Felipe. Vm. està bien en ello, y en eseto no se hazen alli tantas y insolencias como en otras Cortes mucho menores; Mas quien quisiere ver la grandeza del Rey de España, que vaya a Naples, Sicilia, Mexico, o Perù, adonde los Virreyes viven con mayor pomp y luzimiento que no haze el Rey a Catolico en sn Palacio (porque assi llaman la Corte) en Madrid. Carlos. Pues dexemos de hablar mas destas Cortes, porque no bastaria un dia entero para dezir lo que se pudiera de la una y de la otra; y prosiga si vm. mandare, su viage. Felipe. Al salir de Madrid tomè el camino de Alcala de Henares famosa Universidad, ye de alli passando por Aranjuez que es otra casa Real mas muy
caluroso, por su situation siendo, como dizen' la tierra circumvezina de un temple Africano; Alli ay algunas colas muy curiosas; y de Aran∣juez me encaminè para Toledo Ciudad principal de Castilla la nueva, y Arcobispado, el qual es el mas rico de entradas despues del Papadgo, de todos los de la Christianidad: Alli ay una yglesia rara, y un riquissimo tesoro en ella. Carlos. Vio Vm. alli la Torre Encantada, y el artificio con que se sube el agua del Rio hasta lo alto de la Cindad que es tan curioso y renombrado? Felipe. Quanto a la Torre yo me informè benissimo della, pero no me la supieron ensenār, y assi lo tengo por fabla; mas el artificio del agua, aun∣que sea bueno, no tiene que ver con los que se hallan en otras Tierras, como yo he visto en Italia, y Alemaña; El pueblo de Toledo es muy grave, y subtil, que fue causa del refràn Del Toledano guarte tarde y temprano; El mas puro Dialecto del Costellano se habla alli, de suerte que ay una ley en España, si huviere alguna di∣ferencia y ambiguidad en la significacion de al∣guna Palabra Costellana, un Toledano hà de ser el Juèz. Toledo tambien es renombrada por los Consilios generales y Ecumenicos que se tuvie∣ron alli.
Carlos. Abrevie vm. si mandàre, y passe adelante en su discurso. Felipe. De Toledo passe por muchedumbre de Lugares, pero no me detuve sino muy poco; Los mas señalados son Talavera, Truxilla, Merida, y Ba∣daioz postrera Tierra de Castilla adonde se hà de registràr la Ropa, y el dinero; y a tres leguas de alli en Portugal se registraron otra vez pa∣gando cierta alcavala a la salida de Castilla, y a la entrada de Portugàl. Carlos. Que importunidad es aquella de Registrar tan∣tas vezes, y aun pagar algo del poco dinero que se lleva a cuestas para meter pan en boca. Felipe. Señòr, no ay que apelar sino a la bolsa, y esto puede ser la causa porque se hallan tan po∣cos caminantes por aquellas Tierras; y puede Vm. creerme pienso de aver encontrado mas passajeros entre Paris y Orleans que casien todo mi viage en España. Carlos. Bien se lo creo sin que vm. lo jure, porque pa∣rece casi una procession la gente que passa por aquella parte de Francia.
Felipe. Claro està, y en efeto pienso que ay mas pueblos en Francia entre los dos Rios de sena y la Loira, tomandolos desde su origèn hasta que se entran en la mar, que en toda España. Carlos. Passe vm. adelante en el discurso de su via je si fuere servido de favore cerme. Felipe. Aviendo entrado en Portugal passème a Yelvas bonito lugàr, y assi a Villa vieiosa, despues a Evora Ciudad de cuenta, a Estremoso, a Monte major, y assi passo passico a Lisbona, grandissima Ciu∣dad la qual se puede paragonar a las mejores, y mayores Ciudades de Europa teniendo siete millas enderedòr. Carlos. Li Lisbona siendo una Ciudad tan renombrada porque ay un Refran, Quien no ha visto Lisboa no hà visto cosa-boa, supplico a Vm. que me cuente algo della. Felipe. For çoso es que Lisbona sea antigua, porque suvieio apellido es Olisippo de Vlisse qui pasto por allà; ella està situada sobre el Taio, y tiene trafego y Tierras en ambas las Indias.
El primer Descubridòr de Tierras agenas fue el Infante Don Henrique hijo menòr de los cinco que ganò Don Iuan el primero (Rey de Portugal) de Doña Felipa hija de Iuan de Gaunt Duque de Lancastrià en Imglatiera; Este Principe Hen∣rique siendo gran Matematico descubrio primero los Açores, y la Madera, y otras Islas en el mar Atlantico; despues la Guinea, y el passaje a las Indias Orientales por el Capo de buena Esperança, desde que tiempo Lisbona hà florecido maravillo∣samente; El hermano mayor del dicho Prin∣cipe Don Henrique se llama va Don Edovardo (qui vino ser Rey de Portugal) el Rey Edovardo tercero, de Ingla-tierra siendo su padrino, que era la pri∣mera vez que el nombre de Edoardo ò Duarte fu conocido en Portugal. Lisbona està circuyda de buenos muros y sobre ellos 76 torres, hazia la mar tiene veynte puertas; Hazia la Tierra firma esta situada sobre cinco montecillos, y es lugar de infinito comercio, &c. Carlos. Beso a Vm. las manos una infirnidàd de vezes por esta relacion tan puntuàl, prosiga, si man∣dáre, a hablar de otras partes de Portugàl. Felipe. Les segunda Cindad en Portugal es Santeren situada tambien sobre el Tajo; y la Tercera, es Sinira, situada sobre el Mar Atlantico; la 4a Co∣nimbra sobre el rio Mondego; la 5a Braga un gran
Arcobispado; 6a Porto, situada a la boca del Duero; 7a Miranda 8a Bragança, cuyos Duques eran tan grandes Principes que la tercera parte del pueblo vivian sobre sus Tierras; 9a Eubora, Arçobispado; 10a Portalegre; 11a Olivença sobre la Guadiana; 12a Beja: Todos estos lugares estan situados sobre Rios considerables. Carlos. Parece que el Reyno de Portugal està bien aguado, teniendo tantos Rios. Felipe. Tendrà como dizen mas de cien y cinquenta Rios grandes y Pequeños; los principales son el Tajo, el Duero, Guadiana, Minio, &c. Carlos. El Reyno de los Algarves no pertenece a la corona de Portugàl? Felipe. Si señòr, y tiene buenos lugares, como Faro, Niebla, Villa Maona, Tavila, Lagos, Sylvia, &c. De suerte que el Reyno de Portugal con los Algar∣ves tendra cosa de 400 millas de largo, y 100 de ancho. Carlos. Que son los otros dominios que tiene la Co∣rona de Portugal?
Felipe. En Asia, o en las Indias Orientales tienen tantos que es cosa difficultosa de nombrarlos; ienen Diu en el Reyno de Cambaia; Tienen Goa en el Reyno de Decan, Damau, Macao en China, y muchos otros lugares y castillos; En Africa, los Portugueses tienen señoriòs muy largos en los Reynos de Conga y Angola; Las Islas del Capo Verde que son nueve en numero per∣tenecen a los Portugueses; y Tanger en Berberia situado cerca de la boca del Estrecho de Gi∣braliàr. En las Indias Occidentales tienen Brasil, y una grandissima extendida de t erra, con muy considerables puertos como Todos los santos, Fer∣nambuc, san Salvadòr y diversos otros. Carlos. Muy largos son los Dominios a mi parecer que los Portugueses tienen en todas las quatro partes del mundo, es a saber en Europa, Asia, Africa, y America; mas de gracia passe Vm. mas adelante. Felipe. Antes que de partirme de Portugàl tengo de confutar un proverbio que tienen los Castellanos, viz. Los Portugueses son pocos y locos; mas estos años passados se hallan muchos y Mañosos; Agòra assi lo manda Vm. harè pues un salto desde
Lisbona a Sevilla en Andalusia, Ciudad tan estre∣madamente rica teniendo la casa de contra∣tacion de las Indias y magnifica, que ay dos Re∣franes della, el uno, quien no ha visto Svilla no ha visto Marauilla; el otro, A quien Dios quiere bien en Sevilla le da a comer. Carlos. Ayotro dicho qui yo entendi, que las calles de Sevilla son como lostrebejos del axedres tantos prietos quantos blancos, referiendo a los esclavos Moriscos que ay alli en gran numero; y de Sevilla adonde se encaminava vm? Felipe. De Sevilla passe por Carmona, yezij, que son dos indifferences Tierras, y de la a Cordoua a∣donde vi la famosa mesquita que los moros llama∣van Ceca, fabrica muy admirable, y el mas en∣tero de quantas he visto en mi vida de los Anti∣guos aunque he peregrinado en muchas partes; En Cordoua ay la mas escogida casta de Ginetes, que son tan sueltos y ligeros que dizen que estan engendrados del viento. Carlos. De Cordoua donde fue vuestra merced! Felipe. A Granada cabeja de un Reyno el ultimo que perdieron ls Moros, adonde vi el Alhambra co∣sa
grandiosa; De Granada boluimea Malaga el principal ectanco de vino, adonde vila la pu∣erta que trae el nombre de Cava hij a de Don Iu∣lian que el Rey Don Rodrigo avi desflorecido, y el conde Don Iulian supdre por vengrse del a∣gravio introduxo los Mros los qules senorea∣van en España mas de 700 años, y assii devino Traydor a su patria. Carlos. Assi lo fue, y muy infame traydor, porque la ofensa siendo particular no era y gual a la ven∣ganz que era tan general. Felipe. Despues yo passe por Gadix, Baca, Lorca, y Cartagena llave del Reyno de Marcia antigua po∣blacion, adonde ay vn muy famoso y convena∣ble puerto de mar, el mejor de quantos ay en España, porque los navios aportando alli qu edam nceroados coma en una caxa, y abrigados de as borrascas. Carlos. He leydo, que Felipe el segundo preguntando a Andrea Dna (gran navegador) qual er a el me∣jor puerto de España, respondio donosamente, Iunio, Iulio, y Caragena, porque en aquellos meses todos puertes son buenos por la mansedum∣bre de la sazon; y de Cartagena adoude?
Felipe. A Murcia, que fue cabe ça de un Reyno en tiempo de Moros, el principal estanco de seda; De al∣i passe por Origuela, y Elche a Alicante llave del Reyno de Valencia lugar de buen comercio; De Alicante passe por Xativa, y otros lugares a Va∣lencia cidad bizzarra en estremo, Tierra muy viciosa, y delicada; Los animales brutos alli hazen us estrados de flores, como de romarino y otros vegetables odoriferos; De Valencia passè a Mor∣viedre que era Sagunto donde ay muchos rastros de antiguedad; de alli a Castillon de la plana, y assi a Saragoça Metropple de Aragòn, Ciudad muy sobervia, y la Tierra enderedor fecundissima donde se come el mejor pan de toda España. Carlos. De Sarogoça por doude adereçava vm sus pas∣sos? Felipe. Por Cataluña; yo pense ver Tortosa, y Tarrago∣na, màs no avia comodidad, y ansi passando por Lerida lugar muy bien poblado, y Universidàd, garè Barcelna la cabe ça del Reyno de Cataluña, Ciudàd muy rica, y soberbia por sus edifici∣os; passe tambien por Nuestra Senōra de Mon∣serrate, adonde sos Pelegrinos acuden de todas partes; Desques passe por Gyrona, y assi al
condado de Ruysllon, adonde està Perpiñan muy buena tierra con un fuerte Castillo, que agora pertenece al Rey de Francia, y al fin ganando Salsas salj de España con harto trabajo aviendo atravessado dos vezes los montes pyrenèos, y allà tambien las Guardas me quitaron algo del poco dinero que me quedava. Carlos. Aquellas Guardas son muy enfadosas a los passageros; Hè oydo hablar de un pintor Fran∣cès, que a viendo medrado vna suma confidera∣ble de dinero trocava todo en pistoletes de oro los quales tragava; y las Gurdas aviendo teni∣do noticia ates, que traya una cantidad de di∣nero acuestas, y aviendo escudriñado por todas pares sin ecetar la boca, y el salvonòr echaron∣le entre quatro muros, y le dieron pildoras, y ona melezina de suerte que las Guardas hallaron todo el dinero: Mas como tratarona vm en las ventas por donde passava? Felipe. Aquellos Venteros son medio ladrones, porque en algunas partes pden dos vezes mas que la cosa vale; Por tanto yo concluyrè con un donoso cu∣ento de lo que acontecio cerca de Girona; Vn pa∣ssagero llegò a vn lugar do avia dos ventas cer∣canas vna al otra con vn Crucifixo en el medio, el passagero mirando lo, dixo, a l'oydo de su huesped, nuestro señor està aqui como estava
puesto en la cruz entre dos ladrones, (entendien∣do los dos Venteros. Como senòr, à venido vm aqui por afrentarme dixo su huesped, el passa jero replicava, no os enojeys mi huesped, porque yo os tengo por el buen ladòn. Carlos. Semejante a este cuento, es vn otro de vn Tu∣desco qui passando cerca de Alcala de Henares don∣de ay dolces y riquissimos vinós, y llegado que avia a vna venta, bevio 4 a çumbres de vino, y assi fue todo emborrachado a la cama; El dia si∣guiente preguntando a su huespeda que avia a pagar, dixo cinco açumbres; Esto no puede ser∣replico el Tudesco, porque no cabran en mis tri∣pas mas de 4 açumbres aviendolas medido muchas vezes; la hues peda respondio, señor, como este vino era muy bueno y fuerte, vn açumbre subia a la cabeza, y los demas quedaron en las tripas, que hasen cinco açumbres en todo.
THE PERAMBULATION OF Spain and Portugal; In a Discours 'twixt CHARLES and PHILIP. Charles. GOD give you very good dayes Sir Philip, It is a great while since I saw you; tell me, if you be pleas'd, Where have you bin so long? and whence com you now? Philip. You are very well met Sir Charles, I rejoyce in my soul to see you with health; and, since you command it, I will tell you whence I com, I am newly com from Spain.
Charles. From Spain? God bless me, and what was the cause (under favor) that made you to undergo such a journey? for they say, that it is a tedious Countrey to Passen∣gers. Philip. Sir, Curiosity was the cause; but let us go into the House, and I will give you account at large of what you will desire to know, but chiefly the cours that he is to take, who hath a mind to go unto that Coun∣trey. Charles. But let us dine first, and if you please, we will dine together in that Tavern which is a very neat hous, and well provided; and then you may please to re∣late unto me more at lesure when the Table is taken away. Philip. Be it in a very good hower, for I accept of the favor you do me to conduct me to so good a House, for it is a good while since I found any. Charles. What do you tell me? Is it possible that you did not find such in your travels, Spain being so good a Countrey, and abounding in all things?
Philip. She might be good, were it not for the slothfulnes of the peeple, who do not cultivat the ground not ner the third part; otherwise of its own nature tis good enough, but since the expulsion of the Moores it is not so much tilld. Charles. Then Sir, you inferr that the slothfulness of the Inha∣bitants is the cause of ill accommodation. Philip. Ther's no doubt of that, because the earth cannot produce unlesse it bee tilld, therfore ther is a want of necessary provision, so that in some places ther is but the cask of a House, with a little napery, but some∣times ther are no beds at all for Passengers in the Inns, or Ventas. Charles. I pray, do me the favor as tell me what Venta is? Philip. Ventas are Lodgings which are found in the Countrey, and on the Kings high-way, where if Pas∣sengers meet, they must carry their Knapsacks well provided of what is necessary; otherwise they may go to
bed supperles, for there is nothing to be had, but Barly and Straw for your Mules; and if haply ther be any thing it is a little bread and wine, and it may be som few eggs, and puddings. Charles. I pray do me the favour as relate unto me the successe of your journey when you entred Spain, and that which principally passd in places most remarkable, that I may know how to govern my self, if perchance I have a dispo∣sition one day to go to that Countrey. Philip. Sir, as I took farwell of France, I passed by that River the Dordonna, that divides her from Spain, which is neer Iron not far from Fuentarabia, I had noon at the' sayd place of Iron, and at night I gaind San Sebastian the first fortified place of Biscay, and a sea Port. Charles. In those frontire places, are ther not Gards to look what Travellers passe? Philip. Yes that ther are; tis tru that at your entrance into Spain they give no obstacle; but one thing must be don when one comes to Iron, which is, that the party must manifest all which he carries about him, whether Goods or Iewels, as likewise the very Money he carries for his ordinary expences, all which he
must register, and pay what is taxed by the Custo∣mers; then they give him a little Cedule, which they call Albaràn, and it is a kinde of Pasport, because the Gards may not seize upon what he car∣ries for want of registring. Charles. And are all kind of persons used th, whether Forren, or Natives? Philip. They except none, and that which is worse, the Gards who lye at the Catch at the other Gate, if they please, they will make you alight, for to search whether one carries any thing that is not mention'd in the Albaràn; But the best cours is for pre∣venting this importunity, to throw them a piece of Money according to the quality of the person. Charles. By this means, Sir, they know what Money one carries about him, and so he runs a hazard to be follow'd and rob'd, or it may be to be kil'd. Philip. This needs not to be fear'd; for there's little ta'lk in Spain of High-way men and Thieves, unlesse it be in Catalonia, which is more frequented by Passengers then any other; for all those who com
from Italy, or from those parts of France do pass that way to the Spanish Court; moreover it is the most populous Province of Spain. Charles. Well, when you parted from San Sebastian, whi∣ther did you direct your cours? Philip. I took the road of Navarr, where I saw Pam∣pelona the principal City of that Kingdom; and therein the famous Castle, which is somewhat like that of Antwerp. Charles. And doth not the Kingdom of Navarr appertain to the King of France? Philip. That Kingdom divides it self into two parts, that on this side the Pyrenean hills, which belongs to the King of France; the other beyond the Hills, which is the Kings of Spain, a goodly Countrey, and gallant peeple not ill affected to the French. Charles. From thence whither did you bend your cours? for in my judgment you left the ordinary Road that leads to Madrid.
Philip. 'Tis a great truth, for I left the Road of Victo∣ria, and the Port of Saint Adrian, and struck in at Logronio, a Countrey good enough, situate upon the River of Ebro, neer a Mountain, where in an∣cient time the City of Cantabria was; which gave the name to that Province, which at this day con∣tains, Biscay, Navarre, Guipuzcoa, and other par∣ticular places, which were too long to relate now. Charles. Surely you have pretermitted divers other places which I find in the Map that are of the Kingdom of Navarre. Philip. You dovery well to put me in remembrance, and there are two signal places which I pretermitted; And those are Estella de Navarra (the Star of Navarre) which is the Vniversity of that Kingdom, and the Town is sited in a place full of amenity; The other place is La puente de la Reyna (the Queens-Bridge;) And besides those two, there is another call'd Viana, a cor∣rupted name of Diana; for in ancient times there was a Temple dedicated there to that Goddess. Charles. I pray passe on, and doe not make a halt in places of small consideration, for I believe you have a great journey to make.
Philip. Since you will have it so, I will make a leap from Logronio, to Santo Domingo de la Calçada, which is a Town in Rioja neer the mountains de Oca (of the Goose) where is to be seen neer the Church, a living Cock, and Hen, which were of the brod of those, that being roasted, turned to life again. Charles. Peradventure they may be those of that Miracle which happened to a young French Pilgrim, who was hang'd in that place for a Theef, whose Pa∣rents returning from performance of their Pilgrimage to Santjago, and passing by the Gallowes they found him alive again. Philip. They say, they are of the same; And the custom is, that the Passengers who go in Pilgrimage that way, do take some of their Feathers and wear them in their Hats; and, were not the story too long; I would give you a more particular account, but I will put it off to another time. Charles. However, I pray do me the favour Sir, as to pur∣sue what you have begun, and may it be in a good hour.
Philip. Since it is your pleasure, and that you delight so much therein, I will proceed; From San Domingo I passed to Burgos the Cape City of old Castile, 'twixt whom and Toledo there have been often contests for priority. Charles. I have read so; but in a Parlement which was held once at Toledo, King Philip the Second, ap∣peased this Contestation very wisely for that time, which happened thus: The Burgesses of both Cities sitting in Parlement, they contested who should speak first, and the contest grew very hot, when the King did suddenly rise, and said, Let Burgos speak, touch∣ing Toledo I will speak for Her my self; and to this day the King is counted Burgess of Toledo. Philip. It was a very signal passage, and were it for no∣thing else, Philip the Second deserv'd the attribute of Prudent (which is given him) for this speech alone; but let us go n: In Burgos there is a Mo∣nastery without the City, where that miraculous Cru∣cifix is, whose nails and hair are clip'd once a moneth. The great Church of Burgos is a very stately Fabric; There is also a Castle but not very conside∣rable.
Charles. And with your favor, Whither did you direct your way from the City of Burgos? Philip. To Valladolid a goodly fair Village, and well peepled, where one of the Chanceries of Spain resides. Charles. But do you call Valladolid a Village, being so great a place, and where the Catholick Court kept so long? Philip. Yes Sir, 'tis but a Village, because 'tis not en∣compass'd with walls, and they have two Proverbs, Village for Village, and Valladolid in Castile; City for City, and Lisbon in Portugal. Charles. Well, let us detain our selfs no longer in this place, let us proceed further, if you please. Philip. From thence I went to Medina del Campo, an indifferent good Countrey, where there are famous Libraries; I went thither in the Evening, nnd the next morning following I took the Rod of Sala∣manca, a great place, and the most illustrious Vni∣versity of Spain, I viewed there the Colledges, which
are in great number, and well built; As also the ridge rear'd up by the Romans, and the Bull which is at the entrance, wherof Lazarillo de Tor∣mes speaks. Charles. Did it fortune you to see the House of Celestina? Philip. Sir, they pointed at the place where it was, but I had not so much curiosity to go and see it, besides, me thinks it is a fained thing. Charles. I have heard say, that there were at one time fifteen thousand Scholars in Salamanca, which me thinks is strange, Spain being so thin peepled, and there being 16 Vniversities more. Philip. It may well be so, because Salamanca is situated almost in the center of Spain, whither they have easie recourse from all parts; But the major part of the Scholars are Oppidanes, who lodge out of the Colledges. Charles. I have read a Proverb, A Farthing in Salamanca is better then a fair Face; but you may please to proceed.
Philip. From Salamanca I took the Road of Segovia, a famous place for many things which are there re∣markable; The first is the Monastery of Parral, which is without the City; Then the Mnt-house; Then the renowned Alcsar, and Segovia Bridge, which indeed is but an Aqueduct made of marvellous big stones; but above all, the fine Woollen Cloths that are made there. From Segovia I pass'd the Port of Guadarrama, having in the way seen a great Edifice call'd La casa del Campo, built among Woods; and having pass'd Guadarrama, I came to the Escurial, the eighth wonder of the World; But because there would need a whole Volume to describe as well the Church, the Librarie, the Quadrangles, the Kings Quarter, as also the delicate Waters, Orchards, and Fountains, which are found there; therfore I referre it to the diltgence, and curiosity of such who desire to know things exactly, and at large. Charles. Well, I hope to see it one day, if God give me the grace; but what a glorious thing it is, that one House should be a Monastery, a Royal Palace, and an Vniversity?
Philip. Being departed from the Escurial I went to Madrid, passing in the way by La casa del prado, where the King useth to reside often. Charles. Since we are now come to Madrid, I pray what do you think of the Catholic Court. Philip. I will tell you no more, but that it may be call'd a thin Court in comparison of others. Charles. How can that be, the Spanish King being so great a Monarch; and hath he not a Court correspondent to his greatnes? Philip. You must know, that there is a great deal of gravity and state in the Catholic Court, but little noise, and few people, so that it may be call'd a Monastery, ra∣ther then a Royal Court. Charles. By this means the King of Spain spends not much. Philip. So little, that I dare wager the French King
spends more in Pages and Laquays, then he of Spain a∣mong all his Court-Attendants. Charles. Is it possible? Yet when I think well of it, I find that he is more in the right, in regard that much trouble, and confusion is avoided, which the French Court is subject unto; Moreover, the wast which is made in that Court, is more then what is necessarily expended. Philip. You have reason on your side, besides, ther are not so many insolencies committed in that Court which are done in farr lesser; but he who will behold the greatnes of the King of Spain, let him go to Naples or Sicilia, to Mexi∣co or Peru, &c. where the Spanish Vice-roys live in greater lustre and magnificence then the King himself doth in his Palace, for so they call the Court in Madrid. Charles. Well, let us give over speaking further of these Courts, for a whole day would not suffice to discourse of this sub∣ject and pursue, if you please, your journey. Philip. From Madrid I took the Road of Alcala de He∣nares, a famous Vniversity; and passing thence to Aranjuez, which is another of the Kings Houses, but
excessive hot by its situation, being, as they say, with the circumjacent Countrey of an African temper: There are many curiosities to be seen there, but I stayed as little as I could, and went the way of To∣ledo, the chief City of Old Castile, and an Arch∣bishopric, the richest for Revenues, except the Pope∣dom, of any in Christendom; There is there a sumptu∣ous Cathedral with a rich Tresury belonging thereunto. Charles. Did you see the Enchanted Tower; As also the great Artifie whereby the Water ascends from the Ri∣ver to the upper part of the City, which is so curious, and so much spoken of? Philip. Concerning the Tower I informed my self as much as I could, but I could find nothing to any purpose, so that I take it for a Fable; But touching the Artifices of making the River-water to mount up, I have seen better in Italy and Germany. The peeple of Tole∣do is grave and subtil, which was the cause of the Proverb, From a Toledan take heed night and day; The purest Castilian Dialect is spoken there, so that there is a law in Spain, if there be any ambiguity, or that there happen any difference about the sense of a word, a Toledan is to be Iudge. Toledo also is renowned for some Ecumenical, and General Coun∣cels which have been held there.
Charles. I humbly thank you for these remarkable observa∣tions, and may you please to go on in your journey. Philip. From Toledo I passed by many places, but I did not stay any time in them▪ The most remarkabe pla∣ces were, Talavera, Truxilla, Merida, and Badaz the Confines of Castile, where Goods and Money are to be registred; And three Leagues thence I was forced to register them again, paying a certain Toll going out of Castile, and entring into Portugal. Charles. What an odd importunity  that, to register so often, and withall to pay something out of that small parcel of Money which one carries about him to put bread in his mouth. Philip. There is no appeal but to the Purse, and this may be the cause why so few Passengers are found in those Countreys; and truly you may believe me, I think I more Passengers 'twixt Paris and Orleans, then I found well neer in all this journey through Spain. Charles. I am easily induced to believe that, because the peeple that pass that way, are so thick, that it may be called a Procession.
Philip. 'Tis very tru, insomuch that I think ther's more peeple in France, 'twixt the Seine and the Loire, taking them from their source till they disgorge into the Sea, thn there is in all Spain. Charles. I pray proceed still in the account of your journey, if you please to favour mee so much. Philip. Having entred Portugal, I passed to Yelvas a pretty place, and so to Villa viciosa, then to Evora a City of account; thence to Estremoso, so to Monte Mayor, and so by degrees to Lisbon, a great City which may be compared to the best, and biggest Cities of Europe, having seven miles compass. Charles. Lisbon being so renowned a City, because there is a Proverb, Who hath not seen Lisbon, hath not seen a good thing, I pray Sir make som relation of it. Philip. The City of Lisbon must needs be very ancient, for her old name is Olisippo, of Ulisses, who passed that way; she is situated upon the River Tagus, and she hath traffic and possessions in both the Indies.
The first Discoverer of Forrein Countreys was Don Henrique, youngest son of five which John the first (King of Portugal) gain'd of the Lady Phi∣lippa Daughter to John of Gant Duke of Lancaster; The said Prince Henrique being vers'd in the Ma∣thematiques, discovered first the Azores, and the Madera's with other Islands in the Atlantic Ocean; Then Guiney, and after the Passage to the East Indies, was found out by the Cape of good Hope, since which time Lisbon hath marvailously flourished; The eldest Brother of the said Henrique (who came to be King of Portugal) was call'd Edward; Ed∣ward the third, King of England, having been his Godfather; which was the first time that the name Edward, whom they call Duarte was known in Portugal. Lisbon is encirled with good Walls, upon which there are 76 Turrets; towards the Sea, she hath twenty Gates; she is situated upon five Hills, and is a place of infinit Traffic. Charles. I thank you a thousand times over for your Relation, which is so punctual; you may proceed, if it stands with your pleasure, to speak of other parts of Portugal. Philip. The second Town in Portugal is Santeren, situa∣ted also upon the River of Tagus; The third is Sintra, upon the Atlantic Sea; The fourth Co∣nimbra, upon the River Mondego; The fifth Braga
great Archbishoprick; The sixth Porto at the mouth of the River Duero; The seventh Miranda; The eighth Braganza, whose Dukes were such great Prin∣ces, that the third part of the peeple of the Kingdom liv'd upon their Lands; The ninth Eubora, an Arch∣bishopric; The tenth Portolegre; The Eleventh Olivenz upon Guadiana; The twelfth Beja: All these Towns are situated upon considerable Rivers. Charles. It seems that the Kingdom of Portugal is well watered, having so many Rivers. Philip. They say it hath in all above 150 great and small Rivers, whereof the chief are Tagus, Duero, Gua∣diana, Minio, &c. Charles. The Kingdom of the Algarves, doth it not apper∣tain to the Crown of Portugal? Philip. Yes Sir, and it hath many good Towns, as Faro, Niebla, Villa Maona, Tavila, Lagos, Sylvia, and others; so that the Kingdom of Portugal with Al∣garve, is about 400 miles in length, and 100 broad. Charles. What other Dominions are there, over which the Crown of Portugal doth Lord it?
Philip. In Asia, or the East Indies, they have so many that ther is som difficulty to number them; They have Diu in the Kingdom of Cambaia; They have Goa in the Kingdom of Decan, and Dama; They have Macao in China, with sundry other Towns, Castles, and places of Fastness. In Afric they have large Possessions, in the Kingdom of Congo and Angòla; The Isles of Cape Verd, nine in number, are theirs, as also Tanger in Barbary, neer the Streights of Gibraltar. In the West Indies they have Brasil, with a vast extent of ground, and divers considerable Ports, as Todos los santos, Fernambuc, san Salvadòr, with others. Charles Truly me thinks those Dominions are very large, which the Crown of Portugal hath in all the four parts of the World, viz. Europe, Asia, Africa, and America; but I pray proceed further. Philip. Before I budge from Portugal, I will confute a Prverb which the Castilians have, viz. Los Portugue∣ses son locos y pocos, The Portugueses are Fools and few; but of late yeers the Castilian hath found them Many, and no Fools; But now since it is your
pleasure, I will make a hop from Lisbon to Sevil in Andaluzia, a City extremely rich, having the Contra∣tation-house of the West-Indies; so that ther are two Proverbs of Her. The first, Who hath not seen Sevill, hath seen no Wonders: The other, Whom God loves, he gives him his bread in Sevill. Charles. I have heard another saying that the Streets of Sevill are like a chess-board who hath as many black as white men, alluding to the multitude of Morisco slaves which are there. Philip. From Sevill I pass'd by Carmona, and Ezija which are pretty indifferent places, and thence to Cor∣dova where I saw that famous Mesquta (or Church) which the Moors call'd Ceca an admired fabrick, and the most entire of any ancient peice that ever I saw in my life, though I have travers'd a great part of the world; In Cordova there is the choisest race of Ginetts, which are so fleet and light that they say they are engendred of the wind. Charles. From Cordova whither did you direct your course Philip. To Granada the Metropolis of a Kingdom the last which the Moors lost; There I saw the Alhambra a
glorious piece; From Granada I turn'd to Malaga the chief staple of Wine, where I saw the Gate which bears the name of Cava (daughter to Don Julian) which being deflowr'd by the then King Don Rodrigo the said Don Julian her Father to revenge himself of the affront, brought in the Moores who lorded in Spain 700 yeers, and so he became a Traytor to his own Country. Charles. So he was, an infamous Traytor; for the offence being but particular, was nothing equal to the Revenge which was so general. Philip. After that, I passed by Guadix, Baca, Lorca, and so I came to Carthagena, the Key of the Kingdome of Murica, An ancient Colony, wher thre is a famous and convenient Haven, the best of any in Spain, for Shipps when they arrive there are as it were shut up in a box, and fenced from all storms. Charles. I have read that Philip the second asking Andrea Doria a great Seaman Which was the best Port in all Spain? he answered pleasantly June, July, and Cartage∣na; for in those two months any port is good because of the mildnesse of the Season, and from Cartagena whi∣ther.
Philip. To Murcia, which was the head of a Kingdom in the time of the Moors, it is the cheif staple of Silk; Thence I pass'd by Origuela, aud Elche to Alicant the Key of the Kingdom of Valencia, a place of good traf∣fic, though it have no Port but a Road; Thence I pass'd by Xativa, and other places to Valencia, an extreme bewtiful City, and a wanton delicat soyle about, so that the brute animals there make themselves beds of flow∣ers, as Rosemary and other odoriferous Vegetables; From Valencia I pass'd to Morviedre, which was old Sagunto, wher ther are many peeces of antiquity; Thence by Castillon de la plana, and divers jlly towns, I came to Saragossa the Metropolis of Aragon, a prowd stately Citly, and the circumjacent soil extreme fertil, for the best bread in Spain is eaten there. Charles. From Saragossa whither did you direct your journey? Philip. For Catalunia; I thought to have seen Tortosa and Taragona, but I had no conveniency; so passing by Leri∣da a wel-peepeld place, and an University, I gain'd Barcelona the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Catalunia, a prowd Citty both for her riches and buildings; I saw also our Lady of Monerrat, where Pilgrims of all Na∣tions resort; Afterwards I pass'd by Girona, and so to
the County of Russllion, a good Countrey with a well Fortified Castle which appertaines now to the King of France; And at last gaining Salsas, I made a sally out of Spain having twice travers'd the Pyrenàn hills, and there allso they took from mee som of that mony which I had remaining. Charles. Those Gards are very troublesom to passengers; I have heard of a French Painter who having got a con∣siderable som of mony changed all into small pistolets of gold, which he swallowed down, The Gards having notice before hand that he carried a quantity of mony about him, and searching narrowly every place, his mouth and his tayle not excepted they threw him twixt fowe walls, and administred unto him som pills, and a glister, so that the Gards found all the mony by this means: But how were you usd in your Inns or Ventas as you passd along. Philip. Those Inkeepers are half theefs in som places, because they demand twice as much as the thing is worth; Now, will I conclude with a merry tale of what happend neer Girona; A passenger arrivd at a place wher ther were two Inns, and in the middle betwixt them ther stood a Crucifix, The passenger looking upon the Pic∣ture of it, sayed in the hearing of his host, Our Savi∣our is here, as hee was upon the Crosse between two
Theefs meaning the two Inkeepers, How Sir, said his Host are you com hi ther to affront us? The Passenger replyed, Hold your self contented mine Host, for I take you for the good Theef. Charles. Not much unlike to this, is another Tale which I heard spoken of a high Dutchman, who passing by Alcala wher ther are sweet, and rich wines, and be∣ing com to a Venta, He drank fower quarts of wine, and so went drunk to bed; The next day, asking his Hostesse what was to pay, she said 5 quarts of wine; That cannot be, for my gutts will not hold above fower for I have mesurd them often this way, The Hostesse re∣plied, O Sir this wine being so good, and strong, one quart went up to the brain, and the other fower re∣mained in your belly, which makes in all five quarts.
Carta COMPVESTA de Ochenta y dos REFRANES, Concurrientes Todos, PARA LA CONSERVATIÒN DE LA Salùd Umana. Mi Senor Don L: LA Salud es la cosa que mas importa al cu∣erpo umano, Es la ioya mas preciosa de quantas la Natura tiene en todo su retrete por tanto yo le encomiendo tres Dotores para mantenerla, es a saber, El Dotor Dieta, el Dotor Reposo, y el Dotor Gozo.
Tocante el postrero, bien se sabe por Experi∣encia Que es aquel gran espejo de sabidu∣ria, Que vna onça de alegria vale mas que ci∣en quintales de melancolia, pesadumbre no pa∣ga deudas; y el Cuydado en demasia roe hasta el tuetano; Coraçòn contento es gran talento; que puede dezir Alegramente, el diablo es mu∣erto, y el Italiano dize que poo cibo & men affan∣no, sanita del corpo fanno; Tambien dize, Grave dura non ti punga, & sarà la tua vita lunga. To cante el segndo Dotò, que mira al govi∣erno del Cuerpo, es mucha verdàd que poca fatiga es gran salud; Bueno es passear hasta que se vea la sangre en la mexilla, no el sudor en la frente; Porlo que toca al sueño que es el Rey de Reposo, Duerme el dia quando quisieres, y la noche quanto pudieres; Sea la noche noche, y el dia dia, y Viviras con alerina; pero, Qien quiere bien dormir que compre la cama de vn deudòr; Allende desto, Come poco, y cena mas duerme en alto y viviràs; però sobre la som∣bra del nogal no te pong s a acostar; Ms desto, Bueno es madrugàr, porque Quien el diablo l à de engañar, de mañana se hà de levantar; Tam∣bien tenga cuenta de yrse a la mañana a la ps∣caria, y la tarde a la carneceria, porque pece y huesped presto hieden. Tocante la cobertura del cuerpo, si quieres vivir sano hazte viejo temprano; no dexes los pelliscos hasta que vengan los Galileos; Buena regla es, Que yo ande caliente, y riase la gente,
Otra ay mas particulàr, Euxuto el pie, caliente la cabeçc, por el resto vive como bestia; escuche tambien lo que dize el Ro mano, Vesti caldo, ma∣ngia poco, bevi assai & vir viai. Quanto a las partes del cuerpo, adviertase. Que los o jos siendo malos se han de curar con el co∣do; Los dientes no piden in mucho cuydado, ni demasiado descuydo; Quando te dolieren las tripas hazlo saber al culo; Mee claro y caga bi∣en, y higa para el Medico; Añadese a esto, si meare; de color de florin, echa el Medico para ruyn; Toda via, Quien mea y no pee, và a la Cote y al Rey no vee; sepasi tambien, Que a la gota el Medico no vee gota. Tocante el Casamiento el dicho del Marquès de mirabè se ha de observar, el qual siendo pre∣guntado como avia vivido tantos años (porque tenia mas de ochenta) respondio, Casème tar∣de y embiudème temprano; si quieres hembra escoje la Negra, Porque Muger Negra trementi∣na en ella; Tambien dize Frances, Fille brunette gaye & nette; Escoj la tambien el sabado, y no el Domingo; Pero Muger roxa y barbuda de cien pssos la saluda, Ms de esto, muger, ana∣de y cabra mala cosa siendo Magra, Para mien∣tes tambien a este cumplimiento, Junio, Julio y Agosto, señora mia no os conosco. Tocante el Doctor Deta que prdominà mucho sobre la salùd, es Regla general, Quien mucho come, poco come, el Italiano dize Bisogna far tre pasti di star sano, vn buono, vn cattivo, & n mez∣zano;
Quien come bien y bien beve, haze lo que deve, Pero a buen comer o a mal comer tres vezes haz de bever. Por lo que toca a la bevanda, Beved agua como un buey, y vino como vn rey; El agua tiene tres excellentes vir∣tudes, Ni enferma, ni adeuda, ni embiuda, To∣da via dizen que Agua fria y pan caliente nunca hizieron buen vientre: Siempre a higo Agua, ya la pera Vino: Tambien a bocado haròn espolado de Vino: Pero vino transnochado no vale vn cor∣nado: Dixo la leche al vino bien vengais, ami∣go. Tocante los manjares, es Regla muy saludable, Quien quisiere vivir sano, coma poco, y cene tem∣prano: Cabrito de vn mes, rezental de tres: Vn huevo escaseza, dos gentileza, tres valentia, qua∣tro vellaqueria: Dizese, Que si el Villano supi∣esse el sabor de la gallina en el Henero, no dex∣aria ninguna en el pollero: Escojase siempre leche de cabra, manteca de vaca, y queso de o∣veja: Pero, se hà de observar, Que el queso que vien de corta mano es el mas sano: Alos moços està permitido de comer mas amenudo que a los otros, porque dizen, que el moço creciente hael lobo en el Avientre, mas, to cante los Viejos se di∣ze que Qien hurta la cena al Viejo, no le haze agravio: por tanto es buen precepto para los de dad Quien no cena no hà menester Avicena, Otros dizen Que mas matò la cena que no sanò Avicena: De suerte que si tuvieres gana de mo∣rir
cena con carne assada y echate a dormir: A∣ñadese a esto, que si quieres comida mala, come la liebre assada. Quien en Mayo come sardina en Agosto caga la Espina: Et Quien co∣me Caracoles en Abril apareje cera y pavil; Toda via Quando llueve y haze sol coge el ca∣racol; No ay Caldo como el çumo guijarra; Pero Ni Olla sin tocino, ni Sermon sin Agu∣stino. Tocante las frutas y legumbres, observese que Pan reziente y uvas, a las moças ponen mudas, y alas viejas quitan las arrugas; Azey∣tuna oro es vna, dos plata, tercera mara, Nie∣spolo despedr ado es buen bocado; Pera que dize Rodrigo no vale vn higo; Otros dizen, La Muger y la pera la que calla es buena; El Francès tiene vna notable caucion tocante esta fruta, es a saber, Apres la poire ou le vin ou le prestre; Mis, sobre melòn, vino follon; Con todo sea sal, porque dize el Francès, Cest vn banquet pour le diable ou il n y a point du sel; Tocante el Hinojo, y la ruda, ay dos refranes muy señalados, viz: Quien hinojo vee y no lo coge, diablo es que no hombre: El otro, si supiesse la muger la virtud de la Ruda la bu∣scaria de noche a la luna, &c. En Observando estas Reglas se podria vivir tanto quantos vn Elefante que es de mas larga vid de quantos animales ay, segun aquel Refiàn gradual, Vn sero dura tres años; Vn perro
tres setos: Tres perros vn Cavallo: Tres Ca∣vallos vn Hombre: Tres Hombres vn Ciervo; Tres Ciervos duran vn Elefante. No soy Por mas, si no, que desseandole en con∣clusion, Salud y Gzo, y Casa con vn cort y pozo le quedo de todas mis entrañs su Criado mayor, por∣que. Quisiere aunque soy Chico, Ser, en serville Gigante, I. H. The same rendered into English.
Fourscore SPANISH PROVERBS couch'd in one Familiar LETTER, Concurring All to one congruous Sense, AND Conducing to the Preservation OF Human Health. SIR, HEalth is a thing that most imports a Human Body; It is the most precious jewel that Na∣ture hath in all her Cabinet. Therfore I re∣commend unto you three Doctors for the maintenance therof▪ to wit, Doctor Diet, Doctor Quiet, and Do∣cter Merriman.
Touching the last, 'tis well known by Experience which is the great Looking-glass of Wisedom, That an ounce of Mirth is more worth then a hundred stone of melancholy; Sorrow quits no scores; And too much care corrodes, and eats to the very marrow; A heart con∣tent is a great Talent; A heart which may say Ale∣gramente, the Devil is dead; And the Italian will tell you. That a little meat and lesse grief make a health∣ful body. Touching the second Doctor, which concerns the Go∣vernment of the Body, 'Tis a great truth, That a lit∣tle toyl is great health: 'Tis good to walk till the bloud appears in the cheek, but not the sweat on on the brow: Touching sleep who is the King of repose, Sleep in the day what thou wilt, and in the night as much as thou cast; but make night of night, and day of day, then thou mayst sing welladay; But he who doth desire to sleep soundly, let him buy the boulster of a Bankrupt: Moreover, Dine with little, sup with less, sleep high and thou wilt live; But take heed of sleeping on the shadow of a Wall-nut-tree; Besides, 'tis good to rise early; for, He who will cosen the Devil, must rise be∣times: Go also early to the Fish-market, and late to the Shambles; for Fish and Guests quickly stink. Concerning thy clothes, or coverings of thy body, If thou wilt be healthful make thy self old betimes; Leave not thy Furrs till the Galileans come (viz. till As∣cenfion-day, when that Scripture is read) It was a good saying, Let me go warm, and let the word laugh at me as long as it wi: Ther's another rule, Keep thy head dry, and thy head hot, and for the rest live like a
Beast (viz. eat and drink no more then will sffice Nature.) Concerning the parts of the Body, Take notice that when the eyes are sore, cure them with thy Elbow, (viz. thou must not finger them): The Teeth require not much care, nor too much neglect: When thy uts ake make it known to thy tail; Piss clear, and go well to stool, and a fig for the Physitian: Whereunto may be added, If thy Vrine be bright yellow, piss upon the Doctors head; Our Gransires said, That he who pisseth without a re∣port backward, goes to Curt and sees not the King: Touching the Govt, the Physitian is but a lut. Concerning Mariage, the saying of the old Mar∣quis of M is observable, who being asked how he came to live so long in such health, he answered, I married late, and I became a widdower betimes. If thou de∣sirest a wife, choose her upon a Saturday, rather than upon Sunday (in her fine clothes): And if thou canst, choose a black one, for they say, in a black woman there is Turpentine; whereunto the French-man al∣ludes something, A brown Lasse is gay and cleanly: but for a red-hair'd, or bearded woman, salute them a hun∣dred paces off. Touching Doctor Diet, who predominats much over Human health, 'tis a general rule, That he who eats much, eats but little; the Italian saith, That to pre∣serve health, one must make three meals a day, one good, one bad, and another indifferent meal: 'tis ob∣served, that he who eats well, and drinks well, doth his business; but, whether you die well, or ill, be sure to drink thrice.
Touching drinks, Drink Water like an Ox, and Wine like a King: Water hath three excellent ver∣tues, for it neither makes one sick, nor puts one in debt, nor makes one a widdower; yet cold Water and hot Bread never made good belly. After the Fig, Water; af∣ter the Pear, Wine: A jadish bit requires a spur of Wine; but Wine that stood all night is not worth a mite: The Milk told the Wine, Welcom friend, Wine upon Milk is mine; Milk upon Wine is thine. Touching meats: It is a wholsom precept, Who will live healthful, let him dine sparingly, and sup betimes: Touching flesh, a Kid of a month, and a Lamb of three, are best: For Eggs, one is scarsenes, two is gentlenes, three stoutnes, and four are roguishnes. They say, that if the Country-man knew the goodnes of a Hen in January, he would not leave one in his roost house: Goats Milk, Cow Butter, and Sheeps Cheese are best; but for Cheese, that's best which comes from a miser's hand: Young men are allow'd to eat oftener then men in years; for, they say, a growing Youth hath a Wolf in his belly; Therefore who steals an old mans supper, doth him no wrong; moreover he who doth not use to sup, hath no need of the Physitian; therefore if thou hast a mind to dye, sup upon roasted Muten, and go to bed. Hereunto may be added, If thou desirest ill food, eat a roasted Hare: he who eats Pilchers in May, may shite out the bnes in August; and he who eats Mushrumps in April, let him provide Week and Wax; viz. let him provide for his burial; yet in other months, when it rains in a Sun-shine gather thy Musrumps: There is no Broth like that of the juyce of flint (viz. of water
flowing thence); but Pottage must not be without Bacon, nor a Sermon without Saint Austin: Con∣cerning fruits, and pulse, observe that new Bread and Grapes paint young Maids, and take away wrinckles from the old: One Olive is God, two Silver, three Brass: If thou wilt have a good bit, eat a gelded Medlar: The Pear which cres Rodrigo is not worth a rush; O∣thers say, That the Pear and the Woman which are si∣lent are best: The French-man hath a good caution touching this fruit, That after Pear, the Wine or the Priest (to confesse thee before death); but after Melon, Wine is a Felon: Let there be Salt with every thing, for 'tis a banquet for the Devil wher ther is no Salt: Concerning Fennel and Rue, ther be two notable Pro∣verbs of them, viz That he who sees Fennel and gathers it not, he is a Devil, and no Man; the other is, That if the good Woman did know the vertue of Rue, she wold look for it in the night at Moonshine. By observing these Rules one might by the strength and complacency of Nature arrive to the age of an Elephant, whom the Naturalists observe to live longest of any Ter∣restrial Creture, according to that gradual Proverb of longitude of lifes, viz. A Hedge lasts three years; a Dogg three Hedges; a Horse three Doggs; a Man three Horses; a Stagg three men; an Elephant three Staggs. No more now, but that wishing you all health and gladnes, I rest from my very Bowells your Gretest Servant for though I am little, I wold bee a Hercules to serve you. I. H.
A CHAIN Of above Threescore old English PROVERBS, couch'd in one Familiar LETTER, And conducing all to one Subject or Sense: Rendred into Spanish. SIR, I Have much Aquaintance, but few Frends, amongst whom I rank you for one of the choisest; Therfore, although I am none of those that love to have an Oare in every mans Boat; or such a busy body as deserves to bee hit
in the teeth, that he shold keep his breath to his pottage; yet, you and I having eaten a peck of Salt together, and having a hint that you are upon a busines which will make you, or marr you, viz. Mariage, I wold wish you to look before  leap, and make more then two words to burgain, in regard that a Mans best or worst Fortune is a Wife. Tis tru, that Mariages are made in Heaven; It is also sayed, that Mariage and Hanging go by destiny; But, if you are resolv'd to marry, mar∣ry a Shrew rather than a Sheep, for a Foolis fullsom; yet you run a risk allso in the other, for a Shrew may so tie your Nose to the Grind∣stone, that the Gray Mare will prove the bet∣ter Horse: Moreover, There is another old sayed saw, That every one knowes how to tame a Shrew, but hee who hath her: If it be your fortune to meet with such a one, shee may chance put you to the charge of buying a long spoon; for hee must have a long spoon who will eat broath with the Devill. Furthermore, If you are disposed to marry, the Spaniard wold have you to choose a wife upon the Saturday (in her old clothes) not up∣on Sunday (when shee is trick'd up): But by all means do not fetch a Wife from Dunmow,
for so you may bring home two sides of a Sow; Nor from Westminster; For, they say, That he who goes to Westminster for a Wife, to Pauls for a Man, and to Smithfield for a Horse, may have a Iade to his Horse, a Knave to his Man, and a Wagg-tayl to his Wife. But if you needs must have a wife, let her be rather little than bigg, for of two evils the least is to bee chosen: yet ther is a hazard in that also; For a little pot is soon hot, and so shee will bee little and loud; If you give her an Inch, shee will take an Ell; Shee will al∣wayes have a Rowland for your Oliver, and two words for one; such a wife, though shee bee as tender as a Parsons Lemman, yet shee may prove a Wolf in a Lambs skin: Insteed of a Rose you will have a Burr; if you happ too meet with such a one, you may bee put to answer as hee was, who having a dam∣nable Scold to his Wife, and being asked by Sir Thomas Badger, who recommended her unto him? hee sayed, And old Courtier Sir; What Courtier sayed Sir Thomas? 'Twas the Devil Sir: The Anagram may well fit such a wife: —Uxor & Orcus idem.
Moreover, Take heed of too-handsom a wife, for then the Italian will tell you, she is like∣ly not to bee all your own; And so shee may bring you to your Horn-book again, or rather make you horn-madd, and then you have brought your Hoggs to a fair market; yet take delight when you have one to see your wife go han∣som, and not to spoil her face: To that end, the Spaniard wold have women when the se∣son serves to feed upon Grapes and Bread, for ther is a saying, That Grapes and new Breed paints young womens faces, and takes away wrin∣kles from the old. But by all means take heed of a too costly and lavishing a wife, for so you may quickly turn a Noble to Nine-pence, and com home by broken crosse, Shee will in a short time make hunger to dropp out at your noe; Shee will thritten a Mill post to a Pudden-prick: The Goose will drink as deep as the Gander, and then when all is gon and nthing left, What boots the Dagger with the Dudgeon hest? The Wolf wilbee then still at your dre, and the black Ox will tread on your toe: Your neighbours will make mowes at you and say You are as wise as Walthams Calf, who went nne mile to suck a Bul, and came home more thirsty then when he went.
You must allso bee wary how you marry one who bath cast her Rider, lest you all into a Quagmire wherin another was lost, I mean, a Widow, for so you wilbee subject to have a dead-mans head put often into your dsh: Touch∣ing the complexion of your wife, the Spani∣ard holds Black to bee the wholsom'st, for hee hath a saying, Muger negra trementina en ella; A black Woman hath Turpentine in her. The Frenchman is for the Brown, Fille bru∣nette gaye & nette, A brown Lasse is gay, and cleanly; but they both will tell you, That touching a red hair'd, or beard∣ed Woman, you must salute them a hundred paces off. Lastly, Take heed by all means of doting so far upon any Female as to marry her for meer affection; 'Tis tru, That one hair of a Woman will draw more then a hundred yoak of Oxen, yet meer Affection, they say, is but blind Reson, and ther are more Mayds in the world then Malkin: 'Tis allso tru, That in love ther is no lack; yet it is as tru, That nothing hath no savor, nor can any thing bee bought in the Market without Money: There must bee Suett, as well as Water and Oat-meal, to make
a Pudding: They that marry for meer love, may have merry nights but mournfull daies; In this case, 'Tis better to buy a quart of Milk for a peny, then to keep a Cow; And to follow the Italians advice, viz. Com∣mend the Sea, but keep thy self on the Shore; Commend the Hills, but keep thy self on the Plaine; Commend a Wedded life, but keep thy self still a Bachelor: Accord∣ing to another wise Proverb, Hee who mar∣ries, doth well, but hee who marrieth not, doth better: Wherunto alludes a third, That next to a single life, the married is best; I will conclude with another, Honest men use to marry, but Wise men not. When you read this; I know you wilbee apt to say, That a Fools bolt is soon shot, or cry out, Witt whither willt thou? Yet though I am none of the seven Sages, I can look as far into a Milstone as another; And you know that the stander by sees oftimes more then the gamster. What I write, is the language of a Friend, and could I stead you any way herin, I wold do it with
as good a will as ever I came from School, for I am such a frend that will shine with you in the dark; And to conclude with the old Roman Pro∣verb, I am yours Usque ad aras, Yours to the Altar. I. H. The same made Spanish.
Cadena de mas de sesenta Refranes Ingleses, Puestos en una CARTA FAMILIAR, Concurrientes todos A un Sentido, y rendidos en Castellano. Señòr, TEngo Conocidos muchos, Amigos pocos, entre los quales estimo a vm. Vno de los mas Escogidos; por tan∣to, aunque yo no sea del numero de aquel∣los, qui quieren tener remo en cada barca,
ni tal entremetidor que meresca que le den en los dientes, que guardasse el alien∣to para enfriar su caldo, Toda via vm. y yo aviendo comido juntos vn celemin de sal, y oyendo correr la voz que vm esta empe∣ñado en vn negocio que podrà hazerle o deszerle viz. Casamiento, yo le aconse∣jaria de mirar bien antes que saltar, y que aya mas de dos palabras a tl concierto, porque el casarse es la mayor Dicha o desdi∣cha que pueda acaeèr a vn hombre. Verdàdes que Casamientos se hazen en el Cielo, Tambien se dize que Casamientos y ahorcamientos andan por Destino, pero si qued resuelto a Casarse, Casese antes con vna baladrona que con vna bova, por∣que las mansas en demasia son enfadosas. Toda via corre riesgo con la baladrona, por∣que ella le podra atalle las narizes de tal suerte Que la vaca negta serà mas brava que el toro; Mas desto, dizen que Cada vno sabe domar vna Baladrona si no el que la tiene por mugèr, si a caso se casàre con tal, le serà for çoso de comprar vna cuchara larga, porque dizen que es meñester vn cucharon largo para comer con el demo∣nio. Allende de esto si es menester que se case no se vaya por muger a , porque
assi podar llevar a su casa dos lados de puer∣ca; ni a Vestminsterio, porque quien v a Vestminster por vna muger, a san Pablo por servidor, y a Smithfield por vn cavallo, cor∣re peligro de tener vn Haron por cavallo, vn picaro por servidor, y vna puta por mugèr. Pero, si ay necessidad que teng mugèr, que sea antes Chiquita que Grande, por∣que de dos males el menor se hà de eligir, Toda via corre riesgo con tal, porque las pucheras pequeñas luego se calientan, y assi ferà chiquta y Gridadora, En dando∣la vna pulgada, ella tomarà v na vara, Ti∣endra siempre Vn Roldan contra su Ro∣dulfo, y dos palabras por vna: Tal mugèr aunque sea tan tierna que la manceb de vn clerigo, toda via seà quiça vna loba en pel∣lejo de cordera; En lugar de vna Rosa rendrà vna Espina: Si los Hados le dieren tal muger, la mesma respuesta servirà a vm, que diò el, qui teniendo vna endemoniada parlera, y fien∣do preguntado por Don Tomas Badger quien se la avia dado por muger, dixo, vn Cortesano viejo me la dio, que Corresano replicò Don Tomas? Era el Demonio, Se∣ñor; El donoso Anagramma quadraria bien con tal mugèr. —Vxor & Orcus idem
Mas de esto, tenga cuenta que su muger no sea linda en estremo, porque el Italiano le dirà que tal no puede ser toda su ya, y assi ella podrà reduzirle otra vez a su librito cornudo, o auà de hazerle cornudo y fre∣netico, y entonces yà con sus puercos a vn lindo mercado: No embargante esto en te∣niendo muger deleytese de guardarla linda y limpia con buena cara; A este efeto que coma con la sazon pan y uvas, porque di∣zen Que pan reziente y uvas a las moças po∣nen mudas, y a las Viejas quitan las arrugas. Sobre todo guardese bien de vna muger desperdiciadora, porque en aquel modo vn doblò deviendà luego diez maravedis; E∣la le harà passar por la cruz rota; Haà a hambre gotear fuera de sus narizes: La gan∣sa bevera tan hondo que el Ansaròn; y en∣tonces la pobreza darà priessa; Porque don∣de sacan y no pon luego llegan al hondòn; el lobo se hallarà a puerta, y el buey negro dara vozes; Sus vezinos diràn Hideputa, soys tan sabio que el bezerro de Waltam, qui fue nueve mi llas por tetar vn toro, y bolviose mas sediento que no era antes. Tambien hà de guardarse de esposar la
hembra que hà ya derribado su Cavalgador, de miedo que no se cayga en vn Atolladero adonde perecio vn otro, es a saber Vna Bi∣uda, porque en esta manera tendrà cada ra∣to la cabeça de vn muerto echada en su plato: Tocante la Complexion de su esposa, el Español dize que muger negra trementina en ella; El Francès es por la morenita, porque las Morenitas son loçanas y limpias; Pero el vno y el otro le diràn, muger bàrbuda, o con cabellos roxos, saludalas cien passos lexos. En conclusion quardese bien de no dex∣arse transportar, o Empeñarse por la sola aficion de alguna hembra viviente; Verdad es que vn pelo de muger tira mas que cien bueyes, Toda via la Aficion sola no es otro sino Razon ciega; por tanto sepa que Mas moças ay en el mundo que Mar∣guilla; Tambien es Verdad, Que en Amor no ay mengua; mas otra verdad ay que nada no tiene sabor, Los Casamientos no se ha∣zen de hongos sino de ducados redondos, porque en la plaça no se puede comprar nada sin dinero; por hazer vna longaniça es menester sebo con sangre; Los que se casan por pura aficion podran aver noches
plazenteras, mas dias pesados: En este ca∣so mejor es comprar vn açumbre de leche con su placa, que guardar vna vaca; y con∣formarse al consejo del Italiano, Alaba la mar mas tente en Tierra firma; Alaba los mon∣tes mas tente en la vega, Alaba la vida ca∣sada mas tente Saltero; Tambien ay otro, El quien casa haze bien, mas quien no ca∣sa haze mejor; A este se puede añadir vn tercero, Despues de la vida soltera, la ca∣sada es la mejor; Concluyrè, Que los hombres de bien suelen casarse los, savios no. En leyendo esto bien sè yo, que vm. di∣rà que el virote des Loco presto sesolta; Toda via, Aunque yo no sea del numero de los siere Savios, bien se quantos son cin∣co, y muchas vezes el vee masque el Ju∣gadòr. Lo que yo escrivo aqui, es el len∣guaje de Amigo, y si podria ser∣ville en algo lo haria de tan buena gana como jo vine jamas de la Escue∣la, porque yo soy tal amigo que lu∣zira
con el en las tinieblas; En su∣ma, concluyrè con aquel Refran Ro∣mano suyo soy usque ad aras, hasta los altares. I H.
OF THE Portugues Language, OR SVB-DIALECT, &c. AS Scotland is to England, so Portugall may be sayed to be in relation to Spain, in point of Speech; The Scott speaks somwhat broader, and more gaping; so doth the Portugues compared to the Castilian, and shorter farr: for wheras the Castilian out of an innated humor of gravity is addicted to long-traind words, the Portuguès doth use to curtayl divers of them, som in the middle, som in the end; But to know the main difference betwixt them, take these Instances. The Portuguès is not much affected to l or n; touching the first, hee turns her to r, the snarl∣ing letter, as the Philosopher calls her: For ex∣ample, wheras the Castilian sayes Inglatierra Eng∣land, hee sayes Ingraerra; Noble Inglès, a Noble Englishman, Nobre Ingrès; Flamenco a Flemin,
Framengo in Portuguès; Blando soft brando; Blan∣co white branco; Hermoso fair fermoso; Complido fi∣nishd, comprido; Emplear to employ, Empregar; Flaco weak, fraco; Diablo the Dievil, Diabro o Dia∣bo, &c. Besides, when ll beginns a word in Spanish the Portuguès turns them to ch; As, Lamar to call chamar; Llama a flame, chama; Llaga a wound, chaga; Lleno full, Cheo wherby the n. allso is lost; Luna the Moon, lue: Llegar allegar to com or approach, chegar achegar; Llave a key, chiave; Ll∣ro weeping, choro: Luvia Rain, chuva. Yet the Portuguès is not so well affected to ch, when hee finds it in a Spanish word, for then he turns it to yt commonly, as noche night, noyte; Ocho eight, oyto; Pecho the brest, peyto; Provecho profit, proveyto, &c. In divers words hee leaves l quite out, when hee finds it about the middle, as Delante before, diante; Cielo Heven, ceo; Candela a Candle, candea; Mala ill, maa; As Ma noyte y faz Filinba, An ill night and maka a girl. The Portugues likes not allso the aspiration in the beginning of a word but turns it to f, wher∣by his language comes neerer (in many words) to the Latin, which is the Mother of both: as, wher∣as the Spaniard sayeth Hazer to do, the Portu∣guès sayeth Fazer; Hado Fate, Fado; Horca the Gallows, Forca; Hazaña an exploit, Fazanba; Hacha a Torch, facha; Hablar to speak, lar; Hrno an Oven, forno; Hormig an Ant, formiga;
Holgar gandeo folgar; Hidalgo a Gentleman, fidal∣, &c. Note allso that where the Portugues finds the throaty j, or ishota in a word, hee turns it to lh, As, Abeja a Bee, abelha; Oveja a sheep, ovelha; Ojo the Ey, olho; Aparejàr to prepare, aparelhar; Tra∣bajo toyl, travalho; &c. But it is to be observed, that those words in Portugues must be pronouncd as if an i followd; As, Abelha a Bee, abelhia; Tra∣valho toyl, travalhio, &c. Nor is the Portuguès much affected to the let∣ter n, for where hee finds her in the middle of a Spanish word, hee quite cutts her off; As, for adena a chain, he sayeth cadea; Amonestar to warn, amoestar; Cenar to supp, cear; Corona a Crown, coroa; Freno a bridle, freo; Buena good, bo; Mano a hand▪ mao, &c. Moreover the Portugues turns Spanish Dissylla∣bles into Monosyllables; As, Tener to hold, ter; Venir to com, vir; Poner to putt, por; Color co∣lour, cor; Dolor greif, dor; Mayor a Maior, mor, &c. The Portugues also turns oftentimes Spa∣nish Trissyllables into Dissillables; As, Menester need, mister; Ganado a flock, gado; Generar to engender, gerar; General General, geral: Obispo a Bishop, Bispo, &c. Furthermore where the Spanish words end in bre, the Portugues turns it to me, or mem; As, Co∣stumbre custom, costume; Hombre a man, homem; Nombre a name, nomem; Cumbre the top, cume, &c.
The Portugues allso turns the Spanish ble into vel; As, Possible possible, possivel; Insufrible unsuf∣ferable, insufrivel; Mudable changeable, mudavel; Durable durable, duravel, &c. The Portugues makes allso Trissyllables of Spanish Quatrosyllables often; As, Slameme only, somente▪ Mahamente ill, mamente; Enemigo an Enemy, imigo, &c. Yet sometimes the Portuges adds a syllable more; As, Duvida to the Spanish duda, a doubt; Duvidosamente for dudosament, doubtfully; Duo for dos, two, &c. The Portugues allso adds e to Spanish words end∣ing in d; As, Mocidade for mocedàd, youth; Ai∣stàd friendship, amizde; Liberted liberty, liber∣tade; Liberalidàd liberality, liberalidade; Pieded piety, piedede, &c. Now, Though the Costilian, and the Lusitanin language bee both derived from the Latin, the first immediately, ther othe mediatly by means of the Gastilian, wherof shee is a Dialect, and therby a subdialect to the Latin; yet shee hath divers words for which shee is beholden to neither, nor to the Morisco also, wherof I thought it worth the while to give a particular Catalog.
A Short DICTIONARY OR, CATALOG Of such Portuges Words That have no Affinity with the SPANISH. Portugues, Spanish, English Abafar Garrotar To strangle Abalroar Pelear To fight Abalo do animo Desaiossiego Trouble of mind Abegaon Rustico A swayne Abelhaon Colmena A hive of bees Abelhudamente Appressuro Sa∣mente Hastily
Abençoer Bendezir To blesse Acamar Enfermarse To be sick Agastar Provocar To provoke Aginha Presto Speedily Agoacento Humedo Watry Alagar Deribar To overthrow Alapardarse Esconderse To hide himself Alardo Nombramiento de soldados A list of Soldiers Alar Socorrer To succour Alcunha Sobrenombre A sirname Alem Mas de esto Moreover Alfayate Sare A taylor Alfaqueque Mensajero A messenger Alvacento Blanquecino Whitish Alvela Milan A kite Aniae Alfiler A pin Amuado Obstinado Obstinat Andorinha Golondrina A swallow A Podar Paragonar To compan Apupar Aullar To houl Arreceo Miedo Fear Atlhar Impedir To hinder Atasanero Panadero. A bakee. Bacoro Puerca A sow Bafo Aliento The breath Bafio Hediondez A stink Balisa Carcel A gaol Baque Cayda A fall Barça Cofre A coffer
Bicho Gusano A worm Bragante Ruyn Lewd Breu Pez Pitch Bugio Mono An Ape Buraco Aguijero A hole Burrifar Aguar To sprinkle Cachopo Mocito A little boy Cadela Perra A bitch Canga Yugo A yoke Cardume Muchedumbre A multitude Crestaon Cabron A goat Carpinha Lamentaciòn Lamentation Caranca Mala cara An ill face Caramelo Yelo Ice Cavidarse Guardarse To beware Colheyta Cosecha The harvest Coceyra Começon The itch Cocegas Coxquillas Tickling Cossar Arañar To soratch Coyma Dolor Pain Cafra Yunque An Anvil Cedo Presto Quickly Ceysa Cosecha Harvest Chambaon Tonto A dullard Cheyrar Oler To smel
Decepar Romper To break Derrancar Corromper To corrupt Desazo Ociosidad Sloth Desdobrar Exprimir To expresse Desmiçar Aboler To abolish Desmanchar Quebranter To break Devesa Selva A Wood Dia azinhago Dia Escuro A black day Dia de Hotem Ayer Yesterday Dianteyra Frente The forehead Discante Lalyra The harp Doudo Bobo A fool ELche Apostata An Apostat Embeve∣darse Emborracharse To be drunk Embleçar Engañar To cosen Embicar Ofender To offend Embelr Cunar To rock Emborcar Invertir To invert Empecilho Obstaculo A stopp Emperrar Porfiar To be obstinat Emposta Ayuda Help Empar Obtruder To obtrude Encuica Noticia Knowledg Endoudecer Enloquecer To grow foolish Enfastiar Enfadar To trouble Engeytar Menospreciar To cast away
Ensejo Ocasion Occasion Entraz Carbunculo A Carbuncle Entulbar Entoñalar To fill up Escavedar Huyr To fly away Esfalsar Cansar To tyre Esmechar Herir To wound Esqueho Tuerto Crooked Espaçar Alargar To lengthen Esmolar Dar limosna To give alm Esmera Perfecto Perfect Esmoga Synagoga A synagog Esquecimiento Olvido Forgetfulnesse Esterqueyra Muladàr A donghil Estulagem Venta An hostry Estabalhoado Arrebadato Rash Estrondo. Alboroto A noise FAim Lança A lance Fala Voz A voice Faisca Centella A flash Fanar Costar To cut Fanchono Mugeril Effeminat Faqua Cuchillo A knife Fanquey Lencero A linnendraper Fanga Hanega A bushel Farelo Salvado Bran Febre Delgago Slender Felugem Hollin Soot Felinha Hijuela A little Girle
Figo Lampo Precoz Too soon ripe Fiquar Quedar To stay Focinho Boca The mouth Folga Gozo Mirth Fraga Peña A rock Franga Polastra A pullet Fracayro Putaniero A wencher Furna Caverna A den Fuzilar. Relampaguear To lighten GAbo Loor Praise Gabar Loar To prayse Gafern Lepra The leprosie Gaguo Tartamudo A utterer Galbo Ramo A branch Geyto Ademan de cu∣erpo Gesture Gear Yelo Yce Gielho Rodilla The knee HOntem Ayer Yesterday Huyvar Aullar To howle IAnella Ventana A window Jentar Comida A diner Ilharga Lado The side Inçar Propagar To propagat
Ingoas Las buas The Pox Lapa Cueva A Cave Leycenço Ladroncillo A little thief Lembrar Acordar To remember MAchado Seguar An ax Magao Congoja Grief Madraço Picaro A Rogue Mamote Lechoncillo A sucking pigg Maminher Esterilidad Barrennesse Marral heyro Vellaco A cuming knave Madioso Liberal Liberal Matiz Retrato A picture Matreyro Zorro Crafty Mealherro Casa de tesoro Exchequer Morno Tibio Lukewarm Morgado Primogenito The first born Mouco Sordo deaf ORate Mentecato A madman Outiva Arrebatada∣mente. Rashly PAyxaon Ensado Trouble Pancado Bofeton A Blow
Pao Madera Wood Porolento Mohoso Musty Patife Desembuelto A loose fellow Pezinho Piojo A lowse Pelouro Bala A bullet Peneyra Harnero A sive Perto Cerca Neere Pinga Gota A drop Pissa Carajo A mans yard Pomba Paloma A pigeon Povo Pueblo The people Presunto Pernil A gamm REfenn Caucion A pledg Rilhar Roer To gnaw Roldar Tener centinela To keep watch Rolda Centinela The watch SAloya Rustica A Country woman Sanden Frenetico Madd Saluço Suspiro A sigh Sisa Pecho A tax Soada Fama A rumor TAmancas Alpargatas Wodden shoos Tamalaves Vn ratico A little white Tarefa Obra A task
Tayvar Rabiar To rage Tolo Necio A fool Traquinada Ruydo An uproar Trevas Tiniblas The dark VAlhacouto Refugio A refuge Colhor Cuchara A spoone Ambicar Tropesar To stumble Calleyro Granja A barn Suncho Hinojo Fenell Sedo De mañana Early Sargueyro Saulze A willow Radea Carcel A gaol Zombar Motejar. To geere The Portugès in nombring five dayes of the week differs from the Castilian, and all other, but it agrees with the Roman, Missal, As Munday, Twes∣day, Wenesday, Thursday, Friday are calld Se∣gunda, Terca, Quarta, Quinta, Sexta, Feyra; But sa∣terday and Sunday are calld Sabado y Doming.
THus have I given a short Essay of the Lu∣sitanian Toung, which, by observing the differential precepts pointed at before, may be attained with much ease by any who hath but an indifferent knowledg of the Spanish from whom she is derivd but become somewhat more rugged; so that it may be sayed, as a Castilian was ma∣king of a Toledo blade, a Portugès came, and taking up the filings he made a Toung of them; Indeed, it must be granted that the Castilian is in more esteem, yea, in Portugal it self, where the best sort of the Gentry and Marchants speak it, with Church and cloysterd men; most of their Sermons, their musical sonets, and madrigals, with their stage plays being in Spanish. Insomuch that as it is a saying in Italy, Lingua Toscana, in Lingua Romana; So there is one among them, Lin∣goa Castelhana em bca Portugueza; The Spa∣niard hath so little esteem of it, That he sayes there is but one good word in all the Portuguès Tongue, and that is Saudades which is a large word, and a kind of Amphibolon, for it signifies many things, as Tenho mil sauddes de vm. I have a thousands desires of you; Muero de saudades, I die for sorrows, &c. Concerning the preceding Spanish Grammer, ther went more o yle, and labor to rayse up (as I may say) that little Castle of Castile, wherein an Ingenious Student may find not only a survey of the Language, but he may take livry and saisin
thereof in a short time; To which purpose we have consulted the best Artists upon this Subject as Miranda, and Salazar; together with Fran∣ciosni the Florentin, and Oudin the Frenchman, with others who have laudably taken pains her∣in, and are more extensive in the conjugating of som Verbs: For as soon as the idea of this work entred into the imagination, the first thing we designd was brevity, yet without making it sub∣ject to Lamenesse or Obscurity. —Nec dum Brevis esse Labaro Obscurus, vel mancus ero— Liberorum Cerebri Quintus Post Quadraginta. J. H. FINIS.
