J1147A R29886 11217540 46865
Joyfull Newes FROM THE KING. OR, The true proceedings of His Maties Armie At Notingham. Lichfield. Tamworth. Warwick. Coventry. Medingham. VVherein is declared His Majesties ill suc∣cesse in all his enterprises, being repulsed by my Lo: Brooks, and the well affected Protestants of the severall places above mentioned. Published for the encouragement of all those that are Labourers in this blessed Harvest of Reformation. LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. Septemb. 3. 1642.
Joyfull Newes FROM THE KING. OR, The proceedings of His Majesties Armie in severall places. From Nottingham. THe County of Nottingham seem to be much discontented, that His Majesty makes their Countrey a seat for war, inso∣much as they afford him nor his followers any thing that they can with safety deny thē of: The Cavaliers having lately used the well-affected party very barbarously, seizing their goods, especially sheepe and calves, with all sorts of provisions, which mak mn that have power to stand upon their guard, and to ke that by foule, which faire meanes cannot prevaile. Ma∣ny houses the Cavaliers have plundred, which causeth the Countrey generally to hate them.
they long for the arrivall of his Excellence the Earle of Essex, with whom tis thought they mean to joyne, and then they will cry downe with the Cavaliers. From Warwicke. ON the Fast Eve, Prince Robert, Mr. Hastings and the Cavaliers came against Warwicke, but at their arrivall Sr. Edward Peto gave them a very scurvy entertainment, giving them five shots to congratulate their welcome, but they were so pleased therewith, that Mr. Hastings swore Dam him, Sir Edward Peto was a Divill of a Roundhead; many waies they endeavoured to gaine the Castle pressing to gaine the Bridge, but were bravely re∣pulst by the well affected party of the Towne, by the assistance of Sr. Edward from the Castle, who playd with his Ordnance upon them verie fierce∣ly, doing great execution at every shot. But be∣fore the Skirmish was ended my Lord Brooks came with his men having had intelligence of their de∣signe, and before they could get themselves cleere of the Castle, he fell upon them, but they not li∣king his company, made away as fast as they could, certaine poore men were slaine, others wounded, and Prince Robert in great fear of being taken. From Litchfield. THe Cavaliers have made a petty randevous that towne consisting of an abundance of de∣boist
drunken fellowes, by reason of the Colledge that harbours them, by which meanes many of the townesmen have suffered many oppressions (namely their Armes taken away by the Cava∣liers) but they having cleered the towne of them are now in a pretty posture of defence, by which meanes they have opposed them and kept them out of the towne. Coventry. COventry stands fast to the Parliament, be∣ing strongly fortified, and most of the In∣habitants well affected people, and though the Cavaliers have endeavoured by many stra∣tagems and plots to gain the Towne, yet they have been valiantly repulst, and been forced to retreat with losse. My Lord Brookes has a speciall eye to this place and watches the Cavaliers in all their procee∣dings, their only aim being to gain the Citie by reason that it is rich and well fortified. Severall tumults has been of late raised in the Towne by severall deboyst fellowes, that pre∣tend themselves for the King, which being sup∣pressed by the Sherifs, was turned out of the Gates, to seeeke their lodgings in a Hay-cock. From Tamworth. THe Cavaliers had possessed themselves of Tamworth, doing many outrages on severall persons, which caused the town to send privately to Adderson, Non-Eaten, and other adjoyning
towns, desiring them to come in to their assistance: which they did accordingly. For in the night they (to the number of 4000. well armed) stole upon the towne; at whose arrivall the Allarum being given, the towne rose with them, seizing on such Armes as the Cavaliers had left carelesly being drunke, and disordered, by which meanes they redeemed the towne, took many of the Cavaliers prisoners, killed others, to the great joy of the towne, and sorrow of the malignant party. Medingham. THe Cavaliers having beene so bravely de∣feated at Tamworth, made head again, and went up against Medingham, a little Towne but very populous, intending to secure themselves, or at least to redeeme what they had lost at Tam∣worth, but their hopes proved cleane contrary, for in stead of getting what they expected, they lost more then before, for the inhabitants of the Towne having notise of their behaviour at Tan∣worth, and knowledg that they were driven from thence, put themselves into a posture of defence, for feare that they should come against them, and as they feared so it happened: for had they not prevented them by a timely fear, they had had cause to fear, and curse their untimely neglect. The Cavaliers come confidently upon the Towne, never dreaming of any danger, but in∣stantly at their arival at the entry of the Town, they met with such a welcome, that some of them lay tumbling on the Ground, and the rest ran a∣way
with a powder, leaving their friends be∣hind to enquire the cause of their scurvie enter∣tainment. Thus it hath pleased God to blesse us in our proceedings, to the great encouragement of all the distressed Israelites in this part of the King∣dome. Three Motives or Encouragements for all those that are or ought to be Labou∣rers in this harvest of Reformation. BEfore I begin, I will declare what enemies thou art to fight with, and the cause why they are thy ene∣mies, since the perfect knowledge of the justice of thy cause gives great encouragement to the action, and al∣wayes crownes the actor with a wreathe of glory. The enemies thou art to fight withall, are Court Para∣sites, Papists, both Gentry and Laick, Prelates, and their adherents, the Courts, and Ministers of the Law, who have abused the Law, selling Justice to the adversary, and betraying the poore innocent to ruine and destructi∣on; Projecters and Monopolizers, who for private gain have robbed thee of thy liberty: So that betweene the Prelate and the Projector, thou enjoyedst but the tythe, to whom the whole did belong. These actions of theirs made them labour to disaffect the King to Parliaments; but the necessity of the King, and the grievous oppressions that lay heavy upon the Kingdome, enforced the calling of a Parliament, which was no sooner called; but dissolved. A second Parliament
was likewise inforced, which being assembled, they did likewise endeavour to dissolve: but God being stronger then they, wrought for us, and turned their plots upon themselves, strengthning the Parliament in a miracu∣lous manner, that they withstood all their plots and stra∣tagems from the beginning to this day. And now having failed in all their attempts, they have now laid all at the stake, waging war against God and his Church, in which war they have almost invol∣ved this whole Kingdome, if God stand not for us, for against all there is none to rise up, but onely the poore Protestant, armed with the justice of his cause, Religion and Law, in defence of which every one that would de∣sire to be a Citizen of Jerusalem must valiantly ven∣ture his life and and fortune, against the usurping Ro∣mans abroad, and the seditious Jewes at home. Let these three motives be as so many spurs to prick you forward to this service. 1. Your Religion (which is Gods cause) lies at stake. 2. The King and his posterity run an equall hazard. 3. The Laws of the Land, liberty of the Subject, nay, the very being of the Kingdome, are utterly in danger of subversion, should this Malignant party get the upper hand, Therefore let us all with one accord put on the Ar∣muor of righteousnesse with the breast-plate of faith, and then doubtlesse God will fight with us, and if we lose our lives in this cause we may joyfully say with Saint Paul, We have fought a good sight, wee have finished our course, and in heaven wee shall receive a Crowne of glory. FINIS.
