j221 99827802 32225
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms His MAJESTIES Most Gracious PARDON, Pleaded at Justice Hall, in the OLD-BAYLY: On Monday the 7th. of March, Anno. Dom. 1687. And in the Third Year of His Majesties Reign. AS Mercy and Compassion to miserable Miscreants, (who by a wilful Breach of those Laws, which are set as Rules to square their Actions by, or Boundards to their wicked thoughts, and lawless desires, have Forfeited their Lives to Justice) is the brightest Gem, or most Resplendent Virtue, that Adorns the Royal Pow∣er, so it has appeared in nothing more excellent, or shewn its fuller perfection, than in our Most Gracious Sove∣reign, as his Reiterated Goodness and Commisseration of that kind, has manifested to the World, and amongst others, his Princely Acts of Clemency, flowing from the Royal Favour. (This) the Relation of which, is the Subjects of this Paper) ought to take place in the Hearts and Minds of his Subjects, and never to be forgotten by those whom it has snatched, even from the Gates of Death, and given a longer Date of Life; to try whe∣ther such Mercy (as indeed, it ought to do) can reclaim them from the Wickedness of their Ways. The Account of which, take as followeth At the Sessions of Peace, Oyer and Terminer, Held at the Sessions-House in the Old-Bayly, on the 23d. 24th. and 25th. of February last. In the Close of the said Sessions, Monday the 7th. of this Instant March, 1687. was ap∣pointed by the Court, for the Criminals then remaining in the Goal of Newgate, to Pleade his Majesties Gracious Pardon, when accordingly between two and three in the Afternoon, the Right Honourable Sir John Peake, Kt. Lord Mayor of the City of London, the Deputy Recorder, and divers of the Aldermen; together, with the Right Worshipful, the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, came to Justice-Hall, whether the Prisoners being brought from Newgate, in the Custody of Major Richardson; were set to the Barr, and being severally asked what they could say, why they should not be Executed, upon the Sentence that had passed against them at sundry times, &c. They one, by one, falling on their Knees, Prayed the Benefit of His Majesties Most Gracious Pardon, and so being brought out of the Pound from behind the Barr. The Partys whose Names follow, fell on their Knees in the Court whilst the Pardon was Reading, &c. viz. Elenor Davis, Mary Stanly, Hester Sympson, Sarah Dean, Joseph Hensly, William Wilder, John Clverwell, John Mis, John Eldid, Richard Roberts, John Dunkin, Arabella Reeves, Elias Smith, Humphrey Payton, Thomas Wall, Mary Lush, William Austin Hide, Edward Newgent, Thomas Fann, Edmund Anthony, Elizabeth Brockhouse, alias Brudnel, Nicholas Jones, Elizabeth James, James Deal, alias Reynolds Sarah Vince, John Jennings, John Reeves, Elizabeth Bamfield, alias Carter, alias Smith, Isaac Vaughn, als. Howard, Thomas Gibbs, Richard Richardson, Edward Skelton, John Clark, and Elizabeth Maurice. Richard Jonson, who was Condemned for the Murther of William Patfield, was likewise included in this Pardon, but appearing as h had before done in the Court, to be Distracted, his Friends were ordered to take Care of him, in order to his Cure. John Reddall, for shooting his Fellow Apprentice in the Head with a Pistol, did not Plead, and Richard Alborough did not Plead, the Rcord being in the Crown. The Pardon beng Read, the Court Proceeded to put the Criminals in mind of the great Favour and Mercy they had received, through he Clemency, great Goodness, and Compassion of His Most Sacred Majesty; and that they ought in an extraordinary manner, to be sensible of that Benignity, and be exceeding thankful for their Lives, which were gi∣ven them, &c. and udy for the Future, by the Amendment of their said Lives and Conversations, in some measure to make their Sorrow appear for what had passed, and their abhorrence of those Crimes whereof they had been Guilty, do∣ing what in them lay, to Render Restitutions for the wrongs, they had done; but above all, to Repent, and be heartily sorry for their Sins and Mis-doings, &c. The Court then proceeded to remind them of the Crimes, whereof they had been Convicted, which in General were Murthers, Burglarys, Felonys, Horse stealing, Coining, Robbery, and the like; after which, having expressed their hearty thank for the Mercy and Favour Extended towards them; they were Re-conveyed to the place from whence they came. Claud de Aurange, and Roger Kenneday, who had been sometime in Newgate for Runing from their Colours, were brought to the Barr, and upon Certification that it was their Captains desire they should be admitted to Bail, they were accordingly Bailed. The Prisonrs being gone out of the Sessions-House, the Adjournment was made to Guild-Hall on the 4th. of April, and to Justice. Haon the 6th. of April next following, and so the Court broke up. GOD SAVE THE KING. This may be Printed, March the 8th. 1687. R. P. London Printed by D. Mallet, next Door to the Sign of the Star, between Fleet-bridge and Bridewell-bridge.
