J528 12360370 60213
Lord Chancellor's PETITION To His Highness the Prince of Orange, On His Entrance into LONDON. Most Humbly Sheweth, THAT your Petitioner, who was once Lord High Chancellor of Eng∣land, is now become the Lowest of your Supplicants; and from the first and chiefest Councellor about the Throne, a miserable Dejected Captive in the Tower. I do not presume to Justifie my Integrity, that would be an Arrogance as black as my Crimes. I confess, I am as unworthy to Live, as I am unwilling to Die; and therefore I Prostrate my self to the Foot-stool of your Grace and Clemency, that Fountain of Inexhausted Goodness, whence only Mercy can flow, upon so Vile and Notorious a Delinquent. To Innumerate my Crimes, would be as numberless as the Enemies I have created by them; nor will I presume to Prophane your Sacred Ears with so black a Catalogue, whose precious Minutes are more happily Imploy'd in the weigh∣tier Affairs of the Nation; the Restitution of those Laws and Liberties which I, by my byass'd and precipitate Council, endeavour'd to Subvert. What cou'd be more pernicious and destructive to the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, than to Establish a Power in the Monarch, to dispence with them? What greater Inlet to Popery, than to take off the Test and Penal Laws? What deeper stroke to the Protestant Church, than to Erect a Court of Ecclesiastical Commissioners, to pull down Her Pillars? What sharper Persecution of the Pre∣lates, than by publishing an Arbitrary Declaration; for the Non-obeying of which Illegal Warrant, so many since have been treated as Criminals in the Tower: Nor cou'd there be a more Irregular Method than the late Regulating of Corporations for a free Election of Parliament. In all which, and many others, (to my Shame, I must confess) I have been all along a principal Counsellor and Instrument. These (may it please your Highness) are the crying Crimes, which, were they yet greater, is in your Power to mitigate, by your Intercessions to the Parliament, having already the King's Pardon. If you vouchsafe this Mercy to an humble Supplicant, I will promise in some measure to make Retaliation, by disco∣vering some Arcana Imperii, or Intriegues of State, what I am Capable of; which may highly concern your Highness's Interest in this Kingdom. LONDON, Printed for S. M. 1688.
