J75C 99828689 33120
THE PEDIGREE AND PERIGRINATION of ISRAEL. Being an abridgement of the Histories of The creation of Adam. Cain & Abel. Noah. Abraham. Isaac. Jacob. Joseph. Joshuah. Deborah. Ruth. Hezekiah. Zedekiah. And the taking of the Arke. With Meditations and Prayers upon each HISTORIE. By John Jackson of Kilingraves in Com. Ebor. Gentleman. I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my Fathers were, Psal. 39. 14. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, for John Wilcox, and are to be sold at the signe of the Crown in Duck-lane, 1649.
meaning of the Frontispiece. AS the glorious Sunne did enlighten the earth at the Creation, and comforted the creatures: so it represents to us ur darke and blind condition, untill that Son of Righteousnesse did shine upon us, whereby we are enlightned and comforted. The next is the desolate condition of our first Pa∣rents after their fall, sitting under that they did, & we now hope in, which is by the pillar of perfect faith, placed upon the rock of a sure confidence, & under the safe shade of that vine the Church, pointing up to their hope. The Rain-how puts us in mind of the deluge in the time of Noah, of Gods mercie if we repent and a∣mend, as likewise of the 2d judgment to come by fire. That of Moses and Aaron represents Gods commands, & Israels obedience to them in their perigrination or us to imi∣tate, by our duties to our Governours and Superiours ap∣pointed over us. The Arke, Altar, and the Cheruhims in the Sanctum San∣ctorum, shewes how wee should worship towards the Holy of Holies in heaven, the end of our hope. The Dove descending, as it did shew unto Noah, the cea∣sing of the waters, whereby hee and them in the Arke were comforted: So it may signifie unto us the comfort of the ho∣ly Ghost; and the ceasing of Gods wrath, and the safety of them within the Arke of his Church, that exprest in the clouds, as a cloud of witnesses may confirm us of that happi∣nesse which the Saints possesse, and which they shall enjoy, thus blieve, obey, and serve this Creator of Heaven Earth.
Just and true are thy wayes thou King of Saints, Revel: 15. Thou Leadest thy People like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aron. Ps: 77. 20. The Law was geven by Moses but grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. Joh. 1. 17. 1649.  Author invēt W. M. Sculpsit.
To the Nobility, Gentry, and Commo∣nalty beyond TRENT, my deare and Native Countrey. The Author doth principally present these his Endeavours. I Am bold to present you with these following Histories and Meditations; the which, if your liesure you will please to peruse, though they be plaine, yet I doubt not, but they will administer you some comfort, in regard they are e∣tracted out of some choise places of holy Scripture, which is the fountaine whence our chiefest consolati∣ons flowe: and never any age did stand in more need of spirituall comforts, then wee doe in these times of ours, which occasioned me to the com∣posing of them, and I am in hope that they will equally profitable as they are seasonable. I shall desir your favourable construction for some errours in th Presse; or what failing may be in my selfe composure. So wishing you as much happy solace in the perusing, as it pleased God to afford mee in penning of them, I rest, From my chamber in Holborn, 28. Septemb. Your most affectionate Countreyman and servant, JOHN JACKSON.
To the Reader. Christian Reader. THis short abridgement being drawne our of some part of the Histories of the old Testa∣ment, yet following the very plain phrase of the holy Scripture, I do recommend unto thee, it be∣ing so portable to carry about thee, and so pro∣fitable to read, being the circumstances of such matter as behoves thee to know and practise, to comfort and encourage thee in this thy pilgri∣mage, & to parallel all thy sufferings in these sad and bad times, by the examples of these Kings, Priests, & Prophets, which were holier & better then thy self, thereby to teach thee with the like resolution & perseverance to follow the stps, and them in all their good examples of piety, pa∣tience, and devotion; as likewise to obey thy Governours and superiours appointed by God over thee. It will be likewise usefull fo thee in thy private closet, for thy contemplations in the fields, for thy children to read at home, to per∣fect them in the knowledge of the wonderfull works of God, that in their innocency & youth they may be engrafted in this so necessary know∣ledge, learning betimes to practise the piety of these holy men, & to strengthen them in grace, and a happy course, in this their spirituall war∣fare towards their hoped for happinesse.
Now  the severall meditations and prayers following each History, if they fall short of thy of phrase, or length of line, or  of zeale, I shall desire God to enlarge thine heart unto more perfection in thy self, and to stir up happy and learned men, that may en∣large this so necessary work, tending to devoti∣on, so requisite for this age, so full of spirituall pride, the which hath so much enfatuated our understandings, and brought us to so dangerous a distemper; and God divert from us that heavy judgement which is the attendant unto this bur∣ning feaver of pride and self-conceit, and insen∣sible frenzie, which cannot be cured, but by him that raised the dead to life. And that God of power & mercy, give us all that perfect humility which is so pleasing unto him, and the only safe and sure rule, which will bring us to all other vertues, and to that right and plaine way, that will lead us to perfect happinesse in heaven, the resting place of the humble and meek in heart. So desiing God to direct thee in the reading, and all of us to practise what we read, I com∣mit thee to Gods mercifull guidance and pro∣tection. J. J.
To his much respected Friend Mr. Iohn Iackeson. SIR, I Have perused with much comfort the Manuscript you sent mee; and whereas you desire my opinion of it, truly Sir, I must tell you, without complement, that it is a very useful & pious piece of devotion. Doubt∣lesse, you were truly inspired, when you were compi∣ling the work, and your soule had taken a high fight towards her Creator, insomuch that one may finde that you felt the joyes of heaven, while you were thus meditating upon them. This part of the Christian Common-wealth will be much obliged to you for such materiall notions, and strains of piety. For my particular, I must confesse they affrded me much solace in this my sad conditi∣on, for they raised my spirits to a great height of com∣fort, and I am confident they will worke the same ef∣fect in any soul that is susceptible of spirituall impres∣sion. So, with my very kinde respects to my deare friend, your kinsman, Major John Jackson, I rest. From the Fleet this 11. of September. Yours most affectionately to dispose of, JAMES HOWEL.
THE Creation of Heaven and Earth, and the life of ADAM. IN the beginning God crea∣ted the Heaven and the Earth,Gen. 1. the Earth being a meere Chaos, without forme, and darkenesse was upon the deepe, and the Spirit of God moved upon the waters. And God commanded there should bee light, and separated the light from darknesse, which was day and night. Then God commanded a Firmament, which was made, and called it Heaven. After by his power, hee made he herbs and trees to bud, and beare fruit. Then hee comman∣ded
to be made the two great Lights in the Firmament, the Sunne and the Moone, and it was so, and there was Morning and Evening. After, God cau∣sed the waters to bring forth a∣bundance of Creatures of all kinds, with feathered Fowles. Moreover he made the Earth to bring forth Creatures of his kind. After these great workes, God created Man, even accor∣ding to his owne Image, to rule over the Earth, and all these Creatures. This wonderfull worke by Gods power was done in sixe dayes,Gen. 2. and God rested the seventh day, and sanctified it. The Lord made this Man, of the dust of the ground, and breathed in him life, and then was he a living soule. Then the Lord planting a Garden in E∣den, put therein the man whom
he had thus created; that place being planted with all sorts of trees of pleasure: and for meat, the tree of Life, and the tree of Knowledge, of good and evill, being in the midst of that Gar∣den: And out of Eden went a ri∣ver to water the Garden. Then was the man put into the Gar∣den, by God, to dresse and keep it, giving him leave to eate of e∣very tree, only forbad him to eat of the Tree of Knowledge; the which if he did, he should die the death. Then the Lord for his comfort, formed of the Earth the Beasts of the field, and the Fowles of Heaven, and brought them to the man, who named them. But besides for Adam, he created one of greater com∣fort and helpe; for the Lord causing a heavy sleepe to fall up∣on him, took out of his side one of his Ribs, of which hee made Woman, and brought her to A∣dam,
who called her Woman: And they were both naked, but were not ashamed. Now in this Garden was a Serpent,Gen. 3. who was more crafty then any beast of the field, who said to the Woman, hath god said that yee shall not eate of every tree of the Garden? Yes, said the Woman, of every tree, but that in the middest of the Garden, God hath commanded, we should not touch it, lest we dye. Then the Serpent said to the Woman, ye shall not die at all: but God doth know, that when you shall eat there∣of, your eyes shall be opened, and yee shall be as Gods, to know both good and evill. So the Woman see∣ing the tree was good to eate, pleasant to the eye, and a tree to get knowledg, took of the fruit thereof, and gave likewise to her Husband; then both their eyes were opened, and finding themselves naked, they sewed
fig-leaves together, and made themselves breeches. After this, in the coole of the day, hearing of the voyce of God, they hidde themselves a∣mongst the trees from his pre∣sence: but the Lord called the man, who answered. I heard thy voyce in the Garden, and was af∣fraid, being naked. Then the Lord said unto him, hast thou ea∣ten of the tree I forbad thee? And the man said, the woman thou ga∣vest me, she gave it me, and I did eate thereof. Then said the Lord to the woman, why hast thou done this; who answered, the Serpent did beguile me, and I did eate. And then the Lord said unto the Serpent, because thou hast done this, thou art accursed a∣bove all Cattell, upon thy belly shalt thou goe, and dust shalt thou eate all thy dayes. I will also put enmity betweene thy seede and her seede, shee shall
break thine head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. And to the wo∣man he said, he would encrease her sorrows, and that in sorrow should she bring orth her chil∣dren, and be subject to her Hus∣band. And to Adam, for his disobedience he cursed the earth for his sake, that thorns and thi∣stles should it bring forth, and that in sorrow hee should eate his meat all the dayes of his life, and in the sweate of his face hee should eate his bread, till he re∣turned to the earth from whēce hee was taken: and as hee came from dust, thither he should re∣turne: and Adam called his Wife Hevah. The Lord made them coates of skins, and cloa∣thed them; then the Lord sent him forth from the Garden of Eden, least hee should eae like∣wise of the tree fo Life, sending him to till the earth from whēce he was taken. And being so cast
out, at the East side of the Gar∣den of Eden, hee set the Cheru∣bims with the blade of a sword to keepe them from the tree of Life. After this, Adam knew He∣vah his Wife, who conceived & bare Cain, who became a tiller of the ground: and againe, shee brought forth Abel, who was af∣ter a keeper of sheep. After this, when hee was one hundred and thirty years old, he begat another child, calling him Seth: and hee lived after that, eight hundred yeares, and begat sonnes and daughters. So al the dayes of Adam were nine hun∣dred and thirty yeares, and then he dyed.
Meditations & pray∣ers upon the Creation and life of Adam. O Thou incomprehensi∣ble God, who wast from all beginning, even before the Cre∣ation of this Heaven and this Earth, and who for all E∣ternity wilt continue, after the dis∣solution of this thy great workman∣ship the world, which thou hast crea∣ted. O Lord, I that am thy Creature, and composed of this Earth by rea∣son of sinne and ingratitude, doe finde my selfe most deformed and ful of darknesse, even as that Chaos the world it was, before thou O Lord diddest looke upon it, and give it light.
Now my God, being in this de∣praved condition, and sitting in this darknesse. In thy mercy looke thou upon me, enlighten my soule, and create a new heart in me, and let thy blessed Spirit move upon the waters, and troublesome waves of my vast unbridled concupiscence & vaine affections, whose floods are uncessant in this deepe and darke∣some Sea, which is so full of danger to my distressed soule. O thou fructifier of the Earth, which by thy wonderful and unsear∣chable power, and comfort to man∣kinde, created the trees, and herbs, and by making them to bud, and bring forth both blossomb, and fruit in their due time. Looke mercifully O Lord upon this lump of earth I am composed of, and so refresh mee with the dew of thy grace, as that timely, me from this thy Plant, growing from this earth, there may spring out the ten∣der buds of contrition, the blossome
of Charity, and the fruit of good workes and piety: And let the holy Sun-beames of thy goodnesse, which thou hast set in the Firmament of thy mercy, preserve me from the bit∣ter cold and frosts of Afflictions, & the mildewes and blastings of the temptations and vanities of this world, which are so dangerous in the bud and blossome of my good pur∣poses and resolutions towards thee. O Lord, as thy wonderful works in the Creation are far beyond the weake capacity and apprehension of mortall man to conceive; yet by thy goodnesse, some things thou makest us sensible of, which are so visible to our mortall eyes, and so admira∣ble to our due consideration, where∣by we may so see thy such infinite power and providence; for which, to magnifie, extoll, and praise thee O thou God of omnipotency. As in wonder thou diddest create thy Creatures abundantly, both by Sea and Land, so thy goodnesse did
this great worke, at a time of great mercie, and providence to Adam, whose Creation did next follow. O Lord, how abundant is thy goodnesse, and thy wayes of mercy, except our sins provoke, and stop the current of thy blessings. What creature is more miserable then man in his birth, & first bree∣ding, yet how wonderfully hast thou ordained, and provided for him, that though he came most feeble and crying into this miserable world, no creature more unable to help himselfe; yet thou O God by thy goodnesse, even before his being hast thus provided thy creatures and comforts to him for his preser∣vation. O Lord, how unsearchable are thy workes, and how infinite was thy goodnesse in the Creation of our first Father, of which substance I am; let me with wonder admire, & e astonished, that whiles I consi∣der, that being so made of the very
dust of the Earth: and yet to thy blessed Image, O Lord most mighty, O thou my only hope, and comfort of my soule, I want new words to ex∣presse this thy boundlesse goodnesse; for how doth this thy so high and di∣vine mercy herein meet with my so deepe and earthly misery. Therefore let me who am this dust fall downe in all humility before thee, upon that Earth of which I am made. And O Lord my maker, whose Image I am, let thy power & strength look in pitty upon me, and bring mee to the true knowledge of my selfe, and thy goodnesse: and grant that this thy holy counte∣nance may so shine in me, that ther∣by I may be so enlightned by the splendor of thy grace, as I may break from the danger and darksome cor∣ners of my owne blinde and corrupt conditions so derived unto me: and so by seeing thy goodnesse and mercy with most ardent and burning zeal, I may adore and magnifie thee my Creator.
O the unconceivable losse of that happinesse which was once in Para∣dise, that just reward of disobedi∣ence (and the dangerous endant of spirituall pride,  know∣ledge) the bane of  nhappy children of Adam▪  eeth are set on edge by the forbidden fruit that he did eate (we still pursuing to know more then is needefull, or that we ought to doe), the which e∣ven at this unhappy time s so like to destroy us, and to throw us out of this our fooles paradise, which we e∣steem of so much  pleasure, (the which indeed) though it come farre short of the Paradise of happi∣nesse in Eden; yet by thy mercie O God, to a sinfull Nation, one of the best amongst the thistles, and thorns, of this our banishment from the hap∣pinesse we have lost. O Lord open thou mine eyes, that I may discern before the coole of the day, and my latter end, my great of∣fence against thee, & not to esteeme
it any safety for me, to run from thee, or by covering my secret or open sins with the fig-leaves of hypocri∣sie, it being of such weake and de∣ceitefull vert to thy All-seeing eye. But oh thy mercy my Creator, in the depth of thy so just judgements, whereby wee were lost, and by thy so great mercy, whereby we were redee∣med and preserved. By one womans pride, being se∣duced by the Serpent, we suffered, and by the humility of another, be∣ing full of grace, who was the Mo∣ther of our Redeemer that saved us, the one by the Cherubin in thy wrath, was kept out of that terre∣striall Eden▪ The other with a hea∣venly salvation, brought us the blessed tidings of that happinesse in celestiall Paradise. And thus by thy mercy diddest thou breake the head of the Serpent, and saved us by that Messias the Saviour of the world.
This is hee,Joh. 1. 1. that in the begin∣ning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was God, and the same was in the beginning with God, and all things were made by it. He was in the world,10. and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came to his owne,11. and his owne received him not. O unmeasurable mercie of thine, O God, thou pattern of perfect good∣nesse, from thy glorious seat of mer∣cy in heaven, thus to looke upon us the great map of earthly misery, and objects of thy wrath. As for our redemption,14. to make this word flesh to dwel amongst us, and to see the glory of it, as the glory of the only begotten Sonne, full of grace and truth. Surely there is no mercie or com∣fort like this thy incomprehensible goodnesse O Lord, thus to give thy selfe unto us. This is even such a
gift as may sufficiently astonish the Receiver. Therefore, O thou boun∣tifull Benefactor, give me grace e∣ven to forsake my selfe, and give it unto thee. Let me out-strip by a hea∣venly expedition those Shepheards and Kings, who came first to offer unto thee, the Angels thē rejoycing, when this thy Word was made flesh, and came amongst us. Lead mee O Lord by that blessed star of thy grace to that manger of mercie. Let no difficulties hinder mee in this my holy pilgrimage, to the blessed Beth∣lehem, where thou art. And if these three Kings tooke such a long journey to see thee O god, in that homely stable. What difficulties should we undergoe to enjoy thy hea∣venly salvation. Let me imitate these Shepheards & Kings by their humility and offerings (O Lord) by offering even all that I have unto thee; my heart in perfect humilia∣tion with those Shepheards, & both heart and goods in charity to the
poore and distressed, inimitation of the humility and Presents of these three Kings. That at last, in the fulness of thy mercie, being delivered out of this misery wherein I am fallen, by the fall of Adam, out of earthly Pa∣radise: And being thus redee∣med by thee, as these devout Shep∣heards and Kings did see thy face here upon earth, in such humility; grant that I may so follow thee here, by such humble and harmlesse steps, as hereafter I may enjoy the happy fight of thee in glory in the heaven∣ly Paradise, where the Saints and Angels doe rejoyce in thy presence, even for ever and ever.
THE HISTORY of Cain and Abel. CAin being a Tiller of ground,Gen. 4. brought an oblation of the fruit thereof unto the Lord: and Abel did the like with the encrease of his Cattell, and of the fatt of them, unto the which the Lord had respect: but unto the offe∣ring of Cain he had no regard; for which he was wroth, and his countenance fell downe. Then the Lord said unto him, why art thou wrath, and why is thy countenance cast down? If thou dost well, shalt not thou be ac∣cepted? and if thou dost not well, sinne lyeth at the door.
After this, Cain spake to his brother, and meeting him in the field, did murther him. Then the Lord said unto Cain, where is Abel thy brother? who answe∣red, I cannot tell, am I my brothers keeper? Again, the Lord said, what hast thou done, the voyce of thy brothers blood cryeth unto me from the earth. Therefore thou art now cur∣sed from the Earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood from thine hand. When thou shalt till the ground, it shall not henceforth yeeld unto thee her strength; a Vagabond, and a Run-agate shalt thou be in the earth. Then Cain said to the Lord, my pu∣nishment is greater then I can beare; behold, thou hast cast me out this day from the Earth, and from thy face, shall I be hid, and shall be a vagabond, and whoso∣ever findeth mee, shall slay mee.
Then the Lord said unto him, whosoever killeth thee, he shall be punished seven fold: and the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any man finding of him should kill him. Then hee went out of the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod, to∣ward the East fide of Eden, and he knew his Wife, who concei∣ved, and bare a sonne called E∣noch: and he built a City, cal∣ling it by his name, Enoch.
Meditations & Pray∣ers upon the Historie of Cain and Abel. OThe miseries & mischiefs that befall us, when we have lost thy favour, and the happinesse of thy guard and protection O LORD. For so it fell out with Adam & his generation after their falling from thee, and losse of that happinesse & safety, the which in their innocen∣cy they enjoyed in Eden, and lost by their disobedience unto thee. How are our natures thus depra∣ved when we have lost thy heavenly guidance, being made weake and miserable by our own perverse wills, as appeares: but this so sudden and most unnaturall murther of Cain,
the first childe of Adam, thus to kill Abel his most innocent bro∣ther. O Lord be mercifull unto mee a sinner, one of the sonnes of Adam, and who stands in the same corrup∣ted condition, and under the lash of thy judgements, for my manifold sins; strengthen me with thy grace. Let the teares, my Saviour, in obe∣dience unto thee, and shed for me, in the garden of sorrow, strengthen my soule, and repaire the losse of thy favour O God, which my first Pa∣rents lost by their disobedience in that Garden of pleasure in Para∣dise. Let the vigour of thy blessed grace prevent all vice in me: and so en∣dew me with thy goodnesse, as in stead of murthering. I may doe all the workes of mercy to my brother. Grant that the sacrifice of my prayers in humility may be presen∣ted unto thee with zeale and perfe∣ctn of heart; for as thou art of
much mercy, so thou art a jelous God; therefore with Abel, let me bring unto thee even the fatnesse of up∣rightness and innocency, in the sin∣cerity of my soule; then with the pi∣ety and humility of Abel shall I be acceptable unto thee. O Lord keep me harmlesse, that I may die in the happiness of Abel, and deliver me from the cruelty & hardness of heart which was in Cain, and from the marke of thy wrath for sin and iniquity. O Lord deliver me from such de∣spair as was in Cain, for murthe∣ring this his innocent brother, wherby he became a vagabond, or to lose all hopes of thy mercy, with Ju∣das, forbetraying his Master, and my Saviour. But make me sensible of thy boun∣ty, and my penury, thy mercie, and my miserie, thy strength, and my weakenesse, And Lord let thy insi∣nite goodnesse and power, helpe and strenthen me, in all the inevitable
dangers so subject unto me, by the fall of these my first Parents, whose infirmities I carry thus about me. But in Jesus Christ thy Son, & my Saviour, looke in mercie upon mee, whose innocence did exceede that of Abel's, the sonne of Adam, and whose sacrifice was of such incom∣parable value; for hee sacrificed even himselfe for me a sinner. It was not the fat of Lambs upon the Altar, but this immaculate Lamb, the Son of God, he shed his most pre∣cious blood upon the Altar of the Crosse for my Redemption. The sprinkling of whose blood speakes better things then that of Abel's,Heb. 12. 24. for his cryed for vengeance to thy seate of Justice (O God:) but tbis most precious blood did call for, and procured mercie, from thy seat of mercie. And therefore with much comfort in my suite and most humble confidence of thy mercy, I beseech thee with this most precious blood so shed for me, to wash from
me the foule blemishes, and heal the putrifactions of my soule, fallen up∣on me, by that offence of my first Pa∣rents in Paradise; which sore I have made worse by my owne loose and sinfull scratching. But O my God, let his sufferings, patience, and obedience, satisfie for the vanity, rashnesse, and disobedi∣ence that reignes in mee. Let the sufferings of him in whom there was no guile, stand for me which am so full of guilt. Let the blessing of that fruit of my redemption, more sweet then Manna which came from that tree the Crosse, in this vaile of misery, to which we are allotted, O Lord, it being of such inestimable value, let it take off the bitternesse of that curse, which is so justly due unto me, for that pleasant and banefull de∣ceiving fruit of that tree in Para∣dise, whereby we are made thus mi∣serable, and subject to such cruelties as was in Cain, and all other infir∣mities:
and by thy grace so qualifie me with the gifts of innocencie and harmlesse living; that by avoiding all the acts of cruelty, and shun∣ning that dangerous rocke of des∣pair, at last I may arrive to that happy habitation of Eternity, pre∣pared for the innocent, and such as trust in thee, and thy incompre∣hensible mercie; it being that place of happinesse those Innocents en∣joy, who were the first most happy & harmlesse Martyrs in their Infan∣cy, for thy sake O my Saviour.
THE HISTORY of Noah. NOah was the sonne of Lamech,Gen. 5. who did prophesie concer∣ning him, of the comfort that should proceede from him, because of the earth, the Lord had cursed, & Lamech lived after hee begat Noah, five hundred ninety and five yeares, and begat sons and daughters. And it came to pass,Gen. 6. when men began to multiply upon the face of the earth, and great impiety did abound; that Gods wrath was kindled against thē for their iniquities, for God saw the wic∣kedness of man was great on the earth, & that every thought and imagination of his heart was e∣vill
continually: and the Lord said, I will destroy man from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping things, & the fowls of the aire, for it re∣penteth mee that I have made them. But Noah found grace in the eys of the Lord; for he was a just man and perfect in his gene∣rations. Noah had three sons,6. Sem, Ham, and Japhet: and the earth was corrupt before God, and filled with violēce. And God said un∣to Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me, for the world is filled with iniquity & violence; Behold, I wil destroy them with the Earth. Make thee an Arke with roomes in it, and pitch it within and without, and fashion it as I direct thee: a window and a doore shalt thou make in it: make it with a lower, a second, and a third story. For behold, I wil bring a flood
of waters upon the earth to de∣stroy all flesh, and every thing that is in the earth shall die. But with thee will I establish my co∣venant, & thou shalt come into the Ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, & thy sons wives with thee. And of every living thing of all flesh, male & female shalt thou bring into the Ark to keep them alive with thee, and take in with thee food of all sorts, for thee and for them. And Noah did all that the Lord comman∣ded him, and when the Ark was finished, the Lord said unto him, Come thou and all thy house into the Arke, for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation. And bring into the Arke of e∣very clean beast by sevens,Gen. 7. and of unclean by 2. male and female: and of fowls by seven, to keepe eede alive upon the face of the earth; for after seven days I will
cause it to raine upon the earth 40. days & 40. nightsand Noah did as the Lord commāded him. He was 600. years old when the flood was upon the earth: and af∣ter he and his family were enter∣ed into the Arke, and all other living creatures, as 'twas com∣manded, the flood came upon the earth, and the Ark was born above the waters, and went up∣on the face of it, and the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth, and all the high hils that were under heaven were cove∣red: and all flesh dyed that mo∣ved upon the earth, and the wa∣ters prevailed one hundred and fifty dayes upon the earth: but after God made a winde to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged. And after the hundred and fifty dayes the waters were aba∣ted,Vers. 8. and the Ark rested upon the mountaines of Ararat, and after
forty dayes Noah opened the window of the Ark, and sent out a Raven which went forth too and fro untill the waters were dryed up from off the earth: al∣so he sent forth a Dove to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground: but the Dove found no rest for the sole of her feet, but returned to the Ark. But after seven days more he sent forth the Dove again, & the Dove came in to him in the evening, and in her mouth was an Olive leafe, so by that Noah knew the waters were abated upon the earth. After that hee staid seven dayes more, and sent the Dove out againe, which re∣turned no more unto him: then Noah removed the covering of the Ark, and looked, & behold, the face of the earth was dry, and God commanded Noah to come out of the Arke, and all that was within it; the which he
did: and after he built an Altar unto the Lord, & offered burnt offerings on the Altar, which was pleasing to the Lord: and the Lord blessed the earth again and promised never to destroy it by water any more, and set the Rainbow as a signe thereof. And the Lord blessed Noah and his sons, and Noah began to be a Husbandman, and he plan∣ted a Vineyard, and he drank of the wine, and was drunke, and was uncovered within his tent. And Ham the father of Canaan saw the nakednesse of his father, and told his two brethren with∣out: then Sem and Japhet took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went back∣wards and covered the naked∣ness of their father, and would not look upon his nakednes: but when Noah did awake, and knew what his younger son bad done: he said, Cursed be Canaan, a ser∣vant
of servants shall he be un∣to his brethren. And Noah li∣ved after the flood three hun∣dred and fifty yeares: and all the dayes of Noah were nine hundred and fifty yeares, and he dyed.
MEDITATIONS upon Noah. O Lord make me sensible of the grievousnesse of sin, ad of the punishments that follow such trans∣gressions: let this example of the old world in the time of Noah, teach me to looke into my selfe, that I may see mine owne iniquities, and the cor∣ruptions of my heart, and give me, O Lord, true repentance and contriti∣on, that I be not drowned in the de∣luge of my sinfulness▪ but receive me with thy servant Noah into the Ark of thy saving mercy, and good Lord, let me not be like those secure & sinfull persons, that built the Ark' and they themselves perished, to give instructions to others, and my selfe to fall into impiety; to be left out of thy holy Ark of thy saving grace, or out of
the blessings of thy holy Church, and so come at last to perish in my sinnes. O Lord, whiles I am in this ark of ma∣teriall safety and refuge, keep me thy servant safe from the danger of ship∣wrack and leaking, in the faith and unity of the hurch, not to distrust thy providence in this Ark, though I live and subsist among the bruit beasts & wild creatures of this world, who be as the Psalmist speaketh, like the horse & mule that have no understāding. Send the Dove of thy holy spirit with the olive branch of thy strength and comfort unto me, that may bring joy∣full tidings unto my soul of that hap∣pinesse which I may expect when I shall be enlarged out of this flesh. Bring thy Arke, thy Church, O Lord, out of the troublesome waters of affliction & persecution, that now so grievously tosse and disturb that poor modell, that it may rest upon the safe mountaines of Ararat, in the full power of thy mercifull redemption. In thy due time take from over my un∣derstanding,
the covering of the ark, that I may discerne the pleasure of that heavenly habitation, which thou hast prepared for my soule, and that I may with a particular evidence of faith and piety, passe out of this Ark thy Church militant, to thy Church triumphant in heaven: and let mee build here an altar of thanksgiving, with the incense of zeale burning in my heart, to praise thee for all thy mercies and goodness towards me. And good Lord, whiles I live here the small remainder of my dayes, let me not he overcome with intemperate desires, or sin in the wrong use of these thy creatures, that thou hast ordained for my miserable life: but to use them soberly without drunkennesse or any excesse, that thereby I may be the bet∣ter enabled by the comforts of them, to serve thee in the moderate use thereof, and all other thy blessings. And good Lord give me grace to co∣ver the infirmities of such father, and others of the world, which I shall
see to fall by weakenesse into these or the like offences, & charitably to judg of them, and to judge of my own ways, looking into my own actions: & with a single eye to judge my selfe before o∣thers, then shall not I cast a stone at another, but reflect the worst thought upon my selfe, so shall the soule of thy servant, O Lord, avoid all active scandall, and black reproach, & that curse which Cham received from Noah his father, standing upon re∣cord for ever.
THE HISTORY of Abraham. ABraham was the son of Terah,Gen. 11. who descended from Sem the eldest sonne of Noah, and A∣braham married Sarah, who was barren: and it came to pass that Terah brought Abraham with Sarah, Lot, and others from Ur in Caldea, to goe into the Land of Canaan. And they came to Haran, where Terah dyed, hee being then two hundred and five years old; who being dead, by Gods command Abraham de∣parted from Haran, being then 75. yeares old, with Sarah his Wife, and Lot his brothers son, with their substance & servants,
and took their journey towards Canaan; In this his journey he came to Sheshem, and to the Plain of Morah, the Canaanites being then in the Land. There the Lord appeared to him, pro∣mising to give his seede that Land: and in that place did A∣braham build an Altar unto the Lord. From thence hee removed Eastward from Bethel, where he likewise built an Altar unto the Lord, and there called upon his Name. Then hee after tra∣vailing further South, a great Famine comming upon that Land he went into Aegypt there to sojourn: and when hee drew neare that Land, he began to be fearfull of himselfe by reason of the beauty of his Wife, and de∣sired her to say she was his Si∣ster. Now after his comming there, the Aegyptians were much taken with her beauty, &
the Princes of Pharoah's Court acquainted the King therewith. So shee was brought into his Pa∣lace, and for her sake Abraham was kindely used: but the Lord plagued the house of Pharoah for detaining of her; then was Pha∣roah angry with Abraham for not telling him she was his wife, and so hee delivered her backe, and sent him friendly away, with good rewards. Then departed A∣braham out of Aegypt,Gen. 13. with Sarah, and Lot his brother, with great wealth both in treasure and Cat∣tell, and travail'd towards the South, to Bethel, where formerly he had been, even to the Altar he had made, and there he worship∣ped, (at that time, Abraham's Cattell were so many, as Lot and he could not live together, and striving there was betweene their Heards-men, even amongst the Canaanites their enemies. So A∣braham spake to Lot, and desired
there might be no strife between them, they being brethren, and and left it in Lots choise whether to goe: and Lot looking for his conveniency, hee observed the Plain of Jordane was every way watered; for before Sodome and Gomorrah were destroyed, it was as the Garden of the Lord, and thither did Lot goe, according to his owne choise, and so they par∣ted one from the other: Abra∣ham continuing in the land of Ca∣naan. Then it was, that the Lord againe did promise that Land to the seed of Abraham. After this, Abraham removed his Tent, and dwelt in the Plaine of Mamre, which is Hebron, and built there an Altar unto the Lord. And it came to passe,Gen. 14. in some warres betweene the Kings of So∣dome, Gomorrah, and other Kings, that Lot was prisoner, and his Cattell taken, of which a message
being brought to Abraham, hee presently brought forth of his house, that were born & brought up there, three hundred and eigh∣teen persons, and pursued them to Dan, and Damascus, & brought backe Lot and all his substance, with the women and his people. Then brought forth Melchisa∣dech, King of Salem, bread and wine unto him, who was a Priest of the most high God, and blessed Abraham, saying, Blessed art hou Abraham, of God, posses∣sor of Heaven and Earth, who hath delivered thine enemies into thine hand: and then Abraham paid him tithe. After,Gen. 15. this the Word of the Lord came to him in a vision, gi∣ving him much comfort, saying, how he would defend and reward him: but at that time Abraham was much troubled, hee being childlesse, resolving to make his Steward his Heir: but the Lord
promised him his owne seed should inherit, and that he would multiply his generation upon Earth, and how they should goe into Aegypt, and sojourn there 40. yeares, and be hardly used: but that they should be delivered, and returne with great plenty. Now Sarah,Gen. 16. Abraham's Wife, continuing barren, shee had a maid-servant, whose name was Hagar, an Aegyptian, whom she desired Abraham to receive, wher∣by he might have Issue, the which hee did; this was ten yeares after he came to Canaan, and she con∣ceived with childe, whereupon she despised Sarah her Mistrisse, of which her pride, Sarah com∣plained unto Abraham; who lea∣ving her to Sarah, shee dealt roughly with her, and thereup∣on shee fled: but in her flying, comming to a fountaine of water in the Wildernesse, an Angel ap∣peared unto her, enquiring from
whence shee came, and whether she intended; who by her being told the reasons of her journey, he perswaded her to return to Sa∣rah her Dame, and to humble her selfe unto her. Moreover the Angel told her he would increase her seed, and that it should multi∣ply exceedingly: and that in re∣gard of her tribulation, shee should call her sonne Ishmael. So when she was deliver'd of this child, Abraham called it Ishmael, himselfe being then fourescore and sixe yeares old. And after Abraham being nine∣ty and nine yeares old,Gen. 17. the Lord appeared againe unto him, pro∣mising many blessings unto him, so he would obey him: and how he would multiply his seede ex∣ceedingly, and he fell upon his face: Then the Lord called his name Abraham, promising hee should be a Father of many Na∣tions, that Kings should proceed
from them, and that hee would give them the Land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and to be their God, they keeping his Covenant. Then the Lord ap∣pointed Abraham, that every man-childe of eight dayes olde should be circumcised, as well of his house, as of strangers that were bought, that his Covenant might be in their flesh as an ever∣lasting Covenant, and the uncir∣cumcised should be cut off from the people. Then hee comman∣ded his Wife should no more be called Sarai, but Sarah: and how he would give her a son, and shee should be a Mother of many Na∣tions; then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, thinking it strange, hee being an hundred years old, and Sarah ninety, then hee desired the Lord that Ishmael might live in his sight: but the Lord said againe, Sarah shall bear a sonne, and thou shalt call his
name Isaac, with whom I will e∣stablish my Covenant: and thy prayer for Ishmael I have heard, and him will I blesse and make fruitfull, twelve Princes shall he beget, and he shall be a great Na∣tion, and that Sarah shall beare Isaac, the next yeare. Then Abraham tooke Ishmael his son, with all the men-children that were borne in his house, 15. and that were bought with money, and circumcised them, the selfe-same day, God had commanded him, himselfe being ninety nine years old when hee was circum∣cised, and Ishmael thirteen. Now againe,Gen. 18. the Lord appea∣red unto Abraham in the Plain of Mamre, about the heat of the day, as he sate at his Tent doore, and looking, loe three men stood by him, whom he ran to meet, bow∣ing himselfe to the ground, say∣ing, Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight, goe not I pray thee
from thy servant, but wash your feet under this tree, and I will bring you some bread to comfort your hearts, and after you may goe: and they answered, doe as thou hast said. Then Abraham made hast unto Sarah, and bade her make some cakes upon the Hearth; as like∣wise hee made his servant kill a Calfe, ad so with some butter and milke hee set before them, standing himselfe by under the tree, whiles they did eate. Then they asked for Sarah his Wife, whom hee said was in the Tent: and he said, I will certainly come again unto thee, according to the time of life; for Sarah shall have a sonne: Sarah heard this being at the Tent door, and laughed within her selfe, because she and Abraham being olde. And the Lord said, wherefore doth Sarah thus laugh; shall any thing bee too hard for the Lord to doe▪
at the time appointed will I re∣turne unto thee, even according to the time of life, and Sarah shal have a sonne, then Sarah was af∣fraid. So the men did rise, and went towards Sodome, but Abraham stood yet before the Lord, and knowing of the Lords anger, he pleaded for that City, desiring the Righteous might not be de∣stroyed with the wicked: and de∣sired that if fifty righteous were therein, it might not be destroy∣ed; for said hee unto the Lord, shall not the Judge of the world doe right? but Abraham's suite continued, from fifty to five and forty, so from forty to thirty, and so to twenty, and at last to ten, which not being in that Ci∣ty, the Lord went from Abra∣ham, and Abraham returned to his place. After this,Gen. 20. Abraham went to∣ward the South, and sojourned
at Gerar, and once more said, Sa∣rah was his sister, and Abimilech the King sent for her, whom God (before he toucht her,) in a dream threatned death unto him for taking another man's Wife; so with many circumstances, in the feare of God, very religious∣ly, hee delivered her backe to A∣braham, blaming him for saying she was his Sister; the which he excused, by saying hee thought them to have been a wicked peo∣ple, and was affraid of his life pretending she was his sister, ha∣ving both one father, but not of one mother. Then Abimilech gave them great store of Cattell & treasure, reproving of Sarah for her dissembling▪ & he gave them leave to live in his Countrey, where they pleased: and by the prayer of Abraham, Abimilech was heal'd of his Infirmity, with his Wife, and women-servants, who before were barren, and now
brought forth children, before they being accused for Sarah's cause. After this,Gen. 21. according to Gods promise, in due season, Sarah conceived, and bare Isaac, whom Abraham circumcised at 8. dayes old, and Sarah rejoyced in the Lord, and wondred at his mer∣cies. And when he was weaned they made a great feast, but Sarah see∣ing Ishmael mocking, she said un∣to Abraham, cast out this bond-woman and her sonne; for hee shall not be heire with my sonne Isaac, at which Abraham was troubled: but the Lord comor∣ted him, by telling him the com∣fort he should have by Isaac: so in the morning early hee sent a∣way Hagar and Ishmael, who went to the Wildernesse of Beersheba, and God was mercifull to them in their journey. After this there was great
friendship, between Abraham and Abimilech, and all differences be∣ing reconciled, Abraham giving him Beeves and sheep. After this, Abraham planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there upon the name of the Lord the everlasting God. Then the Lord to prove Abra∣ham's faith,Gen. 22. said unto him, take now thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and goe to the Land of Moreah, and there offer him a burnt-offering, upon one of the mountaines I shall shew thee: so Abraham went early away with Isaac his sonne, two servants, his Asses, with cloven wood for the sacrifice: and the third day spy∣ing the place, he commanded his servants to stay behind, himselfe and Isaac going on to the moun∣taine to worship, Isaac carrying the wood, himselfe the knife and the fire. Then said Isaac, Father here is the fire and the wood, but
where is the Lamb for the burnt-offring; then his father answered that God would provide it: and comming to the place, Abra∣ham built there an altar, and cou∣ched the wood on it, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him like-wise on the Altar upon the wood: and Abraham stretched out his hand, and tooke the knife to kill his sonne: but an Angell from Heaven called unto him, saying, Abraham, Abaham, who answered here am I; then he said lay not thy hand upon the child, nor doe any thing unto him; for now I know thou fearest God, seeing for my sake thou hast not spared thine onely sonne. Then Abraham lifting up his eyes, be∣hold there was a Ramme behind him, caught by the hornes in a bush, the which hee tooke, and offered him a burnt-offering in stead of his so, and he called the place Jehovah Jireth as it is said
this day, in the Mount will the Lord be seene: and upon this by an Angell from heaven the secōd time, a great blessing was promi∣sed unto Abraham and his seede, and that in them should all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. Then turned Abraham againe to his servants, and so went to Beer∣sheba where he dwelt. Now after this,Gen. 23. when Sarah was one hundred, twenty, and se∣ven yeares old, she dyed at Kiri∣artharba, in the Land of Canaa, and Abraham mourned for her: but hee arising from the sight of the Corps, talked with the Hit∣tites about a place for the bury∣ing of Sarah, hee being there a Stranger, and they proffered him to bury her in the chiefest of their Sepulchres: but with much respect he desired them to speak for him unto Ephron to give him a Cave called Maeh Pelah at the end of a field for so much money
it was worth for a burying place. Then Ephroa in the hearing of all the people, said, No my Lord, the field I give thee, and the cave that is therein, even in the pre∣sence of the fons of my people. Then Abraham bowed himself before the people, saying, See∣ing thou wilt give it me, I will give thee the price of the field, and so hee gave him 400. filver sheckles for it; after which, A∣braham buryed Sarah in that cave, it being against Mamre, the same is Hebron in Canaan. Now Abraham being growne old,Gen. 24. tooke care for a Wife for his sonne Isaac; hee then calling for his Steward, making him put his hand under his thigh, and causing him to sweare by the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that his sonne should not take a Canaanitish woman to Wife: but to goe into his owne Coun∣trey and Kindred, and there to
take a Wife for him. Then said his servant, what if the Woman will not come with me into this Land, shall I bring back thy sonne? To whom Abra∣ham answered, beware that thou bring not back my sonne thither againe. The Lord God of Hea∣ven, who tooke me from my fa∣thers house, even from the Land where I was born, that spake, and sware unto me, saying, unto thy seed will I give this Land, he shal send his Angell before thee, and thou shalt take a Wife unto my sonne from thence. Neverthe∣lesse, if the Woman will not fol∣low thee, then shalt thou be dis∣charged of thy oath; only bring not my son thither againe: and the servant swore unto Abraham: so he tooke tenne of his Masters Camels, who went his journey, & obtained Rebecka to be his wife, as in the story of Isaac is more at large exprest.
Now after the death of Sarah,Gen. 25. Abraham took another Wife cal∣led Keturah, which bare him di∣vers children: and Ahraham gave all his goods unto Isaac: but un∣to the sonnes of his Concubines he gave them gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son; this he did in his life-time. And Abra∣ham being one hundred, seventy, and five years old, hee yeelded up his Spirit, dying in a good age, and was gathered to his peo∣ple, and his sons Isaac and Ish∣mael buried him in the Cave with Sarah in the field Ephron.
PRAYERS upon the History of ABRAHAM. GIve mee obedience, O Lord, to follow the steps of my Governors, and to bee guided by my Parents, as Abra∣ham was by Terah his Father, who brought him to Haran. So likewise let mee be obedient to thy blessed Inspirations, which may bring me to the heavenly Canaan. And as Abraham carried with him in his journey, his wife, Lot his Brother, with his servants and sub∣stance; grant that all my nearest af∣fections, my flesh & blood may cheer∣fully goe along with mee in this my pilgrimage to my eavenly happi∣nesse,
with the servants & substane of piety, and good workes, to attend me. And in this progresse in Mo∣reh, and in the middle of the world∣ly Canaan, let thy blessed grace ap∣peare unto mee, and grant that I may build an Altar of thanksgiving in my heart unto thee, and call up∣on thy Name. Preserve me in the famine, necessity, and miseries of this world, as thou diddest Abra∣ham. But above all worldly helps, keepe me from the famine of thy favour and grace, that in thee my soule may be safe from the spirituall danger of faith and a good conscience. By thy good guidance remove me from dan∣ger, as Abraham was by his going into Aegypt. Let not the feare and jealousie of worldly respects, make mee to dissem∣ble before thee O Lord, who knows't the secrets of my heart, as Abraham did by his Wife for his earthly safety, and deliver mee from such bad in∣tions
of fleshly desires, as was in Pha∣raoh King of Aegypt by detaining of Sarah, lest I partake of such pu∣nishments as befell unto him. And for such offences against thee, as wrongs and bad intenti∣ons done to any man or woman, grant tha I may not continue in them, but timely to repent: and by leaving such sinnes, give satisfaction for wrongs done, as Pharoah did to A∣braham at his departure. And still to praise thee for thy mercies, O Lord, as Abraham did at his return to Bethel. Give un∣to me the like charitable love as was between Abraham & Lot in their parting; yea in the middle of such worldly fortunes as they had; that most dangerous rocke of ambition, pride, and Emulation: and let mee not bee too much in love with the pleasant Plains of this worldly Jor∣dan of earthly and vaine delight, with Lot in his choise; for then shal I not be so neare the like danger as
he was at the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. Good Lord give unto me conti∣nuall comforts, and assurances unto my soule, by thy mercies unto mee, in the hope of that blessed eternity as thou diddest give unto Abraham & his seede for their blessing in the earthly Canaan, and in this Plain of Mamre, the Hebron of this world, still let me praise thee for all thy mer∣cies, with this father of the faithful. Give unto me O my helper, a helping hand unto my distressed Brethren, and friends of this world, as Abra∣ham did to Lot in his captivity. With such blessings and comforts as was given to Abraham by that King and Priest Melchisadech: and not only to be humbly thankefull unto thee for the same, but to pay that tithe of duty and obedience due unto thy Ministers as he did. In the sadnesse of my dejected spi∣rit, and coldnesse of devotion to∣wards thee, be thou my strength and
comfort, as thou wast to Abraham, in thy promise to his seede: so shall not this my earthly Steward of vain and worldly suggestions, possesse, an∣noy, and supplant my good thoughts, intentions, and hopes in thee, but still I may be made happy by thy hea∣venly mercies. In the barrennesse of my soule, as it was in Sarah her body, & in such fruitfulnesse as was with Hagar; let me not despair with the one, nor presume with the other, lest I be cast out of thy mercies: but in my cries send mee thy good Inspirations, to make me returne timely and humbly with Hagar, and with leasure to re∣ceive thy promised blessing with Sarah. So by the humiliation of Hagar, and the hope of Sarah, I shall by thy mercie, with Abraham, enjoy the Ishmael of worldly comfort here, & the Isaac of everlasting happinesse hereafter. Grant O Lord, that I may be cour∣teous,
and charitable to all men, as Abraham was to the three, who came to his Tent doore, with the like agility and alacrity to do good works as he did for their provision, (that a hee, in stead of men, received An∣gel: so by thy promised mercie to wel doers, shall I receive with A∣braham thy comfort here, and thy heavenly reward hereafter) where the Angels waite at the doors of hea∣ven to receive the righteous. Take from me O Lord all distrusts of thy promises, with Sarah's se∣cond doubt, and with her, wonder at thy mercies; for by this faith and confidence in thee, I shall by thy goodnesse, and in good time, with this hope and wel-doing, enjoy the happinesse in heaven as she did after in earth in thy promise of Isaac. O Lord keep me from the unrigh∣teousnesse which was in Sodome, lost by mine unworthinesse the medi∣ations and prayers of the faithfull do not prevail for me before the Throne
of mercy, lest that for my sins I par∣take of their punishment from thy seate of justice. O Lord, how miserable and wret∣ched are we, even the best of us, with∣out thy continuall helpe, as it befell once more unto Abraham, in Ge∣rer, by calling his Wife sister. O Lord keep me thy servant from relapsing into deadly sinnes; yea in the least offence against thee, as he did by this his infirmity. And in my wicked intentions, and thy just punishments for them, deale with mee as thou diddest with Abi∣milech, to repent, and leave off, be∣fore sin fully passes me. Keepe me O Lord from a scoffing and mocking condition, as was in Ishmael, lest I be made a scorne a∣mongst my friends, and bee thrust from the society of the discreet. Let me O Lord, admire and imi∣tate the great faith and resolution of this thy servant Abraham, the fa∣ther of the faithfull; give me grace
cheerefully and faithfully, to goe to∣wards that holy Morah, and there to sacrifice my soule, and what is most neare and deare unto me, to thee, to carry that soveraine wood to inkin∣dle zeale in mee: and the sacred and sharp knie, to cut off the bran∣ches of my ibred corruptions, and fleshly love, and let the two servants, the World & the Devill stay behind, that they may not hinder my good purpose, and obedience to thy com∣mands: and so by this blessed resolu∣tion and sincerity, I shall receive thy mercie, and a timely offering from thee, as Abraham had the Ram, with the comfort of thy heaven∣ly grace and blessings, still more & more, to nforme and strengthen me in a holy progresse towards thee O Lord. Great was this faith in Abraham the Father, and perfect was the obe∣dience of Isaac his sonne. But oh the incomprehensible good∣nesse and mercy of our God and hea∣venly
Father, and his sonne my Sa∣viour by that his humiliation and obedience. This omnipotent God brought this his only begotten Son unto Mount-Calvary, where neither Ramme nor Bullocke was sufficient for that Sa∣criice which was for our Redempti∣on: but that Lamb of God who tooke away the sinnes of the world, he hum∣bled himselfe, and was offered as a sacrifice for our sins upon the Crosse, whose blood was far more precious thē that of Rams; for this most precious, holy, and unvaluable blood is the cure of our corrupttd soules, by washing a∣way the foule spots of sin. Oh was ever the like obedience, or ever any love like to this? O Lord, as the two servants whom Abraham left below the mountaine might wonder at the resolution of their Master, & his son's obedience: so let my soul and body that desires to serve thee in imitation of these two servants with much humility, wai∣ting
in the bottome and valley where thou hast appointed us to stay, with wonder amire thy goodnesse & mer∣cie, for this thy fatherly mercie unto us, and thy Son's goodnesse and obe∣dience for us; for this is mercie be∣yond measure, to us most miserable sinners. O Lord, it is far beyond the appre∣hension of sinful man, to comprehend this thy so infinite goodnesse and mercie; therefore let mee for ever with admiration looke up to heaven, from whence thou descendedst, to do this so unspeakable a work of pitty & mercie: and looke downe into my self who was the cause of this severe suf∣fering, and see my owne unworthi∣nesse: so by seeing this thy incompre∣hensible goodnesse, and my own vile∣nesse, in the humblenesse of my heart, & mith admiration of thy goodnesse, that I may magnifie thy Name for e∣ver O Lord: and let sorrow & com∣pūction for my sins be my companions for ever. Let mee O God, see the
foulness of sin, and shun it with per∣fect hatred, it being of that danger to mee, and such an offence against thee, O Lord, even of such a dange∣rous consequence, as nothing could sufficiently satisfie for it, but that all-sufficient and great sacrifice up∣on the Crosse, even by such a holy ob∣lation as thy selfe O rightous God, for sinfull man. Therefore let the consideration of the shame and pain thou sufferedst upon that Tree, make me be ashamed to offend thee. Cru∣cifie all the wicked and vaine affe∣ctions that reigne in my corrupted flesh, and bring me in true obedi∣ence unto thee. O thou Redeemer and Saviour of the world, give me pati∣ence and moderate sorrow for the loss of near friends, as Abraham was, for Sarah his wife, and to have a charitable & venerable regard un∣to them, as Abraham had, by the de∣cent burying of Sarah. O Lord with Abraham make me carefull, for the lawfull and discreet disposing of my
children, as he did for Isaac: And grant that thy good Angel may goe before me, in such actions, and thy good inspirations so to guide me, not only for the earthly marriage of my sonne, but likewise that I may so use and enjoy these earthly comforts here, as that at last I may bee brought to that blessed marriage in heaven; which happinesse there, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with the Patri∣arks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Professors of the true faith enjoy for all Eternity.
THE HISTORY of ISAAC. THE servant of Abra∣ham having taken his journey accor∣ding to the directi∣on of Abraham his Master,Gen. 24. for the ob∣taining of a Wife for Isaac, and said he began his journey, having in his charge ten Camels, with such goods delivered unto him by Abraham, as were fit for his journey; who journeyed & came to a City called Nahur; where comming, he there made his Ca∣mels to lie downe without the City, by a well of water, being e∣ventide, the time that women u∣sed to come for water: and then
he said, O Lord God of my Ma∣ster Abraham, I beseech thee send me good speed this day, & shew thy mercy to him. Loe I stand by the well of water, whiles the daughters of the City come hi∣ther, grant that the Maid to whō I say, bow downe thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drinke; If she say drink, and I will give thy Camels drink also, let her be she that thou hast ordained for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed mercy on my Master. Now while hee was speaking, Rebeckah the daughter of Bethuel came out with her pitcher upon her shoulder, who was very fair, and a Virgin: and going downe into the Well, and filling her pitcher, and comming up, the servant ran and met her, saying, let me drinke I pray thee a little water of thy pitcher. Then she hastily put the pitcher to her
hand, and gave him to drink, say∣ing, moreover, I will draw like∣wise some water for thy Camels, that they may drinke: and then she ran againe to the Well, and drew water for the Camels: So the man wondred at her, but held his peace, to know whether the Lord had made his journey pros∣perous or not. And when the Camels had left drinking, the man took a golden Abilloment, and two bracelets, with ten sheckles of gold, and gave them her: and he asked her whose daughter she was, saying, I pray thee tell mee; as likewise if there be any roome in thy Fa∣thers house to lodge in; she an∣swered, I am the daughter of Be∣thuel, whom she bare to Nahor. Moreover she said, we have litter and provender enough, & room to lodge in: and the man bowed himselfe, and worshipped the Lord, saying, blessed be the Lord
God of my Master Abraham, which hath not with-drawne his mercie and his truth from him; for when I was in the way, the Lord hath brought mee to my masters brothers house. She then hearing this, ran straight home, and told her brother Laban ther∣of; who came presently to the man, and said unto him, come in thou blessed of the Lord, where∣fore standest thou without, see∣ing I have prepared the roome for thy selfe and thy Camels: so he unsadled the Camels, giving them litter and provender. Then hee, and the men that came with him washed their feet, and meat was set before him: but he would not eate, untill he had delivered his message. Then hee related how hee was servant to Abraham, and how God had blessed him exceeding∣ly, in goods, money, & servants, and how he had a sonne by Sarah
in her old age, to whom his Ma∣ster had given all his estate, with all such Circumstances as Abra∣ham had commanded him as a∣foresaid; with such passages as was between Rebecka and him at the Well, and how he then gave her the Abiloments and Brace∣lets. Then hee said further unto them, if you will deale merciful∣ly, and truly with my Master, tell me, & if not, tell me, that I may turn me to the right hand, or to the left. Then answered Laban, ct Bethuel, that this thing is pro∣vided of the Lord, wee cannot therefore say unto thee neither evill or good. Behold, she is be∣fore thee, take her and goe, that she may be thy Masters sons wife as the Lord hath said. Then hee bowed himself towards the earth unto the Lord, and gave unto Re∣becka jewels of gold, and Rai∣ments, as likewise gifts unto her
Mother, and her Brother, and then did eate, tarrying there all night. Now in the morning when he was ready to depart, they desired Rebecka might stay only ten days with them: but he said, in regard God had prospered his journey, hee desired forth-with to goe to his Master. Then they desired to know Rebecka's minde, and have her consent, whose answer was, she would goe; and so when they had blessed her, they let her goe, and her Nurse likewise. So this servant, with Rebecka and her maid-servants, tooke their jour∣ney, riding upon the Camels. Now Isaac being walking a∣broad in the fields to pray, in the evening, and looking about him, see these Camels comming to∣ward him: and so soon as Rebecka see him, she lighted from her Ca∣mell: and asking the servant who it was that was comming toward
them, he said, it was his Master; so she tooke a vaile and covered her selfe. Then the servant tel∣ling him what he had, Isaac took her to his Mother Sarah's Tent, and she was his Wife, whom he loved. After this, Abraham dying, I∣saac and Ishmael buryed him with Sarah his wife, after whose death Isaac dwelt in Beerlahai Roy: and Ishmael dying at the age of one hundred, thirty, and seven years, was gathered unto his people. Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebecka, who conti∣nued for a while barren: but hee prayed to the Lord, who heard him, and she conceived: and at the time of birth, being with child of two, they did strive in her womb, and she prayed unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto her, two Nations are in thy wombe, and two manner of peo∣ple shall bee divided out of thy
bowels, one people shal be migh∣tier then the other, and the elder shall serve the younger. So at the time of the delivery, the first that came out was red, and all o∣ver rough, him they called Esau: and after came the other, whose hand held Esau by the heele, who was called Jacob, and then was I∣saac threescore years old. Now these two growing into yeares, Esau became a cunning Hunter, and lived in the fields: but Jacob was a plaine man, and lived in Tents. And Isaac loved Esau, for Venison was his meate: but Rebecka loved Jacob. Now Esau comming one day very hungry & weary out of the fields, Jacob had made some pot∣tage, of which Esau desired to eate; for which Jacob desired E∣sau's birth-right, who answered, loe I am almost dead, what is then this birth-right to mee, so hee sware unto Jacob to give it
him, and contemning of it, hee sold it; then gave Jacob unto him some bread and Lentill Pottage, and so went away. And alter it came to pass that there was a Famine in the land,Gen. ▪ and by the appointment of God, Isaac he went to Gerar, and there the Lord appeared unto him, confirming his promise to Abra∣ham his Father, and to the seede of Isaac. And being at Gerar, Rebecka being very beautifull, the men thereabouts did much look after her, insomuch as Isaac be∣ing affraid, he said she was his si∣ster. And it came to passe one day, Isaac being sporting with her, Abimilech King of the Philistines looking out of a window did es∣py it, and called to Isaac, & said to him, surely she is thy Wife, and why dost thou say she is thy Sister; to whom hee answered, that he was affraid of his life.
Then said the King, why hast thou done this? If any one of my people had lyen with her, thou shouldst have brought sin upon us. Then Abimilech charged all his people, saying, he that tou∣cheth this man or his Wife shall dye the death. After this, Isaac living in this Land, and sowing Corne, the en∣crease was a hundred fold, and his Cattell did encrease excee∣dingly. So having a mighty houshold, and growing so great, the Philistines did envy him, in∣somuch as they filled up the wels which were digged in his Father Abraham's time. And being grown so rich and potent, Abi∣milech bade him be gone, saying, Thou art mightier then wee a great deal. Therefore Isaac de∣parted, and pitched his Tent in the valley at Gerar, and there dwelt, and opened the Wells a∣gain that the Philistines had stop∣ped,
calling them by the names that Abraham his Father had gi∣ven them: and his servants dig∣ging in the valley, found there a Well of living water; for which there was strife betweene them and the Herdmen of Gerer, they saying it was theirs. After this, they digged ano∣ther Well, and there was strife for that likewise. After this, they digged another, for which there was no strife. So from thence hee went to Beersheba, where the Lord appeared unto him the same night, and confir∣med unto him the blessings and promise to Abraham his Father, and his seede: and there he built an Altar, calling upon the name of the Lord. Then came unto him Abimi∣lech, with his friend, and a Cap∣taine of his Army, to whom I∣saac said, why come ye to me, see∣ing you put mee out from you,
who answered him, wee saw the Lord was with thee, and we used thee kindly, and sent thee away in peace, and therefore let there be now a Covenant betweene us, and let it be done; the blessed of the Lord doe this. Then hee feasted them, and they arose betimes in the mor∣ning, and sware one to another, departing in peace and amity. Now when Esau was forty yeares old, hee took to wife Ju∣deth a Hittite, and Beshemath a∣nother Hittite likewise, who were a griefe of minde to Isaac and Rebecka. Now Isaac growing old,Gen. 27. and his sight failing of him, he called for Esau his eldest sonne, who came unto him, to whom he said I am now old, and know not the day of my death; wherefore I pray thee take thy bow, and goe into the field and kill mee some Venison, and make me some sa∣vory
meate, and bring it me, that I may blesse thee before I dye; the which accordingly Esau went about to doe. Now Rebecka hearing what I∣saac had said, after Esau was gone into the field, she told Jacob what Isaac had said, and pointed Esau to doe, and how he intended to blesse him before his death. So she commanded him, saying goe to the flocke, and from thence bring two Goat-kids; to make pleasant meate for thy Father, that hee may blesse thee; then said Jacob to his Mother, that his brother Esau was rough, and himselfe smooth; by which, if his Father should feel, he should seeme to mock him, & so should he bring a curse upon himselfe in stead of a blessing: but shee said, let the curse be upon me: So he went and brought them to his Mother, who made pleasant meat thereof, such as Isaac loved, then
she put upon him furre cloath's of Esau's which were in the house, and covered his hands, and the smooth of his necke with the skins of the Kids: and so putting the meat & bread into his hands, he comming to his Father, said, my Father, who answered, I am here; who art thou my sonne: and Jacob said, I am Esau thy first borne, I have done as thou bid'st mee, arise I pray thee, sit up and eate of my Venison, that thy soul may blesse mee; to whom Isaac said, how hast thou found it so quickly my sonne; who answe∣red, because the Lord thy God brought it to my hand. Then said Isaac unto him, come neare that I may feele thee my sonne, whe∣ther thou be my sonne Esau or not; then Jacob came near him, who felt him and said, the voyce is Jacob's, but the hands Esau's, wherefore he blessed him. Then he again asked him if he were E∣sau,
who answered him hee was; then hee called for the Venison to eate, that he might blesse him, the which was brought by Jacob who did eat; as likewise he drank wine. After which hee called Jacob unto him to kisse him, who did so; then he smelled the savour of his garment, and blessed him, saying, the smell of my sonne is as the smell of a field, which the Lord hath blessed: and when I∣saac had made an end of blessing Jacob, hee departed from his Fa∣ther. After which, Esau com∣ming from hunting, came to his Father, who asking whom hee was, told him it was Esau his first borne sonne, whereat Isaac was struck with great feare; then hee told Esau of what had been done, and how hee had blessed his bro∣ther that brought meat unto him and that hee should be blessed; then Esau hearing this, cryed bit∣terly.
Then Isaac , behold I have made  Lord, and all his Brethren  made his ser∣vants. Also  wheat & wine have I furnished him, and unto thee now  what shall I doe. Then  said unto him, hast thou  blessing, my fa∣ther? blesse  me also my Father: and  lift up his voice and wept.  Isaac said unto him, that  of the land should be his welling place, and to have the  of heaven from above, and  time hee should break off  others yoak from off his . After this Esau hated Jacob, & intended afterwards to kill him; of which becka hearing, did forewa Jacob, and wished him to flye  Haran to her bro∣ther for safety, untill E∣sau's was over. After this,Gen. 8.  Isaac called for Ja∣ when he had blessed him,
gave him a chge not to marry any of the daughters of Canaan, but presently  to the house of Bethuel his hers Father, and take to  of the daugh∣ters of Laban  others bro∣ther: and so after he had blessed him with a  blessing, he sent him  Laban. Many yeares after this, Jacob came unto his ather Isaac, who was at Mamre, which is Hebron, where in the hundred and foure∣score yeare of his  he gave up the Ghost, and was gathered un∣to to his people, his sons Esau and Jacob burying him.
PRAYERS upon the History of ISAAC. O Lord in thy mercy di∣rect, assist, and pre∣pare for mee through the passages of this world, and in all my journeyes, as thou diddest for that faithfull servant and Steward of A∣braham's. Make me carefull, discreet, and honest in all my actions and deport∣ments, as this good Steward was un∣to Abraham in his undertakings. So concerning my soule, and that so certaine a passage to eternity; pre∣pare me O Lord, and let my care therein transcend all thought of earthly cares, in this journey, which
so nearely concernes eternall happi∣nesse or woe. Guide me in what I goe about, & grant O God that I may take no∣thing in hand but what may please thee: and give unto me O Lord thy blessing in the prosecution, with a thankefull heart unto thee for thy goodnesse, with this good servant, whose prayers and praises thou did'st heare. Oh let me admire thy providence and power in this thy worke at the Well to this servant: and by it let mee consider how mercifully and strangely thou bringst things to pass even amongst us, though not so poin∣ted out by thy holy immediate finger, as this particular. O bring mee to thy happy Wel-spring of thy happinesse, O Lord, & the comfort of thy holy grace, to re∣fresh & direct me, even that which so farre exceeds all transitory conso∣lations. And if this Steward did so much
pray for his Master, and praise thee O God for thy goodnesse to him, how ought I, who am thy humble, but most unworthy servant, even to exceede him in many degrees, both in my hu∣miliation for my sins, and thankes∣giving for all thy manifold mercies; for infinite have they been to me, be∣yond desert and expectation. There∣fore open thou mine eyes which are so dull, and raise up my heart which is so dead; that the one may see thy goodnesse, and the other may praise thee; that this my heart may mourne for my sins, & my eyes may flow into a fountain of tears for my offences. With this servant make mee to be carefull in what I shall undertake for others, as he was, who would eate no meate till hee had delivered his message: so O Lord in things which concerne thy service. Let me neither eate nor sleepe un∣till I have paid my vowes, and devo∣ted my selfe unto thee, for to be con∣tinued & confirmed in thy feare and
favour is happinesse indeed, for be∣yond all earthly hopes, whose budd is barrennesse, and fruit strife. Give me this good Stewards care to be gone, and the cheerfulnesse of Rebecka to be going; by the one to discharge the trust to my friend: and by the other to gaine the love of my neighbour. So O Lord, in that which con∣cerns thy service, let me with resolu∣tion and alacrity come speedily vnto thee, so shall not the Bethuel of self-love, nor the Laban of worldly care hinder me from my due obedience & service of thee. Give mee grace in imitation of this Grand-fire of the holy Patri∣arks, the pattern of obedience upon his Fathers Altar, and in his con∣stant serving of thee; that with a contemplative heart, and a peni∣tent soule, I may continually call unto thee, both morning, evening, and at all times, as he did in that e∣vening he so happily met Rebecka:
so by thy mercie shall I obtaine thy heavenly Comfort as hee did in earthly respects, by meeting of her, and so be joyned unto thee for all E∣ternity. Give me a tender care & regard for the obsequies of my Parents, and to joine in charity for the perfor∣mance thereof, though with my ene∣mies and most jealous friends, as it was done by Isaac and Ishmael to their father Abraham. Grant me patience O Lord in the barrennesse of my dejected spirit, & give mee grace to persevere in my prayers unto thee, as Isaac did, in the barrenness of Rebecka: so in due time thou wilt heare me as thou did'st Isaac, and in thy good time shall I receive the fruit of thy con∣solation. In the strivings between the flesh and the spirit as was in Rebecka's womb, the which by reason of sin and my infirmities, I am so subjected un∣to, be mercifull unto me O God, and
grant that stil I may pray unto thee; so by thy grace shall I bee delivered, and know thy goodnesse and good pleasure, as she did in her two twins. And grant O Lord, that the bles∣sings of thy good grace may bear rule over this my rough and rude flesh, to keepe it in subjection. O Lord deliver and preserve me thy servant from the like hunger & wearinesse in my soul, as it was with Esau in his body, that I may not en∣danger it for the lentill light vani∣ties, & fading refreshments of flesh∣ly desires, thereby to lose my heaven∣ly inheritance, & that blessed birth∣right in heaven, purchased for me by the birth, and left me by the death of thou my blessed Saviour and Re∣deemer. In much griefe of heart, I must confesse O God, & with great shame and confusion to my self, that I have done much evil in thy sight; Esau was not more ready by that deare Bargain to eat those lentill potage,
than I have bin to swallow up sin, & offences against thee even for a lesse value, my greedinesse to sin was such, as even for a peice of bread have I finned against thee; having been lead away by the meanest of tempta∣tions, and therefore I have no other plea for my self but thy mercy O Lord, and the merits of my blessed Saviour, whose Sacrifice for sin up∣on the Crosse, for us that were Gen∣tiles was of far more effecacy, then the blood of Buls or Goites were for the Israelites. Deliver me O Lord, from the power of my infirmities, which still persues me to indanger my soule, as it dealt with Isacc, who fell into his father Abrahams error, by calling his wife sister when he came to Gerer amongst the Philistims; and give me the like Chastity, and Charity as was in Abimeleck, towards him and Rebekah. Give me O Lord that increase of thy grace, and mercy to sustaine my
soule as thou diddest give unto Isacc in his corne to preserve his body, and graunt that I may be that good ground mentioned in thy Gospel, to bring forth, the fruit of good works a hundred fold, as it was in Isacc's graine. Preserve me from the envy of the wicked, an from the sug∣gestions to sin, that the well-springs of thy grace may not be taken from me, but raise up unto me the living well-spring of thy mercy, that the stirrings of flesh and blood may have no power to take from me, as the mat∣teriall wells were taken from Isacc; and bring me O Lord unto the spiri∣tuall Beersheba, so appeare thou in mercy unto me there, as knowing thy goodnes, and believing thy promises, I may build an Altar of praise and that thanksgiving unto thee. In the passages of this world grant that I may alwayes, preserve love and friendship both with my friends neighbours, and even my enemies, with firmnesse and integrity of
heart, as was between Isacc and Abimeleck. And let me so obey my Parents in my courses & carriages of this world that I may not prove a griefe of heart unto them, as Easu was to Isacc and Rebekah by his marry∣ing of Judeth the Hitite. O Lord, give me such obedience unto them as may cause and draw their blessings upon me, both in their lives and at their deaths, to be near unto them in duty & obedi∣ence as Jacob was, whome in mercy thou diddest looke upon, and after gave such blessings unto, by whose off-spring all the Nations of the world were made happy. And still to continue obedient unto them, as Jacob was unto his father in his marriage; for this obe∣dience to Parents is pleasing to thee O Lord, and calls downe for thy blessings upon us the children of men, let there alwayes continue in me a neare and pious regard, for the
interring of  Parents with a con∣junction of charity in the doing of it, even with thy greatest emulaters, as it was in the charitable perfor∣mance of this solmnetie, between Jacob and Easu in the burying of Isacc their father. So by this brotherly concord, and charitable deportment, wee shall be made partakers of that mercy thou O ord hast promised, to them that doe the works of mercy; to which happy to coition and the fruition of that hapinesse, bring me O Lord, even  his sake who was the true of patience, amongst his enemie and gave forgivenes even to his crucifiers.
THE HISTORY of JACOB. AFter Isaac had blessed Ja∣cob,Gen. 28. and in obedience to his Father and Mo∣ther, departing from Beersheba, taking his journey to Padan-Aram, comming to a cer∣taine place, it being night, hee took a stone, and laying it under his head, he fell asleepe▪ and fal∣ling into a dreame, there appea∣red unto him a ladder, which rea∣ched from the earth to heaven, Angels going up and down upon it, and the Lord standing above it, who said, I am the Lord, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac thy Father, the Land whereupon thou sleepest will I give unto
thee and thy seede, and they shall multiply exceedingly, & in them shall the families of the Earth be blessed, and promising to pre∣serve him in all his journeys, and to bring him again to that Land. Now Jacob awaking, was affraid, but did thinke the Lord was in that place, saying to himselfe, it was the house of God, and that there was the gates of Heaven. Then after hee had risen early in the morning, he took that stone and set it up as a pillar, and pow∣ring oyle upon it, called it Be∣theil. Then Jacob made a vow, that if God would preserve him in that journey, by giving him bread to eate, and cloaths to put on, and to come in safety backe to his fathers house, that then the stone which he had set up as a in that place, should bee God house, and he would serve him, and pay the tenths.
Then Jacob travailed towards the East Countrey: and in his journey he came to a Well in the field, where sheep lay fast by to be watered, and there was a great stone upon the Well's mouth: and people being thereby, he as∣ked them from whence they were, who answered, they were from Haran; then he asked them if they knew Laban the sonne of Nahor, who answered yes; then asking them how hee did, they said in health: And moreover, saying, here is comming his daughter Rachel to his sheepe; then he told them, is it not time to water the sheep? and they an∣swered they could not, untill the flocks came together, and till some came to roll away the stone from the Wels mouth. Now whiles they were talking, comes Rachel with her Father's sheep; when Jacob saw, he row∣led the stone off from the Wel's
mouth, and watered her sheepe; then Jacob kis'd Rachel, and wept, telling her he was Rebecka's son; then presently shee ran and told her father, the which when La∣ban heard, in hast he came to him, and kissed him, bringing him to his house. Then Jacob told him all the cause of his comming, and continuing there a moneth with very much friendship and love; then Laban pretended it was too much for him to serve him for nothing, asking him what wa∣ges he would have. Now Laban having two daughters, Lea and Rachel, Jacob told him he would serve him seven yeares for Rachel the younger daughter, for Jacob loved her, the which Laban a∣greed unto. And Jacob having served the seven yeares, which seemed unto him but as a few dayes, in regard of his love to her. Then Jacob demanded her of Laban, according to the agree∣ment;
upon which Laban called his neighbours together, and made a feast: but in the evening hee put Leah his other daughter into Jacob's bed, who went in un∣to her: but in the morning when Jacob spyed it, hee asked Laban wherefore hee had so deceived him, by giving him Leah in stead of Rachel; then Laban answered it was not the manner of that place to give the younger before the elder. So they came to a new agree∣ment, which was to serve seven years more for Rachel, the which hee performed, and then Laban gave Rachel unto him for his Wife; yet Jacob loving Rachel better then Leah: but when the Lord saw Leah was despised, he made her fruitfull, and Rachel was barren: and Leah conceived and bare a sonne, calling him Reuben: and she again conceived, and bare a sonne, calling him Si∣meon;
a third time she conceived and bare a sonne, and called his name Levi; and conceiving the fourth time, she bare a son, and called him Iduah, and praised the Lord, then she left bearing. But Rachel envyed this her Si∣ster, and said unto Jacob, give me children, or else I dye. Then was Jacob angry with Rachel, saying, am I in Gods stead which hinders thee from fruit? then she recom∣mended her maid Bilhah unto him, who went in unto her, by whom he had a sonne, who was called Dan: and shee conceived a second time, and bare a sonne, who was called Nepthali: and when Leah saw shee had left bea∣ring, shee gave her maid Zilpah unto Jacob, who bare him a son, whom they called Gd: and after she bare another, calling him Ashur. Now Reuben went into the fields in the time of wheate Har∣vest,
& found Man-drakes, bring∣ing them to his mother Leah, the which Rachel hearing of, she de∣sired her to give her some of her son's Man-drakes, but shee refu∣sed her; Then Jacob comming out of the field in the Evening, Leah met him, saying, come in unto me, for I have bought my son's Man drakes: so hee slept with her that night, and she con∣ceiving, brought forth a 5th son, whose name was called Issachar. And after this shee bare another sonne, calling him Zebulon, and likewise a daughter after that called Dinah. Then God loo∣ked upon Rachel, and she concei∣ved and brought forth a son, and she called his name Joseph. Then Jacob was wondrous de∣sirous to depart from Laban with his Wives and Children to goe back into his own countrey, but Laban was loth to part with him, in regard he had prospered
so well by his company and ser∣vice. But Jacob was loth to stay with him; then Laban offered him what wages hee would demand, the which he refused: but said he, give me all the black-spotted and blacke sheep in thy flocke, and I will serve thee, and thus they were agreed: so Jacob kept one part, and Laban's sonnes kept the other, being three dayes journey between. Then Jacob tooke the rods of green Popler and Hazle, & ches∣nut tree, pulling white streakes in them, putting them in the wa∣tering Troughs, when the sheep came to drinke: and drinking there when they were hot, which after made them bring forth spotted Lambs: so he encreased exceedingly, whereat Laban and his sonnes were not well pleased. Then the Lord spake unto Ja∣cob to goe into his owne Coun∣trey; 31.
upon which he sent for his two wives, Rachel and Leah into the fields, telling them of the bad countenance their father shewed him: and how Gods plea∣sure was, he should return to his own Land, with many other cir∣cumstances of Gods wonders & mercies to him, and of the great commands from God he had to return to his own Land. Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon Camels, and carried away al his flocks and substance he had gotten, & took his journey to Isaac his father in∣to the Land of Canaan; before which, when Laban was gone to his sheep-shering, Rachel tooke away his Idols: so they going a∣way towards Gilead, then Laban with his brethren followed him seven days journey, and overtook him at Mount-Gilead. There God came to Laban in a dreame by night, and bid him take heed hee
spake any thing but good to Ja∣cob: so hee overtooke him, and they pitched both their Tents neare one another. Then Laban said to him, thou hast stoln away mine heart (mea∣ning his Idols) and carried away my daughters; telling of him, how hee intended to have sent them away with the mirth of Songs, Timbrels, & Harps, bla∣ming him for his foolish doings, and taxing him for stealing his gods; withall, letting him to know how he could be revenged on him, but that the God of Ja∣cob the night before had appea∣red unto him, who bid him take heed that he spake any other but good nnto him. More hee said, because thou longest so much af∣ter thy father, thou needest not so to haue gone away, and to steal my gods. But Jacob told him how he feared that hee would have ta∣ken his daughters from him: and
for his Gods hee wisht him to make a search for them, and with whom he found them that party should die: but Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them; then Laban came and searched in Jacob's, Leah's, and the maids Tents, out there could not finde them, and so came to Ra∣chels, but she had put them in the Camels litter, and sat done up∣on them, Laban after hee had searched the Tent, after came in∣to the Stable, where Rachel was siting, who said unto him, my Lord be not angry that I cannot rise up before thee, for the custome of women is upon me, so after his search he could not finde his Idols. Then Jacob was angry with Laban for persuing after him in that manner, telling him of the hard service he had under him, even for twenty yeares, and of the increase of his wealth by his
care, withall how hardly he had far'd, and what strict accompt he gave unto him, that if the least by mis-chance were given, he had made it good, if they were stolen by day or by night he did the like; how in the day he had been consumed with the heat, and in the night with frost, and was kept from sleep, and how he had served fourteen yeares for his two Daughters, and six yeares for his sheep; and how hee had changed his wages ten times, and but that the God of Abraham, and the feare of Isacc, had been with him, hee had sent him empty; telling of him that God seeing his tribulation, and the labour of his hands, had rebuked him the last night. Then Laban became exceeding milde, with many expressions of fatherly love to his wives and there children, and desired to make a firm covenant of friend∣ship
with Jacob, the which being agreed upon, then there was a Pillar set up to be a token there∣of, and his brethren made a great of stones, wherepon they all eate, which heape was likewise to be a witnesse between them of their frienship, and they called it Galeed, both of them promising, neither of them to come over that heap one to the other for evil, to wh both of them did sweare, Laban swear by the God of Abraham and Na∣hor his father; but Jacob by the feare of his father Isacc: Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mounte, calling his brethren to eate, who did so, and stayed upon the mounte all night; and early in the morning Laban roase up kissed his sonnes and daughters, blessing them, departed, and went to his place againe. After this Jacob going on his journey, the Angels of God met
him, whom he called the hoste of God: But being in great feare of his brother Esau, he sent messengers before unto him, with messages of great respect, and humiliation: but they retur∣ning, told him that Esau was coming against him with foure hundred men, at which he was sore troubled, and divided his people and cattell into compa∣nies, thinking if the one were taken the other might escape, and then Jacob prayed unto the Lord saying, O God of my fa∣ther Abraham and Isacc, which said unto me, returne unto thy countrey and to thy kindred; I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, which thou hast shewed unto me, for with my staffe came I over this Jordan, I pray thee deliver me from the hands of my brother Esau, &c. So he tarried there that night, and preparing a present for Esau
of severall cattell, sending his servants before with them in two droves, himself following, com∣manding them to say if Esau met them and inquired whose cattell they were, there answer should be they were presents sent from Jacob to him, and himself fol∣lowed, so they went before and he stayed that night with the company, but in the night hee aroase, taking his two wives his two maides, and his eleven chil∣dren, sending them over the ri∣ver Jabhek with all his goods. Now after they were gone there was a man wrestled with him untill break of the day, who seeing he could not prevaile, hee touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh, which was loossed, but Ja∣cob would not let him go without a blessing, then he asked his name, and he told him Jacob, then said he thy name shall be called no more Jacob but Israel, because
thou hast had power with God, thou shalt also prevaile with men, and so blessed him, and as he parted the Sun aroase, and he halted upon his thigh; therefore the children of Israel eat not the sinewe that shrank in the hollow of the thigh unto this day. After this Jacob going on in his journey, he espyed Esau com∣ing towards him with his foure hundred men; then hee divided his children to Rachel and Leah, and to the two maides, putting the maides and their children foremost, Leah and her children next, and Rachel and Joseph hin∣most, and he going before them meeting Esau bowed himselfe to the ground seven times, untill he came neare him, then Easu ran to him, and did imbrace him, and kisse him, and they both wept, and seeing the women and chil∣dren Esau asked who they were, who answered, they were the
children God hath given to thy servant, and so in order the mo∣thers and their children came to∣wards him, and bowed with great reverence, then Esau asked him what he meant by all them drovs of cattell he met, hee told him I have sent them to thee, that I may finde favour in the sight of my Lord, then Esau said I have enough my brother, keep them to thy self, but Jacob answered, nay, I pray thee if I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present, for I have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God, because thou hast accepted me therefore take my blessing, for God hath had mercy on me, and so Esau tooke it; then Esau said, let us take our journey and I will goe before thee, but Jacob said, my Lord thou know'st the children are tender, and the cattel with young, and it were dangerous to go too fast, but go
my Lord before thy servant, and I will drive softly untill I come to my Lord unto Sier, and so they parted, Esau going that day to Sier. And Jacob going towards Succoth, where coming he built a house, and made provision for his cattell, after he came to Se∣chem in the Land of Canaan, and pitched before that Citie, there he bought a parcell of Land, of the sonnes of Hamor, where hee set up an Altar, and called it the mighty God of Israel. And it came to passe, that Di∣nah the daughter of Jacob by Le∣ah,Gen. 43. going to see the daughters of that countrie, Shechem whom the sonne of Hamor Lord of that country seeing took, and defiled, and after loved her exceedingly, desiring his father to obtaine her for his wife, who according to his sons desire went to speake unto Jacob about it, but Jacob and his sonnes having heard of this
wronge done to Dinah, were much displeased thereat, because he had wrought such villany in Israel; Now Hamor coming to Jacob told him how the soule of his sonne loved Dinah, and de∣sired she might be his wife, and how by that there should be a continuall freindship betweene them, their children, and people, with great expressions of what love & happines this would pro∣duce; now they seem'd to likewel of those Propositions, only they would not marry with an uncir∣cumcised people: but if they would be circumcised they would approve thereof, all which Hamor and his son Shechem liked well of, consenting there unto, and Shechem deferred not the do∣ing of it, his love was such to Di∣nah; so the father and the sonne acquainted the Citie therewith, who considering of the conveni∣encie and neighbour-hood that
hereby might come; so they con∣sented, and all the men children were circumcised, even as they went out at the gate of the City: But on the third day after when they were sore, two sonnes of Jacob, Simeon and Levi took each of them a sword, and going bold∣ly into the Citie, killed every male, as likewise Hamor and She∣chem, taking Dinah out of She∣chem's house and so went away, and the other sons of Jacob came up and spoiled the City, taking all their goods, because of this wrong done to their sister Dinah: But Jacob was troubled at this act of Simeon and Levi, saying, they had made him stinck among the Inhabitants. After this God commanded him to arise,Gen. 35. and goe to Bethel, and there to make an Altar unto him, the which he did before, commanding all his house-hold to put away their false Gods
whose counsell they observed, giving him all their Gods, or, Idols, and there eare-rings, and buryed them under an Oake. So they went towards Bethel, and there built an Altar, and after many promises there of God un∣to him, and his seed, with his worship, and testimonies of thanksgiving unto God, for all his mercies, he departed from Be∣thel, and in their journey Rachel travel'd in child-birth, and was in danger: but the Midwife did comfort her, telling her shee should have a son, and in her ex∣treamity, before she died, being delivered, called the child Benja∣mine, and so gave up the Ghost, & was buried at Bethlehem, Jacob com∣ānding a Pillar to be set upon her grave. Then Jacob went on his journey, and came to Isaac his Fa∣ther, to Mamre, where Isaac died. After this Jacob lived in the Land of Canaan, where after his
other sonnes▪ sold Joseph into Egypt, unto which Land in the time of famine, by Gods great Providence Jacob and all his sons did repaire. All which, and the rest of the life and acts of Jacob and his sonnes, with Jacobs Death and Buryall, are at large exprest in the ensuing History of Joseph.
PRAYERS upon the History of JACOB. O Lord, as Jacob by his o∣bedience vnto his Pa∣rents obtained the blessing from them, & in his journey to Padan-Aram thou diddest mercifully preserve him. So blesse mee O Lord in what I goe a∣bout, and give me true obedience to∣wards thee, that thou maist give me the blessings of thy holy grace to pro∣tect mee through the manifold dan∣gers of my soule, in the pilgrimage of this world, and that thy blessed in∣spirations may abide with me. In the distresses so subject unto me for my sinnes, be thou mercifull unto me, as thou wast unto Jacob, when
his lodging was the earth, and his pillow a stone. If the Father of the Patriarks, and descended from the Father of the faithfull, was well con∣tented with such thine appointment, and did praise thee for thy mercies? Let me O Lord, a most miserable sin∣ner, and who have been most disobe∣dient unto thee, reflect into my self, & with sincerity of soule, by looking into my bad deservings, so see them, as with compassion to my selfe, I may bewaile my manifold sinnes, and by the remembrance of them, fall down upon this earth, and think my selfe so unworthy, as to esteeme all the sufferings and hrd passages of this world, not punishments sufficient to expiate my cying offences: but sill to bewaile my sins, and to lie downe with my head upon this sone of Con∣trition with patience and thankful∣nesse to submit to thy blessed will. And in these my streights and most just sufferings, thou who sittest in heaven, and then stood upon the
toppe of that ladder which reached downe to the earth here Jacob was▪ Looke downe from thence O Lord, and speak mercifully unto me, and let thy blessed Angels descend downe upon this ladder, and steps of thy fa∣vour to assist and comfort mee in all my troubles. O Lord, awaken thou my drousie spirit, that by thy grace, casting off all feares, I may apprehend thy good∣nesse, and discern the gates of hea∣venly mercie; for which, let me rise early: and by taking up stedfast thoughts, and good resolutions, I may raise up a pillar of praise, pow∣ring thereon the oyle of chearefull thankefulnesse for all thy mercies, as Jacob did upon that stone he stept on: and for all thy preservations let me pay my vowes unto thee. Lord keepe mee thy servant from voluptuousnesse and curiosity, the great distempers of these times, and by the example of Jacob thy servant, and the Predecessor of Kings, who
desired but bread & raiment; give me grace to mortifie all my vain af∣fections, & surfeitnig pleasures of this world, and most willingly to be contented with thy good pleasure. Continue thy good providence to∣wards me, as thou diddest unto Ja∣cob in his journey, when hee came to that Well, where he so happily met with Rachel. Let mee alwayes admire thy won∣derfull wayes, and meanes, whereby thou bringst thy mercies and bles∣sings unto us. And let me O Lord well consider and see, how many times in the course of my life, thou hast shewed mee thy works of mercie; by preventing me in things, where∣by my owne weak judgement and in∣tentions, destructions of soule and bodie had been the isse. And like∣wise how by wayes and meanes of thy speciall providence, thou hast pro∣tected and directed me into the wayes of safety: and therefore as Jacob af∣ter thy good guidance was brought
unto that Well, from which he row∣led the stone, to doe the office of cour∣tesie. So good Lord, in imitation of him for thy goodnesse, let me remove by thy mercie all sad and heavy thoughts from over those good inspi∣rations, which thou hast infused into the dry well of my heart, springing from thy grace: And that I may a∣bundantly distribute this holy water to the rich, by friendship and courte∣sie, and to the poor by love & charity. And as Jacob in the fulnesse of joy in his heart by meeting of Ra∣chel, wept: so good Lord, when I shall finde at any time the blessed comfort of thy grace, and good inspi∣rations, let mee embrace them with true thankfulnesse and rejoycing in thee for thy mercies: and in fear for thy judgements, weep for my offences against thee. In the manifold uncertainties & unconstancies of the friendships of this world, and worldly men, give
me such honest care and patience as Jacob had by Laban's hard servi∣tude unto him. Still to discharge the trust com∣mitted unto me, & never to distrust thy mercies and deliverance. And though things fall not according to my will and choise, as it fell out with him about Rachels; let me O with Jacob's other seven yeares ¦tiently waite thy liesure and time. So for thy heavenly mercies in drynesse and coldnesse of my resol¦ons and devotions towards thee, let mee with patience and prayer waite for that good time when thou shalt enlarge and deliver my soule from this thraldome and bondage of selfe-love, and the snares of worldly slavery, whereby I may be fitted for my journey to the heavenly Canaan, there with joy to meete Isaac and all that rest in the happinesse to see thy presence O God. Remove from mee all distrusts of
thy promises and providence, that common and dangerous rock, where∣upon this weake Vessell we saile in is so subject to fall upon, by the crosse windes and troubled Seas of our un∣faithfull constitutions; for so it was with Rachel, when in the bitterness of her anguish shee said to Jacob, give me children, or else I dye. But O Lord, so instruct my heart with such firme hope in thee, as all doubts may depart from my weak and stupid sences, and open thou the eyes of my understanding, clearly to dis∣cerne how much thy mercy and good∣nesse are unto me, beyond my deser∣vings, and so by this pious patience I shall in thy good time enjoy the fruit of my hopes, as Rachel after did by her issue in Joseph, that hap∣pie sonne of so good a father, the ve∣ry comfort and preserver of the seed of Israel. Good Lord let it enter into my heart to see with admiratiō & won∣der how thou diddest performe thy
promises unto Abraham by this nu∣merous generation of Jacob. Af∣ter so many doubts, by fleshly weake∣nesse, barrennesse of constitutions, and the great difficulties and dan∣gers in the sverall stations, jour∣neys, & perigrinatiōs of Abraham and Isaac, and the great opppession of the seed of Jacob in Aegypt, and their long and dangerous perigrina∣tion to that land of promise, & how from them to come our Saviour. O mercie beyond mans apprehen∣sion or deserving, whereof they did only hope for, and the which wee the sons of the bond-woman now see, and so happily enjoy: and by the enjoy∣ment of which promise, both the seed of Jacob and the Gentiles receive such an unvaluable blessing, being such, as all the hopes & promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were but types: and the tempoall plenty of the Patriarks in their land of milke and honey, and all their delive∣rances were but shadowes in compa∣rison
of the fruits of this hope, and the super-aboundant mercy of our re∣demption from sin, and the fulnesse of heavenly grace bestowed upon us by this promised Messias, in whom they in hope did rejoyce, & by whom they and we are made so happy in the enjoyment and fruition. Oh the hidden treasure of happi∣ness, now so transparent & glorious, inlighten my soule O Lord, that by this blessed enlightning, I may see thy wonderfull mercy, and my owne misery, to put off all worldly love and vaine delight, and make sale of all my earthly merchandise to purchase this jewell, even the love of thee my Saviour, farre more precious then that manna was to to the children of Israel; for no earthly love is like in perfect happinesse to this of thine O thou Saviour of the world. Good Lord, let me continually o∣bey blessed command and holy inspi∣rations, and as Jacob by thine ap∣pointment returned into Canaan
and with expedition tooke his jour∣ney, with his wives, children, fami∣ly, and goods. So Lord, let me breake from the love of this world, wherein I am made a slave to sin, and so subjected to uncertainties as Jacob was, for twenty years, with so many changes of his wages. And let not the allurements and vain promises of this world detaine mee, either for the enjoying the fa∣ding profits therein, or to stay in the vanities thereof, with such hopelesse and helplesse promises as Laban did intend to him. But let me with re∣solution and sincerily follow thy good directions, & break from such things as may offend thee to the hurt of my soule. Deliver me O Lord from the fears and jealousies, so subject to the infir∣mities of flesh and blood, & from the danger of my enemies, as thou did'st Jacob from his brother Esau; let thy protection be with me, and thy
holy Angels to guard me. And as Jacob sent his wives, children, ser∣vants and goods in order and came before him, with such Presents and directions as might appease the fury of his brother Esau. So O Lord in my progres towards thee by a true faith and humble con∣fidence; give me a holy care & pru∣dence to send unto thee before-hand, my heart and good intentions, with my goods of piety and good workes that in mercy thou maist receive me, so shall I escape thy judgements so justly due to me for my sins. O Lord keep me from a wandring spirit, and a loose condition, so shall I avoid evill, and all occasions of e∣vill. Let me not doe like Dinah, who went a gadding to see the daughters of Shechem, whereby she was entrap'd and brought to solly, so shall I avoid sin to my selfe, and the punishment of others, as it befell to that unhappy Prince and Citie of Shechem.
And O Lord preserve mee from the like cruelty that was in Simeon and Levi, whose revenge was impla∣cable and transcendent, being odi∣ous in the eyes of their Father and to all good people; yet by this terrible judgement, teach mee to know thy displeasure against sinne, and leave such severe punishments to thy un∣searchable judgements. O thou my Creator, Redeemer, & Preserver, or wonderfull in my crea∣tion, infinitely good in my redemp∣tion, and most mercifull in my pre∣servation; the great strength, guide, and directer of Abraham, Isaac, & Jacob, in all their passages, through the Desarts, and Labyrinths of this crooked world; which mercies of thine O Lord have beene most boun∣tifully and mercifully extended un∣to me, a most miserable sinner. There∣fore as they at all times, and upon all occasions, in their severall stations, for thy mercies & deliverances un∣to them, did build Altars; and offer
Sacrifices of thankesgiving unto thee for thy goodnesse: and Jacob ac∣cording to his vow, at the beginning of his perigrination, where he set up that stone, did now at his returne in that very place pay his vows even at Bethel, with much solempnity and piety. So O Lord, let it enter into my heart, duly to consider of thy great mercies unto me from time to time, let me not cast them behind mee, but call them to minde: and as Jacob by finding thy mercies, did not forget them, when he came backe to Bethel, but there did performe his duty and promise unto thee: so let me alwayes remember thy deliverances unto me, and how in my severall distresses I have so seen and found them, as they having moved good thoughts and purposes in mee of better living, good Lord, let not my dulnesse and fleshly vanity dispossesse me of a hap∣py resolution to serve thee. But as
thou hast begunne in me by thy good motions, so continue them and thy mercies unto me, that by the strength of thy grace and good Inspirations, I may persevere in all good purposes to pay my vowes, and upon the Al∣tar of my heart to sacrifice most hum∣ble thankes and praise unto thee, e∣ven for ever. Here beginneth the History of Joseph.
THE HISTORY of Joseph. JAcob loved Joseph more then all his children,Gen. 37. be∣cause he was the sonne of his old age; and he made him a coat of many colours: and Joseph dreamed certain dreames, the interpretation whereof much displeased his brethren, and they hated him, and conspired to slay him. But Reuben his brother heard it and delivered him out of their hands. But it came to passe after∣wards that they stript him, and took and cast him into a pit where was no water; and they sitting downe to eat bread, a company of Ishma∣elites came from Gilead with their Camels, bearing spicery, balme and myrrhe; going into Egypt.
And Judah did perswade his brethren not to kill Joseph that his blood might not be upon them, but to sell him to these Ishmaelites: and they sold him to a Midianite Merchant for twenty pieces of sil∣ver, and he carried Joseph into E∣gypt. And his brethren took Josephs coat, and killed a kid and dipped the coat in the blood, and brought it to their father who knew it, and said, It is my sonnes coat, and some beast hath devoured him: and Ja∣cob rent his clothes and mourned for him many dayes. And all his sonnes and daughters rose up to comfort him, but he re∣fused to be comforted: after the Midianites sold Joseph into Egypt, unto Potiphar an officer of King Pharaohs, who was Captaine of his guard. Now the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man, and found favour in the sight of Poti¦phar,
who made him overseer of his house, and all that he had he put into his hand; and the Lord blessed the Egyptians house for his sake, and Joseph was a goodly person and well favoured. It came to passe that Potiphars wife grew in love with him, tempt∣ing him to lye with her; but he re∣fused, and said unto her, My Ma∣ster hath beene kinde unto me, and committed all to my charge: and how then can I doe this great wic∣kednesse and sinne against God? But she daily solicited Joseph: and one day coming into the house she caught him by the garment, saying, lye with me, and he left his garment and fled: then she called aloud unto the men of her house, and said, An Hebrew is brought unto us to mock us, he came and urged to lye with me, and I cryed with a loud voice: and when he heard me cry he left his garment and fled: and when her lord came
home she told him of this passage: and his wrath was kindled against Joseph, and put him into prison. But the Lord was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, giving him fa∣vour with the keeper of the prison. And it came to passe that Pha∣raoh King of Egypt was wroth with his principall Butler and Baker,Gen. 40. and they were committed to the prison where Joseph was; and they dream∣ed dreams both of them one night. Joseph coming unto them in the morning, they were sad: and he said unto them, Wherefore looke you so sadly? and they told him their dreames, the which he inter∣preted; that the Butler within three dayes should be released and in King Pharaohs favour, and deliver the cup into his hand as he former∣ly did: and Joseph desired him to remember him with Pharaoh when he was thus advanced. And Joseph interpreted the Ba∣kers dreame, that within three
dayes he should be hanged on a tree: and it came to passe the third day was Pharaohs birth-day, that he made a feast to all his servants: and he restored the chiefe Butler to his place, and he gave the cup into Pharaohs hand, but he hanged the Baker: yet did not the Butler re∣member Joseph, but forgat him. And it came to passe after two yeares that Pharaoh dreamed that he stood by the river,Gen. 41. and there came out of the river seven well fa∣voured kine, fat, and they fed in a medow; and seven other kine came out of the river ill favoured, and leane, and stood by the other kine, and did eat them up: and he dream∣ed a second dream, that seven ears of corn came up upon one stalke, rank and good; and seven thin ears and blasted with the East winde sprung up after them, and the seven thin ears devoured the seven ranke and full ears. Pharaoh being troubled at these
dreams, sent for the Magicians of Egypt, but none of them could in∣terpret these dreams. Then spake the cheife Butler un∣to Pharaoh, saying, I do Remem∣ber my faults this day, thou wast wroth with me and thy chief Ba∣ker, and put us in prison; and we dreamed both in one night, and there was in the prison with us a young man an Hebrew that did interpret our dreames, and ac∣cording to his interpretation, I was restored to favour, and the Baker hanged. Then Pharaoh sent for Joseph out of the dungeon, and he shaved him∣selfe, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh: and Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dreame, and no man can interpret it: and Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me. God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. Then Pharaoh related his dream, and Joseph answered,
The dreame of Pharaoh is one▪ the seven good kine, are seven years; and the seven good ears, are seven years; and the seven thin and ill fa∣voured kine that came up after them, are seven years; and the se∣ven empty ears blasted with the East winde, shall be seven years of famine; this is the thing that God is about to doe. Behold, there shall come seven years of great plenty thoroughout all the land of Egypt; and there shall be seven years of fa∣mine, and the famine shall consume the land. Now therefore let Pha∣raoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt, to provide in the seven years of plenty, for the famine that shall follow: and the counsell was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and his ser∣vants. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, for as much as God hath shewed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art: therefore thou
shalt be over my house, and ac∣cording unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater then thou: and Pharaoh set him over the land of E∣gypt: and took off his Ring from off his hand, and put it upon Jo∣sephs hand, and arrayed him in ve∣stures of fine linen, and put a gold chaine about his neck. And he made him ride in the se∣cond Chariot which he had; and they cryed before him, Bow the knee: he made him Ruler over all the land of Egypt, and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah Priest of On. Then was Joseph thirty years old. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt, and gathered provision in the seven years of plenty, for the seven years of famine that was to follow: and unto Joseph was borne two sonnes
before the years of famine came: and he called the name of the first Manasseh, and the name of the se∣cond Ephraim. After the famine was over the land of Egypt, the people cryed to Pharaoh for bread, and Pharaoh sent them to Joseph; then Joseph opened all the store-houses, and sold unto the Egypti∣ans: and all Countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corne, because the famine was so sore in all lands. Now when Jacob heard there was corne in the land of Egypt,Gen. 4▪ he said to his sonnes, Get you thither and buy for us from thence, that we may live and not die: and Josephs ten brethren went downe to buy corne in Egypt, but Benjamin staid at home with Jacob: and the sonnes of Israel came into Egypt unto Jo∣seph who sold the corne, and bow∣ed downe themselves before him with their faces to the earth: and Joseph knew them to be his bre∣thren,
but made himselfe strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them: and he said unto them, Whence come ye? they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food: then said Joseph unto them, Ye are spies: to see the nakednesse of the land you are come: and they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come: we are all one mens sonnes, we are true men, thy servants are no spies: and they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren the sonnes of one man in the land of Canaan, and be∣hold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not living. And Joseph said unto them, Ye are spies, hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not goe forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither: and he put them altogether three dayes into prison, and Joseph said unto them the third day, If ye be true men, let one of your brethren stay
here in prison, and goe ye and carry corne for the provision of your houses, and bring your youngest brother to me, and they did so: and they said, one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother Joseph, in that we saw the anguish of his soul whē he besought us, and we would not heare: there∣fore is this distresse come upon us. And Reuben answered them saying, spake I not unto you, saying do not sin against the childe, and ye would not heare, therefore behold all his blood is required; and they knew not that Joseph understood them, for he spake unto them by an Inter∣preter: and he turned himself about from them and wept, and returned to them again, communing with them, and tooke from them Simeon and bound him before their eyes: so Joseph dispatched them away with their provisions, and commanded their money to be put in their sacks: and they laded their asses with corn
departed thence: and opening their sacks and there finding their money they were afraid, saying one to ano∣ther what is this that God hath done unto us? And they came unto Jacob their father, unto the land of Canaan, and told him of that befell unto them: but Jacob was troubled to part with Benjamin, and said unto them me have ye bereaved of my chil∣dren, Joseph is not living, and Sime∣on is not here, and ye will take Ben∣jamin away, all these things are a∣gainst me: then Reuben spake unto his father saying, kil my two sonnes if I bring him not to thee: and he said my sonne shall not goe downe with you; for his brother is dead, if mischiefe befall him in the way, then shall ye bring down my gray haires with sorrow to the grave. But the famine continuing sore in the land,Gen. 43. and having spent that which they brought out of Egypt, Jacob said unto his sonnes go againe
and buy us some food in Egypt: and Judah spake vnto him saying, the man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face except your brother be with you; and Israel said, Wherefore dealt you so ill with me, as to tell the man that you had another brother? And they said, The man did aske us straight of our state and kindred: and Judah said unto Israel his fa∣ther, Send the young man with me, and we will arise and go, that we may live and not die for want of food, both we and thou, and also our little ones; and I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou re∣quire him: if I bring him not to thee, then let me beare the blame for ever: and then father Israel said unto them, If it must be so, Now then doe this; Take of the best fruit of the land in your vessels, and carry downe the man a present: a little Balme, and a little Honey: Spices and Myrrhe, Nuts and Al∣monds;
and take double money in your hand, and the money that was brought againe in the mouth of your sacks: carry it againe, perad∣venture it was an oversight: take also your brother and goe againe unto the man; and God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother and Benjamin: If I be be∣reaved of my children, I am be∣reaved. And they took that present, and Benjamin, and went downe to E∣gypt, and stood before Joseph: and when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the Ruler of his house, Bring these men home, kill provision and make ready, for they shall dine with me: and they were brought thither, but were afraid by reason of the money they carried back in their sacks: and they com∣muned with the Steward, and told him of it: and he said, Peace be to you, feare not, your God, and the
God of your fathers hath given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money: and he brought Si∣meon unto them: and he bringing them into Josephs house, gave them water to wash their feet, and he gave their Asses provender. And when Joseph came home they brought him the present, bow∣ing themselves to him to the earth: and he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father well, the old man of whom you spake; is he yet alive: and they answered, They servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive: and they bowed downe their heads and made obei∣sance; and he lift up his eyes and saw his brother Benjamin his mo∣thers sonne, and said, Is this your younger brother of whom you spake unto me? they said, Yes: and he said, God be gracious to thee my sonne. And Joseph made haste, for his bowels did yerne upon his brother,
and he sought where to weepe; and he entered into his chamber and wept there; after he washed his face and came out, and refrained himselfe; and said, set on bread: and they set on for him by him∣selfe, and for them by themselves, and the Egyptians that did eat with him by themselves; because the Egyptians might not eate bread with the Hebrews: and they sate in order according to their age, and they sent messes unto them from before Joseph; but Benjamins messe was five times as much as any of theirs: and they dranke and were merry with him. And Joseph commanded his ser∣vants to fill their sacks with food,Gen. 44. and to put in every sack their mo∣ney; and to put a cup of silver in the sack of the youngest with his corne money, and betimes in the morning they were sent away, they and their Asses. And when they were gone a little way, Joseph said
unto his Steward, Follow after the men, and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evill for good? and he overtooke them, and he spake unto them as he was bidden, and they said unto him, Wherefore saith my Lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should doe according to this thing. Behold, the money which we found in our sacks mouthes we brought againe unto thee out of the land of Cana∣an: how then should we steale out of thy Lords house, silver or gold? with whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him dye, and we also will be my Lords bond∣men. Then they speedily tooke downe their sacks, and opened eve∣ry man his sack; and he searched, beginning at the eldest, and left at the youngest; and the Cup was found in Benjamins sack: then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his Asse, and returned to the City.
And Judah and his brethren came to Josephs house, and they fell before him to the ground: then Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done? wot ye not that I can divine? and Judah said, What shall we say unto my Lord, what shall we speake? or how shall we cleare our selves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: Behold, we are my Lords servants, both we and he also with whom the Cup is found. and he said, God forbid I should doe so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my ser∣vant; and as for you, get you up unto your father: then Judah came neare unto him, and said, O my Lord, let thy servant I pray thee, speake a word in my Lords eares, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant; for thou art even as Pharaoh: and Judah said, our fa∣ther was loath to part with Benja∣min, saying unto us, Ye know that
my wife bare me two sonnes, the one is dead, and surely he is torne in pieces for I saw him not since; and if ye take this also from me, and mischiefe befall him, ye shall bring downe my gray haires with sorrow to my grave: Now there∣fore when I come to thy servant my father, and the young man our brother be not with us: seeing that his life is bound up in the youths life, that he will dye; for thy ser∣vant became surety for the young man unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall beare the blame to my father for ever. Now therefore I pray thee, let thy servant abide in stead of Benjamin a bondman to my Lord: and let the young man goe up with his brethren: for how shall I goe up to my father and this Benjamin be not with me, lest peradventure I see the evill that shall come to my father. Then Joseph could not refraine
himselfe before all them that stood by him: and he cryed, Cause eve∣ry man to goe out from me, and there stood no man with him while he made himselfe knowne to his brethren, and he wept aloud; and he said unto his brethren, I am Jo∣seph, doth my father yet live; and his brethren could not answer him, for they were troubled at his pre∣sence: and Joseph said unto his bre∣thren, Come neare unto me I pray you and he said: I am Joseph your Brother whom you sold into E∣gypt: be not angry with your selves that ye sold me hither, for God did send me before you to preserve life: for there is and shall continue a great famine, And God sent me before you to preserve you a poste∣rity upon earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance. So it was not you that sent me hither, but God; he hath made me father to King Pharaoh, and a Ruler in Egypt: Haste you and goe up to
my father, and say unto him, thus saith thy son Joseph, Come downe to me and thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, thou and thy chil∣dren, and thy childrens children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou haste. And you shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of al that you have seene; and ye shall haste and bring downe my father hither. And he fell upon his brother Benjamins neck and wept, and Ben∣jamin wept upon him: moreover, he kissed all his brethren and wept upon them: and after that his bre∣thren talked with him: and the fame thereof came to Pharaoh, and it pleased him and his servants: and Pharaoh said Joseph, Bid your bre∣thren load their beasts and goe into Canaan and bring your father and all his families, and take wagons to bring them, and all they have; for they shall have the good of the land of Egypt, and eat the fat thereof:
and Joseph gave them wagons ac∣cording to the commandment of Pharaoh, and provision for the way, with changes of raiments: But to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment: and to his father he sent twenty Asses laden with good things of Egypt: and provision for his journey into Egypt: and they went up out of the land of Egypt unto the land of Canaan unto Ja∣cob their father, and told him, say∣ing, Joseph is yet alive, and he is Governour over all the land of E∣gypt: and Jacobs heart fainted, for he beleeved them not: and they told him all the words of Joseph which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived: and Israel said, It is enough, Joseph my sonne is yet alive, I will goe and see him before I die. And Israel took his journey withGen. 46.
all that he had, and came to Beer∣sheba and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac: and God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob, I am God, the God of thy father, feare not to goe downe into Egypt, for I will make thee a great Nation: I will goe downe with thee into Egypt: and I will also bring thee surely up again, and Joseph shall put his hands upon thine eyes. And Jacob departed from Beer∣sheba with all his families: with all their cattell and goods, and came into Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him: all the souls of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt were threescore and ten: and he sent Judah before him to Joseph to direct his face to Goshen: and they came to the land of Goshen: and Joseph made ready his chariot and went up to meet Israel his father, and presented himselfe unto him, and he fell on his neck and wept;
and Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die since I have seene thy face. And Joseph said unto his bre∣thren, and to his fathers house, I will goe up unto Pharaoh and tell him, my father and you are come hither: and when Pharaoh shall aske you, What is your occupation? Ye shall say, Thy servants trade hath beene about cattell; that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen: for every Shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians. Then Joseph told Pharaoh of his fathers coming into Egypt:Gen. 47. and presented five of his brethren unto him: and Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupati∣on? and they said, Thy servants are Shepherds both we and also our fathers: and they said more∣over, The famine is great in Cana∣an, now therefore we pray thee, let thy servants dwel in the land of Go∣shen. And Pharaoh spake to Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren
are come unto thee: in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any man of activity a∣mongst them, then make them ru∣lers over my cattell. And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed Pharaoh; and Pha∣raoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou? and Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The yeares of my pilgrimage ar one hundred and thirty years: few and evill have the dayes of the yeares of my life beene. And Jacob went out from before Pharaoh: and Joseph placed his fa∣ther and his brethren in the best of the land, as Pharaoh had comman∣ded: and Joseph nourished his fa∣ther and his brethren, and all his fathers houshold according to their families. And Israel did grow and multi∣ply exceedingly in Goshen: and Ja∣cob lived in the land of Egypt se∣venteene yeares: so the whole age
of Jacob was one hundred fourty and seven yeares: and the time drew nigh that Israel must die, and he called his sonne Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh: and deale kindly and truly with me: Bury me not I pray thee, in Egypt▪ But I will lye with my fathers, and thou shalt cary me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place: and he said, I will doe as thou hast said: and he said, Sweare unto me: and he sware unto him: and Israel bowed himselfe upon the beds head. And Jacob being sick,Gen. 48. Joseph brought his two sonnes, Manasseh and Ephraim with him, and Jacob was told of their coming, and he strengthened himselfe and fate up∣on the bed: Israel, after he had bles∣sed Joseph, called for his two sonnes to blesse them. Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age so that he
could not see: and Joseph brought them neare unto him, and he kissed them, and imbraced them: and Is∣rael said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face, and loe God hath shewed me also thy seed: and Joseph brought them out from between his knees; and he bowed himselfe with his face to the earth, and Joseph tooke them both, E∣phraim in his right hand, towards Israels left hand, and Manasseth in his left hand, towards Israels right hand, and brought them neare unto him: and Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it upon Ephra∣ims head who was the younger; and his left hand upon Manassehs head, guiding his hands wittingly, and he blessed Joseph, and said, God before whom my fathers A∣braham and Isaac did walke: the God which fed me all my life long unto this day; the Angel which re∣deemed me from all evill blesse the lads; and let my name be named
on them, and the name of my fa∣thers Abraham and Isaac, and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth. And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him, and he held up his fathers hand to remove it from Ephraims head unto Manasshs head: and Joseph said unto his father, Not so my father, for this is the first borne; put thy right hand upon his head: and his father refused, and said, I know it my sonne, I know it: he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater then he, and his seede shall become a multitude of Nations: and he blessed them that day saying, in thee shall Israel blesse, saying, God make thee as E∣phraim and Manasseh: and Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die, But God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
Moreover, I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren which I tooke out of the hand of the A∣morite, with my sword and with my bowe. And Jacob called all his sonnes,Gen. 49. and said, gather your selves toge∣ther, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last dayes: gather your selves together and heare ye sons of Jacob, and hearken unto Israel your father: and he blessed them, and he charged them and said, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fa∣thers, in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittit in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought for a possession of a burying place: there they buried Abraham and Sa∣rah his wife: there they buried I∣saac and Rebeckah his wife: and there I buried Leah: and when Ja∣cob had made an end of command∣ing his sonnes, he gathered his feet into the bed, and yielded up the
ghost, and was gathered unto his people. And Joseph fell upon his fathers face and wept upon him, and kissed him: And Joseph commanded his servants the Physicians to embalme Israel: and fourty dayes were ful∣filled for him, (for so are fulfilled the dayes of those which are em∣balmed) and the Egyptians mourn∣ed for him threescore and tenne daies: and when the dayes of mourning were past, Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Goe up and bury thy father as he made thee sweare: and Joseph went up to bury his father, and with him went up all the ser∣vants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt; and all the house of Joseph and his brethren, and his fa∣thers house; onely their little ones they left in the land of Goshen: and there went up with him both Cha∣rets and Horsemen, and it was a very great company: and they
came to the threshing floore of A∣rad which is beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven dayes: and his sons did unto him according as he commanded them, and carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave as he appointed. And Joseph returned into Egypt, he and his brethren, and all that went up with him: and when Jo∣sephs brethren saw their father was dead, they said, Peradventure Jo∣seph will hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evill which we did to him: and they sent a messen∣ger unto Joseph, saying, Thy fa∣ther did command before he died, saying, so shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee, now the tres∣passe of thy brethren, and their sin, for they did unto thee evil: and now we pray thee, forgive the tre∣spasse of the servants of the God of
thy father: and Joseph wept when they spake unto him: and his bre∣thren also went and fell downe be∣fore his face, and they said, Be∣hold, we be thy servants: and Jo∣seph said unto them, Feare not, for I am in the place of God: but as for you, ye thought evill against me, but God meant it unto good to bring to passe as it is this day, to save much people alive. Now therefore feare you not, I will nou∣rish you and your little ones: and he comforted them. And Joseph dwelt in Egypt he and his fathers house, and lived one hundred and ten yeares, and saw Ephraims children of the third generation: and the children of Machir the sonne of Manasseh, were brought up upon Josephs knees. And Joseph said unto his bre∣thren, I die; and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land, unto the land which he sware
to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence. So Joseph died, being one hun∣dred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt: and after in the time of Joshua, when the children of Israel came over Jordan they brought his bones out of Egypt and buried them in Shechem in a parcell of ground Jacob bought of the sonnes of Hamer the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver, and it became the inheri∣tance of the sonnes of Joseph.
MEDITATIONS Upon the History of Jo∣seph who was sold into Egypt by his brethren. O Lord God everlasting, which out of thy great mercy to mankind, sentest thy onely begotten Sonne Jesus Christ into this world, for the redemption of me a sin∣ner: and who for my sake was sold un∣to the Jewes by Judas, one of his disci∣ples: was crucified for my sinnes: and is gone before to the heavenly Canaan, to be a Mediator at thy right hand for my sinfull and famishing soule: for his sake be thou mercifull unto me, that am a sofourner here in this Egypt of the world, that the vaine temptations of the flesh, may not have power over me; but give me the like Chastity that Jo∣seph had. Neither let me grow in love with the flesh-pots of voluptuousnesse; nor be blinded with the Egyptian dark∣nesse
of this world. But grant, I doe most humbly beseech, for his sake my Jesus, that was sold, and died for my sinnes, that I may happily passe this pilgrimage here in this land of Egypt, and use my stewardship like blessed Jo∣seph, by dealing honestly and truly with all men: and where I finde fa∣vour and friends, as he did, make me ever thankfull unto thee for thy mer∣cies therein; and to be religiously care∣full to discharge that trust which shall be committed unto me like Joseph; that it may be with me at my accounting day, as it was with the wise steward to know what to doe. For blessed is that servant whom the Lord when he cometh shall finde so do∣ing. Good Lord give me charity to∣wards my Christian brethren, and as concerning them that have done me wrong, as Joseph did; Take revenge from the soule of thy servant, O Lord, I beseech thee; and give me grace to doe good against evill: and to forgive, as I desire to be forgiven of thee.
And blessed Lord, after a thy bles∣sings and mercies, here in this Egypt that thou hast prepared as an earthly comfort for me a sinner, make me rea∣dy, and at thy call to take a happy passeover, for my passage towards the celestiall Canaan; and in the meane time give me grace to overcome all dif∣ficulties, and to be obedient, to my task-masters and superiours, in this vale of triall, where the enemies of my soule, strive against my intended jour∣ney towards the Land of promise. Good Lord keep me from hardnesse of heart, and the Egyptian plagues and punish∣ments my sinnes have so much deser∣ved: grant me, O Lord, a good and prosperous voyage thorough the Red sea of danger; help my hungry and drooping soule, feed and strengthen it with the Manna of thy blessed Spi∣rit. Good Lord give me grace to subject my selfe to follow and obey my Governours as the Israelites did sub∣mit to Moses and Aaron; and not to follow mine owne devises and inven∣tions,
But to obey them that thou hast appointed over me; and not to be one of the murmuring Israelites, neither Se∣ditious and contentious, against Order and Government, with Corah, Da∣than, and Abiram. But in all things to submit my judgement, in the way of my Pilgrimage, to the Rules of Jesus Christ, and the governors of his holy Church, as thou O Lord, hast com∣manded; not following my owne fan∣cies, nor the suggestions of my spiritu∣all enemy that cloaths himselfe like an Angel of light, to deceive, and fill my soule full of spirituall pride, the sin that cast downe the Angels from heaven: from which most dangerous rock, O Lord, deliver thy servant, that puts his trust under the shadow of thy wings of mercy: that at last I may come with humblenesse of heart and soule, through the wildernesse of this world, so full of cares, troubles, and temptations, to the land of promise, that heavenly Jeru∣salem which thou hast prepared for them that love and feare thee, and
fight a good fight through this desart of danger and diffidence; let me not in this passage, O Lord, leane to the pleasures and plenty of Goshen, but obey thy lawes delivered at Mount Sinai, and chearfully goe on like a good Israelite, in this my passage the which so much concerns my soule, so that, good Lord, by a true faith and confidence in thee, with a happy perseverance in the obedience of thy Commandements, at last I may arrive amongst them, that live and feare thee, in that heavenly feast of tabernacles, and receive the comfort of that blessed saying, Come ye blessed of my Father; and in that heavenly and eternal habitation, where all teares shall be wiped away, and all afflictions and temptations cease, sing Halleluiah, and praise, and honour, and glory, and worship, unto the Lambe that sits upon the throne for ever.
THE HISTORY of Moses. AFter the death of JosephExod. 1. the children of Israel did increase exceed∣ingly in Egypt, and grew very mightily: and another King reigning after the death of Pharaoh, he was jealous of their greatnesse and strength, and therefore set task-masters over them to afflict them with their bur∣dens, and to keepe them under, in so much as they made their lives bitter with hard bondage by work in morter and brick, and all manner of service in the field with much rigour: and the King in his jea∣lousie of them, commanded the Midwives to kil the male children, and to save the daughters, that
should be borne of the Israelites: but the midwives feared God, and would not doe his commands: but excused it to the King. And there was a man of the house of Levi that took to him aExod. 2. wife of his owne tribe, who con∣ceived and bare him a sonne being a goodly childe, whom for fear she hid three moneths: but when she could not longer hide him, she made for him an arke of bulrushes, daubing it with slime and pitch, putting the childe therein, and laid it amongst the flags by the rivers side. And his sister stood a farre off to see what would become of the childe. And Pharaohs daughter coming downe the river with her maides to wash her selfe, found the arke, and sent her maids to fetch it: and opening of it found the childe, who wept, and she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews children: and Pha∣raohs
daughter commanded the si∣ster that watcht the childe, to call an Hebrew woman to nurse it; and she went and called the childes mo∣ther; and Pharaohs daughter said unto her, Take this childe and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages: and the woman tooke the childe and nursed it: and the childe grew, and she brought him to Pharaohs daughter, who took him for her son, and called his name Moses; because she drew him out of the water. Now after he grew to yeares, when the Israelites had hard bur∣thens upon them, he went out a∣mongst them, and seeing an E∣gyptian strike an Hebrew, one of his brethren, who warily looking about him, and seeing no body, he slew the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. And the second day going a∣broad he saw two Hebrews at strif: and he said to him that had done
the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? who answered, Who made thee a Judge over us? Inten∣dest thou to kill me as thou didst the Egyptian? then Moses was a∣fraid, and when Pharaoh heard of it, he sought to kill Moses, but he fled from Pharaoh and dwelt in the land of Midian: and there sitting downe by a well, came seven daughters of the Midian Priest, who drew water into troughs to water their fathers flock: but there came other shepherds and drave them away: But Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock who returning to their fa∣ther, he asked the reason they came so soone back, and they told him, that a certaine Egyptian had help∣ed them: and he commanded to call him to his house to eate bread: who came and dwelt with him: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter to wife, by whom he had a sonne called Gershom.
Now after this Pharaoh died, and the children of Israel were exceed∣ingly grieved by reason of their great bondage; and they cryed un∣to the Lord, who heard them, and remembred his covenant with A∣braham, Isaac, and Jacob. Now Moses keeping the flock of his father in law,Exod. 3. and leading them to the back side of the de∣sert, he came to Horeb the moun∣taine of God: where appeared un∣to him an Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in the middle of a bush: and Moses turned towards it, to see why the bush was not burnt: then God called unto him out of the middest of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shooes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground: and told him, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Then Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to looke upon God: and God said
unto him, I have seene the afflicti∣ons of my people which are in E∣gypt, and have heard their cry, by reason of their task-masters: and told Moses that he would send him to Pharaoh, and to bring his people of Israel out of Egypt: and Moses said unto God, Who am I that I should goe unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the chil∣dren of Israel out of Egypt? and God told him he would be with him, and that for a token thereof, after he had brought them out of Egypt, they should serve God up∣on that mountaine: and Moses said unto God, When I come unto the children of Israel, how shall they beleeve me? then said the Lord, Say unto them, I am, hath sent me unto you. But Moses answered and said,Exod. 4. Be∣hold, they will not beleeve me, nor hearken unto my voyce: and Mo∣ses having a Rod in his hand, the Lord commanded him to cast it
upon the ground; and it became a serpent, and Moses went from it. And the Lord said unto him, Put forth thy hand and take it by the taile: the which he did, and it be∣came a Rod againe. And the Lord said more to him, Put thy hand into thy bosome, the which he did, and when he tooke it out, his hand was leprous as snow: and he said, put thy hand in∣to thy bosome againe, the which he did, and it became as it was be∣fore: yet neverthelesse Moses was very scrupulous to goe: Excusing himselfe that he wanted eloquence and was slow of tongue: and the Lord said unto him, Who hath made mans mouth, who maketh the dumbe, or deafe; the seeing, or the blind, but I the Lord? and the anger of the Lord was kindled a∣gainst Moses, and then he appoint∣ed Aaron to joyne with him, and to assist him in this great worke, for the deliverance of the children of
Israel out of Egypt. And so Mo∣ses returned to Jethro his father in law, to desire leave to go into Egypt to see his brethren, who bid him goe in peace. And Moses returned towards Egypt with his wife and children, and the Rod in his hand, with command from God to doe wonders before the King of Egypt: And Aaron met Moses in the mount of God, and kissed him. Moses telling him, all the words of the Lord who had sent him: and all the signes he had commanded him: And then they two gathered all the Elders of Israel together, and did the signes in sight of all the people, who beleeved them, and worshipped God, for his good∣nesse. After that they went to Pharaoh, desiring they and the children of Israel might hold a Fast unto the Lord in the wildernesse. But he would not obey the message and voice of the Lord.
And they said againe, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us, let us go, we pray thee, three dayes journey into the Desert, to sacri∣fice unto our God lest he lay his plagues upon us, of pestilence and sword: but Pharaohs heart was hardned, and would not let them goe, and added more to their work, whereof they complained mighti∣ly to Pharaoh. But he said, Ye are now idle, therefore ye say, Let us goe and doe sacrifice to the Lord: and the people murmured at Moses because their task was greater since his coming to them; and Moses was much troubled thereat. Then the Lord spake unto Moses,Exod. 6. and told him of all his promises unto Abraham and his seed, to give the land of Canaan; and of the bondage of Israel in Egypt, and his Covenant, and sent him againe to Pharaoh to let the children of Israel goe out of his land: but all this while the children of Israel did
mightily murmur against Moses and Aaron; Moses was then fourescore yeares old, and Aaron fourescore and three. And they went both unto Pha∣raoh againe, and Aaron cast down his Rod before Pharaoh and it be∣came a serpent: and the sorcerers of Pharaoh did the like with their inchantments: But Aarons Rod swallowed up all theirs. And as God commanded, Moses and Aaron in the morning they met Pharaoh at the water, and at the Ri∣vers side, and desired that the peo∣ple of Israel might goe and wor∣ship God in the wildernesse. But he refused, then he smote the waters in the sight of Pha∣raoh, and they were turned into blood; and the fish died, and the river stanke; yet Pharaohs heart was hardened: this continued for seven dayes, in which time they digged for water to drinke. And the Lord commanded Mo∣sesExod. 8.
to goe againe unto Pharaoh, to let the people of Israel goe, and still his heart was hardened: and Aaron stretched forth his hand with the Rod over the ponds, and caused frogs to come over the land of E∣gypt; and the Magicians did th like: then Pharaoh called for Mo∣ses and Aaron, and said Intreat the Lord that he may take away the frogs from me and my people, and I will let the people goe that they may doe service unto the Lord. And Moses said, That thou mayst know that there is none like the Lord our God, the frogs shall de∣part, but onely they shall remaine in the rivers; and the Lord did ac∣cording to the word of Moses. And the Lord commanded to say unto Aaron to stretch out his Rod and smite the dust of the land, that it may be lice thorowout all Egypt, and it was so: and the Magi∣cians attempted to doe the like but could not.
And they told the King it was the finger of God; yet he hearken∣ed not unto them. Then the Lord commanded Mo∣ses to goe early in the morning unto Pharaoh as he came forth and speak to him, that the people of Israel might goe to serve him; and to tell him what plagues otherwise would follow; but still his heart was har∣dened: then there came a grievous swarme of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into all the land of E∣gypt; and the land was corrupted by reason of the flies. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Goe ye sacri∣fice to your God in the land: But Moses said, they desired to go three dayes journey; for it was an abo∣mination to the Egyptians to sacri∣fice in their land; and Pharaoh let them goe; desiring Moses to intreat the Lord for him; the which he did, and the flies departed out of the land of Egypt.
Yet againe Pharaoh hardened his heart and would not let them goe:Exod. 9. then all the cattell of the land of Egypt died; but of the cattell of the children of Israel died not one: yet was Pharaohs heart hardened, and would not let them goe. Then as the Lord commanded, Moses took ashes of the furnace and stood before Pharaoh and sprinkled it up towards heaven, and there be∣came boiles and blames upon man and beast, and upon the Magicians. And stil was the heart of Pha∣raoh hardened, and would not let the children of Israel goe: and Moses stretched forth his Rod, and the Lord sent thunder and haile, and the fire ran along upon the ground; so there was fire and haile mingled together, such as was not since the land of Egypt became a nation: and it smote both man and beast, and every herbe, and brake downe the trees: onely in the land of Goshen where the chil∣dren
of Israel were, was none. Then Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned, the Lord is righteous; I and my people are wicked: Intreat the Lord for me, and I will let ye goe. And Moses went out of the city, and spread his hands unto the Lord, and the thunder and haile ceased: yet neverthelesse Pharaohs heart was again hardened; neither would he let the children of Israel goe. And Moses and Aaron came a∣gaine unto Pharaoh,Exod. 10. and said thus unto him: Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble thy selfe before me? let my people goe that they may serve me: and his ser∣vants perswaded him to let them goe, but he refused to heare them. Then Moses stretcht forth his Rod, over the land of Egypt, and there came an East winde which brought in Locusts which went
over the land of Egypt, and the land was darkened: and they left no greene thing upon the land. Then Pharaoh called againe for Mo∣ses and Aaron in haste, and said, I have sinned against the Lord your God, and you: forgive my sinne, and entreat the Lord for me. The which Moses did, and the Lord sent a mighty West winde which did drive the locusts into the Red Sea: but yet would not Pha∣raoh let the children of Israel goe. Then the Lord commanded Moses to stretch forth his hand towards heaven; and there was a thick dark∣nesse throughout the land of Egypt three dayes; but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings. Then Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said to him, Goe ye, and serve the Lord, onely let your flocks and herds stay here: but Moses refused that, and said, they must have sa∣crifices for the Lord and all their cattell: then Pharaoh would not let
them goe, but bid Moses to see his face no more. And the Lord commanded Mo∣ses to speake to all the children of Israel,Exod. 12. upon the tenth day of the moneth, to take every house a lambe, a male lambe without ble∣mish, and to keep it untill the four∣teenth day, and then kill it in the evening, and to take the blood with a bunch of hyssop and strike it on the two side posts, and upon the upper post of the doore; and that they shall eat the flesh that night rosted with unleavened bread, and bitter herbs: That they shall eat it with their loins girded, shooes on their feet, and staves in their hands, and in haste, for it is the Lords Passeover. For the blood upon the posts shall be a token that the Lord would passe in mercy by them, when the Egyptians should be destroyed. And after the performance of many other ceremonies before the
eating of the Passeover, it came to passe that at midnight the Lord smote all the first-borne of Egypt; and Pharaoh rose up in the night, and all the Egyptians, and there was a great cry: then the children of Israel, according as they were commanded, departed, taking their dough before it was levened, and the kneading troughes upon their shoulders, with great store of Jew∣els they had from the Egyptians. And they journied towards Suc∣coth, being in number about six hundred thousand on foot, besides children: after they had beene in Egypt foure hundred and thirty yeares. But they went not the nearest way by the land of the Philistines: but about through the wildernesse of the Red Sea. And Moses took the bones of Jo∣seph along with him: and they came from Succoth in Ethem in the edge of the wildernesse, and there
encamped: and the Lord went be∣fore them by day in a pillar of a cloud; and by night in a pillar of fire. And when King Pharaoh heard they were gone,Exod. 14. he made ready six hundred chosen Chariots, & all the Chariots of Egypt and Captains over them, and a great army, and the children of Israel coming neare the Red Sea, the Egyptians over∣tooke them: and they were afraid, and cryed unto the Lord, and did murmur against Moses exceedingly: thinking it better to have staid in Egypt: but Moses comforted them: then the Lord commanded them to march, and Moses to lift up his Rod, and to stretch out his hand o∣ver the Sea, and the Angel, and the pillar of the Cloud which went be∣fore, removed and stood behinde them: and the Lord caused the Sea to go back by a strong East winde, and it was dry land, and the waters were divided, and the children of
Israel went into the middest of it upon the dry ground, and the wa∣ters were as a wal on every side; and the Egyptians followed them: but by Gods will, when they were in the middle of the water their Cha∣riot wheels fell off: in the morning when all Israel was over, Moses stretched forth his hand and the waters closed up, and Pharaoh and all his Army were drowned: and when Israel saw this great worke they feared the Lord, and beleeved him, and his servant Moses: and Moses and the children of Israel sang praises unto the Lord. After which Moses brought the children of Israel three dayes into the wildernesse and found no wa∣ter;Exod. 15. and when they came to Marah the water was bitter, and the peo∣ple murmured against Moses: and hee prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord shewed him a tree the which he cast into the water and they were made sweet. And then
they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and seventy Palme trees, and there incamped: from thence they came to the wil∣dernesse of Sin, which is betweene Elim and Sinai, being the fifteenth day of the second moneth, there the people of Israel did murmur at Moses and Aaron: repenting they came from the flesh pots of Egypt; then Moses and Aaron said unto them, At even ye shall know that the Lord hath brought you out from the land of Egypt; and what are we that ye murmur thus a∣gainst us? And as Aaron was speaking to them, they looking towards the wildernesse, the glory of the Lord did appeare in the cloud: and it came to passe that in the evening the Quailes came up and covered the Campe, and in the morning the dew lay round about the host. And after the dew was gone, there lay a small round thing like
the frost of the ground, and they said one to another, It is Manna. And Moses said unto them, This is the bread the Lord hath given you to eat, gather thereof: and he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no want. Moses commanded them to leave none untill the morning: but some of them did not hearken to him, but kept of it till morning and it bred wormes and stanke: and this Manna was not to be found upon the seventh day. It tasted like wafers made with hony. And Moses spake unto Aaron to keep in a pot an Omer full of it therein, and lay it before the Lord to be kept for their generations. So Aaron laid it up before the Testi∣mony to be kept: the children of Israel did eat Manna fourty years, untill they came to the borders of Canaan.
And the children of Israel jour∣nied from Sin, and came to Rephi∣dim, and there was no water to drinke: wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and murmured a∣gainst him. And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, What shall I doe with this people? they be almost ready to stone me: and the Lord command∣ed him to call the Elders of Israel and goe to the Rock in Horeb; and smite the Rock, and there shall come water out of it for the people to drink: and Moses did so in the sight of the Elders of Israel. Then Amalek came to fight with Israel, and Moses bade Joshua goe and meet them with a chosen com∣pany; and Joshua did so, and fought with him: and Moses stood upon an hill with Aaron and Hur, and had his Rod in his hand, and in the fight whiles he held up his hand the men of Israel prevailed, but when he let it downe Amalek prevailed.
But Moses hands being heavy they took a stone and put it under him, and he sate thereon, and Aaron and Hur staid up his hands of each side; and they were steady untill the going down of the Sunne: and Joshua discomfited Amalek. There Moses built an Altar and called it Joshua Nissi. And Jethro father in law to Mo∣ses,Exod. 18. his wife with his two sonnes, came unto Moses into the wilder∣nesse, where he encamped at the mount of God, where they recei∣ved one another with great love: Moses telling him of all what God had done for Israel, by delivering them from the hands of Pharaoh: and Jethro sacrificed to the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of Israel: and Aaron came, and all the Elders of Israel to eate bread with Jethro: but Jethro seeing Moses sit in judge∣ment amongst the people from morning to evening: he perswaded Moses to take some helpers, and not
to weare himselfe out: which coun∣sell he followed; onely when mat∣ters of great difficulty came to be heard, Moses heard them: and Je∣thro departed from Moses and went into his owne land. After this the children of Israel removed,Exod. 19. and came to the desart of Sinai, and encamped before the mount: and Moses went up unto God, who spake unto him, and bad him tell the sonnes of Jacob what he had done for them; and if they served him, he would con∣tinue his mercies exceedingly unto them: and Moses told the people what the Lord said, and all the peo∣ple answered together: We will o∣bey the Lord. And Moses return∣ed the words of the people unto the Lord: then he commanded him to sanctifie the people unto the Lord, and to be ready against the third day, for then he would come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai: but commanded
bounds to be set about the moun∣taine, that the people should not come upon the Mount, nor touch the borders of it lest they be de∣stroyed; onely Moses and Aaron were to goe up: and Moses sancti∣ied the people, and bid them be ready the third day; and that day in the morning was thundering and lightning, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people trembled. And Moses brought forth the people to meet with God, and they stood at the bottome of it: and the mountaine was altogether on a smoke, for the Lord descended up∣on it in fire: and the whole mount quaked greatly: and the Lord cal∣led Moses unto him to the top of the mount: and the Lord said unto Moses, Goe downe, charge the peo∣ple, lest they breake thorough to gaze, and perish: so Moses did as the Lord commanded: and then
God commanded Moses and Aaron to come up: then was delivered unto them by word from God, the Ten Commandements. And the people being much a∣fraid of the thundrings, lightnings,Exod. 20. and sound of trumpet; and smo∣king of the mountaine, they remo∣ved and stood afarre off: and they said unto Moses, Speake thou un∣to us, and we will heare: but let not God speake with us lest we die. And Moses said unto the people, Feare not, for God is come to prove you, and that his feare may be be∣fore your faces, that ye sinne not: and the people stood afarre off, and Moses drew neare unto the thick darknesse where God was, and there the Lord taught unto Moses his lawes and ordinances to deli∣ver to the people. After this the Lord commanded Moses,Exod. 24. with Aaron, Nadab and A∣bihu, and seventy Elders of Israel to come up, who were command∣ed
to worship a farre off; and Mo∣ses above came neare the Lord. And returning from the Lord, Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose up early in the morning, and built an Altar under the hill, and twelve pillars accor∣ding to the twelve Tribes of Israel. And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord: and the Lord again said un∣to Moses, Come up to me into the mount and I will give thee Tables of stone, and the Law and Com∣mandements which I have written that thou mayest teach them: and Moses with Joshua his minister went up to the mount of God; and said unto the Elders, Tarry ye here for us, untill we returne: Aaron and Hur are with you: If any man have any matters to doe, let him come unto them. Thē Moses went up into the mount
and a cloud covered it: and the glory of the Lord abode upon mount Sinai: and the cloud cover∣ed it six dayes, and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the middest of the cloud, and the sight of the glory of the Lord was like a devouring fire on the top of the mount, in the eyes of all the chil∣dren of Israel. And Moses was in the mount fourty dayes, and fourty nights. And after his returne, he by Gods appointment, set downe Lawes, and Ordinances, and Ce∣remonies, for the people of Israel to keepe. Now whilest Moses was in the mount,Exod. 32. the people gathered them∣selves together to Aaron, and said, Make us gods to goe before us: for as for this Moses that brought us out of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him: and Aaron to please them, bade them breake off their eare-rings, which they did,
and of them did make a Calfe, and did worship it: and the people sate downe to eate and to drinke, and rose up to play. And the Lord said unto Moses, Goe, get thee downe, for the peo∣ple thou broughtest out of Egypt have corrupted themselves, and are quickly turned aside, out of the way which I commanded: they are a stiffe-necked people, and the Lords wrath was growing hot a∣gainst them to consume them. But Moses besought the Lord his God to spare this people, whom he had brought out of the land of Egypt with such power and might: and to be mercifull unto them for A∣braham Isaac and Jacobs sake: and the Lord heard the prayers of Moses for them. And Moses coming downe from the mount with the two Tables of the Law, the worke and writings of God: Joshuah hearing the noise of the people as they shouted, he
said unto Moses, There is a noise of warre in the Campe: but Moses said, No, it is the noise of them that sing: and as hee came neare the Campe he saw the Calfe and the dancing, and Moses anger waxed hot; and he cast the Tables out of his hands and brake them beneath the mount: and he took the Calfe which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to pow∣der, and strewed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drinke of it. And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee that thou hast brought so great a sinne upon them? and Aaron an∣swered, Let not the anger of my lord waxe hott, thou knowest the people that they are set on mis∣chiefe. Then Moses stood in the gate of the Campe, and said, Who is on the Lords side? and goe in and out from gate to gate thorough the
Campe, and slay every man his brother, and every man his com∣panion, and every man his neigh∣bour: and the children of Levi who were consecrated, did accor∣ding to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day a∣bout three thousand men. And on the morrow Moses said unto the people, You have sinned a great sinne, and now I will goe up unto the Lord, peradventure I shall make an attonement for your sinne: and Moses went up and pray∣ed for the people: and the Lord commanded Moses to leade the people forth, and sent his Angel with him. Then Moses tooke the Taber∣nacle and pitched it without the Campe a farre off,33. and every one that sought the Lord went out un∣to the Tabernacle: and when Mo∣ses went unto the Tabernacle, the people rose up, and stood at their tent doores looking after Moses un∣till
he went into the Tabernacle; and the cloudy pillar descended and stood at the doore of the Ta∣bernacle whiles the Lord talked with Moses; then every man rose up and worshipped in his tent doore. The Lord commanded Moses to he we two Tables of stone like to the first, and to be ready in the morning to come unto mount Si∣nai,34. but not any man to come up with him; neither any man to be seene thorowout all the mount: neither that the flocks or herds should feed before the mount: the which was done, and Moses went up unto the Lord; and it came to passe when Moses came down from the mount with the two Tables of the Testimony, his face shone, and and Aaron and the children of Is∣rael were affraid to come near him, but he put a vaile over his head, and told them what the Lord had com∣manded.
Then the children of Israel migh∣tily35. gave themselves to the adoring of the Tabernacle wherein was the Arke of the Covenant, which be∣ing finished Moses reared up, and put the Testimony into the Arke, and put the Mercy-seat above upon the Arke, and he set a Laver be∣tweene the Tent of the Congre∣gation and the Altar: and Moses and Aaron, and his sonnes washed their hands and their feete thereat, when they came neare the Altar, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle, and the cloud of the40. Lord was upon the Tabernacle by day, and fire by night in the sight of Israel thorowout all their jour∣nies. Then Moses consecrated Aaron and his sonnes,Levit. 8. and girded them with girdles, clothed them with robes, and put the Ephod upon them; and the Brest-plate of Urim and the Thummim; and put upon Aarons head the Mitre and the holy
Crowne as the Lord commanded Moses: and then sacrificed unto the Lord. And the Lord commanded Aa∣ron and his sonnes not to drinke wine nor strong drinke when they shall come into the Tabernacle.10. In the wildernesse of mount Si∣nai, in the Tabernacle the Lord commanded Moses to take the number of the children of Israel:Numb. 1. their males by name, every one by the poll from twenty yeares and upward, fit for warre: and the whole number was six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty, besides the tribe of Levi, who were appointed over the Ta∣bernacle of the Testimony, to bear the Tabernacle and the vessels thereof to minister unto it, and en∣campe about it. And Moses and Aaron did en∣campe before the Tabernacle to∣wards the East: and Moses num∣bred all the first borne among the
children of Israel; the males from a moneth old and upward, and they were twenty two thousand two hundred threescore and thirteene. And the Lord commanded Mo∣ses to make two silver Trumpets to call the people together,10. and for their marches. And the cloud being by God ta∣ken up from off the Tabernacle of the Testimony, the children of Is∣rael tooke their journeys out of the wildernesse of Sinai, and the cloud rested in the wildernesse of Paran, the Tribe of Judah marching first with their Standard; and after them the Tribes in order. And they departed from the mount of the Lord three dayes journey,11. and the Arke of the Co∣venant of the Lord went before them to search out a resting place for them: and when the Arke went forward then Moses said, Rise up, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate
thee flee before thee: and when it ested he said, Returne, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel. After this the children of Israel did murmur and long after the flesh pots of Egypt.11. And Moses heard the people weepe every man in the doore of his tent, and the anger of the Lord was greatly kindled; and Moses was much grieved, by reason of the great burthen that was upon him, of so great a people. Then the Lord commanded se∣venty of the Elders of Israel to as∣sist him, upon whom was the Spi∣rit of the Lord, and the people still murmuring: and Moses with the Elders came into the Campe, and there went forth a winde from the Lord which brought Quailes from the Sea, which fell by the Campe in very great plenty, and the people gathered abundantly of them: and whiles the flesh was betweene their teeth, the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against them, and smote them with a great plague. And it came to passe that Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses,12. be∣cause he married an Ethiopian wo∣man, and the anger of the Lord was against them; and Miriam be∣came leprous. Then Aaron said unto Moses, A∣las, my lord, I beseech thee lay not the sinne upon us wherein we have done foolishly. And Moses cryed unto the Lord. Then Miriam was sent out of the Campe 7. dayes, the people journeying not, but after that time she returning, the Campe removed and pitched in the wilder∣nesse of Paran. Then the Lord commanded Moses to send forth of every tribe one to search the land of Canaan, and to know the strength and plen∣ty thereof;13. and they coming to the brook of Eshcoll cut off a cluster of grapes, and they brought it upon a staffe by two men; with some
pomegarnets and figges, and did give relation of the land: and some of them spake very doubtfull of the land, and put the people in feare. Insomuch as the Congregation wept and murmured against Moses and Aaron,14. and wished they had died in the land of Egypt, or in the wildernesse, and desired to returne into Egypt: then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the As∣sembly of the Congregation of Israel; and Joshua and Caleb who had searched the land, rent their clothes, and commended the land exceedingly to the people, and ad∣vised them not to rebell against the Lord. But they bade stone them with stones, and the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them: But Moses prayed earnestly to the Lord for this people, and he heard him, and pardoned them. But the Lord said, Because all those men which have seene my glory,15. and my miracles which I
did in Egypt and in the wilder∣nesse, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice, they shall not see the land: but my servants Caleb and Joshua, because they have followed me, them will I bring in∣to the land whereinto they went, and their seed shall possesse it: and the children of Israel, and the peo∣ple murmured exceedingly, and contrary to the command of Moses, got up into the top of the moun∣taine, repenting and being ready to goe to the place the Lord had pro∣mised: but the Arke of the Cove∣nant staid behinde in the Campe; then the Amalekites, and the Ca∣naanites came downe and discom∣fited them. It came to passe afterwards Ko∣rah,16. Dathan and Abiram, with cer∣taine of the children of Israel, with two hundred and fifty of the Prin∣ces of the assembly, men of fame and renoune gathered themselves
against Moses and Aaron, saying unto them, Ye take too much up∣on you, seeing all the congregation is holy: wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the congregation of the Lord: then Moses said unto them, even to morrow the Lord will shew who are his, and who are holy: and Moses said unto Korah, Heare I pray you, ye sons of Levi. Seemeth it but a small thing un∣to you that the God of Israel hath brought you so neare himselfe to doe the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them; and seeke ye the Priesthood also? And Moses sent for Dathan and Abiram, but they would not come up; but murmured against Moses, for bringing them out of the land of Egypt. And Moses was much troubled, and said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before the Lord with Aaron to morrow, and bring
each of you your Censer, putting Incense therein: and they did so, putting fire in them, and stood in the doore of the Tabernacle of the congregation with Moses and Aa∣ron; and the glory of the Lord ap∣peared unto them: and the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, say∣ing, Separate your selves from a∣mong this congregation that I may consume them in a moment. And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation? And God commanded Moses to bring the people from the Taber∣nacle of Korah, Dathan and Abi∣ram, and he did so. And all the El∣ders of Israel followed him: and he spake unto them, saying, Depart I pray you from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs lest ye be consumed. And so they departed and stood in the doores of their Tents, their
wives and their children: and Mo∣ses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord hath sent me to doe all those workes, for I have not done them of my owne minde; if these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then the Lord hath not sent me: but if the Lord make a new thing, and the earth o∣pen her mouth and swallow them up, with all that appertaine to them, and they goe downe quicke into the pit, then shall ye under∣stand that these men have provo∣ked the ord. And it came to passe as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave asun∣der that was under them, and swal∣lowed them up, their houses and their goods: and the earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the congregation; and there came a fire out from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and
fifty men that offered incense; and as God commanded, Eleazer the sonne of Aaron tooke the censers out of the fire, and made of them broad plates to cover the Altar, be∣cause they were formerly hallow∣ed; and to be a memoriall to all the children of Israel, that no stran∣ger which is not of the seed of Aa∣ron come neare to offer incense be∣fore the Lord, that he be not as Korah and as his company. But on the morrow after this great judgement fell upon Korah, the congregation murmured a∣gainst Moses and Aaron, saying, They had killed the people of the Lord. And they being gathered together, Moses and Aaron looked towards the Tabernacle, and the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared. And Moses and Aaron came before the Taber∣nacle of the congregation: and the Lord spake unto Moses saying, Get you up from among this con∣gregation
that I may consume them in a moment; and they fell upon their faces, and Moses bade Aaron to take a Censer, and put fire there∣in from of the Altar, and put on in∣cense and go quickly unto the con∣gregation, and make an attonement for them, for that wrath was gone out from the Lord, and the plague was begun: and Aaron did as Mo∣ses commanded, and ran into the middest of the congregation, but the plague was begun among the people; and then he put on incense and made an attonement for the people, and stood betweene the dead and the living, and the plague ceased. Now they that died of the plague were foureteene thousand and seven hundred, besides them that died about the matter of Ko∣rah: and Aaron returned unto Moses to the doore of the Taber∣nacle, and the plague stayed. And the Lord commanded Mo∣ses to speake unto the children ofNum. 17.
Israel, to bring twelve rods, for e∣very Tribe one, and thereon to write their names, and to write Aa∣rons name upon the rod of Levi; and to lay them up in the Taber∣nacle before the Testimony: and the Lord said, That the mans rod whom he shall chuse, shall be the chiefe, and shall blossome, thereby to make the children of Israel cease from murmuring against Moses and Aaron; and Moses did as the Lord commanded, and every one of the Princes gave him a rod according to their fathers houses, Aarons rod being amongst them: and Moses laid the rods before the Lord in the Tabernacle of witnesse: and going on the morrow into the Taber∣nacle, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, brought forth buds bloomed, and yielded Almonds: and Moses brought them forth, and they tooke every man his rod: but the Lord bade Moses to bring back Aarons rod before the
Testimony to be kept for a token against the Rebels, and take away their murmurings lest they die; and Moses did so as God comman∣ded: and the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we dye, we perish, we all perish: Shall we be consumed with dying? And the Lord commanded the Tribe of Levi to be joyned unto Aaron to minister unto him,18. and onely that Aaron and his sonnes should minister before the Taber∣nacle of the witnesse, and that the Levites should keepe the charge of the Tabernacle, but they should not come nigh the vessels of the Sanctuary and the Altar lest Aa∣ron and they should die: and that no stranger should come near them: and gave them many other Ordi∣nances to observe. Then came the children of Israel unto Zin,20. and abode in Kadesh where Miriam died and was there buried: and in that place was no
water, in so much as they gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron, and the people did chide with Moses, and wished they had died with their brethren. Then Moses and Aaron went from them unto the doore of the Tabernacle, and fell upon their faces: and the Lord bade Moses and Aaron take the Rod and assemble the people together, and speake unto the Rock before them, and it should give forth water; and they gathered the congregation together before the Rock, and Moses said un∣to them, Heare now ye Rebels, must we fetch you water out of this Rock? Then Moses lift up his hand, and with his Rod he smote the Rock twice, and the water came out a∣bundantly: and the congregation dranke, and their beasts also. And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aa∣ron, Because ye beleeve me not to sanctifie me in the eyes of the chil∣dren
of Israel; therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them. After this Moses sent messengers to Kadesh to the King of Edom, letting him know of all their passa∣ges in Egypt, and of the wonders that God had done; desiring to passe through his Countrey onely to goe by the Kings high way, and pay for what they tooke: but the King of Edom refused it: where∣fore Israel turned another way, and came to moūt Hor, where the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron say∣ing, Aaron shall be gathered to h people, for he shall not enter into the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled against my word at the water of Meribah: take Aaron and his sonne Eleazar and bring them up unto mount Hor; and Moses brought them up, and as the Lord commanded, Moses stripped Aaron of his garments and put them upon
Eleazar his sonne, and Aaron died there, in the top of the mount, and Moses and Eleazar came downe from thence, and when the congre∣gation of Israel saw that Aaron was dead, even all the house of Israel mourned for him thirty dayes. And they journied from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea,21. and compassed the land of Edom, but they were much discouraged be∣cause of the way, and the people spake against God and Moses, then the Lord sent fiery serpents a∣mongst the people, who bit them, whereof many died, and then they confessed their sinnes unto Moses, and desired him to pray to the Lord for them; the which he did. And the Lord commanded Mo∣ses to make a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it shall live: and Moses did according∣ly make a brazen serpent; and they that were bitten when they beheld it, lived.
And the children of Israel then journeyed faster and came to Beor unto a place,21. where the Princes and Nobles digged it by the directions of the Lawgiver, and went further, where they sent to Sihon the King of the Amorites to let them passe thorough his land, paying for what they had, and onely to goe the Kings high way while they were past his borders, but he would not suffer them to passe; but gathered his people together, and fought with Israel; where the Amorites were overthrowne, Israel taking all their cities and dwelt in them, and the Countrey thereabouts; and Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and drave the Amorites from thence and possessed it. And after they marched, and Og King of Bashan raised his people, and then Israel did over∣throw them, and possessed their land. After this the children of Israel
set forward and pitched in the plaines of Moab: and Moab was affraid: Balak the sonne of Zippor was King of the Moabites at that time, who sent messengers unto Balaam to come to him, letting him know, how the children of Is∣rael who came out of Egypt came neare him; praying him to curse them. And he bade the messengers sent lodge there that night, but God said unto Balaam, Thou shalt not goe with them: neither curse them for they are blessed: and Balaam told the messengers, Get ye home, for the Lord refuseth to give me leave to goe with you: and the Princes returned to Balak, saying, Balaam refuseth to come with us: then Balak sent Princes more ho∣nourable then they with proffers unto Balaam of great preferments and honour unto him: but he an∣swered, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, hee
could not goe beyond the com∣mand of God, to doe lesse or more: but desired them to stay that night, that he might know the will of the Lord: and that night the Lord said unto Balaam, If they call, goe a∣long with them, but doe that which I shall say unto thee. Then Balaam rose up in the morning and sadled his Asse, and went with the Princes of Moab: and the Angel of the Lord stood in the way, and as he was riding with his two servants, the Asse seeing the Angel of the Lord, with his sword in his hand, he turned out of the way, and Balaam smote her, it be∣ing betweene two wals: the Asse thrust her selfe upon the wall, crusht Balaams foote against the wall, and then he smote her againe; then the Asse fell down under Balaam; and then he smote the Asse againe, and the Lord opened the mouth of the Asse, and she said unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee that
thou hast smitten me these three times? and Balaam said unto the Asse, Behold, thou hast mocked me, if I had a sword I would kill thee: and the Asse said unto Bala∣am, Am not I thine Asse, upon which thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day? was I e∣ver wont to doe so unto thee? and he said, Nay: then the Lord open∣ed the eyes of Balaam and he saw the Angel of the Lord, and he bow∣ed downe his head, and fell flat on his face, and said, he had sinned. Now therefore, if it please thee, I will returne back: but the Angel said, Goe on with the men, but onely speake that word I shall speak unto thee: and so he went with the Princes, and Balak hearing of his coming he went to meet him, and said unto him, Wherefore diddest thou not come sooner? am not I able to promote thee to honour? but Balaam said, The word that God putteth into my mouth will I speake.
And they offered burnt-offerings, and he said unto Balak, How shall I curse, whom God hath not cur∣sed, or how shall I defie whom the Lord hath not defied? at which Ba∣lak was offended, but he answered; must I not take heed to speake that which the Lord hath put into my mouth? and after other burnt-offer∣ings at Zophim, his answer was to Balak, Behold, I have received commandement to blesse, and he hath blessed, and I cannot reverse it; he hath not behld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seene per∣versenesse in Israel; the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them: then Balak said, Neither doe thou blesse them nor curse them: but he answered, All that the Lord speaketh, that I must doe: but Balaam seeing it was Gods will to blesse Israel, he left af∣ter looking to enchantments, but set his face towards the wilder∣nesse, and he saw Israel abiding in
their tents according to their tribes; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he said, How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy taber∣nacles, O Israel, &c. then Balaks anger was kindled against him; but Balaam prophesied, saying, I shall see him, but not now: I shall be∣hold him, but not nigh: There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Seth: out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, &c. And Balaam rose up and went and returned to his place, and Ba∣lak also went his way. And Israel abiding in Shittim the people beganne to commit whoredome with the daughters of Moab and bowed towards their gods;25. and the anger of the Lord was kindled against them. One of the children of Israel came and brought unto his bre∣thren
a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses and all the congre∣gation of Israel, who were weeping before the doore of the tabernacle; and when Phineas the sonne of Ele∣azar the sonne of Aaron the Priest saw it, he rose from amongst the congregation, and tooke a Javelin in his hand and went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both the man and the woman, Zim∣ri and Cozbi, through; so the plague was stayed in Israel: and those that dyed of the plague were twenty and foure thousand. And Moses desired of the Lord to set a man over the congregation,27. to goe in and out before them, that they may not be as sheep that have no shepherd; and the Lord said un∣to Moses, Take thee Joshuah the sonne of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and lay thine hand upon him, and set him before Eleazar the Priest and before all the con∣gregation, and give him a charge
in their sight; and thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all Israel may be obedient; and he shall stand before Eleazar the Priest who shall aske counsell for him, after the judgement of U∣rim before the Lord: and Moses did as the Lord commanded him, and he tooke Joshua and set him before Eleazar the Priest and the congregation; and he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses. After this the children of Israel warred against the Midianites, and they slew the King of Midian, and burnt their cities, and their goodly castles, and there Balaam was slaine, they divided the spoyle of the Countrey. And Moses growing old,Deut. 31. he called Joshuah unto him before the people, giving him good counsell, and bidding him to be valiant: and encouraged the people, and set∣teth
forth a song of Gods mercies and vengeance. After which the Lord spake unto Moses,32. saying, Get thee up into this mountain Abarim unto mount Nebo which is in the land of Mo∣ab that is over against Jericho, and behold, the land of Canaan which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession, and dye in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto thy people as Aa∣ron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people: because ye trespassed against me a∣mong the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah Kadesh in the wildernesse of Zin, because ye san∣ctified me not in the midst of the children of Israel; yet thou shalt see the land, but thou shalt not goe thither: and after Moses had blessed the twelve Tribes of Israel,34. he went up from the plaines of Moab unto the mountaine of Nebo, and the Lord shewed him the land of pro∣mise
which was promised to Abra∣ham, Isaac and Jacob: so Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord, and he buryed him in a valley in the land of Moab over against Beth Peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day: he was 120. yeares old when he died, his eye was not dim, nor his naturall force abated: and the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plaines of Moab thirty dayes; and there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses whom the Lord knew face to face: In all the signes and wonders which the Lord sent him to doe in the land of E∣gypt to Pharaoh, to all his servants, and to all his land; and in all that mighty hand, and in all that great terrour which Moses shewed in the sight of Israel.
MEDITATIONS Upon some parts of the History of Moses. O Lord direct my meditati∣ons, and assist me humbly and truely to contemplate this thy great work of the deliverance of thy chil∣dren of Israel out of Egypt by Moses, after they had sojourned there foure hundred and thirty yeares; after which time, according to thy promise, thou diddest deliver them, and brought them to the land of promise. This great deliverance, O Lord, is the true type of a great mercy that did follow, which was by our Moses Je∣sus Christ, who redeemed, and brought us that were Gentiles, and under the bondage and slavery of sinne, to serve and follow him out of the darknesse wherein we were inthraled; being far worse then the Egyptian yoke.
O Lord my God, let it enter into my heart, most humbly and seriously to con∣sider of this inestimable mercy of my redemption, and of thy wonderfull and unvaluable goodnesse towards me a sin∣ner: by sending into this Egypt of the world, such a guide, such a deliverer, and such a Redeemer as all the Angels and powers in heaven doe adore, even thy onely Sonne. Let me be astonished, O Lord, with wonder at this thy so great mercy, and be confounded in my selfe for offend∣ing thee, so glorious and so gracious a God. And let my sinfull soule be con∣verted unto thee, to serve thee with all humblenesse of heart. O Lord, how sutable in mischiefe were Pharaoh and Herod, by giving way to Ambi∣tion and Jealousie, and the reignes to commit cruelty to an unlimited height, for the murdering of innocent Infants. Pharaohs ambition was to destroy the Hebrew children, amongst whom was Moses, which thou, O God, preservedst
to deliver the people of Israel out of Egypt: and Herods designe to destroy the children in Jury, amongst whom was that immaculate Lambe Christ Jesus: even to destroy him who deli∣vered the Gentiles, and was after cru∣cified to deliver and redeeme both Jew and Gentile. O Lord, how wonderfull are thy workes and all thy goodnesse: for flesh and blood could not prevaile against thy providence: for the cruelty of Pha∣raoh could not prevent thy goodnesse, for thou diddest multiply and blesse thy children of Israel: and preservedst Moses in a poore basket of bulrushes to doe thy great worke to deliver thy people out of the thraldome of Egypt. And O wonder of wonders, and mer∣cy of mercies, out of the manger at Bethlehem came our blessed Saviour who redeemed the world: and how wonderfully, O Lord, hast thou preser∣ved thy Church for whom he died, and multiplied thy servants through the persecutions of this world.
As it was thy great mercy and bles∣sing, O Lord, to preserve Noah and his family in that great Arke whereby mankind was preserved upon earth: So it was thy mercy to preserve thy ser∣vant Moses in that little arke amongst the watery flags of danger, to preserve and bring thy children of Israel descen∣ded from Noah, out of Egypt to the land of promise, from which stock so preserved, came my Saviour Jesus Christ: as these have beene thy mer∣cies, O God, to preserve thy people of Israel by thy Prophet Moses the type of Christ: and to redeeme the world by thy Sonne my Saviour Jesus; So O Lord, many have beene thy mercies un∣to me a sinner, by thy manifold mercies and deliverances even since my infan∣cie hitherto, both by sea and land. Good Lord, in thy mercy take from over me this thick and mysty cloud of stupidity, that so much darkens my understand∣ing, that I may discerne these thy mer∣cies, and feare, love, and serve thee with all the faculties of soule and body:
and good Lord grant that I may love my kinred and neighbours, as Moses did love his Nation the Hebrews, with kindnesse and affability to all men, as he used to the daughters of Jethro. Let the soule of thy servant know, that in the places of peace, quietnesse, and retirednesse from the eye of this world so full of vanity and pleasures, there art thou to be found, for in the desart behinde the mountain and neare Horeb thou wast with Moses. O Lord, bring my soule from these worldly cares, afflictions, and tempta∣tions amongst which I live; and lead me with thy saving grace toward thy holy mountaine: with contemplations of holinesse and penitency for my sins, and there let me rest in thee and be freed from the thorny and scorching passages of this world. As thou, O God, didst wonderfully appeare unto Moses in the Bush by a flame of fire which did not burne nor consume it: so I doe most humbly be∣seech thee, enter into the heart of thy
servant, and enflame it with holy love and zeale towards thee: and enlighten it, O Lord, that it may discerne thy wonderfull goodnesse: and that I may have alwayes such a burning desire to serve thee, as no overflowings of the waters of this world may quench it: let me with Moses, put off my shooes of worldly thoughts, cares, and sinfull imaginations, when I shall presume to come before thee, for the place where thou art is holy: and places consecra∣ted unto thee and thy service, in the assembly of Saints, are not to be propha∣ned by any kinde of unholy actions; for we must worship towards thy holy tem∣ple, and enter into it with reverence; for so, O Lord, thou didst command all thy people in all nations of the world. Give me grace to obey thy good in∣spirations as Moses did obey thee, by going unto Pharaoh: Lord, let thy wonderfull works, that thou hast done and that I daily see, strengthen my faith and confidence in thee; and not to di∣strust thy power and goodnesse, but that
I may resolutely goe on to serve thee with a blessed perseverance, untill my soule shall be delivered out of this E∣gyptian bondage, be freed from the taskmasters of afflictions, and the fleshpots of the pleasures of this world. Moses was slow in speech, and doubt∣full of himselfe, yet God did worke mightily by him. By his example let us master our fleshly opinions, and know that God hath his owne work; and not to judge of the defects of other men. And good Lord, teach me to looke into my selfe, for if I have received that which others want, it is thy meere mercy and goodnesse: and as I ought alwayes to be thankfull for thy gifts, yet let me not be proud of them; for as thy goodnesse gives them, so thou canst take them away as thou pleasest; for the foot of pride brings downe thy wrath upon us the chiefe of men; and though Moses had that defect, yet by thy pow∣er he did greater matters then either Absolon or Achitophel could bring to passe; for thou makest our speaking,
and hearing, and all our senses to serve thy commands; and my Reeemer made the dumbe to speake, and the lame to walke: as by thy great mercy thou hast delivered me from the Egyptian plagues which the hardnes of my heart hath deserved; so prepare me I do most humbly beseech thee, and make me ready to goe out of this Egypt of the world, and to be obedient unto my Lea∣ders, and Governours, Moses and Aa∣ron, in the midst of all perversenesse and perverse men whomsoever. In the darknesse of this world en∣lighten me, and as thou diddest send a distinct light to the children of Israel in Goshen; so enlighten, O Lord, my inward soule with the light of thy bles∣sed spirit, to discerne thy wonderfull mercies towards me; and grant that I may praise thee for thy goodnesse, and obey thee as a man separate from all the world: prepare me, O God, to be ready for my passage to the Celestiall Countrey of eternitie as the Israelites were; with my loines girt in caritie,
my shooes on in mortification, and my staffe in confidence: sprinkle the posts and lintles of my heart with the hysope of thy grace, and the precious bloud of thy salvation; that I may be knowne to be thine, and be received into thy mercy when thou shalt come to visit me, and to bring me through the Red Sea of that dangerous passage to the hea∣venly Canaan of eternitie. Keepe me at that time, O Lord, from distrust and diffidence; strengthen me in the narrow passage, betweene the two wals of that dangerous water of presumption and despaire, that I be not drowned with the Egyptians of this world, whose trust is in their chariots and not in thee; and whose hardnesse of heart and contempt of thee, brought them to destruction. O Lord, be mercifull to my thirsty soule, and preserve me from murmur∣ing against thee, thou which diedst upon the tree of the Crosse, take all bit∣ternesse from my soule, and quench my thirst with the holy water of thy grace,
and grant that I may cheerefully goe on towards the land of promise. Without thy continuall helpe how fraile and perverse are we? as the re∣bellious Israelites ever murmuring and repining against Moses and Aaron; send therefore that heavenly Manna unto me that may strengthen my soule and preserve it unto thee in faith, and obedience. Thou knowest my frailty, O God, and how feeble I am, as likewise my unruly and unbridled conditions, my stubbornes and hardnesse of heart: therefore I doe most humbly beseech thee for thy mercy sake in Jesus Christ, with thy miracu∣lous and mercifull Rod of grace to strike upon my stony heart, that from that rock may ascend unto mine eyes a fountaine of teares, with such a true and perfect contrition as may come be∣fore thee, and by thy mercy my sinnes may be washed away, and that I may thirst no more after vanity. O Lord, how weake is the arme of the strongest man without thy help:
for Moses could not hold up his hand with the Rod without assistance from thee where Amalek fought with Is∣rael, but Aaron and Hur assisted him. I do most humbly beseech thee, in the fight that I have against the Amalek of sin and impiety: give me thy Rod of grace and strengthen me, and make me able to hold up my hands & heart unto thee, and in my weaknesse and distresse send me, O Lord, spirituall comforters, which may assist and strengthen my faith, that I may hold out untill the sunne of my age be set, and obtain vi∣ctory over all my spirituall enemies. With what wonderfull feare diddest thou, O Lord, deliver thy holy Com∣mandements unto Moses, and with what reverence and feare did the chil∣dren of Israel stand without the bounds of Mount Sinai; and onely Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy Elders of Israel went into the moun∣taine who worshipped a far off, onely Moses came neare the Lord. Good Lord, make me to feare and
tremble to break these thy holy comman∣dements which thou diddest deliver with such circumstances of glory and terrour: and with thy children of Is∣rael let me keepe without the bounds of mount Sinai as thou appointedst them, and out of all humane curiosity humbly waite to receive thy lawes from the hands of Moses, and the Prophets and Ministers of thy Church. Keepe rash presumption from the soule of thy servant: for though Aa∣ron, Nadab, and Abihu, and the seventy Elders were good and holy men, yet they kept their distance in their worship towards thee O God, and at the writing of the Law. So good Lord, give me lowlinesse, to stand before thee without the bounds of Sinai, with such as are humble of heart, and there worship and waite thy leisure for what thou shalt command me by Moses, my spirituall guide, by whom I must be directed; for I must not be my owne director. Without this continuall helpe of
thine, O Lord, and by thy Ministers and Shepherds thou appointest over us, how dangerously doth that Wolfe the devil assault and prevaile against this britle and corrupt flesh of ours: for Moses being absent but for a few daies the people went a whoring after their owne inventions. Into what extreme folly did they runne headlong even to worship a calfe, and to give that which was most precious unto them to make an idol, and their jewels to make a calfe: O Lord Jesus looke upon me, and helpe me, in this time of danger to my soule: how at this time doe the most of this world wherein I live go a whoring after their owne waies, as though neither Moses nor any Prophet were amongst thē: how have they consumed the land, & given their jewels to raise up the idol of ar∣rogancy and pride: and what doe we else but sit downe to eate and drink, and rise up to play: and no man mournes for the misery of the land. O Lord Je∣sus, strengthen my faith and beliefe in
this dangerous Sea wherein are so ma∣ny rocks and quicksands, of Error and Innovations. Be thou my Pilot, and grant that I may steere a right course towards thee in this sea, so covered with the mists and fogges of Heresie and Schisme; that by a true faith I may arrive unto the harbour of my hoped for happinesse, and with speed send some in the spirit of Moses to us againe; and deliver us from the like punishment that fell upon the Israelites for that their sinne; and that peace may be in our Land, that thy Tabernacle, O Lord, may be raised up, and that we may wor∣ship towards it, every man with humi∣litie at the doore of his tent with the children of Israel so humbled and pro∣strate; and that we may doe as they did, give our selves to adorne the Ark of the Church wherein is the Arke of the Covenant, and reare it up with Moses in the solemnitie of spirituall and divine worship, for there is the glory of the Lord and of all God▪ peo∣ple.
O Lord, let me know that Aarons worship before thee in his robes of ho∣linesse the ornaments of honour, the mitre and crowne, upon his knees hum∣bly before thy Altar in the Sanctu∣ary being according unto thine owne holy order, was more pleasing unto thee then the confusion of such who step up without order or ornament, spirituall or corporall into the Church, not so much as looking with reverence to∣wards thy place of worship. For doubtlesse, O Lord, thy Sonne and our Saviour the great example of humility, did come into this world to teach us humilitie, and that by his grace working in us humilitie, low∣linesse and devotion should encrease and continue in this world. Therefore let me not, O Lord, with the proud spirituall Pharisees of these times, being blasted with boldnesse presume to step into thy house the place of worship but with reverence, and in imitation of thy children of Israel who
worshipped and wept at the doore of the Sanctuary. O Lord, the children of Israel though they provoked thee unto anger by their murmuring distrusts and iniquities in their journeys, even ten times: when I looke into my selfe, O Lord, I finde and must needs confesse to my owne shame and confusion, that in this my pilgrimage I have exceeded them in impietie, both in number and degree: for indeed my sinnes are numberlesse, having murmured exceedingly in my journeys at the crosses of this world, as never considering from what hand they came, nor how justly I have de∣served them: I have for most part of my time eaten, drunk, and rose up to play, and thirsted after the flesh-pots and pleasures of this world: I have neglected thy service and have not humbled my selfe before the doore of thy Sanctuarie to bewaile my sinnes as I ought to have done: the due obe∣dience that I owe to my Superiours and Pastours of thy Church have I neg∣lected,
following mine owne inven∣tions and opinions, and have wander∣ed like a sheepe out of the fold, whereby I have fallen into by pathes and crooked waies; leaving that good way thou hast appointed: and thereby have drawne thy just displeasure upon me. O Lord, my God, standing in this sad and dan∣gerous condition, give me grace true∣ly to humble my selfe before thee: and as thou didst heare the prayers of Mo∣ses thy servant who mediated for thy children of Israel, and was mercifull unto them: So I doe most humbly be∣seech thee by the merits of thy Sonne and my Saviour Jesus Christ my Me∣diatour, for his sake be thou mercifull to me, and deliver me from finall de∣struction denounced against me. How endlesse, O Lord, are our im∣pieties, when we grow proud and stiffe-necked, and how rebellious then doe we grow against thee and thy Ministers whom under thee we should obey. O Lord, deliver me thy servant from a rebellious spirit, and teach me,
not to spurne against them that thou hast appointed over me with Korah, Dathan and Abiram, so spitefull a∣gainst Moses and Aaron thy Mini∣sters, nor to cover my rebellious impie∣tie with the specious cloake of holinesse as they did, when nothing was in their heart but ambition and desire to rule, and to bring that out of order which thou, O Lord, hadst established in Mo∣ses and Aaron. How wonderfull are thy judgements, O Lord, and how unsearchable are thy wayes! Let the example of these men, and the just and terrible punishment that fell upon them, make me feare to breake thy Ordinances, or disobey my Governours that thou hast appointed: for what are we, O Lord, in a head∣lesse government, and what mischiefe shall not betide us? O Lord, preserve me from the fiery stings and punishments of that old ser∣pent, which mine iniquities deserve, and in these afflictions that I may suf∣fer for my sinnes, give me grace to look
up towards him that died for me upon the Crosse, that by his merits I may be healed, and praise thee for thy mercies, and live to goe in my pilgrimage by a true obedience unto thee: and that I may no more murmur against thee, nor be weary of the Manna of thy blessings: and O Lord, as Moses saw the Land of promise before his death, upon the top of the mountaine: so good Lord, raise up my thoughts, before I dye, from these earthly things to contemplate the eternity hereafter; and give me a taste and faithfull apprehension of that hea∣venly Countrey which I doe expect; that with joy of heart, and comfort to my soule, I may leave this earthly ta∣bernacle, and ascend unto that place of happinesse where Moses and other thy Prophets, Apostles, Saints, and Mar∣tyrs sing praise unto thee that sits upon the throne for ever.
THE HISTORY of Joshua. AFter the death of Moses God made choice ofJosh. 1. Joshua the son of Nun to be his Champion, and to goe before the children of Israel: and Joshua com∣manded the Officers to goe unto the Hoste amongst the people, and command them to prepare victuals and provision, within three dayes to passe over the river Jordane to∣wards the land of Canaan: and Jo∣shua spake to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the halfe tribe of Manasseh, saying, You and yours are to possesse the land beyond Jor∣dane, but ye shall passe over before your brethren armed to helpe them until the Lord hath given your bre∣thren
rest as formerly he hath given you: and they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we will doe, and obey thee as we have done Moses: and whoso∣ever shall not observe thy com∣mands let him dye: onely be thou valiant. And Joshua sent out two men as Spies to view the land, and they came unto Jericho, and lodged in the house of Rahab the harlot: which was told to the King of Je∣richo: and he sent unto Rahab to bring forth the men: but she hid them: and answered, they had been there, but she knew not who they were. And in the evening the King sent out Scouts to pursue them: Rahab had hid them in the top of her house, and covered them with the stalkes of flaxe: after the Scouts were gone out, she came unto the men, and said unto them: I know the Lord hath given you the land,
for terors are fallen upon us: and the whole land are afraid of you, for we have heard how the Lord dryed up the water of the red sea for you when you came out of E∣gypt, and what you did to the two Kings of the Amorites Sihon and Og whom you vtterly destroyed, and therefore your Lord is the true God of heaven, therefore in regard of my kindnesse unto you, shew kindnes unto my fathers house: and give me a token to save alive my father and my mother and my bre∣thren and sisters and all they have: and they answered her, giue ns safe∣ty, and when the Lord gives vs this Land we will deale kindly and lo∣vingly with thee: and her house standing vpon the towne wall, she let them down by a cord: and bade them be gone to the mountaine and hide themselves three dayes vntill the scouts returne and then go their way; & they said vnto her, that we may remember thy love
and our promise, when we come unto this place: tye this scarlet cord thou letst us down withall vnto thy window, and thou, thy father, thy mother brothers sisters and all they have shall be safe. But if any goe out of thy house at that time, let his bloud be vpon his owne head: for all shall be safe within: but if thou utter this to any we will be quit of our promise and oath: and they de∣parted: and they did observe her counsell hiding themselves three dayes, and after came to Joshua and told him the state of things and of the feare of the Inhabitants about Jericho. And Joshua hastened and came to Jordan with the children of Israel, and after three dayes the officers of the hoast commanded the people that when they see the Arke of the Covenant of the Lord remove, the Priests and Levites bearing it, they should remove and go after it, and to keepe a distance from it, to
know the way they must goe, and Joshua said unto the people sanctifie your selves, for to morrow the ord will do wonders amongst you, and Joshua spake vnto the Priests to take up the Arke and go before the peo∣ple, the which they did, and the Lord said vnto Joshua this day will I begin to magnifie thee in the sight of Israel, that they may know that as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee. Command the Preists that beare the Ark when they come to the brink of Iordan to stand still; and he said to the children of Israel hereby ye shall know that the li∣ving God is amongst you to driue out the heathen before you; behold the Arke of the Covenant even the Lord of all the earth passeth over before you into Iordan. Then the people removed from their tents to passe over Iordan, the Priests bear∣ing the Ark of the covenant before them: and when they dipped their feet in the river, the water rose on a
heap and the people passed over dry over against ericho, and when all the people were over, the Lord commanded Josua to take twelue men according to the tribes and command them to take out of the midst of Iordan where the Preists feet stood twelue stones and carry them ouer and leaue them where you shal lodge this night; the which Joshua did accordingly, and they brought thē upon their shoulders, and left thē to be a sign to after ages that the water of Iordan was cut off before the Arke of the covenant of the Lord when it passed over, and the Arke stayd in Jordan vntill the people were passed over and that Joshua had commanded twelve stones in the river of Jordan where the Priests had set their feet to be placed: but the children of Reuben and Gad and halfe the tribe of Ma∣nasseh passed over armed before the children of Israel unto the plaines of Jericho being about 40000. and
the Priests that bare the Ark of the Covenant were come out of Jor∣dan, the water returned to his place: and those stones which they tooke out of Jordan did Joshua pitch in Gilgal for a token unto their chil∣drens children that they came on dry land over Jordan as he did the red sea: that all the earth might know the power of God and feare him for ever. And all the Kings of the Canaa∣nites and the Amorites that dwelt thereabout, when they heard of this wonderfull worke were astonished, and their hearts failed them: and the Lord commanded Joshua to make sharpe kniues to circumcise the Israelites the second time, the which he did performe at the hill of foreskins, now all the people that came first out of Egipt were circumcised: but they that were borne by the way as they came out of Egipt them they had not circum∣cised vntill now: and they con∣tinued
in the campe untill they were whole: and the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the Passeover in the evening in the plaines of Jericho: and they did eate of the old corne of the land the morrow after the Passeover un∣leavened cakes and parched corne, and the Manna ceased; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan. And Joshua coming towards Je∣richo, there stood a man over a∣gainst him with his sword drawne in his hand, and Joshua went unto him and said, Art thou for us, or for our enemies, and he said, Nay, but as a Captaine of the hoste of the Lord am I now come: and Jo∣shua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, saying unto him, What saith my Lord unto his ser∣vant: and the Captaine of the Lords hoste said unto Joshua, Loose thy shooe from off thy foot, for the
place whereon thou standest is ho∣ly: and Joshua did so. Now Joshua straightly besieged Jericho,6. so that none could goe out or come in: and the Lord com∣manded Joshua with his army and 7. Priests to bear before the Ark 7. trumpets of Rams hornes, and the seventh day to compasse the city 7. times, and the Priests to blow the trumpets, and the people to shout with a great shout: and Joshua com∣manded them so to doe, and they did accordingly: and the seventh day they rose up early and compas∣sed the City seven times, and at the seventh time when the Priests blew the trumpet Joshua commanded the people to shout for the Lord hath given you the City: and it shall be accursed, even it and all that is therein: onely Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that are with her, because she hid our messengers: but let all the gold and silver, and vessels of brasse and iron be con∣secrated
to the Lord, they shall come into the treasury of the Lord. So when the Priests sounded the trumpets the people shouted, and the wals of Jericho fell flat downe and they tooke the City: and they utterly destroyed the City, and put them to the sword man and wo∣man, young and old, oxe, sheepe, and asse; but Joshua sent the two spies unto Rahabs house, those men whom she had entertained: and they brought her safe forth of her house with her father and mother, her brethren and all she had, and her kinred, and left them in safety with∣out the Campe of Israel, and they burnt the City: and Rahab lived long after amongst the Israelites: and Joshua cursed the man that should build Jericho againe: and Joshua was famous throughout the land. But the children of Israel com∣mitted a trespasse in the accursed thing,7. even Achan one of the tribe
of Judah, for which the anger of the Lord was kindled. And Joshua sent spies from Je∣richo to Ai, to view the Countrey, and they viewed Ai: and they re∣turned to Joshua, and told him, that in Ai were but few people. Joshua upon their report sent thither about three thousand men and they fled before the men of Ai, being migh∣tily discomfited: the which did much dishearten the people of Is∣rael: and Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the Arke of the Lord untill the evening, he and all the Elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads: and they did grieve exceed∣ingly. And the Lord said unto Jo∣shua, Get thee up, wherefore lyest thou thus upon thy face, Israel hath sinned and transgressed my Cove∣nant, for they have taken of the ac∣cursed thing, they have stollen and dissembled; therefore could not the children of Israel stand before
their enemies, neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from you. And the Lord commanded them to sanctifie the people against the next day, that the accursed thing may be taken from amongst them: and in the morning Joshua rose up early and brought Israel by their tribes: and the tribe of Judah was taken by lot, and every houshold of that tribe was examined, and A∣chan was found to have stolne the accursed thing: and Joshua coming to Achan, said unto him, Achan my sonne, give I pray thee, glory unto the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now what thou hast done, hide it not from me: And Achan confes∣sed the fact, saying, I have sinned a∣gainst the Lord God of Israel: for when I saw amongst the spoiles a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels
weight, I tooke and hid them in my tent: and Joshua presently sent for them, and being brought unto him, and before the children of Is∣rael, he laid them before the Lord, and Joshua and all Israel with him brought Achan, the silver and the gold, and the Babylonish garment, his sonnes and daughters, his oxen and his asses, his sheepe, and his tent, and all that he had unto the valley of Achor, and all Israel stoned him with stones and after burnt them; and raised over him a heape of stones, so the Lord turn∣ed from his fierce anger. And the Lord commanded Jo∣shua to go a second time to Ai,Josh. 8. with a great army: and he chose thirty thousand of the most valiant men, giving them directions what to doe and sent them away by night, com∣manding them to lye in ambush neare the City of Ai: and they lay before Bethel and Ai: and Joshua rose early in the morning, and with
all the Elders of Israel, and a great strength he marched towards Ai and drew near the City: and when the King of Ai saw it, hastily came forth with his whole strength to give battell to Israel: but he knew not of the ambush: and Joshua and all Israel seemed to fly before them: and the whole strength of Ai and Bethel pursued them towards the wildernesse: then they which were in ambush speedily made towards the City, and took it: and instantly set it on fire. The men of Ai looking back and seeing their City on fire they were astonished and disheartened: and being scattered and in disorder, Jo∣shua and his army fell upon them one way, and they that tooke Ai issued out another way, and so cut them off every man: and they took the King of Ai alive and brought him to Joshua: and the Israelites returning to Ai put all within it to the sword; so there fell that day of
men and women twelve thousand. And Joshua burnt Ai downe to the ground; and the King of Ai he hanged upon a tree: and after the Sunne was down commanded to take him downe, and his carkasse to be cast at the entry of the gate of the City, and raised thereon a great heape of stones. And Joshua built an Altar unto the Lord God of Israel in mount Eball, as Moses had commanded, and there they offered sacrifice, and writ the Law of Moses upon the stones: and there the Arke of the covenant being brought, all Is∣rael and the Elders, Officers, and Judges stood before it, and before the Priests and Levites that bare it: and the whole Law was read unto them. And when all the Kings on this side Jordane heard of these things,Josh. 9. they joyned together to fight with Joshua: but the Gibeonites had
heard what they had done to Je∣richo and Ai; they cunningly came unto Joshua in poore habite and great humiliation unto the campe at Gilgal: and there made their peace with Joshua and the Princes of the Congregation who sware unto them. But after the Princes finding they had deceived them, for their oath sake they would not de∣stroy them: and Joshua called them before him, and said, Wherefore have you beguiled us, saying, you dwelt a farre off when ye dwell a∣mong us? for this deceit ye shall be bondmen and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God: and they said, It was told us that Moses commanded we should be wholly destroyed, there∣fore we were afraid and did this thing, and doe with us as thou pleasest: and Joshua saved their lives, and made them hewers of wood and drawers of water for the
congregation, and for the altar of the Lord; and so they did continue to doe. Now the King of Jerusalem and the other Kings understanding that the Gibeonites had made peace with Israel;Josh. 10. and Gibeon being a great City they feared greatly; therefore five Kings and all the strength they could make came and encamped before Gibeon, they of the City having made their peace with Joshua, sent presently for aid unto him: then presently Joshua marched with a mighty army from Gilgal toward Gibeon all night, and falling suddenly upon them gave them a great defeate: and fly∣ing before Israel the Lord cast great stones from heaven upon them, and kil'd more of them then the sword, and the Sunne and Moone stood still that day, untill the people had destroyed their enemies: and Jo∣shua and all Israel returned to Gil∣gal; but the five Kings fled and
hid them in a cave: afterwards Jo∣shua commanded they should bee brought forth, then Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the Captaines, Come neare and put your feet upon the necks of these Kings, and they did so: and after Joshua commanded them to be hanged upon five trees, and there they did hang untill the evening: and being taken down, Joshua com∣manded they should be cast into the cave where they were found and laid great stones to the caves mouth: and Joshua conquered all the Countrey and put them to the sword:Josh. 11. for the Lord God of Israel fought for Israel: and Joshua re∣turned and all Israel with him unto the campe to Gilgal. After this Jabin King of Hazar, Jahab King of Madon, and all the Kings north of the mountaines, ga∣thered themselves together and raised a marvellous great host: and pitched themselves together by the
waters of Merom to fight against Israel: and Joshua came and all his people of war with him, and came suddenly upon them by the waters of Merom, and put them to a very great slaughter, and chased them unto great Zidon and Mizpeh, houghing their horses, and burning their chariots: and Joshua returned and took Hazor and kill'd the King thereof, and did all things as the Lord commanded Moses his ser∣vant, so did Moses command Jo∣shua, and so did Joshua. So Joshua took the whole land according to all that the Lord said unto Moses:Josh. 13. and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel, ac∣cording to their divisions by their tribes: and the land rested from warre, chap. 18. And the whole con∣gregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congre∣gation there for the land was sub∣dued before them.
And the Lord appointed them by Joshua Cities of refuge,Josh. 15. that he that killeth a man unawares and unwittingly may flee thither for re∣fuge, and coming to that Citie he shall stand at the entering of the gate of the Citie, and declare his cause to the Elders of that Citie, and they shall receive him in: and if he be followed thither they shall not deliver him back, because he did the act unwittingly and hated him not before time. And they appointed Kedesh in Gallole in mount Nepthale, and Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Hebron in the mountaine of Judah: and on the other side Jordan by Je∣richo Bezer in the wildernesse out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ra∣moth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golon out of the tribe of Manasseh. These were the Cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the strangers that sojourned a∣mong
them, that whosoever killeth any person at unawares may flee thither, and not die by the avenger of blood untill e stand before the congregation. Now after the land was con∣quered, and every tribe settled in their severall divisions. Joshua called for the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the halfe tribe of Manasseh, and commended them for their valour, and obedience to the Commandment of their Lord: and said unto them, Now the Lord hath given rest unto your brethren, returne you unto the land of your possession which Moses the servant of God gave you on the other side of Jordane, but be carefull to doe the commandements and the Law which Moses gave you, and love the Lord your God and serve him with all your heart, and with all your soules; so Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they departed from the children of Israel out of
Shiloh:Josh. 22. to go unto Gilead the land of their possession formerly by the hand of Moses, and when they came to the borders of Jordan, there they built an altar by Jordan, and when the children of Israel heard thereof they gathered themselves together at Shiloh to goe and warre against them, and they sent unto them Phi∣neas the sonne of Eleazar the Priest, and with him ten Princes of each tribe of Israel one, and coming unto the children of Reuben, Gad and Ma∣nasseh unto Gilead, and said unto them, Thus saith the congregation of the Lord: What trespasse is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turne away from following the Lord in that ye have built you an altar? Is the iniquitie of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed untill this day although there was a plague in the congregation of the Lord? if the Land you possesse be uncleane then come over to us
where the tabernacle dwelleth and take possessions amongst us, but re∣bell not against the Lord, nor re∣bell against us in building you an altar beside the Altar of the Lord our God. Did not Achan commit a sinne in the accursed thing, and wrath fel on all the congegation of Israel, and that man perished not a∣lone in his iniquitie? then the chil∣dren of Reuben, Gad and Manas∣seh answered them: The Lord God of gods, The Lord God of gods, and Israel shall know that this is no rebellion in building this al∣tar: being not intended to offer thereon burnt offerings, or meat offerings, or peace offerings there∣on; but onely our reason was to set up a monument for feare of the time to come, that your children might speake to our children, What have you to do with the Lord God of Israel? because the river Jordan hath divided us, and so your chil∣dren make our children cease from
fearing the Lord: and therefore we raised that altar, not for burnt-of-ferings, but that it may be a wit∣nesse betweene us and you and our generations after us, that we may doe the service of the Lord before him with our burnt offerings and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings that your children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part in the Lord, and therefore this altar we have made is a witnesse unto you and to your children hereafter. God forbid that we should have any altar but that Altar of the Lord our God that is before the taber∣nacle: and when Phineas the Priest, the Princes of the congregation, and the Elders of Israel heard this from them, Phineas said unto them, This day we perceive that the Lord is among us because ye have not committed this trespasse against the Lord: and they returned unto the land of Canaan unto the children
of Israel, and they all rejoyced and blessed God, and the children of Reuben, Gad and Manasseh, called the altar Ed, as a witnesse betweene the Lord and them: and after that God gave rest unto Israel from their enemies round about. And Joshua waxen old,Josh. 23. called for all Israel and for their Elders, for their heads, ad for their Judges, and told them of all things the Lord had done for them, and what the Lord would doe if they served him: counselling them to be vali∣ant and couragious, and to keepe the Law delivered by Moses, and not to turne neither to the right hand nor to the left, nor to leane to the gods of the heathens: not to sweare by them, or make ma∣riages with them, if they did so, that they would be snares and traps unto them and thorns in their eyes untill they perished from off the good land the Lord had given them.
And he said, I am going the way of all the earth, and you know nothing hath failed you that the Lord promised you: but if you transgresse the Covenant of the Lord your God, and serve other gods and bow your selves to them, then shall the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and ye shall perish from the land. And Joshua againe gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shichem and called for all the Elders of Israel, and they presented themselves be∣fore God, and Joshua told them of all the good things that the Lord had done to the children of Israel from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to that time. And the people said, they would serve no other gods then the God that brought them and their fathers out the land of Egypt from the house of bondage, and which did those great things in their sight, and preserved them in all their waies: and after much
perswasions of Joshua unto the peo∣ple to serve the Lord: he made a covenant with them that day, and set them a Statute and an Ordi∣nance in Shechem, & Joshua wrote it in the book of the law of God, and took a great stone and set it up there under an oke that was by the Sanctuary of the Lord: so Joshua let the people depart every man to his inheritaece, and after he depart∣ed to his fathers, being one hun∣dred and ten yeares old:Josh. 24. and they buried him in the border of his in∣heritance in Timnah-Serah which is in mount Ephraim.
MEDITATIONS upon the History of Joshua. O Lord, thou art gracious unto thine Inheritance, for though thou diddest take thy servant Moses to his fathers, yet thou diddest not leave thy children of Israel destitute and without a Leader to goe before them, but sent them Joshua thy servant to be their captaine and de∣fender. This is, thy goodnesse, O Lord, still from time to time to be a preserver of thy people whom thou hast chosen, and this mercy of thy speciall providence and love, extended it selfe, O God, not onely to thy children of Israel, but to thy holy Church militant here upon earth, and likewise to us most miserable sinners by thy continuall providence over us; How often, O Lord, hast thou
delivered me the sonne of thy hand∣maide, from time to time, and raised me helpers and preservers: I have found these thy mercies, and let the due consideration of them, enter into the closet of my heart, and there rest by a blessed remembrance of them, never to be forgotten; and grant that I may humble my selfe before thee with all due thankfulnesse and obedience to serve thee, and thou, O God, which continuedst thy mercy unto thy servant Joshuah and the children of Israel, continue thy good mercies unto me, di∣rect and guide me over this Jordan of danger, that I be not drowned in sinne, and grant that I may rightly and truly follow my guides, and the Arke of thy holy Covenant, by an humble and true distance, directly to follow their feete, lest I fall into the crooked by-pathes, of my owne inventions, and as thy chil∣dren of Israel, after their deliverance over Jordan did shew their thankful∣nesse, by picking up stones at Gilgall, so fix and pitch in my heart, O Lord,
some Sacred monuments of praise and thankesgiving for my redemption from the deep waters of pride and mischief: and circumcise thou my corrupted heart, and so cleanse and purge me, that I may be made fit to fight against sinne and Satan, and the Jericho of this inconstant world, and grant that I may keepe a holy passeover here in the plaines of my pilgrimage, before I ap∣proach before the wals of Jericho to conquer the lusts and vanities thereof: let my soule know, O Lord, that the Princes of darknesse will rise up against me to destroy my soule, (as the Cana∣nites and the Amorites did rise a∣gainst Joshua) and therefore arme me with thy shield of faith, and strengthen me with the helmet of salvation: and as the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the halfe tribe of Manasseh did goe before the children of Israel towards Jericho, so let thy blessed Angels, O Lord, goe before me in this my passage of life and danger of sinne: and let the enemies of my soule be astonished and in feare
as they were before the children of Is∣rael: and as thy holy Army, O Lord, did goe by thy command seven times a∣bout Jericho with such solemnities as thou didst appoint, and by thy wonder∣full mercy, the wals of Jericho fell downe, and the city was destroyed by fire: so give me thy servant grace to obey thee as thou commandest, thought it please not my sense, and to imitate thy holy Prophet David, to worship thee seven times a day, and to obey and serve thee in those things, and in that way, as thou by thy holy word, and the Church of Christ commands me, though it seeme contrary to mine owne unruly fancy, conceit, and opinion; that by thy mercy and my obedience, the stony wals of my wilfulnesse and ini∣quity may fall downe in me, and thy di∣vine fire may consume all the drosse of my inward and sinfull soule; and as Rahab the harlot, though a sinfull wo∣man, was the instrument of safety, to the spies sent by Joshua to view Je∣richo; and by her was discovered the
fears of that countrey and people, which charity and hospitality of hers proved afterwards the saving of her selfe, her kinred, and all that she had; so by this example let me know, O Lord, that thou canst worke good out of evil, for the good of thy servants, and them that go forward to serve thee in the obedience of thy commands. And good Lord, by this let me know, and discerne, the great reward thou preparest for them that doe the workes of charity, and what a buckler and de∣fence it is unto them, in the time of danger when the judgement and strength of man is feeble for O Lord, it is thy promise to reward the works of mercy: furthermore, good Lord, keepe covetousnesse, pride, and dissem∣bling from the soule of thy servant; let not the Babylonish garment of pride take hold on me, nor let me encline to the wedge of gold to infatuate my un∣derstanding, thereby to draw me from my obedience to that which thou com∣mandest; then shall I avoid the punish∣ment
due unto disobedience, & the hurt & danger which may redound unto thy Israel my brethren; good Lord, when I shall fall, raise me up with true re∣pentance, and let me lie in wait by all prudent and carefull wayes in an holy ambush, to destroy and entrap these men of Ai, the enemies of my soule; and after thy deliverance of me, and the forgivenesse of my former offences, build in my heart an altar of thankes∣giving to sacrifice my soule unto thee and praise thee in the presence of the Ark of thy Covenant before all the Elders of thy Church; and if in this my spirituall progresse, I shall meete with any people of bad deservings, give me grace to beare with their infirmi∣ties, and to keep my Covenant and pro∣mise with them, and to helpe them in their distresse, as Joshua did deliver the Gibeonites, because of his oath that he sware unto them; and good Lord, helpe and assist me in the continuall conflicts of this world, of so much dan∣ger and trouble to my soule: helpe me
at the waters of Merom, from the con∣flicts that there I may suffer, by the grand opposers of my hoped for happi∣nesse, and for my deliverance I may give thankes unto thee, and serve thee, in that thy tabernacle of Shiloh which is the house of God. Lord, by thy mercy give me the be∣nefit and comfort of thy Cities of re∣fuge, that by my sinnes of ignorance and weakenesse, I may not fall into thy hands of Justice, but may be received unto mercy: and give me grace, O Lord, to be thankfull and well content∣ed with that portion of livelihood, which thou hast appointed for me, a∣mongst the tribes thy servants, in this Israel wherein I live: give me grace to follow and obey the counsels of my spirituall governours, and have a ve∣nerable regard to their commands, as the good Israelites had, to the last counsels of Joshuah, and so good Lord, living in the true obedience of thee, I
may depart this transitory life in thy blessed feare and favour, even for Jesus Christ his sake, my onely hope, my captain and deliverer. Amen.
THE HISTORY of DEBORAH. NOw after the death of Joshh and Ehud,Judg. 4. the children of Israel did that which was evill in the fight of the Lord; for which their sins the Lord sold them in∣to the hands of Jabin, King of , the Captaine of whose host was Sisera, who oppressed them exceedingly, even for teaty yeares. At which time Deborah the Prophetesse, Wife unto Lapidoth, judged Israel, who then dwelt under a Palme∣tree, between Ramah and Bethel, in Mnt-Ephraim, to whom the people came up for judgement, who in their distresse cryed unto
the Lord: and the people com∣ming thus unto her, she Barak, the sonne of Abino out of Kdesh-Nepthali: who com∣ming to her shee told how the Lord had commanded he should take with him ten thousand men of the children of Nepthali and Zebulon, and goe towards mount-Tbor, saying to him likewise, how the Lord would bring Soft∣ra with all his Army to the River Kishon, and deliver them into his hands: but he answered, that ex∣cept she would goe with him her self, he would not goe; to whom shee replyed, I will surely goe with thee: but the journey thou takest shall not bee to thire ho∣nour, for the Lord shall sell Si∣sera into the hand of a Woman: So she arose, and went with Ba∣rak, to Kaesh, they having with them ten thousand men of Z∣lon and Nepthali, who after to Mount-.
Now it was that Heber the Kenite the father in law of Mo∣ses, had sever'd himselfe from the Kenites, and pitched his Tent neare Kadesh. And they shewed Sisera how Barak was gone up to Mount-Tabor; whereupon hee gathered all his strength toge∣ther, even nine hundred chariots of Iron, and great store of peo∣ple gathered from Harosheth un∣to the River Kishon; of which De∣borah hearing, shee bade Barak to rise and goe against Sisera, saying that the Lord was gone before, and how Sisera should be de∣stroyed. So Barak marched down from Mount-tabor with the ten thou∣sand men, and by the help of the Lord hee discomfited Sisera and all his host, pursuing and killing them, leaving not a man; at which time Sisera leaving his Chariot, fled on his feete, and came to the Tent of Il the Wife of Heber
the Kenite; for there was peace then between Jabin & the house of Heber. Now Sisera comming towards the Tent, Jael came out to meete him, who said unto him, turn in my Lord, turne in to me, feare not. So hee went in, and she co∣vered him with a mantle: but he being athirst, desired of her a lit∣tle water, but she having a bottle of milk, gave him that to drink. And then he said to her, stand at the doore, and if any enquire if any man be here, say no: so he lay down to sleep, she covering of him. Now whiles he was sleeping and weary, she took a naile of the Tent, and a hammer, and com∣ming softly unto him, smote the naile into his Temples, fast∣ning of him to the ground, and so he dyed. At which instant Barak pursu∣ing of Sisera, and comming to∣wards
the Tent, Jael came out to meet him, saying, come in, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest: so hee came in and found Sisera dead, the naile being in his Temples. So God subdued on that day Jabin King of Canaan before the children of Israel.
PRAYERS upon the History of DEBORAH. HOw unhappy are wee by our inbred corruption, like these the children of Isra∣el, who still was relapsing from the service of their Creator, and Preserver, even before, in, and since their fourty yeares journey to∣wards that land of Promise. And now at this very time, being growne so high in iniquity, as for their due punishment, the Lord sold them to the King of Canaan, who pesecuted them for twenty yeares; such is the reward of sin, and so just is the Lord in his judgment against sinners. O Lord let me to know, that when we do wickedly, that thy justice lies
at our doors, and how thy wrath will break in upon us. And if with Ju∣das we betray the sincerity of plain∣nesse in our heart towards thee, with the deceitfull kisse of hypocrisie, and sell thee, and in thee, our selves, to commit wickednesse in thy sight. Most justly maist thou deale with us as thou diddest with Israel, when they were sold by the King of Canaā. Therefore O Lord deliver me from this most dangerous merchandizing with sin, lest I become Bankrupt by mine iniquity, and so come short of paying my duty and service unto thee, thereby to be cast into the gaole of thy displeasure: and by the losse of thy favour and grace, be sold as a slave to sin, & partake with the pu∣nishment so due for such a dismall debt; not only for twenty years with Israel, but even for Eternity with such who have not known thee. O Lord in the most dangerous di∣stresse of my soule, by reason of sinne, give mee grace to call timely unto
thee, yea to cme unto thee thou su∣pream Judge of Israel▪ even thou which dwelest between the Cheru∣bims, and sits' under the Palm-tree thy blessed seate of mercie. Look upon my distresse, and deli∣ver me from this sinne, and that pu∣nishment that I so justly deserve for mine iniquity, and deliver me from the powerfull enemy of my soul, who seekes to corrupt & destroy me, either from the truth or power of thy word, like Barak, whose confidence was more in a fraile woman, Deborah, by her presence, then in thy promises who art omnipotent. Bring mee with the strength of thy grace to the holy mountaine of thy power and saving health, strengthen my faith and confidence in thee, to fight against this proud Sisera of sin my capitall enemie, and send thy might from this thy holy mountaine of Tabor, that by thy power & gra I may be made able to overthrow and defeat all the disturbers of my soules
health, who lies so strongly in wait to destroy me, with such worldly advan∣tages by their River of Kishon. Dissipate all the designes O Lord of all my spirituall enemies, let them flie before thy wrath as Sisera did to the Tent of Jael, and there let them perish in the snares of their own in∣tended mischiefs to the innocent. Retaine in mee a harmlesse and a pure conscience, so shall I lie downe with safety, and rest under thy happy protection, with security to my soule, and escape the like judgement that fll upon Sisera, which is the reward of presumptuous and unrepentant sinners. And for thy mercies let me praise thee, & in the innocency of a sincere soule, for ever to serve and obey thee, untill I shall be freed from this spi∣rituall warfare here, and be made happy to rejoyce with thee in that happinesse and bliss of eternity here∣after. And let me magnifie thy Name with Deborah and Barak, saying with them,
Praise yee the Lord for the a∣venging of Israel;Judg. 5. heare O ye Kings, give eare O ye Princes, I, even I will sing unto the Lord; I will sing praise unto the Lord God of Israel. The mountaines melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before the Lord God of Israel. My heart is towards the Go∣vernours of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people, blesse ye the Lord. Awake, awake, Deborah, awake awake, utter a song. Arise Ba∣rak, and lead thy Captivity cap∣tive, thou son of Abinoam. The river of Kishō swept them way, that ancient River, that Ri∣ver of Kishon. O my soule thou hast trodden down strength. So let all thine enemies perish O Lord: but let them that love him be as the Sun, when he goeth forth in his might.
THE HISTORY OF RUTH. IN the time that the Judges ruled in Israel there was a Dearth in the Land, upon which▪ Elimelech of Bethlehem Judah went to sojourn in the Countrie of Moah, with his Wife Naomi, with their two sonnes, where continuing a while Elimelech died, and she remained with her sonnes, who tooke them Wives of the Moabites, the one was named Orpah, the other Ruth, who lived thereabout ten yeares, where both these sonnes died, af∣ter whose death Naomi hearing the Lord had given them bread in her owne Countrie, thither
shee returned, with her, two Daughters in Law into the Land of Judah; then Naomi perswaded these her two Daughters in Law, to return to their own Mother houses, desiring the Lord would shew the like favour  them, as they had done to the Dead, and to her; wishing them comfort in the house of their husbands, and when shee had kissed them they wept: But they desired still to continue with her, to whom shee answered, turne again my daugh∣ters, for I shall have no more sonnes to be your husbands, and pleaded much with them to re∣turn, so Orp departed, but Ruth staied with her: but still Naomi perswaded Ruth to goe, but Ruth told her whither she did goe she would goe, and where she dwelt she would dwell, saying more∣over, thy people shall be my peo∣ple, and thy God, my God, where thou diest I will die, and there
will I be buried, the Lord doe so to me and more also, if ought but death part thee and me; So when Naomi aw her love & steadfast∣nesse, she brought her along with her to Bethlehem, and it was in the beginning of Barly Harvest; where Naomies deceased husband had a Kinsman of great power, whose name was Boaz. Now Ruth desired her Mother in Law, that she might goe with others to gleane, who giving of her leave, she went and gleaned after the Reapers, and it hap∣pened to be in the field of Boaz, who coming from Bethlehem, he said to the Reapers, the Lord be with you, and they bad the Lord blesse him, and hee seeing Ruth, he asked the servant, that over∣see the reapers, who she was, who told him she was the Moabitish Maide that came with Naomi, and how shee desired to gleane there.
Then said Boaz unto Ruth, my daughter goe not into any other field, but abide by my Maides, go after them, I have charged the servants that they touch thee not when thou  thirst drink such as the servants have, then she fell on her face, and bowed to the ground, and said unto him how have I found favour in thine eyes, that thou shouldest know me, seeing I am a stranger: But hee told he he heard what shee was, and what she had done for her Mother in Law, having left her Father, Mother, and her Countrie, to come amongst strangers, so the Lord recom∣pence thy worke, and a full re∣ward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust; then she said let me finde favour in thy fight my Lord, for thou hast comforted me. Then Boaz bad her come at
meal-times to eate bread, and so shee sat by the Reapers, and hee reached her parched Corne and she did eate, and he commanded she should gleane amongst the sheaves; and so returning in the Evening with plenty to her Mo∣ther in Law, shee asked her with whome she did gleane, who told her it was in the Field of Boaz, then said Naomi, blessed be the Lord for hee ceaseth not to doe good, to the living and to the dead, telling Ruth hee was of her husbāds kindred, & did wish her not to gleane in any other place, but with the Maides of Boaz. Now Naomi did love Ruth,Ruth 3. ex∣ceedingly she finding her good∣nesse, and constancy, and said un∣to her, shall not I seek rest for thee my Daughter, that thou maiest prosper, saying is not Bo∣az out Kinsman, and this night hee winnoeth Barly, wash and a∣noint thy selfe, and put on thy
Raiment, and get thee down thi∣ther, & let him not know of thee untill hee have left eating, and drinking, and when he shall sleep mark where he lyeth downe, and uncover the place of his feete, & lie thee down, and hee shall tell thee what thou shalt doe. And Ruth did according to her dire∣ctions. Now when Boaz had eat, drunk, and cheared his heart, he lay down by the heap of corn, & she came softly, and uncovering his feet, lay downe: and he awa∣king about midnight, and feeling one, he was affraid. Then he said, who art thou; she answered, Ruth thy hand-maid, spread therefore the wing of thy garment over me for thou art the Kinsman. Then said hee, Blessed be thou of the Lord my daughter, thou hast shewed more goodnesse in the latter end then at the beginning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, were they poore or
rich. And now my daughter fear not, I will doe what thou requi∣rest, for all the City of my peo∣ple know thee, that thou art a vertuous woman. Telling her, that true it was, he was her kins∣man: but there was one nearer, so bade her lye there all night: and if in the morning hee would doe the duty of a Kinsman, to marry her, well and good: but if he would not, he would then doe the duty of a Kinsman himselfe: So she lying at his feet untill the morning, she arose early, he de∣siring that none should know that any woman had been there: so he calling for her sheet, giving her fix measures of barley, and returning to the Citie, she came to her Mother in law, and gave her the corne, telling her all the passages betweene Boaz and her selfe. So shee bade Ruth sit still untill shee heard further of the thing, telling her how hee would
not rest untill the thing were done. Then without delay,Ruth 4. Boaz went up to the gate of the City, to whom came this Kinsman na∣med, to Ruth, Boaz desiring him to sit down; likewise ten Elders of the City came and sate downe with them. Then said Boaz to this Kinsman, Naomi is come out of the country of Moab, who will sell a parcell of land that was our brother Elemelicks, and so proffered it unto him, being of nearest in kindred, to redeem it, before them Elders. If he would not, that himselfe being the next, he would. Then he said he would redeem it. Then said Boaz, if thou buyest it of Naomi, thou must al∣so buy it of Ruth the Moabitis, the wife of the dead, to stirre up the name of the dead upon his inheritance; the which this Kins∣man refused, saying, if hee did so, he should destroy his owne, and
so put off that his right to Boaz, and to confirme it according to the custome, then he put off his shooe, and gave it to him, which confirmed the agreement. Then Boaz called them all to witnesse of this contract, where∣in he likewise did buy Ruth the Wife of Mahlon to be his Wife, to stir up the name of the dead. All which the Elders did witnes, who prayed unto God that Ruth might be to him like Rachel and Leah, which two did build the house of Israel, and that he might be famous in Bethlehem, and that by the seede of Ruth, his house might be like Pharez, whom Tha∣mer bare unto Judah. So Boaz took Ruth to his wife, and the Lord gave her a son: and the women said to Naomi, blessed be the Lord, which hath not lest thee this day without a kinsman. And his name shall be continu∣ed in Israel, and this shall bring
thy life again, and cherish thine old age; for thy daughter in law which loveth thee hath born un∣to him, & she is better unto thee then seven sons. And Naomi tooke the child, and laid it in her lap, and became nurse unto it, and the women gave it a name, calling it Obed, which after was the father of I∣shai, the father of David the King.
PRAYERS UPON THE History of RUTH. O Lord, in the prosperities & adversities of this world, thou hast thy waies of mercie unto us, as it befell unto the children of Israel, even in their famines, what blessings diddest thou give thē, by their perigrinations into other Lands: and how diddest thou from time to time, not only provide for their bodily sustinance, but likewise for their spirituall welfare, both in Aegypt and other places. And O Lord, no less was thy ex∣traordinary mercy unto Naomi, by her journey in the time of famine unto Moab, with her husband and children, whom though by the course of nature death deprived her of thē, yet thou diddest raise up unto her a most happy daughter in law, even Ruth. O Lord, this is the generall cur∣rent
of thy continuall mercy unto us, and nothing makes us so unhappy as the want of the fight & considerati∣on of that which daily befalls us, through the course of our fraile life. Therefore open thou mine eyes that I may see these thy mercies unto me, & for ever praise thee for thy goodness. The constant resolution and chari∣ty of Ruth unto her Mother in law is for our imitation, as the very true example of love and pitty, it being the more full of goodness and rarity, they being of two severall Nations and Religions. O Lord, give me such happy love and pitty as was in this thy servant Ruth with her resolution in the pur∣sute of all good things, which may tend to thy glory and worship; let no worldly perswasions or reasons draw me from my way to Bethlehem, in the land of thy promised happinesse: but with the good and vertuous, let me follow their steps, as Ruth did Naomi, that thou their God mayst be
my God, and that I may turne from my worldly and Moabitish affections, & at∣tain to the happy serving of thee in Ju∣dah; so shall I live and dye amongst the righteous, by this thy mercie and help un∣to my weakenesse. And as nothing but death could part Ruth from Naomi, so good Lord, let my soule so love and feare thee, as to my last breath my hope, comfort and confidence may rest in thee alone, & undividable. O Lord furnish me with such happines as was in Ruth, by her charity and hum∣ble deportment; for which as thy blessing was upon this thy own gift of mercy unto her: so she had the happinesse of a good e∣steem in the world, shee being so full of modesty and vertue. Give me O Lord such piety as may bee pleasing unto thee, with such humility & harmless courtesie, as may gaine the love and good opinion of my neighbours. O Lord grant unto mee such perfect frendship with my friend, as was between Naomi & Ruth, with such loving and plain intentions: so by thy goodnesse and
mercie shall I enjoy such love, comfort, & content as was between them to their dy∣ing daies. O Lord, all thy works are so full of won∣der, as wee cannot sufficiently admire them, as it was by thy providēce to bring Ruth unto Judah, not only through so many stops, by confirming her good pur∣pose: so now, so strangely to bring her to glean in the field of Boaz, whereby such a happiness did befall her, not only for worldly respects, ut likewise even in a heavenly happiness, by the marriage and issue she had by Boaz. O Lord my God, my ingratitude would cast me even into hell without recovery, if I should not for ever most thankfully acknowledg thy many mercies & delive∣rances unto me, not only in my temporall preservations & blessings, but thou hast brought me into the field of thy plentifull goodness, to the bottles of comfort, and the sheaves of thy strength and saving grace, shewing me all thy blessings, to strengthen my confidence in thee, and bought mee at a dearer rate then Boaz paid for Ruth.
Boaz comming into th field amongst the reapers, said to them, the Lord be with you: & they answering, the Lord blesse thee. Admirable and exem∣plary was the goodnesse and plaine∣nesse of the hearts of our Ancestors, whose blessings was one upon another: & by such their good meanings, the bles∣sings of God being upon them. What blessings frō time to time did God give unto the blessings which Abraham, I∣saac, and Jacob gave to their children and people. Lamentable is the conditi∣on we are grown unto in this our iron & ungodly age, whiles this blessing is accoū∣ted superstition, and common courtesie being even departed from amongst us. Our very children having left off thet common duty and civility which former∣ly they used, even with their milke, lear∣ning to be surly, sawcy, and disobedient. O Lord deliver mee from this bad cu∣stome, that tends to such ungodliness, from spirituall pride, nd an over-wee∣ning opinion and conceit of my owne judgement. But give me grace to follow
the good and plaine paths of my fore-fa∣thers, in such things as concerns my obe∣dience unto thee, and my duty to my Pa∣rents & Superiours with christian cour∣tesie, to be friendly, humble, and charita∣ble to all men; for thou promisest thy bles∣sing and exaltation to the humble: but confusion will fall upon the proud, whom thou O Lord dost resist. The love of Ruth to Naomi was great, & the comfort she received from her did exceed with her integrity in the doing of it, being so sincere by leaving her coun∣trey, her parents, and her deceased Hus∣bands house. And therefore as Boaz by his blessing & prayer for her, said, the Lord recompence thy work, and a full re∣ward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust. So God the rewarder of the righ∣teous and mercifull, seeing her humility and goodness, did hear the prayers of this righteous man, by shewing such great mercie unto hr, the which did after fol∣low, even in a plentifull manner indeed, for though by her first husband she had no
Issue; yet by Boaz she had Obed, from whom descended the wel-spring of our happinesse and salvation. Oh thy goodness O Lord, whose bounds are without limit, and whose workes and wayes are unsearchable; thy rewards are the fulnes of happines, & thy mercie ex∣tends from generation to generation, to such as love and fear thee. Therefore O Lord, mortifie all vaine & wicked affe∣ctions which are so inbred in mee, by thy grace cast them out, and place in stead thereof the strength of a lively faith, and the fulnesse of love and charity, that thereby I may forsake my selfe, and all things that are dear and near unto mee, and follow the good steps of the godly, as Ruth did Naomi. So that at last I may arrive to the happinesse, and rest within the limits of thy true Church, that pillar of truth and safety, and there with an humble heart to serve thee as Ruth did, by comming into Judah, that once limi∣ted place of thy worship. O he good plainness & harmless sim∣plicity of that golden age of the world,
when bread and water was their common viands, & parched corn the masters food, as it was with Boaz, an eminent man in his age, for such was his fare and enter∣tainment to a stranger, when he reached some to Ruth, yet then did God blesse them with comfort, health, and length of dayes. O Lord deliver mee from the pampering of this my corrupt flesh, with the voluptuous sensuality of these licenti∣ous times, the bane of the soule by such luxury, and the shortning of our dayes by such surfeits. But give me such modera∣tion as I may rather fast then feast: and by which in this health of my soul, I may the better serve thee here, & that thereby hereafter I may attaine unto that happi∣nesse, where the length of dayes both for soule and bodie is life everlasting. O Lord make me studious to requite courte∣sies, & zealous to ballance the workes of charity & piety, as Naomi her zeal was for Ruth, by wishing her to Boaz, and give prosperity to all my good intentions with the blessing ef a thankfull heart for the successe of thy mecies unto me.
Grant O God, that I may be faithfull and firm in my promise, as Boaz was to Ruth, true to my friend, as he was to his kinsman, and discreet in my actions, as be was in his performance before the El∣ders. Gods divine providence did migh∣tily appeare by the marriage of these two righteous, Boaz & Ruth, as his bles∣sings upon them after made it manifest. O happy Bethlehem, to which place Ruth the mirrour of love and pitty, with so much difficulty came unto, led thither by the light of divine power, and following the good steps of Naomi, who there was made happy in her sonne Obed. O happy Bethlehem, to which place that ever blessed virgin Mary came, that most resplendent Vessell of blisse and happi∣ness, being led thither by the light of the holy Ghost, and then comming upon de∣votions towards Jerusalem. O thou bles∣sed Bethlehem, consecrated to our happi∣ness, for there was born a Saviour. Ruth was happy in her son Obed: but this Ma∣ry, blessed amongst women, by her sonne, redemption and salvation came into us.
O Lord my God, let the star of thy bright∣ness appear unto me, that with them lowly Shepheards I may come to this sacred Bethlehem, and there find out that lamb of God that takes away the sinnes of the world; more happy were them Kings who came to see thy holy face in the manger at Bethlehem by their humiliations and of∣ferings, & this blessed sight of thee, then in all their glistering loyalties & vain∣glory of this world. Let me O Lord partake with these Kings in their devo∣tions & humiliations, thou King of hea∣ven. Indue & lead me with the starre of thy grace, that I may come unto thee with the presents of perfect humility, patience and perseverance in the pursuit of such things as shall be pleasing unto thee. So after thine enlightning here by this light of thy holy countenance and favour unto me, grant that at last I may attaine unto that everlasting light in heaven, where from the manger and thy crucify∣ing for our sinnes, thou art exalted into glory everlasting.
THE HISTORY OF Hezekiah, and the de∣struction of Ierusalem by Nebuchadnezzar in the reigne of Zedekiah. IT came to passe in the fourteenth year of He∣zekiah that Senacherib King of Assyria,Isa. 36. came into Judah and tooke all the strong holds, and he sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusa∣lem unto Hezekiah with a great Ar∣my: then came forth unto him from the King, Eliakim and divers others: and Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye unto Hezekiah, Thus saith the great King of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou trustest? and spake other great words, and blasphemed against the
God of Israel, and demanding pledges for his Master the King of Assyria. Then said Eliakim unto him, I pray thee speake unto thy servants in the Syrian tongue for we under∣stand it, and speake not to us in the Jewes language in the eares of the people that are upon the wall. But Rabshakeh said,Isa. 37. Hath my Ma∣ster sent me to thy Master and to thee to speake these words? Hath not he sent me unto the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eate their owne dung, and drinke their owne pisse with you? and he spake this with a loud voice in the Jewes language: and said more, Thus saith the King of Assyria, Let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he shall not be able to deliver you: neither let him make you trust in the Lord, or think he can deliver you, hearken not to the King; but come you out with a present and make your a∣greement, that ye may eate under
your owne vines, and drink in your owne cisterns: but the people held their peace answering him not a word; for so the King commanded them: then came Eliakim and the rest that were sent out, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh: when the King heard it he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth, and went into the hose of the Lord; and he sent Eliakim and the Elders of the Priests covered with sack∣cloth unto Isaiah the Prophet the sonne of Amos. And they told him of the bla∣sphemy and threatening of Rabsha∣keh: and the Prophet answered them, Thus shall you say unto your Master: Thus saith the Lord, Be not afraid of the words wherewith Rabshakeh hath blasphemed me: Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall heare a rumour and returne to his owne land, and there he shall fall by the sword: and
the King of Assyria being gone from Lachish to fight with the King of Ethiopia: he sent messen∣gers to Hezekiah to say unto him, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jeru∣salem shall not be given into the hand of the King of Assyria, as well as other lands: and Hezekiah re∣ceived the Letter from the hand of the messengers, and after he had read it, he went into the house of the Lord and spread it before the Lord, and prayed unto him, saying, O Lord of hosts God of Israel that dwellest betweene the Cherubins, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast made heaven and earth: encline thine eare, O Lord, and heare; open thine eyes, O Lord, and see, and heare all the words of Senacherib which hath sent to re∣proach the living God. Now there∣fore, O Lord, our God, save us from his hand, that all the king∣domes
of the earth may know that thou art the Lord, even thou onely. Then Isaiah the sonne of Amos sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Where∣as he had prayed unto the Lord a∣gainst Senacherib, the Lord would neare him, and put a hooke in is nose, and a bridle in his lips and turne him backe by the way he came, and that he should not come into the city of Jerusalem, nor shoot an arrow there, nor cast a banke or trench against it; but would defend and preserve the city for his owne sake, and for his servant Davids sake: and the Angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians one hundred foure score and five thousand:Jer. 37. so Sena∣cherib King of Assyria departed and returned and dwelt at Niniveh: and after it came to passe as he was worshipping in the house of Nis∣roch his god, that Adramelech and Sharezar his sons smote him with the sword, and they escaped into
the land of Armenia, and Esarhad∣don his sonne reigned in his steed. And in those dayes was Heze∣kiah King of Israel sick unto the death,Isa. 38. and Isaiah the Prophet came unto him, and said, Thus saith the Lord, Set thine house in order for thou shalt die: then Hezekiah turned his face towards the wall & prayed unto the Lord, Saying, Remember now, O Lord, I doe beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart: and he wept exceedingly: then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, say∣ing, Goe, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, and have seene thy teares, Behold, I will adde unto thy dayes fifteene yeares, and I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the King of Assyria. And this shall be a signe unto thee from the Lord, I will bring a∣gaine the shadow of the degrees
which is gone downe in the Sunne∣dyall of Ahaz ten degrees back∣ward: and Hezekiah praised the Lord for his mercy, saying, The Lord was ready to save me, there∣fore will I sing my song to the stringed instruments all the daies of my life in the house of the Lord: and Isaiah gave order to apply unto him a lump of figs, and lay it as a plaster upon his boyle, which did heale him. About that time Merodach Bala∣danIsa. 39. the sonne of Baladan King of Babylon sent a letter and presents unto Hezekiah hearing he had been sicke: and the King was glad of their coming, and entertained them with great courtesie, and shewed them all his precious things; the silver, gold, spices, and the pre∣cious ointments; his armour, and all that could be seene in his house, or his dominions. Then came Isaiah the Prophet unto King Hezekiah and said unto
him, What said these men, and from whence came they? and He∣zekiah said, They came even from Babylon: then said he, What have they seene in thine house? and He∣zekiah answered, I have shewed them all in my treasures, and no∣thing have I hid from them: then said Isaiah unto him, Heare the word of the Lord of hosts, Behold, the dayes will come that all that is within thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store un∣till this day shall be carried to Ba∣bylon, nothing shall be left, saith the Lord: and of thy sonnes which shall issue from thee shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuches in the palace of the King of Baby∣lon. And according to this pro∣phesie, many yeares after it came to passe. Jeremiah living at that time when Nebuchadnezar came to be∣siege Jerusalem,Isa. 37. he told them what would befall: but the Princes were
wroth with him and put him in pri∣son: after he had beene there many dayes Zedekiah the King sent and tooke him out, and the King ask∣ed him secretly, Is there any word from the Lord? and Jeremiah said, There is: for thou shalt be deliver∣ed into the hand of the King of Ba∣bylon, therefore heare me, O my lord the king, let my sute come un∣to thee, that I may not returne to prison where I was, lest I dye there: then the King commanded he should be committed into another prison, and that he should have gi∣ven him daily a piece of bread out of the Bakers street, whiles the bread lasted: but still the Prophet persisted, and told them, Thus saith the Lord, This city shall surely be given into the hand of the King of Babylons army: therefore the Prin∣ces were incensed against him, and said unto the King, We beseech thee, let this man be put to death, for thus he weakeneth the hands of
the men of warre and all the people in this city in speaking thus unto them. And the King said, He is in your hands, doe with him what you please: and they tooke Jeremiah and cast him in a dungeon, and they let him downe by a rope, and in the dungeon was no water but myre that he sunke in: and some men complained of this cruelty done to Jeremiah unto the King, who commanded thirty men to goe and take up Jeremiah out of the dungeon: and they tooke old rags and cast them downe into the dun∣geon, the which Jeremiah put un∣der his arme pits, and so they drew him up: and Zedekiah the King sent for Jeremiah and said unto him, I will aske thee a thing, hide nothing from me: and Jeremiah said unto the King, If I declare it unto thee, wilt thou not put me to death? and if I give thee counsell wilt thou hearken to mee? so the
king sware secretly unto Jeremiah saying, as the Lord liveth that made us this soule, I will not put thee to death, nor give thee in∣to the hands of these men that seek thy life. Then he said unto the king,Jer. 38. 17. thus saith the Lord God of hosts the God of Israel, if thou wilt goe forth to the Princes of the king of Babylon, then thy soule shall live; and this city shall not be burnt with fire, and thou and thy house shall live. But if thou wilt not goe forth unto them, then shall this city be given to the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it, and thou shalt not escape out of their hands, and the king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jewes that are fallen to the Chaldeans, least they deliver me to their hands, and they mock me. But the Prophet said, they shall not deliver thee, obey I beseech thee the voice of the Lord, so shall it bee well with thee. But if thou re∣fuse
to goe forth, this is the word that the Lord hath shewed me. Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, let no man know of these words, and thou shalt not die; the which he did: so Jeremiah after, abode in the Court of the prison, untill the day that Ierusalem was taken. And it came to passe on the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Iudah, Nebuchadnezzer king of Babilon, and his army came before Ierusa∣lem and besieged it, and in the ele∣venth yeare of Zedekiah the city was taken, and all the Princes of the king of Babilon entered the city, at which time Zedekiah and all his men of warre fled out of the city by night, by the way of the kings gardens, but the ar∣my of the Chaldeans pursued af∣ter them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plaines of Iericho, and took him & brought him to Nebuchad∣nezzar king of Babilon, who gave judgement upon him, and caused
his sonnes to be slaine before his face, and all the Nobles of Judah, and he put out the eyes of Zede∣kiah, and bound him in chaines to carry him to Babilon, and they burnt Ierusalem, and brake down the walls thereof, and carried cap∣tive to Babilon all the remainder of the people that were within the ci∣ty, but left the poorer sort that had nothing, and gave them vineyards and fields; and the king of Babilon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to take him, and doe him no harm, but use him with all kindnesse, so they took Jeremiah out of the Court of the prison, and sent him home, so he dwelt among the peo∣ple.
MEDITATIONS upon the History of king Hezekiah. EVerlasting God, whilst we live here in this earthly Jerusalem, nothing is to be ex∣pected, but continu∣all conflicts in our spirituall warfare, between the world, the flesh, and the spirit; how bitterly O Lord, and vehemently doth the enemy of my soule, like Rabshekah, suggest in∣to me distrusts and feares, to make mee doubtfull of thy promises and provi∣dence, endeavouring to weaken my faith and confidence in thee, by putting great feares, doubts, and troubles, to my inward and fraile senses. In this affliction and trouble to my soule, O Lord I beseech thee from time to time to give me grace with good Hezekiah, to come unto thee with
my heart rent, and continually to im∣plore thy blessed help and assistance, and that I may obtain the like mercy that he did receive from thee, and let not that hellish blasphemer prevail over me, but put thou a hook in his nose, & a bridle in his lips, and send a blast upon him, that he may be driven away, and have no more power to disturb and op∣pres my weak & feeble soul, by his threat∣nings and suggestions; and good Lord, in all thy conflicts, batteries, and op∣pressions, that hereafter I may meet withall by this my spirituall and dan∣gerous enemy to my soule, give me grace most humbly to come unto thee my hope and helper, and to thy house where thou dwellest between the Cherubins; and there, as Hezekiah in his trouble and distresse, did spread out the letter of Ze∣nacherib before thee, and humbled him∣selfe before thee with much sorrow; so good Lord, in all my troubles, grant that I may spread before thee, with true and perfect humility of heart, the trou∣bles and afflictions of my soule; and
then O Lord heare me, and in pitty look upon my danger, and deliver me, from the power of the Zenacherib of this world, and his instruments, the di∣sturbers of my pilgrimage to my hea∣venly happinesse, and the quiet of a good conscience in this Jerusalem, strengthen (O Lord) my outward walls of flesh and blood, enable me with obedi∣ence and patience, quietly to beare the reproaches and threatnings of this my spirituall enemy, which in a kind of proportion, the Children of Israel did endure upon the walls of Ierusalem; de∣liver me from the danger of their deadly arrows O Lord, and grant they may not entrench about my soule to endanger it. And O Lord, as for thy servant Davids sake, thou diddest look favou∣rably upon Jerusalem, so I doe most humbly beseech thee for thy son Jesus Christ his sake to be mercifull unto me, to defend and keep me thy servant that putteth his trust in thee, from the danger of al my spiritual enemies, whensoever it shall please thee to visit me by the bed of
sicknesse, be thou then mercyfull unto me a sinner, O Lord, and with Heze∣kiah let me turn unto thee with true and perfect contrition of heart, and grant that then I may receive mercy and comfort from thee, thou God of mercy and compassion, and as thou sent'st thy Prophet Isaiah unto Heze∣kiah to comfort him in his sicknesse, and who administred unto him help both for soule and body, so be thou mer∣cifull unto me a sinner, and at the hour of distresse and danger, send unto mee thy servant, spirituall comforts, to as∣sist my feeble soule towards thee, and good Lord let the lengthening of my dayes here upon earth, and my health, be sanctified unto me, that thereby I may be strengthened to serve thee bet∣ter and more carefully, for thy goodnes and mercy; and let me know and conti∣nually consider, that the eternall life hereafter, is the only true happinesse, and let me so run my course here, O Lord, that at last I may attaine and come to that safe haven of felicity, the
only hope of my soules health, and the hope of all them that put their trust in thee. O Lord thou seest and knowest the great we aknesse and frailty of flesh and blood, and that without thy continuall help we cannot stand, but stil are subject to stumblings and falls by the traps of the old serpent and watchfull enemy, when it shall please thee O Lord to hear my prayer, and to deliver me thy ser∣vant from all those dangers and evils, as thou didst Hezekiah, and the which I have so humbly desired of thee. Let me not fall I doe most humbly be∣seech thee, into that great impiety and danger, to forget thy mercies, to grow proud and confident of my selfe, and of my wealth and power; and to expose my vanity to the Babilonian messengers and intelligencers, the enemies of my soule, But let me alwayes be watchfull over my selfe, to avoid the danger of all wicked suggestions, and still to hum∣ble my selfe before thee, and truly to know, and seriously consider, that all
things upon earth, beauty, wealth, or whatsoever else, that is most pleasing to our fond and unbridled fancy, are as but dung, even glistring and fading vanities; and so shall they servant O Lord, by avoiding these vani∣ties, continue in thy favour, and befreed from the bondage and yoake of Babilon, and all the just punishments of sin, and be safe within the walls of Jerusalem, and worship thee in thy ho∣ly Temple for ever.
MEDITATIONS Vpon the taking of Zede∣kiah, and the captivity of the children of Israel. O Lord, when we are capti∣ved unto sin, and drunk in our iniquities, how blind doe we run head∣strong to destruction? nei∣ther Zedekiah nor his Princes would follow the counsels of the Prophet Jere∣miah, for the king was besotted, and the Princes were infatuated in their understandings, & so destruction came upon them. O Lord make my soule to know the great danger of sin, and what effect it works, where presumption fears no danger, and hardnesse of heart, shuts the gates of mercy. Therefore O Lord remove from me thy servant this hard∣nesse of heart, and presumptuous sin∣ing against the least; I run by my cor∣ruption into this dangerous way of
blindnesse and wilfulnesse to perdition; make me capable and willing to receive good counsell, and to obey the instructi∣ons and directions of my spirituall guides, and not to follow my own dark obstinate mind and opinion, that will lead me by a back way, and a bad way towards Jericho, where my spirituall enemy will entrap, overthrow, and tri∣umph over me; then shall I be captive to a mercilesse enemy, and never see a∣gain the beauty of Jerusalem, but live in chaines and Babilonish blindnesse with Zedekiah. But open thou mine eyes O Lord, that I may see the myste∣ries of thy lawes, and obey them; then shall I behold the beauty of thy holinesse for ever.
THE WICKEDNESSE Of the sonnes of Eli, and the taking of the Ark of the Lord by the Philistines. THE sins of the sons of Eli was very great be∣fore the Lord,1 Sam. 2. 12. for by their bad carriage, men abhorred the of∣fering of the Lord, and they lay with the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation. Eli then being old, and hearing all that his sonnes had done in Israel, with too much mildnesse he said unto them, why doe you such things? I hear of your evill dealings by all the people, it is no good report I hear of you, my sonnes, ye make the Lords people to transgresse; but they hearkened not to the voice of their father, and
there came a man of God unto Eli, and told him of all the mereies that God had done unto his house, to sacrifice and wear an Ephod be∣fore him, telling him of his too much adhering to his sonnes, and threatned the judgement of God upon his house, and that Hophni and Phineas his two sonnes should dye both in one day, and that God would raise up another faithfull Priest to sacrifice before him, and that the remainder of Elies house should come and crouch to him for a morsell of bread, and shall say, put me I pray thee into one of the Priests offices, that I may eat a piece of bread. And the Lord said to Samuel the Prophet, I will doe a thing in Isra∣el, at which both the eares of every one that heareth it shall tingle, for what I shall doe against Eli; when I begin I will also make an end, for his iniquity which he knoweth, be∣cause his sonnes were wicked, and
he restreined them not; Samuel fea∣red to shew Eli that vision, but Eli called Samuel and said, my sonne what is the thing that the Lord hath said unto thee. I pray thee hide it not from me, and Samuel told him every whit, hiding nothing from him. Now the Israelites went out a∣gainst the Philistines to battell, and pitched by Eben-ezer, and the Phi∣listines met them, and they joyned in battell, and Israel was smitten, and 4000 of them was slain. And the Elders of Israel coming into the Camp, they said, let us fetch the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that when it cometh among us, it may save us out of the hands of our enemies; so the people sent to Shi∣loh to bring from thence the Ark of the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth between the Cherubins, and the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni, and Phi∣neas, were there with the Ark of
God, and when it was brought un∣to the Camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang againe. When the Philistines heard thereof, and that the Ark was come into the Camp, they were a∣fraid, saying, God is come into the Camp of Israel, and woe unto us, who shall deliver us from this mighty God, this is the God that smote the Aegyptians with all the plagues, but they neverthelesse en∣couraged one another to quit them∣selves like men, that they might not be servants to the Hebrewes, and after fighting with Israel, they overthrew them, and they fled e∣very man to his own tent, and there fell of Israel that day thirty thou∣sand, and the Ark of God was ta∣ken, and the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni, and Phineas, were slain; and there ran a man of Benjamin out of the Army, and came to Shilo the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head; and when
he came, Eli sate upon a seat by the way side watching, for his heart trembled for the Ark of God, and when it was told unto the city, they all cryed out, and the man came to Eli, telling him hee came out of the Army; then said Eli, what is done there my sonne? the messenger answered, Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there hath been a great slaughter; thy two sonnes Hophni and Phineas are dead, and the Ark of God is taken; and when Eli heard mention of the Ark of God, he fell backward from his seat by the side of the gate, and brake his neck and died, he was then 98 yeares old and blind, and heavy of body, and he had judged Israel forty yeares; and his daugh∣ter in law the wife of Phineas being with child, and near her time, hea∣ring the Ark of God was taken, fell into travaile, and being delivered of a sonne a little before her death, they would have comforted her
herewith, but she did not regard it; but she named the child Jehabod saying, the glory is departed from Israel, for the Ark of God is ta∣ken. And the Philistines took the Ark of God and brought it to Ash∣dod, and set it in the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon, and when they came in the morning into the house, they found Dagon fallen up∣pon his face to the earth, before the Ark of the Lord, and they set him up in his place again, & coming the next morning early, Dagon was fal∣len upon his face againe to the ground before the Arke of the Lord, and was broken upon the threshold, onely the stumpe of Da∣gon was left, for which the Priests of Dagon, nor the people ever after did tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod; but the hand of the Lord was heavy upon them of Ash∣dod, and all the coastes thereabout, and they were destroyed and smote
with Emrods, and when they saw the judgement upon them, they said the Ark of the God Israel shall not abide with us, for his hand is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our God, and they assembled them∣selves together, and concluded to carry the Ark of the Lord unto Gath, and they carried it about thi∣ther, and that city was likewise smitten with the hand of God, with a great destruction, and they had Emrods in their secret parts; therefore they sent the Ark of God to Ekron, and they cryed out say∣ing, you have brought the Ark of the God of Israel to us to destroy us and our people, and all the Lords & people of the Philistines gathered together, & said, send away the Ark of the God of Israel, and let it goe again to his own place, that we be not utterly destoyed, for there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city, and the men that died not, were smitten with Emrods, and the
cry of the city went up to heaven, and the Ark of the Lord was with the Philistines 7 months, and they called their Priests and Divines together, to conclude how they should send the Ark away, and they said, send it not empty, but in any wise return unto the God of Israel a trespasse offering, then yee shall be healed; then said they what shall be the trespasse offering wch we shall return to him? they answered, five golden Emrods, and five golden mice, according to the number of the Philistine Lords, for one plague was on you all, and on your Lords, and you shall make Images of your Emrods, and Images of the mice that hurt the land, and give glory unto the God of Israel, to take his hand off you, your Gods and your land, and doe not you harden your hearts, as the Aegyptians and Pha∣raoh hardened their hearts when he wrought wonderfully among them did they not let the people goe, and
they departed? Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke, tye the kine to the cart, and bring the claves home from them, and take the Ark of the Lord and lay it upon the cart, and put the jewels of gold which ye return for a trespasse offering in a coffer, and tye, by the side thereof, and send it away; and see if it goe by the way of his own coaste to Bethshemesh, if so, then he hath done us the great evill. But if not, and that it goe a∣nother way, we will take it as a chance that happened to us; and they did do what was commanded them, and laid the Ark upon the cart, and the coffer, with the Jewels; and the kine took the streight way of Bethshemesh, and went lowing along the high way, and turned not aside; & the Lords of the Philistines went after them; and they of Beth∣shemesh were reaping their wheat, and seeing the Ark they rejoyced
to see it, and the cart came into the field of Joshuah, a Bethshemite, and stood there where there was a great stone, and they clave the wood of the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the Lord, and the Levites took downe the Ark of the Lord, and the coffer, with the Jewels, and put them on a great stone, and the men of Beth∣shemesh offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed the same day unto the Lord. And when the Lords of the Phi∣listines had seen those things, they returned to Ekron, and the stone whereon they set the Ark, is called the great stone of Abell which is in the field of Joshuah the Bethshemite, and the Lord smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into the Ark of the Lord, even fifty thousand men, and the people lamented, and they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kiriath-jearim to fetch up the Ark
unto them, and they came and fetched the Ark of the Lord unto them, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hil, and sanctifi∣ed Eleazer his sonne to keep the Ark of the Lord, and there it con∣tinued twenty yeares, and all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord. And long after twenty yeares,2. Sam. 6. David gathered all the chosen men of Israel, and went with them, from Baal of Judah to bring up the Ark of the Lord of hosts that dwelleth between the Cherubins, and they set the Ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab, and Uzzah, and Ahio the sonnes of Abinadab drove the cart, and Ahio went be∣fore the Ark, and David and all the house of Israel played before the Lord on all manner of instruments made of firre wood, on Harps, and Psalters, Timbrels, Cornets, and Cimbals, and when they came to
Nachons threshing floore, Uzzah put forth his hand to the Ark of God and took hold of it, for the Oxen shook it; and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and God smote him there for his error, and he died by the Ark of God, and David was afraid of the Lord, upon the death of Uzzah, and would not remove the Ark of the Lord unto the city of David, but carried it into the house of Obed-E∣dom the Gittite, where it continued three months, and the Lord blessed Obed, and all his houshold; and when David understood how God had blessed them, because of the Ark of God, David went and brought the Ark of the Lord from thence unto the city of David with much gladnesse; and after, they that bare the Ark had gone six paces, he sacrificed Oxen and fatlings to the Lord, and David danced before the Lord, and was girded with a lin∣nen Ephod; and so it was brought
by David and all the hoste of Israel, with shoutings, and with the sound of Trumpet, into the city of David; but Michall, Sauls daughter, loo∣ked through a window, and seeing king David leaping and dancing before the Ark, shee despised him, and they brought the Ark of the Lord, and set in the ta∣bernacle that David had made for it, and then David offered burnt of∣ferings and peace offerings to the Lord, and blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts; and he gave to every man and woman of all Israel, bread, flesh, and wine; and so they departed every one to their house. And David returning to blesse his house, Michall the daughter of Saul came out to meet him, & said, how glorious was the king of Israel this day, who uncovered himself in the eys of the hand-maids of his ser∣vants, as one of the vain fellowes, shamelesly uncovereth himself▪ and
David said unto Michall, it was be∣fore the Lord which chose me be∣fore thy father, and before all his house, to appoint me Ruler over the people of Israel, therefore will I play before the Lord, and I will be yet more vile then thus, and will be base in my own sight; and of the maid-servants which thou hast spo∣ken of, of them shall I be had in ho∣nour: therefore had Michall the daughter of Saul no children, untill the day of her death.
MEDITATIONS Vpon the Arke of the holy Covenant. O Omnipotent God give un∣to me thy servant a vene∣rable regard unto thine ordinances, and to wor∣ship thee as I ought to do, and not to encline to an unreverent ser∣ving of thee, and selfe-conceit; but let zeale possesse my soule, and humble de∣votion dwell in my heart; deliver me O Lord from the danger of these had and evill times, for thine altars are prophaned, and thy worship in thy holy places are wholy neglected, and the glo∣ry seems to be departed out of this our Israel; let me look back O Lord to the times of old, how thy servants the children of Israel did worship to∣wards thy holy temple, and the Ark of thy holy Covenant, placed between the Cherubins; and how thou wast pleased
therewith; what blessings O Lord from time to time did goe along with this Ark of thy Covenant, and what punish∣ments did fall upon them that did pro∣phane it? O Lord give me humblenesse of heart to desire an humble knowledge of thee, and not to be busie in prying into thy secrets, to look into the Ark of thy Covenant, least I be destroyed with them of Bethshemesh, neither let me di∣strust thy power O Lord, or intermedle with holy things, but keep the right and lowly rule that thou hast comman∣ded; so shall I avoid and escape the pu∣nishment of Uzzah, the sad experience of evill, which curiosity and intrusion into Gods secrets and other mens cal∣lings, ever brought unto the consci∣ence. Lord let me stand with perfect hu∣mility afarre off with the Publican, and humbly without the bounds of the San∣ctuary with thy people of Israel, in their worship towards thee, and not proudly to presume to come into the Sanctum Sanctorum, the holy of holyes, but
venerably to worship towards it with lowlinesse of heart; keep thy servant O Lord from the dangerous disease of these times, let me not be wise in my own conceit, nor busie, and opinionated of my own Iudgement, to disturb Church and State, and to seare my own conscience, but give me grace to be humble and meek; and as the children of Israel did obey Moses by keeping without the limits of mount Sinai, and must not touch the border of it whiles the law was delivered; so keep me, O Lord, farre from presumption, that nei∣ther eye nor hand out-compasse them∣selves to my destruction; and this was by a most strict charge from thee O God, and that only Moses and Aaron should come before thee upon the mount, with great punishments threatned unto the breaker of this command. By this restraint, let thy servant tremble at thy Iudgements, and feare with the chil∣dren of Israel in the conservation of my spirit, and obey thee with humility from the very bottome of my heart, as the
Israelites did at the bottome of mount Sinai, and let me not O Lord follow the dangerous example of them, that with so much presumption goe about to break the rules which thou hast commanded, presuming to step before them whom thou hast appointed to be their guides, to break with pride of spirit within the borders of mount Sinai, contrary to thy commands; good Lord let me leave my Iudgement in points of faith, to the Priests that thou hast appointed to come into the inner Temple of thy holi∣nesse, where they doe receive the holy oracles of truth from thee to deliver unto us, that doe humbly wait in the place and state which thou hast ordai∣ned. For this boundlesse and unruly pride, and groundlesse selfe-conceit, as it brought the Angels from heaven, so O Lord from time to time it hath di∣sturbed the world, and thy holy Church, filling it full of hereticks and blasphe∣mers, who have been the fire-brands of thy wrath, as plagues and punishments for the sins of the world; preserve me
therefore O Lord from this so dange∣rous a rock, and let me not follow my own will and fancie, and keep thy ser∣vant from rash and heady resolutions, and not be too confident of my own opi∣nion, for what am I O Lord, to build a Church to my own weak imagination, to rend my selfe from the Elders and Congregation of Israel, to go a gadding after my own inventions, and to fall into the traps of innovations, and the private opinions of these bad and dan∣gerous times, the Seminaries and seed∣plots of sedition and tumults, the ruine of Church and Common-wealth, of all order, government, charity, and bro∣therly love. But let me keep O Lord that safe rule to walk in, even the plain path of thy Church, which thou hast appointed both in the old, and the new law. For O Lord, the Church, the Ark of thy Covenant, was alwayes eminently to be seen and known to the Israelites in all their journies, from Egypt to Jeru∣salem, and towards it they did worship,
so after thy marvellous deliverances of them over the red Sea, and the deserts of this world; this Ark was placed in thy holy Temple at Jerusalem, where all the Tribes of Israel came up to wor∣ship; and towards which holy of holies, they did worship, wheresoever they were dispersed; and in their captivities: and the sacrifices there was more acceptable to thee, then the Adorations that were at Bethel framed by Ieroboam, that made Israel to sinne, by a worship of his own invention; for vain glory, the true type of heresie and innovations. By this O Lord, let thy servant to see that there was alwayes a knowne and certain way of worship, and a visible Church to thy children of Israel, even in the middle of the red Sea, and Jor∣dan of danger and drowning, being pursued by the Egypt of this world, and still from time to time, this people of thine, and in thy Church, there were guides and governours for them to fol∣low, to preserve them from by-paths, and in the right rule of thy Church,
and saving truth, which Church and worship was hid from the Gentiles for their great abominations, and by thy se∣cret judgements; yet out of thy great and wonderfull mercy to mankind, ac∣cording to thy promise, and prophe∣sies, a Messias did come to redeeme the Gentiles, and to bring them unto thee, and that great mercy of his Re∣demption, which wonderfull mercy was by my blessed Redeemer and Saviour Iesus Christ, the long hoped for Messi∣as, descended from the roote of Jesse the great deliverer of the Gentiles, from the thraldome and bondage of sinne, whom no creature could redeeme, but that immaculate lamb the sonne of God, descended from that blessed root, of whom all the Prophets have so much prophesied; and above all, the Prophet Esaiah of the calling of the Gentiles, and the great visibility of the Church, that should be at his coming, for all the world to see and follow; and by which they should learn to leave all blind cor∣ners, and crooked by-paths of igno∣rance
and wilfulnesse, and all good and humble soules thither to repaire both Jewes and Gentiles, even to this Church, placed upon an open mountain, that every one might see the light thereof, thither repaire for the com∣fort and care of their soules; for there are the true Physitians, and the whole∣some balsames, to cure the festred sores of sin, and there is safety for the hum∣ble of heart, and there is ever light pre∣pared for them. Thus with humility of heart, ascend up into that mountain of the Lord, and Thus O Lord by thy incomprehensible mercy, thou hast given us a way to fol∣low, confirmed to us and the truth thereof, by the great example of thy servants in the primitive Church; the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and Virgins, and other thy Saints, by their great sufferings and persecutions in the spirituall progresse of this world, before the Ark thy Church could come to rest, from that deluge and troublesome waters of afflictions.
In all their sufferings and persecuti∣ons, following the Example of their Pilot and Redeemer, being humble and meek, and obedient to their temporall Lords, and giving unto Caesar, that was Caesars, onely their faith and a good conscience, they preserved unspot∣ted before thee O Lord, desiring rather to submit their lives, then hold up their hands, and prayed for their persecutors, rather then they would shed the blood of any man, that had the least stamp of Gods Image upon him. Let me not therefore O Lord spurne against authority, nor laugh at devoti∣on, as Michall that proud Dame did scoffe at David for dancing before the Ark, nor think it superstition to follow thy holy Ark seven times about Jeri∣cho, if it be commanded by Scripture, or men of divine authority have so de∣termined, for there is a blessing goes along with this Ark of thy Covenant, and happines is a reward to the humble and devout soule, that attendeth with∣out reluctation upon thy ordinances,
and the discipliue of thee O God, whiles this Ark of truth stood with Da∣gon, that Idoll fell down and was bro∣ssen, for truth and falshood cannot stand together; let the soule of thy fer∣vant know this (O Lord) and let mee not think to serve thee but with a sin∣gle, sincere, and an humble heart, and not to mix it with my own foolish fan∣cy, but to serve thee by that rule as thou hast appointed; and good Lord let the Dagon of sinfulnesse that is raised up in my corrupt heart, fall downe and be broken in peices, and place in steed thereof thy holy Covenant and truth; Lord cleanse and purge me, and make me worthy to receive the Arke of thy Covenant, thy saving truth, and holy spirit; that by my corruptions and wick∣ednesse of life, it may not he with mee, as it was with them of Ashdod, and Ekron, whiles the Arke was amongst them; to bring punishments and plagues upon me, for my iniquity and prophanesse, and inordination. But sanctifie my soule O Lord, and give the
blessing unto me, that thou diddest give unto Abinadab and Obed-E∣dom, with whom the Ark did rest; and make me a happy vessell to receive thy holy spirit, and then will all things be happinesses and blessings unto me, both in this life, and in the life to come. O Lord, though Eli and his sonnes did unrighteously before thee, to the bad example of the Israelites, yet let not the bad example that I may see by some bad members in thy Church, make me to stumble in my way, but still to follow the Ark of thy Covenant, and mourn after it as the children of Israel did mourn and rejoyce in the prosperity of thy Church, when there shall be any joyfull remembrance of any kinde of mercy or deliverance. O Lord, bring me thy servant into the sanctuary of thy saving grace, and thy holy Ark the Church, in safety unto the city of David, in despight of all mocking Michals, that all the world may praise thee for all thy mercies, as David did magnifie thy mercy in the
presence of all the congregation, with a kind of spirituall joy, beyond the li∣mits of all humane conceit, or the capa∣city of a proud Naturalist, and place it there O Lord, in the Tabernacle of peace and quietnesse, that all the world may see thy mercy, and know the way to their salvation, leaving all blind by∣paths, and distracted wayes that tend, and bend to destruction. For thou O Lord hast shewed us a way, and left us unexcusable if wee follow it not, without unsound and deceitfull reasoning; and our destru∣ction is of our selves. But let all praise and glory be given to thee O Lord for thy goodnesse and truth, Thou O Lord art the way, the truth, and the life. Lord lead us all by that way which thou hast shewn, unto that truth which hath promised that life, then shall all doubtfull errors be removed from our soules, and we shall live in that Ark, where is the light and glory of thy pre∣sence for ever. FINIS.
