K708 12863250 94703
AN EXPOSITION OF THE Eleventh Chapter OF THE REVELATION. WHEREIN All those Things therein Reveal∣ed, which must shortly come to pass, are EXPLAINED. By Hanserd Knollys, a Servant of Jesus Christ. Luk. 8.10.—To you it is given to know the Mysteries of the King∣dom of God, but to others in Parables. Printed, Anno Domini, 1679.
An Epistle to the READER. Ingenuous Reader, MY Intention in the Exposition of this Chapter is, to Explain those things therein Revealed, which are not Fulfilled; but must shortly come to pass. This Book of the Revelation in the Prophetical part thereof doth contain in it three principal Visions, viz. First, the Vision of the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.12. Secondly, The Vision of the seven Seals; Rev. 5.1. seven Trumpets, Rev. 8.2. and seven Vials, Rev. 15.1.7. & 21.
9. Thirdly, The Vision of the new-Hea∣vens, and new-Earth, and the new-Jerusa∣lem; Rev. 21.1, 2. This Chapter be∣longs unto the second principal Vision, to wit, the seven Trumpets, and it containes the chief Effect of the sixth Trumpet, and the second WOE to the end of the 14. verse: And al∣so the fulfilling of those Prophesies of the Da∣vidical and Monarchical KINGDOM of our LORD Jesus Christ here on Earth, (which God hath spoken by the Mouth of all his holy Prophets since the World be∣gan.) When the seventh Angel shall begin to sound the third WOE Trumpet, Rev. 10.7. and the 15. verse of this Chapter, and some Effects thereof, verse 16. to the End. The Reason why I speak so briefly touching the BEAST in the Exposition of the se∣venth verse of this Chapter, is because I in∣tend (God assisting me) to treat more large∣ly thereof in my Exposition of the Seventeenth Chapter, vers. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. which verses contain the Description of this BEAST, and
the Revelation of the Mystery thereof; (as in its proper Place to be Expounded) and there I shall open the Mystery of Iniquity of that Man of Sin, 2 Thes. 2.3.7. the POPE of Rome, &c. I do humbly Counsel thee (friendly Rea∣der) to Consider, that this Prophecie is deli∣vered after the Manner of other Prophesies, wherein several things are spoken in the words and language of the Prophets, and accord∣ing to the Custom of the Jews, For that an∣cient People, their State, Sufferings, and Ce∣remonies; their Temple, Worship, and Ordi∣nances; their Kings, Priests, and Prophets were in many things Typical, and in some particulars lively Types of Christ, and his King∣dom. Again I intreat the Judicious Reader, to observe the Allusions of the Spirit, touch∣ing the Temple, Altar, City, Tabernacle, &c. and whereunto the Allusion is made, by its apt Resemblance unto some other thing, agree∣ing in some sort together, and yet not the same thing but alluding unto it. Lastly, I earn∣estly
desire the Reader diligently to search in∣to the Times of the forty two Months, the 1260. Daies, and the three daies and an half here mentioned, verse. 2.3.9.11. by com∣paring the most authentick Histories with the Prophesies of this Book, whereby the judicious Reader may probably know how many of these Prophetical Months, and Daies are past, and so come to understand how near the finishing Time of the Testimony of the two Prophetical Witnesses is, which must shortly come to pass, and be fulfilled. To conclude, If this Treatise shall come to the hands of the Learned, and they not dis∣dain to Read it, I do most humbly beseech some of them, to whom God hath given a greater Measure of Wisdom, Knowledge, and understanding, that they would be pro∣voked hereby, to communicate the same pub∣lickly for the Glory of God, and the Benefit of his Church, and People; unto whose Judg∣ment I do submit this little Treatise, to Censure it, as their Learning, Piety, and Wisdom
shall dispose them. Now earnestly begging the fervent and constant prayers of all, that shall Read the same, I subscribe myself, The most unworthy of all the Servants of Christ, Han. Knollys.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE Eleventh Chapter OF THE REVELATION. THis Book of the Revelation containeth the last part of God's Revealed Will, which HE gave unto our LORD Jesus Christ, who com∣manded his Servant John to write it, and to send it unto the Seven Churches in Asia.Rev. 1.11. In this eleventh Chapter from the first verse, to the the End of the 14. verse, is revealed the State and Con∣dition of the Church and Ministers of Christ during the Time of their Prophesying, expressed prophetically vers. 3. to be 1260. Daies,Rev. 10, 11. & Rev. 11.3. And from the beginning of the 15. verse, to the End of this Chapter is Revealed the State of Christ's Kingdom, and two notable Effects there∣of under the Sounding of the Seventh Trumpet.
Vers. i. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein. In this verse is contained, first, Johns Preparation unto his work appointed him by Christ, And there was given me a Reed like unto a Rod: secondly, Johns Commission for the Work, which he was commanded to do; And the Angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship there∣in. The Reed like unto a Rod wherewith the Servants of Christ, his Ministers, ought to Measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein, is the written word of God, the holy Scriptures of Truth. So God commanded his Servant Moses and the Children of Israel, Exod. 25.8.9. And let them make me a San∣ctuary—After the Patern of the Tabernacle—even so shall ye make it. And Heb. 8.5. See (saith God) that thou make all things according unto the Patern shewed unto thee in the Mount. And this Revelation of Measuring the Temple of God under the Administration of the Gos∣pel in the latter Daies, which Jesus Christ shewed by his Angel in a Vision unto his Servant John, beareth some Al∣lusion to that Vision, which the Prophet Ezekiel had of Measuring the City and Temple of God. Ezek. 40.1-6. In the Visions of God brought he me into the Land of Israel, and set me upon a very high Mountain,—and there was a man with a line of flax in his hand, and a Measuring Reed—of six cubits long, by the Cubit, and an hand breadth, so he measured the breadth of the Building one Reed, and the hight one Reed. Vers. 4. And the Man said unto me, Son of Man, behold with thine Eyes, and hear with thine Ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew thee—declare all that thou seest to the House of Israel, Ezek. 41.1-5. Afterward
he brought me to the Temple, vers. 4.—So he measured the length thereof twenty Cubits, and the Breadth twenty Cubits before the Temple. And he said unto me, This is the most holy Place. Now as God had shewed and in∣structed MosesExod. 25.8.9. 2 Chron. 3.1.3, 4.17. Ezek. 43.10, 11.13.15.16. and the Prophets, how the Taberna∣cle, and the first and the second Temple should be builded, and all things to be done about his Worship and Ordinan∣ces by his holy word, which he spake unto them. Ezek. 43.10, 11.13.15.16. So Jesus Christ Revealed to his Servant John all things, that must shortly come to pass, and be done about the Temple of God, the Altar, and them that Worship, which are to be measured by the Reed of the written Word of God. Rise, and measure the Temple of God. By the Temple of God here we are to understand the House of God, 1 Tim. 3.14, 15. which is the Church of the living God, called the Temple of God under the Ad∣ministration of the Gospel, Eph. 2.21, 22. which was to be Rebuilded after the Apostles daies, As was Prophesi∣ed, Amos. 9.11. of the Gentile Churches under the Gospel, Acts 15.14, 15, 16, 17. God at first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of the Gentiles a People for his Name. And to this agree the words of the Prophets,—After this I will Return, and will build again the Taber∣nacle of David, which is fallen down,—And I will set it up: That the Residue of Men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my Name is cal∣led, saith Jehovah, who doth all these things. And the Altar, and them that worship therein. By the Altar here is meant the whole worship of God, and all his holy Ordinances instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles, which ought to be measured al∣so by the same Reed of the written word of GodPhil. 3.16. Gal. 6.15, 16. 1 Cor. 11.1, 2.23. I Praise you, Brethren,—that ye
keep the Ordinances, as I delivered them to you. The Gol∣den Altar was a Type of Christ, Exod. 40.26, 27. com∣pared with Rev. 8.3. And he put the golden Altar in the Tent of the Congregation before the vail; And he burnt Incense thereon, as the Lord commanded Moses. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer, and there was given unto him much In∣cense, that he should offer it with the Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the Throne.Math. 23.19. This Altar Sanctifieth the Gift. The Altar of burnt of∣frings, and daily Sacrifices, which stood in the open Court of the Tabernacle of the Temple called the Bra∣zen Altar, typed forth the worship and Ordinances of God under the Gospel, 2 Chron. 1.6. & Heb. 13.10.Psal. 26.6. and 43.4. Then will I go to the Altar of God, that is, I will wor∣ship God, and offer to him the Sacrifice of Praise, I will praise thee, O God, my God. And them that worship therein. The Worshippers of God in his Churches of Saints ought to be Measured by the Reed of God's written Word, as well as the Temple, and the Altar of God: that thereby it may appear, they are the true worship∣pers of God in his House, and worship him in Spirit and truth, John 4.23, 24. For the father seeketh such to worship him. 1. Meditation.That the Ministers of Jesus Christ (who are the Build∣ers1 Cor. 3.9, 10, 11, 16. of God's gospel Temple) ought to Measure the PaternEzek. 43.10, 11. of the Churches, Worship, and Worshippers of God in the Daies of Christ and his Appostles, and to See that the Churches, Worship, and Worshippers of God now in these latter Daies be in all things, as they were then, and to Reform those things, that are amiss.Tit. 1.5. & 1 Cor. 11.34.14.40. Col. 2.5. The rest will I set in Order, when I come. Let all things be done decently and in Order. Joying and beholding your Order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ. All things in the Church and Worship of God ought to
be done according to the Rule of the written Word of God, Phil. 3.16. Let us walk by the same Rule. There is but one Rule for all the Churches, worship, and Worship∣pers of God to be framed, measured, and Ordered by, And the Ministers of Christ now ought to measure, frame, and order all things in the Churches and worship of God by the same Rule. Isa. 8.20. Heb. 8.5. & Ephes. 2.19-22. First, The Ministers of Christ ought to take care, and Inspection of the Church of God, and to See (for they are called Seers, and over-Seers, Acts 20.28.) that the Church be builded upon the Foundation Doctrines and Faith of the Apostles and Prophets,Heb. 6.1.2. Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone, Eph. 2.19 20, 21, 22. In whom all the building fitly framed together, (and compa∣cted) groweth unto an holy Temple in the Lord, &c. Secondly, They are to take Care, that the PillarsGal. 2.9. Jer. 3.14, 15. Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13. in God's house, his Gospel Temple (which is the Church of the living God, 1 Tim. 3.14, 15. the Pillar and ground of Truth,) be not only Trees of Righteousness the plant∣ing of the Lord, that he may be glorified, Isa. 61.4. but that they also be able Ministers of the new Testament, both of the letter, and also of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. The Bi∣shops, [] in every Church (called Stars and Angels of the Churches, Rev. 1.20.) And the Pa∣stors and Teachers in every Church (called Presbyters, that is, the Elders,) that Rule well, 1 Tim. 5.17. ought to be Learned and holy Men, taught of God by his ho∣ly Spirit, qualified with Spiritual and Ministerial Gifts and Graces, to wit, Knowledge, Wisdom, Meekness, and a blameless Conversation, 2 Tim. 3.1-8. & Tit. 1.5.7. Thirdly, They ought to take Care, or heed, That the whole worship of God, and all the Sacred Ordinances of the Lord be Administred according to the Gospel In∣stitutions, Commandments, and Examples of Christ, and his holy Apostles; and not after the Rudiments of
the world, nor after the Commandments of Men,Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.8.19.23. John 4.23, 24. Mat. 28.19, 20. and their Doctrines. Fourthly, They ought to Inspect them that Worship, and to take Care before persons be Admitted into the visible Churches of Saints, to partake of all the Sacred Ordinances of God, that they may be sound in the saith, an holy in their life,Act. 19.18. Act. 9.26, 27.28. And after they be added to the Church the Ministers ought to Oversee them, that they do not walk disorderly, to the dishonour of God, and scandal of the Church; that the Ministry be not bla∣med, nor the Weak Brethren Stumbled or Offended, and the way of God reproached,2 Thes. 3.6.15. Tit. 3.10, 11. 2 Cor. 6.3. & 10.32. Rom. 14.13. & 21. vers. And therefore I do humbly beseech the wise Master-builders, and all Christs gospel Ministers to take this Reed of God's holy Word, and Measure the Churches, the Worship of God, and the Worshippers of God in his gospel Tem∣ple; and to use their Spiritual Wisdom, and ministeri∣al—Power, and utmost Endeavours to Reform and Amend, what they shall see amiss and set in Order1 Cor. 11.34. and 14.40. Col. 2.5. & 4.17. Tit. 1.5. 1 Tim. 19, 20, 21, 22. things that are wanting, that God may be Glorified, his Churches of Saints Edified, and Sinners Conver∣ted. Verse ii. But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two months. In this Verse is contained, 1. John's Prohibition, he might not Measure the outward Court of the Tem∣ple; 2. the Reason, why he was prohibited, For it is given to the Gentiles; 3. a Prophecy, adjoyned to the Rea∣son of John's Prohibition, And the Holy City shall they (viz. the Gentiles) tread under Foot forty two Months.
First, John's Prohibition: But the Court which is with∣out the Temple, Leave out, and measure it not. Selo∣mons Temple (unto which Christ here Alludeth) had three Courts, the first whereof was called the outwardEzek. 42.14.17. & 44.19.46.20. 2 Chron. 23.5, 6. and Ezek. 40, 17.42.14. Court, where all the People worshipped, Luk. 1.10. The second was called the inner Court,Ezek. 8.16. And he brought me into the inner Court of the Lords house, &c. where the Priests burnt Incense upon the Altar before the Lord,Luk. 1.9.10. when they went into the Temple of the Lord. The third was the inmost Court called, the holy of holies, the most holy place or House of God2 Chron. 3.8.10. Heb. 9.3.7.11, 12. where the High-Priest went in alone once every year, not without Blood, &c. He being a Type of Jesus Christ. And there was a Wall of Separation between the Sanctuary and the Profane-Place, where the Publicans Heathens, even all sorts of profane People, were permit∣ted to come to see, and hear, This Court without the Tabernacle, Sanctuary, and Temple was measured also,Ezek. 42.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Ezek. 42.15-20. 500. Cubits long, and 500. Cu∣bits broad to make a Separation between the Sanctuary and the Profane-Place, or Court without. By the Court which is without the Temple (in this verse) we may not understand any Material Court, or external Place of Separation; For this is but an Allusi∣on unto that Court without Solomons Temple. And the Temple here which was to be measured being Mysti∣cal, and figured forth by that of Solomon's, this Court which was without the Temple must be understood My∣stically, to wit, The Papal-Gentiles, of whom it is here Prophesied, That they shall tread the holy City under their Feet forty and two Months. This Court must be left out (or cast out) and must not be measured, but separated from the Sanctuary or Temple, which is the Church of God.2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Secondly, The Reason of John's Prohibition followeth, viz. For it is given to the Gentiles. By these Gentiles we are to understand false Christians, Namely, Atheists, Papists, and all profane and ungodly Persons, the unbe∣lieving
Jews also, and the unconverted Gentiles like∣wise: especially, the Papal-Gentiles by whom the holy City Jerusalem (that now is) the Churches of Saints (that now are) are troden under foot, as our blessed Sa∣viour fore-told his Disciples Luk. 21.24, 25, 26, 27. And Jerusalem shall be troden down of the Gentiles [the Papists] untill the Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Therefore the Angel said unto John, Leave it out, and measure it not. Thirdly, The Prophecy adjoyned to the Reason of John's Prohibition. And the holy City shall they [the Papal-Gentiles] tread under foot forty two Months. By the holy City here is ment Mystical-Jerusalem. As the great City of the Roman-Church is called Mysterie, Babylon the great, the Scarlet WhoreRev. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. So the holy City of God, his true Church is called Mystically, Zion, and Jerusalem, that now is, and is in Bondage with her Children,Gal. 4.24, 25. whilst the holy City is troden under foot of the Gentiles, that is to say, Persecuted, imprisoned, confiscated, banished, and killed by the Popes, Poten∣tates, Emperours, Kings, and Princes of the Gentiles, who have given their Kingdom, power, and Strength to the Beast,Zech. 1.19, 20, 21. Rev. 17.13.17. and do exercise Dominion over the Chur∣ches, and the People of God, who are the Woman in the Wilderness, and her Seed, who have the Command∣ments of God, and the Testimony of Jesus.Rev. 12.6.14.17. The Time here numbred, That the holy City [the Church and Saints of God] shall be troden under foot by the Horns of the Gentiles, that is, Persecuted and Killed by the Kings of the Earth,Rev. 13.17. who have given their Kingdom, Power, and Strength to the Beast of the seventh, and eighth Head, the Pope of Rome, &c. I say the Time is forty two prophetical Months, which compu∣ting thirty prophetical Daies to a Month, are 1260 years. (a day for a year, and each day for a year, as Numb. 14.34. and Ezek. 4.6.) So long the two Witnesses of Christ Prophesie in Sackcloth, Rev. 11.3. So long the woman shall be fed and preserved in the Wilderness,
Rev. 12.6.14.17. And so long the Beast that Ascend∣eth out of the bottomless-Pit,Rev. 11.7. who shall kill the Wit∣nesses, and that did Rise out of the Sea, and out of the Earth, shall Continue.Rev. 13.1.5. And Power was given unto him, to Continue forty and two Months. All these four Prophesies are Contemporay, for they all begin and end at one and the Same Time: whereof we shall say more in the Exposition of the third Verse of this Chapter. The Visible Churches of Christ and his Saints have been Persecuted, oppressed,2. Meditation. and Killed by the Roman-Papal Gentiles, the Popes and Kings of the Earth a long time past, and shall be so for some Time yet to come, even until the End of those forty two Months. Ecclesiastical Histories do abundantly testifie the Truth hereof for several Ages past: especially Eusebius. And the Prophesies touching these Persecutions in this Book of the Revelation do testi∣fie the Truth hereof for some Time, yet to comeRev. 11.3-7.14.12.6.14.16.13.7. and 17.6.17. viz. Until the two Witnesses be Killed, and the second WOE be past, these forty two Months ended, and the Seventh Angel begin to SoundRev. 10.5, 6, 7.11.7.14, 15, 16, 17.. Verse iii. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesie a thousand two hundred and threescore daies, clothed in sackcloth. In this Verse we are to Consider first, who these two Witnesses are; secondly, what Power Christ gives his Witnesses; thirdly, what their Gift of Prophesie is; fourthly, what Time we are to understand by these 1260 daies; and fifthly, what is meant by their being Clothed in Sackcloth. First, These two Witnesses are described Metaphori∣cally verse 4. These are the two Olive-trees and the two Candlesticks, &c. By which Description it appears, that these two Witnesses are not two Individual Persons, as Moses and Elias: neither by these are intended any two Testimonies, as the Old and New-Testament: nor two
distinct Offices, as Magistrates and Ministers. For none of these Interpretations will agree with the metaphorical Description of these two Witnesses verse 4. These two Witnesses are the faithful Ministers of Christ, called two Olive-trees, verse 4. Alluding to them two Olive-Branches, Zech. 4.3.11, 12, 13, 14. These are the two anointed ones, which through the two gol∣den Pipes empty the golden oyl out of themselves. That is to say, They are the Ministers and Prophets of the Lord, who (under the Gospel) have received an unction from the holy One, Christ Jesus, 1 John 2.20.27. As the Priests and Prophets did (under the Law) who were Anointed with material Oyl. Exod. 28 41. & 1. Kings 19.16. And they are also the visible, true, constituted, Gospel-Churches of Christ, called here two Candlesticks, which are so Interpreted and Expounded by Christ himself Rev. 1.20. And the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches. The Church of God under the Law being but one, and that a National-Church, was Metaphorically described by one golden Candlestick, Zech. 4.2. But the Churches of God under the Gospel, being many Congregational Churches, (as the Churches in Judea, Act. 9.31. The Churches of Galatia, 1. Cor. 16.1. and the Churches in Asia, Rev. 1.11. when they were first planted.) are Resembled by two golden Candlesticks, and by seven gol∣den Candlesticks. Nor is my distinguishing between the Lords Ministers, his Prophets, and his Churches, unwar∣rantable: for the holy Spirit of God did distinguish them, Acts 13.1. Now there were in the Church, that was at Antioch, certain Prophets and Teachers. Acts 15.4. They were received of the Church and of the Apostles and Elders. Act. 15.22. Then pleased it the Apostles, and Elders, with the whole Church, that is, all the Brethren, Act. 15.23. The Apostles and Elders, and Brethren send greeting unto the Breethren, &c.Med. 3. The Ministers of Christ in the Churches of Saints are Christs Prophetical Witnes∣ses; who ought to bear their Testimony for Christ and against Anti-christ, both Pagan and Papal. Rev. 12.11.
Secondly, the Power, which Christ hath given unto his two Witnesses is not a Magisterial-Power; for Christ hath given that kind of Power to the Kings of the Earth, and Governours under them, Rom. 13.1-7. & 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. & Titus 3.1. nor a Monarchical Prelatical Power, such as the Pope of Rome, his Cardinals, and Priests have usurped: who Lord it over Gods heritage, his Churches and Clergy, contrary to the Mind of our LORD Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5.3., not as Lord∣ing over the Clergy. but it is a Mini∣sterial—Prophetical—Power, that is, the Power of the WORD (not of the Sword,) Jer. 1.9.10. Behold I have put my words in thy Mouth, See, I have this Day set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to Root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build and to plant. That is to say Prophetically, by De∣nouncing Gods Judgments against them (which the LORD will execute, if they repent not; Jer. 18.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.) Jer. 25.13. And I will bring upon that Land all my words, which I have pronounced against it—which Jeremiah hath Prophesied against all the NationsThough the Ministers of the Gospel may declare the righteous Judgments of God against ungodly Men, according to his written word, yet They ought not to sit in Judgment and pass Sentence of Corporal punishment upon any Man. Luk. 12.14.. But yet all the Plagues and Judgments here mentioned and intended are principally, (though not only) spiritual Plagues and Judgments, such as the Lords Prophets had Power to do by the Sword of the Spirit (which it the word of God) Eph. 6.17. which proceedeth out of Christ's Mouth, Rev. 19.15.21. So that this Power which the LORD Jesus Christ gave his two Witnesses, is a Ministerial, Prophetical, Ecclesiastical—Power of Faith by the word of God, and Prayer,Act. 6.4. which they ought to give themselves continually unto: not using the Power of the Sword at any time, in any Case; Rev. 13.9.10. He that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear—He that Killeth with the Sword, shall be Killed with the Sword, &c.Med. 4. Ecclesiastical Power Or∣dained by Christ, and given to his Ministers, is not Ma∣gisterial, but Ministerial: Not the power of the Sword, but of the word, Heb. 4.12. For the word of God is Living and Powerful, &c.
Thirdly, By the Gift of Prophesie here, which Jesus Christ gave to his two Witnesses (called the two Prophets, Rev. 11.10.) we are to understand such Ministerial and Prophetical Gifts of the holy Spirit, whereby they were fitted and qualified to Prophesie before many Peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings, Rev. 10.10, 11. There are Diversities of Spi∣ritual Gifts, and among the Rest the Gift of Prophesie, 1 Cor. 12.4.8.9, 10. & Rom. 12.6. Having their Gifts differing according to the Grace that is given to us, whether Prophesie, let us prophesie according to the Analo∣gy of Faith. This Gift of Prophesie Christ gives unto his faith∣ful Ministers in the Churches of Saints, that they may be his Witnesses,Act. 1.8.5.32. in bearing their Testimo∣ny for Christ against Anti-Christ in all the Offices of his Mediatorship: And it is therefore called the Testi∣mony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecie. Rev. 19.10.Luk. 21.12-19. that is, a Mouth and wisdom given by Je∣sus Christ, which no Adversaries shall be able to gain∣say, or Resist: And it shall turn to you for a Testimony, Luk. 21.13. Fourthly, The Time of their Prophesying is here said to be 1260 Daies, which Daies are not to be understood Literally for so many natural Daies, for that is but three years and an half, and is intended by the three daies and an half, expressed verse 9. to be the Time, that the dead-Bodies of the Slain-Witnesses shall lie unburi∣ed, called a Time and Times, and half a Time, Rev. 12.14. & Dan. 7.21.25. But those 1260. Daies must be under∣stood of Prophetical Daies, that is, a Day for a year, and each day for a year, according to the Scripture Accompt, Numb. 14.34. & Ezek. 4.6. which is 1260 years. And so is the Prophetical Number of Daies and Time of the Woman, that is, the Church of God in the Wilder∣ness, viz. 1260. Daies, Rev. 12.6. It is not my work at present to Determine the Beginning and Ending of this Time, and these Daies, but to give the right Inter∣pretation
thereof, that the Reader may understand the Meaning by my Exposition.Med. 6. God hath Timed the per∣secutions, tribulations, and sufferings of his Churches, Ministers, and Saints, in their Generations. Gen. 15.13. Exod. 12.41. Jer. 25.10, 11, 12. and 29 10-13. Rev. 2.10. and Rev. 11.2. They must last no longer, nor End sooner, then God's set Time. But yet I may say, that the best Ecclesiastical Histo∣rians, and the latter Expositors of this Book of the Re∣velation affirm, that these 1260 Daies began about the year of our Lord 407.409, 410. or before 428.Sympsons Hist. of the Church lib. 4. Socrat. Hist. Eccle. cap. 3. Helvicus in Concil. Tarinat. cap. 7. Magdeb. Cent. 5. cap. 10. &c. And if these 1260. Daies did begin about 428, then they will End about 1688. which a short time will manifest more certainly. Though these are uncertin Conjectures, Yet If we shall see the Beast that ascendeth out of the bot∣tomless pit make war against the two prophetical Witnes∣ses, and overcome them, and kill them, as is Prophesied vers. 7. Then we shall certainly know the Ending Time of these 1260. Daies; Dan. 12.4.6, 7, 8, 9, 13. Fifthly, To be clothed in Sackcloth, signifieth the sor∣rowful, mournful Condition of these two Prophets, the Witnesses of Christ by Reason of their Sufferings, Perse∣cutions, and Tribulations, which they endured in the Daies and Time of their Prophesying. The Prophets of old used to wear Garments of black, especially in times of Ca∣lamity and Affliction, which were made of Hair, and cal∣led Sackcloth of Hair, as an Emblem and Symbol of great Calamity, and mourning.Isa. 22. & 32.11.50.3 Jer. 49.3. 2 King 1.8. Mat. 3.4. Rev. 6.12. The faithful Ministers of Christ, who in serving of their Generation have born their Testimony for Christ against Anti-Christ in all his Media∣torial Offices, as HE is Prophet, Priest, and King in his Church, have suffered Persecutions, Imprisonment, Ba∣nishment, and Death many of them; As the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ did Suffer under the Roman—Pa∣gan—Dragon; So the Ministers and Saints of God have Suffered under the Roman—Papal—Beast about 1251. years. And they must yet Suffer nine years, more un∣der the Roman-Power.Med. 5. God faithful Witnes∣ses
must suffer Persecutions for their Testimony against Anti-christ. 2 Tim. 3.12. Yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution. Vers. iv. These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. The Olive-tree is Excellent for its beautiful green∣ness, for its plentiful fruitfulness, and its abundant fat∣ness, Judges 9.9. But the Olive-tree said unto them, should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they Honour God and Man, &c. Unto which God compareth his Church Jer. 11.16. The LORD hath called thy Name a green Olive-tree, fair and of goodly fruit, his fruitful Saints, Hos. 14.4, 5, 6. And His beauty shall be as the Olive-tree. But especially his faithful Ministers, Zech. 4.3.11, 12.14. These two Olive-trees upon the right side of the candlestick, and upon the left side thereof, vers. 11. These two Olive-branches, which through the two golden Pipes empty gold out of themselves, vers. 12. These are the two sons of oyl, that is, Anointed ones, &c.vers. 11.  verse 12.  verse 14.  Vers. viz. the Bishops and Pastors, the Prophets and Teachers in the Churches of Saints, whom the LORD Jesus Christ hath raised up, Spirited, and appointed to be his Witnesses, and to bear their Testimony, for the Doctrine, Worship and Kingdom of Christ against the false Doctrines, Worships, and Kingdoms of Anti-Christ, the Pope of Rome that Beast, the great Whore, and all the Cities of the Nations.Rev. 16.19. Mystical Babilon: the Mother of Harlots, and her three Daughters the Cities of the Nati∣tions.  Tit. 1.5. is , Act. 14.23. A Candlestick all of Gold in Zecharijah's Vision Chap. 4.2. was a Figure of the Church of God which was then but one visible Constituted Church, viz. The National-Church of the Jews. The two-golden Candlesticks in
St. John's Revelation, chap. 11.4. were a Representation of the true visible constituted Churches of God in the Latter-Daies of the Gospel, viz. Congregational-Churches of the Gentiles; such were the seven Churches in Asia, (at their first Planting) Rev. 1.12.20. So that we may upon those Scripture grounds conclude, That by the two Witnesses Jesus Christ meant and intended his Churches of Saints, and his faithful Ministers in their Generations.Med. 7. The Churches of Saints ought to be like golden Candlesticks for purity, for visibility, and for hold∣ing forth the light of truth by their Ministers, Mat. 5.14, 15, 16. Standing before the God of the Earth. Standing before great Persons, viz. Kings, Princes, and Nobles,1 King. 10.8. & Prov. 22.29. imports, waiting, and serving them in obedience unto their Commands, being in their pre∣sence, and also in their Favour. So here, To stand be∣fore the God of the Earth, is to Minister unto God, to Worship him, to obey his Commands, and to keep his Ordinances. As the Tribe of Levi did of old, Deut. 10.8. To stand before the Lord to minister unto him, And Ezek. 44.15, 16. But the Priests, the Levites, the Sons of Zadoc, that kept the Charge of my Sanctuary, when the Children of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall stand be∣fore me, to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord God, &c. So shall the faithful Ministers of Christ stand before God to be his Witnesses, and to bear their Testimony for Christ against Anti-Christ; They shall be holden up: for God is able to make them stand, Rom. 14.4. HE is called the God of the Earth, for the Earth is the Lord's and the fulness it. God made the Heavens and the Earth; He Rules and Governs all things in Hea∣ven and Earth, and HE gives Power to the saint,Isa. 40.28-31. Rev. 7.14-17. and to them that have no might he increas∣eth strength, that so they may stand before the God
of the Earth, and serve him Day and Night in his Temple. Vers. v, vi. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the daies of their prophesie: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. In these two verses is declared more particularly, I. The Power, which Christ hath given unto his two Prophetical-Witnesses, which Power is three fold, 1. They have Power to shut Heaven, 2. They have Power over fire and waters, 3. They have Power to smite the Earth with all Plagues. Verse 6. II. The Objects upon whom their Power is to be Executed, to wit, their Enemies, that will hurt them, verse 5. and III. The Manner how they shall exercise their Power; Fire proceedeth out of their Mouth, and devoureth their Enemies, And if any man will hurt them, he must in this Manner be killed. And if any Man will hurt them,Rev. 11.5. , If any do them injury, or injustice. There is no Respect of Persons with God, therefore saith Christ, who is the true, and faithful witness, If any One, viz. Power or Potentate, King or Emperour, Princes or Nobles, Pope, Priests or People, will hurt them, that is, will persecute them, injure them, oppress them, and wrong them, that are the Churches of God, and the faithful Ministers of Christ, who are his Witnesses, and do bear their Testimony for Christ against Anti-Christ;
Fire proceedeth out of their Mouth, and devoureth their Enemies; By their Mouth here we are to understand their Testi∣mony, called the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 1, 2. & chap. 6.9. & chap. 12.11.17. & chap. 19.10. The Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophesie, which Spirit of Prophe∣sie is here called the Fire which proceedeth out of their Mouth, and devoureth their Enemies: And if any one will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. Christ's Ministers and his Churches of Saints, when they are inju∣red, wronged, and hurt by Persecution, Oppression, Imprisonment, Banishment, &c. ought not to betake themselves to their material Arms, but to their Spiri∣tual Prayers: their Fire, which devoureth and Kills their Enemies, must not proceed out of their Guns, their brass or Iron Cannons, &c. but out of their Mouth, viz. their Prophesie and Testimony of Jesus. Read Act. 12.5.9.24.23, 24, 25. Herod the King stretched forth his hands, (that is his Magisterial-Power) to vex certain of the Church, And he Killed James the Brother of John with the Sword—And he proceeded further and took Peter also,—and put him in Prison,—But Prayer was made (without ceasing) of the Church unto God for him. And the Angel of the Lord came, and deliverd him out of Prison, Verses 7-11.12. And the Angel of the Lord smote Herod, and he gave up the Ghost. God made his word in the Mouth of his Prophets as Fire, Jer. 5.14, &c.Med. 8. The faithful Ministers of Christ and Churches of Saints, have Spiritual weapons, And especially the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. Ephes. 6.11.17. & 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God.
Vers. vi. These have Power to shut Heaven, that it rains not in the Daies of their Prophecie. The Ministerial and Prophetical-Power of Christ's two Witnesses is here declared to be over Waters (as well as fire:) both the Waters that are above the Firmament of Heaven, To shut Heaven that it Rain not, and this is the Power of Prayer also; As Eliah had 1 Kings 17.1. & James 5.17. Elias was a Man subject to like (infirmities or) Passions as we are: And he Prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the Earth by the space of three years and six months. Thus he shut Heaven in the Daies of his Prophecie; And thus Christ's two Pro∣phetical Witnesses have Power to shut Heaven in the Daies of their Prophecie. And they have Power over the Wa∣ters (under the firmament) to turn them into Blood, as Moses did, Exod. 7.19, 20, 21. And to smite the Earth with all Plagues, especially Spiritual Judgments, Isa. 6.9, 10. & Mat. 13.13.14.15. and temporal also, Jer. 25.13. which God executeth according to the Word of the Lord, which cometh forth out of their Mouth. Vers. vii. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. In this verse and the following verses to the end of the 14. verse of this Chapter, Christ revealed to his Servant John. 1. That his two Prophetical Witnesses shall be killed. 2. That their dead-Bodies shall lie unburied in the open street of the great City three daies and an half. 3. That their Adversaries shall Rejoice over them, make merry, and send gifts one to another. 4. That after three daies and an half the two slain Witnesses shall
live again, and shall Ascend up to Heaven. 5. That at the same Time of the Witnesses Ascension, the Tenth part of the great City shall fall, and 7000. Men of Name shall be slain. 6. That the Remnant will be affrighted and give glory to God. 7. That then the second Woe will be past; And the third Woe will come quickly, vers. 14. but of these 7. particulars in Order. First, Touching the Killing of Christ two Prophetical Witnesses, verse 7. we are to observe these particulars, viz. 1. The time when the Witnesses shall be Killed, when they shall have finished their Testimony. 2. Who shall Kill them: The Beast that ascendeth out of the bot∣tomless Pit: and 3. The Means by which He shall Kill the Witnesses. He shall make War against them, and overcome them, and Kill them. In the Exposition of this verse, and of those things, we are to observe, 1. What is the Finishing Testimony of the Witnesses of Jesus Christ? 2. Who is the Beast that shall Kill them? And 3. What this War is whereby the Witnesses shall be overcome and killed? The finishing Testimony of Christs two Prophetical Wit∣nesses is the Gospel of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; which must be Preached in all the World for a Witness unto all Nations. Math. 24.14. And then shall the End be. Therefore, that is their finishing Testimo∣ny. Let it be Considered, that the Prophetical Witnes∣ses of Christ, (namely his faithful Ministers) during the 1260. Years of their Testimony have had a threefold Testimony to bear for Christ against Anti-Christ, viz. First, for the prophetical Office of Christ against the Papal Beast and the false Prophet: which Testimony the faith∣ful Ministers of Christ have in the daies of their prophesy∣ing in Sackcloth born by their sound Doctrine of free Grace against the false Doctrine of free will, Merit, and Condignity: also by their sound Doctrine of Justificati∣on by faith in Christ, against the false Doctrine of Ju∣stification by our own Works, or by our own Righteous∣ness. And by their sound Doctrine of Evangelical Re∣pentance,
against the false Doctrine of Popish Penant and Purgatory &c. Then for the Priestly Office of Christ against Anti-Christ, Mystical-Babilon, the Beast, the great Whore, and the false Prophet, which Testimony the faithful Ministers of Christ have born likewise in the daies of their Prophesying in Sackcloth, touching the true and pure Worship of God in the Administration of his holy Ordinances; against the Superstitious and false Worship of the Beast, the Church of Rome her Priests and Jesuits in their Idolatrous Worship of God by Images, Crucifixes, Ave Maria's, Masses, &c. especially, the papal principal Idol-work, of their Breaden-God by their Su∣perstitious, and blasphemous Invention of Transubstan∣tiation of the Bread and Wine into the very true and real Body and Blood of Christ by vertue of the Priests Consecration. Lastly, for the Kingly Office of Christ as King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. King of Zion, Psal. 149.1, 2. and King of Nations, Jer. 10.7.10. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Tim. 6.14, 15. whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom. Dan. 7.27. And he shall Reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. Now the faithful Mi∣nisters of Christ, have born their Testimony for Christ, that he is King of Saints, and King of Sion in these 1260. prophetical daies of their Sackcloth-Condition, their finishing Testimony, viz. That the Lord Jesus Christ is King of Nations, King of Kings, and all the Kingdoms of this world shall be the Kingdom of Christ. Dan. 2.44 7.13, 14. & Rev. 11.15. And HE shall be the only Potentate, 1 Tim. 6.15. This Finishing Testimony of the Kingdom of Christ is properly called the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. which is the Spirit of Prophesie: Many of Christ's Witnesses have been slain for the word of God, which they preach∣ed, and for the Testimony which they held: Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. & 12.17. But those Witnesses of Christ who bear their Testimony for the Davidical Kingdom of Christ (to wit, That all the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdom of Christ) are not yet slain, Of
which Kingdom we shall Treat more fully in the Expo∣sition of the fifteenth verse of this Chapter. The Beast, that shall Kill the Witnesses of Christ, is here said to Ascend out of the Bottomless-Pit,, &c. Rev. 9.12.11.20.1.3. and so Rev. 17.8. that is out of the Sea, Rev. 13.1. called the Deep, Luk. 8.31. Rom. 10.7. mentioned, Rev. 9.1, 2.11. & 20.1.3. And Rev. 13.1. I saw the Beast Rise out of the Sea, with Ten Crowned Horns, &c. The Mystery of this Beast Christ shewed to St. John, Rev. 17.3-11. where HE is described, 1. By his three∣fold State, verse 8. Behold, the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is. 2. By his two fold Number, verse 8. Even He is the Eighth, and is of the Seven Heads. 3. By his Rise, Rev. 13.1, his Continuance, Rev. 13.5. and his Ruine, verse 8. & 15. of the 17. Chap. And shall go into Perdition, And goeth into Perdition, Rev. 18.21. And shall be found no more at all. Which Description of the Beast we shall (according to that Mea∣sure of wisdom and understanding which God shall give) speak more largely in our Exposition of the 17 Chapter. In the mean Time, Those that will Read My Apocalypti∣cal Mysteries published An. Dom. 1679. And My Trea∣tise of Mystical-Babylon Ʋnvailed, An. Dom. 1679. may understand more fully my Opinion, who this Beast is;That Angel of the Bottom∣less Pit, whose Name is Abad∣don & Apollyon Rev. 9.11. And that I may not leave the Reader altogether unsatis∣fied in this Matter, I shall at Present assert, That this Beast, (with respect of his whole complex Body) is Mysti∣cal-Babilon, viz. The Beast of the eighth Head Rev. 17.8.11. with two Horns like a Lamb, Rev. 13.1. to wit, the Pope of Rome, that Star which fell from Heaven unto the Earth, Rev. 9.1, 2, 3. The great Scarlet Whore, and Mother of Harlots, &c. Rev. 17.1.5. to wit, the Church of Rome, and all false Churches; And the false Prophet, Rev. 16.13. & 19, 20. to wit, the Roman Priests, those Deceivers, and all false Mnisters, Called the Mini∣sters of Satan 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.
The War, which the Beast shall make against Christs prophetical—Witnesses, whereby HE shall overcome them and kill them, is an open, visible, and publick Opposition which the Enemies of Christ, his Church∣es, Ministers, and Saints do make against them, either by open Hostility, as the Popes and Emperours Forces did against the Protestants in Germany; or else by Publick Edicts, and Laws, as the Papists did against the Prote∣stants in England in Queen Mary's daies, by a violent and Bloody Persecution: which hath ever been the Pra∣ctice of the Popes and Papists; Pope Alexander the third, about the year 1159. and the popish Powers persecuted the Waldenses with a great and bloody Persecution; After∣wards about 1464. the Waldenses, the Whicklevists, the Hussites, and their followers were violently persecuted e∣ven to Death, under the Name of Lollards. And at this very Time the Papists, with their Adherents, and Ab∣bettors have an Hellish Plot and a bloody Design to de∣stroy the Protestants, and the Protestant Religion in En∣gland, and to Reestablish Popery, and Reinforce that bloody Religion by Fire and Sword. And shall overcome them, and Kill them. Some Ministers and some Members of Churches will be overcome by fear, others by flatteries; the mouths of some will be stopt by Preferment; others will be silenced by threatning, by Excommunication and by persecution, and so far overcome, as they will cease for a Time to bear their Testimony against the Beast so publickly and vigo∣rously, as they did before. But that will not appease the Rage and great wrath of the Beast; for he will proceed further, and will Kill them, that still go on boldly and constantly to bear their Testimony against him, his Wor∣ship, and his Kingdom, Rev. 13.15, 16, 17. The Kil∣ling of the two-Witnesses doth not signifie a Corporal-death only, nor principally, for such a Death doth not fully agree to their lying unburyed in the streets of the City:
nor to their Resurrection, verse, 19.11. but it is rather a Metaphorical Expression by which Jesus Christ meant and intended both a Civil and an Ecclesiastical Death or depravation, and deprivation of life, and livelihood: Some of them shall be deprived of all their Civil Rights, Priviledges, and Liberties: their Estates will be Confisca∣ted, Proscribed, or Decimated, &c. Their Persons con∣fined, imprisoned, or banished, &c. and in fine all their Livings and Livelihood taken from them by the Beast, and his Instruments of Cruelty. And others of them shall be deprived of all their Ecclesiastical Rights, Privi∣viledges, and Liberties: yea their Love to Christ will decay, their Zeal for the Glory of God will cool, and their Spiritual vigour against Anti-Christ, and his false Doctrines, Superstitious Worship, and tyrannical Go∣vernment will faint and be ready to die. The Darkness and blackness of the DAY of the Death of the two-Witnesses will be very great, for they will be deprived of that Spirit of Life, which they formerly had, and manifested for Christ against the Man of Sin and Son of Perdition, that Sits in the Temple of God. Some of the Witnesses, (not all of them) will fall from their first Love, loose their former zeal, and become Luke-Warm; Some of them will fall in with the grand Apostasie of these latter daies: and thereby be deprived of that vigour and Spirit of Life, which they had. And this Spiritual kind of Death is called here the Killing of the Witnesses; for as their Resurrection shall be by the Spirit of Life from God entring into them, Rev. 11.11. So their Death will be by being deprived of the Spirit of Life.
Vers. 8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. In this verse Jesus Christ shewed his Servant John, where his two-Prophetical-Witnesses shall be Killed, viz. In the Street of the great City, which great City is Spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, even where our Lord was Crucified. This great City is Mysterie, Babylon the Great, Rev. 17.5. that City, which then Reigned over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.18. The Roman-papal-Dominion, to wit, the whole Anti-Christian Kingdom of the Beast, the Great-Whore, and the False-Prophet, called the Man of Sin, and the Anti-Christ, &c. The Street of the great City, is the Place where the Dead-Bodies of the two slain Witnesses lie unburied for a Time. Which Place being spoken of by way of Eminen∣cy, must be understood either in Relation unto the two-Witnesses, or in Relation unto the Beast that shall Kill them, or in Relation unto both. Now take either of these, or both; And it doth not, it cannot signifie the whole Kingdom of Mystical-Babylon; because that is the City, as before proved, not the Street which is after vers. 13. called the tenth part of the great City. Nor are all the Witnesses of Christ in the Street of that great City Killed, but very many of them for there were some alive, who called to these dead witnesses, when the Spirit of Life from God, was again entred into them, saying, Come up hither &c, verse 11.12. Therefore by the Street of the great City we are to understand, some part of it, and not the whole City: that is, some very eminent and famous Kingdom, where these two-Witnesses have most eminently born their Te∣stimony
for Christ against the Beast, the great Whore the Church of Rome, and the false Prophet, the Pope, the Papal-Prelacy, and the Popish-Clergy. Which is (in my Opinion) this Kingdom of England. For the highest, and most eminent Testimony for Christ his Kingdom, his Worship, and his Government, and against the King∣dom, Worship, and Government of Anti-Christ hath been, yet is, and will be born by Christs faithful Mini∣sters, and his Churches of Saints, (that are his two-Wit∣nesses) here in England cially in London. And the Descriptio s Street and City of England and London, if it co delineated, and drawn to the life, or lively Pourtrayed, (as the Prophet was commanded by the Lord, Ezek. 4.1. to pourtray Jerusalem upon a Tile.) London would seem to be so like that City, where our Lord was Crucified: and England so like the Land of Egypt, yea and both this Nation and this City would so resemble Sodom; That every one, who shall view and consider the Type, and Antitype, will doubtless be of my Opinion, and say, certainly London is Spiritually Jerusa∣lem, where our Lord was Crucified, and where his two-Prophets must be Killed. And is not England as like Egypt for Oppression, Exaction, and other Cruelties against the Israel of God? And (which I cannot without abhorrence write.) how like Sodom and Gomorrha these two near-adjoyning Cities are for Pride, and fulness of Bread, yea, for Whoredom, Adultery, Bloodshedding, Sodomy, and other Abominations, for which hainous wickednesses God did burn Sodom and Gomorrha, and set them forth for an Example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude vers. 7. And God did overthrow some of the Cities of Israel, as he had overthrown Sodom and Gomorrha, Amos 4.11. Yea and God will destroy these Cities also for their Sins, if the Rulers and the Inhabi∣tants thereof will not Repent and Return unto the Lord, Isa. 1.10.-20. Hear the word of the Lord, ye Rulers of Sodom: Give ear unto the Law of our God, ye People of Gomorrha—But if ye Refuse and Rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the Sword; For the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. And the Laodicean-Churches shall know, that God commandeth his destroying Messengers to begin at his Sanctuary, Ezek. 9.5, 6, 7. And that Judgment must begin at the House of God. 1 Pet. 4.17, 18, 19. Vers. ix. x. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and Nations, shall see their dead bodies three daies and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. And they that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoyce over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another: because that these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt on the Earth. The two-Witnesses being Killed, some pity them, others rejoyce over them, and most of the People will not suffer their Dead Bodies to be put in Graves. The Beast having killed the Witnesses, would have them buri∣ed, that their Names, and their Testimony might not be Remembred: But they of the Peoples, &c. would not suffer their Names to perish, nor their Testimony to be forgotten: They would not suffer their dead-bodies to be put in Graves. Which some Expositors understand to be an Act of pity and good will, and favour towards the two-Witnesses and their Testimony. Other Expositors Interpret their not Suffering of the dead-bodies of Christs Witnesses to be put in Graves to be an Act of Enmity and Cruelty in those of the Peoples, &c. that rejoyced over them after they were Kill'd, who would not let them have a Christian-burial.
And they that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoyce over them, and make merry, &c. As the Killing of these two-Witnesses is the last Act of the Papal-power of the Beast: So the Rejoycing over their dead-bodies is the Last Act of the Whore's Joy; And both these Acts are the Last Sufferings of the Mini∣sters and Churches of Saints. For we never Read of the Beast's Power, the Whore's Joy, nor the Saints Suf∣ferings after these their 1260. Daies, or forty two Months be fulfilled. And these three daies and an half are the Ending Time, and full Period of the Witnesses 1260. Daies, and of the Beasts forty two Months. And Christ hath sworn, Rev. 10.6, 7. That there should be Time no longer, But in the Daies of the Voice of the Seventh An∣gel, when he shall begin to sound, &c. which is the very next Dispensation, after this Sixt Trumpet, Rev. 11.14, 15. And the Seventh Angel Sounded, &c. The Reason, why the Inhabitants of the Earth, that is, Earthly minded Professors, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. do rejoyce at the Killing of Christs two-Wit∣nesses, and are so Merry, when they shall see their dead-bodies lying in the Street of the great City, is because these two Prophets tormented them, that dwell on the Earth, verse 10. which happened 1. By the Power of their Te∣stimony upon some of their Consciences, which cut them to the heart, as St. Stephens Testimony did theirs, Acts 7.51.54. 2. By the guilt of the Blood of the Martyrs and Witnesses of Jesus, which wounded their Spirits where∣by they were filled with Indignation against them, as the Scribes and Pharisees were, saying, Acts 15.17.28.33. Ye intended to bring this Man's blood upon us, &c. And 3. By bearing their Witness against their Murders, as Elias did, when he said to Ahab, 1 King. 21.19, 20. Hast thou Killed, and also taken Possession? and against their Whoredoms and Adulteries, as John the Baptist Witnessed against Herod and Herodias, Mark 6.17-
24. and against all other their wicked Abomina∣tions. Vers. xi. And after three daies and an half, the Spirit of life from God entred into them: and they stood upon their feet, and a great fear fell upon them which saw them. Mystical-Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and her Daughters are now rejoycing, and making merry in Hope, that the slain Witnesses shall never Rise again; But their joyful daies will not long continue, for after three Daies and an half (which is but a very short Time) the Witnesses are Revived and Raised again; And that Dispensation will suddenly change their joyes into fears. This Mystical-Resurrection of Christs two Prophe∣cal-Witnesses is in this verse described by three particu∣lars, that is; 1. By the Time of their Reviving and living again, After three daies and an half. 2. By the Means and Manner thereof; The Spirit of life from God enterd into them: and they stood upon their feet. 3. By the present Effect thereof; And great fear fell upon them, which saw them. First, Touching the Time of their Reviving. Read Hos. 6.1, 2, 3. By the three Daies and an half we are to understand the last three Daies and an half of the 1260. propheti∣cal Daies before expressed and expounded, even the Ending Time thereof. The knowledge of this ending Time is that which many godly and Learned Men have studiously searched, and laboured to understand, whose labours being Published, have been profitable to the Lords People, and unto me, that have read their Judg∣ments, and have received much light and Comfort in
many things: but not being fully satisfied in their Inter∣pretations, and Expositions touching these two Witnesses and the time of their being Killed, and Raised again, I am willing to give my Opinion also and the Grounds thereof. The 1260. Daies, verse 3. being according to the Nature of this Prophecie of the Revelation, and the Prophetical number of such Daies, Numb. 14 34. & Ezek. 4, 5, 6. (as hath been proved) each Day for a year, that is, 1260. years: And these three Daies and an half being the Ending Time of the two Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, and the last of the 1260. Pro∣phetical Daies; It doth hereupon necessarily follow, and hence I conclude, 1. That the ending Time of the 1260. Daies (viz. these three Daies and a half) are not yet come, And the two Witnesses are not yet slain, for their Testimony for Christ against Anti-Christ, is not yet finished, Math. 24.14. nor is the tyrannical-Power of the Beast (which was to continue forty two Months, Rev. 13.5. & 11.2.) yet ended and expired. For the holy City is yet trodden under foot by the Papal-Gentiles, Rev. 11.2. and the woman (that is,—the Church of God) is Yet in the Wilderness, Rev. 12.6.14. The Tyrannical Power of the Papal-Beast according to the Accompt of the best Ecclesiastick Historians, began about the year of our Lord 428. in the Reign of the Empe∣rour Theodosius the second. When Pope Sixtus the third, a Roman, who at the Instance of the Empress Eudoxias, made a holy-Day for St. Peters Church. And if the Hi∣storians say true, we may Conjecture that the Ending Time of the Beast's forty two Months, and of the Wit∣nesses 1260. Daies, will be about 1688. for 1260. and 428. make 1688. or sooner. 2. Though the 1260. Daies be almost expired, the Testimony of the two Witnesses almost finished, and the Beasts Tyranni∣cal-Power almost come to its End, Yet the ful Period thereof will not be certainly known to the Churches, and Saints of God until these two Witnesses be Killed by
the Beast, Read, Dan. 12.4.9. & Hab. 2.3. At the End it shall speak, and not Lye. And None of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand, Dan. 12.10. 3. When these three Daies and an half are come (which are the last three years and an half of the 1260. yea.) The Churches and Saints of God shall certainly know them to be the Last Daies by those most remarka∣ble Signs thereof, which are noted in the holy Scripture of Truth. Viz. First, Then will be such Tribulation as hath not been heretofore, to the Jews, Dan. 12.1.4.7, 8, 9.10. to the Gentiles, Math. 24.21, 22.29, 30. Luk. 21.25, 26, 27. and to the Church of God, 2 Tim. 3.1. & 1 Pet. 4.17. Secondly, Then will the Gospel of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ be Preached in all the World, For a Wit∣ness unto all Nations,, which is the finishing Testimony of the two-Witnesses, for which they shall be slain. Search those Scriptures, Jer. 10.7.10. Dan. 7.13, 14.27.28. Zech. 14.7, 8.9. Math. 24.14. & Rev. 11.15. Thirdly, Then will happen a very great formality, lukewarmness, and Worldliness, &c. among Church-Members, 2 Tim. 3.1-5; holding up the Form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof: Et hos devita, vel, ab his aver∣sare. , &c. from such turn away. And the last and greatest Apostasie a∣mong Gospel-Professors, 2 Thes. 2.3. Except that Apostasie come first, which will also happen in those Last Daies, 2 Pet. 3.3.4. Insomuch that our Saviour said, When the Son of Man cometh, shall he find faith on the Earth? Luk. 18.8 & 1 Tim. 4.1 For which For∣mality, and Apostasie, God will shortly and suddainly bring forth such a Dispensation of his Divine Provi∣dence, whereby those Laodicean Churches shall be bro∣ken in pieces, scattered, and dispersed; and then will the two Witnesses be Killed, by whose Mystical Resur∣rection will happen a very glorious Reformation Isa. 60.1, 2.7.13.19.21, 22. Even the Times of the
Restitution of all things, Acts 3.19, 20,-21. viz. Churches, Ministery, Worship, and Ordinan∣ces, &c. Secondly, Touching the Means and Manner of their Reviveing. The Means of the Mystical Resurrection and Spiritual Reviveing of the two Witnesses of Christ is here expres∣sed to be the Spirit of life from God, which entred into them. vers. 11. The Manner is also here declared, And they stood upon their feet. That is, They were Raised, revived, and strengthened, imboldned, and encouraged by the Spirit of Life from God, which was powred up∣on them, and entred into them to bear the same Testi∣mony of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, against the King∣dom of Anti-Christ, as formerly, and they were by the Divine power and assistance of that Spirit of life inabled to stand boldly and publickly to that Testimony of Christs Kingdom and Dominion. And this bears some Ana∣logy unto that Dispensation Prophesied of, Ezek. 37.5.14. O my People—I will put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live. The LORD knowes, that his Servants, his Mini∣sters, his Churches, and his Witnesses are not able to say, do, or suffer much for Christ without his holy Spirit help and impower them, influence and assist them. And therefore when God hath any eminent Work to do, or any excellent Witness to bear for Christ his Truth, Worship, or Kingdom; He doth not only Raise up his Instruments to do that Work, and Call up his Witnesses to bear their Testimony, but He doth Spirit them thereunto. As he did in former daies, The Spi∣rit of God came upon Othoniel, Judg. 3.9, 10. upon Gideon, Judg. 6.34 upon Jepthah, Judg. 11.29. upon Sampson, Judg. 14.19. & 15.14. upon David, 1. Sam. 16.13. So it shall do upon the Servants and Witnes∣ses of Christ in that Day, when he shall Call and Raise
them up to his Work and Testimony, And he that is fee∣ble among them at that Day shall be as David, &c. Zech. 12.8. Thirdly, touching the present Effect, And great Fear fell upon them, which saw them. They that saw these two Witnesses of Christ arise from their Death, were them that dwell upon Earth, vers. 10. who rejoyced over the dead Bodies of the slain Witnesses: And now they are sorely amazed, and greatly afraid to see them stand upon their Feet: And great Fear fell upon them. This Fear is not that holy and filial Fear of God, which the Lord puts into the hearts of his new-Covenant People, Jer. 32.40. But it is that Terrour and Dread, wherewith God smites the Spirit and Conscience of the Adversaries of his Peo∣ple, whereby they are Cut to the heart, as they were, Act. 7.54. Vers xii. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them. The two Prophetical Witnesses being now raised and Spirited for the Work of the Lord, are called up into an high Place and Condition, which Calling is, 1. By a great voice from Heaven, which they heard; 2. By that which the Voice said unto them, Come up hither; 3. By their ready and willing Obedience unto that Heavenly Call: And they Ascended up in a Cloud; 4. By their Spectators, And their Enemies beheld them. This voice from Heaven is the voice of the Lord, who speaketh from Heaven to his Servants the Pro∣phets in divers Manners, Heb. 1.1. And he spake to his Apostles in Visions, Acts 18.9. The Lord spake to
his People of old by the voice of his Prophets, Act. 3. 21. And here the Lord speaks unto his Raised Wit∣nesses, by the voice of the Remnant of the Womans Seed, Rev. 12.17. which kept the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, all the Time, that these two Witnesses were slain, and lay dead, and disperited: Who being gathered and Congregated to∣gether, and having among them at this Time an Emi∣nent Spirit of Prophesie (which is the Testimony of Je∣sus, Rev. 19.10. do Call those Raised Witnesses, into whom the Spirit of Life from God was Entered: Say∣ing unto them, Come up hither, Come and Joyn with us in the Church of God, Come and Worship God with us, Come and help us to carry on the Work of the Lord in his Churches of Saints according to his holy Word. Med. When the Witnesses of Christ are killed and disperited, and lie slain under Deadness of Spirit, There will be even then a Remnant of the Womans Seed, which will keep the Commandments of God, and have the Te∣stimony of Jesus. And they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud. By Hea∣ven in this verse, we may understand the holy, Spiritu∣al and glorious State of the Church of God here on Earth in the latter Daies, Prophesied of, Isa. 28.5. & 60.1.3.7.13.19, 20, 21. & 62.3, 4, 5.1.12. which shall be in the Time of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, when the Church of God shall be like a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars. Rev. 12.1. Even when the new Jerusalem shall come down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, Rev. 21.1, 2, 3. This Cloud is a Cloud of Testimony: And there∣fore were those former Believers (and Martyrs of Jesus, Heb. 11. Chapter) called a Cloud of Witnes∣ses, Heb. 12.1. This Cloud may also bear some Allu∣sion to Christ's Transfiguration, Math. 17.2.3. or ra∣ther
to his Ascension, Act. 1.9, 10, 11. For the Spi∣rit of Life from God entring into them, did not only transform them more and more into the Image of Christ, but did also Raise them into an higher and more heavenly frame of Spirit, than they had attained unto before they were Killed: in which Respect, they are said to stand upon their Feet, as is Prophesied the Peo∣ple of the Jews shall do, at the Time of their Mysti∣cal Resurrection, Ezek. 37.3, 4, 5.9, 10, 11-14. compared with, Rom. 11.15. & Isa. 60.2, 3.8, 9.11. And their Enemies beheld them. The Witnesses Ene∣mies are the Roman Papal Monarchy, the Beast that Kil∣led them, Mystical-Babylon, the great Whore and her Daughters, those Harlots, which are false Churches, and the false Prophet, those Priests, Jesuits, false Tea∣chers, Seducers, and all them Adversaries, that Rejoy∣ced at the Death of the Witnesses, and made Merry, and sent Gifts one to another, vers. 10. of this Chap∣ter. Those Enemies shall behold with Amazement, Fear, and Horrour, these two Prophetical Witnesses, when they shall Ascend up to Heaven, that is, when they shall be honoured, exalted, and dignified in the glorious State of the Church of God on Earth.
Vers. xiii. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, and in the earthqutke were slain of men seven thousand, and the remnant were af∣frighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. This verse contains the Concomitant Effects of the Witnesses Ascension. And the same Hour, (that is, at the same Time) there was a great Earthquake, viz. great Commotions over-turnings, and terrible Shakings of Nations, in the Kingdom of the Beast. Math. 24.6, 7. Rev. 11.19. & 16.18. And the Tenth of the Ci∣ty fell. This City is that great City, verse 8. and chap. 16.19. Mystical-Babylon, That great City which Reigneth over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.18. And the Tenth part of that great City is One of the Ten Kingdomes, whose Kings have formerly given their power and strength, and Kingdom unto the Beast, Rev. 17.13.17. vers. Till the word of God shall be ful∣filled. Which (most probably) is the Kingdom of En∣gland, which will then certainly fall, that is, either fall off totally and finally from Mystical-Babylon, the Pope, and Church of Rome: or else, fall, that is to say, It will be utterly Ruined, and Destroyed for adhering to, par∣taking with, and Subjecting under the Anti-Christian Yoke, power, and Dominion of the Beast and Whore of Rome. For when the LORD shall glorifie the House of his Glory, Isa. 60.7. Then that Nation and Kingdom, that will not serve him shall perish, and be utterly wasted. Isa. 60.12. But my Opinion is, that England, Scotland, and Ireland, will then fall off totally and finally from the Pope, and Church of Rome, And that the King will joyn with those other Kings of the Earth, that then shall hate the Whore (Mystical-Babylon) and make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire, Rev. 17.16. As God hath Revealed and declared they shall do. And in the Earthquake were slain of Men (of Name) seven thousand. Names of Men. that is, a great Number of Roman Grandees, renowned Papists, Cardi∣nals, Prelates, and Romish Clergy-Men; Popish-Bishops, Priests, &c. And the Remnant were affrighted, and gave Glory to the God of Heaven. The Remnant, that is, the Rest of the Men of Name, which were not Killed in this Earthquake, were afrighted, that is, ama∣zed, and Converted from Popery, to the Glory of God. Vers. xiv. The second Woe is past, behold, the the third Woe co∣meth quickly. When this second WOE (which was to happen to the Inhabiters of the Earth, Rev. 8.13.) is past; then we are come to the Period of the second principal Vision, to wit, of the Seven Trumpets, whereof six have been Sounded by their respective Angels: And the Seventh Angel is ready to Sound, whereupon quickly followeth the third WOE. Behold the third WOE cometh, quickly, that is, without any delay, Math. 5.25. without any Intermission of Time, Math. 28.7. Even as soon as the second WOE is past, behold the third WOE cometh speedily, suddenly, and quickly. This third WOE Trumpet must be Sounded by the Seventh Angel. The Fifth Angel Sounded, and one WOE past; Rev. 9.1.12. The Sixth Angel Sounded, and the second WOE past; Rev. 9.13. & 11.14. And when the Seventh Angel begins to Sound there shall be Time no Longer (as Christ hath Sworn, Rev. 10.5, 6, 7.) unto the Roman-Papal-Beast: for then the forty two Months of his Reigning-Power, Rev. 13.1.5. will be expired; then the 1260. Prophetical-Daies of
Christs Sackcloth Witnesses, Rev. 11.3. will be fully Ended: and then the Kingdoms of this World will successively one after another become the Kingdom of Christ, as here followeth in the 15. verse of this Chap∣ter: And then this third WOE follows immediately, which containeth the third principal Vision, to wit, the Seven Vials of the Wrath of God, which are the seven last Plagues, that are to be poured forth upon the Ro∣man-Papal-Kingdom, Mystical-Babylon, the Beast, the Whore, and the false Prophet. Rev. 14.8, 9, 10, 11. & 15.1.7.16.1.10. and the 18. Chapter of this Book of the Revelation, vers. 2.8.21. Now although I have a very honourable esteem of those godly and Learned Expositors of this Book of the Revelation, who have declared their Judgments and some Reasons thereof, viz. That several of those Seven Vials have bin poured out upon Mystical-Babylon, and upon the Kingdom of the Beast; Yet notwithstanding all that they have said, I do humbly confess, that I am not of their Minds, but do rather think, That none of those seven Vials are yet poured out. And the Scripture Grounds which I humbly Submit to the Judgment of the judicious Reader for my Opinion in this Matter are. First, Because the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven is not opened: out of which Tem∣ple the Seven Angels must come, who are to pour out those Seven Vials of the Wrath of God, Rev. 15.5, 6, 7. The opening of the Temple is the Restoring the Church of God on Earth unto its Apostolical Constitutions, and Primitive Purity of Worship, and Spiritual-Gifts, and unto Christs Ecclesiastical Government which is not yet done. Secondly, Because the Second WOE is not yet past, and therefore the third WOE, (which are the Seven Vials of the Wrath of God as hath been fully proved) is not yet come, Rev. 11.14. That the second WOE is not yet Past, is evident, for Christ's Prophetical Wit∣nesses
have not yet finished their Testimony for the King∣dom of Christ (which must be preached in all the World, for a Witness to all Nations, Math. 24.14.) they are not yet Killed, they are not yet Risen, nor Ascended, but are yet Prophesying in their Sackcloth Condition until their 1260. Prophetical Daies be ended. Thirdly, Because the Seventh Angel hath not yet be∣gun to Sound, Rev. 11.15. For then, and not till then those Vials of Gods Wrath and last Plagues are to be poured forth one after another, as is Revealed in the whole 16. Chapter of this Prophesie. As the Seventh Seal ushered in the Seven Trumpets, Rev. 8.1.6. So the Seventh Angel Sounding ushers in the seven Vials, and brings in the Dispensation of the Kingdom of Christ (which is not yet come) and the Opening of the Temple of God in Heaven, (which is not yet done) Rev. 11.15-19. And out of the Temple shall come the Seventh Angel having those Se∣ven last Plagues, Rev. 15.5, 6, 7. And after all these Things (then, and not till then) they are Commanded by a great voice from Heaven, Saying to them, Go your waies, and pour out the Vials of the Wrath of God upon the Earth, Rev. 16.1, 2. Fourthly, Because, These last Plagues come upon My∣stical-Babylon in One Day, Death and Mourning, and Famin: and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the LORD that judgeth her, Compare Rev. 17.1.16. with Rev. 18.2.5.8.21. And a Mighty An∣gel took up a Stone like a great Milstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.. And shall not be found thenceforth, after that, at all. A great Milstone cast into the Sea doth not, can∣not sometimes sink, and sometimes swim: but alwaies sinks even to the Bottom, and never swims, no never Riseth again at all; So whensoever Mystical-Babylon is once cast Down, and fallen by the pouring out those Vi∣als of Gods last Plagues upon her, she shall never, no ne∣ver Rise more, but be made utterly desolate for evermore, Rev. 18.8 10.21.
Let the Churches of Saints, the Ministers of Christ, and all that have heavenly wisdom and Spiritual under∣standing seriously Consider under what Dispensation we are at this Time, and at this Day; We are under the Dispensation of the sixth Trumpet, and the second WOE, for the holy City is trodden under foot of the Gen∣tiles still, Rev. 11.2. The faithful Witnesses of Christ still Prophecie in Sackcloth, Rev. 11.3. And they are about to Finish their Testimony, Rev. 11.7. And the very next Dispensation of this second WOE Trumpet will be a Mystical War against the Witnesses of Christ by the Beast, who will overcome them and kill them, as hath been proved in the Exposition of the seventh verse; And as soon as the second WOE is past, the Seventh An∣gel will Sound his third WOE Trumpet, Rev. 11.14, 15, &c. See the Exposition of 11, 12, 13, and 14. ver∣ses. Vers. xv. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are be∣come the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. In this verse, and the verses following to the End of this Chapter is continued, 1. A Publication of glad Tydings by a great voice from Heaven upon the seventh Angel's beginning to Sound, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our LORD, and of his Christ: And he shall Reign for ever and ever. 2. A Doxology and thanksgiving unto Christ by the twenty four Elders: for taking unto him his great Power, and setting up his Kingly Government, vers. 16.17.3. The Effects of God's setting up Christ's Kingdom on Earth, vers. 18. And the Nations were angry. The Heathen Rage; The Kings of the Earth set themselves: and the Rulers take Councel together, against the LORD and against his ChristPsal. 2.1.2 3 &c.  lxx. .. Amplified, 1. By the wrath
of Christ against his and his Peoples Enemies unto their Destruction, vers. 18. And thy wrath is Come; 2. Time of the Dead, that they should be judged, All the Saints Rewarded, and the wicked Destroyed, vers. 18.3. And the Temple of God opened, vers. 19. And the Ark of his Covenant seen in his Temple: Whence proceedeth a dreadful and terrible Tempest of lightnings, thunders, and voices, vers. 19. And the Seventh Angel Sounded. This seventh Angel is the Angel that is to Sound the third WOE Trumpet, Rev. 8.13. which third WOE will come quickly after the second WOE is past, to wit, The seven Vials full of the seven last Plagues, Rev. 21.9. for in them is filled up the Wrath of God, Rev. 15.1. to be poured out without mixture (of any mercy) into the Cup of his Indignation, which Wine of the Wrath of God Mystical-Babylon, and every One that (then) shall Worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his Mark in his forehead, or in his hand shall drink, and shall be tormented for ever and ever, Rev. 14.8, 9, 10, 11. & Rev. 16.10.19. & Rev. 18.2.8.21. Med. 1. As it was dangerous to worship the Beast or his Image when HE was Rising: so it will be Damnable to worship Him or his Image when HE is falling. Rev. 18.2.8, 9, 10.17, 18, 19. & 19.19, 20, 21, & Rev. 14.8, 9, 10, 11. And there were great Voices in Heaven, Saying, This publick Declaration of the glad Tydings, which our Lord Jesus Christ Revealed to his Servant John, by way of Anticipation for the Comfort of his Churches, Mini∣sters, and Saints, Rev. 17.1. & 21.9. by voices from Heaven, his Ministring Spirits sent forth by Christ to Minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. So that the Doctrine of Christs Kingdom hath Heavens Authority for it, touching which here are two principal things Asserted by these voices from Heaven,
viz. two heavenly Truths, 1. That the Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdom of Christ: 2. That That He shall Reign for ever and ever. The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdom of our LORD, and of his Christ. Are, that is, shall be; when the Seventh Angel Soundeth: As Rev. 14.8. & 18.2. Babylon is fallen, that is, shall fall; when God jud∣geth her, verse 8.21. By the Kingdoms of this World we may understand, First, The Kingdoms of David, Luk. 1.30-33. to wit, Judah, and Israel; Mich. 4.18. And thou O Tower of the flock, the strong hold of the Daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, EVEN THE FIRST DOMINION, the Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem, vers. 7. And the LORD shall Reign over them in Mount Zion from hence∣forth even for ever. Read. Zech. 12.7. Secondly, The Kingdoms of the Roman Caesars, which is the fourth Monarchy, Dan. 2.40-44. And in the Daies of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a King∣dom, which shall never be Destroyed, &c. that is the fifth Monarchy, viz. the Kingdom of Christ. Lastly, All the Kingdoms on the Earth, Dan. 7.13.14. And there was given him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve him: His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, And his King∣dom, that which shall not be destroyed, Zech. 14.9. And the LORD shall be King over all the Earth: In that DAY (viz. One day known to Jehovah, vers. 7.) shall there be ONE Lord, and his NAME one. Psal. 2.6.7.8. and Dan. 7.27. These Prophesies have not yet been fulfilled, but they shall be fulfilled to a Tittle. Mat. 5.17.18. The Kingdoms of this World shall become the King∣dom of Christ, 1. By Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom in all the World, for a Witness to all Nations, Math. 24.14.30. & Rev. 14.6, 7.14. 2. By pouring out the Spirit upon all flesh, Joel, 2.28, 29. by which Dispensation of Grace the Earth will be filled with the
Knowledge of the GLORY of the LORD, as the Waters cover the Sea, Hab. 2.14. And in his Temple (when that is opened, Rev. 15.5.) shall every one speak of his Glory, Psal. 29.9, 10. The LORD fitteth KING for ever. And then will the Saints bless HIM. They shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy Power, to make known to the SONS of Men—the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom. Psal. 145 1.10, 11, 12, 13.3. By breaking the Kingdoms of this World to pieces, Dan. 2.34, 35.44. Thou sawest till that a STONE was out out without hands—It shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, &c. And that after this Manner: viz. 1. God will make Jerusalem, that is, his Church and People a burdensom Stone for all People: All that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, Zech. 12.3. 2. The Beast and the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies Will fall upon the chief corner Stone (which God hath laid in Zion, 1 Pet. 2.6.) namely, Jesus Christ, Eph. 2.20.21. And afterwards that STONE will fall upon them, by whom they shall be broken in pieces, and grinded to powder; Read and Compare those Scriptures for proof hereof, Math. 21.42, 43, 44. Rev. 17.13.14.17. & 19.19, 20, 21. Math. 21.42, 43, 44. Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner? this is the Lords doing, and it is marveilous in our eyes. Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And whomsoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. 3. The LORD Jesus Christ will then put down all Rule, and all Authority, and Power, (that are Ene∣mies to his Kingdom and Kingly Power) For he must Reign till he have put all Enemies under his Feet. 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. & Luk. 19.27. & Isa. 60.12. Therefore King David Prophesying of those Kings of the Earth, and Rulers, that take Councel together against the LORD
and his Christ, Psal. 2.2.3. doth thus exhort them, vers. 10, 11, 12. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be in∣structed, ye Judges of the Earth—Kiss the SON, least HE be Angry, and ye perish, &c. And let the Churches, Ministers, and all the Saints know, and Consider seriously, That though they ought to pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. to obey Magistrates, and be subject to Principalities, and Powers, being God's Ordinance, Tit. 3.1. & Rom. 13.1.2.5. & 1 Pet. 2.13.14. For so is the Will of God, vers. 15. Yet in Case the Powers of this World shall com∣mand them to do any thing, which God hath forbidden, or shall forbid them to do any thing, which God hath Com∣manded, they ought to obey God rather then Men, as they did Act. 5.29. and patiently Suffer for Righte∣ousness sake, 1 Pet. 4.13-19. as the Saints and Servants of Christ have done, 1 Thes. 2.14, 15, 16. Vers. xvi. xvii. And the four and twenty Elders which sate before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God. Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord, Gods Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou hast ta∣ken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned. These two verses contain a Doxology and Thanksgiving to God (for the glad Tydings of the Kingdom of Christ de∣clared from Heaven) by the twenty four Elders, who sate before God on their Seats; They Worshipped God with Thanksgiving, &c. vers. 16. By these twenty four Elders, which alludeth to the twenty four Orders of the Sons of Aaron, who were Governours of the House of God, 1 Chron. 24.1.3.5.7-18, 19. We are to understand the faithful Ministers of Christ, who are also called Elders, Acts 20.17.28. & 1 Tim. 5.17. and have the Rule and Government over the Members of the Church, Heb. 13.7.17. In their Thanksgiving we have 1. The Object of Praises, O LORD, the God, the Al∣mighty. which art, and wast, and art to come. 2. The
Matter of their Thanksgiving, That for which they give thanks to God; Because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast Reigned. By the LORD, the God, the Almighty here, we are to understand the LORD JESUS CHRIST, for he is called Jehovah our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. The true God, 1 John 5.20. which IS, and which WAS, and which IS TO COME, The ALMIGHTY Rev. 1.5.8. This great Power, is All Power in Hea∣ven, and on Earth, Math. 28.18. By Christ his taking this great Power to Himself, we are to understand is meant the Execution of Christ's Kingly Power on Earth, there∣fore it followeth, And hast Reigned. Though the LORD Jesus Christ had this great Power given him of his Fa∣ther before, Math. 28.18. Yet HE hath suffered o∣ther Lords to have Dominion over his People. As God suffered the Kings of the Nations to have Dominion over his People Israel of old, Nehe. 9.36, 37. So the LORD Jesus Christ hath Suffered the Princes of the Gentiles to exercise Dominion over his Saints, Math. 20.25. The Saints at Rome, Rom. 13.1, 2, 3, 7. also the Saints scat∣tred throughout Pontus, Galatia, and other Gentile Countries, were exhorted to submit themselves to their Kingly Government, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14-17. For so is the Will of God, verse 15. But the LORD Jesus Christ, Who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. will in his Time shew himself to be the Only POTEN∣TATE, 1 Tim. 6.13, 14, 15. by taking unto himself his great Power, and Reigning on Earth. And Christ will then put down all Rule, and all Authority, and Power, that are his Enemies, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. For HE must Reign till he hath put all Enemies under his Feet.
Vers. xviii. And the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the Pro∣phets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy Name, small and great, and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth. The Effect of Christ's Execution of his Kingly Power and Government as King of Nations, whom they should fear, Jer. 10.7.10. is as here followeth, The Nations are Angry. Or as David Prophetically Expound it. Psal. 2.1, 2.3. The Heathen Rage, The Kings of the Earth, (who from the Rise to the Ruine of the Beast give their Kingdom, their Power, and Strength unto him, Rev. 17.13.17.) Set themselves, and the Rulers take Coun∣cel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, Saying, Let us break their Bands asunder, and cast away their Cords from us. This Opposition of the Kings, Ru∣lers and Councellors, will provoke the LORD to be angry against them, as here followeth, And thy Wrath is Come. So David Prophesied, Psal. 2.5. Then shall HE speak to them in his Wrath, and vex them in his hot Displeasure. Such a Dispensation was very Terrible to the Kings and Princes, and Captains, and People of the Roman-Pagan-Empire, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captaines and the mighty men, and every bond-man, and every free-man, hid themselves in the denns and in the rocks of the mountains. And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand. And so will this Day of Christ's great Indignation, when his Wrath shall Come upon the Kings, the Rulers, the Councellors, the Cap∣tains, and the People of the Roman-Papal-Empire, and
the Kingdoms of this World, Rev. 17.15. And he saith unto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. And Rev. 16.11-21. The Effect of Christs wrath will be their utter Destruction, as here followeth, And to destroy them, that destroy the Earth.. And the Time of the Dead, that they should be judged. This is another Effect that will follow upon Christ's Co∣ming to set up his Kingdom on Earth, when HE shall take unto himself his Kingly Power, and hath Reigned, till God have put all his Enemies under his feet, then the Time will come, when the Dead shall be Judged, and all the Saints shall be Rewarded by the LORD Jesus Christ. The Dead, that are to be judged in Contradistinction to the Saints, that are to be rewarded, are all Persons with∣out Christ, (when HE Comes to judgment,) whether they be then living in their Sins (and yet dead in trespas∣ses and Sins; Eph. 2.1.5.11.12.) or Dead for their Sins, dying without Christ. For Christ shall Judge the quick and the dead, at his Appearing and his Kingdom, 2 Tim. 4.1. And that thou shouldest give the Reward, &c, Rev. 22.12. And behold I Come quickly, and my Reward with me: to give every Man according as his Work shall be. Read those Scriptures, Rom. 2.6.7.10. & 1 Cor. 3.8. & Math. 16.27 Ʋnto thy Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy Name, small and great. Vers. xix. And the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the Ark of his Testament, and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earth∣quake, and great hail. This Temple is not the New Jerusalem, which is still above, the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. And shall come down from God out of Heaven, Rev. 21.2. For in that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven
from God, Rev. 21.9, 10, 11. St. John saw no Tem∣ple therein, For the Lord, the God, the Almighty is the Temple of it, even that Lamb, Rev. 21.22... But this Temple is that Temple which St. John was Commanded to Measure vers. 1. of this Chapter, viz. The true visible Constituted, organized Churches of Saints in the Apostles daies (whereof see more in our Exposition of the first verse of this Chapter) which are called the Temple of God, Eph. 2.20, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 6.14-18. Rev. 7.15.5. & 15.5. And after that I looked, and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven was o∣pened: And there was seen in his Temple the Ark of his Te∣stament: This Ark bears some Allusion unto that Ark in the Temple of God's Tabernacle, called the Sanctuary, Exod. 25.1, 2.8, 9, 10, 11.16-21.22. And in the Temple of the House of the LORD, which Solomon built, 2 Chron. 5.1.2.5.7.9. & 10. There was nothing in the Ark save the two Tables which Moses put therein at Ho∣reb, when the LORD made a Covenant with the Children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt. Compare 2 Chron. 5.13, 14. with Rev. 15.5.8. wherein you have the full Allusion. By the Ark of his Testament we are to understand Christ in whom is safely laid up the new Covenant of Grace, or, the new-Testament of the Gospel, For all the Promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. And there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an Earthquake, and great hail. By these Metapho∣rical expressions, are signified the Ruines, and Destructi∣ons of all those Nations, Kingdoms, Potentates, Pow∣ers, Kings, Princes, and People, that oppose the Church of God, and the Kingdom of Christ on Earth in that Day. Dan. 2.44. And in the daies of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be de∣stroyed: and the Kingdom shall not be left to the people, but it shall break in pieces, and consume these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. Isa. 60.7.12. For the Na∣tion and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish, yea,
those Nations shall be utterly wasted. Psal. 18.13.14. The LORD also thundered in the heavens, and the high∣est gave his voice, hailstones and cols of fire. Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out light∣nings, and discomfited them. Especially the righteous Judgments and Plagues of God upon Mystical-Babylon in that Day of her Desolation. Compare Rev. 16.18, 19, 21. with Rev. 18.2.8.10.19.21. Lastly, By the voices here we are to understand those Alleluja'hs expressed Rev. 19.1-9. And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in Heaven, saying, Alleuja, sal∣vation, and glory, and honour, and power unto the Lord our God. For true and righteous are his judgments, for he hath judged the great Whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. And again they said Alleluja: and her smoke rose up for ever, and ever. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluja, for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. All which things will be more fully manifested in our Expo∣sition of the Sixteenth Chapter of this Book of the Revela∣tion. FINIS.
