L2039 12979511 96168
THE LIFE OF William Fuller, THE Late Pretended EVIDENCE Now a Prisoner in the King's-Bench. Who was Declared by the Honourable House of Commons, Nemine Contradicente, to be a Notori∣ous Impostor, a Cheat, and a False Accuser of Persons of Honour and Quality. With all his Pranks and Villainies, &c. to this Present First of March. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, near Temple-Bar. 1692.
THE BOOK-SELLER TO THE READER. Gentlemen, NOT to Flourish in the Matter, for that's not the Book-seller's Talent, in this short History I give you the Life of our New Plot Evidence, in which, consi∣dering the Person, a Young Fellow, Two Years within his Apprenticeship, his Age not above Twenty Two, of such low Extract and Education, take all these toge∣ther, perhaps, upon your Reading throughout, you'll ac∣knowledge you have met with a Rarety beyond a Guz∣man, a Clancy, a Morrel, a German Princess, or any of our most Famous Impostors. I have this farther Re∣commendation to make you, That I have made it my Busi∣ness to get the whole Contents from the Original Parties concern'd, there being but one Story in the whole Book, viz. That of Major-General K-'s, that I have not at first Hand, and that, though at second Hand, I received from very Credible Authority. I have not done (as 'tis custo∣mary) built a great deal of Fiction upon a small Foundation
of Truth. For either from his Master, the Merchants, Tradesmen or others, all Cheated by him, I have ga∣thered my Intelligence all from their own Mouths, and dare confidently averr, there never was a Book of this kind, that the Contents more faithfully adher'd to Truth than this. I have likewise inquired into all Affairs in the Gaol, have taken out his Copy of Actions, and re∣ceived all my Relations in the King's-Bench, from the most certain Information. One thing is much to be ad∣mired, He is naturally one of the greatest Cowards living, and how so Low-Spirited a Cheat should attempt such Perillous Impostures in several Nations exposed to so ma∣ny manifest Hazards and Dangers attending, is some∣what unaccountable. As to the List of the 28 Lords and 15 Commoners Accused by him, though I have had a True Copy of 'em, which I keep by me, I durst not pre∣sume to put such Honourable Names in Print, though God knows the vile Breath of such an Accuser has rather done them Honour, than otherwise. So bidding you welcome to what Entertainment you'll find, I am Your Humble Servant A. R.
THE LIFE OF William Fuller, &c. TO begin with the Birth of our great Plot-maker, He was the Son of William Fuller, of Milton, near Sitingburne in Kent, by occupation a Butcher. His Father, now many years ago deceased, had the misfortune to break, and dye a Prisoner in the Kings-Bench; his Calamities in a high measure imputed to his Wife (our Evidences Mother) who perhaps, to say all, was too gay a Dame for a Butchers Wife. The Son, under such unhappy circumstances, through the Fathers Decease, and his Mothers second Marriage, being left in a manner friendless, was bound Prentice to Mr. James Hartley, Citizen and Skinner of London, a Coney wool cutter in Shooe-lane, on the 4th of Jan. 1686. His Introduction to this Master was by Cornelius Harfleet, Gent. (some time since one of the Evidences against Captain Crone) who was a person very intimate all along, and for some years before our young Coney wooll cutter was born, with both his Father and Mother.
Our Youngster, though bound, (yet not strong enough tyed) to a Trade, had a roving Head, and all along thought a mechanick employment too inferiour for his more aspiring Ambition; and therefore, with a great restraint upon his nature, made but a hard shift to continue under the com∣mand of a Master. He had not been a year and a half in his Apprenticeship before his Mother dyed: Now it happening that his Mother, possibly not altogether so obedient a Wife, as her second Hus∣band expected, had therefore now and then received a little corporal Correction from his hard Hand, and sometimes from his harder Foot; more particularly not long before her Death she had been a little disciplined by a Cudgel, or some such Family Instrument. The Son therefore upon the news of his Mothers departure, and remembring the Castigation she had often received from his Father-in-law, desires his Masters leave to go down into Kent to inquire into the death of his Mother, alledging that the Blow she had received from her Husband had been the cause of her Death; and that he designed this Journey only to prosecute his Father-in-law for her Murther. The Confidence he exprest in this matter half perswaded his Master to give him a little credit, and to fancy there might be something in it; and truly in so reasonable a request he could not refuse him the favour desired. Our Youngster resolving to bring his Evidence hand in betimes, being an early Affidavit-man, moves to Kent with no less Indignation upon the Anvil, than bringing in Daddy-in-law to the Bar for his Life. Down therefore to the Country he goes; and truly makes bold to say some hard words to his Father, in relation to his Mother; which the Father, as an honest man, was very able to answer, having really done nothing but what he could justifie, his correction to his undutiful Wife being no more than she was able to bear, and less than she deserved. The Son, to do him justice in this matter, was not so over zealous
for his Mothers death (that being the least of his concern) as designing to fright his Daddy out of a summ of Money to tye up his Tongue (Evidencing being indeed a Trade, and Money the grand design of Swearing.) And therefore all his loud Clamour and the formidable proofs he threatned to bring against him, on the account of his Mother, really designed more vengeance against his Purse than his Life. If that bled but heartily the other might scape whole. But, a∣las, he found his project in vain, for the honest Yeoman being hardy enough to stand out the storm, and defying what∣ever Justice or Judge could do to hurt him, was so far from being over-reacht that way, that truly the whole expectation was defeated; our Threatner so far short of gaining his point, that he was forced to quit his Cudgels; and after a fortnights staying, come pennyless to Town; his Daddys Reputation and Innocence standing both too well fortified against all Attacques of this kind. Returning home to his Master, with much ado he conti∣nued with him till the 10th of June, 88. the memorable Ju∣bile day for the birth of the Young Royal Hopes, the Prince of W. But whether over transported with the joys of that mighty Festival, or too much elevated with Bonefire ma∣king to bring his hand back to any poorer mechanick drudge∣ry, he took occasion to walk off, or as some call it, run away from his Master. Thus scamper'd, out young Coney-skin cutter could not be heard of by his Master, till he found his diminutive Rene∣gade a Page to the Right Honourable, and in those days Right Mighty, Earl of Melfort. And truly to qualifie him for that dignified post, he had taken the then fashionable Test, viz. turned Romish Convert; a young but passionate Zealot (as far as the little use he had for Religion requir'd) for the Popish perswasion. In this gay Livery, and in this Honourable Family, being ask'd by some friends from his Master why he deserted his service, he made answer in these very words, That truly he could not serve his great God in a Pro∣testant
Family, which was all the reason he had to leave his Master. With this Noble Peer he continued till the days of Abdica∣tion: but then the greater Buntings all taking wing, this young unfledged Squab was left behind; and whether too shame-fac'd (if I wrong him not in laying shame to his charge) to return to his Master; or for what other reasons his volatile Mercury prompted, he footed it down to his late Kentish Daddies, though truly not with his late terrible countenance he made his last visit there, having more use at present of a suppliant face; for his stock low, and wages and gay Livery both spent, he had occasion of sheltering under his Roof, and creeping to his Table, as a much humbler Guest. But, alas, his Reception here proved not so favourable as wisht. His Father in Law having made a second venture, and marryed again, here was a Mother in Law two degrees removed, to be pleased: And though the good for∣giving man had forgotten his last rough Treatment, and consequently his House and Table were free for him; howe∣ver the new Major Domo, the Mother, had not an overfond affection for him; and having unluckily heard of his Romish Conversion, through her aversion to Popery, she would by no means suffer him to live in the House. The Son, to re∣move all Obstacles of that kind, was ready immediately for Recantation, Renunciation, Abjuration, and what not. He exprest all the sorrow in the world for his being misled, and so shaking off his Romish Superstition, as easily as he could shift his Linnen, declared himself a penitent Re-convert, and desired nothing more than his Re-admission to the Bosom of his abandoned Protestant Mother Church. But his forsa∣king his Husks, could not bring him to the fatted Calf. His Infidel Mother-in-law would by no means be satisfied with the reality either of Protestations or Tears, nothing belike would convince her of his Re-conversion: So that, in short, here was no home to be had, not so much as a Cockloft for him to roost in.
Under these melancholly circumstances, his Pride some∣what lower'd, he condescends to think of returning to his Master; and therefore to smooth his way home again, (for his affairs stood not very well there neither, as with good Reason being not at present in his masters very good graces) he writes him a great many pityful Letters, earnestly implor∣ing of him to receive him again, and making wonderful pro∣testations of Amendment, together with his utterly abjuring his Romish Delusion, and his promises of intire Reconciliation to the Church of England. His Master being not over easily softned, as having but too just Occasion of Resentment, he writes several Letters full of the same promises to Mr. Harfleet, and beseeches his Mediation to his Master, Mr. Harfleet having a most natural Affection for him, (for truly the Boy was extreme like him, so like him that you should rarely see a Son like a Father) was not wanting in all the good Offices he could do on this occasion, and in a short time made a perfect Reconciliation, and so called home the Fugitive. The Wanderer being returned, Mr. Harfleet promised very lavishly for his Reformation, and often would visit his Master on the Young mans account. In several discourses with the Master and Patron, between jest and earnest, the Patron was often taxed for being perhaps a little nearer than ordinary related to the Youngster, and therefore his Zeal in obliging him, looked like a natural Affection towards him. The Pa∣tron, not to belye him, would not plainly own himself his Father, but has several times (swore not to use the plain Lan∣guage he spoke it in) that he had kist his Mother a hundred and a hundred times. And truly if you'll take the word of an Evidence in his own Cause, 'tis much to be imagined our Minor Evidence is a Gentlemans Graft upon a Butchers Crab∣stock. But to return to our History; as large as the promises have been, and as humble and dutyful a Servant as he intends to be, in a short time he grew a perfect Reprobate; would use little
shifts out of his Masters small dealings to miscount his Mo∣ney; kept a private book to enter Wares trusted, and if his Master mist 'em hot, demanded and received the Money for himself. He had not kept home this last time above 3 months, when, about Michaelmas 89, Mr. Harfleet came to borrow him of his Master for 3 or 4 days service to Major Kidgell (af∣terwards another Witness against Mr. Crone;) the Master kindly complyed and lent him, but Mr. Harfleet when he had borrowed him, took care never to see him paid again; for in six or eight months after his Master never set eye of him: Insomuch that he call'd Mr. Harfleet to account about it, and receiving no satisfactory Answer, threaten'd him with no less than prosecuting him for Spiriting away his Ser∣vant: Mr. Harfleet at last gave him the satisfaction of show∣ing him his man again about six months after, about April, 90, at Joes Coffee-house in Salisbury-Court, in a Rich Coat and all Accoutrements answerable, two Footmen at his heels, and the Secretary's Protection in his pocket, and in fine, much too great for a Coney wooll cutter to grapple with. In this five months past he had been in France, as we sup∣pose, and 'twas here that he pick'd up his Plot, the venge∣ance whereof sell first upon Mr. Crone, when tho' Senior Mr. Harfleet and the Junior William Fuller, with Major Kidgwell, were the Triumvirate Testimony against him. In this advancement he made an extraordinary bluster about Town; and soon after past for a Major of a Regiment, par∣ticularly to one Dr. P—n, a Physician in Kent, and for∣merly his acquaintance: upon an accidental meeting between em, with a very magisterial behaviour, and a great many Bravadoes, he talk'd of prodigious Interest he had at Court, and professing great friendship for the Doctor, he proffer'd him any service he pleas'd to command him there. Would the Doctor be the Queens Physician, if he pleas'd to accept of that preferment, 'twas in his power to give it him; with Promises as large, as ever Wickham made Legacies; therefore desiring him not to be modest, but ask and have, he assured
him he should not be three days without it. The Doctor who gave little credit to such Mountain promises, yet never∣theless being better bred than rudely to contradict so vain a Boaster, gave him the favourable hearing, and courteously replyed, that he was by no means qualified for that Dignity, and whatever favour the Major was able to do him in it, how∣ever his own want of merit would not give him leave to aspire so high. The Major swore a great many Oaths, that 'twas his own fault if the Doctor did not accept of his kind∣ness; for with a very hearty Oath, he told him he could do it with a wet Finger, nothing more easie. The Doctor still modestly refusing, the Major then prest him to accept of a lower post, a Doctor to a Regiment. The Doctor, though really giving little credit to any thing he said, yet seemingly satisfied with his last kind proffer, he thanked him for his great goodness, and if the Major would do him the Honour to let him know where he might wait upon him, or write to him, possibly he would make bold to embrace his Favour in somewhat of this kind, and acknowledge his Friend∣ship for so signal an Obligation. The Major hereupon tells him that he would not fail in serving him in this, or a greater matter; and as his affairs called him to his command in Ire∣land, whether in some few days he was upon setting forwards, he called for a Pen and Ink and left this Direction for the Do∣cter to write to him, viz. Direct your Letter for the Honoura∣ble Major William Fuller, in the Right Honourable the Lord Sidneys Regiment. This direction did the Doctor keep by him, and has several times produced it in company, all of Fullers own hand wri∣ting, to laugh at the Impudence of so much Pride and Vanity; in a Fellow, that knew the Doctor was no stranger to his birth, as a Butchers Son his sometime Neighbour in Kent, and yet thus arrogantly to write himself Honourable. This Summer he took a Ramble to Ireland, where he staid but a short time, however he lived well there, for he never wanted some bubble or other to bear his travelling charges in
what Country soever; he had either Bills or Shams, or some∣thing, in all places that brought him in a comfortable Sub∣sistence. From Ireland he returned, and lived about Town in a pre∣ty splendid Equipage, for he had not only so many fair words at pleasure, but likewise that innocent Face, that it was hard to suspect him a counterfeit. Here by his several wheadles he run into a great many Tradesmens, and others Debts (wit∣ness the large Sums that now lye upon him in the Kings bench) for his resolution, young as he was, was to live apace; for instance, he got 50 l. into a Mercer in Covent-garden's books. From a pastry Cooks near St. James, pretending himself a persecuted Romanist, with shams and storys, in money and otherwise, he hooked out 80 l. But the neatest sham was put upon one Coll. C—an old Cavalier and Loyal Officer to King Charles I, living not far from Westminster Abby. Spying a Bill upon this Gentlemans door, he comes one day thither in a Chair attended by his man, where desiring to speak with Madam C— the Lady of the House, and pretending himself a Country Gentleman newly come out of the Country, and that he had brought his Sister up with him to see the Town, he wanted a Lodg∣ing for her, and none could please him like her house, for he understood 'twas a sober Family, and 'twould be a great hap∣piness to his Sister to have the Conversation of the two young Ladies Madam C—Daughters, and truly on that consi∣deration he would give her any content, and not stand with her for price. Upon this they strike up a bargain, and in 2 days he brings his Sister in her Country attire. When she had been there a while, he desired she might go to the danc∣ing School along with the two young Ladies, being very de∣sirous to have her take her education, in all things, from two such fair Examples; but first he so far insinuates with the good Collonel and his Lady, as to buy for his Sister such new Cloaths and other necessaries, as might dress her up a suitable Companion to two such gentile young Ladies, promising to
repay all very speedily with gratifications, &c. The kind perswaded old Lady accordingly takes her out and new rigs her from top to bottom, gives her all the breeding of her own Daughters, supplys her with every thing, a good Table, fair Lodgings, and what not. This continued above half a year, without one penny payment from the Country Gentleman, the Brother; though continual fair words and promises were never wanting, and several very extravagant Letters came on that occasion, some whereof are as follows. The first Letter. March 7. 1691 Madam, I Am almost half distracted that I have thus been forced to disappoint you; Which I am most heartily ashamed of: My Banker to whom I committed the care of receiving two hundred Pounds, on Tuesday last, I fear is gone off, I have been every day this week to meet him but can never find him within: He sent me word he would be with me this morning, but is not come, nor is he at his own house, which grieves me much; for I have not only disappointed you but others; but I am resolved if possible to find him, but whether I do or not, at the beginning of the next week I shall receive two hundred Pounds more, and then you shall com∣mand what you please of me, and now if your necessities are great, I am contented to pawn some things for you: for I do protest I have not by me twenty Shillings, by reason I thought my Money safe in that fellows hands; but if it is not much to your prejudice, I shall bear my loss the more contented, for I am ashamed to see you till I bring your Money. Your humble Servant, W. Fuller. This Letter though dated 91, was last March 90. But you have it from the original verbatim, as he penned it.
The Second Letter Monday March 30, 1691 Madam, THE great Obligations you have laid on me, by your care of my dear Sister, and your kindness to my self in this time of want, justly compels me to acknowledge the Favour; and though it is so great, I will shortly if possible find out some way partly to requite it. neither will I cease there, but always whilst I live will study to be grateful to you The Queen has this morning passed an order for all my Moneys to be paid me, and to morrow morning I hope it will pass the great Seal, the Sum is near two Thousand Pounds, which I am certain of in a few days, I am just now going by her Majesties Command to a grand Consultation of Chief Officers, so that I cannot possibly wait on you; but will on the first opportu∣tunity, and will not fail shortly to oblige you with what Money you desire. My humble Service to all, I am Madam, Yours, W. Fuller. This second Letter, besides the Rhodomontades in the Contents, I must make one farther remark upon. When our great Courtier was solliciting at Court for the broad Seal for 2000 l. due from the Queen that very day March 30.91. he was in a Spunging House, a prisoner for debt, in an Action charged 39 l. 17 s. And another of 20 li From whence the 1st of April following, he was by Habeas Corpus removed to the Kings-Bench. But he staid not there long, for he made hard shift (his credit being not quite crackt) to get bail soon after.
The Third Letter May 5. 1691. Madam, I Hope once more of your wonted goodness, you will pardon me for not waiting on you since yesterday. I could by no means get an opportunity of speaking to the Queen, by reason her Majesty went to visit the Countess of Suffolk; I am now going to wait for an opportunity, but something unfit by reason I had the misfortune yesterday to rinch my Foot; if I do not suc∣ceed this day, to morrow by Gods leave, I will go to the A. Bp. of Canterbury's: nor will I miss of any occasion to forward my my business, that I may make both you and my self easie, and my Sister happy. Who am, Madam, Your ever Obliged and Faithful Servant, W. Fuller. You see Reader, by what management our young Arts-Master put upon the world. For indeed 'twas much at this high sort of Romance that he gained so much credit, and run into these numerous debts, in so few exttavagant Years. (nei∣ther Kings, Queens, Princes nor Prelates, no names too sa∣cred for him) He's an Officer, a Courtier, a Statesman, a Politician; our beardless Privy Councellour call'd to Consul∣tations, and what not: Has Broad Seals and Royal thousands all at command: Every thing and any thing to look great. But to return to our gay Boarding Sister, you see that Cheating and Imposture may run in a Blood; this young Country Damsel, with the same taint in her Veins, a tang of her Brothers Pride, could hold her false countenance with no less assurance, than his own hardned front; and pass for a Country Lady, eat, drink, and sleep, with Women of
in her false trappings of Honour, her unpaid-for Gallantry, their Friend, their Companion and Equal; run on Tick to support her Vanity, and put her Romantick Brother to the expence of so many impudent Forgeries, such lying Epistles, and all to gratifie a natural Ambition, the itch of a little Pro∣digality, the Family's frailty. But to pursue our History; the Collonel and his confiding Lady have not only lodg'd, fed, and rigg'd this Lady Errant, but school'd, pamper'd and danced her too, and all to the Tune of Patience. Our young All-plot having talk'd all, but done nothing, banter'd and shuffled so beyond all humane sufferance, that goodness itself can bear no more; at length they come to this prudent result, to attach the gay Rigging in their own hands, the rich garniture they had bought her, and so forgiving her her Boarding, Lodging, Schooling and Dancing, they fairly turn'd out the poor Spinster in her own proper Accoutrements, the Country weeds she came in, to shift in the wide world, and exercise her own and her Bro∣thers wheadling faculty for a new Lodging at another Land-lord and Landladys as kind as they had been. But this current of Felicity was not always to run on un∣stopt; for as a small check to his career, on the fifth of June he was snapt, and committed once more to the Kings-Bench. Now this second time with his Stone-Doublet on, being a little faster noos'd than before, he was soon loaded with 3 or 4 hundred pound Actions, and our Spark too well known to be Bail'd: However, to keep up his port and character, he still carries the Title of a Collonel, and Grandee-like, keeps a man to wait upon him in prison. One Comical passage during his confinement is worth the Readers hearing. It happened that one Major Collingwood, sometime a Brigadeer of the Guards, was then his fellow Collegiate; with whom contracting an Acquaintance, and having one Sunday invited the Major to Dinner, after a good Treat, and the Bottle going briskly round, (for our Collonel lived nobly) the Major, amongst other chat, ask'd him very
frankly, how so young a man as he, (being then not above 22) came to be made a Collonel? Our young Commander immediately replyed, For his Services at the Boyne: And thereupon he makes a most heroick relation of Exploits he perform'd there, as a Volunteer, of that extravagant Gallantry equal to Captain Braggs Bell-clapper feats at Buda) that he told him King William took particular notice of him, and in the very heat of the Battel clapping him upon the shoulder, Well Fuller (says the King) thou art the bravest young lad in all my Army, and immediately upon the spot gave him a Collo∣nels Commission. The Brigadier, who was prepared to swal∣low the Jest, made answer, that no Honour could be so great as what was gotten in the Field; and truly he much won∣dred the King did not dub him a Knight Bannoret. But pray noble Collonel, continues the Major, were you a Collonel of Horse or of Foot? Our young Field-Officer having not his memory about him, could not readily answer to that point, but upon second thoughts fancying the Major pincht upon him, Why Sir (recollecting himself) do you think (says he) that I tell you a lye? If you won't believe me, ask my man here, he was there with me, and saw the King give me my Collonels Com∣mission. You Sirrah (turning to his man) did not I do so and so, &c. (repeating all over again) and for my Courage and Ser∣vices at that famous Battel did you not see the King seal me a Coll's Commission? No, by G—d, replys the man. How Rogue, Dog, Rascal! crys Master) and flings a Glass of Claret in his Face: The fellow, a sturdy Lad, his Eyes somewhat smart∣ing, and his Indignation a little provoked, returns his Ma∣sters civility by fairly knocking him down. For though nei∣ther Fire nor Steel, Halbert nor Pole-axe could fell him at the Boyne, a box o'the Ear was a little too heavy here; so rising up again (for the Fall was not mortal) the Collonel in heat of blood somewhat forgetful of his honour, to match his Prowess with varlets, nevertheless enters into single Combat at Loggerheads with his man. In short, a most terrible fray ensued between 'em, sometimes one uppermost and sometimes
t'other; till the Major at last, to make a Battel Royal of it, comes in for the third; for having a small walking Crab-tree utensil in the Room, which he called Marjery, he makes bold to lay on. And though he seemingly let fly only at the Squire, he let some chance drubs fall upon the Knights Shoulders, till master and man, to shield from this new Assailant, drew off at some distance, and stood at bay. The Major, as if his whole vengeance was intended only for the impudent Var∣lets back, began to swear as hard now, as he thresh'd before. Sirrah, Villain, Scoundrel, (crys the Major) G— D—mn you for a Son of a Whore, what does your Master give you wages for, but to lye for his Credit? if your Master had said he had been a Ma∣jor General, were you so impudent a Rascal as to deny it. D— him, let me cut the Rogues Throat. The fellow pretty well satisfied with the Cudgelling already received, would not stay for any further engagement, but fairly facing to the right a∣bout, marches off with some Precipitation, and the Master after him, crying very vehemently to the Turn-key, Stop the Rogue, and by no means to let him go out. The Turn-key made answer, He was no Prisoner, and 'twas more than he could justifie to stay him. Ay but (replies the Collonel, with his Nose a little dripping) do you see what the Rascal has done, he is a Dog and a Villain, and has abused me. Nay, for that matter (quoth Turn-key) I am neither Constable nor Justice of Peace, and so opening him the door he gives him the compliment of [Run Rascal] and so troops off Valet de Chambre; and never found the way back again. Our Collonel though loaded with so many hundred Pounds (as I told you) nay and though so formidable a Hero at the Boyne, nevertheless found that favour from the House as now and then to be trusted abroad with a single keeper, particu∣larly on the fifteenth of July following, he prevailed with one of the Turnkeys to take him abroad to Westminster. The Turn-keys wife who had been often promised a small token of Love from the Collonel, for her Husbands former civilities to him, was pleased to be very high both with the Collonel and Hus∣band
for Nonperformance of Articles. Well, what would she have? Why truly he should present her with a Topknot and a Commode. Very well, the Collonel upon honour would not fail equipping her at one of the Milliners in Westminster-Hall. No, troth that won't do, for either she wanted faith, being so long promised before, or else would not trust to the Col∣lonels fancy; she had rather have one of her own choosing. Then Madam, replyes the Courtier, there's a Guinea, please your self. So all parties well satisfyed, her Spouse and his Martial charge the Collonel, move immediately to Standgate, and there take Oars for Westminster Bridge. At their landing the Turnkey trips out of the Boat first, and turning back to look for his Prisoner, he found him stept over into a Galley, a boat with 4 Oars, that lay ready for him, and pushing off with all might and main towards Whitehall. The Turnkey immediately bellows at no small rate, in the Kings name, and what not to stop him. To take Boat and follow him was in vain, for the Galley was too nimble for any common Oars, besides the Watermen were of the Col. party. In short he has no way but to leap into the Thames, which at that time at the very shore was near middle deep. So full cry he flounces in, with all the Expedition he could make af∣ter him; but all in vain, the Coll. was got to Whitehall stairs before him; where the Watermen made a fair open Lane for him, whilst the dripping water-rat came too late to catch him. Some small Hubbub was made at the stairs on this occasion, but all to no purpose, our new Courtier was in his own Element, and our Collonel-Hunter snapt too short to reach him: and the Jest of this pleasant Adventure went so far, that the Queen, inquiring into the occasion of the Huzzas and Hollows at her watergate, was informed that only a young Bloodhound, had slipt his Collar an Eivdence of hers was got loose.
The poor Turnkey, possibly what with his great Heat within, and his cooling fresh water pickle without, together with his dolorous Affliction for his lost Prisoner, soon fell sick, and dyed before the end of the month. After this nimble conveyance out of his enchanted Castle, he began in prudence to consider, that London, and indeed little England might soon grow too hot for him, and there∣fore he resolves for a Ramble for Flanders: but before we shew you his Adventures there, we shall relate some particu∣lars of his Irish Frolicks, which were unhappily forgotten, in his forementioned Irish Expedition. In Ireland by the Title of Squire Fuller, his Abode was at Dublin, he lodged at a Barbers in Colledge Green, where he lived at that extravagant Expence, that notwithstanding he wheedled one Capt. Vaud—a Dutch Officer out of 100 l. and some other people of considerable Sums by drawing of Bills upon an eminent Merchant in Woodstreet (for to countenance his shams he made use of no little names for his Correspon∣dents) he run in his Landlords and some others debts near 100 l. more, who having occasion for their money, and (as with good Reason) pressing a little hard for it, to get his heels loose to return for England, he wheedled in an honest man to be bound for it, with Oaths and large promises of returning it as soon as he came to England. But about 6 months after came a most miserable Letter from his kind Bondsman, di∣rected for him to a House near Cheapside (whether he used to direct his own Letters) deploring his sad condition, himself in Dublin Goal, for the Debts he stood engaged for him, which he was utterly uncapable of satisfying; and that unless he returned the Money according to his promise, he must pe∣rish in Prison, and his Wife and Children starve. This Let∣ter lying long in their hands, and none of our Wandring Spark at that time to be found, they made bold to open it, and found these lamentable contents in it. Had the Letter not been lost you had had it at length.
At his first coming back from Ireland, at a Tradesmans in London, he talked of most Stupendious Wonder he had per∣formed there, that he was a Collonel of Horse, had been at the Siege of Lymrick; That the Lords, Justices had resolved to make him a Lord Commissioner, and as an Earnest of their Favour, had already given him the Lord Clanoarties House, (what he meant by this unaccountable Gibberish I under∣stand not) that he was to have Twelve Sub-Commissioners under him, the worst of their places worth 50 l. and the best 100 l. per Annum. But these over and above Ex∣travagant Vapours he only made use of, where he thought High Words and Small Sense would pass Currant. But let us return to our Flanders Voyage. Accordingly himself, with his Man to attend him, and Entitled Collonel Fuller, he went down to Gravesend to take Shiping for Holland: Meeting with Honest Capt C— that carried the King over, the Collonel struck up with him for 10 Guineas (a Sum bid like a Chapman) to waft him over, saying, He was a Collonel and was going to his Com∣mand: The Captain paid him a more than ordinary Respect, and gave him the best Treatment his Vessel could afford. When he came cross the Water, the Collonel had not Money enough to pay the Sum contracted, but writes a Bill for the Captain to receive 10 Guineas in Amsterdam, which at pre∣sent very well satisfied the Captain: But when he came to get his Bill accepted, he received an unexpected Answer, That they knew no such Collonel, nor had any such Sum so payable. This Disappointment put the Captain into no good Opinion of his Collonel; however, he resolved to say nothing, because he found himself bubbled. But his good Fortune in about a Fortnights time after, made him acci∣dentally meet his unlook'd for dear Collonel at Rotterdam. The Captain makes up to him, and catching him fast by the Hand, made bold to tell him, that his Bill was not worth a Farthing. No, replyed Fuller, with a look like a Dead Man, (being not a little surprized) Captain, says he, I am heartily
sorry for it, and beg your pardon, here are four Pistoles for you, Swearing a great Oath, 'twas all he had; and so in haste took his Leave, whilst the Captain was very glad to get so hand∣me a Composition for a Debt so desperate. However this cross Adventure did not baulk our Knight Errant, and pretending to be a Man of great Quality, no less than a Nephew to the Lord S—, he carried on the Dis∣guise so artfully, and insinuated himself into the Favour of Major General K—, whom he saw at Brussels, that he struck up his Heels for 200 Guineas, and was so intimate with him as to ride in his Coach with him, the Major General thinking no favour too great for a Person so nearly Related to his Lordship, and one that behaved himself so much like a Per∣son of Quality. Till one Day meeting his Lordship, he could not forbear telling him how hopeful a Young Gen∣tleman he had for his Nephew, whom he had the particular Honour to be Acquainted with, not a little priding himself in his Friendship and Conversation, and giving his Lordship a very extraordinary Character of him. My Lord was much surpriz'd, and utterly disown'd any Relation of that Name, and being showed the Person, and asking him what Coun∣trey he was of, and which way his Relation to my Lord came in, he said he was of the Fullers of Kent, that truly he had the Happiness to be somewhat Related, though not so near as a Nephew, to his Lordship, 'tis true as he much feared, it was his Misfortune to be at present unknown to his Lordship, however he hoped his Lordship would pardon his Boldness, in laying claim to so high an Honour, it being impossible for him to do less than pride himself, though in the most distant Affinity to a Family of that Worth and Glo∣ry as his Lordships. My Lord not altogether satisfied with this Complement, was pleased to signifie his Pleasure, that he desired him to forbear laying farther claim to his Kindred, for if he did, he would have a Paper pin'd to his ck, and have him Bumbasted by his Footmen through the Camp, that it might be known how little Respect he had for his
Nephew. This terrible Answer put our Spark into some Mortifying Consternations, and the Major General into some small surprize, which timely warn'd our Rebuked Gal∣lant to walk off to shelter from his Lordship's Indignation, or rather in prudence to retire from a more formidable dan∣ger; some hard Questions that possibly might arise about his 200 Guineas, rais'd upon so Insolvent a Pawn as the Credit of his Lordships Kindred. And therefore modestly with∣drawing before the Major General was prepared to make any such Motion, he left the Room, and in less than half an hour after, the Town. Here at Brussels he had all along kept a Coach and Four Horses, to drive backward and forward to the Camp, &c. at Six Crowns a day Expence; though truly his Man Kent (for that was his Name) had often in several Companies, reproved his Masters Extravagance in not bringing over his own Coach and Horses, and so have saved all this needless Charge. But having occasion at present to move off incognito, his Coach and Four Steeds were no further useful, the Man and Master making the best of their way from this dangerous Town, with all the Privacy Requisite. From hence his Pocket pretty well lined he gets to the Hague. Here he did not think the bare Title of Coll. which at highest amounted but to Honourable, sufficient for the Fi∣gure he intended there, and therefore to Tagg his Point with Right Honourable, he mounts a little step higher, and Dubs himself a Lord by the Title of Baron Fuller; for it was observable, in all his shapes; he was very unwilling to part with his Sirname, for whither Major, Collonel, Sir William, or Lord in the Front, still Fuller brought up the Reer. Here he drove at a high Rate, till Fortune one day unhappily play'd a Sly Jdes Trick; for when several of the Highest Nobility one Night were at a publick Gaming, our Baron not to stand out put in for one of the Fair Gamesters, where 'twas his misfortune to loose all his Money; and his
last stake being gone, he pulled out a small Bill of Exchange of 30 l, charged by Mr. John Sainsburough, Hop-Merchant in Thamesstreet, London, upon Myn Heer Van Wyke Merchant in Amsterdam payable to William Baron Fuller, or his Order, without any further Advice. This Stake went currant in play, no body doubting a person of his Honour, and conse∣quently the Bill as substantial as ready Money. But his Bill, in short followed his Gold; our Gamster lost all he playd for. But when the Bill was tendered to Myn Heer, here was no Advice (as the Bill mentioned) wanting, for at the first sight he own'd it a Counterfeit, but this not fully satisfying the Person that tendered it, it happened that an English Gen∣tleman being by, made bold to tell him, that he was afraid the Lord was as Covnterfeit as the Bill, for to his certain know∣ledge, there was no English Nobleman of that Name, and to confirm what he said, he sent for the Present State of England, offering to lay twice the 30 pound, that no such Title could be found in the whole Catalogue of the English Nobility. In this Flanders Ramble his Bank somewhat sunk, he happens into Company with one Mr. M.— a Native of Holland, and one of the Kings Messengers. His Occasions want∣ing a new supply, and some new Arts to raise it, he thought fit to strike in and try his Fortune with this Gentleman. The Discourse between 'em, discovering that the Messenger scarce ever lay still, that he had been upon several Expedi∣tions with Expresses, &c. to several Courts on his Maje∣sties Account, and consequently imagining that the Messen∣ger whose Business lay so wide, and himself so always upon Motion, was undoubtedly an Absolute Stranger to the Name of, Fuller either as Coll. Major, Esq; Sir William or Baron, or any of his Pranks under any of those Titles, and in all likelyhood like to continue so; with this consideration he resolves to pass now for Sir William Fuller, an English Baro∣net newly come to his Estate, his Father Sir William not two Years dead, himself newly arriv'd in Flanders, but just come on shore, his whole Business here being to spend a
little Money, see a few Fashions, and so return home to his Family and Tennants, with all the Priviledges of a Travel∣ler, viz. To be able to tell Wonders to the homebred Coun∣try Gentlemen his Neighbours, that scarce ever Travelled beyond their own Grounds; to give the two young Ladies his Maiden Sisters a Character of a Dutch Froe, and describe 'em the Difference between a Flandrian and an English Gal∣lant; And likewise to see a little of a Warlike Campagne abroad, that he might talk Miracles to his Peaceful Brother Militia Captains at Home, and see some other Foreign No∣velties, as might furnish out a modish Gentlemans Conversa∣tion at his return: And this truly was all the design he had in this Quarter of the World. The Messenger much de∣lighted with the Gayety of his Humour, exprest his ready In∣clination to do him any service in his Power. Our Sir Wil∣liam returning the Complyment, told him he would take him at his word, and the Favour he would beg of him should be this, to be some part of a Guide to him in a Country where he was so much a Stranger, desiring his Directions in his intended Ramble and Travels. The Messenger proud of oblidging him in that Civil Courtesie, told him he should want no Instuctions of that kind, and indeed 'twould be no little pride to him, could himself be his Companion in his Travells; that is, if his own troublesome Employ would permit: But as that rendered him uncapable of receiving that happiness, however nothing in his part should be wanting to gratifie so worthy a Gentlemen in so poor a service, and if he pleased to honour him by visiting an Uncle of his at Rot∣terdam, a Brugher of some small Fashion there, he would by a Letter do him that Justice to his Uncle, that his Uncles best services should be ready to oblidge him in a higher mea∣sure then his own weaker Abilities cou'd do. This Gene∣rous Engagement from Mr. M— you may imagine, occa∣sioned a Courtly Complimental Answer. But to shorten the Flourishing part of our History, the Messenger and the Baronet grew intimate, and a Recom∣mendatory
Epistle was prepared for him to his Uncle; and Rotterdam is the next place that our Traveller must visit But before our new Sworn Friends part, the Baronet being in a strange place, and and all his Travelling Treasure in Bills, and those unfortunately drawn upon Merchants in Amsterdam, he has a present occasion for a small spill of about 200 Guelders to supply his pocket till his Receipts from Amsterdam, and therefore he makes bold to trouble his Friend for that Diminitive Sum, to be repayed upon Demand with Thanks. The 200 Guelders without the least scruple were instantly furnisht; and our Baronet thus Equip'd sets forward to Rotterdam. Here he is no sooner Arrived but the Uncle is kind above Imagination, Treats him most Sumptuously, pays him all the Addresses suitable to the Quality of his Honourable Guest, brings him into the Conversation of several Rich Mer∣chants, who all of 'em grew extreamly fond of his Company, being indeed a Darling among 'em. During his stay here he strikes in with the Uncle for much about the same Sum he had before borrowed from his Nephew the Messenger, and does it with that ala mode de negligence, that truly 'twas im∣possible to deny him any thing, his pretensions for borrow∣ing, being only occasioned by their own over kindness to him, for he is so highly caressed by the Uncle and his worthy Friends, that he cannot get loose from their Embraces to go to Amsterdam, to receive his own Bills. Amongst the several Rotterdam Acquaintance, he grew mightily Intimate with a Scotch Merchant who more passionately Doated upon him then any of 'em all; with him he grows so bold, that having a bill of 300 l. English Money to receive at Amsterdam, he gets him to lend him 150 l. of the Money, all under the old pretence, that he cannot stir yet from his overkind Friends. Having thus neatly trumpt upon the doating Sir Credulous, he is not content with this pretty handsome Squeeze, but in some few days after, privately understanding that some Af∣fairs call'd our Scotch Adventurer very speedily to Amsterdam,
he resolved to pass the Slur upon him once more. Sir, says our Baronet, I am so tied by the Leg, that I despair of ever getting free from the daily Importunities of my good Friends here, and could heartily wish you would take the trouble off my hands, of getting me one of my Amsterdam Bills received. Noble Sir; re∣plyed the kind Scot, I have some Occasions in some few Days thither my self. The Knight seemingly transported at that good Fortune, made Answer. Nay then Sir, I'll be so bold as to make use of my worthy Friend, without seeking any farther, if you'll please to favour me with 50 l. more, to the Sum you have already pleasured me with: Pray take this 300 l. Bill, and re∣ceive the Money, and then pay me the Remainder at your Re∣turn. To make even Money on't, the Scotch-man deposites the Additional 50 l. without the least scruple, and takes the Pa∣per Pledge for his Security. Upon this 200 l. out of one Pocket, and so slender a Mortgage for it, our serious Sir Wil∣liam begins to consider that his Affairs are now upon their Critical Point, and therefore so orders matters, that that Morning our Scotchman moves towards Amsterdam, Our Baronet has extraordinary Occasions to meet some Friends newly Landed from England at Helvetsluys, and to palliate the Business, he received Letters the very Night before, which laid an Indispensible Obligation upon him of meeting them there, one of the Company being of no meaner a qua∣lity than an Earl, to whom he had the Honour by his Mo∣ther side to be Nephew. The Duty therefore that lay up∣on him on this Occasion, superseded all other Obligations, and he must be forced to borrow himself for some few Days from his kind Friend his Landlord, but faithfully promising his Return, and withal, not doubting but to bring my Lord his Honourable Relation to Rotterdam, whom he was sensi∣ble would be highly thankful to him for the great Favours he had heap'd upon his Nephew, he formally takes his Leave. No sooner came he to Helvetsluys, but by an accursed Ca∣price of Fortune, who should he meet but a particular Friend
of Major General K—'s, who privately takes our Sir William aside, and tells him, there were 200 Guineas long owing to the Major General, and which must be paid upon sight: Our Sir William was almost Thunderstruck at this Accident, and began a softening kind of a Speech to him; but the Gen∣tleman who had no leisure for talking, cut him short in this manner. Look you Sir, (says he) the 200 Guineas were bor∣rowed by fine Words, and Sweet Looks, but hark you, Sir Knight, they must not be so paid. In short, I give you this Choice, either pay down the utmost Doit of the Money, or look to be Jayl'd for a Cheat and a Rascal. I confess if thou wert a Gentleman, I would give thee a third Choice; that is, to go into the Field with me, and there give me the pleasure of cutting thy Throat for thy Villany to my Honourable Friend the Major General; but as thou art a Scoundrel, that's an Honour too great for thee. And so, as I told thee before, of the two take thy choice. The poor Sir William at this last blow, almost knock'd down like one of his Fathers Heifers, for some few Minutes stood Speechless; but at last recovering Soul enough to breathe and speak once more, he told the Gen∣tleman he would give him the utmost Satisfaction he was able; that truly he was ashamed of his Ingartitude to the Major General, but whatever he had deserved from his hands, he hoped both he and his Friends were Men of such Goodness and Worth, that if he strained hard to pay him 200 Guineas, they would graciously please upon his hum∣ble Supplication, which he would make upon his Knees, to seek no farther Satisfaction nor punishment for his faults. That therefore he hoped the Gentleman would be so kind as to be silent in the matter, least the exposing of him might be his utter ruin, which alas would be a poor Trophy for so noble a Gentleman as the Major General. Nay, says the Gentleman, pay but the Mony, you owe my Friend, and cheat all the World besides in the Devil's Name. For my my own part, I'll be so far from exposing thee, that I'll rather push on the Jest than baulk it.
Upon this small Comfort, and some farther Assurances from the Gentleman on the same Account, he made hard shift, from the 200 l. from the kind Scot (which, as good Fortune would have it, was yet untouch'd,) and the addi∣tion of a Gold Watch, to satisfie the whole summ demand∣ed. The Gentleman seeing the Moveable' viz. the Watch in too, to help up the summ, began to have some Commise∣ration upon him. Well, poor Rascal (says he) I will not un∣do thee quite, there's five Gueneas back again for thee for work∣ing Tools, till thou makest the next Bite for more; and so, true to his Promise, without words o noise he takes his leave. Our poor simple Travellor reduced to this small stake of five Guineas, is not a little disconsolate at his Calamity; however considering his Credit's above Deck, though his Pocket is a little under Hatches, 'tis some Mitigation to his greif; and resolving to trust Fortune once more, he plucks up a Spirit; puts on a good Face, and looks out sharp for new Game. He has no sooner shook off all Care, and banish'd all Sor∣row, but he happens to meet with two or three English Mer∣chants waiting for a passage to Harwich, he soon makes one with 'em; where bearing up the Port of an English Barro∣net, in an hours Conversation he begins to be a familiar Ac∣quaintance, talks much of his Travels, that he was a great Man at Court, formerly the late Queens Page, but since he came to Age, and his Estate, a Gentleman of Their now Majesties Bed-Chamber; that he was returning for England, & expected a King's Yatch for his Passage, to which these En∣glish Gentlemen should be welcome, and that he had by Letters ordered his Coach and six Horses from his Seat at Cobhamhall, to attend him at Harwich. This Account from our Bed-Chamberman, procured him a great many Legs and Scrapes from the Merchants, who in Duty bound, returned his Honour a kind Acknow∣ledgment for the Favour of his Yatch, they having design'd their Passage by the Packet Boat. No, by no means, he must beg that Favour of 'em; and not only so, but to take a part of his Coach from Harwich to London. He
had at present only one Servant attending him, and the Diversion of good Company, would be an Obligation of the highest value. The Merchants were in no small Confusion at this Ex∣travagant Generosity from a Stranger, and a Person of his Rank. But waiting for our Royal Yatcht, our Expectants were all disappointed, Wind, Tide, or some other cross Ac∣cident was in fault, for no Yatcht came: insomuch that in∣stead of a Kings Cabin, our Grandee was forced to make one with the Merchants in the homely Packet-Boat. Our short Voyage quick Dispatcht, no sooner were we all safe at Port, but Inquirie at the Inns in Harwich was made for a Coach and Six Horses that waited for Sir William Fuller, to which being answered in the Negative, that no such Coach was or had been there; He fell into a great Passion, called his Steward a great many Rogues and Villains for this im∣pudent neglect of his Commands, that his Letter that order∣ed his Coach, he was certain he must have received; that there was no Wind or Tide could hinder his Coach from Traveling, whatever they had done to disapoint him of his Yatcht; that the Negligence of his Servants was unpar∣donable, and when he saw 'em he should reward 'em ac∣cordingly. Now one thing I should have told you, he had Struck in with one of these Merchants for Ten Guineas; for a Person of his Quality, to want so poor a Sum, was only thro his Distance from home, and the long stay abroad, that had lickt him up some considerable Hundreds more than he Expected. Thereupon being defeated of his Coach and Six Horses, and thereby not only unable at present to re∣pay the Ten Guineas, but what grieved him more, that he could not obliege his worthy Friends as Engaged, he begg'd a Thousand Pardons of 'em. One little Escape I had almost Omitted. In the Packet-Boat he met with one who very intimately knew him, viz. when he was my Lady Melforts Page. This Person at pre∣sent under some Cloud, being a Noblemans Discarded Ser∣vant, made bold to borrow of his old Croney a Crown; and upon this Encouragement, once or twice more request∣ed
a further Favour of two or three Half Pieces of him, which our prudent Sir William to stop taling pretty willing∣ly lent him; but at last hearing his Fellow Traveller; the gay Baronet, talk at that Prodigious Rate to his Mates the English Merchants, he whispered him once more and desired to be pleasured with a Brace of Guineas. Our Knights Fund at this time none of the strongest, and good Nature some∣what tired with so troublesome a Petitioner, he was pleased to refuse this importunate Suppliant. Upon which his hum∣ble Addressor changing his Note, began to talk hard words, that if he denyed him this Favour, he should take the bold∣ness to cackle, and make some not overgrateful Illustrations to his Merchant Friends, upon the true Birth and Pedegree of their Honourable Friend Sir William, &c. Our Sir William a little nettled, but not out braved with all these threatnings, wisely runs to his Friends, and crys Whore first; tells 'em that an impudent fellow in the Boat whom he never saw be∣fore, and on whom he had bestowed some Charity, had the Insolence to ask to borrow two Guineas of him; which being denyed him, the ungrateful Villain with that fore∣head of Brass, that he had never mett with in his whole Life, pretended to asperse him with a parcel of Lyes and Forge∣ries, such as he almost trembled to hear; that the Rogue would come and tell his worthy Friends forsooth, that he was a Cheat, some pittyful Scoundrel like himself, and other such impudent Stuff that made his Hair stand on End but to Repeat. The Merchants were much concerned at this hi∣deous Affront to their Honourable Friend: And in short the Matter came to a Tryal of Skill; For the whole Life and Pedigree of this pretended Knight was reap'd up before 'em, in which the Knight so out brav'd all the poor Accuser could say, that he clearly carry'd the Cause; insomuch that at last it came to a Challenge between the Knight and the Im∣peacher, in which the two Merchants on the Knights side, and two other Passengers for the other Principal, were to have been their Seconds; But the Quarrelling Part before they came a Shore was husht; and though this Accuser took the Merchant (that had lent him the Ten Guineas) aside,
and bid him have a care of the Impostor, engaging to make out the Truth of all he had said; Nevertheless, our Sir Wil∣liam held that intire Ascendant that he would not believe one Syllable against him. But to return to Harwich. The Coach and Six Horses be∣ing wanting, the Knight and his Companions came in a hired Coach to London; and there taking leave, he Invited 'em to meet him at Dinner at a Tavern in Queens-Street near Cheapside on Thursday sevenight following, against which time he would have a fat Buck from his Park at Cobham Hall to entertain 'em, and then pay the Ten Guineas borrowed. The Merchants accordingly with some Friends (one where∣of an Oyle Man in Aldersgate-Street) met at the Tavern on the day, but to their Suprise found neither Dinner, Veni∣son, nor Knight provided. This Defeat strangely exaspe∣rated the Merchant that lent him the Ten Guineas, that more out of revenge than value of the Money, he made it his Business to hunt him through the whole Town, till at last he fixt him at a House over against the Charterhouse: here he found it cursed hard to get at him, for he lived upon the Sculk, came in Late, and went out Early; however, re∣solved to Snapp him, he came with his Officers at 11 one Night, resolving to keep 'em upon the watch all Night, him∣self, and his Oyle-man Friend with him. The Spark was then going to Bed, but his man discovering some Persons at the Door, which he fancied waited for his Master, he slipt to the Constable and Watch, and told 'em there were Thieves designed to break open such a House; the Constable and his Mirmidons thus Allarm'd, came to do their Duty; when seing their Substantial Neighbour the Oyle-man, out of the Gange of Thieves, upon Examination they found out the whole Roguery: And instead of Apprehending joyned with them, and so far prevailed with the Landlord as to open his Door, and let in the Officers; who Arrested him in his Chamber, and hurried him to a Spunging-House, from whence on the 18th of November last he was by Hab Cor. re∣moved to the Kings-Bench. It seems now that all his old Arreers are to be paid at once,
for on the 18th of November last, he was brought over to the Kings Bench by Habeas Corpus, and Lodged at one of the Tipstaffs Houses, under careful Tuition. The Marshal was pretty well pleased that they had retrieved their Fugitive, and giving him a visit, he asked him the Reason why he made so ungrateful a Return, for his Keepers kindness in July last, in making that former Escape: To which he im∣pudently made Answer, he did it by the Queens Special Order. In these Melancholy Circumstances, his Projecting Head, about the end of December, put him upon Addressing to the House of Commons, concerning his new Discovery; The Cre∣dit he thought he had gained in Mr. Crones Diminitive Cause, made him presume upon the Foundation of the Inconside∣rable Truths delivered hen, to raise Airy Castles and Moun∣tain Prodigies now. Accordingly, he writes two Letters to the Speaker, whereupon, January the first, he was Ordered by the Marshal of the Kings Bench, to Attend the House on the Monday following. According to that Order, he appeared before the House the 4th. of January and had a Hearing before 'em, upon which was resolved, that an humble Application should be made to His Majesty, that he would please to Grant to Mr. Fuller a Blank Pass for two persons, for their safe coming from beyond Sea, or any other place hither to give their E∣vidence, and for their safe Protection while they are here, and their safe return if desired. On the 22d, of February, the House being acquainted by the Marshal of the Kings Bench, that Mr. Fuller was very ill, and not able to attend the House according to Order, seve∣ral Members were appointed to repair to him, and take his Examinations and Information upon Oath, to secure his Papers, and Examine him who his Witnesses were, where they lived, and where to be found. And the House being farther acquainted by one of the Members, where the said Witnesses would be that Morning, the said Member was ordered to go to the place and bring 'em to the House. On the 23d of February, one of the Members of Parlia∣ment (according to the order of the day) Reported, that
the Members appointed, had repaired to Mr. Fuller, Had taken his Examination and Information upon Oath, and secured his Papers, and Examined who his Witnesses were, and where to be found. Which Papers and Examinations were delivered at the Table Sealed, and there opened and Read by the whole House. Mr. James Hayes, and Coll. Tho. Dalavell, be∣ing mentioned by Fuller, to be the two Witnesses, and he having directed where they Lodged, and describ'd 'em to the Member that had repaired to him; several Members of the House were Ordered to bring the said Persons with them: and accordingly the Members appointed went, and Return∣ed with this Report to the House, that they had been at the place directed by Fuller, but upon Inquiry there, both of the said Persons Names and the Descriptions of their Persons, they could not hear of any such Persons to have Lodged either at that place, or the adjacent Houses, the Persons who owned the said Houses, being all ignorant of any such Persons Whereupon the House ordered that Mr. Fuller should procure his said Two Witnesses to attend the House to Morrow Morning at Ten a Clock peremptorily. But that Morrow being a Day quite out of his Alma∣nack, and the whole Juggle and Shuffle now plainly appear∣ing, it was declared by the whole House, February 24. Nemine contradicente, that the said Fuller was a notorious Impostor, a Cheat, and a false Accuser; that he had scanda∣liz'd Their Majesties and their Government, abused the House, and accused several persons of Honour and Quality; and that an humble Address should be presented to his Majesty, to com∣mand his Attorney General, to prosecute him accordingly. After this just Brand set upon him, and the prospect of a condign punishment, now speedily to attend him, I shall only inform the Reader, that when his swearing Hand was in, he accused no less than 28 Lords, Spiritual and Tempo∣ral, and 15 Commoners, most of which of no mean Quality. I shall only add a little Account of his Deportment in his Confinement; first, he affected his old Title of Collonel still; nay, suffers himself to be call'd Collonel to this very day. Upon the Credit he thought he should get by his
Plot, he bore himself with a very high strut and big look to the Tipstaff his Landlords Son, and others; he offer'd 'em places in his Gift at the Custome-House, or where they pleased, of near 200 l. a Year. One day he had the Im∣pudence to write a Letter to the Arch Bishop, who smil∣ing at the Confidence of the Man; a Gentleman then at∣tending his Grace, for the Humour sake, came to visit him at the Tipstaffs, which happening at Noon-time, he was at Dinner with 2 Fowls in a Dish, and two young Women at Table with him. The Gentleman told him, that he understood he had written a Letter to the Arch-Bishop. Yes Sir, replyed our Coll. and I have good Rea∣son to write; here am I serving the King and the Church, and the Nation, by discovering the Plots and Designs of their Enemies, and whilst I am doing 'em all this service, I am kept here and Starved. How (replyed the Gentleman) two Fowls, and two Mistresses, and complain of Starving! Troth, Sir, I think one Fowl, and one Mistress at a time, would make shift to keep you from that Danger. In his Sickness, which disabled his Attendance upon the House, he slily indeavour'd to insinuate a Belief that he was poyson'd, imagining (as 'tis to be supposed) that such a Suggestion might have credited his Evidence, by being thought some design of the Plotters, to stifle his Discovery. A Day or two after this last Vote of the House of Com∣mons, his pretended Indisposition continuing, perhaps in earnest, that mortifying Vote being sufficient to make him sick indeed, Mr. Th— an Eminent prisoner, a person that had given a little too fond an Ear to our Plot Witness (though at present somewhat ashamed of his over-Credulity) at his own Charge sent a Physitian to him. And at almost Mid∣night after, the Lecturer of the Parish was call'd to him, and desired to pray by him, who told him plainly, That if he would first deserve his Prayers, he should have 'em, viz. if instead of the pretended Poyson he was sick of, he would disgorge the true Poysons he had poyson'd the Nation withal, and own the Motives and Causes why he Accused so many Innocent Persons of Honour, then he should have
the Heartiest Prayers he could make for him. But till then he must excuse him, and so left him. The next Morning the Curate was sent for, to intreat him to do that Christian Office, which the Lecturer had refused him, which the Curate readily consented to. And after some very Hearty Prayers suitable to the Sick Conscience he pray'd for, he modestly prest it home to him, concerning the many Persons of Honour he had Accused, till at last he frankly confest he had done 'em a great deal of wrong, For all he had Sworn was not of his own Knowledge, but only from Hear say. He wheadled Dr. Oats out of Fifteen Pound (but upon what pretence our Examinants are not informed) and a∣mongst other Actions lyes charged at his suite for 30 l. It happned that two of the Waiters either in the Spirit of Ale, or Spirit of Prophecy, were one day so overhardy, as to talk little of our great Evidence; that they believ'd he wou'd prove a second Dangerfeild, and his highest Preferment end in a Pillory or Carts-Taile. This coming to his Ears, he fell into that Mortal Dudgeon against 'em, that the Marshal was forced to turn them both out of their places, and glad he could come off so cheap; though 'tis true, since the last House of Commons Vote, he has Restored them again. But above all, one thing is strangely Remarkable, that notwithstanding, he lay charged with so many Actions; one of 'em particularly of a 1000 l. at the Marshals Suite for his last Escape; and as slippery a Prank as he had plaid 'em before; Nevertheless he had that strange Influence on the Tipsstaff that had him in Custody, to be several days trusted abroad without a Keeper. For instance within Six Weeks last, he made three Several Visits to an old Friend in Wood-Street (where the whole Family will Attest it for Truth) without any Waiter Attending him. Now certainly he must either have some mighty Hopes of doing Wonders by his Plot; or else must lye under some strange Infatuation; that he did not run away from such a Lord of Debts; that 'tis impossible he can look for less than starving under 'em. For I dare Swear for him, 'twas not out of pure Honour, to be true to his Parole that made him slip so many Occasions of Escaping. FINIS.
