L353 13516672 99885
The Citty Prophisier. Or, the country Fortuneteller. Here in these Lines the which below are pend, You may know when these hard times will amend, For they will show, Exactly, right, and plain, When as we shall enjoy good times again. Observe them well, and then you all will say, 'Tis worth your time and leisure for to stay. Tune of, Oh is not Old England, grown New. By Tho. Lanfiere. ALL you Honest Men in Country and town, which by the bad times much hardship have known observe, & I briefly to you will set down, When the times will be better again, again, When as the times will mend again. then mark well my subject which I shall declare 'Tis worth your attention, if you will it hear, I briefly unto you all now will declare, When, &c. When great rates and taxes are took away, From Country & City, which men yearly pay, If you chance to live for to see that day; Then the times will be better again, again, Oh then the times will mend again. When a Counsellor pleads without ere a Fe, And a Vsurer throweth away his Money, When that comes to pass, you plainly shall sée That the, &c. When as all rich men so liberal doth grow, that to the poor part of their means they bestow If we could see such doings, I certainly know, That the, &c. When all men to each other faithful doth prove For to live still in unity, true peace, and love; And envy & mallice from their hearts remove; Then the times will be better again, again, Oh then the times will mend again. WHen trading is quick, as it was formerly, In City and town, and in the Country; And money with all men flow plentifully; Then the times will be better again, again, Oh then the times will mend again. When Desimulation forsaketh the Land, That plain-dealing may get the upper hand, And conscience in all mens hearts firmly doth stand; Then the, &c. When Misers do fetch forth their silver & gold The which in their chests is grown rusty & old; Or when Honesty is by Knaves to be sold: Then the, &c. When all Neighbours leaveth strife & debate, And live still in peace and not each other hate, And forgeing and lying is worn out of date; Then the, &c. when swearing & drunkenness all men do abhor And fully conclude for to use them no more, Or when the City doth yield no trade for a whore; Then the, &c. when cheating & couzening is proclaim'd down throughout all the Kingdom in country & town And covetousness is from rich mens hearts flown; Then the, &c. when all knaves prove honest, & thieves do turn true, And leave off their old ways, for to take up new Or when every Creditor is paid his due: Then the, &c. When flaunting Perriwigs are out of request And Ladies with curled locks hates to be drest Or when gréedy rich men their poor neighbours feast, Then the, &c. & when painting & patching is quite laid aside, by those which doth set their delight all in pride Or when gallants doth at new fashions deride; Then the, &c. When Round-heads & Quakers their religion remove, To turn Cavaliers, & church-government love, Or when Lawyers to Clyents do honest-men prove; Then the, &c. And now to conclude my Song, which is new, I here have declared nothing but what is true, When these things come to pass, I will assure you, That the times will be better again, again, Oh then the times will mend again. FINIS. VVith Allowance, Ro. L'Estrange. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.
