L446 12148261 55010
LICENSED, March 20. 1677/8. Roger L' Estrange.
ALMANZOR, AND ALMANZAIDA. A NOVEL. Written by Sir PHILIP SIDNEY, And found since his Death amongst his PAPERS. LONDON, Printed for I. Magnes and R. Bentley, in Russel-street, near the Piazza, in Covent-garden. 1678.
THE BOOK-SELLER TO THE Courteous Reader and Buyer of this Book. IT may seem strange how this Book should lie dormant all this time that is elapsed since Sir Philip Sidney's Death; therefore I thought it necessary to acquaint
you by what means it came to my Hands. A Gentleman who came in the Train of the Prince of Orange when he was last in England, brought this Novel in an old Ma∣nuscript, and presented it to a Lady as a great Rarity of that excellent Authors Sir Philip Sid∣ney, and supposèd he wrote it when he was Governor of Flushing;
for soon after his Death it was found amongst his Papers, and hath been several times tran∣scribed for the English Gentry there: But this that I print it by, is the Original Copy. I cannot suppose but I shall do many Persons a kindness in publishing this Novel, by reason that they may now buy that for a Shilling, which so many Persons have
given Twenty for, and have thought it a Fa∣vour to have it at that rate, esteeming any thing of that excellent Authors at what Price soever it should be va∣lued at. That this Book shall have a good acceptance in the World, I make no doubt of; but if it should be otherwise, I shall not be much con∣cerned, because I have
in this considered your Advantage more than my own Profit. Now let me beg your pardon for detain∣ing you thus long from what is much better, I mean the Book it self; which if you receive with a favourable a∣spect, I will assure you, you shall get this ad∣vantage by it, (which is no very inconsidera∣ble one) That for the
future you shall be eas∣ed of Prefacing from The humblest of Your Servants, R. Bentley.
ALMANZOR, AND ALMANZAIDA. A NOVEL. THE Kingdom of Moroco had for many years suf∣fered under Tyrannical Powers, when at last it began to breathe, and receive new life, un∣der the just and peaceable Reign of the Great Abdala, the most ac∣complished of all Princes; who having employed his younger years in Arms, had thereby ac∣quired great fame, and assured a peaceful and quiet Seat unto him∣self, in the most renowned City of Africa.
It was there that in a Palace whose Magnificence did surpass even Imagination, the greatest Beauties of the World spent their days under some severity of re∣straint, being deprived from the sight of all Objects but their own enterview, the presence of a Prince past the flower of his age, and some few young Slaves that were but just stepp'd out of Childhood. Of all Abdala's Women, there was but one absolute, the birth of a Son had render'd her happy; Roxana had the most absolute Authority: yet Cleonisa did still preserve such a deserved Power over the Kings heart, as she estee∣med infinitely beyond that pub∣lick Grandeur, which was the Right of Roxana. Amongst those Slaves apper∣taining to the King & Princesses, that had the liberty of the Wo∣mens
Apartments, one onely had attained to his twentieth year: He had been presented to Abdala in his Infancy, and some years having given him the opportuni∣ty to discover most exquisite Parts of Mind and Body, Abdala was taken with them so, that they oblig'd him to bestow his Love and Favours upon the Possessor of them, and distinguished him from the rest, by his tender Affections towards him; and proceeded so far, as to honour him with the Magnificent Name of Almanzor, so much in esteem with the Prin∣ces of Moroco, as having been that of many of their most ancient Kings. The onely Mark that re∣mained with him of his Bondage, was a Chain of Diamonds: and if his Apparel had any thing of Abdala's Liveries yet remaining upon them, they were so obscu∣red under a vast quantity of Jew∣els,
as not to be discernable. In short, no Captive in the World had a happier Fate; as many as saw him, became his Ad∣mirers; none amongst the most considerable, but thought them∣selves highly favoured with his Friendship; and to wish, was with him the same thing as to enjoy. Yet notwithstanding all this Happiness, he fell into such a pro∣found melancholy, as became ob∣vious to all Persons; but in a more particular manner, it was obser∣ved by the chief and most anci∣ent of Abdala's Eunuchs, unto whose particular care had been committed the Education of his Childhood, of which he had re∣ceived divers great Advantages, such as were sutable to Alman∣zor's brave Soul. The extreme affection that this Eunuch had for him, made him with the more ex∣actness observe his Distemper;
and not being able to see him in any discontent, it made him enter one evening into Almanzor's Lodgings, where having found him, he spoke to him in this man∣ner: I have deserved otherwise from you, than that you should hide your sorrows from me: I cannot see that Person over∣whelmed with sorrow, unto whose Childhood I have given all my Cares, and to whose Me∣rits I have sacrisiced all my Affe∣ctions, and be ignorant of the cause of his change. Must I have the trouble to see you hide your Sighs from me? Sir, your Inte∣rests are too dear unto me, not to reproch you this reserved∣ness. Almanzor, I am not un∣worthy of your considence; and you ought to believe, that I loving you with that tenderness as I do, I should not desire with so much earnestness the know∣ledge
of what so much disturbs your quiet, but to endeavour the re-establimment of it, even with the hazard of my Life: Therefore I conjure you to speak. At this onset, Almanzor stood for a while in suspense; af∣ter which, casting an obliging look upon the Eunuch, Aristan, (said he) I should become un∣worthy of your kindness, if I was so ungrateful as to conceal from your knowledge any thing that concerns my Fortune. I do not mistrust a Vertue so well known, and so useful to me as yours has always been: And if I have hid from your know∣ledge a trouble wholly contain∣ed within the narrow limits of my Heart, it was that I might not involve the quiet of a Per∣son to whom I owe a thousand times more than my Life, in such secret Misfortunes as must be
suffered by me alone. Do you believe (interrupted Aristan) that I can quietly see you suffer, hear your Sighs, and have your troubled Eyes for continnal ob∣jects, and not be moved? Speak your mind, Almanzor, with this assurance, that of whatsoever you can inform me, you will less afflict me in the declaration of it, than you do with your obsti∣nate silence; since there are no such evils, though never so great, but may find remedies: And if there be a necessity of courting you to it, let me conjure you by all that love I have for you. Well (replied the Slave, sigh∣ing) you must be satisfied; Ari∣stan, I love; it is love that cau∣ses all my grief: the onely se∣cret that I would have kept from your knowledge, because of its cruel circumstances Your informing of me that you love,
is defective (replied the Eu∣nuch), except you acquaint me with the Object also. Dear Aristan (replied the amorous Captive), if ever you have ob∣served me when near the amia∣ble Almanzaida, you could not but perceive it. Almanzaida, (replied Aristan, with an extra∣ordinary emotion) Roxana's Slave! Yes (pursu'd Alman∣zor) it is she that a thousand Charms makes me adore. Re∣member (replied the Eunuch) that she is destinated to an eter∣nal Servitude; and, if it be possible, fix you heart on some other Object. Dear Aristan, (replied Almanzor) can Al∣manzaida's ill Fate make you forget mine of the same nature? Does the glittering of my Ap∣parel so dazel your eyes, as that you cannot see the Badge of my Slavery on me? And does this
Chain, because of Jewels, alter my Condition? It is, peradven∣ture, that equality of Fortune, that unites our Souls. Know, Ari∣stan, that my Griefs are not the effects of Almanzaida's Rigours; for we having been both toge∣ther bred in this Palace, with the liberty of seeing and con∣versing with one another, have kindled such Flames as have grown more furious by the dif∣ficulties they have encountered, and which will prove eternal, though of a Slave I should be∣come Master of the whole World: For do not imagine, that none but my single Heart does justice unto Almanzaida's Beauty; the Prince Abdemar, Son to the King, and to proud Roxana, is her Captive also: That Rival's he which makes me unfortunate; 'tis he, who envious of those Advantages
which Love gives me over Al∣manzaida's Heart, does by a cruel Jealousie disturb the quiet of two Persons whom the Hea∣vens have produced designedly to love one another. The change which I see in your face, Aristan, (continued he, after a little pause) speaks that particular in∣terest which you take in my mis∣fortunes; therefore to give you still more occasion of exercising your compassion of my mise∣ries, hearken attentively unto the Story of my Love. The Eunuch did but cast his eyes to∣wards Heaven, and Almanzor thus continued. The History of Almanzor, and Almanzaida. I Need not give you the Pour∣traicture of Almanzaida; she
is too well known to you, to be ignorant of it; and your eyes have too just a discernment, not to inform you, that she is more beautiful than any thing else they ever yet saw: But, Aristan, though I am not ignorant of whatsoever her Person has of amiable, you are not throughly informed of the excellency of her Soul: In the whole World there is not a Vertue more solid than that she is Mistriss of; she has a Generosity beyond all example, such noble Thoughts, such an exact Know∣ledge, and a quaintness of Wit so little common, that it may boldly be asserted, that her greatest Per∣fections are wholly unknown to those that have not such familiar Conversations with hr, as I have had the happiness to enjoy; in which all is spoken wih absolute Liberty. I was yet so young, and she so
innocent, when she was placed with Roxana, that all our Plea∣sures were limited within the bounds of Childrens Sports; yet then was I infinitely pleased with them, when permitted me; and Love was then interwoven with them, in a manner proportionable to our age. It was still my endea∣vour to insinuate my self in all places that were bless'd with Al∣manzaida's presence; and the ad∣dition of some few years, to those I had pass'd already in that agree∣able Commerce, did give to un∣derstand, that an innocent com∣plaisancy, and some childish en∣endearments, had been the begin∣ners of a most violent Passion. After that, I had no other thoughts, but such as did abso∣lutely confirm me of the certain∣ty thereof, and would languish in all places that her presence did not grace: I would be out of pa∣tience,
when Abdala would defer some moments in his custom of sending me with an How do you to Roxana; and I confess, that I would grumble within my self al∣so, when you detained me upon some Lesson longer than my Affe∣ctions thought reasonable, of which I could reap no benefit at all, but what did happen by meer chance, seeing that I could have no other thoughts but of her: all my Study was bent in endea∣vouring to please her, and that took up my whole thoughts: she could no sooner desire any thing, but I would with all the earnest∣ness imaginable effect it: And when at last she had learn'd from her own Heart, and from my Eyes, rather than from my Mouth, part of my Intentions, she would frequently blush at the receit of any Services from my hands. The Prince Abdemar went but
too frequently unto Roxana's A∣partment, not to see her, which he could not do without Love; and I had but too much Interest in that Love, not to take notice of it: and the Princes high birth, and other Advantages, represent∣ing daily a thousand Evils in that Concurrency, I suffered infinitely by it. He was not so reserv'd as I; he would speak of his Love to Almanzaida in a most tender manner, even in my presence, without the least scruple, or any thought that his Fathers Slave durst raise his Pretensions to the same object to which he address'd his. The young Bond-maid would always answer his Sute with such reservedness as would charm me, and conjuring the Prince to spare her, gave him to understand, that if she had heard him make his Ad∣dresses to her, he was obliged for it to nothing but his Rank, and
Almanzaida's evil Fortune. Some moments after, he went out, and I remained singly with her, with an impatient desire to learn the cause of a profound reasoning within her self, in which she had fallen immediately upon Abde∣mars departure. Her Complexi∣on was altered, her Eyes were troubled, and her Respiration be∣ing more violent than usual, gave me to understand, that her Heart had a great share in this disorder. Good Gods, how heavy did my doubts and my restlesness lie upon me! I look'd upon her for some time with silence; but at last, taking the resolution to inform my self of the very center of this business, which till then I durst not attempt, You are surpri∣zed, Almanzaida, (said I) and what is most sensible to me, is, that I perceive with sorrow it im∣mediately follows the Discourses
with which Abdemar has enter∣tained you. Abdemars Discourses (replied she) have nothing in them but what is a trouble to me; and whether what he has said to me be true or feign'd, I think my self very unfortunate in being obliged to hear him. Abdemar is so great a Prince (I replied) that he thinks he may say any thing without caution; but if he could be what Almanzor is, then acting like a slave, he might, 'tis like, less displease the fair Al∣manzaida in his Addresses. Ab∣demar (replied she) cannot be∣come a Slave without a wonder; but though he is the Son of a great Monarch, his Love is no more pleasing to me, than if he were in Chains, or of a mean Rank: For my part (added she) with the unhappiness of an un∣known Birth, I have that also of being a Captive; but, Almanzor,
I know and feel my Heart, and all that it doth inspire me is so great, that notwithstanding my low condition, I feel within me a certain natural adversness, which makes me look upon all things that carry any thing of mean and low in them, with horror; which flatters me in an opinion, that I am not inferiour to Roxana. I am not happy enough (said I) to have any Intelligence with a Heart whose Motions are so generous: yet, fair Almanzaida, though I can judge of it but by the outward ap∣pearances, it is long since I am perswaded of the Truth you speak, which makes me look upon you with that respect as is due to a Person whose bare Vertue would prefer her to all the Queens of the World. In a word, Almanzaida, you are worthy to Reign in all pla∣ces, and therefore it is that Ab∣demar does you that justice. Al∣manzor,
(she replied, with some discomposure, that seemed to me as disadvantageous to Abdemar) give me leisure to forget his Di∣scourses to me, I conjure you to it; for I declare, I hate that Love which he hath entertained me with; and no doubt but I should hate his Person likewise, should he pursue it. Thus, (replied I, in an accent that exprest some disturbance) thus it is, that those that love you must merit your hate; and the Son of Abdala is— Are you his Advocate (interrupt∣ed Almanzaida, looking fixtly on me)? and is it in his behalf that you design to employ that privi∣lege that your Bondage gives you? Ah, Almanzaida, (I replied, with such an agitation of mind as she could not but discern) if my better fortune should procure me any with you, it should not be in his, or any others behalf, but my
own, that I should employ it. I am not his Agent, Fair one, but his Rival; and give me leave to say, a more bold and more passionate Lover than he, who desires all, but dare not hope any thing. I did not think (replied Almanzaida, with much coldness) that Abdemar and Almanzor should at the same time make their amorous Addresses to me; and I was in hopes that you would have assisted me, in di∣verting the thoughts of his Courtship, and not thus add to my troubles: And yet I am not angry with you, though I should resent it; that esteem which I have for you, will not permit me; which I promise to continue, not∣withstanding what you have de∣clared, provided you repeat it not, and that you confirm me by your future silence of your re∣pentance. Divers Persons which were
seeking for Roxana did interrupt us; I was obliged to withdraw, where making some Reflexions upon Almanzaida's reception of my Declaration of Love, I fan∣cied to find in it more of discom∣posure than of anger. Hopes, though small, do pleasingly flat∣ter. I took enough to perswade me, that I was more happy than Abdemar, and that she had im∣pos'd me silence for no other rea∣son, than because she found in her self more disposition to hear and favourably answer me, than she had a mind to discover. I pass'd that night passably well, and the next day having waited on Abdala unto Roxana's Apart∣ment, I had the happiness to see Almanzaida: She appear'd nei∣ther cold nor disagreeing, but as if her Eyes, which I observed to be more languishing than fierce, did take care to shun mine; which
I concluded to proceed from a modest bashfulness, that cannot be avoided, when one would hide the motions of the Heart, not being absolutely Master of those of the Eyes. Cleonisa being some few days after at Roxana's Apartment, did tell her so many fine things in the praise of the Weather, that she set her in a humour of going into the Garden: Almanzaida took up her Train, and Cleonisa, who ever had an obliging goodness for me, seeing me in Roxana's Chamber, and having observed by my assiduous waiting on Al∣manzaida, that her presence was most dear unto me, made me take an Umbrella, to give me the hap∣py opportunity of making one in the Walk. It served onely to cross a Plat of Ground that led to the covered Walks, where be∣ing got, Roxana having made sign
to Almanzaida to let go her Train, we followed at some di∣stance, under pretence of respect, and so I had the means of eter∣taining her with liberty. Almanzaida (said I) those that interrupted us at Roxana's the o∣ther day, prevented my answering you, on that severe silence that you would have imposed upon me, and of letting you know, that it is impossible to be silent, and love so passionately as I do. You would not have me have an esteem for you then, (replied she) the Re∣ward of your silence? since you so wilfully relapse into a fault that I was willing to forget? I was going to reply, but Alman∣zaida continued, saying, You a∣buse my Indulgence, Almanzor; I was too little mov'd: but if you knew how dangerous an Enemy I can be, you would doubtless fear, me more than you
do. There is no resisting of that Power which makes me speak, (I replied) and I am confident that you would pardon , if were sensible of it: But am I so crimi∣nal onely for loving you? and if it be an offence, are not you more guilty of it than my self? Could my Eyes be pardonable, should they see you without admiration? and would that admiration be as per∣fect as you deserve it, if it were not followed with all that Passion which I have for you? No, fair Almanzaida, none can behold you with quiet thoughts; and I confess, that I shall ever remain a Crimi∣nal towards you, if I cannot be∣come innocent without ceasing to love you. I should be very sorry (replied she) that you should cease being my Friend; and to shew you, that it is nor Hatred, nor so little as Indifferency that I require of you, I do protest to
You, Almanzor, that I wish you were my Brother. This is a mo∣dest way of wishing me dead (I replied); for if the amorous Al∣manzor were Brother to the beau∣teous Almanzaida, he would not long out-live that fatal advan∣tage. Iudge by these tender resent∣ments, whether it were easie, or rather possible for me to keep si∣lence —Well, (interrupted Al∣manzaida) since you cannot re∣solve your self to it, see me no more; shun the occasions of be∣ing in those places where I shall be, and I shall take care to for∣bear those of meeting you. Cru∣el one (said I) were you so unjust as to execute what you mention, you would have much to do to per∣form it; and in vain would you endeavour to hide your self from such Eyes as seek after no other Object but you. How obstinate you are, (replied Almanzaida)
and what pains must I take to convince you? Never hope it (said I) since 't is easier for me to die, than not to love you, and let you know it. I must hear you then, it seems, (replied Almanzaida, blush∣ing in such a manner as added luster to her Charms) since that I esteem you Life more than what I required from you. There needed no more to make me ap∣prehend my Happiness: Alman∣zaida being vanquish'd, did from that time no more oppose with fierceness what I would say to her; and I was made sensible of all the Joys that the assurance of being beloved could inspire. Some short space of time did so confirm me in it, that there was no cause left me to doubt. I am certain, that my Resentments did answer all Almanzaida's Boun∣ties, and I neglected no means to make her sensible of it. Abde∣mar
mar had too much Love not to take notice of mine, and of Al∣manzaida's tenderness also: He did openly reproch her of it, and came to such threatning terms with me about it, as made her to tremble, and to advise me to con∣strain my self for my Lifes secu∣rity. From that very time forward the Prince did treat me with so much contempt, that no conside∣ration could have made me bear, had not Almanzaida forced me to it, by such Orders as I shall e∣ver submit unto: He never more employ'd me on his Messages to Roxana; and when I was sent by the King into her Apartment in his presence, he would take that Office upon himself: by which, depriving me of my Happiness, he would bring me almost to de∣spair. Yet I still found some fa∣vourable means to see and enter∣tain
Almanzaida, whose Bounties were onely capable of making me happy. I was one day alone with her, charm'd with the assurance which she had given me, against some fears that troubled me: too much joy was to be perceiv'd in my Eyes, when Abdemar came in: He perceiv'd it; and that Plea∣sure which I could not dissemble, raising a most violent Passion in him, he forgot the Respect which is due to Almanzaida's Sex, from which no Rule nor Greatness can ever dispense a gallant Man. I was concern'd at it in such a man∣ner, as would have made me run into some extreme, if Almanzai∣da's looks had not restrain'd me Retire (said he to me, in a dis∣dainful manner), shun with dili∣gence not onely the speaking to this Slave, but the sight of her also; think on those Consequences that
may follow your disobedience, and believe, that it is not in conside∣ration of your self, that I have spared you till this time. Ending this word, he went into his Mo∣thers Closet. Almanzaida com∣manded me to obey, but not without so much concern for my safety, as forc'd me to sacrifice all my resentments to her pleasure. My grief did irritate her more against Abdemar, than all that he had said to her; and I was but just gone out, when he return'd. I see (said he) that your heart cannot harbour any other thoughts than such as are proportionable to its condition; and while you dis∣dain a Prince, you give a favoura∣ble attention to a Slave, by reason of the proportion which he bears with your condition. I am not to give you an account of the se∣crets of my heart, (replied Alman∣zaida, angrily) and it would please
me very much to remain ignorant of yours: Do not expose your self to the shame of loving a Slave, who has not a Soul large enough to contain such an esteem as it should have of such a Con∣quest as you would be: Leave me and my unworthiness, with the liberty of not hearing of you; and raise to some higher place those tenders of Services which I do not, nor never shall deserve. Roxana's presence prevented her proceeding; and Abdemar re∣tired, so netled, that his last looks did set Almanzaida into a trem∣bling, with the fears of the result of his Passion: But he never did break out, and the Prince, as jea∣lous as he is, being vertuous with∣al, has never attempted any thing against my Life or Fortune. But, Aristan, what has he not done a∣gainst my Love? How oft has he most cruelly torn me away from
Almanzaida's presence, to possess my room? What Stratagems have I not invented to gain the sight of her, mauger all those Cauti∣ons which his Jealousie did sug∣gest to him? In a word, he has so ordered things, that though I am fully assured of Almanzaida's Heart, the vexations of seeing her but by stealth, and Abdemar's strict observing of my Actions, have reduc'd me unto that restless melancholy which you have ta∣ken notice of. Here did Almanzor end his Recital; and perceiving that A∣ristan remained silent, Will you not say something to me (said he) is it thus that you have promised to comfort me, and to allay my griefs? Ah, Almanzor, (replied the Eunuch) you know them not all yet; and the greatest Forti∣tude you can be Master of, cannot
secure you from trembling, when you learn those that I am oblig'd to inform you of. Oh, what a Love is this that the Fates have inspired you with! and from a∣mongst so many others, what a Person have they chosen to give you a Passion for, such a Passion as cannot be continued but with horror! How, (replied Almanzor, strangely moved) what horror, and what repentance ought to fol∣low that Passion which I have for the most amiable Person in the World? I know (replied the Eu∣nuch) that her Beauty, her Merit, her Mind, and her Vertue, render you pardonable for that Error you have been in to this present: but, Almanzor, learn, since it must be told you, that she is your Sister, and that one and the same Blood does animate you both. My Sister? (said he, in a great passion) do not deceive me thus,
it would be my death, Aristan. You must not die, though nothing is more true, (continued the Eu∣nuch) Abdemar shall not be hap∣pier than you, since that he shares in the same misfortune, and is Al∣manzaida's Brother, as Well as yours. In a word, Almanzor, you are Abdala's Child, as he is; and both Almanzaida and your self were born of that Prince, and of the generous Cleonisa. The King knows it not, Cleonisa is also ig∣norant of it, and I am the onely Depositary of that important Se∣cret. It is that Blood which is ever acting, though by secret mo∣tions, which renders you so dear unto Abdala. It is the same that affection which Cleonisa has for you: and doubtless it is that also which restrains Abdemar from acting against you with more vi∣gour than he hath shewn. Alman∣zor was exceedingly astonish'd at
what he heard; never was sorrow comparable to his: he curs'd his Stars, and remain'd in a most de∣plorable condition, while Aristan inform'd him in this manner of the whole Mystery of his Birth. The History of the Births of Almanzor and Almanzaida. THere were but two years past, since that the Birth of Abdemar had fill'd all the In∣habitants of Moroco with joy, and had fortified the imperious Roxana's Credit; when ly, who commanded the Naval Ar∣mies of this Kingdom, a Person considerable both to the King and his People, through the im∣portant Services which he had rendred, did unfortuuately perish by the strength of an infinite number of Pyrates who had com∣bined
bined his destruction, seeing him the Terror of all the Eastern Seas. He was of an Illustrious Birth, and descended from the first Prin∣ces that had reign'd over Moroco. His unfortunate Death having ru∣in'd his Fortunes, which had not always been one of the happiest, he left behind him his Family, composed of two Daughters and one Son, without Means or assi∣stance. His Widow felt most sen∣sibly his loss, and finding her self incapable of giving her Son such an Education as would suit with his Birth, she came into this Pa∣lace, followed by her three Chil∣dren, to bring them and her Sor∣rows at the Feet of Abdala, and humbly to implore his Protection and Assistance for the Reliques of a Person who had been so faithful in his Service. Those Objects which accompanied Haly's sad Widow, were too moving not to
prevail. The Son was but twelve years of age, the Daughter that preceded him, thirteen; and Cle∣onisa, who was the eldest, was going into her sixteenth. It is ea∣sie for you to imagine, that no∣thing was so beautiful as she: the blackness of her Habit added more Charms unto her Face, and the King found so much in her Eyes, though drowned in Tears, that granting both Means and Dignities unto the young Prince Hily, he made a Gift far greater and more precious than all this unto Cleonisa, since it was of that Heart over which Roxana had till then had an absolute Empire. He had too much Love, to cauti∣on himself; and mauger Roxa∣na's Rage and Jealousie, some few days after he espoused Cleonisa. Thus Roxana had the grief to see her self have a Rival, even an adored one. As she is ingenious,
but very dissembling withal, she took upon her the Art of feign∣ing, she conceal'd her Resent∣ments with policy, & frequently visited Cleonisa (who presently af∣ter grew with Child) and became almost inseparable from her; thus obscuring under a formal and af∣fected Complaisancy, a form'd design of ruining her, she decei∣ved the King and Cleonisa also. I was the only Person that distrust∣ed her real intentions, and that feared the evil consequences of this disguised Friendship: Roxa∣na's Endearments were always suspected to me, because I knew her Inclinations: yet all my cir∣cumspection could not prevent an accident which had like to have been of a most dreadful consequence. The King did love Cleonisa most passionately; but he feared Roxana's evil spirit, and durst not be wanting in his
complaisancy: therefore he was highly pleased to see them in a strict union, which to promote the more, he sought all the means imaginable, daily procuring them a thousand various delights. Cleonisa's great Belly taking away her appetite towards Flesh∣meat, she was complaining one day of it to Roxana, who caused some Baskets of choice Fruits to be presented unto her, of which she did eat with great delight and satisfaction; but she was scarce retired to her Apartment, when she fell into a Distemper, the vio∣lence of which did make us de∣spair of her Life. I found her in the arms of her Slaves, without colour, and almost without moti∣on. The King, almost desperate, came in running. Roxana was one of the first, and of the most busied in her assistance; but in her Actions I could observe a ma∣licious
Joy mix: and examining more nearly all Circumstances, I concluded that the had been poy∣soned. I have some skill in the choice of Plants, such as I have found divers times by experience to be great enemies to Poysons; and after I had administred a Re∣medy to Cleonisa, I was confirm∣ed in the suspicion which I had had, of the cause of her Distem∣per. The Heavens blessed the means, and the young Princess seconded their strength; who af∣ter she had vomited the Fruit and Poyson, remained without dan∣ger of her Life, but much fati∣gated with the Pains she had en∣dured. So soon as she could go forth, she returned to Roxana's Lodg∣ings, with the same assiduity as she did before, without the least distrust: but apprehending the future by the late experience, I
resolved to make her Partaker of my jealousies and fears. My Fidelity was well known unto her, and she had reason to conside in it; so that she fell into such an astonishment at my Discourse, as would be difficult for me to ex∣press. I confess (said she) that not mistrusting in the least Roxa∣na's dissimulation, I should have at some time or other blindly precipi∣tated my self in those ambushes that she laid for me, had I not had this timely advertisement. Madam, you must feign, as she doth (I replied); but let it be so, that she may not have the least distrust of it: Caress the King, who loves you, and to whom I have lately given to understand the same as I have now declared unto you: Secure your own life, and that you go with: for I must tell you, Madam, that Roxana is not onely jealous, but highly ambitious
also: She hates you mortally, be∣cause she sees that you triumph over her in the Kings Heart; and fearing lest you should one day produce a Rival for the Throne unto Abdemar, as there are no Crimes black enough to strike hor∣ror in her, neither will she spare any means to prevent it. Cleonisa did rellish my Rea∣sons: The King came unto us, and we took our measures ac∣cordingly. That which we thought the surest way, was to conceal the time of Cleonisa's de∣livery, that your death might be feigned. This took happily; you came into the World, I de∣livered you out of the Palace, in∣to the hands of such Persons which I knew to be very faith∣ful, and which I had managed be∣forehand to that purpose. Cleo∣nisa shed such tears at your ab∣sence, as confirmed Roxana in the
belief of your death, which for the present setled her cruel mind: but within the term of a year, we were again in the same trouble, and Cleonisa's second great Belly did set us in a greater confusion than was the first: In fine, we overcame it. Cleonisa is tall, her shape easie; and cruel Roxana was not the onely Person that was ignorant of her big Belly; but every body else of the Pa∣lace, except the King, two Slaves, and my self. Almanzaida came into the World with the same cautions as we had had for you: I took her from hence also, though but a Daughter, that I might hazard nothing. I trusted her unto a Man of my own Coun∣try, whose Wife had been delive∣red about the same time as Cleoni∣sa. Mean time, my Lord, the tender Cleonisa was not long without entreating me to have
you brought secretly into the Palace. I thought my self too weak not to be overcome at some time or other; therefore I rather chose to cause some sorrow to Cleonisa for some time, than to hazard your Life, and Almanzai∣da's also, by telling her that you were dead, and that the young Princess had not outlived you above two Months. She grieved for you both a long time. I told the same story to the King, for fear that through his tenderness to Cleonisa he might have unde∣ceived her. Six years were expi∣red, before I durst introduce you into the Palace. A supposed Mer∣chant presented you to Abdala for a Slave: you from that very moment did please him; and that high Recompence which he gave to him that had presented you, was a sufficient testimony of it. He commanded me to take the
care upon me of your Educati∣on; and you may easily imagine what joy I received with that or∣der. In fine, two years after, by other means, I got the young Princess also into this Place, to whom had been given the name of Almanzaida (you bearing that of Almanzor) who was present∣ed unto Roxana, to endeavour by that means the engagement of her Affections towards her, through a familiar frequentation. She took great care of her; and Alman∣zaida has rendered her self so worthy the affections of all the World, that she could not refuse her hers. My dear Prince, this is that important Secret, of which your particular Interest made me the particular Depositary: You perceive the Reasons which made me conceal it, though I fear too long; but I could not foresee that fatal Engagement, the cause of your afflictions.
Ah, cruel Aristan, (cried out Almanzor, seeing him silent) why did you not abandon me to Roxa∣na's fury? Ton see that the Hea∣vens disapprove of your pity, since I am fallen into that sad disaster of loving my own Sister with a more than Brotherly love.—My Sister! (added he, a moment af∣ter) Good Gods! How can I pro∣nounce that word, and live? Oh, thou too charitable Friend, why did you rescue a Victime from Roxana's fury, and did not let it fall unto Roxana's satisfacti∣on, for the security of Abdemar's future Reign? How many evils had you spared me, and sorrows to your self? What a Life shall I lead for the future? What quiet can I ever hope for, being thus linked to a Passion, which I find that the name of Brother will ne∣ver extinguish in me? Whatever Aristan could oppose to his Pas∣sions,
or that he could alledge to moderate the Princes grief, was all in vain; he could find nothing in him but a rebellious and distur∣bed Reason, which would not permit him to hearken to any ad∣vice. He conjur'd Almanzor to continue the Secret, and took upon him to inform Almanzaida of all things. It is easie to imagine what a restless night this miserable Prince had. The next morning he feign'd himself indisposed, that he might not be disturbed; and Aristan having found out some opportu∣nity of entertaining Almanzaida, related unto her the same things which he had done to Almanzor the day before. Though she was less passionate than the Prince her Brother, yet she was not less sen∣sible; and if she fell into no pas∣sion before Aristan, as he had, she, it is very probable, did it in pri∣vate,
and with as much sorrow. Aristan exhorted her to silence, till he had disposed the minds of the most concerned for the rece∣ption of such surprizing News; and so he left her, as much op∣pressed with grief, as was Alman∣zor. He kept his Chamber three days, and Almanzaida her Bed during the same time, the better to conceal a trouble which she could not overcome: She feared to see a Brother whom she loved with too much passion; and this unfortunate Prince, still fearing to confound his Sister with his Mistriss, had not the power to go towards Roxana's Apartment, though carried on by such power∣ful Motives. At last he resolved it. Three days of violent sorrow had made such an impression on Almanzor, as was sufficient to perswade any one that he had been sick; and Almanzaida's
tears had rendered her eyes so languid, as if she had thus punish∣ed them for having carried her Charms into her Brothers very Heart. The disconsolate Alman∣zor found her alone, in Roxana's Chamber; and never two Per∣sons that feared, and yet passio∣nately longed to see one another, did feel more equal Passions at their approch. The Princess did cast down her looks; and Alman∣zor, who under the name of a Lover, as well as of a Brother, did still take the same delight in beholding her, fixed his upon her Face; and after some moments of silence, which were employed in sighing, Madam, (said he) have you forgot me? have you not one word for me? will you not speak to me at this time specially that I have so much need of your Vertue, to consolate a Soul so overcome with sorrow, and grown even de∣sperate
by that very advantage which will prove fatal to me, though in the same moment infi∣nitely glorious. If I had that pitch of Vertue which you speak of (replied the Princess) it would be very useful to my sef at pre∣sent; and you may well imagine, that being no less surprized, nor less overcome with Sorrow than you are, Consolation would be as necessary for me, as for you: But, dear Brother, we must seek for comfort in constancy; and if I cannot be an example of Forti∣tude, at the receit of so unfortu∣nate a knowledge as we have lately come to by Aristan, but too long concealed from us, I will at least serve you, in helping you to forget that criminal tenderness which ought not to consist be∣tween such Persons as are anima∣ted with one and the same Blood. Oh, cruel one, (replied the Prince,
looking languishingly upon her) I find that it will be easie for you to effect what you say, since that you can pronounce with so little concern that Name which shall ne∣ver be expressed by me. What (ad∣ded he) shall a few moments be capable to extinguish those Fires, that I have had so much pains in a long assidnity to kindle? And I foresee that you will easily be brought to look with some indiffe∣rency upon that Person who, though a Slave, you had preferred to a Prince. I see, Almanzaida, that you onely thought you loved me, but never did it really. I shall profit but little of the advice you would give me; and though the merciless Fates have determined, that I must never be more than a Brother to you, yet they shall ne∣ver force my passionate affections from you, but that I shall ever love you, as I have always done: For it
is but just, that since you have changed onely in Name, but have preserved all your Beauties, I shou'd likewise preserve my Love, after the loss of all my Hopes. The Hea∣vens (replied Almanzaida, sighing) would punish you, should you do what you say; and being what we are, such a Love can remain no longer innocent. Alas! what more cruel Griefs than those I suf∣fer at present, can happen to me? (repli'd the Prince) It is not death that I wish for, though it would be far more welcom to me than life, as I look upon it at present. Know, Madam, that the more I reflect up∣on what has past, the more horror I have for the future. You know, that through your bounty, forget∣ting the obscurity of my Birth, and all that could afflict a Man whose Soul was sufficiently raised above the Vulgar, I was become sensible to my Passion onely. You are not ig∣norant
also, Madam, that proud of that preferency which you had gi∣ven me above Abdemar, I esteem∣ed my self incomparably more hap∣py than him with all his Dignities. And can you think, that this so passionate and constant Heart, sub∣mitting it self unto a timid Ver∣tue, would sacrifice unto it such a Passion as is to out-last all Sorrows, and even Time it self? In such a case, the Resignation would be a Crime; and doubtless that Love must be but very superficial, that can so soon be laid aside. But you, Almanzaida, you that have ho∣noured me with your Love, or that at least would have made me be∣lieve such a thing in you, is it pos∣sible that you should so soon be at an agreement with that thing cal∣led Decency, so that a meer scru∣ple can so suddenly triumph over your Heart? and that in the midst of all my sorrows, I have not so
much left me, as the bare comfort to think, that this surprising change has been unwelcom to you? Good my Lord, (replied the Prin∣cess) do not thus pierce into a weakness which is so difficult for me to conceal. I seek how to cure, and not how to afflict you. But you, my Lord, do not do me that Justice. I hid my Tears from you; yet you are so cruel as to lay all your Sorrows open to me, and add to them such Reproches as I do not deserve. Can you imagine, that she that preferred you before the Prince Abdemar, at that very time also when your Chains were your greatest Orna∣ment, did but indifferently love you? Can you believe, that that Preferency was the effect of a wa∣vering Heart, not firm in its Reso∣lutions? No, Sir, you know not Almanzaida: I share your Sor∣rows, am no less sensible of them
than your self; but they are past remedie, and I can see nothing but Time and Reason that can over∣come them: Let us wait the one, and endeavour to make use of the other; and in the mean time, my Lord, in pity of me, moderate a Passion that overcomes me, and be assured, that I am not of suffi∣cient strength to bear, without dying, both your Sorrows, and my own. Almanzaida was going on, when the Prince Abdemar came in: He presently cast such Looks on Almanzor as were full of in∣dignation; but straight smooth∣ing them up again at the sight of the Princess, whom he had not seen of three days before, he took notice of a change in her Face; and then perceiving Alman∣zor's trouble, he knew not what to attribute it unto: and being but too well persuaded of their
reciprocal Love, he imagined that their sadness proceeded from the despair of ever being happy in the enjoyment of each other: And it is probable, that in this imagination he might have flown into some Passion against Alman∣zor, had not Roxana come in. Almanzor withdrew himself, and passing through a Gallery that led into Cleonisa's Apartments, he met her as she was coming out of them. Though she was absolute∣ly ignorant of his Condition, she had a most tender affection for him, and making him sign to draw near, As I have always been con∣cerned in your Interest, Almanzor, (said she) I must now give you a most important advice, while I have the opportunity of speaking to you in private. You love Alman∣zaida; Abdemar is your Rival, who intends (in order to your eter∣nal separation from her) to get
the King to enfranchize you, so to turn you out of the Palace, and out of Moroco also. This I learned from his own mouth some days since, I being hid in a place where I overheard him, while he was di∣scoursing of it with Zais, who doubtless is of his Secrets. What Charms soever Liberty can put on, I am of opinion that you would find but little content in them, whilst separated from Almanzai∣da. I was glad of the opportuni∣ty of giving you this Advertise∣ment, that you may take your mea∣sures against Abdemar and Roxa∣na's Designs, who will not sail in∣considerately to execute whatever her Son shall require. During Cleonisa's Discourse, the Prince found himself agitated in divers manners, and was often upon the point of discovering all Aristan's Secrets unto her; but remembring that he had promised the contra∣ry,
he kept them still within him∣self. I am infinitely obliged to your Bounties, Madam, (said he) and I know nothing in the World that I would not do, to render me wor∣thy of it. It is certain, that I love Almanzaida; and it is no less true, that Abdemar is my Rivalin it: But, Madam, neither he nor I can have any further hopes: Some day you may learn the surprising cause of it: Mean time, Madam, continue to protect a miserable Per∣son, who is threatned with so many misfortunes; watch also for Al∣manzaida. Cleonisa could return no answer, because some body came by; so that Almanzor was forced to retire himself; and she went into Roxana's Apartment, amazed at his Discourse, where she found Almanzaida all in tears. Abdemar, transported with jea∣lousie, was resolved to break off all Converse between Almanzor
and Almanzaida; and having found Roxana in a fit humour to open his Designs to her, he told her, That they had a confirmed private Intrigue between them, which for some discontents against Almanzor, he intreated her to break off, and to forbid him her Apartment. Roxana was a de∣clared Enemy to all the Worlds quiet, and glad of the opportu∣nity of troubling two Persons that loved one another, she assu∣red her Son, that she would not onely forbid Almanzor her Apart∣ment, but that she would also turn him out of the Palace, for having secret Amours there, and even out of Moroco also, if occasion re∣quired it. Abdemar went forth well satisfied with this assurance; and Roxana having caused Al∣manzaida to be called, I should never have believed (said she to her) that forgetting that Vertne in
which you have been educated, you would have lent an ear after amo∣rous Propositions, and bound your self in an Intrigue of Love with one of the Kings Slaves: yet it is but too true, that it is so; and the audacious Almanzor, abusing of those Privileges which my Bounty and Abdala's Favours had procu∣red him above many others, has been so bold as to seduce your Heart in this very place. I am convinced of this by unquestionable assuran∣ces, and it is with trouble that I speak it. I had conceived a sincere affection for you from your very Infancy; and looking upon you with the Eyes of a Mother, rather than of a Mistris, I had designed something more than a Slave for you: But since your Heart has made an unworthy choice, and would not stay for mine, all that you must hope from it, is, that Alman∣zor shall turn out of this Palace,
never to enter into it again; and moreover, I shall not onely deprive you of those advantages which I intended you, but of my Esteem and Friendship also. Almanzaida's Heart was but too sensible, to endure with pati∣ence Roxana's Taunis; she was conscious of her own innocence, and had always lived with Alman∣zor in such a manner, as deserved Praises, rather than Reproches. Therefore looking on Roxana as on a Person that would have sacri∣ficed to her own Fury both Cleo∣nisa and Almanzor, with a bold∣ness that had some mixture of scorn in it; Madam, (said she) I neither deserve your Reproches, nor your Menaces; and my Incli∣nations have ever been so much to Vertue, that peradventure I have even outgone those Lessons which were given me therein. I have no commerce that can make
me blush; and I dare tell you, Madam, (whar Respects soever I owe you) that you never did per∣ceive in me any thing that could give you any disadvantageous thoughts of Almanzaida. I speak with that freedom, Madam, which perhaps is not wholly sutable to my Condition, but which is very conformable to the motions of my Heart, and to those sensible wrongs which I do not deserve, neither, know I any Power that can make me to suffer them. I have made no unworthy Choice, Ma∣dam; and mauger the obscurity of my Birth, knowing my Soul sufficiently raised above the Vul∣gar, I leave the success of my De∣stiny unto the protection of Hea∣ven; I hope the Gods will accept of it, and procure me the means of justifying my self. But, Madam, though you should unhappily de∣prive me of your Protection, up∣on
such groundless suspicions, I should endeavour to consolate my self of such a disgrace as I had not drawn upon my self, and that I had not deserved. I know not (replied Roxana, fretted at Alman∣zaida's Answer) which of us two is the Queen, and which the Slave: Yet when I consider you, I can see nothing but the effects of my Boun∣ties, and Almanzor's Mistriss. I know what I am, Madam, (replied Almanzaida, resolved to justifie her self) I acknowledge my self your Slave: But if my Person is obliged to you, it was for protect∣ing a miserable wretch, destinated to bear your Chains, and to serve you; and I am sensible enough, that this servile condition requires nothing but submission in me: But, Madam, my Heart and my Condition are at odds, and I may say, that the one is the wreck of the other; and if I believe my
Heart, which is impatient of suf∣fering wrong, if I am no Queen, at least I am not descened from a place much inferiour to a Throne. A Conquest so Illustrious as that of Almanzor (replied Roxana scornfully) cannot inspire lower thoughts. Almanzor (replied the Princess) has a Vertue that would justifie all those that I have for him. I know (interrupted Rox∣ana) that Vertue does affect you so, as to make you fancy your self the more considerable for it; but such weak Imaginations move no∣thing but Commiseration: and for my part, I pitty you, for losing in one day that precious Lovers sight, with all the hopes of ever seeing him again. Go, shut up your shame, and hide it from my sight, and the rest of the Worlds also. At these words Almanzaida retired, anger drawing a deluge of tears from her fair Eyes, which was the
condition that Cleonisa had found her in. She endeavoured to com∣fort her, and to learn the cause of her troubles. Almanzaida in∣formed her of it, not mentioning in the least Aristan's Secret, though not without great re∣straint. Cleonisa was moved at it, and embracing the young Prin∣ces, It i but a moment (said she) since I was advertising Al∣manzor of what you were both to fear: but, my dear Almanzai∣da, what Service can I render you? The most cosiderable that I can expect from your ge∣nerosity, Madam, (replied she) is to do me more justice than Roxana.Roxana'sSoul and mine (replied the amiable Cleo∣nisa) are too different, to have the same Motives: I have but too much cause to believe her unjust; and though I were not so satisfied as I am of your Ver∣tues,
her bare Accusations would be sufficient to confirm your In∣nocence to me: But once again, what must be done in this jun∣cture? Give notice to Alman∣zor of all that has passed (re∣plied Almanzaida); bid him to consult Aristan, and that they use all the means they can ima∣gine to deliver me from these aspersions, and from Roxana's and Abdemar's Persecutions. Al∣manzor must no more come in∣to the Palace, Imperious Roxana banishes him from thence for ever; and since you have the goodness, Madam, to engage your self in an unfortuntte Crea∣tures concerns, be pleased to see Abdala's Slave, tell him my con∣dition: Time presses, and one moment of wrong unto Alman∣zaida's Vertue, is capable of casting her into despair. Cleo∣nisa had no more time, than to as∣sure
the Princess, that she would act as she desired; for Roxana's coming in, obliged Almanzaida to retire. Roxana said not a word to Cle∣nisa of what had hapned; she de∣signed that the business should break out in publick: her Slaves Answer had so strangely netled her, that she could entertain no other thoughts but of her destru∣ction. Cleonisa staid but little with her, being in an impatiency of assisting Almanzaida; and be∣cause she could not seek out Al∣manzor her self, so soon as she was in her Apartment, she writ him a Note, which she gave to an old Eunuch to deliver unto him, in which were these words. To ALMANZOR. A Most important Businesse is the cause that I must of ne∣cessity
see you this day; having such things to impart to you, as are not to be confided to Paper. Meet me within two hours at the Fountain of the Labyrinth: I shall not fail to be there, and to let you know whether your Inte∣rests are dear unto me, and what thoughts there are of you in the Bosom of CLEONISA. What a World of Troubles did this innocent Letter cause in Abdala's Palace? The Slave Tox∣ara did carry it in his Hand so that it might easily be perceived, and was passing into the Kings Apartment to seek out Almanzor, when he met Roxana, whose su∣spicious Eyes were immediately cast upon the Note. What Mes∣sage are you going about, Tox∣ara, (said she to the Slave)? What is that Paper you carry?
He not answering, and seeming perplexed, rendred Roxana the more curious, who took the Note out of his Hand, with no further consideration than of her own satisfaction, with which she re∣turned into her Apartment. Tox∣ara durst not inform Cleonisa of the truth of the business, but gave her to understand that he had lost the Note, after he had made a fruitless search for Almanzor. Roxana, whose spirit was natu∣rally wicked, presently suspected that Cleonisa had some private concerns with Almanzor; and howsoever she had hitherto con∣cealed her thoughts, it is most certain that she always hated her, seeing with rage and spite her Merits to reign so powerfully over Abdala's Heart: being over∣joy'd of having this opportunity of ruining so dreadful an Enemy as she esteemed Cleonisa, she put
up the Note for the present, not without a world of revengeful thoughts. Mean time this accident, and the night coming on, had broke all Cleonisa' Measures; and what desire soever she had of serving Almanzaida, she was forced to stay till Morning, to advertise Almanzor of her desires to speak with him: While she was musing which way to compass it, (a Note having already been lost) Alman∣zaida in her solitude overcome with sorrow, Almanzor suffering still at the same rate, uncapable of comfort, Roxana was not idle: Abdala coming into her Chamber that night, according to his custom, she could no longer defer giving the first onset unto Cleonisa's Happiness: My Lord, (said she to Abdala, with an af∣fected sorrow) it is with great reluctancy that I am obliged to
inform you of a Business which will be unpleasing to you; and were not your Honour interest∣ed in it, I would not be thus in∣strumental in any trouble to you: But, my Lord, your Glo∣ry is concerned in it; and what∣soever be the event, you are not to be long kept from the know∣ledge that Cleonisa is false to you, and that it is Almanzor, whom you love as your own Child, that insolent Slave, that dishonours you, and entertains a secret Traffick of Love with her. Ah, Madam, (said the King, struck with her words as with Thunder) do not distrust Cleonisa's Vertue, and Alman∣zor's Fidelity. You know Cleo∣onisa's Character, (replied Rox∣ana, giving him the Note) Read. At this sight Abdala had much to do to believe his own Eyes: He loved Cleonisa more than ever he
had loved Roxana, and Almanzor had always been in a manner as dear to him as Abdemar; and those kind thoughts he had for them, making them seem much the more guilty, Ah, persidious, (cried he) you shall both perish, and your criminal Lives shall revenge me of so sensible a wrong. Does Cleonisa thus be∣tray me? and is it Almanzor that seduces her? This is too much, and I will no longer de∣fer the Decree of their Ruine. Roxana, who politickly weighed all things, did fear that if this Business should break forth more publickly, it might so happen that a Justification would destroy her Designs, retained the King as he was going forth to pronounce their deaths, and craftily gave him to understand, that he was not to publish an Affront which would grow greater by being di∣vulged.
This Advice did some∣thing allay Abdala's rage, who re∣tired into his Apartment. At the same instant Abdemar came in, and Roxana renewed her pleasure, in repeating to him what had hap∣ned. He believed nothing of it, and was too well skilled in tender Affections, to believe that those which Almanzor had for Alman∣zaida were not real: He there∣fore would have perswaded his Mother, that Cleonisa's Note was more mysterious than guilty, and that she ought not to expose her to the Fury of the King, without a further search into the Business had first been made: But in stead of receiving this good advice, she accused him of timidity and weakness. Abdala passed that Night with∣out rest; and the great Love he resented for Cleonisa, and tender∣ness for Almnazor, made him con∣clude
them the more deserving death, which he was preparing for them. Aristan had hitherto been the sole Depositary of all his Se∣crets; but he would not make him partaker of this last: he was Almanzors Adorer, and Cleonisa's faithful Agent, who had too great a liberty with him, not to employ all his Interests in their behalf. Thus did all things concur to both their ruines; who not think∣ing of what was preparing for them, were entertaining them∣selves of all that had hapned the day before. Almanzor returned a thousand thanks to Cleonisa, for what she had done for him; and being sensible of those ill things which Roxana was contriving a∣gainst Almanzaida, he took leave of Cleonisa, to go seek Aristan, to conjure him to declare a Secret that could not have more dange∣rous Consequences when publish∣ed,
than it had already. The Eunuch, to please the Prince, run immediately to the King, who having resolved not to see him till after he had executed his Designs, feigned to be sick, and pretended to repose; so that the Fates had a full scope to bring this Adventure to the last extre∣mity. Almanzor was past all pa∣tience at these delays; he durst no longer cast his Eyes towards the place which contained Al∣manzaida: Imperious Roxana was insulting over Cleonisa; and Abdemar durst not complain of not seeing Almanzaida, for ha∣ving drawn this evil upon him∣self. Mean time, the incensed King would no longer defer his Re∣venge; and the evening of that same day the Executioners of such private Deaths had Orders given them to deprive Cleonisa
and Almanzor of their Lives. Roxana was suddenly informed of the Sentence, and so was feed∣ing her ambitious thoughts with the pleasure of Reigning solely. She would have the satisfaction to acquaint Almanzaida first, of that thing which she thought would be the most sensible to her in the World: She sent for her, and not forbearing at Abdemar's arrival, because she no longer feared the revocation of those Orders that had been given, and `tis probable already executed, she informed the sorrowful Al∣manzaida both of the Deaths and pretended Infidelities of her Lover, and of Cleonisa. This unexpected News had like to have cost the Princess her Life; she fell upon a Couch that was near her, without colour or mo∣tion. Abdemar run to her, and discovered unto his Mother, by
that diligence he used, what she had never mistrusted. Roxana's Slaves did second those Cares which he took to succour her; and while some were flinging of Water in her Face, and others tearing off her Clothes, Abdala, mortally troubled at what was going to be done, came into Roxana's Chamber, and found Almanzaida in that desperate condition: He learned the cause of it, and judged Almanzor the more deserving death, in betray∣ing not onely his Bounties, but the beautiful Almanzaida also; who at last came out of her swoon, having gathered some strength through an effect of the very same Sorrow that had de∣prived her of it before: How beautiful did she appear? and how difficult it was to see her in that strange disorder, and not be infinitely moved at it? The dis∣composing
of her Dress, the lan∣guidness of her Eyes, her Tears, her sorrowful Complaints, and, in a word, all her Actions, did contribute in exciting both Love and Commiseration at the same time. The discomposure that she found her self in before the King, did not prevent her from casting her self down at his Feet, Ah, Sir, (said she to him) preserve Cleonisa, and do not lose Alman∣zor, if you will not expose your self to a remorse more cruel than their deaths. Almanzaida (re∣plied Abdala) I ought to revenge my self of a most ungrateful Wo∣man, and deliver you from a perfidious Man, who is unworthy of your Tears, and that deserves a thousand deaths more cruel than that which is going to pu∣nish his Crimes. He is not perfi∣dious, Sir, (cried she); he is your own Blood, your son, and of un∣fortunate
Cleonisa, who by Roxa∣na's treachery, after so many years of distrusts and precautions, falls at last the victime to her fury. Yes, Sir, Almanzor is your Son, and that unfortunate Creature that speaks to you at this present is his Sister, your Daughter, Sir: be∣lieve it, Sir, and Aristan shall confirm it; it is he who being con∣vinced by experience of what we were to fear from Roxana's rage, deceived you, to preserve us: These are the Criminals that you sacrifice to her satisfaction. Al∣manzaida's Discourse found not any thing in Abdala's Heart that could resist it; and those tender affections which he always had for Almanzor, were convincing proofs that he was his Blood: It would be difficult to express his grief; and the first word that he spake, was to bid Abdemar hasten to render him a Service more im∣portant
than his Life, in endea∣vouring with all diligence to pre∣vent Cleonisa's death, and Alman∣zor's also, if it were yet time; bidding him remember that he was his Brother, and worthy of that Title by a thousand Vertues. Abdemar deferred not a moment to obey; he was generous, and really moved with what he had but just learned, he flew to Cleo∣nisa's Apartment. Mean time Roxana seeing Abdala busied in giving Almanzaida some Testi∣monies of his Affections, was re∣flecting with an inward rage on the sudden change that some few words had brought to this busi∣ness, and was seeking in her Heart and Spirit, ingenious to all evil, some means by which she might invalidate Aristan's Testimony, and render it of no effect, by ma∣king it pass for a feigned Story, who in a days space did bring a∣gain
to life not onely that Child of Cleonisa's which she her self had thought dead coming into the World, but another also, of whose Life she was wholly ignorant. Abdemar came happily to Cleo∣nisa's rescue, who constant in her adversities, was writing her last thoughts unto Abdala. He staid with her no longer than to make known that the Orders were re∣versed, and run immediately to Almanzor's Lodgings; but it was too late, and his Executioners, more diligent than Cleonisa's, ha∣ving found him upon his Bed, had mercilesly strangled him there. Abdemar moved at so deplora∣ble a fate, could not stay his Eyes on so dreadful a Spectacle; and too certain of a Truth which so afflicted him, he returned to Rox∣ana's Apartment: I have staid too long, Sir, (said he to the King)
Cleonisa lives, but Almanzor is breathless. At these fatal words he King resented his Sorrows to the quick, and repented that he had so lightly given credit to Roxana's perfidiousness: The beauteous Almanzaida found her self in the heighth of extremity also. Abdemar, whose affections unto her had given way to a real tenderness, did wholly lay upon himself the cause of all these evils, and being moved with a sincere penitency, did reproch unto Rox∣ana her barbarousness, unto which the King added his resentments; and certainly nothing in the world could be more touching, than to hear all that passed be∣tween them. In fine, Abdala re∣tired from a place in which Rox∣ana's presence did but augment his sorrow, and went to Cleonisa's Apartment, leading the most a∣flicted Almanzaida along with
him; where they found the Prin∣cess as composed, as if she had had nothing to fear: but she soon ceased to be so, when she learned at once both the Life and Death of her dear Son: It was her Hand that had sacrificed him, and with∣out that fatal Note Roxana could not have destroyed him. In vain did the King endeavour to recal her Fortitude by his Embraces; Almanzor was no more, and though innocent of his death, she looked upon her self as the cause of it. Since that your un∣just distrusts (said she to the King) have caused me so much sorrow as nothing can ever conso∣late me, and that the unfortunate Almanzor was not rescued from furious Roxana's rage, but to be∣come a more noble Victime to her cruelty; and that without enjoy∣ing the happiness of his Life, I have all the sorrows that such a
death could produce, suffer at least that I may give unto his Heart, as cold as it is, such Embraces as I could not give unto him living. At these words, without staying for Abdala's Answer, she went to∣wards the Slaves Quarters, and had already crossed some Galle∣ries that made the distance bet∣ween the Kings and the Womens Apartment, when she perceived Aristan, with that beloved Son which she was lamenting, and whose supposed loss was going in all probability to cause hers effe∣ctually. She was no sooner cer∣tain of his Life, but that she gave a full scope to all her Joys, and to the tenderness of her Affecti∣ons; the King was no less sensible of this Happiness: But Alman∣zaida, notwithstanding her reso∣lutions to the contrary, did re∣sent it in a manner which it is like was yet more eminent than
the rest. Aristan in few words did clear more amply that Myste∣ry which had preserved two such precious Lives, and did receive such Eulogies from all as his Fi∣delity did deserve. Almanzor, surprised at so many Accidents, could not be taken off from re∣flecting on the dangers unto which Cleonisa had been expo∣sed: As for his part, he found his Soul in such a condition, as made him look upon Death as a refuge, and not as an evil. Em∣braces and expressions of tender∣ness were often repeated on all sides; but the Princess Alman∣zaida, who knew by her own experience what Sorrows Alman∣zor did yet feel for her, durst scarcely look upon him. Mean time it was unhappy Yoxana who had received that sad fate which was intended for Almanzor: He had found the
Princes Chamber open, and while he was walking with Ari∣stan in the Garden, he had thrown himself upon his Bed, where the Executioners had strangled him, taking him for Almanzor. Tox∣ara's loss was not significant e∣nough to disturb so much joy. After Abdala had left Cleonisa in her Apartment, where he also parted with Almanzaida, he re∣tired himself unto his also; and Abdemar, who had nothing but Brotherly Affection for Alman∣zor, would not part from him; he being not capable of so strong a Passion as his Brother, his Rea∣son overcame his Love: But Al∣manzor was less conformable; he was more in love than ever: and while the rest were at quiet, his share was Tears and Sighs. The next morning he rendered his Dovoirs unto the King, and in the next place to Cleonisa;
who seeing now her Happiness above her own desires and hopes, did continually ply Almanzaida with Caresses. That amiable Prin∣cess did answer her favoors with a world of affection, but with as much sadness; so that Cleonisa was perswaded, that the know∣ledge of her Fortune had not re∣stored her Heart to its Liberty, and that Almanzor did still hold there a larger place than the name of a Brother would admit of: Almanzor's presence did confirm her in that Opinion; and not∣withstanding Almanzaida's reser∣vedness, her Eyes would speak another Language than that of Friendship unto the passionate Almanzor. This mutual Affecti∣on did not trouble Cleonisa, fur∣ther than as it had relation to their quiet; and being confident in both their Vertues, she knew that she had no cause to fear of
that side: therefore she busied her thoughts in healing of such Evils which a long Error had contracted: But he was incapable of it; neither Time, nor Cleoni∣sa's and Aristan's Cares, could obtain any thing upon his strong Impressions; but forgetting eve∣ry moment that Almanzaida was his Sister, he did speak to her of his Love: and the young Prin∣cess, being sometimes deluded by a too powerful Charm, did hear∣ken unto him without interrupti∣on, and did daily more and more plunge her self into an Abyss, whence it was impossible to re∣trive her. Mean time Roxana looked up∣on Cleonisa's Prosperity with rage; and never were so many attempts made for the ruine of her happiness, as then: But all too late; Abdala was convinced of the Vertue of the one, and of
the others evil Designs: and it is likely that he had resented Roxa∣na's wickedness in an higher mea∣sure yet, but that he looked upon her as on Abdemar's Mother. Almanzor of a Slave had taken upon him the Name and Rank of Prince, but not the Pride; and as in his mean condition he had the Art of pleasing all the World, it was not difficult for any Person to add to that esteem they had always had for him, those respects due to his Birth. Aristan seeing his Designs come so forward, did look upon his good Success with delight; onely Almanzor's obsti∣nate Passion did intermix some discontents with it: He was thinking on the small hopes there was of curing him, when he was advertised, that a Stranger asked to speak with him: He gave or∣der he should be brought in; and no sooner had he cast his Eyes up∣on
him- than he knew him to be that Person to whom he had in∣trusted Almanzaida's first Years. As he had ever found him most faithful to all his Secrets, he did entertain such thoughts of him as were full of Acknowledgments; so that he embraced him, and af∣ter the first testimonies of affecti∣on, he offered him his Services at Moroco, in all that he should de∣sire. I am perswaded (replied Zideus) that you would generous∣ly serve a Person in whom you did once repose the highest confidence: but, as the case stands now, it is on no particular Interest that I come here at present. Aristan, I have a business of the highest na∣ture to impart to you, the mystery of which I conjure you to pardon me, since that all my intentions in it, have been but to save you from much sorrow. That Child with whom you had intrusted me,
was not the same I returned you back, Death bereaved us of it within six months after you had committed it to our care; and I being informed of its Birth, I guess'd at the sorrow that you would have for the loss of it; which to prevent for the present, I supplied the place of the King of Moroco's Daughter, by another young Princess, reduced to seek for succour, and exiled from her very Birth, through extraordinary events, since it had pleased the Heavens to intrust her into our Hands. I did it, Aristan; and the Age was so well sitted, that you were not sensible of the change which I had put upon you. But now pray bearken unto the Story of that Person after whom I am now come to inquire. You are not ignorant, that Al∣benzais King of Fez was driven from his Kingdom some twenty
years since, by the ambitious Mo∣rat; and that he unhappily ended his days, being about to defend the Remains both of his and his Queen Zaira's Liberty. The Queen was then with Child, and near the time of her Delivery, when the deplo∣rable Albenzais lost his life; the sorrows of his Queen ended hers also, presently after that she had brought a Daughter into the World. I was born in Europe, but had gi∣ven my self from my youth unto Albenzais his Service, and was married unto one of those Persons whom Zaira did most consider: We were the onely two that did not abandon them in their Adversi∣ties; and it was into our Hands (in the presence of Prince Orti∣sis, Brother unto Albenzais, who had never for saken her) that the dying Queen deposited that inno∣cent Creature which she had newly brought into the World, entreating
us to conceal her from Morat's knowledge, and to retire into some unknown place, to wait for a bet∣ter Fortune. Ortisis extremely grieved at the Queens death, sent us away without delay, assuring me, that either he would perish in the attempt, or tear Albenzais his Scepter from the unjust Morat's Hands, and restore it unto that new-born Babe his Brother's Daughter. Thus we parted from Ortisis, who some time after was taken by the Agents of Morat, as he was on a Design, and shut up in a close Prison, in which he did languish for a long time. In the mean time, that I might not be far from some place where I might hear News from Fez, I come to Moroco, where I met with you, and where you were pleased to take me into your Friendship: My Wife did appear to you a fit Person to take upon her the care of
Abdala's Daughter: but when, af∣ter her death, I had given you the Princess of Fez in lieu of her, I was well satisfied as to that parti∣cular; and finding my self use∣less at Moroco, I took a Voyage, and at my return learned that Or∣tisis had escaped out of son. I made some stay at Fez, and through my care and diligence did learn the place of his retreat. I came to him, he received me kindly; and I was the more wel∣come, when I assured him of the Princesses Life. In sine, after di∣vers years of needless Cautions, and of Secret Enterprizes, one has taken effect, in which Morat the Vsurper has been massacred by the People of Fez, tired with the Oppressions; of his Tyrannical Go∣vernment; after whose death, Or∣tisis has no sooner appeared, but the Name of Albenzais, and his also, have been repeated a thousand
times. He generously refusing the Crown, has assured the Chief a∣mongst them, That there was a Daughter of Albenzais's living, in whom his Memory was to be perpe∣tuated; That for his part, he had taken up the Sword but as its De∣positary, till the arrival of the Princess. Thus presenting some Papers to Aristan; This is (conti∣nued he) the Prince Ortisis his Testimony, with a Note of the Queens, which will confirm the truth of my Relation. The Eunuch was so amazed at this Discourse, as to remain some time in a profound silence: But after he had read the Letters, being fully perswaded of a thing in which there was so much de∣monstration of truth, Ah, Alman∣zor, (cried he, thinking on the joy this would bring to the Prince) what happy News are here for you? And being unwilling to
lose a moments time of publishing them, in few words he informed Zideus of Almanzaida's Conditi∣on, and gave him also some light Informations of what had passed of her Concern. So conducting him into the Kings presence, they found Almanzor entring the Chamber, with such a consterna∣tion of Spirits, as did speak him worse than ever he had been yet. Will you thus for ever give your self over to sorrow, Sir, (said A∣ristan to him)? and will you ne∣ver endeavour to overcome it? I should attempt Impossibilities (replied the Prince) should I de∣sign it; but as the Cause has been from my Infancy, and as it were born with me, so neither can it end but with my Life. Hope better things, my Lord, (replied Aristan); Here is a Man, Sir, that boasts of curing you, if you please; but will not undertake a Business
of such importance, but in the King's presence. Ah, (cried out Almanzor) save me at once both the labour and confusion of in∣forming him of what passe in my Breast. At these words they en∣tred, where they found Abdemar onely with the King; who pre∣sently conceiving, that this Stran∣ger did not present himself thus without Orders, but on some ex∣traordinary account, expected to learn the occasion, when Aristan informed the King of the business. During the Relation, never was Man more hearkned unto than he was by Almanzor, neither was there ever so pleasing a surprize as this. Zideus his Relation, the Queen of Fez's Note, and the Letters from Ortisis, did joyntly confirm the truth, and removed all doubts. Abdala was the first that congratulated Almanzor with these surprising News, and
immediately went with Aristan and Zideus unto Cleonisa's Apart∣ment, to inform her and Alman∣zaida of a thing that would so strangely surprize them. During their stay in that place, Alman∣zor, in the midst of his Joys, thinking on Abdemar's concur∣rency in his Amours, fell into a sudden melancholy, of which the Prince could not forbear asking him the cause. Almanzor ingenu∣ously confessed, that he feared a return of Abdemar's amorous Flames, which he might reasona∣bly fear would re-kindle, the ra∣ther because his own had never suffered the least decay. Abdemar did assure him, in so obliging a manner, that he was free, and that he had no other Affections left for Almanzaida, but such as might become a Brother, that far from opposing in the least his Happiness, he would seek all the
ways imaginable to contribute to it. The King by his return did further confirm Almanzor in his Happiness, in promising him the possession of the Princess of Fez; to that purpose immediately send∣ing back with Zideus some of the most considerable of his Officers to advertise the Prince Ortisis of the state of things, and to de∣mand of him the Princess of Fez for Almanzor, he being the one∣ly Person on whom she did de∣pend. Mean time Almanzor run to Cleonisa's Apartment: she took no small part in his contentment, and was somewhat consolated of the loss of her own Daughter, by the consideration that her Son should possess the beautiful Al∣manzaida; to whom he having expressed part of those Joys he felt, he went from her Apartment into that in which was the Prin∣cess
of Fez, whom he found with∣out company: Their contented looks did speak to each other a mutual joy; but being both fil∣led with various thoughts, they kept a profound silence for a con∣siderable time, before they could express themselves; which was first broke by Almanzor, in these words: Madam, (said he) all my Happiness has its whole dependen∣cy on you onely; and the same happy Fate which has brought us out of that confusion in which all my hopes were lost, without the least decay or alteration in my affe∣ctions, does assist me to bring at your Feet both my Love and my Hopes, here prostrating my self, to demand of the Queen of Fez a continuance of those Affections which the beauteous Almanzaida did once entertain for the Slave Almanzor. My Lord, (replied Almanzaida) you should demand
with more confidence that which you are sure to obtain: The Slave Almanzor was ever dear unto me; Almanzaida's Brother has been the same, peradventure more than he ought to have been; and the Prince of Moroco Shall ever be more precious than her own Life unto the Daughter of Albenzais. I complained a∣gainst Fortune, when some Cir∣cumstances had made me believe that I was Abdala's Daughter, because that Greatness was out∣ragious to the Inclinations of a Heart which could not pardon any thing that did but check its Passions for Almanzor: But now I am contented with my change, since that through Ortijis his Ge∣nerosity it gives me a Throne, in which I may have something that may please you. It is you onely, Sir, that I can share it with; and give me leave to tell you, that
that which renders it the most considerable to me, is, that I can offer it you. Generous Princess, (replied the passionate Lover) all that I can boast of, is of a Heart that has been wholly yours since it first knew it self. I have nothing more to repay those preci∣ous Favours which you so pro∣fusely pour upon me. That Heart you speak of (replied Almanzai∣da) which I esteem above the World, has already acquitted you of all the Favours I could bestow upon you; and no soon∣er shall Ortisis say the word, but— Ah, Madam, (cried out Alman∣zor) can he be the sole Opponent to my Happiness? Hope for better things (replied the Princess); Zi∣deus has given us an advantageous account of his Goodness, and his Actions hitherto have been an∣swerable to it: Having so much Vertue, he cannot be ungrateful;
and if he is sensible, he will doubtless share in those Obligati∣ons which I owe you. It is I that owe you immortal ones (in∣terrupted the Prince) and I should have just cause to fear all things, if I had not more confidence in both your Goodness, than in all my Pretensions. My Lord, (re∣plied the Princess) I hope he will be favourable to you; but should I be deceived in my hopes, that Faith which I at present give you, to be ever yours, shall never be altered. These last words eleveted Al∣manzor at the heighth of his hap∣piness. Cleonisa met him: Abde∣mar came presently after, and did assure them in a handsom manner of the joy he resented at their satisfaction. In fine, after a tedious expecta∣tion for our impatient Lovers (though it was not long) Abda∣la's
Envoys returned with a full consent from Ortisis, for Alman∣zaida's marriage; which was no longer deferred, than to prepare the Gallantry there of, which was worthy Abdala's Magnificence, and sutable to those Lovers for whom it was made. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some BOOKS Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentley. Folio. LOrd Bacon's Natural History, in Ten Centuries: Whereunto is newly added, The History Natural and Experimental of Life and Death, or of the Prolongation of Life. The History of Lapland, wherein is shewed the Original, Manners, Habits, Marriages, Conjurations of that People. The Triumphs of Gods Revenge a∣gainst the crying and execrable Sin of wilful and premeditated Murder; ex∣pressed in Thirty seven Tragical Histo∣ries, digested into Six Books, which contain great variety of mournful and memorable Accidents, Moral, Amorous, and Divine. The whole Work now compleat. By I. Reynolds. Fodinae Regalis: or, The History of the Laws and Places of the chief Mines
and Mineral Works in England, Wales, and the English Pale in Ireland; as also of the Mint, and Money: With a Cla∣vis, explaining some difficult Words re∣lating to Mines. Quarto. Burnt child dreads the Fire: or, An Examination of the Merits of the Pa∣pists relating to England, mostly from their own Pens; in justification of the late Act of Parliament for preventing Dangers that may happen by Popish Re∣cusants: And further shewing, That whatsoever their Merits have been, no thanks to their Religion; and therefore ought not to be gratified in Religion, by Toleration thereof, unless we intend to inslave our selves and our Posterity. Romish Doctrines not from the Begin∣ning: or, A Reply to what S. C. or Se∣renus Cressy, hath objected against Dr. Pierce's Sermon, in vindication of our Church against the Novelties of Rome. By Dr. Whitby. Falshood unmasked: or, An Answer to Truth unvailed. An earnest Request to Mr. I. Standish.
Plays in Quarto. Tartuff: or, The French Puritan. A Comedy, acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Servants. Written in French by the fam'd Wit of France Monsieur Moliuer, and made English by Mr. M. Medburne. Plays written by Madam Beane. The Fore'd Marriage: or, The Jea∣lous Bridegroom. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. Abdelazzar: or, The Moor's Re∣venge. A Tragedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. The Town Fop: or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. Plays written by Mr. Iames Howard. All mistaken: or, The Mad Couple. A Comedy, acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Servants. The English Monsieur. A Comedy, acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Servants.
Plays written by Mr. Crowne. Calisto: or, The Chast Nymph. A Masque, acted at Court, by the Lady Mary, the Lady Anne, and many other Persons of the greatest Quality in Eng∣land. The Country-Wit. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. The Destruction of Ierusalem by Ti∣tus Vespatian, in two Parts, acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Ser∣vants. Price 2 s. Plays written by Mr. Lee. The Tragedy of Nero. Acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Ser∣vants. Sophonisba: or Hannibal overthrown. A Tragedy, acted at the Threatre Roy∣al, by their Majesties Servants. The Court of Augustus Caesar, or Glo∣riana. A Tragedy, acted at the Theatre Royal. The Rival Queens: or, The Death of Alexander the Great. A Tragedy, acted at the Theatre Royal. The Plain Dealer. A Comedy, acted
at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Servants. Written by Mr. Witherly. The Mistaken Husband. A Comedy, acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Servants. Part of it written by Iohn Dryden Esq. Madam Fickle: or, The Witty False∣one. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. Written by Mr. Durfey. The Fond Husband: or, The Plotting Sisters. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. Written by Mr. Durfey. Mitbridates King of Poxtus. A Tra∣gedy. The Fool turn'd Critique. A Comedy. Books in Octavo. A Discourse of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, wherein that Charge is justified, and the pretended Resutati∣on of Dr. Stilling slect's Discourse is fully answered. By Dr. Whitby. The Natural History of the Passions. By the Lord Clarendon. Price 2 s. Mauger's Letters, French and Eng∣lish, on all Subjects, Moral, Divine, Amo∣rous. Price 2 s. 6 d. Covent-garden Drollery: or, A Colle∣ction
of choice Songs, Poems, Prologues, and Epilogues: Never Printed before. Books is Duodecimo. Zelinda: A Romance. Translated from the fam'd Monsieur Sudery. By T. D. Price 12 d. The Happy Slave. A pleasant Novel, in two Parts. Written in French by the fam'd Wit of France Monsieur Bromond; and rendred into English by a Person of Quality. Price 2 s. The Cheating Gallant: or, The false Count Brion. A pleasant Novel. Tran∣slated from the French, by a Person of Quality. Bishop Andrews his Devotions, and Manual for the Sick. Price 1 s. 6 d. Dr. Cole's Devotions, or Daily Pray∣ers. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Disorders of Love, in Four Hi∣stories; full of many pleasant and true Adventures. Heroine Musquetier, in two Parts. Prince 2 s. Almanzor and Almanzaida. A Novel. The Double Cuckold. A pleasant No∣vel. In the Press. FINIS.
