L535 R26080 9348312 42797
1662. THE LAST YEARS INTELLIGENCER In BURLESQ. MERCURIUS PUBLICUS in verse Although it be not very terse, Doth yet the Sum of News comprise, Partly in Truth, and partly Lies, All that's on foot in the three Nations For the good Peoples Informations; And as it dedicated was To th' Author of Sir HUDIBRAS. JANUARY. THe Prince de la Grange whilom of Lincolns-Inn Who set all that House on so merry a pin, (Entertained the King, and the Ladies with Sweet-meat, With Pleading, and Dancing, and many a fine-feat) Was Knighted by name of Rise-up Sir John Lort, A Knight in good earnest, though Prince but in sport. But all this is nothing to what the News saith How Christians at Edinbrough converted to th' Faith,
To shew their Profession was true and sincere Did keep the high Feast in Minc'd-pye and good cheer. Then to shew us how strangely some men are deceiv'd That Mary 'thout sin was Born, and Conceiv'd The Pope has of Faith it an Article made To keep in repute the Infallible trade. Advertisements. ONe pretty young trotting roan-colour'd Mare With a whey bristl'd main, and her tayl half bare, Having five white feet, and a large wall-eye, Of a dozen years old, and thirteen hands high, Was lost; with a motly coloured Bitch Spotted all o're as if she had the Itch. These losses and crosses do shrewdly portend Some great Revolution of State is at hand 'Mongst Faulkners, and Hunts-men, and Lovers o'th' Game, Fore-told by Black-mondays Ecclipse 'ere it came. Those famous Lozenges hight Pectoral, Approv'd for Consumptions, and Diseases all, From Plague to Prick'd-finger, by Thomas Buck—worth Nothing, are sold at Mile-end and so forth. An Aegyptian Mummie show'd with Hieroglyphicks, But with no Oration like the Philippies; From Lybian Sands, and neer to Town Memphis, (Of which there is mention in Thomas a Kempis) Was after two thousand five hundred Years Brought into the Strand to be seen, as appears. We would fain have ended this Moneth without malice, But Mors had a pique at my good Lord Cornwallis.
FEBRUARY. OUr Bishops abus'd by some ignorant Flirter, Was Whip'd by Le Strange for his Animadverter. If any Sweet Lady suspect her own Kisses, One Turner can give her approv'd Dentifrices. New Books. LE Reading del mon Seignior my Lord Cooke Was publish'd in print, 'tis thought in some Book; Do's any young Student care to know what that is Let him turn to the Statute de Clunibus levatis. Or if he affect our Poetic Essays There are newly publish'd One and twenty Plays, With Olios, Orations, and all in new dresses By one of our thrice noble Marchionesses. For Caudles, and Jellies and many such knacks To strengthen both Elders and Presbyters backs In spite of proud Praelats (I tell you no storie) A Lady has set forth a Choyce Directorie. This Moneth the great Wind blew down Chimney-tunnell, Had it blown up the Hearths too (good troth) it had done ill, For those who maligne our blessed Kings Revenue, 'Tis believ'd would have payed Him never a pennie. The Virtues of the Antimonial Cup, (Whereof you need take but a pound at one sup) Do's cure all Diseases without the least danger By the time one may gallop from London to Tangir.
MARCH. PRince Charles of Lorrain as fast as horse would goe, Went Post from Vienna to kiss the Popes good-toe; And thence to Vienna he rode back again, For which (it is said) he had's labour for's pain. APRIL. ANother Edition of Help to Discourse, (In which there's as much Wit as in my old horse) With a curious new Volume of State and Court Jests To be us'd in the City and Aldermens Feasts. MAY. STurgeons Male and Female; at Hampton came in Portending the meeting of our gracious Queen With King Charles (heavens bless him) just as who should say I think He was born to be Married in May. This Moneth our Scots-brethren being in a good mood, Six Bishops did consecrate at Holy-Rood, With promise they'd never be such Knaves and Fools To fling at their heads again Chairs and Joynt-stools. But now see our Queen arriv'd at Hampton-Court, To which the whole Kingdom did make their resort: VVhat kissing of hand! what loud acclamation By Londons Recorder with Spanish Oration In Moote-French was there! to see Ladies in dresses Not like us poor Subjects, but all like Queen-Besses, Or hundred Maid marrians in Ginger-bread-past, VVith wide Peticoat, and fine slender VVast.
JUNE. LOrd Verulams Bushell long out of his Wits, Made now an Agreement with those of Row-pits, Where through five tall Mountains, he now the sixt cuts; For he makes it nothing to rake in Hells guts, Get Gold out of Flints, squeeze Aire through the Hills By Pipe, and great Bellows, which turn the Wind-mills His head is so full of; but this is not all, He melts Lead with Lightning to spare our Coal-small: In hermitage-Grotto writes many fine fancies, And sends to Man in Moon by internunce Gances. But if all these Miracles will not yet charm ye, At Oxford he once did clothe all the Kings Armie. Not Herc'les's Labours to his comparable VVhen he slew the fell Dragon, and clens'd the foul Stable, All which so much cry'd up, are not worth a Louse; Master Bushell will set up a Solomon's-house. Sir Henry Vane that so long was extoll'd, On Tow'r-Hill was this Moneth for Treason decoll'd. JULY. QUeen Christin as if sh'ad been tost in a blanket, Comes again now to Rome where she had a brave banquet, At which she disputed in French, Greek and Latin, Not in Peticotos but Breeches of Sattin.
Ken ye well why the French-Ambassador yet Has made her no Visit 'till he know where to sit, On Joynt-stool or Chair, at left-hand, or right, For which there's two Couriers sent Post day and night, To bring word from Paris, and from King of France, Alas, What's eight-hundred miles for a French Dance! Advertisements. NEw Books this Moneth publish'd; first comes Mr. Hobbs Consider'd, or not; with a many dry bobbs. The Shepher-sheba, and Anti-baal-berith, Confounding the Covenant from Edenbrough to Erith. Chocolata's true history for the Mully-grubbs, And help Kinder-maken by Proselyte Stubbs; VVith many more Pieces of wondrous strange Titles, Some writ by good Scholars, and some by Dull-betles. AUGUST. HIs Holiness quarrels this Moneth with Duke Crequy, In which there were shot, & slain many a French-Laquay; This anger has lost the Pope City Avinion; But 'twill all come to nothing some are of opinion. In Ireland his Grace (Father of Lord Ossery) 'Mongst Vassals whose speech is Fragulian Chessery, Did bathe his Bootes in Sea from knees to the heels, To invite the lost Fishing, and good Salmon-peals; Such virtue in Leather there is on Dukes foot, As made simple Fishes swim thither a trot,
SEPTEMBER. THe Prince of Bavaria that he might remember VVhen he comes to ripe Age, this Moneth of September, VVas Christned by name Maximilian Innumerabil. Constinopolitan; Lodovicus, Francisc, Ignace, Antonîus, Jose, Nicolas, Felix, and last of all Pius By the Praelate of Tegen, lest men should miscall, Or Saint take unkindly, he nam'd him names all. The Rump newly risen from tedious Session, The right honest Speaker dy'd with a Confession, That all they pretended was nought but Confusion: May more Knaves have grace to make such a conclusion. Some thing I should here say of Pulve Sympathetic, Which cures all Diseases that are Hypothetic; If any the like to compose should desire, 'Tis to be prepar'd by Promethean-Fire. VVhat other strange wonders it do's bring to pass, Recommend we your Patient to Sir Hudibras. OCTOBER. GReat talk there was now of Herrings, and Busses, And one Rowland Pepin for making good Trusses, 'Gainst Burstnesse, and Ruptures, and all such loose things, But that damn'd disease of our Merchants Purse-strings. Room, room for — my Lord Mayor comes, VVith Whifflers, and Pageants, soft Fifes and lowd Drums;
Some marching on horses, and some on foot trudge, Some dighted in Scarlet, Gold-chains, and in Budge; To see the Worlds-wonder, Pauls Church walk on foot, The great Tow'r of London pluck'd up by the root; All born on mens shoulders, like Elephants Castles, Or, as on my Lords-horse his crimson-red Tassles. NOVEMBER. THe next gallant sight was th' Ambassador of Mosco, From Countrey far like his Chin o're-grown with Bosco; With black-Fox, and Ermine, Hawkes, Carpets and Sables; Sea-morse-tooth, Bows, Arrows, and Hemp to make Cables. Two brave Persian Pransers lead by beards in green, All born for a Present to King, and to Queen. A wondrous fine Pupet-play Bartholomew Fair Shew'd, where the small Manikins danc'd in the air; But oh! the rare Butter-fly, you'd swear were alive, All singing in Musique with Recitative. DECEMBER. NOw was the Extraction of Genoüa Guioco, Set up by no Cheat, but some fine subtil Rooko: 'Tis hung out as Licence, in book, in the Lent is Of Faculty-Office, when time to repent is For eating of Flesh, at so damn'd dear a rate, Sound Wench would be Cheaper, unless the Price bate. London, Printed in the Year 1663.
