M2366 13659615 101066
A Modest Inquiry Into the Carriage of Some of the Dissenting Bishops; With Reflections upon the late B. of E. LETTER, Compared with their own Vindication. Licensed according to Order. We read in the Sacred Writings, That the Children of Israel, when in any Extraor∣dinary Danger or Trouble seemed to be mightily concerned, under it, and to make strong Resolutions against those  that had procured it, to cry earnestly to God for trance therefrom, and withal to use all Lawful  in order to their Recovery from it. But no soon∣ the Storm over, but they forgot what God had  for them, and returned with the Dog to his Vo∣. This was the Temper of the Generality of the le of Israel: And 'twere to be wisht that the same  of Spirit were not too visible in some of the est Character of our Church-Guides, who no less  that People have forgot the wonderful Deliver∣ God has wrought for us, and too daringly tempt  and turn back in their Hearts to Egypt. It is not  years ago that some at least of these very persons ed to stand up mightily to stem the Flood of Po∣ hich then (had not God in his Mercy prevent∣ed it) had undoubtedly over-flown our Land; so as they would not give their Concurrence to any thing that might in the least weaken the Protestant Interest, and therefore rather than they would have any hand in reading the late K. James's Declaration, in order to have the Penal Laws and Test Repealed (which yet might have been done in a Parliamentary way without Sin, and shews that they themselves would deny O∣bedience to the Civil Power in some things not for∣bidden in the Word of God, when so doing was found to be for the general good, as well as those the; have exposed for so doing as the worst of men) they chose to undergo what Penalties the Law could inflict upon them for their Refusal. And 'tis not unknown how much this Action has been magnified, not only by themselves, but by their great Admirers, who have fre∣quently extolled it even above what was fitting, when some persons Zealously affected towards Their Present Majesties seemed to shew their displeasure at their re∣fusing the Oaths, by telling them, Had it not been for
them what had become of us and our Religion ere now? But how those Reverend persons can reconcile that Action with their Carriage and Deportment since is justly the Admiration of any thinking Man. The Protestant Religion we all know was in no small danger then, and they did run well, who has hindred them since? But should they carry their designs now so as to bring their Friend Mr. Redding (as the Canting Letter terms the late King) back, and resettle him, I would gladly know whether the Protestant Religion would not be in infinite∣ly worse Circumstances than it could possibly have been in then, even tho the Penal Laws & Test had been actu∣ally Repealed. For then we had not made our Address to the Protestants abroad, which considering our Innate strength at home, and the Assarance we had of their Assistance for the common Safety was a terrour to our Enemies. But now we have already had help from them, and it has pleased God to bless it so far that our Liberties were in no Reign so well setled as now they are; and had it not been for those Reverend per∣sons and the Party influenced by them we had ere now been the Terrour of our Enemies. But should the late King be restored, no rational Security could be pro∣posed for us. For that turn of Affairs here, would un∣doubtedly be of Fatal Influence on all the Protestant Princes and States abroad, so that we could not pect the least Assistance from them, whom the pedious∣ness of some of us would destroy with our selves; the Countrey here is mightily Empoverished by reason of the prolonging of the War; and 'tis not to be suppo∣sed but that the Flower of our Nobility and Gentry, with the best of our Commons will Sacrifice their Lives for the Religion and Liberty of their Countrey, rather than come again under the Clutches of one who has shewed himself so implicitely abandoned to the Council of the Jesuits: And if it should please God to punish us so far for our Sins as to permit him to prevail over us, 'twould be no hard matter for him with his French and Irish Souldiers poured in upon us to guide the rest as he pleased. All which plainly shews what great Friends to the Protestant Religion, some at least, of those Holy Confessors, those Golden Candlesticks have been, who pretended to stand up for it, when it was nothing near in so great Danger, and yet would betray it in its greatest Exigency, and that upon such slender Pretences that a Child would even be ashamed to mention. How mightily the English World has wondred after those Dissenting Gentlemen needs not be insisted up∣on, nor how strong a Party of easie short-sighted men have been brought over by their means, to King James's side, notwithstanding their fair Pretence in their own Vindication, That they would always by Gods Grace make it their daily practice to study to be quiet, to bear their Cross patiently, and to sek the good of their Native Countrey. It has been the Admiration of not a few, that the Publisher of the Modest Enquiry, was so severely threat∣ned, since it was done from so great a Zeal for their Majesties Government, and to awaken people from their sluggish Security in a time of so great a danger a that was, meerly because they seemed to expose in their own Colours those dissenting Prelates, who eve in their own Vindication (however it was by some of their Admirers ready to be entertained with, T Voice of a God and not of a Man) make so superficial a Defence, that in the Judgment of all Impartial Rea∣ders rather bewrays their Guilt than any way evinces their Innocence. As if Romish-like the Protestant Religion and Government should be Sacrificed to the Caprice of a few sullen Prelates. But now it has pleas∣ed God of his Infinite Mercy to give us a plain Evi∣dence of the Integrity of at least some of them; one of whom (as is reported by his Admirers) is now go over to France to prevent that Arbitrary Ewer (as he with the rest have it in the common Vindication) from coming upon us and prevailing ovr us; or rather  prevent its too late coming among us, (as his Lette imports.) A few Remarks upon which comparing it with their Vindication, I shall here subjoyn. But before I begin it may not be amiss to say some what as to the Reality of the matter of Fact, viz. that 'tis not a Fiction on purpose to asperse so holy a Mans Name; and this is plain enough if we consider that these Two Letters were seized among the re that were sent over to France by my Lord Prest  the rest, and known to be his by undoubted Evidence. But besides, it is further confirmed by this, that 'tis  to be supposed that any thing less than a Conscious∣ness of Guilt could Induce this Reverend Person  withdraw himself at this Juncture, even tho' he might be sensible enough that the Government is so m that tho' his crime was of a Crimson dye, yet no fur¦ther rigour would have been used against him, tha to keep him from betraying that Church which he pretends so great a Zeal for, (but in Truth, it s never designed to serve her, but his own Interest a Ambition.) And whether he may not be reckon amongst the Hireling Shepherds, who when he  brought some of his Votaries as near destruction  may be, forsakes them, I leave to the World to ju It might have been thought that one that would  renounce his Hopes of Heaven (absit blasphemia!) is  would swerve in the least from K. James's Interest, w not have thus betrayed it by a cowardly flight, esr ally when standing to it, and laying down his Life  so good a Cause would have been of such mighty Inf¦ence on all his Votaries, who now when their  leader has thus faintly turned back, can do no o than follow his Example. But I will now proceed the Letter; which is penned in the same fulsom that dropt from the Mouths of those that  preaching people into that Slavery that was to  in Popery. Tho' the Bearer will do us the Justice [Observe quietly soever the Holy Man protests before Go live, in his Vindication, yet he would not be so represented to his most Gracious Soveraign Ja
just] to assure you that we are as full of Duly, &c. as  self could wish. [This speaks the Gentlemans meaning plainly enough; Now look to your seves you that spoke so much in the favours of the Dissent∣ing — sticks, that tho' they had some insupera∣ble Scruples upon their Consciences, which hindred them from appearing Zealous for this Government, yet they were so devoted to the Protestant Religion, that they nor any one of them would ever act so much to its prejudice as to carry on Plots to introduce the late King.] And his next words do more fully explain his meaning; Yet this Gentleman has under∣taken you will forgive the Presumption [wards expressing the deepest sense of Devotion, that they must be as sensless as Stones that do not see what a Zeal for the cause these words import] If I give my self the honour to give you this fresh assurance in a few words which owe  by cur, Actions: [The old flattering Language of Eighty three, Eighty four, Eighty five. And we see by the word Actions, how little difference there is be∣tween the solemn Protestations before Almighty God made by them in their Vindication, and that of the Order of the Name Jesus. But 'tis true since their de∣signs now jump so together, 'tis no wonder if the measures to accomplish them be much the same. And they are mightily byassed or shallow-pated that are not sensible, that what the Jesuits are in the Romish, that a parcel of High-flown Tantivy-men are in the Protestant Church. 'Tis not unknown to the World how this Party has inveighed against Dissenters as the worst of men (so that their Admirers to this very day reckon them worse than Roman Catholicks) and Moderate Church-men, upon a Presence of their be∣ing of so Seditious Principles, who have both notwith∣standing, not only here but in the Neighbouring Kingdom, shewed as much Zeal for Their Present Ma∣jesties Government as ever Subjects did. And it may deserve our Consideration, whether Persons be more desirable in a Kingdom; those whose Loyaly is shewed only to Princes, who in modest speaking are Princes neither of Religion nor Honesty, and who by their Flatteries and Counsels hurry those Princes to com∣mit more Extravagancies than possibly their Natures would prompt 'em to; but when Princes of undoubt∣ed Religion and Honesty come to the Throne, pretend I do not know not what Conscience against it (more like one acted by the Prince of Darkness, than the Father of Light:) Or those who tho' they seem not to give much countenance to bad Princes, yet follow after Judgment when returned unto Righteousness, whom that Kingly Prophet declares to be right-hearted men. But how much credit soever has been given to that sort of Men, when out of a malicious design calum∣niating their Fellow Subjects, for ought can be ra∣tionally concluded from either of their I Practices men of much more Religion and Integrity than them∣selves, I hope they will not gain such ground as they have formerly with men at leaft of any Morals, since not only from their carriage in the latter end of the Reign of K. Charles II. and the beginning of the late King's, 'tis easie to know what they are, but from their demeanour now it will be obvious enough to any to reply to their Calumnies, Quis tuler it Gracchos de seditione querentes? But left we should think this the Sentiments only o one Non-Con-Prelate (as if he were using We By vertue of his Apostolical Function) he plainly solves the riddle himself by telling us; I speak in the Pur Number, because I write my Elder Brothers sentiments as we as my own, and the rest of my Family. [What he means by his Eldest Brother is obvious enough, and by the rest of his Family, nothing else can be meant bu the rest of the Dissenting Tribe, for 'tis easily suppose able that his Domestick Family could do but littl Service to the Cause. And if he speaks Truth (as we are bound to believe a Gentleman of his Function) then there's never a Barrel better Herring.] He tells us next, Tho' lessened in Numbr [Which suppose refers to the Two Worthy Prelates, who a they ftood up for the Protestant Religion (not in pre¦tence, but) really; so they have persevered in s good a Work, by emproving all their Interest t support Their Present Majesties, with whom  must now suffer the same Fate, and another, wh had suckt in those Principles with his Mothers Mill sometimes since deceast, but whose Intercessions fo the good of the Cause, no doubt they expect] yet  we are not mightily out in our Accounts [which we hope they shall to their own Confusion; for the Prover says. They that reckon before their Host, must count twic We are growing in our Interests, that is, in Yours. [Th former is too true to be denied, and is too sad  Indication what hollow-hearted Protestants we hav amongst us. And by the Letter we plainly see wh Confessors they are for the Protestant Interest, King James's Interest (which he has plainly de¦clared to the World was to advance the Romish Id¦latries) and theirs is become one and the same.—was indeed the Jealousie of not a few, that th would never have stood it out so much as they d and it seems they thought they had done too muc and therefore resolved to make amends for the ¦ture. The Conclusion of this Letter is much the sa with the rest of it; and therefore I pass it. That to Mrs. Redding (the late Queen) tho' it much to the same purpose with the former, yet I sh briefly take notice of it. And first, As it is impossible for me to express that ¦traordinary satisfaction it gave me this time twelve mo to receive that Mark of your Favour and Goodness u your own hand: [This is a plain Indication that  Holy Father is not a Plotter of yesterday: Other 'tis not probable that the late Queen would h vouchsafed such a special Favour as to write to  with her own hand.] So I have lived in some pai
an Opportunity to write to you my Humble Acknowledg∣ments, and Truest Duty: [It had been much more be∣coming his Coat to have travelled in pain to discharge the duty he lay under to his great Master, in feeding the Flock committed to his Inspection, which if he had been so faithful in as became a Bishop, he would have been very indifferent of paying his Duty to the late Queen.] From which (by the Grace of God) I am no more capable of swerving than of Renouncing my Hopes of Heaven. [I thought this Reverend Prelate had been a great Opposer of the Impossibility of the Elects final Apostacy; but the confident Language he expresses himself by, would induce us to believe that he is turned over to Infallibility. I wish his Hopes of Hea∣ven be well grounded: But I am afraid that if they had been such as he pretends, he would never have put them in the balance with his pretended Allegi∣ance to Her.] I say this in behalf of my Elder Bro∣ther — You may entirely depend upon us, not only for a con∣stant Adherence to so well chosen a Principle [the , Jure Divinity of Succession, Non-Resistance, with all its Appurtenances, which has been sufficiently lasht these two years; and this Beast has received more Wounds than ever his Apost—ship will be able to heal] But for our utmost Activity to promote your In∣terests, which are inseparably our own. [This with a Witness is a Discovery of the Candor and Ingenuity (to say nothing of his Brethren whom he makes as Guilty as himself) of his Solemn Protestations (in the Common Vindication) as in the presence of Almigh∣ty God, that he knew of no Plot against the Govern∣ment! What greater Dissimulation with God Al∣ty could the most perfidious Jesuite have been guilty of, than for him to protest there, that he knew of no Plot, when yet he himself was promoting K. James's Interest with his greatest activity? For we have no reason to believe that he has changed his mind in the least since. Nay, their Vindication it self shews they have no great affection to their present Majesties; for while they pray for all sorts of Subjects, they have not a good wish to spare for Their Majesties, whom the Apostle Ranked first, and they themselves  times, and would now, had they a King accordin  their own hearts. He concludes, Our Young Master has all our  Wishes [Similes habent sua labra Lactucas; a Spur Prelate and Prince. How great a Friend is this Gent¦man to the Succession he so much pretends to, wh he would thrust by the Genuine Issue, and bring  Race no Body knows of what Extract? Since 'tis o¦tain that for all the noise has been made about  proving of his Legitimacy, no Legal Proof could  adduced, nor ever will: And whatever Presumptio there might be of his Legitimacy, which are fear  probable, 'twould be very unfair dealing to pre him to them, whose Legitimacy is unquestionab Had there not been Imposture in the case, 'tis no  be supposed any thing would have been omitted  might have contributed to the Legal proof of it N believe there are some persons can justifie that  Prelate has sometimes been of another Opinion  any Body rather than Their Present Majesties shall  our Holy Prelates Young Master: And good rea why: for His Majesty shall never be forgiven his ¦ving the Royal Assent to the Act for suspending  Laws against Protestant Dissenters: Which K. Charles  of Blessed Memory, a Man according to God's o heart would have been very loth to have done.  no wonder then that they can be no Well wish a Government that takes their sting from them  daly gains more Friends, and We get ground of hi ¦versaries. [How confident soever he is of the  of his Party, yet blessed be God we have odds en nor are we dissatisfied at it, since thereby we  only lost those men, whose being for any  would make a Man of any Integrity to suspect  Gentlemen, for the generality of them, that have  little either Religion or Morality, as the Two L Horses, and take away those two sorts of Men  of them commonly called K—and F—the Phi∣losopher might Light a Candle to find another M and lose his labour. London, Printed for J. K. 1691.
