N578 16157154 104921
A NEW BALLAD UPON DR. OATES HIS Retreat from White-Hall, Into the City. To the Tune of, I'le tell Thee Dick where I have been. I. CAn'st tell me, Ceres, What curst Fate Hangs o're the Head of Oates of late? Or what Cross Planet Reigns? That Oates, the Noblest Thought at first, And Best, should now be held the Worst, And Vilest of all Grains? II. Oates, that same brave & swagg'ring Blade, Which th'other Day, with lofty Head, His Fellows all o're-top't; Should for a Roguish Weed be thrown Out of the Court, and now full blown. Be in the Blossom Crop't? III. Oates, that was whilome thought to be For the King's Horse, fit Company, (God bless him evermore!) Should now by ev'ry Groom be spurn'd, And for a Rogue in Grain be turn'd Out of the Stable-Door? IV. Had these Oates musty been, or stale, Or had they any Noysome Smell, They had of Blame not fail'd: But These (as Musk it self) were Sweet, With Coat as Black as any Jet; But some-what too Long-Tail'd. V. That Tyrant's Jades, that Oates & HayDiomedes, Refus'd for Man's Flesh, I dare say, Ne'r such an Oate did taste: And, pity 'twas, his Worth to show, That He had not been long agoe, Into their Maunger cast.
VI. The Case is hard, that Oates, that fed The Noblest Beast, that liv'd in Mead, On Pastures Green, or Heath well; Should be, at last, Himself turn'd down Into the Common of the Town, To feed the Calves of Bethel. VII. But chear up, Oates; 'tis no Disgrace: These Calves are of the City Race, (There are none such at White-Hall;) And freely will their Milk give down, (And thou canst stroak them well, 'tis known) To feed Thee in Requital. VIII. Some have the Pedigree, and Strain Of Oates, deriv'd from that Bless'd Grain, Which Egypt's Famine freed: And I believe, what they aver; For, without doubt, these (Our) Oates are Of the true Gypsie Breed. IX. Nay, others have his Parents blam'd, They had the Brat not Joseph nam'd; But they herein had err'd: For that Good Man at Court, at last, For his Deserts was highly grace't; Not for a Rogue Casheir'd. X. Yet, I doubt not, but of such known Divinity had Oates there grown, He would have with a Rope, Amongst their Leek, and Onyon-Gods, (As more deserving it by odds,) Been long agoe Trust up. XI. Shall We, who boast true Gospel-Light, Instead of doing Him that Right, Then treat Him worse than Pagan? And Excommunicate Him clear Out of our Courts, as if he were A Minister of Dagon? XII. This sure is a New Popish-Plot; Who seeing now we in a Knot, Begin to hang together; Think't the best way, (which Heav'n defend!) Is to untye us, and to send Our Doctor, God knows whither. XIII. You Charitable City-Dames, If now you will set up your Names, Preserve Him like Sweet-Meats: He flyes to You, to be Secure; Keep close your Fore-Doors; but be sure, Guard well your Posterne-Gates. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for W. Brown, in the Year, 1681.
