N575A 13127082 97854
A NEW BALLAD To the praise of JAMES D. of Monmouth. He once was great, And to this Land did bring Triumphant Bays And Lautel to his KING. To the Tune of Now, now 'tis in vain. NOtwithstanding the Frowns That descends from the Crown, On my Lord that once was so dear, Prefer'd above other, Undone by a Brother, And the hate of an Uncle so near; Yet let them tread on, And end as begun, My Love it shall never withdraw; But in spite of all Fate In him I'le delight, For Monmouth's the flower of them all. Of great Places at Court, Turn'd him out for their Sport, Pretending that he soar'd too high; Or fearing he might At last claim a Right, Became a great Beam in their Eyes Cause the Mobely ran, And admir'd him each Man, And Welcom'd him with a Hazza, For who can do less Than love whom they Bless? For Monmouth's the flower of them all These Monsters of Rome They first hatch't his doom, Because that he stood in their way, And stop't their carrire When their Plots did appear To make our Religion their Prey. Those other great Lords Are now all abhor'd, And term'd as great Monsters as he, By that Tory Crew Who has nothing to do But to Scandel brave Monmouth's Degree. May they Shimie like In Cursing Delight, Till the Fall on their own Heads Rebound, And he like the Palms Supprest, firmer stand, And the higher ascend from the Ground: For who can he be That's so happy as he, Who smilingly can so forgive, The abuses of Late Receiv'd from the State, Brave Monmouth be happy and Live. For the Heavens may grow clear And Great Charles appear, With the smiles of a Father as before; As he promis'd to me He Ever would be And he my Great Monmouth Restore. To his Places of State That he may be Great, And his Enemies unmasked be, Who's Endevoured to bring Him in disgrace with his King, Brave Monmouth I love none but thee. May thy Royal Father Sway the Scepter for Ever, And flourishing Govern this I and, May the Turks and the Athiests, Presbyterians and Papists, Turn one and in Unity stand; Then shall be firm Peace, From our Jars we shall Cease, In Church Government when we agree, And in the mean time, May the Crown keep the Line; Brave Monmouth we hapier shall be. FINIS. Printed and Sold by J. Grantham, in Newstreet. 1682.
