N479 24425173 109698
A DECLARATION OF WAR, By the States-General against the French, Hague, March 12. 1689. THat the States-General being in perfect Peace and Tranquillity in the Year 1672, with such an entire Confidence in the Treatles of Peace, Friendship and Alliance Established between the French King and this State, That they were unprovided of whatever might serve for their De∣fence against so powerful a King, not being able to imagine that the said King, without any just cause, would break the said Treaties, were yet contrary to all expectation fallen upon with so sudden and heavy a War, that the State was in a short time brought into great danger, and might have been entirely subverted, had they not reflected upon the Reasons which the said King Declared had mov∣ed him to the War, to wit, the Encrease of his Honour and Glory; and firmly trusted that Almighty God would not suffer their destruction, undertaken with so great Injustice, whereby they were encouraged in that desperate state of Affairs, under the prudent Conduct of his Highness the Prince of Orange, to stand our all extremities in the defence of the true Reformed Religion, their Liberty, & Country; That it having pleased God to pour out his Mercies upon the State, after the spilling of much innocent Blood, & the great suffering of the Inhabitants by the Cruelties of the French, a Treaty of Peace, Commerce, & Navigation was Concluded in the year 1678. with the French King at Nimeguen: which the States on their part exactly & religiously observed; but that on the con∣trary the French King soon after, by a publict Edict, laid heavy burthens upon the Commerce of the State, and endeavoured from time to time, by all manner of way, as well in, as out of Europe, to molest the same: fa∣voured the taking of their Ships and Goods, and sought, as far as in him lay, as well directly as indirectly, entirely to ruine their said Commerce and Navigation, causing even their Ships of War to be visited by force, and some of them to be attack'd in time of Peace; That the said King had finally by new Impositions and Vexations hindred the Inhabitants of these Countries from vending in France, their Manufactures, and product of their Fishery, and had on frivolous pretences laid such great and unjust impositions upon their Trade, that it was impossible for them to continue it any longer; slighting with great contempt all the Instances made by the States on occasion thereof, and denying their Ambassadors in France the Honour and Respect which they had always enjoyed; That the said King having begun the Terrible Persecution against those of the Reformed Religion within his Kingdoms, had involved therein the Subjects of this State, resid∣ing there on account of their Trade, forcing Women from their Husbands, and Children from their Pa∣rents, and treating even the Consuls of this State in a cruel and unheard of manner, contrary to the Law of Nations, and the express Tenor of the Treaties; That the said King had farther shewed his ill design a∣gainst this State, by the continual motion of his Troops towards their Frontiers, thereby to oblige them to make extraordinary Preparations by Land and Sea, to the exhausting of their Revenues; That he had some∣times with fair Words and solemn Assurances, and even by Overtures of an Alliance, endeavoured to amuse them, but that when ever they went about to provide for their own security, and the farther strengthning of the Treaty of Nimeguen, by making Defensive Alliances with any of the Princes their Neighbours, He had always opposed them, & even threatned them with a War on account thereof. Lastly, that the said King has in ful Peace caused the Ships, Goods, & Persons of the Subjects of this State who were residing in France, upon the pub∣lick Faith of the Treaties, to be seized, and the Masters and Seamen of the said Ships to be imprisoned, and most babarously treated, to force them to change their Religion, and the said Ships, Goods and Ef∣fects to be sold, although it is expresly stipulated by the Treaty of Commerce, that in case of a War, the Subjects on both sides shall be allowed six months time to retire with their Goods, or otherwise to sell or dispose of them; which was followed with the plundering and burning of diverse Villages within the Territories of this State; and afterwards with a Declaration of War, for which no other reason was given than that the States had made Extraordinary preparations by Land and Sea, although they had asured the said King that they were only intended for their own necessary defence, and that they would not concern themselves with the Election of Cologne; That the States having thus made manifest the Evil Designs and Machinarions of the French King against this State, do admonish their Subjects seriously to reflect upon the Treatment they are to expect from him in matter of their Religion, Liberty, Estates, and Persons, and that they will call to mind the cruel Persecution he has undertaken against his own Subjects, and in what manner the Towns and Places, who thought they had surrendred upon good Conditions have been Treated, and whole Countries destroyed which his Troops have been forced to quit. Upon all these Con∣siderations, and for the preservation of their Religion, and Liberty and the repairing the Injuries ther Subjects have so unjustly suffered, the said States do Declare War against the said King of France, and all his Subjects Countries and Dominions, both by Sea and Land, strictly commanding. 1. That none of the Inhabitants of this State, or any Forreigner residing within their Territories, shall transport any thing to France that's use∣ful in War, or Correspond with the French to the prejudice of the State. 2. That all Contraband Goods which shall be taken going to France, shall be declared Prize. 3. That good security shall be given by all persons car∣rying any Contraband Goods out of these Countries, that they are not designed for France. 4. That all ships laden with contraband goods as shall be found on the French coasts shall be taken for good prize. 5. That all ships ought to have lawful Pass-ports. 6. The Men of War not to molest any Ships having such Pass-ports, and not being bound with any Contraband Goods to any Ports in France. 7. That such as shall be found offending here-In, shall be punished with Confiscation of Ship and Goods. 8. That the Commanders of the Ships of War shall punctually govern themselves in this matter according to the Treaties made in relation thereunto, with other Kings, Princes, and States. 9. That the Admiralties shall have the Cognisance of these Offences. 10. 11, 12. The Moneys arising by such Confiscations shall be disposed of, as has been heretofore practised in like Cases; And as to the Seisure, &c. former Placaers to be observed. 13. None of the Inhabitants of this State shall Insure any French Ships or Goods, or others bound to France, on Forfeiture of the Sum In∣sured. Given at the Hague the 9th of March, 1689. Re-printed at Edinburgh in the Year, 1689.
