O204 12962085 96092
OLD JEMMY An Excellent New Ballad. To an Excellent New Tune, called, Young Jemmy: [1] OLd Jemmy is a Lad Right lawfully descended; No Bastard born nor bred, Nor for a Whig suspended: The True and Lawful Heir to th' Crown, By Right of Birth and Laws, And bravely will maintain his own, In spight of all his Foes. [2] Od Jemmy is the Top And Chief amongst the Princes No Mobile gay Fop, With Brimigham pretences: A Heart and Soul so wondrous great, And such a conqu'ring Eye, That every Loyal Lad fears not In Jemmy's Cause to die. [3] Old Jammy is a Prince Of Noble Resolutions, Whose Powerful Influence Can order our Confusions: But Oh! He fights with such a Grace, No Force can him withstand; No God of War but must give place Where Jemmy leads the Van. [4] To Jemmy every Swain Does pay due Veneration; And Scotland does maintain His Title to the Nation. The Pride of all the Court he stands, The Patron of his Cause, The Joy and Hope of all his Friends, The Terrour of his Foes. [5] Maliciously they Vote, To work Old Jemmy's Ruin, And zealously promote A Bill for his undoing: Both Lords and Commons most agree To pull His Highness down; But ('spight of all their Policy) Old Jemmy's Heir to th' Crown. [6] The Schismatick and Saint, The Quaker and the Athiest, Swear by the Covenant, Old Jemmy is a Papist; Whilst all the Holy Crew did plot To pull His Highness down, Great Albany the Noble Scot Did raise unto a Crown. [7] Great Albany they swear, He before any other, Shall be immediate Heir Unto His Royal Brother, Who will, in spight of all his Foes, His Lawful Rights maintain, And all the Fops that interpose, Old Jemmy's York again. [8] The Whigs and Zealots Plot To banish him the Nation, But the Renowned Scot Hath wrought his Restauration. With high Respects they treat his Grace, His Royal Cause maintain; Brave Albany (to Scotland's Praise) Is Mighty York again. [9] Against his envious Fates The Kirk hath taught a Lesson; A Blessing on the States, To settle the Succession. They real were, both Knight and Lord, And will His Rights maintain; By Royal Parliament restor'd, Old Jemmy's come again. [10] And now He's come again, In spight of all Pretenders, Great Albany shall Reign Amongst the Faiths Defenders. Let Whig and Brimigham repine; They shew their Teeth in vain; The Glory of the British Line, Old Jemmy's come again. LONDON: Printed by Nath. Thompson, 1681.
