O183 99828278 32705
THE Translation of Homers WORKS into English Verse being undertaken by John Ogilby Translator of Virgil, and Paraphrasor on AEsop, which Work will be of greater Charge then can be expected to be born by him; It being found by Computation to amount to neer 5000 l. He therefore being de∣sirous to spend his time and pains to bring that great and ancient POEM into our English VERSION; Doth humbly propose to all Honourable Personages, Encouragers of Art and Learning, an Expedient for the publishing of the said Work, as followeth. First, All Persons that shall be pleased to be at the charge of a Design, and graving of a Plate, which will cost the Author at least 10 l. for the adorning and illustrating the Work, are desired to pay into the hands of the Author, or of such as he shall appoint, the summ of 12 l. for which each person shall have two Books; Viz. The Iliads and Odysses; the 12 l. to be paid as followeth; Viz. 5 l. upon the Subscription, and upon the receipt of the Iliads Printed 5 l. more, and upon the receipt of the Odysses 40 s. more; each of which Persons upon their said Plates shall have their Names, Armes, and Titles Engraved, and be thankfully Recorded to Posterity, to be Promoters, Bene∣factors, and Patrons of that Noble WORK. Secondly, Such persons as are not willing to be at the charge of a Plate, and yet are desirous to have the said Books compleat with Pictures, of the aforesaid dedicated Plates, as soon as they shall be published, are requested to deposite in the hands of the Author as aforesaid, the summ of 40 s. upon their Subscription, and upon the receipt of the Iliads 40 s. more, and upon the receipt of the Odysses 40 s. more. To all which Persons the Author shall give Acquittances upon the payment of their first Subscriptions, and such order shall be taken for securing the Copies or Volumes before mentioned to the Subscribers, as shall be thought reasonable, being in all 61. for the said two Books. Thirdly, Any Person who by his Interest or Acquaintance shall bring in five Subscribers, or compleat the number himself, on either of the said Proposals, shall upon their payments of their subscribed Summs, have the said two Books of Iiads and Odysses cleer from the Author, over and above the said five, as a return of thankfulness, and be secured thereof as aforesaid. The first Volume is intended to be perfected with Plates (if Subscriptions come in) within a year, and the second Volume by the end of the year following. For the better ease and accommodation of such Subscribers as know not the Author nor his dwel∣ling, they may be pleased to repair to the House of Mr. Abbot in Cornhil neer the old Exchange, to the House of Mr. Yarway in Woodstreet, at Lad-Lane end, or to the house of Mr. Roycroft in New-street, neer Criple-gate, where the Subscriptions may be made, and the Receipts acknowledged to the use of the Author; Who will secure the delivery of the Volumes to the Subscribers up∣on perfecting the Work.
