O135 R1784 12958936 96052
AN ODE Performed at the Anniversary Feast of the Gentlemen, Na∣tives of the County of Kent, AT Merchant-Taylors-Hall, Nov. 21. 1700. Set to Musick by Mr Barret. HArk, Musick, hark, Melodious Sounds are made: A Noble Theme in moving Numbers laid, Is to our Sence by moving Notes convey'd. Apollo takes his Harp and plays: The God of Music sings the Praise Of KENT, the Darling of his Rays. Fair Land, that glads my wondring Eye, While round the Spacious Orb I fly, Proud of my Lustre, here I view The Sprightly products of my Rays in you. Upon thy fertile sides The Thames with Plenty loaded glides, Inriching thee with tributary Tydes. Britain's Glory, Safety, Trade, Within thy Medway's Arms are laid, And KENT is England's Bulwark made. By thee her Fleets protected are, By thee are furnish'd out for War. In Peace secur'd within thy Land, In War by thee are bravely mann'd. The Goddess of the British Isle Fair Liberty on Thee does smile.
Thy Lands Exempt from all Despotick sway, Their ancient Patrons ne'r betray: By long Succession sure, Riches and Titles here endure; But Vertue with Estates come down, And from the Father bless the Son. No wonder Vertues there abound, This part down to the Grand Cho∣rus was not set, lest the Enter∣tainment should be too ong. Since Britain first was bless'd, And with the Noblest Worship grac'd, On this Religious Ground. Blest Land, Propt by thy ruling Pow'rs, The Saving Gross was fixt on thy exalted Tow'rs. There Justice, Freedom, Plenty, Ease, The Pride of War, and Joys of Peace, And ev'ry Good are found: KENT with its ancient Honors great, It self a Kingdom and a State, With ev'ry Bliss is crown'd. Ye Gen'rous Offspring of a Noble Land, Still ev'ry heart command; Still ev'ry Year your Minutes thus employ, And let your Goodness be diffusive as your Joy. There Nature plac'd you to oppose, And awe Britannia's Neighb'ring Foes: Of Freedom fond, untaught to yield, The first to take, and last to quit the Field. That Mighty She, who did her Sex adorn, The Great Eliza here was Born. The very Swain here like a Noble lives, Blest in the Sweets that Freedom gives; Blest in the best of Representatives. Thus may ye yearly hither throng, Like Them your Joys improve; Still help each other, rear the young, And still promote Society and Love. Grand Chorus. REjoyce, Brave Sons of KENT, Hail! Crown'd with loud Applause, Guard what your Fathers fixt of old, Our Altars and our Laws. Guard, what your Fathers fixt of old, When early pious, wisely bold, The Conqu'ror they Controul'd. FINIS.
