O903D 31355647 110574
ORDERS AGREED UPON BY THE HEADS OF HOUSES FOR THE PREVENTING AND QUENCHING OF FIRE. THAT Fifty pounds be forthwith rais'd by the University, and the respective Colledges, (of which summe the University is to pay Ten pounds,) for providing Engines, Ladders, &c. That the Governors of the respective Colledges, do deal effectualy with their Tenants, within the University, that with all Convenient speed, both their dwelling houses, and out houses be Slatted or Tyled; and that no Lease be hereafter renew'd to any such Tenant, who shall refuse or neglect to Slat or Tyle their said houses accordingly. That every Colledge and Hall, provide a convenient number of Buckets and Ladders; and signifie what provision they have made unto the Vice-Chancellor, within one Month after the Publication of these Orders; and as often as any of them shall be lost or decay'd, that the same number be imme∣diately compleated, and made up again. That the Governors of the respective Colledges and Halls, doe engage all Bakers, Brewers, Cooks, Chandlers and others with whom they have any dealing, forthwith to remove their Wood-piles, and Fewel of all forts, a convenient distance from the City, or otherwise to provide houses Slatted or tyl'd to secure their Fewel, Hay, Straw &c. (as much as is possible) from all danger of Fire. And that the Chandlers be also engag'd to remove their melting houses, to places where they may not annoy nor endanger their Neighbours. And in case they or any of the foresaid persons shall refuse or neglect to doe accordingly, that then the Heads of Houses shall forbid all tra∣ding and dealing with them, for their respective Colledges and Halls. That all Governours of Colledges and Halls, take effectuall care, that all sorts of Fewel, Hay &c. within the precincts of their respective Houses be covered as aforesayd, or else so placed that they may not endanger any Buildings. That diligent care be likewise taken that all Chimneys be swept yearly before the Feast of All Saints, and that no Fire be carryed about either from the Kitchin, or from Chamber to Chamber in open shovells, but only in cover'd pans or any Candles caryed into Wood-houses, or Places where any kind of fewel lies, except in Lanthorns, and that a severe penalty be inflicted by order of the respective Governours, upon all who shall presume to offend in these particulars. And furthermore, that all Scholars be frequently admonish'd to take care, that at night the fire in their Chambers be quench'd or securely cover'd, and that they place not their Candles at their Beds-heads: and to that end the respe∣ctive Governours are desir'd to command some Officer of the House, to visit all Chambers and cause all Boards, which are placed for that purpose at any Beds-head, to be remov'd and taken away, and likewise strictly to prohibit the use of hanging Candlesticks. That when any new Buildings are erected, care be taken that no Timber be layd under the hearths of the Chimneys. That when any Fire shall happen in any Colledge, or in the City, the respective Governours cause their Buckets and Ladders, to be brought with all speed, to some place nere the Fire, where they may be ready for use, and appoint some discreet person to see them dispos'd off. That when any Fire shal happen abroad, the respective Governors take care to restrain the Scholars under their commands from going out, excepting such who will be assistant in quenching the Fire; and because at such times many wicked Persons, take an opportunity, to break open Chambers, and commit other villanies; that the Colledge Gates be kept shut (especially if the Fire happen in the night) and none admitted but such who are well known to the Porter, or such persons as the Governour of the House shall appoint to assist him. That no Scholars presume upon any occasion to let off Rockets or any other kindes of Fire-works. That these Orders be hung up in a Frame in the Halls of the respective Houses, that so all Persons concern'd may from time to time take notice of them. P. MEWS Vice-Cancell. Octob. 23, 1671.
