P2027A 9386801 42938
Licensed, Febr. 21. 1675/6. Henry Oldenburg.
THE PRESENT STATE OF Tangier: IN A LETTER To His GRACE, THE Lord Chancellor of Ireland, And one of the Lords Justices there. To which is added, The PRESENT STATE of ALGIERS. LONDON: Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Sign of the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. MDCLXXVI.
THE PRESENT STATE OF TANGIER: In A LETTER To His GRACE, The Lord Chancellor of IRELAND, &c. May it please Your Grace, BEing conscious to my self of my own ve∣ry great incapacity to render such an Account as may be delightful
and satisfactory; I am ashamed so unprofitably to divert you from better imployments, and so palpably to discover my own weakness in the follow∣ing Description of the City of Tangier, and the Territory thereunto belonging: where∣in howsoever I had rather be∣wray my folly in this abrupt Narration, than administer an occasion to be suspected in my readiness to obey your Com∣mands; and therefore I presume to present to your Grace these hasty Notes, resolving to deal truly and impartially, ac∣cording to what I have seen and observed, and what hath been related to me by credible persons.
On Saturday the 12 of June last, early in the morning, we entred the Passage into the Streights, between Cape Spar∣tel and Cape Trafalgar, in one of His Majesties Frigots: from the Cape to Tangier, (the wind blowing fresh from the Land) a most odoriferous smell, like to the Fume of Cedar or Ju∣niper, entertain'd us; which I conceive to be a mixture of pleasant sents arising from the variety of sweet Trees and Herbs growing there wild: the Coast rocky, rugged, and full of Hills, yet very safe for Ships, very green with Grass and Herbs, and full of Trees. When we came into the Bay
of Tangier, there fell a most ve∣hement storm of rain, which continued an hour, and (as it is said) was more than was seen at that time of the year in any mans memory. Being sa∣luted with a thousand shots of great Guns from the Mole, the Castle, the Forts, and the Ships riding in the Bay, we landed, where we were met by the Mayor and Corporation in their Gowns, and conducted through a Guard of Souldiers from thence to the Castle. The City of Tangier is in the Latitude of 35 deg. 35 min. situated very pleasantly about the middle way between the Entrance and the Mouth of
the Streights, in a large Bay like a Semi-Circle, in plain sight of the Coast of Spain, being less than six Leagues di∣stant from it: the weather na∣turally very hot and scalding, but so temper'd with Friscoes and Breezes both from Land and Sea, that the Air is rendred very tolerable; the Sky alway bright and serene, no Rain (nor hardly a Cloud) being seen there for three parts of the year: the Levant-wind, (which blows very often and very strong, especially during the months of July and August) as it makes the weather more cool, so, besides its unkindness to Ships, it is not very agree∣able
to Health; many people, especially such as are sickly, being then faint, and more dis-composed. The City seems to have been one of the great∣est in the World, which is ap∣parent by the old Walls and Ruines, extending S. E. about two miles, as far as old Tan∣gier, (where stands a heap of ruined Buildings, a pleasant River, wonderfully stored with several sorts of good Fish run∣ning near it, and a large Stone-Bridge over it, but now bro∣ken) and stretching N. W. near three miles, and beyond Teveot-Hill, (so called from that Renowned Person the Earl of Teveot, who there was
cut off the by Moors) and a pret∣ty Brook, called Jews-River, running about the middle way. I dare not take upon me the part of an Historian, or go about to give an exact Ac∣count of the Annals of this Place; but only in a few words to deduce the Summary History of its several Owners, till it came into the Hands of His Sacred Majesty, (whom God long preserve over us, and that City under Him.) Tangier, or Tingis, was first built (as some say) by those fugitive Canaanites, who in the Fields adjoining erected Pil∣lars, with this Inscription in the Phoenician Language, import∣ing
in English, We flee from the face of the Son of Nave, the great Robber: Or, as others, by Tinga, Wife of Antaeus, slain by Hercules. I shall not mention what Leo Africanus saith of it, because himself al∣lows it fabulous. It was a City of great note and esteem, when the Carthaginians con∣tended with the Romans, and gave Name to all the adjacent Country, but is said to have been buried by Caesar in the Ruines of Juba its King; but by Claudius (who first made Mauritania Tingitana a Roman Province) to have been resto∣red, and made a Colony, called Traducta Julia: From thence
it continued the Metropolis of Mauritania, until Constantine the Great laid it to the Diocess of Spain; in which condition it continued during some time of the Empire, until about the year 642. Suintilla King of the Goths in Spain, added it to his Dominions. So that they seem to err, who report, this City, and its dependant Coun∣try, to have been possessed by the Vandals, invited into Afri∣ca by Boniface, in the Empire of Valentinian the third. It continued subject to the Goths, longer than Spain did: for though Osman, the third Caliph Successor of Mahomet, con∣quered the rest of Barbavy;
yet Tingitana was still held by the Goths, and afforded retreat and shelter to the Sons of Viti∣za, the true Heirs, during the Usurpation of Roderic the last King, and also some years after his slaughter, and the subver∣sion of the Gothish Kingdom in Spain, by Musa and Tariffe, Lieutenants to Ʋlidor Ʋlit, the Saracenical Caliph. The Moors, when they held this Town, had here a Publick School or University, where their Youth were taught Let∣ters; as also an Hospital libe∣rally endowed by Joseph a Ben Teifin, the second of the Al∣mora Vides, who founded Mo∣rocco, conquered Fez, and sub∣dued
all the Moorish Roytelets in Spain, adding this to his large Dominion. Under his Successors of the three Races, (the Almoravides, the Almo∣hades, and lastly the Merines) Tangier was their chief Port for Spain; for in this Bay, and that of Alcazzer, not far from the Point, did Alboacen embarque his Army for Spain, confisting of 400000 Foot, and 70000 Horse, who were discomfited by the Christians at Salado near Tariffa: by which blow, the power of the Miramemolins was so broken, that their Em∣pire declined very fast both in Spain and Africa, their civil dissentions also hastning their
downfal; in which decay of the Merin Family, Tangier was deserted by the Moors, as most of this Coast was, on the ap∣proach of Alphonso the fifth, King of Portugal, who took possession of it An. Dom. 1472. whose Successors held it with continual Wars, and various Successes with the Xerisses, un∣til the year 1669. when it was delivered to that excellent and much-lamented General, the Earl of Sandwich, for the use of CHARLES the Second, King of Great Britain. But whoso∣ever desires a more particular and satisfactory account of these things, may consult He∣rodotus in Vita Cambysis, Proco∣pius,
Enagrius, Josephus, and Bochartus his Phaleg, Plutarch's Sertorius, &c. the Histories of Spain, written by Mariana or Turquet; of Portugal, by Osorius, &c. of Africa, by Leo, and others. It is certainly a very sweet and well-chosen place, at the foot of a very great Hill, on which the Castle standeth, on a Declivity, but yet insensible, of an irregular square, and fen∣ced with a high, thin, old∣fashioned Wall, (much like to that of Droghedah in Ireland) having only two Gates, one to∣ward the Country, called Port-Catharina, a wonderful strong, and well-contrived Entrance; the other to the Sea, called the
Water-Gate. The Streets are extreamly narrow, (which is absolutely necessary in all pla∣ces where the Sun is so much Vertical) which makes the Town seem much smaller, and less considerable than it is: but were they extended at the rate of the new Streets in and about London, it would take up a great deal of Ground, and appear a very large Town. The Houses are low, and ge∣nerally little, with Spanish Roofs, almost flat, (which is the cause that it makes the less shew) the Walls generally of Stone and Mudd, the cover∣ing crooked Tiles, the In side and Cielings of Slit Deal, or
Pine: There are many of the Officers and principal Towns∣men, who have fine, large, com∣modious, and well-furnished Houses and Gardens; and in∣deed the Houses are for the most part very pretty and con∣venient, hardly any without a little Garden, but extreamly beautiful and delighting, full of sweet Herbs, and pleasant Trees, especially Vines, which running up upon Pillars made of Stone, and Espaliers made of great Reeds, (which for that purpose they commonly Nurse in a corner of the Gar∣den, and annually cut down for that use) all their Walks, and Back-sides, and Spare∣places,
are covered and shaded with Vines, mightily loaden with excellent Grapes, of di∣vers sorts, sizes, and shapes, and some very early ripe. The Air, taking one time with ano∣ther, exceeding temperate, not so sultry as many times of the day in Ireland, nor so sharp as many of the nights there. It is observed, that the Inhabi∣tants here (as of the adjacent Country) are much subject to sore eyes, which I am apt to impute not to any innate qua∣lity of the Air, but to the dry∣ness and continual brightness of it. New-comers are wel∣comed constantly with strange Blisters and Pimples, like to
the Small-Pox, which is ge∣nerally attributed to the biting of Muskitoes, (which are just the Gnats in some parts of Eng∣land, but a little more pert) and Chinches, (which much re∣semble Ticks, but that they leave so intolerable a stink when they are killed) but I rather think it to proceed from an Ebullition of the Blood, upon change of the Air, it hap∣pening most severely to such as drink much water at their first coming. There can be no place in the World better accommodated with Water, and the best that can be tasted; no Garden in the Town (at least on the North-West-side)
but hath a Well, and some many; and in the Market-Place is a handsom large Con∣duit, with a very fair Cistern, and a Cock continually run∣ning on each side: the Water is brought to the Town in most admirable and costly Aque∣ducts, made formerly by the Romans, and said to come from the Foot of Mount-Atlas; but where the Passages are, no man can discover, till you come within two hundred paces of the Lines, and there they may be seen, curiously made of Brick and Stone; and at eve∣ry twenty yards, or there∣about, a little Well, into which the Gravel, Mudd, or any
other Filth doth fall, and when they are filled, it is easie to empty and cleanse them. I have often wondred that the Moors (such inveterate Ene∣mies and Haters of all Christi∣ans, especially the Tangerines) should forbear cutting and spoiling the Aqueducts, or poysoning the Water; till I understood, that it is a point of their Law and Religion, not to destroy any thing that is made for the natural and ne∣cessary use of Mankind, (which is the cause that they so curse and exclaim on the Christian-Dogs, when a Party hath been sometime sent out of this Ga∣rison to burn their Corn.) The
Land about the Town is very rich and pleasant, abundantly luxuriant in the production of fine Flowers, (as Narcissus, Crocus, Iris, &c.) and sweet smelling Plants, which with so much care and cost are nou∣rished and reared in the Gar∣dens of Europe; so that the Hay made there by the Gari∣son, is only a wither'd Nose∣gay of Rosemary, Thyme, Marjoram, Pennyroyal, and other sweet-smelling Herbs. In the Gardens are very good Pease, Beans, Artichokes, (As∣paragus growing wild in the Fields) Strawberries, Lettice, Purslane, Cucumbers, &c. but Melons, so plentiful, so various
in the shape and kind, and so delicious, that it cannot be de∣scribed to understanding and belief. The common Fruits of this Place are Apricocks and Peaches, (which I cannot say are so good as in England, and I conceive the cause to be, that they are Wildings, and not mended by Inoculation) Figgs, which bear twice a year, and Mulberries, (much better) O∣ranges, Lemons, Limes, Ci∣trons, Pomegranats, Plumbs, some Cherries, but not worth eating, some Pears and Apples, but very scurvy, (which pro∣bably ariseth from the cause before hinted, that no pains are taken in Grafting;) but the
Grapes are certainly not to be parallel'd in any place of the World. They ordinarily use Calabashas, a kind of a long Pompion, and Simnels, in stead of Cabbage and Turnips, but they are no way comparable to either of them. The Fields about the Town were hereto∣fore much more delightful, when they stood full of O∣range-Trees, Lemons, Olives, Pomegranats, Figgs and Mul∣berries; but some time since, there being no timely provisi∣on made for Firing, the Soul∣diers were necessitated to cut them down, and burn them, for want of other Fewel. There is a very great and curious
Wood near the Town, green all the year, which I daily saw out of my Chamber-window; and though I did not hold it convenient to take a nearer survey of it, I was told, by such as in time of Peace have been in it, that it is a ravish∣ing Wilderness of Oranges, Lemons, Figgs, &c. Scarlet-Oak, and Cork-Trees; and in stead of Bryars and Thorns, thickned with Damask Roses, Groves of Myrtle, Jasemine, and Bushes of Rosemary. The Hay-Harvest useth to be about the middle of May, and is compleatly made in two days. Barley and Wheat are cut down in June; the Grain
trodden out by Oxen, laid up in Caves, and the Straw kept for Food for Horses and Cat∣tle: And in the Month of August, the Stubble through the whole Country is set on fire, partly to destroy the Ver∣mine, which otherwise would become insupportable, and partly to inrich the Ground, there being no other manure used. The Seasons seem to be opposite to those in Eng∣land and Ireland, and quite in∣verted: for whereas there from May to All-Hallontide, the Ground is green, and pleasant, and covered with Grass, and from thence to April dry, white and withered; on the contrary,
all the Verdure and Sweetness in Barbary, rank Grass, and variety of Flowers and Herbs, is from November to April; but from thence to November, the Ground dry, white, wither'd, and burnt with the Sun; this I mean of the Country, but the Gardens are perpetually green, and produce two Crops in a year of almost all Garden stuff and Sallads: nay, the Cows, Asses, and Horses, (directly contrary to the usage of Eng∣land) do live all the Summer upon Hay, and chopt Barley∣straw, (which is brought in Barca-luengos from Spain) and upon Grass in the Winter. If a Peace were made with the
Moors, all manner of Fresh Provisions would be as good as in England, and as plentiful and cheap as in Ireland: the Beef and Mutton is not so ge∣nerally fat, but as sweet and juicy as in any other place: Hens, Chickens, Capons, Geese and Turkies, are extreamly plentiful, and very good; the Pigeons very large, and very fat; but the Ducks are certainly the best in the World: for being kept from Puddles and dirty feeding, and fatned with Oatmeal and Pease, the Flesh of them is quite changed in colour and taste. I have eaten here Plover, Curlew, and Bu∣stard, and very good; the Par∣tridge,
though much larger, doth not please me so well as those of England and Ireland: but here are a sort of Birds about the bigness of a Phea∣sant, the Spaniards call them, Pesones de Campo, which I must commend above all the Fowl that ever I tasted. In the mean time, no place under Heaven, perhaps, is better furnished with excellent kinds of Fish, and great plenty; here are (beside Soles, Gurnets, Mul∣lets, Turbets, Lobsters, Eels, Shrimps, &c. in common with England) Cod-fish, Bonito's, Old-women, Porgo's, Salmo∣netto's, Rock-fish, Star-fish, and many other, for which they
have no name. The Castle of Tangier is situated most secure∣ly and most delightfully upon a very high Hill, overlooking the Town, Country, and Har∣bour; Fortified, beside its Foundation, on inaccessible Rocks, by four the most regu∣lar, high, and well-built Ba∣stions that can any where be seen; several excellent, and inexhaustible Wells within it; and is, in a word, to all appea∣rance, a place impregnable; all the Store-houses of Ammu∣nition and Provision, many Houses, Streets and Gardens contained within it, and very near the third part of as much Ground as is in the whole City,
being divided from it by a Wall that reacheth to the Sea. The Upper-Castle, or the Go∣vernours House, is very noble, large and commodious, and owes its beauty and conveni∣ences to the care and genero∣sity of that excellent Person, the Earl of Middleton, late Go∣vernour, and doth afford a most incomparable Prospect, all Ships that pass to or from the Mediterranean sailing un∣der the sight of the Windows: out of Foraging-Port, the Gate that looks to the Sea, an even, plain, and very pleasant Walk leads to Charles Fort, a strong and well fortified Place, and Commanded by Captain
Charles Daniel, whose Inge∣nuity I must not forget, that hath so curiously beautified the Fort, without impairing the Strength, having on one side made a most delightful Walk between the Wall and the Graft, about twelve foot wide, and near two hundred yards long, curiously Gravelled, and covered close with Vines, which run up upon Pillars, and afford a cool shade on the hot∣test day. On another side he hath his Melon-Gardens, and not far from thence his Garden for Flowers and Herbs; so that Charles Fort, which is the great terrour to the Moors, and which they dare not come near, is
the greatest delight of the In∣habitants of Tangier, and con∣tinually visited like Spring-Garden. There is another House of Pleasure within the Lines, which they call by the name of White-Hall, a place where the Ladies, the Officers, and the better sort of people, do refresh and divert them∣selves with Wine, Fruits, and a very pretty Bowling-Bare. The Mole is in its design the greatest and most noble Un∣dertaking in the World, (all other Moles, as at Genoa, Ma∣laga, Algier, &c. not deser∣ving more than the name of a Key, in comparison of it) it is a very pleasant thing to look
on; and if it may be finished according to His Majesties purpose, who hath spared no cost upon it, it will not only secure the Bay and Ships in it, but in time render Tangier ve∣ry considerable and advanta∣geous to His Majesty and His Kingdoms: It is now near four hundred and seventy yards long, and thirty yards broad, several pretty Houses upon it, and many Families; on the in∣ner side twenty four Arched Cellars, and before them a cu∣rious Walk, with Pillars for the Mooring of Ships. Upon the Mole are a vast number of great Guns, which are al∣most continually kept warm,
during fair weather, in giving and paying Salutes to Ships which come in and out: for the most part of the year there are imploy'd in this work three hundred Men, and several Carts with good Teames of Horses continually going with Stone and other Materials be∣tween the Mole and Whitby; which is a little English Ham∣let, planted by that industrious and ingenious Gentleman Sir Hugh Cholmely, where are about twenty Families, beside at least an hundred Labourers and Souldiers lodge there eve∣ry night, and are sufficiently defended by Guns and Forts from any Attaque of the Moors.
It is very pleasant to see how busie every man is there in his several Trade; the Smiths, Carpenters, Sawyers, Coopers, Wheelwrights, Carters, Ma∣sons, Miners, Drill-men, Quar∣ry-men, and Stone-cutters, making a pretty confused Mu∣sick, and very pleasant to such as do not pay for it. There were in Tangier, when the Portugueses left it, seventeen Churches and Chappels; but now there are only two; one whereof, with a large scope of Ground, a Convent, and Lodg∣ings for the Church-men, and very commodious Out-houses and Gardens, is left to the Portuguese Inhabitants, and is
indeed a fine Church, delicate∣ly beautified all round it with neat and costly Altars: the other, a pretty plain Chappel, formerly dedicated to St. Jago, and now to Charles the Martyr, is the Protestant Church, and very well filled on Sundays. There is also an Hospital for sick and wounded Souldiers, very well provided for; and an Exhibition of 200 l. per ann. for maintaining and breeding the Orphan-Children of Soul∣diers or Towns-men. Tangier, and the Territory belonging to it, is at the pre∣sent governed by the Earl of Insiquin, a Person of very great Abilities, and immoveable
Loyalty. In whose time though it unluckily fell out, that a party of men were cut off by the Moors, yet it ought to be no Impeachment of his Prudence and Conduct. For the Garison being extreamly scarce of Provisions, the Stores exhausted, and nothing to be had from Portugal or Spain, (whither he sent Vessels with ready money to buy Meat, but could get none) and the Cor∣poration by a Remonstrance laying before him how ill the Stores were furnished both in quantity and quality, he called a Council of War, by whom he was with one consent advi∣sed and intreated to send a
Party out to fetch in a Prey of Cattle; and accordingly on the 19th of September he sent out a Party of 500 men, under the Command of Sir Palmes Fairborn, (being the rather in∣duced to it by the encourage∣ment of James Hamet, a Rene∣gado-Moor, recommended to the Governour as a fit person to be a Spy) the Forlorn con∣sisting of 100 Souldiers, and about 35 Voluntiers, marched two miles beyond the Body, and were suddenly encompas∣sed by a great Party of Horse, who lay in Ambush, and all slain, except Captain Alexander Mac Kenny, who commanded 15 Horse-men; and being dis∣mounted,
lay among the dead bodies, till he found an oppor∣tunity to steal into the adjoin∣ing Wood, where he lay that night, and attempting to re∣turn to the Garison next day, he was met by the Moors, and carried prisoner to Tetuan: He gave an account by Letter, that sitting in a Tree, he saw the Moors gather 80 bodies from among the dead, of such as were most considerable among them, and having laid them in a Funeral-Pile, and performed their accustomed ceremony in howling and lamenting, burnt them, leaving a great number of the ordinary sort mingled among the dead bodies of our
men: In the mean time the main Body, being divided into two parties, one commanded by Sir Palmes Fairborn, the other by Captain James Leslie, made a safe and honourable Retreat, though furiously attacqued on all sides by a great number of Horse and Foot, performing their parts even to admiration. This action was a very great terrour to the Moors, who ne∣ver lost so many men, since the English possessed the Place; and thereby were feelingly convinced, that the Christians would fight for their Lives, which before they would not seem to allow, all the former Losses having happened upon
treacherous surprises, and at such times when our men were not provided for a fight. The Garrison consisteth of 1440 Foot, and 30 Horse, and is certainly a Body of as brave, bold, well-trained men, as are to be seen any where in the World; they are paid 6 d. per diem in meat, and 3 d. in mo∣ney. The Town is for the most part peopled with His Majesties Subjects, who live neatly and pleasantly, and are generally of a kind and hospi∣table disposition: The Cor∣poration consisteth of a May∣or, six Aldermen, and twelve Common Council-Men, all annually elected, and then ap∣proved
and sworn by the Go∣vernour. Every Sunday the Mayor and Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns, and the Com∣mon-Council-Men in Purple, do pay a civility to the Gover∣nour, coming up to the Castle, and from thence attending him to the Church. There are in the City about 200 Families, beside Officers (who have, and keep very good Houses) and Souldiers, who have very con∣venient Quarters assigned them, Strangers, the Inhabi∣tants within the Castle, the Dwellers on the Mole, and at Whitby. Among the Inhabi∣tants there are some few of se∣veral Nations, as French, Spa∣nish,
Portugueses, Italians, and divers Jews both of Barbary and Europe, who are great Dealers in Trade, and have their several Synagogues with∣in the Town: I say, several, for although they agree in the common Reading and Vene∣ration of the five Books of Moses, their Denial of our Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, and their Hatred to Christians; yet they are not free from their little Schisms, as appears by a pas∣sage since my coming hither, which may perhaps be worth the relating. On the 9th of July last, a Petition was presented to the
Governour by Joseph Artnitel, Samuel Mexias, Joseph Benja∣min, and Moses Benazara, in the name of the Barbary-Jews residing in Tangier, setting forth that Abraham Cohen, an Am∣sterdam-Jew, did continually affront, molest, and disquiet them, that they could not at∣tend their Callings: whereup∣on Abraham Cohen, and the European-Jews, being sum∣moned, and the matter heard, it appeared that they were on both sides in Faction and Fire, for that the said Abraham Co∣hen and his Fellows did drink Wine, and traded in Swines-Flesh; for which cause the Tangier-Jews had made their
complaint to the Sabios of Te∣tuan, who had actually Ex∣communicated the said Cohen, and the rest: but the Gover∣nour perceiving knavery in the business, and that the inhibi∣ting the European-Jews to bring Pork into the Town, might be out of design to hin∣der the bringing in of Provisi∣ons; and that their Appeal to the Moorish-Jews at Tetuan, and the publishing of an Ex∣communication, was a very great presumption, and an af∣front to His Majesties Govern∣ment; commanded the Bar∣bary-Jews within a few days to dissolve the Excommunica∣tion, and to renounce the Au∣thority
of Tetuan, or any other Power, but of the King of England; or else he would turn them and their Families out of Town: which took good effect, caused a Peace among them, and no more was heard of it. The following Address was made to the Mayor of Tangier by Abraham Cohen, &c. Forasmuch as certain Tetuan-Jews, who at present are residing in this City of Tangier, have given out, that they have a Decree from the Sabios of Te∣tuan, by which they do Excom∣municate all and whatsoever Jew and Jews, who shall joyn
in Communion with Abraham Cohen to say their Prayers: We the Ʋnder-written, do suppli∣cate, that they may give us a Copy of the said Decree, to the end we may not fall into a Prae∣munire, and to amend our selves in case we have failed, and to undergo that chastisement which shall be due to us in conformity to the Law of Moses. Tangier, this 21 of Tamos, Anno 5435. Abraham Cohen, Jaacob Cohen, Jacob del Canio, Isaac de Mexias. Upon an Order from the Mayor, the Decree was pro∣duced; which, for the satisfa∣ction
of your Grace, who may be pleased with such a curio∣sity, I have set down, as it was Translated out of the Hebrew Language into English. To the Holy Congregation of the City of Tangier, whom our Lord pre∣serve, Amen. After having desired your joint Peace, Peace be unto you, your Fellow-helpers, and all those that are joined with you, Amen. WE send this unto you, by reason of one we re∣ceived from you, complaining
in what manner Abraham Co∣hen treats you, of his Abuses, and what he hath done to your Congregation; and if it be so as appears by your Letter, it is a sign that he is not of the seed of Aaron the High Priest, loving Peace and persecuting it, loving the Creatures, and endeavouring to have Differences at Law with them; and it is not a new thing with him to desire the continu∣ance of Law-Suits wheresoever he lives, but also to fasten them on others; and thus he made his Disturbances in Sally, and se∣parated a House of Prayer for himself, and in the end preten∣ded to confirm what the Learned say, Every House of Prayer
that is not designed to a good intention, cannot be confirm∣ed: But on his side it signifies little what he can do unto you, for that we once, by reason of the complaints you made, used our utmost diligence to set you up a House of Prayer, that so you might have no Communication with him; and yet you do join and meet with him; now you seek after him, you have no reason to complain: Yet not∣withstanding all this, if sufficient Testimonies shall come, signed by those that are not concerned on either side, we will do unto him here what the Law re∣quires: But without this, by reason of the evil Offices that
you say he hath done, and does you, and for things he doth con∣trary to the Law, as drinking of Wine, making profit of those things which he cannot do ac∣cording to Law, and acting se∣veral things of the like nature, We order, That no Jew enter into his House of Prayer to pray with him, much less rehearse the Ten Commandments with him; and whosoever shall enter into his House of Prayer to pray with him, and rehearse the Ten Com∣mandments with him, he is Ex∣communicated by the Justice of Heaven and Earth: And the same Excommunication reaches any one whatsoever that shall drink of the said Wine, make any pro∣fit
thereof, or of goods of the like nature; and whosoever shall do any thing of what is above re∣cited, and break our Order, there shall be used to him, the same as is usual to those persons that are Excommunicated, No Jew shall speak to him, much less shall he come within four cubits of him, and he cannot be esteemed for one of the Ten. We say no more. Tituan,  the 18 of Sinan, 5435. Jacob Aboab, Isaac Bivas. There remain in Tangier many marks of the Roman Greatness, Ingenuity, Arts, and Architecture: as,
1. The strong, vaulted, well-compiled Foundations of Houses, (in the digging up of which great store of Medals are found, of Corinthian Brass, Copper, and Silver, stamped with the Effigies of their Em∣perours, and Consuls, and with other Mottoes and Fancies. 2. The outside of the Rock next to the Bay, between the Water-Gate and the Mole, on which the Town-Wall is built, which is faced with Rows of little Walls from the Water to the Foundation of it, equally distant one from the other; which served not only to strengthen the Foundation, and to keep it from sliding, but
also for an Amphitheatre; and on these Rows of Seats did the people sit to behold their Pa∣stimes and Shews upon the Water, the whole Bay being under the view of it. 3. The curious Arches and Vaults, among which I saw one built with Brick and Free∣stone, of an unknown length, about eight foot wide at the Floor, and about ten foot high; the half of which Arch is standing, and serves for a curious, close, cool Walk. 4. The Aqueducts, of which I have given an account before. I shall not mention the Salt-Pits, (though a pretty curio∣fity, cut out in the Natural
Rocks that lie on the surface of the Ground within the Lines) nor the strange, deep, narrow Pits cut into the Rocks, (of which I cannot apprehend the use, unless for Burying-places) because they may be the work of the Portugueses. But one thing I must mention, a Re∣main of the Moorish Grandure, the Ruines of a most rich and sumptuous Structure, some of the Floors whereof are yet to be seen, made of small Roman Bricks two or three inches square, of divers colours, the sides of the Walls lined with delicate Mosaick Work; and in one place is an Inscription of Arabick Characters cut in
Stone, not worn by time, though done more than three hundred years since, very easie and plain to be read, the Let∣ters not being cut into the Stone, but the Stone cut away from the Letters; and because this is a piece of great Curio∣sity, as well as Antiquity, I have caused it to be Transcri∣bed from the Original, and afterward Translated.
The Translation of an Arabick Inscription contained in a Stone of Marble, at the Entrance from the Vestry of the English Protestant Church of Tangier, called, CHARLES the Martyr, formerly a Moorish Convent. In the Name of God, Amen. AMemorandum of the holy Convent, under the Almighties Obedience, which God preserve in his Grace and Favour: Being a Register and Roll of the Revenues and Lands be∣longing to the said Convents
Incommings, as well those which are situated within the City of Tangier, as without the same; together with their Limits and Districts, and how far the said Revenues do extend themselves. Those situated within the said City, are, viz. First, A Shop wherein Herbs are sold; and another where Starch is made and sold; with another Shop nigh unto the Hal∣bardeers; and another Shop somewhat higher, where Oyl, Figgs, Reasons, and such like Ware is sold; and a third Shop adjoining to the former. And moreover, four other Shops, si∣tuated in the Butchers Row, ad∣joining
joining to each other: all which Shops afore-specified, have each of them a little back-yard: and also another Taylors Shop un∣der the Arch; with another Shop belonging to the Wafer∣sellers, next adjoining to the Bakehouse; and another Shop where Chopt Straw is sold, and Tinder and Match, and such like Commodities; and another Moyety of a Shop where the Waterbearers refort, below the Spinters, the other half of which belongs to one, called Majanez; and from thence on the other side of the Street, hard by the Shop where Spicery Wares are sold, and where the Cutlers do live, there is another Shop, equally
high with the said Convents situation; as also a House situa∣ted in the Street where the Stone∣cutters do live; a little higher than the Potters dwellings. Moreover, The Convent and its Church, is situated towards the West, and doth contain a Court-yard, surrounded with Houses or Lodgings; to wit, round about the whole situation; also the said Convent hath a Free-School, being a large and vast Room, in which the Inha∣bitants Children are taught to Write and Read; besides which the Convent contained all such Lodgings and Conveniences, and other necessary Offices and Ac∣commodations as behoved, and
were necessary and requisite for the entertaining and lodging of the Priests, Clerks, Lay-brothers, and other Ministerial Persons to the said Convent belonging and appertaining. Besides which, there was another Shop, fituated at the foot of the said Convent; and yet lower than that, a second Shop, where Earthen Ware, as Pots, Pans, and Dishes, are usually made, &c. And this is the Revenues which the said Convent doth enjoy within the said Cities Walls. The Revenues belonging to the said Convent situated with∣out the Walls, in the Country abroad, viz.
Consist in One hundred fifty and four several Fields and Gardens, with Houses and Wells intermingled here and there; as also with some Orchards for Fruits, and Summer-Houses for Recreation; all which are set down in the Moorish Roll, with their Moorish Names and Ap∣pellations thereunto annexed; which being conceived to be too tedious and superfluous to be here specified, are omit∣ted, as being of no moment nor benefit to be Read, but rather a trouble and vexation, &c. being only bare Moorish obsolete Names, at present not known, nor in use, &c.
Finally, The said Moorish Roll is closed in this manner following, viz. And thus we have specified all the Revenues and Incom∣mings of the said Convent; and to the end it may remain to po∣sterity, we have Engraven it in this Stone, on the last day of the Month called Rabbea the se∣cond, In the Year Seven hun∣dred forty and three; And thus we have made an end thereof, &c. God be praised, Amen. It is to be observed, that since this Arabick Inscription was Engraven on the said Stone,
there are 343 years past, it being according to the Moo∣rish Accompt the year 1086. and with us according to the Christian Computation, the year 1675. &c. Which is on∣ly set down to shew the mean∣ing of the said Arabick Inscri∣ption and Antiquity, for the better satisfaction of your Grace, who may please your self with such a Curiofity. The first Governour of Tan∣gier under the King of Eng∣land, was the Earl of Peterbo∣rough, a Person of Noble and Generous Qualities, a great Friend to the Souldiers, and
very likely to have made the Place considerable, had not His Majesty, upon some grea∣ter Imployments, called him home. In whose room was sent that excellent Souldier the Earl of Tiveot, whose Fame will be fresh, while there is a Stone standing in Tangier: he was of indefatigable Indu∣stry, a compleat Souldier, a resolute Man, and in all pro∣bability had he lived to this time, would have enlarged the Demeans of Tangier to a very great compass: but in the midst of his Endeavours, he was by false Intelligence be∣tray'd to march out with five
hundred men, (most of them armed only as Pioneers) and were all, except a very few that escaped, destroyed toge∣ther. Immediately after whose death, Sir Tobias Bridges, who Commanded the Horse, was by joint consent of the Offi∣cers, voted to the Govern∣ment; which he held till Col. John Fitz Gerald, (a Gentleman as well of known Valour, and try'd Experi∣ence, as of an Ancient Fami∣ly) was made Deputy-Gover∣nour. And so remained until the Lord Bellasis was sent over, whose Gentleness, Prudence,
and Moderation, did mightily endear him both to Garison and Town: but his indispo∣sition urged him, within less than a year, to get His Ma∣jesties Leave to be recalled, much to the sorrow of that Place. Upon his return, Col. Hen∣ry Norwood was appointed De∣puty-Governour; who not only terrified the Moors by his Arms, but out-did them in their Wit, and managed the Government of that Place with very great Honour to the King, and Advantage to the People. Then the Earl of Middleton was appointed Governour, a
Person very famous for his Conduct in War, of great Cou∣rage, and as great Experience, of excellent Learning and Parts, and Liberal beyond Example: He made the Go∣vernours House, of a Portu∣guese-Dungeon, to become a very Noble Palace; caused the Castle, with the Store-houses of Victuals and Ammunition, to be separated from the Town by a strong Wall; and would have done many brave Things for the Good of that Place, but falling into a Flux, he was much weakned; and rising one night to call for a Candle, he stumbled over his Servant, who lay cross the
Threshold fast asleep, and with the fall broke his Arm short at the Shoulder, and within a few days died. After his death, Col. Roger Alsop was appointed Deputy-Governour; who, if his Legs were answerable to his Heart, would give convincing Testi∣monies of his great Worthiness of that, and a much better Imployment. The Earl of Insiquin is the present Governor, whose Cha∣racter to Write, were a kind of flattery to commend before the Face; and to your Grace especially, who so well know him, I need say but this, He is of greater Abilities than either
himself would discover, or his Friends could expect, till he came to the Tryal of them; and I cannot doubt but that His Majesty will find him to be most useful for His Service there, or in any other Place. And now, my Lord, having led you a tedious Walk round our little Town, and narrow Lines, (which may be paced over in the time that this Paper may be read) I am to beg pardon for this most impertinent Interruption; which I cannot but hope for, because innocently intended: And as I have reason to be∣lieve, your Grace will not
read it twice; so I seriously promise, you shall never be troubled in this manner again by, My LORD, Your Graces most Obedient Servant, G. P. Tangier, Sept. 29. 1675.
THE PRESENT STATE OF Algiers. LONDON: Printed for H. Herringman, 1676.
THE PRESENT STATE OF ALGIERS. Their First Rise. The Several Changes of the Government. The Manner of the Present State, and the Prin∣cipal Persons in Credit. What People the City of Algiers consists of, and the Number of the Inhabi∣tants. Their Militia, and the Dis∣cipline thereof. Their Naval For∣ces, and Sea-Discipline. BY the Ancient Re∣cords of the Divan Hoggi, or Publick Secretary, it ap∣pears, that the City was for∣merly
Commanded by the Genoeeses, who kept a constant Garison in the Castle, that stands at the head of the Mole, of about three hundred men, until the defeat of Bajazett by Tamberlain the Great, when two Brigantines of fugitive Turks put in there for shelter; who conspiring with the Arabs and Moors, Then the Divan was kept in the Cas∣sale, the Aga was kept in a Cage to preserve himself from the fury of the multitude. in a few days after, on a Holy-day, (as they were at Mass) fell upon them, and became their Masters. Where∣upon, as having before practi∣sed the Trade of Piracy, they armed all the Vessels they could make themselves Masters of,
and in short time had One hun∣dred & fifty Sail in Corso. They builded then likewise the Cas∣sale, where the Publick Trea∣sure is kept, and the principal Magazines for Arms and Pro∣visions, and formed a Govern∣ment by a Divan, who was to sit every Saturday to con∣sult of Publick Affairs, till in the year of the Hegira 810. in respect to the Grand Seignior, they admitted Bashaws of his to precide in the Divan, and Govern them; (only keeping in their hands the Command of the Cassale:) The first where∣of was called Osman Bashaw, allowing them 12000 Dollars per annum out of the pay, be∣sides
an allowance of all sorts of Provision for his whole Fa∣mily and Officers. Under these Bashaws (who above the said allowance found ways to exact great Treasures from the Moors and Inhabi∣tants, in so much that some of them, after their ordinary three years residence, have been known to carry away 200000 Dollars, besides Jewels, &c.) they lived with great Obedi∣ence, notwithstanding all the said Oppressions, until the time of Ʋsuff Bashaw, a Gal∣lant Prince, and one that made it more his business to increase the Conquests against the Moors, than to mass up Wealth,
for which reason then, upon the Petition of the Publick Divan, his Commission by the Grand Seignior was renewed. He took Constantine from the Moors, Bugia from the Christians, Bona from the Tuniseenes, marched with his Army in∣to the Zachary, A desart Coun∣try only affording Dates. sixty days South-East, and continued his Con∣quest four months march to∣wards Angola, all which are to this day Tributary to Algiers: So having been two years in the Camp, he returned in great triumph, accompanied with all the popular applauses ima∣ginable. But all this could not secure him from the secret con∣spiracy
of his Kia; who, ha∣ving had the sweetness and be∣nefit of the pay in his absence, made a faction against him, murdering him in the Bettistan, or Market-place, in the year 1642. Since which time, though they have received the Bashaws sent by the Grand Seignior, yet have they never admitted them to sit in the Di∣van, or to meddle with Pub∣lick Affairs, but they have been muzled, receiving only their ancient allowance, the extraordinary Revenues being wholly taken away; so that this place being not of so great profit as was formerly, it has not been so greedily sought for
at the Ottomans Porte, witness this present Bashaw, called Is∣mael, who has lived here now near fifteen years. After the said Rebellion, there has been a person chosen out of, and by the Divan, to sit over the pay, and had the Title of Governour. To his care was committed the receipt and payment of all money brought into the Publick; and his presence required at the pay of the Souldiers, which is every two months. Thir∣teen persons have succeeded in this Office, of which but one is found to have died in his bed, the other having been poisoned, or murthered by
some means or other. The last that served in that Office, was Ally Aga, who was cut in pieces by the Souldiers in the year 1672. after their Ships were burnt in Bugia: When the said Ally Aga came to the Government, the Divan con∣sisted of Bulga-Bashaws, Geo-Bashaws, and Youde-Bashaws, in all above one thousand Per∣sons, besides that the Souldi∣ers would come into the Divan upon any Foreign Affair that was to be debated; so that it was a rabble of people, and a confused multitude, until he found a way to reduce them to forty eight, of each quality beforementioned, viz. 144
persons in all, whereof himself was the head. The day that he was murthered, all the Soul∣diers were in Arms in great confusion; some that were of his party fled and escaped, o∣thers were kill'd in the Streets, and in their Houses: the Ba∣shaw then brought out the Grand Seigniors Bandera, and made Burgone, That all Soul∣diers should come under it; which they readily submitted to; so that it was believed the Bashaw would be brought into the Kings House, or place of Judicature, and the former Authority of his Predecessors not only restored, but also the Keys of the Cassale given him,
when in the middle of the tu∣mult, a bolder fellow than the rest cry'd out to bring in Ma∣homet Raise Treig, formerly Admiral, Present Go∣vernment. but at that time in disgrace: this cry was seconded by all the Sea-faring people, and in less than half an hour it was deter∣mined to fetch Treig to the Kings House. The Old Man knew not whether they came to Kill, or to Crown him: But so soon as he came there, he was given to understand that they had chosen him Go∣vernour; which he obstinately refused, until some that had occasioned his coming thither, cryed, Father, Will you let us
suffer by your Humility? Up∣on which he made a bold speech to the Souldiers, telling them, If they gave the Govern∣ment into his hands, he would be absolute, and no ways con∣trouled by the Divan; whose Counsel he would willingly ad∣here unto, but the Decisive Vote should be left to him. They, unwilling to refuse him any thing at that time, did above all this deliver unto him the Keys of the Cassale, never be∣fore in the possession of one man, but kept by Eighty Bulga-Bashaws that attended there by turns, Eighty every week going up and exchanging the other Eighty; and so they pro∣claimed
him by the Name of Dey, making him Superinten∣dent over all the Militia by Sea and Land, Director of the Cadees, and Head of the Divan. To his assistance they joined Babba Hassan, The Divan is reduced by this Go∣vernour to 24 Yeo-Bashaws, 24 Bul∣ga-Bashaws, 24 You-Bashaws; in all 72. one that married his daugh∣ter, a stout Turk, and well learned in the Maho∣metan Law; to his charge is com∣mitted all Receipts and Pay∣ments, so that he hath the same Office former Governours had, he is intituled the Dey's Lieutenant, and General of the Army: without the City, he acts in all respects with as ab∣solute power as the Dey him∣self,
and neither of them makes use of the Divan for any thing but trifling affairs. The Aga. THere is also an Aga, (or Lord Mayor of the Ci∣ty) exchanged every two months. This Office is taken gradually, as will be seen in the manner of the Militia: He is attended by eight Grand Chomes, and several other Officers; hath Drums and Trumpets, and other Musick allowed him, and twelve thou∣sand Doubles to defray the charges of his Agaship. He
is the second person in the Di∣van, Caya or Kia. and hath a Kia that acts like a Cham∣berlain of the City, and de∣cides all Differences that hap∣pen between one Inhabitant and another, unless it be some criminal cause, and then he carries them to the Deye; or a cause in Law about the Title of Houses, and then he sends to the Caddee, who is to de∣termine the matter gratis. All other Places of Trust, Civil as well as Military, are wholly in the disposal of the Deye, or his Lieutenant Bobba Hassan, who so well understand each other in the Government, that hitherto nothing has been con∣tradicted
which one hath pro∣posed or acted. The City consists of divers sorts of people, as, I. Cololies. Cololies, or the Sons of Turks born there, which for the most part are brought up to Handicraft-Trades: for since the time of Maharam Bashaw, which was in the year 1625. the Cololi made a con∣spiracy against the Govern∣ment, and seized on the Cassale, and blew it up, wherein was by estimation five hundred Barrels of Powder, hoping by this means to bring the Go∣vernment
into their hands, but they were presently overcome, and it was then decreed that none of the Cololies should ever be capable of any Publick Office by Land for the future; yet they are continued in pay, and may rise to forty Dobles per month, according to their merits. II. Jews. THe Jews, whereof there are two sorts, the Na∣tives consisting of thirteen thousand Families, which for the most part are Handicraft∣men and Brokers; the other Christian Jews, so called be∣cause
they are bred up in Spain, Portugal and Italy, and go ha∣bited like the people of the Country from whence they came; these are for the most part Merchants, and cunning fellows above the rest. III. Tagareens. THe Tagareens are banish∣ed Moors from Andalu∣sia, of which there is about eight hundred Families: they are the principal people that deal in Slaves, and are great Armadores to fit out Ships against the Christians, being for the most part very rich.
IV. Jerbeenes. THe Jerbeenes, so called from the Isle Jerbis near Tunis; these are all Merchants or Pedlars, and may be about three hundred Families, be∣sides Comers and Goers, who may have six or eight Barks and Vessels yearly Trading be∣tween Jerby, Alexandria, Tu∣nis, Tripoli and Algiers. V. Moors. THe Native Moors, who have by little and little gotten Houses and Habitations within the City, and are about seven hundred Families.
VI. CAbiles, Biscaries, and Moors, from the Zacha∣ry, or Southern Country: they serve as Porters, and are less esteemed amongst the Turks, than the Christian Slaves: they attend the Souldiers to dress their Horses, and other slavish services, for which they have no other reward but a little bread; they are in number at least five thousand. VII. Christian Slaves. I Know not if it be proper to set down here the Chri∣stian Slaves also, that accor∣ding
to the best Computation are constantly Eighteen thou∣sand; of which about Nine hundred are Gally-Slaves, whose lives are very miserable, the rest are imployed by their several Patrons, some in their Garden-house, or sent to Sea, according to the professions and qualities of the Patrons, by whom for the most part they are better treated than any Slaves in all the Grand Seig∣niors Dominion, having the benefit to keep Shops, Ta∣verns, to work upon their Handicraft-Trade, paying their Patrons a certainty a month, not exceeding three Dollars per month, according to the
best agreement they can make; and what they can make more, is not in the power of the Pa∣tron to take away from them; by which means many thou∣sands of Captives have ob∣tained their liberty by their own industry. They have also liberty to say Mass, and hear it every day in the week at the respective Banyards, and places allowed for that service. The Protestants also have a place to preach and pray in, which is performed in the English Consuls House by the several Nations, English, German, and Dutch, &c. Protestants have the benefit of the Hospital. They have also an Ho∣spital maintained
by the King of Spain, with an allowance of twelve thou∣sand Dollars per annum, a Do∣ctor, Chiurgeon, and Apo∣thecary, with two Fathers of the Order of St. Trinidad to say Mass. There is also a Vi∣car-General, who has allow∣ance of six thousand Dollars per annum out of France, being left as a Legacy by the old Dutchess of Orleance. All these abovesaid are com∣manded by the Levant-Turks, which in all exceed not sixteen thousand. Out of which they have three Camps, or march∣ing Armies, and thirteen Ga∣risons to be supplyed, besides the Ships and Galleys at Sea;
so that in the Town to Go∣vern this vast multitude, is seldom left more than two thousand Souldiers. It would fill a very great Volume to relate the Diffe∣rences and Heresies they have one among the other in their Religion; but all the Maho∣metans frequent one and the same Meskitos and Churches, and are not so inveterate one against the other, as the several Sects amongst the Christians.
Militia. THe Militia consists of two sorts of Souldiers, of which the principal are the Levant-Turks, brought hither yearly by Ships employed to that service, as occasion re∣quires. At their first entrance into their pay, they are called young Turks, and have four Dobles per month, four Loafs of bread per diem, and a Lodg∣ing in the Casharee, or Publick Quarter: his pay increaseth one Doble per annum, and one Doble every time he goes into the Camp, and engageth against
the Enemy, and one Doble for every head he brings from the Enemy. At the death or re∣moval of every Bashaw, or Dey, or Governour, the pay increaseth one Doble per month, until his pay amount to forty Dobles per month, and his bread to eight Loaves per diem; then he is in full pay, and can rise no higher in pay, although he hath never so high an Office: so that the pay of the Dey himself is no more than forty Dobles per month, and eight Loaves of bread, though he hath other Perqui∣sites, &c. that amounts to a vast, but unknown sum. If a Souldier marries, he loses
the benefit of his bread, and lodging in the Casharee. A Souldiers first Preferment is to be Spahee, or Trooper; from a Spahee he comes to be a Ste∣ward of the Casharee, or a Quartermaster for his Tent: from thence an Oude-Bashaw, and then a Yeo-Bashaw: the eldest Yeo-Bashaw is Kia, or High Sheriff of the City; he in two months becomes Aga, or Lord Mayor of the City; whose Office, as I said before, lasts but two months, and then he is misuled, and past all Of∣fices of the Government; stands in full pay, and is called Mis∣sul'd Aga: It is usual to be thirty or forty years in pay
before they come to that Of∣fice. But the poorest Souldier, and though never so ignorant and incapable, when his turn comes, is set on Horse-back, and hath a rich Vest put upon him, and made Aga for two months, which may be worth to him, besides the Honour, about five hundred Dollars. There are many Souldiers that, after they arrive to be Spahees, Sometimes an A∣ga is changed in two days, but he hath the full allow∣ance for the whole time. de∣sire to continue so; and then they, next to him, take his Office: Of these are about two thousand, that have their allowance for their Horses, and
are in full pay, keep ranging up and down the Country, and have Free-Quarter where-ever they go amongst the Moors: They assist the Beyes to gather in Contribution, &c. Runnegadoes. ARunnegado that is writ∣ten in the pay, enjoys all the benefit that a Natural Turk doth, and is made Aga when his turn comes, as well as a Levant-Turk. If a Slave turns Runnegado, it is at the pleasure of his Patron to have him written in the pay, for he
continues still a Slave, unless his Patron gives him his liber∣ty. There are of the Runne∣gadoes written in pay about three thousand. Zwows. THe next rank of Souldi∣ers are called Zwows; these are Moors that List them∣selves in pay upon any extra∣ordinary occasion, and are du∣rante beneplacito, and their pay never exceeds twenty Dobles per month. But their Officers are better paid, which are elective: These are always
placed in front of the Battle, with Muskets. To which may be added the Subby Anni, a sort of resolute salvage Moors, that wait upon the Turks, and live upon the spoil of the Ene∣my: They fight with Pikes or Launces only. Of the Zwows are in number and pay about four thousand. When they fight with the Moors and overcome them, all the spoil of the Enemy is brought to the Deyes or Ge∣nerals Tent, it being account∣ed a great crime and disgrace for any Souldier to touch the worth of an Asper, but to get the heads of the Moors, and bring them to the Deyes Tent,
receiving for every head as be fore hath been said, a Doble per month in pay until he comes in full pay, by which means they seldom or never give Quarter in time of fight; nor is there between any Ene∣mies in the World such an ha∣tred as the Moors and the Turks bear one to the other. Their Order of March and Discipline in the Camp, is so little diffe∣rent from the Turks in other parts of the Grand Seigniors Territories, that it will be needless to relate more of them.
Naval Forces, and Dis∣cipline thereof. THeir Naval Forces four years since was the greatest part destroyed by the English at Cape Spartle and Bu∣gia: but they have since built about five and twenty Sail of Ships, good Men of War, from twenty to forty Guns, and have at present thirty two Men of War, and three Galleys, the List whereof I have here∣unto annexed, besides several Brigantines and small Crafts, and two Ships upon the Stock
that will carry fifty Guns each. The manner of maintaining is different to any that I have either seen or heard of; for of all the said Ships and Gal∣leys, not one of them belongs to the Publick, but all to pri∣vate persons, armed out as our Privateers in England. The Souldiers know when their turn is to go into the Camp, at which time he may not be absent. THe Souldiers that go to Sea in their Ships, are not taken notice of when they Embark, nor are commanded
to that service; so that it is not easie to know how many Men go in every Ship, being some∣times twice as many as at other times; and if a Souldier lose a Leg or an Arm in the Sea∣service, he is cut off half his pay, and is incapable of any other Office in the Publick. The Armadors that fit out the Ships, provide no Ammu∣nition for the small Arms, but each Soldier finds his own Mus∣quet and Cutles, with Powder and Shot. For Provision they have only Bread and Vinegar, and some few Olives from the Armadors. They lie always upon the Deck without Cabins or Ha∣macks,
and are quartered in time of fight not much diffe∣rent to what they are in our Men of War. The Souldiers that are upon the upper Deck, and stand only to their Mus∣quets, are called the Tiffa. They have great encourage∣ment for entring of the Prize if they fight; he that gets an Ensign hath a reward some∣times of three hundred Dollars; and the like is given to the first, second, and third Man that enters, according to the hazard he hath attempted.
How they share their Plunder. WHen the Prize is ta∣ken, there is no Pow∣der belongs to any body, but all is brought to the Main-mast and sold, and that money is kept and joined to the rest. Then the Ship, Goods, and Slaves are sold for the most; one eighth part of the Goods and Slaves belong to the Pub∣lick, and half of the Hull of the Ship, the other half be∣longs to the Armadors, after the Beylick or publick part is deducted, one half of the rest is the Armadors, the remainder belongs to the Ships company,
and is thus shared: The Cap∣tain hath twenty shares for himself, the Leiutenant five shares, the Gunner three shares, the Gunroom crew and best Souldiers two shares, the private Souldiers one share; a Christian Slave hath two shares; a salvage Moor (of which many go to Sea) one share. There goes also an Aga in each Ship, whose Of∣fice is the same of a Judge Ad∣vocate, and hath a greater Command over the Men than the Captain, except in time of Fight; He is sent on Board by the Publick to re∣present at his return any diffe∣rence that should happen on
Board in the time of the Voy∣age; He hath for his pains three shares. All the Goods that are taken in the Prize, as well the Christians as the Hull of the Ship, are sold by an Outcry, and the whole Sum kept intire untill all be sold; and then after the Pub∣lick part is deducted, the Ar∣madors and Souldiers share the rest, as before-mentioned.
Galleys. THe Galleys are seldom armed out but in the Summer, and are rather a charge to the Armadors than profit, having seldom taken any purchase considerable: The charge of putting out a Galley is usually imposed up∣on such persons as are known to be very Wealthy, who have a Banyard to keep their Slaves in, whereof there are three, according to the num∣ber of the Galleys, to each of them belonging about
three hundred Slaves, out of whose ransom the Armadors do draw no small profit, as having bought them com∣monly for an inconsiderable price, and not granting them their liberty again but at a high rate, the poorest of them pays one thousand Dobles, or about three hundred Dollars, with its Port-charges inclu∣ded.
Territories. THe Territories of Algiers are bounded on the East with Tunis: Two days march of that City is a Town called Calla At-Sevan, where is a Garison of twenty Soul∣diers sent from Algiers. The yearly Tribute brought from thence is twenty thousand Dobles. The next is Tibuisa, a Ga∣rison of the same force, and pays the like Tribute of twen∣ty thousand Dobles per an∣num.
The next is Biscary, lies South-East from Algiers fif∣teen days journey; hath a Garison of one hundred Soul∣diers, and pays Tribute twelve thousand Dobles per annum. The Souldiers of Biscary at their yearly exchange in their march homeward, receive the yearly Tribute of thirty Ne∣gros, from a place called Wor∣gola. The next is Constantine, a famous and strong City, so well seated and fortified, that one hundred Souldiers who lie in Garison there, are able to defend it against ten thousand. It pays Tribute one hundred
and fifty thousand Dobles per annum. Next to Constantine is Bona, which hath a Garison of one hundred Souldiers, and pays one hundred thousand Dobles per annum, and one hundred Kintals of Butter. The next is Mesela, has twenty Souldiers, and pays Tribute ten thousand Dobles per annum. The next is Lemora, has twenty Souldiers, and eight thousand Dobles per annum. The next is Berenan, a fa∣mous Castle built by the Chri∣stians, and seated amongst the Mountains about seven days march South-East: it hath a
Garison of eighty Souldiers, and pays Tribute to the Dey, or General of the Army, fifty thousand Dobles per annum. The next is Giggery, which hath a Garison of twenty Men, pays fifteen thousand Dobles per annum, famous for the great defeat given the French there in 1663. The next is Buggi, where Sir Edward Spragge burnt their Armada, hath a Gari∣son of one hundred Souldiers, and pays twelve thousand Dobles. To the Westward their Territories extend as far as two days journey from Fez and Morocco. The principal
and most remoted Town, is Trimesan, an ancient and large City, well inhabited by the Moors and Cololis that are married and live there: The Garison consists of one hun∣dred Souldiers, and pays one hundred thousand Dobles per annum. The next is Mastagan, a fine Town well fortified by the Sea-side, hath a Garison of one hundred Souldiers, and pays Tribute to the Dey one hundred thousand Dobles. Besides these, is, Shershell, Dellus,
Kollia, Bleeda Millyeave, Masson Medden, and divers other Towns, in∣habited by the Moors; and se∣veral Turks are married and live among them. For the Collection of the Contribution of all these parts, are three Camps year∣ly sent out, besides the fore∣mentioned Garisons which are yearly relieved. To each of these Camps is a Bey, or Ge∣neral that Farms the Contri∣bution. The first Camp is called the Churke Mahallas, Commander
Harradien Bey, and rangeth all the East as far as their utmost bounds to the Eastward. His Army consists of fifty Tents, in each Tent is forty Souldi∣ers, he pays five hundred thou∣sand Dobles per annum. [The Bey is usually a Person of Noble Blood, bred among the Moors, of which is many so esteem∣ed by them. He hath an Aga in the Camp, as the Ships have at Sea; and the Souldiers are as much or more obedient to the Aga than the Bey.] The second is Mahalla Ti∣tera, or the Southward Camp, they consist of fifteen Tents, and two hundred Spahees; they are Commanded by Dell Bey,
who gathers Contribution sixty days journey Southward, from whence he brings many Ne∣groes of Angelo, and some∣times Gold having farmed it for one hundred and fifteen thou∣sand Dobles per annum. The third is Carpe Mahal∣las, or the Western Camp, they consist of sixty Tents, and gather Contribution within two days journey of Fez, and all the Westward part from Algiers. This Camp is com∣manded by Ben Ashia Melias, Brother to the Captain that was taken in the Algier-Frigat. He pays the Publick five hun∣dred thousand Dobles per an∣num.
Besides these Revenues, this City of Algiers receives from the Handicrafts-men eighteen thousand one hun∣dred and eighty Dollars per an∣num. The Jews pay two thou∣sand eight hundred and eighty six Dollars per annum. The Farmers of the Wax and Hydes pay eighty five thousand Dobles per annum. The French pay for the Coral Fishing at Bastion twen∣ty five thousand Dobles per an∣num. The Genoveeses pay for the Priviledges they enjoy upon Tobacco, ten thousand Dol∣lars per annum.
The Custom of Goods may amount to twenty thousand Dollars per annum. Moreover, if any Turk dies without any Heir lawfully be∣gotten, his whole Estate goes to the Publick: If he hath one or more Daughters, the Goods of the Turk are given her; but of a Moor the Daugh∣ter cannot inherit: This brings in an unknown and vast Re∣venue, it having been com∣puted some years to amount to four hundred thousand Dol∣lars. From the poor Slaves there arises no small profit to the Publick: for after the Slaves are sold at the Badistan, or Market∣place,
they are carried to the Kings House, and entred a∣gain, where every farthing that is offered for them more than was in Batistan, turns to the benefit of the Publick, be∣sides every Slave pays to the Publick fifteen Dollars for his head, and ten per cent. for so much as he is redeemed for: Add to this the ⅛ part of all Prizes, and what else is ex∣acted by the Revenues laid up∣on all sorts of people, which all amounts to a vast unknown sum of money. Every two months they pay their Soldiers; No Person is permitted to go in∣to the Treasury. and what money re∣mains, is sent up
to the Cassale, from whence they have never yet taken any thing: so that the mass of Wealth that is believed to be therein, might very well de∣fray the charges of an Army, fit to take both that and the City; when it was blown up by the Collolies, that part stood where the Treasure lies, and received little or no prejudice.
Their Trade. THe Trade of Algier is the most inconsiderable of any great populous City in the World, depending chiefly upon the success of their Py∣rates: among the Tukrs I do not find ten Merchants, and they only use to Tunis and Alexandria, from whence they are supplied with Linnen Cloth, Coffee, and other Mer∣chandize. The Handicrafts-men are chiefly Collolis, or Sons of Turks, who being uncapable of Preferment in the Govern∣ment,
are brought up to earn their bread, and are well im∣proved in their several Arts. Every Trade and Profession hath an Emeene, or Master of the Company, whose care is in effect the same as the Ma∣sters and Wardens of a Com∣pany in London; but more ab∣solute, it being in his power, and also incumbent upon him, to chastise any of them with blows, when they shall de∣serve it, or lay what for∣feit he sees cause upon any misdemeanor; to force them to pay their debts, if for any Commodity belonging to their Trade, and to demean themselves civilly. Each Trade
lives in a Street by it self. The Power given the Emeene is no small ease to the Governours. They have a Fabrick of Cloth, and Linnen, and almost all things necessary for Mankind; so that the Manufactories they stand in need of from Chri∣stendom, is so often supplied by Prizes, that the Consumpti∣on of the place supplyed by Merchants, is most inconside∣rable. Of English, the Goods brought hither is chiefly Cloth, of which four hun∣dred pieces per annum is the greatest Consumption, some Iron, Lead, and Tin, but in all not enough to employ one
good Ship to make two Voy∣ages a year. The current money of that Country is Aspers, of which 232. make a Ryall of 8 8, a Coyn that is altogether unfit for any other Country, being not full three quarters of an Ounce of Silver in a Dollar of Ryall 8 8. They Coyn also a Substance of Gold, which is the just weight of an Hunga∣rian, and is worth two Ryalls 8 8, and three quarters in As∣pers, so that a Merchant that brings his Wares hither by selling them for the money of the Country, finds loss of twenty per cent. to the pound in the exchange of Spanish mo∣ney,
that it hath much discou∣raged all Trade hither. The greatest production of Merchandize to be transport∣ed of the growth of the Coun∣try, is Wax, about three hun∣dred Kintals per annum, Hydes about twenty thousand, and nothing else worth noting; but of Prize-Goods no small quantity, having been, as I have particularly noted, one hundred eighty and seven Prizes brought in, in less than two years and an half. All Goods that are not contrabanda to be brought from Spain and Italy, pay 11 1 2 per Custom, a Ship pays fifty Dollars Port-charges, and a
Barrel of Powder to the Cas∣sabe. The Weights and Measures are no ways altered since the time that several have under∣taken to give an accompt thereof.
A LIST of the Ships in Algiers. Ships Names. Captains. Men. Guns. What in their Stern. Marygold Aly Rais Canary 350 40 Marygold The Lyon   350 40 Lyon Red The Citron Tree Hamet Lagere 350 40 Citron Tree The Orange Tree Sampson Rais 350 40 Orange Tree The Moon Regip Raise 350 40 Half Moon in a Ring
The Sampson Asaph Race 200 40 Sampson The Seven Stars Buffon Race 250 36 Seven Stars The Fountain Baker Oggia 250 36 Fountain The Lemon Tree Ally Raise 250 36 Lemon Tree The two Lyons Biram Raise 250 36 Two Lyons Muskitto Assaine Raise 250 34 Stambol Church, and 2 Calabashes. Pine Tree Mahomet Torsett 250 30 Pine Tree The Sun Cornet 200 28 The Sun Blew
Yellow Rose Topall Oggia 200 26 Yellow Rose The Sun Fortass 200 24 The Golden Sun Three Roses Mustap. Chelett 200 24 Three Roses The half Moon Biskaine 200 24 The half Moon The Flower Pot Mustapha Raise Canary 300 34 A Golden Flow∣er Pot The Green Rose Corally Raise 200 20 Green Rose   Mustap. Reis Genores 250 30 A new Ship The Star Mustap. Reis Greek 250 30 The Star
Sun and Pearl Hassan Raise 200 24 Sun and Pearl A Carvel Over Raise 150 16   The Pearl Ashatt 150 16 Pearl The two Stags Mah. Rais Malles 200 20 Two Stags The great Pearl Abducadre Rais 200 24 Great Pearl The little Lyon Mustaph. Raise 150 16 Lyon Rose and Pidgeon Bostanges 150 18 The White Rose and Pidgeon. Pearl and 3 Roses Taggarin 80 8 Pearl and 3 Roses
Settia Ʋsuph Raise 80 8   Settia Regip Raise 80 8     Mahamel Raise, the Deys Son 400 50 2 new Ships.   Bashaw Ship 400 50 2 new Ships. Seven Brigantines, and three Galleys. FINIS.
