P2629 12431158 61958
THE CHARACTER OF A Good Commander, Together with a SHORT COMMENDATION Of the Famous ARTILLERY (More properly MILITARY) Company of London; ALSO A Brief ENCOMIUM on the Great Duke, and worthy Prince, Elector of Brandenbourg. LASTLY PLAIN DEALING with TREACHEROƲS DEALERS. Whereunto is Annexed The General Exercise of the Prince of Orange's Army. By Captain THO. PLƲNKET. Licensed, March the 4th. 1689. London, Printed for William Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-Street, 1689.
TO His most Excellent MAJESTY, WILLIAM III. By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the True Faith. WHat greater Good than timely preservation, From Fire and Sword, Destruction, Devastation, &c. Can come to any Countrey, great or small? Which I suppose will be confest of all, That Heav'n hath pitch'd on You, truth to advance, And work for us such great Deliverance; You that kick at this Pro∣vidence, the same Provi∣dence may kick you out of all, if you don't mend your man∣ners. None but blind Papists, will or dare deny, Or blinder Protestants; (for such we spy.) You came, Sir, in the very nick of time, Even when our Foes were in the very prime; Yea, when they wanted nothing but the word From Hell, and bloody France, to draw the Sword, To Kill, Burn, Massacre, (&c.) just then you come, For which we praise the Great JEHOVAH's Name: For which, to thank you all good Men are bound, For which You shall for ever be renown'd.
For all the Protestants throughout the World, Had into woful miseries been hurl'd, If Britain had been lost, and all subverted; But such a Curse your comming hath averted; Also preserv'd our Lives and Liberties, And freed us from a Thousand Tyrannies: Yet shall you meet with vile ingratitude, Rubs, Censures, Cavils, and base blanditude, &c. Yea, and from Stars of the first Magnitude? To Christ, the King of Kings, be all the praise, That did your worthy noble Highness raise, To do for him so great, so good a work, (As great work as conquering the Turk:) The Ld preserve You from the hands of those, That to his Kingdom are the greatest Foes; He bless and guide you still to do such things, As may Record you 'mong the best of Kings. I have heard this when I was a boy, above Fifty years ago Some have foretold of a Ninth Henry, which Should do great things for England, poor and rich, And for the true Religion very much. And that he should e'er Ninety two appear, And put the brats of Babylon in fear; That at his Fame they would be very sad, And fly in haste; which would make good men glad. I may with Reason (and good reason to) Conclude it can be no Man else but you; Sith the event hath answer'd the prediction, Attended also with Heavens Benediction: The God of wonders worketh wonders still, And with those wonders all the World doth fill.
Mira sunt Opera Dei. He looks down from his high and lofty Throne, And laughs at such, as cry, The day's our own. By Babes and Children, often he befools Great Dons and Doctors of the learned Schools. He tosseth Kings and Kingdoms to and fro, And maugre all their might can lay them low. Some he lifts up, and some throws down the Hill; The Reasons are absconded in his will. Stat pro ratione voluntas. He doth astonish mighty Kings and States, And casteth at his feet the prime Magnates. He taketh crafty Counsellors in their Own Nets; and trampleth Judges in the mire. Plotters, and such as bloody mischief hatch, He doth them in their own devices catch; He makes them fall into the pit they made For others, because Murder is their trade. Inciderunt in foveam, quam fecerunt. He can discover all their subtil tricks, And quite befool them in their politicks. He breaks the power of such as Tyrannize; And brings to nought the wisdom of the Wise. He makes the guilty flee, when none pursue; And in his time, will pay them all their due. He breaks and scatters Armies when he please, And crusheth Kings and Counsellors with ease. Their Chancellors he can infatuate, And cause them to mistake the Rules of State; Yea, make them in stone-doublets see their Fate.
Their close Cabals he quickly can uncover, And all their curst contrivances discover; Their deeds of darkness he can bring to light, And turn their Day into a lasting Night. These matters to Your Highness are no news, And which are owned by the very Jews;) But they are too too serious and sublime, For the debauched Bullies of the time; The celsitude of any Theam is gall, To such as are at Flora's wanton call. But my Muse scorns to humour such, as of Aethereal strains can make a jeer and scoff; Or tread the Mazes where such Satyrs range, As ca heir honour for dishonour change; Or please such curious, quaint, sly, wanton Wits, As can be hot, cold, bad and good by fits. One thing (Great Sir) I cannot supersede, (Of which, in History, all Men may read) Which ignorant or envious people have Labour'd to hide, (for such love to deprave;) And that is, (spite of malice, spleen and gall) Here to record what should be known to all; Viz. That the seven Provinces are owing to Your most renowned Ancestors, and You, For that high Grandeur which they now possess, And other benefits, even to excess; Whose noble actions fill the Trump't of Fame, While Nero's fume and fret to hear the same: To rank You with the Worthies of this Age, Will envy put into a furious rage.
But where the Truth is said, (and nothing more) There's the less need to fear that chafed boar. A restless passion's full of jealousies Envy is restless. Of Fears and Cares; it seems all ears and eyes; 'Tis always listning for one tale or other, To undervalue ev'n his only Brother. But noble Souls, slight what depravers say, So virtue, while it suffers, wins the day. Virtus dum patitur vincit. Your Highness in few Weeks hath done such things As have astonish'd all European Kings. Who could of such Catastrophe's Divine, When Philadelphia did with sorrow pine, And Sion trampled underfoot by Swine? O what stupendious changes have we seen Of late? have such in England ever been? God hath made you the happy instrument To introduce this healing Parliament. By your wise conduct we have Halcion days, Since you have Crown'd the Protestants with Bays; Viz. Great Victories; and without blood-shed too: This shews us what almightiness can do: Some have the Laurel won by blood and strage, But you in peace have climb'd the British Stage. The Sun of Providence here shall not set, Till it do that, which done it hath not yet. The Wheel within the Wheel still goeth round, Ezek. 1.16. Turks, False Prote∣stants. Atheists, Popes and Papists to confound: Mean time (illustrious Prince) be pleased to Accept this Mite which I present to You.
Of Your good Nature, much I have been told, Which did encourage me to make so bold As to adventure on the Dedication Of this small book (though with some For fear of offending. Hesitation) To your renowned self; wherein you may Read your own self, (as I may truly say) For 'tis a noble subject, fit for none But Martial Spirits, and for them alone; Whereof your kind acceptance (Sir) will be A favour, and encouragement to me. May Heaven protect and always on You smile, And make you ev'n a Moses to this Isle; As it hath already hath begun to do, Who onours God, God will him honour too. May all your Foes before you fall and fly, And Romish rags be bury'd totally. May God direct and guide you Night and day, For which (no doubt) good Protestants shall pray: And so shall I my self, among the rest, In which and all things else, I'll do my best To serve and honour Your Majesty according to my power Tho. Plunket. April the 10th. 1689.
AN Advertisement TO THE READER. I Think it necessary in this place to give the World a short Account of some things relating to my self, to avoid surmi∣ses and sinister Constructions, having now (and not till now) found a fit opportunity after my Forty five years Ob∣scurity, to satisfie Enquirers by giving them the reasons of my so long and voluntary Exile, wherein I shall be as brief as possible. The Name and Family of the Plunkets are not Irish Originally, but descended from the Romans, but have been in Ireland almost a thousand years. My Father was of the House of Dunsaney in East-Meath, and brought up in the Romish Religion until to∣wards the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when about the age of fourteen years, he came off from Popery, and became a zealous Protestant, and so continued till death; and because he was the first of our Name that turn'd Protestant, he was therefore extream∣ly hated by many great Papists, and all their Clergy, so that they waited an opportunity to do him some mischief one way or other; and at last they found one, for a little before the Rebellion in 1641,
he fell sick, and in that his sickness a Popish Physician poison'd him; fearing (as being a man of a great spirit) he might (as he would have done) by his repute and interest in the Country, ob∣struct their designs thereabouts. And the said Physitian confess'd upon his Death-bed that he poison'd him for no other cause but his being a Protestant; and that he was put upon it by others. And at the beginning of the Rebellion the Papists Plunder'd and burnt our House, whereby nine Orphans of us were expos'd to great hardships and miseries, as well as many thousands more. My Grand∣father had an Estate left him by the Lord Dunsaney, whose second Son he was; but betwixt him and my Father, partly by Gaming, but mostly by engaging for others, all the Estate was gone. As soon as I heard (being then at Dublin) what bloody work the Papists made in the Country, by murthering the Protestants, I resolved to oppose and fight against them to the utmost of my power, and pre∣sently Listed my self in Sir Charles Coot's Regiment, then sixteen years of Age, and continued in the Wars until the Cessation made with the Rebels by the King's Order; whereupon about 8000. that fought successfully against the Rebels, were sent for by the King to fight for him in England, after which they never had success, but were always worsted. After my Father's death, I found I was not only very much sligh∣ted and neglected by my Protestant Kindred, but hated and threat∣ned by my Popish Kindred, for fighting against them, &c. as I was by other young Rebels; therefore to be no longer vext and griev'd with the unkindness of the one, and to avoid the danger of the other (whose malice I had but too much cause to fear) I resolved upon a voluntary Banishment, for at least twenty years (if I lived so long) and away came I with the Army (in Colonel Gibson's Regiment) in November 1643. Which Army at the Siege of Nantwich, were
routed by Fairfax the January following, where Colonel Monk (since Duke of Albemarle) with many others were taken, and sent up to the Parliament. And while I was in those parts, a Report being spread abroad (which was too true) that the King had many thousands of Papists in his Armies, and that in one of them were 6000. This as it very much offended me, so it begat some thoughts in me of going to the Parliaments side, being also informed that they allow'd no Papists in their Army (which was true). But while I was musing what to do, some other Regiments came out of Ireland for the King, among which were many of my former Threatners, this rais'd in me a firm resolution, to List my self in the Parlia∣ments Army, which I did soon after; and to escape the bloody in∣tentions of those Threatners above said, and other such in time to come, as also to perplex my most unkind Kindred with a twenty or thirty years silence, in which time I vow'd they should neither see me, nor hear from me, I changed my own name, and went by the name of Clark, and have hitherto, and was in many Fights and Skirmishes in the North of England, and at the great Battel on Marston-Moor in July 1644. And when Sir T. Fairfax afore∣said, was made General of that Victorious Army call'd the New Model 1645. I Listed my self in his own Regiment of Foot, where∣in I continued fifteen years, during which time divers Officers, be∣cause they knew not who I was, concluded me to be of some base ob∣scure, beggarly Parentage, for which I have been scorned and tra∣duced by them, and others all along; and when I saw what great Changes and Alterations were in hand in the beginning of the Year 1660. in reference to things and persons, tending to a total subver∣sion of that Interest and Cause, which I had so zealously owned, and engaged in from first to last, I could not in judgment and conscience recede from them, or any my former principles, by complying either
to keep or get a place (as many Officers did) whereby I should have bespattered my Reputation (more dear to me than my life) and incurr'd that (to me) odious name of a Time-server; whereupon I threw up my Commission, and broke my Sword (losing all my Arreers, and much Money lent my Company) and so retired from all publick mat∣ters ever since. For it shall never be said, That a Plunket was false or guilty of any base unworthy treacherous Action for me; from which I have (by the Grace of God) kept my self clear at all times, especially these 29. years last past, wherein I have suffered many hard things for my integrity, being forced through the malice of Neigh∣bours, Mayors, Informers, &c. to change my Dwellings fifteen times in twenty years. And as I lost all in Ireland for being a Prote∣stant, so I lost all again in England, for being a Dissenter. But I am still semper idem, and resolve to be whilest I live, come what will of it. And though many hundreds (dead and alive) know what I was, and am, yet no man or woman knew who I was, till of late years.
THE PROLOGUE. OF Warlike Deeds my Muse affects to write; For Comedy's I love not to Endite; Nor mimmick Charms, or Madrigals to please, Such as in Flora's Arms can sleep with ease: They being Subjects fitter for the Pen Of some fine Gallant, or hot Citizen; A Merry Andrew, Miss, or Ganymede: But my quil scorns such pimping Paths to tread. A Marshal Mind delights to Treat of Kings, Noble Adventures, Wars, and such like things. My self, upon Bellona's purple Stage, An Actor was at Sixteen years of Age. (A year almost ere Edge hill Fight begun, Where many vap'ring Sparks first learnt to run.) Most of the Warlike Projects of those days I noted well; also the several ways▪ And modes of Fighting still in mind I bear, When Thousands, by one Thousand routed were. In many bloody Battels I have been, Where horror was in all its Colours seen; Being almost Twenty Years together in The School of Mars, (but not in a whole skin.) 'Tis true, your Theoreticks may do well, But 'tis Experience bears away the Bell. Some brag at Taverns (and they not a few) Of what they never saw, nor never knew. What impudence is this! Others, that were I'th' Wars, but Three, Two, nay, or but One year, Or in a Fight, or Two, Oh, how they'll chat, As if they did great things, but God knows what! Others again (for which they have been blam'd,) Whereof I have been divers times asham'd, Will basely jear, and trample upon those They overcome in Fight, though valiant foes. Fy, on such dirty Spirits; but I doubt They're of that Gang that first began the Rout; And those are Cowards: And, as bad as they, Or worse; are such, as will their Trust betray. Oh! did I serve the Turk, I'd rather dy A thousand Deaths, than through black Treachery Betray my trust, let it be great or small, For Treachery is worse than Devil and all. The Traitor too, of all the World is hated; Yea, ev'n by those, him to it animated. Besides, he will be never trusted more By any; no, they'll kick him out of Door. But, leaving these; my self I shall apply, Though briefly, and but superficially, To give a little taste of what I have Observ'd in some Commanders, wise and brave, In the late bloody Wars; but naming none, Including all of them, as 'twere in one; Yet one of them transcending all the rest, I chiefly aim at; being of all confest To be the greatest Captain of his time, And did up to the highth of honour climb; However, I in general describe A good Commander of the Martial Tribe, Be he who he will; nor of him very much, For (as I said) I will but at him touch; For every Warlike Project to express, Would be a Task too great for Hercules.
Time, strange Occurrents, new Necessities, &c. Will things produce, now latent from the wise. It seems a crime (still) to live soberly: Also to write, or speak Religiously. Many have thought that none good Subjects were, But such as drink and whore, and curse and swear; That all, but such, are Fools and Cowards too; That none, but such, brave things could ever do! I wonder where such brave things have been done! For in the Wars I never could see none Perform'd by swearing drunken Sots: No, no, For such a Kingdom always overthrow. Ten sober Men have charg'd five Tens of these, And broke their armed Ranks and Files with ease; And chas'd them many Miles out of the Field, Making those swearers (whiningly) to yield, And cry for Quarter in a Panick fear, Lest Yea, and Nay, should them in pieces tear, Who, but i'th' Morning, brag'd what they would do, In Routing, Killing, Taking, Hanging too; Yet after all these valiant words, they ran At the first Charge, both in the Reer and Van. Pray then, what can be done by sottish Fools? When was the day got by such wooden Tools? Those Princes seldom win great Victories, Whose Captains live in base Debaucheries: Yea, they are often most abus'd by those In whom they do most confidence repose. —Venit ad me pro amico blandus inimicus. Seneca. But—Qui verum dicit, nihil timere debet. If 88 rouz'd horror from his Den, When Warriors were thought something more than Men, What if like dread should England now surprize, And bloody Papists should against us rise? (For such a Plague, there's cause enough to fear; Nay, don't we all expect it every year?) Then, good Commanders would be priz'd indeed, For they are precious in a time of need. But, I mean such, as in the Martial Art, Have skill acquired by the Practick Part, Or long experience in the art of War; And many bloody Battels (near and far) Where Terrours; Terrours did in clusters meet, And where in earnest, Cannons, Cannons greet. 'Tis such, as win deserved Reputation; Yea, 'mong their enemies high estimation. Some have I known to do such things, as have Made ev'n their Foes confess, 'twas very brave! Yea, with the Titans, dar'd to be at odds, As if they'd been descended from the Gods: 'Tis such, (I say,) not Novices, that know, How to amuse, and match a crafty Foe. But my design is to describe but One, And in him, shew, what hath and might be done. Ducis in consilio posita estvirtus militum.
THE CHARACTER OF A Good Commander. A Valiant, Wise Commander is a prize Hard to be found amongst the vulgar size. He bears a Generous, Vertuous, Noble Mind, In whom (in all conditions) you shall find All the parts of a Gentleman; for he In Generosity, Civility, Justice, Humanity, Humility, And Courtesy, ev'n to his Enemy; Also in many other worthy deeds, Most Men and Gallants of the time exceeds; Therefore the Muses do Record his Name, And with his Vertues fill the Trump't of Fame. He's one of a great Spirit, courage high, Stands at a pinch, when others faint and fly. He saith not to his Souldiers, go, but, come; And 'mongst the Armed Squadrons maketh room. He's the Atlas of a Commonwealth, for He Bears Heav'n up with his Shoulders constantly; That is, with Temp'ral Power, he defends Religion, Christ's Kingdom, and his Friends. He knows that Vertue doth consist in Action; But sides not with the giddy-headed Faction. When Wars are done, and bloody Battels cease, His wisdom is the Rule and Guide of Peace; 'Specially if he hath at his command A store of Arms, to arm a needful band. For, Arma pacis fulera. He knows the way to Honour, lies through danger, To which his Mind and Body is no stranger. Without him ne'er expect a Victory, But at the foot of enemies to ly. He's Valiant upon all Attempts whatever, Prudent, Constant, Faithful; no Deceiver. He will not for a little hurt with-draw; As some, when but a little scratch they saw. He will not break his Sword against a Tree, (Yet swear it was against an enemy) As Major C— did; nor pistol his Hat, As Captain Prater, and Lieutenant Chat: Nor run his Breeches, nor his Buff-coat through, As Captain B. and Monsieur W. Nor coin excuses in a time of War, As hath that Blandiloquious Colonel R.
Nor counterfeit Morbosity, when well, As that loquacious Coward, Captain L. Nor creep into a Ditch, as Captain A. Nor from the Battel hitch, as Major Ba— There's many such, whose Valour lies in words, Deserve to wear (not Ir'n, but) wooden Swords. Nor is he one that's Valiant at a spurt; No, no, he's far from being such a flurt. As many Sparks that this hour will be stout, But the next, very bravely face about; For they cannot endure a while to stand; Nor above all, to Combat hand to hand. But our Commander you shall ever find, Of a brave, steady, fixed constant mind; Yet if he sees he shall be over-power'd, With ten to one, rather than be devour'd, He will (as he must needs) sound a Retreat, As Scipio, Hannibal, Pompey the Great, And other Valiant Worthies oft have done, In the same case, or all been undone. And more sometimes is done by policy, Than force it self, against an Enemy. But there's no power, policy, nor skill, Can once withstand the Lord of Hosts his will. Our Hero, to whom I return again, Is one, who did his Country never stain: He ne'er was guilty of debauched Crimes; Nor will he change Religion with the Times, As many now; yea, and some great ones too, For many Magnates any thing will do, To win the favour of the rising Sun: And when he sets, they know which way to run: To th' Dev'l, or Tiburn, some may go perchance, Others may trot to Newgate, Rome, or France; For knaves have many Subterfuges, where No honest Man durst ever yet appear. But this brave Soul, whose Fame I now record, Is always fixt, and faithful to his Word. Let times be what they will, he firmly stands, And ready to obey all just Commands. He Herds not with the Beasts of Prey; no, no, His Soul is more Seraphical than so. He's no Time-server, no, he's not so base, As to comply meerly to get a Place. He will not change his Note, nor turn his Coat; No, not although he is left not worth a Groat. While Temporizers turn to save their Bacon, Which for Nathanaels too too long were taken: For another time hath them discover'd all; Yet still are proud and confident withal. Our General is careful that his Men Are not debaucht; for he will now and then, Walk up and down incognito, by Night, Among their Tents, and sometimes in the Light, To hear, and see their several humours; which, They hearing, doth from Oathes restrain them much: A Vice, which Souldiers are so wedded to, As if the Div'l had taught them so to do. Nay, and some Captains are as bad, or worse, Who cannot speak, but they must Swear and Curse, At every trifling, petty Provocation, Whereby they hast'n their own condemnation. And so, like Officers, like Souldiers too; A swearing, cursing, rude debauched crew: And such our General cann't endure, Of which he'll rid his Army to be sure. For towards such, and all Offenders, he Doth carry it with great severity: Knowing if he pass by some hateful Crime, 'Twould blast his Army, and himself in time. Therefore strict Discipline he doth observe, And spareth none that punishment deserve: Whereby good Order he doth always keep, That he might with a quiet Conscience sleep. But some for writing thus, will call me Whigg, &c. And I, their Railing value not a Fig.
He likes not multitudes in Armies; no, Too many will themselves overthrow. Not above Thirty Thousand he will have For one Field Army. Numbers seldom save. Great Multitudes, heaps of confusion are, No Order keep, but always out of square; So rout themselves. When on the other hand, A small smart Army under good Command, Well Disciplin'd, well Officer'd to boot, Hath worsted mighty Armies, Horse and Foot; Of which you'll find enough in History; And which my self, for Truth, can testify In the late Wars, at many a bloody Fight, In the Three Nations, by Day and Night. Therefore to fear a huge untutor'd Host, (Like that of which Darius made his boast,) Is unto Cowardice too near a kin, And such, a Victory do seldom win. But our brave Hero, whom I now describe, Is none of that exanimated Tribe. He knows, that in great Numbers there may be But few good Souldiers; not scarce One in Three, But be they few or many, good or bad; Yea, as brave Men as ever Lewis had, Yet he has such skill, methods, wiles, and ways, Unknown to France, even in these skilful days: To baffle, or put some new trick upon them, He'll seem to fly, and yet turn short upon them; And suddenly rush on their strongest Wing, Which be'ng unlookt for, will Confusion bring; Which commonly ends in destruction. For, The English serv'd the Scots so at Dunbar, At Marston-moor, Preston, and Worster too: Where, though we won, yet 'twas with much ado. For, to speak truth, the Scots did pretty well; But Cromwell 'twas that bore away the Bell, From them, and others, English, Irish, all, Be who they will, did there before him fall. Whose fierce and furious ways of fighting, I (Although long since) yet keep in Memory. But hold! I must return unto the Man, Of whom I write, and tell you what I can. He's still projecting how to worst his Foes, Whom now and then he leadeth by the Nose Into some of his Traps; whence, while they strive To get away, he taketh them alive. He'll cause some to be bidden to a Feast, Then seize on them, half earnest, half in jest: And this he doth to gain Intelligence, Keeping them with a friendly negligence. He'll find away to burn some Houses where They quarter, while himself is posted near; And in the great confusion it will make, He presently will his advantage take. I need not tell you what a panick fright His Foes are in, who soon are put to flight; As needs they must, being round about beset, And taken in a strange new-fashion'd Net. To get some strong hold of his enemy He will devise a trick, (but secretly.) His friends are to appoint a great Horse-Race, On such a day, near to the intended place; Which doubless will draw many Souldiers out, And divers of their Officers, no doubt: Who, while their Minds are fixt upon the sport, His Troops rush in betwixt them and their Fort; By which Device they're taken in the Field And so the place forthwith is forc'd to yield: Thus I could tell you where, and how 'twas done, In Sixteen Hundred, Forty three, and one. Fairfax, his Regiment, in Forty eight, (In which the second War was at the height,) In York-shire, on a Moor, was near surpriz'd, (A stratagem, the day before deviz'd)
By full Three Hundred Horse, well mounted all, Which congress they would needs an Horse-race call: Most of our Souldiers (dreaming of no Plot) Amongst the Horse-men scatteringly trot Without their Arms; which lay in Rank and File Five Hundred Yards from whence they were: Mean while, Three friendly Horse-men, running a full speed Came to our Major, bidding him take heed, For certainly those Troops had an intent, Forthwith to fall upon our Regiment, Now scatter'd, and to seize our Colours too: Therefore, consider quickly what to do, Said they to White, (which was our Majors Name) A daring, brave, bold Spirit 'sever came Into a Field. Our Drums a larum beat; Arm, Arm, we cry; our men (all in a sweat) In order plac'd themselves immediately; Whereat, most of the Horse began to fly; The rest amazed stood a while, at last, They also several ways did flee as fast.) Their Hearts did fail them, (as themselves confess'd) Or they had that brave Regiment distress'd; While they were scattered upon the Moor Without their Arms, (as you were told before) Some of those Horse to Langdale fled a pace, In Cumberland; and told him what a Race They had been at. This Langdale was a brave Commander; solid, valiant, wise, and grave; No hot-spur, no, but wary in each thing, And but a few such Heroes had the King: Not to be match'd by any other side, Except old Oliver; as had been try'd. If Langdale had not strove against the stream, (The stream of Providence, and things supream) He had done more than Rupert, and the rest: He, Hopton, Astly, were adjudg'd the best, For prudent conduct, in those blust'ring days, On the King's side; yet could not win the Bays. By Hunting Matches too (on purpose made) Some have been circumvented, and betrayd, At Drinking-matches, Weddings, Bowlings; nay, At Church, (and also Troopers making Hay) Many have been surprized un-aware. Young Captains, learn by this to have a care; Such as you have of many been the Loss, And oft returned home by weeping Cross. To these, and all such projects of this kind, Our Hero is no stranger, you may find: But is a stranger, and always hath been, To what in many Gallants he hath seen; With whom, and such, he cares not to converse; Yet seldom their misdoings will reherse. His Thoughts on vertuous deeds are daily bent, His time is not in Courting Ladies spent. No, but is vigilant, and circumspect, That he no opportunity neglect, T'anoy his Enemy; whom he doth watch, That he might him at some advantage catch. He's careful all disasters to prevent: In fore-casting most of his time is spent: Experience taught him dangers to foresee, In every corner of the Camp he'll be. He's still at work, when others are asleep, A watchful eye on every hand doth keep; And in the Field, He will be last, and first; He'll die, before he will betray his trust. High Enterprizes He will undertake, His Life doth very often lie at stake. He knows that Valour is the mean, between Temerity, Fear, Fury, Gall, and Spleen: And as He scorns to flinch, or shun his foe; So, He'll not rashly run himself into Unnecessary dangers, that He may (which ought in every Captain to bear sway) To God, King, Country, be more serviceable, Which to be, Rashness might him quite disable. His Souldiers of Him stand so much in awe, That every word he speaks to them's Law;
Yea, (which is rare) they love, and fear him too; Without which Captains little good can do. He'll do more with a frown from his stern brows, Than many other Chieftains with their blows. He brings not all his Men at once to fight, Without constraint: But some keeps out of sight For a Reserve; and when the Battle's ended, He's careful (lest the rest should be offended) Not to praise any Man more than another; Winks at small faults, and greater (sometimes) smother; Yet, bears in mind, or notes it with his Pen, Still to preferr the most deserving Men. He hates rapacity, (so do not some, Which slaves, a Captains place did ne'er become) Covetousness He knows incurreth hate, And would his Souldiers love to him abate; But He gives every Man his right, and due, Which to his Honour greatly doth accrue; His Groom, nor he that Weds his Chambermaid, &c. No Captain, nor Lieutenant shall be made: Which hath been much in fashion, and is still; But to such dirty Deeds he hath no will. He's not greedy after trash and pelf; He cannot act so much beneath himself: No, He's more noble spirited than so, As they can witness, that his Vertues know. And as the Romans fear'd the Policies, Tricks, Stratagems, and other Mysteries Of Hannibal, more than his Army; though, They once gave them a dismal overthrow; So is our Hero's Conduct, dreaded more Than all his Forces; for he hath in store What non-experience cannot apprehend; (And yet, to know great matters, will pretend.) If he perceives th'encamped Enemy, Scout, and keep watch, but somewhat carelesly; He'll with all speed march towards them that Night; Keeping his Army close, and out of sight; Then (with a Guard) his Drums and Trumpets he Will send to th'other side of th'enemy: And there to sound and beat alarums, (which, Th'encamped Foe will startle very much;) Also their Guards shall at some distance fire, As oft as well they can; and so retire. This makes the Foe bend all his thoughts that way, So he go's onward to begin the Fray: Thinking the adverse Army all is there; When they, just then, are falling on the Reer: Where must be slaughter and much mischief done; And peradventure a great Vict'ry won: Which to our Hero's Honour doth redound, For few such Good Commanders can be found. False News, he knows, are dangerous; also Counterfeit Letters work an overthrow: And when the Foe's misrepresented too, &c. But in such cases he knows what to do. Nay, perhaps too, some Traitor may be hir'd (Or some curst Villain, like a friend attir'd) To poison, stab, or pistol him by Night; (In which he can more safely take his flight;) Yet the all-seeing providence prevents, (With care and guard) such cursed Instruments (As oft it hath) by a discovery Of their intended devilish Treachery. But hark, the Trumpet sounds, I must be gone, To see what by our Hero will be done. He hath some Stratagems in hand, I see, And I can partly tell you what they be. He'll scatter many Caltraps in the way, Or powder, cover'd with Straw, or Hay: The one will make their Horses halt, but th'other Will them amaze, confound, disperse, and smother;
Then he falls on, and wins the Field no doubt. The Prince of Orange, by this trick, did rout The Spanish Army, then commanded by Proud Spinola; who threatned vauntingly, That he (before his Wife did shift her) would England Invade; which every where was told. And, perhaps, he had done as he intended, Had not the Prince of Orange him prevented. (For, Spain, was the ascendant in those days, And clouded France with its Meridian Rays; Making her Monsieurs stoop, and hang the Head; Yea, and her Lilies under foot did tread: But France, since that, of Spain has got the start; And like a bloody Nero plays her part. Nay, and the Duke de Alva, swore he would Surprise and Conquer England, if he could, (That's well put in) because it helpt the Dutch. But Orange, in this too, restrain'd him much, As he himself, and th'English too confest. The present Prince of Orange, God hath blest And prosper'd, to save England from th' Invasion, Of the black Popish-part of the French Nation, Which are for killing, burning, devastation, &c. And shall we prove, to God, and him, ungrateful? A Vice, even to Barbarians so hateful. Shall we forget this late deliverance, Which, here, again, the Gospel doth advance? Shall we slight what affects the very Jews? Shall we, still, still more Miracles abuse, As we have done? (would God it were not true,) Which evil, I, and many others rue: Then, the next blow may with a vengeance come, And settle here in England, France, and Rome. O vile ingratitude! you, you, and you, Magnates, prime Magistrates, Priests, Jesuits too, And Myriads more, in this have oft transgrest, But I return from whence I have digrest. Our Hero with small Forces being in sight Of th'Enemy, but yet is loth to Fight; Because most of his Souldiers he finds Discouraged, and troubled in their minds, At the vast Army of the Enemy, Which makes them quite dispair of Victory. Besides, they see themselves out-wing'd, almost Five Furlongs (more or less) by th'other Host, Which daunts them very much; so, that they cry, 'Twas dangerous either to fight, or fly. This may fall out sometimes through negligence Of Scouts, (&c.) sometimes through false intelligence Or treachery; sometimes through oversight, Or th'envy of some great ones, that they might Disgrace him if he should chance to be taken; Or run for't, being of his Men forsaken. But for all this, our Hero, though entrapt By treachery, (to which some are so apt) Yet spite of envy, and his potent Foes, He'll come off with applause, and without blows. (For when force will not do, then policy Must come in place, against an enemy.) Two or three ways he can devise, to get Out of this treacherous devised Net: He'll frame a Letter, as if from a friend Of the adverse General; which to him he'll send By one fit for the purpose, (and with speed) Wherein he finds he's charg'd with some foul deed; And that another is appointed to Succeed him: That most of his Captains do
That Night intend for to betray him; or, Desert him quite with all their Souldiers; for He had distasted them, (&c.) While he doth muse On this sad sudden overwhelming News, He sends some unto him as Run-aways, (But trusty to himself at all Essays) Which tell him that the adverse Army are With Thousands re-inforc'd, and that they were Resolv'd to fall upon his Camp that Night, Which added much unto his former fright; And thus, be'ng unresolv'd what shift to make In that distraction, or what course to take; Our Hero makes a very fair Retreat; Which all his enemies doth vex and fret. Besides this, divers other ways there are, Whereby men may get out of such a snare: Necessity will teach them what to do, And set their Wits upon the Tenters too. He nothing fears, but what all good men fear, And that's disgrace. He will not lye, nor swear, 'Cause God commands the contrary; whom He Desires to Worship in sincerity. The greater Honour unto him is due, Because a Souldier and a Christian too. He's a meer stranger to black Perjury, His noble Heart can do no injury. He'd Racks, and Torments undergo; Yea, mortally be wounded by the Foe, Than a false Loon, or Coward to be found; The one would but his Body tear and wound; But th'other would his Soul excruciate, And all his Reputation terminate; For, blemishes in Honour cutteth deep, And makes Renown in dark oblivion sleep. When he prepares to sight his Enemy, He marcheth towards him as chearfully As to a Banquet; and scarce speaks a word When he comes nigh, but claws it with his Sword, &c. Yet he fights warily, and with discretion, Till he and's Mermidons make an impression Into the Ranks and Files of th'enemy, Who then must either run for it, or die. He trusts not in the number of his Men, But in his God, then he'll fight two to ten. His enemies perchance may worst him, but Can never conquer him, for he'll be cut In pieces first; his great Heart cannot yield, Although his Foes were Master of the Field; For, in the midst of all adversity, His manly Patience gains a Victory. He thinks it hight of folly, to expose Himself, and's Souldiers (when at handy blows) To needless dangers; no way honourable For him, nor unto others profitable. He well observes the Ground where he must fight, And sometime fortifies his Left and Right, For great advantage may accrew thereby, Even to the routing of his Enemy. Hill, Wind, and Sun, he'll strive to have behind, Or what he can of them; 'bove all, the Wind, Which driveth all the smoak upon the Foe, And tendeth much unto their overthrow. If he be followed by his enemies, Hoping that Night his Quarters to surprize; He'll dig some Trenches where they needs must pass, And cover them with Hurdles, strew'd with Grass; Puts Powder in them, and in Ambush lies; And then, as soon as ever he espies Them fall into the Pits, he fires his train Of Powder, then he falls on them amain; Many being killed, the rest are forc'd to fly, So, by this trick, he gains a Victory. Also to scatter Money on the way, Will charm their Minds unto a scrambling stay; As did the Ponticks, when in haste they fled The Conqu'ring Romans, by Lucullus led; For while the Romans gather'd up the Gold, The Ponticks all escaped, young and old.
But now, most Men had rather (as I think) Part with their Lives, than their beloved chinck. Against a crafty numerous potent Foe, That carries all before him, high and low; When Stratagems and Policy do fail, Enforcing Force, by Force, he must assail; For there's no other shift in such a case. Or else he must be forced to give place; And which to do would cut him to the Heart, And stick within his Liver like a Dart: Therefore, he neither can, nor will be gone, Till first he something hath upon them done. For knowing that a strenuous opposition, Backt with a steady haughty resolution, With daring, braving Camisado's, have Made Hectors for a time, fighting to wave; And knowing well his disposition, and His skill and courage, they are at a stand, Musing what should be done, to fight or no; If not, they quietly must let him go. Or perhaps some smart skirmish there may be, So part on equal terms, both they and he: Which unto neither side is no disgrace, Sith neither was enforced to give place. But when an Army is surrounded by A greater force, there is no remedy, But they must either fight it out, or fly: Either of which, to do, is hazardous; Yea, desperate, and very dangerous: Which falleth out (sometimes) for want of care In the prime Leader. To avoid that snare, (A deadly snare indeed, as it hath prov'd To divers Armies, that would fain have mov'd From whence they were drawn up but one half Mile, But could not, for their Enemies, the while) Fell on their Front and Flanks most furiously; So all were killed and taken presently, Except a few that made a shift to fly. Yet in this case, a way they might have found, (Before the enemy enclos'd them round) From being kill'd and taken totally Which is, at the first sight of the Enemy, If you see that you must be forc'd to fight, And by no means you can keep out of sight, Divide your Forces in two equal parts, Look chearfully, and comfort up their hearts; Let all of them at double distance stand, Then double all their Ranks; then out of hand Let them shout, and advance couragiously, Which will, I'm sure, amuse the Enemy; Yea, damp their courage too: And who can tell, But something they may do. If they do well, The other half may second them; if not, Then to be sure the first will go to pot: Which if you do forsee, then haste away The other half, (lest they should be a prey;) If you see you are followed by the Foe, Fell Trees, or else some Wagons overthrow Where they must pass; or else some Houses Fire, &c. By which you may more quietly retire: So march apace all Night, and rest by day, Hath in this case been found the safest way. There's many other Wiles and Tricks, whereby You may escape a Potent Enemy; Which, some know better (I suppose) than I. And though half of your Army now is lost, And doubtless something to the others cost) Yet th'other half is sav'd by this device; Better lose half, than all, is good advice. A desp'rate Disease (you know) must have A desp'rate cure, to try if that will save. But our wise General, would never let His Enemies so slily him beset; For he'll have many eyes, and Spies abroad, And many nimble Scouts upon the Road. Nor will he wholly trust to them: for he Himself will busie in such matters be; Knowing it is a blot to any chief, To have his Foe steal on him like a Thief.
For some, because surpriz'd, have been turn'd out, Though otherwise well qualified, and stout. Cromwell chid Lambert soundly, because he Carre's craft and policy did not fore-see, He was to fall on Carre, but Carre fell on Upon his Quarters, first, at Hamilton. Th'English had no great harm, but came off well, For Gibbey Carre they forthwith did repel. Another time I thought he would have kill'd Lieutenant General Whaley in the field, 'Cause the Scotch Army gave him the go-by, (And in the dark) for him he charg'd to spy And watch their motion; but, for all this slur, (Which for a while, amongst us made some stir,) Both these were good Commanders, stout and wise, Which was confest by friends and enemies. Fortuna nunquam perpetua est bona. A thing may happen in an hour, which may Not happen in an Age; and though to day Be yours, yet may the next anothers be; There's nothing certain, but uncertainty. Rich Men are counted wise, and wise Men fools, if poor; But time turns upside down; yea, rich Men out the door. Cum fortuna manet, vultum servatis amici; Cum cecidit, turpi vertitis or a fuga. Our Hero's not Infallible; 'tis true, Some trick there may be put upon him too; Suppose he finds the Foe hath crept too near him, (And if he does, he knows not how to fear him;) And that he's like to fall into some danger; Which very thought, inflames him so with anger, That in a desp'rate rage he'll charge his Foes, And courage arm'd with wrath, who can oppose? He laughs, when other Chieftains are confounded, And shews no fear, when by the Foe surrounded; No, but cries, have at all, Caesar, or none, If I must die, I will not die alone. (The sad wise Valour is the bravest man, He Conquers oft, that bravely thinks he can.) Then's Front and Rear half Files stand back to back, Impulsed by fell fury; bringing wrack On ev'ry side, to such as dare them meet, Whilst Drums and Cannons in dire Thunder greet; And then they give a Turk-amazing shout, So they must either give or take a rout; But he that never knew what 'twas to shun His enemies, much less from them to run, Cannot (though overpower'd yet) to them yield, So, he'll a little longer keep the Field; Then with an over-topping courage, and Some stratagem, whereby the oe's trepan'd, He extricates himself and all his Mates, From present ruine, whom he animates With a short Speech, (his noble mind to ease) And (perhaps) with such arguments as these. "What! fellow Souldiers are we all a mort? "How Woman-like do we our selves deport! "Where is our quondam courage? what although "Our numerous Foes do yet upon us grow? "I tell you, a brave resolution may "Not only stagger them, but win the Day. "Heard ye not of that Victory was won, "By Miltiades, near to Marathon? "How with Ten thousand Greeks he put to flight "An Hundred thousand Persians, Men of might;
"And how brave Edward, called the Black Prince, "Kill'd, took, and routed Sixty thousand French "At Poictiers, only with Eight thousand Foot; "Took many Nobles, and their King to boot! "Brave Henry with a handful did advance "His Standard through the trembling heart of France. "Shall such a little number win such Fame? "And shall we nothing do! come, come, for shame "Rouze up your Spirits then, brave Souldiers all, "Let us with double courage on them fall. "Though they are five to one of us, what then? "Shall we not therefore quit our selves like Men? "I can't call that a noble Victory, "That's gained from an equal enemy. "Souldiers to Perils are accustomed; "Yea, by continual dangers to be led. "Pray Sirs, mind what I say then; if you stand, "Ye can but die like a renowned band, "But if ye run, y'are sure to die; therefore, "If ye be Men, come follow me once more. This having said, he falleth on again, Attended by his new-revived Train; And ten to one but he gets ground apace, And may, perhaps, his Foe put to the chace. If so, be sure all was performed by His Courage, noble Speech, and Policy; Which greatly doth his Fame and Honour raise, Whilst envy pines, that would him fain dispraise. Optimus ille dux, qui novit vincere & victoria uri. Though by this means they wan the Victory, Yet his Humility, and Modesty Is such, that nothing can offend him more, Than to hear people put it to his score. His very Enemies respect him too, 'Cause such a gallant, courteous, noble Foe. By which he draws some of them to his side, Which in his service faithfully abide. To the afflicted he a Brother proves, And fear from daunted Spirits he removes; His hand to help the helpless he will lend, To good and vertuous Men a fixed friend: In Counsel grave, deliberate, and wise, In action heedful, to his word precise. The obstinate, rough-hewn untutor'd crew, Have tasted first or last what he can do. For his great spirit, and undaunted Heart, Can brook no threatnings, if they be too tart. He's vers'd in policy, and warlike strife, As well as how to lead a vertuous Life. Bellona's Banners in the purple field, Affright him not, nor make his spirit yield. His Travels both in Body, and in Mind, Can't very easily a fellow find. He's well acquainted with all Warlike feats, As with the Drums diversity of beats. He bears about him honourable Scars, Which he received (nobly) in the Wars; Not in those private and ignoble quarrels, (Which cannot claim so much as faded Laurels) Much used by some Gallants of the time, Which think themselves, of all the rest, the prime; And through whose Veins such hot distempers run; As never yet were known since time begun. Taverns are haunted with these fiery spirits, Who think, to make all sly, is for their credits. These vap'ring Hectors, when the Wine is in, Can take from Hercules his Lions Skin: Yea, by a storm of Words, and Oathes to boot, One of them can lay Typhon at his foot; Nay, at a pitched Monomachy quell, Die Polyphemus, and the Dog of Hell. If their skill, courage, strength, and worth be such, I wonder why they did not beat the Dutch!
The Glance. A Little higher let my genius soar, And pierce the breast of greatness warily; Titles of Honour by some wights are wore, Which unto good have no proclivity. Whose sequels are black infamy and shame, Which unto many Ages shall indure; Corroding, and extinguishing their Name, Which never can be capable of cure. They that would not into such evils run, Nor turn their glory to a waning State; Let them, and theirs, the same occasions shun, Which courted others into scorn and hate. And bravely in all vertuous ways persist, Which will bewray the greatness of their mind; Yea, Fame to make them greater will assist, And from the Heavens shall Protection find. Who lives in Vertue, shall with Honour die, And be Recorded to posterity. Quis honorem, quis gloriam, quis laudem, quis ullum decus tam unquam expetit, quàm ignominiam, infamiam, contumelias, dedecus fugiat? Cicero. Now to my matter I return again, And give you what doth yet behind remain; I have digrest more than I did intend, And unto such to whom I am no friend. But for our Hero I'll write all I can, (At which black envy will look pale and wan.) I pretermit his bringing up, and Birth; My aim is only to display his worth. None should be chose a General for his Riches; No, though he were the Husband of a Dutches; But for his great Experience, Gravity, His Wisdom, Valour, and Fidelity. Our Hero hath all these, (besides his love To that Religion which is from above;) He knows which way his Foe to circumvent, And how an Ambuscado to prevent; And if his adversary from him fly, He will not follow them too hastily, 'Cause that's the way to make them desperate, And turn again, as 'twere in 'spite of fate. For desperation will make Cowards fight, And put their Hot-spurr'd followers to slight. Many by sad experience do know, Too close pursuits wrought their own overthrow; Whereof I could give many instances, But our Commander loves no such excess; For if the adverse Army will be gone From's Territories, he will help them on, By leaving them an open way, whereby, They may with ease and safety from him fly: Nay, more, if in their slight they seem but cold, He'll quickly make for them a Bridge of Gold. The wary Valour is the best of all, For hot-spurs shall into confusion fall. Hosti fugienti pons aureus faciendus. He will be here, and there, and ev'ry where, Filling his Enemies with care and fear: Loose Wings on either hand he sendeth out, And nimble Lads upon the private scout. When Phoebus sets, if he be Five Leagues from them, Yet by the Morning he'll be in among them; And lets them hardly take a full Nights sleep, He so torments them, or plays at Bo-peep; Putting them into horrible confusion: And yet desireth not their bloods effusion; No, no, if he sees his Souldiers are For slaughter, he'll restrain them; and take care Both for his well, and wounded enemy, That he receive no farther injury. He seeks to know the mode, and disposition; True temper, inclination, and condition Of him that is the adverse General, And of some others of the principal.
He hath a busie brain, a steady foot, A watchful eye, an heart most resolute. To's Souldiers he's a Father, for he will, Provide what's necessary for them still. His Discipline is so severe and strict, That heavy punishments he will inflict On such as do the Country spoil and wrong, Which is his constant practice all along; For Souldiers, where good Order bears no sway, Will to their Foes soon make themselves a prey. He scorns to plunder either friend or Foe, As many other dirty Captains do; No, but will treat his Captive Enemy With all Humanity and Courtesy, According to their Rank and Quality. And for the sick and wounded taketh care; Yea, leaves himself, to furnish them, but bare. His Muster-Rolls with Faggots are not pil'd: He will not injure Man, Woman, nor Child. He's none of those that ramble in the dark, Nor of that Crew that visit Whetstone's-Park, &c. He can't be justly charg'd with any Vice; To which none (easily) can him entice. He loves to exercise his Souldiers oft, Of whom they learn the Military craft. To whom he shews familiarity, And will discourse with them facetiously; But yet, retains convenient gravity. He strikes them not for every fault, as some Proud fools, whose places nothing them become. Such are made Officers before they Souldiers were, But our Commander was a Souldier Before he was an Officer; therefore, Of these new Milk-sops worth a hundred score. Such have I known, (and some are yet alive) That knew not whether they should lead, or drive Their Souldiers, when they have been Captains made, They were so simple! yet, a vap'ring blade Was each of them, which in a Tavern could Do many wonders! yea, with Juno scold! But our Commander scorns such Catamites, As can do nought, but in their drunken fits. For he'll be first and last in danger; while Those young fops leap o'er every Gate and Stile, And panting, cry, God bless us from a Gun! Starting at their own Shadows; yea, would run Into a Mouse-hole, if they could, and there, Be ready to besh— themselves for fear Any should with a Cushion shoot them through The Nose! you see then what these Sparks can do! Others, whose Oaths thicker than Bullets fly, Yet they in bloodless Battles love to die: They are for fine rich Silver Swords, not for Steel Swords, 'cause earnest Fighting they abhorr. Many such valiant boasters did I hear (Who at a Feast would huff and domineer) To brag, that for the King they'd spend their blood; Yet when they should, have sneak'd into a Wood, Or other place, in a most deadly fright; And when the Trumpets sound, keep out of sight. Nay, do but tell them of an Enemy, They'll have the shaking Ague presently; And if at Midnight you but fire a Gun, They'll stare as if they had a mind to run; Yea, look so simply and pitifully, As if condemned to the tripple Tree, And, peradventure, Aize their Breeches, Or creep behind some Wall, thick Hedge, or Ditches:
But when all danger's past, peep out, and say, Ho! ho! brave boys, now we have got the day. (I knew a Captain did so at Dunbar, Whose Tongue was stouter than his hands by far) And these, through their Tongues volubility, Shall get all the preferment still, from they That bore the brunt and danger; who've been glad If they kept but those places that they had; Yea, Cowards have been Courted, Graced, Knighted, And worthy Persons, overlook'd, and slighted! 'Cause not so valiant of their words as hands, So stood as Cyphers, or old Cancell'd Bonds. Here I will you a pretty story tell, Of one of these whom I knew very well, Who was a Captain, and a bragger too. One Night he needs would visit his per-du; For in a Field of Wheat he then had three; So in all haste to one of them goes he; Saying, in a bravado, unto him, With a contracted brow, and aspect grim, "Souldier, be sure what I command you, do, "Or for a Coward I will punish you. "If comes upon you but one Enemy, "You must not flinch, but fight him manfully; "If two assail you, you must do the same; "If three, you may retreat from whence you came. The other two hearing him thus to chatter, Stood up an end, to see what was the matter; Whereat their Captain gave a fearful start, And could not choose but let a thundring F— Thinking them to be many Enemies. So, in a pannick fear away he flies, As if a thousand Foes were at his heels, Throwing away his Sword in the same Fields, Also his Cane, Gloves, Head-piece, Pistol too, So scap'd his Foe (as he thought) much ado: Yea, such a lerry did possess his breech, That he was forc'd to ease him in a Ditch. Then to his Guard he runs, quite out of breath, And looks so like the Effigies of Death, That all his Souldiers arm'd themselves apace, And so stood gazing on his rueful face; Musing what Devil or Witch should so transform him! At length, they ask'd, if any thing did harm him? Harm me (quoth he) sure, if you had been where I was, 'twould make your hearts to quake with fear. But the next day the truth of all came out, Whereat his Souldiers at him jeer and flout; Yea, with such scornful terms they did him brand, That presently he quitted his Command, And went to London, where he studied The Law; and so a Lawyers life he led. Many for their preferment, never were Beholden to their Valour, (I dare swear;) But to their flattery, dissimulation, Great friends, or to their sly insinuation. Pimps, pocky Pages, have been rais'd on high, And Men of great experience put by. But stay my Muse, why spend we so much time, About such slaves as don't deserve a Rhime? Come, to our noble Hero lets return, And trace him, till we bring him to his Urn. But hold! Quid Monstrum id? what Elf is that Crossing the way, like an unlucky Wat? How jealous, pale, lean, angry, hollow-ey'd, It looks? yea, looks a squint on every side:
It seems to pine away with fear and care, Lest others should with it in something share. How ominous and frightfully it shows? What terrors hang upon its cloudy brows? One may guess shrewdly at his inner part, And in his speculation read his heart, It looks as if some ill it did devise. How ghastly doth it roul about his eyes? The symptom of a troubled brain and breast; Or, as if with some fury 'twere possest. How like a Malus Genius doth it look? Just such another as old R— C—k, That lov'd no Man or Woman but himself; This Spectrum, sure, is such another Elf. Timon Misantropos, (though churl enough) I think, was better than this Furifuff; Milder than this morose, sowre, surly Huff. It often seems to mutter, or to look Nine ways at once, within, or without book. Sphinx it resembles (as the Jesuits do) Being like a Dog, a Fox, a Dragon too; That's surly, crafty, cruel, full of hate. So that this Monster it doth personate. None but the Devil, or Envy, can look thus! Whose sight would ev'n astonish Cerberus: Therefore it must be Envy, certainly, Sith it frets at good Mens prosperity. Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. It grins his Teeth to see another rise, Whom to his vengeance he could sacrifice; He wears a Dagger always in his Heart, And like a Raviliack can act his part. He waiteth for their haulting secretly, Whom he supposeth in his way to ly. He will lay deadly snares and traps, for those That are (or whom he fears will be) his Foes; For he hath Desperado's near at hand, That will (for Gold) obey his curs'd command: Or if they fail, he hath a Dose or Two, That undiscerned, can the business do: For Envy is so witty in all evil, That it can turn a Man unto a Devil. For how propense are some to do such things, As to themselves, and friends, destruction brings? When Envy putteth on his Sunday's face, Then, then, beware of him, in any case: For if he courts ye with a smiling grin, Yet his black Heart is wounds and blood within. He can set Servants to destroy their Master, Or else betray them into some disaster: Yea, near Relations have been set on work, To do what would have terrified a Turk. Parents their Children dear have made away, When Popish Envy did in them bear sway. So envious Joab, Amasa did Murther, Ev'n while he cry'd, Art thou in health my Brother? Joseph was envied of his Brethren; so Was David, by King Saul his mortal foe. O Sirs, who, who can before envy stand; 'Specially where it gets the upper hand? 'Tis restless till some mischief it hath done, And will proceed, if once it hath begun. A Cataline to Christian Liberty, A Cius Marius to Tranquility; A Lucifer, and Hildebrand, to those That with devised fancies cannot close. A troublesome Tertullus, unto all That are o'th' same Religion with Saint Paul. A bloody Bonner to the Sons of Sion; A Duke de Alva to the Belgick Lion. A sly informer to impiety, Against the Props of true Divinity; And like the Priests and Pharisees, would fain Christ, in his Members, Crucify again: As it hath done among us many years; Which by some Thousand Sufferers appears. Envy, on Worth and Vertue doth attend, And will its censures on the worthy spend: A Wasp enamour'd of protervity; A Cur engorged with asperity. Some of such cynick Dispositions are, That other mens Transactions they will square,
According to the crooked line and rule Of their own humours, which must have no Thule Or limits. Yet themselves can nothing do That's honourable, or that can accrew To others good; yet they will seem to know All things, tho' nothing they could ever show, Except it be their venom'd teeth to bite, Or with their poyson'd tongues to wound and smite The reputation of far better men, And every way much more deserving than Themselves; or any of their Generation; And who (perhaps) are burthens to the Nation; Yea, troublesome unto their Neighbours too, Cause in all things they do not as they do. But our most noble Hero fears them not, Being got beyond the reach of their Tongue-shot, Whose time in Mars's and the Muses Tent Not triflingly, but vertuously is spent. He can both say and do, and do much more Than say; yet, he will not himself adore. He was bred in the School of vertue, and The Pen, as well as Pike, he can command; So that he merits double Equipage. Sith he so bravely doth become the Stage: Therefore, I make no question but he Will make his Exit with a Plaudite. Whose good Examples noble Souls do move To try if they can such another prove; And purchase fame by valour, worth, and arms, Amidst a thousand hazzards, deaths, and harms; The way to honour through the Pikes doth ly, And who would win honour must not fear to die. This Hero's Tongue is the point of his Sword, He knows not what it is to break his word; His courage Conquers e'er the Field is fought. Which being done, more enemies hath sought. He's Semper idem, take him when you will, The same below, as he is up the Hill. He is full of Hector's Magnanimity, And never's daunted with extremity. Fortitude's rooted in his noble mind. When others fall, him, standing you shall find. There's nothing hard to be accomplished By him, because by truth and reason led, And doth all things by good deliberation, Yet is he not affected to cunctation. He is a Fabius for Solidity, Not a Minutius for temerity. Misfortunes, trials, and adversities, His faith and patience do exercise; Whereby himself he conquers, which is more Than all the Conquests that he made before. Dangers he feareth not: yea, doth despise What narrow souls account calamities. War's the Whetstone of his Fortitude, And heat, the Spur, that makes him resolute, Yet counts not that a noble victory, That's not accompany'd with Clemency. He knows that skill and courage wanting in Commanders, is to routing near a kin. Besides, their Soldiers will contemn and slight them, Yea, to their very faces will neglect them, Which will redound unto their lasting shame, When blown about by the nimble wing of Fame. For to their own Pufillanimity They cannot but be conscious, or might see Men laughing at them for the same; but they Can take it in good part, and nothing say. O strange! that these should have the face to take Upon them to be Captains, and mistake Themselves for better men: O impudence! And Brazen fac'd, prodigious confidence! Go, ye conceited Jacks, go Hen-peckt slaves, And in some dirty Dunghill dig your Graves. Fit but for Powder-Monkeys, or keep sheep, Or Company with Scavengers to keep. What? when you should go fight, then, you'll be sick: Oh, take 'em Derrick, gripe 'em to the quick. Our Hero scorns you all, who'd rather die Than live, as you with shame and infamy▪ He knows not what 'tis to be so abjected, Or by his Veteranes so much rejected.
No surely, no, but to them is as Spurrs, But ye are Stops, Remora's and Demurs. Unto a Kingdom there's no greater danger, (Which to the Prince himself is but a slander) Than to such to commit their warlike bands, As are more nimbler of their tongues than Hands; Some that have known how Victories to gain, Yet knew not how their Conquests to retain. But our Commander can do both of these, And that with more applause, less loss, and ease Than some that conquer Kingdoms in conceit. (Conceit without receipt, is but deceit). If he perceives his Enemy too strong For him in Horse, then will he pitch among Thick Hedges, Woods, &c. (he being mostly Foot) And gall him; may be, win the field to boot. But if in Horse the foe he doth surpass, Then he will try to make of him an Ass, By seeking to decoy him to a Plain, And that he might his will therein obtain, He sendeth such amongst the enemy That tell them this for truth and certainty, That most part of his Horse went yesterday, But privately, to seek for Oats and Hay. Or on some other Errand, and that now Or never was the time to make him bow. If th' Enemy believes this to be true, (As like enough he does) then will not you Imagine he'll upon our Hero fall, And if he do, he is undone withal; But if he do not, our Commander will Beat up his Quarters, which is ears will fill With sudden crys, his eyes with gastly sights, His Soldiers hearts with Pannick fears and frights, Which will confound, and make them run astray, And most of them to throw their Arms away. Suppose a Regiment, or two be broke, And several hundred Prisoners are took, This doubtless will so daunt the enemy, That he'll conclude the best way is to fly; Which if he do (as he must do) you know, It tendeth to a total overthrow. Whom our Commander follows at the heels, Through thick and thin, Hills, Vallies, Woods and Fields, Till all are routed, and the vict'ry won. (Oft have I known the very same thing done.) The foe, his men unable to revive, And's former reputation to retrive, Is forc'd to seek a peace immediately, Well knowing there's no other remedy. Should I insist on all the slights, and wiles, Strange circumventions, stratagems and guiles, Craft, cunning tricks, deep reaches, policies, And unimaginable Mysteries, That have been, are, and might be us'd in Wars, By worthy Captains, and great Conquerors, 'Twould take much time, and paper many Quire: My Muse, my Pen, my Genius overtire, And crack my Pericranium. Therefore Of Warlike feats I shall endite no more. All chief Commanders should inherit these Bright Virtues, or to have a writ of Ease: Justice, Truth, Temperance, Prudence, Fidelity, Skill, Learning, Patience, Courage, Courtesie; All which in the word Conduct seem included; And who wants that from chief should be excluded. Men's lives are far more worth than that they should Be trusted with a Novice, young or old. And which to do, is (as all wisemen know) The way unto a fatal overthrow. Yet this should be observ'd, that victory Heav'n to the best side sometimes doth deny; Success, as such, is no infallible token Of a good cause; nor when a foe is broken, Is it a sure sign of a bad cause? no, God's secrets are past finding out, you know. God hath, and can by poor weak means cast down, And break in pieces men of high Renown.
Yet a wise Conduct is more likely to Gain ground, than fools that know not what to do. For good Commanders hinder not the day, But non-experience often hath and may. As I could instance make of many places, Where such contracted taunts, and great disgraces; Yet who are so self-confident as they? So ready to traduce what others say? So apt to find a fault where there is none? And all that Jack in Office might be known. But as the shadow on the substance waits, And Turtle Doves are follow'd by their Mates, So Fame and Honour justly waits upon This valiant worthy (tho' much envy'd) man. And on all other Worthies like himself, (But not on any starched upstart elf. Nor him whose heart and soul is in his pelf,) For vertue will shine forth, even in the dark, Whilest envy to no end does at it bark. Honour gain'd honestly, and gallantly, Can never fade, nor vanish totally. As will the Glow-worm flushes of some sort, That never can deserve a good report. And others that creep sneakingly into Favour, for which they any thing will do. Nay some that have but sometimes turn'd a Spit, And here receiv'd a knock, and there a bit, (But complaisential in their words) also On every base and pimping Errand go, Hoping in time, 'twould something introduce; And so it hath indeed, for my Lord Louse, And Madam Sly, have found him a long time Too faithful unto what they count no crime. And therefore study how to gratifie him; For nothing now, they can, nor dare deny him. At last they find the favour him to grace, With a Lieutenant, or a Captains place: Whereof the Coxcomb is become so proud, That he will jostle 'mongst the noble crowd; And Elbow at the Table in such state, And saucily to all his betters prate: Nay, and perhaps at last be made a Knight, And then, Sir Assinego's at the height. But whosoever shall this fellow mind, In few years shall not know where him to find; For all is gone, and spent, and he forgot, Whose memory and name shall die and rot. And the like fate on others doth attend, Who think their day will never have an end, Or that their Sun will never set. But their Vain hopes shall be rewarded with despair. Yea, and like the snuff of a Candle go out, As if they were but of the Rabble Rout. But vertuous souls have a more noble breath, And greatly are bemoaned at their death. For such as Honour win by noble deeds, Shall bury thousands of those stinking weeds. Whose Progeny shall still uphold their name, And be recorded in the Book of Fame. What can the vertues of their Ancestry Avail such as from vertue seek to fly? And every way from them degenerate, As many now, but they are out of date. As worth and merit just rewards do crave. So great Ancestors should good Issues have, The thing possest is not the thing it seems, Tho' otherwise each Ignoramus deems. For tho' men by their Ancestors be great, Yet if they from their vertues quite retreat, What are they good for? being the disgrace Of their name, family, and all the race; What tho' from Ancestors we have our names; Yet from our vertues do arise our Fames. Birth without worth is but a Painted Post, Wealth without vertue, can of nothing boast. The base Brats of ignoble Ancestry, To save themselves, will quit all honesty. As the more men moil in the dirt, the more They are defil'd. So, the more some men pore Into (and seek to understand) their base Ancestors, the more shame flies in their face. The longer any men delay the show Of vertue, then, you may both judge, and know. They are of base beginnings; for you'll find Such (covertly) to bear a sordid mind.
The leaven of their lin'age doth remain Amongst them many Ages, to their stain, Which is perceived by the wiser sort, And others that thereof do make report, Like Root, like Tree, like Tree-Branches too, And so like fruit; (viz.) a proud and dirty Crew. For, can a Swine bring forth a gen'rous Lion? Or the base bramble Polyanthemion? Or Cannibals beget true Sons of Sion? Or can a Crab-Tree bear a noble Pippin? Or the Princely Eagle hatch a Dunghill Chichen? No, no, for where there's noble Ancestry, There (mostly) will be a like Progeny: And of this sort, our Hero is, no doubt, Or he could not for Vertue be so stout: The end of all whose Actions, Honour are, (Though Honour to assume, is not his care; As many others do most sneakingly.) I mean, he seeks not Honour, but only Seeks to deserve, though envy can't abide To hear of it, but labours all to hide. Titles he knows (which many gain by art) Are but the Seals and Badges of desert, And the rewards of Vertue in this World; Which oft upon unworthy Men are hurl'd. Experience hath taught me to affirm (Which many knowing Persons will confirm) That Honour upon base Mechanicks cast, Hath ruin'd those entrusted them, at last. Be'ng nat'rally propense to innovation, Division, dissention, alteration; Wilful, deceitful, proud in Word and Mind, Unstable, and unconstant as the Wind: Here could I gall them with a yerking Rhime, But I forbear them till another time. Mendico asperius nihil est cum surgit ad altum. I say, to make Men of a sordid race Commanders, or them with high Titles grace, Is one way to turn all things upside down, And with dire discord fill each Shire and Town. Sith then it's so, that Men of base degree, Or Rascal breed, plac'd in Authority, Have upon States and Kingdoms mischief brought, And nothing but their advancement sought; Therefore, were I to raise a Regiment, (Though to that height my thoughts were never bent) I would, as near as possible I could, Commission none but Gentlemen of old Or ancient Stocks to choose, 'cause not so proud Nor insolent as are the latter brood; (Who 'cause they've jumped into great Estates, They think none good enough to be their Mates.) Yet of that sort, I mean not every spark That gives a Livery: Nor such as shark About the Court, or Inns of Court; nor they That are made poor through base debauchery. Nor any scandalous Sir; or witty flash, That in his word and actions is too rash. Nor he that hath the name of a Deceiver; Sir Gregory Nonsense, or Sir Good-be-never: Sir Topsey Turvey, that never kept his Word, Nor Mr. Maggot-brain that draws his Sword At every petty affront; nor such as they As wrong and cheat poor Souldiers of their pay; Nor any supercilian in fine Clothes; Nor such as rend the Heavens with Hellish Oathes. Or any of that humour old or new; For few are good of that debauched Crew: No, no, for they may prove as bad as t'other; Viz. For you to day, to morrow for another. But him I call a perfect Gentleman, Whose Vertues grace his good Extraction. Or (in a word) 'tis Birth and Worth conjoin'd Makes a true Gentleman; the rest are Coin'd.
With such as these an Army should be led, 'Specially if i'th' true Religion bred. This good Commander which I now describe, Is one of that most honourable Tribe. He graceth his Employment. (For 'tis not The place that makes Men honourable, but 'Tis Men that make the place so; yet I vow, 'Tis something hard to find such Persons now,) To the disgrace, black infamy, and shame, Of such that impudently take the name Of Gentlemen; sith their base deeds attest, They are as far from such, as East from West. Then mend your manners, live more vertuously, Banish all baseness and obscenity. Many more Reasons have I to dehort From putting any of the vulgar sort, Proud Monsieur Th'other-day, or any such Into Command, let them be Poor or Rich. Except them, as on trial have been found Assiduous, Steady, Trusty, True, and Sound. Woful experience makes me thus to write; But of this matter I'll no more Endite. This true description and character, Or property, of this brave Man of War, And most accomplisht Gentleman, whose worth Even his very Enemies sets forth; Methinks should raise a vertuous emulation In every generous Spirit in this Nation, To imitate him, and of him to learn Such things as would them very much adorn. But Gentlemen, and others, are of late, Grown so debauched, loose, degenerate, And so bewitched to a vicious brood, That few of them will ever come to good. Nay, they count him an Ass, and very Fool, That loves (or leads his life in) Vertues School: Therefore to court them to it is but vain: For with all Vice their Souls are dy'd in grain. But now, I think, it's time to make an end, And bid Farewell, to this my noble friend; Only, let me tell you, when Death is nigh, That he hath nothing else to do but die: For Death and he so well are reconcil'd, That if he chance to meet him in the Field, He bids him welcom, be it cut or shot, (If Heaven shall please such measure to allot;) When like a Cedar he falls to the ground, And like a Roman Caesar dies renown'd. Whose Worth, and Vertues him immortalize, And lifts his Commendations to the Skies; And in the Book of Honour writes his Name, Which, 'spite of envy, fills the Trump't of Fame; Whose Mirmydons, with great solemnity, Carry him to the Grave where he must ly, Which is the bed of Honour, and the best, Repository wherein he must rest, Until his mortal Body rise again, Be immortal made, and so remain: Who needs no carved Tombstone, for ostent; For his renown's a living Monument. Vivit post funera Virtus.
A LITTLE TOUCH Of the Renowned ARTILLERY, (Or rather MILITARY) Company of London. BUT now, methinks, I hear some question, why, I Nothing said of the ARTILLERY (Nor the Train'd-Bands) of London, sith they are For exercising Arms, without compare, (At least are so reputed;) therefore, they, Of England are the University, And nursery for War. But truly, Sirs, Our heats, and fewds, and persecuting stirs, And other things dis-jointed, so, my Wits, That what I writ before, was all by fits. Besides, I thought they might offended be, Should they but find a Venial fault in me. Moreover, many ly upon the catch, And slily for their Neighbours halting watch. Therefore I'll supersede what might be writ, My Muse be'ng turn'd old Cato's Proselite. However I presume (or think) I may Without offending them, now briefly say A few words of, and to them; not that I Pretend to any skill and mastery In exercising, or in handling Arms: (Th' ignorance of which attracteth Harms) Yet to the skilful they are pleasing Charms. Although my Genius carries me oft-times To things that may [in me] be counted crimes; That is, to manage many Companies, Conjoin'd, or parted, to fight Enemies. (By long experience taught) yet, for all this, The best Commander in the World may miss What he would have, and that is, Victory, Which to no Mortal is entail'd, say I; No, 'tis the Lord of Hosts that giveth still, The day to whom he please, and when he will.
Artillery-men, in many things excel, And Train'd-Band Officers, do very well. In the Theorick part of War, they are Proficients, in which, no pains they spare; Or, shall I, Theoretick-practick, write it, For both of these, amongst them, seem united.) Especially in their several firings, when All things are practis'd, except killing Men. Give them but Ball, and they can do so too Unto their enemies, (I'll warrant you.) In handling Arms, thus much I can discern; Viz. The Grecian Gods might somewhat of them learn. King Priamus, with all his Warlike Sons, Would (were they here) admire these Mirmydons: And wish they had been with them, to anoy The sturdy Greeks, when they besieged Troy. The Spartan Sparks, in armour gilt with Gold, Pace with these Sons of Thunder could not hold. Nor with their Counter-march, be able to Ran-counter against what these Men can do. The Pyrrhick Dance, the Belgick Cavalry Could not out-vy this brave Artillery. 'Specially upon a General Day, When they appear in Arms, and brave Array. When divers sorts of firings may be seen, And things that nev'r before in use have been: Only they seem to want the Spanish Gate, 'Cause it would make them to march more in State. Also the Turks erected countenance, Which Terrour strikes in Foes, when they advance, This to observe, as often as they meet, And march about, 'specially in the street. However, none can take offence at me, For writing what I formerly did see. But some object, that many things are done In exercising, which Men ought to shun, Because so needless, useless, dangerous, Distracting too, being so numerous, Therefore in Wars, they never can be us'd. Hold, hold, Sir! But who ever Gold refus'd, When it came freely, though his Purse be full? From many Dishes you may pick and cull A Dinner, yet not burst your belly, Sir, Except you lay it on with switch and spur. Store is no sore, you know, for 'twill not crack Your Pericranium, nor yet your back, Except you carry all at once: Therefore Throw this lazy Objection out the door, Because, methinks, it smells of prejudice And malice, to that noble exercise. For knowledge is no burthen I am sure, But ignorance and envy can endure Nothing that's gallant, brave, or honourable, Tho' to the publick ne'er so profitable. Just like the Dog that in the Manger lay, That would himself eat neither Oats or Hay, Nor suffer them that would: What slaves are these, Whose humours none but fools would seek to please? (I've for the same, &c. been hated too, by those That to all noble things were secret foes; All in Commission too: However I Have them out-liv'd, and all their enmity). Artillery-men learn War in peace, you know, Therefore the fitter in the Wars to go. The Roman Majesty and Magnitude, The Persian Bravery and altitude, Would not disdain to make a stand, and view The Martial motions of this Warlike Crew. And Barzapharnes, that proud Parthian Prince, They quickly could of arrogance convince, Who thought, 'cause he could handle the Dart and Bow, That all the Gods him could not overthrow. But one God was too hard for him, and all His Army, for he crusht them great and small. Raw men, alas, will nothing signifie Against a formidable enemy; Experienc'd in the practick part of Wars For many years, and us'd to Wounds and Scars.
No, they must first be present at some fights, Where blood, death, horrour, and such gastly sights Are to be seen, and then indeed, they may Prove valiant men, and help to win the day. Such as from their youth, have been Soldiers bred, (And Soldiers are by many dangers led) Must needs be stouter, and know something more, Than such as never heard the Cannons roar. Yet, strange it is, to hear some Novices, In what high strains they will themselves express; For they can rout them which they never saw; Yea, rescue Daniel from the Lions paw. That they could make a shift to drink small Beer Above a week, and feed on Country-chear. Yea, and at night sleep in a Loft of Hay! 'Tis such as these which made their moan, that they Were forc'd to eat Py-crust instead of bread, So hard were they put to't! so ill they sped (As they thought) and such serpents now there be Which hate and envy any worth they see In others, while they nothing do that's brave; But with such Carpers no Commerce I have. My Genius scorns to keep the common road, Where railings and depravings are the mode. I shun extreams, I hate what is obscene, My Muse affects to descant on the mean. I crave no Heliconian Hippocren, No, nor the Scriblings of Apollo's Pen. But thus much, O ye Sons of Mars, I may Without offence (I hope) unto you say, Viz. Where Vertue raiseth men to Honour, there, God will confirm the Dignity. But where They mount aloft by flattery, or Gold, Their Glow-worm Magnitude long cannot hold, Yet certainly such persons get the start Of more deserving men, (for the most part) It hath been so, and is like to be so, That Blanditude Desert shall overthrow, If it in competition with him stand, For, by strange arts, and projects (underhand) By ways that never have been heard before, By right or wrong, 'twill have its will. Therefore, Desert, go whistle, Valour stand aside, Vertue in some dark Cell thy self go hide: For Fools and Pantomimmicks bear the Bell, Because that Shibboleth ye cannot spell. Nor fawn, and creep, as they and others can, To all sorts, whether Knave or honest man. These Proteus-like, turn into any shape; And for advantage they will be your Ape. They will be for you here, against you there, Now for the front, to morrow for the reer. Nay, for the Devil and Pope too, if they will, Provided they do help them up the Hill, Being double minded, double-tongu'd. Also, Fine double dealing Trinkets they can show. They are no strangers unto sordid things, They love to send and give malicious flings; They inwardly hate men of noble minds; Nay, him that but to honesty enclines. Leaders they taunt, (and many times by name) 'Specially such as are of any fame In Peace and War. Nay, and the Red-coats too This was Writ Anno 1683. They cannot brook, tho' ne'er so stout and true: But, Oh ye senseless Animals, take heed For ye that Soldiers scorn, may Soldiers need: For tho' Bi-fronted Janus Temple's shut, And the Sword sheath'd that erst was wont to cut Down Horse and man, making such Massacres Of Armed Ranks, besides deep wounds and Scars. Yet perhaps such a time ere long may come, When the loud strokes of your (yet) silent Drum May fright you with unlooked for alarms, And force you to betake you to your arms;
And summon you into the Purple field, There to fight, run away, or basely yield. Then such Salvagians as scorn Soldiers now, Would Soldiers complement; yea, to them bow. As did the Citizens of Rome to all Their valiant Regiments, when Hannibal Approacht their Gates. So the Greek Emperor Did even adore that worthy Conqueror Great Tamberlain; that freed him from the stroke Of Bajazet, and his enslaving yoke. Yea, to his Soldiers down himself he bow'd, Stiling them his deliverers, and vow'd To love, and honour them. Likewise the States Of Holland, with their chiefest Optimates, Courted their Soldiers, th' English 'specially; Or Spain had swallow'd them undoubtedly. Great Kings and Princes have with Hat in hand, Beseech'd their Soldiers but a while to stand, When ready to give back; and 'tis well known The same (oft) in our late War hath been done By both the Kings, Prince Rupert (and some more) At Naseby; Newbery, at Marston-Moor, And Worcester too. But it now appears How Soldiers have been slighted of late years, By most ungrateful persons, for whose sake Their lives and limbs did often lie at stake; But since they can scarce one of them afford A draught of Beer, nay, hardly a good word, Altho the chiefest Blessings they retain By Soldiers (under God) did they not gain? O! who would such a sordid people serve, As can let such as venture for them, starve? And which is worse than death, huft at, and jeer'd By Slaves, that never in a fight appear'd For neither side, nor King, nor Parliament; Such Swine were always against Soldiers bent: Yea, Soldiers hate meerly as such! Don't they Th' Artillery-Company sometimes decry? As if they'd have none learn to exercise Or know how to encounter enemies! (But what they mean by this, is clear to me) And besides these, another sort there be That privately traduce (set on by Hell) Such as in skill and courage them excel: Yet when in danger, spur them on to go With others to engage against the foe. While they and all such Hedg-Hogs as they are Would hide themselves, or with the fearful Hare Run stoutly at first sight of th' enemy, Or when the Bullets but begin to fly. Then what are they that daren't so much as show Themselves in arms; nay, to a flying foe? Yet, in a Tavern with good Wine and Cheer, O, how they'll bounce and brag, and domineer, And valiantly drink healths, and threaten all That hear them not, that durst them Cowards call. Nay, dare the Vintners boys to fight them; so, 'mong Fools and Fidlers, for stout men they go. They can to others an alarm beat, But to themselves a merciful retreat. Fall on, to others, they can stoutly cry; While they intend courageously to fly. Divers such have I known, and often seen In the late Wars, where I have present been. Qui cupit pacem, paret bellum. Who wish for peace, will yet in wars appea, But some in peace and war, are still in fear. Tho' all are not born Soldiers, yet, I say, Most young men should learn something, that they may Be able to bear Arms in time of need, And in the ground their Teachers to succeed; Which would (in time) fit them to go into A marching Army, some exploit to do, By which they would almost immortal seem, And time from base debauchery redeem; As did the Youth of Rome, in ancient days,
Which Crown'd their Temples with Triumphal Bays, For by their skill and courage, they acquir'd Renown, and were by all the world admir'd. Some spare hours in the School of Mars they spent Each week; and muster'd in Bellona's Tent, So that their manner seem'd a war indeed, In which they weekly did their servants breed, And all young Gentlemen; by which you know They did great States, and Kingdoms overthrow. But—Mars, in London's cast behind the door; Not Mars, but Venus (now) young men adore; O thou bewitching and debauching Devil, Thou introducer of all sorts of evil, Thou soul-destroying, all-devouring vice, That to the Devil so many doth entice; That dost effeminate and pockifie Those Creatures called men, both low and high, Whose health and wealth, and all, dost overthrow, Yea, and at last into a lasting woe: Had I but power to my will, I would Torment thee, till thy whorish heart grew cold. Yea, throw thee to the Devil from whence thou came, And out of Britain blot thy cursed name; And all thy Favourites in England, tame, And put them all (by Law) to open shame, And in thy stead Mars and Minerva place, And ransom vertue from a sordid race. But wishing can do none of these (old whore) Therefore at present I shall say no more. Ye Sons of Mars, now I return again To you, (whom none, I hope, can justly stain) Sith I have eas'd my mind in chiding those That to all Martial men are mortal foes. And, Martialites not their foes. among which, your selves I must include In spite of the malicious multitude. To you (I say) directly, now I write, And make you smile by what I shall endite. Which shall be inoffensive every way, Therefore be pleas'd to read me out, I pray. 'Tis intermixt with mirth and seriousness, And both as harmless as I could express. I know ye can't be taught to exercise Sith divers things some of you can devise. However, after a new fashion, I Will exercise you, if ye please to try; Through the five Vowels I shall briefly run In such a way as never yet was done. Silence, attention, (and obedience too) But for this once, I do request of you. 1. A. DISTANCES. 1. YOur closest order if you thought it fit, Inch-order, might be call'd, but I submit. 2 Close order in your Pockets keep, be sure, For 'twill them of a deep Consumption cure. 3. Close order in your Speech cannot be blam'd For opening too wide, hath many sham'd. 4. Order your self, affairs, and family, By reason, and you'll stand when others fly. 5 Orders may not be orderly, but sure, Orderly Orders will disorders cure. 6. Order your wits, draw them in rank and file, When you see crafty Knaves upon you smile. 7. An open order needful is, sometime But a foul mouth to open is a crime. 8. An open order in House-keeping hath Broke many, while good order kept the path. 9. A double distance ever let there be Between your souls, and every ill you see. 10. At double distance (Sirs) stand from a Knave, And from a fawning hollow hearted Slave. 11. At double double distance always keep From Culleys, or they towards you will creep. 12. At the same distance keep (if you be wise) From those to Honesty are enemies.
2. E. FACINGS. 1 FAce to the Right, and keep the right way still; Face still about from any thing that's ill. 2 Face inward, and examine well your hearts, Try, if like Christians ye have play'd your parts. 3 Face where you will, 'tis two to one, but ye A Knave before an honest Man may see. 4 Face an opposition; but, to whom? To France, to Papists, and the Man of Rome. 5 Face not a shrew, when she begins to scold, For if you do, her Tongue will never hold. 6 Face to the Right and Left, the Front and Rear, When of disguised Knaves ye stand in fear. 7 Face in good earnest, them ye cannot shun, For a good Face hath oft made braggers run. 8 Face not thy Captain with a brazen face, When he doth justly give thy Coat a Lace. 9 Face from such Liquors as inflame the blood, Yet Eleemosinary Wine is good. 10 Face not a Brothel-House, but turn your back, Least Soul, and Purse, and Body go to wrack. 11 Face from your Wives, when they give urging Speeches, Laugh at their folly, but hold fast the Breeches. 12 Face, and outface the Devil, and all his crew, In any thing that's honest, just, and true. 3. I. DOƲBLINGS. 1 DOuble your diligence, and watch, for fear The World, the Flesh, and Devil, should you ensnare. 2 Double your Guards, and Centinels sometimes, Or you'll be guilty thought of other crimes. 3 Double Argentum in your Pockets take, Though to your Father you a journey make. 4 Double-tongu'd Hypocrites are double dealers, And near a kin to Cheats, and private Stealers. 5 Double your confidence when money fails, For to look sneakingly nothing avails. 6 Double your courage when you see your Foes Begin upon all hands you to enclose. 7 Double your patience in adversity, And 'twill at last crown you with Victory. 8 Double your resolutions against Vice, And stop your ears, when any you entice. 9 Double the number of your friends, but yet Look to your self; but do not them forget. 10 Double your Prayers in a time of trouble, For fear your trouble should be more than double. 11 Double the fore-front of your Soul, when you Are tempted any evil thing to do. 12 Double your hopes, when nothing else is left, For hope hath Rocks of desperation cleft. 4. O. Counter-Marchings. Id est, Contrary-Marchings. 1 TO Countermarch before an enemy, Is one way to the loss of Victory. 2 To Countermarch your thoughts, puts them into Confusion, by which something you may do. 3 As Countermarch gaining ground is the best, So gaining ground of Vice brings Souls to rest. 4 Counterfeit Counter-marches against Vice, Makes vertue fade, and zeal as cold as Ice. 5 Counter-march from the Counter, if in debt, Lest Catchpols you into their clutches get.
6 Counter-march evil actions what you can, Let Reason and Religion lead the van. 7 Countermarch well your Consciences, and try What Counter-scuffles there do latent ly. 8 Encounter Counter-marchers, and they'll soon Run Counter-Cross into confusion. 9 Ran-counter to the counter-part, and you Perchance some un-expected thing may do. 10 To countermine a Knave that means to cheat, Is honestly his projects to defeat. 11 March Counter to the Counter, if you be Plagu'd with that Devil whose name begins with D. 12 March Counter to the counter-mand of those Would hinder you from chasing of your Foes, Or you in just and lawful things oppose. 5. U. WHEELINGS. 1 WHeel off from evil Company, also From feigned friends, as from a deadly foe. 2 Wheel all your sinful thoughts into a Ring, And let them know you'll over them be King. 3 Wheel Front, and Flank, and Reer, and what you will; Yet what's all this, if you be down the Hill? 4 Wheel off in earnest from thy sneaking tricks, O Jack—and from thy costly Meretrix. 5 Wheel from the Center to circumference Yet what's that, where's a seared conscience? 6 Wheel round your self, take an impartial view, And you may find what yet you never knew. 7 Wheel off? no, no, till you have paid your shot, Lest you be paid off with the Pewter-Pot. 8 Wheel off from Setting-Dogs, or they'll beset, And by degrees draw you into their Net. 9 Wheel off from jealousy, stop ears and eyes, Put up the Horn in peace, if thou be wise. 10 Wheel from the Tavern when you have enough, Lest you should meet Pemelians counter-buff, 11 Wheel, and Re-wheel, but wheel not over fast, For Wheelers Wheel, did wheel him off at last. 12 Wheel round the Wheel of Fortune, and you'll find All Men and things unconstant as the Wind. He's only happy that makes God his friend, And neither needs to borrow, nor to lend. This (Gentlemen) is all I have to say Of exercising in this silent way. The Military mode I leave to you, For I've forgot what sometimes I could do: Not having for these Five and Twenty years, Exercis'd either Pikes nor Musqueteers, For time hath indisposed me thereunto; Yet a well-wisher to all such as do. What I have writ, I hope, will not offend Your minds, which thing my thoughts did ne'er intend. So wishing you all Health and Happiness, And that God would you and your City bless. Paulo Majora Canamus. GReat Armies wanting Order, (as you know) Will dissipate themselves without a foe. A scattering March, when the Enemy is nigh, Hath such mad Marches brought to misery, As in the Wars I've seen four several times; Therefore such Marchings are no Venial crimes. Of marching Armies in the Senior days, The several Nations had their several ways.
Israel from Egypt marched five a breast, Turks, Persians, and the people of the East, Marched and fought by heaps and crowds, in which Confusion they always suffer'd much. The Macedons still march'd in great Phalanges, And kept that order several Parasanges, Before they would break either Rank or File; Yet at their manner Caesar us'd to smile. 'Twould be too ted'ous to write any more Of Marches, which I supercede therefore. The modern mode of marching certainly, Is far more easier for the Souldiery, And also more delightful to the eye: In which, who can out-vye the martial Tribe Of London, or their skill in arms describe? The Kingdom is beholden to their care. For every Week they teach; therefore they are The School of Mars, where all the rudiments Of War is taught by old Proficients, For which, this (too too scant) Elogium, I Compos'd, to praise them to posterity; Because the present Age too little prize them, Though none but envious Ideots despise them. If something were not learnt of War in Peace, Conduct and fame would soon amongst us cease. Yea, and be over-run of foreign Nations, At least in danger daily of Invasions. How often Peace hath been obtain'd by wars? How often Wars have ended tedious Jars? How many depredations have been seen Where Martial Discipline hath wanting been? Danes, Saxons, Normans, England oft invaded, Whereby the Land was very much degraded. But had they been well exercis'd in Arms, They had not felt such, nor so many harms. But since this famous Company reviv'd, They have most of that honour well retriv'd, Which had been lost in former time by those That were out-matcht by exercised foes. But now let French invade us if they dare, (So we but true amongst our selves are) For England never better was provided Of Martialists (tho' envy seeks to hide it) Than now it is, and hath for many years, As by their brave admired skill appears. Is it not from our Military brood That England so renowned is abroad? How many brave Commanders known have I, Which have been Members of this Company, That served both the King and Parliament, In the late Wars? how many of them went Beyond Sea? where much honour they acquir'd, Being for their skill and courage much admir'd. Which high renown they never could have gain'd, Had they not in this Company been train'd, Whose enemies have wisht them wholly crusht, And all their fame in dark oblivion husht. Because so prais'd in Paris, Venice, Rome, &c. And the remoter parts of Christendom; But they as soon may lift Olympus up, And drink Apollo's Pitcher at a sup, As to exterminate or nullifie This most admired Martial Company, Whose fame the Muses sounded have by droves Among the Martialists, and Lawrel groves. Have they not been extolled by our Kings, For the variety of noble things By them ostended? Foreign Princes too, Have much admir'd at what they saw them do. Our Duke in them such Bravery did see, That he desir'd their General to be; And whom he treated as the best of men; Yea, with them din'd in person, now and then, Altho' they were no friends to his Religion, (As he knew well) but far from his opinion. The Prince of Denmark too, could not refrain From Blazoning this Military Train, When (with the Duke) he led them to their Ground, And still their Commendation forth doth sound.
Shall Kings and Princes, and prime Optimates, Gentlemen, Travellers, Scholars and Magnates, Praise and admire this Martial Company, And shall a Rascal sort of people cry And baul against them, for they know not what? Which of the Furies makes them so to chat? Surely 'tis Monsieur Envy, and no other, Which to the Devil, is both a friend and Brother. First may the Tropicks meet together, and The curled Main be turned into Land, First may the Welkin from Diana fly, And bright Aurora's blushes quit the sky; Also grim Mavors still run retrograde, And Jupiter be turn'd into a shade; Before a noble generous spirit can Creep to a slave that is both Devil and man, Whose sole delight is daily to bespatter Brave souls, yet to their faces fawn and flatter: For as one wave another doth impell Unto the shore, and o'er the bank to swell, Impuls'd by Cynthia, who rules with ease, The flux and reflux of the rowling Seas, Which doth not only rage and overflow, But bears down all before it; even so Those thick-skin'd-fellows, and those brawny hinds (Whose grosser Bodies, carry grosser minds) Are always barking (like a Testy Cur) At little faults; nay they will make a stir For nothing; and so confident and bold, That Bess of Billingsgate, they can out-scold. Pray slight them, sith to Envy they were born, Pass by them with an honourable scorn. Contra verbosos noli contendere verbis, Sermo datur cunctis, animi sapientia paucis. Strive not in words, against a prating Crew, Tho' all have words, yet wisdom have but few. Some have more words than wisdom, (more's the pity) For words disturb, but wisdom stills the City. Some have more Gold than wit, more wit than Grace; And some will ne'er be good, they are so base. Cum rectè vivas, ne curas verba malorum. VALETE.
THE MAGNANIMITY and GALLANTRY OF THAT ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE THE Elector of Brandenburg, Discovered in His Noble LETTER (HEREUNTO ANNEXED) TO SEVERAL MINISTERS of STATE, Declaring his firm Resolution to Defend the Protestant Religion; for which an Encomium (display∣ing his Great Worth) is here Composed and Published. By THO. PLƲNKET. Emore praestat per virtutem, quam per dedecus vivere. Cic. Better with Honour die, (as many have), Than live disgracefully, or be a Slave. London, Printed for W. Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-Street, 1689.
TO His MAJESTY. May it please your most Excellent Majesty, THE Subject of the subsequent discourse, (For which I shall incurr the Jesuits Curse) And that brave Duke (chiefly concerned) too, Illustrious Prince, no Strangers are to you. I could not (when his Letter I had read) Forbear (though something late) his Fame to spread. Whose zeal for true Religion here I have Display'd too meanly, for a Prince so brave. However, for His sake I do request Your Highness Patronage (which is the best) Of this Encomium, written by the hand Of him that ever rests at your Command.
AN APOLOGY. THe Reader may with reason demand, why this was not Printed sooner? the answer is, because honest Printers (for I would not trust others) durst not meddle with it in those perillous days, for fear of present Trouble, or the future displeasure of a great Man at Court; besides, I thought best deferring it a while, to give people time enough to discourse the Letter it self; which, being by this time almost forgotten, I therefore publish it now, on purpose to revive the memory of the Letter among us (herewith Re-printed) but especially the honour of that noble Hero the Author of it, though lately ex∣pired. However, His most excellent Son and Successor, the present Elector, being of the same Name with His renowned Father, and Inheritor as well of His noble Vertues, as of his ample territories and other grandities, I thought therefore that it might be of as good use, and as much to the purpose now as formerly. My design being chiefly to record and keep in memory amongst us, the honour and worth of that illustrious, ancient and potent Family, for their great zeal, love to, and care of the Protestant Religion, a taste whereof you have in the aforesaid Letter, to the last∣ing Fame and Glory of Brandenbourg.
A LETTER FROM THE Duke of Brandenbourg, To several Ministers of STATE; SHEWING His Firm RESOLUTION to Defend the Protestant Religion. Gentlemen, I Shall be aware both how and with whom I engage; for through the Conduct of all the Affairs of the Confede∣rates, since the Rise of the War in the year 1672, their several Projects have been no sooner formed but betray∣ed; for, the Jesuits being the Ascendant, both laid a Mo∣narchical Design, and a total Subversion of the Protestant Religion, all over Europe, influencing most Princes Coun∣cils, by a powerful Operation of Money, both from Rome and France, which is plentifully bestowed, and was gratefully re∣ceived;
and though the Jesuits seem to carry on several In∣terests, being the guidance of many Princes, yet craftily cen∣ter their Designs in the most Potent. And I too sensibly know, that when I commanded the Im∣perial Forces, my Destruction was levell'd at, by the Jesui∣tical Cabal, by those I Assisted, which caused me timely to withdraw. Now therefore amidst these Disadvantages, can I promise any better Success? I have many Motives to induce my be∣lief, that the same Design is vigorously carrying on, though in a seeming Peace; nothing therefore can be of Efficacy to Protect us, till we new model our Affairs, and by a strict, sin∣cere Re-union, and fixt Resolution to go through the Work, and to make an utter Dismission of all the Jesuits, who lie lurk∣ing in our Bosoms only to confound us. But, I fear some are so infatuated by them, as not to pur∣sue my Advice till Desolation and Misery overtake them: And for my part I will strictly observe it my self, and for ever defie their pestilent Notions, and stand upon my Guard, and assume the glory, though I be forsaken by all, and chuse rather to die with the Sword in my Hand, in Defence of my Coun∣try and Protestant Religion, than survive under the Ty∣ranny of France and Malignancy of Rome; for I am sure in what place soever it dilates it self, a Deluge of Misery will be brought along with it, both by Oppression and Idolatry.
A Touch at Waverers, Instead of a PREFACE. SOME turn and change, and alter with the Wind, Being scarce five days together of one mind; Weather-cock-like, stand as the Wind doth blow, And what to make of them 'tis hard to know: Now, cry Hosanna, but e'er Weeks are past, They madly roar out, Crucifie, as fast. Here half a Protestant, here half a Papist: Here bluster like Machavilian Statist: This week stand up for God, the next for Baal: Now sweet, e'er long as bitter's any Gall: Now lukewarm, cold to morrow, next day hot; As if i'th' airy Trigon they were got. What Frenzy hath possest the minds of men? For stedfast you shall not find five in ten: What Consternations are we like to see, When wise men cannot with themselves agree? Nor men with men, tho of the same Religion, Because so wedded to a self-opinion. Jack-Adams with Jack-Adams doth contend, 'Cause Jack to Adams will not condescend, So Jack and Adams, one another rend.
Such Maggot-pates should trade in Hellebore, Lest Compos mentis they should be no more. Say, and unsay, and change with every time, Play fast and loose: Sirs, is not this a Crime? Jeer Atlas, laugh Democritus, for why? Men give themselves, their former selves the lye. Tempora mutantur, & nos mutamur in illis. Stability and stedfastness are lost, And Honesty from post to pillar tost. The Scull and Pericranium are fallen out, The Brain with Windmill fancies whirles about; The mouth rebels against the mind; the Will Is subdivided between good and ill, The Gall affronts the Liver. And the Spleen Shoots poyson'd Arrows at the Heart unseen. Mundus magnus homo, Homo parvus mundus. The Microcosm is out of order; and So is the Macrocosm by Sea and Land, The Center against Nature seems to swim: Yet men see nothing; still their eyes are dim. Only the Papist steady is in all His Plots and Projects Diabolical. Then sleep in your security, till He With horror rouze you from your Lethargy. Multa laudantur in Principio, sed qui adfinem perseverat beatus est.
AN ENCOMIUM On the Worthy Duke of Brandenbourg, FOR His Noble and Seasonable LETTER, giving his Resolution to Defend the Protestant Religion. The Introduction. WHo sees not Vertue out of fashion grow, And floods of Vice in every corner flow? Who's such a fool, as cannot hear or see Right Reason ranked with stolidity; And brave Heroick Spirits commonly Clouded most slily with malignity? Whose sallow Jawbones sink and fall each day, And through corroding hatred pine away; Darting revenge from a contracted brow, Which at the vertuous covertly they throw; And feed so long on envy 'till it brings Them in a deep Consumption. Yet, some things They once approv'd off, now each of them hates, As if some frenzy did possess their pates. To see the objects of their malice thrive Is Death: yea, 'tis a death they are alive. Nay, they care not (though to their own confusion) If Anti-Rome might make a hot conclusion. And with conspiring Catiline over-whelm Such Patriots as wisely steer the Helm. Fools mount and fall; yea, fall and never rise; But such extreams are shunned by the wise, Who firmly stand, although they stand on high, Because their Pole star is pure verity. Desert, and not Ambition, is the step, By which they rise, but Assentators leap
Ʋpon the Stage, by what they are; but none Of that stamp ever permanent were known. 'Tis noble deeds in dangers imminent, That render noble Patriots eminent. Many have by wise management of things, Mounted from low degree on Eagles Wings: True noble minds (as unto all is known) Live in such virtues as acquire renown; Which some so envy, and some emulate, As if thy bounds would fain prescribe to Fate, Envy and Emulation are half Brothers. The first sting kills, and noble actions smothers: The second doth excite Men to such things As have amazed mighty States and Kings: Yet, wherein such hath place no true Religion, Their emulation will be found ambition; Which, if not check'd in time, proves such a Beast As will on Sheep, as well as Foxes, feast. Could but the Lily now supplant the Rose, And of the Belgick Lion yet dispose; And such a Goss-hawk prove, as should amate The Austerian Eagle, and Tridentine State; And ravish all those Regions between the Pyrenean Mountains, and Cantabrian Sea, Taming the Celtiberians; and from thence Grasp all into Morvedre in Valence. Nay, more, the Alpes turn into Royal Forts, And stretch his Line to the Sicilian Ports, And all, even to the Banks of Nilus catch; Yea, Alexander in his Conquests match: Yet if th'Ignatian Tribe he did not crush, His greatness would not signify a rush: For they will have a hand in every thing, So Lewis; would be but almost a King. Nay, many Popes of them have stood in fear, Such Lurdons are they! yea, such sway they bear, That the Consistory sometimes dare not But choose him Pope, whom they please to allot. Strange Fate, that such a saucy upstart Tribe, Should Rule the World, and Laws to it prescribe.
AN ENCOMIUM On the Worthy Duke of Brandenbourg. BUT Brandenbourg, as you may plainly see, Scorns once their slave, or hobby-Horse to be. Bright star of Honour! Glory of thy Nation! Teutonick Champion; worth, in exaltation! The Lamp, the Morning-Sun, of Germany, The best of Dukes for Truth and Piety; A Worthy, Valiant, Wise, great Prince Elector; And of all Protestants a good Protector. We, in Great Britain, justly do admire Those sacred flames which set thy Soul on Fire, When some contriv'd to ruine, or amate thee. And no less do we wonder at thee For thy true Zeal, great Spirit, and brave mind, Which we in thy thrice welcome Letter find: Thou didst afright the Rampant Jesuits, when Such Thunderbolts flew from thy awful Pen; Their Bulls, nor Fulminations (as we see) Can terrify, nor yet discourage thee: No, though against thee, with them should advance The force and power of ambitious Fr Whose lofty King, though he is mighty, yet He's not Almighty; no, for bounds are set To his designs, by one far greater then Himself; even he which Scripture stiles Amen. He can un-king thy King, O France, with ease, And bring him to his foot-stool when he please. The Pope, if magnipotent, yet he is Not omnipotent; (Jesuits grant ye this) Nor are his Ruffians (who thirst blood to drink) Immortal, or invincible, I think. He trusts in Men, and maketh flesh his Arm, Therefore accurst. He cannot check nor charm Ens infinitum! no, 'tis past his skill, We know he wanteth power to his will. The Kings of France, Spain, Poland, Portugal, &c. Are his grand Vassals, He commands them all: But Brandenbourg is more Magnanimous, Being sprung from a most noble ancient House; Whom, and some others, God will raise on high, do great things for him before they die;
Mean time, great Soul, be watchful, have a care, Lest for thee should be laid some deadly snare. The bloody Jesuits, backt with all but Heaven, Have many Christians of their Lives bereaven. Read o'er the Saracens and Turkish Acts, The Mamalukes, and Scythian Cataracts; You'll find those Butchers have more mischief done Than all of them; and it is two to one, But that at length, their too much medling may Provoke some Popish Potentates to pay Some with the Rope, and banish all the rest; For where they Rule, there things cannot be blest; Then imitate bold Brandenbourg, for he Hath openly Cashier'd them, you may see. Louis, while there's a Jesuit or Pope, From danger to live free, thou canst not hope, Ma Foy, Thou canst not safely wear a Crown, 'Till to the Devil those Blood-hounds thou hast thrown. Thou art not sure; nay, thou canst not be sure They will not hurt thee; how canst thou endure Such Rogues as Murther'd Henry thy Grandfather? Though he bestow'd upon them many a favour. Therefore, there's no obliging them, O King! No, though thou pleasure them in every thing. What danger of them divers Kings are in? To Murder them, or thee, they count no sin. Serve them as our Eighth Henry did, for He, Thou knowest, threw out the Popes Supremacy; And all his Monks, Nuns, Friars, Jesuits too, By which, a mighty Prince indeed he grew Who was before a slave: Take my advi Do as he did, and more, if thou be wise. But there's no hopes thou'lt ever come to good, Because thou art so much for shedding blood; Thousands of Saints thou hast Dragoon'd to Death, And Myriads more robb'd of their precious breath; Therefore as high and great as thou art now, Both thou, and thine, shall to misfortune bow. But noble Brandenbourg, Thou, Thou art He That scorn'st to Jesuits such a slave to be. Those Hydra's are spawn'd in the See of Rome, Storms needs must rise where her Sea-monsters come; For all Divisions these Hundred years, And errors among Protestants, appears To be the Spectrums of their plotting brains; Which they have spread with no small cost and pains: For almost in each Troop and Company, And each Religious Society, They had some to pervert and undermine, Especially in the year Fifty nine; So, that where e'er they come, they mischief make: Yea, Men of soundest Principles they shake, Setting the Son against the Father; nay, The Wife against the Husband, that they may Thereby work their own ends. Yea, on each King And Nation, they heap trouble; yea, they bring 'Monst them, as 'twere a Spiritual Pest and Pox, And all the evils of Pandora's Box. Then who would not help Brandenbourg? come, come, And drive these Monsters out of Christendom. Indeed [true] Jesuits are Christians; but, Rome's Jesuits seek Christians Throats to cut, Because themselves are none; for if they were, gs would not of them stand so much in fear;
Nor London felt so sad a conflagration; Nor Wars so feared in each Christian Nation. The censures of the Sorbonne faculty, Of their damn'd errors, and impiety, Shew what they are. O WILLIAM, give the word, And let those Gockatrices feel thy Sword; Do thou appear to many a defence, For of thy Name that is the very sence; And with the bloody Frenchmen make such work, As glorious Scanderberg did with the Turk: Or as renowned Zisca, who did rout Great Sigismundus, that before did flout And jear at him. Here, why should I omit, Thy Ancestors, who with their Swords did slit The Nose of that great Whore of Babylon, By whom, and others, she was half undone; For ever since her Pristine Glory Could not assume. O that brave Soul, by thee She might be quite undone, conjoin'd with those That dare her host'ring Nimrods now oppose. While mercy is in Heaven, and a good cause On Earth; who think Rome, and her bloody Laws Cannot be crush'd, ne'er rightly did believe In God, but pin their Faith on anothers sleeve: But this our Hero, better things doth know, As his brave Letter manfully doth show; Which ought to be reserv'd in golden Pages, To be transmitted unto after Ages; That they may read the Magnanimity Of that brave Prince; and keep in memory How early, and how zealously he did Appear even in the Front, and bravely bid Defiance to the Foes of Jesus Christ, Viz. The plotting Jesuits, and their High-Priest; Whilst others seem'd to play at least in sight. Curse ye such Merez, as shall fear to fight, When Sisera is ready to invade Judea, which he threatens shall be made The scorn, the laughing-stock of all the World, And Sion be into confusion hurl'd. Come Valiant Brandenbourg, thou, and thy Son, Must help to crush the Brats of Babylon; And other Worthies of this Nation too, Are born (I'm confident) great things to do. Ten thousand with Gods help have wonders done, Five have I known make Thirty thousand run; And kill Four thousand of them on the place, And take Ten thousand more upon the chase; After both sides appealed solemnly To God: And that he would grant victory To them that had the justest cause; and so It did fall out accordingly; although The routed still were obstinate. (But God Would not be mock'd, for they have felt his Rod Since that; and more are like to feel.) Pray then Despair not, for the Papists are but Men, Not Gods, nor Angels, Saints, nor Christians good, Because they thirst to shed true Christian blood: Killing is Murther, and no Murther; but, I'm sure 'tis Murder good Mens Throats to cut. Papists, by their Religion, are bound All Protestants to torture, kill, and wound. Surely their Principles were hatcht in Hell, Sith all their Combinations of it smell. Doth not this gallant Prince, of whom I write, To noble Resolutions us excite? In which, I hope, we of the British Nation, Will think him worthy of our imitation. I say, should we not follow his example, Rather than Papists should upon us trample, And murder us, our Wives and Children too; Which, I am sure, they would not spare to do,
If they had power. A brave resolution Will much contribute towards their confusion. Better die manfully with sword in hand, And fight as long as ever we can stand, Than be hang'd up like dogs. Our Wives and Daughters First ravished, then kill'd. With horrid slaughters Of Protestants, in Fields, Streets, Lanes, and Houses, These things if well considered, soon would rouze us. But be sure let the Papists first begin: For us to do so, were no venial sin. The very sight of a great Army will Some terrifie; yea, them with horrour fill; Yet many a multitude have very few Good Soldiers in it, either old or new. It is such, not an huge throng, that win the field: But God alone the victory doth yield. Who with the best, though fewest, taketh part, Unless their sin make him a while depart. They that fear numbers, Leaders specially, Much more wil fear to fight them; no, they'l fly. Which will daunt and discourage all the rest; 'Twere better be without such, (I protest) A few good Soldiers well conducted, will Do more than thrice as many without skill. Hot-spurs against a wary enemy, Will do no good, but hasten misery. When he that keeps the mean will safely ride; If he can't stemm, yet he will cross the tide. Brave Brandenbourg, to none is second in The feats of War and Warlike Discipline. Else he had not been pitcht upon to lead Th' Imperial Army, as you plainly read In his stout Letter: where he tells you that His own destruction was levell'd at, By Jesuited Cabals: and how they had Infatuated divers; to which add Their bribing Princes Councils; friend and foe, The whole Protestant cause to overthrow: Which mischief, as the worst of miseries, He will prevent as much as in him lies. Hold on, Brave Prince, in what thou hast begun, And Heaven protect thee 'till thy race is run, I know not how some will these lines resent, 'Bove all such as to Rome, now stand half bent. Nay, others of a better frame are prone To blame all writings which are not their own. For self-opinion hath made them wise, So that the finest wits they will despise. But I am none of them, therefore I need Not fear such as on envy love to feed; Who (like the Ass in Trappings) terrifie Such Mules as can, (but dare not) versifie Fearing the strokes of their deep drolleries Or to be known for the Popes enemies. If this be all, my Muse shall still endite: Nor shall my Pen for this fear truth to write. No, I am born for nobler ends than to Comply and equivocate, as many do. Transcendant Brandenbourg! I come again To blaze thy worth, which envy cannot stain. Rome, thou hast startled much already by Thy Letter full of Magnanimity. O the Vindictive rage and malice that Now lies in wait! you know what she'd be at; Viz. Destruction, Devastation, quenchless flames, Blood, rapin, ruin, are her end and aims. Malice [in her] hath found its proper nest. Envy's enthroned in her bloody breast. Would ever any generous spirit be A Papist if he knew what others see? Great Soul! thou understandest from thy youth, What are their Tenents, and how far from truth. Stand to thy Letter, and God will stand by thee, 'Tis he alone that gives the victory. Why frowns not Mars and Minos upon those That would have Earth and Hell at their dispose? But the tremenduos Tetragrammaton
Will not, not always be a looker on. The mighty [He] in power does surmount: Yea, they shall know [He] is Lord Paramount. Can he them favour that would him dethrone? Will he not from his foes defend his own? Is not his Glory now as much concern'd, As when Pharaoh him, and his people scorn'd? He can the Romish Pharaoh overwhelm In his own see; or thrust him from the Helm. Yea, force him, and his Jesuits to drink Deep draughts of vengeance blacker than mine Ink. And trample haughty Lewis under foot, And all such bloody Potentates to boot. I doubt not but thousands alive shall see Such things as shall amaze and trouble thee O France! and thy adherers great and small, Though now most confident to carry all. But—Judgment must at Zion first begin, She must expect to suffer for her sin. What storms and Tempests do the Jesuits raise? What fears do even mighty men surprize? What dire (atastrophe's impending are? What stupefactive things we daily hear? What strange discoveries of Plots are made? Yet Divine Astraea still runs retrograde. The Earth's fill'd with fraud and violence, Impulsed by the Jesuits influence. Yet some will credit nothing till they are Convinc'd by feeling arguments. Beware I say, beware lest Eighty eight proves not Like Forty two, or three, when went to pot So many Thousands, almost in an hour. And do not some at present on us lowre? Pray what assurance have you that the Papists (Join'd with false Protestants, and ranting Atheists,) Will not in their intended course proceed, And which by bloody France is now decreed? Sleep on, in your security, sleep on, And see what will come of it at long run; Sleep on till midnight horrors do awake you, And unexpected evils overtake you. As 'twas in Ireland (which still makes me groan) In that Blood-streaming year of Forty one, When I did see and hear such things as would Amaze, and make the stoutest heart grow cold. But, Brandenbourg, thy Letter hath abated Much of our fears; and Christians animated. Say, say, brave Duke, arm, arm, thou son of Thunder, And scatter these fell Termagants in sunder: Those Birds of prey would fain pick out the eyes Of such as will not offer sacrifice To their grand Idol; and themselves adore, As the prime Champions of the Romish Whore. To frown them out of thy Dominions, Or banish them by Proclamations; Won't do: but hang them up, and then, may be They will not for a season trouble thee; But they're so brazen-brow'd, so impudent, So sly, bold, malipert, (yet complaisant) So cunning, crafty, subtil, that they will Fool and deceive men of the greatest skill, That are not well acquainted with their Jokes, Equivocations, shifts, Ironick-strokes. For they will swear that they are no such men: But Perjury with Jesuits is no sin: So, that 'tis very hard to find them out, But Gold can do it, be they ne'er so stout. What dirty dung-hill spirits some men have, Who creep to Papists, and their favours crave Before hand: how officious are they for them? How ready to bestow all kindness on them? Sheltring and feasting them at Taverns, and Lend them what money they please to demand. By what ignoble Policies they do Comply with them; yea, fee their Friars to, Hoping t'oblige them, but—they may as soon Evacuate tame Isis with a spoon: For only Polyphemus courtesie They can expect, and that is, last to die.
What servile, sneaking, abject Tykes are these, That every Rascal Papist seek to please? Nay, what if some of them should be Magnates! Go, go, ye creeping Capons, 'mong your Mates, Queans, Cowards, Courtezans, Hen-huswives, go, Wear Aprons, Hood, Coifs, Petticoats also. Go, Knit and spin; brave spirits scorn you all, As the Tag-rag, and dirt of Adam's fall. For ye that wink and fawn on Papists now, Will, if they bluster, basely to them bow. Most noble Prince, I bid thee new farewel, Wishing thou maist Gods enemies repel: A mirrour stand to Christian Magistrates, A terror stand to Popish Potentates, A horrour stand to Romish treacheries, A Souldier stand, so as to win the prize; A Pillar stand for the cause Protestant, A Father stand for the Church militant; Yea, let thy brave Successors ever stand For truth, as thou hast done with sword in hand. Too careful of thy self thou can not be, For all the Jesuits still threaten thee, (As they do each reformed State and Prince) May Heaven thee prosper in thine own defence And the Protestant Cause, the which thou hast Declared to stand by unto the last. May all the Boreal Princes, Kings and States, And other pious Protestant Magnates, Take the same noble resolution, Viz. Turn Actors, and not idle lookers on. Neutrality in such a case and time, Will be judg'd an unpardonable crime; Yea, 'tis a sneaking, dirty disposition; Besides, 'twill raise in men a just suspicion, That such are rotten, false, or cowardly, Which will bespatter their posterity With shame and infamy. Nay, Papists too, Will look upon them as a treach'rous crew, So that by both sides they must meeds expect To suffer, because both they did neglect. Rouze then, prepare with Cannibals to War, And follow Brandenbourg, that Northern Star. Rem gere praeclare, atque uliis praestare memento.
PLAIN DEALING WITH Treacherous Dealers. ANNO 1683. TEll me what mortal can himself restrain From uttering what unto him is pain? Who would not write being inwardly opprest If writing will exonerate his breast? Who can but brand the madness of the time, And ease his mind even in Sarcastick Rhime? Are all the yerking Muses fallen asleep? I wonder how they now can silence keep, When treachery and perjury destroy, More Hero's than fell at the Siege of Troy. Then give me leave once more to rattle those That to a Kingdom are the greatest foes. And though I do fall short of other Pens, Yet have I honest, good, and noble ends. Therefore, Reformed Reader, I desire Thy kind acceptance, which shall be my hire. Quare fremuerunt Gentes? Why do the Papists rage so cruelly? And brutish people trust in vanity? VVhy do they lay such stress on humane wit, Sith Heaven upon it doth in Judgment sit? What folly is it to combine with Hell Against Jehovah, and Emanuel? Whoever got by such vile practices? Or prospered in the ways of wickedness? VVhat Monsters? what dire Hydra's hath this age Brought forth to fill the Earth with blood and strage? Have all the Furies forc'd a way through Hell, To fright the world, and all that in it dwell? Being conjur'd up by Rome, still, still, at work; Resolving to surpass the Devil and Turk, In malice, mischief, murders, Massacres, New Tragedies, and Crimson Characters. Whose Laws like Draco's are not writ with Ink, But Blood; more blood therefore she longs to drink: Wherewith she never yet was sated: no, Nor will until she faint, and speechless grow. Christ took his Church out of the world; but, Sirs, The world is the Pope's Holy Church; who stirs Them up against poor Sion every way, To persecute, enthral, vex, burn and slay. There's few but Rogues and Whores will take thy part, O Rome, and such as rotten are in heart; 'Pray take them all, for spare them well can we; Leave us the Wheat, and take the Tares to thee:
A good riddance truly, for three or four True Hearts, are of such Rake-hells worth a score. O restless Bawd! thou sittest now as Queen, Venting upon the Saints thy Gall and Spleen; By how much thou thy self hast magnify'd, By so much shall this Woe be multiply'd. We see thy Agents can false Servants hire, Their Masters Houses to consume with fire; Nay, Masters too, they can [so] work upon, All to promote a conflagration, By firing their own Houses, O ye Swine, Fell Fiends, Miscreants, thus to combine With Hell, their innocent Neighbours (without cause) To ruine and expose them to the Paws Of Tygres, Bears, and Bandogs; who could think That English-men such poison down would drink? Nay, others, 'stead of helping at a fire, Rob poor distracted people, so retire! These are, or such as soon would Papists be; From which Religion, Lord, deliver me: For well I know 'tis founded upon blood; Therefore, a Papist never can be good. The Pope they honour more than Christ; yea, more Old Shooes, Boots, Cloaks, and Bread Gods they adore, And other Relicks, once belonging to Some silly Dotard, which they never knew. This, and much more, the Jesuits, and all Their Clergy do impose on great and small; Whose Pupils poison, and contaminate Each City, County, Kingdom, People, State. Who kills a Christian, Heaven (say they) shall merit Who Murder most, high place in Heaven inherit: These are but tastes of those damn'd drugs, with which The Romanists so many fools bewitch: And 'tis but fruitless with them to dispute; For when by sacred writ they are struck mute, Backt with strong arguments assiduously; And that while Conscience in their faces fly, And secret wispers racking every part Of their convinc'd, and self-condemned Heart, That swell through spite and shame, as in their faces May be discern'd, as marks of their disgraces: Yet, for all this, in words they will not yield, Though Conscience tells them they have lost the field; But desp'rately oppose themselves still Against the Truth, through anger and self-will; Forcing their stopped Mouths to rave and rend, In railing Rhetorick, with which they'll end. If Papists Truth and Reason would obey, To real good they soon might find the way: Till then, no doubt, Heaven will upon them frown, And by its stroak be shamefully cast down. Then 'twill be vain for Turn-coats to retrive, What erst they might have had; (nor can they strive Against the stream) wherein their sentiments Are all prejudg'd; and in such exigents, Who fix their hopes upon contingencies, Cannot be judged to be very wise: But they'll not retrospect to any thing Of Truth, when meekly urg'd, but huff and ding; Yea, so fastidiously aspect on those Which their flagitious practices oppose; And whose vindictive Souls (perboil'd in hate) Damn such as own not the Trans-Alpin State; Under whose Umbrages, they think they're blest, And the bi-fronted Eagle builds her Nest, While the poor Phoenix knows not where to rest; Be'ng daily threatned by the Birds of prey, Viz. The Romish Kites, and Vultures; also they
That lurk in London, spawning plots a-pace, And yet abjure them with a brazen face. Look back ye blood-hounds to blest Edward's time, When Truth our Horizon began to climb; And tell me what advantage have ye got By all your plottings? Truly, not a jot. Nay, ye have lost whole Kingdoms, chiefly by Massacring, and inhumane cruelty. Sweden, Great Britain, Ireland, Denmark, and Great part of Germany, France, Switzerland; Hungaria, Transilvania, Belgia too, And many more have all forsaken you: Besides, vast Russia never own'd the Pope, Nor the Greek Church: Nor never will, I hope, Because your Tenents are so black and bloody, And ye your selves nothing but mischief study: Your whole Religion, I may well compare To th'Strangury, because so like they are; Viz. Froth on the top, blood at the bottom, and Sometimes a tearing, burning, torturing sand: More blood, cries Rome, because (Sirs) the word [More] Is th'Anagram of Rome; where sits the Whore; In Latin Amor, is her Anagram, Because she loves the Sons of Ge-hen-nam. The Anagram of Sion, [Sino] is, Permitting Men the Son of God to kiss; To suffer patiently, and give them leave To Love, Fear, Worship God, and to him cleave: But Jesu'ts threaten such, though ne'er so good, And to send French Dragoons to let us blood; Boasting, that now they have us in a Net, And that our Gospel Sun-shine now must set; That they'll invade us with a Foreign crew: Which many fear, indeed, will prove too true. Let them come if they dare, we fear them not, For home-bred Brats, for all they are so hot; For still I hope, though still they are so high, Their Cat-like Cause, that lusty Puss is nigh To hanging; notwithstanding that she is So Catarumpant now: And more than this, John the Divine hath read her destiny; Which many others worthies testify. Besides, I know, (and by experience) Her Hectors (through an evil Conscience) To be but cowardly; especially If but impugned somewhat strenuously: For (credit me) true valour they have none; And loth to fight, except they're Two to One. Their desp'rateness is far from fortitude, For their chief Captains have amazed stood, Yea, utterly confounded, (as I've seen) When but a little they have worsted been; Fear not their threatning brags, nor yet their Swords, Being not so valiant in their Hearts as Words. Whose Manhood lies in stabbing armless people, In Murthering the naked, weak, and feeble; In plotting any mischief, great or small; And Protestants by any means enthrall: Their mighty brags (now a-la-mode de France) Are but the copies of their countenance, Not of their courage; for they dare not stand Scarce half an hour, and fight us hand to hand: Hold out but the first shock, and you shall see The stoutest of them all begin to flee; Whom they can't, or dare not harm openly, They'll do it sneakingly, and covertly; Or get in with their Servant-Maid, or Man, Nurse, Midwife, Surgeon, or Physician, Apothecary; or some one or other, As Sister, Cousin, Uncle, Friend, or Brother, For Gold, to poison them; but if these fail, Then with their Tongues and Libels them assail: Yea, in a restless rage, they will devise How to bespatter them with horrid lies;
Hiring false witnesses at any rate; To plague, destroy, or make them out of date: Nay peradventure, fall to conjuring, Thereby, if possible, some hurt to being On them, or theirs. Who half their tricks can tell? For all their Plots are laid as deep as Hell. But 'tis a comfort, God is still on high, Who trust in him shall find security. He laughs at all their Machinations, and Will break their arm with his All-conquering hand. But e'er that time, I fear, (for sin) he will Permit them many Protestants to kill, &c. If so, no doubt, they'll rave, and rage amain, Where they can but the least advantage gain, Being basely cruel where they overcome, Thereto, impulsed by the Man of Rome. There's little of a noble enemy In them, except some few Nobility. Here me (ye that with malice are so drunk, Whose valour lies in fighting for a Punck.) He that is cruel is a Coward too. This Maxim (I am sure) belongs to you. Oft have I known, and found it to be so, In English, Irish, French, (&c.) in friend and foe. On equal terms, 'tis rare that ye do fight. Though your high words, faint hearts, and fools afright. I've help'd to cudgel you in many places, When thousands of you durst not shew your faces, To one poor Regiment! well, well, but now, All (as you think) must to your Idol bow. But if the Lord of Hosts be on our side, We shall not fear you, nor your swelling tide. 'Tis possible (if we must come to blows) That ye may have the better of your foes, The Protestants at first (whose help and hope Is in the Lord, not in the Lordly Pope, In whom ye trust, on whom ye do rely And your own merits for the victory.) But yet at last look for a smarting blow, A total, fatal, final overthrow. At first, I say, Victors ye may become; Or divers times ye may us overcome In Praetio, not in Bello, I am sure: If God shall please us of our sins to cure. Ye shall strike first, (if needs ye must do so) But we'll take leave to strike the second blow. The Laws of Nature teach us to defend Our selves, and so we will; let who will send You 'gainst us; or connive at what ye do. How e'er, I wish, it may not fall out true: Yet for my part I scorn to fear you; no, For I have oft been at your overthrow, By reason that your cause is not of God, VVhose Cause and Truth ye under foot have trod. Frangit, & attollit vires in milite causa, Quae nisi justa subest, exciuit arma pudor. It is the cause that Soldiers animate, VVhich if not just, shame will their force abate. Therefore let Christ that party put to shame, Which at his praise and glory least do im. Let them be routed, and re-routed too, VVhich have the worst cause, either we or you. The PAƲSE. I Cannot but admire at the folly of Papists, in wishing that the Protestants would rise, and begin first. Nay, they have curst us, for being so patient under so many and still reite∣rated provocations; as if they were sure to win the day. VVho but a madman would wake a sleeping Lion? which if but once rouzed, would not be easily conjur'd down, or be so soon courted to a parley, as people imagin; therefore ye Papists do not provoke and dare us too much, lest ye stir up the old man in earnest; nay the meek, the just and peaceable man, that is so averse from war, to scatter you once more, that so much delight in war and bloodshed, Psal. 68.30.
The Jesuits new notions have infus'd; By which the Universe they have abus'd. Bewitching and ensnaring Sophistry, They do exalt above Divinity. And Aristotle's Ethicks (it should seem) More than the Decalogue, they do esteem. Do they not study Plato, more than Paul? Nay, Machiavil the vilest wretch of all, As much as Augustine? and Tom Aquine, More than Calvinus, or John the Divine? Thomists and Scotists, do they not preferr Before Evangelists that could not err? And their Mass-book exalt above the Scriptures, Though but an heap of Heterogeneous mixtures. Quos Deus vult perdere, iis permittit ludere cum Sacris Scripturis. Jeering and mocking at Gods Sacred word, Which of the Sacred Spirit is the Sword. Pray tell me then, who would a Papist be But such as mean to quit Christianity? To the Luke-warm Protestants. REvenging vengeance, soon will draw his sword, And with bold sinners will be at a word. Some storm or other must be near at hand, To sweep away the sullage of the Land. Heaven is provok'd, then mortals look for strokes To fell not only shrubs, but stately Oaks. O luke-warm Protestant, this points at thee, And such as hypocrites and wantons be, Whose avarice, self-love, and surquedy I fear, with blood, their streets will rubrisie. Indifferency, at such a time as this, A treacherous dirty disposition is, And far beneath a man of any worth, High, low, rich, poor, of mean or noble birth. Think ye that the Immortal Powers will Indulge a Laodicean temper still? What! think ye God will be a friend to those, That friendly speak of his nefarious foes? Let's know your hearts, ye double minded, and Inform us truly for whom will ye stand? For Christ or Anti-christ? leave mincing, come, Be either cold or hot; are ye for Rome? Then say so plainly: No! ye will not yet, Till first you see who uppermost shall get. And if you did, ye would but 'quivocate, A knack which many Tykes have learnt of late. For amphibologie, deep dissimulation, Perfideous practices, black perjuration, Proteusian pranks, unthought of mysteries, Unheard of falsehoods, Hell-born treacheries. Who ruin such brave souls as cannot bow To Romish Rabsheka's, are nothing now. But that which most of all amazeth me, Is, that good Church-men, these seem most to be; Who (as they've said) would rather Papists turn, Than Presbyterians, whom they hate and scorn. Which I believe; for, who let fly such darts, Already must be Papists in their hearts. Whose memory and names shall die, and rot. Yea, look to feel the fury of that plot, Still fear'd so much. Yea, cause they have to fear Lest God thereby should them in pieces tear, And such as they; but this will be but sport To such as care not for a good report. There's also many Summer-Christians, who Love not cold Winters-blasts should on them blow. They'll not endure the storms of persecution, No, lease and plenty is their resolution! And rather Christ forsake, than their Estates. And change Religion, and Religious mates. They will be still, as is ther company, And in all what they say, with them comply! Though ne'er so false, or fear they should them anger. Therefore to such, I nean to be a stranger. Can they that now speak so ambiguously, For the true Protestan Religion die?
Pray what of such dumb Asses can be made, That are afraid to call a Spade, a Spade? For they are neither fish nor flesh; what then? Owls, Apes, and widgeons, or faint hearted men. O thou that canst a Janus personate, Thinking to save thy life, and thy estate; Read but a paper lately set out by Hibernicus, where see the vanity Of trusting in vain hope, or resting on Sly tricks, shifts and dissimulation. For God will not be mock'd by any; no, Not by the greatest Prince on Earth. If so, Look to it, Sirs, for when you think to find Favour from Papists, God can change their mind, Making them take your Lives, Estates, and all. And other luke-warm slaves, by them to fall. Could men each others hearts but understand, They'd part and live asunder out of hand. Where's that great stranger Honesty, dost know? An undivided heart, who now can show? Conscience!—what's that? pray where is't to be found? For Conscience now (once tender) feels no wound! But swallows Head, Heels, Boots and Spurs, and al, And cares not though at last it turns to gall. Some Consciences (of late) are grown so large, That Coach and Horses, and a Western Barge Can turn, and tack about in them with ease. And swallow Camels with it if they please. Thousands make shipwrack of their reputation; VVhose sordid soils swim in dissimulation, That mortal eneny to Reformation. How many wretch's mischief still devise, Being to all honesty sworn enemies. And strangely bent pon all wickedness; Yea, in their Villanie themselves they bless. Vice marcheth boldly even in rank and file; And rusheth like the Cataracts of Nile. Nay, like e'er long to grow so formidable, That Hercules to curb it shan't be able. Men seem to rant it with authority, Swimming in Oceans of iniquity. For do they not rush thorow thick and thin, As if they were on purpose born to sin? Nay, they will needs be damn'd, they will, to Hell, Come what will of it, be it ill or well. Dam 'em! what do they care for Hell or Grave, So they Pleasure here on Earth may have. The other Lass, and t'other Glass of Sack, Come, all is well enough, here's to thee, Jack. (Saith one to's Comrade) and thus they spend Their Lives, which they like Reprobates do end. Repute defac'd, or once with baseness stain'd, Will hardly, very hardly, be regain'd. Mens Vertues and their Vices over bide; Time nor the Grave shall any of them hide; But many so debauch'd and brutish are, That to be infamous they nothing care. Some now are made Offenders for a word, Because with Ranters they can not accord; Which Vermin now begin to swarm apace, Urging their betters with a brazen face: 'Tis to be feared, that imperious Rabble, May in a short time grow very formidable. He that departeth from iniquity, Is sure to make himself a prey, thereby, To such as favour Popery; or those That do for Wine and Wenches pawn their Clothes. Who cannot Shibboleth pronounce aright, Will be in danger of some Popish Knight, Knight of the Post, I mean, or some tale-wright. Who can be safe, though ne'er so innocent, While Rogues are upon blood and mischief bent? If, Perjury were well at Tiburn bad, Good Men would not be half so much amated; How stupid, Sirs, how blinded must they be, That see not God, in ought, but what they see?
Proximate objects are conspicuous, Not things remote, unto the vicious. They mind what's seen by the corporeal eye, Not things unseen, which only faith can spy. Tremendous Tribulations nothing are, With them that are immerg'd in Hellish care. All the veracity of sacred writ, The Majesty of him that penned it; Nor those black Scenes that mount the British Stage, Move not the Monsters of this wretched Age: Whose care and study is to be unjust; Whose Glory is in their shame, whose Law is Lust. Cupidity backt with saturity, Is the true complex of sensuality. What Rhetorick can court such Swine to good? What Logick can convince a perjured brood? What Arguments hot Humors once can cool, Or from old Customs wean a doating fool? What Words, what thundring Lectures, Verse, and Prose, Can bring old Formalists with truth to close? What thwacking Rhimes, what Satyrs can dehort Young Ranters from their Lusts, and base deport? What charming Eloquence can Courtiers win, To him that's ready to remit their sin? What Golden-mouth'd Chrysostom can allure Men to that bliss, which ever shall endure? What Paul or Peter, what Boanerges can Reach Meritorians to the Son of Man? What Angel some Professors can convince Of spiritual pride, self-love self-excellence? What Saints, or Sons of Thunder, can perswade Fools into Romish Errors not to wade? What Solon can convince some blockheads, that There ever was of late a Popish Plot? What a strange Prophanatick Age is this, When Truth is scorn'd, and falshood courted is? Where's a true dealer to be found, canst tell? Pray what's his Name? Ho, where, where doth he dwell? What Press, or Pulpit, can some sordid fools Bring to confess an error? 'tis such Tools The Jesuits make use of at a pinch, Knowing they'l die like Dogs, rather than flinch From their Assertions, be they ne'er so wrong, And of such, now in London, there's a throng, Which haunt Clubs, Coffee-houses, Taverns, and With great Mens Servants, oft go hand in hand, To Proselyte, or learn from them such News As may their Lords (if Protestants) abuse; Be-ly, traduce, (&c.) that they might odious make them, Whilst Gotamites for honest Men mistake them; I mean those Semi-Jesuits, those tools, By whom the Jesu'ts make so many fools. Thus, many are half Jesuits, although They know it not; yet I can prove them so; For they the very Leaven in them have Of those grand Pharisees (men to deprave;) Their jokes, and wheedles, quirks, reserves and shifts, Stile, arguments, craft, impudence, and drifts, Who 'gin t'appear of late on open Stage; Most of them under Thirty years of Age: Spritely quick witted Blades some of them are; Therefore the fitter others to ensnare, Debauch, empoison, as indeed they do, Th'effects whereof, I fear, you'll find too true. For next to no Religion, they will choose The worst Religion, and the best refuse; For Popery indulgeth any sin, That any wretch is pleased to live in, So he but own the Church of Rome; also Make his Confession to the Priest, and go To Mass sometimes, then all is very well; But all this will not keep them out of Hell.
Nay, there are she Jesuits, or Jesuitesses, As Nurses, Midwives, Chamber-maids, Laundresses; Sly Teachers, Cook-maids, Madam-Visitors, Dressers, and Gossiping Inquisitors, &c. Pretending zealous Protestants to be, Whom at the Church you very often see; Whose Work is to debauch the Family, Or taint them with the pest of Papistry: He carries lies and tales from place to place, Tending their Lords and Ladies to disgrace, &c. And others that are steady Protestants, Have from those Mimmicks many quips and taunts; Which, notwithstanding, patiently they bear; Yet th'other, for all that, cannot forbear; For which they've yearly ensions: Thus you see, How rife the Romish Locusts 'mongst us be? Who are between half Protestants, half Papists; Or semi-Romanists, and semi-Atheists. Popery's a Plague, which all Men ought to shun, And from it, ev'n as from a Serpent run; For it will turn a Saint into a Devil, A Man into a Monster full of evil: Also transform a Lamb into a Lion, The meekest Man into a Wolf; and Sion Into the Grave, if God did not befriend her, And from the Romish Tygre still her. A Mass of errors is the Popish Mass; Then who would own it but a very Ass? A CAƲTION. I Would have none with Jesuits dispute, But such as know that they can them refute; For weak disputants they will soon confound, By which the true Religion looseth ground: For those young blades, I mentioned above, Good Counsel may (perhaps) some of them move; And where Advice and Counsel take no place, There, to be sure, all goes to wrack apace: But such as study words, more than fit matter, They give not Counsel; no, they do but chatter. In Council, Time, and Place, should be observ'd The Party's humour too; or all is marr'd. Timing of things, that is, to speak in season, Will make a Brute give ear to truth and reason. First, strive to plow their Hearts, (that fallow ground, And weed from thence whatever is unsound, Before you sow the Seeds of admonition, (Or they will rest still in the same condition.) Then he that hath a penetrating strain, May pierce the ear, not only, but the brain; Whence it may drop, perchance, into the heart, But God, in this, must act the chiefest part. But some (though ignorant) think they are wise, So scorn that Men should think they need advice; These seem the greatest fools of all to me Because they over-rate themselves; but he That takes a wise mans counsel (as some do) I reckon him the wiser of the two. I wish I could write what I would, of such As for a little Sister care not much. Deformers, not Reformers, still excite Informers, Non-conformers, to indite. Truth and Plain-dealing under-foot are laid, And Protestants by Protestants betray'd. Such as should Preach up Love and Unity, Rather excite to strife and enmity: Nay, Protestants, e'en of the British Church Can now leave one another in the lurch. Ephraim against Manasses draws his Sword, Yet both against poor Judah, can accord. Old friends now take each other by the Throat; Neighbours pick holes in one anothers coat.
Some called Protestants, (but alias Athiests,) Nowly upon the catch as well as Papists. False Jury-men, Perjurors, Perjurators, Have at the Court, found potent animators. Yea, Juries have been packt on purpose to Clear Nocents, and poor Innocents undo. Jury-men have been bribed to betray An honest cause, and have what in them lay. Might beats down-right, (for right or wrong it would) So that poor people have been bought and sold. Yea, worthy Patriots too, (and that of late) Have been destroy'd to serve a turn of State. Yea, some have privately been made away, Because they would not change a yea, to nay. Divine Astraea up to Heaven is fled, For here on Earth no Justice can be had. Vindex! where art thou? why so long a sleep? Behold, how wolves devour the silly sheep. Papists, and semi-Papists, have agreed Like Cannibals, on Protestants to feed. For have they not resolv'd our blood to spill, And all that would not side with them, to kill? And Rubrifie the Streets in every Town? So make us truckle to the Tripple Crown. Then pluck the Rose up by the roots (at last) And plant the Lilly in its ead, and blast The Thistle (if they can), also new-string The Harp again. (Good musick for a King) And now they wait for the appointed time, (When all their Irons are heated first) to climb The Brittish Stage; and rule the Nation too, Which they already have begun to do. God knows what next they will be at mean season, To speak against their height, is counted Treason. Who can impending wo's avert, but he That said to Sion, I will succour thee. The Heliotrope turns always with the Sun, And so continues till the race is run. The Jesuits shew no such friendliness, To Jesus Christ the Sun of Righteousness. Their Sun (or Cynosura) is the Pope, They follow him, though in the dark he grope. Chose to walk by Owl-light, that they might Not see the beamings forth of Gospel-light. The Sun to Plaints more welcome is, than he That made the Sun to men, is here we see! Thus they of Vegetives might learn some good, Were they not of the Antichristian brood. The Heliochryse (when Sol doth culminate The Horizon, his glory to dilate.) His Golden Leaves expandeth out of love To Phoebus, while he walks the Rounds above. But Jesuits when the Son of God doth rise With healing mercies, yet! they him despise. But the Popes bloody Mandates they embrace. Yet Jacob's Star and his Commands debase. Sure they must be the proselytes of Hell, Sith all in works of darkness they excell. Thus from the Truth they wilfully do range, Which with the Church of Rome is nothing strange. ERRATA. PAg. 7. l. 31. wants the word rather. p. 17. l. 25, for flushes r. flashes. p. 17. l. 35. for louse r. loose. p. 19. l. 18. for when r. then. p. 19. l. 30. add the word, to, before be. p. 29. l. 16. for Emore r. Remori. p. 38. l. 10. for thy r. they. p. 38. l. 6. for into r. unto. p. 39. l. 20. wants the word also. p. 41. l. 20. wants the word she. p. 41. l. 9. for this r. thy. p. 43. l. 10. for Say, say, r. Sa, sa. p. 46. l. 7. for this r. thy.
THE EPILOGUE. THE World's a Lottery, which do comprehend A thousand Blanks, for one true-hearted Friend. An open enemy is better far Than a dissembling Friend (in Peace or War), Dissemblers are the Devils Embassadors, And hollow-hearted Knaves, his Chancellors. Where's nothing but external Sanctity, There's neither faith nor truth, nor honesty. Some holy men in shew may prove in time, But hollow-hearted Tyks (a double crime! Dissimulata sanctitas, est duplex iniquitas. Dissemblers can avert to any shape, For small advantage they will be your Ape. They'l change the day to night, the night to day. Yea, turn and wind, and change, e'en when they pray! Their Tongue and heart do seldom go together. Nor Fish, nor Flesh, nor good Red-herring neither. Sure but a few would gladly be acquainted With one, that's [only] with Religion painted. But here's enough to warn the wiser sort, 'Tis folly (fools) from danger to dehort. Quis me impune lacessit? FINIS.
THE GENERAL EXERCISE Ordered by his HIGHNESS the Prince of Orange, To be punctually observed of all the INFANTRY in Service of the STATES GENERAL OF THE Vnited Provinces. BEING A most Worthy COMPENDIƲM, very useful for all Persons concerned in that Noble EXERCISE of ARMS. 2 Sam. 22.40. For thou hast girded me with strength to Battel; them that rose up against me, hast thou subdued under me. LONDON, Printed for William Marshall at the Bible in New∣gate-Street, 1689.
THE GENERAL EXERCISE Ordered by his HIGHNESS the Prince of Orange, To be punctually observed of all the Infantry in Service of the States General of the United Provinces. General Observations. I. IT must be understood that before the Exercise begin, the Offi∣cers at the first Advertisement by tuck of Drum advancing their Pikes, shall turn about to the right; and upon the second, march through the Battalion, ranging themselves in the Rear in the same order they were upon the Front; the Sergeants, who were posted be∣hind the Battalion, separating themselves to the right and left, shall take their Places upon the Flanks till the Exercise be done, and the Officers shall have taken their former Post upon the Front at the fore∣mentioned Advertisement by tuck of Drum, at which time the said Sergeants shall also return to the Rear as before. II. The Drummers shall stay upon the Wings of the Battalion during the Exercise, excepting those that are in the Center before the Pikes, who in the time that the Officers march through to the Rear, shall range themselves behind the Major, to be always ready either for giv∣ing Advertisements, or in case the Battalion might be exercised by tuck of Drum. III. No man shall offer to stir or make the least motion till the Word of Command be fully pronounced, and then to perform what shall be commanded with a graceful readiness, and quick motion all at the same time.
IV. The Souldier having his Musket shoulder'd, must stand straight up on his Limbs, hold up his Head, and look always to the commanding Officer, making no Motion, but such as shall be ordered, which must be observed as a general Rule in all Commands. V. The Souldiers must keep their Feet a small pace distant from each other, their Heels straight in a line, and their Toes turned outwardly, holding their Muskets with their left hand upon their left Shoulder, the Thumb in the hollow above the Butt, holding the Iron which co∣vers the Drawer close to the Shoulder, that the Muzzel of the Musket behind may stand somewhat high, turning the Lock a little outward, so that the Butt may come to the Buttons, or middle of the Breast, and the Muskets over all be the more equally carried. VI. The Match must be holden in the left hand, one end betwixt the first and second finger, and the other betwixt the two last, both the ends a fingers length without the back of the hand, so that the rest thereof may hang betwixt the hand and the Butt of the Musket; and because in exercising the Match is to be laid down no more, it must never be kindled without express Order, VII. With a shoulder'd Musket the left Elbow ought to be turned a little outwards from the Body, but without constraint of the Arm, and the right Arm hanging loose downwards along the Body with the Palm of the hand turned to the Thigh.
The Manual of the Muskets. 1. JOyn your right hand to your Muskets. 2. Poise your Muskets. 3. Joyn your left hand to your Mus∣kets. 4. Take your Matches. 5. Blow your Matches. 6. Cock your Matches. 7. Try your Matches. 8. Guard your Pans. 9. Blow your Matches. 10. Open your Pans in presenting. 11. Give Fire. 12. Recover your Arms. 13. Return your Matches. 14. Blow your Pans. 15. Handle your Primers. 16. Prime. 17. Shut your Pans. 18 Blow off your loose Corns. 19. Cast about to charge. 20. Handle your Chargers. 21. Open them with your Teeth. 22. Charge with Powder. 23. Charge with Bullet. 24. Wadd from your Hats. 25. Draw forth your Scowrers. 26. Hold them up. 27. Shorten them to your Breasts. 28. Put them in the Barrels. 29. Ram down your Shot. 30 Withdraw your Scowrers.
31. Hold them up. 32. Shorten them to your Breasts. 33. Put them up in their places. 34. Joyn your right hand to your Muskets. 35. Poise your Muskets. 36. Shoulder your Muskets. 37. Rest your Muskets. 38. Order your Muskets. 39. Lay down your Muskets. 40. Take up your Muskets. 41. Rest your Muskets. 42. Club your Muskets. 43. Rest your Muskets. 44. Shoulder your Muskets. Take heed to make ready by three Words of Command. 1. Make ready. 2. Present. 3. Give Fire. Here follows the Manual of a Gre∣nadier, beginning from a shoul∣der'd Fire-lock. 1. JOyn your right hand to your Fire-locks. 2. Poise your Fire-locks. 3. Joyn your left hand to your Fire-locks. 4. Bend your Fire-locks. 5. Present. 6. Give Fire. 7. Recover your Arms. 8. Handle your Slings. 9. Sling your Fire-locks upon your Shoulders. 10. Take your Matches. 11. Take your Grenades. 12. Open the Grenade Fuse. 13. Guard the Grenade Fuse with your Thumbs. 14. Blow your Matches. 15. Fire and deliver your Grenades. 16. Return your Matches. 17. Handle your Slings. 18. Poyse your Fire-locks 19. Cast about your Fire-locks to left side. 20. Draw your Daggers. 21. Screw your Daggers in the Muzzle of your Fire-locks. 22. Rest your Daggers. 23. Charge your Daggers the butt to the right knee. 24. Stand up again, and rest your Daggers. 25. Cast about your Daggers to the left side. 26. Withdraw your Daggers. 27. Put up your Daggers. 28. Half-bend your Fire-locks. 29. Blow your Pans. 30. Handle your Primers. 31. Prime. 32. Shut your Pans. 33. Cast about to charge. 34. Handle your Cartridges. 35. Open your Cartridges. 36. Charge your Cartridges. 37. Draw forth your Scowrers. 38. Hold them up. 39. Shorten them to your Breasts. 40. Put them in the Barrels 41. Ram down your Shot.
42. Withdraw your Scowrers. 43. Hold them up. 44. Shorten them to your Breasts. 45. Put them up in their places. 46. Joyn your right hand to your Fire-locks. 47. Poise your Fire-locks. 48. Shoulder your Fire-locks. 49. Rest your Fire locks. 50. Order your Fire-locks. 51. Lay down your Fire-locks. 52. Take up your Fire-locks. 53. Rest your Fire-locks. 54. Club your Fire-locks. 55. Rest your Fire-locks. 56. Shoulder your Fire-locks. Take heed you be ready to give fire by three Words of Command. 57 1. Make ready. 2. Present. 3. Give Fire. Take heed ye be ready to fire your Grenades by three Words of Com∣mand. 58 1. Make ready. 2. Blow your Match. 3. Fire, and deliver your Grenades. Take heed ye be ready to use your Dag∣gers by three Words of Command. 59 1. Make ready. 2. Charge your Daggers, the Butt against the right Knee. 3. Rest your Daggers. Take heed to make your Fire-locks ready again. 60 Make ready your Fire-locks.
Here follows the Manual of the Pike, beginning from the Advance. THE Posture of a Pike-man with his Pike advanced, must be the same as the Musketiers with a shoulder'd Musket, viz. that he stand straight upon his Limbs, holding up his Head, looking briskly, wirh his Eye always turned towards the Commanding Officer, and making no other motions than the Commands do bear, that he keep his Feet a small pace distant from each other, his Heels in a straight Line, his Toes turn'd outwardly, and holding the Butt end of the Pike in his right hand, stretched downwards along his Body to the full length, so that the back of his hand be turn'd so much outwardly, as his Arm in such posture can suffer without constraint, and the Pike be kept close as well to his shoulder as the outside of his Thigh, that it may stand straight upwards, without inclining to either hand, which Posture must be always observed with an advanced Pike. 1. Charge to the Front. 2. As you were. 3. Charge to the right. 4. To the left, as you were. 5. Charge to the left. 6. To the right, as you were. 7. To the right about charge. 8. To the left, as you were. 9. To the left about charge. 10. To the right, as you were. 11. Shoulder your Pikes. 12. Charge to the Front. 13. Shoulder as you were. 14. Charge to the right. 15. To the left, as you were. 16. Charge to the left. 17. To the right, as you were 18. To the right about charge. 19. To the left, as you were. 20. To the left about charge. 21. To the right, as you were. 22. Port your Pikes. 23. Charge to the Front. 24. Trail your Pikes the Spear be∣hind. 25. Charge, as you were. 26. Push your Pikes. 27. Trail your Pikes the Spear be∣fore. 28. Present your Spears. 29. Charge to the Front. 30. Advance your Pikes. 31. Order your Pikes. 32. Lay down your Pikes. 33. Take up your Pikes. 34. Plant your Pikes. 35. Order your Pikes. 36. Advance your Pikes.
Here follow the Evolutions. General Words of Command. 1. Take heed. AT the pronouncing of this Word, there must be great Silence observed throughout the whole Battalion, the Souldiers do∣ing no motions neither with their Heads, Bodies, Hands or Feet; but such as shall be ordered, and looking stedfastly to the command∣ing Officer, as hath been said above concerning the Manual. 2. Carry well your Arms. 3. Dress your Ranks and your Files. Evolutions with Muskets and Pikes together. 1. Present your Arms. 2. 1. To the right. 2. To the right. 3. To the right. 4. To the right. 3. To the right about. 4. To the left, as you were. 5. 1. To the left. 2. To the left. 3. To the left. 4. To the left. 6. To the left about. 7. To the right, as you were. 8. Poyse your Muskets, and ad∣vance your Pikes. 9. Shoulder your Muskets. Take heed to double your Ranks to the Front. 10. To the right, double our Ranks to the Front. 11. March. HEre it must be observed, as also by all other Marches, that all the Souldiers of the same Rank make the first step with the left foot, lifting all at the same time, to the end that marching softly, looking continually to the sides, more especially to the right, they may keep the Rank straight, and come upon their places all together, stepping, so that with four paces they may enter the Rank that is be∣fore them, having special care to carry their Arms well, hold up their
Head, keep their Bodies in a straight and unconstrained posture, and look briskly. 12. To the lest, as you were. 13. March. 14. Halt. 15. To the left, double your Ranks to the Front. 16. March. 17. To the right, as you were. 18. March. 19. Halt. Take heed to double your Ranks to the Rear. 20. To the right about, double your Ranks to the Rear. 21. March. 22. Halt. 23. As you were. 24. March. 25. To the left about, double your Ranks to the Rear. 26. March. 27. Halt. 28. As you were. 29. March. Take heed by half Files to double your Ranks to the Front. 30. To the right, by half Files dou∣ble your Ranks to the Front. 31. March. 32. To the left, as you were. 33. March. 34. Halt. 35. To the left by half Files, dou∣ble your Ranks to the Front. 36. March. 37. To the right, as you were. 38. March. 39. Halt. Take heed by half Files to double your Ranks to the Rear. 40. To the right about by half Files double your Ranks to the Rear. 41. March. 42. Halt. 43. As you were. 44. March. 45. To the left about by half Files double your Ranks to the Rear. 46. March. 47. Halt. 48. As you were. 49. Halt. Take heed to double your Files. 50. To the right double your Files. 51. March. 52. Halt. 53. To the left, as you were. 54. March. 55. To the left, double your Files. 56. March. 57. Halt. 58. To the right. as you were. 59. March.
Take heed to double your Files by half Ranks. 60. By half Ranks to the right, double your Files. 61. March. 62. Halt. 63. To the left as you were. 64. March. 65. Halt. 66. By half Ranks to the left dou∣ble your Files. 67. March. 68. Halt. 69. To the right, as you were. 70. March. 71. Halt. Every Division must double its Files in it self, and the odd File must stand on its ground. Take heed to contre-march by Files. 72. By Files to the right about, con∣tre-march. 73. March. 74. By Files to the left about, con∣tre-march. 75. March. Take heed to contre-march by Ranks. 76. By Ranks to the right, contre-march. 77. March. 78. Halt. 79. By Ranks to the left, contre-march. 80. March. 81. Halt. Take heed to close your Files. 82. From the right and left, close your Files to the Center. 83. March. 84. Halt. Take heed to close your Ranks. 85. Close your Ranks to the Front. 86. March. Take heed to wheel. 87. Wheel to the right. 88. March. 89. Halt. 90. Wheel to the right. 91. March. 92. Halt. 93. To the right about, wheel. 94. March. 95. Halt. 96. Wheel to the left. 97. March. 98. Halt. 99. Wheel to the left. 100. March. 101. Halt. 102. To the left about, wheel. 103. March. 104. Halt.
Take heed to put your Ranks and Files at their former distance. 105. Files to the right and left, take your former distances. 106. March. 107. Halt. Take heed to put your Ranks at the former distance. 108. Ranks, as you were. 109. March. 110. Halt. Take heed to lay down your Arms. 111. Rest your Muskets. 112. Order your Arms. 113. Lay down your Arms. Take heed to quit your Arms. 114. For Straw. 115. March. 116. To your Arms. 117. Put up your Swords. 118. Take up your Arms. 119. Rest your Muskets. 120. Poyse your Muskets, and ad∣vance your Pikes. 121. Shoulder your Muskets. FINIS.
