P356 13167455 98261
A SERMON PREACHED before the RIGHT HONOURABLE THE Lord MAYOR AND COURT of ALDERMEN, AT GƲILD-HALL-CHAPPEL, July the 23th. 1682. By THOMAS PARGITER D. D. Rector of Greetworth in Northampton-shire. 1 THES. 4.6. That no Man go beyond and Defraud his Brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such. LONDON, Printed for A. Green, and are to be Sold by most Book sellers in London and Westminster, 1
TO THE READER. I Suppose that which hath made several Worthy Persons very Earnest and Importunate for the Publication of this Sermon, is the exceeding great Honesty of it, it be∣ing directly Levelled against all manner of Fraudulent and Injurious Practices. In it the great, but very much neglected Du∣ty of Doing no Harm or Wrong to one another, is as throughly and fully Pressed upon us, as it could possibly be in so short a time as is allowed for a Sermon; and the hopes that it may do some good to∣wards
the making of Men more Just and Righteous in their Dealings than gene∣rally they are, hath been the chief and prevailing Cause of the Printing of it: And surely the sending abroad of a Dis∣course upon this Duty of not Wronging one another, cannnot be thought Ʋnseaso∣nable or Impertinent in such times as these, wherein the Hearts and the Wits of Men are so much set upon doing Wrong.
A SERMON PREACHED before the Lord Mayor, AT GUILD-HALL Chappel, July 23. 1682. ON 1 THESS. iv. 6. That no man go beyond and Defraud his Brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such. THESE Words will afford us very good and fit Matter for a serious, useful, and practical Discourse; and that the ensuing Sermon upon them may be altogether such, I shall observe in them these two things.
1. A Duty. And, 2. The Enforcement of that Duty. The Duty here enjoined us by St. Paul, is, that we must not go beyond and Defraud our Brethren in any matter. And this Duty the Apostle enforces upon us by such a dreadful Argument, as may well terrifie and affright us all into a careful Performance of it; for he tells us, that if we do go beyond and Defraud our Brethren in any matter, the Lord will be the Avenger of us: God will not then suffer us to go Unpunished, but will most surely Execute his Vengeance upon us. There is some Controversie among Exposi∣tors about the Duty of the Text, and they are not fully agreed what it is that St. Paul doth here enjoyn us, when he chargeth us not to go beyond and Defraud our Brethren in any matter. Some of the ancient Exposi∣tors, and a late Learned one of our own, do here very much contract and straiten the ge∣neral signification of the words  and , which we translate go beyond and De∣fraud, and in this place restrain and deter∣mine the sence of them only to the mat∣ter of Uncleannesse, and think that that
which the Apostle here enjoins us, is, that we must not injure and wrong our Brethren in the matter of Uncleanness, either by Defi∣ling their Bed, or by drawing them to Com∣mit such unnatural Filthinesses with us, as are not to be named: And that which chiefly In∣duced them to make this Interpretation of the Words, is St. Paul's speaking against the Sin of Uncleanness, both before the Text, and also immediately after it. But notwithstanding this, the generality of Ancient and Modern Exposi∣tors do not think fit thus to straiten the signi∣fication of the Words, nor see reason enough to make such a narrow and scanty Interpreta∣tion of the Text, as if it respected only the matter of Uncleanness: But they take the words in a larger and more general Sence, as they may be Applied to any Matter or Business whatsoever that we may have with one ano∣ther, and so make the meaning of the Text to be, That we must not transgress and over∣pass the Bounds of Justice in our Dealings with one another, we must not go beyond and over-reach our Brethren in any matter; we must not Defraud and Circumvent others in a∣ny thing whatsoever; we must not any wayes
wrong them, nor in any kind be Injurious to them. And in this Sence surely the Words may well be understood, and we shall the ra∣ther believe that this is the right meaning of them, if we do but consider that this Duty of not Wronging and Defrauding our Brethren, is a thing that St. Paul was very strict and se∣vere in Pressing upon others, and in Practising himself: He chides the Corinthians, and Re∣bukes them sharply for their Neglect of this Duty, and seems to upbraid them with a great deal of Indignation for their breach of it, 1 Cor. 6.8. Nay, you do wrong and Defraud, and that your Brethren. Nay, in the foregoing Verse of that Chapter, he Presses this Duty farther and with more strictness upon them, than most men are now willing to hear of; for he is there so far from allowing them to do any injury to others, that he earnestly per∣swades them rather to take Wrong, rather to suffer themselves to be Defrauded, rather to lose something of their own Right, than to go to Law with others upon every Trespass and Offence. And to shew these Corinthians how rigid and strict he himself had been in the Performance of this Duty, and how clear he
had alwayes kept himself from unjust and dis∣honest dealing with others, he solemnly Protests to them his own Innocency in this matter, 2 Cor. 7.2. He there washes his Hands clean before them from the doing of any wrong, and lets them know that no unjust Gain had ever cleaved to his Fingers; Recieve us, (sayes he) we have wronged no man, we have Defrauded no Man. I shall take it for granted then, that the meaning of the Text is that which our own and most other Translations speak it to be, and that the Duty enjoined us here is to this effect; That we must not Encroach upon the Rights of our Brethren, nor Defraud them of their Substance, nor Injure them at all in any of their Possessions, but must suffer them to en∣joy their own Goods in all quietness and secu∣rity. We must not take Advantage of the Igno∣rance or Unwariness, the Unskilfulness or Cre∣dulity of others, to beguile them and do them wrong; we must not stretch our Wits and Inven∣tions to hurt them, nor any wayes to over-reach and Circumvent them in our Dealings with them; we must not endeavour by any cunning Devices to take or Detain from them that which is their due; we must not use any subtil Arts
or Policies either to get or to keep from them that which is their own, and doth of Right belong to them; or in short, We must not do any manner of Wrong to them, nor in any thing deal Injuriously with them. And that I may the more successefully enforce upon you this Duty of not Wronging others, and the more effectually bring you all over to the Per∣formance of it, I shall handle it both in a Do∣ctrinal and in an Applicatory way. For, 1. I shall fully Prove it to you, not only by the Apostles, but also by some other Argu∣ments, that we must not do any manner of Wrong to others, nor in any thing deal Injuri∣riously with them. And then, 2. I shall bring this Duty yet farther home to you by some close words of Application. 1. I shall clearly and fully prove it to you, not only by the Apostles, but also by some other Arguments, that we must not do any manner of Wrong to others, nor in any thing deal injuriously with them. And, 1. We must not do this, Because that Nature it self teaches us not to do any Injury or Wrong to others. We are not born Wild and Savage Crea∣tures, and Beasts of Prey: We have not natu∣rally
a Disposition in us to bite, and tear, and devour one another: The State of our Nature is not a State of Rapine and Violence, Cheat∣ing and over-reaching are not any of the Prin∣ciples of it; as a late Monster of Men and Shame of Mankind, the great Leviathan of Atheism, that vile Asperser and Slanderer of our Humane Nature, hath scurrilously asserted in his Works, to make way for some other of his wretched and forlorn Principles: But on the contrary, our Nature would lead us to all kind of fair and just and honest Dealings with one another, if we our selves did not stifle the Dictates, and suppress the Inclinations of it: Whatsoever the forementioned Traducer of our Nature, or any of his Disciples may or can say to the contrary, we are not left at Liberty by the Principles of our Nature to do what hurt and Mischief we can to one another; but there are natural Principles of Honesty written in le∣gible Characters upon all our Hearts, that would check, and curb, and restrain us from doing wrong, if we were not continually razing them out of our Hearts, by giving way to Pride, and Ambition, and Lust, and Worldly-mindedness; We must wink hard, and be wilfully blind,
blinder than ever the Heathens themselves could be, if we cannot find a Law of Nature with∣in us, that plainly Instructs us in this Duty of not wronging others, and strongly Prompts us to the Performance of it. For this Doctrine of doing no Injury or harm to others, is a Do∣ctrine that was alwayes Currant, not only at Jerusalem but at Athens too; not only in the Church of God, but also in the Gentile World: This is a Lesson that was taught not only in the Schools of the Prophers, but in the Schools of the Philosophers also; a Lesson that we may learn not only out of the Word of God, but likewise out of the Writings of Heathen men; for many of the Heathens themselves, who had only the Light and the Law of Nature for their Guide, have spoken very excellent things of this Duty of not wronging others, and have been very serious and earnest in pressing the Performance of it, as might easily and abun∣dantly be shewed to you out of their Writings: Nay, these Gentiles who were meer Strangers to the Grace of God and his written Word, who had nothing else but the Dictates of their Nature, and the Principles of their Reason, and their In-bred Notions of good and evil to go by,
were so far from allowing the doing of any injury to one another, that they had a∣mongst them very severe Laws against Rapine and Violence, against Theft and Co∣zenage, against Fraud and Deceit, and a∣gainst all manner of injurious and disho∣nest Dealings, and were also very strict and punctual in the Execution of those Laws. And therefore we are obliged not to wrong others for this reason, because the wronging of them is a plain violati∣on and breach of that very Law of Na∣ture which is written upon all our Hearts, and such a Sin as the Heathens them∣selves, who were any waies careful to fol∣low the Di of their Nature, were quite ashamed to be guilty of. And let us Christians have a care, and look to it, that the Heathens do not rise up in judge∣ment against us in this matter at the last Day, and then in the face and hearing of all the World confound and condemn us in it. But then, Secondly. We must not do any manner of wrong to others, nor in any thing deal
injuriously with them, because that this is a thing that is not only taught us by the Law of Nature, but is expresly required of us also by the Word of God. The Will of God in this matter is sufficiently realed to o in the Scriptures, and his Commands both in the Old and in the New Testament are very full and frequent to this purpose, that we must not imagine mis∣chief in our Hearts against others, nor do them any wrong, nor injure them at all. The Law of Wioses is plain to this pur∣pose, as plain at words can make it, Le∣vin. 19.13. Thou shalt not Defraud thy Neighbour and again in the Thirty fifth Verse of that Chapter, Ye  do no un∣righteousness in Judgment, in Mete-yard, in Weight, or in Measure, that is, Ye shall not allow of any manner of falshood and wrong amongst you, nor give way to any kind of Fraud and Deceit whatsoever in any of your Dealings and concerns with one another. And perhaps this Duty of not wronging others was dearly signified to the Jews
under the Law, by the very Nature and Temper of those Living Creatures which they were to offer in Sacrifice: For none of the Birds of the Air, or Beasts of the Field were chosen and appointed by God for Sacrifice, but such as were harmless and inoffensive, and of a mild Temper, and of a gentle and good Nature and Con∣dition: And the appointment of such only for Sacrifice might be to teach the Jews, that they ought to be Tender-hearted, Loving, and Gentle towards one another, and to live in all peacableness together, and to do no hurt, or injury, or wrong to one another. And then as for the Prophets, they are very full and express in enjoyning this Duty of not doing any wrong, and it would be endless to instance in places out of them to this purpose; for they do all with open and with one Mouth exclaim and inveigh against the Jews for those injurious pra∣ctices and unrighteous Dealings which they were given to, and call aloud upon them to lay aside their unjust and fraudulent courss,
and to live uprightly, and deal honestly with one another. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Pro∣phets, says our Saviour, Matth. 7.12. that is, this is the very summ and substance of that which the Writers of the Old Testa∣ment have taught us concerning our Duty to one another, that we should carefully ob∣serve amongst us that great Natural Rule of Equity, To do as we would be done to; that as we would not that others should do any injury to us, so neither should we do any wrong to them. And this Du∣ty of not wronging others is very much improved in the New Testament, and our Saviour hath there advanced it to an higher pitch than it was before; for he is there so far from giving us leave to do the least wrong to others, that he hath strictly commanded us to be kind to our very enemies, and to do good to those very Persons that hate us and deal evilly with us, and to suffer the greatest inju∣ries from others, rather than to do the least harm to them: And we may observe
that most of the Precepts delivered by him in his famous Sermon upon the Mount, are such as put us upon a severe honest course of Life, and leave no room at all for any kind of crooked and deceitful dealins amongst us So that now under the Gospel it is more especially our Duty to be of an innocent and harmless conver∣sation, to live without Guile and Deceit in the World, and to keep our Hands pure and clear from violence and wrong, and from all manner of unjust dealing. The ancient Christians that lived in the first Ages of the Church, thought them∣selves strictly obliged, by the Doctrine of Christ to do so, as plainly appears by that well known and that often cited account which Pliny gave of them in a Letter to Trajan the Emperour, when he had begun a Per∣secution against them; for in his Letter to that Heathen Emperour he tells him, that all that could be proved against his Christi∣ans was only this, that they used at set times to meet together early in the Morning be∣fore day to Worship Christ; and that they did then bind themselves not to Rob, or
Steal, or commit Adultery; not to break their Word, or falsisie their Trust, or the like. Thus honest had these former Christi∣ans their conversation amongst the Gentiles; thus harmlesly and inoffensively did they be∣have themselves in the World; and thus carefully were they to abstain from the very appearance of doing any wrong; so that the Heathens themselves, who watched for their halting, could find no other fault with them, nor charge any other crime upon them, but only this, that they were Christians. And though the Christians of our daies, to their shame be it spoken, are in their temper and their carriage very unlike to these Christi∣ans of old, yet the Doctrine of Christ in this matter is still the same, and doth as strictly require us to forbear the doing of any wrong, as ever it did them. But farther yet. Thirdly, We must not do any manner of wrong to others, nor in any thing deal in∣juriously with them; because that it is re∣quired of us that we should love them. The loving of one another is the Royal Law of Christ, and that which is peculiarly his Com∣mandment.
It is indeed an, old Command∣ment, as old as the Law of Moses, nay, as old as the Law of Nature it self; for long before Moses made it Written Law, God himself had made it a branch of the Law of Nature within us. But our Saviour hath now so fully instructed us in it, and in such a special and particular manner obliged us to the performance of it, that he, calls it his New Commandment. And indeed this Com∣mandment of loving our Brethren he doth every where in the Gospel so strictly enjoyn us, so earnestly recommend to us, and so vehemently press upon us, as if he almost re∣quired nothing else of, us in comparison of this. And if it is thus strictly and indispen∣sably required of us that we should love others, then to be sure we must not any waies wrong them, or be injurious to them: for how can the doing of any wrong to them be any waies consistent with, our loving of them? This would certainly be but a very cross and untoward way of shewing that kind∣ness and affection to others, that Christ hath Commanded us to have for them. But far∣ther yet than this:
Fourthly, We must not do any manner of wrong to others, not in any thing deal injuri∣ously with them; Because that it is not only required of us that we should love others, but also that we should love them as our selves. Indeed that known Precept, Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self, respects rather the quality than the quantity of our Love towards others, and doth not command a parity but a likeness of it; for we are not bound to Love others equally, or so much as our selves, but with the like manner and kind of Love, that we do our selves. Our Love then to others, like the Love to our selves, must not be false, and feigned, and hypocritical; but true and real, and without all manner of dis∣simulation. Now if we are commanded to proceed so far in our kindness, and good will, and affections towards others, as to Love them as truly and sincerely as we do our selves, then it is past all doubt that we must not do any manner of wrong to them; for there are none of us that Love our selves so little, as to be willing that any kind of hurt or injury should be done to us. But now,
5. To make use of the Apostle's dread∣full Argument, to Enforce this Duty, and set it fully home upon you: We must not do any manner of Wrong to others, nor in any Matter whatsoever deal Injuriously with them; Because that the Lord will be the Avenger of all such. There is not one of all those that do so, that shall escape the Ven∣geance of God, and go away unpunished; For the God that is above them, doth narrowly observe all the Fraudulent Cour∣ses which they take, and all the Injuri∣ous Practises which they use to the hurt of Others, and will in due time call them to a very strick and severe Account for them, and fully pay them that which they have Deserved. They that break through all the Bounds of Equity and Justice to go beyond and o∣ver-reach their Neighbours, that use any subtile Arts and Devices to defraud their Brethren of their Possessions, and endea∣vour to encrease their own Substance, by the Spoil which they make of other men,
are such Transgressors as God is highly Displeased with, and doth usually sooner or later Plague even here in this World, as well as in the World to come. Some∣times he sends his secret Curse into their Houses, which there sticks fast by them and like a Canker eats into their Estates' and wastes away their Goods, and by de∣grees devours and consumes all that they have. And sometimes he causes the Hand of Publick Justice to find them out, and to pluck the Spoil out of their Teeth, and to gripe them, and handle them roughly, and make them Vomit up those forbidden Morsels, those Morsels of Violence and Deceit, which they had so glibly devou∣red. And sometimes, nay oftentimes indeed, he takes the Matter more openly into his own Hand, and punishes them in an extra∣ordinary manner, and in some signal way doth Execution upon them, when they think themselves safe from fear, and far enough from danger.
How secure did Ahab and Jezebel, that wretched Pair of Wrong-doers, think them∣selves, when they had over-reached Na∣both, and defrauded him of his Vineyard in a Court of Judicature, and under a Form of Justice, and with a shew of a Legal Pro∣ceeding against him? Having this way gotten from him the An∣cient Inheritance of his Father, they thought themselves safe enough in the possession of it, and free from any Harm that might fol∣low. But a time of Recompence, and the Day of the Lord's Vengeance came upon them at last, and that with a Witness too, in a very Remarkable Way and Manner; for, as the Prophet Elijah had foretold, in the place where the Dogs licked the Blood of Naboth, there they also licked the Blood of Ahab; and there they not onely licked the Blood of Jezebel, but there they eat her up too, and left nothing of her Carcase re∣maining, but her Skull and her Feet, and the Palms of her Hands. And it is farther observable, that the evil which befell their Son King Joram, did over-take and seize
upon him in the Portion of Naboth the Jez∣reelite; for there Jehu met him in his fu∣rious march against him, and there he smote him thorow the Heart with an Ar∣row, and killed him; and there he com∣manded his Body to be pulled down out of the Chariot, and cast upon the open ground; so that he lay weltring in his own blood in that very plat of ground, which his Parents had defrauded Naboth of, and got unjustly from him. And indeed it is usual with God, as the Histories of all Ages will inform us, to punish those that wrong others even in this World, either in their own persons, or in their Posterity, or in both, and that in some strange and fear∣full manner too: Nay, so strangely is God provoled to Anger by this Sin of Wrong∣ing Others, and so severe is he against it, that he many times plagues a Community, and punishes a whole Land and Nation for it; for we cannot read the Prophets with any heed and observation at all, but we must needs take notice that this is frequent∣ly mentioned by most of them, as one of
the main Sins and great Abominations for which God delivered up the Jews into their Enemies hands, The Jews, as we find up and down in the Prophets, were strangely bent upon Violence and Wrong; their Houses were full of deceit, and they were continually setting Traps, and laying Snares for their Brethren, and devising how they might over-reach and defraud one another; and for these sins especially it was, that the Wrath and Vengeance of God fell so heavy upon them: For it is very observable, that no sins are so much insisted upon by the Prophets, as these, to be the Cause of their Desolation, and of those great and terrible Judgments that came upon them. Nay, it is yet farther observable, that in the Seventh Chapter of Zachariah, Injustice, and Oppres∣sion, and Wrong-dealing are the onely sins that are mentioned, for which God sent them away into Captivity, and laid their Land desolate and waste: for the Prophet there tells them, that because they refused to execute true Judgment, and would not shew Mercy and Compassion to their Bre∣thren,
but went on still to oppress the Wi∣dow, and the Fatherless, and the Stranger, and the Poor, and to imagine evil in their Hearts against their Brethren; therefore there came a great Wrath from the Lord of Hosts: For these sins such a storm of his Anger fell upon them, as scattered them with a Whirl-wind among all the Nations whom they knew not. But if those that wrong others, and deal injuriously with them, should escape the Vengeance of God in this World, and go down into their Graves, without having any remarkable Punish∣ment inflicted upon them here; yet shall they not for all this always go unpunished; for the Wrath and Vengeance of God will pursue them into the other World, and there finally overtake them, and come up∣on them to the uttermost, and their latter end will be, that they shall perish for ever. Tho these men may here by their wit or their Wealth, by thir power or their Friends, or by any other means escape the Judgment of Man, yet shall they not hereafter by all the Arts that they can use, escape the righteous
Judgment of God: for God hath appointed a Day, wherein he will judge the World in Righteousness; and when that Day of re∣compences is come, he will then render to every man according to his Deeds: to those that have done justly, and have been righte∣ous in all their waies, and upright in all their Dealings, he will render Glory, and Honor, and Peace, and Immortality, and eternal Life: But to those that have done wrong, and been unjust; to Oppressors and Deceivers; to the men that have been Injurious to their Bre∣thren, and Inventers and Practisers of evil things against them; He will render Indig∣nation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of them. They that have done Wrong, howsoever they may escape here, shall then receive in full measure for the wrong which they have done; their violent Dealing shall then fall down upon their own Heads in Eternal Showers of Vengeance, and God will for ever pay them home for all their Villanies and Mischiefs which they have been guilty of. He will then make his whole Displeasure to arise against them, and will cast the fury of his wrath upon them, and
punish them with everlasting death and destru∣ction from His Presence, and be alwaies ter∣rible in his doings towards them. He will then turn them into Hell, that frightful place of torments, where they must alwaies have their Habitation amongst Devils and damned Spirits, and dwell with devouring Flames, and suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, and for ever endure the heaviest Plagues and pu∣nishments, that the vindicative Justice of an angry and incensed God can heap upon them. And so I have done with the First thing, and I think have sufficiently proved it to you by the Apostles, and by some o∣ther Arguments, that we must not do any manner of wrong to others, nor in any matter whatsoever deal injuriously with them. And now 2. I shall bring this Duty yet farther home to you by some close words of Application. And that this may be the bet∣ter done.
1. Let us suffer a few words of Rebuke, and be perswaded to hear a little, how very careless and negligent most of us are in the perfor∣mance of this Duty. And then, 2. Let us also suffer some words of Exhor∣tation, and be perswaded for the time to come, to be more strict and careful in the Performance of this Duty, than hitherto we have been. 1. Let us suffer a few words of Rebuke, and be perswaded to hear a little how extreamly careless and negligent most of us are in the Per∣formance of this Duty. Though this Doctrine of not wronging others, is very clear and evident, both from Reason and Scripture, and a Doctrine that cannot be gainsaid, yet it is not received and entertained amongst us, as it ought to be; for who is there that believes our report in this matter, that hath any regard to what we say in this thing? or that follows the Advice and Counsel that we give them in it? who are the Persons, and where are they now almost to be found, that behave themselves aright in this case, and are as careful as they ought to be, not to go beyond and defraud their Brethren? Are not the Hearts of most Men fully set in them to do Evil to one another? Do not their inward
Thoughts altogether run after Mischief? And are they not continually plotting how they may compass their villanous Designs, and bring about those pernitious Devices which they have devi∣sed to the hurt of others? do not the generality of Men amongst us make account that their Wits are their own, and that they may use them as they please for their own Interest and Advan∣tage here? Do not they think that they may be as wise in their Generation, and as crafty as pos∣sibly they can, for their worldly Gains, and that to inrich themselves, they may over-reach their Brethren in any of their Dealings and Con∣cerns with them? And may not we make the same complaint of our Age, as Petrarch some∣where doth of the Age wherein he lived; That Hunters and Fowlers cannot use greater cunning in laying their Nets and Snares for wild Beasts and Fowls, than we do in setting Traps for one another? For what mysteries of cheating and cozenage have Men now-a-days got amongst them? What Arts and Stratagems do they use to inveigle and ensnare those that are unwary, and make a Prey of them? And how skilfull are they grown at all the ways of circumventing and over-reaching their Brethren? How subtile
and politick are they in their fraudulent and de∣ceitful Courses? What cunning Fetches and De∣vices have they to wrong their Neighbours, and do them Harm? And how many Wiles and Inventions have they found out to work this their Iniquity by? So many indeed, that if I should declare and speak of them, they would be more than I should be able to express: Nay, it might justly bring a Man's Honesty into suspi∣cion to have the Skill, and be able to reckon them up. And therefore in a word; how bu∣sy and active are the Men of this Generation in invading the Rights of their Neighbours, and in∣juring them in their Goods and Possessions? How greedy are they to inrich themselves by Fraud and Deceit, and to enlarge their Estates, though it be by unjust Gain, and the Spoil of others? And how ready are they to take every Advantage that they can over their, Brethren, and to bring any kind of hurt and damage upon them, if by so doing they may any ways profit themselves? But now, 2. Let us suffer some words of Exhortation also, and be perswaded for the time to come to be more strict and precise, more exact and punctual in the performance of this Duty, than
hitherto we have been. Let us not hereafter any ways wrong our Brethren, nor defraud them in any matter, nor in any respect whatsoever do them the least hurt; but let us walk honestly amongst them, and in all things deal well and truly with them, and in no kind be injurious to them. Let us consider what Obligations we have upon us not to wrong others: Let us con∣sider, that the Law of Nature it self, that very Law that is written upon all our Hearts, teaches us not to do others any wrong: Let us consider also, that the Laws of God are very full and ex∣press to the same purpose, and that the Old and the New Testament do abound with Precepts of this nature, that we must not harm others, nor imagine Mischief in our Hearts against them, nor take any thing from them that doth of right belong to them. Nay, let us consider, that the Commands of God do carry the business somewhat higher, and oblige us to love others, and to love them, though not in the same degree, yet with the same Truth and Sincerity of Love, that we do our selves, and to endeavour their good, as we would our own. And let us not break these Bonds asun∣der, nor cast away these Cords from us, nor sin
against these Obligations which Nature, and the God of Nature hath laid upon us, not to be inju∣rious and hurtful to others. But if these things will not signify any thing with us, as perhaps with many of us they may not; then let us consider farther, how very great the danger is that we run, in doing wrong to others. Let us bethink our selves, that if we do injure and oppress, and defraud our Brethren, it is very likely that the Wrath of God will break out against us in this World, and that we shall be soundly punished for it here; but to be sure, we shall smart se∣verely for it hereafter: for then God will at last come in flaming Fire to take Vengeance on us, and will condemn us to the Punishments of the other World, to those dreadful Pains and Tor∣ments there that will last to eternal Ages, and ne∣ver have an end. And let these Terrors of the Lord scare us out of all our unrighteous Practices, and fright us from all manner of Fraud and In∣justice in our Dealings with one another. Be∣fore we venture upon the wronging of our Bre∣thren, let us consider it well in our minds, whether we can bear up and support our selves under the Vengeance of God that will follow. Is our Dam∣nation a thing that we can lightly pass over, and
make no great matter of? Can we withstand the Power of God's Wrath, when he shall accom∣plish all his Anger upon us? Can we for ever bear up under the weight of his Indignation, and without any anguish of Mind lie under the strokes of his eternal Vengeance and Fury? Can our Hands be strong in the day that an avenging God shall deal with us in his Justice, and set all his Terrors in array against us? Can our Hearts en∣dure when he shall come in flaming Fire to take Vengeance on us, and turn us into Hell for the wrong that we have done? Can we then with any Comfort dwell in the midst of devouring Flames and everlasting Burnings? Can we then suffer the Vengeance of eternal Fire, without shrinking or being daunted at it? Can we then take any Contentment in the company of cursed Angels, and damned Spirits? And can we then chear up our selves against the horror and remorse of our own guilty Consciences, and with Pati∣ence indure the Stings and Bitings of that Worm that never dies? If we cannot do these things, as to be sure we cannot, then what desperate Folly and Madness will it be for us to run into the com∣mission of that Sin, which will most certainly be avenged upon us by such dismal Punishments as these are.
Surely, if we would sometimes consider how terrible God will be in his dealings with all inju∣rious Persons, and how dreadful the Works of his Vengeance will for ever be upon them, we durst not defraud our Brethren, and do them Wrong so commonly as now we do. Would any dare to turn aside the needy from Judgment, and take away the Right from the Poor, and make Widows their Prey, and rob the Fatherless, if they did but consider with them∣selves, that a Father of the Fatherless, and a Judg of the Widows is God in his holy Habitation; and that from thence he sees the Oppression of the Poor, and hears the sighing of the Needy, and will at length arise for their defence, and maintain their righteous Cause, and plague all those that have harmed them wrongfully, and dealt injuriously with them? Would Men covet Fields, and take them by violence; and Houses, and take them away: and so oppress a Man and his House, even a Man and his Heritage? Could they be so very busy and industrious as they are in invading the Rights of others; in defrauding the Brethren of their Goods, and injuring them in their Possessions; if they did but once take it into their Thoughts,
that they must be called to a strict account for these things before the righteous Judg of all the World, who loves Justice and Judgment, and will be sure to punish the wrong-doer, and break in pieces the Oppressor, and spoil the Soul of all those that have spoiled others? How durst the subtile and the cunning Sinners hold fast Deceit, and go on in their fraudulent and mischievous Courses? How durst they deal so treacherously, and endeavour by their circumventing Skill to go beyond and over-reach their Neighbours, if they did but call to mind, that God sees all their Fetches and their Devi∣ces, all their lesser and greater Mysteries of Ini∣quity, and will at last bring them into Judg∣ment for all those wicked Arts and Stratagems, which they have so often made use of to ensnare the ignorant and unwary, and make them fall a Prey into their Nets? Would Men covet an evil Covetousness to their Houses, that they might set their Nests on high? Would they go to raise their Families by that which they wrongfully take from others, if they considered that thir ill-gotten Wealth will
bring such a Curse of God along with it into their Houses, as will root out all their Increase, and quickly be the ruine and Dectruction of them and their Posterity? Would they dare to suffer any unjust Gain to cleave to their Fingers? would they not presently with all the haste imagina∣ble, shake their Hands from holding of it, if they considered further, that the heaping up of this is but the laying up of Vengeance in Store, and the Treasuring up of Wrath for themselves against the great Day of Wrath? Would men be tampering in the very Courts of Justice, and be devising Subtilties there how they may Circumvent their Brethren, and thrust them out of their apparent Rights, if they consi∣dered that they must in another Court of Justice, and at Gods own Tribunal, give an Account of this, and there have the Sentence of Eternal Con∣demnation Passed upon them for it? Would any Persons have the boldness to be Givers or Takers of Bribes to Afflict the Innocent, if they considered that a God of Infinite Justice looks upon them, when their Hands are either opened to Receive, or Stretched out to give the Wages of Unrighteousness, and that he will be an Avenger of all those that use such foul and Indirect Practices against their Brethren? With what Confidence could any men talk
deceitfully, and speak in any matter to wrest Judgment and pervert Equity, if they did but bethink themselves that the God of Faithfulness and Truth knowes every word that is in their Mouths, and that he utterly abhorrs all those that love Lying rather than to speak Righte∣ousness, and will at last Condemn them to those eternal Flames, where they shall never be allowed one drop of Water to cool their false Tongues, which have framed Deceit? What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false Tongue? It is David's Question, Psal. 120.3. And his Answer to it in the next Verse is very dreadful: Sharp Arrows of the Mighty, with coals of Juniper: That is, as some of the Jewish Interpreters expound it, piercing Plagues here, and Hell fire hereafter: This shall be the Portion of those men whose Tongues devise Mischief, and who love all De∣vouring words that will do hurt. What fearfulness and trembling would seize upon the false Swearers? what an horrible dread would presently overwhelm them, if they did but call to their remembrance that the just Lord hath taken notice of all their Perjuries, of all those Oaths which they have Sworn falsely by his Name, to the hurt and Prejudice of others? And that he will not hold them Guiltless, nor
suffer them to go Unpunished for these hainous Crimes, but will most certainly let loose the fierceness of his Anger and Displeasure upon them, and pursue them with Wrath and Ven∣geance all their dayes here, and throughout all the dayes of Eternity hereafter? And as for the high and mighty Transgres∣sors, the haughty and imperious Sinners, that have no regard at all either to the Laws of God or Man in this case, but do their Brethren hurt with as great a Confidence as others do them good; how would their Courage sink, and their hearts fail them, if they would but take it into their Consideration, that there is a great God above them to whom they must be ac∣countable for all the Hurt and Mischief they have done, and that he will be no Respecter of their Persons in Judgment, nor Spare them any more than the meanest Sinners in the day of his Wrath? And to draw to a Conclusion, for I think it is time so to do; Let us all be perswaded ve∣ry frequently and seriously to consider what this terrible place and Text of Scripture puts us in mind of, That the Lord will be a sure and severe Avenger of all such as go beyond and Defraud their Brethren in any matter; and let the fear of his Eternal Vengeance keep us
within the strictest Rules of Equity and Justice, and restrain us from doing the least Injury or wrong to others. That we may escape that dreadful Wrath of his that is to come, let us forsake all our over-reaching, and fraudu∣lent and deceitful Courses; and let us do just∣ly, and live honestly, and neither devise nor practise any harm against our Brethren; and then when God comes to Judge the World, he will not be an Avenger, but a Rewarder of us; then we may all with Chearfulness and Comfort stand before his Judgment Seat at the last and final Judgment of all the World; for then the Judge of all the World will pass a joyful Sentence upon us, and before the great∣est and most solemn Assembly that ever ap∣peared before, all the Angels and all the Devils, and before all the Good men and all the Bad men of all Generations, will Pronounce us Blessed for evermore. And God grant that we may all be so Just to one another now, that the Lord may be Merciful to us all at that Day, and Receive us up into his Heavenly Kingdom, to be Partakers of all the Joys of it, and there to make our Eternal abode in his most glorious and delightful Presence. Amen. FINIS.
