P3840 R10620 13001898 96473
A Protestant PLOT NO PARADOX: OR, PHANATICKS Under that Name PLOTTING AGAINST THE King and Government. PROVED First, From their PRINCIPLES, Secondly, From their PRACTICES. Quo semel est Imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Graves in the Strand. 1682.
A Protestant Plot NO PARADOX. THere are (no doubt) in the world many Honest and Cha∣ritable persons, who themselves living up to the Rules of the Christian Religion, scan the Actions and Con∣sciences of other men by their own, and charitably believe all men are, what by all Laws of Heaven and Earth they ought to be; fearing God, and honouring the King. This pious disposition to make and think the best, is most commendable in every Christian; yet this Charity has its objects, and when mis-placed, is of dangerous consequence: Omnia praesumuntur bene esse facta, donec probetur in contrarium, is a rule of Law; and yet that Law which presumes all men (what she intends them for) honest, when they appear other, will both take notice of and punish them: else that which were meant for a curb from Vice, were the greatest dispensation for it. If to think ill too soon of men, and upon too slight grounds, is uncharitable on the one side; to shut our eyes against the light, and obstinately to persist in a good opinion of men who by all their actions labour to undeceive us, is as indiscreet and unsafe on the other. To be tender of the Sheep, is a just and necessary duty; but to spare the Wolf for appea∣ring like one, is the zenith of madness, and the very heighth of folly. Names make not things, but shew them; and forms and appearances alter not na∣ture: The Lyon is still a Lyon, though he have the Foxes skin; and the Devil is still the Devil, though he transform himself into the appearance of an Angel of light. Men are not Protestants for calling themselves so; nor does Christianity consist in an empty Name: this teaches all men, and obliges all men to do justice and love mercy, to fear God and honour the King; yet there are men, who assume to themselves that Name, that defie the one, and cum licentia Murder the other; that are only just when the strong hand of Law is upon them, and who love mercy to the devouring of Widows houses. These men that call themselves Protestants, and in the stile of their late and much-la∣mented Prytomartyr at Oxford, according to the best and purest Reformation, may be Tray∣tors and Murderers; and by their very Principles inclined, I say yet more, obliged to be so. And this is a sad truth, fit for every man to know, notwithstanding so many Argu∣ments, Letters and Papers with so great labour and art sent abroad of late to perswade the contrary. And if the Protestant Plot, (for so the Phanaticks would have us believe) may be an invention of the Papists, to draw us from a further enquiry into their own now almost desperate one; 'tis not impossible, but so many late Pamphlets, which de∣ny a possibility of a Protestant Plot, are by these as cunningly spread abroad, to work the Government into a fatal security, by a new-created confidence of their Loyalty. The old serpent has for many years, with two great Batteries, assaulted the Church of England, Popery and Phanaticism; the first his eldest issue, but the latter the more hopeful and active. Long had the first been making his approach with small success, when the latter soon, and like a true Devil, almost invisibly made a mighty breach, which all the valour and skill of the Defenders could not make good. Here it will not be amiss to take things a little higher, and shew, how these two migh∣ty streams, which seem to take two ways, and are in appearance so contrary, have yet one spring, are indeed the same, and tend to the same end.
The Prince of darkness and of this world, inraged at his repulse in the person of the great Redeemer of Mankind, and desperately mad to see all his labours defeated, and his hopes in his old Rebel the first Adam, confounded by the obedience and sacrifice of the second, resolved to try if he could be more fortunate in his offers to some one who were merely Man. The Roman Conclave, and its monstrous Head the Pope, were pitcht upon; to these he renews the offers of all the Kingdoms of the world and their glory, if so be falling down, they would worship him. Scarce was the offer made, but accepted; nay, more was paid than promised: for they not only worshipped him themselves, but drew the world after them to do so too; for which the grateful Devil was better than his word, and to all the Kingdoms of this world in possession, granted them in reversion his other in the next. Under this Title, and for ought I know the best they have, they claimed the domi∣nion of the world; but wanting force to make good their claim, they a while dissembled their pretensions, confining their Authority to a Spiritual Kingdom, till by degrees they workt themselves into the Temporal one too, and arrived to that prodigious pitch of greatness we this day behold them at. Twice four hundred years was the Christian Israel in bondage to this Spiritual Egypt, when at last God was pleased to deliver them, and bring them again into the right Worship of himself, whose service is perfect freedom. England began to perceive the madness of enslaying Soul and Body to a Forreign Jurisdiction, of sacrificing the one, and much endangering the other, to satisfie the Pride, Luxury and Ambition of a stran∣ger; resolved to be free, and was so: since which time, the restless malice of Rome has not ceased her continual endeavours to restore her lost Authority in this Kingdom, and re-unite so sweet a Province to her Empire. Long like a gallant enemy she waged fair and open War, which served but to make us stand the better on our guard; forewarned, forearmed: still their designs failed, and their Counsels were brought to nought, till almost despairing, they were giving over the Cause; when the Devil, who still helps his servants at a dead lift, sent them an unex∣pected relief: in stept the very worst Order of men, the most fruitful in invention, the most forward in execution of all villany, the Jesuite, whose Name is Legion, for many Devils are in him. These instruments of Hell, of the Devils own making, soon changed the face of af∣fairs; Divide & impera was their Motto: what cannot be beaten down, must be blown up: a little Dissention within, helps more, than a mighty Army without: these new Maxims produced new Counsels, and those Counsels put them upon taking new mea∣sures; and the deep policy of the Jesuite justly admired by the Conclave, entitled him to the chief administration of Affairs. Now, and not till now, were the English at a loss: for whereas hitherto they had hung out their own Colours, so that we had time at a distance to discover and know our enemy, and prepare for our defence; these were taken in, they manned out English Bottoms, and English Colours were set up, whereby, not suspected by us, we were sur∣prized by them; and if after a sharp dispute we had the good luck to get clear of them, yet we were very much battered and disabled. Well knew the subtle Jesuite, that Popery and its Principles (by the remembrance of Smith-field-fires, and those other prodigious villanies and cruelties in the Quinquennium Mariae) were the aversion of the English; and that many good and wholsome Laws, like so many well-mann'd Outworks, forbid the approach to our walls: wherefore giving over assaulting us without, they wrought underhand within, corrupted the Guards, gai∣ned the Walls, and turned the Cannon upon us; and now when by the treachery and baseness of those whom we trusted, the enemy was got on so far, that the very means of our safety became the instruments of our destruction, what could be expected but that which followed? the Governour was Murdered, the chief Commanders killed or imprisoned, and the Common Souldiers forced to serve the conquering and prevailing Party. And thus what the united Arms Spiritual and Temporal of Rome could not ef∣fect; what the formidable power of Spain, then the Monarch of Europe, and the Indies Lord, to their loss and confusion attempted in Queen Elizabeths days; what the secret Conspiracies of Papists failed of compassing in her Successor's, that a few false brethren, acting by the same Principles, under different appellations, brought to pass in the days of the late King; who as in his troubles he at least equall'd David, so might he well say with him, For 'twas not an open enemy that did me this dishonour, for then I could have born it, neither was it mine adversary that did magnifie himself against me, for then peradventure
I would have hid my self from him: but is was even thou my companion, my guide and my own familiar friend; we took sweet Counsel together, and walked in the house of God as friends. A stratagem of War well known to the Phanatick, to draw the Defenders (more valiant than wise) by a false Alarum of an intended assault by the Papists to one side, whilst the Town was surprized, and truly taken by themselves on the other. So much more dangerous is a false friend, than a fair foe. And all this is done not in a humour, or by accident (for then we might comfort our selves with the hope that it would happen no more) but designedly, upon principles of Conscience and Religion; Their Prophets prophesie false things, and the people love to have it so; they compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, and when he is made, they make him twofold more the Child of Hell than themselves: for there is no faithfulness in their mouth, their inward parts are very wickedness. To run over all their Anti-monarchick Principles, were an endless task; I shall pick out one, which comprehends all the rest. The Original power of Kings they place in, and derive from the People, to which, as Rivers to their mother Ocean, it ought to return again, when the end for which Kings have been entrusted, their salus populi, is by themselves apprehended not so well provided for, as by some other constitution of Government in their opinion it might be. Now this Principle is either true or false: If true, it is impossible for any people ever to Rebel; for Rebellion must still be against the Supreme Authority, which is lodg∣ed by this Rule in themselves. If false, it is almost as impossible, upon every dislike or fancy that comes upon them, for them not to do so: for it is ridiculous to imagine, that a people conceiving themselves opprest, should not make use of their power, when they are taught to believe it rightful, to fight themselves into Liberty. Infinite are the ill consequences of this one Principle; this alone warrants all the evils of the late Civil War, this justifies the Parliaments taking up Arms against the King: by this, the Kingly power struck still on the peoples side; this divided his per∣son from his Authority, and when the first was at York, made the other their Prisoner at Westminster; this makes out that part of his monstrous charge, That the King can commit Treason. Lastly, This made out the major singulis, minor universis; which autho∣rized (as they say) their proceedings in his Tryal, and warranted the Sentence of our modern Pontius-Pilate, the greater villain of the two, in many respects; the other ex∣ercising a lawful Authority, though in an ill cause; this an Arbitrary power upon one over whom he neither had nor could have any Authority: a Heathen and a stranger had more bowels for a Jew, in that case, than a Reformed Christian for his King, and Coun∣trymen in this: neither in the last day, when he shall know what it is to judge a King, and slay the Anointed of the Lord, shall he have this to offer in mitigation of his Dam∣nation, that like the other, (who upon a bare surmise that he was a King, though he indeed knew no King but Caesar) he sought to let him go, whom he knew well to be the King, and could not but know, that through envy they had delivered him. Now if these men still retain and profess this and the like Principles, why should it be so unreasonable for their Governours by all just ways to provide against the like pra∣ctices? Ictus piscator sapit; he that having once felt the flame, will again expose him∣self, if he be burnt will fall unpitied. But they may say, Why are these things, which by the mercy of our King have been forgiven, cast again in our dish? is there not an Act of Oblivion which stands betwixt them & us? is there any thing of later date to that, to rise in judgment against us? do we not live peaceably with our Neighbours, & in all due submission to the Kings Laws? To this I answer: Men that design disturbance in, and an alteration of Government, do accordingly take their measures; and whilst secretly they Cabal, Project, and take Counsel for War, Ruine and Confusion, are outwardly, and in shew, the greatest promo∣ters of Peace, Charity, good Order, and Obedience, till their Counsels are ripe for A∣ction. And we have the more reason to fear some such design now on foot, because we find the same Principles as occasioned the last Rebellion, are with great care new vented in many Pamphlets lately come out, and are as generally received, applauded, and ap∣proved by the same sort of men. Of this, amongst many others, a late celebrated Piece, the No Protestant Plot, is a proof; in which the Author labours, from the Principles of Religion, to prove the impossibility of a Protestant Plot. Take it in his own words, See Protest. Plot first part, p. 7. To charge a Conspiracy upon Protestants against the King, is to suppose them Fools as well as Traytors, (what news he tells us! why every man that means to become a Traytor, is at the same time necessarily a Fool, if we consider what he is to expect if he miscarry here, if otherwise hereafter) for had they no regard (con∣tinues
our Author) to the obligations of Conscience, yet the respect which they must be appre∣hended to bear to their own safety, will compel them, if they have any love for themselves, to be loyal to his Majesty. That is, seldome comes a better; they know not how at present to mend themselves, and therefore for once are content to bear with him. And that this is plainly his meaning, appears from that which follows: for says he, As matters one stated at this day in the world, they must forfeit their Reason, before they can abandon their Allegiance. So that it seems the Saints have their times, when they may be Rebels up∣on good reason: and yet the result of all is but this, that at this time we cannot reasonably suppose a Protestant Plot; which very concession is against them: for taking that pro con∣fesso, it is neither any principle of Religion, or obligation of Conscience, but the circumstan∣ces of the time, that admit not of a Plot. And then what a condition is the King in! what reason can he have to trust men who have already once deceived him, and do as good as tell him would do again, were they not more restrained by fear of the Successor to, than any sence of Duty, principle of Loyalty, or affection to the possessor of the Crown: yet even this were some ground for a present security, if it were true; but there is nothing less so, than the asserted reason of the present Loyalty. Heretofore indeed, when men upon some civil pretence compassed the death of a King, their malice & mischief went not further than his person; and though the Governour fell, the Government was preserved: but since men have Rebelled upon a Religious account, the mischief goes a great deal farther. Of instances, though History be full, two shall suffice; great ones indeed, viz. the French League, and Scotch Covenant. In the first, the blood of one King was no allay to the sanctified zeal of the Guyzards; H. 3. fell, but the war was continued with greater height than ever against his Successor H. surnamed the Great, upon the score of Religion now; with whom they meant to have dissolved that Monarchy, and have cantoned the Kingdom. The other deadly instance is too well known; and 'tis very plain from all the events and actions in that War, 'twas not only the King, but the Kingly Office they fought against: the Saints are thorough Reformers, and go through-stich: when a King by them is Murdered, the very Foundations of Government are overthrown; and 'tis made Treason to assert, (what it would be so now to deny) the Supreme Authority in a single person. And I doubt not but the Saints of our time would come up to the great example of their renowned Ancestors; they seem to plot for a single life, though a Royal one; all that pretend that way, must perish or save their lives by falling down and worshipping Common-wealth; that Golden Image which the Saints once did, and would again set up. He is a took, that believes that they who having Murdered the Fa∣ther, and set the Head of the Son to sale, would, should they Murder the Son, have more Kindness for his Brother; or that James D. of Y. should escape better, when Ch. the Second were killed, than the Prince of Wales should, had they caught him upon the Murder of Ch. the First. But to return to our Author; he tells us of another tye, Obligations of Conscience; and no doubt these should make men honest. But how far Conscience is binding in a Fa∣natick, is worth enquiry; and I find it resolved to my hand, in his Second Part of the No Protestant Plot, pag. 1. Where Allegiance is tyed to Interest, I know it will change as that does: but Conscience should be always the same; and yet a true Protestant Conscience is not so: for our Au∣thor says, That 'tis possible for a Prince to cancel all bonds by which Subjects are tyed to him: and gives for instance wherein, viz. his excluding a company of innocent persons from the benefit and protection of the Law; for this, he assures us, destroys all pleas and arguments which may influence their Consciences to obedience: that is, they are no longer obliged to be obedient to a Governour, than they are the better for him: so that indeed, the Kings Conscience, and not their own, is the standard of their Allegiance. Is this to be subject for Conscience sake? I would be thankful to any man that would reconcile the Doctrine of these Protestants with that of St. Paul; but they say, it needs not; 'tis an old antiquated conclusion drawn from a proposition not admitted by them. Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, (there they hold with him:) whether to the King as supreme; there Paul was a Tory, and now they differ: for the powers that are, says that Apostle, of Nations, speaking still of Kings, are ordained of God: we deny the Pro∣position, they are made by the peole. Now 'tis no wonder if denying the Propositi∣ons, they reject the Conclusion; a pretty indulgence that for Rebellion; nay, it places in the People, without appeal from them, the right of determining when the King for∣feits his Crown. And can any man after this, with modesty pretend, that 'tis so very hard, so morally impossible, for men holding these Principles to be Rebels, when by them, as I said at first, he is in some sort obliged to be so?
And that these are their Principles, any man without much argument thay be perswa∣ded to believe, that will take the pains to enquire into and observe their Practice, in all times within these forty years. There has been a Popish Plot, we are sure of that, and if conspiring the Death of the King; and the Subversion of the Government, be a Plot, and Fanaticks be Protestants, I find at least Three Protestant Plots within that time. From Forty One, to 1660, I think may pass for one; Venner and his Compa∣nions for a Second; that of that of 1662. of which more hereafter, for a third; and to make good measure, let that in April 1666. be added. Of these two last there is extant an account: but because the first of these, for many reasons is by much the more remarka∣ble, I have at the end here added the whole proceedings against those Criminals, as the same were exactly taken by the same, Gentleman who took and afterwards printed the Trial of the late Kings Regicides. The reading of this Tryal, is alone sufficient to convince all sober and judicious men, that these practious are very natural, and suitable to the Principles they flow from. Out of Which I have gathered some observations, as they affect the present time; and do here set them down first, that the Reader having some light into the Tryal, may the better weigh the greatness of the villany and mis∣chief that was intended. But the Fanatick perhaps may object the uncharitableness of charging the sins of a few persons upon a whole party. To this I answer, When thou sawedst a Thief, thou consentedst unto him. Nor was this the product of a few mens brains; as anon it will appear. But how does it appear (will they say) that these men here convicted were Fanaticks? 'is true indeed, the Religion of the individual persons cannot be so far made out, as to point to the particular Sect and Opinion of each, since most of them were silent at their deaths as to that; and he of them that did speak, tells us rather what he is not, than what he is; for the same reason possibly with a late Brother in the like circumstances at Oxford, that the blame and odium of their Crimes might not fall upon their Party. Yet thus far without doubt we may venture, from their employ∣ments in the late Civil War, their affections to the King, Lawn sleeves, and Circingle, to conclude, that men so uneasie-under, and so soon weary of Monarchy; so little sa∣tisfied with, and so ill affected to Hierarchy, had not their education in, nor ever were Members of that which alone deserves the glorious Sirname of true Protestant, the Church of England by Law establisht. It is likewise pretty plain, they were not Papists, further than all Sectaries are indi∣rectly so, being all several issue of that common Mother. It remains then that they must be Dissenters; Dissenters indeed, and as much divi∣ded in their Tenets from each other, as they are all from the Church of England; Dis∣senters ih every thing, but their old malice and continued Plots against her; in con∣spiring whose overthrow, (though no two of them agree among themselves) they are all of a piece; to this they can give unfeignedly assent and consent; so very forward in this ther zeal, that they always resolve of pulling down the one, before ever they once consider of setting up any other. This was a Plot indeed, that shewed the Authors Masters in their Mystery; a general Plot; not a few hot-brain'd fools met together without Order or Discipline, Friends or Money; but a close and deep contrivance formed after long deliberation; things well weighed and digested; every man his particular Province assigned, and every Sect (not one excepted) engaged  all interests were agreed, Fifth Monarchy men, Anabaptists; Independents, Fighting Quakers; and the Congregational Churches were consenting; and the Presbyterian, (that first-born of Rebellion) though not so visibly at the head as in o∣ther cases, yet full as deep as any; and if he craftily pulled in his horns in appearance, 'twas but to play the villain with more success. Yet some good honest harmless well-meaning men, may perhaps mistake this policy for honesty, and imagine remorse of Conscience for former offences, or a grateful re∣membrance of an Act of Oblivion, occasioned it; but for my part, I have not Charity enough to believe, that they can either repent indeed of old sins, or forbear attemp∣ting new ones, when occasion offers itself. Naturam expellas fureâ licet usque, recurret. Can a Black be washt white? or do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? They were not grown honester, but wiser, (if cunning in mischief, improved by long practice, may deserve that name:) they yet remembred how in the late Rebellion, they had born the heat and burthen of the day, and how yet those that came in at the eleventh hour were made not equal, but superiour to them: they had been the first aggressors, at a vast expence of Blood and Treasure; when the Independent stept in, tript up their heels, reaped the fruit of their labours, and even surfeited with the riches of their spoils their
Blood had paid for; their birthright not bought, but forced from them, and not a single mess left them to feed on: Virgil's fate was theirs; Hanc ego rempublicam feci, tulit al∣ter honores: they were therefore now for playing an after-game, and desired in their turn to be even with their younger brother; by which means, nothing venturing, they had hopes of all; to step into the Government if the Plot succeeded, to slip out of the halter if it miscarried. For your true Protestant Dissenter, whose Province is Rebellion, hates no Plot but that which miscarries; prosperum scelus vocatur virtus; and is as proud to own a successful villany, as cunning to shift it when 'tis not so. So when lately God for unscrutable causes was pleased to prosper the Arms of Traytors against their lawful Sovereign, how forward, (even to ambition) were they of being esteemed the Patrons of that then glo∣rious villany? Keepers of the Liberties of England, Godly reforming Saints, and what else were they not? but when in process of time, by as many sudden and extraordina∣ry revolutions as any Age or History can boast of, his Majesty was restored, and the god∣ly and thorough Reformation was solemnly damn'd, and declared a downright detesta∣ble Rebellion; not a Saint had a hand in it then; 'twas a damn'd Popish Plot, devised to discredit the Kings Protestant Subjects; and every babe was taught to answer to so much of his Catechism, That the Papists cut off the Kings Head; an evasion poor, even to ridiculousness, That the Papists should raise and carry on a War against Popery: for that was then (as still it is) the burthen of the Song. But a sorry shift is better than none. That relation of Dr. du Moulin of disguised Jesuits sent over by the French Cardi∣nal, which they urge so often in their own excuse, does not at all shift the Scene; an account that makes (in my opinion) much against them; it proves them Fools as well as Knaves; derogating much from their policy, without the least addition to their ho∣nesty: For if a Jesuit suitably habited, may pass for a zealous holder-forth, and that they look no farther; then the outside of a man, a starcht Band, a brace of Caps, a whi∣ning Tone, some six Grymaces, with as many Crocodile Tears, are all the ingredients that go to the making up a painful Soul-saving Preacher. For they try not the spirits that are amongst them, digesting every thing with an im∣plicite Faith; know no more of a man than his habit; and seem not to have read, or altogether to have forgotten, that a tree is known by its fruit, and men by their works, not habits; that ravenous Wolves are then most dangerous, when they appear in sheeps cloathing. If then Dissenters may be thus imposed upon; if where there is a Con∣venticle, there will be a Jesuit, that is, a villain; which may by no means be questioned, it having the authority of a man whose Evidence has stood the Test of Three Parlia∣ments; and of which a fresh instance we have in the person of the Doctor: if so it be; and that the most pernicious matter in point of Doctrine may be disguized by the ri∣diculous but most affected manner of delivering it, so as to pass currant; a man may I hope conclude, and his hair never stand an end for the matter, that it is no such Para∣dox, nor monstrous absurdity, 1. That this sort of Protestants, but most unprimitive Christians, may be, and are, by their very Principles, engaged in Plots and Designs against the King and his Govern∣ment. 2. One may believe without offence, that 'tis day, when the Sun shines; and we may conclude from all that we have seen, read, and known of these men, that their practice did never belye their Principles; and this more particularly will appear in the following Tryal. 3. That not only some few individual persons (though such only can be made ex∣amples) but whole Sects and Parties, and to use their own cant, their very Congregatio∣nal Churches, may be aiding and consenting to, and actually engaged in Treasonable Designs; of which this Tryal is an undeniable evidence. Here the Reader will find their grand Councels of Forty, Councels of Six; Committees of Secrecy, general Officers, Agents, Collectors, Treasurers, Magazines, Arms and Ammunition. Upon which, this is observable, that though it be not extraordinary for two or three men, without confer∣ring or putting their heads together, by accident to jump in the same thought, fancy, or design; yet where-ever all the several Sects of Dissenters, and all the great persons in every Sect, take the same resolutions at the same time, so strait and general an Union must of necessity proceed from some one principle that is common to them all; it being full as unlikely, and as unreasonable to suppose so strange a conjunction should be by acci∣dent, as to imagine that a handful of sand thrown into the air, should in falling to the ground form a perfect page in Homer or Virgil.
4. Another thing observable from this Tryal, is, That Sham-plots are not so late an invention as some pretend; and if (as they say) the Papists under colour of a Prote∣stant Plot, meant more securely to compass their own, I can tell them in what School they learnt that craft; of the Fanatick, the elder Brother for Shams of the two, who having cunningly spread a rumour of an intended Massacre by the Papists, designed themselves, under the security of that report, to cut off all, from the Cedar down to the Hysope: so that 'tis no new thing for Fanaticks to be Murderers and Rebels, and throw it upon the Papists. A bloody purpose it was, a villany as much exceeding the Irish Massacre, as the Protestants of the Church of England in England, do those of Ireland in number; besides the dignity of one above the rest, and more worth than all the rest, the King. There is another consideration, that incrceases that guilt above the others, by how much they pretend to be better Christians, and better principled. Neither was their Sham upon the Papists only; 'twas upon the King himself: for by that Letter in the Tryal it appears, the Kings Guards were that Popish Army that was kept on foot to do such mighty things. And at that rate, what do these men make of the King, who keeps and pays that Army, but a Murderer and a Papist? But here I would not be misconstrued, as if I designed to clear the Romanists from those sins, but I would give (as the saying is) the Devil his due, and set every saddle upon the right horse: they have more than enough to do to clear themselves of so ma∣ny notorious principles, dispensing with, and encouraging Treasons and Massacres, the sad effects whereof are yet felt in some, and remembred in most Kingdoms of Europe; so that they cannot want Presidents of their own, without borrowing of the Fanaticks, who indeed have enough and to spare. 5. By the Letter I mentioned but now, and which the Reader will find in the Tryal, it appears, that your true Protestant Dissenting Conscience has a dispensation for Swear∣ing too, and in the very cat of a Jesuit, call God to witness in the most solemn man∣ner, as if they were as innocent as the Child unborn. And now if the principles of Pope and Presbyter are so near akin; if it be so natu∣ral for the first to be Plotting, how comes it to be so almost impossible at any, and al∣together impossible at this time, for the latter to be so too? and surely for any number of men (whatsoever their authority may be as a Grand Enquest) upon the single, posi∣tive, and obstinate presumption of the principles of these Protestants, right or wrong to return Ignoramus, is not perhaps the clearest Evidence of a truly tender and Christi∣an Conscience. And this by way of caution I shall add, That since Juries have found Bills of High-Treason against Fanaticks, and such as call themselves Protestants, and are in nothing so but the Name; the late strange deliverance of some, is not a sufficient ground for that assurance and freedom with which some men speak, and almost act whatsoever they please: so great a security in confidence of an Ignoramus, may in time prove fatal. And now having seen the Principles of these men, I conceive it by this time plain, that they may Plot; and from this following Tryal, which is matter of fact fresh in our me∣mories, and for truth unquestionable, it is as plain they do. To endeavour to make it out yet more plainly, were lost labour: for them whom the following Tryal shall not sa∣tisfie, it is impossible ever to convince by any Arguments. As deep a piece of villany it contains, as ever was intended to have been acted on any stage; and had it taken ef∣fect, it had been as general a desolation: and I think, that considering the persons con∣spiring, and the persons conspired against, and the pretence of the Conspiracy, Religion; any ordinary judgment must needs agree, that that must needs be a very scurvy Religi∣on, which infuses such Principles into men, as will not let them live quietly under any Government; who will own no Authority above their own; consider the King as their Tenant at will; and esteem subjection for Conscience sake, a Doctrine for slaves, Turks, Vassals, and French Boors: a people not to be encouraged, because not to be relyed on; whom neither the King, who is all Mercy; nor the Law, that is the strictest Justice; the favour of the one, nor rigour of the other, can reclaim, and contain within the bounds of duty; whom neither the powers of this world, nor the consideration of the next, no Ordinance of God or man, can make honest; who will neither obey for love nor fear; and be subject neither for wrath nor for conscience sake.
An Impartial Narrative of the Indictment, Arraignment, Tryal and Sentence of Thomas Tonge, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs, James Hind, John Sallers, and Nathaniel Gibbs, at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bailey, London, Decemb. 11. 1662. THE Commission of Oyer and Terminer being read, and Proclamation made, the Grand-Jury were sworn, whose Names are, Arthur Jourdan, John Freestone, Thomas Fawson, Thomas Coney, George Compere, Isaac Rutter, Chr. Rigby, Rowland Steed, William Standen, John Worth, John Rigby, Leonard Staples. And several Witnesses being called, there appeared William Hill, Edward Rigg, Tyler, Godolphin, Bonfoy, and several others; who being all sworn, were directed up to the Grand-Jury. After some hours examination of the Witnesses, and consultation, the Grand-Jury returned the Indictment Billa vera. Clerk of the Peace. You good men of the City of London, summoned to appear here this day, to enquire between our Soveraign Lord the King, and the Prisoners that are and shall be at the Bar, answer to your Names as you shall be called, every one at their first Call, upon pain and peril that shall fall thereon. Good men of the Ward of, &c. Serjeant Glyn, Sergeant Maynard, His Majesties Serjeants at Law, Sir Jeoffry Palmer Attorney-General, Sir Heneage Finch His Majesties Sollicitor, Serjeant Keeling His Ma∣jesties Serjeant, Sir Edward Turnor, taking their places in Court, the Prisoners were com∣manded to be set to the Bar. Clerk of the Peace. Thomas Tonge, hold up thy hand; George Phillips, hold up thy hand; Francis Stubbs, hold up thy hand; James Hinde, hold up thy hand; John Sal∣lers, hold up thy hand; and Nathaniel Gibbs, hold up thy hand. Which they severally doing, their Indictment was read, the substance whereof is as followeth, viz. YOU the Prisoners that were last called to the Bar, stand Indicted in London by the Names of Thomas Tonge, late of London Distiller; George Phillips, late of London Yeoman; Francis Stubbs, late of London Cheese-monger; James Hind, late of London Gunner; John Sallers, late of London Compass-maker; and Nathaniel Gibbs, late of Lon∣don Felt-maker, for that you six, together with divers others particularly in the Indict∣ment mentioned, and others not yet taken, as false Traytors to the Illustrious, Serene, and most Excellent Prince Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scot∣land, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. minding, and with all their force intending the Peace and Tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to disturb, and our said Soveraign Lord the King to death and final destruction to bring and put, the 31. day of October, in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of our said Soveraign Lord King Charles the Second, Traiterously did compass, imagine and Intend the killing of our said Soveraign Lord the King, and the antient Government of this Kingdom of England to change [as in the Indictment more particularly was mentioned.] What sayest thou Thomas Tonge, art thou guilty of this High-Treason in manner and form as thou standest Indicted, or not guilty? Tonge. Not guilty. Clerk. How wilt thou be Tryed? Tonge. By God and my Countrey. Clerk. What sayest thou George Phillips, art thou guilty? &c. Phill. I am guilty in hearing and not discovering of it. Clerk. Art thou guilty of this High-Treason whereof thou standect Indicted? Phill. I am guilty, but not in manner and form as I stand Indicted; I have heard the words, as I formely confessed to Sir Richard Brown: not guilty as to the manner and form. Clerk. How wilt thou be Tryed? Phill. By God and my Countrey. Clerk. How sayest thou Francis Stubbs, art thou guilty? &c. Stub. Not guilty.
Clerk. How wilt thou be Tryed? Stub. By God and my Countrey. Clerk. What sayest thou James Hind, art thou guilty? &c. Hind kneeling down, and discovering much penitency, answered, I am guilty, and humbly beg mercy of His Majesty. Court. Record his Confession. Clerk. How sayest thou John Sallers, art thou guilty? &c. Sall. Not guilty. Clerk. How wilt thou be Tryed? Sall. By God and the Countrey. Clerk. How sayest thou Nathaniel Gibbs, art thou guilty? &c. Gibbs. Not guilty. Cler. How wilt thou be Tryed? Gibbs. By God and the Countrey. Court. Carry up Hind to the Gaole. And the rest standing at the Bar, silence was commanded. Cler. Thomas Tonge, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs, John Sallers, and Nathaniel Gibbs; You the Prisoners that were last called to the Bar, those men that you shall hear called, are to pass upon Tryal for your several Lives and Deaths; if you, or any of you will challenge them or any of them, you must challenge them when they come to the Book to be Sworn, before they be Sworn. Edmond Butler. Tonge. I challenge him; but afterwards admitted him. Clerk. Edmund Butler, Clement Punge, George Dixon, Samuel Pain, John Bagnal, John Gourney, William Gayler, Ralph Silverton, William Dudley, Joseph Drake, John Peake, and Robert Morrice were severally Sworn in this manner: Lay your hand on the Book, look upon the Prisoners: You shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make between our Soveraign Lord the King and the Prisoners at the Bar, whom you shall have in charge according to your Evidence. So help you God. Clerk. Count these, Cryer, Edmond Butler; Cryer, one; Clement Punge, two, &c. Twelve good men and true, stand together and hear your Evidence. Clerk. Cryer, make Proclamation. Cryer. O Yes, If any one can inform my Lords the Kings Justices, the Kings Serjeants, or the Kings Attorney, before this Inquest be taken, let them come forth and they shall be heard; for now the Prisoners stand at the Bar upon their Deliverance; and all others that are bound by Recognizance to give Evidence against any of the Prisoners at the Bar, come forth and give Evidence, or else you forfeit your Recognizance: and all manner of persons that were summoned upon the Jury, and have not yet been Sworn, they are discharged, and may depart the Court. Clerk. Tho. Tonge, Hold up thy Hand, and so to the rest of them at the Bar. You of the Jury, Look upon the Prisoners, and hearken to their Cause; you shall understand that they stand Indicted in London by the Names of Tho. Tonge, late of, &c. and so as in the Indictment aforementioned, who together with James Hind, who stands Convicted by his own Confession, and the rest also aforementioned: and so reads the Indictment again. Upon which Indictment they have been Arraigned, & thereunto have severally plea∣ded Not guilty; & for their Trial have put themselves upon God & the Countrey, which Countrey you are. Your Charge is to enquire whether they be guilty of the High-Trea∣son in manner and form as they stand Indicted, or not guilty. If you find that they or any of them are guilty, you shall enquire what Goods & Chattels, Lands and Tenements, they or any of them had at the time of committing the said Treason, or at any time sithence: If you find that they are not guilty, you shall enquire whether they or any of them did flee for it; if you find that they fled for it, you shall enquire of their Goods and Chat∣tels, &c. as if you had found them guilty. If you find that they are not guilty, nor that they did flee; say so, and no more, and hear your Evidence. Sir Edw. Turner. MAy it please your Lordships, and you Gentlemen that are Sworn of this Jury, the Five Prisoners at the Bar, by the names of T. Tonge, G. Phillips, F. Stubbs, J. Sallers, and N. Gibbs, do stand Indicted for that they as false Traytors, together with several other persons mentioned in the Indictment, the 31. of October last, did, in the Parish of St. Michaels in the Ward of Cornhil, London, assemble and meet to∣gether, consult, contrive and design to levy War against the King, to subvert and change the Government as it is now established, to Depose and Kill the King; and in order to effect this, they did likewise then and there agree, and design to seize and take in their hands, the Kings Royal Palace called Whitehall, where the King resides. For this they have been Indicted, Arraigned, and all these five have severally pleaded Not guilty: if we prove them guilty, you must find them so.
Serjeant Maynard. GEntlemen of the Jury, you have heard the Indictment read, you have heard the substance of it opened; it is in short words, but of as high consequence as any thing can be; I shall open the Particulars of that Evi∣dence, that we conceive will be made good by the Oaths of Witnesses to be produced to you. You see here what the Indictment is, I shall insist upon these particulars, which I shall open and make good to you; first, what was their Design; next, what was their means of accomplishment; what encouragements they used one to another, and what colours they put upon this wicked action. For the first, Gentlemen, I shall begin at the highest, higher no man can go in this world; that is, to design and compass, to contrive to put the King himself to Death, to seize his Person; some of them called it Secu∣ring; you know the English of that, a King Secured. We will go further, for we shall prove to you the person that with his own wicked Hand undertook the Slaughter and Murder of the King; he did contrive how he might do it, sometimes when the King was performing an office of Piety to visit his Mother; other times, when he should re∣create himself by Hunting; higher than this they could not go, and this they coloured over with Religion; this merciful King that had pardoned his People beyond their own desires, and contended to do it, this King they would Murder. Had there been no more, it had been exceeding hainous; but they went farther, their malice rested not up∣on his Person, but the Family, the Noble and Excellent Duke of York is designed to be secured likewise, and used like his Brother: not they only, they went further, the whole Nobility was in design; not (Gentlemen) that every one of these before you used these Expressions, but they and their Complices, some one and some another Expression, but all joyned in this, to destroy the King and his Family root and branch, that was their expression: King, his Family, Nobility, nay, go down to the Gentry, and it ceased not there, they go to the Clergy, as one of the Prisoners at the Bar (as you will hear) did express himself, I think it was Stubbs, that there should be never a Lawn-sleeve, never a Circingler should have a hole to hide his head in. Stubbs. I never opened my mouth to that purpose. Serj. Maynard. That will be left to proof: I undertake not of my self to prove this, but to open it let the Witnesses speak. In discourse some went farther than that; who∣soever would not joyn with them in their Design (it was one Strange) was an Enemy; and thereupon one Cole, who is gone, deserted them; though he was contented to have the King Murdered, the Nation ruined, yet would not agree in that Principle. To ac∣complish this, we shall prove to you they did Treat of levying a War, that among them∣selves it was given out that Arms were provided, some delivered, and their Designs to raise Money, seizing all the Treasury at Whitehall, Worcester-house, and the Chamber of London, to seize the person of the Noble Duke of Albemarle, and all about him, and Quarter to be given to none, that was their expressions. They did give out among them∣selves (for a while there was some difference among these Foxes, whose Tails were tyed together, and had fire in them) and Tonge told them (as we shall prove) that all parties were now agreed and would joyn: they had framed Declarations to justifie their pro∣ceedings; framed Papers to raise a Mutiny among the Mariners, and encouraged them to joyn with them, this will be proved: for their means, Phillips at the Bar undertakes to procure the Word that the Guard in the City had, so to betray them. There was a Design made for seizing the Tower; several men appointed for that purpose, they and their Complices were to come there with Papers in their hands as if they were Ma∣riners, and had Accompts to make up; these were to go up to those that sat there to finish Accompts. To encourage themselves, they gave out, that they had dealt with the Soul∣diers at Windsor, and secured that Castle; if this be proved to you, there can be no∣thing higher. There was this one pretence, it was given out, (and perchance the ru∣mours of the City are come to your ears) that they had designed a Day for the execu∣tion of this Mischief; several days were appointed, one on the Lord Mayors day, ano∣ther on Alhallows Eve. They gave out by a feigned Letter, that there would be a Mas∣sacre by the French and Papists of the Protestants; this was to raise a fear and discontent among the Nation, to induce them to joyn when this Design should be attempted. Gentlemen of the Jury, had they gone on in this wicked purpose, having possessed the people with these fears, who could have told how to behave himself? And it seems strange and wonderful, especially looking upon the persons, men of little consideration, despicable men, and who live under the Mercies of so good a Soveraign, that they should take such a Design in their hearts, and undertake the performance. Though the Spear hath not entred into the Sides of our Soveraign, yet it must needs Crown his Head with abundance of Thorns, that such people should be desperately wicked. But we shall call
our Witnesses; and when you have heard this proved, we cannot be so vncharitable to think you shall need any further aggravation, or doubt of your giving a Verdict against such  as . Sir Jeoffry Palmer. THese few Prisoners at the Bar were not all in this Contrivance, though we have not all their Names; but in the Evidence you will hear, there was a Council of Forty, and then of Six, but none discovered. These Six ated and infused into these and divers others what they intended, and then broke up, and gave out all was ready, and would be done on such a day. We shall not trouble the Jury with giving Evidence particularly against these men; they are joyned and knit together in one Cause. But hear the Evidence. William Hill, Edward Riggs, and one Bradley were Sworn. Council. Mr. Hill, Speak your knowledge in this business to my Lords and the Jury. Mr. Hill. May it please your Lordships, about the middle of October last, I met John Baker, one that is now Indicted, he was a Captain formerly called; I met him in Cheap∣side; he meeting me (after a Salutation) invites me to drink with him. I went into a house with him. When I was with him, he began to ask me what News there was in the Countrey. I told him I had little to inform him. He told me, if I would stay a while, he would ell me some. I asked him of what nature? says he, Not long ago the King went a Hunting, sent some Stags to Sir John Robinson, now the Lord Mayor, and went but with a small Guard, and I could have been one of the Twenty that would have slain that Outlandish Dog. Then said I, Mr. Baker, that's nothing to me; but what other News have you? Saies he, I know thou art right, and I know your Father; there is something on foot in the City, and if you will meet to morrow, I will bring some persons to you, that will give you information. Sir, said I, understanding it of dange∣rous consequence, and willing to get it out, I will meet you: and we agreed to meet the next morning; that Morning Three persons came early to my quarters, Hill the Cloth∣drawer, Mr. Bradley, and this Mr. Riggs; he appointed them to meet him there, but fail∣ing himself, they being strangers, said nothing to me then, and so I departed and left them a drinking; the morrow after he himself came to my Lodgings, fetches me out of my bed, and tells me he had appointed some persons on the Exchange to give me an ac∣count. I went with him thither; and there we met with some persons that were his ac∣quaintance, and from thence we went to the Ship in Leadenhal-street; and among us was Hind, that confessed himself guilty; and there the business was fully discoursed of what their intention was, that all interests were agreed; Fifth Monarchy-men, Anabap∣tists, Independents, and Fighting-Quakers; and the Congregational Churches were con∣senting, and were resolved to endeavour their deliverance from Adversaries at Whitehal. Many passages more. On the Morrow after we met again, and there met with us Hind, and Brown, and Baker; there we were acquainted of their Magazine and Arms provi∣ded, and about their Correspondence in the several Counties; that they were sure of Windsor-Castle; that the head-Gunner and Sergeant there were privy; we had informa∣tion concerning this Tonge, as an active person in this design. I studied to know this Tonge, and I was brought to him at his house; and there I met one Ward, Stubbs and Hind, and some others, and there we had discourse concerning the business. Tonge told us something of the business of Windsor-Castle, and proposed something in reference to the taking of the Tower, what Arms and Men they had for this Design; we met many times at the Ship; that Gibbs we met at Bridewel-Dock, and there was Stubbs and one Bearley with me; there we waited for a Brother of this Gibbs's to give us intelligence when the day of the Insurrection would be: we waited not long, but in came his Bro∣ther, and two persons more, one Thomas a Bridler or Bit-maker in Shooe-lane, and ano∣ther person in a handsome Garb came along with him; his Brother was somewhat shy (because I was a stranger) to speak any thing, but calls for this Gibbs and Stubbs, and had some private discourse with them, and away departed; after they were gone, we desired to know the Intelligence: they told us, that the Council of Six was broken up, all business was setled, Ludlow was Commander in Chief, and Al-hallows Eve was the time, that Horse and Arms were provided. For Phillips, that day that the Meetings were intercepted, that the Trained-ands did suprie them, that day this Gentleman and I (pointing to Riggs) came to the Main-guard at the Exchange, where Sergeant Phillips was with a Buff-Coat, and a Halbrt, and this Gentleman (meaning Riggs) saluted him and thanked him for his service in sending down notice to the Meeting to be gone, for he was coming down with the Trained-bande to surprize them; he asked him what was the occasion of the buse: says he, they say —
Sir Robert Foster. Who is that he? Hill. That Phillips said, they say they were up in the Wist; and if they were not, I would they were, and here too, for a few would do the work. Upon the Monday after, we met him near the Exchange, and so likewise Riggs thanked him for his service, and then he (Phillips) promised his further service when the time of the Insurrection would be. For Sallers, I was by agreement to have Thirty Arms delivered me, and I was very pressing to have the Arms out of the Magazine. Sallers met with this Gentleman (Riggs) and he urging Sallers about the Arms, Sallers told him that they were all de∣livered out the night before, about five or six hundred, and that forty of their friends went away without Arms; but that within two or three days there would be more laid in. Sir Heneage Finch. Mr. Hill, I will ask you one question (with my Lords favour) as you have given a general account, I will keep you to one particular person, Tonge: Did Tonge in any discourse with you, tell you of one Strange that was gone into the Country? Hill. One night he told us he had spoke with Strange; that he was gone into the Countrey, and would come back the morrow, and then we should have more intelligence. Sir Heneage Finch. What concerning the Tower and Windsor Castle? Hill. He talked of the good service that he had done in being at Windsor Castle, with the Serjeant and Gunner, for the securing of that Castle; that near five hundred of their friends were in and about Windsor, ready to assist for surprizing that Castle. Court. Who told you this? Hill. Tonge told me himself, that he was instrumental in it. Finch. Did he tell you any thing of the Tower? Hill. Only he said, it was fit some care should be taken to surprize the Tower at the time. Finch. Any thing of Alhallows-Eve? Hill. He did not fix the very instant time, but said, he looked for intelligence from Strange. Sir Jeoffry Palmer. What day of the Month was that? Hill. I cannot remember the very day. Serjeant Maynard. What did he say concerning Declarations? Hill. The Declaration was ready, Stubbs acquainted us, against Popery and Monopo∣lies, for Liberty of Conscience, and a Free Common-wealth. Finch. Any thing of the Popish Massacre? Hill. Yes, I had this Paper of them, a Copy of a Letter. Sir R. Foster. How many Copies of that Letter were to be dispersed in the City? Hill. About five thousand. Sir Jeoffry Palmer. These things were to be dispersed to possess the people, that the Papists about that time would Massacre the Protestants, that so they might draw all against that Party to joyn with them; a brave colour, when in truth there was no such thing, but only to carry on their design of killing the King, and altering the Govern∣ment. The Letter was read by the Clerk, and follows, in his verbis. SIR, OƲt of the respect which I bear to you in particular, and to the Protestant Party in general, I give you notice of this passage: About a fortnight since, a woman, which you must be ignorant where, who had it from a Correspondent of the Papists, that they in∣tend to make use of their Army (which all the World sees they have provided) against Al∣hallows Eve next; It was thought good therefore, in as prudent a way as may be, to give no∣tice to our friends in remote parts, that they may do what Piety to God, Loyalty to their Prince, Love to their Country, and self-preservation should direct them. Sir, I call the Eternal God to witness, that this is not to trepan, to put a trick upon you, but a sober truth; and also commu∣nicated to a Justice of the Peace, and by him to the Privy-Council; and what the issue of it is I have not heard; I hope you will inquire and tell us. From Yexford in Suffolk, Octob. 31. 1662. Serj. Keeling. Do you (Mr. Hill) remember any discourse of the way of taking White∣hall? Name who were there, and who spoke. Hill. There was Hind, and one Captain Browne a Shoe-maker in the Strand, and some other persons. Council. Was Stubbs there? Hill. Not at this discourse; but we talked of taking Whitehall at Stubbs's house, when a Sea-Captain was there that was to go to Saranam, and Stubbs invited him to stay at home to assist them; who was to come down with a Party by Charing-cross, and ano∣ther
the Party to come up by the Cock-pit, and to kill my Lord Duke of Albemarle, and to slay Sir Richard Brown in the City, and the Party in the City to keep a Drum bea∣ting, &c. And Tonge said, That their main care must be to keep down Sir Richard Brown, and the Trained-bands, or else they should never be able to stand. Council. What concerning the Privy-Garden way? Hill. They discoursed concerning the getting down the Door and the Wall, and so get the sooner to Whitehall. Council. What was Stubbs's opinion at that Communication? Hill. His was at Black-fryers, the last Tuesday night before they were taken, this Stubbs, Thomas, and Gibbs. Court. Which Gibbs? Hill. This black Gibbs at the Bar; they discoursed that they would be sure to make an end of Kings, Princes and Dukes, that they might have a Free State, and be troubled no more with any such kind of persons, neither Lawn-sleeves, nor Circinglers. Council. Do you remember that Stubbs proposed any other way to Whitehall? Hill. No, Sir. Maynard. Did they say what Number was provided, ten, or twenty thousand? Hill. Stubbs assured as there was a great Party in East-Smithfield, right for the work, and had their Arms. Council. What Imployment had Sallers about delivering the Arms? Hill. He said, the Arms were delivered out at Crutched-fryers, about six hundred, and that Forty of their Friends went away last night for lack of Arms; that within two or three days there would be more. Council. Did he name a Magazine? Hill. Yes, the Magazine in Crutched-fryers. Council. Did you know any thing touching the discovery of the Word, and by whom? Hill. No, Sir; but I understood that Tonge was assured by Philips, that Phillips would get him the Word that very night that they intended the Insurrection. Council. What was propounded, if they had taken the King, what would they do? Hill. He should have the same Quarter as Ludlow was to have. Court. Who said that? Hill. Stubs, Gibbs, and Tonge. Council. That's three of the Prisoners at the Bar. Lord have mercy upon us▪ Council. Were you not acquainted of a Council of Six? Hill. Yes, they named some at a venture, but they believed some of them were of the Six. That they met not twice in a place, sometimes here, and sometimes in another place. Council. Who did they name? Hill. Colonel Danvers, Phillips, Nye the Minister, Lockyer, and one Cole of Southamp∣ton, that these Five were part of the Six. Council. What discourse touching the distance of place where they engaged any? Hill. Forty miles about the Town. Council. Did Tonge tell you that Strange had lodg'd any Horse? Hill. He said, he had taken out the Horse that were provided for a time, but Gibbs and Stubs at Black-fryers assured us of the Horse coming into the Town the night before. Council. Did Tonge tell you of any Back, Breasts, Blunderbusses? Hill. Not he, Sir, it was talked of that night at the Black-fryers. Council. What did you hear concerning sending into Dorsetshire, to spread Rumours there? Hill. That they had four hundred of their Friends there that they were sure of, and several Cases of Pistols sent down by the Carrier. Court. Who said that? Hill. I know not what particular person, but at that Meeting and in that company. Council. Who was present? Hill. Gibbs and Stubbs. Council. None of the rest? Was Tonge or Phillips there? Hill. No, Sir. Council. Did you hear of any other Countrey, either Kent, or Worcestershire, or Derby, or Leicestershire? Hill. Tonge informed us of the faithfulness of Colonel Kendrick in Kent, to bring him some Arms. Court. If the Prisoners will ask him any Questions, they may. Sallers. Friends, all that here are present, I did ever abhor such an action: Ask him whether he did hear me speak those words, that I would say, That there was Arms delive∣red out, and that forty went away lacking, and in one or two days there wou'd be more; which words I never did speak in my life, or any such thing; only what I heard from Wapshot, as Wapshot declared to my Lord Mayor he told me, to whom I appeal. It's true, meeting with that Wapshot, says he, We hear there will be a Rising, and there are some Arms delivered out; said I, I would advise you to have a care of such a business.
Sir Orl. Bridgman. I would not interrupt you, you will be admitted to make your de∣fence afterwards; but if you will, ask him any Question. Sallers. My Lord, I shall come to that. Wapshot told me thee were Arms delivered, but further told me, he knew not of the certainty of these things; that at night he should go to a house where he should know. I bid him have a care. At night as I was passing along I met Riggs at Stubbs door, he asked me what news at London? I said, I was told there would be a Rising, and that Arms were delivered: Is there? says he; said I, I do not believe it, but I shall know certainly to morrow. I did call the next morning, and asked, Is the story true? No, says he, I was there, and there was no Arms: that was all that I know of the business. Friend, did I tell you any such thing? Council. Tell him, and upon what occasion. Hill. Upon occasion of Riggs asking him for thirty Arms for me, (this upon the Ex∣change) Sallers took him a little aside, and told him, They were all delivered out; that forty went away lacking that more would be there within two or three days. Sallers. That which I said to Riggs, was the Message I received from Wapshot; but that I inquired, and there was no Arms there; so that it was but a fallacy; For I ad∣vised him not to meddle with any such thing. Mr. Hill never saw my face, till I was ap∣prehended upon the Exchange, and brought before Sir Rich. Brown. Hill. I saw him upon the Exchange with this man (Riggs.) Council. Did he say that any Arms were delivered before, and what number? Hill. About five or six hundred. Sallers. He never heard me speak a word. Council. How long before he was apprehended? Hill. Never but that time with Riggs upon the Exchange, about nine days before his apprehension; and he confessed upon his examination, That he did see me with Riggs. Court. Have you, or any other the Prisoners, any Questions more? Sallers. I have more: Whether he will positively affirm that he spake with me upon the Exchange? Hill. No, Sir, you answered the question to Riggs. Council. You heard the answer? Hill. Yes, Sir. Sallers. May be at the second hand. Council. Did you hear the prisoner answer it, or had you it at the second hand? Hill. I heard it from Sallers himself, answering Riggs. Sallers. Did you hear me? Hill. Yes, to Mr. Riggs. Sir Hen. Finch. He swears it, and you wonder at it, and so we do all. Sallers. Who was there then? Hill. It was upon the Exchange when almost full. Sallers. What day of the month? Hill. I cannot remember the day. Sallers. I do declare before this Honourable Bench, Gentlemen of the Jury, and this great Auditory, That I never saw this mans face till I was apprehended: That which I told Mr. Riggs, was, what I heard Wapshot say. I never till then saw this mans face, nor exchanged one word with him; whereas he saies, he heard me, I do not believe Mr. Riggs saw him near me, when I gave him the answer. Hill. Seeing he doth invalidate my Testimony, Mr. Adjutant Carent took him upon the Exchange, I shewed him the person; and therefore, certainly I must see him before. Sallers. It was not he, but the other in the white cloaths, that came and took me, that knew me. Court. Will any of the rest ask him any question? Sallers. Here is that that I am accused of, That I delivered Arms, which is altogether false; My Lord Mayor can bear me witness, Wapshot confessed he told me such a thing; I was always serviceable to his Majesty upon all occasions, and all times: my Neighbours can witness my civil Conversation. Court. Have you any thing more to ask him? Sallers. I would fain know, whether the Bench and Jury are satisfied with this Evi∣dence. Court. That you will hear anon: What else will you ask him? Stubbs. What he accuses me, you have all heard: I do in the presence of God, and this Honourable Bench, and the Jury, deny it; for it is very false, and believe none will verifie the same upon Oath. Court. Have you any questions? Gibbs. We all stand in the presence of God; and I am very conscientious of what I say and do, I must give account of all things before the Lord. This Gentleman, Mr. Hill, has asserted concerning me, That I should deliver divers Cases of Pistols, or know∣ing the delivery of them: if Mr. Hill, who stands likewise in the presence of God, can produce any man to prove, that I delivered to any man any Pistols, or that any were so delivered by my order, or that I conveyed or sent them a way into the Countrey; do this in the light of the Lord and his own conscience, I expect no mercy. But I would have him speak no more of me, but what the knows of me, or by me; whether he knows
I ever received any Pistols, or delivered any at any time, for such an end as he is pleased to speak; which my Soul abhors, and God can witness. Stubbs. This Mr. Hill was the man that mentioned this, and that he had four Hor∣ses and Arms himself, and had two hundred pound in order to it. I was never any Plot∣ter, nor contrived any thing, but am as innocent as the Child unborn; but being by an accident at Tonges house, a Strong water-man; ask the other Witnesses whether he speaks truth? Sir O. Bridgman. I would put you in a right way, you shall be all heard at large, when you make your defence: But will you ask him any question? Gibbs. I propounded one, I desire an answer; Whether I received or delivered any Pistols to such a use? Hill. I did not say he did; but at that Meeting at Black-fryers it was discoursed among them, that several Arms were sent to Dorsetshire to several friends there, and he was there then; I believe he cannot deny it. Stubbs. There was Arms spoken of, but that man (Mr. Hill) spoke of them, and upon this consideration, that there were Arms delivered to every Hall, Ammunition and Powder: Riggs knows he spoke it at that time. Hill. Sir, that was spoken after the question was put, What was the occasion of send∣ing the Powder and Ammunition to the Halls? These Arms were spoken of, in reference to the design, I do acknowledge. I told him I had some Arms my self, and said, I had Two hundred pound for carrying it on: and I know the grounds of my speaking, and so do some of this Honourable Bench. Stubbs. Hill advised, that they fall upon Sir Richard Brown, as an enemy to all ho∣nest men. Gibbs. This Hill says, that I should say these things: there was more there, and had ears as well as he, let them speak. Hill. There was Riggs, Stubbs, my self, and I know not the other Names. Gibbs. This Hill and Mr. Riggs, whose face I never saw, came to my Neighbours house, where I was alone, found me plotting with no man. Hill. We were brought into his company by one Beazley he had been at Tower-hill about two or three a clock, to give some intelligence to some persons there, about the design. Riggs and I took a Coach and went after him, and Stubbs told us we might meet him at a Bakers house near the Tower. We found Beazley, and he said he could not sig∣nifie any thing to us, but would carry us to Black-fryers, to one Gibbs; and there he brought us to this very man, first enquiring at a house for him. Beazley was told, he was at a Tavern at Bridewel-stairs: We went there and found him; he told us, he could tell us little himself, till his Brother came; and accordingly he presently after came, that was the occasion that I came into his company. Gibbs. He says that I spoke of Pistols delivered, and a number, but how many he knows not; and that I should talk of the death of the King, which is as false as God is true. Again, I knew not of his coming, never appointed him, never was privy to any such Plot; I abhor it in my Soul, I never engaged in any such design with any man at any time Court. You do your self much wrong, and take away that time, which you may happily spend better. Stubbs. I desire to know of Mr. Hill, who was present at that Meeting, that I should say, the King should have such quarter as Ludlow. Hill. It was spoken at the Meeting at Black-fryers, after his Brother and the other persons were gone: it was there spoken, that the Council was broke up, and all ready; Alhallows-Eve the time, and then the same quarter to be given as Ludlow should have if taken. Stubbs. You do not answer the Question: who was there besides your self? Hill. There was Riggs, and that Gibbs there. Stubbs. You have onely his Evidence. Tonge. Who was in company when I talked of Three hundred men at Windsor? Hill. It was at your own house; and there was Ward, Stubbs, Riggs, Hind, and my self. Phillips. Whether did he ever see my face at any Meeting? Hill. I never saw you before that time in Cornhill. Phillips. Upon what account did I speak to Riggs then? Hill. When you came off the Exchange, you told him you could not stay, your Cap∣tain was coming, Riggs thanked you for your favour in sending word to the Meeting to be gone, to a certain Quaker.
Phillips. I never sent to any Quaker to that purpose. I did not see this man upon the Sabbath-day; but Riggs came down to me, and thought I had sent notice to Anchor-Alley, but I did not. Sallers. He affirmed that there was several Meetings of Forty, and then of Six: ask Mr. Hill whether I was in either of those numbers at any time. Council. He did not charge you with any such thing of being in that number: he asks a question about things not laid to his charge. Council. Let Mr. Riggs speak. Edward Riggs. About three weeks since, I came acquainted with Mr. Tonge, upon this occasion; Captain Baker did say, that he was a man of Intelligence, but Mr. Tonge did not care for him; and told me that I might be acquainted with him: a while after I came acquainted with him accidentally, when I came to his House. Court. Whose House? Riggs. Tongs house; Mr. Stubbs was there; he said, that he had been at Windsor, spo∣ken with the Gunner and Sergeant, and that they promised it should be ready upon some certain notice given: that night he had received a Letter of some business con∣cerning a suit at Law, he said, in which there was a mystical meaning, which he did not tell me of; but this he said, That he had made sure of Windsor, by the Gunner and Sergeants promises. This is that I know of him. Council. Is this all of Tonge? Riggs. This likewise he has told me, that he had sometimes met with a certain com∣pany, he did not say Thirty or Forty, but a pretty many there was: he named Mr. Co, Captain Elton, Captain Leigh, that they had often me, but could not well agree; but at last Mr. Strange did meet with them, give them one Meeting; they could not agree neither: they went away, and said these words, to the best of my remembrance, Mr. Strange did refuse to joyn with them, but when God bids him go, he would go; whether this day, or next week, or next year, matters not; but when God bids him go, he would go. Mr. Cole, was somewhat troubled to hear it; but says Mr. Cole, if you will go, give me but notice, if I cannot go so fast as you ride, I will hold by your Horse-tail: A little while after he told me, they had not met again; that Mr. Cole, because they could not agree about this business, was gone beyond Sea; but before he was gone, he did tell me of some considerations that were drawn, as he judged, about a Government, by Mr. Cole, and gave me in a Paper some certain Propositions, three or four, concerning Sea-men; the substance was this, what great benefits they had by a Common-wealth. Court. Who gave you them? Riggs. Tonge, but it came from Mr. Cole, as he said; In general, they were to declare against the Misgovernment of Church and State, in particular to Sea-men, what great ad∣vantages there would be to them; and three or four things propounded in order to them. 1. That no Sea-men should pay custom for any commodity that he did bring under the value of Ten pounds; upwards they must: And likewise there should be care taken up∣on our own Coasts, and beyond Sea, that where any of our English Ships should be cast away, there should be care taken out of the Customes, that might keep them in their travelling homewards, either from begging or starving; but Mr. Cole when they met, as Tonge said, would not agree, and therefore went beyond Sea: after he was gone, within a week or fortnight they had another meeting. Court. They, which they? name them. Riggs. I did not hear him name many, unless Leigh and Captain Elton, I remember no more; and there, he said, they had under consideration the Government of a Com∣monwealth; and so to declare against the misgovernment of the Church and State; and there was to be a meeting at London-wall, in a little time after, and he was there: He afterwards told me, he mist that meeting, but had intelligence brought him, that that time that he missed, thirty or forty, I know not the certain number, had referred it to Six men; they called it, The Council of Six, but the names of them, I never heard from him; and indeed, he said he knew them not, by reason of his absence from that meeting: but what I gathered from him, was this, That he judged Captain Elton was one of them. Council. He told you, there was a Council of Six? Sir Hen. Finch. To make things short; were you ever at any meeting where there was a discourse touching surprizing the King, altering the Govertment? and who was there, upon your Oath? Riggs. That Friday immediately before we were taken, I think Octber 24. there was some discourse, in general, concerning Whitehall; what might be done, as to the procu∣ring of that, and likewise concerning the Tower. Council. Who was present that Friday? Riggs. My self, Hill, Tonge, Stubbs, Ward, Hind, and John Baker; and then to the best of my knowledge, there was this discourse in general. Concerning the taking of the
Tower, there was some Propositions on all hands concerning the taking of that; Mr. Hind, he only mentioned, but did say he would undertake it, the righting of Gunners Ac∣compts. Mr. Tonge, he said, that the way that he thought convenient, might be this: When Sir John Robinson, now Lord Mayor, did late in the evening go into the Tower, there should be a party following his Coach; and so might do it. And John Baker at that present instant of time did say, That it was necessary the King should be surprized; and likewise sa then, That there should be no quarter, he would give nor take none. Council. Who was present? Riggs. Mr. Hill, my self, Bradly, Hind, Captain Brown, and Baker, and another Hill, the Drawer I think. Council. Was not Tonge and Stubbs there then at that time? Riggs. Yes, they were there. Sir Hen. Finch. I ask you this: I do not desire large stories, but firm and close answers; Were you present at any meeting, when the securing of the King, Tower, or Whitehall, was discoursed of, or no? Riggs. Sir, that Friday Octob. 24. immediately before we were taken, there was this discourse. Tonge did propound such a way for surprizing the Tower, by following Sir John Robinsons Coach in at night: and Baker did say, That it was necessary to undertake the securing of the Kings person, and assaulting of Whitehall; and that if there were Five hundred horse and foot, they would undertake it, by going into the Privy Garden, and Back-stairs. Council. Were you present when Stubbs did advise the assaulting of Whitehall, by the Privy Garden? Riggs. No; but Baker did say he would undertake it. Council. Who was present? Riggs. Mr. Hill, Bradly, Stubbs, and Hind was there: but that Stubbs undertook it I cannot say, but he was there. Sir Hen. Finch. Did Tonge ever tell you any thing of Phillips, or that he had hopes of the Word? Riggs. I came acquainted with Phillips, presently after I was acquainted with Mr. Tonge. Phillips once met me, and I carried him to Tonges, and then Phillips freely said, That there was Three hundred Arms at the Artillery Garden; he being one of the Artille∣ry, knew where they lay, and could tell them how they might come by those Arms; and that for the Word, it was necessary to be got; and if in case that it so fell out that the White Regiment was then out, or he then in office, he would endeavour to procure it: But afterwards meeting him several times, he declared, he would not meddle any more with it. Sir H. Finch. Were you upon the Exchange with Sallers, when there was a discourse about delivering out of Arms? and what did Sallers say? Riggs. Mr. Hill saying, That he had Two hundred pound to buy Horses, and that he had our already, and wanted Swords, and had friends in Town wanted Arms; asked me, if I knew if any were given out. I told him, that one Mr. Sallers told me, that he had heard some Arms were given, and to be given out that day. Upon the Exchange, Mr. Hill, and Bradley, and I being together, Mr. Hill said, I there is the person that told me of the Arms; I will go and ask him if there be any such thing. Whether Mr. Hill heard the discourse, I cannot tell, but he said, says he, I have enquired, and some Arms are delivered, and forty went without; but within two or three days there would be more. Sir Hen. Finch. Did Hill see Sallers upon the Exchange at that time? Riggs. Yes, but whether he heard him, I cannot tell. Sir R. Foster. What induces you to believe he did see him? Riggs. We were close together. Foster. What about Nathaniel Gibbs? Riggs. For Gibbs, I brought Mr. Hill acquainted with Mr. Stubbs; and he said he knew one at Fleet-bridge that sells Plums and such things; and if we would go along with him, he would tell us news. Hill, Stubbs, and I; that day I was taken, went to Beazley; Stubbs asked him what news; says he, I hear the business goes on; but if you will go to one Gibbs, meaning him that is fled, he has intelligence. So we went to an Ale-house near him, but he was not at home; and we were told, if we should go to Bridewell, they said they would send for his Brother, meaning him at the Bar, and so would have an account. Gibbs at the Bar being with us, he told us he knew little himself, but when his Brother came, we should hear.. Three quarters of an hour after came Gibbs that is gone, Thomas and another man. I knew him not, and Gibbs called this Brother; Beazley, Stubbs, and Hill, and I set still: when this Gibbs came, he said his Brother knew little, hoped we were honest men. The news was this, that he heard that Ludlow
was in Town, and that now the Council was broken up. Court. What Council? Riggs. The Council of Six was broken up, and that they had sent Messengers into the Countrey, to give notice, and to make their interests good abroad: this is that he said there, or as much as I remember. Finch. Now I will ask you in general; Did you ever hear of any discourse at any time of these Meetings, touching a Risting by the Papists, and a Massacre of the Protestants? Riggs. Being upon the Exchange, Hill, Bradley, and I, there was a Lieunant came to me, and asked me whether I heard of the Massacre to be; I said no: says he, I can let you see a Copy of a Letter to that purpose, and gave it me: Hill going to the Ship, I told him of this, and he was desirous of having a Copy; and this was the Copy that was this day read in Court. Sir Jeff. Palmer. What did you hear concerning the surprizing of the King at Camberwell, when he came from his Mother? and what did Phillips say? Riggs. Phillips, Tonge, Stubbs, and my self, being together, they were discoursing con∣cerning the Kings going abroad; and at that Phillips said, the King was to come to Hampton-Court, to see the Queen-Mother at Greenwich, and hinted that he might be sur∣prized. Tonge said, it need not; there might be such an opportunity twice every week. Court. Prisoners, will you ask the Witnesses any Question? Phillips. Did you not meet me on a Sabbath-day? you may remember I met you in Cheapside, we walked to Burchin-lane end: you asked me of a Rising that should be. I said, What rising? says you, To surprize the King, coming from Hampton-Court to Green∣wich: and I came and spoke it openly in my Family, as news that I heard. This Gen∣tleman had me to Tonges house, and there grew the discourse; Riggs told me, Tonge could tell further; and Riggs told me, that the reason why the time for it was not ap∣pointed, was because the Fifth-Monarchy-men and Anabaptists were not agreed. Riggs, did not I disclaime this business, and declared I would have nothing to do with it? Riggs. This is certain, that afterwards he did say he would not have any thing to do with it, and I did not see him a great while after that: Concerning Bakers surprizing the King, it is true, he did say before Hill and I, and Bradsley, that the King was a hun∣ting, and came through the City; and said, he would have been one of the Fifty that would have surprized him, and pulled him out of the Coach. Court. Who said that? Riggs. Baker. Court. Who present? Riggs. Bradley, Mr. Hill and the other Hill, Brown, and others. Finch. Do you remember no discourse concerning the coming in at the Privy-Gar∣den? Riggs. I have under my hand to the Grand-Jury declared, that Baker said he knew the way to the Back-stairs through the Privy-Garden, better than any; and Bradley did once, and but once, say, that he knew it as well as any, and would undertake to do the same, in the presence of Stubbs, Tonge, Hill, and the rest of them that were there that Friday night. Court. Who were the rest? Riggs. Hill, my self, Ward, Stubbs, Hind, and John Baker, at Tongs house. Sir John Maynard. We do not conceive, that these two witnesses have given Evidence against all of them; if any thing stick with the Jury, let them speak. Council. Hear Bradley; this witness that we call, he was no Conspirator; but when there was notice of the design, he was imployd to find it out, and to give us an account of it. Sir Heneage Finch. Mr Bradley, were you present at any debate? Gibbs. Whether did Riggs hear me say, that Ludlow was in Town, or that the Coun∣cil was broke up, and the business went forward? Riggs. This I said, That Hill, Stubbs, and Beazly, were present; and he said, he knew nothing himself, but from his Brother; this was the news, that he heard that Lud∣low was in Town, Council broke up, and that there was sent out Messengers to give no∣tice to prepare for the business; that it would be on Alhallows-Eve, or the latter end of the week, being Saturday the next day. Gibbs. I never spake these words, and do desire that the Honourable Bench will in∣quire of the persons, then present, Whether they will avouch the same; whether I said it from my Brother. These words I did not speak; and others being present, had ears as well as he. Tonge. Mr. Riggs told me Ludlow was in Town, and told me he would enquire after him. Riggs. I confess, I did so. Tonge. And that he was like to be taken in Cheapside; he was continually at my shop, and would not let me alone, prompting and inducing me to these things. Council. Mr. Bradley, were you at any meeting touching discourse of surprizing Whitehall?
Bradley. I was on Friday night at Tonges house a Strong-water-man on Tower-Ditch, where there was these two Gentleman with me (pointing to Mr. Hill, and Mr. Riggs,) and there was Mr. Stubbs, and John Baker, and another Gentlemen, one Ward; and we had some discourse about surprizing of Whitehall, which way it might be done. Some said, that a party might go through the Guard, and so surprize General Monks Guard: Others said, they might come down by Charing-Cross; but Tonge said, there was no coming down by Charing-Cross, because there was two great Guns planted at the bottom, and commanded all that way; but said, the only way he conceived, was to bring a par∣ty through Kings-street, and if it were possible to get into the Privy-Garden, and so into the Lodgings that way. This is all that I remember. Serj. Keeling. Do you know any thing about the Ship at the East-India house? Bradley. I went to this Ship sometimes; and with Riggs, Hill, Brown, Hind, and one Hill a Cloath-drawer, we had divers discourses concerning the design, and the news on foot. Court. What design? express it. Bradley. To alter the Government, the surprizing the King, the Duke, and the Gene∣ral, and as many more of the Council they could lay hands on. Council. What about the Guards, surprizing Whitehall? Bradley. At another meeting they discoursed about bringing forces to Whitehall. Council. Who were present then? which of the prisoners at the Bar? Bradley. None, unless Hind be there. Council. At what other meetings were you? Bradley. I was never at any other, but twice at Tonges house. The Friday night we had a discourse about taking Whitehall; and the day before we were taken, I met this Mr. Riggs upon the Exchange; he asked me to go home and dine with him; we intended to go and see a Ship: His Dinner being not ready, we went over to Tonges Shop, and had a quartern of Strong-waters, and I took a Pipe of Tobacco. Riggs went away, and said he would not stay; Hind staid with me the whilst. After we had taken a Pipe of To∣bacco, he came again, and said he heard the business was near at hand, and that there would be speedy action. Hill was at the shop, and after dinner Riggs and I, Mr Hill; and Hind, went all out together to Stubbs his house. Riggs and Hill went in, Hind and I staid. Standing there a little, said I to Hind, What mean these Gentlemen to stay so long? Riggs said he staid for a friend; but I will go and meet him: Said I, Will you not go on board a ship with Mr. Hind and I? says Riggs, No, I will go to meet my friend. Do you go on board the ship, and come to my house; If I am not there, pray stay a little. We asked Mr. Hill, if he would go with us, but he went with Riggs; and they told me coming back, that Gibbs had informed them, the design was ready, Council broke up, and Messengers sent to give notice, and Ludlow in Town, and to be General. Court. Who told you this? Bradley. Riggs did, when he returned from Bridewell. Tyler Sworn. Sir H. Finch. M. Tyler, do you know Tonge? Tyler. I know him very well. Sir H. Finch. Have you ever been in his company, and spake of any design about secu∣ring the King? Tyler. Often. Council. Tell what you have heard. Tyler. I have met Mr. Tonge, and others, in three or four several places; at the Wheat-sheaf at Lions, once if not twice; at the Half-moon, Widow Jordans within Bishops-gate, twice at the least; near Dukes-place at the Sheares. I have heard several things, and have noted it down, to be sure to deliver the truth. I have heard them speak about Whitehall, and securing of it, and of the two Guns there. Elton and he said that they might come with a Party backwards, breaking through a Barbers shop in Kings-street, and dismount the two Guns. But as touching the King, the Duke, and the Noble Duke of Albemarl, they proposed what excellent service it would be to secure these persons. He said it was not a thing that would admit of much debate; in as much as he had a friend a Courtier, (I know not his Title) that would give him notice at any time when the King was gone a Hunting, or his progress; and that it was easie to take it. Tonge said he served the Tower-Sutler, and was acquainted there; and said, there was no way to surprize that but this: either about ten or eleven a clock, I will undertake we may do it with forty persons, thus, says he, some to go in dropping, one by one, or two together; and others to be at se∣veral Ale-houses neer, to be ready; and they within seizing on the Guard by a private sign, we would secure those without; and the Soldiers being of the old Army, will readi∣ly comply: And said, there was a person that lived nigh him, wears Ropes about him, is a Porter when off the Guard; and believes he can command the whole Company, and would undertake it. For Windsor-castle, there was an old Gunner that he kept a cor∣respondence withal, and he serves the Sutlers of that Castle with Tobacco, I think he named Strong-water; and that the Souldiers were many of them of his acquaintance,
and that he had received Letters from this Gunner, under some strange title, and said it was easie, and knew, that at any time, when Word was given, let him go or send by such a token, and that place were our own. Court. Who said this? Tyler. Mr. Tonge. As to the other person Phillips, I can only say this of him; There is one Lieutenant Chapman, so formerly, now a Prisoner in the Tower: This Lieutenant was a Carrier of Norwich. I went to his Inn the George in Lumbard-street, and asked for him. I was told he was at Captain Fosters house in Leaden-hall-street, and there I might find him. I went to Captain Fosters, and Captain Fosters man told me he was at Supper there with his Master: I went up, there was this Lieutenant Chapman, and Phillips; which was the first time I laid eyes on Phillips: My business was to speak with Mr. Chap∣man the Carrier; but I perceived by some discourse of Mr. Phillips, there was some∣thing driving on: but I must say, that Captain Foster walked about the Room, as if he minded not the discourse; there was Chapman, Phillips, Elton, and a man looking a squint, I heard Phillips call him Muster-Master, but I know not the man; I heard them discourse very promiscuously about ships, and something wildly. I tarried while I spent my two pence, and came away with Mr. Chapman, and asked him what that young Blade was that talked so promiscuously? Chapman told me he was a Serjeant belonging to the Trained-Bands: Tell me his Name? his Name is Phillips: Do you know his Trade or Dwelling? He is a Gilder I think: Then this is the same person I have heard of at a Coffee-house, which was thus: A Perfumer in Southwark, he heard of great Rumours about a new Commonwealth; and pressing this Perfumer how he came to be thus informed; says he, there is one Phillips that lives in Abchurch-lane, this man knows of it: For, saies he, he hath said himself, that he has gone from Committee to Committee, where Offi∣cers met about these things, and he named Captain Foster for one that was ingaged in the business: said I, This is strange. I hastened back again in the morning to Captain Fosters: Sir, said I, Do you know that Phillips that was here last night? Yes, says he What is he? said I; he answered, A Serjeant. The thing is this; this man does talk a∣broad, That there is a meeting of the old Officers, and that you are engaged. At which, Captain Foster seemed to be troubled that he should be so spersed; answered, I know no∣thing, not one word of this. I do declare an abhorrence thereto, or of any action against His Majesty; and thereupon presently went to Phillips, and charged him with this Re∣port; and soon after, this Perfumer comes to my house, and desired me to go over to the Cross-Keys, where Phillips was. When I came there, says Phillips, Sir, I saw you the last night, when we were talking of Ships, I hope you do not mind the report about Captain Foster; for I am troubled such a thing is mentioned: For my part, I knew not that I said so; I am sure, I knew no such thing. This was all as to Phillips: But for Tonge I must needs say, in all meetings where I was, the several places that I formerly na∣med, and the Whalebone behind the Exchange, he still discoursed of this business. Council. What was done there concerning the chusing the Council of Six? Tyler. He was spoke to be at the Shears, but he sent a Note sealed and directed, in which was inclosed either nine or eleven of the Rump-Parliament names of persons: And, says he, for my part I cannot come this day, because the Hamlets are to go out into the Field; it was when Sir John Robinson marched with his Regiment; that I may avoid suspicion, I must go with him. Council. What were those names? Tyler. I cannot tell; but they were nine or eleven of those in the Tower: And he promised he would get a note of those mens names in the Tower; for he was confident of it, that they would sit as Members, and do good service upon the account of a Com∣monwealth: And said there were some that had a correspondency with them in the Tower. Council. What correspondency had they in the Country? Tyler. Tonge told me at the Wheat-sheaf, That if a Rising should be, it were necessary that the old Commanders up and down the Country should head them: And therefore, says he, What forces can be raised, should go under that Conduct; or to that effect: he and Elkin did propose several Colonels, I think most that are now living, both in Eng∣land and beyond the Seas. Council. Can you tell any thing of the rumours abroad, expecting this design? Tyler. Tonge told me this, That there was one that they called the Lord Lockhart, he, said he, was Governour of Dunkirk; that he had thirty or forty servants about him; that these persons expected a rising; and that they and himself would engage. We heard that Col. Rosster, not particularly from Tonge, but there in company, was expected to be at Sturbridg-Fair, to Head Fifteen hundred Horse to be at London. Also, he asked me
this question at his house, Whether I was acquainted with Captain Leigh, a man with one arm, a stout honest fellow, and an active man of his acquaintance? Council. Speak your knowledge, both of persons and things. Tyler. There was one Mr. Cole of Southampton, Swetnam, Gibbs a Hat-maker, not he at the Bar, Tonge, Thomas Elton, Elkin, Pryor, and one Cox a Gardiner, and Ward now Pri∣soner in the Tower, and one Ward a Southwark-man, and Dyer a young Scholar; there was one Rose of Chesterfield, and the Perfumer I spoke of, I know not his name, he lives in Southwark; and there was a Quaker, I know not his name: the great business was to unite all interests; Elkin said, there were several Meetings in St. Martins, and other places. Tonge. If there be any of the six in London, I believe this Mr. Tyler is one. Tyler. To clear that I am none of them, I will name those whom I said were the six; Thomas of Shoe-lane the Copper-smith, one Elton in White-chappel, one Raddon, Captain Spurway of Tiverton, a West Country Gentleman, Dr. Ward in Southwark, and Jones a Minister. Sir Hen. Finch. Did Tonge tell you that the time was appointed when the Rising should be? Tyler. I know nothing of that. Maynard. What about Leicester? Riggs. Hill said he dwelt there, and came from some that dwelt there, and others in Glocestershire; but there was another person with Stubbs and Tonge, and said there was a report in the Countrey that there would be some rising; and he came to Town to bring his Child to put him Apprentice with his Brother, and would go down again and car∣ry the certainty of the news. He was one of Lamberts Souldiers. Phillips. Mr. Tyler, did not you come in with the Carrier of Norwich to Captain Fosters? Tyler. No, I did not. Phillips. I am sure I came accidentally to Captain Fosters, and saw you there. Gibbs. Did I tell you, Mr. Riggs, that my brother said Ludlow was in Town, and there would be a rising shortly? Riggs. Mr. Hill, Beasly, Stubbs, and I and you, were together; Mr. Thomas and your Bro∣ther came in: your Brother Beasly, Stubbs, and Thomas were private in discourse: when you came again to us, we asked you what news? you said, before we came you knew not much, but your Brother could tell; but then you said Ludlow was in Town, the Council was broke up, and that Messengers were sent to give notice to the Countrey. Gibbs. I deny that ere my Brother said so. Maynard. Know you any thing of surprizing the Kings Council, or Whitehall, or any thing of that, of altering the Government? Tyler. As for altering the Govenment, that must needs be designed; for Tonge said it was debated, and thought convenient, as being the desire of several in the Country, that the old Parliament should be chosen again; that was to say, that so many of them that had approved themselves faithful from first to last to the Common-wealths interest, es∣pecially in the times of Dissention. Secondly, that none should have power to elect, or be elected, but such also as have approved themselves faithful, as aforesaid. Thirdly, this House was to be filled up within a Month. Fourthly, that it should continue one year, and no more. Fifthly, that they should not have power in things of an Ecclesiastical na∣ture, to impose any thing upon the Consciences of the people. Sixthly, that it should be High-Treason among them to assert the interest of a King, house of Lords, or single person. Seventhly, that they should not appoint any Salary-Officers. Eighthly, that while they keep to this, it should be High-Treason to disturb them. As touching Arms and things of that nature, the truth is, the business which was very much urged is this; that there should be an uniting of all interests together, Quakers, Fifth monarchy men, A∣nabaptists, Independents, Presbyterians, and Levellers; to which purpose every one was obliged at the Meeting to see what interest they could make among the Presbyters, be∣cause they looked upon them as persons that had most money and strength. I think there was no Presbyterian spoken of except one, who is lately secured in the Tower; he said, that if so be Col. Beanes was at liberty, he believed he could engage him. There was one man that was there, which was one Prior, I suppose Tonge knew him; he said, he had very much acquaintance with the Presbyters, knew many in the Countrey, and that there they did not meet with any difficulties as here; for all interests, Quakers, and Presbyte∣rians, and the rest, are all agreed. Sir Hen. Finch. Very well; you see Tonge was at all these Meetings, at the Wheat-sheaf and Sheares, and there were the Colonels proposed. Did you hear of any Orders given out, in any of these Consultations, to make the rising in the Countrey at the same time as in London?
Tyler. Mr. Gibbs's Brother told us, that he kept a Correspondence in the Countrey, that in Essex he knew there were divers Horse ready there; and I my self spoke with one who is lately secured, who said, there were divers Horse ready thereabouts. I remember there were several at the Half-moon at Bishops-gate; one Smith a Northamptonshire man, and one Elose of Chesterfield, and Tonge; and we heard that at Mansfield and Notting∣ham there was a rising intended; and it was assured, that the Countrey was very ripe and forward for action. We were informed, that there was 200 Horse at Bristol: one person not yet secured, did affirm to us, that one Col. Templar in Essex had two or three thousand men ready, his name was Thomas; that Templar was now in Town, if we would we might go and speak with him. Said, I, surely he doth but tell you this; saith he, his Lieutenant Col. gave me this Information, and assures me, that this Colonel had converted his Estate into Money, to pay his Souldiers. Upon this, having occasion to go down into Essex, I promised Tonge I would enquire further there; and understanding that one Thornback a Glover was one of Templars men formerly, I went to his house, and being not at home, I rode to Holsted Fair, and riding there, the man pulled me by the Coat, for he knew me; saith he, Mr. Tyler, my servant said you were at my house to speak with me. Yes, said I, I understand your name is Thornback, that you can give me some account concerning Col. Templar; we hear in London, that he hath two or three thou∣sand men in readiness. I pray inform me, saith he, I do not believe any such matter I have served him long, and if occasion were he would be for you. I asked him the news; saith he, We all dread a Massacre; we understand by a Letter from Ipswich, that the Papists intend a Massacre of all Protestants about Alhallontide, and that the Coun∣trey was in great fear about it. This Thomas the Coppersmith told us another story a∣bout some Roman-Catholicks in Southwark, that had a purpose to rise and take off all Phanaticks. After this the Court directed that Phillips's Examination should be shewed him at the Bar, and he acknowledged his hand thereto, and was read as followeth. The Examination of George Phillips Serjeant and Bringer up to Col. Sir William Wale's Company of Trained-bands in the City of London, taken this 29 of October, 1662. before me Richard Brown. Who saith, THat he knoweth one Parson Riggs, late Chaplain to Blake, who is now Clerk to one Friend, a Brewer in Cats-hole, near the Iron-gate in St. Katherines; which said Riggs told him, this Examinant, That there would be a rising of divers godly people in Arms for preservation of Religion, about the time the Queen came to Town; and that they intended to seize the Kings Person about Camberwell, in his passage to see the Queen-mother at Greenwich: but after the Queen was come to Town, this Examinant asked the said Riggs, why it was not done according to their intendment? who replyed, they were not then ready, because the Congregational Churches and they were not fully agreed; but now they were come to an agreement, and the work would be done in a short time; that all things were now near ready both in Countrey and City, and that a Frigat or more would revolt from the King to them. Not long after, the said Riggs carried him, the said Phillips, to the house of one Tonge, an old Army-Captain, but now a seller of Tobacco and Strong-water in Tower-ditch, where he heard Tonge say unto Riggs, that he had been at Windsor-Castle, and had made a Captain, two Serjeants, and a Gunner, to be of their Party; and that they had undertaken to deliver up the said Castle to that Party which were now to rise: to which Riggs replyed, You have done well. And further said, I am now going to surprize two Castles in Kent; one of them, as this Deponent remembreth, was to be Deal-Castle; and this he would and could do, for that he had some correspondence therein, and much acquaintance near, where he formerly used to preach. And further saith, That Tonge asked Riggs, who should lead the men that were to rise, and who command in chief? to which Riggs, reply'd, That Ludlow was ap∣pointed for that work. He further saith, that he asked Riggs and Tonge, how this business might be carried on with safety and secresie? Riggs told him, that there was a Council of Six which managed the Design, who sat but one day in a place, and would not be spoken with, but by the Agitators of each County, who were employed by them to and fro in this work, to prepare and make ready all parties in the several Counties: and that these Six were of several Congregations and Opinions, to the end that all Parties might unite. And further saith, that one Wade, or some such name, whom he heard Riggs and Tonge say was a Ship-chandler in East-Smithfield, did furnish Powder to carry on this Design; in whose company he once was, and himself said as much; which said person he believes he knows when he seeth him again. He also saith, that Riggs told him all the Congregational Churches were now agreed to joyn in this Design. And that Riggs and Tonge desired this Examinant to furnish what Men and Arms he could; which he saith; he never intended to do, though he earnestly requested it
of him; only he saith, in some things he was too faulty, which he prayeth pardon for, which was, in sending word to the several Meetings on Sunday last, That the Trained-bands were coming to seize them, upon which the chiefest of them made their escape before the Souldiers arrival: and that he being deluded by their fair Speeches, did promise to give them the Word when the gene∣ral Rising was to be; in which Rising all the Churches aforesaid promised to joyn, and the Fifth-Monarchy men to lead the Van. And further saith, that Riggs told him, they had a Declaration ready to fling among the people, against Bishops and Common-prayer; and that Li∣berty of Conscience was held forth therein: But first before this Declaration, they would seize on the Kings Person, and that then their Declaration would take with the people. And also saith, That one Captain Baker, one Bradley and Tonge were privy to all these transactions, which were debated by them in his presence; and that the said Baker came afterwards to this Examinant, and discoursed all the aforesaid particulars, and incited him to help on with the work; and told him, their Arms and Powder was distributed, and that a Porter, which was formerly a Souldier, carried the Powder to several places in a sack. And further saith, that Riggs had told him, they had divers friends both in London and the Countrey, who had and would help them to Money; and that all their friends were now ready in all Counties, waiting only for the day when they were to Act; and that Treasure in Guild-hall was likewise to be seized. And that the said Riggs also told him, that they intended to surprize the Tower: which they d easily do, having some therein that would assist: and this was to be put in Ex∣ecution in some Evening, when Sir John Robinson came home late, by following close after his Coach with a Party of men which should lie ready for that purpose. George Phillips. Sir William Morrice, and Sir Henry Bennet, Principal Secretaries of State, Sworn. Sir William Morrice. I have had Intelligence, and several adverstisements from several parts of the Kingdom, that there was a Design of Rising, and an Insurrection; that it was the general expectation and common discourse of the discontented and dis-affected Party; nay, it was likewise preached about, that the Papists had a Design to Rise and cut the Throats of the Protestants. I had four or five Letters to that effect sent and brought me; and these Rumours were spread to excite others to joyn with these. Sir Henry Bennet. Divers Letters of mine were to the same effect, that there was an Insurrection intended at that time, and calling upon one another to be ready at that time. Sir John Talbot Sworn. Sir John Talbot. I suppose that the Evidences that I can give in relation to the Priso∣ners, is only the consequences of this report, which they had rumoured about the Pa∣pists Massacring the Protestants; the consequence was this, that it made a very great di∣sturbance in Worcestershire and Warwickshire; insomuch that many Gentlemen that lived in the Countrey in very good repute, came under a very great suspicion of all their Neighbours; and the Lieutenants wrote to one another to secure many: there was Guards set to satisfie the fears of the Countrey. Friday night which the Rising should have been on, they would not intrust the Catholicks to be in Arms, but other Voluntiers. Mr. Hodges Sworn. Mr. Hodges. In Dorsetshire the 23 of October last, there was a Discovery made by some of the Town, of an intention of a general Rising, and some of the Town were engaged in it: one Mr. Harvey, a Justice of the Peace examined divers persons; four that were privy to it were sent to the Gaol, and an Express sent to Secretary Morrice. Sir John Weld the younger gave such an account of Shrewsbury. Stubbs. My Lord, The occasion of my going that Friday night was by Mr. Hill and Mr. Riggs suggesting the Papists Rising. I was never known to be a Plotter, I had not gone forth that night, but only by their perswasions; I never heard of any Arms, but only the rumours of the people. Sallers. I would ain know the Mr. Riggs what number of Arms I told him was deli∣vered. Riggs. I know not the number. Major Thomas Bonfoy (at his desire) was Sworn. Major Bonfoy. I do not remember that I ever saw Phillips's face; but I did under∣stand it was his custom to come to the Exchange to insinuate himself into my Officers, making merry with them, and endeavouring to get the Word; and I believe it was his common practice. Phillips. He may remember I came on the Exchange, and spoke to him, and was look∣ing for one of his Sergeants; I asked no man the Word, but presently went to the Black Lyon in the new Alley, and from thence I went home: I did not ask the Word of any one. I have confessed before the Council, that at the beginning of August, I met Mr. Riggs in Cheapside, he then came and closed with me, and walking along said he,
Do not you hear of a rising which should have been on Friday? No, said I: and then I I asked him where? he said at Camberwel; and I thinking nothing of it, came home and spoke of it in my Family, as news from Mr. Riggs; on Tuesday I met Mr. Riggs on Tower-hill, and he brought me to the house of Mr. Tong; Tong told Riggs he had been at Wind∣sor, and made some party to secure the Castle; Riggs said he could go down to Kent, and secure Deal and another Castle, for he had been a Preacher there. As for Mr. Tyler, one night coming neer Captain Fosters door, and having not seen him in three years be∣fore, he asked me if I would not drink. I said yes: then came in the Carryer of Norwich, I never saw this Carryer till then; then came Mr. Tyler, and there was talking of a Friggat, and the time of the lanching of it, and how it was to be man'd; but a little after Captain Foster came and charged me with a report, that I should say he was en∣gaged; I told him I knew it not, nor said it not; I have often declared I would have nothing to do in it, ti's true Mr. Roggs came and thanked me that I sent notice to the meeting to be gone, and I told him I would do the people any good I could, but Mr. Riggs knows I told him it was a dangerous business, and I would not meddle with it. I am sure in the time of the Fifth-monarchy Insurrection, I was faithful to the King, ventured my life as far as any man, Sir William Wale put trust in me, and I did that service there, that the Colonel himself did not venture to do: but that I was en∣gaged in this business, it is a trouble to me, and I hope the King will be merciful to me. I did not think that such a thing would be disclosed in so short a time, for my part I did not mind it, I knew nothing the night I was taken, I was in bed, and did not offer to e∣scape. I hope the King will look upon me as one drawn in. Stubbs. I never had any meeting with any of the Council, most of the things I heard at Mr. Tonges house, meeting with Mr. Riggs by chance; for those Gentlemen Mr. Tyler speaks of, the Council of Forty and of Six, I never knew them. I am sorry I should be concerned in such discourse, and I hope his Majesty will have mercy on me. Gibbs. My Lord, I was at a Neighbours house at that time, and went to drink a cup of Beer alone in their Kitchin, not knowing of Hill, Riggs, or Stubbs coming there, I never appointed them any meeting, they came in: and when they came in, they asked if there was not one Gibbs there, so the people of the house told them there was, they came and told me there was some Gentlemen would speak with me, whereupon they being strange faces, I stood up and said, Gentlemen, what is your business with me? said they, We would drink a Cup of Beer with you: then said I, sit down; they had a desire to be pri∣vate, and to go up, whereupon not knowing their business, I went up, supposing they meant some matters of my trade, but we fitting down, Mr. Riggs said to me, Mr. Gibbs what is the best news? and Mr. Hill also did urge and ask for news: said I, Gentlemen, I know no news, nor none I can tell you; so they made inquiry then for my Brother: said I, I cannot tell where my Brother is, may be your business is most with him; I will send for him: and I sent the Maid for him, and directed her, that if he was not at home, she should leave word for him to come: Again they urged for news, and I told them I knew none but only this, that the meeting was seized upon the last Sunday by armed Soldiers; but to tell them there would be any rising, or of any arms delivered, or Pistols, as Mr. Hill has related it, was a thing I was wholy ignorant of, I speak as in the presence of God, and I know I must one day give an account before the great Assizes of the world, and I fear that which they have said, is out of some fear lying upon them, being guilty of some fact, and so to shroud themselves under false lyes. They nor no other can prove that e∣ver I received or delivered any arms, or that any were delivered by my order; these men speak falsly. Sir O. Bridgman. You mistake your self, they do not charge you with receiving or de∣livering Arms, but you related it: your Brother speaks such things had been done, and if you know of this, and do consent and conceal it, you are equally guilty. Gibbs. After they had asked me the News, in a short time my Brother came into the room, and I rose from the Table, and went towards my Brother, and then my Brother as∣ked me what those Gentlemen were? I said they were strangers to me, and I knew not what they came for; saies he, they are strangers to me also: immediately we arose, paid our reckoning, and went away: but that ever I said my Brother told me, The Council of Six was broke up, all is ready, Ludlow to be General, and Alhallow. Eve the time, or that things went on well: I deny it, my Brother said no such thing to me, nor I to any man. When there was an Insurrection by the Fifth-monarchy-men, I was then presently ready at beat of Drum, went out in my own Person to serve his Maejsty at twelve a clock at night, though I had Servants of my own. My affections were such, that I have always ever since his Majesties Restauration been an obedient Subject to all his law∣ful
Commands. I belonged then to Major Kilby's Company, and did continue marching in the Company till the whole business was over, and ventured my Life, and never did contrive any Plot, or knew of any Plot, received or delivered any Arms. As to the Inha¦bitants among whom I have lived many years, they have known my Conversation: I have been a peaceable Neighbour, subjecting my self under the Government that now is, whom God continue. I desire this Certificate may be read concerning my Neighbours testimony of my Conversation. Sir O. Bridgman. If you have any of them here they may speak, but the Certificate cannot be read. The Porters man of Bridewell said he knew nothing but that he lived very quietly a∣mong his Neighbours. Sir R. Foster. Nor I neither. Court. Mr. Tonge what have you to say? Tonge. I have nothing to say, but that the first man that brought me into this business was Tyler. Sallers. All that I am charged with, is a report of the delivery of some Arms; seeing that a number of Arms are mentioned, I would ask what was the number? Riggs. I cannot well tell the number, but you said there were some arms given, and some to be given; and that several had come to that place, and went away without Arms, and that within two or three days there would be more given; but as to the number I cannot remember. Sallers. Now take notice of Mr. Hills Evidence, he hath asserted that there were 5 or 6 hundred, how do these agree? I can have sufficient testimony of my Life and Conver∣sation. Court. If you have any thing more to say in this business, speak in the name of God, no body hinders you, but keep to the business. Saller. I intreat the Bench to take notice what I am charged withal, it's only a report I received from one man, and told to another, and the very Original was a Lye, there was no such matter, and yet here is audacious Evidence; he saies I named 5 or 600 and yet Riggs to whom I spoke heard me name no number Council. One speaks to the Arms, but does not remember the number; they both speak to the thing. Sallers. How can Mr. Hill be a competent Witness against me; when he never saw my face before, but saies Mr. Riggs told him? Mr. Hill. I said not so, but that I heard it from your own mouth. Mr. Solicitor. Mr. Riggs, why did you go to Mr. Sallers to help Mr. Hill to Arms? Mr. Riggs. Because Mr. Sallers told me the day before that he heard there was some delivered, and more would be, and the next day we went to the Exchange, and there he told me this story. Sallers. I cannot hear him. Sir O. Bridgman. He saies you told him the day before there was Arms delivered, and more would be delivered, and then the next day he and Mr. Hill came on the Exchange, and then you spoke those words which they both witness against you. Sallers. I spake no such a word; It's true, what Wapshot told me, I told Riggs, which was, That there were Arms delivered; but it seems there was none: and I told him I would tell him the truth the next day on the Exchange, and so in the mean time speaking with Wapshot, he told me there was no such thing, and I told Riggs Wapshot said there was none. Court. Pray what made you so busily enquire after Arms if you were not concerned? Sallers. I did not enquire after it, but accidentally meeting him in Mark-Iane he told me. Tonge. My Lord, as you are my Judge, so I hope you will be my Councellor; and I pray your advice whether Mr. Tyler and Mr. Riggs be competent witnesses against me, they be∣ing in the same case. Sir O. Bridgeman. Where is the cause of your exception? Tonge. Because they are in the same case. Sir O. Bridgeman. There are four witnesses all against you, your own confession and examination against you; through the whole business you are a principal person. Tonge. I confess I did confess it in the Tower, being threatned with the Wrack. Sir O. Bridgeman. There is Mr. Hill, Mr. Riggs, Mr. Bradley, and Mr. Tyler; there is Hill and Bradley without exception; Bradley he was not at all concerned, he went along with you to know what you said; and Mr. Hill was not a person in the design, but made use of only to find out the Plot; they did nothing unjustifiable, so they are witnesses without exception. Serjeant Glyn. We desire your Lordship to declare whether Riggs and Tyler be lawful witnesses.
Sir O. Bridgem. I would have you know this, whereas you make exception against those persons that are guilty of the same crime, that's a mistake to say they are not witnesses: in cases of Treason, where there are works of darkness, these are things men will not do by day-light but in darkness, and who can discover these works of darkness better than they that have to do with them, if God turn their hearts? It's true, such persons as these are, if they had been convicted, they are not Witnesses, but though they are in the same fault, it is frequent they are allowed: besides, they are not witnesses alone, there are di∣vers circumstances, 1 Edward 6. 5 Edward 6. both Statutes say, there shall be two lawful witnesses in cases of High-Treason, that is, such witness as the law would allow, before those statutes: the meaning of the statutes was, that m might not be taken upon a bare surmize; therefore the Law saies, There shall be two witnesses. When one is accused of Treason, another in the same offence convicted and untainted, his Evidence is made use of, and though it is not so upright a witness as others, yet he is such a witness as the Jury is to take notice of: it is plain by several circumstances, you have been a principal person, a Leader on of the business; though a man be but present, when Treason is spo∣ken or designed and acted, if this man be present and shew any thing of approbation, his concealing of it is as much Treason as he that did it s they are all principals in Trea∣son. Sir Hen. Finch. May it please your Lordships and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard the Evidence of the Prisoners at the Bar, five of them have stood out their Tryal, a sixth hath confessed the Fact against those persons that now stand at the Bar; under good favour, there is a clear and unquestionable proof of the Crime charged of them, and they have not said any thing that hath either taken away the credit of the Evi∣dence, or excused the matter; if you consider first Tonge, there is against him four wit∣nesses, and those unquestionable, as you heard the direction of the Court, that he knew of the design, approved of it, contrived how to surprize Windsor Castle, had corrupted the head Gunner and Serjeant there, that he did contrive to seize Whitehall, and if you believe Bradly, advised as the fittest way, to break into Privy-Garden: all this against Tonge, with a world of other Evidence how active he has been, his house was the place of Consulta∣tion, he imparts the design to Phillips, and Phillips undertakes to get the Word of the Trained-Bands. I think none can prove more than is proved against him. When you come to hear the proof against Phillips, it is proved that he offered to betray 300 Arms in the Artillery, where he had some kind of Trust, and that he was ready to endeavour the Word when the Insurrection was to be, and but a very little before, he is the man that discovers to the Congregational Meetings, that the Trained-Bands where coming to sur∣prize them, that is in his own confession, as well as the willingness in him to discover the Word. It is proved that Tonge and Stubbs were present at those discourses touching surprizing the Tower, securing the King, this is proved expresly against them, Stubbs he thinks he has said fairly for himself, when he doth ask Mr. Hill whether he did not say he had horses and 200l. to carry on the work, Mr. Hill says he did say so, then it seems Stubbs was inquisitive what helps there were to carry it on; Mr. Hill goes further, that in the presence of Stubbs, it was said there should be no quarter given, but such as Lud∣low should have if he were taken. When you come to Gibbs, he does deny all the whole matter, and indeed so they would all; and they have nothing to say, but to cry all the witnesses have sworn falsly, and God is a Righteous God, and he will require their blood one day; but remember what a horrid protestation was in that Letter that was sent a∣broad to Alarm the whole Kingdom, as if a Massacre were intended by the Papists, and the Watch-word they should all rise by: that Letter saies, I call the Eternal God to witness, that this is no Trepan, but a sober Truth. Do you think, that men who are not ashamed to call the Eternal God to witness to a Lye, when 'tis to raise Sedition, will make any scruple at such protestations at the Bar, when 'tis to save their lives? and if a man may scape by his own protestation, who shall ever be found guilty? But Gibbs thinks he says a great deal for himself, when he says his Neighbours can give great testimony of his good Conversation. Alas, who will deny to give a good report of a man till he hear evil proved against him? But do you think a little demure and sober carriage a∣mongst a mans Neighbours, will serve to ballance an Evidence of High-Treason? Is not the proof clear, that he did both know the Design, and approve it? Mark what Gibbs tells the company: My brother, saith he, for his part he will not speak before you; but if you be honest men, this is the News, that was spoke like one that was not consenting to it; well then, what is the News? he tells them why the Council of Six are broke up, Friday is the day of Action, Ludlow is to be General. Can any man be privy to these things, and relate
them so cheerfully, and yet not be consenting? believe it, it is a hard matter to find grea∣ter evidence of a knowledge and consent against any Conspirator, until he break out in∣to open action. Sallers, he says that the Witnesses do not agree: for Mr. Hill speaks that he said there was Five hundred Arms delivered, and Forty men went without Arms, but within two or three days there would be more: and when Riggs comes to speak, he says, he did say Arms were delivered, and more would be, but he did not remember what num∣ber; and because they agree in the thing, but not in the number, therefore he thinks they disagree in the matter. Observe what reason was there that Riggs comes to en∣quire of Sallers for Arms, because Sallers told him the day before Arms were delivered, and more would be, he thought therefore he came to a very proper person to tell him. If you mark, Sallers does deny openly in the Court that ever he saw the face of Hill till he was apprehended, although Hill was with Riggs when the Arms were spoken of upon the Exchange. And then he says again, that Hill speaks by hear-say: he is out in that too; for Mr. Hill swears expresly, he heard the words themselves from Sallers. Then here are these before you, four witnesses against Tonge, two against Phillips, and his own confession; here is two against Gibbs, with these circumstances, If you be honest men this is the news, &c. Here are two Witnesses likewise against Stubbs, who was like∣wise present at all their Debates, even when the King himself was to have had the same quarter with Ludlow. Now Gentlemen, that there was a Conspiracy, I think you have a clear Evidence: we may thank God, and the care of the King and his Ministers, that it went no further; but 'tis no thanks to these men, they would have carried it to the extremity, had they had power; and with out question this was formed by other kind of wits than these poor contemptible Agitators, who are now tryed for it. You see there was a Council of Forty, and an under-Council of Six, a Declaration framed to scatter at the time of Action, and that Action directed to be both in the City and Coun∣try, just in effect at the same pitch of time; and that it might be so, a wicked and an im∣dent Letter is contrived, and many thousand Copies dispersed; and it wrought so far, that the Countries, much about the time appointed, were in great disorder, as you have heard it proved. Is it not plain, that an evil spirit went throughout the whole Nation, and animated the whole party of Malecontents? most evidently it was a terrible Conspi∣racy. Gentlemen, 'tis true, it is a question of Blood, but 'tis Royal Blood, 'tis the Blood of Princes and Nobles, and it concerns the peace and security of the Kingdom, and every mans propriety, and of Religion, for they had left no man of Conscience or Reputation behind, if they had prevailed. Consider the Massacre these men would have committed, had they prospered, and oppose that to the pretended Massacre, which they gave out by their Letter the Papists would have committed. Consider that you have the life of the King in your hands, and I doubt not but he and the whole Kingdom shall always be safe in the Verdict of honest men. Sir Robert Foster. My Masters of the Jury, I cannot speak long to you; you under∣stand the nature of this business, such as I think you have not had the like president in your time. My speech will not give me leave to discourse of it; for the Witnesses, they are none but such as may satisfy all honest men, it is clear they all agreed to subvert the Government, to destroy his Majesty: what can you have more? two of the witnesses are without exception, but I do not see any way but their testimony is good. For the parties, they in themselves are very inconsiderable; these are but the out-boughs, and if such fellows are not met withal, these kind of people are the fittest instruments to set up a Jack-straw, and a Wat-Tyler; therefore you must lop off these, or else they will en∣courage others. You see one of their own company hath confessed the Fact out of re∣morse of his own conscience: But I leave the Evidence to you. Go together. [Officer was Sworn to keep the Jury.] The Jury withdrawed, and after an hours Consultation, the Jury returned. Silence was commanded, and James Hind fetcht from the Goal to the Bar. Clerk of the Peace. Gentlemen, answer to your names. Edmund Butler, Clement Pung, and the rest of the Jury before mentioned, are you all agreed of your Verdict? Jury. Yes. Clerk of the Peace. Who shall say for you? Jury. The Foreman. Clerk of the Peace. Set up Thomas Tonge to the Bar. Thomas Tonge hold up thy hand. Look upon him Masters; how say you? is he guilty of the Treason whereof he stands Indicted, or not guilty? Jury. Guilty. Clerk of Newgate. Look to him keeper. Clerk of the Peace. What Goods and Chattels? Jury. None. Clerk of the Peace. George Phillips to the Bar; How say you? is he guilty of the Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?
Jury. Guilty. Clerk of Newgate. Look to him keeper. Clerk of the Peace. What goods and chattels? Jury. None. Clerk of the Peace. Francis Stubbs to the Bar; How say you? is he guilty of the high Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty? Jury. Guilty. Clerk of Newgate. Look to him Keeper. Clerk of the Peace. What goods and chattels? Jury. None. Clerk of the Peace. John Sallers to the Bar; How say you? is he guilty of the high Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty? Jury. Guilty. Clerk of Newgate. Look to him Keeper. Clerk of the Peace. What goods and chattels? Jury. None. Clerk of the Peace. Nathaniel Gibbs to the Bar; How say you? is he guilty of the high Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not Guilty? Jury. Guilty. Clerk of Newgate. Look to him Keeper. Clerk of the Peace. What Goods and Chattels? Jury. None. Clerk of the Peace. Hearken to your Verdict as the Court hath recorded it. You say that Thomas Tonge is guilty of the Treason whereof he stands Indicted, and so all the rest. And you say, that they, nor any of them had any Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tene∣ments at the time of committing the said Treason, or at any time sithence to your know∣ledge; and this you say all. Jury. Yes. Clerk of the Peace. Thomas Tonge hold up thy hand; thou hast been Indicted of High-Treason, thou hast thereunto pleaded Not guilty, and for thy Tryal hast put thy self upon God and the Countrey, and the Countrey hath found thee guilty; what hast thou to say for thy self, why the Court should not proceed to judgment, and thereupon award execution of thee according to the Law? Tong. I pray mercy from the King, I cry for mercy from the King. Clerk of Newgate. Tye him up Executioner. Clerk of the Peace. George Phillips hold up thy hand; thou art in the same case that Thomas Tonge is, what canst thou say? &c. Phillips Kneeled down, and said, I pray the mercy of the King and the Honourable Bench. Clerk of Newgate. Tye him up Executioner. Clerk of the Peace. Francis Stubbs hold up thy hand; thou art in the same case the two last Prisoners before thee are, what can'st thou say? &c. Stubbs. I beg mercy, I was meerly drawn in. Clerk of Newgate. Tye him up Executioner. Clerk of the Peace. John Sallers hold up thy hand; thou art, &c. what canst thou say? &c. Sallers. I would intreat this Honourable Bench to consider my condition, and what my charge is; I delivered no Arms: if I had known were they had been, I would have discovered them. I beg mercy from the King and this Honourable Bench. Clerk of Newgate. Tye him up Executioner. Clerk of the Peace. Nathaniel Gibbs, hold up thy hand; thou art, &c. what canst thou say? &c. Gibbs. And please this Honourable Bench, I have something to say. I am innocent as to my Conscience of acting any thing Treasonable against his Majesty, the Lord forgive the Witness, I beg the mercy of the King. Clerk of Newgate. Tye him up Executioner. Clerk of the Peace. James Hind hold up thy hand; Thou art guilty of the Treason whereof thou standest indicted by thy own confession, what canst thou say? &c. Hind. I have nothing to say, but humbly beg the mercy of the King. Clerk of Newgate. Tye him up Executioner. Cryer. O Yes, my Lords the Kings Justices command all manner of persons to keep silence while Judgement is in giving, upon pain of imprisonment. Sir Robert Foster. Thomas Tong, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs, James Hind, John Sal∣lers, and Nathaniel Gibbs, you six prisoners at the Bar, you have been here indicted for one of the greatest crimes that can be committed upon earth, as to this world, against God, our King, and your Country, and against every good body that is in this land, for that capital sin of High-Treason, which is a sin inexpiable, & indeed hath no equal sin as to this world: upon this you have severally been Arraigned, and have severally (except one) pleaded Not guilty, and put your selves upon God and the Countrey for your Tryals, and your Countrey have found you guilty: for the five that are found guilty, I must say, that in you I find little remorse, little sense of your sin; for the little man there, Hind, he hath much shewed his penitency. The manner and circumstances of this, most men here believe, this did not originally arise from your particular selves, it must be
put into you by some others. You speak as if you desired mercy; where was your mercy, that would have destroyed King and Country, and massacred many millions of souls, no respect of any person, but your own Fellows? I speak this, that you may be the more sensible of your own Crime, that you may truly out of the remorse of Conscience, be sorry for your sin: you know very well the old councel, and it is a good one, Fear God, and honour the King, meddle not with them that are given to change. Medling with them that are given to change, has brought too much mischief already to this Nation; and if you will commit the same sin, you must receive the same punishment, for happy is he, that by other mens harms takes heed: I shall not spend long time with you, but if you will, as much as you can, discover the Actors herein, you will do God, the King, and your Country good service. It remains that the Court proceed to Judgment, and therefore you six, the one by his own confession, and other five by conviction of Law, the Judg∣ment of this Court is, That you be conveyed back to the place from whence you came, and from thence to be drawn upon an Hurdle to the Place of Execution, and there you shall be hanged by the neck, and being alive shall be cut down, and your privy-Members to be cut off, your Entrails to be taken out of your Body, and (you living) the same to be burnt before your eyes, and your head to be cut off, your body to be divided into four quarters; and your head and quarters to be disposed of at the pleasure of the Kings Ma∣jesty. And God have mercy upon your Souls. The Confession, Speeches, and Prayers, of George Phillips, Thomas Tonge, Na∣thaniel Gibbs, and Francis Stubbs, at the place of Execution, on Munday, Decemb. 22. 1662 The manner of Conveying the Prisoners to the Place of Execution; and their Be∣haviour there before they began to Speak. THe 22. Decemb. Thomas Tonge, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs, and Nathaniel Gibbs, were according to a late Sentence, drawn on two Hurdles, viz. Tonge and Phillips in one, and Stubbs and Gibbs in the other, to the common place of Execution at Tyburn: Where being come, they were received into a Cart under the Gallowes; and the Executioner desiring them severally to forgive him, they all declared they did freely forgive him and all their enemies, and did severally salute each other with this Phrase, Welcome Brother; and to one another said, We are now launching into the deep. They being all tied up, Phillips gave the Executioner a small sum of Money, and the rest directed the Executioner to take out of their pockets a small parcel of money, as their gift to him; and Phillips afterwards bended a Six-pence, and presented it to a friend of his, Mr. Stroud; and a Shilling likewise bended to one Mr. Clark. Then the Under-Sheriff of Middlesex acquainted them, they had all free liberty to speak, provided they did not reflect upon his Majesty or the present Government; which they all promi∣sed not to do, and thanked him for his civility; and then Phillips began in manner fol∣lowing: Friends and Country-men, I Am come this day to pay that great debt that I owe to Nature; it is a work that had need be well done, for it is but once to be done. My hope is now above: and for what I now come to suffer, for my own part, I bless God, in whose presence I now speak as a dying man, I had not any murderous thought against the King; but I have prayed for him, and wished that he might Live and Reign, and long Reign in Righte∣ousness; and that God would make his Crown a Crown of Righteousness upon his Head, and bless him in his Government, so that he may not know any of these occasions more: For my part, I have ventured my life for his Majesty; it was far from my heart to do any thing of that nature. The Lord receive my soul. I freely forgive all men, as I hope to be forgiven of God: I never did act any thing, but only this, which was my ignorance of the Laws, that I did not discover it; And I was justly found guilty for not discovering. I have done Mr. Sheriff; but hope, after my Brethren have spoken, we may have liberty to call upon the Lord. Ʋnder-Sher. It will not be denied you.
Then Mr. Tonge began in this manner: Friends and Countrey-men, YOu see me here a dying man: I have sometimes been in some mens company, where I have heard them contriving the business for which I am condemned to die; and that which led me to joyn with them was this, I was and had been sometimes in the Army; and I have looked upon this Cause to be good. As for his Majesty, the Lord bless him, and prosper him, and put it into his heart, that he may be a Nursing-Father in∣deed to this Country. Ʋnder-Sher. Have you any more to say? you may speak. Tonge. I have nothing more. And then Gibbs proceeded and said, COuntry-men and Friends, and I hope Christians, and the last consideration is that that makes me the more free to speak to you: we all profess to own God and Jesus Christ to be our Saviour, our Redeemer, our Sanctifier, and giver of, and bestower upon us E∣ternal Life; this should excite our Souls to love one another; and upon the account of Gods love, that God has so loved us, as to give Jesus Christ to reconcile us sinners to God, we ought to love one another; it is his great command. Truly as to the Cause for which I am brought here, God the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, before whom I stand, knows that in the place where I have lived, I behaved my self as an obedient Subject, and when there was an Insurrection by the Fifth-monarchy-men, I went out in my own person, though I had Servants as well as others, purely out of affection to his Majesty, knowing that in the peace of his Government I should have peace, and so I went out, hazarded my life, and continued out till all was quiet. I was at a Neighbours house drinking of a cup of Beer on Tuesday night in the Kitchin, alone, save only the man of the house and the maid; these men came in, one Hill and Riggs that are the witnesses against me; there was Riggs and Hill, and this Stubbs, and one Beazely, and I being alone in the Kitchin, they asked for one Gibbs; the people of the house told me there were some Gentlemen would speak with me, I wished them to direct them to me, and they came to me; and through the ignorance of the Law, which it seems runs thus, If any words trea∣sonable against his Majesty is spoken, it is Treason to conceal it. So thus I have given you in part the cause of my being here. Hereupon information was given to the Kings Majesty that I should say there would be a Rising, and that Alhallows-eve was the time; that there were Arms sent into the Country, and that Ludlow was to be General; and this was charged upon me by the Kings Majesty when I came before him to be examined: and upon Hills and Rigg's Oath, I was sent to the Tower, and kept a long time a Prisoner, examined three or four times over by the Lords of his Majesties Council. I have one word more, as touching my Judgment. I am reputed in the world to be one of those that is called by the name of Anabaptist, a name of derision and scorn; One is an Anabaptist, one an Independant, one a Presbyterian, one this, and one that, and one the other: who gave these nick-names to Christians? There is but one God, one Lord Jesus, one Baptism, one Hope of Glory: How comes the Body of Christ, or the Members of Christ to be called these nick-names? But now, as I am one that do profess Faith in God through the Lord Jesus Christ, and do stand be∣fore you all, and before the Lord, I know no other God, but the Eternal and Living God, that hath made the World, and that Rules and Reigns, and disposes all his Creatures; I do believe in this God, he has been gracious to me a poor sinner, and to all poor sinners, that when we by reason of sin had forfeited our mercies, and were under wrath and e∣verlasting destruction, and must perish for ever; that God did out of his rich grace and tender mercies give his only begotten Son, according to his promise, to be the blessing of God to the poor Gentiles, according as the Scripture did declare; the Scripture forseeing that God would justifie the Heathens through Faith, preached before the Gospel to Abra∣ham, saying, In thee shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed: he speaks not of the natural seed of Abraham, but of Christ; so that all the blessings that God did convey to the sinful world is by the means of Jesus Christ, whom God in the fulness of time did send his Son born of a woman, to redeem poor sinners under the Law: and herein was the great grace and mercy of God towards all sinners, that he was so gracious to send his beloved Son out of his own bosom to take our natures upon him, who were defiled, and cursed, and condemned, and separated from God. I say, Jesus Christ took our na∣tures upon him, and for this very end, to do the will of his heavenly Father: Lo it is writ∣ten in the volume of thy book, I come to do thy will, O God, and it was his meat and drink
to do his will; and what was that, but that we might be sanctified through e offer up of the body of Jesus Christ for our sins, to tread the winepress of his Fathers wra and to endure the cross, and bear all our sins in his own body, that made his soul hea∣vy unto death: he was a surety for us and our sins, and for our sakes the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all and he hath born our grief and endured our punishment, it made his soul cry out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? or else we must for ever be banished out of the presence of God, and never have any hopes of glory, of faith, or of salvation, had not the Son of God become our Mediator and Surety; so there is one God, and one Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus. He gave himself a Ransom for all our sins, to free us from the wrath to come, everlasting destruction, and from the worm that never dies. O that we could ever be thankful to God, live to him that hath so loved us, as to send his Son to die for us, and is by the almighty power of God raised from the dead, and now sits at the right hand of God, and ever lives to make intercession. Truly, friends, this is not the love of man, but the love of God, and therefore eternal love. God so loved the world; it is Gods love, he loved sinners, ungodly ones; he did so love them as to give his only begotten Son to save them, to reconcile them, to uphold them, to redeem them from wrath to come: it was to seek and save them that were lost. That is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. We all like sheep had gone astray, and must perish in our sins, had not the Lord Jesus been sent of his Father, out of his bosom to declare the good-will of God, and did it, by which we are sanctified through the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ; and this Lord Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, he is the Mediator between God and poor sinners. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, said Christ, and I will give you rest; now this grace is from God, we are saved by grace, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God, through faith in Christ we are saved, and all things that do pertain to life and godliness is the gift of God; now all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto him. Would you know the forgiveness of your sins, your peace with God, and that God is well pleased, with you? God is reconciled by Jesus Christ unto you, and does not impute your sins unto you, but looks on the righteousness of Christ as satisfaction, that thereby you might have the re∣mission of your sins through the blood of Christ. Be it known unto all men, that through this mans preaching, the forgiveness of sins. Act. 13.38, 39. and by him all that do be∣lieve are justified from all things, from which they could not be by the Law of Moses; now justification from sin, and redemption from iniquity, is through the knowledge of Christs death for your sins, and his resurrection, and now there is no other name given under heaven whereby we can be saved, but by the name of Jesus, and whosoever believ∣eth in his name shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Joh. 5.24. It is the doctrine of Jesus Christ, it is his word, and I hope you will search the Scriptures, and look into those things for your souls good, when Christ says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that hear∣eth my words and believeth them, he hath everlasting life, and shall not come into con∣demnation, but is passed from death to life. The reason why God does assure poor sinners they shall not pass into everlasting condemnation and perish, is through his rich grace, through his promises; for he hath promised he will be merciful to our iniquities, and our sins will remember no more; and these his promises of grace which are all Yea and Amen in Christ, are ratified by the blood of Christ; the blood of Christ is the blood of the New Covenant, and it is that by which we have the forgiveness, remission and cleansing of all our sins. Ʋndersheriff. Mr. Gibbs, let me interrupt you, this is very good and pertinent, but you have said these things over and over, there is another of your friends is to speak, and the time grows short, pray go on to the matter, or conclude. Gibbs. I shall speak a word or two as to the knowledge of forgiveness of sins, by and through Jesus Christ; and so the knowledge of the Resurrection of the dead, it is the fruit of Jesus Christ; for by the first man came death, and by the second man Christ came life, and God that has by his exceeding great and mighty power, raised up Jesus Christ from the grave and power of sin, he also shall raise us up by the same power, and when he comes again the second time, at his appearing and coming, we shall see him, and be made like to him, and he will receive us to himself; he is gone to prepare a place for us, and in his Fathers house are many Mansions; and if it were not so, he would have told us. And now God that hath given eternal life, and forgiveness of sins unto his poor servants, he will also, when Jesus Christ shall come to judge the world, receive him into his everlasting glory, which is my Faith expectation and hope, in God through Je∣sus Christ. A man may bear his infirmities, but a wounded Conscience who can bear? When God smites, who can bear? and therefore I desire, as I believe the forgiveness of
all my sins, through the rich grace of God, through the bloodshed of Jesus Christ his Son; every one must give account to God, and as their works are, so will their reward be; either accepted by God, as workers of Christ, or condemned as workers of ini∣quity. Last of all, as to the separated Congregations to whom I belong, I have obser∣ved in those few days that I have lived, there is a great deal of animosity, evil will, hard censuring, and abusing the precious Saints of Jesus Christ. If they are in an error, you that are in the truth instruct them, and you may recover them out of the claws of the Devil: Are you Christians, and have the light of God in your Souls? O then strength∣en your Brethren, do not give them nick-names, and abuse them; that's not the way, Christ teaches another lesson, That if thine enemy hunger you shall feed them, and if he be thirsty give him drink; we should pray to the Lord that he would turn those that be out of his way, into the right way. Ʋndersheriff. You know we must be all subject to Government, every Congregation must not have a Ruler; their Meetings are prohibited by good Authority, and because they will not be obedient to good Government. Gibbs. I do not say, that every Congregation must have a Ruler, and I hope I speak the words of sobriety; I hope you will put a charitable construction upon what I say. As to the Magistrates I have a word or two. Ʋndersheriff. Speak well of them. Gibbs. Be not afraid, I will not speak any evil of them; Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, and the end of Magistracy, is for the punishment of evil-doers, and the praise of them that do well; and for this purpose; I do desire that the Lord will give to the supreme Magistrate here on earth, wisdom and understanding, a wise Council, a Council fearing God, and hating covetousness, that they may study to exalt the Throne of the King in righteousness and truth O that we may all praise the Lord for deliverance out of condemnation; and I say it is the duty of all the Subjects of the Kings Majesty, in all his Kingdoms and Dominions to live peaceably, and to pray for the Kings Majesty: Pray∣ers and intercessions ought to be made for all men, especially for Kings and Governours, for this very end, and purpose, that thereby we may live in all quietness, godliness, hone∣sty and justice; and to this very end the Lord bless our Magistracy, give them Counsel and Wisdom, that they may love them that love the Lord, and hate them that hate the Lord. After Gibbs had done speaking, then Stubbs began, who went over all the particulars of his Tryal at large, to which for brevities sake we refer you, only saith he, as followeth, Friends and Country-men, IT is true, and I must confess my sin in the presence of God, (and did ask mercy of the King) that I was in the company when I did hear wicked and Treasonable words spoken, and I being ignorant, and not knowing the Law, did not discover what I did hear. As to my Judgment, truly I desire to own what the Scriptures own; I shall speak of that place in the Hebrews, which is the command of Christ, I desire the Churches and people, every one to live the life of Faith, and love one another, I am confident it would be a means of abundance of comfort here in the Nation; there is a kind of heart-burn∣ing and rising one against another; you are so and so, throw dirt one against the other; it is our and your duty, still to be studying to live in love, and bear with one another, not be angry, destroy, and fight one with another: O that we might live that life of love that God has commanded, then we may expect the presence of God to be with us; sure∣ly God hath a great Judgment against his own people for not loving one another. Phillips. Mr. Sheriff, I Have only one word to speak before I go to my Prayers; that is, Here I see some Gentlemen present that are in the capacity that I was in, as a Souldier; I say, be faithful to your trust, and beg of God that you may stand fast, and not dishonour God, nor be disobedient to the King; when the Fifth-monarchy-men were up, I was free and willing to lay down my life for the interest of the Nation; and did venture as much as any young man in London: Therefore good friends, have a care, I am now brought to suffer; it is true I was guilty of concealing it, I desire your Prayers, that now as we are going to the State of Eter∣nity, from whence there is no redemption; I humbly beseech you, as Christians and friends, that you would seek earnestly to God, that now he may receive our souls into everlasting rest and happiness, which he has been pleased to bestow on them that love him and fear him; and the Lord knows my heart, I speak it in his presence, that had the King been pleased to shew mercy to me, I should have been a faithful and true Subject to him all my days: but seeing it is the righteous hand of God that now I am come to this un∣timely death, I desire you to lift up your Hearts and Souls to God with me, that when my soul shall leave this body, that the Lord Jesus Christ may with his everlasting arms receive me to glory. There is no redemp∣tion after death, we shall either go to eternal woe or eternal happiness; therefore good friends, I desire you to look up to God, that when my Soul departs, it may be received to glory. [Mr. Phillips his Prayer.] O Eternal Lord God, thou that art the great Creator of Mankind, and thou that formedst him in the womb, hear thy poor and sinful creature, now he is coming to make his last approaches to thy Throne. O that thou wouldst be pleased to look down in mercy upon my Soul: O Lord that thou wouldst be pleased now to take my soul and wash it, and hath it in the blood of Jesus Christ, who hath died and risen again for me. O that now I could see the heavens opened, and Jesus Christ ready to receive my soul. Be pleased, O Lord, to look upon me in thy tender mercy and compassion, and as thou hast said, thou dost not delight in the death of a sinner, therefore good Lord, look down upon my poor soul, and receive me into the everlasting mansions which Jesus Christ is gone before to prepare for all them that love thee.
O Lord, we are now going, I hope, to an estate of happiness, where we shall sin and sorrow no more, but where we shall ever reign with Jesus Christ, O Lord, had we not some hopes, had we not some sight of the Lord Jesus Christ made known to our souls, we durst not appear before thee this day, we durst not stand before thee in thy presence: O that thou wouldest more and more manifest thy gracious presence with me; that thou wouldest uphold me to take the bitter cup and drink it freely. O Lord, I desire to come unto thee; I have been a great sinner before thee, but Jesus Christ has died, is risen, and is now at the right hand of his Father, making intercession for us. And good Lord, as thou hast commanded us to come unto thee, and to believe in thee, and hast said, thou wilt in no wise cast off the soul that comes un∣to thee, in confidence of that hope, I desire to fix my soul upon thee before I go hence, and be no more. Bow down the heavens, O Lord, and hear the request of the poor soul before thee; and I beseech thee for Christ his sake, as thou wouldst forgive me, so freely forgive all that have done evil against me. Be pleased to let the Kings Majesty reign in righteousness and holiness put a spirit of power and might in his soul; and let him see wherein the stability of his Crown lies, in following Righteousness and Justice and Judgment, and preserving of that Truth that is made known to him out of the book of the Lord. Come down, Lord, to his soul, and let him see wherein is his hope, and O that he may at last lie and reign with Jesus Christ for evermore. Good Lord look upon me, I am coming unto thee, these are my last words. O that thou wouldest be pleased to receive us this day, that we may dine with thee in Paradise; make known thy e∣verlasting kindness to my soul before I go hence and be no more, that I may receive that comfort and sa∣tisfaction which I have longed and looked for. Lord my hope is in thee thou wilt not fail them that put their trust in thee, in thee is my trust and confidence; if I perish, I will perish at the feet of Jesus Christ. O that thou wouldst humble me, and seal up the pardon of my sins before I go hence, and let thy Son Je∣sus Christ manifest his gracious presence with me, and cloath me with that wedding garment of his righ∣teousness, and then take me into his arms, and present me to his Father. O that thou wouldest be pleased to strengthen and uphold me under this great stroke which thou hast been pleased to inflict upon me; I kiss the rod, and receive it thankfully from thy hand. I had been undone to all eternity, hadst thou not afflicted me, blessed be thy Name, that thou hast been pleased to send Jesus Christ, upon him I depend, upon him I cast my confidence, who is the rock of ages, and never failed any that came to him. Hear me and answer me, do for me and all thy Churches and people abundantly above what I can ask or think, and all for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with thy self and thy holy Spirit be all honour power, and praise, henceforth and for evermore. Amen. [Mr. Tonge his Prayer.] O Most Glorious, and Eternal Lord God, thou that hast created the heavens and the earth, and formedst of dust us thy poor creatures, to which we are now returning. Lord I beseech thee speak peace to my poor soul, lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, and let me see in thee, and through faith in thy dear Son Jesus Christ, that I am in covenant with thee, and reconciled with thee. Holy Lord, I beseech thee, let me see thy dear Son Jesus Christ sitting at thy right hand reconciling of me to thy self. Let me find my soul washed in the blood of the Covenant of thy dear Son Jesus Christ. Seal a pardon to me thy poor creature; O Lord, one smile of thy countenance is worth all the world; blessed be thy Name that thou hast supported me hitherto. Lord God I beseech thee finish thy good work thou hast begun in me, and go along with me, and strengthen and hold me to drink off this bitter cup. Be with me to the end. Remember the Governours of this Nation. O that thou wouldest showr down upon the King and Council thy mercies, as thou showrest down rain on the ground, that they may rule for thee, and those that fear thy Name may live in happiness and peace under thee, for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus Christ. O Lord, we pray thee remember all thy people, and be good to them, and deliver them out of their troubles, and speak peace to them, and let them know thou wilt deliver them. Keep me to the end, and uphold me by thy right hand, and so receve me with joy, for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, to whom be all honour and power henceforward and for evermore. Amen. Mr. Gibbs his Prayer. O Eternal, Everliving and Everloving God, who art a reconciled and loving Father unto thy poor un∣worthy Creatures before thee, and unto all the children whom thou hast called to believe in thee. O Lord, this is no small priviledge, that sinful dust and ashes mortal worms, should have to do and to deal with so holy and infinite a God, as thou art, to make requests unto thee, considering the vast disproporti∣on that there is between thee, and poor sinners: Thou art of purer eyes than to behold any unclean thing in thy presence, O Lord. We our selves are nothing but polluted rags, and fountains of uncleanness, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot; all the faculties of the soul, and members of the body, are all members of unrighteousness. Were it not therefore, that thou hast been pleased to give us good hopes, and found out a way to hold communion with us, which is through the Lord Jesus, in whom thou are well pleased, in whom thou hast spoke forgiveness of sins to our souls, we durst not now stand before thee: but thou hast promised, that though our sins are as scarlet, thou wilt make them as white as snow; and though they be as crimson, thou wilt make them as wool. Thou hast opened a fountain of free grace, and eternal mercy for poor sinners; that through the blood of the Lord Jesus they may receive remission, forgiveness, cleansing and purging from all their sins. Thou hast laid an All-sufficient help upon him, who is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God by him. We have nothing of our selves to bring unto God, but sins to pardon, and unclean souls to purge: Thou hast been pleased to give thy Son, and together with him, freely to give us all things: Thou hast given thy poor servant before thee, saith that has brought sal∣vation to his soul: Thou hast saved him by thy free-grace; not of works, but through the mercies and blood of Jesus Christ; and hast sprinkled the virtue of the blood of Christ in his conscience, in the belief of the truth, as it is in Jesus. O blessed be thy Name, that sent him to seek, and to save us from condemnation; who is risen with healing in his wings, and hast set Christ before us, that we should behold him that our sins have pierced. Certainly great was that disease that needed such a medicine; that nothing could expiate & take away our sins, and blot out the hand-writing that was against us, but the precious blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb without spot; he is now become our peace, who has made peace for us, through the blood of that his Cross, and has made twain, one in himself, Jew and Gentile. He was delivered up for our offences, and rose again for our justification: We in the knowledge of him, being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And blessed be thy Name, O merciful God, that has made such a Covenant of everlasting grace to poor sinners▪ and the children that do believe in thee, through Jesus Christ. Thou hast said, thou wilt be merciful to all our iniquities and sins, and wilt remem∣ber them no more: These are thy promises, and they are Yea and Amen Christ in Jesus. Thou hast made thy servant to hear thy voice in thy Son: Thou hast been a merciful God to him, and forgiven him all his sins, and justified him freely through the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall condemn us, or lay any thing to our Charge? It is God that justifies, who gave himself a ransom for our sins, is risen again, and now sits at the right Hand of God, ever living and making intercession for us; whose blood
speaks better things than the blood of Abel: His blood cryed for vengeance, but the blood of Christ cries for peace and forgiveness. God is in Christ reconciling himself unto the world, not imputing their tres∣passes: He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness o God in him. Blessed be thy Name, that thou hast sent thy holy Child Jesus, to be the propitiation, not only for our sins, but for the sins of the whole world. He hath suffered the just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God. O do thou therefore help thy poor servants before thee, and all thy children: Give us to see the removal of eternal death, by the death of the Lord Jesus. Let us see thee at peace with us, and justifying of us, through thy grace. All have sinned, and come short of thy glory; but being justi∣fied through the redemption of Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation for the sins of the whole world. Thou hast promised, that whosoever believeth in the Lord Jesus Christ, thy grace, thy mercy, thy love shall not perish, but have everlasting life; and thou hast given to thy poor servant excee∣ding great and precious promises, and by thy own spirit, bringing home these promises, given him to be∣lieve the Records thou hast given of thy Son; which beareth witness, that God is reconciled to him, and well pleased with him in Christ Jesus, and given him eternal life. And seeing thou hast bid his soul in Jesus Christ, when he shall appear, then shall we appear with him in glory, and be made like to our Lord Jesus Christ: By the same power that thou raisest up Jesus Christ from the dead, by the same power thou art able to subdue all things. There is nothing impossible with God; what ever thou hast promised, shall be performed; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but one title of thy word shall not fail: And therefore blessed be thy Name, that thou hast revealed these things to thy poor and unworthy Creature; that thou art his God and Father; that thou wilt never leave him, nor forsake him; and thou hast hid his life in Christ, and wrote his name in the Book of the Lord Jesus Christ; and he rejoyceth that he knows he is his, who is the onely true God: Knows thou art well pleased with him, and justified him freely from all his sins, accepted him, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ. O therefore, dear Father, do thou receive his soul according to thy promise, that he may be thine, and thou his God. O blessed Father, do thou be pleased to do good to all thy people: And now, dear Father, take care of our families, be thou a Hus∣band to our yoke-fellows, a Father to the Fatherless: Do them good abundantly above what we are able to ask or think; and what is wanting, and lost by our removal do thou hand out to them, thy mercy and grace, and move the hearts of the children of men to do them good: Be thou their God, help them, and provide for them: Seal up thy loving kindness to them, not only for this life, but for the life to come. Do good to our Magistrates; thou who hast the hearts of all men, make such as are about them, men fearing God, and hating covetousness, that may judge for God, that he may have glory. O be pleased to let his Majesty Rule and Reign in righteousness; let his Throne be established in Righteousness, and reveal the choicest of thy blessings to His poor soul: manifest Christ Jesus, and him crucified to him; and give Him to see the most precious blood of Christ, cleansing him from all sins. Bind up his soul in the bundle of everlasting life: Crown Him with a Crown of Righteousness, as well as with an earthly Crown: Let him be a Nursing Father, and Nursing Mother indeed, to this Nation; that He may hate the evil door, and be a praise to them that do well. D good to every one of us; O help us that we may first seek the Kingdom of God. First, believe in God, and then honour our King: First, fear God and serve him, and then give to Cesar, that which is Cesars. Give unto the King, that which is the Kings; Give Him all obedience to live quietly in all godliness and honesty: And now, O Lord, do thou take a∣way that spirit of emulation and strife, and malice. From whence comes wars? come they not from our lusts? The Lord remove pride, preiudice, and malice from us, and cause us to love one another: The Lord teach every one in their places, to walk continually, to the glory and praise of God; that we pro∣fessing the name of Christians, may be enabled to walk humbly and meekly; to do good, to walk uprightly, and to love mercy, and then certainly we may expect that blessing that God hath promised to them that believe in him, which is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. [Mr. Stubb's Prayer.] PRecious and eternal Lord God, in thy presence, O Lord, are we, and in the presence of thy Son, and of thy holy Angels, and in the presence of the great multitude that now is beholding us poor objects, poor worms, poor dust and ashes; and truly, Lord, we were not able to lift up our heads this day, except thou didst come in by thy mighty Power. O Lord, elp us to see the Heavens opened this day; and that the Arms of our Christ may be opened to receive our poor souls. O Lord, we are bidding farewel to the world,  enjoyments;  to every thing and now, Lord, we are going home to thy dear and  forth our souls, and enlarge our hearts after thee, that we may be in pursuit of our God; our souls long for the Lord, as the Hart longs or pant after the water brooke. Lord appear in this hour; this is a great Tryal, that thy poor creatures are brought to. Now come and smile upon thy poor worms: O that thou wouldest communicate thy self unto us; the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon our precious souls, be a precious God to us, and  Father; thou hast not left poor souls in the dark, in such an hour as this; O that thou wouldst com∣municately thy self unto us; we are now departing and dying, good Father, we pray thee, that we may have the spiritual life communicated to . Look in mercy upon every heart here in thy presence; O that their souls may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ: thou hast given Christ to dye for us, whilst creatures here; thy blood is able to wash and make me clean; O there is no spot, no dye, but the blood of Jesus is able to take it away. O Lord help us, that we may dye in the love of Jesus Christ: And good Lord, we desire that thou wouldst look in mercy upon him that in the Officer & Execution of those poor worms; and as he is to wash his  our blood, O Lord wash his Soul in the blood of the Lamb of God. Father, thou knowest we desire the good of his oul: we forgive him, and we desire to forgive every one. And dear Lord, we desire thee to look upon the King communicate the riches of thy mercy unto his Majesty; we desire his Soul may be saved; thou hast the hearts of all Kings in thy hand, draw forth his heart, that he may love those things that plea∣seth thee, and love them that thou lovest; let him be established in righteousness, and let Justice and Judgment run down the streets of England  a mighty stream. We pray thee to  forth our Souls to pray for every Relation; beget love in all sorts of people, th they may live the life of love, that when they depart this life, they may enjoy the blessed Comforter, the Lord Jesus Christ. And dear Lord, thou or  to give us a ast of thy love this day; Lord thou hast given us a pardon, blessed be thy Majesty for it; thou hast given us a reprieve for our Souls, we are delivered from death to life; we hope when we depart this world, we shall enjoy those blessed manons to all eternity. And gracious Father, we desire to bless thee, for that civility we have had from those that have been Officers here; Lord make it up to them; and we desire to bless thee for it. O the riches, and the height of the grace of God, and the love of Jesus Christ to poor sinners! We may see that thou  be pleased to look in mercy upon th poor ; O that thou wouldst unite their hearts in love together▪ O that there might not be any more  or lued: unite their hearts in love and obedience, that they may fear God, honour the King, that they may desire in all righteousness and holiest, to do those things that are according to thy mind and will. And gracious Father, thou canst not abide Hypocrites, the Lord cause Souls to love holiness, and the power of godliness, that they may not shrowd themselves under the profession, when there is no reality. Look in mercy upon all the Churches of Jesus Christ, communicate thy mercy and love to them; be pleased to be with  this day, and go along with us. O that we may bless that with our Souls, and all that is within us. Be with us, and do for us, more than we are able to ask or think, upon the account of Jesus Christ, in whom thou art well pleased, to whom be all praise and glory now and for ever. Amen. After which, their Caps being severally pulled over their faces, and after some private Ejaculations, the Executioner caused the Cart to be drawn away; and after they had hanged a while, they were severally Headed and Quartered, accor∣ding to their Sentence, and thee Heads and Quarters conveyed in a Basket to Newgate, to be disposed of at the Kings pleasure. Which he was graciously pleased thus to dispose of; Their several Quarters to be Buried, which was accor∣dingly done on Saturday-night, December 27. Their Heads to be set on several Poles, Two on the one Tower-Hill, and two on the other, as neer the Tower as may be. FINIS.
