P4052 99863281 115471
THE RE-PUBLICANS AND OTHERS SPURIOUS Good Old Cause, briefly and truly Anatomized. To preserve our Native Country, Kingdom, legal Govern∣ment, Church, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Privileges of Parliament, and Protestant Religion from ruine, scandal, and perpetual infamy; to reform, reclaim all Jesuit-ridden seduced Republicans, Officers, Soldiers, Sectaries, heretofore, or now engaged in the prosecuti∣on of this misintituled Good Old Cause, from any future pursute thereof, and engage them for ever to abo∣minate it, as apparently tending to publike ruin, their own temporal and eternal condemnation, infamy, our Religions Reproach, in present and succeeding ages. By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esq a Bencher of Lincolns Inne. Jer. 6.15. c. 8.12. Were they ashamed when they had commit∣ted abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: Therefore they shall fall among them that fall, at the time that I shall visit them, they shall be cast down, saith the Lord. Prov: 29.1. He that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. Zech: 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Execute true judgement, &c. and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law and words which the Lord of hosts hath sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets: Therfore came a great wrath frō the Lord of hosts, who scattered them with a whirlwind Numb. 16.26, 27. And Moses spake unto the Congregation, saying, Depart I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins. So they gat up from the Tabernacle of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, on every side. Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1659.
The Republicans and others spurious Good Old Cause briefly and truly anatomised. IT is not only an Evangelical counsel, but Precept, which every con∣sciencious Christian, as well in point of conscience as prudence, is ob∣liged strictly to pursue, 1 Thes. 5.21, 22. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good: abstain from all appearance of evil: this being the distinguishing character between a real Wise-man and a Fool: Prov. 14.15, 16. The simple believeth every word, but the prudent man look∣eth well to his goings. A wife man feareth and departeth from evill, but the fool rageth and is confident. This consideration put me upon a serious scrutiny of the Good Old Cause, newly cryed up, highly magnified, and violently pursued, not only in sundry printed Pamphlets and Petitions, but also in the last convention at Westminster by the confederated Triumuirate of Repub∣licans, Sectaries, and Souldiers, pre-engaged in its pursuit, and en∣deavouring (like those old seditious Seducers, whom the Apostle be∣seeched the Roman Saints both to mark and avoyd, Rom. 16.17, 18.) by good words and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the simple Souldiers, People, and some of the wiser sort of Members, Citizens, and Army-Officers, yet dissenting from them, to engage them to e∣spouse so Good and Old a Cause, set out with glorious general words and painted varnishes; without acquainting them particularly, really and ingeniously what it is. When I had not only superficially viewed the outside, but conside∣rately penetrated into the true original, seminal sourse, and intrals of it, I discovered it to be in truth the Jesuits & old Gunpowder-Traytors, most execrable Plot and Cause, principally projected and secretly promo∣ted by Popish Cardinals, Jesuites, Priests, Agents of all sorts, but vi∣sibly carried on and effected, by Apostate Republican, and Sectari∣an Members of the late long Parliament, Army, and their confede∣rates, to blow up, subvert, destroy the King, Queen, Prince, Royal posterity, Lords, commons, Kingdom, Government, Laws, Liberty, and Property of the People of England, yea the verie constitution, freedom, power, privileges of all true English-Parliaments, the church and ministry of England, and true Protestant Religion it self, formerly established, to set up Oligarchy, Anarchy, Tyranny, Oppression, Libertinisme, Marshal-Government, and all kind of Heresies, Blas∣phemies, Religions, Sects, yea Atheisme, Popery it self at last in their steads, to bring our Kingdoms, Churches, Nations, Religion to inevi∣table desolation, and subject them to the Iron yokes of Rome, France,
and Spain, for the future, The blackest, horridst infernall cause ever yet owned by any Christians, or treacherous perfidious Sons of Adam since the Creation. This needs no better nor clearer demonstration, than the review of all their late treacherous perjurious actings, proceedings, (contrary to all their former Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, Protestation, Vow, League, covenant, Declarations, Remonstrances, new Acts of Parliament, yea the very▪ clauses of the Writs, Indentures by which they were choosen and retorned Members, and the Commissions whereby they were first made Army-Officers) not only against the late beheaded King and his posterity, but Monarchy it self (theDeut. 17.14, 15. Ezech. 16, 13, 14. Jer. 17.25. c. 21.3, 4. best of Governments) being that ofPs. 10.16. Ps. 29.10. Ps 47.7. 1 Tim. 1.17. God himself over the whole World, and ofPs. 2.6. ps. 24.9, 10 ps. 45 14, 15. ps. 149. 2. Is. 32.1. c. 33.17.22. Dan. 7.14. Lu. 1.23. Mat. 2.2. c. 21.5. c. 25, 34, 40. Rev. 15.3. c. 17.14. 1 Tim. 15. Christ himself in, over his Church, of which they prophesied, ordained Kings to be the chief nursing Fathers, Protectors, Ps. 72.10, 11. Ps. 138.4. Psal. 148.11. Is. 46.7, 33. c. 60.3, 10, 11, 16. c. 62.2. against the successively impeached, restrained, secluded; secured Members of both Houses of Parliament, and the whole House of Lords, not only most insolently and illegally voted down but professedly engaged against, by the Tayle, of the garled commons House, when they had forcibly thrust out the Majori∣ty of their Fellow-Members, Burgesses, which made it no legal House, and usurped to themselves by a new Self-creation, without a new Election, not only the name of the Parliament of England, when they had totally destroyed the Parliament it self, but the Supream Au∣thority of the Nation; Antichristianly2 Thes. 2.4. exalting themselves above all that is called God, or worshipped, & exercising a more transcendent lawlesse boundlesse Arbitrary power, than any Parliament of King, Lords and Commons, all united in one, ever formerly claimed, at∣tempted, both in their Westminster-Conventicle, its several Committees, their new High-courts of Injustice, their Counsels of State at White∣hall, their City and Country Sub-committees, (set forth in their proper coulors in the History of Independency, their own printed new Knacks, Remonstrances, Engagements, Iohn Lilburnes, Englands New Chaines his printed, Letter to the Speaker, July 6. 1649. and other Pamphlets.) In so much that after their near five years exorbi∣tant Tyranical Domination, the very General and Officers of the Army, (by whose power, assistance they undermined, destroyed the King, Lords, former Parliament, and constituted themselves alone the Parliament, and Supream Dictators over our three whole Nations,) by way of just Retaliation, forcibly dissolved, shamefully thrust them out of the Parliament House, & Whitehall, laying their elevated Honor in the dust; And by their Declaration of August 22. 1653. and A true state of the Common-wealth of England, 1654. p. 8. &c. not only declared them to be actually, finally, and justly dissolved from being any
more a Parliament, by an extraordinary providence, & power; but also branded them to all posterity, for a CORRUPT PAKTY carrying on their own ends, to perpetuate themselves in their late, PARLIAMENTARIE & SV∣PREAM AVTHORITIE; never answoring the ends which God, his People, and the whole Nation expected from them, but exercising an Arbitrary Pow∣er over them, likely to swallow up all the antient Liberties and Properties of the People, and to perpetuate their Vexations and Oppressions in every kind, though the multitude of unnecessary Laws, and Ordinances, many of which were made upon occasion of, and to suit with the concernments and interests of partiaular parties, tending to the absolute enslaving of the free-born Nation, under their perpetual Dictatorship; as they there at large remonstrate. These New Athenian Republican Tyrants (worse than the worst of all our Kings) being thus sodainly dismounted by the Army, to the general joy and contentment of all three Nations; Generall, and the Army-Officers, seating themselves in the Supream Power, (which they alla∣waies retained and actually exercised in reality at their pleasures, though their Mock-Porliament had the Title and visible administration therof) usur∣ped an absolute Legislative, Tax imposing, Parliament-modelling, electing, con∣vening, secluding, dissolving power at their pleasures; and made their Genera, under the Title of Lord Protector of the Infant Common wealth of England Scotland, and Ireland (as the Roman-Souldiers did their Generals, under the' Titles of Caesar, or Emperour) a more absolute real, though not nominal King over us, than any of our antient Kings, and themselves as a Counsel of State and Major Generals under him, acted more arbitrarily, tyranically, oppressively, as Legislators, Military, and civil Dictators, Iudges, or pe∣ty Kings under him, than any of our Saxon Kings during the Heptarchy, or old Counsel-Table, Lords, or Lord Lieutenants under our late King, though branded by them as the worst of Tyrants. Whose exorbitant Autho∣rities being in some measure bounded, and their Major-Generalships set aside by the Assembly at Westminster, 1657. and their first Protector (soon after his beloved Daughter) sodainly out off by unexpected death, and his Son, (no former Officer in the Army) succeeding him, cal∣ling a New Convention at Westminster in Ianuary 1658. the all-swaying Army-Grandees, either fearing or discerning in him an inclination, rather to close with the antient Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, and Prebyterians, than with them, and to revive the old English Militia of Trained-bands by degrees for the peoples ease in their Taxes, as the probablest means for, his own and our Nations ease, settlement, security; Thereupon they resolved to set up their new Republick again: but finding them∣selves and the old and new Rebublican Members, (with whom they confe∣derated) over-voted in the House by the Lawyers, and Court-party, in their de∣sign of the reviving their former Common-wealth, purposely to set aside their young Protector, or reduce him and the Republick too under their own pristine Wardship, they fell to their former Policy, whereby they dis∣membred, dissolved the long Parliament, setting up a new General Counsel of Officers, and Agitators of the Army, against their Protectors will, and the Votes of those they acknowledged to be the Parliament, and General Counsel both of England, Scotland, and Ireland, of both which them∣selves (like Ambidexters) were Members, by which stratagem they
engaged the major part of the forces here, to side with them against the Parliament, and enforced their Protector, by a suddain surprise, much a∣gainst his will, unexpectedly to dissolve the Parliament, to make them∣selves the present Supream Counsel, Dictators, and Governors of our three Nati∣ons, as their subsequent actions every day more and more demonstrate. To engage all the old and new Republican Members, Sectaries, Soul∣diers & others in this their foreplotted New-Confederacy, they did in sundry printed papers, at the beginning of the last Convention, since its dissolu∣tion, and in several Speeches in the House, extoll The Good Old Cause in which they formerly engaged; and what that was, themselves in some of their Speeches, motions for their indemnity and justification therein, have discovered: to wit, the impeaching and beheading of the late King in an illegal new High Court of Justice, against the Votes of both Houses, the Presidents of all former Ages, the Laws and Statutes of the Land; their own Declarations, Remonstrances, Commissions, Oaths, Vows, Protestations, Covenants, yea the very Writs and Indentures by which some of them were elected Members of the long Parliament, all obli∣ging them in precise terms to defend the Kings Person, Crown, and lawfull Authority, (as well as both Houses of Parliament, their Members, privileges) a∣gainst all violence, conspiracies, and attempts whatsoever. To disinherit his royal posterity, to sel, divide among themselves all or most of the antient Lands, Rents, Revenues, Treasure of the Crown, which formerly defrayed the or∣dinary expences of the Realm, (without taxing the people) to dissolve the whole House of Lords, impeach, seclude, secure, imprison, & close imprison the majority of the House of Commons, opposite to their new spuri∣ous Good Cause at their pleasure, and to create the small remain∣der of the Commons confederated with the Army, an absolute Parl. and the Supreme Authority of the Nation, without King or House of Lords, or the ma∣jor part of their secluded Fellow-Commoners; to metamorphose our Old Kingdom into a new Infant Republick, Oligarchy under themselves alone, to disinherit all secluded Members, and other English Freemen of their hereditary Laws, Liberties, Franchises, and put them into a new Praemunire without any legal Indictment or Conviction, disabling them to sue in any Court, or enjoy, receive any office or preferment whatsoever, unless they shall perfidiously abjure all former Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Covenants, and engage to be true and faithfull to them and their new-minted Republick, without a King or House of Lords; to new-modle our Nations, Parliaments, Government, subvert our old fundamental good Laws, Li∣berties, Properties; imprison, banish, condemn, execute our persons, se∣quester, confiscate our Lands, Offices, real, personal Estates, ransack our Houses, Studies, papers, and create new Treasons, forfeitures of our Freeholds at their arbitrary Lordly pleasures: to repeal the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, suspend all penal Executions against Jesuits and Romish-Seminaries; give a free toleration, protection to all sorts of Sects and Religions whatsoever; to hold intimate correspon∣dency with Popish Princes, Cardinals, Jesuits, Jesuited Papists, and main∣tain justifie their most abominable, treasonable principles, as they did in their preceedent, concurrent and subsequent to, in and after the pro∣ceedings against the King, Members, erection of their new Free-state, the worst of all Arbitrary Tyranies; All which & nought else but this is the only
Good Old Cause they now extoll, & are to act over again, perchance to the ruin or their late Protectors, as well as K. Charles his posterity, if they prevail. This their Good old cause, and Republike, is in truth the old pernicious project of Father Parsons the Jesuit, & his confederats, in their high Court of & his Memorials for Reformation for England, at Sevil in Spain, An, 1590 asIn his Quod∣libets, p. 92, 94, 95, 233, 286, 305, &c. 306, 307, 308, 330, 332. See my Epistle before my Hi∣storical and Legal Vindi∣cation of the Fundamental Laws, Liber∣ties Privileges of all English Freemen: where all this is largely evi∣denced: And before my Jus Patronatus. Will: Watson a secular Priest at large relates; and of Tho: Campanella, an Italian Friar, De Monarchia Hispanica, c. 25. p. 204. where he informs the K of Spain, That nothing will so much conduce to weaken the English forces, as dissention & discord sowed amongst them, & perpetually nouri∣shed; which may best be effected by these 2. means, 1. By in∣stigating the swaying men in the Parliament of England, Vt An∣gliam in formam Keipublicae reducant, in imitationem Hollandorum; to reduce England into the form of A Common Wealth, in imitation of the Hollanders. 2ly, If that could not be effected, then, either by making it an Elective Kingdom; or by setting up Kings of another Family, in opposition to the true he∣reditary royal line. To effect which good old cause, and plot, the Pope, Parsons, and other Jesuits engaged the old Gunpowder Trai∣tors to blow up both the King, royal issue, Lords and Parliament, Anno 1605 as the History of their Arraignment, Speed, the Statutes of 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5. relate: which then proving abortive, the Pope, Jesuits, and CardinalRomes Ma∣sterpeace. Richelieu of France, whiles living, revived, prosecu∣ted this good cause, to destroy our King, Monarchy, and turn it into a Republike, or else into an Elective Kingdom, to put by K. Charls his progeny; andHistoria de Conte Gale∣azzo, Gualdo Priorato. Ve∣nis, 1648. p. 175, 176. recommended it in writing to the French King, & his Successor Cardinal Mazarine, (with whom our Grandees of late years have held intimate correspondency in prosecution of this good old cause) vigorously to prosecute after his death; who accor∣dingly accomplished it by the old Republican Members, and Parlia∣ments own Army, seduced, instigated, assisted in it by the Spanish, French and Jesuits Agents. Ol: Cromwell Pro: himself publikely de∣claring in his printed Speech to his Parliament at Westminster, Sep∣temb. 4. 1654: p. 16, 17. That he knew very well, that Emissa∣ries of the Iesuits never came over in those swarms as they have done since these things were on foot: and that divers Gentle∣men can bear witness with him, that they had a Consisto∣ry & Counsel abroad thatNota bene. rules all the Affairs of the things in England: and had fixed in England, in the limits of most Cathedrals (of which he was able to produce the ParticularQuaere, whe∣ther the In∣strument of Government, took not its Title thence? Instrument) an Episcopal power, with Archdeacons, and o∣ther persons, to pervert, seduce, and deceive the people: yet never capitally executed the penal Lawes against any of them. This being the true Original, progress, state, anatomy of this Good old cause, wherewith the old Republican Members, Sectaries,
Army-Officers, Souldiers, are so much enamoured, and some would have enforced all Members of the last Convention publikely to justi∣fie and subscribe to, under pain of being secluded. To draw off and di∣vorce their affections, if not henceforth to engage them cordially a∣gainst it, for their own and the publike good, I shall further Anato∣mize, and paint out the horrid deformity, and infernal execrableness, blackness thereof, by parallelling it with the old Gunpowder Traytors Plot and Cause, which it farr exceeds in monstrosity, exorbitancy, trea∣chery, and matchless flagitiousness; though justly stiled by the Parlia∣ment and Statute of 3 Jacobi ch. 2. The most wicked, barbarous, exe∣crable and abominable Treason that ever could enter into the heart of most wicked men; and such as was never before heard of: (though now gilded over with the glorious Title of The Good Old Cause,) as these 8. circumstances will demonstrate. 1. That Good old Cause and Treason, to destroy the King, Par∣liament, Kingdome was originally3 Jac. c. 2, 4, 5. Speeds History, 3 Jac. contrived in the years 1604. 1605. by English, Spanish Jesuits, acted by discontented Jesuited Papists, abetted by the Pope, and other forein papists, all inveterate professed Enemies to our Protestant Princes, Parliaments, King∣dom, Church, Religion: But those who lately prosecuted, visibly in∣gaged in, & actually accomplished it, in the years 1647, 1648, 1649, and still pursue it; professe themselves the most zealous Protestants, Puritans, Saints, the greatest Opposites to the Roman Pontiff, Church, Religion, Jesuites, Seminaries and Papists, of all others, and the best affected people to our Parliaments and their privileges. 2. The old Gunpowder-Traytors3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5, & Speed. contrived that good old Cause, Treason beyond the Seas and in private secret conventicles here, of none but Jesuits, Papists, obliged by an Oath of Secrecy to conceal it, and were so afraid, so ashamed of it, that they pursued it only in the night, acted it under ground in a dark vault under the Lords House, wherein their train of gunpowder was secretly hid with Fagots and other materials. But those who since espoused it, consulted about, promoted, avowed it in open General Councils of the Army, and known publike Meetings, Committees of Republican Members of the Long Parliament, Army, and others confederating with them, in England, London and Westminster it self, in the very day-time; and then presented it in the name of the Counsil and Army it self, to the Parliament House, at the Commons barr, in their Remonstrance from St. Albans 16 Novemb. 1648 andThe 2. Part of the Historie of Indepen∣dency. J Sedg∣wicks Justice on the Armies Remonstrance other precedent and subse∣quent papers; which they printed, divulged in a most insolent manner to all the world. 3. They plotted, prosecuted their Old cause by the instigation of the3 Jac. c. 2, 4, 5. Pope, Jesuits, and Popish Priests, their ghostly Fathers, who confederated with, and encouraged them therein, and that from the
Parsons Philopater, §. 2. Tresham de Officio Prin∣cipis Christia∣ni, c. 5. Hospi∣nian, Historia Jesuitica, l, 3. Ludovicus Lu∣cius Hist. Jes. l. 2. c. 4. Speculū Jesuiticum, p. 156, 157. &c. principles of their own Antichristian, trayterous, bloudy Romish Religion; which assured them, that it was not only just, lawfull, neces∣sary expedient, but a most heroike and meritorious Christian Act, to de∣stroy, subvert, ruin all Protestant Kings, Princes, kingdoms, churches Parliaments, declared by the Pope to be Hereticks, Enemies, or Schis∣maticks from the Church of Rome, and assure them of a saintship on Earth, & a crown of glory in heaven for such an heroick attempt. But those who since took up their good old cause, 1648. and 1649. and would now revive it, by their instigation; did it against the de∣hortations ofThe 47 Lon∣don Ministers Petition, Dr. Hamonds Ad∣dress, & others sundry godly Protestant Ministers, theThe Homi∣lies of Diso∣bedience and Rebellion, Deus & Rex, 3 Jac. c. 4. Dr. John Whites Sermon at Pauls Cross, 1615. & De∣fence of the Way ch. 6.10. Samuelis Bo∣charti Epistola Parisiis 1650. dehor∣tations of their most indeared Protestant Friends, the Votes of their Fellow Members; the very principles of the Christian and Prote∣stant Religion they professed, and publike doctrine of the Church of England, whereof they were Members; and the Common and Sta∣tute Laws of the Realm, all declaring and branding it, as an in∣fernal, Jesuitical, Popish, Antichristian practise, and most detesta∣ble, matchless, High Treason, deserving the highest temporal Pu∣nishments, eternal torments, and condemnation in this and another world. 4. The3 Jac. c. 12. and Speed. old Popish powder Traitors, contrived their treason against the King and Parliament, meerly out of envy against the flourishing estate, and true profession of the Protestant Religion in our 3. Realms under King James, the continuing of which happiness and profession to all posterity, by reason of his most hopefull and plentifull Progeny, they much fearing, and maligning; thereupon most horribly and trayterously conspired  to blow up the King, Queen, Prince, with all the Lords Spiritual & Temporal, and Commons, when assembled in the Upper House of Parliament, Nov. 5. 1605. pur∣posely concluding to do it in that House, that where sundry necessary and religious Laws for the preservation of the Church and State were made, (which they falsly and slanderously termed Cruel Laws) & enacted a∣gainst them and their Religion; both place and persons should be all destroyed and blown up at once; which would have turned to the utter ruine of the whole kingdom, and subversion of the whole State, had it been effected: But the Republican Members, Army-Officers, and chief Actors in this new Good old cause, had no such inducements, to engage them against the King, his royal issue, the true Protestant Religion, Parliament or kingdom of England; whose flourishing estate, welfare, prosperity safety, and defence against these Romish Enemies forces, conspiracies, and the making, executing of new se∣verer Lawes against them passed by both Houses, and assented to by the King in the last Treaty: were the principal things they pre∣tended they contended and fought for, in all their printed Remon∣strances, Declarations protestations, and Solemn League and Co∣venant:
as the printed Collections of both Houses & the Armies Decla∣rations irrefragably manifest: And so most powerfull arguments to diswade them from, and engage them against this their Good old cause; which yet notwitstanding they wilfully prosecuted, to the ut∣ter overthrow and subversion of the late King, kingdom, Parliament, House of Peers, which they quite blew up; the Royal posterity, and thereby the Church of England and Protestant Religion (much scan∣dalized, defamed by it) in a great measure. 5. All those who lately engaged in this good old cause, were Members of Parliament, or of the Parliaments Army, commissio∣ned. raised, payed,Exact Coll. p. 339, 340, 342, 456, 457 932. A Col∣lection, p. 43, 44, 305, 406. to 430, 598, 606, 623, 668, 669. obliged by their Writs and Indentures of e∣lection, their Oaths of Supremacy, Fealty, Allegiance, Protestati∣ons, Vow, Covenant, League, with their manifold Declara∣tions, Remonstrances, which they all made as Members of Parlia∣ment or the Army, and other sacred and civil obligations inviolably to preserve, defend the Kings person, crown, dignity, posteritie, the kingdom, Church of England, the Parl. with its Members, privileges, the fundamental Laws, Liberties, and Government of the Nation: who yet notwithstaning most perfidiously, treacherously, atheistically, subverted and destroyed them all one after another, contrary to all these most sacred multiplied oathes, and strictest ob∣ligations, beyond all presidents of the worst and most treacherous Monsters since the creation; whereas all the Gunpowder Traitors, (as theLud. Lucius & Hospinian, Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. p. 204 l. 4. p. 264. Speeds History. Jesuits by their Oaths, the rules of their Order, the commands of their Superiors; the rest by a particular Oath; Guy Faux, the Low-country Souldier who was to set fire to the train, and others) were purposely hired, employd thus to blow up, destroy our old King, Par∣liament, Religion, kingdom, and had no such obligations, oaths to restrain them from it, as these New conspirators had; which ag∣gravates their Guilt, and makes them ten thousand fold worse, yea more execrable to God and all good men, than they. 6. The Gunpowder Traytors, had their plot taken effect, were yet so ashamed of it, yea so farr from justifying or owning it as a good old cause;Speeds Hi∣story, p. 1241. The Arraign∣ment of Trai∣tors. that they agreed before-hand, to cast the Im∣putation thereof on the Puritans, to make them more odious: And some Jesuits and Papists soon after published in sundry Books, Ludovicus Lucius Hi∣storia Jesuitica l. 2. c. 4. p. 208, 209. that there was no such plot as this really contrived by them, but that it was a feigned plot devised by the Puritans, to render them and their Religion infamous and odious to all posterity. Yea the Jesuits of Colen most impudently asserted; that this Gun∣powder Treason was plotted only by the Calvinists, and not by any Catholick; that no Jesuit had any hand in, or knowledge of it; and that Henry Garnet the Jesuit, was only executed for his Religion, not for this horrid Treason, of which he was not found
guilty, asAndreas Eu∣demon, Johan∣nes, Apologia pro Henrico Garneto, Endaemon Johannis, andOpus Chro∣nographicum totius Orbis p. 309. Laurentius Beyerlincke, most falsly published to the world, against the Indictment, Verdict, Evidence and Iudgement against him, by which he was most clearly found guilty thereof: But those Republican Saints, Zealots, and over-grown Puritans, who lately prosecuted their good old Gunpowder plot and cause, executing far more than they durst pro∣ject; are so farr from being ashamed of, disowning, abominating this most execrable, impious, treacherous, monstrous powder trea∣son; and that after3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7. Jac. c, 4, 6. sundry Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, Hi∣stories, Treatises, publike annual solemn thanksgivings, and thou∣sands of excellent Sermons preached, printed on the Fifth of No∣vember for above 40 years space, (yet continued in most places, and still observed by many of themselves) setting forth the matchless, devillish, infernal, monstrous barbarousness, of that old abomina∣ble Treason; the transcendent Treachery, Execrableness of those unnatural Traitors, and the odiousness of that Antichristian Religion (whose Faith is but meer faction, rebellion, & whose practice is the mur∣dring of souls & bodies) that engaged them therin, to their everlasting3 Jac. c. 1. infamy, by a special Act of Parliament, that so it and our thankfull∣ness for being delivered from it, may never be forgotten, but had in perpetual Remembrance in all ages to come. Yea after all these old Traitors exemplary condemnations, forfeitures execu∣tions, and hanging up of their Heads, Quarters, over both Houses of Parl. to deter all others from the like treasonable attempts. That though this their late plot was for certainThe 2. part of the History of Indepen∣dency, my E∣pistle to a Seasonable, legal & histo∣rical Vindica∣tion, My Speech in Par∣liament, p. 107 & the Ap∣pendix to it. originally projected & infused into them by Jesuites and Popish Agents, yet they openly attributed to themselves both the projecting, prosecution, accom∣plishment of this transcendent Treason, farr exceeding theirs, and proclaimed, justified it in sundry of their Remonstrances, Acs, Ordi∣nances, Papers, as a most heroick, Saint-like Christian, Honorable, and meritorious Act of Justice, wherein God himself hath most gloriously appeered, bearing witness to, and owning it from Heaven, by their un∣paralleld successes, not only as a Good, but the very best of causes, tending to the great advancement of the Throne and kingdom of the Lord Iesus Chist; Some of them desiring that the everlasting me∣mory of it may be inscribed on their publike Statues, or Monuments For their eternal honour in all succeeding Generations: Whereas the very foulest Devils, and worst of damned Spirits in Hell, would be both afraid, ashamed to own or approve such an infernal black cause as this, much less to justifie and extoll it in such a prodigious impudent manner, as some now doe, which exceedingly heightens and aggravates their Impudency, Impenitency, Guilt, and Con∣demnation. Certainly those must haveJer. 3.3. whrish forheads, brows of brass, hearts of steel,2 Tim. 4.2. and conseiences seared with an hot iron, who
dare to own, extoll, or espouse such a prodigy, or Cause as this. And may doe well to remember those two woes, which will fall upon them for it, Isa. 5.18.20. Wo unto them that draw Iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with a cartrope. Wo unto them that call Evil (yea the worst of all Evils, Treasons) Good, and good will, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; and now call the destruction of their law∣full Soveraign, their Native Country, kingdom, Church, the Par∣liaments of England and their privileges, their Good Old cause, andPhil. 3.19. glory in these their shamefull Actions;Job. 42, 6. which should cause them rather to abhor themselves, and repent in dust and ashes. 7ly. The old Gunpowder Traitors only plotted, but never actu∣ally effected the blowing up of the King, Parliament, and House of Lords, thorugh the providence of3 Jac. c. 1. Almighty God, who in all ages hath shewed his power and mercy in the miraculous and gratious deliverance of his church, and in the protection of Religious Kings and States. But our new Salt-peter-men, have with an high storng hand fully executed,See their Declaration of 17 March, 1648. & May 6. 1659. John Godwins Ob∣structors of Justice, Cooks & Bradshawes Speeches, John Miltons Answer to Salmatius, and sundry other printed Pamphlets. accomplished whatever they designed; and because they miscarried not in it, like them, but by Gods justice up∣on them, us, our King, Lords, Parliament for all our crying sins, have prospered in this Foelix Seelus, and brought their wicked devices to pass; they glory in it, as the Highest Act of Justice, the Best of Causes; the Greatest Mercy and Deliverance that ever befell the English Nation; point blank against thePsal. 37, 1.7. Ps. 73.3, &c. Ps. 92.6, 7. Ps. 94.3, 4, 5. Dan. 11.33.36 Mat. 7.21. Acts 2.33. Pro. 29.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Job 21.7. &c. Scriptures, and princi∣ples of Christian Religion: whereby they have involved us in many intestine and forein Wars with our Protestant Brethren and Allies, by Sea and Land, which they have dyed red and drenchd with precious Christian bloud; exhausted our publike treasures, destroyed our trade, impoverished, oppressed, quite eaten out the wealth and spi∣rits of our Nation; imposed endlesse Egyptian burdens on their backs, an Iron Yoak of vassallage on their necks; subverted all Liberty, property, unity, amity, real piety, charity, honesty, justice; divided us into sundry irreconcileable Sects, schisms, factions, fractions; perplexed us with sundry manifold fears, dangers, so∣dain changes, alterations, dissolutions of Government, Parlia∣ments, supreme and subordinate Authorities, yea reduced us into a desperate, unsetled, floating, tottering condition, without any pro∣bable means or hopes of the least setled establishment, and brought that severe judgement which God threatned to, and inflicted on the Rebellious ten tribes of Israel, (who revolted from, and rebelled a∣gainst their lawfull Soveraign, and right heir to the House of Da∣vid, King Rehoboam;Hosea 8.4. c. 13.11. setting up Kings, but not by God, and making them Princes,Hosea 3.4. and he knew it not, whom God took away in his wrath?)
The children of Israel shall abide many days, without a King, and without a Prince, &c.Hosea 10.2, 3, 4. &c. He hath divided their heart, now shall they be found faulty: For now they shall say (and I wish we all would con∣sider it & say so too) We have no King, (no true Parliament nei∣ther) because we feared not the Lord: What then should a King (or Parliament) do to us? (to help us in our confusions and extre∣mities.) They have spoken lying words swearing falsly in making a Co∣venant; thus judgement springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the field: (one Judgement of God, one trouble, war, change, confusi∣on, oppression upon the neck of another, and many complicated Judgements together) So that Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel; now her King is cut off, as the fome upon the water; and the High places (wherein they seated themselves) destroyed; and all their New Modles of Goverments, Parliaments destroyed by them∣selves; they being now disuniting, undermining one another more than ever; never free from new Troubles, plots, fears, jealousies, per∣plexities, since they undertook this New Good Old Romish Cause; blow up King, Lords, Parliaments; since they 1 Kings 21, 19. killed, and also took possession; and like those rebellious wicked H. sbandmen in theMat. 21.38.39. 1. u. 19.27 c. 20.14, 15, 16. Gospel said among themselves (when the son came to dem and the fruits of his Fathors vineyard from them, and cast him out of the vineyard) this is the Heir, Come let us kill him, and seise upon the Inheri∣tance, and it shall be ours: which ended in the miserable de∣struction of those wicked men, and taking away their usurped vine∣yard, which was let out to other Husbandmen, who would render the fruits thereof in due season. All which considered, our new Pow∣der mens Guilt, crime as far transcends the old Powder Tray∣tors, as actual Murder, destruction of the King, Parliament, king∣dom, Laws, Liberties, and ill consequents thereof, exceed only in∣tentionall, without effect: Theirs unsetled nothing, and did no mis∣chief to the publike: whereas their actual accomplishment of their old plot, hath brought actual destruction on them all, and endlesse miseries, distractions ever since to our Three whole Nations, Churches, and God only knows, not man, what sodain and final ruine it may bring upon them all. And is it then a good old cause as they now proclaim it to all the world afresh May 7. 1659? 8ly. The Gunpowder Traytors engaged in their pretended Good old Cause, never passed any solemn Iudgement and con∣demnation against it, before or after its undertaking, which those who espoused this new misnamed Good old cause have often done, against it, themselves, and all such who appeared in it. Not to press or insist upon the antient Resolutions, Statutes of 4 E. 3. rot. parl.
n. 1. 25 E. 3. c. 2.21 R. 2. c. 22. 1 H. 4. c. 10.31 H. 6. c 1. i E. 6. c. 12. 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5. positively declaring, resolving, the le∣vying of war against the King or Parliament, the plotting, compassing the death or destruction of either of them by any open Acts, to be High-Treason. The Republican Members of the long Parliament and Army did together with the rest of the members, in sundry Ordi∣nances, resolve, declare, [particularly in theExact Coll. p. 576. Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, printed and publi∣shed by their special Order, August 8. 1642. to the end that no man might be misled through ignorance:) That all such persons who shall up∣on any pretence whatsoever, assist the King in making war against the Parliament, with Horse, arms, plate or money, are Traytors to His Maiesty, the Parliament, and the Kingdom, and shall be brought to condign punishment for so high an Offence. Upon which ground alone, the Lords and Commons by their Ordinance of Apr. 1.1643 sequestred the estates of all such persons, Ecclesiastical or Tem∣poral, as Traytors and Notorious Delinquents, who have rai∣sed or shall raise Armes against the Parliament;A Collection of Ordinances p. 13. 219, 220. or have been, are, or shall be in actual Arms against the same; or have contributed, or shall contribute voluntarily, any money, plate, horse, arms, ammunition, or other ayde or assistance, for or towards the maintenance of any forces rai∣sed against the Parliament, and of all such as have joyned or shall joyn in any Oath, or Act of Association against the Parlia∣ment; or have imposed or shall impose any Tax or Assessment upon his Majesties subjects, For or towards the maintenance of any forces against the Parliament. Upon this only ground they afterwards con∣demned, executed Mr. Tomkins and Mr. Chaloner in the year 1643. as Traitors, for receiving a Commission from the late King datedA Collecti∣on, p. 199, 200 201. March 16. An. 18 Caroli, to raise forces in & about London to force the Parliament, and seise upon some of the principal Members of it, though they never put it in actual execution, nor offered the least force to the Parliament, to either of the houses, or their Members. Since which sundry others were elsewhere condemned and execu∣ted as Traitors, upon the same account of levying war against the Parliament. Yea, bothA Collection p. 905, 906, 907, 908. Houses in their last Propositions to the King, exempted some particular persons frō any pardon for their lives or estates, perpetually banished and confiscated the estates of others, and put all the rest to great Fines, only for levying warr against the Parliament,See the 2. part of the History of Indepen∣dency. which they declared to be High Treason. Yea the Republican members sitting after the others seclusion, and Army-Officers themselves in their late High courts of Justice, impea∣ched, condemned, beheaded our late King * Charls himself, the Head
of the Parliament, the Marquess of Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, the Lord Capel, others of the Lords House, and divers Commoners; and condemned, executed Sir Charles Lucas with others, in and by a bare Councel of War at Colchester, confiscating most of their real and personal estates, as Rebells, Traytors, and publike Ene∣mies, only for levying war, and taking up Arms against both Hou∣ses of Parliament. Since which, the Army-Officers, and those in late yea present power, in and by their Instrument of Government, 1653. and contradictory Humble Petition and Advice, 1657. disabled all persons who had formerly taken up arms and levied any war against the Parliament, at any time since the year 1641. and given no signal testi∣mony of their good affection to the Parliament in taking up Arms for its defence; to be disabled to be chosen Members of Parliament, or to give their voice in the election of any such Members: Yet neither the King himself, nor any of all these beheaded, execcuted, excepted, sequestred, disabled Lords, Citizens, Souldiers, Gentlemen, ever actually as∣saulted the Parliament it self, or either of the Houses of Parliament, or any Member or Members thereof, sitting in, entring into, or returning from the Houses; nor secured, secluded, them by any Gards put upon the Houses, only for speaking their Consciences, or dischar∣ging their duties in the Parliament, as they did; but only waged war against the Parliament and Members thereof at a great di∣stance, by levying war against the forces raised by them: neither did the King or his Forces in any of their Proclamations or Decla∣rations ever affirm, that they took up arms against the Parliament it self, or its Members, to dissolve, secure, seclude, force or interrupt their proceeding;An Exact Coll. p. 349, 350, 351, to 357. 451, 455, 470, 472, 620, 621. which they utterly disclaimed, but only to defend the Kings person, his just Royal authority, and those adhering to him, against the Parliament Army; to preserve and maintain the just Power, Rights, privileges of Parliament, and the loyal Members therein, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty and Property of the Subjects, against the usurpations of a prevailing Faction, who had (as they affirmed) rai∣sod Forces to destroy the King, Morchy it self, the very Freedom, Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty, Property of the Subjects; which they constantly asserted in all their printed Papers to the very end of the War. If they then not withstanding all this were thus capitally and criminally proceeded against, sentenced, executed, sequestred, disabled, by the Votes, Resolutions, Judge∣ments, Instrument, Declarations of the Republicā Members, Officers, Soldiers themselves, now crying up this Good old cause, as Tray∣tors and publike Enemies; for levying war against the Parlia∣ment only thus mediately, indirectly, consequentially, and secundarily, because they waged war against the forces raised for the Parliaments defence and safeguard: and if the unarmed London Apprentices, and
other disorderly persons coming unarmed to the Commons House dores, and there in a tumultuous manner, pressing some Members to pass a Petition, and some Votes they desired, without seising, se∣curing or secluding any one Member of either House; though an unarmed force; was presently so resented by the General and Offi∣cers of the Army, that they immediaty declared it to be aThe Generals Letter from Bedford, 30 July 1647. & His and the Armies Re∣monstrance 8. August 1647. Treaso∣nable act and force, for which they pressed speedy exemplary Justice to be executed against the chief Actors in, and abettors of it, to prevent the like attempts and force for the future. Then doubtless, by all these Judgements and Resolutions, the Martching up of the Officers and Soldiers of the very Parliaments own Army, (purposely raised by themselves for their defence against all force and violence whatsoe∣ver offered unto them as Members) in an hostile manner; against their Duties, Trusts, Commissions, protestations, Covenants, both Houses Votes Orders, and express commands, several times one after another; to impeach secure, seclude, imprison eject what Members of the Lords and Commons House they pleased; to garble purge the houses themselves; to enforce them to repeal their former Votes, Orders, Odinances; their bringing up the whole Army to London and Westminster, against the Houses commands, removing their very Guards out of their Quarters; their for∣cible taking the kings person out of the custody of the Committee of Parliament, and disposing of him as they pleased, contrary to both Houses direction; their securing and imprisoning above 40 Members, and secluding above 100 more at once, by whole Re∣giments of Horse and Foot, besetting all passages to the Houses: Their suppressing the whose House of Lords and setting Guards up∣on the small remainder of the Commons House, to force them to vote and un-vote what they pleased; their beheading the King, the Head of the Parliament, and sundry Protestant Lords (but not one Popish Lord, Briest, Iesuite, though the principal Incendiaries and promoters of these wars, and soExact Col∣lection p. 816, 817, 819, 826, 827, 662, 438, 662, 664, 664, 666, 336, 637, 637, 907 to 916. A Collect. p. 218, 227, 240, 704, 705, 706. declared by both Houses) who were Members of the Lords House against the Houses votes, in strange High Courts of Iustice, which they forcibly set up; their dis∣solving the Parliament it self by force, against an expresse Act of Parliament (to omit the like force since upon some of their own cre∣ated Mock-Parliaments, transcending all presidents of former ages) and secluding mcself and other Members afresh, May 7. 1659. con∣trary to all their Obligations, Trusts; must needs be a more Capital Treason in all respects, than the bare successeless plot of the old Guno powder Traytors; and a more treasonable, actual levying war against the Parl. it self, than the late beheaded kings, Lords or any sequestred disabled Cavahers, for which they deserve all the capital Iudge∣ments, execution, penalties, forfeitures, sequestrations and disabi∣lities
for ever to elect, or to be elected Members in any suture Parliament; which they and their Confederates have de∣nounced against others; for farr lesser Offences, and not so direct and professed Wars immediately against the Parlia∣ment it self and its Member, as themselves are by their own Declarations, Remonstrances, and printed Papers, most real∣ly guilty of in a farr higher degree than the late King, or any Cavaliers, & still impenitently justifie, applaud, persist in with∣out the least remorse, and now stile, their Good Old Cause. I shall therefore earnestly desire all persons ingaged in this whorish, bastard old Cause, now seriously and sadly to consider, how their often forcing Ruptures, of the houses, Members, privileges of Parliament; their absurd, frequent new-modelling of our Government, Parliaments, according to their own whymsical fancies, present interests and designs, carried on with prayers, mock-fasts, and humiliations, for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickednesse,Isa. 58.2, 3, 4, 5, &c. c. 1.10. to 24. c. 66.3.4. most execrable unto God, have produced these deplorable effects. 1. A justification and verification of all the late Kings De∣clarations, Proclamations, Prophetical predictions, grounds, reasons, fears:Exact Col∣lection, 618, 657, 658 893 895, 320, 325, 322. A collection, p. 28, 38, 39, 116, 117. That this Army was raised by a factious, ambitious, prevail∣ing party in the Houses of Parliament (whatever they pretended to the contrary) to depose, murder, and destroy the Kings person, life, Crown, dignity, posterity, and Monarchy it self; the whole frame of Govern∣ment both in Church and State; the Rights, Privileges and Freedom of English Parliaments, to subvert the true established Protestant Religion; the Law of the Land, the Properties, Laws and Liber∣ties of the Subject; to introduce Democracy and Parity; and subject them all to an Arbitrary, Military and Tyrannical power of Ana∣baptists, Brownists, and of a few Seditious, Factious, Covetous and Ambitious persons; who by being seized of all the Armes, Ships, and strong places of the kingdom, (if they should happen to prevail in this war against his Majesty,) would in de∣spite not only of the people, but of their present Rulers, (if they should be willing to divert them) extirpate the Law rent and branch, alter the whale Frame of Government, introduce Democracy, Independency, Parity and leave neither King, Church, Lord nor Gentleman: distinguish between
those who assisted them but a little, not out of zeal and out of fear, and those now called Moderate man, they will then call Malignant, and the Inequality, Injustice and Oppression they will then indure, will too late discover to them to their costs; That they have undone themselves with too much Discretion, and obtained nothing by their unjustifiable cautious Compliance, but to be de∣stroyed last.Exact Coll. p. 320, 321, 322. And by this means the most excellent Constitution of our Government, moulded out of a mixture of the three kinds of Go∣vernment amongst men, Absolute Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy, by the experience and wisdom of our Ancestors, to give to this Kingdom (so farr as humane prudence can provide) the conveniences of all 3, without the inconveniences of any one of them, as long as the ballance runs even between them, and they run joyntly in their proper channels; (which bath made this Nation for many years both famous and happy, even to a great degree of envy;) shall by this means end in a dark equal Chanos or confusion; and the long Line of our Noble Ancestors, end in a Iack Cade, or a Wat Tyler. Upon which reasons alone the King professed he took up arms, for his own necessary defence, and pre∣vention of all these predicted mischiess, now really and truly accomplished in every point, worthy our saddest contem∣plations. 2ly. It hath produced a falsification of all the long Parliaments and Armies Declarations, Remonstrances, Prote∣stations, Vows, Covenants, to the contrary, in answer, or opposition to the Kings Declarations and Proclamations. 3ly. A translation from the Kings and his parties heads, souls, upon the Armies and some of the late Parliaments heads, souls the guilt of all that Christian bloud, shed in our intestin wars against the King and his party, by turning their pretended just defensive, into an unlawfull, offensive, invasive, destruc∣tive war against their lawfull King & Parliament too. 4ly. A justification, or extenuation of the Popes, Jesuits, and papists most treasonable, Positions, principles, Conspiracies, Practises, Regicides, Powder-plots, against our Protestant Princes, Par∣liaments, Kingdom, Church, Religion, & other forein Kings, Churches, States, now exceeded by them. 5ly, An inexpi∣able scandal, infamy, to the profession, & zealous Professors of the Protestant Religion, as now more treacherous, perfidious,
disloyal, seditious, covetous, rebellious, bloody, hypo∣critical, faithlesse, apostatical, diabolical, atheistical, than the worst of Papists, Pagans, Turks, Infidels. 6ly. A base contempt, scorn, derision, infamy, dishonour even of Parlia∣ments themselves, their lurisdiction, Privileges, Members, Proceedings, Votes, Ordinances, quite trampled under feet, and made the song and by-word of every common Souldier, Sculler, Fidler, Drunkard. 7ly. A perpetual dishonour, ob∣loquy, disgrace upon the whole English Nation, in all fo∣rein States, Countries, Kingdoms, who now scorn us as the most slavish, sottish, unfaithfull, unpolitick, unprovident, vilest, perversest, foolishest, variablest Nation under Heaven. 8ly. An indeliable infamy upon the very profession of a Souldier, and whole Parliament Army, who have verified this old Adage to the uttermost, Lucan. Nulla fides pietasve viris qui castra sequntur. 9ly. A present incomparable dearth and losse of all sorts of Trade, Traffique by Land or Sea; a present confusion, un∣settlement in our Government, Counsils, and all publick Affairs; a general discontent, fear, dispondency in all sorts of people, a greater fraction, dis-union of all dome∣stick publick interests, and stricter combination of our forein Enemies against us to work our ruine and wreck their malice and revenge upon us, than ever heretofore. 10ly. A fresh occasion and advantage to all our Popish Adversaries, not only to traduce, deride, reproach, blaspheme our Protestant Profession and Religion, asMilliere his victory of Truth. 1654. some of them have done in print, as a mere Seminary of Treason, Rebellion, Sedition, Hy∣pocrisie, perjury, Disloyalty, and all sorts of Villany: but to combine together in a holy League, toHospinian Jesuit. l. 2. p. 213, 214, 215. Lud. Lucius Hist. Jesuitica, l. 2. c. 2. p. 186, 187, 188 & l. 4 c. 1. p. 346. extirpate it and all professors of it out of the World, now thus divided from, engaged against each other, exhausted, weakned, dis-united from eachother, and almost totally ruined one by another, through their long intestine bloody wars, feuds, and infinite Sects, Factions, endeavouring to undermine, weaken, destroy, and not daring to trust each other.Mat. 12.25. A very sad presage, or fore-runner of our approaching ruine;Lucan, lib. 1. En que discordia Cives porduxit miseros?Lam. 2.13. What shall I equal unto
thee, O Virgin Daughter of our distracted English Zion, that I might comfort thee? for thy breach is great like the Sea, who can heal thee? O that the serious consideration of all these deplo∣rable effects, might now at last effectually work upon the iron, steeled hearts, the intoxicated brains, seared conscien∣ces, rebellious spirits, perverse wills, reprobate senses, dis∣orderly passions, self-seeking affections of all Army-Officers, Souldiers, Republicans, Sectaries, and others heretofore or now engaged in the pursute of this Good Old Cause, to bring them to a speedy repentance of all the evils they have acted, occasioned by and under the specious mask of Reli∣gion, Justice, Liberty, Zeal, Necessity, Publick safety, Self-preservation, the setting up Christs Kingdom, propagating the Go∣spel, reformation of Abuses, and maintaining their Good Old Cause. And that this Anatomy of their Good Old Cause, (the principle end of its publication.) according to their fresh printedMisdated April 6. for May 6. being made in hast. Declaration, May 6. 1659. might lead them to look back and examine the true cause of the Lords late withdrawing his wonted presence, and GOOD SPIRIT (which formerly appeared among them) from them, and where they first turned out of the way; (in forsa∣king their first espoused Good Old Cause, to commit Whorcdom with the old whore of Romes cause) their many back-slidings from which, by wan∣dring divers wayes FROM RIGHTEOUS AND EQUAL PATHS; hath (as themselves ingenuously confesse) put the Publick concernments of this Common wealth, through a Vicissitude of dangers, into that sad unsetled state and posture wherein they now stand, and rendred all their essaies to obviate the dan∣gers, and to settle these Nations in peace and prosperity utterly ineffectual, the only wise God in the course of his providence disappointing all their endeavours therein: since they secured, secluded the old honest members and House of Lords, from the exercise and discharge of their trusts, and owned their new Old Cause, and purged Republican Conventicle, for the only Parli∣ment, without their Fellow-Members, King, or House of Lords whom they now call in again against their former Declaration upon which they case them out. It shall be my prayer to God, that the serious perusal of the premi∣ses (intended only for their information, reformation, not perdition) may at last induce them for ever hereafter to stop both their ears against the enchanting songs of all Romish Syrens, and open both their ears and hearts cordially to embrace this sacred counsell of God himself, they have so long obstinately trampled under feet, Prov. 24.21, 22. My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with Changers, or those who are given to change, for their cala∣mity shall sodenly arise (as we have seen by many late expe∣riments, in the very making, acting of all our late publick changes) and who knoweth the ruine of them both? FINIS.
