P421 18676085 108155
Scotlands holy War. A DISCOURSE Truly, and plainly remonstrating, How the SCOTS out of a corrupt pretended zeal to the COVENANT have made the same scandalous, and odious to all good men: and How by religious pre∣texts of saving the Peace of Great Brittain they have irreligiously involved us all in a most pernitious Warre. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. Curs'd man, what canst Thou hope for, what desire? To Thee Christ brings a sword, his Gospel fire. Be man no more, abjure thy wretched kinde: Lest Mannah poizen, Sun-beams strike thee blinde: By H. P. Esquire. LONDON: Printed by Fran: Neile, in Aldersgate-street. 1651.
READER, I Have lately seen in Print an Apologie for such Ministers, and people, as out of conscience did not observe the Thanksgiving-day dedicated by the Parliament to Almighty God, for giving us victory against the Scots: and the Apologist had prefixed this Title in his Front: Sad and serious Politicall Considerations touching the Inva∣sive Warre against our Presbyterian Protestant Brethren in Scotland, their late great overthrow, and the probable dangerous consequences thereof to both Nations, and the Protestant Religion. As soon as I had read it over; I saw heavy, and bitter char∣ges in it against the Power now Governing, and by conse∣quence against our Nation, and Religion, but all was built upon such premisses, as were left utterly unproved. I doubt not therefore but all Schollers will deride the Author, as void of wit and ingenuity: and will think that Pamphlet unworthy of an Answer, which can challenge nothing be∣sides a flat denyall. But when I consider the multitude, who scarce discern betwixt Arguments and Invectives, or points that require solid proofs, and such as sometimes are not worth prooving: when I consider this multitude may be dangerously imposed upon by confident writers indeed, such as have effrontery enough to grant themselves any thing under dispute: I dare not be wanting to a distressed
Cause, and vitiated Truth. What the Apologist though affirmant has left unproved, viz: that the Parliament has broken Covenant with the Scots, and made an Invasive warre upon the Presbyterians: the same I though respon∣dent shall endeavour to leave disproved. And I hope I shall remonstrate by something more then Averments, my Antagonists best arguments: 1▪ that the Covenant was first violated by the Scot, and 2ly, that this warre of great Brit∣tain was raised by the Presbyterians. Of the Covenant. ABout 11. or 12. yeers since, the late King began to take Arms against the Scotch Nation upon Ecclesiastical quar∣rels, but his successe was so ill therein, that He could nei∣ther hopefully pursue, nor yet handsomly compose those broils. The reason was, because his Popish Subjects could not, and his Protestant Subjects in England would not support him with their effectuall assistance in that causless warre. So this Par∣liament was then convened to extricate the said King out of those difficulties: and had here been any other remedie that possibly could have releasd him (so intangled, as He then was) either by pacifying the Scots without force, or forcing them with∣out pacification, this remedie had never been thought on: for there was nothing in the world more adverse to his Tyrannicall ends; then the freedome, and controuling authority of that high Court. Long it was not therefore after the sitting of our great Councell, before the said King gave open testimonies, how odi∣ous it was to Him to see his boundles Prerogative so checkt: nay many months had not elapsed before disgusts had hacht & ripend bloody & dangerous plots against the whole representative bodie of our State, 2. Armies were now in the North out of all military imployment, and this put the King in some hopes, that either one of them or both might be woone to his partie; and so help to rid him of his loathed rivality. Strong endeavours were used accor∣dingly: but God blasted them all: the Scotch Army thought it
too horrid a thing to attempt the ruin of that Court which was so true to their preservation, and so assured to the ends of their late Declaration: and the English Army durst not attemp any thing, having the power of London to mate them before, and the Scots behinde, yet the Parliament truly apprehending danger from these, and other like machinations to forifie themselves the better, frame a Protestation for all the people to take, and who∣soever should refuse the same, He was voted unfit to bear Office either in Church, or Common-wealth. This Protestation was taken in 1641. and the Protesters did thereby in the presence of Al∣mighty God binde themselves to defend Religion, the King, the Parliament, publick Liberty, the Union, and peace of the three Kingdoms, with a clause to be assisting to all that adhered to this Protestation, and to be at enmity with all its opposers. The King stomacht much this new way of imbodying the people in leagues, and parties, and knew well that the contrivers of it intended it for a combination against his unlimited pretensions: but seeing his interests were here as specially provided for as any other, with∣out any insinuated subordination, and that it left his pretensions as unprejudiced as they were before: he smothered much of his distaste against it. Ordinary affronts, and misadventures did ra∣ther quicken then quash this Kings resolutions, wherefore upon this Account He made the more haste into Scotland upon some concealed reasons of State: and his hope was, that by his passing through both the Armies in the North, He should finde an oppor∣tunity to be his own negotiater with all the chief Commanders. All these royall arts neverthelesse miscarried, and were not able to debosh the Armies, for either the Commanders were jealous of the soulderies integrity, or the Souldiery of one Army suspected the sincerity of the other, or else the Parliaments sollicitations proved as efficacious, as the Kings: somthing there was that con∣curred to the abortion of that mischief. The King therfore speeds away to Scotland with superetations of further plots in his un∣quiet head; but his old fate still accompanied him, for there He was soon disburthened of some of his monstrous conceptions, to the great detriment of other men: but He scarse ever prospered in any one designe for the advancement of himself. Some Noblemen that were invited to a bloodie supper, got timely advertisement of the royall assassinators, and so by flying privily out of Eden∣burgh secured themselves: but that ever to be execrated insurrecti∣on
in Ireland, by the Irish Papists against the British Protestants, came to effect at that time; and tis known well enough that the chief actors in that tragedie alledged a Commission from the King under the great Seal of Scotland, to justifie all that they then perpetrated. Here was an issue of blood spent, that is not stanch∣ed to this day: little lesse then 500000 Christians were sacrificed, and devoted to slaughter by that Commission (and the King him∣self never took any effectuall course to wipe off that stain) but what prosperity has that dismall deluge of blood brought at last to the Kings cause? Hitherto the King keeps from open defiance with the Parlia∣ment of England: but now Gods flaming Minister of warre begins to brandish his sword against this Nation: now the King is re∣turned from Scotland: and now begins the year 1642. wherein Arms are openly taken up, and avowed on both sides. Scotland for two or three years before had seen war, but without slaughter▪ Ireland had been miserably the yeer before imbrued with slaugh∣ter, yet saw no war: but England must now prepare her self both for war, and slaughter. At the first harnessing, and making ready for the field both sides pretended to be on the defence: and both pretended to stand for the defence of the same persons, and rights; the Parliament declares for the Kings rights aswell as the sub∣jects Liberties: and the King for the Subjects Liberties, as well as his own rights: the matter of the Protestation is the cause they both ight for; insomuch that by their professions it might be thought the Protestation were equally favoured by both. Neither were their successes much unanswerable to their professions: for after a bloodie battell fought neer Keinton in Octob: and another hot encounter at Brainford, and after divers other conflicts in se∣verall other places of the Northern, Western, and middle Coun∣ties of England either side got blows, but neither side carried away any great advantage, or conquest: only the Kings secret corres∣pondence with the Irish began now to grow more evident, as well by their declaring for the Kings pretences, as by his divering the preparations made here against them. At this time the threed of the Kings Councels was exceeding finely spun, the more zealous He seemed against the Ish openly, the more zeal He attested to them privately, and they themselves could not but see by the Kings seizing our Irish provisions here, and assuring himself of our Forces sent thither, that the more we exhausted our selves in
sending supplies against them, the more unable we should be in the end either to resist the King here, or to reduce them there. Howsoever as was noted before, though the most subtill threeds of the King, were strong enough sometimes to fabricate toils and nets for his subjects, yet they never could be twisted into ladders for the mounting of him to his aspired grandour. About the beginning of the year 1643. another black desperate designe against the City of London was discovered, scarce inferior to any of those former impregnations of the Kings inraged brain: whereupon the Parliament again had recourse to this new religi∣ous guard of Vowing, and Covenanting. And herein after the Covenanters had humbled themselves before God for the Nations sins, and judgements, and promised by Gods grace to endeavour for the future, an amendment of their wayes, they the second time ingaged themselves by Vow, and Covenant, in the presence of Al∣mighty God, to be adhering faithfully to the Forces raised by the Parliament for defence of Religion, and liberty. &c. But not∣withstanding the vertue of both these holy remedies against the Kings uncessant stratagems: about the latter end of the same Summer the Parliaments affairs came to a great declination, and till they obtained aid from the Scotch Nation, their condition was thought very tottering. In August the English Commissioners began to treat at Edinburgh: and about the depth of Winter the Scots advanced with a compleat, well appointed Army. Yet this may not be wholly preermitted, that the Scots were long delibe∣rating about their march, and though they saw their ruin invol∣ved in ours, and their faith no lesse pre-ingaged to us for mutuall assistance, then ours was to them: yet they advanced not at last but upon these strict conditions: 1. That we being then but a wasted part of England, yet should presently imburse them out of our afflicted affairs with a great summe of ready money: 2ly, That they should be payed as mercenaries, and yet have a share in government here, as if they were our joyntenants. And 3ly, that we should enter with them into a new solemn League and Cove∣nant upon Oath, as it was by them composed, and conceived. So disproportionable, and unsuitable is their amity to their enmity: for when they had a pretence of a quarrell contrary to former Treaties with England, in 1648. twas in their power to invade England readily without assurance of present Advance-money, or establisht pay afterwards: and such able Enemies we found them
in all ages: but when they were to be ayding to part of England, in observance of former Treaties, in 1643. there is no moving in such a work without ample Covenants: so much more difficult amongst them is the enterprise of helping, then is the enterprise of undoing. It is manifest now, by that which has been hitherto premised, that the first occasion of flying to such conscientious tyes and ex∣pedients as these, was that the late Kings plots, and conspiracies might be thereby the better disappointed, and that the people might be thereby the better confirmed in their opposition against Him. And this makes it now seem the more strange to us, that the Scots at present should make their Covenant so main an engine for the King against us, which at first was certainly excogitated as a main engine for us against the King. 2ly, it is hereby as mani∣fest that the Scotch Covenant which is now insisted on by that Na∣tion, and was pressed on us at first with so much rigor, did add no new obligation at all to the English: Religion, Liberty, Monarchy, and the peace of the Nations were as much secured before, and as sanctimoniously by the Protestation in 1641. and by the vow, and Covenant in 1643. as they were afterwards by the solemn League and Covenant, when the Scotch Army was to enter England. 3ly. We cannot observe by any remarkable blessing from Heaven, that the hand of God did ever give any gratious testimony in behalf of these new sacramentall obligations. The protestation was thought ineffectuall till the vow, and Covenant came in with a greater supply of religion: the vow, and Covenant was not able to break the Kings Armies till the solemn League of Scotland had su∣perinduced its further sanctity: and when that was superinduced and came accompanied with 20000 armed men from Scotland, the King subsisted, yea and thrived a long time after: and without doubt those Oaths which he imposed within his quarters did as∣much service against us, as ours did for us in our quarters. We all know that twas not a new Oath but a new modeld Army that by Gods most gratious hand first gave check to the Kings prosperity: and tis not so visible that ever we trampled on the Royalists for∣merly by observance of the Covenant, as that we are now mise∣rably ingaged in blood against the Scots, by misprisions, and false glosses of the same. The Lord of his boundles mercy grant at last that we may return to our old wayes of humiliation, seek to ap∣pease that Majesty by fasting, and praying, which is to be feared
we have provoked by superstitious vowing, and swearing. 4ly, We cannot finde that ever the people was rightly fitted, or at all benefited by these new sacramentall Leagues, or rather politicall Sacraments: for in England we had too many that would take the Kings Oaths when He was prevalent, and the Parliaments also when they were prevalent: and in Scotland Montrosses victory left lamentable spectacles of humane treacherie and impietie as to the Covenant: No sooner had he in 1644. woon one pitcht Field but the Nation generally flow'd in to Him, to submit unto his new royall bonds, with curses upon them that had forcibly clogd their consciences by contrary ones before; and no sooner had D: Lesly routed Him, but the same people again shifted Montrosses bonds with detestations as high, and bitter, as they had the Par∣liaments before. This is a prodigious example, exceedingly to be deplored not onely by the Scots, but by all mankinde. But to proceed: The breaches, and hostilities which at this day are sprung out of the Covenant betwixt the Covenanters of both Nations are too visible: the question is therfore, whether we shall charge these mischiefs upon the ill composure of the Cove∣nant it self, or upon the malice of the Covenanters: and if upon the Covenanters, whether are more guilty the English, or the Scotch? And first as to the Covenant it self, it seems to me that even that was not compiled so briefly, so clearly, and so impartially as it might have been, and that has given some occasion of stum∣bling to some: but certainly blood had never been drawn by brethren so leagued together, as we are, had it not been for the ignorance, arrogance, and high injustice of the Covenanters. Antiquity which was famous for ingenuity, had not any use to charge their humane contracts, much lesse divine, with so various and heterogeneous branches, as this Covenant is charged withall: some points of it arc divine, some morall, some civil: some are of higher, some of meaner concernment: and all of them thus odly compacted together swell it up into too rude a lump. Moreover, since variety of parts made it more grosse, and by consequence more obnoxious to doubts, and intricacies, there ought to have been more care to distinguish betwixt those parts which were coordinate, and those which were subordinate: and in case some provisoes proved inconsistent with others, it should have been predetermined which should supersede, and which should be
superseded. The King by one clause, as He is King, is to be main∣tained equally with Religion, &c. yet by another clause, as He is a profest enemy to the Covenant, is to be pursued by arms, and brought to condigne punishment. The safetie of Religion may possibly be irreconcileable with the safety of the King: and the safety of the King confessedly owes a subordination to the safety of Religion: yet it is left dubious by the Covenant how far the in∣ferior here shall give way to the superior. The unity, and peace of the Nations is the scope of one Article in the Covenant, and that Article had a high place in the intent of those which indighted the Covenant: yet neither does this Article condemne all war as unlawfull betwixt the Nations, nor yet prescribe when it may be judged Lawfull, nor by whom. The Scots by one interpretation of the Covenant are more strictly imbodied with us then former∣ly, and so to be assisting in our Reformation: yet by another in∣terpretation, they are to maintain to us our Nationall rights, and not at all to interpose in judging of our English affairs: and how can they reform where they may not judge, or how can they judge where they have no propriety? or how can they challenge more by vertue of this Covenant-union in England, then we do in Scotland? or how can confusion of interests be introduced, where there remains a coordination so equally, and justly pre∣served? In the next place, there is a palpable partiality in the Covenant whereby is easie to be perceived in which Nation it received its being: for the Church of England, and Ireland are to be reformed, but the Church of Scotland is to be preserved in its perfection of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government. In summe, all three Nations are to purge away whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of Godlines: and the only true standart for such purgation is the book of God, and forasmuch as that is as truly a standart to the Scots as to the English, they, though the Covenant prejudges and presumes them perfect, are to be tryed by this Book as well as we are, and as that which is defective in them must be rectified by this standart: so that which is not defective in us must be justified by the same. We conclude therefore justly, that either the Article it self pre-judges us, or is by them ill pre∣judged when they assume, that we are to conform to them, more then they are to conform to us: for so much as there is but one
only book to which we are bound equally both of us to conform▪ and of that Book they are no more authenticall interpreters then we are. These exceptions, and perhaps more, might be taken against the Covenant it self, and the manner of obtruding it: but we fix not hereupon, nor will we mention it, as to the genuine intent of it, without reverence: the main offence that has been given to the world, has been given by the Takers of it in a false sense, not by it self. The inquirie therefore at this time is, whe∣ther the English, or Scots, whether the Presbyterians, or Independents are most blameable before God, and Men, for the scandall which has been given by occasion of this Solemn League, and Covenant. For the better discussion hereof, we shall do well to observe, first, which of the parties has been most clamorous against the other▪ ly, What the principall matter of those clamors has been▪ 3ly, What may be most probably aymed at by the raisers of those clamors: 4ly, What the issue has been▪ As to the first it is apparent, that the Scoch Presbyterians, were the first compilers of the Covenant, and that they still continue to set a sacred value upon it, even unto a great degree of supersti∣tion: and tis as apparent, that they had not been so strangely transported with rage against us, but for our attributing lesse then they do to it. The Covenant is their Word in the day of bat∣tell; the Covenant in specie is carried along by their Priests, when they march into the Field, as if it were held oraculous, and had the same presence of God ingaged to it, as the Ark had amongst the Jews: The Covenant in Law is made transcendent to an Act of Parliament; nay if both Nations should agree in one Act of Par∣liament, that Act could neither make more intense, nor more re∣misse the obliging force of this Covenant. This Covenant is some∣times call'd Gods Covenant, and inscribed by the Scots in the same table with Gods Covenant of mercy to his Church, and therefore when they will animate the people against us in war, they tell them that God cannot deliver up his Turtle dove, and his Covenant into the hands of such Enemies. Now because we come not up to this hight of adoration, we seem despisers of the Covenant in the Scots eyes; and because we seem despisers of so holy a thing (accounted by them the very soul of Religion, and policy) their gall flows out most violently against us. They tell us▪ we have brought great scandall, and reproach upon the
Name of God, the Name of his people, and the study of piety▪ that we have not onely broken the Solemn League and Covenant betwixt God and these Nations, but have in effect rejected it, and trampled upon it, are become enemies to all the ends of it, yea persecuters of the servants, and people of God for their adherence to it. This in effect has been their burthen against us for divers yeers, though it be as void of truth, as it is of charity: and though we (who may more justly instance in this, and divers other things as breaches of the Covenant on their parts) have never made the Covenant any ground of quarrell, or reproach against them. Tis far from us to under-value the Covenant: we hold it a religious tie of mutuall assistance betwixt the Nations against the common Enemies of Religion, Liberty, and Union, and so we think hono∣rably of it: only we make it no spell, nor idol: nor can we be∣leeve that it ties us to any duty, which our Pretestation, and Vow, tied us not to before, nor did our Protestation, and Vow create any new duties to us when we first entred into them. In the next place, though there be many heavy breaches of Covenant ubrayded to us: yet all of them resolve into these two, That we make not good what we have covenanted for either to God, or to the King. They could never say till this last Summer (nor can they truly say so of us last Summer) that we ever entred their Countrey to disturbe their peace, to claim, or usurp any share in their Government, to lay taxes, seize Towns, waste Villa∣ges, and destroy Natives amongst them, as they have done a∣mongst us: all that they can object to us is, concerning injuries done to other parties, within our own territories, where by the Covenant they have no jurisdiction at all. In the behalf of God, they complain, that our professed Faith is nothing else but a mix∣ture of Arrianisme, Socinianisme, Antinomianisme▪ Familisme, Antiscripturisme, Anabaptisme, Erastianisme, and Independency: but they know well that for matter of Doctrine, we still retain the old Articles of our Church, without any staggering at all in the least: and for matter of Discipline, we are willing to comply with them so far as they comply with Gods Word: but in this we have our eyes in our heads as well as they, and tis no Law for us to damne the opinion of Erastus, or the person of any Indepen∣dent, because they by them are dishonorably spoken of. The truth is, the Independent departs not so far from Erastus, as the
Presbyterian: and Erastus is no Freind to the supreme power of Synods, nor the uncontroulable dominion of Priests; and this makes the Independent so injurious to God, otherwise call'd the Kirk, otherwise call'd Kirkmen; were it not alone for this sin in the Independent, Arrainisme, Socinianisme, &c. (though we were therewith more infected then the Scots, as we are not) would make no breach of Covenant at all amongst us. In behalf of the King, they complain, that we have treated him not onely as an Enemy to the Covenant, but also irreconcile∣able to the very being of our State: and hereupon they take up∣on them to bewail the hard condition of the English, that they are loaded with so many, and so great taxes, and subjected so rigo∣rous, and obdurate Laws: which shall receive Answers in due place. But in the mean time, tis neither the Kings, nor the peo∣ples sufferings that stirs such a deal of compassion, and zeal in the bowels of our fellow-Covenanters; tis the change of our Govern∣ment, by which they perceive at last, they themselves are verie great loosers. The truth is, the difference betwixt the King and us heretofore was of great advantage to them: and this advan∣tage (though it was no property, or right of theirs, but a wrong, and damage of ours) is now faln away from them. The King shall now have no more occasion to give them pensions in Scot∣land, nor gratifications here to do us dis-service in behalf of his Prerogative: nor shall we be any more bound to hire their service against the Crown: and we must know, that these double offices, or ambidextrous versatile arts of doing services, and dis-services was as great a revenue to them (especially since these last trou∣bles) as the intra does of all Scotland. Now this therefore in the third place, may save us our labour of further inquiry about the ends, and aims of the Scots in their exclamations, and expostulations against us, when they contest in behalf of the Covenant. We see what the Clergie in Scotland, and here, are so thirstie of, they would fain have Consistories in every Parish, where they might have a free power to dispence the Ordinances of Christ to such as prove observant of them, and to cast out all that are not submissive enough: and for fear Lay Judges should ballance too much there, they would have Classes above better defecated of such secular persons: and for fear lest those Classes should be controuled by Parliaments: they would
have Assemblies above all to act for Christ in all matters whatso∣ever military, or judiciall, wherein Christs Throne, that is the Kirk may be concerned. No Protestant Bishops ever aspired to so sollid a power on earth: nay except in the Popes own Patrimony, where He is a Prince, no Bishops in Europe undr any other Lay Princes are allowed to sit and act so independently, upon a Com∣mission so large, as the Scotch Assemblies do: and therfore we cannot wonder if such a new Hierachy, as this of the Presbyteri∣ans be so desirable amongst our Kirk-men. Furthermore, when such impetuous appetites of all the Clergie in Scotland, backs with some thousands of ours in England, shall also fall in at the same time with the interests of so many of the Nobility, Gentry, and Souldiery in Scotland, as drove a very thriving trade hereto∣fore by siding sometimes with the King against us, at other times with us against the King: and these things can be no other way compast, or pretended to but by the ambiguous sense of the Co∣venant: we cannot wonder, if the Covenant be held so venerable a thing as it is in Scotland, and made the price of blood and war, as to every puntilio in it. More then this needs not be said of the Scotch Presbyterians, if as much could be said of the English Inde∣pendents, and that they may have as fair hopes, and probable ends against the Scots by suppressing the Covenant unduly, as the Scots have against us by inforcing it immoderately: I would wil∣lingly quit this as a nugatory, weightles presumption. The last thing that may deserve to stay and take up our thoughts a little is, the issue, and event that both sides have met with, and this may justly sway our censures in such a question, as this is. The King being driven to extremities in Oxford, and being privy to the differences betwikt both Nations about some constructions of the Covenant, chose rather to cast himself into theirs then our hands▪ and we cannot imagine that the King which so hated and feared the true intent of the Covenant, would rather intrust his life to those which He thought more true, then those whom he thought more false to the Covenant▪ But what successe had that trust of his? it cost him his ruine in the end; for they which interpreted the Covenant for his purpose whilest he was to put  great prize into their custodie, soon found out a contrary inter∣pretation, when the Parliaments money out-weigh'd that prise. This end their animating him divers times against our Proposi∣tions
tendered, when the King was thereby, and by other secret correspondencies rendered more dangerous to us, and more un∣councellable to Himself was fatall to Him. But now since in fa∣vour of his Son the former interpretation is resumed the second time: how has the case been altered? The case in truth is even thus, the young King has repented of his coming amongst them, the Kirk begins to repent of his admission amongst them: the hand of God has been heavy upon both: and tis almost come to this, that the most conscientious Presbyterians in Scotland must read the Covenant in a new sence amongst us: whilest all the rest must lay afide the Covenant wholly amongst the ancient, professed Enemies of it. I will not strain this argument of successe too high: but this is to be remarked, that the successe here put, is not ordi∣nary, or meer successe: forasmuch as it has been sent from Hea∣ven after solemn appeals thither made by two religious parties, and as the honour of God was much concerned in it, so the man∣ner of sending it was more then ordinary. We draw nearer now to the Covenant it self, and shall consi∣der it first in the whole, and then in its parts. The first clashing we had with the Scots was about the right which each Nation had past to the other meerly by joyning in such a mutuall, sancti∣monious stipulation: for when we objected to them upon severall occasions, that they interposed too far in the Affairs, and Coun∣cels of England, they as often gave us this Answer, that we were not since our conjunction with them in the Covenant and Trea∣ties to look upon them as strangers, or so far distanced, in the in∣terest of England, as they were before. This was at large refuted, and silenced by the Parliament, and therefore little need to be said in it: and indeed Leagues, and Pacts are common amongst all other Nations, yet no man ever argued such a State is united to such a State as to such a particular war, or as to the attaining of some other particular purposes, therefore they are incorpora∣ted into one State, and united as to all other purposes whatso∣ever. This is ridiculous: sense, and experience is sufficient to ex∣plode it. And if the Scots plead further, that there is something extraordinary in this bond of the Covenant, which knits faster, and closer then all other bonds: proof will fail them herein: and yet if proof were not failing: their equality of interest with ours in England would not follow notwithstanding. For either the Co∣venant
has reduced our two States and Dominions into one, or not. If it has not; then the English mans interest is as intire, and remains as distinct from the Scochmans as it was before: confu∣sion of properties is a thing as abhorred in policy, as a vacuity is in nature. But if both the governments by our Covenant aduna∣tion be compacted into one, and the same: then where is that one and the same supreme Tribunall, which is equally to determine all Nationall disputes, and may legally challenge submission from all aggrieved parties? Should an Army be committed to 2. Generals, and the Commission specifie nothing concerning the partition of their Commands, and prevention of their rivalities, nothing but ruin could be expected. Therefore the very letter of the Covenant was so far from intending to take away all seve∣rality from us, that it clearly puts each Nations Liberties and rights amongst those other things, which it proposes to it self to save by this promised assistance of each Nation: ordring likewise this assistance, that no man should yeeld the same otherwise then in his severall place, and calling, and according to all our seve∣rall places, and interests. Tis the more immodesty also in the Scots to arrogate to themselves an equall share in the rich Common∣wealth of England, which the English never made any pretence to in the like barrener soil of Scotland. But if a moity of our English government in all cases whatsoever be not due to the Scots, as they are our brethren in Covenant with us, and equall parties in the same stipulation: yet in the next place we cannot deny them an equall share in the judgment of the Covenant, and all disputes about the same. If they be contractors with us, and by vertue of the same Contract are as well inabled to require performances of conditions from us, as they are obliged to perform conditions to us, it stands with all manner of equity and reason that they should have as great a latitude and freedom, as we, in determi∣ning what is to be performed on either part. We deny not to the Scots the same extent of judging in England, as to Covenant diffe∣rences, which we claim in Scotland: this onely is denied by us: that either they are as properly Judges of matters in England, as they are in Scotland, or we in Scotland, as in England. This was the fallacy that should have blinded us, but there is no such great depth of sophistry in it. The States of England and Scotland are equally independent▪ & the Covenant cannot grant to one equall
a jurisdiction over another. So long as both Nations stand upon equality, and confesse no superiority to be in either: so long it is vain, injurious, and against the ends of the Covenant for one to passe sentence upon the other. Tis vain, because the sentence has no operation at all, the party sentenced protests justly against it, and all third indifferent parties look indifferently upon the sen∣tence and protestation. Tis injurious; because he that condemns his equall, does that to another, which he would not have ano∣ther do to himself: and if there be no other superior Judge on earth, He intrud into the chair of God himself. Lastly, tis against the Covenant, because the intent of the Covenant is to settle peace, and amity by offices of justice and humanity betwixt the Nations: whereas there can be no end of controversies and hosti∣lities, when sentences shall be spoken against parties that are no inferiors, and that by parties that are no superiors. The Scots therefore in this have been exceedingly too blame, and there is no doubt but the ruine of the King, and all the late miseries of their own wasted Countrey have been derived from this strange insufferable arrogance of theirs. Tis frequent with them to pro∣test against the Parliament of England as no lawfull Authority; to denounce against all the Souldery of England as Sectaries, Re∣bels, and regicides; to upbraid all the Gentry, and Comminalty of England submitting to the present Government, as men that prostitute their consciences to a sinfull shamefull thraldome: to incite all the Presbyterians, and discontented persons in England to the kindling of new flames amongst us. And this is more then to invade a moity of the Legislative power of England, this is to seize all: this is more then to claim a jurisdiction in Covenant affairs, this is to in vas all us totally in all cases whatsoever: this is more then to pronounce judgement against us at home in civill cases, this is to pursue us with fire, and sword, as well forrein, as domestick. Should our Nation now descend to the like outragi∣ous recriminations, or rather feminine altercations▪ being first provoked, and having juster grounds, what an odious noise would this trouble all Europe with? Well: but still there is some∣thing to be said for the Scots: if they may not call us to their own barre, as they are our fellow Covenanters, and as they are equally parties in so religious a League with us, yet there is ano∣ther Bar to which they may cite us, there is still here upon earth
a barre of common equity and reason; and at this Bare the English are accountable for all their delinquencies against the Covenant. To this we agree, and shall appear a is required by the citation. The late King some years before the eruption of these troubles had made many dangerous attempts against the purity of the Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of the Subjects in all the three Nations. Now in 1643. when Arms were taken up on all hands either for assisting, or opposing the King in those his de∣signes against Religion, and Liberty: the Covenant was formed by that party which rose up against the King, and the main, pri∣mary use, it was formed, & intended for was to protect Religion, and Liberty against Him, and his adherents: The formers of it also at the same time took notice, that the cases of Religion, and Liberty could not be well separated, forasmuch as the King if He prevailed against the one, would more easily prevail against, the other. Religion was the richer Free-hold, but Liberty had the stronger fence to preserve it from the violence of intruders. It was likewise visible that Religion would make the people more zealous for Liberty, and Liberty would impower the people the better to defend Religion. besides, suppose the taking away of the people, and you suppose with all the taking away of Religi∣on, and suppose the taking away of Liberty, and you do in a man∣ner suppose the taking away of the people; for the life of a bodie politick consists not in living, but in living free. The Covenant therefore primarily, and ultimately proposes to it self the safety and prosperity of the true Protestant Religion in the safety and Liberty of the three Nations, and the safety and Liberty of the three Nations in the safety and prosperity of the true Protestant Religion. All other Articles in the Covenant are but secondary, and subordinate hereunto: and they are to have respect from us not as they stand higher, or lower in order, but as they are more, or lesse serviceable to those higher purposes, for which they were at first ordained. Upon this ground, that branch in the Covenant which obliges us, to seek God in this sacred Ingagement by a speciall amendment of our lives, and reformation of our own private wayes: at such a time as this, merits the honor of the first place. And next hereunto worthily may succeed those 2. branches by which the Nations are so strictly confederated in peace, and
amity: and by which all parties to this confederation have past their solemn Pacts to be assisting to each other, & bringing all op∣posites to condigne punishment. That branch which was insert∣ed in favour of the King (at that time the principal Enemy of the Covenant) and for saving of his Prerogatives (so desperately at that time disputed by the sword) if it could challenge any place at all, could certainly challenge none but the last and lowest, how soever the Scots had ranged it, and do still propugn it. No∣thing surely could more cloud the meaning of each part in the Covenant, or more pester, and perturbe the whole frame of it, then this insertion. The same Oath to God now binds us in one clause to pursue with fire, and sword all that are enemies to this Oath, and yet the grand enemy of this Oath by another clause in the same Oath, is preserved inviolable: nay that clause which preserves one Enemy, has a local preference before, that which pursues all. Hereupon if a Commission be taken from the King to destroy this Solemn League, He that takes it dies igno∣minously as a Traytor, but he that gives it, has that indemnity given by the Covenant, which his kingly office could not have given him. The very penning also of this Article leaves us very dubious, and perplext, how far the Kings royalty is saved to Him: for the saving is not absolute; but refers to some thing in order above it: and that is the saving of Religion and Liberty▪ Here therefore two new doubts meet with us to intangle us: 1. In what degree the King may be proceeded against, when in such a degree He indangers Religion, and Liberty: 2ly, how we shall ex∣actly judge of these degrees, when our judgements are wholly left at liberty, without any limits, or marks set by the Covenant. The Scots have proceeded so far as to imprison the Kings person, and to sequester all his royall power, which is a temporary de∣throning, and deposing▪ because they suppose Religion, and Li∣berty was so far impugned by Him: but they suppose that from an imprisoned, sequestred King no further offence, or danger can arise: and therfore He ought not further to suffer. This is suffici∣ently erroneous: but this is not all yet, for they will not only thus expose Religion and Liberty to greater hazards in their own Countrey, but they will over-rule us with their errors, and in∣force us to run the same hazards in our Countrey likewise: and this is more, we are sure, then the Covenant enforces us unto.
And doubtles this is very hard. For besides that there is no Nati∣on, nor scarce any individuall person in any Nation, who is not Judge of his own danger: in this case our judgement is wrested out of our hands, and resigned into theirs, who are the creators of our dangers, and have declared for, and thereby diverse times exasperated our greatest Enemy against us. In Novem. 1643. before the Covenant was consummated, the Lord Generall Essex moved in Parliament for the shortning of our war, that the King (who perchance was then encouraged to prolong the same out of hope of impunity at last, in case his arms should miscarry) might have a peremptory day set Him to come in, or else to know his danger: and this was consented to by both Houses, but obstructed by the Scoch Commissioners: what service was done to the King by this obstruction of the Scots, and divers other the like ambidextrous dealings, since that time, and how much longer the war was protracted by it, and how much mischief the same has at last drawn upon the Scots, as well as us, time has clearly enough demonstrated. And yet still, upon this the meanest, and most intricate article of the Covenant, they think they may break the unity, and peace of great Brittain against one of the most indisputable, fundamental tyes of the Covenant, and that onely to shew their zeal to an Anti-covenanter: which is a breach as indisputable, and fundamentall, as the former. The intrinsecall form of the Covenant binds one party to assist the other against a common enemy: it binds not one party to be as∣sistent against the other: for how can that be call'd assistence, which is direct opposition? Besides, it binds specially to assist against such an enemy, as is injurious to the others right, free∣dom, and property: and can the Scots perform this bond to us, when that which they call assistance to us, is opposition against us, even by taking away our right, freedome, and property? for what right can remain to us, whilest we are subjected to their forces, what freedome, whilest we are to be judged by their discre∣tion? What property, when we have lost the independency of equals? Certainly if we covenanted with the Scots as equall par∣ties, we did not covenant with them, as superior Judges; and if we had so covenanted with them, our covenanting by Oath with God had been superfluous, but we hope that will not be held su∣perflous: and therefore we will not endeavour to assoil our selves
before the Scots, we will onely in charity let them know, how we have hopes, to be assoiled before God. The change of Govern∣ment in England, which could not be without the execution of the late King, and rejection of his posterity (more then they could be without change of Government) was urged upon us (and God, before whom we plead, knows we had not long premeditated it before, nor imbraced it willingly at last) by two unanswerable, irresistable arguments. The first was drawn from our duty to God: the second from the naturall, necessary care of our own preserva∣tion. The first argument pressed us hard, that what God had commanded could not be reversed by any act, or pact of man: that God had commanded us, to punish blood with blood in all persons whatsoever under the power, and force of our Laws: and therefore our Covenant could not exempt the King himself▪ If it be said, that the King of England was above all Law; that has been disputed by the sword these many years, and decided for us by signall victories: and the Scots have appeared as far upon that Triall, as we have done; and after that triall, tis unequall for us to descend now, to any other. We prescribe nothing to other Nations, whose Kings have a Legislative power, and thereupon are solati Legibus, and have their very wils interpreted, and ob∣served as Laws: nor do we censure such States as have Princes subject to Laws, yet use not rigor in all cases whatsoever. We are willing that every one should stand, or fall to his own Master. Onely, when immuring, sequestring, deposing, impoysoning of Princes has been very frequent in the world, that no Nation can be excused thereof at some time or other: this seems beyond ad∣miration, that our judiciall, publick execution upon the late Charles should undergo an harsher censure then all these, meerly because it wanted not the due solemnities of Law, and Justice to attend it. May a Prince be reduced from his publick capacitie, and when He is made a private person shall he be treated so, as no private person may be treated? Shall he be subjected to clan∣destine, unlawfull proceedings, belowe the right of a common person, because He was once more then a common person? and shall either Jurists, or Statists that have any insight into the Laws of God, and Nations, stand for a secreted veiled justice, such as blushes, and dares not shew her face in open Court, yet passe neg∣lects upon that justice, which as far abhors darknes? and disdains the use of masks?
Our next argument was drawn from the hard necessity that was incumbent upon us for saving our selves from utter ruin. Divers times we had made humble addresses to the King for a cordiall pacification, the Lord knows our sincerity therin: and the Scots that are now our accusers were for divers years our wit∣nesses in that behalf: but before 1646. the K: had too much confi∣dence in his English, and Irish abettors, and so would not hearken. In the year, 1646. the Kings English Forces in England failing, we made new addresses at Newcastle, where the King was in the na∣ture of a Prisoner: but we soon found at Newcastle that the Kings confidence was still supported there also by something that had been infused unto Him by the Scots, and so that hope prooved frustrate likewise. The dealing of the Scots herein was very close, the English that were in Commission with the Scots for governing the affairs of that Army in the Scotch Quarters, knew nothing by what invitation the King was drawn from Oxford thither, nor to what purpose Montreil the French Agent was there solicititing; but when our Propositions were rejected, and that the Scots (who joyned with us in tendring them) began to dispute the Kings in∣terests, & their own against us in other things: and that their lear∣ned mouth Louden professed against the rigour of our capitulati∣ons, in the same elaborate Oration to the King, wherein He so zea∣lously laid open the necessity of them, we could not but discern a halting in that Nation: and that that halting had as strange an operation upon the King. The King thought now He had got∣ten as great a strength of Scots in the North, the same being like∣wise fain away from our strength, as He had lost of the English at Nasby, and in the West: and for our parts, had the Scots been gold-proof, we should have thought so too. The disposing of the King was the matter in question: the Scots were not desirous to take him into Scotland, nor would leave him in England: but be∣ing under our pay within our own territories, where we had publick persons in Commission with them: without the Parlia∣ments or their Commissioners consents, they would be a guard to Him in England, till their Parliament at home were further sa∣tisfied. In the mean time after a long consuming war ended, En∣gland was constrained still to pay and maintain two Armies: the Scotch to prevent a new war if that were possible, the English to sustain a new war, if prevention proved unpossible: so that
every moment was irksome to us, whilst the Kings pretentions was an occasion to draw so much treasure from our coffers, and it was as irksome to the King to see the Scotch arrears, or any thing else besides his pretentions brought into debate, but at last the Scotch arrears took place, and justled out the Kings matters; for after a great sum agreed upon, the Scots quite contrary to the high expostulations of some of their Papers, thought it honora∣ble to leave the King in England, and the English thought it as profitable to buy the Scots out of England. This probably might prepare the King for new Pacificatory addresses, partly by damp∣ing his hopes in the Scots, and partly by defeating the next privy applications of the Scots to Him: and partly by giving a better rellish of the English whose prisoner then He was, & yet had been treated very honorably; but this would not do, new Propofiti∣ons were once and again sent, and denyed, and new assurances from the Scots were admitted, which procured thosy denyalls. Nay, after that Hamilton in 1648. Commission'd by the Parlia∣ment and Presbyterians in Scotland, had invaded us with 20000 men, and was beaten, and a new party of Kirkmen of a contrary party to Hamilton, had gotten the sway of the State into their hands, by the help of our forces who pursued the Hamiltonians beyond the Tweed; the English still received further repulses. So vowedly inflexible was the King against all that could be tenderd by the English, though even when his condition was grown low∣est, and the Parliaments Propositions not at all raysd higher, and so vowedly obstinate were the Scots, and all parties, and factions among them upon all changes of affairs whatsoever, to make all agreements of the English with the King, disadvantageous to their fellow Covenanters. Their voluminous Papers yet shew what they pretended to in disposing of the Kings person in En∣gland: what a negative voice in the Parliament of England they would assign to Him: what revenues, and signiorys out of the Court of Wards and elsewhere they would secure to Him: what power military, and judiciall they would intrust him with in England: and how all should be managed by the joynt advice and consent of Scotland. In summe, the King must again be more humbly sought to then ever: He must be discharged of imprisonment, received in pomp at London, to treat about what we had to propose: and his
freedome must be such that He must sent for, and advice with what Delinquents He pleasde: if we granted the Scots this, we left our selves nothing: if we denyed, All Ireland was at the Kings devotion, all Ormonds, all Oneals adherents, all the old Irish, all the English Irish: all the Protestants, all the Papists were against us: we had then scarce three considerable Towns left in that Countrey: In Scotland all that Montrosse, all that Huntly, all that Hamilton, all that Arguile the Kirks Champion had any power in, even Jo: Cheesly himself to get a dubbing at the last hand was for the roy∣all Cause: In England the Clergie had imbitterd the City, and the City had sharpned the Countrey against the Army, and against all that had not forgotten the first quarrel with the King. The Parliament it self had some leading men in it that had se∣cretly capitulated with the King, and those false Leaders had many other ignorant followers that would beleeve no such mat∣ter. At such a time as this, when all forrein States desired, and contributed something to our ruin besides; and the King had as free scope to sollicite and treat them as ever, and did make use of his time, especially to conclude with the Irish: what should the Army do? to execute the King, and eradicate Monarchy, was to expose themselves to a thousand hazards, and extremities: to spare the King, and Monarchy, and submit to the Scoch Presby∣terian faction, was to perish inevitably: to treat with the King brought them upon this perplexity: either they must propose things safe for the State, and then they had no hopes of prevail∣ing: or they must propose things unsafe, which would be sinfull, dishonorable, and ruinous to them, as well as others in the end. I am confident England never travail'd with such sharp throes, or strugled through such gasping agonies since She was first a mo∣ther: and none but God could have given her such a deliverance. When the King was retrograde to his Trust, and with the swinge of his Train had swept all the chief luminaries out of our firma∣ment: when the Clergie was generally disaffected, and with their doctrines had almost poysoned all the City, and almost half the Countrey, when the remaining part of the Parliament that had stoodout the brunt so long, and wetherd so many gusts became recreant at last, then did an Army inspirde with strange courage but stranger counsell from above, step in to save their sinking Countrey, over-powring all the windes, and waves that raged
against them. The wonderfull dispensations of God bringing great matters to passe by such crosse meanes must be observed, and adored by all that are not aliens from Religion: and I doubt not but future Parliaments in future ages will be amazedly af∣fected with them: but of all men we that now live, and see the effects of that critical time, and what a prospering posture we are now in, within so short a space, in England, Scotland, Ireland, and round about by the seconding mercies of God since, must needs most gratfully recent these things, except we have sold our selves to Atheism & rebellion against Heaven. The Chiliasts from hence and from the race ordering of all our commotions, since, 1640. & something before may assure themselves that Christ is to reign upon Earth, and that he ha's already taken the Scepter out of the greater Warriors and Counsellors hands of the earth into his own: For the hills are now plained, and the vallies are raised, and yet there is no humane hand appearing in it. Some men thinke all successe unworthy of all regard, as if there were no difference between the administrations of God in his Church in times of distresse, and his disposing of other mens ordinary affaires at other times: or as if Alexander, Hector, Caesar, had foyled their enemy by the same inward promptings as Jo∣shua, David, and Judas Machabeus did: but this certainly is an irre∣ligious error: for as there is a generall providence of God by which the course of all naturall things is steered: so there uses to be a speciall interposition of God in some things and is to be ac∣knowledged, when his owne honour and interest is specially concerned: and this speciall interposition is sometimes of the finger of God, when the effects are lesse supernaturall; but when the effects are more stupendious, and beyond reason; the Scrip∣ture it selfe stiles this the making bare, and the stretching forth of Gods arme. They which are disaffected to the late egregious proceedings of God in the world will not, but they shall see, and owne this truth. But let us returne to the procedure of our affaires; when the Army saw it selfe surrounded with so many dangers, and in∣sulting enemies; it began by some faintnesses, and carnall doubts to grow dangerous, and an enemy to it self; it began to receive suggestions that the removing of a King and Kingly power was like to prove more unfeaseable, then to treat a King into reason.
And this was likely to have proved the more banefull, because the King by speciall graces was as ready to draw them into this am∣buscado as they were prone by their irresolutions, and diffiden∣cies to run into it themselves; for 'tis thought all agreements with the King would have been short lived, but if any had been made with the Army, that would have bin but as Samsons withs, and ropes, which was the reason, That the King, upon whom Five Addresses of the Parliament had wrought nothing, seemed to lay the Armies Proposals, though little differing in substance, exceedingly to heart: Howsoever it pleased God at this low ebbe of things, when the Army was weakest, and most apt to be inveagled, and when the King was securest, and had most hopes to inveagle, to break off that Treaty, and then was brought on the last with the Parliament in the Isle of Wight; which when it was likely to overturne all by accepting of the Kings Conces∣sions; then also did God make the Army his Instrument, in pre∣venting that sad conclusion. The debate in Parliament after the returne of the Commissioners, was; Whether the Kings Conces∣sions at that Treaty had been such, as might make further appli∣cations hopefull, or no: and after a very long time▪ spent, the affirmative was Voted. This Vote struck a true apprehension of an universall imminent danger into the Army; for, now an ac∣cord with the King by the sense of the Parliament was to be ho∣ped for, whereas in truth any accord (besides an absolute submis∣sion of the King) was sufficient to take away all hope; for since the King unsubmitting, had no visible obstacle betwixt him, and his long, eagerly pursued ends, but the Army: and any accord was certaine to discard, or new form that Army, the security of all our Laws, and rights; yea, and lives was solely to depend upon the Kings Honour: and what was honour in his sense, who was so principled, and who had now for diverse yeares waded through so much bloud, and exposed himself, and posterity to so certain a disinherison, only to be true to his principles, any ordi∣nary man may determine; Immediatly therfore after this Vote past, the Army saw no other remedy to prevent their eminent overthrow but to lay a hand of force upon the affirmative Vo∣ters in Parliament, and to bring the King to a tryall, which were done accordingly, and so both they prevail'd and we were preserved as to this day.
Some say twas more Noble to trust the King too much, then too little: but these consider not that Trust is not always alike free; in this case distrust could ruin but a few, and that by a le∣gall course; but Trust was likely to have ruin'd Millions, and the Laws to boot. Some of the Scotts say; God was able to save Religion and Liberty in despight of the King: had he prov'd perfidious, and therefore if the King was not to be trusted, yet God was. These consider not that God holds himselfe tempt∣ed, not trusted, when we leave the use of ordinary hopefull meanes on Earth, and rely upon unprovmist succour from Hea∣ven. Some say if the King was not to be trusted, yet the Army had no lawfull warrant to judge of him, and the Parliament, but these consider not that extream, eminent, and otherwise insuperable dangers give private persons; yea, single private persons, an extraordinary warrant to defend themselves, and o∣thers: and this Warrant will be avowed by necessity, the ex∣ception, that all Law admits to be within the reach of no Law; and the danger was here extream, because it concerned Life, Re∣ligion, Liberty, and all that could be endeared to man: it was likewise eminent, because another day might have prevented them by disbanding, or some other way. Lastly, it was other∣wise insuperable; for that there was no other Judge, or hand on Earth that could hear and relieve them. Others say still, the danger was not so existent or manifest to other men, as to the Army. Let it be considered by these; 1 That Nature has entrusted to every man a speciall custody of his owne safety; and there is none of us all, but would be loath that the same should be transferred to another mans care, viz. in cases extraordinary, where legall remedy cannot be had in a common way. 2 In matters of fact, where no full proof can be had, every mans judgement is to be lesse peremptory, and to take in as much of Charity as is possible. Whether the King would indeed have broken his Trust, or no: and whether the Army did falsly pre∣tend such a fear, or no: neither of these is matter of Law, nor liable to any infallible proof, as to the fact: wherefore I may sin against charity if I passe my judgement against either, but I cannot sin, if I leave the judgement of both to God, and to waite for his determination.
Some in favor of the King frame conjectures that He was pro∣bably very firme in performing because He was so slow, and cir∣cumspect in ingaging: and that if He had been lubricous or pro∣fuse of his faith, He would not have refused an accord with the Parliament so long upon what tearms soever. Others make use of contrary conjectures to a contrary purpose; alleadging that 'twas but art in the King to dally, and to trifle away some time with the English, to set the higher esteem upon his constancy, and make them the more assured of his performance: that He was ab∣solutely secure of the Englishmens facility, and plain-dealing, and never made any doubt to be received at his own pleasure: that he was never to his last day void of other confidences, or destitute of other plots to compasse his designe by force, that for his fidelity, and the value he set upon promises▪ and oaths, and the infinite subtilty he had to evade any ingagement whatsoever, scarce any forraign State or Prince in Europe was ignorant in that point. That scarce ever any just, or innocent man fell un∣der the weight of such transcendent, unparraleld calamities. But I list not to leane upon such Reeds, as conjectures are▪ tis enough for me to know that whatsoever man intends, or acts wickedly and perversly, God orders, and disposes rightly, and profitably; may he so do for England, Scotland and Ireland, in all these late mutations. It remains now, that we cleer our selves in point of Church-Reformation: for having covenanted to reform in Doctrine, Discipline, &c. according to the word of God, and the patterns of the best Reformed Churches, we are bound (as the Scots main∣tain) to take our pattern from them, and that, we, as yet refuse to do. This is the grand, and most heynous charge the Scots have against us: and because we follow not the modell of Scot∣land, which they hold the best Reformed Church in Christendom, they seek to overwhelm us with a thousand calumnies, and la∣bour to possesse the world that wee are nothing else but a Lerna of Heresies, and a sinck of all uncleannesse. To this we answer, 1. When wee are bound to reform according to the word of God, and the examples of the best Churches; wee conceive the word of God signifies all, & the examples of other Churches sig∣nifie nothing at all; for those are the best Churches that reform
neerest to the word of God, and what Churches have neerest Re∣formed cannot be known but by the word of God it self, so that that instance might have been spared. 2. If it come to tryal by the word of God, whether the Scots Reformation be the best or no, the Scots therein can challenge no more priviledg of judging, then we or any other Church. When we were governed by Bishops, the Gospel of Christ was as pure∣ly delivered in England, and as heartily embraced by the English (any being Judges besides the Scots) as ever it was in Scotland: and shall it be said, that because wee have cast off Bishops, and thereby come some steps neerer to the Scots, our Doctrine remai∣ning still the same without all innovation, shall it be said that our very approaches have st us backward? It will be required at their hands who are intrusted with the government of Christs Church, that his word and Ordinances be piously and duly dis∣pensed: and it will be required at their hands who are govern∣ed, that the dispensation of Christs words and Ordinances be faithfully and sincerely entertained: but if the Governors right∣ly discharge their duty, and the governed fail of theirs, the Go∣vernors shall not answer for what they cannot help; 'tis God that gives the encrease, and does the saving, inward work: the Minister cannot go beyond planting, watering, and doing that which is the outward work. 'Tis one thing therefore for the Scots to upbraid the Flock, and another thing to upbraid the O∣verseers of the Flock, and yet the Scots constantly take an advan∣tage against us by confounding these two things. For the people of England, we must confesse they have been of late too much tainted with Heresies, and monstrous opinions: pudet hae opprobria nobis, & dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli: I hope all good men are grieved and humbled for it; but let the Scots consider, 1. That growing of Tares in Gods Field, does not alwayes shew that the Husband-man sowed ill grain, the contrary rather is true: inasmuch as the more busie the good Husband-man is culturing and improving the Earth, the more sollicitous ever the Enemie is in casting in his malignant seeds, & the more readily eager he is to debosh & mar the crop. It was so with the Church of Christ in it's Infancy; it was so under Constantine in it's ma∣turity; it was so in Luthers dayes, when it began to recover out
of a long lethargy: and we must expect the like now, when our aces are set upon the last, and greatest calcination as ever the Church saw: as Reformation now in the ends of the world, when the chiefe mysteries of iniquity begin to be revealed, will most annoy Sathan, so Sathan will double his rage to annoy us accordingly. Hornius the Dutch-man, a great friend of the Scots, and who in favour of the Scotch Presbytery, has written a bitter Tract in Latine, to defame us in Germany; after he has represented us as the most leprous, contaminated Nation in the world; yet confesses withall, that to the prodigious revoltings of some amongst us, there is an answerable improvement of o∣thers in burning zeale, and shining sanctity. In Religion beauty and deformity are not inconsistent: those times often which have been most glorious for divine dispensations of knowledge and grace, have been likewise most deplorable for persecutions and apostacies; and this has ever been a great stumbling block to carnall minds. If therefore the great Lyon range and roare, and ramp lesse in Scotland then in England, let not our Brethren boast of it, or think themselves the more safe. 2. Let not partiality blind the Scots; Strangers think Scotland ha's as great cause of humiliation as England, if not greater. Ili∣acos intra muros peceatur, & extra; It were more Christian-like in them, and lesse Pharisaicall, to aggravate their own sins, and ex∣tenuate other mens, then to extenuate their own sins, and ag∣gravate other mens: and if they wil remit nothing at all of their rigour against us, yet let them not stuffe their long catalogues of Pseudodoxies with such wandring terms as Familisme, Erasti∣anisme, Independentisme, &c. which taken improperly, may reach the best Saints of God, and are seldome used properly by any. 'Tis a sad thing to offend Gods little ones, 'tis a more sad thing to deprave many congregations of Gods most precious ones. 3. Whatsoever judgement the Scots will take upon them to passe against the people in England, yet let them not alway set upon the Magistrates, or Ministers account what they find repro∣vable in the people; let them not call us fedifragous for not re∣dressing things beyond us, and such as none can redresse besides God; but this has been toucht upon already. Let us therefore see what is peculiarly objected to the present governing power in England. The Magistrate in England is char∣ged
to be an Enemie to Magistracy, a strange charge certainly. The very last answers we had this last Summer to our Declarati∣ons upon the march of our Army into Scotland, tell us from the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners of the Assembly, that our expedition into Scotland is to overturn Religion, and go∣vernment Civill and Ecclesiasticall, and to set up amongst them the same vast toleration of Religion, as we have done in England. Now if this were true, the sins of the People would become the sins of the Magistrate, but what credite can this obtain in the world. As for the overturning of civill power, that is answered already; we confesse a change of the Form, but we deny any o∣verturning of the thing cal'd Government in England; and wee hope our actions here, and in Ireland, and in other Forreign parts, yea, & our War in Scotland also will quit and essoyn us of anarchy and ere long make the Scots swalow downe their own untruths with open shame. As for the overturning Ecclesia∣sticall also, that may be as resolutely and justly denyed as the other; for that lawfull power which was in Bishops before, is still in being; and though we have not committed it so intirely unto Presbyteries and Assemblies, as the Scots would have us, to the dishonouring of our Common wealth; yet we have preserved it from abolition and utter dissolution. The truth is, in pur∣suance of our Covenant, we have consulted with a Synod of Di∣vines about the best method of Discipline: and they are not able to satisfie us, that the word of God (the rule limited by the Co∣venant for our Reformation) does invest any convention of Clergy-men, who claim to be the only due Representants of the Church, and immediate Vice-gerents of Christ, with supremacy of independent power in all causes Ecclesiasticall. The Pope claims no more in the pale of the Italian Church; the Popish Cardinals and Bishops in Spain, France, &c. claim lesse; and the Protestant Prelates, whom we lately ejected for Usurpers, ne∣ver claimed halfe so much. Now the word of God is so farre from holding forth to us any such vast power in persons Eccle∣siasticall; that it's information is contrary, viz. That the Apo∣stles and Disciples of our Saviour for many years after his death assumed no more Authority on earth then he assumed: that our Saviour plainly disclaimed all jurisdiction and dominion in this world: that by practse as well as precept, he quasht all ri∣vality
about power, or precedence amongst his own dearest fol∣lowers. Besides, if any such spirituall supremacy were vested by divine right in any such Representants of the Church, and vi∣cars of Christ: it were necessary that exact obedience in all things should bepayd them by all Inferiours: and if such obedi∣ence were due, it would be consequently necessary, that they should be free from errour, else the alleadged supremacy would serve to no great purpose: and we know God and nature pro∣duce not great matters, but for purposes as great. This made the Romish Hierarchists rationally assert an infallible spirit, when they had once asserted an ūlimitable power in the Church; for where the Scripture is clear, there needs no soveraign Judg, every man is a sufficient Interpreter to himselfe: and where the Scripture is doubtfull, the doubt is to be cleared by something else of the same indisputable authority, or else that defect is not supplyed, no can the same submission be demanded. Where∣fore upon this account we say, that unlesse our supream Church Lords (when they take us off from our own judgments, & cannot convince us by divine authority of cleer Scripture) wil not con∣vince us of some other divine authority in themselves of the same alloy as Scripture is for the inforcing of our acquiescence: they deale worse with us then the Pope does with his Vassals. More∣over that power in the Church, which Eclipses, and perturbes civill power cannot be supposed to be of Christs institution: but such is the power of the Clergy in Scotland many ways; Ergo, For first clashings may be about what is purely a Civill case, and what is purely Ecclesiasticall, and all such clashings are ex∣ceeding dangerous. 2 Since there are very few cases that are not mixt, and as few mixt cases that are not unequally mixt: great questions may a∣rise, to whether Tribunall the case shall be first refer'd when it is equally mixt; and how the Tribunalls shall agree upon execu∣ting their decrees, where the case is unequally mixt, especially if the decrees be contrary, as they may be. In the year 1648. the Representative State of Scotland, Voted a war with England ne∣cessary: the Representative Kirk Voted the same unlawfull; which contrary Votings might have confounded both, for if the war was necessary, the State might suffer much by the Church∣es seditious malediction: and if the war was unlawfull, yet the
people having no more warrant to obey the Ecclesiasticall then Civill power in matters of that nature must needs be in a strange distraction, and that distraction at that time might have created ethquakes in the whole Nation. It should seem want of force in the party adhering to the Kirk preserved them at that time from a bloodie ingagement against the contrary party, which might have devoured, and swallowed up all. For as soon as Ha∣milton was defeated in England, the Kirk party got help from the English Army, and by force wrested the Government out of Lan∣nericks hands: and then again had not Lannericks side been too weak, another flame might have been kindled, and perhaps have continued unquenched to this day. Now if the temporal sword be in part spirituall, and the cases of warre be held so equally mixt in Scotland, that both the supreme independent Councels claim an equall judgement in them, and do sometimes judge con∣trarily: and there can be yet no certain rule given for the recon∣ciling of those contrarieties: it is manifest, that these two coor∣dinate powers may be destructive to the people: and it is as ma∣nifest that no destructive institution can derive it self from God. Much more might be said of the encroachments of the Clergie upon the Laity in cases mixt, by pretending sometimes to an equality of interest in some cases, where the Laities ought to be greater: and pretending to all at other times, where the Laities interest ought to be equall: the Popish Clergie scarce ever used more jugling and trumperie in these affairs, then the Presbyterian Ministery now uses. In the stating of the present war in Scotland, the Kirkmen go hand in hand with the Committee of Estates, and in their Answers to our English Declarations they interpose in all points whatsoever, whether religious, politick, juridicall, or military: and whether they be points of Law, or matters of fact. But if a Minister preach sedition in a Pulpit, this appertains not to the secular Magistrate; for though sedition be a secular busi∣nes, and sedition may be preacht by a Minister in a Pulpit, yet a Ministers Pulpit sedition is no matter for secular cognizance. Was the Laity ever worse bridled, when it was the Popes Asse? But of this no more, I will onely touch briefly upon the end of all this spirituall coordination, and so shut up this point. The Clergie of Scotland have spoken great, and magnificent things of the use of their spirituall sword: and the principall
allegation for it was, that without such a sword in the hands of the Kirk secular Princes, and Grandees could not be awed, and restrained in many enterprises, and crimes very dangerous to the Church. But who can imagine they ever beleeved themselves herein? when in the processe of all our late wars, that very Kirk it self which told the King He was guilty of a deluge of blood, and had made himself, and his throne, and his posterity obnoxi∣ous to Gods high indignation thereby, yet never offered to strike with the weapon of excommunication all that while? if there was any correcting, restraining, healing, recovering vertue in that weapon, why did they uncharitably forbear to use it? why did they not pitie those multitudes of Innocents that perished daily under his fury? why did they suffer the King himself to run on, and die in his persecutions? And if their pretended wea∣pon had really no such vertue in it, why do they brandish it so ludicrously onely to dazle our weak eyes? The next Objection of the Scots is, that we have not onely se∣questred a great part of Christs spirituall power, and detained it in Lay hands, but have also abused the same power; tolerating thereby, and countenancing all manner of heresies, which is di∣rectly contrary to our covenanted Reformation. Our Answer is, that we are neither intensively, nor extensively lyable indeed to this objection. For, 1. all sects, and scandals are not permitted by us: nothing is more distant from truth, then this suggestion. All grosse sins, and seducers are supprest with as quick severity as ever: nay since the Norman Conquest there have not been so many sharp Laws made against Adultery, Swear∣ing, blaspheming, Sabbath-breaking, and open prophanation, as have been made within these few yeers. All the remission, and relaxation that our Parliament has indulged of late is only to∣wards tender Consciences, where men comport themselves civil∣ly, and inoffensively towards their neighbours, and attempt to innovate nothing in the Church for perturbing of Religion; and even in this also we havenot extended our indulgence so far as the united States of the Netherlands have, and divers other Pro∣testant Princes in Germany. The truth is, we do not finde such danger in Erastianisme, Independentisme, Anabaptisme, Round∣headisme, &c. as our rigid Presbyterians suspect: and this would not dislike the Presbyterians themselves, if they were men willing
to do to others, as they are willing others should do to them▪ for they themselves are sensible, that we can never desire more gen∣tlenesse from them to us, then is now shewed by us to them. 2ly, That toleration which we are accused of, is but a non persecution in its most intensive degree: for we use all Christian means, be∣sides force, to reduce such as wander, and divide from us: and we are far from cherishing schismes and broyls either in Church, or State. Our Saviours own parable allows us where weeds have gotten head, and are as numerous as the standing corn, rather to spare the weeds for the corns sake, then to indanger the corn for the weeds sake. Howsoever, it would be some charity in our traducers, if they would advisedly consider how the growth of our weeds came at first to be so rank amongst us: and thereupon joyn with us in humiliation for it, not exult over us in scorn, and derision. Upon the first defiance given by the King to the Parliament, half the Clergie at least fell away from this cause: and before that rent could be sowde up, there happened a second distance betwixt us, and the Scots partly upon a royal, and partly an Ec∣clesiasticall account, and that distance drew on as great a revolt of the Clergie as the former. And how can any man imagine, but that strange disorders must needs follow and abound in a Church so deserted? When the dressers of the Vineyard do not onely quit their charge, but throw down the mounds, how can it be expected but that Bores and Foxes should break in? And in∣deed the Parliament is still ill beset, for either they must deny preaching to the people, to three parts of foure, or else they must yeeld the Pulpits to their seditious Enemies: and to such as shall seek to wound the Magistrate through the souls of the people. This being the Parliaments hard case, it may better become the Scots, to whom may be attributed a great part of these distur∣bances, to afford some pitie, and help, then to adde miserie to our miserie. This is sufficient to plead for our indulgence, let us onely ad∣vise the Presbyterians not to take unjust offence thereat, or to stumble into the contrary extreme. Tis wofull to see how rigidly the Ministers carrie themselves towards the poore people in ma∣ny places, and what an absolute discretionarie power they chal∣lenge in many places over the ordinances of God. There are ma∣ny
Parishes in England where the people have not been admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, nor some Infants to the Sacrament of Baptisme for a long time. This deserves much be∣wailing; for certainly God gave these rich Legacies to the diffu∣sive body of his Church, for the spirituall comfort of the meanest servants of his, and not to that which cals it self his representa∣tive body, to be a trade, and monopolie for their advantage in this world. But I have done: if the world now finde cause to condemne us of dealing treacherously with the Covenant, and our fellow-Covenanters, in that we have not submitted to the Scots, and for their sakes disclaimed our own judgements and interests to gratifie the King, and the Presbyterian Clergie, with our per∣petuall servility: let us fall under their condemnation. Or if the world can justifie the Scots as pursuers of that union, freedome, and fidelity which was aimed at in the Covenant, when they made themselves our Lords to give us Laws in our own Domini∣ons, and when they did not onely raise sedition here in our own bowels, but came in with an Army of 20000. men to devour us: let them stand upright here, and injoy their wished Triumph. Our finall assurance, and comfort is, there sits a Judge in heaven, who can neither deceive, nor be deceived, a Judge that hears all appeals, made above, and does right at last to all that groane under oppression, and injustice belowe. Of the Scoch Warre. VVEe have seen how the Covenants waxen nose has been turned and moulded into many forms: wee see now cause to suspect, that 'twas made so large at first, and compacted of such materials, that like the Grecian wooden Horse, it might tear our walls the wider upon its entrance, and discharge the more discords, and dissentions amongst us after its entrance was procured. We see it was intended by the honest party in England for cement to unite the Nations in a more arct, faithfull confede∣ration, then ever our Ancestors knew: but the couching of it was obscure, and left liable to so many false glosses, that it soon be∣came . Our brotherly offices of Assistance soon dege∣nerated
into harsh expostulations: harsh expostulations begat se∣creet feudes, and secreet feudes heightned themselves into open hostilities. The question is only, when open war commenced betwixt these Nations, Whether the Scots first invaded us by their Duke Hamil∣ton, above two years since, or whether the English first invaded Scotland this last summer under the command of the Lord Gen. Cromwell. For a year or two after reception of the Covenant in England, a good correspondence was kept betwixt us: the Scotch Commissioners sat in our Committee of Lords and Commons at Darby house, whereby they were admitted into the knowledge of our highest and secretest affaires, and had opportunity to frame parties amongst us for promoting of their own Interests. Out of these kindnesses sprung our first unkindnesses, for the more ho∣nour was given to the Scots, the more still they thought was due, and the more they thought was due, the worse use they made of all that was or could be given them. So all jealousies could not long be supprest, for in time some of our Lords and Commons saw cause to conceale some things concerning this State from them, and this was extreamly ill taken, and indeed no otherwise then if it had been a reall piece of injustice to the Kingdom of Scotland; but moderation as yet kept both within reasonable bounds. Mr. A. Henderson was then living, and conversant in those businesses, and surely he was a man of an Apostolicall spi∣rit, and though a great lover of his Countrey, yet He knowingly durst not interpose in an ill action, for his Countreys advantage: and I am perswaded He did very good offices and kept us from further jars during his life: and if He had lived longer, would have prevented much of what has hapned since,▪ Besides, Presby∣tery the Scotch Clergies darling seemd plausible at first to the En∣glish, and soon grew indeared to our Synod, and for a good space it got such footing in England, that the Scots had no cause of dis∣satisfaction in that behalf. The King also the other darling of the Scotch Nation, till about the latter end of Summer 1645. pro∣sperd so that He more slighted the Scots then He did us, and so about him, there was no great cause of animosities: and if any did appear, they were more easily to be digested; But when the English Army under the Lord Gen. Fairfax had in one Summer de∣feated, and utterly broken two very great Armies of the Kings,
and taken in divers other considerable Cities, and strengths without any help at all from the Scots, many emulous considera∣tions began to breed strange alienations in the hearts of our bre∣thren. The easie warfare of the Scots all this while had afforded them, besides good store of pay and plunder, an absolute signiory over the Northerne Counties (our Northerne men tell us wofull stories till this day) and now they saw that rich service, or ra∣ther absolute dominion was likely to come to an end, they thought sit to strengthen themselves in Berwick and Newcastle, and they got Carlile also by very foul play in spight of our Commissi∣oners, as if they were resolved and certain to have a dispute with us. Likewise in 1646. when Oxford grew straitned, and unsafe to the King, and when it was visible also that Presbytery after so ma∣ny years experience, did not altogether rellish with the English, the Scots presently resolved (as was related before) to expound the Covenant in favour of the King, at least for setling and securing their arrears, and making a commodious retreat out of England. Accordingly that Article which provided for the Kings interest, served their interest wel enough, and war so well commented up∣on by them, that it held us at a bay, till their contract was per∣fected, and then after a long dispute very chargeable to our Na∣tion at the instance of an Army, and 200000 li. they delivered up Newcastle, Barwick and Carlile, and took time to study the Kings Article a little longer. In the year 1647. there was no notable businesse for the Soul∣dier, England took a little breath, having nothing to do but to squench the few remainders of war, and Scotland kept at home to share the late gotten spoiles of England; yet this year there past some new cajoleries betwixt the Scots and the King, and some contests betwixt the Scots, and us about the King: and no doubt, the next years action was now in forging, and all preparatory hammers were on working. And now enters the memorable year of 1648. a year never to be forgotten by the English, in regard of the unparralleld dangers that then overspread it, and the unspeakable mercies of God that then protected it. All the enemies of this poore Common∣wealth were now in a solemn conjuration against it. In Ireland all was held past recovery: Ormond the Parliaments revolted servi∣tor, was complying with the bloody Irish, and betraying his own
Religion into the bargain to get some of their forces into En∣gland: in Wales, in Kent, in Essex, in Surrey, great bodies of men rose up, some upon the old Royall account, some upon a new, whilst many also of the Navy fell away from the Parliament to make the case the more desperate. No lesse then 40000 English did their endeavours this Summer to make way for Hamilton, from whom (by good intelligence doubtles) they expected 20000 Scots. Great was the goodness of God that all these confederates could not be in a readiness at one and the same time, and that all the Forreign Princes round about us which favoured them, could not be assistent to them that yeer: God had so ordained it, that the Welsh should be reduced before the Scots entred, or else our condition had been altogether hopelesse in the eye of reason. But to the Scoch businesse. The Solemn League, and Covenant was now brought under a new debate in the Parliament of Scotland: and the main matter in question was, how they could be absolved of that holy stipulation, if they did not imploy all their power to reform Religion, and to restore the King in England: and for the fuller agitation, and ventilation of this matter, severall grave harangues by persons affected severally were drest, and we may well imagine to what effect. Agent: of the Kirks party seeing the Parliament filled with so great a party of the Hamiltonians is sup∣posed to begin. My Lords and Gentlemen: The Covenant presses us all to endeavour the reformation of Religion, and the restauration of the King in England by a brotherly way of Assistance in our severall places, and callings: and so, as that these ends of the Covenant, may stand, and agree with all the rest. But withall, it behoves us to use a great deal of caution▪ and circumspection in a matter of so high importance, wherein the honour of God, and good of the Nations is so religiously involved, not to be mistaken either in the mark we all shoot at, or in the arrows we are to shoot. As for the point of Religion I am perswaded, it wants reformation in England, and I beleeve I dis∣sent not therein from any here: but this scruple sticks by me: I doubt whether I am so properly a Judge in England of Religion, as I am in Scotland, and if I am not; then I fear I step out of my place, and calling, whilest I take upon me there to reform by force, which sure the Covenant requires not, but excludes in expresse terms. The account of my scruples I give thus: first, if we are now judges of matters Ecclesiasticall in England. we are so con∣stituted by the Covenant, for before the Covenant we pretended to no
uch thing and in the Covenan it self, I finde no such constituting words. 2ly. if the Covenant creates us Judges in cases Eccles: it creates us the same in all other things civil, military, and judiciall: for all the inte∣rests of the King, and Subjects in Parliament: and out of Parliament: are inclosed within the verge of the Covenant: and yet no man here supposes himself bound by any words of the Covenant to look after the whole ad∣ministration of justice, and the whole managery of the government in Eng∣land or els to stand answerable for all abuses whatsoever, that are not there redressed. 3ly. If the Covenant give us a power so large in England, it must by the same reason give the Eng: the same in Scotland: for the bonds are equall, and reciprocall: and so here are discords raised betwixt us, con∣trary to the principall drift of the Covenant, such as never can be pacified: the sword it self can never give any decision in the busines: victory may take away equallity betwixt. 2. brethren: but meer victory can never take away the true right of equallity. 4ly. The Covenant injoynes us precisely to assist one another in reforming, now the word assistence intimates a concur¦rence with the party covenanting against some joynt opposer, it cannot be for∣ced to intimate any violence against the party covenanting. 5ly, Not onely the tenor of the whole Covenant, but also the particular clear purport of the fifth Article in the Covenant mainly intends to tye a firmer, closer knot of union, and conjunction betwixt the Nations, then ever was before: and therefore to rescinde a knot so manifest upon expositions, and glosses of things not manifest seems to me to be a wilfull violation of the Covenant. As to the other point about the Kings inlargement: much may be resumed of what I said before against our judging in England: but I forbear that: the scruples that here suggest themselves to me are these. 1. If the Kings li∣berty may not be restrained, then neither any other of his royall prerogatives, honours, and powers: and yet we our selves hold all these here under sequest∣ration, and for divers yeares of late, we have entred upon, and administred the whole royal Office ourselves: shall we then maintaine, that the K: has a right to that in England, to which He has no right in Scotland. 2ly, If the K: has a right now to his Liberty being amongst the English: it will follow upon the same reason that He had a right to the same, two years since when he was in our Quarters at Newrk, and Newcastle: yet all men will s: amongst us He had no command at all, but was under such a guard, as had a strict charge of his person, and were as rigorously answerable for the same, as any Jaolers whatsoever. Besides, all men know He was by us deli∣vered up to the English against his will: and that upon contract▪ and va∣luable considerations: and that we could not have justified, if we had
thought he was at full liberty, and could not be thereof abridged. Thirdly. A speciall Article in our Covenant obliges us to bring all enemies of the Covenant to condigne punishment: and we do punish daily capitally such of the Kings adherents as have offended against us by his Commissions, and shall we think that death is due to the Actor, and instrument, when imprisonment is not due to the Author and principall? Fourthly. If we dispute not about the Kings imprisonment, but as it is such; that is, as he is imprison'd by the Souldiery in England without consent of the Parliament there: then do we take upon us to vindicate the consent of that Parliament, without consent of that Parliament: And since we hear not that there is any change of the Kings restraint, save onely of the persons under whom he is restrained, nor do the Parlia∣ment in England think fit to use force, nor to desire our assistance there∣in, I doubt if we should obtrude our force therin without any call, we should offend against another proviso in the Covenant, by intrenching upon the Parliaments priviledge there, and by invading the Subjects property like∣wise, which the charge of this war must necessarily draw after it. These things deserve a sober deliberation before we resolve upon the justice of this war: but then the justice being cleered, yet I conceave we are bound to all mankind, much more Christians and brethren in Covenant, to give what evidence we can of the justice of our cause, that if possible they may be convinced, and do right before bloud be shed. And since the Parlia∣ment of England, upon reports of our preparations ha's dispatcht Com∣missioners hither to treat about all points in difference, and we specially by Treaty were held to send the like to them, and after all to give three months previous warning, before we could have recourse to the Sword: I hope no man here will offer any thing against a Treaty with the English Commissioners, that satisfaction before blood may be either given, or ta∣ken: and if not, yet the due space of warning may be observed; if we should faile herein, I fear we should proclaim our selves to the world a∣busive simulatory pretenders of the Covenant, only to prophane the high Gods Name to whom we have all lifted up our false hands. Next, since the English in observance of their faith to us, ingaged freely for our bet∣ter assurance in them, have left their Frontire Towns Berwick and Car∣lisle ungarrison'd, notwithstanding the notice they have of our present posture: I hope we shall scorne to make their plain dealing with us a nare to themselves; and thinke to chastise their fidelity with our infidelity, at such a time as this is, when we wage war with holy thoughts, and only for religious purposes.
And lastly, since we are to engage out of pure conscience to the ends of the Covenant, one whereof is to bring all enemies of the same Covenant to a legall triall, I hope we shall not rceive Langdale, and the rest of the English Fugitives, whose Swords have drawne much bloud of Covenan∣ters to fight under our Covenanters banners. This will convince us of insincerity before men, this will provoke the eyes of Gods jealousie against us in the day of Battail; God must be served justly, as wel as in just actions, and when bloud is the meane, and holinesse the end, God uses to be more jealous, and expects more exactnesse then ordinaily: Oh let not any oc∣casion be given by a Parliament of Scotland to lay stumbling blocks be∣fore others; let not the world say we wrest the Covenant to what sence we please, and use it as the Papist do the word of God: the case is of grand consequence, it may concerne us and our posterity for ever, I pray let it be throughly scand and sifted. Hereunto a Gentleman of Hamiltons party may be supposed to answer: My Lords and Gentlemen, YOu have heard it granted, that Religion in England wants Reformation, and that the King ought to be set free from his forced durance under the Souldier: you have heard likewise granted, that our Solemn League and Covenant requires these things to be done: but divers scruples have been cast in withall, about the manner of doing these things, in regard that a juste is required, as well as a justum. The main thing is, that we are not qualified by the Covenant to do these honorable things in England: Alas, if the Covenant does not add any new qualifica∣tion to us to serve Religion, and our King: I hope no man will suspect that it takes away any such qualification from us as we had before: And I hope thers no man here but thinks before any Covenant taken he had a warrant and capacity good enough to do honorable service to his Religion, and his native Prince: Let me speak plainly, and bluntly, I doubt these scruples do not arise against us, as we are Scotch men, and so have no pow∣er of judging in England, but rather as we are of such a party in Scotland, that the Kirk dares not conside in us: & this is lamen∣table halting before God. Let us not therfore be driven into any unmanly irresolution by logicall nicitis, and School-puntili∣oes: let us beleeve that such just ends as we aime at inserving∣our God and Prince have just avenues belonging to them, and
that God ha's not hedgd in, or inscons'd goodnesse from the approaches of men, as he did once the Tree of Life. My Lord, and Gentlemen: shall pure reformed Religion want an Advo∣cate in this presence? no: it were labour lost here to recommend the excellencies of her; you all are confident you cannot, but be certaine that God hath rather sent a Cherubim to invite and wast you to her assistance in England, then to affright you and drive you from her embraces with a flaming Sword. Then, as for the King, you have a greater interest in him then the English have, and he ought to have a greater interest in you, then he has in the English: Let me tell you if you should prove oblivious of his favours, he might upraid divers of you with your Fields and Vineyards, as Saul did once his Benjamites. Do we not all know, that his graces towards us ha's made him the lesse acceptable to the English? and does not the whole world taxe us of our ill requitall at Newcastle? I speake of that in your ears: what can be said then, either we must requite him better, and acquit our selves better now, or all generations to come will call us ungratefull and unjust; and for my part I cannot ever construe the Covenant as that it intends to render us un∣gratefull or unjust. Tis true the enterprise we goe upon must cost blood, and fall heavie upon some of our fellow Covenan∣ters in England: it were else impossible almost, it should be great and honorable: let this be our comfort: the work is great, and honorable, and being so it must be acceptable to God: and that which God accepts cannot but be feaable: for Qui dat finem, dat media▪ Let the justice of this war fix our resolutions upon the pursuance of it, and when we are upon its pursuance, let us pursue it wisely, and strenuously as becomes Souldiers: let no scruples defraud us of the opportunities and advantages that at∣tendit, for such in war are irrecoverable & pretious: to be brief, let us not be held up with Treaties by the English Commissio∣ners, let us not wave Langdale, nor leave Berwick and Carlisle to the Enemy: when we are in peace let the laws of peace order us when we are in war, let the Maxims of war sway &c. the ra∣ther for that advantage lost in peace may be regained, but an er∣ror committed in war can never be redeemed. The next Gentleman was of a different opinion from either of these, and you may suppose his Oratory was as followeth.
My Lords and Gentlemen. YOu have heard how much may be said for a present war with England, and how much may be said against it: you have heard in what extreams the arguments both of a meer Soul∣dier, and a meer Scholler run, and now having heard both, and compar'd both, you may the better extract out of both that which is truly counsellable at this present, and that doubtlesse, teaches warily to decline both extreams: The Gentleman that spake last maintained well the justice and necessity of the worke that is to be done: such a service to God and the King cannot but be just and necessary; and our Covenant cannot obstruct any thing that is of it self just and necessary; therefore to oppose our Covenant against this war, is to undervalue our Covenant, and to entangle our selves in such nicities as are more fit for the Schools, then this Senate. On the other side the Gentleman that spoke first interposed some necessary advertisements about the manner of our prose∣cuting this high undertaking, not fit to be neglected, for doubt∣lesse it concerns Gods honor, the safety of the King, and the perpetuall peace and safety of these Nations, that this affair be wisely managed, as well as it is religiously intended. We all know that the taking of some advantages in war, if they be at too far a distance with Religion, may prove our disadvantages: and so the parting with some opportunities in some cases, may be a gayn of better to us; hast ha's overthrowne some underta∣kings, as well as delay others. Wherefore I desire leave to coun∣terpoise with a little moderation, that which hath been pressed by both the Gentlemen that spoke before me. And First tis my humble motion, that the Kirk here may have all possible satisfaction given them in the forming, and heading of this Army, and in the conduct, and steering of the great de∣signe; forasmuch as without this condiscention we cannot ex∣pect their concurrence, and without their concurrence, we can∣not expect that readinesse, or confidence in our Friends at home, nor that stupidity & consternation in our enemies abroad, as is to be desired. Secondly, That if wee admit not the English Commissioners to treate, and then allow three moneths warning after the end of that Treaty: yet we may instantly dispatch away an Expresse
to the Parliament of England with particular demands, and a cleere denunciation of warre within a moneth, if those particu∣lars be not instantly agreed to. Thirdly, That some reasonable space before wee march a Declaration may be emitted to satisfie our Friends in England with our sincere intentions towards them: and that the buisines of the Kirke being setled, and the King reinthroned, wee have no intention to intrench upon the priviledges of the Parlia∣ment there, or to breake that bond of confederation and union that was intended to be confirmed by the Covenant. Fourthly, That Langdale may be countenanced at a distance, and with much reservation, and that no other use may be open∣ly made of Him, then of a Forlorne Hope to seize the English frontire Garrisons for our use, and to ingage upon other the like hazardous services. How well these things are calculated for the Meridian of Edenburgh, I leave every man to guesse freely: but this is certain, there were few in the Scotch Parliament, who gave their judgements the first way: many went the second way: and all went the third way, except onely in complying with the Kirke: and if there be any credit to be given to Hamil∣ton, who affirm'd it religiously at the time of his arraignment in England, the Kirkes party refused to comply with Him, and his party, more out of emulations, and particular State-animosi∣ties, then out of any dislike of the cause, or condemnation of the undertaking. And time ha's since made this more manifest, for even the Commissioners of the Kirke in their Declarations since, and by their ingaging against us with their yong declared King, have even by the Covenant, and the same constructions of it, owned every part of the quarrell against us, which they condem∣ned in Hamilton, setting only aside his entring upon us without three moneths previous warning, well: The Scotch Parliament having sufficiently Commission'd Hamilton for his March into England, rose without any audience, or intercourse granted to our Commissioners. Hamilton being so Commission'd, makes present use of Lang∣dale, and his Train, speeds away with 20000. men for England, seizes Barwick and Carlile, commits infinite barbarous cruelties, and destructions in the foure Northerne Counties, before previ∣ous warning given according to our Treaties, but within some
few weeks fights with the Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell in Lan∣cashire, is taken prisoner, ses his Army defeated, and the remain∣ders of it chased back into Scotland. Out of this matter of fact so stated, a dispute now arises, whether this hostile action of Hamilton, that was then chargeable upon the Parliament of Scotland, be still justly to be answerd and accounted for to the State of England, by the present State of Scotland. The Scots deny it upon these grounds. For their first evasion, they say, the good party that now governs is not the same, as the party was, that then governed. Whereby they would have us understand, that the State of Scotland is changed since, 1648. and does not remaine the same as it was at that time, and there∣fore ought not to be responsal for what was then done. After the Committee of Estates, and the Kirk-Commissioners have condemned Hamiltons invasion without antecedent warn∣ing, and his other miscarriages in taking Barwick and Carlile, &c. and confest that nothing can be offerd in excuse thereof: they yet adde, that never any people in the world in a time of defecti∣on did more evidence their freedome from guilt; then They (they meane the party now governing) did. Here is a defecti∣on confest in a Parliament lawfully chosen, and in the major part of the people adhaering to that Parliament: but there was a remnant of good people which at that time evidenced their free∣dome from that guilt, and that remnant since by force, and assi∣stance of the English Army, ha's gotten power into their hands, and therefore the Magistrate that is now, is not guilty of that defection, nor consequently the State of Scotland liable to make any reparation. This evasion must be thus stopt up. 1. In all States where there is a Representative, the publick act of that Representative, or of its major part, bindes all, and every person. And though the next Representative may repeale Laws formerly made, and recede at pleasure from what its pre∣decessrs acted erroneously, or temporarily: and these new re∣peals, and recessions shall be binding to all persons therein re∣presented: yet even these alterations also must be without fraud, Salv semper jure Tertij: they must be without any prejudice to orrein States, and persons there not represented. Nay, if the State of England passe an Interest in Land to a Subject of England
upon a good consideration and contract, that act shal be binding perpetually, and may not under favour be avoyded by a New Representative, because that avoydance will appeare fraudu∣lent in the State: and because such avoydance is to the damage of one that is as it were a third person, and contracts with the State upon equall terms; and it seemes, that a speciall consent is necessary in such a case of his disinherison, and that his gene∣rall consent given by his Representatiues ought not to divest him. And if it be here objected, that the constitution of the State of Scotland is different from other States, inasmuch, as it consists of two Representatives, one civil and the other ecclesiasticall; and in this ingagement of Hamilton the ecclesiasticall Represen∣tative did not act, nor concurre, but dissent, and protest against it, and so made the civil act the lesse authoritative. We answer; First, the ecclesiasticall Representative of Scotland ha's no power but in cases meerly ecclesiasticall, such as this was in 1648. was not. Secondly, if the Scots will tell us, that Hamiltons action, and case was in ordine ad spiritualia: wee must not suffer such col∣lusion to be turnd to our prejudice. The State of Scotland must not thinke it sufficient to stroke us in their spirituall capacity, whilst they strike us in their temporal capacity: the duplicity of their Powers must not justifie, or excuse duplicity in their deal∣ings: when wee sustaine publick injuries, whether it be from a jurisdiction Parliamentary, or Synodical, the whole State of Scotland must be answerable for satisfaction. Thirdly, if the In∣gagement of Hamilton was the lesse valid in Law (if we did grant this, as we doe not) because all that feared the Lord in the Land did petition, and pray against it, and expose themselves to some persecution for not complying with it, yet this does not render the same ingagement the lesse mischievous to us. There was not one drop of English bloud the lesse shed then, nor is there one drop the lesse to be accounted for now. Fourthly, wee are not without some strong presumptions, that the small number of the religious party in Scotland, which were enemies to the In∣gagement then, were not so much enemies to it as it was mis∣chievous to us, or unjust in it selfe, as because it promoted Ha∣miltons action too high, and had an ill aspect upon their owne particular interest in Scotland. Else, what makes them so zea∣lous against our receiving of right now, which pretend they
were so zealous against our receiving of wrong then? It seemes strange to us, that the English which had never a Friend in Scot∣land two yeares since to warde one blow from their throats, or to do any real act of resistance to Hamilton, should now finde ne∣ver an Enemy in Scotland, obnoxious to their challenge of satis∣faction: and that the same men should be the most forward to debarre us of reparation now, which were then most forward to protest against our suffrings. Secondly, where two Representa∣tives have been legally chosen, if it be not honorable for the la∣ter to anull the formers act in prejudice of a third person that ha's right: much lesse honorable is it for a Representative brought in by the sword to derogate from the acts of a former Representative, that had a faire, and free election from the peo∣ple. Wherefore, let the present power in Scotland apply this to themselves: and the rather for that they complain of forcible alterations amongst us, onely upon pretended discommodities to our selves, whilst they themselves make use of forcible alte∣rations amongst themselves, to the defrauding of their neigh∣bours. Thirdly, Admit the Parliament, by which Hamilton was Commission'd, was an unjust Parliament; admit it was no Par∣liament at all; and admit that Hamilton with a lesse party, and without any Commission at all had broke in upon us in a ho∣stile manner: yet even this would not leave the English altoge∣ther remediles; for in this case upon a just demand of satisfacti∣on made by the English, the Scots must disowne the act, and see the outrage legally expiated upon the actors; or else they owne it themselves, and so become as obnoxious as the actors. That which was the sin of one Towne in Benjamin at first, became the sin of the whole Tribe of Benjamin afterwards; and doubtlesse, that which was the sin of one Tribe in Israel at first, had become the sin of all Israel at last, if justice had not been lawfully execu∣ted; Let the Scots look upon this with sad eyes, for that blood of the English shed by Hamilton, which is now the guilt of a par∣ty only in Scotland, upon the deniall of just ice, may be made the guilt of all Scotland. The second evasion of the Scots is this; They say, if they were persons challengeable of satisfaction, yet they that sit now in the Parliament of England, are not persons, that can duly challenge, or require satisfaction: It should seeme as Scotland before was
not to be found in Scotland; so England is now not to be found in England: so hard a matter it is to get right from them that can thus easily transforme, and deforme whole Nationall bo∣dies. The meaning is, Government in England has been of late changed; two of the Estates in Parliament are removed by force, and the third Estate usurpes, what was due to all: wherefore as they cannot treate with us about satisfaction, but they must acknowledge us a lawfull authority; so conscience forbids them to acknowledge our authority lawfull. To this wee answer. 1. The change of rule in a Nation, does not change the Nation; forasmuch as the manner of rule is changeable, and accidentall, and so does not give beeing, or sup∣port the essence of a State. If wee in England beeing a Monarchy owe three Millions to the Hollander, the change of Monarchy in England will not exempt us from, our obligation: and if we in England, beeing a Democracy, have three Millions due from the Hollander, our returne to Monarchy will not denude us of our remedie. The devastations and hostilities of Hamilton were suf∣fred by the English Nation, and the Parliament of England de∣mands justice, and restitution for the same in behalfe of the En∣glish Nation: now 'tis not agreeable to justice, or reason, that a slight exception taken against the substitute, should disable the Principal, or any incapacity of the demandant redound to the prejudice of him which is the true Interessent. Secondly, If the usurpation of the Parliament of England shall bar the State of England from its due course of justice, yet how does it appeare to the Scots, that the power of our Parliament is an usurp't power? If God or Man ha's given them any warrant to judge of our actions, and affaires in England, let them shew it: for without some such warrant they are but our Equalls: and one equall ha's no power of judging another. If they plead any undeniable principle in nature which condemnes all alteration of Government as unlawfull: and all extrusion of Governours as usurpation, and of this Maxime, they say, all men are equal∣ly Judges; then how will they justisie their extrusion of Lanne∣rick, and their new moulding of their Committee of Estates af∣ter the defeature of Hamilton, which without armes, and our as∣sistance they could not have compast? Is that a naturall, indis∣pensible principle in England, which is not so in Scotland? Away
with such partiall shifts; let the Scots shew us that Nation un∣der Heaven that ha's not severall times been driven to mutati∣ons of Governments, and Governours, and been at last justified therein by the plea of necessity, and common safety: and wee shall confesse their Lordly power over us. Thirdly, If the Scots be our Lords, and will give judgement against us in this case, yet they must know, that wee are now upon our appeal before almighty God, and have accordingly taken Armes into our hands for the prosecution of that appeal. And does not one of the primary Lawes of Warre teach them what a hazard it is to deny right to him that beares his aked sword in his hand? Arma Tenenti—Omnia dat qui justa negat. Will the Scots lay an incapacity of Treating upon us first, and then of fighting afterwards. The difference now betwixt us is, whether wee have justly enterd Scotland, or no, to seeke redresse of many injuries, and depredations by tryall of battaile, which was denide us by debate in a friendly intercourse: and doe the Scots thinke now to argue us out of our armes? doe they think, that the same condemnations of our usurp't power, by which they insulted over us, when wee sought a Treaty, will be sea∣sonable now, when the cause is preferd to a higher Court? This were to cut us off from all remedie whatsoever; this were to detrude us below the miserablest of men; this is beyond all or∣dinary strains of Tyranny: There is no Client, nor Subject, nor slave whatsoever, but by way of his last appeale, may repell force with force, when his case is beyond all other decision: and this is held no more then a making an humble addresse to Heaven, or laying the cause before the Lord of Hosts his Foot∣stoole: Will the Scots then which have droven us their equalls to this, last resort, prejudge and foreclude us in this also, and so make us worse them the worst of inferiors? Certainly, if we may not treate before wee confesse our selves usurpers, wee may fight till God declares us to bee so; or that our enemies have usup't over us. The third advantage or exception of the Scots against our demands of satisfaction▪ is taken from the space of time that in∣terlapsed betwixt the overthrow of Hamilton, and our solemne denouncing against them for that hostilitie: as also from some reciprocall kindnesses, and testimonies of accord and pacifica∣tion,
which past betwixt the Nations in the mean while. Of both these I shall now give this faithfull account. The victory of of L: G: Cromwell against the Scots was about the latter end of Summer, 1648: and our Forces following that chase stayed in Scotland till about Mid-winter following. During the stay of our Army in Scotland a good understanding was betwixt us, and the Kirk party there, for we had both the same ends against the Ha∣miltonians, and so whilest we extorted the sword out of Lannericks hands, and put it into Arguiles, we did our own businesse and the Kirks too, and the Kirks more immediately then our own. How∣beit a Treaty was now begun in the Isle of Wight with the King, where the Scoch Commissioners appeared great sticklers for the King to our Nations great dis-service, and this gave us some glimpse, that even in the Kirk party, restored so lately to power by our means, all was not so sound, and sincere, as it ought to be. The Treaty not succeeding about the last of Januar: the King was brought to the block: and then the insolencies of the Scoch Commissioners, and their haughty intrusions into the managery of our English State affairs, and their despicable subjecting of our Parliament to their over-ruling wils, grew so intolerable, that upon the 17. of Febr: the Parliament declared publickly against them. This begat another Paper from the Commissioners dated the 24. following more imperious, and controuling then former∣ly, and this was presently after voted a designe in the contrivers of it to raise sedition, that so under specious pretences they might gain advantage to second their late perfidious invasion. The 6. of March following, the State of Scotland wrote a Letter to us (as they now inform us) to avow their Commissioners last Paper, and withall disallowing our construction of it, for that they judged it no incroachment upon our Government, nor any indeavour to raise sedition. They likewise signified in the same, that if any prevalent party in either Kingdom had, or might break the bonds of Union, yet those sacred tyes ought not to be layed aside or cancell'd, but preserved for the benefit of such as were innocent in both Nations. The Scoch Commissioners to whom this Letter was sent for delivery of it were now upon their return for Scotland, and so the same never came to our hands, though the Scots untruly tax us of suppressing it. But why should they suspect any designe in us of suppressing this Letter? The
Letter, if we had received it, would not have healed our grie∣vances, it would rather have made the wounds wider: for the Scots Commissioners had charged us of Treason, perjury, usurpa∣tion, &c. for doing those things within our own government, which were required at our hands by justice, and Reason of State: now their principals in Scotland tell us that this charge is true: but being true: it molests not, it shakes not, it justles not us out of any part of our power, nor stirs the people at all against us. What is this but to tell us; that they are more truly Judges in England of Treason, perjurie, usurpation, &c. then we? that 'twas not injurious in them to condemne us, nor seditious in the people to rise up against us in observance of their commands? Sometimes they pretend they aime at nothing beyond a simple protesting against us, and that a freedome of Protesting is due to all men: but this is meerly to delude, and infect the people the more: for tis evident to all men, that such Protestations as their Papers have exhibited, have ever been fraighted with the worst of ca∣lumnies, the severest of sentences, and have been received by the people, as warlike defiances. In this case therefore when so many insurrections, and broils have been actually bred against us in our own bowels, and so dangerously seconded by forrein Forces, we call in all men to be Judges betwixt us, whether we may not more justly cast out Pro∣testations when they do but palliate seditious conspiracies, then to submit to seditious conspiracies, because they cover them∣selves with the names of Protestations. This Letter miscarrying, and our Parliament having waited awhile for some other return by some Expresse, or other, in May following, about nine months after the Scoch Rout, a complanatory Letter was sent from hence about divers grievances in generall, and satisfaction was therein desired by Treaty in a peaceable way. An Answer hereunto came in June following, recomplaining that the Scots justly found themselves aggrieved at the late proceedings in England, in re∣ference to Religion, taking away the Kings life, and change of fundamentall Government, which they had protested against. That in case the English would disclaim their late proceedings against Covenant and Treaties, they were contented to authorise Commissioners for a Treaty. Otherwise they were resolved to keep themselves free from all complyance with malignants on
the one hand, and the Enemies of Kingly Government, on the other. That in regard of the Covenant, the Treaties, and many Declarations of both Kingdoms, they could not acknowledge that to be a Parliament, from whom the last Proposition came to them about a Treatie to be appointed. Here was a flat deniall of any satisfaction, by declining all means of treating about the same: Here was a reason given of that deniall, as full of enmity and hostility as could be: instead of making any compensation due to the State of England for the bloodshed, and rapine of Ha∣milton, here was a strange coacervation and accumulation of new landers, and defamations upon the Parliament of England. Let∣ters from the Parliament are now as it were interdicted, no such subscription is to be admitted, hereupon in July following, our Parliament issued forth a Declaration for the better stating of these matters▪ the endeavour of that Declaration was to remove yet all Nationall misunderstanding i possible: and to demon∣strate that the English yet had not laid aside all thoughts of peace: but concluding that if still they were diverted out of the wayes of peace unwillingly, the fault was not theirs. This Declaration was made as publick, as ever any was in England, and we have thousands here of the Scotch Nation disaffected enough to us▪ and ten thousands of English Presbyterians besides more imbittered then the Scoch, and all these can attestate the evulgation of this Declaration, yet the Scots call it a Dormant Declaration, and most dis-ingenuously would infuse it into the people that they had never, nor could have any notice of it. A Letter of theirs to us in the hands of a single Messenger could not be intercepted: but a Manifest of ours Printed, and intitled to the whole world must needs miscarry, and that by our collusion. Some reply was ex∣pected by us to the matter of this Declaration, and some months past away hanging our expectation: but none came: the first news we heard was that about the middle of March following there was a Treaty agreed on to be at Bredah betwixt the Scots, and their yong declared King: and that the principall Subject of that Treaty, was about the pretensions of the yong King to England, and the quarrels of the Scots against England. This to us, that had so little hopes of reconcilement before, was a sufficient alarme, and upon this our L: Generall Cromwell was sent for out of Ire∣land, all warlick preparations were made ready, and our Army
this last Summer, (as soon as we got notice of the agreement made at Bredah, and how far it concerned the life of this Com∣mon-wealth) made its entrance into Scotland. This relation gives the true procedure of all memorable mat∣ters betwixt Summer 1648. and Summer 1650. with the reasons of the slow motions of the English: and amongst them all whether there was any composure made betwixt the Nations for Hamiltons aedifradous irruption, either by satisfaction given, on the one side, and taken, or confest by the other, tis left to judgement. But the Scots alledge still, that immediately after the breaking of Ha∣milton in England, and the dis-arming of his brother in Scotland, there were given divers clear demonstrations of amity, and good accord betwixt the Nations: Letters will yet testifie, that the god∣ly party in Scotland satisfied the English in their innocency, and that the English did accept of the same, as good satisfaction. For example: in Septemb: and Octob: the L: Generall Cromwell wrote in behalf of the Kirk patty, by Him then seated at the stern, and his letters did recommend them to the Parliament as men care∣full of the unity of the Nations, and the interest of England. On the other side the Scots remitted hither an honourable Testimony of the fair comportment of our Souldiery there, together with a thankfull acknowledgment of the benefit, and advantage which our seasonable assistance had afforded them. Likewise from the Parliament here it was written back, that the religious, and well affected people in Scotland were excused from those impious, and unwarrantable actions, and that there was no willingnes in the English to impute those evils to the Nation in generall. As for the L: Generals Letters, questionlesse they contained his true, plain, meaning: He did believe at that time, that the interest of England, and the unity of the Nations was valued by the Kirk, and the Arguilians in Scotland: but what discharge was this to the rest of the Nation? nay what discharge is this to any of that Nation? His Commission extended not to compound for the dammages sustained by us: nor did He ever treat about the same: nor did He at last finde his loving recommendations justly answered by that Godly parties actions. Out of this therefore there follows nothing but that our L: Generall was more charitable, then the Scots were gratefull. As for the Scotch Letters, they serve well to shew the single dealing
of our L: Generall towards them, and their double dealing to∣wards Him: but they serve not at all to shew any act of oblivion, or any other pacificatory conclusion that was consented to by both Nations. Therefore the good that they then bore witnesse to in our Souldiery, we hold it to be just, and according to merit: but when they publish retracting contradicting Papers after the intermission of two years, and therein complain (as they did this last Summer) tha the L: Generall came in un-invited, that the manner of his entrance was not guided by their Instructions, and that the proceedings of his Army were very unsatisfying in ma∣ny other things: this is an argument of their profound dissimu∣lation. As for the Parliaments Letters: although the Parliament at that time was too full of Kirkmen, yet if they had any full words of release in them, we should no prolong our contestation hereupon: but the utmost that can be extracted out of them, is a charitable exemption of some that had the testimony of wishing well to the unity of the Nations, and interest of England from the pen of the L: Generall. The Parliament was unwilling, that the Scotch Nation in generall should be charged with the guilt, and blood of the Hamiltonians, and therefore it did acquit, and hold exonerated thereof all the religious, and well-affected people of Scotland. Without question the religious, and well-affected peo∣ple here excused, are understood to be no other then such as had been adverse to Hamiltons exposition of the Covenant upon sincere grounds, and not for any factious, or particular respects. But how few such there were in Scotland at that time is now manifest, by the general adhering of that Nation to their new King against us. For there is not one man in Scotland that assists this young King against us now, but He expounds the Covenant in the same manner as Hamilton did then: and He might have as safely com∣plyed with Hamilton in that Ingagement, as He may with the yong King in this: as will be further demonstrated in due place. These are the main subterfuges which the Scots flie unto, when we tax them of that cruell, barbarous Ingagement against us in 1648. The rest of their pleas whereby they seek not to shelter themselves from the whole guilt, but onely to extenuate it, or rather to qualifie our demanded satisfaction are scarce worth the mention. They say, they have received some dammage in Scotland by the
ish, and have demanded satisfaction of us, but as yet received none. A strange objection, have not the Irish been prosecuted by us these nine yeers as Enemies? And though they owe allegiance de jure to England: yet are they not as mortall Enemies de facto to us, as to the Scots? Do we any way abet, justifie, or spare them? to vouchsafe more to this, were to disparage right. They say moreover, that some satisfaction has been made us by the booty, and pillage which Hamiltons Army lost in England. Some few Scoch Arms, and Horses, which falling amongst the Souldiers as due prize were like water spilt upon the ground, nei∣ther received in satisfaction by the State of England, nor so given by the State of Scotland, must come in upon the Account of the English to satisfie them for all the plunders, murders, and wasts which a Scoch Army perpetrated contrary to Treaties, and sworn Covenants. No more of this, here ends the first part of the Scoch Warre, whose Scene was layed in England: we come now to its se∣cond part▪ where our Scene by Gods abundant grace, and good∣nesse is removed into Scotland. And in this transition from past, to present, imminent hostilities we doubt not but to evidence the necessity of our War in Scotland, à parte post, as well as we have done the justice of it a parte ante. THe Treaty at Bredah in March last, betwixt the Scots and their declared King: both being upon termes of Hostility with us: had little busines to be debated, that was peculiar to Scotland: the main thing to be proposed by both parties, was the removing some mis-understandings amongst themselves, that they might thereupon the better double their powers, and twist their preten∣sions against England. The Kings interest was Monarchy, the Scots was Monarchy and Presbytery: the English were held to be advers to both these interests: and the Covenant therfore to favour both the Treators, against the English: so mis-understandings amongst the Treators could no be hard to be removed, or at least their slight jars could not be hard to be laid asleep for a while, when they had so little to loose to each other, and yet so much to gain from a third party. All that the Scots desired of the King as hum∣ble suitors was but this, that He would take the Covenant (if that were but swallowed down in its literall sence, they thought all their further aims sufficiently provided for) and this could
not be much more bitter to Him, then the Masse was formerly to his French Grand-father in the like case: and if it were, yet divers dulcifications might be added, and accordingly divers mixtures were used, to qualifie, and make more potable that draught. Ad∣vertisements had been sent from the yong Kings devout Mother in France, and from her most Holy Father at Rome, that in such an extremity the Oath was compulsory, that the matter of the Oath was subject to many severall, yea contrary interpretations: that He should therefore be either left to be his own Interpreter at last in case He prevailed, or if not▪ yet He should be discharged of any contrary strained interpretation. The truth was, the present Power in Scotland had condemned Hamilton for invading England in behalf of an Anti-covenanting King, and so it would be now too grosse for them to do the same thing till they had a Cove∣nanting King: whereupon it became impossible to them to relax the King of this condition. The young King, it may be, might de∣mand why they should more scruple fighting for an Anti-cove∣nanting King, then to fight against a Covenanting brother, since the Covenant lost no more credit by the one, then by the other: and perhaps He might further demand▪ why their conditions to Him were so rigorous; since his to them pressed nothing but what was pleasing, viz: a joint concurrence against a Common enemy. But his Mothers Councellors thought not fit to clog the debate with such intricacies. All Scoch punctilioes being at last waved (for the young King was so far from capitulating about his re∣ception in Scotland, that He was more forward to capitulate against his trusting himself there) it came to the question, what He should obtain at their hands in relation to England. For satis∣faction herein, it was assured, that the Scots had already proclai∣med him King of Great Brittain, that they had alreadie Protested against the governing party in England, as guilty of Usurpation: that they did now ingage to contribute their utmost endeavours, by all necessarie, and lawfull means, according to the Covenant, and duties of loyall Subjects, to restore him to the peaceable pos∣session of his other Dominions, according to his undoubled right of succession. This was the tenor in briefe of that Parlee: here is an inthroning promist to the yong King by all necessary and lawfull meanes according to the Covenant: and here force of armes is not openly profest, as a necessary, and lawfull meanes ac∣cording
to the Covenant, that the English might be ud in the more security: but is ambiguously implyed, and secretly so ex∣plained to the young King and his Counsell, that He might pro∣ceed with the more vigor and confidence. Hereupon now rises the contest, whether this ambiguity of expression, and mentall, equi∣vocall reservation in the agreement be such as ought to delude the English, or not. The Scots still say, no force of Arms is threat∣ned against us, and that if we flie unto force of Arms against them either upon this, or former hostilities, we do caulsly invade them. They solemnly invoke God as a witnesse, and Judge, that they have denyed us no right, that they have done us no wrong: that in this preventing warre, we are meer invaders and returners of evill for good. Yet we must understand to make this good before the Bar of Almighty God himself, they waver, and dllie, and double, and seek to collude in their own plea: for they do not simply deny their ingaging to use force against us, but unlawfull force, nor yet are they willing to confesse their force intended, and justifie it openly as lawfull by the Covenant. Surely in an appeal to Almighty God, the case need not be presented with so much art, and under the cover of such dubious reservations. Let us take a little notice; first, how far they deny; secondly, how far they justifie their forcible assisting the yong King against us. After the King was well satisfied with their meaning by private insinuations, and had adventur'd his person into Scot∣land; then further craft was thought fit to be used to blinde the English, and retard their preparations: and therefore the Com∣mittee of Estates in Scotland publisht, that the Article in the Treaty of Bredah concerning restoring the yong King to his Crowne of England was not to binde, till the Parliament and Kirke of Scotland had taken a previous consideration, and given their determination concerning the lawfullnesse, and necessitie thereof. Behold the ingenuity of the Scots, They conclude a warre, and no warre; To all the enemies of England 'tis a de∣clared warre against England: To the English themselves 'tis no warre till the Scotch Parliament and Kirke have further decla∣red in it. The enemies of England have hereupon just warning and timely summons to arme, and colleague for Englands of∣fence: but in the presence of God they speake it, the English
themselves have no just a▪ no provocation to provide for any defence at all▪ Though this agreement was made by the Enemies of England, with the Enemies of England, and refrres to the Covenant which ha's alwayes been expounded to the justifying of a warre with England upon this quarrell: and though this agreement must signifie a full defiance against Eng∣land to all others, yet to the English it must signifie nothing, God himselfe being admitted Judge. The English had been once before invaded by the Parliament of Scotland upon the same pre∣texs of the Covenant without any warning given, when both the Nations were not onely in profest amity▪ but also under the religious ties of a solemne League: and yet now when the Par∣liament of Scotland ha's peridiously violated that amity, and those ties, and i moreover fstned in a new Agreement and Co∣venant with the most active foe, that England ha's, in the world by Sea, and Land, and by the words of that Agreement and Co∣venant, ha's obliged it selfe to recover the Throne of England to Him: yet now, 'tis expected that the English should sit still, and attend till the Parliament and Kike of Scotland had further de∣side them. Alas, the prevention of a wound that is likely to be mortall, is as necessary, when it is possible, as the warding of it: and some stroakes are of that nature that they cannot be repel∣led by the buckler, if they be not anteverted by the sword. Therefore the fictions of the Cockatrices eyes want no ground in policy, whatsoever they doe in Nature: and 'tis often seene in warres▪ and seditions, that the party which surprizes not is sure to be surpriz'd. This caused the Parliament of England this last Summer to send a preventing Army into Scotland, yet with an intension of defence, not offence, for it was manifest to us, if wee did not pitch the warre there, and there draw the first bloud, wee did necessarily expose our selves to the first charge, and impression of our enemies here, and choose to erect the theater of warre within our own Dominions. Moreover, had wee been meere Assaylants, or had wee been defendnts in an equall cause, against Enemies that had observed Feciall rites with us by giving us antecedent warning, wee would not have been wanting in the due formalities of defiance towards them. Nay, had there been any reall doubt how the Parliament and Kirke of Scotland would have determin'd of the justice, and ne∣cessity
of a warre with England, or had there been any certain time prefixt when that determination should have been given: or had wee been assured of any just time to prepare our selves afterwards for a compleat defence, wee had not been so for∣ward in seeking out the hardships of that cold, and sterill soyle, but as our case was, wee were great sufferers, wee were sufferers by perfidious Enemies, wee were delusorily referd fine die, to Judges that were bound to no meetings, for the resolution of a case that was before resolved against us: and in the meane time whilst wee were brutishly thus to waite upon such Judges, all our conjured foes were contriving our ruine, and were certain to prepossesse irrecoverable advantages against us. But now wee shall see in the next place, the same Scots that before the Judgement-seat of God charged us hitherto for en∣tring upon them when wee were in no danger, nor under any provocation, seeing all their transactions at Bredah more fully come to light, betake themselves from denying to confessing and avoyding. Such is their faultring, such is their doubling: if their deniall could be maintained, they needed not descend to any confession: and if their confession were avowable, they need∣ed not to fly to denyalls: but the truth is, they can neither ab∣solutely deny, nor absolutely justifie their hostile machinati∣ons, and combinations against us, and therefore they shufle, and trifle, and play fast, and lose betwixt both. In August last, when the Scots saw the English would not yeeld themselves to be deluded, or disappointed, or forecluded of any advantages in war by the false pretexts of peace, they stated the case of their war in a Declaration, which they forced the young King to publish in his Name at Dunferlin, and according to the case there stated, they resolved to joyn upon the issue of a Bat∣tail, and in the Field to expect Gods own decision from Heaven. The Battail was fought, and the decision of Heaven dissavoured the Scots: but the successe of a pitcht Feild is not now held an Argument weighty enough to sink a cause so stated. Let us there∣fore more narrowly look into the particulars of that Declara∣tion, and examine upon what sure rules of equity and piety the cause of the Scots, as it is there drawn up, stands founded. At first the march of our Army was held meerly invasive, & causlesly▪ offensive: the Scots denyed any hostile intentions against us at all:
now tis granted there was an intention of force, but it was no other then what was justifiable by the Covenant, inasmuch as it threatned none but such as were Enemies to the Covenant. This seems to mean, that the Parliament of England with all their Armies and Adherents, had had just cause to prevent an invasion from the Scots, if they had been true to the Covenant, that is, if they had interpreted the Covenant in the Scotch sense: but since they are judged to have dealt treacherously with the Covenant, they are not worthy of any defence, they ought not to claim so much priviledg, as to prevent any danger, or enmity; For if the Scotch design had been meerly to plunder and inslave us, then we might have stood upon our guards, or used means of pre∣vention lawfully: but since the designe was meerly to reforme us, and reclaime us to our loyalty, and to reconcile us to our Covenant: 'twas arrogance in us to thinke any resistance at all reasonable: Is not this a candid honest meaning? does not this high pitch of prejudice become a faire noble enemy? but to the effect, and purport of our Scotch Declaration: by that Declara∣tion we are satisfied in two things. First, What conditions were proposed by the Scots to the King both in behalfe of Scotland and England, and Secondly, What Laws were agreed upon by them both to be imposed upon the English. Of the Kings conditions little need be said: by taking the Co∣venant explicitly, he did implicitly bind himselfe to admit the Scots to be his interpreters of it, and by admitting them to be his interpreters, He did ingage to follow the advice of a Parliament in all Civill cases, and of an Assembly in all businesses of the Church: and tis to be understood that the same advice was to sway him as well when he was to consult about his affaires in England, as about his Scotch affaires. For a proof hereof, we see when this very Declaration, so neerly concerning the government of England, was to be issued in the young Kings ame, and he to avoid the same was with∣drawne to Dunferlin: Commissioners were sent after him from the Kirk and States, to let him know, that by the Cove∣nant he was bound to signe, and own this their Act, and that by his refusall if he separated his interest from Gods, and the Churches, they would endeavour the preservation of both with∣out his.
But let us passe to the aws imposed upon us by the accord t Bredah, and let us view sadly those heavy iron yoak that are there eathed for the neck of England. After that the young King  obliged to stand to the advice of the Scots in the supream counsels and concernments of England. Let us consider ow ar that advice is converted to our confusion. The first thing that we are to submit to is, we are here to yeeld up the Crown of England to be disposed of by the Scots▪ we must suppose there lies a duty, and is conferd a power by the Covenant upon them to see to our line of succession, and to take order that in all que∣stions betwixt the people, and any pretendor, the Throne may be duly filled, and possessed. If a Traytor (that ha's been) an enemy in Arms (that is) claime by inheritance the Soveraign∣ty of England, the Scots may justifie force to invest him here, & 'tis breach of Coven: in us to oppose▪ 2. Though the same K. may e under▪ Sequestration in Sco: til he has given publick satisfaction there; yet there is no satisfaction due in Engl▪ of which the English are to be Judges, for the English are to rest satisfied in this, that the Scots rest satisfied: & if the Scots rest satisfied▪ the English sequestra∣tion becomes vacted: Nay, though that which the Scots all sa∣tisfaction, be apparently extorted by force, and almost con∣fessed to be mee imulation; yet the English in spight of their un∣derstandings and senses must accept of it. The Scots say, their young King is truly humbled for his Fa∣thers Tyranny, and his Mothers Idolatry, the young King ab∣hors ther hypocrisie therein▪ and for divers days together puts all his hopes in this world upon eminent hazard, rather then he will subscribe their dictates, yet the English must neither question his, nor their sincerity. Thirdly▪ All these rigos, and imposi∣tions of the Scots our backs must bow, and crouch under for the Covenants sake, and that we may prove true to the most high God, to whom we have lifted up our trembling hands. Though we have discovered the Covenant to be a flaous, lu∣bricous, ambiguous contract (as others besides the Contractors themselves now wrack it) so that in the Scotch sense it makes us enemies to them, in our sense it makes the Scots enemies to us, in a third sense it serves the Papists against us both: and though we are throughly informed, that the young King is not onely licensed but enjoyned to take it by all his Popish Patrons and
Allies, and to make use of it as a sare to both Nations: yet we must take no exception against it. Hamilton, in 1648. expoun∣ded the Covenant in behalfe of the King, and Kirk to the raising of a war against us; yet the same powers in Scotland that con∣demned that war in him, raise the same against us now upon the same exposition. All the difference is this; Hamilton fought for a King that had not taken the Covenant, because He was never so far necessitated, whereas the present powers in Scotl: ight for a King tat has Covenanted against his will, choosing rather to perjure then o perish: But let us aske the Scots seriously, Whe∣ther is the greater enemy of the Covenant before God, he that refuses to take it because it is against his conscience, or he that takes it against his conscience, because he dares not refuse it? Well, Gods judgements herein is by us both implord, & we can∣not doubt but God in his due time will judge, & make his judge∣ment undeniable. Fourthly▪ Though we indeed are not enemies to the Covenant, but can justly plead for our selves, that we are zealous for a true Reformation, even whilst we dislike the Scotch patterne, and that we are well-wishers to Monarchy elsewhere, even whilst we make choise of Democracy in England upon diverse urgent emergent considerations: yet all our pleas are rejected▪ the very last plea of Armes, from which no necessitated men besides are barred, is in us most imperiously condemned as well after open tryall, as before. Nay when wee know our selves condemned by the Scots as Enemies to the Covenant, and that the yong King (to be brought in by force over us) is par∣ticularly sworne against us, in that he is generally sworne a∣gainst all enemies of the Covenant, we must take it as a suffici∣ent answer to all our complaints▪ that the King has no power to annoy any, but enemies to the Covenant. This is to heape Scornes upon the rest of our endurances; for this all one, as if they should insolently tell us, that no man can hold any thing but by the Covenant, and the Covenant can have neither ene∣mies nor friends, but such only as they declare to be such. To pursue these Scornes also and improve them the higher against us, they make their young King in his Declaration at Dunferlin, revoke all his Commissions granted against us by Sea, and Land, to any of his Instruments that adhere not to the Covenant. Do not we know, that such a revocation is meerly udicous, and
jocular? Could the Scots imagine that either Rupert at Sea, or the Irish Papists by Land would obey such a revocation so signed at Dunferlin? And if Ante-Covenanters should lay down their Commissions, would it be more ease for us to be spoiled and de∣stroyed by the hands of false Covenanters, then by the hands of Ante-Covenanters? May not this King do what Hamilton did? May he not prevaile over a faction of Covenanters, and by them assaile us, as Hamilton did? and if not so▪ may he not be impow∣red; nay is he not already bound by all the Covenanters in Scot∣land, nemine conradicente, to treat us as enemies? Will not God in earnest look down upon the makers of such jests? Fifthly. As we must prostrate our selves to a King, to such a King exercised many years in bloudy feats against us before his pretensions to the Crowne, obtruded upon us by such Faedifra∣grous neighbours; and further hardned against us by such reli∣gious incentives: so we must also stoope and kneel to him upon the most servile, odious conditions that can be. For first, wee must come to a new change of Government for his sake. By the present, setled forme; Government is now de∣volved, and as it were naturally resolved into the hands of the people: and as Monarchy cost us a vast effusion of bloud, before it necessitated its own ejection, so it is likely to cost as much now, before it can be reestablisht. Lyons, and Elephants doe not teeme, and propagate so often, and easily as mice, and fer∣rets doe: nor can wee expect, that such great alterations in great States as these are should be compast without much sore travaile, and long continude throwes. The Scots doe know well enough, that our sectarian Party in England, which they charge of usurpation, ha's a great Army in Scotland, ready to cope with all their Levies, another as great in Ireland, a Militia not unequall to both in England, besides a puissant Armado at Sea: and can they imagin that the suppressing of this sectarian party, and re∣investing of Monarchy is likely to prove an unbloudy busines? Secondly, As wee must be forced from the Government that now is, so we must be forced into a new Module of Government, that never was before in England knowne, or heard of. The su∣preme Power of England must now suffer a partition, and have its residence in two severall Councells; the one Ecclesiasticall,
the other Civil, and so whilest in imitation of Scotland, it trans∣forms it self into an Amphisbaena, and submits to the motions of two Heads, it can hardly avoid dangerous disputes, and dissen∣tions. In cases of the Kirk, the King must hearken to Divines, in matters politick the King must be observant of his Parliamens: but if there happen a difference in mixt matters, tis left to the peoples discretion to side, and adhere, as they see cause. Surely twill be an uncooth innovation in England to see Kirkmen sit in an Assembly, and publish Declarations concerning peace, and warrs, as they do now in Scotland; and whether such an innova∣tion may be conducing to a good accord, and understanding in the State, or no, we leave to conjecture. 3ly, As we must subject our selves to these grand innovations, so they must also be pur∣chased by us with the price of some of our best blood: some few of our principall Patriots heads must be payed down in hand for them. It should seem, their Idol the Covenant requires some sa∣crifice to make an attonement for the indignities, and prophana∣tions it has lately suffered in England, and so foure or five mens lives are demanded, as a just oblation. But the Scots might under∣stand that we are not yet so tame, and that the demand of such an oblation from us, is all one, as the demand of many Heca∣tombes: and therefore perhaps tis not parsimony of blood that makes them so parsimonious in their demands of blood. 4ly, As our pretiousest Friends must lye under this discretionary danger, so the most fatall of our Enemies must be secured from all dan∣ger of our Laws: for in the close of all, an Act of Oblivion is to overwhelme all things▪ and all men whatsoever, Royallists, Pres∣byterians, Independents, Papists, Protestants are to be put into an equall condition. What is this lesse then to spoil us of all ad∣vantages, and exempt our Enemies from all disadvantages that the event of these late wars have cast upon us both? especially when the Act is to passe as a Grace from our Masters in Scotland, and not of reconcilement from us? By this state of the cause so formed, and owned by the Scots themselves, 'tis now apparent, that if the English had yielded stu∣pedly to all the conditions, and Laws that are here imposed up∣on them, they had left nothing remaining to themselves: the whole English Nation had been given up to vassalage under a for∣reign Power. Those very Royalists, and Presbyterians which
should have survived the Independents, and could have severd themselves from the ruin of the Parliament: (as was very diffi∣cult to do) yet should have seen the old Government of England overturned, and have served a Master, that should have served other Masters. The Scots neverthelesse in the Declaration before mentioned recommend these impositions of their young K: as his gratious condiscentions, and they expect that hereby he offers satisfaction to the just, and necessary desires of his good Subjects in England, and Ireland. And because they see there are many thousands in England, who have utterly forgotten that ever they were born on this side the Twied: They use many Arguments of Conscience and Honour to Arm all such against the Parliament: and to in amour them with that Freedom, and happinesse that this Declaration promises under them. So wonderous a thing it is, that any liberty under a Parliament of England should be thought worse by Englishmen then any servitude under the Kirk▪ and state of Scotland; but here are the true grounds of our expe∣dition into Scotland: the Justice whereof lookt backward to the incursion of Hamilton in 1648. whilst its necessity lookt forward to the Treaty at Breda, and to the accord that was there made in March last. There is a Justice of warre sometimes that derives it self onely from necessity: but in the War that is now waged by our Parliament in Scotland, we may truly avow, that our Arms are just because they were necessary, and we as truly avow, that they became necessary by being so egregiously just: inasmuch as the Magistrate often is restrained from dispensing with the Sub∣jects right. Now it appears by what ha's been here related, that the Scots unprovoked powred in upon us 20000. men in a maner most perfidious, and at a time most disadvantagious; that after satisfaction peaceably sought they rejected us as unworthy of any Treaty with them: that at Breda they have since conspired with r open Enemy against us, making their cause his, and his theirs: and therefore directly contrary to the Scots Declarations emitted the last Summer, we draw this conclusion, that we have received wrongs insufferable, that we have been denied rights indispensible, and that we have been forced into a War unavoyd∣able. For we hope, since no place, nor time secures us from the offensive Arms of their young King, and his Commissions Offi∣cers, whose cause they have espoused by taking him into a forced
Covenant; No time, nor place ought to secure him from our de∣fensive prosecution. Let the Scots flatter themselves as they please with fond umbrages, that they observe their Covenant whilst they fight against us that are parties to it, and whilst in the young K. they abet P. Rupert, and the Irish, that are parties ingaged against it; God is not mocked, He sees throughly the ill temper of that morter, wherewith their ruinous cause is daubed. The same God knows likewise how unwillingly we drew our swords in this quarrel, and how far all aims of ambition, domination, revenge, or spoil were distant from these our undertakings. The same words which were once used by our Army after the great defeat given to Hamilton in England, the same do we still resume after as great a successe neer Dunbar in Scotland. We believe God ha's permitted his Enemies at several times to Tyrannize over his people, that we might see a necessity of Union amongst them. We likewise hope and pray that his glorious dispensations of successe against our Common Enemies may be the foundation of Union amongst Gods people in love and amity. To this end (God assisting, before whom we make this profession) to the ut∣most of our power, we shall endeavour to perform, what is be∣hinde on our parts: and when we shall through wilfulnesse fail herein, let this Hypocritical profession rise up in Judgement against us, before him who is and ha's ever appeared the severe avenger of Hypocrisie. This we direct now to all the mislead, yet well meaning people of Scotland as cordially after a second signal victory, as we did then after the first. Reader, I here often mention the Scots, and seem to intend the whole Nation; but I pray thee make no such interpretations: for I doubt not but there are many good people there, that either know not their Magistrates Hypocrisie, or bewail it in secret. I my self know many excellent men of that Nation, and these to me are as dear as if they were English. Sit Tros, sit Tyrius, nullo discrimine habebo.
Of the INGAGEMENT. THere was lately Printed a sheet of Considerations against our common Ingagement of Allegiance, to this Common∣wealth: the Author seems to be a Presbyterian of the Scoch Faction, by some thought able and learned: his Argu∣ments are very brief, and I will answer him, as briefly as may be: The Arguments by which our Ingagement is impugned, and as it were on every hand beleaguerd are eleven, as I take it. The first is against the Ingagements inconsistency with former Obligations. 2. Its partiality towards Malignants. 3. Its obscurity, and ambiguity. 4. Its illegall penalties. 5. Its inefficacie. 6. Its want of charity. 7. Its rigor to harmless, conscientious men. 8. Its enmity to Reconciliation. 9. Its diffidence in God. 10. Its ex∣cesse, and extremity in punishing. 11. Its opposition to Christian Liberty. The raising of this seige, I hope will not prove very difficult. Considerator. This Ingagement, to some that have already taken six or seven Oaths, may possibly seem contrary to some of those former Obligations: and such In∣gagers must now suffer, or sin against their doubting consciences. Answ: 1. No State can enact, or ordain any thing, but the same may be lyable to some mens doubts; (In Christian Religion it self all mens scruples are not prevented) those Acts, and Orders therfore which are not lyable to just doubts, are sufficient, and ought to binde. Now the Ingagement, which in truth is not repugnant to any of our former Oaths, or Obligations, is lyable to no just doubts. For our former Oaths, and Ingagements, if we rightly understand them, did not so intentionally oblige us to the form of Government, as to Government it self; nor to this or that changable medium of governing, as to the fixt, perpetuall end of government. Forms, and Means are sometimes very expedient, and so long they are necessarily to be observed: but the question is how far they ought to be observed, when they clash, and by some emergent alteration in the State are put out of Tune, and so jar, as it were, with substances, and Ends: and all wise men
know: Subordinata non pugnant: the matter of lesse moment gives way to the greater. The Law of the Sabbath was strict in all its rites, and requir'd an exact obedience in all its duties which were suitable to its end: but when mans being which was the end of the Sabbath came in question, all its subordinate offices, and so∣lemnities submitted. The Jews thought man must rather perish, then the Sabbath be broken by any labour to save him: and if man had been created for the celebration of that day, they had judged rightly: but since that days rest was ordained for man, our Saviour gives a contrary judgement. The same reason reaches our case. Our allegiance has been formerly ingaged to the State of England governed in such a form: that form is now changed▪ and now our allegiance to the State cannot be continued in the old form, without danger to the substance, without ruine to the end, for which allegiance was so ingaged. In this case, if we grant, that the form of government is but a mean, and that it was or∣dained for the convenience of government, not government for the forms: we have nothing to do, but to conclude with our Sa∣viour, that necessity makes the change lawfull, and the violation of the form no violation: forasmuch as there is no repugnance in subordinate things. Dunkirk was yesterday under the Spaniard, tis to day under the French: the loyalty which the Dunkirkers payed yesterday to the Spaniard is now due to the French: That Dunkirker which now keeps his loyaltie to the Spaniard breaks it, and may justly suffer for Treason: but that Dunkirker which de∣parts from his former loyalty, keeps it, and the truth of his loy∣alty will be justified by the end of all Loyalty. Consider: Known Malignants whose Consciences are too hard for such scruples, readily take the Ingagement, and so get Trust and imployment, whilest the tendernes of Conscience shuts honest men out. Answ: 2. This Objection has no more Force against the Ingagement, then it has against preaching the Word, administring the Sacra∣ments, and all the best Ordinances that ever were past by God, or man: for there was never any duty so holy, nor injunction so equi∣table but some scrupulous men perplexed, and intangled them∣selves with fears about it, and some men of ill conversation would rush, and intrude rudely into it. Tis impossible for the Magistrate
either to ease tender Consciences, or to discriminate hard hearts in all cases: wherefore let us not require impossible things of our Magistrates. Consider: This Ingagement is so pressed, that scruples arising none is permitted to clear them to himself, nor can the tendrers of it prescribe the sense where∣in it is to be taken: so it must be subscribed blindly in the implicit meaning of the Imposers. This agres not with the nature of a solemn Obligation. Answ: 3. The Ingagement is most injuriously accused of any obscuri∣tie; no art of man could pen any thing more clearly, or succinct∣ly: nay I am verily perswaded, that the same men that cavil at the Ingagement for ambiguity: can scarce produce one Law or rule in all the book of God, which might not be made as subject to ca∣villations as this bond of allegiance. By our subscriptions, we onely binde our selves to be true, and faithfull to the Common∣wealth of England, as its now governed without King, or Lords. To ask, what the Common-wealth of England is, is ridiculous; tis the same now under this form of Regiment, as it was before under Monarchy. To ask, how it can be governed without King or Lords, is more ridiculous, our senses discover to us, that we have a government; that we have a government without King or Lords: and if we please we may further inform our selves, that there have been other such governments in all ages, amongst all Nations. To ask how we may be true, and faithfull to this Go∣vernment, is most ridiculous of all: for Truth, and fidelity in England, is the same as Gods Law commands every where. No Law of Gods is more perspicuous, then that which enjoyns obe∣dience, and subjection to Powers and Magistrates; and yet the same Law of God which injoyns obedience, and subjection, in∣tends true obedience, and faithfull subjection: they cannot be divided: false obedience is no obedience, unfaithfull subjection is no subjection. Therefore let our Considerator cavil at God, and his Word, to which our Ingagement refers him, let him not cavill at those which refer him. Consider. The Subjects Liberty is saved to Him by divers Laws, and Oaths: yet the not subscribing of this Ingagement hercaves any man now of the bene∣fit of Law, the greatest of all Liberties, and rights.
Answ. 4. Liberty is the due birth-right, of every Englishman: but Li∣berty has its bounds, and rules; and the liberty of every mem∣ber must be subordinate to the liberty of the whole body. By the Laws of Liberty every man is to injoy, that which is his own: but since one man has far greater, and better things to injoy, then another, the liberties of one may extend further, then the Liber∣ties of another. Likewise, when our Liberties are equall exten∣sive, one man may voluntarily renounce, or maliciously forfeit, that which another does not. Therfore we must not suppose, that any man in England by the Protestation, or Covenant, or any Law else, has such an estate, or inheritance in his Liberty, as is altogether indefeasible, and unreleasible, whatsoever He does, or saies. But in the last place, there is a Liberty of the whole State, aswell as of any particular subject: and that Liberty of the whole State must supersede the Liberty of every particular subject, whensoever both accord not: the lesser, to avoid repugnance, must alwaies give place to the greater. The Coniderator is very erroneous, when He thinks, the Law allowes him any right, or freedome to disturbe the Law, or to oppose any constitution, upon which publick right, and freedom is founded. Consider. These kinde of ties have commonly prooved uneffectuall: nay they have often proved mischievous, like artillery turned against the first planters, and devisers of them. Witnesse the Bishops Canonicall Oath: witnesse the late Covenant, &c. Answ: 5. Religious ties, and pacts are not unlawfull in themselves, but we hold the use of them unlawfull when they are inforced without sincerity, without necessity, and without due authority. As for the Bishops canonicall Oaths; we are not satisfied that there was a sincere meaning in them, or any cleer Law for them: and we are certain there can be no necessity pretended to uphold them: wherefore tis no marvell, if they proved fatall. As for the Covenant also, it was rigorously obtruded upon the English by the Scots, without any pretext of authority: and as we have found since a want of ingenuity in the obtruders, so we are sensi∣ble the pleas of its necessity were mistaken: forasmuch as it has wrought contrary effects, and produced hostility, instead of
amity. Wherfore if this miscarried also tis no great wonder. Nei∣ther does the line, that runs betwixt our Ingagement, and those obligations prove a true parallell: for those were Religious, so is not this: and those were utterly unnecessary, to say no worse of them, so is not this. God has required us to be loyall, and true in our obedience to the higher powers: to obey God in this is ne∣cessary: and therfore to promise obedience in this, even when our promise is a necessary part of our obedience: and is moreover a medium so aptly disposed to reach the end of all obedience, the securance of publick peace: we cannot but conclude it necessary. Besides, the Considerator might take notice, that his objection here is generall against all stipulations, as such: so that by the force of his objection, the very bonds of matrimony; the military Sacraments of souldiers: all the obligations almost betwixt man, and man, by which humane society is preserved, finde themselves struck at, and shaken. There was scarce ever any Nation yet so barbarous, as wholly to neglect ties of allegiance; and amongst all ties of publick allegiance; there scarce will be any found so modest, brief, cleer, easie as our English Ingagement: the obligation is no more then civil, and the extent of it scarce equals the petie homages, and fealties which we pay in Leets, and in our Courts Baron. Consider. If we raised trouble, or sedition under the present Government, these pro∣ceedings against us might be justified: but we are now punisht because we dare not offend God by subscribing. What is our case now was the subscribers ease, when they were formerly over-ballanced in the Government by men of another judgment: let them therfore do as they would be done to, for we desire now, what they desired then, that Conscience may not be forced. Answ: 6. The case of the Non-ingagers is not the same now, as ours was formerly: nor are we so uncharitable as to violent mens con∣sciences, or to exact that from others which we would not have exacted from our selves: these charges are void of truth, and in∣genuity. Necessary Oaths, and naturall stipulations properly tending to the preservation of humane society, we never were Enemies to: nor ought any good mans conscience check at them: and if the non-ingagers can shew, that we require now in this pro∣mise any fidelity or obedience to the State, besides what God
himself requires: and the naturall usage of all Nations justifies, we will acknowledge our error, and harshnes to them at present. Or on the other side, if the Considerator will shew, that the Oaths which we formerly were scandaliz'd at in the Bishops and other oppressors were of such necessity, and so tenderly moderated, as this Ingagement is, we will acknowledge our refractoines in for∣mer times: but if neither of these things can be shewed, the Con∣siderator cannot say we deal unequally or partially with other mens Consciences, tis want of charity in Him, that charges this want of charity on us. Consider. The Non-ingagers can have no other ends of refusing, and becoming obnoxious to the sharp censure of the Act, besides Conscience: because they are few, and cannot compasse any alteration: and they further see, it could not be compast without a great effusion of blood, if they were more, and stronger. Again: if men offend by disturbance of the Government, under which they live: let them receive severe punishment, let them not be punisht before offence given. Again, This Ingagement involves many conscienti∣ous men▪ fearfull to subscribe, who yet verily believe they must stand, or fall with the present Government: and are wholly for them in their judgment. Answ: 7. We must by no means grant, that there is truth in these suggestions. For: 1. we know there are diverse, which refuse this Ingagement out of meer dis-affection to the present Government. 2. There are diverse neutral minded men which do subscribes▪ his Ingagement not without some unwillingnesse, which neverthelesse will the rather be true, and faithfull because they have so inga∣ged. Fear of penalty will be as potent to keep some men from breaking, as it has been to keep others from refusing the Ingage∣ment. 3. Tis impossible for us to beleeve that pure conscience re∣strains any man at all from subscribing: it must be peevishnes, of humor, and opinion, it cannot be conscience. Our reason is: because there is no third thing betwixt being a Friend, and an Enemy: betwixt being true, and false: betwixt being obedient, and disobedient. Can we possibly admit, that they are wholly for us in their judgments; that they expect to stand, and fall with us, that they are conscientiously bound up from attempting against us: which think it a sin to promise any truth, or fidelity to us? Either it is a sin to be true, and faithfull to this Common-wealth,
or it is not. If it be a sin: in the judgment of our Non-ingagers; to be true, and faithfull; then are our Non-ingagers worse then Enemies: for enemies themselves may without sin passe pacts of truth, and idelity to each other: and if our Non-ingagers be worse then ene∣mies, tis treacherous in them to pretend they are lesse. Pure con∣science cannot permit them to say, they are wholly of our judge∣ment, their safety is involved in ours, they are no way disaffect∣ed to the present Government: whilest at the same time it suggests to them that they sin if they prove true, and faithfull to us. On the other side, if they allow there is no sin in being true, and faith∣full to us: then they must allow withall, that there is no sin in promising truth, and faithfulnesse. Nay without doubt, the thing being lawfull, the promise of the thing becomes lawfull, if not necessary when tis required by the Magistrate for securance of the publick peace. Tis a strange thing to imagine, what now predicament the Non-ingagers must finde out for themselves. Pro∣test enemies they abhor to be, their judgements, their safeties, their own interests force them to disclaim that Name: Profest Friends neverthelesse they dare not be; some scruples of consci∣ence deter them from any such obligation. Neuters they cannot be, because they are Natives, and members of this State, and owe allegiance to Government, howsoever they may except against this, or that form of Government. Forreiners that have no de∣pendence upon us, nor owe allegiance to us, may professe neutra∣lity, and if they be not against us, we repute them as if they were for us: but tis otherwise with the English subjects. Ambidexters they will disdain to be: for of such the contrary rule is true: if they be not with us, they be against us: a seeming, simulatory, Friend to two contrary parties is a reall, assured enemy to both: our Saviours mouth has left it unquestionable, that No man can serve two Masters. It will therefore well become our Non-ingagers, to be plain dealing with us in this, though they may not be true to us, and let us know under what notion they would be lookt upon. If they be neither Friends, nor Enemies, nor Neuters, nor Ambidexters, let them give themselves some fifth Name, onely let it be such a Name, as may fall under some definition. Consider. The Covenant, we see, is a great hindrance of reconciliation with Scot∣land, which shews the pernitious consequences of laying obligations upon
the people. For to oblige the people, and not interpret, nor limit those obli∣gations, is a way to perpetuate strife, to multiply disputes, and conscien∣tious entanglements. Answ: 8. How ill our plain, necessary Ingagement, that comes recom∣mended to us by good wholsome precedents from all ages, and Nations is compared to the many intricacies, and inconsonan∣cies, of the Scoch Covenant has been already shewed. The various interpretations of the Covenant might perhaps beget, and perpe∣tuate strifes betwixt two emulous Nations: but our Ingagement is so liquid, facile, and concise a tie of truth, and fidelity from English men to their common Mother: that even they which have most tortur'd their brains to raise quaeres, and scruples about it, at last, know not how to stile themselves, nor where to place themselves: nor can they teach us how we should understand their Chimeraes or resolve their fond aenigmas. Let not that therefore be adosed of creating quarrels, which is so hard to be quarrell'd it. Consider. It were more for the glory of God, if Magistrates would trust God with their Government, not thinking themselves the safer by tying man to them, especially by means that have so often failed. Oh beware of unbelief. Answ: 9. To use honest, well proportioned means allowed, and ap∣pointed by God, with a Trust that God will blesse the same to us, is rather to honour, then distrust God: and tis not a trusting, but rather a tempting of God, when we sit still, and let slip opportu∣nities upon a vain expectation that God will supply us with ex∣traordinarie, unpromis'd helps. Constant experience instructs us, that Promises and other sacramentall obligations have been ever honorably, and profitably made use of for religious, and ci∣vill purposes: they have been sanctified by God himself both gi∣ving, and accepting of them: they have not onely bound man to man, but man to God, and God to man. Therefore to argue against such expedients in this case, upon the strength of such pro∣positions as are generall, and as concludent against all humane expedients in all cases whatsoever, must needs savour of a spirit too litigious, and acrimonious.
Consider: By this Ingagement persecution of godly men is grown higher in divers respects then it was in the times of Prelaticall power: in regard that non-Ingagers are now more in number then non▪ conformists were formerly: and whereas imprisonment was formerly the penalty of Puritans, non-subscri∣bers now are put ut of the Laws protection as to their estates: if 10000 li. be owing them, they are at the Debtors courtesie, whether He will pay one penny, or not. Answ: 10. The Common-wealth of England denyes no protection to any, that will promise truth and fidelity in their reciprocall sub∣jection: nor does it deprive any of the benefit of Law, that ingage to be Friends to the Law. Wherefore since the Common-wealth is in the place of a Mother, and every particular man is but in the place of a Son: tis not fit the Son which first rejects his Mother, should complain afterwards that He is rejected by his Mother. Away with such stupid gross partialities: He which out-la himself, cannot complain of an out-laws hard condition: and He that joyns not with the people in all necessary expedients to up∣hold the Law, out-laws himself. Tis double injustice for a Subject undutifully to forfeit the States favour first, and then to expostu∣late against its dis-favour: as it is double ingratitude in a Son to deny filial duty first, and then to cry out against paternall severi∣ty after. The Subject here is his own persecuter, and the Son his own true dis-inheritor: forasmuch as both with-hold that which was due absolutely, and naturally, yet have nothing with-held from them, but what was due conditionally, and secondarily. Consider. We deny not that the Magistrate may require security for the obedience of men, that give occasion of suspition: but we deny the Magistrates power, and rule over mens consciences. For Christ has redeem'd us to himself, that we might serve him without fear, and not suffer our selves to be brought in bondage to the wils of men. So Calvin: Insti: l: 3. c: 19. S: 14. The Con∣clusion is: what a Christian may not lawfully act, He may not be lawfully constrained to act by the Magistrate: but a Christian may not lawfully act against his conscience though erring: therfore He may not lawfully be con∣strained thereunto. Answ: 11. Tis confessed there are high prerogatives of Liberty (to
use Calvins own words) which Christ has purchast with his blood for faithfull consciences, to exempt them from the power of men: and that these prerogatives are lost to such consciences, as yeeld themselves to be snared with bonds of Laws, and Ordinances at the will of men. But we must understand with all, that no exem∣ption from the bonds of the Law moral, or any Civil ordinances not crossing the Law moral, is here intended, or reckoned a∣mongst Christs purchased Prerogatives: for Christ himself was obedient to the Higher Powers: and did professe that He came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law. We must therefore restrain Calvins meaning to a freedom from Leviticall ceremonies, or hu∣mane, unnecessary impositions in matters Ecclesiasticall: or to commands evidently sinfull. Inasmuch as the Consciences of faithfull Christians cannot be properly said to be snared with any other Laws, and Ordinances. For that we are to be subject to government, and Governors for conscience sake: and that a faith∣full, pure conscience is a thing very different from the ignorant fears, or rash presumptions of a mis-guided minde, is very cleer by the Scripture. Therefore when the Considerator argues that a man may neither act, nor be enforced to act against an erring Conscience. He seems to me to utter meer non-sense, forasmuch as that opinion which may be false, and erroneous, is so far from being a mans conscience, that tis inconsistent with conscience. Shall we call the Papists blinde zeal which makes him thirst after Protestant blood an erroneous conscience? and shall the Magi∣strate forbear all force, and restraint towards Him, because He onely follows the dictates of an erroneous conscience? We may aswell call that conscience which leads the Ranter into unclean∣nesse: which urges the Arrian to blaspheme Christ, and which induces the poore Indian to offer humane blood in sacrifice to the Divill. No: Conscience in St. Pauls sense (whom Calvin follows) is that Agent of God in the soul which holds forth to us the lamp of Nature (or rather of God creating us) improved further with the oyl of grace (or rather of God redeeming us) to shew us the uglines of in, and the beauty of righteousnes: and as this Agent of God never mis-instructs us, so neither are its instances with us ever to be rejected under pretence of any humane ordinances and powers whatsoever contradicting. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: and that cannot be of faith, which is not clearly warranted y
the Word of God: therefore to follow an erroneous perswasion, under the name of Conscience, is sinfull, unfaithfull, and unwar∣ranted by the word of God. The Considerator pleads his doubts, and scruples, and fears, as the dictates of his conscience against the Ingagement: alas conscience, i i be undeiled, pure, and faith∣full (such as Calvin out of St. Paul intimates) is above all doubts▪ fears, and scruples, at least it is far predominant over them. And let the Considerator deal ingenuously with himself, and search strictly into the darkest retirements of that, which He cals con∣science: and He shall finde, that doubts, fears, and scruples assail him on the one hand, as well as on the other. If the Consideratn be not fully satisfied in this, that He may be true, and faithfull to the present Government; I dare tell him, and that from his own mouth too, He is as ill satisfied in this, that He may disobey the Magistrate under whose protection He lives, in denying an assu∣rance of his truth and loyalty, when it is not onely a command, but a command so necessary for securance of the publick peace. Can we then imagine, that Conscience Gods resident in the Soul is divided against it self? or can we imagine, that that trumpet which sounds points of war so contrary is to be obeyed, above all Laws, and Ordinances? and revered as Gods resident? The Con∣siderator will say: if I have my dissatisfactions both wayes, how shall I extricate my self either way? how shall I ingage, or not ingage without sin, since neither ingaging, nor refusing is of faith with me? is it not in this case my safest course to obey that instinct, or prompting of my conscience which is most powerfull, and least opposite to faith? I answer, God has not left thee with∣out an issue, and a way to escape out of the midst of these per∣plexities. For all cases are either certain, or dubious; and in all cases certain God has made every man a Judge: and has left in every man that which we call Conscience to negotiate in his be∣half; and the judgement which Conscience passes herein, is be∣yond all other Laws, and Jurisdictions. But i dubious cases, God has not left every man a Judge; private men against their own opinions are to conform to the sentences of their Commissioned Magistrates; and in so doing they violate not their consciences, they rather do that for which they have a sure warrant, such a warrant as faith may rest upon, and Conscience be quieted by. By this warrant, the Apostles, and their followers did pay due
allegiance to the Caesars, the worst of men, and most injurious of usurpers: though it was more then probable in those daies, that their Titles were gotten, and maintained by force, fraud, and bloody rapine. Who knows not, that in that infancy of the Church Herod had newly usurpt over the Jews, that the Romans usurpt over him, and were in like manner presently after usurpt over by the Caesars: yea that even in the family of the Caesars, there were almost continuall usurpations? But the Considerator will still say: can Conscience permit me to dispence with Oaths formerly taken by submitting now to con∣trary, inconsistent Ingagements? is not this a thing evidently, and indubitably evill? and is not Conscience a sufficient Judge of things so evident, and indubitable? I answer. 1. Where man is hem'd in, with two unavoidable evils, the lesse is to be chosen: and the choise of the lesse, is no sin, but a duty. When man cannot preserve himself, or some other living Creature without trans∣gressing a Sabbath duty, the transgressing of that duty becomes an office of charity: because the means by its subordination was necessarily to give way to the end. 2ly, To submit to a new obli∣gation which is conducent to the publick good, and to wave a former contrary obligation, when it is become opposite to its first end is no evident, indubitable evil. The Law by Oath bound the King, and all under him to maintain the ancient rights, usa∣ges, and Statutes of the Land: yet when any change of those rights, usages, and Statutes became necessary for the publick good, we are all satisfied that the King and all under him gave way to that change without perjury. So if we have been sworn to maintain Monarchy, the form of government being but sub∣ordinate to an higher end, when Monarchy becomes destructive to that end, the force of our Oath ceases: for Laws create forms, and Laws uphold forms by Oaths; but neither forms, nor oaths binde longer then the Laws: and we see, there is a subordination even amongst Laws themselves, and by the rules of that subordi∣nation, temporary Laws are to yeeld to perpetuall Laws, condi∣tionall to absolute; mediate, to finall. When Nature permits hea∣vie bodies contrary to the Law of heavy bodies to ascend, for the prevention of some greater breach of some Law that concerns all the Elements, and the peace of the universe: it teaches us, what we are to do in politicks. I leave these things to the Considerators
own application. The Magistrate which is now girt with Gods sword, requires an assurance from him of his allegiance for the better preventing of future broils, and disturbances. His private phancie tels him that assurance is due to some other Magistrate, which if He may judge of secret reasons of State, and things above Him, has more right to the Sword: yet in the mean time doubts, whether God has intrusted him with any such judgement, or no: and He sees his example keeps the publick Peace the more unset∣led, and He forfeits the protection of Law to Himself, by denying his obedience to the same: I say no more: the Considerator here is hedged in with two inevitable evils, let him consider, whether is the greater. Errata. Page 29. line 2. for dishonouring, read dischotomizing. FINIS.
