S3835 8793699 41852
PHILOSOPHICAL DIALOGUES Concerning the Principles OF NATVRAL BODIES: WHEREIN The Principles of the Old and New Philosophy are stated, and the New demonstrated, more agreeable to Reason, from Mechanical Ex∣periments and its usefulness to the benefit of Man-kind. By W. Simpson. M. D. LONDON: Printed by T. Hodgkin, for Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultrey. 1677.
TO The most noble Prince, GEORGE, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM, &c. My LORD, WHen I had writ this small Philosophical Treatise, I was cast∣ing about in my thoughts, whether this Infant needed a Patron, it was not (as I judg'd) so much) an Embryo-An∣chorite or of such tender Age, but it might go abroad without hold; nor so much stricken in
years, as it had need of a Staff, in as much as ipsa veritas suimet patrona est maxima; nor yet that it was arriv'd to that full strength as to need no support: Amidst which considerations my Lord, your Grace fraught with experimental Philosophy came in view; but I stopt a while, pausing upon it, not daring at the first glance, to be so confi∣dent, till I had taken a better prospect of your personal can∣dour to Ingenuity; (which was not the least of those resplen∣dent Gems that adorn the brest of Nobility) your incouragement to the improvements of Philo∣sophy, grounded upon Mechani∣cal Experiments; your favouring
that for of Physick founded up∣on, and illustrated by the Noble Chymia, the Basis of a genuine Philosophical Hypothesis; and in particular your great condescen∣tion in familiar discourse con∣cerning matters of this nature: All which, My Lord, duly weigh∣ed, has given me the boldness to take liberty of dedicating these my Labours (the first of their kind, I know off, yet ex∣tant) to your Grace: If worth the perusal, it's well: with what curiosities they will enter∣tain you, let them speak for themselves. May these Philo∣sophical Speculations shade them∣selves under your Tutelage, and take shelter under your suffrage,
shall doubtless give them bet∣ter lustre abroad, rendring them more acceptable to others, and give him an incouragement to a further concern, who is My Lord, Your Grace's Most humble Servant W. Simpson.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Candid Reader, SEveral Sheets of which this ensuing small tract is compos'd, had laid by me neer seven years, whose Nativity might be Calculated from that time I was so deeply inga∣ged with my quondam Antagonist, Dr. Wittie, about Mineral Waters, and particularly about the Mineral or Spaw-waters of Yorkshire: For
after I had writ my Hydrolog. Chym. ere I had concluded the se∣cond part (being intitutled Hydro∣log. Essays, or a Vindication of the first) I fell upon some Philosophi∣cal Speculations, which when I had scatter'd in loose Papers, let them lye dormant, waiting a seasonable op∣purtunity for the publishing thereof: And taking an occasiion lately to re∣view them, I corrected, altered, and added as I thought necessary, putting them into a dress, how suitable to the genius of this Critical Age, and how worthy to see Light, as it's not meet for me to say, so must refer to thy more serious consideration, and deep judgment to determine. Perhaps thou mayst without much streining guess whom I mean by Hy∣drophilus personating the old Phi∣losophy:
if thou through any Analogy to the Peripatetick Philosophy, he in his Book vindicates, or through any likeness to his morose Sentiments and dogmatical Placets, or by any other similar Motives, shalt be drawn to conclude him to be the Person, I shall not gainsay; then may'st thou fix thy eye upon him, (no less like than a well drawn Coppy, to the Original) as the grand Champion of that Old Cause or if thou approve not thereof, may by that name imagine any other person indifferently, speaking for, and arguing on the behalf of that lean and therefore hectically inclin'd, and well nigh expiring Philosophy, which will certainly dye of a Consumption, in Tract of time (as the other comes on, and grows vigorous,) wearing insen∣sibly away.
In this Treatise, as in a Land∣skip, mayst view such a draught (al∣though in Epitome) of the Principles of natural Philosophy, as if drawn to the Life, may generally and genu∣inely (without any force) represent and solve (we think) natures Phae∣nomena in the apparances of most Bodies we meet with: In it may find such a set of the Elements of natural Bodies, as (if wound up to the height) may conspire the procuring a Phi∣losophick harmony: Not to say here, how teeming a womb our Principles have, nor how they do quadrate (and that perhaps more universally) with Nature in her abstruce causes, nor how consistent with themselves, nor lastly how adapted to the regular mo∣tions of Nature, and accommodated to the rendring intelligible Natures
model in the Fabrick, Metastasis, and taking in pieces of Bodies, viz. in making Philosophick apparances more conspicuous to our understanding, but refer all our speculations to stand at the Bar of thy more mature (not I hope severe) judgment. We have in this ensuing discourse, but sleightly touch'd upon our Princi∣ples, especially that seaven-fold com∣plication of Fire, whose Principles are under one or other of the seven modi∣fications, twisted or interwoven a∣mongst most Bodies (especially Ani∣mals, Vegetables, and many Mi∣nerals) we converse with: yet may ex ungue leonem, measure the whole by the scantling: the further and am∣ple discourse thereof, we refer to its proper place (viz.) to our Tenta∣men Physiologic. to which this is
chiefly introductory: As to our Halo∣logia Chymica being our discourse of Salts, and our Lithologia Phy∣sica concerning petrification, to both which we sometimes refer the Reader: our labours therein are at present on∣ly in Embrio, yet pretty forward to∣wards the Birth, if at their full time shall be thought worthy to be borne, may ere long see light. Seeing the field of Nature is very large, and many may be taking mea∣sures thereof by their several ways of Physico-metrical commensuration, and that every one has his liberty to survey her with the best instruments Mechanism will afford; and yet the Artists and all the Tools they can pro∣cure or invent, the former too short sighted, and the latter too few, to reach her profundity, to sind out the qua∣drature
of her Circle, or to take the exact dimention of her Solids. So that there is work enough for as many Geomitricians (I had al∣most said Pioneers) to Nature, as are adapted by long observation, and study for that work: And in my opi∣nion all the late Physico-Metrici∣ans (if I may so call them) have in one sort or other done well; Thus Ta∣chenius, Vander Bect, Beckerus, &c. have every one in their several capacities perform'd some service to∣wards on improvement of Philosophy; not that I could, or would justify each of these in their several Hypotheses, but I think they have done this great piece of service, in that they have fur∣nished us with many mechanical ex∣periments, which although each in their way makes use of for building
their particular Hypothesis, yet we may well admit them as materials (viz.) Wood, Stone, &c. in order to a further and more rational Fabrick: but above all these, the noble and wor∣thy Boyle has laid in so many materi∣als, by his curious and manifold me∣chanical experiments and observati∣ons, as has thereby furnished the Checker of learning with a vast stock. Hence its reasonable (I say) every one should have liberty not only in lay∣ing in materials, but also of venturing (if he have skill in building) to put them together, what freedom I have taken herein, is no more than what is in common to any other: And in short, whether I have us'd any skill in ce∣menting together those notions I had grounded upon mechanical experi∣ments, and what uniformity there is in
the Fabrick I have ventur'd on in this ensuing, and in other tracts already published, or yet to publish, (being room enough in the vast shop of Na∣ture for as many as please to set up for themselves) is refer'd (gentle Reader) to thee to determine. And wherein I fall short in this tract, (as being only an abstract of the Principles of Philosophy) I have en∣deavoured to make up in my Zymo∣logia Physica, or Philosophical dis∣course of Fermentation, (a noble sub∣ject and worthy the best of Pens,) to which occasionally I sometimes refer: also in my aforesaid pieces. If this find acceptance, I have thoughts also (favente numine Divino) to col∣lect and digest some scatter'd notions, and at present immature speculations, I have about the abstruse Phaenome∣na
of Hypochondraisme and oc∣cult qualities; where the the true seat is of that grassant and afflicting malady; whence issues such varie∣ties of sypmtoms, and what the Organs by which it's managed, with some considerations offer'd about the cure thereof, by other remedies than are through the ignorance of its causes) usually prescrib'd. Mean-while, if thou look favourably upon these pre∣sent (although small) endeavours, may encourage him to a further task, who bids thee fare-well, W. S. LONDON, April. the 10th. 1677.
PHILOSOPHICAL DIALOGUES. SECT. I. Pyrophilus. WEll met, Hydrophilus, what's the matter that your Coun∣tenance is so discompo'd? what is't that troubles you? Hydrophilus. Troubles me, Pyrophilus? you know well enough, you need not ask the Question. Pyroph. I may perhaps guess; but pray tell me what it is that sticks so on your stomach, as to cause such a cloudiness to over-cast the brightness of your natural fea∣tures? Hydroph. It is in plain terms, a company of your new Philosophers forsooth, that a
man cannot sit quietly down with our old imbib'd Principles of peripatetick Philoso∣phy, nor safely ruminate upon them, but must be disturbed by your conceited fancies indeed; we that have some of us spent so much time in the Colledges, and have taken a great deal of pains to be skill'd in the old Philosophy of Aristotle, and his followers, and you (a company of Punies) to amuse us, and (which is worse) the world, with your new Crotchets, like so many new-nothings; it was never a good world since such a young fry of Novel Philosophers peep'd up. Pyroph. But why (Hydroph.) so wrath with the new Philosophers? Hydroph. Would it not (Pyroph.) raise the spleen of any, even the calmest Dogma∣tists, to see you appear upon the Stage of the World, like so many Americans, present∣ing new and unheard of things, yea like so many innovators in Philosophy, every one bringing his Beads, Rattles, &c. I mean his new Notions, filling the ears of the people with your so much nois'd Mechanical Expe∣riments forsooth. Pyroph. Stay, why so passionate (Hydroph?) pray curb your choler, and discourse more calmly; there's no cause of such heat, if you weigh the matter well. Hydroph. That's strange! how can a man
restrain from passion, while he observes a company of you innovators indeavour (if it were possible) to bereave a man of his belo∣ved Notions, to rob him of his first con∣ceiv'd Opinons, to tumble the Phiosophi∣cal Orb up-side down, yea by ransacking and demolishing ours to establish your new Crincums. Pyroph. But stay (good Hydroph.) be not so hasty, go not on so fast; let not the zeal for the old Philosophy hurry you too fast, nor drive you out of good nature. Hydroph. I tell you (Pyroph.) I have much ado to bear it, I can scarce contain my self within bounds when I think on't: That we who have spent the most, yea the prime and flower of our years in sucking in the old Principles, should now of a sudden, through the introduction of your Whims, be look'd upon as triflers, yea be brought to this un∣happy dilemma, either to reclaim our for∣merly taken-in Principles, or to run the ha∣zard of the repute of old Peripateticks, which now begins to sound as badly in the ears of the World, as it doth in the ears of a woman to be called Old. Pyroph. Pray (Hydroph.) compose your self a little, and be more calm; let not the headiness of passion over-rule you, but dis∣course the matter fairly and mildly.
Hydroph? Mildly, (Pyroph.) how can that be? when we are so affronted and abus'd, that our esteem in the world seems past its crisis, and got upon the wrong side of the vertical point, deeply declining, and all through your so much admired Philosophi∣cal Stratagems: For I know not better how to denominate your mechanical Experi∣ments than so many Stratagems, by which you seek cunningly to overturn and lay wast the walls of our good old Philosophy. Pyroph. The affront (Hydroph.) is not so great, if you consider that from the afore∣said mechanical Experiments a new Hypo∣thesis is, or may be rais'd, whereby you may approach nearer the knowledge of the truth (the great work of Philoso∣phers.) Hydroph. Truth? I tell you we were suffi∣ciently satisfied before of the truth of our already established Hypothesis: and therein (although an inch broke no square with us) could solve the Phaenomena well enough, at at least as much as we thought needful for us, who do not affect too much nicety in our speculations, nor to be too critical in our de∣ductions. Pyroph. Well (Hydroph.) but will not truth be more acceptable to you when the reasons of things shall be deduced from
more natural and genuine Principles, illu∣strated by mechanical Observations. Hydroph. Mechanical Observations (said you Pyroph?) yea that's your Diana, you and the world of late so much admire: your Bacon, and your Boyle, or your Bacon well boil'd is so much in fashion with you, that scarce any other Dish (although never so good) prepared after an old fashion, will go down with you. Pyroph. But withal (Hydroph.) you forgot to add a Calves head, which together make a savory Dish (usually going hand in hand) much in use in the Colledges, especially amongst the Seniors, those old sit-fasts. Hydroph. Droll not (Pyroph.) for I am in good sad earnest, and cannot but tell you (even with a heavy heart) it's a hard case, that we must be compelled to turn School∣boys again, and go with Satchels on our backs, to learn at your Pyrotechnical and Mechanical Schools, or else lye under the censure of every pitiful smatterer, that's lately crept out of the shell, and no sooner looks about him, but falls to Mechanism and Me∣chanical Philosophy forsooth, a thing never known, nor scarce thought of by our anci∣ent Predecessors. Pyroph. It's, I confess, a great tryal of your ingenuity, and demonstrates how much
(Hydroph.) you favour truth, although at∣tainable after former disappointments, to quit the first Principles (although strongly impress'd) and to turn Volunteers to ano∣ther more plausible cause, which yet is no more than the badge of an ingenuous temper. Hydroph. What for us that are gray head∣ed in the ancient sort of Philosophy, un∣derstanding every tittle of the materia prima, forma substantialis, privatio, all the affections of natural Bodys, internal and external, , and quiddities of a thousand things more, familiar to us in our Philosophy, which we have all ad unguem; For us, I say (Pyroph.) to be constrain'd, to have all these impressions wip'd off, and so become so many rasa tabula's susceptible of new impressions of another new (we know not what) sort of Phiysiology, would it not, think you, gaul any man to the inwards? Pyroph. But if all those Notions by the induction of another, and more plausible Hypothesis be demonstrated (Hydroph.) to be no more than figments and Ʋtopian Con∣jectures, shall not that (what ever it be) which is grounded upon an experimental Basis, be more satisfactory, and of more va∣lidity, than the other (you quote) which is founded upon airy Chimaera's and fanciful Dreams?
Hydroph. I shall not dispute that (Pyroph.) only what you insinuate, That ours is built (like Castles in the Air) upon meer Chimae∣ra's, remains for you to prove. Pyroph. Which I shall indeavour to do (Hydroph.) for your satisfaction in the se∣quel of our Discourse. Hydroph. Well, but if I must be the judge to determine the controversie betwixt us, I should (Pyroph.) (once for all) for Anti∣quities sake, and indeed for our own too, (who have toil'd in that sort of Philosophy) give it clearly against you: for I must de∣clare, I highly approve (and that for some reasons aforesaid) of the old sort of Philo∣sophising. Pyroph. You are it seems then (Hydroph.) a Philosopher of the old fashion, and there∣fore, no doubt, can readily give your suffrage on your own side: But if you bring not bet∣ter, or more recent Arguments for the up∣holding thereof, that are yet more cogent than any we see hitherto, your old manner of Philosophising will be out of date, and you, ere long, will want Proselytes. Hydroph. Why? if we can (Pyroph.) by an Hypothesis already erected satisfie our selves, in the general, in the explicating of the causes of things, it's enough, we have what we aim at: For we would not (we
declare) be guilty of too much prying into the nature of things, left we confound our thoughts, and at length lose our selves by too deep speculations into the reasons of things, contain'd in the vast Volume and in∣tricate Labyrinth of the World. Pyroph. True, (Hydroph.) the circuit of nature is of a large extent, many (not to say infinite) are the Meanders of that intri∣cate Maze of things we converse with; one Century is not enough, nor a great many Philosophers sufficient to pry narrowly and well to search into, so as throughly to find out the vast depth of all the secrets of na∣ture, or to investigate every Phoenomenon of the Mundan Susteme, or rightly to know every Encheiresis, and the Motion of every Wheel of the vast Machin of the World. Hydroph. Why therefore, (Pyroph.) seeing nature is so intricate in all her works, and so curious in every texture of bodys (as you seem to insinuate) why, I say, should we be too solicitous about any one Hypothesis, so as out of an affected humour (some are more guilty of than others) to prefer that before another. Pyroph. Because to me (Hydroph.) it seems rational that that Hypothesis (what ever it be) by which the Phaenomena can more clearly and genuinly be solved, ought of right
to be preferr'd before the rest; for if I mi∣stake not, to render any Hypothesis such, it is indispensably requisite that the principles concluded on, be of a competent number, teeming nature, perspicuous, and the most universal, well grounded upon Mechanical Experiments, and such whose deductions in the solution of the apparences of Nature, are to be (not rack'd but) natural and ge∣nuine. Hydro. We are apt to think (Pyroph!) (if we may be judges in our own cause) ours to be such: it has moreover serv'd the world so ma∣ny ages, being kept a foot by the Sages of e∣very generation, till of late that some of you Upstarts have by your phanatick whims, grounded upon the canting mechanical ex∣periments, won so much upon the world, as to give great jealousie ours is upon the verge of oblivion: and were it not that o∣thers (from whose judgment were are apt to measure our own demerits) were amuz'd with the new fancies, we could be content (for our own parts) to be by-standers to laugh at you, and to wait till we saw you weary of your own conceits. Pyroph. But if I tell you (Hydroph.) that you are allowed, (no more than others,) to be competent judges in your own con∣cerns; and therefore the controversie is fair∣ly
to be scan'd and determin'd by indiffe∣rent persons. And as to the continuation of your Hypothesis for many centuries and its flourishing in the days of many learned men, that makes no more for the evincing the truth thereof, than because for many cen∣turies of the world, the Antipodes was dis∣believed, yea by learned men, for instance Saint Austin, Lactantius, and others, that opinion of the Antipodes was deemed to be a direct heresie; that therefore, I say, it was really so: Or, if any, though never so learned man, before Columbus his time, should have concluded that no such vast part of the world was really discoverable, as America, that vast, large and rich part of the habitable Orb, because from the same reason not then found out, which after so many centuries and so many fam'd Naviga∣tions was not known till the late discovery made by (the thereby fam'd) Columbus, that therefore such a conclusion, I say, should have been genuine: whereas indeed it would have savour'd so much of Antiquity, as to have prov'd very fatal to further inven∣tion, and contrary to what matter of fact might, yea did afterwards produce. And as to your being concern'd that others now of late should be taken with our new Phi∣losophy; we well know it toucheth you
to the quick, to be lessened in your repute in the world. Hydroph. Well, (Pyroph.) suppose I should with you conclude, that such an Hypothe∣sis as you speak off were chiefly to be de∣sired, and that ours was not such; yet we find you are not well agreed amongst your selves in order to the establishing thereof. Pyroph. That's not material (Hydroph.) For although several judicious and worthy men erect Hypotheses different from each o∣ther, and all cannot be thought to square with the genuine principles of nature, yea per∣haps not one of them do coincide with the tenure and just method of nature, all (e∣ven the best) being reputed no other then Hypotheses; yet in as much as any Hypothesis is but a compendious System of Principles so laid or granted, as from whence genuine deductions and rational conclusions are to be made for the better and more clear under∣standing of the reason of things: Therefore what Hypothesis soever it be, whose prin∣ciples are such and so laid as to approach nearest the character aforesaid; that with∣out all doubt is by all ingenious persons to be preferr'd, till a better, (I mean such as comes nearer the mark and approacheth nearer the intent of nature) be found out, whereby the Phaenomena may yet more clear∣ly
genuinely and universally be solv'd. Hydroph. Why, what jangle is this (Py∣roph.) you make about your new Hypotheses? are you displeas'd with the Philosophy of the Ancients, do you despise their inven∣tions? Pyroph. No, far be it from me (Hydroph.) to have too low thoughts of the learning and sagacity of the Ancients; surely we are very much beholden to them in many things; and were they now living in this our age would many of them be most ac∣complished in the improvements of the new discoveries in Philosophy and Physick, and therefore in their time are to be looked upon with a favourable aspect. But to set up our staff with a ne plus ultra a∣mongst the Ancients, notwithstanding the late great improvements of ingenuity and advancement of learning in all sorts of Phi∣losophical enquiries, is (if I mistake not) too much to indulge Antiquity, savours too much of affecting that which is old, and dints the appetite to a more plentiful Banquet of more recent rarities. Hydrop. I tell you (Pyroph.) I am re∣solv'd (for ought I yet know) to stick to the Ancients back and edge, its their learn∣ing with which I have been train'd up. Pyroph. True, Hydroph. you and I are
both beholden to them, you for their Precepts as the rule of your Philosophy and Physick, I for the same, as they are foyls to set off the beauty, and shades to give a lustre to the new experimental Philosophy, or as con∣traries to illustrate each other. Hydroph. I must tell you (Pyroph.) that I look upon Aristotle and his followers or Commentators to be the chief, if not the only Dictators of the good old Philosophy. Pyroph. And I must take leave to tell you (Hydroph.) that so much as Aristotle had of real solid knowledg, witness his History of Animals, which doubtless was acquired by a diligent and industrious Autopsie, so much the Modern Philosophers put a value upon him: But as to the whole Body of his Physicks, when I view his Theory of the Principles of natural Bodies, I cannot otherwise look upon them than as mere entia rationis, and in good earnest are mere∣ly figmental, viz. that which is not in re∣rum natura. SECT. II. Hydroph. WHy? are not (that we may speak to the pur∣pose) his three intrinsick principles suffici∣ent
for the production of all natural Bodies (viz.) his Materia, forma, ac privatio? Is not his Materia prima, the first subject mat∣ter of all Bodies, as that out of which all na∣tural bodies are not only made, but ultimate∣ly reducible into; and that which it self is without shape, yet capable of receiving all forme, of which it is always greedy. Pyroph. Truly (Hydroph.) I know not what to make of his materia prima, yea think neither he, his Commentators, or you to boot, could ever ten how to render it intelligible: For the Peripateticks say, that it doth not subsist per se, but is only in po∣tentia, and yet it is an ens non actu tamen poten∣tia: Now (Hydroph.) that a constituent primary principle of all bodies should not be it self a body, is I confess a mystery to me indemonstrable. Hydroph. What think you (Pyroph.) of his forma substantialis, which he defines , (viz.) that which deter∣mines the materia prima in hoc aliquid, as that by which the essence of the thing is in∣troduced into matter, and from which eve∣ry thing is denominated. Pyroph. I have the same thoughts of it (Hydroph.) as I have of his materia prima (viz.) that they are both unintelligible, and, like an image, are nothing in the world.
Hydroph. But what think you (Pyroph.) of his third Principle, Privation, which is the absence of the form in the subject matter, with an aptness of the matter to receive form. Pyroph. I think (Hydroph.) (and see no solid grounds to the contrary) that it is as imaginary as the former: and that his whole ternary of Principles of natural bodys are to be reckoned at the best but amongst entia rationis, and therefore not at all to be reputed essential Principles of natural bodys, but in a true sence are merely precarious: Therefore the fam'd Verulam in his Tract de sapientia veterum, to this purpose hints, where he saith, Opinio Peripatet. de stimulo materiae per privationem fere non ultra verba tendit, & rem potius sonat quam signat. Hydroph. How do you (Pyroph.) look up∣on his external Principles of bodys, viz. the efficient and final. Pyroph. Only (as I said before) entia ra∣tionis, mere reflections of an intellectual be∣ing, and therefore have no concurring influ∣ence upon Bodys as Principles. Hydroph. But are there not (Pyroph.) (according to our Peripatetick Philosophy) certain affections of natural bodys, and those as the Philosopher distinguisheth either in∣ternal or external; viz. motion and rest,
finite and infinite, which are internal: place and time, external: are not these, I say, pro∣per affections inherent and consequent to na∣tural bodys as such? Pyroph. Before I give my thoughts there∣of, I would know (Hydroph.) what he or you mean by those affections of matter, and first what is meant by that affection call'd Motion? Hydroph. It is, (Pyroph.) if I may speak in our own Language) an , or the action of that which is in potentia, as such. Pyroph. Surely that's a definition (Hy∣droph.) as difficultly to be understood, as to know what the Aegyptian Osyris was: or to unfold their Mystical Hieroglyphicks; yea, and for ought I know, more dark than to unvail the Enigmatical Emblems of the Her∣metick Philosophers: however more diffi∣cult (I think) than to know the natural causes of the flux and reflux of the Sea, and less obvious than to know the causes of the Inundation of the River Nilus. Hydroph. But do not you think (Pyroph.) that motion is a proper affection of natural bodies, and that there are various species thereof, which are either conversant about a substance, or an accident: that of substance to be pertinent to motion, in order to genera∣tion and corruption?
Pyroph. Yes, as to the first (Hydroph.) I do look upon motion as the most proper and compatible affection of matter, in order to the fabric of all natural bodies: but as to the division of the species thereof, I confess I do not understand; for I judge motion to be a simple affection of matter, not divi∣sible into species: and that amongst bodys, as such, there are to be found, no other mo∣tion than that we call local motion, which is the chief mechanical affection of mat∣ter. Hydroph. That's strange (Pyroph.) how can that you call local Motion be of so large extent, as to comprise all the various species of motion to be found in our System of Philosophy, while it self is but reckoned amongst the sub-divisions of motion, taken in our general sense? Pyroph. Its true (Hydroph.) it compri∣seth all the various species of motion, al∣though in your Philosophy it be but found amongst those sub-divisions pertinent to ac∣cidents; where it comes lagging in the fagg end of the discourse of motion, by Aristotle and his Commentators. Hydroph. But doth not every loco-motion suppose a terminus à quo, and ad quem? Ima∣gine then in the motion of bodys some to move only upon their own Axis (as no
doubt some do) where then (Pyroph.) is your loco-motion, your terminus à quo, and ad quem? Pyroph. I answer (Hydroph.) It's easily solvable by imagining any one point of that body moving upon its Axis, and the respect it has to any adjacent body, visible, or coucht in the Atmosphere, it no sooner can be thought to move or wheel about, but it loseth the former respect, and applies to another, whereby is really demonstrated a loco-motion, (viz.) a terminus à quo, and ad quem, the thing sought for. Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) is not ge∣neration and corruption a motion incompa∣tible to loco-motion? Is not generation a mo∣tion or mutation, à non esse ad esse, by which a new substantial form is acquired, and cor∣ruption a motion or mutation ab esse ad non esse, whereby the same substantial form is lost, and that generatio unius est corruptio alte∣rius, ac vice versa? Are not these perform'd by motion in a large sense, and yet I hope they are not reducible to that slight sub-di∣vision of motion, we call local motion? Pyroph. I answer (Hydroph.) that I see nothing in that mutation of bodys one into another, which you call generation and corruption, but what is compatible only to loco-motion, guided by seminal
or spermatic Principles in the Fabric of Vegetable and Animal Bodys, and by some∣what analogous thereto, even in the com∣position of all other mixts: and that those various changes amongst bodys one into another, ascribable to generation and cor∣ruption, are no other than the different Me∣tastasis of the constituent Particles of bodys, or the various interweavings and complica∣tions of their intestine Principles; which whether shifting places in the same concretes give the different Phaenomena incident to the same body, while its constituent parts and genuine ferments keep their natural te∣nure, method, and order, proper thereto, or else separating a portion of the most de∣fecate parts, which contain an efflorescence of the whole, become by further and more gradual elaboration, spermatic Principles (being the whole reduc'd to an Epitome) congenial to what at first was set on work by the Primitive Fiat, for the upholding the creation by propagation, or similar pro∣ductions. In all which the main affection of matter is local-motion, where the parts in such size, shape and figure, by motion, guided by seminal Principles, with their congenit and peculiar collisions make up the texture, suppose of one body: The same parts being
differently acted by fire, ferments, salts, or solvents, separate themselves from their first texture that with the seminal beginnings compos'd the fabric of one body, now be∣ing guided by the other aforesaid active Principles or extrinsic Agents convene in another form which thereby give the appa∣rence of another mixt body. Only with this difference, that in bodys that are propagated by seminals or seed∣lings, the motion is guided by the seminal Principles and fermental Collisions connatu∣ral thereto. But in bodys that undergo a mutation one into another by the aforesaid active Principles of fire, ferments, salts and solvents, the motion is thereby guided ac∣cording to the activity and ingagement thereof in bodys, whereby they are dispos'd differently, taken in pieces variously, and complicated in different forms from what they were before, whence they affect our senses with different qualifications of colour, shape, heat, cold, fluidness, permanency, &c. from what they did before. Hydroph. Well, (Pyroph.) but me-thinks you should give us an instance whereby we might better understand your Theory by some practical example; for I can give you an instance, how we apprehend generation and corruption to be a motion, which yet
we are not convinc'd is attributable to loco∣motion, and that thus: We see that the flesh of an Ox corrupting in the Air begets Bees, and that of a Horse, Crabrones, Flies, where the corruption of one thing (viz. the Ox his flesh) is the ge∣neration of another (viz. Bees) which cer∣tainly is a motion from that which was not before to a new thing, and yet we know not how you will solve this by local-mo∣tion. Pyroph. Very well (Hydroph.) I was in∣deed about to have confirm'd what I said by an instance, which is in promptu, but that I was anticipated by yours, which I shall in∣deavour first to take off, and then shall pro∣pound mine: As to what you say therefore concerning generation and corruption in your example of Bees generated from the corrup∣tion of flesh of Oxen; Crabornes, Flies, from Horse-flesh, &c. which you look upon as a motion from a non esse to an esse, and from an esse to a non esse: As to which terms first I must tell you, Hydroph. that these are only entia rationis, and therefore as such have no influence at all upon matter in the production of natural bodys, nor may be reckoned as any species of motion. But as to a true solution of the instance which you propound (Hydroph.) viz. how
this change of bodies happens whereby they are (Proteus-like) transform'd out of one shape into another, may, I judg, be thus explicated (viz.) when the natural fermen∣tations of the juyces of the body of the Ox, &c. (which while uniform and in their pro∣gressive and edifying motion, upheld by its natural balsam the flesh and other parts in∣tire,) had ceased by the death of the ani∣mal, then the same ferments by a retro∣grade motion unravel their formerly wound-up clew, and for want of some imbalming saline particles, which chiefly consisted in the progressive motion of the ferments, a putrid fermentation begins, which by an analysis of the body takes it in pieces, and in its reduction ad minima, some acid and sulphu∣reous parts combine with some seminal ef∣fluvia, and by a transposition of parts be∣come animated into such or such a form, where, by the different Metastasis of the sulphureous and some fluid saline particles, directed in their loco-motion by some semi∣nal emanations (lurking in the inward re∣cesses of the body) they become together determin'd into such a peculiar shape of an other texture and form from what it was before. That the shape, figure, and form of these new products are determin'd either by se∣minal
effluvia, or by new ferments which conspiring with the fluid, saline and sul∣phureous parts in the analytical solution of the compage of the former body, make them combine into such a shape different from what it was before, might, I say, be demonstrated by many instances: the first is confirmed by the body of a Duck buried, from which (as Kircher observes) Toads may be ingendered, and that from some se∣minal parts of a Toad which lurk in the humours or flesh of a Duck nourished there∣by, which by putrefaction are set a work and draw into consent some fluid saline and sulphureous parts resolv'd by the putredinous ferment and joyntly are determined into the form of a Toad. Thus Worms are ingendred by a putred ferment in the blood and other constituent humours and flesh of animals, as also of the humane body: in so much as Shenkins ob∣serves that Worms have been found even in the very heart: And Pareus tells us, they have been seen in the Liver, Lungs, Reins, and Bladder; yea the mass of blood under∣going any putrid resolution proves vermi∣nous. Paracelsus saith to the same purpose, Regiones membrorum suos vermes noverunt, ita enim per anatomiam in cerebro repertus est ver∣miculus qui piam & duram matrem pertuderat,
unde phrenesis solicitabat, tales per anatomian etiam in corde reperti fuerunt, similiter in re∣gione splenis fellisque vermes gigni possint: neither is there any putrid ulcer, impetigo, or elephantiasis which hath not his worms from a putridinous ferment: also in Cheese, Milk, Vinegar, and Horns expos'd to the Moon, in which by a Microscope Worms are discoverable: So that these spermatick ef∣fluvia joyning issue with some saline and sul∣phureous parts set at liberty by a putrid fer∣ment in the analytical resolution (call'd cor∣ruption) or rather mutation or migration of bodies out of one form into another, pro∣duce variety of new products dayly in the mundane System. And what if I should tell you (Hydroph.) and make it good too that there is no Plant which in its putrefaction gives not some pe∣culiar sort of Insect from an oviparous ori∣ginal: nor any perfect Animal (perfect I mean in sua specie) which doth not either im∣mediately from the putridness of its body, or at least by putrefaction of its excrements, give some sort of animal Insect or other, witness that of Lucretius, —Obnoxia cuncta putrori Corpora, putrores insecta animata sequuntur. which also is very evident even in the hu∣mane body, in which scarce any member
inward or outward which is not subject to produce Worms. And as the new Productions are most-what shap'd by the Motion and Manuducti∣on of the Spermatic Principles with other parts set at liberty from the former Tex∣ture, which by new shuffling of parts constitute new Bodys, so also some altera∣tion amongst Bodys are made (I mean in or∣der to new Shapes) by the mediation of new Ferments, as for instance, that from brown Bread and Honey Ants should be produc'd; where from a mixture of those two a new Ferment should proceed, which becoming animated is determin'd into the form of an Ant: so from Honey and Dew that Eels should be ingendred, and so the rest of the like Productions. Lastly, Other Mutations there are (Hy∣droph.) of Bodys out of one shape into ano∣ther, which owe their original to either, or both of the aforesaid causes (viz.) to se∣minal Effluvia's, or new Ferments: of which sort are the production of Scorpions in the Brain of a Man, by frequent smelling at the Herb Basil, or from the fracedinous ferment of the same Herb betwixt two Stones, the same Animal may be produc'd, as both Helmont and Kircher observe: it's very probable this Plant may take its origi∣nal
from some putredinous resolution of a Scorpion, as the Satyrions of divers sorts do from the Sperm of several Animals, which fermenting in the leffas terrae, produce those Plants with those Signatures of the Ge∣nitals. For (I must tell you Hydroph.) as there is scarce any Plant in whose putrid Analysis it gives not an Animal of one sort or other; so there are many Animals out of the pu∣tridness of whose spermatic parts fer∣menting with the nutritive Juyce of the Earth, Plants may be produc'd, of which sort are Basil, all the kinds of Orchis, Saty∣rions, Mushrooms, Androsemum, &c. yea, and from the like causes may many poisonous Plants take their original: For as the indu∣strious Kircher observes, many or most of these Plants are found to grow in morticinis cadaverum, viz. where dead Carcases have been corrupted upon the Ground, or been buried in the Earth, in which places Hemlock, Wolfsbane, Monkshead, Henbane, Assafaetida, wild Camomel, &c. are most frequently found: where from the spermatic parts of putrid cadaverous Bodys, fermenting with the succulent parts of the Earth, or other Excrements, new shapes are assumed, either of other Ani∣mals, or Plants, according to the direction of seminal Effluvia, or specifical Ferments.
So that the Metastasis of those Bodys out of one shape into another, whereby they are very differently represented to our sen∣sitive Organs (as that which was lately an Animal, may become a Plant, and that which was a Plant, may presently be chan∣ged into an Animal) may very well pro∣ceed (as I said) partly from the loco-motion, or transposition of seminal Principles, and partly from the awakening of new Fer∣ments. Thus you see (Hydroph.) how I have inter∣woven mine with your instances, and that the better to illustrate the manner of mu∣tation of Bodys out of one form into ano∣ther, whereby we may be able to solve the urgent Phaenomena incident to Bodys in their Metastasis, or Transfiguration (if I may so call it) by the various extension of the parts of matter differently guided by semi∣nal Principles, and specifiic Ferments, without having recourse at all to Aristotle's Materia Prima, his Quaternary of Elements, substantial Forms, or other general affecti∣ons ascribable to natural Bodys according to the Theory of the Vulgar Peripatetick Phi∣losophy. Where I cannot but wonder why Ari∣stotle's Commentators, should, where they treat of the general Affections of natural
Bodys, omit the Discourse of the four Ele∣ments, seeing they are, as they say, simple homogenial Bodys, from which all Con∣cretes are compounded, into which they are ultimately resolv'd, and themselves ir∣reducible into any thing before them, which therefore they esteem as the true Principles of all Bodys, and yet they are not accord∣ing to their own account the materia prima: so that their materia prima is but at the best a thing in potentia, and that is only as much as to say, a nothing: Therefore it's left to the four Elements, to be according to your Doctrine, the true Principles of Bodys de∣pending upon the  of Qualities, and yet, I say, they treat not of these till after they have done with the most general af∣fections of Matter, which to me argues a large and indispensible chink in the jun∣ctures of that old Philosophy you so much value. SECT. III. HYdroph. But seeing (Pyroph.) we are ingag'd in a Discourse about the Prin∣ciples of natural Bodys, and the general Affections thereto belonging, and that you deny our materia prima, substantial forms,
and privation to be real Principles of natu∣ral Bodys, as also oppose Motion and its Spe∣cies, with other general Affections of Mat∣ter, as they are laid down by our Philoso∣phy, pray tell us how you apprehend the composition of Bodys to be, inlarge your self, and render what you have already said somewhat more intelligible. Pyroph. I have already (though in short) given you hints by several instances, how I apprehend the Mutation of Bodys out of one shape into another do happen. Now (Hydro.) I shall give you an abbreviate Account of my thoughts, how these (thus liable to muta∣tion) are compos'd. And that first by shewing you, that the Matter, Bodys (I mean such as are deter∣min'd by one specifical shape or other) are made up of, is the same (as to the material and constitutive part of Concretes) with that which is in common to them, as con∣sidered in their Metastasis out of one form into another: and therein to shew, how it lies under a three-fold consideration, of so many general Affections: Next to shew what are those hidden Agents and mechani∣cal Principles shut up in the seminaries of all such sort of Bodys, by which those ge∣neral Affections, and essential qualifications of Matter, are exerted, and manuducted, in or∣der
not only to the Fabric, but pulling down, construction, but reduction of all such Bodys. Lastly: Instances to shew how all this is done by illustrating upon several remarkable Phaenomena amongst Vegetables and Animals. As to the first, How Matter as Matter is the common subject the materia substrata of all natural Bodys, which we else where shew to be Water, or such a texture of the parts of Matter, as sooner or later fall into that fluid body, we call Water, the parts where∣of however rarifyed, or subtilized, as really water, I mean when condens'd, or collected, and seminal Masques taken off, as every spark of Fire, is Fire, concerning which we take occasion to inlarge in our Tentamen Physiolog. to which we refer you. As to the general and essential affections of matter, in order to the structure of Bodys, the first is Motion, and that no other than loco-motion, or an intestine collision of the constituent parts: For without such motion neither would the parts of matter be in∣clinable to convene in any form for the tex∣ture of Bodys, nor would the texture of those Bodys already suppos'd to be in rerum natura, ever be changed out of one into ano∣ther, which yet must necessarily be granted as long as things appear upon the wheel of vi∣cissitudes
on the stage of the World: all things, I say, would be at rest, and in a calm stilness, all the Springs, Wheels, Cords, and Pullies (to speak like a Corpuscularian) of automatous Productions, would be let down, disordered, broke, and out of joynt, if mo∣tion should cease, which therefore makes it an affection both general and essential to matter. The next essential qualification of matter is divisibility: For if matter should be in∣divisible into minute parts, there could be no difference of Bodys, all would have the same shape, and the varieties we see of Bo∣dys in the nursery of the World would not be: therefore matter must fall under our consideration as divisible into minute parts, yea, and of those many may be so small and indiscernable as may escape any perception by our senses, though never so acute or for∣tifyed by the best of artificial contrivan∣ces. The third essential affection of matter is Extension: which is that whereby the concentred parts of one parcel of matter, may be so inlarged as to fill a greater space, or to measure a larger Tract (by manifold) than it did before: For matter being set on work by motion, which in the fabric of bodys consists in an intestine collision, and
being divided thereby into minute parts, which combining in such or such a texture make up such a shape as is represented by one body or other: This again being sub-divi∣ded, or taken in pieces by some such active principles of matter, which we call Fire, Ferments, Salts or Solvents is thereby made capable of extending a larger space than it did before. Thus matter (or water the original ma∣trix of all concrete bodys) being moved, divided, and in a sort extended one part upon another by the manuduction of Seeds or Ferments towards the production, sup∣pose of an Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral Concrete, which being determin'd into some peculiar shape (not jumping by an ac∣cidental and blind concourse of the mustring Atoms into spontaneous textures of bodys, according to the wild Epicurean Doctrine but) by the seminal Principles (call'd by the Hermetic Philosophers the innate Pla∣stic Spirit.) This, I say, being further exa∣min'd either by Fire, Ferments, Salts, or Solvents, becomes capable of being ex∣tended over a much larger space than before: so that extension of matter has relation both in order to the fabric of bodys as bodys, as also in order to the Metastasis thereof out of one shape into another.
Now, I say, as matter in order to the texture of bodys has the essential affections of Motion, Divisibility and Extension; so we are to conceive of these parts divided under some shape, size, or figure, whereby they may the better convene in such postures as may by the manuduction of Seeds and Fer∣ments make up the generality of mixt bodys in the World: with what figure so ever they be in their minutest parts physically divisible into, yet till they arrive at others by close combinations they fall not under our cog∣nizance as principles of bodys, as we fur∣ther declare in our Tentamen Physiolog. Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) what are those Seminal Principles and Ferments (the next thing you propos'd to discourse of) which you call hidden Agents and mecha∣nical Instruments shut up in the seminaries of all such bodys, to which you refer much of your Doctrine of Natural Bodys, chiefly in order to the Fabric of Vegetables and Animals, and by which you seem to differ from the Philosophy of the Corpuscularians? Pyroph. Yes (Hydroph.) that I confess, for the better understanding the Basis of Natures works, in the establishing a well-grounded Hypothesis, we are rightly to con∣sider, what is understood by seminal Princi∣ples, and Ferments.
By seminal Principles, therefore I mean the same with what I elsewhere (in my Tentamen Physiolog.) call semina foecunda, or Seeds, which I suppose (for none dare po∣sitively aver) are Minute Portions of the two Principles Acid and Sulphur, concentred and wound upon a very small bottom, im∣planted and wrapt up by the parent of Na∣ture in small raiments of matter, ubi prima cuduntur rerum stamina, which Principles in one are specifically differenc'd from what they are an another, whence the great va∣riety in the textures of bodys of all Vege∣tables and Animals: which Principles are, I say, the organical Instruments and mecha∣nical Agents included in all those bodys vul∣garly call'd Seeds: wrapt up, I said, in small raiments of matter, not but that these Principles themselves are also material, and are at the long run reducible into Water, the material Principle of all Concretes, but with this difference, that they are pure sub∣tile parts, (entangled in more gross) adap∣ted for motion, or that collision we suppose indispensibly necessary in the Fabric of all such Bodys. By Ferments here, we mean the fore-said Principles (being seminal sparks hidden in matter) which are (other requisites duly concurring) actually put into motion, or
set into a natural and genuine collision. These Principles in the progressive moti∣on of their collision, yea, and in the whole round of their operation, (becoming there∣by actual Ferments) give according to their various stades, the different Phaenomena of the same body: so that all the apperances are measur'd forth according to the progress or regress of the aforesaid Principles. Thus Vegetation (as to Plants) is nothing else (as we else-where in our Zymolog. Physic. and Tentamen further say) but a slow pac'd mo∣tion or gentle collision of the aforesaid Prin∣ciples, consisting in an intestin strugling there∣of. Thus for instance in the production of a Vegetable Seed-bearing Plant, as suppose of Rosemary, Marjoram, Time, &c. where we have nothing but the minute Seed with the intrinsic Principles, which are the con∣nate plastic Faber seated in the Center there∣of, and what it can determine matter into: Now when this Seed, being put into a due capacitated Matrix or Earth, begins, by the fructifying nitrous Salt in the Earth, or Air, or both, together with the concurrance of an aetherial matter, &c. (requisite to the set∣ting all Vegitable Springs into motion) to open it self, the Principles or hidden mecha∣nical Agents (or that seminal embryona∣tive
spark, lock'd up in the visible Grain, or Seed) become an actual Ferment, where∣by Matter, which is always mov'd at the beck of those implanted Principles, and is thereby sub-divided into minute parts, en∣ters the Pores, and Streiners thereof, with such adaptation of Particles proportionable thereto, which becomes thereby extended, and is by the fore-said actual Ferment pro∣per to that Seed, wrought into such a tex∣ture of parts, or specifical form singly pe∣culiar to that Plant: where the shape, co∣lour, sapour, odour, and other specifical in∣dowments are determin'd by the seminal Principles, set into a fermental motion, and are the results of Matter formally extended thereby: For that a Plant should constantly (and more forcibly, during the time of the vi∣gour of its natural Ferment) breath forth so strong an apporrhoea, or odour, as to be able to smite our senses therewith, as if 20, yea 100 could (as sometimes they may) stand with∣in the Orb of its activity, might all be sen∣sible thereof, is, I say, a demonstrable Ar∣gument of the extensibility of Matter and subtile Emanation of subtiliz'd or volatiz'd Parts, even in the Fabric of that Plant, carried off by the quick actions of the aforesaid Ferment; which is yet further discoverable, either by the reverse motion of the fore∣said
Principles of the Plant, whereby the same ferment in its Retrograde motion be∣comes putredinous, causing (in some Plants but especially in Animals) a fetidness, where∣by also happens a Metastasis into an Insect (from causes aforesaid) or by force of fire into a fume of 100 yea 1000 fold larger com∣pass than the body it self was, which fume although extending so large a space, is yet so gross as to make it self the object of our senses. Thus you see (Hydroph.) how the same Principles, which lay dormant in the seed, (while in the Garner) where they are pois'd in equilibrio, and remain alone, so long un∣capable of fructifying or multiplying; how? I say, in order to the awakening these Principles and putting them into a fermental motion, there are some concurring requi∣sites duly to be considered, viz. that it should be cast into a peculiar Soil or Ground, as its proper Matrix, which is the Matrix of the Husk, as the Husk is of the true Seed, where the Leffas Terrae (or juice of the Earth) be∣ing imbued with so much nitrous Salt as is sufficient, softens the Husk and makes it swell, whose compage being loos'd, the Air with its other (necessarily concurring to the exciting the Principles in every vegeta∣ble Production) getting entrance, awakes or
puts the implanted Embrio-Principles into motion, thereby rendring them fermental; whence the noble Seed shut up in an obscure point, ariseth, whose mechanical Principles (necessary to the building all Bodies) are I say, call'd forth to act, break the Prison-doors, and in their mutual wrestlings, cause that grand Phaenomenon of Nature, we call Vegetation, where Water by the manu∣duction of Seeds or seminal Principles be∣comes determined into fibrous off-shoots, & those being hollow, carry along more of the succulent juyces, which as it flows in those Pipes, upon its access, more Fibers, Sap∣vessels, and others, (whether as Veins, Ar∣teries, &c. analogous to Animals, we refer to the particular disquisitions of the worthy Malpighius, & our Countryman Dr. Grew) are produced; while the formerly made Vessels by access of Air (or being long expos'd there∣to) become condensed or hardned into stalks, wood, &c. and so is wrought on, by the weavings of the foresaid seminal Principles, till the whole Plant or Tree put on its intire form of Root, Stalk, Bole, Bark, Branch, Fruit, or Flower. Besides which weavings, coagulations, and condensations of water into vegetable concretions from causes aforesaid, its more∣over if I mistake not (Hydroph.) as easie (and
as daily perform'd) for Nature from the power of seminal ferments set a work in Vegetation, and after continued by allow∣ing due requisites or ferments congenial, to turn I say, Water into Wine, as it is for the same, by the winding off of those ferments in a natural circulation to reduce Wine into Water, both equally and daily perform'd by the same seminal Principles differently and in their circular motion considered; yea, and to turn also Water into all manner of potable or fermentable liquors by the me∣diation of the foresaid Principles, once broke off from Vegetation, and kept afoot by the melting of the Grain, then dissolved in Water, and after by a ferment connatural set into a fermentative motion, as it is for the same potable Liquors at the long run of their ferments (insensibly winding off) to be reduc'd into Water again, and so on in a constant round of action and circu∣lation of motion in the upholding the great vicissitude and interchange of things. So that these Principles in their gentle col∣lisions are not only the cause of Vegetation in all manner of Plants and Trees, and the vari∣ous apparences thereto belonging, both of ge∣neration and corruption, weavings and un∣weavings of Bodies by the winding on and off, of the Principles; but also put into new
and different collisions or higher fermentati∣ons become the Patrons of all potable Li∣quors, and yet higher become the efficients of heat, and that either remiss or intense, yea so intense as to break forth into actual Flames, and so by such rapid fermentations exhibit the Phaenomena of fire and light not only compatible to Vegetables, but also to Animals, and all sulphureous Minerals, as we farther discourse in our Zymologia Phy∣sica and Tentamen Physiologic. And further, how from the twistings and evolutions of the same Principles, how I say the most obvious Phaenomena, are thence solv'd; for instance, how colours, those ludi∣cra sulphuris, the sportings of vegetable Sul∣phurs, from whose intertexture and coagu∣lations upon their genuine Acids are produ∣ced such different textures in Vegetables, as from thence are struck those amiable colours our Opticks are so pleasantly accosted with: How sapours of Plants are the results of ve∣getable fermentations in order to an equal temperature, to and from which as they ap∣proach or recede, they become pleasant or ungrateful, whose gratefulness (especially of fruits) depend upon their approximation to maturity, where their Acids are sweeten∣ed by the maturity of their Sulphurs upon the wheel of Vegetation: How odours of
Vegetables are but the efflorescence of their Sulphurs or subtile emanations emerging from intestine vegetative fermentation, where from the continual hits and unweari∣ed touches of the native Acid upon its Sul∣phur, the Sulphur becomes so subtilized as to wheel off in a sensible Apporrhea: How also the medicinal vertues thereof do thence de∣pend; and how lastly, their propagation is from natures skilful management of the same Principles perform'd; You may, I say, see fur∣ther in our late Philosophical Treatise of Fer∣mentation. SECT. IV. Hydroph. BUt before you pass from the discourse of your Principles as concern'd in Vegetation, and having touch'd somewhat relating to the Propagation of Plants in your piece of Fermentation: pray (Pyroph.) how are they (I mean your Prin∣ciples) concern'd in that manner of Propa∣gation of Trees, and perhaps some Plants by ingrafting and inoculation, and what im∣provements may thereby be made? Pyroph. Well reminded (Hydroph.) For that we may nor busie out selves with em∣pty and fruitless Speculations (the usual pro∣duct
of your old Philosophy,) it will be necessary in order to the establishing and confirming our Hypothesis, to acquaint you in answer to your desire, that the ingrafting or inoculation of a Cion or Bud into the bole of a Stock in or∣der to the propagation of Fruit-trees for the improvement of Nurseries, seems to me, Hydroph. to be nothing else but an artifi∣cial planting of those trees, as if they were indeed put into a good proper soyl, by put∣ing their seeds into sutable beds of Earth; whereby the seminal Principles concentred in the Seed, or contracted into those prolifique Buds, are put into their proper Matrix, which with other requisites concurring, are set into their vegetative spring, or fermental motion: And that the adaptness of stocks answers the peculiarity of soyls, in as much as all sorts of Cions are no more properly or with expected success, to be grafted or in∣oculated in any sort of Stock, than any sort of soyl is naturally fitted and qualified for every kind of Seed, only with this diffe∣rence, that in the one (viz. the Earth) the juice prepar'd lies more crude, and scatter'd, yea, is more liable to casualties, especially to injuries by cold, while the other (in the sap in stocks) is more digested (if I may so say) and better collected into Vessels, and pecu∣liar
strainers, and lastly, is not so expos'd to casualties, nor so open to injuries by access of cold: Now that the bole of one Tree is as a peculiar soyl to the proper ingrafted or inoculated prolifique Gem (for both graft∣ing and inoculation are but the planting or insertion of the same seminal Bud or Cion) is hence evident, because if Earth be so much cast up as to reach above the place of inocu∣lation (or graft too, if I mistake not) after they have taken good hold and that it hath sent forth Branches, the prolifique bud casts forth fibrous Roots, just as if it (or the Seed) was originally put into so much well prepa∣red soyl: so that the Root and Bole of a Tree do no other, (I mean as to ingrafting and inoculation) than prepare a juice fit for the nourishment, growth and increase of any other sutable Graft or Gem inserted therein∣to; which the aforesaid Gem imbibes and transmutes by its own fermental Principles, into its own nature, admitting not of the least tincture of the native disposition or se∣minal inclination from the assumed Sap, but dashing all those preconceiv'd seminal tin∣ctures, make use of it to no other purpose (according to the intent of Nature in her great work of propagation, where she is so so exact and curious as in nothing more) than thereby to strike up the new vegetative
implanted spark, whose Principles being thereby set awork, become fermental, and so imploys that juice in the fabrick of its own peculiar Body, guided and shap'd by its own plastick faber, I mean its foresaid semi∣nal, and now (being exerted into motion) fermental Principles, carrying on the build∣ing by its intestine slow-pac'd collision (vul∣garly called Vegetation.) Thus for instance, we commonly inoculate a fruitful Bud or Cion of an Aprecock or Peach into a Plum-stock, whose thriving, budding, putting forth Branches, &c. are no other than the evident indexes of the action of the seminal Principles of those inoculated Gems, which being set into motion (by requisites duely concurring) admit of the juice or Sap of the bole (they are inoculated into) be∣comes fermental, dashing the preconceiv'd seminal tincture of the Stock (whereby it was dispos'd to the putting on the form of a Plum-tree) transmutes that juice into its own nature, and so from the intestine struglings of the said seminal Principles of the instan∣ced inoculated Bud, proceeds the vegetation and growth of the whole, clothing it self with all those natural Liveries peculiar to the texture of such seminal prolifique Prin∣ciples. Now that this sap of the Stock is as a
prepared soyl, or a peculiar Earth for the Seed to be sown in, and wherein it thrives as well (if not better) than in a natural soyl, is evident (Hydroph.) because if you throw up Earth (after it has begun to thrive and put forth Branches) above the place where it was inoculated, it takes Root by put∣ing forth fibrous Shoots, which you may then transplant, (cutting off the former Root and Bole) and so it becomes an intire Tree of it self: and from the same causes it is, that you may by splicing (as the Gardiners call it) propagate as many Trees as you please: also by layers (as they are called) you may propagate as many Trees almost as there are prolifique Buds if they couid all be conveniently laid, whereby every Bud (or as many as you please) gets a Root to it self, by taking in that Sap from the Earth, which they do from Stocks they are otherwise planted into: In all which, the seminal Prin∣ciples are set a work and become fermenta∣tive, hurling forth bodies or clothings ac∣cording to the form of the plastic faber seat∣ed in the Center: whence it appears, I say, that the Sap of the Stock is to a Cion or or prolifique Bud, as the Earth to a Seed, or as the Earth to a laid Cion. Now the improvements, Hydroph. that hence may be drawn, are various, and that
in order to the accelleration, melioration, and fructification of some Trees in other Cli∣mates or Countries than where they natu∣rally grow; Thus we daily see the Imps of an Aprecock hastned as to its fructifying, by being inserted into Plum-stocks, Peaches, by being put into Aprecock, Flanders, Hart, Duke, &c. Cherries, put into wild or black Cherry-Stocks, &c. which thereby in two or three years become Fruit-bearing-Trees, which would not in many more, if set from a Stone or Seed, or propagated from a slip'd Cions: which are not thereby only hastened as to their growth and maturity, but also are bettered thereby, both as to bulk of Fruit as also pleasantness and gratefulness of taste. Thus probably the prolifique Imp or Bud of Quinces, skilfully put into early Apple-stocks, might hasten them as to maturity; later Grapes of a more delicate taste, artifici∣ally inoculated into more early, might do the same: yea very likely if acurate tryals were made of this nature, probably not on∣ly Melons (as to Plants) inserted into Pompi∣ons might make them both more early and more large, especially if the Seeds of Pom∣pion should be brought up in hot-beds to be ready early in the Spring, while the other are also foster'd in the same, till they were
fit for inserting: But also many other rare observations might be made concerning o∣ther maturations and meliorations of Plants and Fruits, not yet taken notice of. As to the third improvement, viz. the assistance of Nature by Art, in the fructifi∣cation of some Trees in other Climates or Countries than where they naturally grow; Thus probably if the prolific Bud of Oranges (train'd up from their seedlings in hot-beds, or other suitable soyl) were inserted into some sort of Trees that grow well with us, and seem somewhat to resemble them, as for instance in some choice Apples (as Pippins or Pearmains) or in Quinces, thence we might very probably have Oranges to grow fre∣quently with us in England: for the reason, why such tender Trees (more accustomed to hotter Climates) do not fructisy with us, is cheifly through the defect of concurring cau∣ses, (which I above call by the name of Re∣quisites duely concurring) amongst which are most considerable the want of a compe∣tent heat, or the presence of our intense cold or frost in the Winter time, which reaching the Roots of such tender Trees, pre∣vents their Fruit-bearing by suspending the fermental action of the Principles, if not totally kills them. Now (Hydroph.) according to our al∣ready
prov'd supposition, that Stocks answer Soils, and are really as such to prolific Buds: therefore if instead of training up Orange-Trees from hot Nurseries, we take their prolific Imps, which we can by hot Beds easily procure, and insert them by Inocula∣tion into the Stocks or Branches of any, or the most likely of those Trees aforesaid, we thereby secure them from intense Frosts we usually have in Winters, the chief defect amongst requisites concurring, and which hinders otherwise the Fruit-bearing of some Trees in other Climates than naturally they spring up in: which, I say, being remov'd by the aforesaid artificial Expedient, gives great likelihood of having upon such tryal, plenty of Oranges growing with us in Eng∣land. Thus also if the fruitful Buds of Figgs (which rarely in England come to maturity for want of heat, and chiefly by being late) were inoculated into some sort of good Pears (for instance Bergamots, or some other early Pear) or Branches thereof, might pro∣bably procure their maturity: and thereby to sit peaceably under the improvements of our Vines and our Figg-Trees. Amongst the aforesaid due requisites ne∣cessarily concurring, I chiefly mean Climates, and thence different Soils (although there
are also great variety of Soils under the same Climate) where, according to the dif∣ference of natural heats from the Sun, the Principles are put into a slower or quicker Motion, from whose more flat or sharp and agil collisions, some Bodys or Fruits are wrought with a courser or finer spun tex∣ture; or by longer weavings become more elaborate, and arrive at higher maturities, whence proceed Fruits of more delicate tast, affecting the Palat more gratefully. What improvements (Hydroph.) might hence be made, nothing but matter of expe∣riment will satisfie, concerning the meliora∣ting, at least inlarging of Collyflowers, by taking the superannuated stem or bole of a choice sort of Cabbage (which the year before has been prevented of bearing Fruit, by cutting it off while young) and early thereinto the next Spring to insert a Collyflower (brought up in a hot or other prepared Bed, or pre∣serv'd over Winter from its seed put down in Autumn.) And so many more choice Ob∣servations might be made, the truth of which only matter of tryal will evince and satisfie the curious searcher. Lastly, What improvements might hence also be made (Hydroph.) is only here pro∣pos'd to further tryal, in order to the ha∣ving of Roses (and perhaps other Flowers)
all the Winter long, by inoculating their prolific Buds at a due season into some Sempervives, or Wintergreens, I mean for in∣stance in Yew, Fir, or Pine, especially if those Trees were assisted by some Artificial heat, as being planted near some Stoves or Furnaces (if found that that would accord with their constitution) where heat was kept and conveyed to them all Winter long: For the Principles in any prolific Bud be∣ing set into motion, by being planted in any proper Stock, the Juyce of that Stock being warm'd by any adventitious heat, or what way so ever kept in action, becomes like a Soil fitted for them, whereby the aforesaid Principles become fermental, and by a slow pac'd intestin collision becomes the essential cause, yea, is the very ratio formalis of vege∣tation and growth, by which the Seed, like a seminal Faber, works until it have hew'd forth its own body, & be cloth'd with all the shape, lineaments and proportions answe∣rable to the Antitype or latent-Idea couch'd in the central point, and exert all the pow∣ers capable of emerging therefrom, by put∣ting on the intire form of the whole Plant or Tree.
SECT. V. Hydroph. AS you have expeditiously enough illustrated what you mean (Pyroph.) by your Principles as semi∣nal and fermental in order to the generation and production of Vegetables, and towards the solving many remarkable Phaenomena thereof; concerning which what you fall short in here, it seems you make up in your Treatise of Fermentation already extant, and in your Tentamen Physiolog. you have ready for the Press: So pray (Pyroph.) give us some touches concerning your Notions, how according to your Hypothesis, you appre∣hend the generation of Animals, and their most noted apparences, are perform'd from your aforesaid Principles. Pyroph. In the generation of Animals from their seminaries, the aforesaid Prin∣ciples (if I mistake not, Hydroph.) are no less (suo modo) conspicuous, than what I have illustrated them to be in the production of Vegetables; and that both as they are Prin∣ciples lock'd up in some minute portions of epitomiz'd matter, and likewise as they, being by requisites duly concurring, put into motion, become fermental.
For we account of Generation of Ani∣mals no other than an evolution or natural expansion of the implanted seminal Princi∣ples contain'd in the minute Embrio, and rendred prolific by the fermental odour (if I may so say) of a masculine Ferment; we cannot otherwise reckon, but that the noblest of fermental animal Juyces (in order to propagation) and where the spirits are most vigorous, and fecund, is the masculine sperm of Animals; which is a digested spermatic Elixir, capable of tinging those more crude feminine Juyces, or a natural, but highly prepar'd liquid Magistery, circulated and brought on to maturity in its peculiar ves∣sels: yea, the very efflorescence, (if I may further add) of Animal Juyces, impregna∣ted at due seasons with such a stock of spi∣rits, emerging from a fermentation proper to it self, as renders it capable of inspi∣ring those feminine ovaria, or uterine Ve∣sicles, with a subtile, but very active Fer∣ment, which awakens those minute dor∣mant, and otherwise steril Embryo's, sets them by its own vigorous action into a sort of (if I may say) vegetative, or expansive mo∣tion. It's not the gross body of the prepar'd masculine or seminal Sperm, or any visi∣ble juice, or sensible part thereof (however
by circulation maturated) which is admit∣ted into the female Matrix, as the worthy Harvey excellently shews in his Tract, de generatione Animalium, Nihil in utero (saith he) post coitum invenias, generatura enim ma∣ris, brevi vel elabitur, vel evanescit: & ta∣men adsit aliquid, quod foeminam foecundam reddat; But it is a spirituous Ferment, in∣dolis contagiosae (of which the seminal Li∣quor is but the Vehicle) at seasons so heigh∣tened, as it (if meeting with an aptness of Reception in the Female) breaths upon the oviformal Embryo, invigorates it into acti∣vity, putting those implanted and close shut up Principles into Motion. For the aforesaid industrious Harvey tells us, speaking of what is contain'd in the Female Matrix, in order to Conception, De generat, Animal. 278. Quod ad procreatio nem foetûs spectat, omnia animalia eodem modo ab oviformi primordio generantur: siquidem in eo∣rum generatione, hoc solenne est, ut primordium ve∣getale (ovi naturam referens) praeexistat, ex quo foetus producatur: est hoc in omnibus vel ovum vel oviforme quid; And as he farther adds, Inest igitur in utero omnium animalium concep∣tus primus sive primordium; quod teste Aristotele, est veluti ovum membrana oblectum, cui puta∣men detractum est. So that in the propagation of all Animals
(the noblest, and for whose sake the rest were made, not excepted) the Embryo anchorite, or epitomiz'd Animal, shut up within the walls of each of the uterine Ve∣sicles, or oviformal Membranes, retains its just and proportionable form and shape, how minute soever in that seminary ovifor∣mal original, inclos'd in the Female Ma∣trix: and only waits for an inspiration from the active masculine, spirituous, and fecun∣dating Ferment, which is to strike up those dormant Principles, into an actual Fermen∣tation or animal fire, whereby the little Em∣bryo (the seminal Principles being once put into motion) begins (from a supply of ma∣ternal Juyces) by a fermental expansion and evolution of its parts, to vegetate and grow bigger, till from those rudiments, by a continual and successive gradation, the vi∣tal fire be struck up: whereby the womb af∣ter conception by the inspiring of the preg∣nant male Ferment is forthwith close shut up; nature being so solicitous in this great affair of propagation, & so wonderfully curi∣ous (both to prevent monstrous Productions, as also multiplicity of contemporary Births from frequent & inordinate Coitions) as that she doth, after Conception, seal up the Ma∣trix (as I may say) hermetically, that not the least of Air, nor what is much more
subtile (viz. the Masculine Ferment) can have the least ingress; The Animal and Mineral Ferments herein conspiring, that after impregnation of either (viz. of the Animal Embryo Juyce, or Mercurial Liquor) by their peculiar Seeds, the Matrix both Animal and Philosophical are (I say) both, the one Hermetically to be clos'd up, the other naturally seal'd up, and kept from all heterogeneous assaults, whether in the Air or else-where, till in the one, it be brought on to the maturity of an Animal Life, and in the other, be elaborated to the perfection of the Philosophic Elixir. Con∣cerning the progress of which, in order to the Exit or Birth of the Embryo, we have somewhat inlarged in our Hydrolog. Chy∣mica, and probably may do more else∣where. But how the same Principles in their fer∣mentative Collisions in the Animal Juyces, are the cause (other requisites concurring) of the circulation of the Blood, the source of all Animal heat and warmth, the efficients of nourishment and growth: The cause of the generation of Spirits, and thence of Vi∣tal and Animal Functions (viz. Sense and Motion) of the Body, how the Fountain of all the several Ferments in the peculiar Ves∣sels and Conduits of the Body.
Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) be not too concise in these great Matters: How in par∣ticular (according to your Principles) do you understand concerning the faculty of the Stomach, you call the Ferment thereof, which doth perform such wonderful effects? doth it by its innate heat according to our Philosophy) or by its acid Ferment, as of late several Neoterics have thought, or by some latent quality unknown to us: For it seems to be of a strange penetrating nature, as to be able to turn all the several sorts of Food into a Cremor, and thence fit it for fur∣ther preparation in order to blood and nou∣rishment? Pyroph. True (Hydroph.) the work of the Stomach (let it be done by what Agent it will) is wonderful, and in that very thing Nature's path is very mysterious. That it consists not in an innate heat, is evident, first, because no degree of heat of what pitch soever imagin'd can perform the like Muta∣tions or Reductions of Bodys. And secondly, because all heat is (according to our Hypo∣thesis) the result of Fermentation, and there fore wherever the heat of the body was which is the constant effect of the intestin struglings of the Principles contained in the Animal Juyces, there would it necessarily follow that it should perform the like opera∣tion
in every part where it's found, but con∣stant observation contradicts the conse∣quent, therefore heat is not the cause of that dissolving action of the Stomach: And that it consists not in an acid Ferment (the more plausible of the two) will be evident from the deposition of what we conclude it to be. Lastly, that it is not from an occult quality will be clear from what we shall afterwards discourse of the inexistency (and therefore futility) of qualities. But how, I say, a pure subtiliz'd Fer∣ment is continually elaborated into a most depurate and refin'd Elixir, containing the most defecate Principles of the blood and aliment, whence blood is prepar'd, is by circulation conveyed from the blood into the Stomach, by the Gastric, and perhaps other Arteries, inserted into the Ventricle, where through the congenealness to our every day receiv'd alimental Juyce, can (by reason of its subtilty of parts) penetrate, dissolve, and unlock the compage of such alimentary bodys, and at length put them into a simi∣lar motion, by striking up their essential Principles into an intestin Collision, which is that very thing we call a Ferment, and is therefore here (according to our Hypothe∣sis) the true cause of the stomachical Ferment, that great and almost universal Alkahest of
nature, that can dissolve bodys, though of many different sorts of Textures, where the same Principles are to be found which es∣sentially more or less constitute all alimenta∣ry Concretes and Liquids too. For I must tell you (Hydroph.) that the congenealness of Principles of bodys under very different Textures and various Com∣pages, give the cause of their more univer∣sal solution by Menstruums prepar'd analo∣gically thereto, yea and give the reason why the Principles of one are brought into mo∣tion by the action of the other; that is, by the congruousness of the Principles of the solvent to those of the solvend. So that how the Ferment of the Stomach consists not in an implanted acid, nor any other native Ferment, peculiarly inherent in that part: But how it chiefly (if not sole∣ly) owes its original to the circulation of the aforesaid highly prepared, and much elaborated Elixir of the blood, which com∣municated by the foresaid ducts, by its great penetrability and agility easily mix∣eth with the assum'd aliment, and by the assimilation of Principles sets the whole mass into a fermentative motion, and there∣by taketh in pieces its Compage by a genu∣ine solution: For the universal constitution of all alimentary bodys, and by which they
all agree in somewhat that is common amongst them, consists in some texture or other of the two grand Principles, Acid and Sulphur: which fermentative Motion, I say, of the Principles by further solution, perco∣lation, separation, and afterwards by yet more intimate commixtion is carried on to the preparing the blood and spirits, and thence to the elaborating the aforesaid vo∣latile Elixir, which conveyed into the Sto∣mach, compleats the whole round of dige∣gestions, and performs the whole circula∣tion compatible to Animals in their great work of nourishment and preparation of spirits in order to Sense and Motion, and other functions peculiar to animal bodys: how, I say, all this is perform'd by the va∣rious collisions and elaborations of the afore∣said Principles, what we only hint here, we discourse more at large in our Tentamen Physiolog. to which we refer you. SECT. VI. Hydroph. WHat mean you (Pyroph.) by those active Principles you spake of before, viz. Fire, Ferments, Salts, and Solvents, by some of which all concrete bodys are taken in pieces, and new
textures or neutral Productions are thence made, and by which great changes as you say happen amongst Bodies. Pyroph. I bring those mentioned (Hydroph.) at present under the notion of extrinsic A∣gents, which have a powerful efficacy in order to the effecting great changes amongst Bodies they are applicable to. Hydroph. What mean you (Pyroph.) by fire according to your Hypothesis: for we suppose it to be the most hot, dry, and light∣est Element, plac'd sub concavo Lunae. Pyroph. Your opinion (Hydroph.) of fire will not be worth the while to refute, and indeed I think will easily disappear of it self, upon the displaying of ours: By Fire there∣fore in this place, I mean the vulgar (viz.) the fourth (and sometimes the first) com∣plication of our Principles of Acid and Sul∣phur, which consists in the highest collision, and intestine rapid motion, those Princi∣ples, sowen or implanted in all combustible Bodies, are capable of; which although here we put amongst extrinsic, yet may al∣so truly be reckoned as the greatest intrinsic Agent, in order to the great changes of the same Bodies from their own highly agitated Principles. Hydroph. Are there not many opinions concerning the nature and essence of Fire?
Pyroph. Yes (Hydroph.) Yours with the rest of your Hypothesis we reduce to six Clas∣ses, as you may see in our Tentamen Physio∣logic. where we undertake to shew the great extent of Fire enlarged to all its Dimensions, not barely confining Fire within the ordina∣ry limits of that which is vulgar and culina∣ry, concerning the illustrating of which, as considered in it self, and as applicable to other Bodies, from our Hypothesis we are not sparing; But also de industria do propose the consideration of Fire as extended to the solving the more general and universal appa∣rences of Nature in the production of Bo∣dies. Hydroph. Why, how (Pyroph?) Pyroph. By supposing the Genesis of all specific concretes compriz'd in the three∣fold kingdom of Nature, to be nothing else but a certain Evolution and Expansion of seminal Principles, carried on by a gentle and mutual Collision of the mechanical Agents, which are the very ground work of all natu∣ral Fire in Bodies: or rather, (if you please) to be nothing else (which yet amounts to the same thing) but certain igniculi or little Fires deposited and hid in so many minute por∣tions, or Urns of matter, as there are variety of things, giving motion and vigour to eve∣ry Body wherewith its cloth'd, to the com∣pleating
thereof in all its numbers: so that every thing we converse with in its existency from Creation or Generation, represents somwhat miraculous to us viz. an igniculus or little Fire, burning after its manner, as made up from the very Principles of Fire mutual∣ly acting by a soft Collision, and yet the thing it self (wonderful! and like the Bush which miraculously burn'd with Fire and was not consumed, Exod. c. 3. v. 7. as the Divine Philosopher in his Pentateuch, tells us, so this) is not consumed. Hydroph. But why (Pyroph.) so lofty in your discourse, and so curious in your so high speculations of Fire? these are strange noti∣ons, such as we read not of in our, nor other sort of Philosophy I have yet met with; Pyroph. Because I find, Hydroph. by consi∣dering Bodies in their Generation or Pro∣duction, and in their reductions or unwea∣vings, and the various Metastases and changes amongst themselves, I say by laying things well together, and by putting them into their due Balance, reducing them to their several Classes, that there are seven compli∣cations, or so many modes of Aggressions of the aforesaid Principles, Acids and Sulphurs: So that by searching into the depth of Bodies and into the various complications of their seminal Principles, we cannot but suppose
in Nature, so many sorts of Fires, hid in the bosome of things, as there are modifi∣cations of the Principles, by which they va∣riously combine to the building of Bodies from their Rudiments, and to the raising them up from their seminaries or radical be∣ginnings, also to the taking them in pieces or reductions thereof: and from which many and those the chief (yea perhaps all) Phaeno∣mena of natural Bodies or Concretes we con∣verse with, may with a great deal of facility and perspicuity be genuinely solv'd; concern∣ing which we designedly enlarge in our Tentamen Physiologicum. SECT. VII. Hydroph. PRay, Pyroph. What are those seven Complications of your Principles, which you say are found in the great series and chain of the causes of things, and from whence you conclude so many Fires contain'd in the orb and shut up in the Centers of those Bodies we are concern'd with? How do you reckon them? Pyroph. The first is when the Principles combine in such a peculiar Collision as that the ethereal matter is interwoven therewith, and is fomented by a continual supply from
the perpetual circulation of the aforesaid Aether: of which sort, are those we call Solar Fires, because made from the same Principles as the Solar rays are: which I say consist of an Eradiation of Solar beams, springing from an incessant but peculiar fer∣mentation in the Body of the Sun, and foster∣ed by an unwearied circulation of Aethereal matter, (as we shew in our discourse of Fer∣mentation:) This Solar-Fire has a twofold considera∣tion, First, per se, and Secondly; as it is trans∣missive or communicable to other Bodies. Hydroph. How do you understand that first consideration, per se? Pyroph. That from whose direct or re∣flexive motion, swimming through the vast depth of the Aether (called by the Epicureans, Inane) are produced by an eradiation the grand Phaenomena of Light and Heat in the great Orb of the Macrocosm. Hydroph. What I pray (Pyroph.) is light, as communicable to us from the great Foun∣tain thereof the Sun, and as that grand Phaenomenon by which all others are made to appear? Pyroph. Light we suppose (Hydroph.) to consist in an illumination of Air, by a per∣petual Emanation of Solar beams, issuing (as I said before) from an incessant, but pe∣culiar
fermentation in the Body of the Sun. That Light is not a quality of a lucid Body, as you define it, but a corporeal substance; and how it is necessary to the exhibiting va∣riety of colours, and answers the rule of Di∣optricks, we shall afterwards in its place discourse. Hydroph. What is that we call Heat, as issuing from the Body of the Sun? Pyroph. It is nothing else (Hydroph. If I rightly understand) but the reflexive motion of those Solar-Rays which in their Emana∣tion from their Fountain, cause Light. Hydroph. How are Light and Heat distin∣guished in their Causes? Pyroph. They differ in this only: (viz.) That Light is the bare illumination of the medium, Air, by a direct Progressive motion of the Solar Rays from the aforesaid fer∣mentation, as the proper object of the Eye, and by which all other things are made to appear, while heat is the reflexion or Re∣verberatory motion (as we say in our tract of Fermentation) p. 106.) of the same Luminous Beams (issuing from the said Fermentation) from the Earth or other solid Bodies, affecting (by that Fermentative mo∣tion) our Sensative Organs of feeling. Hydroph. You have told us Pyroph. how you understand Light and Heat to proceed
from the same Fermentative motion of Solar Rays, the one in a direct, the other in a reverse or reflected line: But how are those you call Solar Fires made? Pyroph. I answer, (Hydroph.) that (be∣sides what we have already said) by Con∣centration of the aforesaid Rays those Fires are made (viz.) from which Rays, (by Glasses contriv'd for the purpose) artificial∣ly concentred, are produced actual Fires, which will give Flame to, and Burn any Combustible. So that Heat is Fire in a re∣miss degree, or the same Rays thinly dis∣pers'd in their vehicle the Air, while Fire is Heat in an intense Degree artificially con∣centred, and both are Essentially the same, that is, are really from the same causes. And as to the second consideration of So∣lar Fires, viz. as transmissive, or communica∣ble to other bodies, we mean such as hit∣ting upon some peculiarly adapted Textures of Bodies, do by their congruousness fix themselves, and thereby are the causes whence several Phaenomena (mentioned in our Tentamen Physiologic.) are easily solvable. Hydroph. What is the second complicati∣on of your Principles, and what Phaenomena in the main are thence solvable? Pyroph. The second is, when the foresaid Principles do mutually accost each other by
a gentle Collision; which is twofold, the one progressive from the Center: The other Retrogressive from the Superficies. The for∣mer respects the Generation and Producti∣of things, as is manifest in every genuine Fermentation, both of Vegetables and Ani∣mals, whence the Vegetation of Plants, and the natural Fermentation of Animal Juices, conducing to their Generation, increase, and perfection or maturity; The latter eyes Putrefaction; whose Ratio formalis is taken from the revers'd motion of the same Prin∣ciples mutually acting, where by a diffe∣rent modification, the Acidum sets upon the Sulphur and thence produceth that putred∣ness and fetidness the frequent effects there∣of: concerning which Principles as conside∣red in their Progressive and Regressive mo∣tion in order to the Production and Redu∣ction of things, more elsewhere. Hydroph. What is the third modification of your Principles, and the apparences in general referrable thereto? Pyroph. The third is when the Principles by a stronger and more sensible Collision hit upon each other: and that's twofold: viz. Natural and Artificial; 1. Natural, as a∣mongst Vegetables is manifest in their ripe∣ned Juices, whose Principles struggle with stronger Collisions; also in Hay, Lime, Straw,
Corn, &c. which have got moisture, being laid up wet: amongst Animals it's manifest in every spurious and exorbitant morbid Ferment, and lastly amongst Minerals, as is evident in every strong Collision of the Prin∣ciples; and that either in their Embryonative Juices or in concrete Minerals, from whose Principles mutually strugling do all Natural Baths, yea all heats which arise from Me∣tals or Minerals Naturally or Artificially perform'd, take their Original. 2. The artificial is manifest in every effervescence made between factitious Alcalies (fixt or volatile) and Acids; concerning which you may see more at large in our Philosophical discourse of Fermentation and in our Ten∣tamen Physiologic. Hydroph. The fourth you have mentioned before, which is the most high and rapid motion the Principles are capable of, whence you compute the Ratio formalis of vulgar or Culinary Fire, and thence also (it seems) solve the Phaenomena thereto apper∣taining: But pray go on, Pyroph. to tell what your fifth is, and what thence re∣sults. Pyroph. The fifth, is when the Principles after they are by the most rapid Collision brought to an ignition, are transmitted from their own into other Bodies, where
penetrating are by a kind of a fixation lock'd up, thereby becomeing the Authors of divers Phoenomena, as is evident in the Calces of Metals made sicco modo, for in∣stance of Lead, (in the preparation of Mi∣nium) Iron, and Mercury, in calx vive, in fixt Alcalies lately made, &c. Hydroph. Now proceed on to acquaint us what the sixth complication of your Princi∣ples is, and what Phaenomena in short are thereto referrable. Pyroph. The sixth is when the Principles are complicated by a certain Colliquation: whence the Fires thence resulting may (pro∣perly enough we think) be called Colliquati∣vi ignes, which are threefold, 1. Caustical. 2. Corrosive. 3. Putrefactive. 1. Caustical, are either Lixivial or Vesicatory. Lixivial, are fixt Alcalies of Plants, fixt Nitre, Calx vi∣ve; Vesicatory, are Chymical Oyls, Cantha∣rides, and some Plants, as ranunculus, cicuta, urtica, inward bark of Walnut, &c. 2. Cor∣rosive, take their original from Mineral Prin∣ciples colliquated by force of Fire; whence all Corrosive Menstrua are produc'd, there be∣ing as many Corrosive Fires as Menstrua; Some more Corrosive than others, according to de∣grees of the Colliquation of the Principles. 3. Putrefactive, whence also a threefold Col∣liquative Putrefactive Fire, (viz.) 1. Pesti∣lential.
2. Venenous. 3. Properly Putrefactive. Concerning all which, and the apparences thence genuinely solvable, besides what is obiter delivered in our discourse of Fermen∣tation we have at large treated in our Tenta∣men Physilogic. Hydroph. Now Pyroph. hast to tell us of the last complication of your Principles. Pyroph. The seventh and last, is when the Principles are fixed by an intimate and radical union, whence arise Fires of their kind, which by reason of the fixity and in∣separable connexion of the Principles, they (as in an Orb above the rest of the Apparen∣ces of Nature) suffer no flagration of parts, nor admit of any injury by the strongest tor∣tures of Vulcan or vulgar Fire (which con∣sists in the fourth Complication of our Prin∣ciples,) or any other below it self, as is evi∣dent in the Metals, especially the fixed, and in the Philosophick Elixir. Nor do they un∣dergo any separation of parts, as appears in the Liquor Alkahest, and Mercury of Philo∣sophers, which by reason of the intimate and radical union of their constituent Principles, are liable to no sequestration of Heterogenei∣ties, the common fate to most Bodies: from which Modification of the Principles of Fire it truely (if such there be in rerum natura) becomes the Ignis Philosophicus, otherwise
call'd the Philosophers Sulphur, that hidden Tincture, so much disbeliev'd by many, and those also learned men: which secret Fires apply'd to their proper Bodies, burn onely away their Dross, separating their im∣purities without the destruction or Con∣sumption of their intrinsick Seeds original∣ly implanted therein, whence is solvable the very Ratio formalis of the transmutation of Metals. Yea, and from this seventh com∣plication of the Principles it is, whence pro∣bably those abstruse Maximes of the Herme∣tick Philosophers may genuinely be solv'd, where they tell us of their Water which burns Bodies, and their Fire, which moistens them; aqua Philosophica corpora urens (viz. eo∣rum hetereogenea) eadem{que} madefaciens, they burn with Water, and moisten with Fire, a great Paradox in Nature! through our igno∣rance in the abstruse causes of things, of which more interspers'dly in our Lithologia, and Tentamen Physiologic. but especially in our Chrysologia Hermetica. From which Principles differently accor∣ding to the aforesaid sevenfold Modifications complicated, the Phaenomena of Nature in her works, are according to our Hypothesis easily solvable: concerning which you may see many considerable instances illustrated in our Tentamen Physiologie.
Hydroph. It seems then (Pyroph.) that Fire in its genuine and Physical sense, is of a larger extent, than ever we dream'd of: For you make Fire or the Principles thereof, to be Seminal and Mechanical Agents, in all Bodies, especially in those from Seminal Productions: & these to be reckon'd amongst the intrinsic, but pray how are they as extrin∣sic Agents, so much concern'd in the great Metastasis and Catastrophe of Bodies? Pyroph. When I accounted Fire amongst the extrinsic Agents, it was only as Culina∣ry, viz. the vulgar (I mean such as our fourth complication of the Principles exhibits) and as considered applicable to Bodies already constituted, and to the changes thence issu∣ing; that is, as the Principles of any com∣bustible Body was by a rapid Collision brought into that highest motion we call Fire, as these I say were applicable to other Bodies (whose Principles in some Modifica∣tion or other had woven the Texture there∣of, and so lay dormant,) and did as adven∣titious Agents, excite the latent Principles into action, so they thereby become extrin∣sic Agents: thus the Fiery or combustible Principles being put into action in one Body, as suppose Wood or the like, this as an ex∣trinsic Agent, is able to excite the same combustible Principles in any other combusti∣ble Body.
But it is applicable to other Bodies, as an extrinsick Agent, upon no other account than this, (viz.) from the congenealness of its Principles, to those in Bodies it's applicable to: for as Ferments (to take them in the u∣sual acceptation) work upon no Bodies, but such as have Principles Analogical to them∣selves, which is the very Ratio formalis of such Ferments acting upon other Bodies, (viz.) their congenealness: so Fire, no o∣therwise burns Bodies, than as its Principles being brought into a rapid Collision, awa∣kens the same sort of Principles in Bodies it's applied to, exciting those Principles into the same motion which lay dormant before. SECT. VIII. Hydroph. HOw do you reckon Ferments amongst extrinsick Agents? Pyroph. Much what as I have said concer∣ning vulgar Fire. For although most Bo∣dies, (especially Vegetable and Animal) lodge within themselves, their own Ferments; by which they undergo that intestin motion of their constitutive parts, they are natually inclin'd to, as appears in the Vegetation of Plants, from the Fermentation of their ge∣nuine Principles; and in the Motion, Circu∣lation, Generation of Spirits, &c. in the Fermentative Juices of Animals, yet these are
also lyable to Mutations from extrinsick Fer∣ments, being adventitious Agents, which according to the Degrees of their Energie, either excite or highten the native, or pervert them into that which is spurious: But in all alterations that are made by those extrinsick Ferments, either by stirring up the supine (native) Ferments, or by graduating and advancing them in their vigour and strength, do it I say always by a consimilarnes of Na∣ture; that is, by a congenealness of the ex∣trinsick to the intrinsick Ferments, concer∣ning which we discourse more largely in our Tentamen Physiologic. Hydroph. What mean you (Pyroph.) by Salts, which you reckon also amongst ex∣trinsick Agents, and concern'd in the Chan∣ges of Bodies? Pyroph. I look upon them (Hydroph.) as other sorts of extrinsick Agents, which ap∣plied to, and interweaving with other Bodies beget great alterations in their apparences: Thus for instance, Quick-silver, which is a fluid Body, doth by the interposition of Salts (as of Vitriol, Nitre, or Fossil Salt) arise together by the help of Fire in the form of a white Crystalline Sublimate, when from the apparences of a fluid Body, and Argent-Colour, it becomes determin'd by the afore∣said interweaving of Salts into a consistent,
solid, and white Body; as may be seen in the preparation of Mercury Sublimate both Corrosive and Dulcis: which solid Body shall become fluid again as Water, by the help of Fire, if thereto be added Sal-Armoniack, and filings of Copper, or the Calx of Verdigreece, remaining after the distillation of that Spiri∣tus Veneris, so called by Snelfer. Thus also two Saline fluid Liquors, (the one made by putrefaction and Distillation, either from Animals or Vegetables, the other by distillation prepared from Fermen∣tative Liquors) put together, shall lose their fluidity, and become a dry Osta; as is con∣spicuous, not only in the well known mix∣tures of Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Urin, Blood, Sal-Armoniac, Plants, &c. but also two Mineral Liquors (mentioned in our Ha∣lolog. Chym.) mixed, a dry Osta may be made: likewise Oyl of Vitriol pour'd upon a peculiarly prepar'd Vitriolin Liquor (to be mentioned in the aforesaid Treatise of Salts) turns to a blue Clay: And as some fluid Bodies, by Salts, as extrinsick Agents, become Solid; so some Solid Bodies by Salts, become fluid, as for instance Butyrum Antimonii (viz. Butter of An∣timony) in a gentle heat, is as fluid, as an Oyl of a strong Body, and yet consists of the Flowers of Antimony brought into that form,
by the additional Salts, before contain'd in sublimate: so Antimony by Salts loseth its colour: Thus from black, with the additi∣on of Salts, it becomes brown, or yellow, as in the Hepar of Antimony, and from thence by further addition of Salts, and Calcinations, it becomes a lighter yellow, at length white, with a sleight yellow re∣flexion, as is evident in Diaphoretic Antimo∣ny, in Mercurius Vitae, and Bezoardicum Mi∣nerale, concerning which Mutations amongst Bodys you may see more in our aforesaid Dis∣course of Salts. Hydroph. What mean you (Pyroph.) by Solvents, the last you reckon upon the score of extrinsic Agents, in order to the changes which happen amongst Bodys? Pyroph. By Solvents I understand all or most sorts of Menstrua, whether preparable amongst Animals, Vegetables, or Minerals; amongst Animals, such whose energetical Crasis depends chiefly upon volatile Alcalies, and those as more or less complicated, or colliquated with their connate Sulphurs: amongst Vegetables, such, where first either the Sulphur is deprest, and the Acidum pre∣valent, as in all Acids or Vinegars distillable from the fermented Juyces of Plants, once deprav'd, viz. in Vinegars, Alegars, &c. or their Spirits: or Secondly, where the
Acidum and Sulphur are in aequilibrio, as in all vinous or other fermentative Liquors; Or Thirdly, where the Acidum is deprest, and the Sulphur exalted, as in all vinous Spi∣rits, distillable from fermentative Liquors: Lastly, amongst Minerals, such where first the Acids prevail and are thin, or lean, as in Spirit of Vitriol: Secondly, where the Acids imbibe and colliquate more of their Sulphurs, as in Spirit of Salt: Thirdly, where the Sulphurs prevail, and yet are bound down by a strong Colliquation with their Acids, as in the Oyl of Vitriol, Sul∣phur per Campane, Aquae Stygiae: or lastly, where the Sulphur is most prevalent, as in Oyl of Antimony: In all which there are real (although gradual) Colliquations of the Mineral Principles, with what alte∣rations they make upon other bodys, they are applicable to, and that as they are ex∣trinsic Agents, not only the Chymical Dispen∣satory's, but also our Halolog. or Discourse of Salts do abundantly illustrate. Hydroph. How do these extrinsic Agents you have mentioned, accord amongst them∣selves, and how thereby reconcilable to your Hypothesis? Pyroph. Because, as I said, Fire (viz. the vulgar) made from the fourth Complica∣tion of our Principles, was applicable to
other bodys (whose Principles otherwise lay dormant) as an extrinsic Agent: so if we take Fire in the largest sense, as extend∣ed through all the seven Complications of the Principles, whereby (according to our Hypothesis) it is concern'd in the Fabric of most (if not all) bodies; then we shall find that even the other three (viz.) Fer∣ments, Salts, and Solvents, are in one sense or other most-what reducible thereto. Thus Ferments are compriz'd chiefly in the second and third Complications of the Principles; and Solvents in as much as they depend (for the most part) upon the Colli∣quation of the Principles, do most-what result from the sixth. The greatest difficulty I find, is in Salts as Agents, and in petrific Concretes, viz. how Salts in their concretions, and Stones in their nativity, are comprisable within the sphere of our Principles, and reconci∣lable to our Hypothesis; concerning Salts, how they all in their several concretions comprehend a Sulphur, in one degree, mode, or other, lockt up in their Compage; And how a ten-fold complication of the Prin∣ciples of Salts are necessarily to be consider∣ed in order to all the various Concretions, they are in Nature or by Art (in imitation of Nature) reducible to, and concerning the
manifold Phaenomena thence solvable: For (for instance) one saline Liquor by the ad∣dition of another Salt or Body, doth as∣sume the form of an Oyl, Butter, Jelly, Clay, Osta, &c. is demonstrated by par∣ticular Examples and Illustrations: Also how Salts do preserve bodys they are apply'd to from putrefaction, by preventing the ac∣cess of somewhat in the Air, which is con∣cern'd in the setting those retrograde Springs in motion, I mean in putting the Principles into their reverse and analytical Fermentations, shew'd in the taking bodys in pieces by putrefaction: And lastly, how these Principles may be arrested from their Motion and suspended from their putrefa∣ctive Fermentations, by additions not only of Salts, Frost, Air, Fume of Brimstone, and additionals of other Condiments, but also by bare but artificial Extrusions of Air, concerning all which at large you may fur∣ther see in our Halolog. Chym. (almost fi∣nisht upon that Subject) when extant: and as to the Nativity of petrific bodys, from their intimate and essential causes, both as relating to the Macro, as well as to the Micro-cosme, you may consult, when ex∣tant, our Lithologia Physica, being a Discourse of Petrification. Hydroph. Wherein (pray Pyroph.) do
your Principles differ from the Corpuscula∣rian? For you seem in some things to strike in with their Hypothesis. Pyroph. If you will observe (Hydroph.) you will find, as in many things it accords, so it differs much; for theirs supposeth in the main matter mov'd, which also includes in it the figure, shape, and size of the parts moved, reducing them into certain minute figur'd parts, irreducible into less, which convening in such and such numbers, with others of different figure, combine toge∣ther under the mask of some other figure than before, and so constitute this or the other body, shap'd according to the tex∣ture of those parts so collected and united together; whereas ours, although it in∣clude much of this Doctrine, especially that of matter mov'd, and under the considera∣tion of variety of figure, shape, and size of the constituent parts: yet herein it dif∣fereth, first that it doth not consider the parts as reduc'd or reducible into indivi∣sible, and yet figur'd points; But supposeth all the however minute parts of matter which do accost our senses, or make any al∣terations in our Juyces (by which we usu∣ally make an estimate of their Figures or take their Dimensions) to be yet divisible into less parts, whose figure as not necessa∣ry
to the constituting, so not needful to be reckon'd upon in our Calculation of the Na∣tivity of Bodys. And Secondly: We suppose the natural or physical division of parts, to transcend by many degrees that of Mechanism how acute∣ly and artificially soever perform'd: which physical sub-division we (in our Discourse of Fermentation, and in our Tentamen Phy∣siolog.) ascribe wholly to the Energie of Ferments, viz. to the subtile Collisions of our Principles mutually acting, which is able to knock off every Angle, to perforate every Solid, and to split in pieces every Globula of Matter, that upon such Figures fall under our cognizance. Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) first, Why are your Principles call'd Mechanical? Secondly, Why do not your Principles, as reducible at the long run into Water, forfeit their Na∣tures or Essences of Principles? Pyroph. I answer (Hydroph.) as to the first, they are call'd Mechanical, because material; and next, because being as such and set into their peculiar motions are suffi∣cient for the physical Mechanism and stru∣cture of all bodys, or such as Nature im∣ploys (as we suppose) in the Mechanism of all specific Concretes throughout its three∣fold Kingdom: so that to the building of
all bodys from intrinsic Agents, these are (according to our Hypothesis) necessarily and essentially requisite. And as to the second, I answer (Hydroph.) that although these Principles be the proxi∣mate Agents, and primarily to be conside∣red in order to the hewing forth of Bodys from their material original water, deter∣mining water into this or the other speci∣fical Concrete: yet we do not esteem of these active Principles to be otherwise than material, only spiritualiz'd or subtiliz'd Matter, for Spirit, in our Physical sense, we only look upon as subtiliz'd matter: and therefore as such at the long winding off, are reducible into water, or convene in such a fluid texture of parts ascribable to wa∣ter. SECT. IX. Hydroph. BUt do not the Atomical Phi∣losophers and you agree in the main, in the Principles and general af∣fections of bodys afore-named? Pyroph. Yes, But besides what I have al∣ready said wherein ours chiefly differ from theirs, we must also crave leave to tell you
(Hydroph.) that we dissent from them in those extravagancies, which renders it just∣ly to be reputed heathenish or vain Philoso∣phy, especially as they sprang from the old Fountain, witness the roving fancies of the first starters of the Corpuscularian Doctrine; I mean of Epicurus, Democritus, Leucippus, Lucretius and the rest of that Classis; whose opinion was, that matter and motion was Eternal; and that innumerable worlds were generated by the fortuitous Coalition of Atoms, as Magnenus tells us out of Diogenes Laert. Seneca, &c. Witness, what Claudi∣anus Pau. elegantly describes in these lines, speaking of Democritus, Ille ferox, uno{que} tegi haud passus Olympo Immensum per inane volat, finem{que} perosus, Parturit innumeros angusto pectore mundos. So that according to their opinion, the World & all the mixt Bodies therein were huddled together by the Justlings, Counter Scuffles, and Duellings of Atoms, which by acciden∣tal jumpings into such and such postures and figures, produc'd such and such figura∣tive sensible Bodies as make up the whole pompage thereof: whence Virgil in his Ec∣logues gives a hint of that Doctrine.
Nam{que} canebat uti magnum per inane coacla Semina terrarum, animae{que} maris{que} fuissent, Et liquidi simul ignis, ut his exordia primis Omnia, & ipse tener mundi concreverit orbis. For they suppose matter out of which the World is made Eternal, and by their inane an infinite space, wherein infinite small Par∣ticles or Atoms of that matter are contained, which Atoms (we might think) being game∣some and frolick, might make infinite con∣gresses, running a tilt upon each other, and that without any designation or appoint∣ment of any Divine, Supreme, intelligent power, twist upon each other, and by a blind (I know not what) impetus, by chance strike the figure of so many Worlds and a∣mongst the rest, form the beautiful regular compage of that World we see: and that the Earth, while in its vigour and fertility, brought forth Men and other Animals, as now it doth Plants: So that they suppose the generation of mixt Bodies, to be nothing else, but a congregation, and corruption to be a segregation of Atoms; and all this sine numine divine, without any Divine Fiat, and therefore may well be called heathenish or vain Philosophy.
Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) is not that Philosophy or knowledg of natural things the best, whose Principles doth best agree with and come nearest to the Mosaic and consequently Christian Philosophy? Pyroph. Yes (Hydroph.) without doubt. Hydroph. Well then surely ours, I mean the Aristotelic Doctrine of natural Bodies must be the best: for we own a Divine pow∣er, that has not only created, but by the same upholds all things in the World. Pyroph. So far (Hydroph.) is very well, and that which every solid Hypothesis should sup∣pose: But to lay such a foundation of fruit∣ful Principles, as to make the Doctrine of natural Bodies the most intelligible, and thereby to solve the various Phaenomena most demonstrably, is the main matter. Hydroph. Why? is not our Doctrine of the four Elements, Principles large enough, to erect a true Hypothesis thereby of natural Bodies? Are not all mixts produc'd there∣from and ultimately resolv'd thereinto? Pyroph. To which I answer, that the four Elements as they are by Aristotle and his Commentators laid down, as the materia proxima of all Bodies, are both too strait and narrow to raise up a Structure of Bodies therefrom: as also too many to enter the composition of natural Concretes.
Hydroph. Why? How are they too strait? Are not all Bodies made up with Fire and Air, Water and Earth? Are not these (Pyroph) the beginnings of all Bo∣dies? Pyroph. These four Elements (Hydroph) are too strait, because all natural Bodies in their genuine Analysis are not resoluble thereinto: and such are demonstrably Prin∣ciples or Elements into which mixts are ultimately reducible. Hydroph. Are not our Quaternary of Ele∣ments such? In as much as they are (accord∣ing to our Hypothesis) simple Homogenial Bodies, from which all Concretes are prima∣rily compounded, and into which they are ultimately resolv'd; which for instance en∣ter the composition of the Body of Man, as well as other mixts: For we read Gen. 3. That upon the Curse, Man was to return to the ground out of which he was taken: So that Earth must be one main ingredient of the Body of Man; which Earth unless it be bound up with a Watery moisture, as with Glew, would fall from together; and there∣fore must needs suppose Water another Ele∣ment in the Fabrick of the humane Body; So that there is Earth and Water, and be∣cause as we suppose all Generation is made up of contraries, therefore Air and Fire as
contraries to Earth and Water must also be of necessity there: That the immoderate driness and coldness of Earth and Water may be temper'd with the moisture and heat of Air and Fire; and so all be brought to a kind of equality. Besides, Ex iis constamus ex quibus nutrimur, but we are nourished by the four Elements and Bodies thence made, Ergo. Pyroph. Here indeed you seem to come pretty close to the point Hydroph. by an ex∣perimental Induction (as you suppose) of the humane Body, in the Fabrick whereof you conjecture the four Elements to become the principia materiata, and that not only of man's but also of all other mixt Bodies in the World, and this you do, by first taking in the Element of Earth, as the Basis of the rest, and that you ground from Adam's re∣turn to Earth from whence he was taken; which was part of the sentence God pro∣nounc'd against Man for his disobedience at the fall: I must tell you (Hydroph.) that this is no Argument for Earth as a simple Homo∣genial Element to enter the composition of the Body of Man: for that sentence, Thou shalt return to the ground, for out of it wast thou taken: For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return, seems to me to intimate no more than thus (viz.) that seeing Man by
his transgression had forfeited his right to an Eternal and Immutable Inheritance (which upon his obedience had then been confirm'd upon him) he had now upon his disobedi∣ence a Sentence of the Mortality of Body pass'd upon him; and that after the revolu∣tion of some years, his Body should undergo the same vicissitude and Law of Mutability with other temporary transient mixt Bodies in the World: Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shalt return, intimates a Reduction of the Body into its primitive minute parts whether in a liquid or dry form, whether reduc'd into a Juice or Leffas of the Earth by the fracedo of the Grave, or that Juice fur∣ther coagulated into some Species of Earth: For the word in the Original is not  by which Earth is signified as being the Sub∣lunary part of the World distinguished from the Heavens or Coelestial Bodies, but is  which intimates a red elixerated Earth, where an efflorescence of the Pansper∣mion of the Macrocosme becomes concentred; in as much as  which takes its original from  is the Microcosme or little World, which is the Epitome of the great World. And although (Hydroph.) we should admit Earth as a constituent Principle or Ele∣ment of Bodies, which yet in our Hydrologia Chymic. by several Mechanical Experiments
have demonstrated Water (not Earth) to be the material Principle of all Concrete Bodies) and so to take in Water and Earth as two Elements of Bodies, I say notwith∣standing that Adoption of Earth to be an Element, we see no reason for a necessity of taking in the other two of Air and Fire as Principles of Bodies: which you ground upon this Supposition that all Generation is made up of contraries, (which yet in some sense is true, as elsewhere in our Doctrine of Fermentation we shew) and therefore ha∣ving Earth and Water granted as two Ele∣ments, you conclude a necessity of Air and Fire to temper the other, and bring them into an equality by their contrary qualities. For if we can, Hydroph. (as we may else∣where) solve those primary qualities of heat and cold, dryness and moisture, without ha∣ving recourse to their subjects of inhesion, as the Elements are reputed to be: then those Elements (at least as to the quaternary of them) must of necessity cease to be primary constituent Principles of Bodies, seeing the Elements in order to the Fabric thereof are to do it by their supposed  or combi∣nation of qualities. And altho that of Aristotle be true (viz.) Ex iis constamus ex quibus nutrimur, yet the Assumption or minor which commonly is an∣nexed
annexed thereto (viz.) but we are nourished by the four Elements, and their Concrete Bo∣dies, is as false: which although they fur∣ther endeavour to prove by the instance of Plants, of which we feed, these are (they say) nourished by Earth and Water, are cherished by Heat, which proceeds from Fire, and are preserv'd by Air, and therefore we feed∣ing upon them, feed upon the four Elements, of which they are made. Whereas (Hydroph.) we elsewhere ac∣quaint you, how Plants have not their ori∣ginal from the Quaternary of Elements, but from Seeds and specifical Ferments, which determine the motion of matter, into such variety of shapes, which we usually see them distinguished into, and that chiefly upon mat∣ter, whose parts are so wrought as to become fluid, I mean Water, which is the proxi∣mate material Subject of most (if not all) Concretes, whether in their Genesis or Me∣tastasis. Hydroph. But I will give you another in∣stance, how we understand the four Ele∣ments, to be the Principles of mixt Bodies, and that is by the destruction or reduction of things into those Principles from whence they take their Original; as suppose in burning a piece of Wood; you may (Pyroph.) view a separation of the four Elements, for
the fumes go into Air, the expressed moi∣sture of the Wood is of the nature of Wa∣ter, the Ashes is of the nature of Earth: and lastly the Fire or Flame is obvious e∣nough to the Eye. Pyroph. This experiment of the burning of Wood, evinceth nothing, Hydroph. of the pre-existency of the Quaternary of Elements, by its reduction into Fume, Moisture, Ashes and Flame: For that by which (according to the Peripatetie Doctrine) you would have Air to be demonstrated to be a consti∣tutive Principle of Wood, is the fume: which if so, then must this Fume be like the Air a simple Homogenial Body, which yet how simple so ever you may repute, we know Hydroph. how to separate by the Py∣rotechnic Art, five or six several distinguish∣able things: as if done in close Vessels, a four Spirit; if openly, it separates a soot to the sides of the Chimney, as of a great recei∣ver: from which we have separated a Phlegm, Spirit, Volatile-Salt, Oyl, and Caput Mort. enough to make it justly be de∣nied the being a simple Elementary Princi∣ple: and therefore some do two things at once, (viz.) both char their Wood, and at the same condense the Fumes in large re∣ceivers or pipes, whereby they get the four Spirit: For the charing of the Wood, is no∣thing.
but a fixation of the Sulphur, with the Salt: which Sulphur before would flame forth, but now being smothered, it only glows in the Coal. So that that whereby you would demon∣strate a reduction of Wood into the Element of Air, by the Fumes thereof, you see (Hydro.) how we find it to be a mixt Body it self, con∣sisting of Heterogeneous parts, many of which are further reducible into more primary Principles; yea even the very acid Spirit, made by distillation of Woods, as of Guaia∣cum, Box, &c. Which one would deem (if any) to be a simple Liquor, is yet by additi∣on of Alkalizate Bodies, such as are Coral, Crabs-Eyes, Pearl, fixt Salts of Herbs, &c. is reducible into a piercing Liquor quite of another sort than before, which I have also observ'd from the acid Spirit of Verdigrease dinted or mortified by a fixt Alcali, to have by further distillation, been reducible into a quick penetrating Spirit, not acid at all, but very much emulating the Spirit of crude Tartar; which will not (as Acids usually do) change the Syrup of Violets into a red Co∣lour; And as to what you say (Hydroph.) that the expressed moisture in burning the Wood, is of the nature of Water: this very thing I say has an Empyreumatic odour, which is
further reducible, and therefore forfeits its badge of a primary or Elementary Princi∣ple: As for the remaining Ashes, which you suppose to be of the nature of Earth, you are mistaken, for they are a great part of them separable in the form of a fixt Salt, which is quite another thing than that you call Earth. And further, that this very Earth separa∣ble after the Calcination of the Vegetable and Elixiviation of the Salt, is not Elementary, will be evident from the following experi∣mental Observation: for from about 200 weight of Oak-wood, first char'd, and then burnt to Ashes, I had but 3 pound of Ashes, which by Lixiviating gave me 5 ounces of fixt Salt and about 2 pound 8 ounces of insipid Earth: which very Earth I say was no more to be accounted an Elementary Principle of the aforesaid Wood, than fixt Salt thence produc'd by Calcination, because the like quantity of Wood being otherwise handled by Fire (besides what different products would result from other Agents) viz. by a naked firing (without any previous charing) gives a larger proportion by much of fixt Salt, than the former; which very fixt Salt, may also by frequent Calcination, Solution, Filtra∣tion, Evaporation or Distillation, may I say, be all converted into an Earth (the same the
Wood char'd was reducible to) and Phlegm: & no Philosopher ever admitted fixt Alcalies (such as are produc'd by Fire from a Plant) amongst Elementary Principles, or if any did, yet was easily refutable by the afore∣said experiment: so that its hence clear (be∣yond Ambiguity) that Earth in the composi∣tion of Bodies is not an Element, but a Product of the Fire, as we further illu∣strate by other parallel experiments in our Tentamen Physiologic. And lastly, that the flaming of the Wood should indicate an Elementary Fire, is somewhat strange: For this Fire in the Wood (which we reckon to be made by our fourth Complication of the Principles as aforesaid,) consumes, or rather redu∣ceth it into more simple Bodies; which yet are most what new Products of the Fire, and other twistings of the same Principles: whereas an Elementary Prin∣ciple, should rather constitute, than de∣stroy Bodies: So that none of those are at all demonstrative of the Quaternary of Elements.
SECT. X. Hydroph. WEll (Pyroph.) but we do not suppose that all mixts are immediately reducible into the four Elements; but many bodys first change into other forms, by a kind of vicissitude, and yet at the last are resolvable into the four Elements, of which they consist: Thus Herbs, and other Food, we take for our nourishment, undergo various changes, in our Bodys, into Chyle, Blood, Flesh, Bones, &c. and after Excretion, is converted into a Stercus, which at length is resolv'd into Earth. Pyroph. It's true, (Hydroph.) let us ima∣gin what Hypothesis we please, yet are not concrete bodys always immediately redu∣cible into their first constituent Principles, but sometimes undergo a transposition of parts, whereby they acquire a new form, and so a second, third, and so on in a round of vicissitudes, before there happen a total Analysis into its primitive Principles or through-resolution of a Concrete into its Minima. But that this ultimate reduction of Con∣cretes, should always at the long run, prove
the four Elements, is not me-thinks (Hy∣droph.) demonstrable by your propounded instance of Herbs, or other Aliment, taken into our bodys, for nourishment: For that they admit of various Mutations, according to the different digestions they pass through, is that we cannot deny; but that these should be intermediate changes of our Food, before it be ultimately reduc'd, into the Quaternary of Elements; is that we are not to let slip unexamined. And first we are to consider, that towards the making of changes amongst bodys, out of one form into another; where there is the same material Principles substituted, and only a Metastasis happens; there must, I say, of necessity concur the super-induction of new Ferments (or other sorts of extrin∣sic Agents, as aforesaid) which by mace∣rating, subjugating, and altering the parts, may raise up a new Structure of a different form, than was before, and yet that body no whit the nearer to a reduction into its Ele∣ments now than before. So that what changes, or alterations our Food undergoes in the several digestions of our bodys, are to be ascrib'd to no other than the different Ferments it passeth through; which altering the texture of the parts, subverts the first, and bringeth on a
new form; so from the form of Beef, Mut∣ton, Bread, Beer, &c. (though different amongst themselves) yet by the uniform operation of the Spirituous, elixerated Fer∣ment of the Blood, thither in its circula∣tion transmitted as aforesaid, become alte∣red, or transmuted into a similar Chyle, or Cremor, which being refin'd through the strait Colanders of the Venae lacteae, by which it is percolated from the dreggy Feces along the Duodenum, Colon, and Ilion, and fur∣ther purify'd in the Glandules, is sent up by the Thoracical Vessels, into the Jugulars, where it's let into the ascending Branch of the Vena Cava, becomes dasht with blood, and by coming to the Heart, where, by the Air in its circuit through the Lungs, it's volatiz'd, and assumes the form of vi∣tal blood; which being carried along the Aorta, and other thence branching Arte∣ries, sublimes or distils into pure volatile Spirits, for the supply of the genus Nervo∣sum; part of which mean while being car∣ried into the whole habit of the body, be∣comes coagulated in the fibrous parts, into Sinews, Flesh, Bones, &c. according as it is determin'd, and arrested by the parti∣cular assimilative Ferments of the several parts. Next to which (Hydroph.) we are to
consider, the humane as well as other mixt bodys, during the revolution of their spe∣cifical Ferments, are in a constant perspi∣rability; always (I mean during the season of the vigour of their genuine Ferments) a making up, and as often resolving, or ta∣king in pieces, (viz.) in a perpetual flux of constituent Elements; otherwise what means the continual supply we have from daily nourishment, by fresh Food? For if there were not a constant flux, and wasting by perspiration, we need not so constant a sup∣ply by Food. In as much as when we come to a full maturity of years, as to the Vegetation, or growth of our bodys; which is from 18 or 20 till towards 30 years (some sooner, others later) Then what ever of Food we take in (deducting what is separated, as Urin, Excrements, and the like) as much, I say, of real nourishment, as is by the dige∣stive Ferments daily made thereof, so much do we transpire, and loose: so that supposing by compute, that in most bodys, every day (I mean while in health, and Ferments strong) 7, 8, or 10 ounces of fresh blood may be produc'd: and yet notwithstanding sup∣pose most men to be weighed at 24, 26, or at furthest 30 years of age (excepting some few that may by the more than ordinary
coagulation of that which should transpire, after those years, grow fat, and gross) and again at 40, 50, or 60 years, it will be found, that generally there is no increase of weight at all during that time; and yet, I say, so much blood is spent every day in nourishment, and so much of the ultimate assimilated aliment is daily transpired, and all this without any residence, or caput mort. of the blood, being constantly (whilst the Ferments, Spirits, and Organs are sound and regular) volatiz'd by a Ferment from the Air. And yet this Blood is made from various kinds of Flesh, Fowl, Fish, Bread, Drink, &c. all which lose their pristine form by the power of the specifical Ferments, through which they pass: so that if I should tell you (Hydroph.) that when we come to 20, or 30 years of age, and so on, we have not the same numerical bodys as we had in our in∣fancy; nay, perhaps not the same we had 5 year ago, you will think it a Paradox (if not Heterodox) and yet if fairly scan'd, what, I say, will not be found impro∣bable. For if we duely consider, how that which yesterday appear'd in the form of part of a Sheep, Calf, Ox, Deer, Pidgeon, Goose, Turkey, Corn, Herbs, Beer, &c. shall to
day be transmuted into Chyle, Blood, Flesh, Bones, &c. of a humane Body; yea, this to transpire within a few days, and assume other forms, and all this, by the power of Ferments, which are as the noble Helmont saith, the parents of Transmutation. If the nutritive parts of our body was not in a constant flux, and always winding off, we should in time become Anakites, grow to be mighty Gyants: But from the vigour of the Ferments of the body, toge∣ther with a perspirability communicated from the Air, the succulent, yea the so∣lid parts themselves, are always upon the wing. Thus as new parts are daily by a rota∣tion of Ferments added, so the old as con∣stantly march off, or wear away: or rather as the former texture of parts by a perspira∣bility wind off, so new parts by fresh sup∣ply of Food (passing the circle of Ferments) are woven on: to confirm which, viz. that the Ferments wind off the old, and wind on the new coming parts of added Nutriment; appears by this Observation, that old Cows or Oxen, after they have done their ex∣pected service, being put to feed at fresh Grass, do by the power of the aforesaid Ferments, lay on new flesh, which eats as tenderly, as if the Goods had been kill'd
young: so that that which solely determines matter, in this grand circulation of bodys, out of one shape into another, are the se∣minal and specifical Ferments, and during the vigour of these the form of the body is kept intire in its specifical difference from other concrete bodys. Wherefore the same specifical Body, after the revolution of some years, is no more the same numerical Body, than the Ship which went from Athens, and by frequent repairs return'd at last without one foot of old Timber, that it was at first built with, may be said to be the same. Hydroph. But if so (Pyroph.) why do not we live always? Seeing as you say our Bo∣dies are in a constant fluor, and as the old parts wear off, new ones come on; what should hinder, but they should always do so, and we live longer than Mathusalem? Pyroph. To which I return (Hydroph.) that although our Bodies consist in a constant flux of Parts; and that nutrition is an apposition of new, in the place of the old, or transpi∣ring Particles; yet as the form of this circu∣lating matter is determin'd by the seminal, and therefore specifical Ferments; so the decaying of our Bodies, both by sickness and old Age, depend Essentially upon the intense∣ness and remisness of the vigour of those
Ferments: so that when these grow languid by diseases, the Body wasts by a Marasmus; or when they at the long run of old Age, be∣come infeebled, and draw towards their li∣mit, according to the great and irrevocable decree of the Almighty, Statutum est omnibus semel mori; then do they come to their peri∣od, as to their Progressive motion, (I mean in order to nourishment, and support of the Body thereby) and leaves the Body to be ta∣ken in pieces, either by a Putredinous Fer∣ment, promoted by access of Air; or by the Fracedinous odour of the Grave: whereby it's either transmitted into other Animals, (by the power of their Ferments) or reduced into its primitive Juice, or Leffas of the Earth; For the strength, floridness, activity, and that which is commonly called the con∣stitution of the Body, depends mostwhat if not solely upon the vigour of the Fer∣ments, as you may see further in our Hydrolo∣gia Chymica, and Zymologia Physica. Hydroph. Well (Pyroph.) I have this yet to add against what you say, and that is to query; why we should be troubled at any time with those sorts of diseases, we call Chronical? For it should seem to me (if what you say concerning our bodies being in a per∣petual flux of parts be true) that few disea∣ses would be of any continuance, so as to ac∣quire
the name of Chronical, because as the Body, so they also would wear off in time. Pyroph. To which I answer, (Hydroph.) that as the Ferments are the primary active and transmutative Principles, to which the most incident Phaenomena of diseases are chiefly reducible: so what alterations are made in the Body, by the Ataxy of Diseases are mostwhat referrable thereto: so that Dis∣eases happen not to the Body, as it falls un∣der our consideration, in the notion of a constant flux, and vicissitude of parts; but as it is compos'd of a round of Ferments, whose exorbitances, prevarications, and fre∣quent errours, become Essential to the be∣getting Diseases: And therefore although the Body as to its material constitutive Prin∣ciples, may admit of a constant alteration of parts in an Agil fluor, yet doth it not follow that Diseases are also as constantly worn off; because they belong to the Body as conside∣red under its Classis of Ferments: so that as the Ferments in their vigour are the Au∣thors of the Eutaxy or due temperament of humors, and consequently of Health; in like manner their spurious exorbitances, are the essential causes of those disorders, and dis∣composures in the Body we call Diseases.
SECT. XI. Hydroph. BUt pray (Pyroph.) why did you in your discourse about the four Elements, being our suppos'd Ori∣ginal of all concrete Bodies, say, that they were too many to enter the composition of natural Bodies? Pyroph. Because (Hydroph.) some of them, as for instance, the Air and Fire (the latter of which, as considered in its suppos'd Ele∣mentary Sphere sub concavo lunae, or as culina∣ry) concur not as constitutive Principles, to the making up of mixt Bodies. Hydroph. Why is not Air in all, or most Bodies? Pyroph. Yes, Hydroph. But not as a material Principle of Bodies, but with the Aether to fill up vacancies, and to do other Offices, in part below, but more fully illustrated in our Tentamen Physiologic. Hydroph. Can either Animals live, or Vegetables grow without Air? Must it not therefore be an Essential Constitutive Ele∣ment of Bodies? Pyroph. I grant (Hydroph.) that neither Animals can live, nor Vegetables grow, without the confluence of Air, impregnate
with its Nitro-Hermetick Salt: and yet see no necessity, why it should thence follow, that Air should be an ingressive Principle of Bodies: For it may help to promote the vi∣gour of the Ferments in Animals, by helping to Volatize the succulent parts, and make the blood circulate the better without Stagnati∣on or spurious Coagulations in the Vessels; and yet may not at all be an Elemental Principle of Bodies. Also it may concur to the promoting Ve∣getation of Plants, partly by impregnating the Nursery of Vegetables, the Earth, with a Volatile nitrous Salt, and partly (with its Aether) by setting the seminal Principles of Plants at work: for Earth (as we further enlarge in the Appendix to our Hydrologia Chymica) is not fertilized, nor brings forth Plants, without a concurrence of the fore∣said Salt, nor are the seminal Ferments of Vegetables awakened, without the benevo∣lence of the Air and its congeneal Aether, saturated therewith, which constantly floats in the Air, as in its proper Sea. Hydroph. But is not Air one parcel of which the Universe is made? Pyroph. Yes. Hydroph. And is not that matter a part of that whereof Concretes are made? Pyroph. No, For although it be matter,
yet is it such a Texture thereof, as is only pliable, but not convertible into other Bo∣dies, that is, never loseth the form of Air: for notwithstanding its Universal concur∣rence in the constitution of most Bodies as aforesaid, yet doth it never quit its genuine form, as we further shew in our Tentamen Physiologic. Hydroph. But we define Air to be an Ele∣ment moderately hot and most moist, filling every place that is not already repleat with another Body. Pyroph. It is (Hydroph.) if I mistake not, neither hot nor moist of it self, and there∣fore can be no Element: for that which ac∣cording to the Peripatetick Sense, makes it an Element, is the supposed combination of the qualities of Heat, and Moisture: by which it should seem, that moisture accord∣ing to your Philosophy, was the Essential quality of Air, and by which Moisture, with a moderate heat, it should enter the compo∣sition of Bodies: Now if I make it good, that there is no moisture, but what is Essen∣tial to Water; then will your Element of Air cease to be such. You must know there∣fore (Hydroph.) that wherever you can find moisture, the Pyrotechnick Art will demon∣strate it to be actually Water, and that ei∣ther in a fluid Texture of parts, whereby it
appears even to the Sense, to be Water, or at least in an extended form, floating vapore tenus in the tenuious and easily recessible Bo∣dy of Air. Whence it's evident, moisture is no qua∣lity at all; from the aforesaid reason of its being really and essentially Water, either in a fluid or extended form; as you may fur∣ther see in our Hydrologia Chymica. So that moisture is only and primarily competible to the thin woven Texture of the parts of Wa∣ter circulating in the Air, and to the Air but secundary, as the Vehicle of the extended Body of Water. Hydroph. But is not the moisture which we see wets stone-walls, before Rain falls, that which properly belongs to the Air, yea, and the very Air transmuted into Water? Pyroph. I answer, no, for that is nothing but simple rarified Water, or the Body of Water extended in the perforations of the Air, which while interspers'd in the tenui∣ous and pliable Body thereof, by the smal∣ness of its rarified parts, escapes our Sense, and so remains till the parts thereof come nearer together, which gliding along the surface of Stones in Buildings (while the lower Region of the Air is ponderous there∣with) becomes gathered into a visible Body of moisture or Water, and therefore is not
Air transmuted into Water, as you may see more at large in our Hydrologia Chy∣mica. Hydroph. But pray (Pyroph.) seeing you neither admit of Air as the subjectum inhaesi∣onis of moisture, nor moisture to be a prima∣ry or essential quality of Air, and conse∣quently deny Air to be an Element of Bodies, and that there is no transmutability of Air into Water: I say pray what do you suppose Air to be? Pyroph. I look upon Air (Hydroph.) to be such a parcel of matter, whose parts consist in a tenuious, diaphanous, pliable and fluid Texture, of easie recess, susceptible of the impressions of the minutest of Bodies, and capable of permitting rarified Waters, Va∣pours and all sorts of Apporrhoea from the ter∣raqueous. Globe to pass and repass: of all which, and many other minute Bodies that fall not under the perception of our senses, it is the proper Vehicle, also subservient to the motion of all Bodies that tack to and fro within its Orb, is the Vehicle of Species, the medium of all influences and transactions betwixt the Coelestial and Terrestrial Bodies: And as Trismegistus in Asclepio, saith, Aer est organum vel machina omnium, per quam om∣nia fiunt, not as an Element, but as a Machine for the motion of all Bodies.
Its parts I say are tenuious, that it may the better give way to the motion of Bodies, within its orbit; of easie recess, that it may the better admit of other rarified Bodies, which are in a continual circulation, and those perforations to be of no prefixt fi∣gure, but either round, or angular, accord∣ing to the pressure of its parts by the motion of other Bodies; Diaphanous, that it may the better transmit the Rays of lu∣minous Bodies; pliable, I said, that it may be the more subservient to the justlings of Bo∣dies, and may the better recede upon the access of other moveables; and lastly, fluid, that it may thereby prevent any large va∣cuum, and may the better press into the Po∣rosities of Bodies; Thus a stone being cast at a distance, which by the impulse it has got, draws, suppose, a straigt line in the Air, force∣ing some parts of the Air, and those press upon the next adjacent, and those the next, till by a circulating motion they fall con∣stantly into the rear of the deserted space, made by the motion of the stone, and so immediately supplies the vacancy thereof, and thereby contributes to the perpetuating the first impulse from a hand, Sling, or Engine; For if the Air did not constantly succeed by a circular motion, close in the rear of the moveable, the impulse would immediately
flag, and the motion of the Body cease. And although Democritus his two grand ingredients of the world were Atoms, and that which he calls vacuum or inane, which was nothing else but what we in the verge of our Atmosphere call Air, and above is Aether; yet certainly, although the parts of Air, are so tenuious, and diaphanous, as never to be∣come visible to our eyes, yet I say, may no less be reputed matter, (in how different a Texture soever) than that which enters the composition of natural Bodies, as genuine Elements thereof. Hydroph. These are general considerations of Air, as it falls in a large sense under our apprehension: But pray (Pyroph.) how do you apprehend of it in a more strict and par∣ticular sense, in order to the intimate con∣cerns of Animals and Vegetables, which seem to have some near dependance thereon, both as to their Generation, Conservation in their Species, and Metastasis too. Pyroph. Not so general considerations (Hydroph.) as you may perhaps take them to be, but may many of them very well serve to some Phaenomena of both Animals, Vegeta∣bles and other Bodies, as they fall under a Philosophick inquiry; for that it should by its tenuious, plyable, fluid Texture, be sub∣servient to the motion of Bodies, is thereby no
less serviceable, as for the general so the par∣ticular concerns of Animals and Vegetables, both by concurring to the Motion, Sensation, Secretion, and Perspiration of Animals; as also by promoting the motion and Vegetation of Vegetables; and that too as it is perfora∣ble and diaphanous admitting both of lumi∣nous as well as other Bodies which circulate in its Orb, for the helping forward Anima∣tion, and Vegetation, and all this by invigora∣ting the Essential Ferments of both, which its congenial associate the Volatile nitrous Salt, and Aetherial matter hid therein. Without which, the functions of Vitali∣ty could not be perform'd, for without those jointly concurring, neither would the Fer∣ments be actuated, the parts perspirable the Taper of Life set a flaming, nor in fine the Body moveable without the help of that Organum, as Trismegistus calls it: which is further evident by what improvements, the great Naturalist, Esq; Boyle, hath made in the lately invented Pneumatick Engine, into which if Animals be put, and the Air pumpt forth, they fall into Palpitations and in a ve∣ry little time, for want of the help of this Essential Organum, the Ferments are damp'd, the Spirits run counter, flag, and the Ta∣per of Life is quickly extinct, so that they speedily die of Spasms and Convulsions.
And as the Air with its Volatile Salt, is an Essential Machine (not as an Element) neces∣sary to promote (if not also to excite) the Functions of Vitality in Animals; so it is no less effectual, in the invigorating the semi∣nal Ferments of Vegetables: For neither are these brought on to maturity, nor do they grow without the concurrence thereof; Inasmuch as the superficies of the Earth, which is the Matrix or Nursery of Vegetable Seeds, is porous and spongy, whereby the Air has access to Seeds, even in their first open∣ings, and beginnings to motion; concurring to the first workings, of the seminal Prin∣ciples, by putting the Springs & Ferments in∣to Action; and when they by the Vegetative Collision of their Principles put forth, or spring out of the Earth, still require the assisting influence of this fluid Aereal matter, of which if they be denied, their Ferments cease to act, and the Body withers. And as to what you ask (Hydrop.) how the Air is concern'd in the Metastasis of Bo∣dies, out of one shape into another; I answer, that new Ferments are super-induc'd upon Bodies, for the mutation thereof, by the mediation of Air, whereby the seminal Principles, which by their intestine and Pro∣gressive Collisions have been the Mechanical Agents in the Production and Genesis of Bo∣dies,
do now, by the superinduction of new Ferments, from the Air, fall into other sorts (I mean Retrogressive) Collisions, thereby takes the same Body (they built before) now in pieces by a putredinous Ferment; For if some Bodies can but be secur'd from the Air (or from what is contain'd in the Air) before a putrid Ferment be intro∣duc'd, (that is, before the Principles be put into their reverse motion,) they may be pre∣serv'd intire in their form: the truth of which, may be confirm'd by several Mechani∣cal instances: For besides the Additaments of Salts, Sugars, and Vinegars, wherewith many sorts of things, as food and all Con∣fections may be preserv'd a considerable time for use: and besides the Occlusions of the Pores of some Bodies, especially Pullen and the like, killed and hung up in the Fea∣thers, whereby those Bodies may be kept intire from putrefaction by the Frost Air, as they preserve their kill'd Pullen for several Months sweet and good, in New-England; I say, besides all these, I know a peculiar Artifice of preserving Aprecocks, Damsens, Gooseberries, Cherries, &c. without the ad∣dition of any thing, save a skilful contri∣vance of excluding the Air: of which more in our Zymolog. Physic. and Tentamen Physiologic. Thus also Quinces by taking forth the Core
which boyl'd with some other Quinces to a Mucilage, with which they are to be fill'd, and put into a close Vessel, fill'd round with the same Mucilage, will preserve them intire in their form for a whole year; so flesh kept in a constant current of Water, or in Spirit of Wine, will be preserv'd a long time in its intire form, as sometimes a Puppy has been kept intire, and Embrio's are preserved from any putrid Ferment in Spirit of Wine. Also Beef season'd and well bak'd, and put in a Cask fill'd with despum'd Butter, has thereby been kept good in long Voyages: Thus by imbalming, Fumes, and Searcloths, Cadaverous Bodies are kept a great while from putrefaction: also by a constant heat the same Bodies may be Mummiz'd, witness the Bodies both of Men and Beasts in sandy Deserts (as those of Arabia) being covered over with Sands by whirl-winds or Hurri∣canes, are by the heat of the Sun (constant∣ly beating upon them) and by being sepa∣rated from the Air, turn'd into Mummy, found unbar'd by other contrary Winds. So that you see hence (Hydroph.) how Bodies are prevented of their otherwise sud∣den Metastasis into other shapes, either by additional Saline or other sorts of Condiments Liquors, Steams, &c. or other more solitary Exclusions of Air; all which do anticipate
the sudden Analysis of Bodies, (which fre∣quently happen from new putredinous Fer∣ments) by arresting and suspending the Prin∣ciples of Bodies in their Fermentative Colli∣sions: wherefore you see that the Air is not only of general but particular concern, as in the production and conservation of Ani∣mals, and Vegetables, so also in the produ∣ction or putredinous Analysis of them into other forms. Besides all which (Hydroph.) we are to consider the Air as the common Vehicle of Heat, Cold, and Moisture, not as Quali∣ties which are Essential to Air, as their sub∣jectum inhaesionis, but as actual Bodies, how minute soever, are capable enough to smite our subtile Organs, and affect our Senses, set on work by Winds from different quar∣ters, which are the Clavigeri tempestatum in order to the mutation of weather. For although these float in the Air and are not seen, (excepting that of Moisture ga∣thered together in a Mist, Fog, or Cloud) yet that they are perceptible enough to our Sen∣ses, is evident amongst the rest, from the minute Particles of Cold, which float in the Air from Northern Winds, and are of such Shape, or Size, as they not only pierce our Skins, and moderately shut the Pores there∣of, thereby invigorate the Ferments, whence
our Appetites to Food are stronger, and the Digestions the better perform'd in Frost than in warm Weather. And in colder Coun∣tries and Climates, than in hot, but in cold raw Weather the Pores (those small Portals of the Body) stand a char (if I may so say) whereby the alterations in the Air have the easier access into our Juices, to procure the like in them; whence we observe, in such Weather people generally take more cold, and are more prone to Diseases, as well Acute as Chronical, than at other Seasons. Which Frost Air, if it be very sharp, con∣geals the fluid humours of our Bodies, force∣ing the Spirits to a retreat unless oppos'd by a warmth from exercise or Spirits of good Liquor, yea the same cold Particles meeting with Water, doth so fill the Pores thereof, that from a fluid, they (by their interpositi∣on) make it become for a time a kind of so∣lid Body: which when the winds change, and are carried in different Percledi of the Air, as breathing, suppose from the South, or West, South-East, or South-West points, the Particles of Heat and Moisture muster in the Air, and mortifie, dint or resolve the cold Particles. For it's very probable that the congealing of Water into Ice by Cold, is nothing else but the congelation of the Atoms (which in
one Sense we admit) of Cold, rivetting themselves fast in the Pores of the Body of Water, in as much as these floating in the Air, either brought to us by those Winds which blow over the Northern Frozen Seas, which in their resolution may extricate themselves from their former combinations, being carried by the fanning of the Wind from that quarter, or from what other cau∣ses soever, meeting with liquid Bodies, by their piercing nature insinuate themselves in∣to the Texture thereof, and as they weave themselves in, they put a stop to the motion or fluidity of those liquids, unless preserv'd by some active, nimble, spirituous parts, and from a fluid make them become (as we said) a sort of solid Bodies; which as they fill some Pores of Water, so they cause some o∣ther parts of Water to constringe or concen∣ter themselves; whence is one reason, why in Frosty Seasons, Rivers (that are other∣wise high by late falls of Rain) are upon Frosty Winds shrunk up, and Water in Ves∣sels expos'd to the Air, are sensibly contract∣ed or lessened. Wherefore all Bodies whose Texture con∣sists most what of liquid parts, if they con∣tain so many of those aforesaid nimble, spi∣rituous, fermentative Particles, by the briskness of whose motion, the liquids are kept fluid,
then are they secured (so long as kept either circulating in their own, or defended by close Vessels) from the injury of the cold, un∣dergo no coagulation therefrom, nor are altered thereby; Thus the Blood, and liquid Juices in the Body of Man or other Animals, as long as they are invigorated with Spiritu∣ous, Saline and Sulphureous parts, which keep them constantly in a circulating Motion, so long are safe from the injury of cold: so all Fermented Liquors, whether Wines, Sider, Perry, Ale, Beer, &c. while the Ferments are active, with Spirituous parts interwoven in the whole Texture thereof, and kept in close Vessels, so long are not apt to be sur∣priz'd by cold, or to be congeal'd thereby into Ice: unless through the excessiveness of Cold, and perhaps carelesness in stopping up Vessels, Wines or other Fermented Li∣quors become Frozen, as sometimes happens upon very long Voiages into cold Climates, witness that of Fishing for Whales, by some Hollanders in the Northern-Seas, their Wines (otherwise generous enough) were by extre∣mity of cold Frozen, the Hoops being taken off, and the VVines uncask'd, they were found congeal'd into Ice, and stood in the form of the Vessels they were put in: which Ice they perforated with Augers, and found about the Center of the Ice, a little Liquor
of an Amethyst Colour, which was the pure Balsamick Spirits of Wine concentred, and therefore incapable of being congeal'd by cold: all the rest of the Body of Ice, being dissolv'd by Heat, was an insipid Phlegm or mere VVater of VVine, into which if a little of the true Fiery Spirits was pour'd, made it like VVine, after which manner they drank it. And in our late intense Frost, December last, the Particles of Cold were so copious, and piercing, as it froze Beer and Ale in Cakes, Sherry Sack in Bottles, and a Lixi∣vium of Vegetable Salts I had by me; yea a pretty smart Spirit of Vitriol standing in a Bottle in a VVindow, was as far as I could discern totally Frozen up: and in York-shire in some places, it froze the moisture in peo∣ples Nostrils, into Icicles, that with their finger (as an Eye-witness told me) they pull'd out pieces of Ice. So all Volatile Spirits, whether Vinous, Ʋrinous, or Oleaginous are (being kept in close Vessels) capable of defending them∣selves from being congeal'd by cold. For neither Spirits of VVine, or Volatile Spirits of Blood, Ʋrin, Soot, Harts-horn, &c. nor distill'd (therefore call'd) Chymical-Oyls, as of Turpentine, Cinamon, Cloves, Rosemary, Sage, Wormwood, &c. are I say none of them
apt to be Frozen by Cold, but can defend themselves, by their nimble, active, spiritu∣ous parts, from the injury thereof: in like manner all Mineral acid Spirits, as of Vi∣triol (except, as aforesaid) Alom, Nitre, Salt, &c. can (if kept in close Vessels) pre∣serve themselves from damage by cold: so also Lixiviums made of the fixt Salts of Tar∣tar, or other Vegetables. But those Liquids, that are destitute of saline, sulphurous, or other fermenting Particles, are of themselves capable of ad∣mitting the ingress of cold Atoms, so as to suffer some Vacuolums to be fill'd, and other parts to be constring'd into a solid form of the congeal'd body of Ice, and all this by the medium of Air: which is the vehicle of these cold Atoms. SECT. XII. Hydroph. BUt we say (Pyroph.) that cold is an active Quality, which doth congregare homogenea & heterogenea, and as such doth condense & congeal Water into Ice. Pyroph. Those qualities (Hydroph.) toge∣ther with the quaternary of Elements, which you look upon as Principles of mixt bodies, and from whose combinations, you would solve the different apparences thereof, I have told you, and I think partly demon∣strated
as such, not to be in rerum na∣tura. Hydroph. But what different impressions (Pyroph.) are made in the Air from cold Particles, and from Ferments of a contrary disposition, and what alterations thence happen to Animal Juyces, and how per∣form'd? Pyroph. I answer, That as the Air by rea∣son of some congeneal Ferments (tacking to and fro therein) doth conspire not only to the awakening the Ferments of Animals and Vegetables, and to the keeping them a foot, and that both in order to building of bodies, as well as to the pulling them down: so doth the Air at other seasons contain other Particles of cold, which are able to suspend the motion and action of the for∣mer, that is, if very intense, are able to de∣stroy the Ferments of Men and other Ani∣mals, as is evident by the killing of many Men and Beasts in cold Countreys, as in Russia, Greenland, and Norway, the Frosts are sometimes so strong as that Men are some∣times brought to Inns or Markets frozen on Horse-back, are found rigid, and starv'd to death, sitting streight up like Statues; And in Vegetables it's very discernable to have them mortified by strong Frosts. And as the cold Particles arrest the vital
and vegetative Ferments of Animals and Vegetables, so it likewise suspends the pu∣trefactive Ferments in the resolution, or ta∣king bodies in pieces, locking up those re∣solving Ferments: hence the Carcases of any sort of Animals expos'd to the Air, having a putrefaction already begun, and thereby grown faetid, have, I say, upon strong Frosts, those putrid Ferments shut up, and send forth no foetor, or bad smell; and that by reason of the cold Atoms, which fix themselves in the Pores of such bodys, and thereby arrest the motion of the Principles: which cold Particles are no sooner extricated by change of weather, but the Ferments, I mean the putrefactive, are let loose again, and then goes on as strongly as ever. Yea, in thawing Winds, all putrefactive Ferments grow vigorous, and are carried in great and numerous swarms through the common Vehicle, the Air, which either smite our Nostrils very sensibly, or affect our Juyces indiscernably to the producing great alterations therein: How much the frost Particles penetrate any Fruits, so much do they when the Frost breaks, undergo a putrefaction, as is obvious in Apples, and other Fruits, which the more they are ex∣pos'd to frost Air, so much the sooner they rot, and that because the active Principles
are so far mortify'd (through the openness of their Pores) as to their natural and in∣testine Fermentation, and so easily (upon the unhinging and unrivetting the cold Atoms,) fall into regressive and putrefactive Fermen∣tation. Hydroph. Have you (Pyroph.) any arti∣ficial way of representing cold to us? Pyroph. Yes, how cold may be produc'd, we had an Experiment above 7 years ago, which was thus: Having mixed Sal Armoniac, and Saturn Ore upon a Marble, or in a Mortar, and put them into a subliming Urinal (for a peculiar purpose we then propos'd) to which adding Water, and shaking them together, while the solution was making produc'd an intense coldness to the hand holding the Glass, and washing the out-side of the Glass with water, found as it was pour'd on, immediately it became long fleaks of Ice, which as we took off and pour∣ed more water on, did the same again and again: the same will Sal Armon. dissolv'd per se in water do, also its caput mort. re∣maining after the sublimation thereof with Pot-ash or Salt of Tartar, dissolv'd in Wa∣ter. And to make two cold Liquors (cold to touch) to heat each other (to evince the reason of the contrary quality, viz. heat) we
have put Oyl of Vitriol to water, which be∣ing mixed by shaking, immediately con∣tracts a greater heat than can be suffered by the hand that holds the Glass; and from the same cause, one may easily cause Ice it self to cause heat to another cold Liquor, by proceeding, as before, with Ice put in Oyl of Vitriol, as the worthy Experimen∣tator, Mr. Boyle, tells us in his last Tract. Hydroph. How do you (Pyroph.) suppose the freezing of Water to be resolv'd, or thaw'd? what becomes of those Atoms of cold, when a Frost is over? and what fur∣ther Observations do you make of those Fer∣ments in the Air upon thawing seasons, and sometimes in other weather? Pyroph. To which I answer (Hydroph.) That as the Atoms of cold are brought to us through the Air by certain peculiar winds, which in their motion meeting with capa∣ble (viz. liquid watery) bodys, becomes coagulated therewith into that rigid body we call Ice; so there are other Atoms of heat which are brought at other seasons, through the same Vehicle of Air, by diffe∣rent (although to that purpose peculiar) winds, which in their motion, meeting with those of cold, either in the Air, or co∣agulated in watry bodies, resolve, mortifie (I mean alter their texture) and dint them
so, as either altering their texture, where∣by they for a while swell, and flow toge∣ther with the water (whence upon thaws, Rivers for a time grow bigger) till they can extricate themselves from the moist, and warm Particles, they are involv'd in; and by other winds are carryed into other places, to perform the same offices: or else do as some sorts of Salts do to others of a different texture, viz. one to mortifie (to use a Chymical term) dint, and change another, until there result a neutrum, or third thing different from either of the two. Besides which, we are to consider (Hy∣droph.) that these mutually acting and work∣ing upon each other, beget new shapes amongst themselves, and many times prove subtile penetrating Ferments, which being carryed in the belly of the wind, insinuate into fermentative Liquors, and set them freshly a working, which we see frequently happen in thawing winds, that both Ale and Beer often ferment anew, yea Wines too, especially about the time of Vintage, when those fermentative Particles are arrested, and determin'd by vinous Atoms, which at that season take wing, and float in the Air. The same also may cause strange, and dif∣ferent
fermentations in the blood, and other Juyces of our bodies, the efficient some∣times of Feavers, and other Endemical, yea Epidemical Diseases: and that these winds and changes of Air thereby have an odd influence upon the fluid Juyces of our bo∣dies, is apparent, in that vulgar, yet true Proverb, that some carry Almanacks in their bones, can discern the changes of weather before hand, which as we apprehend can be from no other cause, than that the mi∣nute Particles of heat, cold or moisture, or combinations thereof (carryed by different winds in the Vehicle of the Air, from whence all varieties of weather do cer∣tainly follow, which, I say, at first, or afore∣hand, mustring in an invisible manner in the Air) become Ferments, which rouse up old Aches, Pains, Asthma's, Heaviness, weakness of the Joynts, and other Symp∣toms vulgarly ascribable to the Scurvey, and and that many times before the weather be discernably chang'd, because these other∣wise indiscernable alterations of weather, are prefigured, and transacted before hand in the Air. Whence many times (as may be obvious to a curious eye) proceed the sudden and unexpected alterations of Symptoms in dis∣eased and crasie bodies, which so much
puzzle Physitians to know whence such sud∣den changes, contrary to their expectation should happen; how well do things suc∣ceed, even according to their desire, and sometimes beyond their expectation at some peculiar juncture of time (attributed by Astrologers to I know not what configura∣tion of the Planets) and on the other hand, how cross and thwarting to their hopes, things happen at other seasons; and all this many times from various excited Ferments in the Air, which work differently upon bo∣dies, according to variety of constitutions, dis∣position of the Ferments, and modification of other parts. So also from other alterations in the Air, by some winds, a verminous ferment is ex∣cited, as we see in the Spring time, when the winds breath long from the East, that many Caterpillers, and other Insects, are produc'd upon Trees, and Plants; and ma∣ny times putredinous animated Ferments are brought with winds from cadaverous bodies, which floating in the Air, prove seminaries to contagious and verminous Di∣seases; whence the great Plague at Milan, at which time, as Cardan reports, the Air was filled, yea the very dust of the Earth animated with those contagious Vermicles; so that in the Air often lurk secret Fer∣ments,
which may both produce different symptoms in the same disease, as also be the cause of many Epidemical Diseases, whose Character (I mean of Exotick Ferments) may for some time be in the Air, before they settle upon Bodies, so as to cause a general discomposure. And from the same cause, very probably it is, that Animals which are frequently abroad in the Air, have a foresight or presensation of the alterations of Weather; (whence the ground of Auguration amongst the Ancients) for their Bodies, being always exposed to change of Air, in the variety of weather, become thereby in their Texture of parts, more capable of being affected, with the least changes of Air, in which are always the forerunners of certain alterations of wea∣ther, by the foresaid congress of the minute Particles of Heat, Cold, Moisture, and what else which give being (by different Winds from diverse quarters) to changes of wea∣ther. Thus Cranes are observed by some Natu∣ralists, that when they fly softly, and silently, do presage fair weather; but when they hasten, make a great noise, and fly in a di∣sturbed order, do predict Storms; so like∣wise Storks and Wild-Geese, as Wolfangius tells us in his Historia animalium Sacra; and
therefore Storks and Cranes, before the coming of Winter, take wing and fly in Troops in a triangular form into hotter Countries, witness from Thracia into Egypt; and from Cilicia, into Persia: [not to say what is reported, that when they fly near Mount Taurus, where store of Eagles are, they each take a stone in their Bill to prevent any noise, lest the Eagles should seise upon them.] Not unlike to which the learned Wormius in his Museum, relates somewhat wonderful concerning a sort of Bird frequent in Norway, upon which change of weather has afore∣hand strange influence; his words are as followeth, Museum. Norm. p. 304. Aliud ge∣nus (saith he) Norvegiae & Islandis frequens, est è Mergorum vel potius Colymborum genere, Ni∣dum prope aquas it a struit, ut cum necessitas fla∣gitat, in eas se celeriter praecipitare potest: sed nidum repetitura, infixo terrae rostro se suspendit, donec corpus sublevaverit, ac petitum obtinuerit nidum; ubi imbres largiores imminere peculiari naturae instinctu persentiscit, pullis ac nido suo ab inundatione metuens, querulo sono aerem ver∣berat; è contra cum coeli serenitatem & clemen∣tiam praesagierit, laetis acclamationibus, & alio gratiori sono pullisapplaudit, unde de futura tem∣pestate certi accolae, vocem Hui audientes excla∣mare solent Norvegi.
SECT. XIII. Hydroph. WHat think you (Pyroph.) of the drying quality, which we define, qualitas patibilis, quae suo facile, alieno autem termino difficulter clauditur: Is not this competible to the Earth primarily, and to the Air secundarily, and to other Bo∣dies as they admit of the combination of this with other qualities, in the composition thereof. Pyroph. I think (Hydroph.) and perhaps may make good, that what you call a drying quality, is no more a quality than its oppo∣site moisture; and that as moisture is no qua∣lity primarily of the Air, nor secondarily of other Bodies in their Composition: so nei∣ther is driness, as a quality, either peculiar to the Earth, or to Compound Bodies: For in that a Body is said to be dry, is in as much as the parts which constitute it, are of ano∣ther Texture than liquid, and are so woven together, as to have few (at least as discern∣able) fluid parts. And those dry Bodies, are either naturally such, as for instance, some sorts of Stones, and some Calces of calcin'd Bodies, which by no force of Fire are ever reducible into
any liquid form: or else such Bodies, as while kept from force of Fire, are accounted dry, of which are all Metals, Minerals, Metalline, and Mineral Ore, so me Stones, as Peables, Flints, Sand, Ashes of burnt or calcin'd Bo∣dies, all which by stress of Fire may be made to melt and become fluid, some per se, as the Metals and some Minerals, others by additi∣on of Salts, as some Minerals, also Mineral and Metalline Ore, Pebbles, Flint, Sand, &c. by the addition of Salt of Kelp, Tartar, or other calcin'd Vegetables melt into transpa∣rent Glass. Thus the Calx of Metals fretted by Acids, and thereby reduc'd after Evaporation in mi∣nima (viz.) into their impapable Alcolizate pouders, are seemingly dry, yet these very subtile Crocus's of Metals; witness that of Copper, dissolv'd into, and incorporated in that Body we call Verdigreece, by the help of the sour Juice of Grapes, or in that which remains after the Vintage, if that be dry'd and beat to a most subtile pouder, (which by the motion of a Pestle or the like, present∣ly by the minuteness of its parts, fly up, and doth ferire nares as also that of natural Vitriol) do I say both by stress of Fire arise in a considerable white fume, and condense in∣to a plenty of liquid Spirits, as is evident in the Spirit of Verdigreeee, of Vitriol; and so
most of other Bodies, which being divided into their Minima, so as to appear in a dry Sapless form, may yet by distillation be turn'd mostwhat into liquids, or by reduction into their Sulphurs or Mercuries (if Meta∣lline Bodies) be furtherconvertible into the fluid Texture of parts. VVherefore seeing dryness is no other than such a Texture of parts in the constru∣ction of Bodies, as renders the Concrete not easily fluid, nor apt to flow together, when the constitutive parts are rather con∣tinuous than contiguous: therefore must this dry quality, as well as the rest of the same fraternity, ipso facto, forfeit its supposed Essence of a quality, and lose its repute of a nothing, for so I esteem it, or little better, while under the notion of a quality. Hence those degrees of qualities, which (Hydroph.) you in your Philosophy) and Medicks are apt to ascribe Concretes to, are no more to be taken notice of, than the qua∣lities themselves: so that all your Solutions of apparences by your supposed degrees of the Primary qualities, will (what is said be∣ing premis'd) of their own accord fall to no∣thing. Hence for instance, Iron, which you in your Scarb. Spaw, repute to be of the third degree of driness, is no more to be taken notice of, as to a Philosophical Soluti∣on
of the Essence of that Concrete) than if you had said it had been in the third degree of nothing, for both are alike unintelligible; of which more particularly in our Hydrolo∣gical Essays. Hydroph. Well (Pyroph.) I might justly re∣ply to you, as formerly, we in the Disputa∣tions of the Schools us'd to accost the Car∣tesians, viz. Contra principia negantem non est disputandum: These are new conceits, which we that are grown old in the Philosophy of Aristotle and his followers, are not at leisure to take notice of: But what will you make (Pyroph.) of the second qualities, viz. those we call Density, Rarity, Gravity, Levity, Hardness, Softness, Thickness, Thinness, Ari∣dity, Lubricity, Clamminess, Friableness, Asperity, and Smoothness? Are not these ne∣cessarily to be reputed Qualities, by which we arrive to some knowledge of the nature of the Bodies they are found in? Pyroph. As to which query (Hydroph.) concerning the second qualities, I answer, that as the first qualities, are not in rerum natura, as such, so neither are the second, for sublata causa tollitur effectus: But the first are the supposed cause of the second, which being (by reasons aforesaid) deducted out of the Catalogue of Entities, nothing of the second qualities, as such can remain.
For that that Texture of parts which makes Bodies appear to our Senses, dense or rare, heavy or light, hard or soft, rugged or smooth, &c. should be reputed Secondary, depending upon the quaternary of the first qualities, Heat, Cold, Driness, and Moisture, is I say, as indemonstrable as unintelligible; for all these (as far as I apprehend) depend meerly upon the different Texture of the constitu∣tive parts of Bodies, whereby they variously affect our Senses, yea and many of them competible to the same Body, as its parts are variously agitated by fire, Ferments, Sal s or Solvents, whereby the same Body so dif∣ferently acted, and its parts transpos'd, may very changeably affect our Senses, after so many different manners, as may make up all or most of those you call second qualities. Hydroph. Is not rarity a second quality, arising chiefly from Heat, having its parts extenuated, as Herbs, Pruinae, Clouds? And is not Density another from Cold, ha∣ving its parts bound up, and solidly adhe∣ring to each other, as Glass, Stone, Iron, and the rest of the Metals? And further is not Levity a quality arising from Heat, making things capable of moving upwards; and Gravity a quality from Cold, which makes things move downwards towards a Center? Pyroph. I answer (Hydroph.) that in
what you term Rarity, I see no necessity of giving the name of a second quality arising from the Primary Heat; but that it is only such a Texture of parts in the composition of some Bodies, as makes them appear thin, and as it were finely woven; being a rare Texture of parts, with many Streiners, Porosities, or vacuolums interspers'd, accord∣ing to whose Fabrick of parts, our Senses are generally affected, so as they fall under such and such distinct perception thereof. Thus Air is a rare Body, in as much as its parts are of a fine, thin, tenuious plyable Texture as aforesaid: And as Rarity, so Den∣sity is no quality, being no other than such a Body, whose parts are closely set together, with few Porosities, thus Stone, Glass, Me∣alline, and Mineral-Bodies, are such whose constitutive parts are closely bound up, and fast rivetted together; and therefore no need of ascribing its original to cold. As for Levity, it is peculiar to such Bodies whose Texture is rare and finely woven, and so the sequel of that we call Rarity. Also Gravity is the contrary, being the necessary product of such Bodies, whose parts are closely put together, I mean of those which are compact and dense Bodies. And as to the rest, of second qualities, as Hardness, Softness, Thickness, Thinness, &c.
all which I say, are but different Modificati∣ons of the parts of Bodies, whereby they variously affect our Senses, having the same way of solution as those I have already spo∣ken of, therefore shall forbear. Now that these (Hydroph.) are neither the Indexes nor the Products of the Quater∣nary of first qualities, and consequently not to be reckoned (as such) in the Category of qualities, is evident, in that one and the same Body, by a Metastasis of its parts by Fire, Salts, or Solvents, may undergo all or most of those you call second and perhaps first qualities too: so that to which of these, the Essence of that Body should be attributed, would prove a query too difficult for most of your Philosophy grounded upon these qualities, to resolve. Thus for instance, suppose we take Anti∣mony into our consideration, which in its Minra, is a stony, dense, heavy, hard, friable Body; this being melted by Fire, and there∣by separated from its petrifique, gritty, and sabulous parts, gives us that Body of Anti∣mony usually fold in the Shops; which still retains all the aforesaid properties, which are the natural sequels of its present Texture of parts; But suppose this by fire be forc'd in Fumes into Flowers, adhering to the sides of Pots, Ovens, or other large receivers,
give a rare, light, soft and impalpable Body, with a white colour; which fluxed by further addition of Fire, becomes a dense, heavy, hard, friable but diaphanous Body cal∣led the Vitrum or Glass of Antimony, where by the Vitrification of its parts, it emulates that other product of the Fire made from Ashes and Sand flux'd together: [Concer∣ning the reasons and causes of Vitrification in general and particular, we discourse in our Tentamen Physiologic. and Litholog. Physica.] This glass prepared as aforesaid, will by further addition of Fire and Salts, become Metalline, melt and run into a Regulus, which melts and flows like Lead or Quick-sil∣ver, (call'd by Chymists the coagulated Mer∣cury of Antimony) is dense, hard, heavy, and opacous, which again may be sublim'd into Flowers, out of which Flowers may a cur∣rent Mercury begot by boyling with Salt of Tartar, &c. as is mention'd in Volum. 4. Theat. Chym. Nova disquisit. de Helia Ar∣tista. Also Antimony by addition of Salts with the help of Fire, produceth that Mass we call hepar Antimonii, (which makes the fre∣quently us'd Emetick Wine) upon which dissolv'd in Water, if distill'd Vinegar be poured, it makes a speedy separation of a Red and Yellow Sulphur, with a Fetid Sul∣phureous
smell very like the Water of the Sulphur-Well at Knarsborough in York-shire: But if in lieu of Vinegar, more Salts be ad∣ded, and it be further calcin'd, it turns from a yellow to a Carnation, then to a white Co∣lour, which when edulcorated by washing the Salts therefrom, becomes that Body we call Diaphoretick Antimony, being a white (with yellow reflection) soft, impalpable powder. In like manner, Antimony calcin'd with Aqua-fortis, either becomes white, or by another addition thereto, with a slight Ar∣tifice is turn'd into a green Sulphur which flames, and has all the properties of com∣mon Brimstone: So Antimony with the addi∣tion of Mercury sublimate, is by the help of the Salts therein contain'd, brought into a gla∣cial Oyl, which as it becomes a fluid Body by the least Heat, so it is congeal'd into Crystals frequently by Cold: if upon this Oyl, warm Water, or Oyl of Tartar be poured, preci∣pitates into a soft powder, call'd Mercurius Vitae: if Spirit of Nitre or Aqua-fortis be distill'd therefrom, it becomes (after the passing away of a stifling Sulphureous Arse∣nical Fume) another soft, white, impalpable powder, call'd Bezoadicum Minerale. Thus you see (Hydroph.) how the same Body of Antimony, is by the various applica∣tion
of Fire, and Salts, so altered in the Texture of its parts, as to give that varie∣ty of apparences under which it arrives dif∣ferently disguis'd to our Senses, viz. as that which appears dense, heavy, hard, of one colour, &c. shall presently discover it self to be rare, light, soft, of another colour, &c. and which even now appear'd solid, and per∣manent, shall forthwith become soft, and fluid; where it will be difficult to judge truly of the nature of this Mineral Concrete by the present prevalency of any of these se∣condary qualities. Yea and further to acquaint you, what great alterations and changes may be made in the same Body, by the transposition and sometimes volatization of the parts, through the mediation of Fire and Solvents, I know by a certain method, how to make Antimony (the Body we urge for instance) as solid a Concrete as it is, arise over the Helm in an easie Heat, and in the form of a Liquor, and by which sometimes I have known it come into the Helm, even in the gentle heat of Balneum Mariae, in the form not only of a limpid liquor, but also sometimes of a Salt dissolvable per deli∣quium into an Oyl, easily discernable by its lactescence and precipitation by the bare ad∣dition of simple water.
I might (Hydroph.) confirm this by fur∣ther instances of the like nature, viz. by ur∣ging the various Phaenomena's of Vitriol, Copper and other Metals, whose different transposi∣tion of parts by Fire, Salts, and Solvents, make up the great variety of those necessa∣ry sequels of Bodies, which you term Quali∣ties, whether primary or secondary; and yet are really no other, than the different mu∣tation of the constitutive parts of Bodies, out of one Posture, and Figure into another: whereby the same Body differently smites our senses with those mechanical Affections of matter, which (Hydroph.) you ascribe to the first and second qualities: For the fur∣ther illustrating of which, you may consult the works of that worthy and incompara∣ble Philosopher and industrious searcher of Nature, the Honourable Boyle, especially his Treatise of the Origin of Forms. But before we conclude this Section, give me leave (Hydroph.) to acquaint you, that amongst other Instances, we have and might urge, how that from Metals by the media∣tion of Salts, and help of Fire, may result other sorts of concretions than usually ap∣pear, by different modifications mask'd with various qualifications: So that Mi∣neral-gums (if I may so call them) may hence be made, which are much diffe∣rent
both in colour, capacity of taking flame, fusibility like water, &c. from any of the ingredients that enter the composition there∣of: Thus for instance, from Sal Armoniack, Mercury sublimate, and cap. Mort. of Verdegreece (left after the distillation of its Spirit) mixed and put in a subliming Urinal, after it flux∣ed together (for it boyls like water) for five or six hours, when cool, I found in the bot∣tom a Cake of a kind of Rosin, very hard, somewhat red, almost like Gum guttae; the sublimate which arose, was but very thin and inconsiderable, which Rosin would take Fire, and burn with a blue Flame, and that chief∣ly from the Sulphur of the Copper, which is opened by the Salts. And not only Art, but Nature her self exhibits us the various Phaenomena of Water, under the disguise of Frost, Snow, Hail, &c. where for instance, in Snow the otherwise liquid, fluid, ponde∣rous and transparent Body of Water, by the interposition of Frost or cold Atoms blowing from the North, becomes (by having the Tex∣ture of its parts so altered) as so many Flats or Planes, laid with layers of cold Particles stratum super stratum (as I may not improperly say) a white, soft, light, opake, continuous and (unless it meet with heat) dry body so that you plainly see (Hydroph.) how humi∣dity, siccity, fluidity, continuity, ponderous∣ness,
levity, transparency and opacity, and in particular whiteness is competible to the same Body, whose parts are variously alter∣ed and transposed per se, or with additio∣nals. SECT. XIV. Hydroph. BUt are there not (Pyroph.) o∣ther qualities of Bodies where∣by they become the Objects of the Senses, as Colours, Sapours, Odours, &c. To begin with the first, do not we rightly define colour to be extremitas perspicui in corpore terminato? Pyroph. Those you reckon (Hydroph.) are no more to be accounted Qualities, than the rest beforenamed: But are to be look'd upon as different affections of Concrete Bodies, as they stand in a relation to a perception by our senses; and first as to the definition of colour, whose genus is extremitas, methinks Aristotle began at the wrong end; For it is not the extremity of a Diaphanous Body which gives Essence to colour, being only necessary thereto à Posteriori: For if I mistake not, light should be the genus of the defini∣tion of colour which admitting of various refractions and reflections, in, and from the extremities or surfaces of Bodies, make those
different apparences thereof we call co∣lours. Besides, it should seem to me, that what you call extremitas perspicui, is not of that extent as to comprise the generality of co∣lours, although we should admit of it as the genus; and that because we see colours as frequently made, by simple reflections of light from the surfaces of bodies, witness from all Vegetables, Animals, stain'd or dy'd Garments and the rest, as well (I say) as by refractions of the same light (the ef∣ficient of all colours) in perspicuous bodies: For that colour should be confin'd to the only extremity of a diaphanous body, is me∣thinks too strait every way, both as to the genus, as also to the specifical difference of the true definition of colour; in as much as where a diaphanous body proves opake, the luminous Rayes which before were refracted, do now become terminated and re∣flected, and yet doth no less produce variety of colours than before. As for instance, Suppose a Solution of Vi∣triol made in distill'd Water, which is a per∣spicuous body, giving a green colour, and that as well by refraction as transmssiion of Rays from a luminous body, gliding side-ways, and smiting through the Liquor, which renders it diaphanous; whose tex∣ture
of parts with the interstices in the fluid Menstruum, causeth (I say) such a re∣fraction of light, as thereby represents it under the form of a green colour. If into this green diaphanous Liquor (Hydroph.) you pour a clear solution of Galls, the tex∣ture of the vitriolin parts in the water will become so altered, as that in lieu of a dia∣phanous, it will become an opake Liquor; so that the luminous Rays which before were refracted and transmitted, will now become either reflected or so intangled in the texture of the parts, as neither to make a transmission, refraction, or any considerable reflection of light there-from, and therefore becomes opacous or black. For by the addition of Galls to the afore∣said Liquor, the first body, whose parts were uniform and regularly transmitted and refracted, the Rays of light, doth now by this commixture with the Particles of Galls, muster in so confus'd a posture, make an extraversion of large flats, some of which always fall in the rear of the Angles, and junctures of others; so as the transmission of light is quite intercepted, and therefore what reflection is made, is only so much as to be sufficient to make that represen∣tation of bodies by that colour we call black.
Which that it is so, appears further by pouring Oyl of Vitriol, Spirit of Nitre, Aqua-fortis, or the like corrosive Acid Spi∣rits upon those vitriolin opacous Liquors, or other bodies made black by vitriolin astringent Steins; where you will presently view those Particles of the Gall, which be∣fore fill'd the Pores of the Liquor, and by extraverting many flats made the Liquor opacous, dark, and inky, will now become fretted, dissolv'd, and the flats lessened, so as the parts will again return into their for∣mer uniform posture, and suffer the light (by becoming clear) to be transmitted as before, so to become a diaphanous Liquor, as at first: as you may further see in our Experiments about the change of Colours in Spaw Water, in our Hydrolog. Chy∣mica. And that colours are nothing else but dif∣ferent refractions and repercussions of light from bodies, according to various Angles of incidence and reflection from the diffe∣rent texture of the depth or superficies thereof, carryed through the transparent Tunicles and Humours of the Eyes, as through so many Glasses (for from the natu∣ral Fabric of the Eye are artificial optical or microscopical Glasses contriv'd) vibra∣ting after a various manner the Optic
Nerves, so as to make that kind of sensa∣tion we call Vision: That colours are, I say, nothing else but such I might confirm by many more instances (viz.) by the frequent Manuals of Dyers, Tanners, Painters, &c. in their colouring Garments, Leather, Wood, &c. by actual bodies (not qualities) of Vi∣triol, Alum, Argol, Indico, Madder, Lime, Oak Bark, Minium, Ceruss, Verdigreece, Spa∣nish-white, Gum, Vernice, ultra-Marine, &c. all which produce different colours, not from inherent qualities in those bodies, ari∣sing from a legitimate contemperature of the four Elements, but represent themselves as being actual bodies; I mean, shew that great variety of colours by the different texture of their constitutive parts, where∣by light becomes so differently refracted or reflected, as to be sufficient to cause that great variety of colours, we see amongst bodies: where we might from the aforesaid different reflections and refractions of light shew amongst the causes of those apparences we call colours, what for instance white is, and how made, which we suppose to be no other than that texture of parts which re∣sults from many superficies, flat, or spheri∣cal born up at some little distances from each other, by one or more of these follow∣ing causes: viz. 1. By Air; 2. Atoms of
Cold; 3. Other similiar inter-woven bodies; 4. Or lastly, are wrought into such a texture of parts by the preparatory Vessels. First by Air, as is evident in Torrents, great falls, and other agitations of Waters, in the white froth of Ale, Beer, or other fermenting Liquors, also in the warming of Ale or Beer, &c. where the Particles of Water and fermentative Liquors are huft up with those of Air, being thereby reduc'd into globular Bubbles, the aggregation of which give us that Phaenomenon of white observable there∣in: the like may be reckoned upon in pro∣duction of white Oyntments from the con∣cussion of Oyls, &c. Secondly, or by Atoms of cold, as is evident in the obvious Phaeno∣menon of Snow: where, from the cold Atoms woven in, with, and between the flats (for such are the figure of its parts un∣der this disguise) of watery Particles, re∣sults that colour of white, as also other ap∣parences compitible to water under the Masque of Snow. Thirdly, Or by other inter-weaving bodies, as is evident where the texture of bodies are such as are made up of many superficies each upon other, by a natural stratum super stratum, born up by some other interposing parts, as is evident in natural Concretions, viz. Talk, Alabaster, Bones, Horns, Plumes, &c.
In factitious, viz. Luna Cornea, Venice-glass pulveriz'd Ceruss, Paper, &c. In all which the light from the aforesaid texture of parts is so refracted and reflected as to exhibit us that apparence of white in all such bo∣dies. Or lastly, are wrought into such a texture of parts by preparatory Vessels, by which in Animals, I mean the Lacteals, and Glandules, whence the whiteness of Milk, and by other Analogous in Vegetables, whence the milky Juyces of all sorts of Spur∣ges, Carduus Marie, &c. But to demonstrate further, that Co∣lour (and in particular White) is no other than the result of such a peculiar texture of bodies, as reflects the light after such a mode competible to that apparence: and that the same body undergoing no other change of any additional, but barely a tran∣sposition of the parts of the active Principles therein contained, was spontaneously redu∣cible to its pristine clarity and transparency, I had this following Phaenomenon repre∣sented to me in an Experiment I was then trying; In which Experiment, I shall for∣bear to name one of the constituent Liquors, in as much as in the main it relates not to this place, and only reckon upon the (to our purpose) pertinent Phaenomenon which was this; I having two transparent Li∣quors
by me, one was rectified Spirit of Wine, the other a Mineral Liquor, upon the mixing these, I had (besides the gentle heat caus'd from a moderate fermentation of the Principles) forthwith the apparence of a Milk-white Liquor, through the whole body of the mixture, which (and what was very curious and remarkable to behold) with∣in a very few minutes without any extrin∣sic addition, was spontaneously reduc'd to a transparent Liquor, as limpid almost as either of the Liquors was before mixture: and all this (which yet adds to admiration) without the least precipitation, or any sort of sediment what ever. I might further inlarge (Hydroph.) but that I pretend not here to give a Body of Philosophy, therefore shall designedly con∣tract. Hydroph. Well, but seeing (Pyroph.) we have been discoursing of Colours, and that you say light is essential in the Fabric there∣of, Pray what do you think of Light it self; do not we rightly define it to be actus perspi∣cui quatenus est perspicuum, and do not we truly distinguish betwixt lux and lumen, in that we say, lux est lucidi corporis qualitas, being a quality of a luminous body as it abides, and is fixt in the lucid body; as for instance, that light which is in the Sun, Stars, or Fire,
while it is in those bodies we call it lux, but when it is dispers'd in a perspicuous body, as the Air, then it is properly lumen; and that in Fire the lux, or quality thereof send∣eth forth that we call lumen, which illumi∣nates the body of Air, and thereby makes it perspicuous. Pyroph. To which Hydroph. I answer, That your definition of lumen to be the act of a perspicuous body as it is perspicuous, and your distinction of lux and lumen, are all too short (in my apprehension) of the offence of a lucid or luminous body, and that because what you call actus perspicui (as you define lumen) is no more according to your own Hypothesis than a product of a quality, or a quality of a quality: For it is (you say) produc'd from that you call lux, and this, you say, is a quality of a lucid body; so that lumen must be the product of lux, a quality of its quality, and by conse∣quence one quality must be the subject of another, and why not of a third, viz. splen∣dour, and so a fourth, and so ad infini∣tum. Nay further, to suppose light to be a qua∣lity of a lucid body, as it abides and is fixt in that body, and yet that this should pro∣duce that you call lumen in another body, which it has or can have no essential depen∣dence
upon, is to admit of qualities with∣out the predicate of a subject, which ac∣cording to your own Doctrine is absurd enough. Hydroph. But what think you (Pyroph.) of the genus of light, is it a substance or body, or is it not rather a quality, or quid incorporeum? That it is not a corporeal substance, we have several Arguments to urge; as first, If it were a body, it could not so suddenly be diffus'd through the whole Hemisphere, and that by reason of resistence of the medium. Next to that it would suppose a penetration of bodies, and that because there is no part of a perspicu∣ous body, as of Water, and Air, but is il∣luminated thereby. And lastly, if light was a body, so would also darkness be, because contraries. Pyroph. These are indeed (Hydroph.) the main Arguments of Aristotle and his fol∣lowers against the corporealness of Light, which we shall easily impugne. As to the first therefore we say, that it is not so diffi∣cult to apprehend that an essential luminous body (such I mean whose light springs from the evibrations of the intestine Fer∣mentation (of its kind) of its intrinsic Prin∣ciples, that is, whose light is from it self and not from another) should upon its exten∣sive
motion, immediately reach to the pe∣riphery of its Orbs activity, then that it should perform that work of illumination by an imaginary quality of a quality, by a lumen, which has its being from a quality of a lucid body. As to the resistency of such mediums (the constitution of whose parts by its teniousness and facil recess, render them diaphanous upon the access of the Rays of light) is no more an obstacle to the speedy diffusion of the body of light, than the Air doth resist the explosive moti∣on of Gun-powder, or than the Air doth oppose the activity of Fire within its own Orb. And therefore (Hydroph.) we might better (and I think more agreeable to its nature) define Light to be a quick Evibra∣tion or extensive and (of its kind) fermen∣tative motion of the intrinsic Principles of lucid bodies, stretching its nimble corpo∣real Rays from its self as the center to the periphery of its Orbs activity: a quick Vi∣bration, and extensive Motion, I said, be∣cause that adds to the quickness of its trans∣mission through a proper medium: For we see that one spark of Fire, or fired matter, mov'd suddenly in a round, makes an ap∣parition of a whole circle of Fire, which suppose it were a Radius, or a Ray of Fire
whirl'd suddenly about its own center, would immediately appear as a whole sphere of Fire, and that meerly from the quickness of its motion, which seemingly makes Fire or Light appear much more than really it is. So that we can no sooner consider a lucid body in motion, that is, its Principles or parts in an intestine collision or fermenta∣tive extrusion, but at the same instant we must apprehend it extended, and that ex∣tension is terminated by the utmost circle of its activity: in so much as supposing a luminous body mov'd, and extended, as aforesaid, is it self but the center to the whole Orb of its light, whose Rays pro∣bably, in their extensive motion are globu∣lar bodies, whirl'd about their own Axis, which very Orb may not improperly be call'd the Luminary: unless we take in ano∣ther notion of the co-existency of firy Par∣ticles: (liquidi simul ignis, the liquid Fire, as Virgil speaks, in his Eglog. to Sileno) inter∣spers'd in the depth of the great Sphere, which becomes enkindled, and takes flame upon the access of the Rays of the great Luminary, the Sun. Whether way we please to take it, amounts to the same thing: For whether we consider, suppose the Sun as the great
Luminary in Motion, extending its Rays instantaneously to the greatest circle of its lucid Orb reaching from it self round to the supposed Vortices of the otherwise con∣ceiv'd fixt Stars, and illuminates the whole Orb save the shades of the opake bodies, the Earth, Moon, and other Planets, which in their motion about it have always some parts shaded (which is that we call Dark∣ness) which, I say, whether we consider the solar Luminary, that great fountain and treasure of light, mov'd, extended, and thereby filling its whole Orb (the shades excepted) even to the periphery thereof, with corporeal Rays through the whole medium of the vast Expansum, is the same as to apprehend a liquid Fire, or firy Prin∣ciple interspers'd in the whole depth of the Fabric of the World, which upon the ac∣cess of its Compeer, the Rays of light immediately darted from the Sun, or me∣diately reflected from other bodies, joyns issue therewith, takes Flame, and toge∣ther by the agil Motion of their parts, com∣pose one great luminous Orb. So that motion, and consequently exten∣sion is proper to both, making (either way) light to diffuse it self speedily through our Hemisphere: For whether it be darted immediately from the Luminary, and so fill
up the whole Orb of light, or it meet∣ing with congeneal firy or sulphureous Par∣ticles floating in the great deep, giving flame to one part after another, till the whole become illuminated, may be conceiv'd readily performable by motion: For a few firy Particles put into a vibrating agil Flour, or into a rapid collision makes a great light, and spreads far in a medium, whose texture of parts makes no interruption in the trans∣mission thereof. To assign a precise figure to the Cor∣puscles of light, is too curious, and per∣haps hazardous of incurring a contradicti∣on: For to say with the Democritans that firy Atoms are of a pyramid form, implies me-thinks a tacit contradiction both in Ma∣thematicks, as well as in Physicks; For ac∣cording to their Doctrine, Atoms) even as the word it self) implies indivisibility; which that these minute Particles should be indivisible, and yet Pyramid-wise is to me very strange, for being they are bodies, and these bodies Pyramids, must of necessity be solid Pyramids: now that such which are always made up of Lines, Superficies, and Profundities (the natural sequels of Solids) should  thstanding all this be sup∣posed indivisible, is certainly indemonstrable. Although indeed if we might imagine
with the Cartesians, the Globulary Figure seems to be the most congeneal to the nature & Phaenomena of Light, as being of all Figures the most apt to be moved, and most capa∣ble of being reflected by its hitting against other Bodies, and that because the globular in their incidence upon other Bodies, of what figure soever, (saving such as are concave in their Texture.) do always touch in puncto, which makes them so apt to recoyl, and make Angles of reflection answerable to those of incidence: and yet to determine a precise figuration of Atoms, as such, wants not its absurdity, as we elsewhere in our Tentamen Physiolog. take an oportunity fur∣ther to enlarge. These being premised, you see (Hydaoph.) it proves not difficult to assign the cause, why the Rays of Light though corporeal, should so readily and instantaneously be transmitted through the Hemisphere, or rather through the whole Sphere, (excepting as aforesaid the shades of the Earth and other Planets) as to make that Light we see in the World, notwithstanding the immensness of the vast medium it wades through, the radius of which Circle, is both in relation to its self as also to its Circle, incommensurable whose motion is always in right lines, unless inter∣cepted by the interpositions of opake Bodies.
Your next Argument (Hydroph.) of the Penetration of Bodies upon the supposition of the corporealness of Light, grounded upon the general perspicuity of illuminated Bodies, will not be uneasy to refute, and that because the bodys of perspicuous mediums are therefore diaphanous, in that they are tenui∣ous, & pliable and thereby easily, and readily give way to the transmission of the nimble corporeal Rays of Light, which upon that ac∣count pervade the tenuious Texture of such mediums even ictu oculi; and yet these Rays if compared with other minute Bodies floating in the Atmosphere, are not altoge∣ther so numerous, as we are apt commonly to apprehend: For although to our eye plac'd in any point of the diaphanous medi∣um, upon the extension of the Body of Light we see the Air totally illuminated, as if it were nothing else but Light, yet if we con∣sider the largeness of the Texture of our Eye, and the proportionableness of an object to render it capable of affecting thereof, we shall find that it will require the mustering of a great many of minute Bodies, to make up the least sensible Object: so that the Texture of the eye is so fram'd by glassy hu∣mours, as to concenter the largely dilated Rays of Light, That thereby it may become serviceable to the transmission of Species.
For the tunica uvea of the Eye being per∣forated and defended by the transparent Tunicles call'd Cornea, & adnata, are supposed as a plain Glass or foramen in a dark Room, through which the sensible Species of Objects, are by the help of Light transmitted, but yet so as they appear only inverted: Therefore that these Images () of things which float within their Orbs, may appear in their proper form, is required the help of the Cry∣stalline humour, which is lenticular & convex, inserted into the vitrious humour as a Gem in a Ring whereby together with the help of the, albuginous humor, (which is to dint & shade the Species of things with their accompa∣nied Light, lest it should come too strongly upon the Crystalline convex humor) the Spe∣cies that were inverted in the tunica uvea might be revers'd, and put into their due po∣sture in the convex Glass of the Crystalline humour, like as the inverted Species trans∣mitted through a plane Glass or foramen in∣to a dark room, are reversed by the help of a Tube, with a convex Glass in it, which thereby represents the Species of Objects at a great distance upon the opposite white Wall, or Paper, in their due and regular or∣der; as for Recreation sake, we sometimes have seen: For the most of the Dioptricks are chiefly grounded upon the Texture of
the natural frame of the Eye. So that it is by these Glasses (that I may so call them) of the Eye, that the distant Rays of Light become concentred, to make a sensible impression there; whereby the Air seems to us to be so totally diaphanous, as if there was nothing else but Light, when indeed it needs a Collection of its Rays by so skilful a contrivance as the Fabrick of the Organ of the Eye, to make it sensible. Wherefore it is very apparent, that not∣withstanding the corporealness of the Rays of Light, there is no necessity of the conse∣quence of the penetration of Bodies both because of the distance of the Rays of Light, as also of the tenuiousness and pliable fluid∣ness of the medium. As to your last Argument (Hydroph.) viz. that if Light was a Body, so also would darkness be, because contraries; for the con∣sequence of which Isee no reason at all: & that because darkness is nothing else but thein∣terception of Light, which is further manifest in that at the same time that the lucid Body of the Sun or other luminous Body is in mo∣tion, (I mean by its emission of Rays extend∣ed) at the very same time is darkness made by the shades of opake Bodies. For the radius of the Sun-beams extend far beyond the shaded, and therefore dark
cones of the Earth, and other Planetary Bodies: so that in the shade there is dark∣ness, because Light is intercepted by an o∣pake Body; but beyond the shaded cone, the Rays become further continued, even to the very circumference of its vast lumi∣nous Orb: and so the like of any other lu∣cid Body: for if a Candle be plac'd at a competent distance from a Globe in a large Room; so far as the Conical shade of the Globe reacheth, so far it is dark, but be∣yond that, the Rays are again continued even to the extent of its Orb's activity, if no∣thing interrupt. And now (Hydroph.) having overturn'd your Arguments against, let me give you one (for all) for the corporealness of Light: and that is thus (viz.) that which may be mov'd, percuss'd, or reflected, is a Body; But such is Light, Ergo. The Major is ap∣parent, both because qualities cannot under∣go a loco-motion, but as considered in their subjectum inhsionis; nor can they admit of percussion or reflection; as also because these are only proper and peculiar to Bodies; for two Bodies mov'd towards each other, with a force, or one Body hitting upon another at rest, must recoil in one Angle, or other, and that necessarily, because Bodies. That the minor is true, all the Rules of
Dioptricks evince, besides we see that the Rays of the Sun smiting against the dense Body of the Earth, and becoming reflected therefrom, gives us that heat of Weather, we usually have in June, July, and August: also the dispers'd Rays of Light being col∣lected by burning Glasses, do concenter in a fiery Cone, which actually gives a flame to combustible things: Hence it was that Archimedes, as by some mechanical Engines he shattered, and sunk, so by some Glasses artificially contriv'd, and sutably plac'd, he fired the Ships at a great distance, that be∣sieged Syracuse: yea, and by the same Light of the Sun concentred, may (for ought we know) this Ball of the Earth be calcin'd in∣to its primitive Embers, and may perhaps be vitrified too at the last into a Crystalline transparency. SECT. XV. Hydroph. WEll (Pyroph.) but what think you of Sapours? Is not Sapour a quality of a mixt Body, arising by Heat, from an earthy dryness, contemper'd with a watery moisture? these no more than odours are substances or Bodies, but qua∣lities, which are in Bodies, tanquam in subjecto.
Pyroph. I think (Hydroph.) that Sapour is no quality of a mixt Body, arising from any contemperature thereof, but consists only in a relation betwixt our food, &c. and our Palat; is that whereby our aliment becomes sapid as I may say, and indicates a consonance or dissonance betwixt Concretes, and our gust or Palat; doth not consist as the Chy∣mists will have it solely in the Saline Princi∣ple of things, although I must confess it much-what depends thereon: But it is ei∣ther from the predominancy of the Saline or from a commixture of that with the Sul∣phureous parts of the Concrete, which to∣gether make up that we call Sapour in Con∣cretes: for one or both these upon chewing being dissolv'd (at least some portion there∣of) in the Saliva, presently thereby insinu∣ates into the pores of the Tongue and Palat, and so affects that Sense we call Taste, and this by the different Textures and combina∣tions of Salt, and Sulphur, in all palatable or saporous Bodies. The Organ of that Sense is situated chief∣ly in that Membrane which like a neb over∣spreads the Palat, Tongue, Larinx, oesophagus, and is in common with that of the Stomach: whence it is that some disgustful things only tasted, do irritate the Stomach to that con∣vulsive motion we call Vomiting: For Sa∣pours
are no otherwise than as Concretes stand related to that Sense of which they are the proper objects, being no qualities inherent in Bodies, nor are to be found in Bo∣dies as they consist of the quaternary of Ele∣ments: and therefore are no results either of a terrestrial dryness, or watery moisture, nor from the combination thereof. And if I should acquaint you (Hydroph.) with my thought herein, I might not let to tell you, that I apprehend (and see nothing in the Peripatetick Philosophy of validity to contradict) that the essential difference of the tast of Bodies upon the same Organical sense, doth consist in a due proportion and just adaptation of the sensible to the sense, I mean that as the Textures of Bodies are various, having different complications of their Saline and Sulphureous parts, so they accordingly do differently affect that sense, having some parts by mastication (chewing) dissolv'd in the Saliva, (brought thither by Glandules, and Lymphiducts) which by dif∣ferent Texture of their constitutive parts, variously smite and affect the sensible Mem∣brane, which as those dissolv'd parts in the Saliva, become more or less proportionable to the Pores of the sensative Organ, so do those affections of Bodies we call Tasts, prove grateful or ungrateful, thereby variously af∣fecting
the Sense with those tasts we call sweet, bitter, sharp, sour, salt, astringent; austere and the rest, (if there be any more.) Hydroph. But are there not some Bodies (Pyroph.) that have insipid Salts? How do these affect the Senses? Pyroph. No (Hydroph.) to talk of an insipid Salt, imploys no less than an ignorance of the Physical construction of Bodies, and be∣sides also a contradiction: For therefore are things chiefly sapid, because Saline, in as much as there is no Salt without its Sapor, which if it lose, its no longer Salt (is indeed good for nothing) and therefore things are said to be insipid, when their Salts are sepa∣rated by washing orotherways, or when the Principles are, lockt up; so that I say what we call insipid, is such a Texture of parts, where the Saline and Sulphureous ingredi∣ents are either totally exhausted, or else in∣terspers'd so remisly as they affect not the Sense at all: of which sort are all decayed rotten woods, Drugs, all calcineous powders of Minerals, Metals, Animals, or Vegetables; all Marcasites, Stones, Sand, &c. or lastly complicated and lock'd up, so as our Organs of Sense are not capable of reaching or be∣ing affected by them. But mechanically to represent those diffe∣rent Modifications of Bodies (called vulgar∣ly
Qualities) which are nothing else but pro∣perties of Bodies as they stand related to our Organs of Sense, how I mean such tasts re∣sult from such and such different modes of the Principles mutually acting in Bodies, we might illustrate from the following experi∣ments and observations, that (for instance) upon the dissolving Silver in Spirit of Nitre, or Aqua-fortis, & evaporating the solution to a Crystallin form, those very Crystals be∣come exquisitely bitter, even as Gall; al∣though neither of the ingredients had the least perceptible taste thereof: the same acid menstruum poured upon another Body of a different Texture, produceth that quality we call sweet, as is evident in the Crystals of Lead made by Aqua-fortis, Spirit of Nitre or even the Vegetable acidity of Vinegar; which Saccharum Saturni (as it is called) is as sweet as any vegetable Sugar. 3. The acid Oyl of Vitriol poured upon another metal∣line Body, as upon Mars or Venus, it causeth an astringent taste, as is evident in the vi∣triol of Iron, or Copper. 4. An esurin Acid complicated with an Alum glebe, gives Alum and the stiptick taste thence emerging: also Oyl of Vitriol meeting with another Body, viz. Quick-silver, gives after edulcoration, a factitious Alum, and Stiptick taste, thereto belonging. 5. An Aqua regis poured upon
Gold, gives a solution or Salt, whose austere taste will (as the worthy improver of Mecha∣nical Philosophy, Mr. Boyle saith) very much resemble that of Sloes or of unripe Bul∣lace. And as bitter, sweet, astringent, stiptick, austere, so probably all other remarkable qua∣lities are producible by Art, imitating Na∣ture; in as much as both have the same Principles, only variously modified, to pro∣ceed upon: the same Principles being substi∣tuted to both, that what Art goeth upon the same nature suo modo probably useth in the productions of Bodies and their qualities Physically. In all which aforesaid experimental ob∣servations we see the same (or analogous) acidity being determined upon diffe∣rent Bodies, give various Phaenomena of tastes, according to the difference of the Sulphur inclos'd in divers Bodies it meets with: and whereas we have no better way of taking measures of Natures workings in Bodies from her own intimate and Essen∣tial Principles, than by Mechanicks, or arti∣ficial imitations thereof: Therefore by how much the nearer we approach by skil∣ful contrivances to emulate Nature in the production of new Bodies and qualifications or properties thence resulting, the more
likely are those Principles (we so search forth) to be consonant to those of nature, the great matter we aim at. For as sweetness (for instance) is made from some Acids hitting upon and concen∣tring with insipid Bodies, in whose Texture a peculiar Sulphur lodgeth, (as in the ex∣amples aforesaid) so likewise probably Na∣ture useth an acid and a peculiar Sulphur (both native and seminal) as the mechanical Agents in the Physical production of the Saccharin juice of Sugar-canes: that Vege∣table Sugar (as well as metalline) has its in∣nate acidity, is evident, from the separation of an acid liquor in the distillation of Sugar, as well as an acid spirit is by the same way separable from Metallin or Saturnin Sugar; which very acidum as well as that of Vine∣gar or Aqua-fortis will with the insipid Bo∣dy of Lead or Minium, gain a fresh sugarness or saccharin sweetness: and that it contains a Sulphur, is evident, both from the coruscation of Sugar (I mean Loaf, or hard) beat in a Mortar, which strikes fire at every knock of the Pestil: as also from the Oyl distillable with the acid Spirit. And what we have said of the Vegetable and Metalline Sugars, Art imitating Nature in order to the produ∣cing that property we call sweet, the same analogically may possibly, consideratis conside∣randis,
be said of all the rest of those other properties or relative qualities we call Tastes. But to say what combinations of Saline and Sulphureous parts in the various Tex∣ture of Bodies, and what proportions and adaptations thereof will be requisite for the making several sorts of Sapors, to rank them in their several Classes from those pe∣culiar contrivances of matter, which con∣tribute to the Fabrick of Bodies, as they stand related to that Sense, is a work now Hydroph. too tedious to insist upon: For it would require a diligent scrutiny into the different figuration of Salts, and that not singly into the forms the variety of Salts naturally shoot into, but as those stand in∣tangled with Sulphureous parts, and those again involv'd in the Texture of other com∣bining Particles, which much alter their former solitary figures, and thereby produce varieties of Sapors: concerning which we shall touch in our Halolog. Chym. Nor shall we here further discourse of those morbid disaffections or preposterous prevarications of this Sense by the irregularities of the Or∣gans thereof from those alterations of the Juices and Solids of our Bodies, which we call Diseases: but shall leave them to fur∣ther inspection.
SECT. XVI. Hydroph. SEeing we have discours'd of Sa∣pours, lastly what think you (Pyroph.) of Odours? Is not Odour a Qua∣lity of a mixt Body, arising from a dry Sa∣pidness contempered with a moisture, brought forth by Heat? Pyroph. That Odour should be a Quality, (Hydroph.) I as much deny as I have done Sapour, neither do I see any grounds, why it should be suppos'd to arise from any dry sa∣pidness, or any contemperature thereof, with a proper moisture from Heat: For first having (and I think evidently enough) de∣monstrated the non existency of Concretes from the quaternary of Elements; it will therefore naturally follow, that secondary af∣fections of Bodies, in order to their relation to our Sences, are to be solv'd by some other more rational Hypothesis, and that is by ascri∣bing it to an extension of some nimble, agil parts, carried off by an insensible collision of the intrinsick Principles of Bodies; where the parts are from the intestine Fermentation sub∣tiliz'd, & highly volariz'd, which bears much upon the Energy of the Sulphur, the diffe∣rent Texture of whose apporrhea's (chiefly∣emerging
from their dilated operative Sul∣phurs) do variously ferire nares smite diffe∣rently upon that Organ of Sence, as to pro∣duce that great variety of Odours, we find Issuing from Concrete Bodies. That Odours chiefly depend upon the Volatization, and Fermentative extension of Sulphurs, is most-what apparent in Ve∣getables, where we see those are most Aro∣matick, which are most pregnant with Sul∣phurous Emanations, and whose Sulphurs are most subtile, and extensive, (from their intrinsick Fermentation) always upon the wing: For we see that odorous Vegetables are most fragrant at their time of flowering and seeding, during which season the Sul∣phurs or Oyls are most predominant, as being uppermost in the wheele of opera∣tion, and so breath forth the effluvia to the utmost circle of their Orbs activity: which as I said are not Qualities, but mi∣nute Particles of extensive active Bodies, set on work by the springy Ferments connatural to their seminal Principles, and wound off in the form of subtile and in∣visible Apporhea; whence probably pro∣ceeds the great variety of Vegetable O∣dours, Also in Animals, the Odours of all their Excrements as Dung, Urine, Sweat, sup∣purated
matter of Ulcers, &c. proceed from various Sulphurs excited by different Ferments in the Analysis of Concretes in their Road to nourishment. So also most faetid Odours arise from the Sulphurs of pu∣tredinous and cadaverous Bodies, where they are taken in pieces by putrid analytical Ferments. And as the objects, so the Organs of this sense, is next to be considered, concerning which we we shall in short say, that the dif∣ferent Texture thereof, is capable of ren∣dering to us the causes of divers, and those abstruce Phaenomena, whence we say, that there are some subtile effluvia which exha∣ling from Bodies, as the result from the Fer∣mentation of Animal Juices, which there∣by become the Object of some curiously wrought Organs of Sense, how ever acute, yet are sufficient to smite the delicately wrought Organs of other Animals, is Evi∣dent amongst other Creatures chiefly in Doggs, who excel in the curiosity of smel∣ling beyond all comparison, who can by the great sagacity of their Organs, or from such a Texture thereof as is susceptible of the most minute impressions of the least Effluvia, who can I say by their bare smel discerne their master, among thousands and how they will trace their steps throughout a
whole Country, and finde their own way home at a vast distance, by the same facul∣ty or acurateness of Organs. Yea, that even the Organs of our Senses are in some persons (through an idiosyncrisia) capable of arriving at a higher pitch of sen∣sation, than is vulgarly observed, even be∣yond the ordinary proportion of Men, may (amongst other examples) be evinced by that strange relation, which Joannes Leo of Africa, and quoted by learned Cafaubon, of a blinde man that was a Guide to certain Mer∣chants travelling through the deserts of Ara∣bia: Casaub. p. 23. The man Rode upon a Camel, led his Company not by his eyes (for he had none) but by his smel, which was so exquisite, that having been acquainted with those ways before, he could find by the sent of the very Earth, nay of the Sand, (which was reached to him at every mile) where he was, and describe the places unto them as they went along, yea told them long before (which prov'd true though not believed then) when they drew near to inhabited pla∣ces. Now how Bodies should by their exten∣ded Sulphurs or intrinsick Ferments, so dif∣ferently affect the sensative Organ, as to produce all those various impressions upon our Sense, which we call Odours or smels,
and those in so different a manner as we (for want of a method of describing them) know not whether we have all the same impressi∣ons of smels from the same Concretes: How the composure of the sensative Or∣gan consists, or lastly how the manner of the various combinations of Sulphureous Effluvia (flowing from Fermentative Colli∣sions of their intestine Principles) happen to our Sences, we shall not now, I say, take time further to discuss, but leave to further enquiry. FINIS.
ERRATA. PAge. 6. l. 19. r. Physiology p. 8. l. 16. r. Systeme p. 21. l. 5. r. Crabones p. 21. l. 20. r. Crabones p. 23. l. 21. r. Skenkins p. 26. l. 23. r. Monkshood p. 38. l. 25. for bole r. trunk p. 39. l. 15. r. Malting p. 42. l. 6. for bole r. trunk p. 43. l. 3. for bole r. trunk p. 45. l. 23. for hurling r. he wing p. 46. l. 1. accelara∣tion p. 61. l. 2. dele your p. 73. l. 23. r. naturally p. 74. l. 27. when r. where p. 75. l. 8. r. Swelfer p. 75. l. 14. r. offa p. 79. l. 5. r. offa p. 79. l. 1. after for r. how p. 81. l. 14. r. globule p. 83. l. 26. r. compage p. 110. l. 26. after to r. solve p. 114. l. 8. production r. reduction p. 129. l. 16. r. Worm. p. 131. l. 16. r. im∣palpable p. 136. l. 26. after retains add almost p. 141. l. 25. r. lares p. 152. l. 8. r. tenuiousness p. 153. l. 21. r. fiery p. 155. l. 7. r. fluor p. 162. l. 25. r. web.
