S410 13551836 100202
THE TRUE PATRIOT's SPEECH TO THE People of Rome. From SALLƲST. Indignatio & Dolor Omnibus, Vis ad Resistendum Nelli aderat. Vell. Paterc. ROMANS, THE Present Circumtances of our Affairs, the Power of the Prevailing Faction, Your Tame Sub∣mission, the Loss of all Justice, and the Danger of Speaking Truth, are such Discouragements, that I should be Silent, as well as Others, at this Time, if my Con∣cern for my Country were not above all other Considerations.
'Tis hardly worth While, Fellow-Citizens, to put You in mind of the Indignities You have receiv'd of late Years, and the ill Treatment the Bravest Assertors of Your Privileges have met with, from some of the Nobility, when We are now reduc'd so low, that a Few Great and Ill Men govern Us, whose Right it Is, and whose Chief Business it Should be, to Watch and Keep such Miscreants in Awe. However, for my Part, I have resolv'd to make War upon this powerful and pernicious Cabal, and will use that Liberty, which, as a Freeman of Rome, I am legally entitled to; but 'tis in Your Power only, to make my good Endeavours effectually serviceable to You. I wou'd not be understood to excite You to any kind of Force: No; Let Us fight 'em with their own Weapons. The same Engines which they have always made Use of, to raise themselves, will, I doubt not, if rightly employ'd, ev'n yet be sufficient to pull 'em down. Not long since, We thought We had Reason to complain of the Squand'ring the Publick Money, and of the Exorbitant Riches, and Excessive Power, of some Particular Persons; but Now, those Very Persons are so far from being contented to go off with Impunity, that They have agen work'd Themselves into Power. They have their Pontificates, their Governments of Provinces, and their Tri∣umphal Processions: They strut; They domineer; and treat Us with such Scorn, and Insclence, as if They thought it not Robbery, but an Honour, to have cheated the Commonwealth. Our Slaves, My Countrymen, Our purchas'd Slaves have Spirit enough to disobey the unjust Commands of their Masters: Shall We, that were Born Free, stand Still, and patiently suf∣fer the Yoak to be put about Our Necks? But, 'pray, Let Us consider, a little, what sort of Men These are, that have thus seiz'd upon the Government? Why, they are Men of Evil Principles, and Worse Practices, Designing, Proud, Ra∣pacious, Violent, and Unforgiving; Determin'd, by all Me∣thods,
to prosecute their Interest, and postpone to That all Regards to Religion and Honour. And this Society, this Ca∣bal, What shall I call it? This Iunto, are firmly and strongly united, by that Wicked Tye, of having All been involv'd in the Same, or in Equal Crimes! However, if We had been as Careful to Preserve our Liberties as They have been In∣dustrious to Wrest 'em from Us, Our Constitution had not been so Shock'd and Unsettled as tis now; nor would so many great Posts of the Commonvealth have been in the Hands of the most Forward, instead of the most Deserving. Our Ancestors ventur'd their Lives and their Fortunes, to preserve their Privileges, and to keep up a proper Balance in the Government; And shall We Not stir One Step, Not dare to run the Least Risque, to deliver down those Privi∣leges to Our Posterity, which We have receiv'd from those Ancestors? Surely, We ought the More Resolutely to Con∣tend for 'em, as 'tis More Dishonourable to Lose 'em, than Never to have Had 'em. But, perhaps, it may be ask'd, What is it proper for Us to do, in this Situation? Shall We address? Shall We impeach? I will not take upon Me to prescribe to You a Particular Method of Proceeding; but I will be bold to say, That Some Stand ought Immediately to be made, Some Stop, if possible, to be put, to the grow∣ing Tyranny of this Iunto; that the Commons of Rome may never have This Reproach, That They, who us'd to Oppose and Condemn the Least Irregular Step, or Encroachment, ev'n in their Kings, now Lie down, Easy and Satisfy'd, un∣der the Heavy'st, and Most Arbitrary Oppression, of Five or Six of their Own Fellow-Subjects! If We have not Spirit enough to rowze Ourselves upon this important Occasion, Our Condition is very Wretched, and almost Desperate; For, Whilst We are subdu'd at Home, faster than We con∣quer Abroad; Whilst no Man is allow'd a Place in the Se∣nate-House,
that is not thought, by These Masters, Less likely to Defend the Peoples Liberties, than to Give up his Own; Whilst hardly any One can be secure from Punishment, that does not deserve it; Whilst we give such Immense Taxes, without Appropriation; and let 'em be distributed, without Account; Whilst We have not Courage enough ev'n to own our Fears; Whilst We are forced to magnify Successful Blun∣ders: In a Word, Whist we lavish our Treasure, and hus∣band the War; a Man may venture to prophesy, without being a Conjurer, That, unless the Gods are pleas'd to work a Miracle for Us at Home, as they have done Many Abroad, the Time is not far off, in which this Ancient and Noble Frame of Government will be Totally demolish'd; and We, that have been so often Conquerors, shall be no longer Free∣men. Dixi C. MEMMIUS. Amsterdam: Printed in the Year 1656.
