T1162 12192701 55909
Bloudy Newse from the North AND The Ranting Adamites Declaration con∣cerning the King of Scotland, with their new League, Covenant, and Protesta∣tion; their denying the great God of Heaven, and burning his sacred vvord and Bible; the name of a new God by them chosen, and his Speech and pro∣mise unto them; their new Law, and grand Court; their Arraignment and Tryal, and a Copy of the several Articles and Indictment; with the several sentences to be inflicted upon divers offenders, together with their names: Also, a bloudy Plot discovered, concerning their Resolution to murther all those that will not turn Ranters; put in execution at York, to the astonish∣ment and admiration of the Reader, that shall diligently peruse this insuing Subject, never before heard of. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1650.
The Ranting ADAMITES, DECLARATION, &c. SIR, SInce my last of the 2d. of this instant, here hath happened a great and bloody Theatre in York, the manner thus: At the sign of the Star in Stonegate, there lately met a great Company of new Ranting-Adamites, who having solac'd themselves for the space of an hour, in a most inhumane, satanical, and luxu∣us way, man and woman together; at last, they came to this Diabolical resolution, at each mans wife or womans Husband, that denied their just and lawful Princi∣s of Ranting, for the holding of all things in common, should be massacred, and that those who would not oncu with them, should be immediately expelled, with bloody ult, was soon put in execution; for upon the dissolving of this infernal Crew, one r. Smart, living at Fowforth, a mile from the City, repairing home to his house, and came to his wife, and asked her, whether she would turn Ranter; she replyed, no, Husband, their wayes are soul damning: whereupon he immediately stob'd her to heart, with his knife, and presently fled; but a Hu-and-Cry is sent after him to∣rds Hull and Scarbrough: Another of these bloudy villains coming from one of eir infernal meetings, hath also kill'd his wife, and wo Children, at Pontefract; upon committing of which act, he was apprehended, and received sentence at York to brhanged: Since which time all possible care hath been used for preventing their meetings, and the Prayers of many hundred Saints have not been wanting for their Conversion; insomuch, that they have proved effectual, and about 500 are come in to the Gospel-light again, who have taken a League, Covenant and Protestation, to stand s to the wayes of truth, &c. But there are some few, that walk still in the wayes of darkness, who burn the Bible, and say there is no God, but Pluto, by reason that he appears to them in several shapes, telling them that they may live as they list, for that there is neither God nor Devil, that will punish them; some of these at a late meet∣ing in Cony-street, forsooth, would needs seem to be for Monarchy, and declared, that they held themselves bound, to yield all due obedience and loyalty to Charles the II. youths indeed, to serve 2 Masters; for although the last be not able to give them any thing for their service, the first will pay them home one day, which is all at prsent from. Your obliged Servant, SAMUEL TILBURY. York 9. Jan. 1651.
Sir, I have sent you here inclosed, a Copy of their develish Judicatore, con∣taining the sum of their Diabolical Law, and strange Indictments, viz. Enter the Jury all together. Williamson. Come Goody Hull, you are a woman so discreet, able knowing and well grounded in this business, that I must pitch upon you for the fore∣woman. Goody Hull. I would willingly do any thing for the good of our Town, ac∣cording to my ability; but unlesse we of the Jury be authorized to inquire o all misdemeanours within the whole Town, as well as of this particular busines for my part I shall refuse to do any thing at all. Will. That which Goody Hull speaketh, I conceive to be nothing but just and right in equiry: therefore I desire you that are here to be sworn of the Jury to proceed accordingly. Horwood. Call Goody Hull to the Book. Horwood She is on Sir. Will. You shall swear that you will diligently inquire, and true present men make of all such misdemeanours within this our Town of Lippuck as shall come to your knowledge, your Fellow councel, and your own you shall truly keep you shall not present any thing for hatred, malice, or evil, will you? You shall not any wise connive, nor passe by any thing out of respect to any person or per∣sons whatsoever: And you shall enquire respectively of our selves, as well as o∣thers, and in all things you shall present the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, &c. Hor. Goody Hull. Will. Come the rest. Jur. Goody Hayes. Goody Norwood. Goody Mashall. Goody Ayling. Goody Houndsam. Goody Hull sen. Goody Hewes. Goody Briager. Goodo Tribe. Goody Tribe. Goody Horwood. Cryer. They are all on Sir. Will. The same Oath that Goody Hull the Fore-woman hath taken on her part, you, and every of you shall truly observe, and keep on your parts, &c. Cryer. Count these. Cryer. It is needless Sir, for I can tell how many there are on them. Will. Be there twelve? Cryer. Nay, I cannot tell whether there be just 12. but I am sure there is a develish crew on them, there cannot chuse but be 12. or 13.
Will. Well, come, Horwood make a noise. Hor. O yes, O yes, O yes, The Judge of the Court doth strictly charge and Command all persons to keep silent, while the Charge is giving. Will. Gentlemen, and you good women of the Jury, I am at a very short warning put upon this business, therefore I shall appear the more unable to ex∣presse my self. But I thought it better that my imperfections should appear un∣to you, then the work to be left undone, therefore I shall only give you a short Charge, and leave it to the Juries grave wisdom and discretion. Sergeant. None of your short Charges, if you charge them at all, you must charge them home. Will. Peace, Peace. 1. You are to inquire of the business between Mother Dutton, and Mother Slade. The first ground, and the cause of their first falling out: What words passed, and whe∣ther they were slanderous. If one called another whore, that will bear no action; but if one say I will prove thee to be a whore, that is actionable, and ought to be here pre∣sented. 2. You are to inquire of the differences between Mr. Pamer and Mother Slade. 3. and lastly, you are to inquire of all, both of Customs, Priviledges, Misdemea∣nours, and defects whatsoever: If any man have married a wife in our limits, not being sufficient in privity, he is to be put away from her. If any man have been mar∣ried the space of two years, and have not gotten his wife with Child, you are to pre∣sent him; for his name is to be turned into Fumbler Hall, there to be entred and re∣corded. And if any such person have so laid for the space of 7. years, then he is to be branded in the fore-head with the likeness of a Rams head, and to find sureties that he shall live contented a Cuckcold ever afterward▪ And many other things of the like ure, which I shall leave to you of the Jury, and desire you to go together, and agree of your present . Vanish the Jury. Sergeant. Sir, you have done very well, I did not think that you could have undergone the business with so much gallantry and readiness, at so short a warning. Enter the Jury with their Presentments. Cryer. Stand by, make room for the Jury. Will. Are you agreed on your presentments? Jury. Yes. Will. Who shall say so for you? Jury. Our Fore-woman. Will. You are content we shall amend forreine and false Latine, altering no matter of substance.
Jury. Yes. Williamson reade the presentments. Imprimis. We present Mother Slade for calling Mother Dutton Jade, for w cannot find that ever she was jaded. Item. We present Mother Dutton, for saying Mother Slade was found again a Gate, with, &c. We cannot believe it to be true, for a woman of so great ex∣perience would have chosen a better place for that purpose. Item. We present Mr. Pamer, for calling Mother Slade Rotton-arst whore we think it a great abuse: For if her Arse had been rotten, it could never have indured one quarter of the brushes it hath received within these few years. Item we present Goody Slade, for being drunk no lesse then 3 times in on day. Item. We present Mother Dutton, for cheating her Daughter of her Sweet-heart. Item. We present Master Pamer for filling his Wine-pots little more then halfull. Item. We present Mr. Pamer for buying low-priz'd Wine at London, and sell∣ing it at the best price, enough to poyson people in the Countrey. Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer for exacting on his Customers, in buy∣ing Brush Fagots at about 18 pence a hundred, and selling them at two pence peece. Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer, for cheating his Customers in stinkin Tobackco. Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer for exacting on his Tapster for Beer that it maketh him fill his Juggs not above half full. Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer for abusing his Hostler, in making clean the Stables, and setting him about other work, and now and then getting two-pence by the bargain. Item. We present the said Mr. Pamer for keeping two doors to his house, that when the Mayor of the Town is drinking with his friends, his wife comes for him in at one door, and he runeth out at the other. Item. We present Goody Hull junior, for scolding at her Husband when he cometh home from the Ale-house, Item. We present Will. Hull junior, for kissing Goody Norwood at times un∣seasonable. Item. We present old Slade for a notorious Wittal. Item. We present Goodman Horwood to be a thin-jaw'd Fellow, and a dis∣paragement to our Corporation. Item. We present Richard Hayes for an intolerable long Nose, that when he
goes to kisse his wife, their two Noses meet before their Bodies are within a spet and a stride one of the other. Item. We present Goody Tribe for not keeping clean her nose, for it drops into all things she medleth withall. Item. We present Mr. Christmas for medling with his betters, in attempting to obtain Mr. Pamers Daughter, and very grosly abusing him in many other re∣spects. Item. We present Goody Stent for claiming more right to her Husband, when he hath been long at the Alehouse then at other times. Item. We present Averies Daughters for rooting up the Hedge-Rowes on the Sabbath-day. Item. We present John Purdy for rooting out the young Plants out of his Beard, and leaving nothing but here and there an old scrub. Item. We present old VVilliamson, drivelling his doublet before, Item. We present Julian Hull for ingrossing in the Market of Hastomore, there∣by inhanching Prikes of Cherries. Item. We present old Right to be misnamed, his name being Right, and he crooked both in person and conditions. Item. We present Goody Pescod for being jealous of her Husbands long stay Goody Valers. Item. We present Thomas Bridger for putting his Ladle into Grace Peatos pot, and then give free liberty for any man to eat the broth. Item. We present Goody Hudson for wearing her Husbands breetches, and nipping his Combe to boot. Item. We present Jesop for a pure Hypocrite. Item. We present the said Mr. Christmas for being the greatest cause of Chr. Pamers absenting her self. Enter the Bayliffs with a Warrant for the Judge of the Court, rffling, to the great amazement of the People. Williamson stands up.] What's the matter there? Horwood. Two Bayliffs come to arrest you, Sir. Judge. A pox take them, will they never leave this trick? Bayliffs. Come Williamson, you must go with us. Judge. I marvail you offer to disturb me in a business of such consepuence. Bayliffs. Ours is of more. Judge Il give you Bail then. Bayliffs. No Bail will hold you, we'll see now what the Goale will do. o the Bayliffs took him by the shoulders, and carry'd him away. So the Court brake up, and all ended.
A Sect of Ranters of late's reviv'd, Who seem more innocent then e'r Adam liv'd, Such as will naked go, and think'c a sin To wear a Garment, they're so hot within With lust, that they all Cloathing do disdain; Aarons old Vestments they account prophane, Elisha's double mantle when they hear But nam'd, they sweat agen: they nought will wear, Not holy Lawn to keep them from the air, Not St. Johns raiment, made of Camels heir: These Vestal Garments though they holy be, Yet they do smell of strong Hypocrisie, Demas must leave his Cloak, not any thing Must here be worn, no nor a Wedding Ring, Nor Fig-leaves, such as Adam wore long since, When he had lost his Robe of Innocence. The whore of Babels smock they all detest, All Antichristian Reliques with the rest. All must be barely naked, 'cause they say Truth it self naked goes, and so should they. Naked as from their Mothers wombs, they wear Nothing that covers, only skin and hair; Thus marching naked Sister, with a Brother, For want of Clothes they cover one another In some dark Grange thus meet they, where 'tis fit That they the deeds of darkness should commit: The Candles are put out, because they say They are enlightned all, and so they pray; Here they begin, and thus divide the text, Handling in order whosoe'r comes next. Each Rant: his fellow-feeler chuseth there, As at the spring each Bird doth chuse his Peer. And when they all grow proud with hot desires, Thus they correct and quench the rising fires.
FINIS.
