T624A R222145 99833372 37848
A DISCOVRSE touching Choyce of RELIGION. By Sr. RICHARD TEMPEST Baronet. Antiquam exquirite matrem, Virgil. Judge yee what I say, Acts Apostles.
To the Lady TEMPEST. Madam, IT is my Duty to give you an account of spending my Houres, whose vertu∣ous directions hath still enjoy∣ned me the imployment of them in the best things: and there can be no endevour comparable to the Inquest after Truth. Happy are Mens early imbra∣ces of that most worthy mistres of Mans soule; when the Son
of their Judgement rises free from those Clouds and Mists, which otherwayes by long as∣cending, time, and endevour, they would be but hardly able to expell. I must acknowledge my weakenesses, and errors, knowing it is the Victory of Christianity, to conquer the Pride of a Mans owne un∣derstanding, and whose vigor is shewed in our lowest sub∣missions. The World is like that Nymph, which still de∣stroyed those, to whom she most seemed faire; And Men in
the short course of life, heape up to themselves a sort of Opinions and Passions, and make them the faithlesse guides of their lives, of which though they highly esteeme, yet doe they but dwell under those barren Hills which are never without Clouds and Showres discending thence: And who would for the love of that, which in a moment perishes, refuse to pro∣fesse that, which will bestow on him Eternity; and in a con∣fusion of all humane things, will render him a felicity solid and
durable? I shall shew you what Port my Thoughts have arrived at, to escape the stormes of Error, and from thence to despise the severall Winds of Doctrine with which Men are much tost, but never Saile; and through the diversity of Opinions, halfe of them Pray for those Winds, whereby the rest are Drowned. The name of Rome, but once Named, some Mens minds become sur∣charged with the apprehensions of Superstition, Conspiracy; and what evills throng not in∣to
their conquerd Imaginati∣on? whereas they being got out of the Magicke Circle of parties, (where their minds are Conjured with the Devill of Faction) they finde that to be the place, which did commend to the whole World, The Faith of the Romans. And where Christian Profession hath with infinite sufferings and perse∣cutions triumphed over the Armed Power of its Ad∣versaries, and foure hundred Heresies that have sprung up before Luther; such high dis∣pleasures
Men have entertai∣ned against those Names which they looking directly on with the Eye of Reason, would perceive ingraven the well-drawne Lines of Truth; they by going on one side, looking with the Eye of Passion, draw the same Figures and Lines, by a deceit of the Eye, to beare an unhandsome pro∣portion. We intertaine Chri∣stian Profession, and the Sacred Word of God (the Records of it) delivered over to us upon a Divine infallible testi∣mony,
which is that of the holy Catholique Church, to which he hath promised his holy spi∣rit to the Worlds end. Where∣fore if Men would inlarge their thoughts, and take a free and open view of all the parts of the Fabricke of Christia∣nity, and shall consider of that power which he hath left to his Church, of his injunctions to heare his Church, of his promises to assist his Church; The Gates of Hell shall not prevaile against it; to re∣maine as a Light upon a
Hill: How great comfort must it needs rayse in the Hearts of Christians, to finde this made good, in a constant un-interrup∣ted succession of Bishops from Saint Peter? Let God be true, and every man a lyar. The Church of Rome lo∣cally, is but a particular Church; but let them not offer affront to the Divine good∣nesse, through abuse of Wit, or Logicall trifle (of a Ʋniversall particular) for the Church of Rome hath ever defended the Catholique cause; and
antiquity hath ascribed unto it a more powerfull principa∣lity, calling Her, The Mo∣ther of Churches; though the Holy Catholique church is ever the same; like the Ocean, which as it beats upon severall Countries with its Waves, begets se∣verall Names; being now called the French Sea, then the Spanish. Those Madam who are possest with prejudice against the Sea of Rome, have all different wayes of maintaining their opposition;
neither will they agree to the judgement of any one Tribu∣nall; the same Arguments have not the same effects with its different enemies; but like Wards in a Key, they are to be fitted to the diversity of parties, and capacities, to un∣locke their judgements, fast bound with error: It being truely said, That not the perfection of Reason, but the proportion doth pre∣vaile. Some retain still some∣thing in the bottome of the Box, and will not let it see
the Light by conference, lest it fly away; accounting it the surest tenure of Truth, to stick with obstinacy in the quicksands of error, and esteeme it their best title to it, to refuse to dispute it. A∣nother Measures Truth by the temper of indifferency, and esteemes it to be the safest way to be freed from Error, to be willing to capitulate. A third frames his own prin∣ciples, and by Reasons and deductions drawne thence, makes all their Discourse agree
well enough with it selfe; As Astronomers, some of them making the Earth to move: some the Heavens; and by both Doctrines, according to their principles layd downe, make up their Phai∣nomena, and appearances; but tell them of Antiquity, Fathers, and the Councels, they will answer you with that Merchant, that hung out for his Signe, Books set on fire; so that if any desired to have been Trusted, or to have come in his Bookes; He answered
them, That they were bur∣ned: so if you would get any beleife from them, from Libraries and Bookes, their Zeale hath already Burnt them. Another sort are wit∣tily placed, betwixt a Puritan and a Priest; If the Priest urge Councels and Fathers, they turne to the Puritan, and steale the Bible out of his pocket, to confute him with: And if the Puritan urge the Bible, then he turns to the Priest, and borrowes of him the Decrees and
Councels, to defend him∣selfe with. Children, saith Aristotle, call every one Mother; but comming to the use of Reason, they then acknowledge onely their true Mother. Thus doe Men beare their spirituall Allegi∣ance, drest up in severall garbes and formes, and apply to themselves the benefits of that stupendous Mistery of our Redemption, by the severall Conduits and Channels of their owne Fancies: but God is both the Way, the Meanes,
and the End; He hath made compleat the designati∣ons of his Grace, and Men will be found to be more in love with the Meanes, then the End, and to empty all their Zeales and Devotions into some new Mode in Reli∣gion, or particular Opinion, whereby they are differenced from others: They hold such a course, that doe make them seem to be desirous to take our Saviour by the Hand, over the backe of his Church; whereas he hath said of his
Embassadors, which were to continue to the Worlds End; Who heares not you, heares not me. But Madam, its more agreeable to you, and more contentfull, to cast the Lines of ones Thoughts into the smooth and pleasant waters of Devotion, which wash the beautifull Walls of Sion, ra∣ther then into the boysterous Sea of Controversie, for which my Barke is too little; and I ever returning thence Sea-sicke: but onely induced Ma∣dam to give your selfe, and
some other of my worthy Friends satisfaction: In the performance of which, I shall little value the Censure of those who suffer themselves to be carried away with that easie fault of Fault-finding; And doe beseech your Ladyship to give me your Blessing: Your Ladyships most humble, and most obedient Son, R. T.
The Contents. CAP. I. COnsideration of Religion, under the Notion of Re∣formations. Wherein is discourst, of se∣verall of their Tempers and Opinions, and perticularly of the Church of England. CAP. II. Pag. 29. against Melatair.An Answer to the particu∣lars of that grand Objection, repeated in the Words of Do∣ctor Bramhal. If you seeke to obtrude upon us the Roman Church, with its Adherents, for the Catholique Church, excluding three parts of
foure of the Christian World, from the Communion of Christ; Or, the Opinions thereof for Ar∣ticles, and Fundamentals of Ca∣tholique Faith: neither our Rea∣son, nor our Religion, nor our Charity will suffer us to listen to you. 1. Wherein is related the Opinion of Antiquity: Of the necessity of keeping communi∣on with the Church of Rome. 2. How Protestants agree, and how they exclude one ano∣ther. 3. The Catholique Church excludes none, but whom their owne errors exclude. 4. Of the use of Reason, in the Election of Religion.
CAP. III. A View of some of the chiefe Doctrines, pretended to be the cause of their depar∣ture. 1. Transubstantiation. 2. Praying to Saints. 3. Ʋse of Images. 4. Praying for the Dead, and Purgatory. 5. Confession and Satisfaction. 6. Of Fre-will. CAP. IV. The falling away from the Church (under the Notion of Reformation) the cause of troubles of State: and from the same grounds they build
their opinions on, arises the grounds of the disturbance of Governments. 1. Wherein is declared the ill and unfortunate ends of those, who in severall Ages and King∣domes, opposed the jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome. 2. True Religion, no Enemy to Governments. CAP. V. An Invitation of Wits to the Study of Arts, and to leave opposing the Church; (where∣in,) 1. Of the excellency of the Fruits of Piety. 2. That they proceed onely from true Religion.
CAP. I. Consideration of Religion, under the Notion of Reformations. THe esteeme and value men put on the finding of what is Truth, makes all men so plausibly vent their perticular Opinions, under the Notion of Reformation; so that by the gate and entrance of that word, mens understandings are deli∣vered into an inextricable la∣byrinth of error; and no sooner men withdraw their wary steps
from one deluding path, but they are insensibly conveyed into another, and doe but still by the variety of falshoods, tend to the Center of those Maeanders: nor is there any way to get out of those toyles, till by a neglect of all those ar∣tificiall fences, that each party inclose their opinions with, de∣spising the Laws of their ma∣zes; men redeeme themselves into the liberty of a dis-inte∣rested judgement, which nei∣ther the name of Calvin, or any perticular opinion, or nationall alterations hath shut up with prejudice. There are sufficient Alarums to hearken to that precept, of trying all things:
and as it is said by one of the Fathers, the Church shall never be free from two sorts of per∣secution; outward affliction, to try mens affections to God: and errors in faith, to try their right knowing him: but I perceived men subject and tide to any party, or to men of perticular opinions, rise to no further ac∣knowledgements, then of such Tenents and Articles, which those men are Patrons of, who cry up the Champions of them, and are wholly frozen in chari∣ty towards those, who using the freedom of their reasons, make a retreat from their precipices. Grotius, the glory of his Coun∣try, and Learning, eminent
through a universal knowledge, and who drew his experience of the state of Christendom, at the Fountain head of great affairs, imployed all his Junior ende∣vours for reconciling Protes∣tants, and bringing them un∣der one band of government; yet in the later deliveries of his judgement, acknowledges that an impossibility, and that there was a necessity to return to Ca∣tholique obedience, or to com∣munion with the Church of Rome, as a Rock against which hitherto, all Heresies had beat themselves into froath. He made me with more equall eye look upon the ingenuous retra∣ctions of Doctor Vaine, and Do∣ctor
Cressey, against whom not∣withstanding I had an edge for deserting that, which as I thought, should have centred all judgements and devotions; but after finding them fetch from deep search of antiquity, their resolutions of returning to that Church (from which the ill accidents and obliquity of late times had misled men) with reluctancy I found their testi∣monies true, and my most re∣belling understanding, their rea∣sons most imperiously brought to capitulate; finding, that though men professe to become ready captives of Truth, yet they are unwilling to think, but that they are in its fetters all∣ready;
wherefore I obtained of my selfe, to discharge all pre-ingaged affections, all byas of Faction, and interest; resolving to pay that Homage to my Cre∣ator, which I should finde he required of me; knowing, that when he commands a Sacrifice, nature must sleep, affections be silent. I found this likewise a great deale more plausible to my selfe, than easie with faith∣fulnesse to put in practice. I perceived that a constant and steddy Judgement was required to enter upon the quarrellings of Polemick Discourses, where were used so much subtilty in arguing, partiall proceeding, ingenious diversion (where wits
were imployd for conquest, ay∣ded with the advantages of Language and Science) not for to be rewarded with the tri∣umph of Truth, but to beare the Lawrell, for having conque∣red men with words, though not satisfied them with reason. Wherefore I considered the dif∣ference, between what may be said, & what should be thought: and therefore to discharge that duty which a man owes his own reason, for the utmost exami∣nation and scrutiny of Truth, I consider'd the Foundations and Authorities upon which se∣verall parties at the same time did challenge mens devotions. 1. The Presbyterians, who ac∣knowledging,
and ingeniously professing to be more convinced by, then tyde to the Fathers, or Antiquity; equall their owne Interpretations and Preachings to the dignity and verity of the Text, extolling and crying up their imaginary discipline; to the meanes of setting up of which, they sacrifice all Morall, Civill, Ecclesiasticall obligati∣ons, counting it want of Zeale in Gods service, to be true in any relation, when for the pro∣motion of the Covenant, it is expedient to be failing in them; this is their invention, to which they ascribe an Apotheosis; they dresse it up, and adorne it with Scripture Phrase, making the
two Attributes of Gods, Mercy and Justice, (all the threats and promises of either) but to damn and crown mens forwardnesse or slownesse in this cause, in titling to Divinity this their delusion; with such heats doe they im∣brace, what was never heard of in Gods Church this fourteene hundred yeares; and this doe they extoll to be the height of Reformation. 2. All other sects and sorts that discent from them, who will not be subject to this spirituall bondage, have their bucklers of defence out of Scripture too (the measure and judge whereof is their own interpretation) they alledge, That when two or three are ga∣thered
together, God is in the midst of them: whereas the Fa∣thers say in their Expositions, That when two or three of the Church are gathered together for devotion sake, God is in the midst of them; not that the gathering of two or three together doth make a Church; thus in the Son of Gods Word, doth swarmes of gnats and flyes play, not ca∣pable of being governed: And though both these Reformati∣ons be contrary to each other, yet both oppose a third Refor∣mation, established by Parlia∣mentary Laws, which retained a solemnity of Forme and Ce∣remony, and from its first angry leaving onely, to acknowledge
the Authority of the Roman Bishop, fell by degrees to leave off one thing after another. And as it served them, to be able to bandy against the Church of Rome, complide with those other reformists (as they call themselves) who in no other thing agreed with them, but in disagreeing from it. Its owne proper temper stood not upon termes irreconcilable, but pre∣tended the cause of new Do∣ctrines received in the Church of Rome, to be that which forced their departure: the most inge∣nious and ingenuous, owned this Modell, whose parts I high∣ly esteem, whose persons I ho∣nour, having had establishment
of civill authority, decency of Ceremony, and Forme of Li∣turgy. I endevoured to observe in the Writings of the chiefe upholders of it, their freer and lesse compeld judgement con∣cerning the Church of Rome, such as fell from them in the intervals of their calentures, & heats of contradiction. I found the Bishop of Canterbury against M. Fisher acknowledging, that if they were another Church from the Church of Rome, he would soon return to it. Hooker denies to damne them, who have been the authors of their salvation. Others part stakes betwixt Truth and Faction, saying, The Church of Rome hath the truth
in it, as Silver lying hid among Rubbage. I have heard a Learned Bishop yet living, confesse, All the difference was onely in words and termes. Thus doe they date their Religion a new, from some accidentall thing, bringing in new Epochaes and accounts from changes and alterations, (which they terme Reformati∣tion) whereas the firme princi∣ple of the Church, was ever a pleading an uninterrupted suc∣cession, of Pastors and Doctrine from the Apostles time to this: Saint Cyprian saying in his Epi∣stles, He hath not Ecclesiasticall Ordination, who keeps not Ec∣clesiastical union; but they have cut this Scepter (which whilst
whole, every one did bow to) into contemptible little coyne, which are severall parties, bear∣ring different impressions, which are onely currant with those, whose perticular marke and character is set upon it. CAP. II. A View of the whole Question betwixt the Church of Rome, and the Episcopall party, by an∣swering the perticulars of that grand Objection, which I repeate in the words of Doctor Bram∣hal. Pag. 29. against Molatair.If you seeke to obtrude upon us the Roman Church, with its adherents, for the Catholique
Church, excluding three parts of foure of the Christian World, from the communion of Christ: OR, The Opinions thereof for Arti∣kles and Fundamentals of Catho∣lique Faith; neither our Reason, nor our Religion, nor our Charity, will suffer us to listen to you. Thus doe they Patronize their opposition to the Church of Rome, under the challenged protection of Religion, Reason, and Charity; and with as great applause as the naming of these things can afford, they celebrate the triumph of error. They be few words, I confesse; but such
as govern and constitute all the actings and reasonings of man, by their light, and influence. But to Write over the Doore where the Plague is, all the Medicinable names in Physicke, will not preserve men from In∣fection: onely the greater dan∣ger is, that men more easily un∣der the title of good things, are deceived into places of morta∣lity: And because this Obje∣ction seemingly is framed up, and upheld by all those things, that are worthy of man. I will leave pecking at stones in the field, and will impartially view the inward strength and force of this building. They finde fault that any should obtrude upon
them, the Roman Church, with its adherents, for the Catholique Church, excluding three parts of foure, of the Christian World, from the communion of Christ. Who is it that would obtrude the Ro∣man Church, with its adherents upon you? is it onely in this age urged by a Faction? Who is an enemy to your most neces∣sary Reformation, and for am∣bition and profit sake, will not apply themselves to the inno∣cency and purity of Gods true Religion? Is it obtruded onely by those, whom you have just∣ly offended, warranted thereto by the Laws of God, and the Church? Is it by those onely, who by their erronious tenents
makes justifiable your depar∣ture from them, and bandying against them? to returne to them again, were, to forfit your zeale in Gods cause, to betray your Reason, Religion, and Charity; but if on the contrary it prove onely a perverse pro∣ceeding to maintaine a Scisme; if it be onely your calumny, and ill dealing with your Mo∣ther, from whose lap, peevishly, and without reason you have withdrawne your selves; if it be you onely who take scandal at the Church, which can be none to you, though they may be to it, Tunc alta ruunt subductis tcta columnis; then have you Passion for Zeale, Opinion for
Faith, and confusion for the effects. St. Iraeneus, who lived in the second age, in his Booke against Heresies, reckons up a succession of the Bishops of Rome, from St. Peter, to the Pope then present, and pro∣nounces it necessary for all Churches, to hold communion with those that adhere to the Church of Rome; Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam, propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est omnes qui sunt undique fideles, in quâ semper ab his, qui sunt undique, conservata est ea, quae sit ab Apo∣stolis traditio; fundamentis igitur Ecclesiam Apostoli, Lino Episco∣patum, &c. then were they plain
and positive, in the declaring the duty of all, to desert all perticular Churches, which did not adhere and hold communi∣on with the Sea of Rome. Ter∣tullian of the same Age, De pre∣scriptione Hereticorum, si autem Italiae adjaces, habes Romam, unde & nobis auctoritas praesto est. St. Ambrose of the fourth Age or century of the Church, How happy is that Church, upon which the Apostles have poured out all Doctrine with their bloods. Saint Jerom of the same time, upon the first Epistle to Timothy, The Church which is the house of God, notes upon it thus; Of which Damasus (then Pope) is at this day ruler: And againe, Primà
adversus Ruffinum, fidem suam quam vocat; camque qua Romana pollet Ecclesia; Si Romana respondent, ergo Catholici sumus. St Augustine of the fifth Age, lib. 11. cap. 2. contra Faunsum, Vides in hac re quid Ecclesiae Ca∣tholicae valet authoritas quae ab ipsis fundatissimis seibus Aposto∣lorum usque ad hodiernum diem, succedentium sibi met Episcopo∣rum serie, populorum consensione firmata. St. Jerom of most au∣stere life, a profound Schollar, and generall Linguist, lived un∣married, a Monke, a Priest, said Masse. St. Augustine was Bishop of Hippo, confessedly a Priest, and offered up the body and blood of Christ in Sacrifice, for
the living and the dead. Saint Basil, a Monke, Priest, unmar∣ried; did not they all live and dye in the communion of the Church of Rome, and did de∣test Scisme? I remember one told me at Venice, pleasantly discoursing of the difference which that Republique had with the Pope; We would have become (saith he) any thing to have been ad oppisitum with the Pope, Lutherans or Calvenists, but that we were satisfied with the truth of all opinions of the Church; from our own Records which have been in violated and kept intire, and delivered then with as great vigor, as now ob∣served, for about a thousand
years; which time that City hath stood, never taken, or plun∣derd, nor burnt; the two great winding sheets of humane things. Will not the Laws and constitutions of all ancient go∣vernments declare and demon∣strate the same, even of those places which have revolted from them? must all men in so many grave Councels, resorting from all parts of the Christian world, relating one to another, what in the severall places whence they came, hath been held, and so from time to time an univer∣sall establishment of such things as have been found to be the generall Traditions and Do∣ctrines of the Church: and yet
must all these be thought to have walked in a vaine shadow? Rocks, Cities, Woods, must be thought to move, while their eyes dwelling too much upon the currant of the times, breeds this deception, that they are thought to move from the little Boats, when it is the Ship boats departing from them. Thus it is evident, who thrusts the Church of Rome upon them, and what hath thrust them from the Church of Rome? When parties are once engaged, though testi∣monies be as lowd as Thunder, yet the ball must be kept up; poore pretences must undergoe the opinion of inevitable ne∣cessities; all sticks seen in that
Water, must be crooked: Non persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris: They say, It must not be obtruded upon them as Catholique, it exclud∣ing three parts of foure, of the Christian World. All Christians in all Ages have pronounced that Artikle, I beleeve the holy Catholique Church; if mens saith should not vary, the object must never faile; and in all Ages downe from our blessed Savi∣ours time, they have most sted∣fastly pronounced this Artikle in the bosome of the Church of Rome; which taken locally, is but a Parish Church; but in re∣spect of retaining with others that same Doctrine which the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul
delivered them, whether by writing, or by word of mouth; in that sence, it is called Catho∣lique; and so, Orbis in Ʋrbe est. When Heresies sprung, as there must be Heresies, they had re∣course still to what was delive∣red by way of Doctrines to them, wherby they did repel all false and erronious opinions, as constantly maintain their own Doctrine. When diverse parts of Scripture were called in que∣stion, it was the Churches Au∣thority did pronounce them Divine: now the Church was to be deceived in its Sentence, or not: If it was then infallible, why not now? and in the in∣terpretation and exposition, as
well as the Letter, when Scri∣pture is not Scripture, but rightly Expounded. As touch∣ing an externe and adventitious condition of the Church, it suffers sometime dilatation and inlargement; other time, per∣secution and contraction, yet still ever the same. The Arke, that was the type of the Church, vvas sometimes on the Waves, sometime in the Wildernesse, travelling: againe, in the Tem∣ple in peace and glory. When the Arrian Heresie had so catch∣ingly surprized the World, no doubt but the Catholique Church did exclude them; and because it vvill not now let every stink∣ing puddle of Opinion, and
every infectious currant of Fa∣ction run into its Sea; or that like the Sea, it will not let any dead or corrupt thing lye in its bowels; therefore forsooth, it must not be obtruded upon any as Catholique, it excluding three parts of foure of the Christian World. If it should have so much good nature, to admit all, its Doctrine would not be Catho∣lique, that is, what was profest at all times; the holy Catho∣lique Church is but one. Epis∣copacy is but one, saith Saint Cyprian, as Streames from the same Fountain, Branches from the same Root; here is nothing but that fidelity, which a Spouse
owes to her Betrothed, no in∣tertainment of Forraine loves, or unlawfull mixtures. Those that are called, Reformists, ex∣clude not one another; when they would appear a great body of opponents of the Roman Church, they exclude them not from opposing the same Autho∣rity, though in manner, and in their own opinions they oppose and exclude one another; like that Image, part whereof was Clay, part Iron, that by clea∣ving together resembled a bo∣dy, though never incorporated.Harmony of Con∣fessions. B. Hall of the Churches of Hol∣land and France. They are enemies of a good Catholique malice, whilst they would unite all the different Formes of Scisme, wherein eve∣ry
ones Fancy was their guide, and of these would make an angry union, to gratifie their humour of opposing their Mo∣ther Church: and if one should lend a severe aspect into their own Commonwealths, and In∣terests, he shall seem to retreave the ancient Chaos, each Sect so differing from other, and every one dissenting from what them∣selves were at first: When they shak'd hands with the Church of Rome, every one departing a se∣verall way, according to the concernments and ends of their Leaders, or the Genius and na∣ture of the People, or the acci∣dents & affaires of those times, which steared their furies, and
indignations. The Lutherans hold the Calvenists for the Phaetons of Europe, and in a late Sinod have condemned them guilty of all the Warres and disasters in these late times. Calvin allowes of Episcopacy, yet his followers make it ground enough of an immortall quar∣rell, to have them extirpated. In every Country, that ill Seed that Calvin sowed, came up of a different fashion; as he well perceived, who described their severall humors of Genevizing, Anglizing, Scotizing. What Wars are raysed in the mutuall opposition of each others Do∣ctrine, every one of them ha∣ving some perticuler Opinion
wherein they magnifie them∣selves, being their Eurika; and sets it as it were in the Van, for an Ensigne of the Faction, un∣der which they doe so peevishly militate? A Satyre would be the best stile, to describe the animosities, they prosecute each others Opinion with, and no lesse would it become all those angry fits, that they ex∣presse in their severall wan∣drings and errors: they throw a Sea of gall and bitternesse after those, who upon mature exami∣nation, relinquish those Mazes, they leade their followers in. What should one speake of the fruitfull Independency, big with all sorts of Opinions,
Brownists, Anabaptists, Armi∣nian, Zwinglian, Aecolampadi∣an, and all these the English Church Protestant, Episcopall banishes & excludes from them. The bosome of the Catholique Church is spread wide, to in∣tertaine all, whom with earnest Prayers and endevors, it invites and desires, zealous of their salvation, which onely in an or∣dinary way, is to be had there. The ancient Heretiques, Arri∣ans, Nestorians, Ʋtichians, whose reliques yet possesse some place in the World, are excluded likewise by themselves, who make this objection; and be∣sides their owne Reformation, hath been a varied unconstant
one; that except they would (fal in love with this Word Refor∣mation) I know not well what can be understood by it. H. 8. first onely threw out the Pope, but retained the seven Sacra∣ments: after, by degrees, they were taken away, and new Do∣ctrines brought in, with relaxa∣tions of Ecclesiasticall Jurisdi∣ction: and sometime it hath been wholly submitted to the Presbyterian humour, in confu∣sedly going to their Churches; and so generally using their Directory: whereas, according to their own opinions, vvithout Bishops no Ordination can be; Quo teneam nodo? They complaine, That the
opinion of the Church of Rome, are obtruded upon them, for Arti∣kles and Fundamentals in Faith. Doth not all the Wildernesse of their opinions, their opiniotive Idolatries, each one avouching their Doctrine, with, Thus saith the Lord? Doth not all their Anarchies and irregularities, flow in upon them, by letting those antient bulworks goe in∣to neglect, which stood betwixt a Sea of error and themselves? that is, in stead of standing up∣on the old wayes, to view and discover truth from: they have onely disdainefully trampled upon them; and in stead of asking the Fathers, to see vvhat they held and thought; they
will make bold to thinke the Fathers mistaken, if they finde themselves contradicted by them; and hold, and thinke of them, as not worth asking. Thus doe they discountenance Tra∣dition, and the establishments of the Church. The Apostle saith, When he should come, he would order things: Now, saith the Father, what hath beene universally observed, was orde∣red by him. St. Augustine de Bap. contra Donatist, That which the Universall Church holds, and is not Instituted by Councels, but alwayes retained, its probably beleeved, not to be delivered, but by Apostolicall authority. Their error that oppose the au∣thority
of the Church, and the prerogative of the Apostolicall Seat, flowes from this wretched pudled Fountaine; that is, Re∣ducing Reformation to the Scri∣pture it selfe, interpreted by mens perticular judgements. The holy and sacred letters, are the bles∣sed records of our salvation, Celestiall Messages, Angels of peace, winged with love, which hover over mens soules, with celestiall protections, comforts, and graces: they are the glasse, wherein is beheld the beauty of holinesse, the splendor of the Eternall Father, the Image of his Sonne. Yet as S. Austine saith, The words of the Scripture, are to be so understood, as the
world hath beleeved, which it self foretold should beleeve: they were writ upon severall occasi∣ons to perticuler Churches, which faithfully kept, what was committed unto them, whether by writing, or by word of mouth; the Scripture confessing, That if all had been writ, the world would not have contained the Books: and every where they enjoyne the hearkning to the Church, which who should not heare, are ex∣cluded from Christian commu∣nion, by their holy censure. The Church was then establisht, when divers of these sacred let∣ters were directed to them; and by them, and what other rules were delivered & taught them:
they governed, taught, admini∣stred, corrected, and absolved; so that they were like the Te∣stimony in the Arke: the Church of God, had the custody and interpretation of them; so that who should Sacrilegiously steale the testimony out of the Ark, and run away with Scripture, and impaile Congregations a∣bout with new goverments, and cry, The Word of the Lord, and quarrell at the other orders and Traditions of the Church, he would be judged by all, to have ravisht the spheares of govern∣ment, to have disordered the Divine dispensation of his goodnesse towards us: Neither can they pretend any right over
those Laws, who are condem∣ned by those Laws Waters out of their own channels, beget strange and forraine tasts; and this is the grand and unhaypy sophistry of this age; a bene conjunctis, ad male divisa. Scri∣pture divided from the Church, seems to countenance every party in their fancies, making it like a Looking-glasse, wherin they doe but see their owne Image, not Gods; and by an inward delusion, view the re∣flections of their owne wits, flattering their understandings, whilst by a foreprepared con∣ceipt, they finde some counte∣nance, to their own inward thoughts: Whereas Scriptures,
the Oracles of God, are truth; not the Pen, or the Presse, being writ because they were true; not true, because they were writ. They say, neither their Reli∣gion, Reason, nor Charity will per∣mit them to acknowledge the Church of Rome for their Mother. I shall now view the use of Rea∣son, in the election of Religion, and see if it well directed, doth hinder them. When that which flows from well establisht au∣thority, shall be call'd in que∣stion, or disputed through the violence and disorder of Facti∣ons, the upholders of Govern∣ment and Justice, have recourse to the Origens and Fountaines
of Justice; shewing how all their Acts and Decrees, received their obligatory nature, from the agreement they had with those rules of Reason, and those seve∣rall Laws which constituted them to be good and just: so that they who before found onely the effects of peace, by a due obedience to them, now search into the reasons and cau∣ses, why they were of such power, to produce such effects: And those who before pleasant∣ly lived in the building, labori∣ously now seeks the Founda∣tion. The mysteries of Religion being above reason, were con∣firmed with mirakles, which are above nature: but whether
this, or that Religion, be the same with that which was so confirmed, must be examined according to all those rules, which though divinely given, must now by reason be exami∣ned, whether they be confor∣mable to them, or not. The protitipe was from Heaven, the originall supernaturall; but for to prove the continuance of it, we must compare, and examine it according to all that hath been delivered concerning the same formerly. And its no small difficulty to chase truth through its severall channels: The Laws of Gods Church, challenge our obedience; the opposing wher∣of is Scisme, because we are
kept in one intire body, by the observation of them: the neg∣lect whereof cuts us off from that communion. Civill Go∣vernments and Policies have their Acts and Statutes, the opposing whereof makes men guilty of sedition and faction; because there is a solution of continuity made, and a divi∣ding of them into parts, which threatens destruction of the whole; the preservation where∣of, is the end of all good Go∣vernments. The Laws of Rea∣son, distinguish Vice and Vertue. What way is there to distin∣guish Ecclesiasticall obedience, from Scismaticall combinati∣ons? but to prove the univer∣sality
of the Church, its constant succession, with the exercise of its jurisdiction: and that those, who have seperated themselves from it, bears a later date, be∣gun from some accidentall change in Government; the Pride of their Leaders, or the ignorance and heap'd up errors of the people. What differen∣ces, Vice, and Vertue? not a locall distinction, of being pla∣ced in the midst of Vice; but, as such actions observe the di∣ctates of right Reason, which assignes them their end, their degrees of heats and motion. Who views not the establish∣ment of ancient Common-wealths in their first and Primi∣tive
Laws, their Records, Acts of State, and a constant exer∣cise of a Supreme Authority? When men with the armes of reason encounter the desert soules of Atheists, doe they not prove the Impression of a Deity ingraven on the soules of all, though they erre in paying their Homage? Doe they not bring reasons from severall Sci∣ences, for the demonstration of à natura naturans, or first mover, or Supreme Governor? Those who prove the truth of Christi∣an Religion against Turkes and Jews, doe they not pleade the innocency and simplycity of those men, that first Preached Christ crucified; that they could
have no end, but the hope of an Immortall Glory to beare them out in all their sufferings; they deliver'd a Doctrine to the world, an enemy to carnall pleasures, and the ambition of the world; and with disarmed innocency to prevaile over the furious malice of their Persecu∣tors, must needs prove an om∣nipotent power that ayded them: and having brought them to the acknowledgement, that God is the Author of our Faith, then they finde a necessi∣ty, to receive the speaker, for a full demonstration of the truth of all that is spoke: Then doe they all to heavenly rules give place Which passions kill, & reason doth deface
The Church is builded upon the Divine promises, That the gates of Hell should not prevaile against it: and we see, that neither Ty∣rants, whose angers are Massa∣cres; nor an Angel of Light-seeming falshood, hath prevailed against his Church; neither the courses, nor discourses of mens Pens and Wits, have been pre∣valent against it; In hanc manca rus fortuna. It hath continued in the Succession of two hun∣dred and sixty Popes; and ac∣cording to the Sibils Prophesie, The Fishers hooke hath subdued the Roman Empire, and conquered the World, verified in St. Peters Successors. Thus Reason may have its satisfactions, and hath a
latitude of discussing, and be∣ing active in those things which are its proper spheare, which are arguments of credibility: the light of nature will con∣duct us a great way in our du∣ties, which we may carry in our hands, till they be obscured with the clearer lights of grace. A Starre conducted the Wise Men to the Sonne of Righte∣ousnesse: and though illumi∣nations from Heaven, sometime beate downe the fiercest Saul to the ground, that is at once to make them humble, and to know his will: and though sometimes by his omnipotent grace, he, as it were, casts his servants at once in a mould; as
Saint Paul was called Apostolus fusilis; yet reason otherwhile, (which is Gods Law too) must be summon'd up to our ayde, whilst by degrees we recover our falling steps, and unwinde our selves out of error: Hos quaesitum munus in usus; Is there any way to weane mens minds, nurst in the imbraces of error, but the imployment and use of their reason? To discover what their opinions owe to their cra∣dle, what to a rationall exami∣nation: men beare an affection to opinions, as to the places where they were borne, though it be the rude rugged moun∣tains of the Swisses. The soule with difficulty parts with its
first imbibitions, and with pain climes the rising Hill of Truth. Many are the innate delusions of mens soules: occult adhesi∣ons, and secret fastnesses, which are not cassierd till their judge∣ments are informed from what source they spring, till by the thred of reason, they unwinde themselves out of that Laby∣rinth, nature, or their first course delivered them into: Mens judgements suffer from society, and example retorts upon our understanding. Cu∣stome and Affection, are me∣diums which represent things different from their true pro∣portions: nothing can infran∣chise mens minds, or set them
free from those inchanting im∣braces, but the Power and So∣veraignty of Reason: Stultus non accipit, verba prudentiae, Nisi ea dixeris, quae sunt in corde ejus. Now, as Reason compels them to return to the Church, so will the tenents of their own Reli∣gion, if great soule-killing opinions be not found to make the Gulph, and the mega kasma. Some perticulars whereof in the next Chapter I shall exa∣mine, and then I hope their Charity is such to themselves and others, that they will be as good as their words. Thus in a short Map, I have let you see, That the Church of Rome,
with its adherents, doth necessa∣rily challenge their Ʋnion with, and obedience to, by the Voyce of Antiquity, which hath still kept its ancient deposited Doctrines, written and unwritten, whose bosome is ever open to receive all, but whom their owne Scisme and Error excludes; and that both their Reason, Religion, and Charity command a returne. CAP. III. A View of the perticular Do∣ctrines, pretended to be the cause of their not returning. THe just exceptions against any opinion, is either want
of Truth, or want of Piety: but they being convertibilia, I shall shew, That as these Do∣ctrines excepted against are true, so likewise they have the Impressions of God ingraven on them; though there be two pretences of exception that they make. First, Objecting to generall Councels, new creati∣on of Truths, when they doe no more then declare what are so. Nextly, From the words they make use of to condemne Error and Heresie. They would have it, that the Councels make new Artikles, when as they pretend to signifie no other thing by those words, then that which is certainely knowne to
be the Ancient, and Orthodox Doctrine. The Reformed Reli∣gion (so called) thus stands in opposition, and is a contradi∣ctory, and a negative one, and is an angry and verball conten∣tion, oppositions of Science falsely so called. There hath not wanted those in the Church of Rome, that have exactly tride the depths of all those studies, whether in the know∣ledge of Languages, for know∣ing the Text in the Originall, or of History, or Schoole-reaso∣ning, wherein any opponents can pretend to contest with them in.Convect Lond. 1562. Art 16. If they will appeale to Scripture, as sometimes they doe, how many Catholique
Champions have faithfully stu∣died the literall sence, the my∣sticall, the Historicall part, the Parabolicall, the Figurative ex∣pressions, the Naturall, the Ori∣ginals of the Old and New Testaments, the Hebrew and the Greeke, with the Antient Greeke and Latin Glosses. If Hystory may prevaile, Eusebius shall bring testimony, Palladius, Sezemen Socrates, Ruffin shall be witnesses. St. Bede, St. Je∣rom shall tell what was the pra∣ctises in the first times of Chri∣stianity. If the pious Decrees of those Popes (which them∣selves beleeve to be Saints in Heaven) shall be heard, Catho∣lique Doctors have viewed all
their Decrees, both before the Councell of Nice, and after. If conquest, by the Arts of Dis∣putation, be pretended to, they have enterd into the nicest dif∣ferences, and have been cutters of a Commin Seed: and are throughly acquainted with all the most retired advantages of Wit and Learning. There have been many and great challen∣ges to the foure first Generall Councels, Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Calcedon; but ma∣ny Catholiques have not onely read from the first of Nice, to the last of Trent, but also all other approved Provinciall Councels. If the Fathers, Do∣ctors, and men famous in all
Ages, be consulted with, they will appeare to be all of the same holy Catholique Church; St. Basill, St. Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Gregory Nessen, St. Gregory the great, Iraeneus, Cyprian, Fulgentius, Pamphilus the Martyr, Palladius, Theodo∣ret, Ruffinus, Lactantius, Vin∣centius, Lyrenensis, Dionisius the Areopagite, Schollar to Saint Paul. St. Ignatius, St. Polycar∣pus, St. Clement, St. Augustine, Hierome, St. Ambrose, Papias Schollar of St. John the Evan∣gelist, &c. Who will not then put their foot into the same Barke, with so excellent com∣pany, to sayle to happinesse in? but remaine in the Cock-Boars
of their owne private opinions, to be tost with every wave of Doctrine, and to suffer Ship∣wracke? The Hebrew and Greek Scriptures, are preserved by the Roman Church (defendors of the Catholique cause. Its Doctrines whether writ, or delivered by mouth, Historians deliver the same to be with, what Popes have maintained, Decrees con∣firmed, Expositions cleared, Councels declared, Schooles taught, and Fathers delivered. And their practice is demon∣strated by all Ancient Laws of England, Imperiall, Nationall of Forraigne Countries, and former times: by confession of Enemies, Mahumetans, Jews,
Pagans, and all those Scisma∣tickes, who confesse Antiquity is not for them. I shall for those opinions, that are pretended to be cause of their departure, and the hinderance of their not returning againe to the Church of Rome, give you a taste of the Fathers in severall Centu∣ries: and withall shew what fruits of piety, charity, and comfort they have contain'd in them. Of the Eucharist Altars, & Sacrifice.The word Transubstantiation, must not be indured; they say it is but a late word,The ve∣rity of its Doctrine. since the Councell of Laterane onely used; hence they impute no∣velty to the Artikles of the Church: they acknowledge the
Church hath a power given it, to decide controversies, and the truth of the reall pre∣sence being called in question, with subtile interpretation of words, the Church must use some words of art to oppose them, and secure the truth a∣gainst their nimble turning of the sence of words; so that to quarrell at the word, is indeed to quarrell at the exercise of the Churches power; moderne rebellions against the Tenents of holy Church, forceth it to use some words, to hinder the evasions of its enemies, which they professe to signifie no more by, then what was taught, by This is my body. The word Tri∣nity
was not used, till Councels found it necessary to oppose certain Heresies of those times, by framing that word. But what a sinister laying hold of all occasions is there, by those who once undertake to defend a party? Ingenuity is fled, pas∣sion is the Pilot, whilst they are tost upon those faithles Seas of error. Transelementation is as hard a word, and M. Moun∣tague allowes that. The Greeks use a word to of the same sig∣nification, yet no offence taken at it. Heare the Fathers seve∣rall expressions, as well as late Councels. St. Ambrose in the fourth Age after Christ, by the benediction, nature it selfe is
changed; the change is not made by Faith alone, but really, saith St. Chrysostome. Not every bread, but that which receives the bene∣diction, is made the body of Christ. Saint Augustine in the fifth Age.In an∣swer to Melatei The Bishop of Derry doth in∣genuously confesse, That Anti∣quity hath used the expressions of seeing Christ, touching Christ in the Sacrament, of fastning our teeth in his flesh, &c. What satisfaction can pre∣vaile with a moderate ingenu∣ity, which one shall not meet with in later Schoole-men and Councels? Clypeus Tridentinus saith, Beleeve Transubstantia∣tion, but the manner of Tran∣substantiating, you need not.
Schoole termes oblidge not, whether by adduction, or as∣sumption, or any other words of Art, they may argue, but not disturb the Faith of the Church. How Christ is present in the Sacrament, can neither be per∣ceived by sense, nor imaginati∣on. St. Thomas of Aquin. Jere∣mias Patriarcha in Greece, saith, By the power of the omnipo∣tent spirit, the bread is changed into the very body of Christ, wine into the very blood. The Councell of Trent declares, that in this Sacrament, Jesus Christ, true God, and true Man, is true∣ly, really, and substantially con∣tained under the species of those sensible things, yet nor
according to a naturall manner of existing, but Sacramentally. He was the Word that spake it, And what that word did make it, I doe beleeve, and take it. All the Ancients use constant∣ly without flashes of Rheto∣ricke, or translation of words, the word sacrifice, and not one∣ly to note, giving of thanks, but propitiation: oblation and offering likewise are used by the Fathers of the Councell of Nice:Dialog. 4.58. This sacrifice singularly saves the soule from Eternall destruction, which doth repaire unto us by mistery, the death of the onely begotten; who although, rising from the dead, dyes not, and death shall have
no further power over him; notwithstanding in himselfe immortally and incorruptibly living, is againe sacrificed for us in the mistery of this holy oblation. Fathers in all Ages have spoke and held this. Car∣dinal Perron calls it a sacrifice applicative of a sacrifice. Thus doe the enemies of Catholique Doctrines and words, by their opposition of them, make that, which should be the band of Unity, the flag of dissention. And for the name of Altars, St. Ambrose saith, He is upon the Altar, who suffered for all those under the Altar (the bo∣dies of Martyrs) who are Re∣deemed by his Passion. St. Au∣gustine
saith, the sacrifice it selfe is the body of Christ, which is not offered to the Martyrs, be∣cause they themselves are that also.The pie∣ty and fruits is brings. The word Transubstantia∣on truely understood, affords us the comfort of asserting the truth of Gods promises: For the severall modes and manners which those out of the Church fancy to themselves, touching the presence of Christ, if there were words of Art to expresse, how detractive would they be found, from the verity, cer∣tainty, and reality of that com∣fort which our Saviour inten∣ded us in the blessed Sacra∣ments? But Catholiques doe adore the Lord Jesus, here true∣ly
present; onely him doe they adore, who although, till the world be dissolved, after a na∣turall manner, he is above; yet here with us, is the truth of the Lord, That as often as we receive, we eate his Flesh, and drinke his Blood, without which, there is no life in us; by which Union, how doe our soules receive a torrent of joyes and graces, which flow from a Celestiall source, into all the faculties and powers of our minde, sanctify∣ing them to him, who is our head, being incorporated into him? Invocation of Saints. Whilst we live in the earthly Tabernacles of our Bodies, we
are subject to the sumes of flesh and blood, to the Impressions of diverse affections, and the clouds of the world; whence we are put to execute a war∣fare, and act a vigilent part against the depths of Satan; and to that end, we desire one anothers Prayers; And shall theirs be lesse effectuall, whose blessed soules are unbodied, out of a possibility of falling, and enjoying the blessed presence of God, inflaming with charity and good will towards us? They rejoyce at our conversi∣ons; they understand our con∣ditions: holy Church hath ever practised to make them friends in the Court of Heaven: To
obtain their requests of their King and ours, the effects of Christs mediation and merits, may be more hopefully purcha∣sed by Angelical Petitions, then mans disturbed and cold devo∣tions.Chrysost. Hom: de Martyr: Egyp. Let us aske the Fathers, and they will tell us, By the Prayers of the Martyrs, we may after our departure hence, see and imbrace them, saith saint Chrysostom. And elsewhere, Mary praies for us, stronger then Deborah, more powerfull then Jael.De Cog. nit: verae vitae. St. Augustine saith, When you call upon the saints in Prayer, it behoves you thus to thinke of them, as placed in the glory of the Eternall beau∣ty, most glorious lights, farre
out-shining the Sonne, who have fully all that is good in the Vision of God, and who forcibly assist all that call upon them. St. Hierom to Heliodore, After death (saith he) you shall pray for me, who have incited you, that you might overcome. In the Liturgy of Basil, Now Martyrs earnestly pray, that God may grant us remission of our sinnes.De vi∣du. Saint Ambrose saith, The Angels are to be cal∣led upon in our behalfe, who are assigned to us for our de∣fence. And againe, let us not be ashamed to have them the Intercessors of our infirmity: of the Intercession of the blessed Virgin; Doctor Don saith pret∣tily,
Her Wombe was a strange Heaven, for there God cloath'd himselfe, and grew; our zea∣lous thanks we poure, as her deeds were our helps, so are her Prayers; nor can she sue in vaine, who hath such titles un∣to you.The pie∣ty and fruits of  Whilst men make themselves such strangers to the Inhabitants above, they break the communion of saints: if mens joyes were all above, if men did thirst after those glorious fruitions, they would accept of all the helps that might leade them to it. In in∣vocating, and worshipping the saints, we worship him, whose saints they are: Saith a Father, in often contemplating their
crownes, and begging their pa∣tronage, how are our hearts in∣flamed through their helps? it erects our thoughts on high, and gives us courage in our journey below, to have seen all the dangers of it conquered, by those who as they were our ex∣ample, so now are our Patrons.. It inlarges and mends our pro∣spect, when we view those Ce∣lestiall Inhabitants shining all as stars of severall magnitudes; one glorious in the ruddy beams of Martyrdom; another shin∣ing with the snow white purity of Chastity; others, now the higher, by having been low in their own esteeme: they pro∣voke us, by viewing their glo∣ries,
to the care of acquiring their vertues; neither let any pretend, and say, God hath com∣manded us to call on him, there∣fore its needlesse to goe to any other; for he hath told us, He heares not every one that cryes, Lord, Lord, but him who doth the will of his Father; and his will is, that we should be obe∣dient, and hearken to his Church, and not in stead of ob∣serving its commands, revile it, and rent, and teare it by con∣tempt of its Doctrines. Confession, Absolution, Sa∣tisfaction. This is, and ever hath been, so universally, generally deli∣ver'd, Preached, urged, practi∣sed
in the Catholique Church, that none can deny it, but those whose stiffe-neckednes will not give thē leave to look back into any Antiquity, or Fathers; these words are plainely, frequently made use of, to expresse this part of the Discipline of the Church, which the Fathers cal∣led, The vigor of the Gospel; as if without it, all mens man∣ners and courses towards Hea∣ven, would languish.Sermons of Con∣fessions. Bishop Andrews, from the Text, Whose Sins yee remit, they are remitted; acknowledges a perticular per∣sonall Confession to be ment, by reason, he saith, it is exprest, whose Sins, not what Sins soe∣ver.Epist. 55. Let us heare Saint Cyprian
expresse himselfe against those that opposed it, It is indevou∣red (saith he) that sins may not be redeemed, by satisfactions and just lamentations, that mens wounds may not be wash∣ed away with tears; true peace is taken away, by the lye of a false one; and the healthfull bosome of a Mother (a step-mother interceding) is shut up; weeping and mourning should be heard from a sinner, and the face of those who have falne.August. Hom. 5. Let him come to the Priests, those by whom the Keyes are disposed of in the Church; and let him, from those who are set over those holy rites, receive the measure of his satisfaction.
Tertullian de poenitentia, Con∣fessio satisfactionis consilium. It is objected, that its an all-da∣ring presumption, to pretend to be able to satisfie in the most pure eyes of Almighty God, and so plausibly run on in an ill applide humility; when a man doth, what anothers demand is, its said, he hath satisfied his desires: nay, if the Creditor doe for some reasons, forgive the Debt; he is said to be satis∣fied: and its spoken by reason of the Evangelicall compact, when God by promising, makes himselfe a debtor, saith the Fa∣ther; and we doing what is required, that is, bringing forth fruits worthy of Pennance, and
performing such expressions of sorrow, and those penitentiall injunctions as the Church wil be satisfied in, for the demonstra∣ting our hearty repentance, it is cal'd satisfaction: but whom the expressions of the Councel of Trent will not satisfie, touch∣ing it, he is sicke of siding and parties, nor is any desire of peace with the Church preva∣lent with him. Sessio. 14 cap. 8.Its agreeable to the divine clemency, lest sins be pardoned us, without any satisfaction, occasion being taken, that we lightlier esteeming of sins, fall into more grievous ones, injuri∣ous, and contumelious to the holy spirit of God, treasuring
up wrath for us against the day of wrath; for without doubt these satisfactory punishments, doe greatly recall us from sin, and, as it were, with a certaine bridle restraine us, and make penitents more cautious for the future; they cure likewise the reliques of sin; they take like∣wise away ill habits got by viti∣ous living, but contrary acts of vertues: nor at any time is there a surer way in Gods Church to remove punishments, then that men frequent these works with true griefe of mind: and it draws to this, that whilst we by satisfying suffer for our sins, we are made conformable to Christ Jesus, who satisfied
for our sins, enjoying also the most certaine earnest; that if we suffer together with him, we shall likewise be glorified together with him. Neither is this our satisfaction such, which we pay for our sins, that it is not made by Christ Jesus: for we who of our selves, as of our selves, can doe nothing; yet he co-operating, who strengthens us, we can doe all things: so man hath not whence he may glory, but all our glorying is in Christ, in whom we live, and merit; in whom we satisfie, do∣ing worthy fruits of pennance, which have their force from him, and are offer'd from him to the Father, and by him are
accepted of the Father. It was ever held in the Church of God the ordinary means of the forgivenesse of sins, and is so farre from being a cause to drive men from the Catholique Church, that to enjoy the be∣nefit of it, they should come with humble minds, and teares in their eyes, to beg the comfort of this onely approved sure way for their pardon. St. Au∣gustine, in his Enchirid. saith, God hath given liberty to none to sin, though by his pittying of us, he blot out our sins, if sitting satisfaction be not neg∣lected. How wholesome must it be for our minds,Fruits & Piety. to discharge
themselves, to ayre our minds by confession, to have the state of our soules judged of, (all men being partiall censurers of themselves) and thence fitting Physicke prescribed, after his inspection of our inward com∣plexion? what comforts are con∣veyed into our breasts, in liew of all vitious affections or acts we part with thence in Confes∣sions? our pardon is confirmed in Heaven, as it is granted here on Earth. How many thicke and foggy selfe-delusions, false opinions, desperate feares, ill grounded doubts, doe all vanish from that soule, that hath dis∣persed those clouds by cleare∣nesse of Confession? What re∣cruits
of graces, spirituall sa∣tisfactions, healthfull directions are acquired? here is exercised an act of that most acceptable humility, in throwing your selfe down at the Feet of Gods Embassador, in detestation of your selfe; exercising your Faith likewise, in beleeving that, Whose Sins they remit, they are remitted, this being the second table after shipwracke. Purgatory, and Praying for the Dead. It is the generall confession of those, who call themselves the Reformed, that Prayer for the Dead was anciently used; some few testimonies of which Ile shew you. St. Augustine in
his Booke pro Mortuis, writes, That if no where it should be read in the Old Testament, yet the authority of the Ʋniversall Church is not small; which is so cleare in the custome of this, where in the Prayers which the Priests poure out to their Lord God at the Altar, a recommending of the dead hath place also. And the same Father, ad Laurentium in the Enchiridion, There is a certaine manner of living (saith he) not so good that it doth not require these things after death; nor yet so ill, that these things may not profit him after death. Aerias was condemned of the whole Church, for condemning this. One may perceive by the con∣stant
practice of the Church, how these Texts in Scripture are to be understood, of being neither pardoned in this World, nor in the World to come: And that other place, concerning those, who build hay and stuble upon the Foundation; they shall be saved, yet as by Fire. Mar∣tyrdome, saith Clemens Alexan∣drinus, is a purgation of sinnes with glory. And St. Augustine saith, That the recitall of the names of Martyrs at the Altar, is more that they may pray for us, then that we may pray for them. For the pains in Purga∣tory; one cannot conceive how there should be a Purgatory, without suffering pain. Heare
what Boethius saith a thousand yeares since, But I pray (saith he) remaine there no punishments after this life? yes, great certain∣ly (saith he:) for some (saith he) I take to be exercised with bitter punishments,Liber 4. others with element purgations. The fruits & pietie.To a Skoffer, there shall ne∣ver want matter; but as he saith, Cave sed fiat nè Jocus iste Focus: When St. Paul menti∣ons tryall by fire, its blowne away with a hundred light In∣terpretations: an Atheisticall spirit would quarrell with that expression, of the damned gnash∣ing their teeth; which, they say, is an effect rather of cold, then of fire. But as a Father saith,
Heresie is not from the Scripture, but from the sence of Scripture, which the Church, by the provi∣dence of God, safely preserves. It must rayse no small com∣forts in the minds of those, who have parted with what were their joy here, to be able by devout Prayers to recommend them to a more advanced state of Joy. It doth inlarge the subject of our charity, whilst death it selfe doth but quicken our devotion for our Friends, parting with them, as men not without hope. It sweetens our passage hence, being not out of the pertaking of the benefit of Prayers, Almes, and the good Works of those we leave be∣hind,
the Communion of Saints: and for the effects that the opi∣nions of postumous and after suffering must have upon the minds of men, it must needs tend to the making the soule disgust these inferiour appetites and affections, which breathe upon the soule an earthy vapor and foulenesse, which it must be cleansed from, with penall purgation, before it can be ad∣mitted into those purer joyes, to see God, which only is gran∣ted to them that are cleane of heart. The perverting, and dis∣ordering the dispensation and application of Gods grace, who (though Gods merits be all-sufficient, and our Redemption
compleat, and the Divine Pro∣mises large) yet thinke, that notwithstanding, all their life time, their judgements have been abused with the too great esteeme of the empty delights and glories of the world, their wills following the impulse of carnall pleasures, nor any Cele∣stiall sparke ever kindling their affections; yet by a swimming fancy in the head, that Christ hath dyed for them; thinke, they shall presently jumpe into Paradise; It is a merry conceit: so was it of that Foole, That thought, that all the ships that came into the Harbor, were his owne. If we suffer together with him, we shall likewise be glorified
with him, was held to be the surest earnest of Everlasting Joy. Of Free-will. He who hath made you with∣out your selfe, will not save you without your selfe, saith a Father. God is the way, means, and end; all is from him, and to him: but how much more noble thought have they of the Deity, who conceive him to deale with man as endowed with free operations, then with us, as with stockes and stones, that are meerly patient? It is the meere grace of God that gives good works their force and value; yet no such necessi∣ty, that any thing is done, whe∣ther
man will or no:Apolig. Epist. For who could either prayse, or discom∣mend that, who can imagine such actions to be rewarded, or punished? or that soule to be immortall, and performe Reli∣gion, which should want free and reasonable actions, the ar∣guments and pledges of im∣mortality: but we are to ad∣mire the wisedome of Gods Church, which agreeth the aeter∣nall prescience of God, with the temporall co-operation of man; that it leaves the first in∣fallible, and yet proveth the temporall action, appetite and delight, or consent to any thing to be voluntary, free, and in the power of man, to be effe∣cted
or omitted, rewarded and punished. Of the use and Veneration of Pictures and Images. Upon this is waged a perpe∣tuall warre; Hic illius arma, hic currus fuit. The Reformists ge∣nerally take it for Idolatry, and what ever is spoken against I∣dolatry in Scripture, they presse and urge upon the use of Pi∣ctures. But before they tax our Mother with so odious a crime: they might please to consider the nature of the objection, and how farre the extent of it is: and withall, they might consult the opinion of ancient
devout Fathers (who would ra∣ther have lost a thousand lives, then have committed Idolatry) touching it; and withall, they might have considered the use of them, before they should be frighted from their Mothers bo∣some (a place of protection) in∣to wandrings and errors, where are layd the snares of the ene∣my. Church story informes us, That the ancient Christians would fall downe before the Statues of the Emperors, which was then the manner and po∣sture used to doe reverence; as sometime to be bare before the Cloath of State, doth signifie the like; though they would rather dye, then salute so the
Images of the false gods. But for the like postures to be for∣bid to be used to the Pictures of Saints, or of our blessed Sa∣viour, none can shew a prohibi∣tion; for those outward signes of honour signified by gesture, are indeed common towards God,Grotius. Angels, and Men; no per∣ticular one being set a part, or commanded to be peculiarly used, to signifie onely Divine Worship: when we frame a thought of that good Shep∣heard in our minds, if we would deliver it in writing, why might we not write it in Hyreogli∣phies, as well as Letters, which are not so ancient, no other thing is so worthy, as the mind
of Man? but if the Image of our Saviour Crucified be there drawne and viewed by the un∣derstanding; why may not our corporall Eye, behold it drawn on Paper, or other materiall, since they doe but serve to re∣call and revive those former Ideas in the mind, which other objects might distract, or steale away? And by severall Persons the severall Attributes of God may be signified; as a King for Royalty, &c. St. Augustin saith, in the Visitation of the sicke, There is added upon the Crosse the Image of a Man; humbly imbrace this, and weekely venerate it. The honour done to the Image, is refer'd to whose Image it is,
saith Basil and Chrisostome. I know these things are proposed in vain, to those who will ad∣mit of no other Tribunall, then their own breasts, who exercise an Arbitrary and Tyrannicall power over the Consciences of their followers, whom an ima∣ginary exposition of some dark prophesie of Anti-Christ doth unhinge their minds and judge∣ments, from off, what they ought to turn on, which is obe∣dience to the Church, whose sa∣cred Authority ought to binde in the luxuriant and forward imaginations of mens owne braines: But I have onely in∣stanced in these few perticulars, without using any illaqueation
of Arguments, or finnesse of discourse. Thus are all the Churches Doctrines, Practises, and Ceremonies, advancements and meanes to Salvation and Piety, the establishment of its regiment on Earth, of Pope, Patriarchs, Arch-Bishops, Bi∣shops, Priests, Deacons, sub-Deacons, Exorcists, Lectors: where the mistery of our Re∣demption is so esteemed, and remembred, that no Holy day, no part of Divine Service is ce∣lebrated, but represents to us one benefit or another: no Ce∣remony in the holy Sacrifice, no action of the Priest, no Orna∣ment or Attire he weareth, no Benediction he gives, no Signe
of the Crosse he makes, but hath its religious signification, and Preacheth to us, and speaks nothing but Christ Crucified: therefore, though the great worke of our redemption may be thought not to be hindred, by opposing things of an infe∣riour nature; yet it is no small matter, the opposing the Au∣thority of the Church, tending to the dissolving that power,Rich∣worths dialogue by which the greatest things are maintained. Common-wealths punish with death a small stealth; because its an offence against the nature of Govern∣ment. Heretofore men proved Doctrines to be true, from the authority of holy Church; and
now they would annull her au∣thority from her Tenents; and from her Articles, would throw durt in her Face, as if she had lost her being, for being the faithfull Keeper of what was committed to her, and had for∣feited her breasts, the Scriptures, for feeding us with their milke. CAP. IIII. The falling away from the Church (under the Notion of Reforma∣tion) the cause of troubles of State; and from the same grounds, they build their opinions on, arises the grounds of the di∣sturbance of Governments. THe Church being Divinely Founded, as it hath survi∣ved
all the malices and practi∣ses of the greatest Tyrants, its enemies; so have those, who breaking of that Ecclesiasticall league which kept them in the limits of the practice, and be∣leefe of the same things, mist of that inlargement and last∣ingnesse of commands, which they expected, by altering the sight and mark, they took their ayme by; they have straide the most, from what they chiefly took their ayme at: whilst they sought a perticular prosperity, seperated from the peace of the Church; against which, the mu∣sterd, forces of mens malice, and Hells fury, became ever weake and impotent.
The blood of the first Bishops of Rome, was the fruitfull com∣post of the Church; their Ashes were Generative: all the fu∣rious conflagrations, sackings, and spoylings of the City of Rome by the Goths, Huns, Vise∣goths, Halaricus, were like stor∣my winds, whose Gole and end was onely to dye and expire; while Rome triumphed over their spoyles, in the continu∣ance of that never fayling Church: I will not name Attila, nor Limprandus; the one reti∣ring from Rome by Saint Leos means: the other by Pope Za∣charies, strangely and miracu∣lously. Those barbarous Sara∣cens, whose rage was glutted
with the conquest of the Ea∣stern Emperor, the glory of whose armes and conquest of Candy increased; who made Africa feele the effects of the advancement of their Armies, and strucke terror into a great part of Europe and Asia; who deflowred faire Italy, and set fire to the Suburbs of Rome. And yet against Gregory the fourth, the Sea of their incur∣sions, found its bounds, that its waves should goe no further. The Duke of Burbon (saith Fox) died censured, being slain in the assault of Rome, whose Faith hath still prevailed, in spight of German Scismes, or the powerfull oppositions of
Dalmatia, Slavonia, Bulgaria; or the entertainement of Luthers dissolutenesse in Dania, Suevia; or Calvins subtilities in Zelan∣dia, Franciae, Genevah, and all other blindnesses and powers of the rest of the world. Ju∣lian dyed with a, Vicisi Galileae, thou hast overcome ô Galilean, meaning our Saviour. The Ar∣rian Emperors opposed, and were confounded. The Jaco∣bines, Armenians, and Grecians, are under the Tyranny of the Turkish Empire, whilst they de∣ny obedience to the Church of Rome. How many Pagans Em∣perors before Constantine oppo∣sed it, and almost all dyed mi∣serably. Foure hundred Here∣tiques
before Luther,Bernard Lutzen. catalog. Haeret. whose ma∣lice was all dasht into froath upon this Rocke? How many of the Kings of Scotland, Eng∣land, Portugal, France. Empe∣rors have been miserable, depo∣sed, slaine, who have conten∣ded with this Sea in its juris∣diction.Bede, lib. 3: 4: 5. hist. Like successe had those Saxon Kings, who opposed the Faith of that Sea: some where∣of submitted, and became re∣ligious men; and those that were Apostates, miserably put to death. The British Kings, disobeyed Rome in the observa∣tion of Easter, and manner of shaving of the Crownes of Priests: a leaven thousand of their Munks, who defended
this opposition, were wrapt up in the sad catastophre of being slaine by the Pagans sword; their Country mastred, and awed by their hired souldiers; and of Kings over them, were made subjects to them. Upon the stage of every Kingdome, these parts have been acted, and have concluded in direfull Tragedies; from whose every parcell and passage in our con∣querors life, Edwards, Henries, Richards, the observation of men might store themselves with most stupendous exam∣ples of their sufferings, in, and from their contests with the Roman Sea; the revolt, defe∣ction, and falling away from
which, I shall shew to be preg∣nant with the unheard of mu∣tations, distractions, wars, and tumults, which threatens such fatall trepidations and concussi∣ons in the bowels of all mo∣derne States: and as effects which are included in their cau∣ses, so all these evills to be shut up and vertually contained, in the principall, upon which their departure from Rome is made: propositions, which seemingly blausible, yet the higher they get into esteeme and reputati∣on, so much the more powerful∣ly, doe they showre downe up∣on their followers, desolation & destruction: one may behold them at first like little Aery,
soft and tender strings exhaled and ascending, drawn with the more powerful aspect of the Son: yet, with you shall ere long, find descending upon you in hard, condensed, thunder stone, with wild flaming expansions, break∣ing forth of the wombe of that cloude that bred it; or like the woodden horse, peaceably at first let in, yet streight filling the Towne with bands of Ar∣med men. A way certainely (as Solomon saith) which seeming right in a Mans owne eyes; yet the end thereof is death. I will first take a view of some of their perticular opinions, and see what a dangerous influence they have upon Governments:
Calvin teaches, That the Lawes of the Magistrate doe not binde the Conscience. Luther Preaches, That it is the nature of the Gospel to rayse wars and seditions among Christians, &c. that there is no hope of remedy, till all humane Laws be taken away: and (then that which is the Foundation and ground of all, Reformati∣on so called) that all things are to be setled, ordered, changed, ac∣cording to their agreeing, or disa∣greeing with Scripture, the inter∣pretation whereof must be the perticular judgements of private Men. This rule is equally strong for all sides; too stiffe to recant, or yeeld to others judgements: and this same rule must patro∣nize
as many opinions & sects, as the various fancies of men bu∣sied in Scripture can invent or suggest: thus naturally flowes from this rule of Reformation, not onely diversity of opini∣ons, various judgements, and opposite Doctrines; but strong and numerous parties, that cry up such a man for their Apo∣stle, or imbrace such an opinion for their Faith: severall bodies of considerable strength, whose obligations are the defence of such opinions. New and seve∣rall interests, whereby every one studies their owne preser∣vations and upholdings, though never so contrary to each other, or destructive to the Govern∣ment
where they live: so that those who in a contemplative way, and abstracted considera∣on did but lately talke of the purity of the Gospel, of light and truth; finde themselves by and by, plunged in all practi∣ses, turbulent, seditious, un∣just, oppressive: A wrong prin∣ciple in the understanding, doth not onely multiply notionall absurdities, but begets and pro∣duces sinister actions: these numbers of men, of severall per∣swasions and Doctrines, comes to be variously planted and spread, in severall Countries and Governments; whether brought in by way of Traffick, negotiating one with another,
or that such men being bani∣shed their own Countries, they sow their ill seed in others Pro∣vinces; or whether the errors be native, and sprung up there; or that, as infection, they catch and spred, by way of example and imitation; yet thus the world becomes to be blended, and the subjects in all sorts of Governments, get a new Pri∣mum mobile to their Allegiance and duty; and instead of in∣tending the good of the com∣munity where they live, they are busied in the advancing of that body, which for conformi∣ty, and holding the same Te∣nents with them, they become concerned in: so that if in one
Government, a sort of them be opprest for their seditious pra∣ctises; presently in all others, those of the same opinion are alarumed: so that Governors streight finde their Laws silent, distractions multiplying; and none secured of their owne subjects, who doe either pro∣fusely throw away on their confederates, that treasure and mony (which should be the support of their own Country) or if those opinions have taken hold of active and generous spirits, which endevour still to make others of the same opi∣nion with them, presently they expect Forraine ayde and help, to change their proper policies
and Governors. Then through the innate reverence that all people beare to the opinion of Divinity; beleeving that the spirit moves upon the Face of their Preachers watry discour∣ses, they become powerfull, like the winds, to make the people as the Sea, swell and become unpeaceable, whilst each ban∣dies against other, and all a∣gainst the State: thus are all the veins of Christendome fil'd with these unwholesome and noxious humors, whilst Ambi∣tion and Heresie often shake hands together; for Ambition seeks but under any pretence to procure the affections and services of men, and to apply
them to their owne uses: and now so great bodies of men, wanting but countenance, and great persons to be their head, and encourage them; these two seek their mutuall ends in this conjunction: no discontented or ambitious great one, but hath a prepared way to awe, or be revenged on his Prince, or State: and Kings, and Gover∣nors themselves, are at last for∣ced to hang their Crownes and Diadems upon the mainte∣nance and upholding on one party or other, who becomes strong or weake, as that party ebbes or flowes; all the rest esteeming themselves but per∣secuted by their power, and
would at last prove like the Ivy, which first dissolves the Wall, and then seems to up∣hold it. Thus did Reformation, (so called) Jehu like, drive its war-like Chariots through Ger∣many; Mars so long a time, seeming to have set up his stan∣dard there; whilst replenished with these unwholesome hu∣mors, the German Diets became not so wholesome, as before: and no lesse suddainely hath those sparkes taken hold, and flowne over the French Stables, whilst Genevah, the Lady of the Lake, challenges the Preroga∣tive of the Apostolicall Seate, and dictates Laws to its Bre∣thren. From Calvins Instituti∣ons,
the Switzers cantonize their Religion, as well as Coun∣try: and not meanly have these seeds grown up under the shade of Orange Tree: The Dane with graver pace, recedes from their former Ecclesiasticall league; and now all breaking up and disbanding, the face of Europe which was seen one and intire in the Sea of Rome, is now by these numberlesse Fractions, but parcels and peeces, repre∣senting severall Faces, the sa∣cred anchor of Religion being moved,True re∣ligion not con∣trary, nor prejudi∣ciall to Govern∣ments. all the ships of States and Goverments, come to be tost and troubled; Religion being like the Sunne, which whilst it keeps its owne proper
and heavenly course, gives light and influence to all; but when the pretence of it serves earth∣ly ends, it causes a conflagrati∣on, and is a Phaeton to set the world on fire. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. True Religion must be such, that it carry no distruction to Common-wealths, though it last for ever, as the worship of Christ was instituted to doe. There are vices of men, and there are vices of times; but disobedience to Governments, or Doctrines of disloyalty are detested by the Catholique Re∣ligion, and the Canons and De∣crees of the Church. I will re∣cite
the words of an English Jesuit, This Priesthood which is now rejected, is the same which was given to St. Peter, and the Apostles; the same which St. Augustine, and his As∣sociates had, that converted England; the same which hath been honor'd of all Kings since; the same Sacrament, unchange∣able; the same power of order, the same jurisdiction: there is not any poynt of civill regi∣ment in that Sacrament, being wholly spirituall and superna∣turall; nothing concerning a temporall Common-wealth; no renouncing or deniall of any authority in England; no con∣spiracy to Prince, no authority
communicated, but to offer Sa∣crifice, to Pray, to Preach, mi∣nister Sacraments. The Greci∣ans, the Germans, and other people, having their Doctrine diverse to the Church of Rome, have their seminaries in the same City, and their Priests maintained by the same Popes; yet the Princes of those Nati∣ons, for the greater part being Infidels, Turkes, condemne not their Priests for Traytors, but admit the exercise of their Function, as agreeable to the Common-wealth: and as it were a great absurdity to say, that the Pope in relieving the Catholique Students of Pale∣stine, Grecia, Armenia, and such
Nations, should doe it in hope to be temporall Lords of those Countries, but onely for love to true Religion; so is it im∣probable he should have any such intent in England, as un∣probable as the other to be un∣der his temporall regiment: no Article we defend, Prayer to the Saints, Prayer for the Dead, restitution for wrongs and injuries to those that live, obedience to Governors, the validity of their Laws, the force of good works; the number, grace and reverence of the Sa∣craments, pennance, and pu∣nishment for sin, both in life and after; teaching duty to God, honour to Magistrates,
equallity to all, injury and op∣pression to none: the chiefest poynts of true regiment, can∣not be offensive to a well orde∣red policy. CAP. V. An Invitation of Wits, to the study of Arts, and to leave op∣posing the Church; with the excellency of the fruits of Pie∣ty, which onely can proceed from true Religion. IT is observed by the most In∣genious Lord Virulam, That in Divinity there was nothing to be added by the wit of Man: and in
stead of finding wantings and de∣sideratars, complained here of too much luxuruancy of Mens brains; for God hath so surely founded his Church on one side, and the Devill hath so busily in the night sowne Tares on the other, that there is no imployment here for the restlesse agitation of Mens heads. It was truely observed by another, That Men must ei∣ther resolve their Religion into Reason, or Authority: if into Reason, then they must beleeve no more then they can prove by Rea∣son. If into Authority, It was apparant where it had continued this sixteen hundred yeares; but the measure of truth is many times the maintaining Mens cause; but
not truth the guide of their cause: they transferre and send the beams of their wit, to gild the clouds of their error. How unhappy are the triumphs of those endevours, which strive to make falshood appeare more like truth, then truth it selfe? As the English Poët, describing truth by Ʋna, which is still one, and the same: and falshood by Duessa, which is doublenesse: complains, Though Una was as faire, as faire might be, Yet false Duessa, seem'd as faire as she. When the edge of wit is tur∣ned aside to maintain an error; how are men uncharitable to Texts of Scripture? how doe
they pretend to a Genealogy, by thredding all the oppositi∣ons that ever was in any Age against the Church, on the line of their Discourse? for their service, such and such Ages must have the plagues of Egypt brought upon them, grosse darknesse. The Fathers must pretend to no more knowledge then that which hath now the approbation of mens more re∣fined braines: and the lately found out rules of (Reforma∣tion so called) must over-rule the witnesse of Antiquity, the Authority of Councels, the constitutions of the Church. When Ireneus, and St. Hierom, &c. doe magnifie the Aposto∣licall
Seat, they must be held but flashes of Rhetoricke, da∣shes with their Pen; they make use of hard niceties, elaborate thinnesse, weake finesse, where Sillogismes must seem to uphold the Church: whereas that which is comprehended within the rules of reasoning, will fly no higher then reason can carry it. Thus doe they strive to place in the Clouds that Article of I beleeve the holy Catholique Church; Divine words being such, that they require a Simple beleever, but argue a disputer impious; because in Divinity we respect not what is spoke, but who speaks: How doe the holy vertues of Charity and
Humility give place to Ambi∣tious heats, and contentions, and tryalls of wit, where men more strive to get the conquest in words, then to become the happy subjects of truth? Is there no new discoveries to be made in the intellectuall Globe? nor means to be found out with the armes of an active reason, to inlarge mans dominion over nature? Doth not the Ethicks invite a further disquisition touching the Cul∣ture and Georgies of the mind, and to finde out Methods of attaining vertue, as well as handsomely to describe it? Doth not the Physickes up∣braide you with the few linkes
that yet men have been able to take up of natures chaine, whereas onely three accidental discoveries of Guns, Printing, and the Loadstone, have alter'd the face of Christendome, in its Wars, Studies, and Expedi∣tions? Are the Arts of reaso∣ning themselves, so exact and fit for these scrutanies, that they need not the help of rea∣son it selfe to make them more expressive and directive: where∣as Hooker saith, There might be a way of reasoning found out, wherewith mens judge∣ments inured, they would goe as farre beyond the greatest Doctor now, as the Learnedest Doctor now doth a Childe:
But I finde it Writ, That there must be Heresies: Therefore doubts, scruples, and questions may breed the same distur∣bance in mens minds, as the prosperity of the wicked did to David: as soon as he entred into the Temple of God, he found an end of them: where now with pleasure, we shall retire from this noyse without, and walke into the Gardens of our Hea∣venly Spouse; where we will view the excellent Fruits of Piety, that he himselfe hath Sowed and Planted there; and which can onely proceed from true Religion. The Antidotes of humane Learning, are many times the Aery Bladders of
mens Pride, though the Me∣thods of Logicke, object to men their confused blindnesse; the Art of Rhetoricke, their rudenesse; the gravity of the Ethicks, their passionate weak∣nesse: yet are they pleased many times, from them rather to plume themselves with some Feathers of ostentation, then endevour the reall advance∣ment of their natures, by con∣forming it to duty and truth. True Religion stablishes men in their duties, and constitutes the vertues of men from the most worthy end of their Ma∣kers prayse: vertue being else but a gathering together of colours, seen through the glasse
of Mens diversified humors. There is no vertue, but Re∣ligion: Wise, Valiant, Sober, Just, are Names which none want, which want not vice co∣vering discretion. Without this directive pow∣er, designing all things their Offices, Warre is but an angry fit, and violence taught to undergoe a rule. Courts, and Tribunals, but injustice, wear∣ing the Gowne, and putting on the Formalities of Law: all mens services, and most obsequious performances, are but well order'd Craft, and methodicall subtility: the con∣versations of Men, but a Stage, where Vizards are worne with
applause: Chastity, the ma∣lignity of the complexion, and humility but Phlegme. Reli∣gion fills mens minds with magnanimity, whilst the judge∣ment is incited to censure worldly things, vaine and tran∣sitory, whereby the understan∣ding takes off a true copy of the world; and the cozenages of mens soules are prevented, all the inconstancies which the Scene of humane affaires re∣presents, doe but yeeld a grate∣full prospect to the soule, be∣holding it selfe placed obove the alterable nature of hu∣mane things; leaving to ad∣mire what is inferior, to the dignity of its owne immortall
nature; finding that of all the Nymphs men court, be it ho∣nour, wealth, power, (by a most true Metamorphosis) they catch but an armefull of dust: for the greatnesse of mens minds, proceeds from the little esteeme they have of all such things, as are under the power, and uncertaine stroke of For∣tune, (that is, of things that by the Laws imposed on them hast to change and corruption) for although mens minds may seem to be too much buried and deprest, with the contem∣plation of the dissolution of things, and in viewing how low all humane hopes doe lye: yet are they thereby truely ray∣sed,
and elevated; which ex∣cept mens minds had buried them, that is, have pursued things to their Tombes and Ashes; they would have buried mens minds, by setting a greater value and rate on things, then their fluid, altering nature would beare. Thus are we cal'd on by Religion, from these delusions from loving the world, or the things in the world: How doth it provide for our contents, lifting up the soule, not to any fruitlesse rocky swellings, but to an active towring height, trans∣planting mens soules, making them take root in Heaven, and to flourish downward in a con∣stant
practice of vertue to∣wards men, till the cold blasts of Death breathe on them; when as then those Celestiall Spirits repayre to their Mother root, to flourish for Eternity? It makes our passions the in∣struments of vertue, by giving them its directions in their motions, hindring their excur∣sions and fallings out, upon the many false shewes and preten∣ces of things. How Heroicall are the commands of Religion? making men the Champions of their neighbours Fame, the de∣liverers of the oppressed, and every where to erect the mo∣numents of their Charity; and this upon their Masters
command, with the contempt of the Aery rewards of the World, but set on fire with an Heavenly flame, which mens breaths neither kindle, nor ex∣tinguish: It makes its followers use the aydes and comforts of this their exile with security, in order to sublimer purchases: it makes them steddily follow through all states and conditi∣ons, their Masters designments, desiring onely to live in the world in order to his service that made it. It will approach that breast with its Celestiall purities, which erects a Stage for vain-glorious thoughts to action; or sets up a Shop for gaine, through covetousnesse;
or shambles, for Envy to act its Massacres on; or a Taverne for excesse and pleasure. How ma∣ny devout orders, as it were the Regiments of the Church, that sight these Battles, and exercise this holy warfarre? and how many have all of them afforded, either stout Champi∣ons of the truth against Haere∣sie; or have stored the Church with able and devout Gover∣nors; or who have ayded mens devotions, and have kindled mens minds with the love of God, with their seraphicall de∣votions?Iesuits. The orders of Gods Church never growes barren, but are alwayes teeming with the excellencies of transcen∣dent
gifts. How many sublime and generous spirits, by fre∣quent making sacrifice of them∣selves into Forraigne parts, makes the hearts of Savages Trophyes of Christ Crucified, and fill the Letterd World with the admired productions of Wit and Learning? Here the fire of Devotion is layd upon the true Altar, which never goes out no houre in the Day or Night, where in some Church or Convent there are not some actually in the Church, offering up their cheer∣full Hyms of Prayse, or mourn∣full throbs of Soule-washing Teares, or their soules dilated with the flames of burning
charity, poure forth their in∣tercessions. They profestly tread under feet the brags of worldly glory: they contemne the dotage of the world, who honour one another in vanity, and set a price upon that, which is but the Ensigne of their lost and falne condition. Here that Hydropick distemper of cove∣tousnesse is conquerd, by send∣ing a divorce to all propriety: Here, by a generous Flight on the wings of Fastings and Pray∣er, their soules soare above the smoke and steames of Flesh and Blood, and breathe in those Upper and purer Regions of Celestiall conversation, their spirits with disdaine, descend
to moderate repasts, all the in∣feriour actions of their life are but rationall distinctions, no interruptions from their Pray∣ers, they being so refined and sublimed up to spirituall ob∣jects, that their conversation, and all the motions and affecti∣ons of their heart, doe but be∣come one continued Prayer: Here they follow that councell of leaving all, and following him: they view what the build∣ing of Christianity will cost; and as the Apostle saith, Resist unto blood, proving what the holy and acceptable will of God is. The Church likewise instructs its Children, and brings them up in the exercise of an active
devotion, as well as contem∣plative, fitted to the imploy∣ments of all sorts of persons and conditions, making it speake in every ones proper and naturall Language; the wise∣dome of Gods spirit descend∣ing upon men (as it were) in such cloven Tongues. Piety and goodnesse is the end of the Commandement, the will of God being our sanctificati∣on, which appeares to triumph in the practice and doctrine of the onely true Catholique Church, of Divine and Infal∣lible authority: to the manife∣station and demonstration of which, its agreeable with the Divine goodnesse to establish
the same (which is the onely director and care of our way to Heaven) with effectuall Sa∣craments, with a successive Priesthood; the verity where∣of might be shewed as a light upon a Hill, by its universali∣ty of place and time: Decrees of Councels, Writings of Fa∣thers, and all Antiquity. Ver∣tue hath its proper object, and all actions, not steared by that compasse of obedience, which truth it selfe hath enjoyned us, though otherwayes plausi∣ble, are wound up upon the bottome of error, and turne upon the Poles of erronious and selfish Principles: as the clearest Rivers (which though
they delight and profit in their passage) yet emptying them∣selves into a Sea of error, there lose their name; and the best mettall is rung out of tune: notwithstanding all those who with hearty and faithfull de∣sires seek to know how to serve God, with a will rather to lose a thousand worlds, then not professe what they should know was Gods command. God is at the end of such mens desires, as he gave them a beginning; and though such be actually in a by channell and way, yet by those. Heavenly inspirations and spi∣rituall gusts, they are Sayling out of them into the great Canal. FINIS.
