V608 14576376 102647
P. VIRGI∣LIUS MARO. THE WORKS OF PUBLIUS VIRGILIUS MARO. Translated by JOHN OGILBY. Will: Marshall sculpsit. 1649.
THE WORKS OF PUBLIUS VIRGILIVS MARO. Translated by JOHN OGILBY. Claud. de bel. Get. & in Alethium. Respice judicium quàm grave Musa subis! Nec tua securum te, Maro, fama vehit. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Crook. 1649.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, My very good Lord, WILLIAM Marquisse and Earl of Hartford, Vicount Beauchamp, and Lord Seymour. My Lord, IT hath been the custome of the most knowing men, to dedicate their Labours to Persons of that quality, from whom with ju∣stice they might expect both pro∣tection
and honour. Our Nation hath not been unfruitful of such, with some difference of degrees, though at present under a cloud: and it can∣not be thought flattery while I make my humble addresse to your Lord∣ship, my ambition enjoys the best; since You are not only descended from Scepter'd Ancestors, (from whose influence I may derive a mo∣dest security) but endowed with those abilities of Judgment and Sci∣ence, to know, and place an exem∣plary value upon Dedications of this nature. So that I may take up that of the famous Lyrick in my just application to your Lordship: Maecenas atavis edite Regibus, O & praesidium, & dulce decus meum.
And that it might not be thought a stain to so great a Patron, I have presurned (which is the second part of my bold undertaking) to wait on your Honour with no lesse then the Prince of Latine Poets; though in relation to my self, I call it but the shadow, and cold resemblance of Virgil. And although this Transla∣tion (for it is hard to render weight for weight, and measure for measure) may relish more of Thrace then Greece, having been bred in phleg∣matick Regions, and among people returning to their ancient barbarity; And that our English Wooll may seem but an unworthy habit for that Muse, which from her conception was adorn'd with all the gold and
spoils of Italie, the most glorious Mistresse of the world: Yet if your Lordship shall be pleas'd to smile upon the dresse she now wears, it may live to be be receiv'd (when time shall ripen more ornament of Sculpture and Annotations) with none of the meanest attempts of this nature; And the Translator though unworthy, encouraged by Your gracious acceptance, shall most gratefully acknowledge himself, My Lord, The most humble Honourer of Your Name and Ʋertue, IOHN OGILBY.
Virgil's BVCOLICKS. The first Eclog. Tityrus. THE ARGUMENT. Sad Mclibaeus banished declares Those miseries attend on civill Wars, But happy Tityrus, the safe defence People enjoy, under a setled Prince. Tityrus. Melibaeus. Melibaeus. UNder the spreading Beech at ease from cares, Thou Tityrus playst on slender reeds soft airs: We, must our Land and pleasant fields forsake, Our country fly: thou in cool shades dost make The woods fair Amaryllis to resound. Tityrus. This peace from God we (Melibaeus) found, (For he shall ever be my God) a soft Lamb from our folds shall bathe his altars oft: He grants my herds to range, and what I will, Thou seest I play upon a rurall quill.
Melibaeus. I envie not, but wonder th' art so blest Since all with Sequestrations are opprest: Lo! I undone, away my Goates must drive, And scarce I lead, O Tityrus! this alive. For mongst thick hazels th'hope of all my flock, Ah! she hath left upon a naked rock. Oft this mischance (had we not sensless been) By Thunder-strucken okes I had forseen, And on the hollow elme, by th'ominous crow: But who this God may be, pray let us know. Tityrus. That city they call Rome, I did account Fondly like this of ours, where Swains are wont Yearly with care, to wean their tender lambs; So I conceiv'd whelps equall to their dams, And judg'd that Kids were as their mothers, tall: So us'd I great things to compare with small. But she, 'bove other cities lifts her head, As o're the shrubs the lofty Cedars spread. Melibaeus. What to see Rome did so thy journey haste? Tityrus. Freedom, which look'd on me, though mean, at last: When first my downy chin the razor shav'd, She look'd at last, and with her smile she sav'd. When me first Amaryllis did possess, And Galatea left; for Ile confess, Whilst me that Galatea did injoy, My freedom lost, no stock I did imploy. Although my folds then many offerings spar'd, And for th' ingrateful city, I prepar'd The richest cheese I could, yet never brought My right hand home again with mony fraught.
Milebaeus. I muse why Amaryllis Gods implor'd, For whom she keeps her tree with apples stor'd. Tityrus was absent, Tityrus the Pines, For thee the fountains call, and tender Vines. Tityrus. What should I do? thraldom I must not leave, Nor could elsewhere, Gods so propitious have. And here that shepherd first I saw, for whom Twice six dayes annually our altars fume: He answering first my suit said: Shepherds, now Your cattell feed, and let your oxen plow. Melibaeus. O happy man! since large enough for thee Thou fields injoyst, though all thy pastures be With stones, with plashie Fens, and rushes spread. Not thy big femals, in strange commons fed Shall suffer, nor sick cattell taint their bloods. O happy man! here by the well-known flouds, And sacred fountains, thou fresh aire shalt take; Then quick-sets, which our neighbouring limits make, Whose sallow flower Hyblaean Bees invade, Oft with soft murmurs shall to sleep perswade. Then shall the Woodman under high rocks chant; Nor thy delight, sad Stock-doves, shalt thou want, Nor turtles cease to grone from elmy bows. Tityrus. In empty skies, first nimble Dear shall browse, The Ocean leave his naked fish on shore; The confines wander'd of both lands before, Parthians drink Arar, Germans Tygris taste, That his Idaea shall forsake our breast. Melibaeus. But we must go to thirstie Lybian Realms,
To Scythia or Oaxes chalkie streams, And from the world divided, Britany. Shall ever I again my Countrey see, And my poor house, which I with turf did reare; My seates admiring after many a year? Shall th impious Souldier have this new plow'd fields? Barbarians reap this corn? What discord yeelds, See Wretched Citizens, See, for whom we plow: Set Pears, Melibaeus, and plant Vineyards now. Farewell my Goates, farewell once happie flock. I stretch't on verdant banks you on a rock No more shall see hang on the shrubby top: Nor Verses sing, nor fed by me to crop Sharp sallows, and the spreading Cythisus. Tityrus. But here this night you may repose with us In this green bower; here are ripe Apples, we Soft Chestnuts have, and store of curds there be: The Villages do smoke, and from the tall Mountains far off, now larger shadows fall.
The second Eclog. Alexis. THE ARGUMENT. Coridon meanes how learned men are bent To honour those of place and high discent: But often they like to Alexis prove, And nothing but disdin return for love. POor Coridon for fair Alexis burns, Joy of his Lord, nor hopes for love-returns. But yet he daily came, where a cool shade The spreading tops of the tall Beeches made: And there in these unpolish'd lines alone In vain to Woods, and Mountains makes his moan. Cruel Alexis doth my Verse disdain, And without pity me with scorn hath slain. The cattel now in cooling shades abide, And speckled Lizarrds in the bushes hide; And Thestylis, for Reapers, tir'd with heat, With strong herbs Betony doth, and Garlick beat: Whilst I am seeking where thou maist be found Amongst the shrubs the Grashoppers resound.
Were it not better that I should have born Proud Amaryllis wrath, and haughty scorn? Were it not better for Menalcas smart, Though he is brown, and thou so beauteous art? Sweet youth, in beauty not such trust repose, White Blossoms fall, when Blackberries are chose. Scorn'd me, Alexis not desires to know, How rich in flocks, and how my pailes oreflow: My thousand lambs Sicilian mountains haunt, Summer, nor Winter, milke I do not want. Lung those notes which once Amphyon did, Calling his Herds to Aracynthus meade: Nor am I so deform'd, late I beheld My self in the calme sea, with winds unswel'd: And wert thou Judg, I should not Daphnis fear, If any shadow true resemblance bear. O that with me thou in these homely parts And humble cotes wouldst stay, and shoot swift Hearts; There with a green wand drive the flocks of Goats, Then in the grove wee'l imitate Pans notes. Pan taught us joyn first many quills with wax, Pan minds our sheep and masters of the flocks. Nor shalt thou ere repent this Pipe to use, For which Amyntas nothing would refuse. Composed with seven differing reeds I have A Pipe, which once to me Dametas gave; And dying said, this thee now second knows, At which Amyntas fond, his envie shews. Besides two Kds I have, I lately found As they were straying in a dangerous ground: Their skins with white already dapled be, Two Yews they suck; these I preserve for thee. Which Thestylis would fain have got; and shall, Since you our presents not regard at all.
Sweet youth draw near; for thee whole baskets full The beauteous Nymphs of unstain'd Lillyes cull, For thee fair Nais gathers Violets, Tulips Narcissus, and sweet Poppy gets, Blossoms of Annis joyns, hath intermix'd Cassia, with other pleasant flowers betwixt, Soft Cowslips with bright Marigolds are deck't, I shall the tender wooll-skin'd Peach select, And Chesnuts which my Amaryllis lov'd, Damsons Ile add; this fruit shall be approv'd, And you O Laurels cull, thou Myrtle next, Because so plac'd your smell is best commix'd. Coridon's rude, nor doth Alexis grace His gifts, nor to thee gives Iolas place. What wouldst thou wretch! I have let tempests spoyl My flowrs, and boars my crystall fountains soil. Whom fly'st thou fond! the Gods have dwelt in bowers; So Paris liv'd, let Pallas keep her towres; But let cool Groves 'bove all things please us best. Stern Lyons, Wolves, Wolves have the Goate in quest, The wanton Goate fresh Cythisus invites, Thou me, each one persues his own delights. Behold they now unyoak the wearie Steer, And the Sun setting, larger shades appear; Still love burns me, there is no mean in love, Ah Corydon, what madness doth thee move? On the green Elm hangs my half-pruned Vine, But rather now, some needful task design, Prepare soft twigs, the limber Bullrush winde, And if Alexis scorn, some other finde.
The third Eclog. Palaemon. THE ARGUMENT. These Swains present, how vertue and the arts Still emulation breed in men of parts. But grave Palaemon doth their passions calme, Both praising, yet to neither gives the Palme. Menalcas. Dametas. Palaemon. Menalcas. ARe these, Dametas, Melibaeus sheep? Dametas. No: Damon's, for he gave them me to keep. Menalcas. Still hapless flocks, whilst that Neaera he Courts, fondly jealous better she loves me. For twice this stranger hourely drains the Dams, Robbing the Ewes of strength, of milk the Lambs. Dametas. Henceforth such crimes more sparingly object, We know what you did, if we would detect,
And how the He-Goats vext lookd on the while, And in what place; but th' easie Nymphs did smile. Menalcas. Sure 'twas when I in Mycon's ground was took Pruning his Vines with an unwelcome hook. Dametas. Or when you Daphnis Bow and arrowes brake, At the old Beech, which thou so ill didst take To see bestowd upon the boy from thee. For couldst thou not do mischief, thou wouldst die. Menalcas. What will not Masters, when the servants dare So bold attempts as these? when thou didst snare Poore Damons Goat, vilde Swaine, did I not marke, Though all the while at thee his Dog did bark? And when I cride, Hold thief, where doth he rush? Swaine, count thy Goats, thou skulk'st behinde a bush. Dametas. Vanquish'd in singing why should he refuse, To pay the Goat, won by my Pipe, and Muse! That Goat (if you must know) was mine, no less Damon who could not pay it, did confess. Menaclas. Thou him in singing? hadst thou ever yet A Pipe with wax conjoyn'd, didst thou not sit In high wayes, thou lewd Piper, and there use, On hissing quils to spoyl a wretched Muse? Dametas. The skill that either hath, let us now trie; I'le lay this Heifer (lest thou should'st denie) Twice she to milking comes, and at her teats Two Calves she feeds; then say, what are thy beats.
Menalcas. I dare not from my flock a wager lay; I have a sire and step-dame, twice a day Both tell the sheep; the Goats another counts. What you shall grant, thy Heifer far surmounts, (Since thou art pleas'd to rant) beech Cups I will Stake down, carv'd by divine Alcymidons skill. On which with a smooth turn soft Vines he shapes, And with pale Ivie cloaths the spreading Grapes. Amidst two signes, Conon-who's th'other then? He with his Art describes Earth's Globe to men; What time the Plow-men, and the Reapers have, Which yet my lips ne'r touch'd, but clean I save. Dametas. Also for us two Cups Alcymidon made, The handles round with bright Acanthus laid, Orpheus amid'st, and following woods they have, Which yet my lips ne'r touch'd, but clean I save. But if that well my Heifer thou dost weigh, In thy Cups praise so much thou wouldst not say. Menalcas. Thou shalt not scape, I'le meet where thou dar'st please, Call when you will; let him be Judge of these That next we meet; Palaemon see before, I'le make thee that thou ne're shalt challenge more. Dametas. Say what thou hast, in me is no delay, Nor shun I any; friend Palaemon stay, No trifle's layd, thy best attention fit. Palaemon. Begin, since now on the soft grass we sit, Now every field, all trees now fruitfull are,
Now flourish Groves, the season is most faire. Dametas first, Menalcas next rehearse, For still the Muses love alternate verse. Dametas. With Jove begin, all things are full of Jove, He Swaines regards, and doth my Verses love. Menalcas. And Phoebus me, and I have for him still His own fresh bay, and blushing daffadill. Dametas. Me Galatea would with Apples win, Then flies to shades, but strives first to be seen. Menalcas. My flame Amyntas courts me oft alone, Nor to our dogs is Delia better known. Dametas. Guifts for my love I have, and by my search I know the place where her swift Pigeons perch. Menalcas. Such as I had, red Apples half a score The youth I sent, to morrow I le send more. Dametas. What words to us did Galatea say, You winds a part unto the Gods convey. Menalcas. That thou not scorn'st me, am I better yet; If whil'st thou hunt'st wilde Boars I keep the net? Dametas. Phyllis Iolas send, my birth-day 'tis, Thy self come, when for fruit I sacrifice. Menalcas. Her I lov'd best, for tears she parting shed, And long farewel, farewel, faire Iolas said.
Dametas. Stern Wolves the Stals, windes trees, ripe fruit the showers, Me Amaryllis ruines, if she lowrs. Menalcas. Soft dew the corne, low shrubs the weaned kids, Small sallow Goats, but me Amyntas feeds. Dametas. Pollio, though she be rustick, loves our muse: A Calfe you Muses, for your reader choose. Menalcas. Pollio makes verses, let a Bull be fed That strikes with bornes, with feet the sand doth spread. Dametas. To joyes like thine, who loves thee Pollio come, For him flowes honey, thorns bear Amomum. Menalcas. Who hates not Bavius, may love Maevius notes, The same may Foxes joyn, and milk he Goats. Dametas. Fly, who cull flowers and earth-born strawberies, For in the grass a cold Snake hidden lies. Menalcas. Lead home the Ewes, least heat their milk detain, And you as lately press the teat in vain. Dametas. How poor my Bull is in a fertile field? One love, the herd, and the herds Lord hath kil'd. Menalcas. Sure love is not the cause, see how they shew! Nor what eye witch't my tender Lambs I know. Dametas. Say, (and my great Apollo be) what shore The Skie extends three fathomes, and no more.
Menalcas. Say in what Land, the names of Princes signe The springing flowrs, and Phyllis shall be thine. Palamon. Tis not in us this difference to compose, You both deserve the praise, and each, who knowes Or fears sweet love, or hath the bitter tride. Swaines shut your Springs, the Meads are satisfi'de.
The fourth Eclog. Pollio. THE ARGUMENT. Here Sibill is appli'de to Pollio's son, Her Prophesies his Gnethliacon, But Christs birth he by happie error sings. The Prince of Poets crowns the King of Kings. SIcilian Muses, sing we one note higher, All like not tamarisk nor the humble brier: If Woods we sing, Woods worthy Consuls be, Last times are come, Cumea's Prophesie, And times great order now again is borne, The maid returns, Saturnian Realms returne: Now from high Heaven springs a new Progenie: To th' infant chaste Lucina favouring be, Who ending iron ages, through all Lands Shall golden plant: thy Phoebus now commands. Thou childe being Consul, Pollio shall possess This Fame of th' Age, great moneths themselves address; If any prints of our old vice remain'd, By thee they r void, and fear shall leave the Land.
He a Gods life shall take, with Gods shall see Mixt Heroes, and himself their object be. Rule with paternal power th' appeased earth, Which shall to thee (sweet childe) undrest, bring forth, Berries, wilde Ivie, and shall pay first fruits Of mixt Acanthus, with Egyptian roots The Goats themselves shall home full udders bear, Nor shall the herds the mighty Lyons fear. Flowers shall thy cradle sprout, the Serpent shall And the deceitfull herb of venome, fall; In each place Roses of Assyria grow. As soon as thou the Heroes fame shalt know, And thy Sires acts, vertue thy self attain, The fields shall mellow wax with golden grain: The blushing Grape shall hang on thorns unset, And boystrous Oke, with dewy hony sweat. Some steps of ancient fraud shall yet be found, Thetis to tempt with ships, and to surround Cities with walls, bids earth in furrows tear, A second Typhis, a new Argo bear Choice Heroes, and another war, imploy Again a great Achilles sent to Troy. Here when full years shall make thee perfect man, The Saylor shall forsake the Ocean, Nor Navigable Pines shall trafick ware: But each part of the world shall all things bear. Nor Earth feel harrows, nor the Vine the hook, Nor shall his Steers, the rustick tiller yoak; Nor Wooll with various colours shall deceive, But in the medows Rams shall skarlet have, And changing sometimes golden fleeces wear, And feeding Lambs, shall native purple bear. The Fates conspiring with eternall dome Said to their Spindle, Let such ages come.
Attempt great honours, for the time draws near, Dear race of Gods, great stock of Jupiter, Behold! the world shakes on its pondrous axe, See, earth and heavens immense and th'Ocean tracts, How all things at th'approaching age rejoyce! Oh that my life would last so long, and voyce, As would suffice thy actions to rehearse: Not Orpheus then shall vanquish me in Verse, Nor Linus, though their parents present be; Phoebus got this, and that Calliope. Should Pan with me strive by Arcadias dome, Although a God, Pan should be overcome. Begin sweet childe, with smiles thy mother know, Who ten long moneths did with thy burthen go. Sweet childe begin, cheer'd by no parents look, To 's board no God, t' her bed no goddess took.
The fifth Eclog. Daphnis. THE ARGUMENT. Since Kings as common Fathers cherish all, Subjects like children should lament their fall; But learned men of grief should have more sense, When violent death seizes a gracious Prince. Menalcas. Mopsus. Menalcas. MAy we not Mopsus (both being skilfull, met, Thou on small Pipes to play, I verse repeat) Here amongst Elms commix'd with hazels sit? Mopsus. Thou eldest art, whom me t' obey is fit. Whether to trembling shades light Zephyrs wave We goe, or take some Grot; See, how you Cave Hath from wilde spreading Vines a Canopie. Menalcas. In our hills only Amintas strive with thee.
Mopsus. What if t'excell Phoebus in song he aimes? Menalcas. Say Mopsus, if thou hast, or Phyllis flames, Or Alcons praise, or Codrus brawles begin: And Tityrus shall thy feeding Kids keep in. Mopsus. I le trie those strains on the green Beech I wrot, And with alternate change did warbling note. Then boldly bid Amyntas strive with me. Menalcas. As the bright Olive stains the sallow tree, As blushing Roses humble Lavender, So thee before Amyntas we prefer. Dear Swaine, no more, here is the caves descent. Mopsus. The Nymphs lost Daphnis funerall did lament, Witness you Hazels, Nymphs, and purling streams; VVhen the sad mother raiz'd the mangled limbs Of her dear son, Gods, stars, she cruel calls. Not any then oh Daphnis! from their stalls The Cattell drove to cooling Springs, the flood No herd did tast, nor touch'd sweet grass for food. Rough hils, and Groves, with echoes did resound Daphnis thy death, and Lybian Lyons gron'de: Daphnis Armenian Tygers first conjoyn'd In's Chariot, and to Bacchus rites design'd: Did trembling Spears with gentle leaves combine. As Vines the woods adorne, as Grapes the Vine, As Males the herds, as Corne the fertill field: Thou thine didst grace: when thou to Fates didst yield, Both Pales and Apollo left our plaine. In furrowes where we oft sow'd largest grain,
Sad darnell, and wilde Oats o'respread, and where Purple Narcissus, and soft Violets were, The Thistle and rough prickling brambles spring. Swains strew fresh boughes, shades to your Fountains bring, Such honors Daphnis for himself did doome, His Monument reare, and this write on his Tombe. I Daphnis known in woods unto the Skie, Kept a fair Flock, and yet more fair was I. Menalcas. O divine Poet! such thy Verse to me, As to the tir'd, in grass sweet slumbers be, Cool streams in heat the thirsty so rejoyce; Thou, both the Pipe do'st match, and Masters voyce. O happie Swaine! thou shalt his second be, Our song what ere it is, I shall to thee Begin, and to the Stars thy Daphnis bear: Daphnis lov'd vs, Daphnis to heaven we'le rear. Mopsus. VVhat gift more welcome unto us? the Swaine Was worthy to be sung, and every straine Stymichon lately did to us approve. Menalcas. Fair Daphnis wonders at strange courts above, VVho clouds, and stars beneath his feet beheld, Joy ravish'd Pan, the woods, and every field, The Shepherds, and the virgin Dryades. No Wolfe layd wait for sheep, no nets to seise By craft the Dear, good Daphnis peace did love. The unshorn hills glad echoes raise above The highest Stars, Rocks in a cheerfull Ode, And shrubs Menalcas sound, the God, the God. Be good and blest to thine; four Altars see, For Daphnis two, and Phoebus two for thee.
Two Bowles with new milk frothing yearly we, And with the fat of Olives, two decree. Rejoycing feasts with plenteous Bacchus made, If cold, with lustie fire, if hot, in shade. Arrissian Wine, brisk Nectar I shall bring. To me Dametas shall, and Aegon sing, And Satyre like Alphisiboeus Dance. These shall be ever thine; and when w'advance Our rites to Nymphs, fields purge with th'annuall rite. Whil'st Boars on hils, whil'st fish in streams delight, Grashoppers dew, and Thyme the bees repast, So long thy honor, name, and praise shall last. As Swaines to Bacchus, and to Ceres pay Their yearly vowes, so they to thee shall pray. Mopsus. Now for such Verse, what present shall I finde? Not murmurs of th' approaching Southern winde, Nor waves more please, when they the shores assaile; Nor water gliding through a stonie vale. Menalcas. This slender Pipe we give, our love returns, This Corydon for fair Alexis burns. To this I sung, These Melibaeus sheep. Mopsus. Take thou this book which hardly I could keep, From dear Antigines who well deserv'd, VVhich is with brasse (Menalcas) neatly carv'd.
The sixth Eclog. Silenus. THE ARGUMENT. Those Sects which promise sensuall delights, Soonest infect, and gain most Proselytes; But oft those Tenets which are held divine, Rise from full bellies, and heads charg'd with Wine. FIrst our Thalia chanted rurall strains In Verse, nor she to dwell in woods disdains. Phoebus, when I did sing of Kings, and war, Said, Tityrus. And nip'd me by the ear; Shepherds should feed their flocks, and tune soft layes. Now I (for thou O Varus, and thy praise Others shall strive to sing, and wars rehearse) On slender Reeds shall tune an humble verse. I chant not things forbid; if struck with love Any shall reade, the shrubs, and every Grove Shall sing thee Varus; what can more ingage Phoebus, then thy name on the title page?
Say Muses; Chromis, Mnasylus, beheld Stretch't in a Cave Sylenus sleeping, swel'd VVith last nights Bacchus, as his usuall guise; Far off, faln from his head his garland lies, On a worn handle, his great bottle hung.— They went (for when the old man should have sung He mock'd their hopes) and with's own Chaplets bound. VVith them joyn'd Aegle, whom she timerous found: Aegle the fairest Nymph; this fraud he spies, VVhil'sts she vvith Mulberies his temples dies, And smiling said, why binde you me? let goe; It is enough that you have seen me so, My promis'd Verses take, they novv are done; Her otherwise Il' please, then thus begun. Then thou might'st see wilde beasts, and fauns advance Sporting in troups, and the tall Okes to dance. Nor so in Phoebus, joy Parnassus spires, Nor Ismare, Rodophe, Orpheus so admires. For he sung how collected seeds did come Of Earth, Aire, Sea, through the huge vacuum, And glittering fire: how all things first commenc'd From these, and the worlds tender Orbe condens'd: Then Earth grevv hard, and Nereus did exclude, And by degrees the forms of things indu'd. That a new Sun did shine, the Lands admire, And showrs to fall from Clouds now mounted higher: When first the sprouting vvoods began t' appear, And beasts in unknown hills, graz'd here and there; Next Saturn's reign, and stones that Pyrrha flung, Caucasus foul, Prometheus theft, he sung: Adds Hylas lost, where Sailors neer the Spring Call Hylas, Hylas, till the shores did ring.
And with a white Buls love did please the Queen Pasiphae, happie, if no herds had been. Poor Virgin, why didst thou to folly yield? And Pretides launs, vvith fained lowings fil'd; Yet such foul lust, not any of the herd: Persu'd, although their necks the yoak had fear'd. And oft had horns sought in their tender brow. Ah miserable, in vvoods thou wander'st now, His snowie side upon soft Daffadils laid, Chevving the Cud, under an oken shade: Or woe's some other in the ample drove. Shut Nymphs, Dictaean Nymphs, shut close your Grove, If any tracts as he shall wandring pass By chance we finde, or took with verdant grass, Or following Cattell, other Heifers call, And they intice him to Gortinas stall. Next, her pleas'd vvith Hesperian fruit he shews, Then Phaeton's sisters, whom sowre mosse inclose, And from the Earth the lofty Aldar brings. And Gallus wandring by Permessus springs. How him a Muse led to th' Aonian top, And how to th' man, Phoebus whole Quire stood up. In divine Verse how Linus these exprest; His hair vvith flovvres, and bitter Apium drest. These Pipes the Muses give thee, take, behold! These ancient Hesiods vvear, with which, he could Singing, wilde ashes from the Mountains move: VVith these thou mayst describe Apollo's Grove: Lest Phoebus should in any woods more pride. VVhat shall I say of Scylla? whose white side, (As Fame reports) with barking Monsters bound, Vexing Dulichian ships; ah! in that sound She trembling Sailors with her Sea-hounds tears. And Tereus limbs transform'd, he next declares,
Philomels bankets, and what gifts she brought, And with what speed, she wretched, desarts sought, And with what wings once o're her Court she flew, He sung all these, which blest Eurotas knevv From Phoebus once: and bids the Laurell sing. And to the stars the Vales with echoe ring. Till night bid house their flocks, their numbers tell, And from unwilling skies the evening fell.
The seventh Eclog. Melibaeus. THE ARGUMENT. The Vulgar like the worst, and make their choice Not from best Language, but the loudest voyce: And oft those men get fame, and win the prize, Who guard with boldness weak abilities. Corydon. Thyrsis. AS Daphnis sate under a murmuring Oke, Thyrsis, and Corydon drove on the flock. Sheep Thyrsis, Corydon milch Goats did bring: Arcadians both, in youth both flourishing, Both match'd to sing, to answer both prepar'd. Here whil'st soft myrtle me from cold did guard, The Goat chief of the flock strai'd; and I spide Daphnis, when he beheld me, straight he cride, Melibe, here, safe is thy Goat, and Kids; Rest in this shade, if no affair forbids,
The herds themselves to drink here, pass the Meads, Green Mincius here with soft reeds Couches spreads, Now from the sacred Oke the svvarms resound. VVhat should I do? no maid was to be found, That carefully my nevv wean'd Lambs should watch: VVhen Corydon and Thyrsis sung their match. Yet for the sport my business I laid by, Then, both in Verse strove for the victorie; The Muse their parts alternate did divide, These Corydon sung, and Thyrsis thus replide. Corydon. You Fountain-Nymphs, our love, or grant me Verse, As once to Codrus, who did strains rehearse Like Phoebus; but, if such can not be mine, This Pipe shall hang upon the sacred Pine. Thyrsis. Your rising Poet crown Arcadian Svvaines With Ivie, and let spight burst Codrus veines, Or if he'le praise too much, let beries arme My browes, lest an ill tongue your Poet harme. Corydon. A Boars head Delia, Mycon doth impart To thee, and large hornes of a long-liv'd hart. Thy Statue shall be in fine Marble plac'd, If this thou grant, vvith purple buskins grac'd. Thyrisis. Priapus, only Cream and Cakes expect Yearly, thou our poor Orchards dost protect, We for a time, thee but in Marble mould: But if our flocks increase, thou shalt be gold.
Corydon. Galate me doth more then Thyme delight, Bright Ivie not so faire, nor Swans more white, VVhen the fed Cattel first to stals repaire; Come, if thou hast of Corydon a care. Thyrsis. I bitterer to thee then Sardan grass, More rough then broome shall seeme, then Owse more base, If this day shews not longer then whole years, Goe, if you' have any shame, goe home, fed steers. Corydon. You mossie Springs, and grass more soft then sleep, And verdant boughes, which you with shadowes keep, In summer save my flocks, great heat comes now, And pregnant Crapes swell on the glad some bough. Thyrsis. A hearth, fat Pyne, nor ample fire we lack, VVith daily smoke, our Chimney peeces black: The cold of Boreas here we fear no more, Then VVolves our Cattell, or fierce streams the shore. Corydon. Here Junipers and downie Chesnuts be, And tempting Apples under every tree. All things now smile, but if Alexis flie Our Mountains, thou shalt see the rivers drie. Thyrsis. In scorch'd fields th' aire infected herbage kils, Bacchus his viney shade denies the hills: VVhen Phyllis comes all shall wax green again, And Jove descend in joyfull showres of raine. Corydon. Alcides Poplar, Bacchus Vines doth grace, Faire Venus Myrtle, and Apollo Baies,
Phyllis loves hazels, if she these allow, Myrtle and Laurell both to hazels bow. Thyrsis. The Ash in woods, in Orchards Pines are faire, Poplar in streams, Firrs in high Mountains are; But if fair Lycida oft thou visit me, The lofty Ash and Pine shall bow to thee. Melibaeus. These I record, and Thyrsis vanquish'd, thus From that time Corydon, Corydon for us.
The eight Eclog. Pharmaceutria. THE ARGUMENT. Nothing can ease the pangs of cruell love, Though a base object do the fancie move, And when they feele the power of Cupids Dart, They will not stick to use the blackest Art. Damou. Alphesibus. ALphesibe, and Damons Muse we sing, At vvhose contention young steers wondering Forgot to feed, Lynces their verse amaze, And in his course the flovving River staies. Alphesibe and Damons Muse we sing. VVhether thou pass by great Tymavus Spring, Or cut Illyrian waves. Shall once the day Appear, when I thy victories shall display? It shall; and I thy praise through earth rehearse, Fit onl y for a Sophoclean verse.
These sprung from thee, in thee must end. Take layes Begun by thy Commands; mongst conquering bayes Suffer this Ivie round thy browes to spread. Scarce nights cold shadows from the skie were fled; When dew the heards delight, had pearl'd the Mead, On a smooth Olive, leaning, Damon said. Damon. Lucifer rise, usher the joyfull day, VVhil'st I complaine, me Nisa doth betray With fained love, and yet at my last houre, The Gods (who knew I gain'd not) I implore, And now my Pipes begin Menalean strains. Menalus never wanted murmuring Groves, And whispering pines, it alwayes heard the loves Of passionate shepherds, and great Pan who still, Suffer'd not Svvaines to have an idle quill. And now my Pipes begin Menalean strains. Mopsus hath Nisa: Then all love may speed, And now wing'd Griphins may with horses breed; And timerous Deer in follovving times be found, Fearless to water with the cruell hound. Mopsus new torches cut, now thou art wed, Strevv nuts, for thy sake Hesper goes to bed. And now my Pipes begin Menalean strains. Oh nobly match'd, vvhil'st thou didst all despise, My Pipes and Goates not pleasing in thy eyes, My hairie eye browes, and my unshorne beard, Nor think'st that any God for mortals car'd. And now my Pipes begin Menalean straines.
I, thee a little one, vvith thy mother found Once gathering mellovv apples in our ground; I vvas your guide, at tvvelve years from my birth, And then could slender boughes reach from the earth, Soone as I saw, as soone I perished, Alas, how great an error me misled! And now my Pipe begin Menalean straines. Now Love I know, Ismarus him hath fed, Or Rodophe, or farthest Afrique bred, Mongst wilde forsaken Rocks, those places cou'd Produce no off-spring of our stock, or blood. And now my pipes begin Menalean straines. Dire Love a mother taught, her hand t' imbrue In her sons blood, thou a stern mother too; Has she more rage, or the boy less desert? He's stubborn, and thou cruell mother art. And now my pipes begin Menalean straines. Let vvolves novv naturally avoid our flocks, And golden Apples grovv on stubborn Okes; From the base Eldar sprout the daffadill, And Amber from lovv Tamarisk distill; Owles strive vvith Swans, let Tityrus Orpheus be, Orpheus in woods, Arion on the sea: And now my pipes begin Menalean straines. Let all parts now be sea, farewell you woods, From aerie hils, I'le leap into the floods, T'accept a dying man's last present daine. Leave pipes, leave off now, the Menalcan straine. Thus Damon: vvhat Alphesibe answerd, you Muses relate! all cannot all things do.
Bring water, with fost wreaths the Altars dress, Rich Gumms, and juicy vervain sacrifice, That I my love with Magick may disarme Of his disdain; there only wants a Charme. My Verse bring from the Town, bring Daphnis home. Charmes can command the Moon dovvn from the skie; Circes Charmes chang'd Ʋlisses company: A frozen Snake being charm d, burst in the meads. I walk around vvith these three severall threads, Bout th Altars thrice I shall thy Image bear; Od numbers to the God delightfull are. Bring from the Town my verse, bring Daphnis home. Knots Amaryllis tye, of colours three, Then say these chaines I knit, for Venus be. Bring from the Town my verse, bring Daphnis home. As with one fire this clay doth harder prove, This wax more soft. So Daphnis with our love, Break Cakes, fire Laurell with a sacred blaze, Daphnis burns me, for him Ile burn this bayes. Bring from the Town my verse, bring Daphnis home. So Daphnis as a wearied Heifer loves, Seeking a steer in woods, and shadie Groves, She near a streame laid on green siege doth mourne, And when night cals, regards not to returne. So Daphnis loves, and I his cure not minde: He once a pledge his garments left behinde. Which now in th'entrance, Earth, I give to thee, This pledg for Daphnis is ingag'd to me. Bring from the town my verse, bring Daphnis home.
Moeris for me these hearbs in Pontus chose, And curious drugs, for there great plentie growes. I many times with these have Maeris spide, Chang'd to a wolfe, and in the woods to hide. Bring from the town, my verse, bring Daphnis home. Bear th'ashes Amaryllis forth, and them Cast o're thy head, into a running streame, Nor look back. These for Daphnis I prepar'd, For he doth neither Gods, nor Charmes regard. Bring from the town, my verse, my Daphnis home. See th' ashes, of themselves on th' Altars blaze, Whil'st I to bear them out did make delayes. I know not what it means; oh may it thrive; And Hylax barks at dore! Do we believe, Or those who love, dreams to themselves still faine? Now Charms forbear, Daphnis comes home again.
The ninth Eclog. THE ARGUMENT Best Princes Peace affect, and more delight Their Subjects to preserve, then their own right; But those who follow War no power can awe, Swords make oppression just, and madness Law. Lycidas. Moeris. Lycidas. MOEris, where go'st? to Town the common way? Moeris. We Lycidas live to hear a stranger say (Which we ne're thought) who now the fields doth own, These Lands are mine; you rustick Swaines be gone. Vanquish'd and sad, since chance swaies all things, we Send him these Kids; may they unluckie be. Lycidas. Truly I heard, where th' hill begins to bend, And with a gentle stooping to descend, Towards the brook, where the old torne Beech doth stand, Menalcas by his song had all regain'd. Moeris. Thou heardst, and so twas fam'd; but our verse proves Gainst martiall arms, as the Chaonian Doves
When the Eagle comes; If from the holl tree, The ominous Crow had not premonish'd me, To cut off new debates, nor more to strive, I, nor Menalcas had not been alive. Lycidas. Alas! can any man so impious be? Menalcas, all our Joys are lost with thee. Who shall the Nymphs record? who with sweet flowrs, Strew earth, and Springs surround with shadie bowrs? Or who such verse I had from thee shall write, When thou courtd st, Amaryllis our delight? Tityrus, till I come, nor long I'le stay, Feed thou my Goats, and having fed convey To watering, and whil'st they driving are, Look how you meet the Goat, he'le strike, beware. Moeris. He sung to Varus this unpollish'd strain, Varus thy name (if Mantua ours remaine, Mantua, (to sad Cremona, ah too nigh.) Harmonious Swans shall carrie to the skie. Lycidas. So from the Cyrnean yewes thy bees retreat, So Cythisus extends the Cowes full teat: Begin if thou hast ought; the muses me A Poet made, and I can versifie; And me a Poet too the Shepherds deem, But I want confidence to credit them. I've nought worth Varus yet, or Cinnas choice, But like a goose mongst Swans I make a noise. Moeris. And so do I, and to my self rehearse, (Could I remember) no unworthy verse. Come hither Galate, what sport is there Amongst the streams? the purple spring is here:
The Earth adorns the banks with every flowre, And silver Poplar hides this pleasant bower, And tender vine-twigs weave into a shade. Come hither, let wilde floods the shores invade. Lycidas. What wa'st I heard thee sing, the last fair night? I have the tune, could I the words recite. Moeris. O Daphnis why observ'st thou ancient signs, Dionean Coesars star, behold, now shines: The star, which fields with fruit, and gladness fils, And coulors vines upon the sunnie hils. Daphnis set pears, thy race shall fruit injoy, Age all things wasts: the minde too; I a boy With song have often tir'd the summers sun, Now all those straines are lost, and my voyce gone; A wolfe saw Moeris first. Menalcas yet At large to thee shall all those lines repeat. Moeris. Thou by delaies our longings dost increase, Through every field is spread a silent peace; The aire is still, the middle path is here; And see now Bianors tombe begins t appear. Here where the Shepherds have their bavins tyde, Moeris let's sing, and lay thy Kids aside: Timely wee'le reach the town, and if we fear The night should gather rain, ere we come there, Singing lets goe, the way shall better please: That I may sing, thee of thy load Ile' ease. Lycidas. Shepherd, no more, let's do what next remaines, When our chiefe comes wee'le fancie better straines.
The tenth Eclog. Gallus. THE ARGUMENT. Both wise and valiant men oft feel the flames Of cruel love, and follow Wanton dames; Yet scornefull Ladies still this curse pursues, To slight the better, and the worse to choose. THis my last work, O Arethusa speed. For Gallus, which Lycoris self might reade, Straines must be sung: who Gallus will denie? So gliding under floods of Sicilie, May not with thee, salt Doris mix her stream. Begin, let Gallus sad love be our theame, Whilst flat no'sd Goats shall crop the tender buds; To deaf we sing not, answer'd by the woods. In what woods were you Naiades, what Grove, When Gallus perish'd, by unworthy love? Parnassus tops, Pindus have not delaid, Nor for you Aganippes fountain staid.
Laurels for him, and tamarisk tears did pay, And Menalus whil'st by a Rock he lay, VVith cold Lycaus Clifts did him lament. That sheep stand round us we do not repent; Nor divine Poet dost thou flocks contemn: The fair Adonis fed sheep near the stream. The shepherds come, and the dull herds-men haste, And fat Menalcas flies from winter maste. All ask whence sprung this love; Apollo came, And said, what madness Gallus doth inflame? Thy dear Lycoris wanders through the snowes, And through rough wayes after another goes. Sylvanus comes adorn'd with rurall boughes, Lillies, and fennel dangling on his browes. Pan comes, Arcadia's God, whom we have spide, With Synople, and blushing berries dide; Betwixt extreams is there no mean? he sayes, Love hath regard to no such things as these. Not love with tears, nor grass with streams, nor bees With thyme are satisfi'de, nor Goats with trees. Pensive he said, O you Arcadians chant About our hils, for you no cunning want. Oh! then my ashes shall finde peacefull rest, When by your quill my passions are exprest. I would with you a shepherds life were mine, To follow sheep, or prune the swelling vine: Then Phyllis, or Amyntas were mine own, Or some love (though I grant, Amyntas brown, Dark are the violets, so the bilberrie) Would mongst soft vines and sallowes rest with me. Phyllis should wreath me flowres, Amynas sing. Lycoris, here are meads, here the cool spring, Thou far from home. (I wish it were not so) Seest without me, cold Rhine, and Alpine snow:
May thee no bleak winds, nor rough tempests meet, Ah may no sharp ice wound thy tender feet. Ile goe and play in a Chalcidick straine, My notes on reeds, of a Sicilian Swaine. Rather in Desarts I resolve to live, And in the dens of savage beasts to grieve; There on the tender barks to carve my love, And as they grow so shall my hopes improve. Meane while commixed with the Nymphs, Ile view Menalus, or the cruel boar pursue: Nor shall I be with hardest frosts withstood, To set with dogs, round the Parthenian wood. Through murmuring Groves, and rocks me thinks I goe, Pleas'd to shoot arrowes, from a Parthian bow. As if this were a medicine for our love, Or by mans sufferings, Cupid milder prove, Verses displease now, Muses in disgrace, And now again, you shadie Groves give place. Nor can our troubles work him to a change, Should we drink Hebrus, in midwinter range Amongst huge frosts, and Scythian snow; should we, When on high elms the parch'd vines dying be. The southern flocks, under hot Cancer move, Love conquers all, let us give place to love. Let this suffice your Poet to have said, Whil'st he a basket of fine bulrush made: Muses, you shall great things for Gallus do, Whose love to me as much doth hourely grow, As the green Alder shooteth in the spring. Let us arise; shades oft hurt those who sing; Juniper shades are to our fruit a foe, The Evening comes, goe home, my fed Kids, goe.
THE FIRST BOOK OF Virgil's GEORGICKS. THE ARGUMENT. What times are best to sow, what natures are Of differing grounds; what industrie and care. What hurts the corne, the Plowmans severall Rules: Who musters up innumerable tooles. Who first the world with th' art of tillage blest. Summer and winter Swaines must take no rest. Plowmen must learn the stars; which frost and snow, Fair and fowle weather, rain and winds foreshew, Clashing of Nobles, tumults, and of late Popular fury, and great Caesars fate. WHat makes rich grounds (Mecaenas:) in what signs 'Tis best to plow, and marrie elms with vines: What care of sheep; with Cattel what agrees: And how much skill belongs to frugall bees; Now I shall sing. You glorious Lights, who bear In your swift motion round the sliding year:
Bacchus, blest Ceres, if from you we gain For poor Chaonian acorns, golden graine; And wine t' inrich our watery cups: and you Fauns, who to Swains your bounty still allow: Together Fauns, and virgin Dryades come; Your gifts I sing: and Neptune, thou to whom Earth trident-struck, brought forth a generous steed: And woods protector, thou, whose snowie breed Three hundred graze on Caeas fertile grounds, Pan, the flocks guardian, leaving native bounds And Lycian groves, if Maenalus thou prize, With Pallas come, who th' Olive did devise: And thou Inventor of the crooked Plow Silvanus, bearing a soft Cypres bough. All Gods our fields protect; and those who feed The tender grain, still cherishing our seed, And who from skies on corne, send plentious rain; Thou Caesar, whom what seat shall entertaine In Heaven's unknown: whether thou take the care Of Realms, and Cities, or the world declare Thee Lord of fruit, to whom the seasons bow, And with thy mothers myrtle wreath thy brow; Or rule vast waves, alone thy Deitie Sea-men adore, and farthest Thule obey: Or Thetys with the Ocean purchas'd thee: Or to slow moneths a new signe added be, Whom Libra, and Erigone may imbrace, Whilst burning Scorpio shrinks to give thee place: And doth his ampler part in heaven forsake. What ere thou'lt be (let not the Stygian Lake Accept thee Lord, nor have thou such desire: Although the Greeks Elyzium fields admire, Nor for her mother car d, sought Proserpine.) Grant a free course, and aid my bold design;
Pity the Ignorance of Swaines, with me, And to b invok'd with prayers accustom'd be. When the warme spring dissolves the mountains snowes, And the fat soyle with West-winds softer growes, Then let my steers at plow to groan begin, And by the furrow my worne Coulter shine. The greedie Husbandman likes best that mold, Hath felt two summers, and two winters cold. That mans great harvest doth his Garners burst. But ere thou break the unknown fallow, first Observe the winds, and mark heavens various face, Old custome, and the nature of the place: What every soyle will bear, and what refuse: This corne, that vines, more kindly doth produce; Here, plants best thrive, and there rank herbage growes, Seest not how Safron Tmolus still bestowes? India sends Ivorie, sweet Sabea Gummes: From the nak'd Chalybs, steel; from Pontus comes The Bever stone, from Epire Mares for race; For nature hath impos'd on every place Eternall Laws, since first Deucalion hurl'd Stones to repair the populated world; Whence men a hard race, sprung. Therefore goe on, And thy rich soyl with the first warming sun Let thy strong Oxen turn, when Phoebus makes Long dayes, and humid clods with ardor bakes. If poor thy soyl, before Arcturus rise, To break a shallow furrow will suffice. Here lest the corn should harme from weeds receive, There, lest small moysture barren akers leave. And let thy furrow lie each year untill'd, And to grow hard with rest thy worne-out field:
Or where in season thou didst barely sow, And pleasant pulse, with dangling cods didst mow, Where brittle stalks of wofull Lupins stood, Or slender Veches like a whispering wood. The field, flax, otes, and sleepy Poppie, burns, But easie is the labour made by turns. Nor a drie soyle with rich marle spare to feed, And uncleans'd ashes on poor grounds to spread. So with chang'd seed, Swains rest give to the fields, And Land left fallow no less profit yields; From burning sterile plains oft plentie comes, And brittle stubble crackling fire consumes. Whether from this new force, and nourishment The Earth receives; or else all venome spent By fire: and forth superfluous moysture sweat: Or many dark hid breathings lax'd by heat, By which, fresh sap the springing corne sustaines, Or more condens'd it bindes the gaping veines. Lest soaking showrs, or Sols more potent beame, Or Boreas piercing cold should wither them; And much he helps his field, who barren mould Breaks, harrowes then; nor Ceres doth behold That Husband-man from the high heaven in vain, And who the gleab athwhart runs ore again, Turning his plow, and crossing breaks the soyle, Making the field obedient with his toyle. Swaines pray for winters faire, and summers wet; Winter dust, joyes the earth, and glads the wheat: Not Maesia then shall harvests boast like these, Nor Phrygian hils admire their own increase. What shall I say of those have sow'd their land? Then straight goes on, casts heaps of barren sand, And streams to's corne in flowing rivers turns: And when scorch'd fields with dying herbage burns,
From rising ground conducts a crystall lake; Which mongst smoth rocks doth gentle murmurs make, And bubling forth refresh the parched field. Or those lest too large ears the stalk should yield, The ranck corne, and soft stemme eat down again, When first it hides the earth; and those who draine, With thirstie sand the plashes in their ground, Most when in doubtfull moneths the floods abound, Whence slimie mud hath cover'd all the vale, Making the ditches a hot steam exhale. But yet (for all mens toyle and oxens paines, Skilfull in tillage) the Strymonian Cranes, Geese, and shade harme, or bitter Succorie. Nor was Jove pleas'd tillage should easie be: And first commands with art to plough the soyle, On mortall hearts imposing care, and toyle; Nor lets dull sloth benumb men where he reigns. Before Jove's time, no plowman tild the plaines, None mark'd out limits, or a meer set forth; But all in common: then the liberall earth Without compulsion brought each kinde of grain, He first black Serpents arm'd with deadly bane, Commands stern Wolves to prey, the Sea to swell, From leaves shakes honey, and did fire conceal: To wine then rivers gave a stricter bound, That severall arts by labour might be found, And men in furrows seek the grain that fell, And hidden fire from veins of flint compell. Then Alder-boats first swomme, then Mariners Gave names, and told the number of the stars: The Kids, the Pleiades, and the Northern Bear. Then birds they catch with Lime, and beasts in snare, And with their dogs, the mighty woods beset. This strikes broad rivers with his casting net;
At sea his humid lines another drawes: Then force of ir'n, and blades of grating sawes; (For first they wedges to soft wood did use) Then came strange arts, fierce labor all subdues. Inforc'd by bold Necessity, and Want, First, Ceres mortals taught the earth to plant: When mast, and acorns sacred groves suppli d, And Dodon's forrest nourishment denide. Then was more sweat for corne; lest mildews spoile The grain, and thistles over-run the soyle: The crop then failes, destructive weeds appear, Briers and burs suppress the golden ear: Then hapless Darnell, and wilde-oats command, Unless with rakes thou daily break thy land: Fright birds with noyse, and cut the shadie bowes Of thy dark ground, and call for rain with vowes. Thou shalt in vaine see others store increase, VVhen shaken okes thy hunger must appease. The hardy Plowmans tooles we next must know; Which wanting, we can neither reap nor sow. A heavie plow of crooked oke; a share; And with flow wheeles th' Elusine mothers carre; Sledges and flailes, rakes, ponderous enough, Fine osier baskets, countrey housholdstuffe, Hurdles, and last, Jaccus mystick Van; All which, if th' art a carefull husband-man, Remember to provide, if the divne Glorie of tillage, thou intendest thine. Soone in the woods with mighty labour bow An Elme, and forme it to a crooked Plow. To this a Tceme beneath of eight foot cut; To th'double back two ears, and Dentals put: Of lofty Beech your Plowtaile: but the yoak, Let that be from the gentle Tyle tree tooke,
Which from behinde should the deep turnings guide, And oke with hanging in the chimney tride. Here many ancient rules I could declare, Unlesse thou shun'st, and scorn'st so mean a care. With a great rowler first, thy Barne flore lay, Smooth'd with the hand, confirm'd with binding clay, Lest grass spring up, or it should dustie grow, Then many mischiefs chance; for oft below The little Mouse her store hath and abode: And the blinde Mole her bed; in holes the toade Is found; much vermine from the earth are borne, The Weezel plunders the great heap of corne, And the Ant fearing age and want to come. Observe when first the nut begins to bloome, Gracing the woods, bending the fragrant tree: If they exceed, such thy increase shall be, And with great heat a mighty harvest found; But if with swelling leaves the shades abound, Then thou shalt thrash a chassie stalk in vaine, I have seene many to anoynt their grain VVith Nyter first, then lees of oyse to spread, That husks deceitfull should have larger seed: Then with soft fire they swell the hasten'd graine, Seed long pick'd I have seen, and culd with pain, And yet degenerate; unless yearly we The largest choose. All things by destiny So hasten to grow worse and backward goes, As one against the stream his Vessel rowes, VVho if by chance his arme a little slack, The Bote in the swift channell hurries back; They observations from the stars should make, Mark rising Kids, and note the glittering Snake, As those who homewards through rough Pontus trade, And straights of narrow Hellespont assaid.
VVhen Libra in just ballances shall weigh Darkness with Light, and shadowes with the day, Then exercise your steers, and barely sow, Till too extream the cruell winter grow. Flax, Poppie then, cover with earth and plough VVhil'st the Clouds hang, and thirsty grounds allow. Beans sow in spring; then clave grass rich earth takes, And Millet then your annuall care awakes; VVhen Taurus golden horns open the year, And Syrius leaves to other stars the Sphear. But if for wheat and stronger corne thy ground Thou exercise, and but a crop propound; First, let the Easterne Pleiades goe down, And the bright star of Ariadnes Crowne: Commit dew-seed to furrowes then, and here Trust earth with hope of the insuing year. Would'st thou thy ground should vetch, and Fessels bear, Nor shalt despise AEgyptian Lentils care; Bootes fall no obscure signe will shew; Begin, and sowing to mid-winter sow. Wherefore the golden Sun in equall lines The great orbe governs, through the worlds twelve signs. Five Zones the heavens infold, one still is beat With scorching beams, torrid with mighty heat: On either hand th' extreams extend their track, Bound still with cruell ice, with tempests black: Between the midst, and these, two more there are, Which seats the Gods for mortals did prepare: Through both of these a passage doth divide, Through which the signs in oblique order glide. As to Ryphaean hils the world ascends, So to the South of Lybia down it bends: To us the Pole is elevated still, But Ghosts see them beneath, and dismall hell:
Here in huge bendings glides the winding Snake, And like a river doth Meanders make: Through both the Bears incireling them about, Who to be dipt in th'Oceans billows, doubt. Here, (as they say) either is lasting night, And gloomy shade for ever hindring light: Or else from us to them Aurora speeds Ushering the day: and when with panting steeds The Orient breathes on us; there purple night Ascending adds, late Tapers to the light. Hence from no doubtful signs we Seasons know, What time is best to Reap, and when to Sow, And when the faithless Sea we may again Row with tuff Oares, when venture to the Main An armed Fleet, or fell the lofty Pines. Nor vain we mark, setting, and rising signs, VVhich in four Seasons th'equal year divide. But if cold showrs force Swaines within to bide, Much work asks haste, which gainst the weather's fair Is to be done: to whet the blunted share, And of a tree to make a hollow bark, To measure Corn, or else their Sheep to mark; These sharpen Forks and Stakes, the tender Vine Others infold with bonds of Amarine: And some with Rubean twigs, neat baskets binde, Now dry their corn at fire, and then they grinde. Some works on Holidayes are to be done: To draw out water, no Religion Nor Law forbids us; nor to hedge our Corne, And Snares to lay for Birds, to burne the Thorne, To wash the bleating Flocks in curing Floods. The driver of the slow Ass, often loads His back with Oyl, or Fruit, returning fetch From Town a Handmill, or black mass of Pitch.
The Moone grants severall dayes should be imploy'd Luckie for severall works: the fift, avoide: Hell, and the Furies then were borne; and Earth Gave mighty Typhon, and the Gyants birth Which covenanting Brethren thrice assay To pull down Heaven, Pelion on Ossa lay; On Ossa green Olympus to have thrown; Thrice Jove with thunder cast those mountaines down. The seventeenth day is best to plant the Vine, Oxen to break, threads to the Web to joyn: The ninth is best for flight, and Bad for theeves. Cold night to many works perfection gives; Or at Sun rise, when fall the early dewes: Night, to mow Stubble, or dry Meadows, choose: For suppling moysture wants not in the night. Some by late fires will watch, and VVinter light, Sharpning a stake, mean while his task, though long His dear wife shortens with a pleasing Song; Running her sounding Shuttle through her Frame. Or she decots sweet Must with gentle flame; And scums with leaves froth from the boyling Pot. But blushing Ceres best at noon is cut; Amidst the heate, the dry corn thrashes best; Plow and sow, naked, Winter is for rest: Then Husbandmen injoy what they did gaine, And with glad seasts each other entertaine: The Geniall time invites, and frees from care. As wealthy ships, when mor'd within the Bar, The Saylors on the Sterns fresh Garlands set. But you may Mast, and Laurell berries get. VVith Oyl and bleeding Myrtle then, and snare Cranes by the feet, and nets for Bucks prepare, Cours timerous Hares, shoot fallow Dear, or swing VVith hempen whip, the Balearian sling,
VVhen Snow lies deep, when Ice the river bars. VVhat shall I say of the Autumnall Stars, VVhen lesser heate gives day a swifter wing; VVhich must be watch'd; so must the floury Spring. Oft I have seen, when corne from golden lands Ready to house, just when the strawie bands Should binde the sheaves; in war the windes contend, And from the roote the yellow harvest rend, The tempest with so black a whirlwinde flew, And the light straw, and flying stubble blue. Oft from the skie a mighty deluge powres, And black storms muster with condensed showrs, Clouds from sea gather, the arch'd skies resound, And Oxens labour the rich corn is drown d. Then dikes are fill'd, and swelling waters raise Loud murmurs, and, seas rore in stormie baies. Then in the hideous night, Jupiter takes In's hand bright lightning, which discharging, shakes The mighty earth; beasts fly, and mortall hearts Base fear dejects. He, with his blazing darts Down Athes, Rhodope, or Ceraunia throws: South windes arise, blacker the tempest grows; Now woods complain with winde, and now the shore. This fearing know heaven stars, and signes, before: Where Melancholy Saturn doth retire, And through what Orbe wanders Cylenian fire. But first the gods adore; to Ceres yeeld Rites yearly, working in the gladsome field, VVhen the soft Spring rough Winter shall succeed Then wine grows mellow and Lambs begin to feed, Then sleep is pleasant, shades spread mountaines ore. Let all the jocund Swaines Ceres adore, Nor one presume sickles to thrust in corne, Till Oken wreathes, for her, his brows adorne,
Dance Country Measures, and like Verses sing. VVhat most sure signs may to our knowledg bring Drowth, rain, and winde, which ushers in the cold, Jove hath decreed; what new Moons should unfold. When South windes rest, what Swaines so oft perceive When neerer to their stalls their herds they leave. Then straight with rising gusts the Ocean swells, And a loud Fragor heard in lofty hills: Or afar off shores sound with raging seas, And mighty murmurs in the woods increase. From tallest ships then bellows scarce refrain, When Cormorants with clamour from the maine Fly to the shore, and when the Sea-foul sports On the dry Strand, and from the Fen resorts; And mounting bove the lofty clouds the Herne. Oft before windes thou shalt the stars discern, Shoot swiftly through the skie, and in the night To leave behinde a traine of blazing light, And often chaff to fly, and falling leaves With floting feathers, sport on bounding waves. But when it thunders from the cruel North, And when the East and Western winds draw forth: All dikes are fill'd, the Sailor at th'Alarms Strikes his wet sail, no storm the wise man harms? From which the soaring Crane to Valleys flies; Or else the Cow viewing the open skies, At her wide nostrils the perception takes. Or chattering Swallows fly about the Lakes; Or in the mud Frogs sing their old complaint. Oft through straight paths to secret roofs the Ant Conveies her Eggs; deep drinks the mighty bow: And from their foode in a great flight, the Crow Makes his retreat, and sounds his fanning wings. Various Sea-foul, with those haunt pleasant Springs,
And Asian Medows of Cayster use, Busie, their shoulders bathe, with sprinkling dews. Now under water thou mayst see them dive, And in their sportfull washing vainly strive; The wicked Crow, aloud then rain demands, And all alone stalks proudly on drie sands. Nor at Nocturnall wheeles the Maidens be Of stormes nnskilfull when they shining see The oyle to sparkle in the shining Lamp, And the hard snuff to make the light grow damp. Nor less may'st thou from storms fair weather learn, And long before by surest signes discerne: For then no star an obtuse beame displays, Nor is the Moon estrang'd from Phoebus rayes, Nor fine wool fleeces driven through the skie; Nor to warme Sun's ashore with spread wings lie Halcyon's belov'd of Thetis: nor loose straw, Foule Swine remenber in their mouthes to draw. But Clouds sink lower, and to Vales retreat: And from high roofes observing Phoebus set, The Owle in vaine, late notes doth exercise. Nisus appears, high in the Chrystall skies, And Scylla punisheth for the purple haire. Where ere she flying cuts the yielding aire, Nisus behold! her sterne foe through the skies, Sounding, persues: where through the Heaven he flies, On swift wings shuning through the Clouds she bends, Then oft the Crow her watery throat extends. Redoubling notes oft in their towrie nest: (With what unwonted joy I have not guest) Sport 'mongst the leaves, the storme past, glad to see Their ancient buildings, and fair Progenie. Nor think I Heaven on them such Knowledge states, Nor that their Prudence is above the Fates.
But when a tempest, and the fleeting rack Hath chang'd their course, and the moyst aire grows black With Southern windes, which thicken in the skies Thin vapours, and the grosser, rarifies; Their thoughts are chang d, the motions of their minde Inconstant are, like Clouds before the winde: Hence tis that birds chaunt forth melodious notes, The beasts are glad, and Crowes stretch joyfull throtes. If the swift Sun whose horses never swerve, And Moons in order following thou observe: Th'insuing day shall never thee deceive, Nor nights fair promises of hope bereave. When first the Moon renewing flame adorns; If a grosse aire, obscure her blunted horns, Great showres, for sea, and Husbandmen prepare: But if her face a Virgine blush declare, It shall be winde 'gainst winde she blusheth still. If the fourth day her Orbe with silver fill, (For that by long experience hath been tride) Nor with blunt horns through Chrystall Heaven shall glide: That day, and all that follow, you shall finde To the moneths end, free, both from raine and winde. To Milecert, Glaucus, Panapaea now Sailors preserv'd, from danger, pay their vow. Also true signes the Sun at rising shewes, And when he doth in Thetis lap repose, For the most certain on the Sun attend: Both in the morne, and when the stars ascend. When rising he with many spots growes pale. Drown'd in a Cloud, and half his Orbe doth vaile: Then storms expect, then Southwinds rise from sea, To trees, and corne, and Cattell, enemie. Or when amongst thick Clouds before the day Many refracted beams themselves dlsplay;
Or when forsaking Tythons saffron bed, Much paleness hath Auroras cheek ore-spread. Ah! then but ill, the vines defend their grapes, Such horrid haile on house tops ratling leaps. This to remember it will profit thee: When he high Heaven forsakes, (for oft we see Strange colours wandring in his visage, joyn'd) The duskie threatens rain, the fiery winde. But if the spots red slashes shall unfold, All vext with raine, and winde thou shalt behold. That night shall none perswade me to the sea, Nor yet advise, that I my anchor weigh. But when he gives, or takes the day again, His Orbe be clear, thou fear'st a showre in vain. Then thou mayst see soft gales to move the woods; What Vesper next, (whence winds drive empty clouds) What Auster plots, the Sun doth signifie, And who so bold to give the Sun the lye. Clandestine tumults, he doth oft foreshew, And open war, from secret plots to grow: He pitying Rome at Caesars funerals spread A mourning vaile, ore his illustrious head. The impious age then fear'd eternall night, Though in that time Earth and vast Amphytrite, Fierce Dogs, and cruell foule strange signs did yield; We, smoking AEtna ith' Cyclopian field Oft saw to rage, and from broke tunnels came Huge liquid stones, and mighty globes of flame. Germany heard from heaven a sound of armes, And the Alps trembled at unus'd alarms: A mighty voyce in silent groves was heard, And gastly spirits, wonderous pale, appear'd Before twas night: and beasts (o wondrous) spake; Swift rivers stand, and yauning earth did quake: Brasse in the Temples sweat: sad Ivorie weeps, High woods, Eridanus, King of rivers, sweeps;
And on the plaines with hostile billows falls, Bearing with him the cattell and their stalls. Nor then sad entrails threatnings ceast to shew, Nor through the channels putrid blood to flow; And then the populous Cities did resound With howling wolves, which walk'd their nightly round, Nor from cleer skies ever more lightning came, Nor such dire Comets oftener seen to flame. Again, Phillipi, Roman Squadrons saw With equall arms, for dreadfull battell draw. Twice with our blood the Gods did not disdain To inrich Aemus, and th' Aemathian pliane. Time comes, by Swians, when turning up their ground Eaten with rust, large Javelins shall be found: Or boysterous rakes, from emptie helms strike fire, And shall huge bones dig'd from their tombs admire. Great Vesta, Romulus, and our native Gods, Who lofty Rome preserve, and Tuscan floods. Ah for the Prince, at length your selves ingage, That he again repair this ruin'd Age. Long since enough we with our bloods did pay For sacrelegious perjuries of Troy. Caesar, long since Heavens court envi'de us thee, Griev'd thou shouldst pleas'd with mortall triumphs be. Wrong was turn'd right, and war through all the world, So many shapes of wickedness had hurl'd. To the scorn'd Plow, no man doth honour yield, Swains prest to arms, waste lies th' uncultur'd field: And crooked Sythes to swords transformed are. Euphrates here, there Germany makes war: The neighbouring Towns in Civill arms ingage, And impious Mars through all the world doth rage. As when the Chariots starting from the bar Straight through the listed Champaine hurried are: The Charioteer is borne away, in vaine Checking their speed; who now contemn the reine.
THE SECOND BOOK OF Virgil's GEORGICKS. THE ARGUMENT. How trees by nature grow, some from the root, Some from the seed, some of themselves do sprout, As many wayes of Art experience grants. The Gardner graffs, inoculates, transplants, What fruitfull trees in severall Countries are; But none with happie Italie compare. How to discerne the goodness of each ground, Where choicest Olives and best Vines are found, What safty in the harmless Countrey lies: What dangers from rebellious Cities rise. THus much of tillage, and the Planets sway, I'le thee now Bacchus, and wilde plants display, And the slow Olives race; father, draw neer, (All things are full of thy great bounty here) Thou pregnant fields deck'st with Autumnall vine, Till foming presses overflow with wine;
O Father come, and lay thy buskins by With me in Must then staine thy naked thigh. Trees in their growth of different natures are, Some spring themselves, unforc'd by humane care, As in the fields where winding rivers flow, The gentle Broom, Poplar, and Sallow grow, And Willowes with fresh branches flourishing. Some from their seed being set, as Chestnuts spring, And Joves great Aesculus which all groves excel'd, And Okes which Grecians still oraculous held. In mighty Groves some spring from their own root, So Cheries, Elms, Parnassian Laurell, shoot: Which small in great shade of their mother rise. These waies first nature gave: by these all trees In Orchards, woods, and sacred Forrests grow: Others there are, which use and custome shew. Here, from the tender Parent, this man gets The sprouting twigs, and in a furrow sets. There in the earth, another covers stocks Of ancient trees, pales, posts, and cloven blocks; Some trees require their boughes be set archwise, And make their own soile, living nurseries. Some need no root, nor doth the Gardner doubt, That sprigs set in the ground shall timely sprout. And wondrous to be told, the Olive root From a drie stick, cut at the end will shoote. And oft without impairing, we may see The boughes of one, chang'd to another tree, And Pears from grafted Apples for to spread, And stonie Cornell, with ripe plums wax red. Therefore O Husbandmen, the best means trie T'improve wilde fruit, lest waste your Orchards lye. To plant the vine in Ismare we are glad, And that Taburnus verdant Olives clad.
Help, O Mecaenass and this work review, My glory and my chief fame, springs from you; Swell thou my saile, now venturing to the main, Nor all things would I in my verse containe; Had I hundred mouthes, a hundred tongues, A voyce of steele; help me to coast along; The taske is easie; nor I'le thee detaine With dull descriptions, nor fables vaine. Those trees which of themselves are fostered, Unfruitfull be, but strong, and fair they spread: Because they draw their nature from the soyle; But these, if any sow, or shall with toyle Transplant, and then in cultur'd orchards set; Their wilder disposition they forget: VVith often pruning then not slowly will Answerthy labour, and obey thy skill; So those which spring sroom roots like profit yield, If you transplant them to the open field, These, boughs before aad parent-branches shade, VVhich stops their growth, and makes the bodie fade. Plants which from seed arise of slow growth are, And shades for our posterity prepare; Apples grow wilde, and loose their former taste, And Vines harsh clusters bear for birds to waste, All labour aske, and covering in rich soyle; And must be conquer'd, with much art and toyle. Th' Olive from trunks, vines prosper best from stocks, And Paphian Myrtle springs from solid okes; Tall Ash, and Hazel, best from Sciens takes, And Poplar which Herculean Garlands makes: So Joves Chaonian oke, and high Palms grow, And Fir which must the Sailors fortune know, Arbuts from Nuts, the sterile Plane tree bears Best Apples, Chestnuts, Beech; blossoms of Pears.
The wilde Ash silvers with a snowie flower, And under Elms rough Swine the mast devoure. T' inoculate, and graffe, are severall arts: For where the bud shoots from the tender parts, And breaks the geutle Filme, just, where they binde; They make an orifice in the knottie rinde; Imprisoning there, the sprig of th' other tree; And with moyst bark they teach them to agree. Or else the knotless trunk they cut again, And with a wedge deep wound the solid grain. After the slip so valued, there inclose, Nor longs the time, when sprouts with fruitfull boughes A mighty tree to heaven, at leaves unknown Admiring, and strange Apples not her own. Nor of one kinde strong Elins, and Sallowes be, The Lotus, nor th' Idan Cypres tree; Nor in one manner the rich Olive comes, Orchites, and Radies, and sour Pausian plums, Alciuous apples, nor such branches bear Wardens, Crustumians, and the Syrian pear; Nor the same Vintages our clusters grant, Which Lesbos hath, from the Methymnean plant, Thasians there are, and silver Mareots, these Fat grounds affect, and those the lighter please; And Pscithian grapes best dride; Legeos strong, Which soon will trie your feet, and tie your tongue; Purple, and early grapes there are. VVhat verse You Rhetick Vineyards shall your praise rehearse? But yet contend not with Falernian vine, There are Aminian grapes, a most sound wine; Tmolus to this, and King Phanaeus give, And less Argitis homage; none will strive With this to fill the Press, with cheering juice, Nor last so many years, and fit for use:
Nor Rhodian gracing Feasts, and rites, shall scape, Nor the Bumaste, that so swelling grape; Their names, and kinds innumerable are, Nor for their catologue we need not care, Which who would know, as soone may count the sands, The westerne winds, raise on the Lybian strands, Or when East-windes at sea more violent rore, Reckon Aeonian waves, which rowle to shore. All grounds not all things bear; the Alder tree Growes in thick Fens, with Sallows brooks agree, Ash craggie Mountains, shores sweet Myrtle fils, And lastly Bacchus loves the sunnie hils: The Yew best prospers in the North, and cold. The conquer'd worlds remotest Swains behold, Where Arabs painted Gelonie are found; Each Land shewes severall plants; the Indian ground Bears Ebonie, Sabea, Frankincense. What shall I say to thee sweet wood? from whence Balsame destills, and beries ever green Of bright Acanthus? How shall I begin Of trees in Aethiopia, white with woll? Where from the leaves the Natives fleeces cull: Or of those groves in utmost India bred, Neer the worlds border, whose aspiring head, No arrow could by Archers skill surmount; And yet good Bowmen we those men account. Media brings wholsome apples of harsh juice, Gainst step-dames poyson nothing more in use: When banefull hearbs they mix with deadly charmes, This helps, and vitall spirits 'gainst venome arms. This mighty tree, Laurell resembles well, But that it casts abroad another smell; No windes offend the leaves, the flowers indure: With this, their tainted breaths the Medians cure,
And it to old mens Tysicks medcine yields. But Median groves, nor all those plentious fields, Nor India, Ganges Hermes full of gold, May strive with Italie, nor Bactrians bold, Nor great Panchaia, rich with Frankincense. This place no Buls whose nostrils fire dispense Have til'd, to set the teeth of Dragons there, Nor did it crops of Spears, and Helmets bear. But lushious fruit, and rich wine fill the Press, And Olive plants, and joyfull herds possess. Here warlick Steeds trot proudly through the fields, This snowie flocks, and Buls prime offerings yields; VVhich bath'd Clitumnus in thy sacred floods, Romes tryumphs draw, to Temples of the Gods. A lasting Spring, and summer all the year; Our flocks twice teeme, our plants twice apples bear, This no fierce Tygers, nor sterne Lyons breeds, Nor Symplers here deceiv'd with poysonous weeds. Nor scalie Dragon quarters in this soyle, Wreathing himself to a prodigeous pile. To these so many famous Cities adde, works of great care, with art, cost, labor, made; So many seats cut from the quarries side, Ʋnder whose ancient wals sweet rivers glide. VVhat shall I say of both those Seas which lave Our Coasts? or of those many Lakes we have? Or speak of thee great Laris, and thy waves Benacus, which so like the Ocean raves? Or Ports, or Lucrine Sluces shall I sing? VVhose raging floods with mighty murmur ring. Where Julian streams thunder in troubled seas, And Tyrrhen waters fill th' Avernian bayes. Here we have silver rivers, brazen Mines, And with much gold this happy Country shines;
Here a bold race, the valiant Marsians are, Stout Sabels. and Ligurii us'd to war; The long spear'd Volscii, Decii, Marii, hence, And the Camilli draw their old descents. This the bold Scipios and thee Caesar bore; Who Conqueror now in utmost Asias shore, Driv'st from the Roman Towers, th' unwarlick Bands Of India. Haile great Saturnian Lands, Parent of fruit, and men of noble parts: To undertake thy ancient fame, and Arts, Boldly I'le open now, the sacred Spring, And through Rome's seats, Ascraean verses sing, Now severall kinds of ground we must declare, Their colour, strength, and what they willing bear; And first your harder soyle, and barren hils, Where stone and thin clay, mix'd in shrubbie fields, Fresh Groves of living Olives, these rejoyce; And by wilde Olives of that Land make choice: And where soure Beries through the Country spread. But a rich ground, with pleasant moysture fed, Where store of grass, and verdant champains be, Such as in wanton vales we use to see; VVhere Rivers from the lofty Rock descend, VVith fruitfull mud, and to the Southward bend, Nourishing Ferne, which so much hurts the Plow: Here, for thee Bacchus strongest wine shall grow To swell the Press; this the rich Grape shall bear, Such as in Gold for offerings we prepare; When the swolne Tuskans on their Cornets play, And we on Altars smoking entrals lay. But if thou herds, and Steers delight to keep; Or Goats that burne the corne, or fleecy sheep;
Seek pleasant Groves, and rich Tarentum's Coast, And plaines which wofull Mantua hath lost. VVhere silver Swans neer flourie Rivers plant, VVhere Crystall Springs, nor grass the Cattel want. How much thy herds eat in the longest day, So much cold dews in the short night repay. Black grounds which under heavie Plowes are rich, A brittle soyle (for tillage makes it such) Is best for corne; upon no ground appears More Carrs returning home with wearie Steers; Or where the angrie Swaine cuts down a wood, And fruitless Groves which many years had stood, And by the roots, Birds ancient seats o rethrew, Who to the skies their nests forsaken, flew. But a rough Champaine soone improves with toyle; For hungrie grounds, and a rough stonie soyle, Scarce bees with Cassia, and sweet dew supplie. In whose dark hollow Rocks, foul Serpents lie: No Land they say with better choice is stor'd Of food for Snakes nor better nests afford. That Earth exhales thin Clouds, and flying mists; And moysture drinks, repaying when it lists; Which alwayes her own verdant Liverie wears, Nor hurts with coomings, and foule rust the shares, Where Elms with joyfull vine are interwove, Where Olives grow; that soyle you may approve, Both for your Cattell, and the heavie Plow. For they such plaines nee'r wealthie Capua sow: And those which border nigh Vesuvius heights; And Clanius who, oft poor Acerra frights. I'le teach thee now moulds differing to discerne; That what's too thick, or looser thou mayst learn. Since one, corne best affects, the other Vines; To Ceres ick, to Bacchus thin inclines.
First with great diligence let a place be found; There let a pit be made, deep in the ground; This done, cast in the thrown-out mould again, And with thy feet tread the whole surface plaine. If there want Earth, tis loose; that most inclines Cattell to feed, and cherish prospering Vines. But if t' its bounds, 'twill not be brought again, And the pit fil'd, some earth shall yet remain, That soyle is thick: plough with thy sturdy yoak, There the hard glebe, let that tough soyle be broke. Land that is salt, and which we bitter finde, Is bad for fruit, to tillage not inclin'd; All plants shall here degenerate, and the vine Looseth the name, and this shall be the signe. From smokie roofes, an Osier basket take, And such a strainer as for wine they make: There Earth with streams drawn from a Crystall Spout Commix; and all the water will run out, And in great drops shall through the strainer flow, But soon the taste will clear distinction shew; And straight thou may'st with bitterness espie, The tasters mouth displeas'd, be drawn awrie. And lastly we thus rich soyle understand, It will not moulder kneading in your hand; But to your fingers it will cling like pitch. Moyst ground hath weeds, and that which is too rich. Ah! Let not mine too fertile prove, nor bear Upon a heavie stalke a ponderous ear. Mould that is sad, that, silently by weight It self betrayes; and so we finde what's light. Black, and all colours, straight our eyes discerne. But cursed cold, is wonderous hard to learn. Yet sometimes pitchy Firr, and fatall Yew, Or winding Ivie will sad tokens shew.
This known with care, thy earth plough long before, And raise the ridges of thy Furrows more: And let thy turn'd up Gleab sterne Boreas face, Before thou set the vines rejoycing race. Brittle is best, which winde and frost indure; And rustick Swaines with turning oft manure. But those men who no care, or labour flie, Choose places fit both for a Nursery, And where they may transplanted after grow: Lest they their mother suddain chang'd not know. Also Heavens quarters on they bark the score, That they may coast it, as it was before: Which Southern heat sustains, which viewd the Pole, Such strength hath custome in each tender soule. First know, if hils or dales best please the grape, Wouldst thou the plenty of rich vineyards reap. Sow the vale thick, then will thy press abound; But if it hillie be, and rising ground, Set thin thy ranks, nor less in every tract, Range ordered vines the walks drawn out exact. As when a mighty battel's to be fought; Up to the front the ordered files are brought, Troups hide the fields; and ready for alarms, All the vast Champain shines, with glittering arms; Before in horrid fight the battell joynes, And doutbfull Mars, to neither part inclines. So let thy ranks in even number grow. Not that vain fancie should be fed with shew; But else th' earth grants not equall nourishment; Nor can their branches have their full extent. Perhaps how deep to furrow thou would'st know. In shallow trenches I my vines dare sow. But the huge Aesculus, that mighty tree Must in earths bosome deeply fixed be:
How much to Heaven her spreading branches shoot, So much towards hell extend her fixed root. Therefore not her, showrs with huge tempests mix'd, Nor cruell winter harms, but remains fix'd, And many years and ages she indures, Of short-liv'd man; whom her own strength secures. Tall branches guard her, and huge bowes displaid Protect her round with her own mighty shade. Nor make thy vineyard where the Sun declines; Nor plant rough hazels mongst the tender vines, Nor pull the lofty branches, nor impaire The sprouting bows; for great must be thy care: Nor rustie pruners harme, the hopefull seed, Nor let wilde Olives in thy vineyard breed. Mongst careless Swains oft happens fire: which first Under the sappie rinde is closely nurst: Then by degrees to the high branches flies And spreading sends loud fragor to the skies: A victor straight from bough to bough aspires; And the Crown seis'd, involveth all with fires. To Heaven black clouds and pitchy mists are sent, And dismall vapours scale the firmament. But more if from the North atempest rise; And in the groves winde makes the flame increase. This happens, then their stocks decatd, no more Sprout fresh again, nor flourish as before: Nor from the earth like nourishment receives: But curst wilde Olives grow, with bitter leaves. Let none how ever skilfull, thee advise To turne hard grounds, when Northern winds arise. Winter binds earth with frost, nor grants the seed To take firme root, nor tender plants to feed. Then set thy vines, when the white bird appears In blushing spring, which the long Serpent fears:
Or in first Autums cold, before the sun Hath cool'd his steeds in winter, summer don. Spring cloaths the woods with leaves, and groves attires, Earth swels with spring, and genitall seed requires. In fruitfull showrs th' Almighty from above Descends ith' lap, of his delighted love: And great, he with the mighty body joyn'd, Both propagates, and fosters every kinde. Harmonious birds then sing in every grove, And cattell taste the sweet delights of love. Earth blest, now teems: soft winds dissolve the Meads, With cheering warmth through all sweet moysture spreads. To the new sun, the tender herbage dare Open their leaves, nor vines rough Auster fear: Nor thundering Boreas ushering dreadfull showrs; But all things bud with blossome, leaf and flowers. Sure I believe, when first the world was made, So shone the day; and such bright conduct had. That was the Spring; the Spring made all things fair, And blustering Eurus did cold tempests spare. Then cattell breed: in unplow'd fields began First to appear, that iron race of man: VVilde beasts possest the wood, and Heaven the stars. Nor tender creatures could indure such cares; If not those breathings were twixt heat, and cold, And Heavens indulgence did the earth uphold. VVhat ever plant thou in the earth dost set, First dung it well, and deeply cover it. Let shels, and limestones guard it with a paile: That streams may glide betwixt, and may exhale A gentle vapour, that may cheer the plant. Some stones, and potshcards use to lay upon't:
Which a defence gainst rising tempests yield, And when hot Syrius chops the parched field. Thy plants being set, next often draw the mold About the roots; to break the clods be bold: And with a thwarting Plow turn cross thy ground: And let thy labouring steers thy vines surround. Then take smooth reeds, and wands, and sticks prepare, With ashen poles, and stakes that pointed are. Supported thus, the winds they will contemn, And boldly climbe the high Elms tallest stemme. But whil'st in tender Infancy they are, Sprouting new leaves, the gentle offspring spare: Nor when the verdant branches do arise, And with loose reins are posting to the skies: Use not thy sharper knife, but gently pull Th' ambitious bowes, and haughty branches cull. But when grown strong th'imbrace the blms high top, Then shave their locks, and dangling tresses crop: Before they fear'd the knife; more rigorous now Use thy commands, upon the stubborn bough. And from all cattell strongly them immare, Whil'st the soft bows disturbance not indure. T' whom Cowes, and Goats, and Sheep more harme have done, Then freezing winter, and the scorching Sun: Cold not so much, nor white congealing frosts, Nor vexing beams, which beat on sandie coasts, As cattell harme, when with a venom'd tooth They wound the branches, in their tender youth. Only for this crime we on Altars pay, Bacchus a Goat, and act the ancient play. Then from great villages Athenians hast And where the high-wayes meet the prise is plac'd. They to soft meads, heighten'd with wine, advance: And joyfully mongst oyled bottels dance.
Th' Asonian race, and those from Troy did spring, Dissolv'd with laughter rustick verses sing: In Visards of rough bark conceal their face, And with glad numbers thee great Bacchus grace: Hanging soft pictures on thy lofty pine. Then vineyards swell, pregnant with cheering wine, The shadie Groves, and the deep vales oreflow, Where e're the God shews his illustrious brow. To Bacchus then, let us due praises sing In ancient verse; wafers, and Javelins bring. A sacred Goat to th' Altars draw by th'horne; On Hazell spits then the fat entrails turn. But other toyles in dressing vines are found, And nere enough: three or foure times thy ground Turn yearly, and with forks reverst, the clods Constantly break: and cleanse from leaves the woods. Labour returns in circle to the Swaine, And years revolve in their own steps again. But when thy vineyard her last leaves removes, And cold North-winds dispoyle the glorious Groves; Then the industrious Husbandman takes care T'extend his labour-to th' insuing year; To lop the vine which hitherto escapes, And with old Saturns hook, he pruning shapes. First dig thy ground, and shreads and refuse burne, And under roofs the poles, and stakes return. Gather your vintage last; vines twice have shade, And twice the corne thick briers, and weeds invade. Both toyles are painfull: a large Farme commend: A little, till. Thorns that to woods extend, And reeds, which clog the banks, to cut prepare: And on wilde Sallow take especiall care.
The vines are bound, pruners no more they want, And round the empty walls the Gardners chant. Yet still must labour be, and toyle in dust, And grapes being ripe, a tempest they mistrust. On th'other side; Olives you may neglect, They need no care, nor crooked Sythes expect, Nor the tenacious Rake: once set, they rise Shooting luxurious branches to the skies. Those grounds supply, turn'd with the crooked Plow Moysture enough, and large increase allow. Th' Embleme of Peace, thus the rich Olive growes. So Apples when they feel extending boughes, And growing strength, suddaine the stars invade, By their own vertue, scorning humane aid. Nor less with fruit are laden every bush. And wilder Forrests with red beries blush, There shrubs are cut, and Firr in tall woods breed Nocturnall fires, and Torches thence proceed. And shall men doubt to plant and carefull be? Why urge I these? Broome and the Sallow tree. Or feed the sheep, or else the shepherd shade Yield honey, or for corne are hedges made. What pleasure is t to view Cytorus, rich With waving Box, and groves of Marick pitch. How am I pleas'd to see those fields that are, Glorious undrest, nor us'd to humane care! Those barren trees high Caucasus do crown, Which storms oft tears, and often tumble down, Are of great use: There Pines for Masts are feld, And Cypres, and tall Cedars towres to build: Here coverings for their Cars, and spoaks for wheels, Husbandmen get, and ships finde crooked keeles. Sallowes have boughes, the tall Elms leavie are, Myrtle for Spears, and Cornell fit for war,
And Yewes are bent into Ityrian bowes: Smooth Tile and Box the skilfull Turner knowes How to compleat, and with his tooles to trimme, And down the Poe in rough streams Alders swimme. In rugged bark the bees conceal their stocks, And hoard in hollow wombs of ancient okes. Can Bacchus blessing like to these dispense? 'Twas Bacchus first proud quarrels did commence. He in cold death did those hot Centaurs tame, Hylaeus, Rhetus, Polus, overcame: As threatning Lapiths he a Goblet threw. Oh happie Swaines if their own good they knew, To whom just Earth remote from cruel wars From her full breasts soft nourishment prepares: Although from high roofes through proud Arches come No floods of Clients early from each roome; Nor Marble pillars seek which bright shels grace, Gold-woven vestments, nor Chorinthian brasse; Nor white wool stain'd in the Assyrian juice, Nor simple oyle corrupt with Cassias use: But rest secure, a fraudless life in peace, Variously rich in their large Farmes at ease; Tempe's coole shades, dark Caves, and purling streams, Lowings of Cattell, under trees soft dreams, Nor lack they woods, and dens, where wilde beasts haunt, Youth in toyle patient. and inur'd to want. Their Gods and parents sacred; Justice tooke, Through those her last steps when she Earth forsook. Let the sweet Muses most of me approve, VVhose Priest I am, struck with almighty Love. They shall to me Heavens starrie tracts make known; And strange Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. Thence Earthquakes are, why the swolne Ocean beats Over his banks, and then again retreats:
Why Winter Suns hast so to touch the maine, And what delayes the tardie night restraine. But if these gifts of Nature I not finde, And a cold blood beleaguereth my minde. Then I'le delight in vales, nere pleasant floods, And unrenown'd, haunt rivers, hils, and woods; Thy banks sweet Sperchius, and Taygeta, where The Grecian virgins stately feasts prepare. How shall I be to Haemus vale convaid, And crown my temples with a mighty shade? Happie is he that hidden causes knowes, And bold all shapes of danger dares oppose: Trampling beneath his feet the cruell Fates, Whom Death, nor swallowing Acheron amates. And he is blest who knowes our Countrey Gods; Pan, old Sylvanus, and the Nymphs aboads: He fears not Scepters, nor aspiring States, Nor treacherous brethren stirring up debates: Nor Dacians Covenant, at Isters streams: Nor Romes affaires, and nigh destroyed Realms, Or poor men pities, or the rich envies. What nourishment the bounteous field supplies, What trees allow, he takes: nor ever saw Mad Parliaments, Acts of Commons, nor sword-Law; Some vex the Sea, and some to war resorts, Attend on Kings, and waite in Princes Courts. This would his Countrey, and his God betray To drink in Jems, and on proud scarlet lye. This hides his wealth, and broods on hidden gold, This loves to plead, and that to be extold Through all the seats of Commons, and the sires. To bathe in's brothers blood this man desires. Some banish'd, must their native seats exchange, And Countries, under other Climates range.
The Husbandman turns up his fruitfull plaines; Whence he, his children, and poore house sustains, His heards, and labouring steers: no rest is found, Either his trees with blushing fruit abound, His folds with Lambs, or else his stacks with corne: Or plenty loads his field, or cracks his barne. In winter he Sycanian Olives mils, And the fat swine, with mast and akorns fils. All sorts of fruit in plentious Autumne falls, And milder vines grow ripe on sunnie walls. Whil'st 'bout his neck his prettie Children cling, His chaste house modest: home his heifers bring Extended teats: in meads his fat Kids rest, And with their horns in wanton sport contest. He keeps the festive dayes on grass layd down, And friends about the fire the Goblets crown. Bacchus implor'd, then for his Hinds sticks fast A prize; at which, they nimble Javelins cast; Stripping their hardned limbs for rustick strife. Of old this was the ancient Sabins life, Rhemus, and Romulus, and Tuscans fierce: And Rome great mistresse of the Universe, Who seven proud hils then did with wals surround, Before Dictaean Jupiter was crown'd, Or Sounding Trumpers heard, or any made Ring on hard anviles the imposed blade. But we have past now through a spacious plaine, And now's high time our smoking steeds t'unrein.
THE THIRD BOOK OF Virgil's GEORGICKS. THE ARGUMENT. How to choose Cattell, and best wayes to breed. To traine a Horse, for labour, war, or speed. The power of Love: whose fire consumes the Males, Makes Buls to fight, and Mares court Westerne gales. Of Sheep and Goats: of milk what profit's made, Of haire and wool, which drive a mighty trade. Of Dogs for hunting, or a watchfull Guard, Serpents and Flies from Beasts must be debar'd. With what diseases Cattell are annoyd, How rots and murrains have whole Realms destroyd. GReat Pales, and th' Amphrisian Swain renown'd, Lycaean streams, and woods, I'le now resound. All things that took up idle mindes are shewn; For who hath not cruell Eurystheus known? And bloody altars fierce Busiris reard, Or not of Hylas, or of Delos heard?
Of swift Hypodame and Pelops fam'd For's ivorie shoulders, who proud horses tam'd: To raise my self a way must now be found, That through all Nations I may be renown'd. First to my Countrey (if I live) I will Conveigh the Muses from th' Aeonian hill; And Idumean palmes to Mantua bear: Then in green fields a Marble temple rear, Where e great Mincius slowlie winding glides, And borders with a tender reed his sides. Amidst the fane, shall Caesars statue be, Who shall in purple me triumphing see, Driving a hundred Chariots to the floods, Leaving Alpheus, and Molorchian woods: All Greece shall strive with whirlbats and the race, And offering Olive leaves, my browes shall grace. How it delights to see the solemn traine, March to the Temples and the bullocks slaine! Or as the sceane, with fronts rever'st shall shift, And painted Brittans purple hangings lift. There, I'le in gold and ivorie draw th' alarmes Of India, and conquering Caesars armes; And huge Nile swelling both with waves, and war. On brazen beams I'le navall trophies rear. Next conquer'd Asia and Niphates show, And Parthians flying, bold to use their bow. In Parian Marble, and respiring brass, Shall stand the statues of the Dardan race; And all their titles, who from high Jove came; Old Tros, and Phoebus, who did Ilium frame. Let cursed Envie at the Furies shake, And tremble at the dreadfull Stygian Lake, And at Ixions twisted Serpents grone, His racking wheel, and never resting stone.
Meane while let us seek Groves, where Sylvane Gods, Their dwellings have, and search untracted woods, Your hard commands Maecenas to persue. Our muse no lofty flight takes, wanting you. Ah quickly come, nor make delay at all, For now Cytheron with loud voyce doth call. Horse-taming Epire, and Tagetian hounds, And woods the clamor echoing resounds; Next I shall Caesars mighty wars proclaim, And through as many years extend his fame: As hath been since bright Phoebus did adorne The world with light, till thou great Prince wert borne. Who ere Olympick games admiring steeds, Or for the Plow his sturdie bullocks, breeds, To choose well bodied femals must have care; Of the best shape the sowr-look'd heifers are, Her head great, thick her neck and to her thigh Down from her chin, her dewlaps dangling lie. Longsided, all parts large, whom great feet bears, And under crooked horns her brisly ears. Those best I like whom spots of white adorne, Or shun the yoake, oft butting with the horne, The whole Cow faire and visag'd like the male Sweeping the ground with her long bushie taile. The fourth year past, Lucina they implore, And after ten tast joyes of love no more. Their strength to plow, or procreate then failes: Whil'st wanton youth thy herds boast, free thy males, Thy flocks whil'st they are young to Venus bring, That from the old new progenies may spring. The best dayes first from mortall wretches flye, Disease, sad age, labour, and death supply: But alwayes there are some, which rather you VVould wish to change; then still your breed renew;
Lest thou for lost things seek, begin before, And let a yearly race supply thy store. Nor choosing horse from the like precepts swerve, Those thou intend'st must their great stock preserve, They at the first thy speciall care require: For the fair issue of the generous sire, Walks proudly round about the spacious field; Whilst his soft thighs in supple flexures yield. First dares the way, and threatning rivers, take; And ore an unknown bridge, at full speed make; Nor fears vain founds, one hath a lofty neck, A hand some head, short belly, and broad back: Luxuriant swellings on his valiant brest, VVhite, sorrill, worst; Bay, or bright grey is best. But when from far a sound of arms he hears, He knowes no stand, he shakes, and pricks his ears, And fierce to charge, fire from his nostrils flies; And his thick maine on his right shoulder lies. His back-bone broad, he beats the earth, and proofe VVith thundring strokes makes off his solid hoof. Such was swift Cylarus, whom bold Pollux tam'd, Mars and Achilles Charriot horses, fam'd Mongst Grecian Poets; Saturn chang'd, had such A flowing a maine, and at his wives approach Flying high Pelion, thunders with his neighs. But when diseases shall his body craze, And struck in years his sinews weaker are; Keep him at home, his age not sordid spare. Aged they coldly Venus entertain, And the ingratefull work prolong in vain; And if to joyne loves battell they ingage, Like fire in straw, they vainly spend their rage. Therefore their years and courage chiefly learn, Next, other qualities, and breed discerne.
Beat, how they grieve, how joyfull when they win. VVhen through the fields they flie, hast thou not seen How they swift Charriots hurrie to the bar? Twixt hope and fear mens hearts distracted are; They ply the whip, and bending give the reine, The burning axe flies thundering through the plain; Now low they are, now up they seem to rise, And easie air dividing, scale the skies: Nor the lest breathing use, nor make delayes, But a dark cloud of duskie sand they raise, VVith faom, and followers breath bedew'd they are, So love they praise, of conquest so much care. First Erycthonius Chariot-horses joyn'd, And on swift wheeles triumphing dar'd the wind. Lapithes first the art of riding found, And horsemen taught t' insult ore trampled ground, Arm'd cap-a-pe, and thick proud steps to use, Both task's alike; and skilfull riders choose One young as well as swift, and fierce for fight. Though he hath often put the foe to flight; And Epire, or Mycene his Countrey call, Or boast from Neptune his originall. This being known, take thou especiall care, To feed them high when they must serve the Marc, Whom for the Stud a Lord they have decreed, They give sweet grass, clear streams, and strongest bread, Lest strength they want, loves task to undergoe, And their Sies filing a poor offspring shew. But carefully they make the female leane; And when known lust provokes to Venus, then They keep from food, and drive them from the streams, And often chase and tire in Phoebus beams, When with thrash'd corne the beaten barneflore's grone; And the light chaffe by Western winds is blown.
These Arts they use, lest that the field of love, By too much wanton rankness barren prove, And oylie fatness make the furrowes thin, But greedie take the seed, and keep it in. The Sires care past, now is the Dams begun, When neere their time, with rekcon'd monchts they' ave gone, To draw a laden carr let no man force, Or to leap ditches, or in speedie course Run through the meads, or in swift floods to swimme, But feed in large groves, neer some pleasant stream, Where banks with moss, and verdant grass araid, Shelter'd with caves, and with a rockie shade. A Fly about the Groves of Silarus haunts, And high Alburnus, green with stately plants, Asylus cal'd by Romans, but the same The Greeks stile Aestron by an ancient name; Loud-sounding, fierce, from which affrighted, flie The herds, and with loud bellowing shake the skie, And Groves, and thirstie Tangerus banks. Heavens queen This Monster sent to wreak her deadly spleen On Io then transform'd into a Cow. This (for 'tis worst when hotter it doth grow) Beat from thy herds, and feed the pregnant Mares, VVhen Phaebus drives, or night brings on the stars. But when they have teem'd, on th' offspring place all care, VVhich straight they name, and mark what breed they are, VVhich to increase their stock they most allow, Or sacred Altars serve, or draw the Plow, Or those thou would'st to Countrey uses frame. Instruct them young, and with much custome tame, Whil'st pliant are their joynts, and soft their minde. And first about their necks loose collors binde, Made with soft twigs, Next, when the free-borne are To service us'd, them in fit couples pair,
And let them joyne their equall steps with Art, And often use to draw an empty cart; To print a small tract in the dusty roade. Then grones the bee chen axe with ponderous load: Next a brass teeme, with mighty wheeles he drawes. Meane while th' unbroken steers, not only grasse, And fennie rushes, must with Sallow feed, But bring him corne thy self; nor let thy breed Their snowie milk pailes, as th' old custome fill, But the full teat, give their dear offspring still. If thou in war, and cruell arms dost pride, Or neer Alphoeus streams delight'st to ride, And drive swift Chariots through the sacred Grove; First make thy horse, arm'd men and arms to love; Make him shrill Trumpets suffer, and to hear The groning wheeles, nor lashing whips to fear; And at th' applauses and his masters voyce, And sounding of his clap't neck, to rejoyce. This from the mothers teat he must indure, And to soft headstals him you must inure. Whil'st weak, and trembling, sturdie age unknown: The third year spent, the fourth now drawing on, Let him begin to ride the ring, and all His Aires to learn, Curvet, and Caprioll. Let his swift thighes alternate flexures bend; Then with the windes in nimble course contend, And with loose reins fly through the open strands, Scarce leaving any print upon the sands. As from the Northern shores when Boreas fierce Doth Scythian stormes, and aiery clouds disperse. When with loud blasts, the waving Chaimpaine crown'd With rank corne shakes, and the tall woods resound. Huge billows charge the shore with all their force, winds fly, and Sea and Land scowre in their course.
This at the games of Elis swiftly flies Through the great lists, sweating to gain the prise, From's mouth flowes bloudy some, or else allots His soft neck for the Belgick Chariots. Then let the large limb'd grow, nor feeding spare When they are broke; before, they stubborne are; When taken up, their haughty souls disdaine The gentlest stroke, nor will indure the reine. No art more keeps their strength then to remove Venus, and cruell shafts of blinded Love; Whether in herds thou dost, or horses pride. Far of the bulls alone are feeding ti de Behinde a mountain, or beyond some flood, Or at full stalls, shut up with plenteous food, The female in their sights, consume their strength, VVho burning, minde nor food, nor groves at length. She with her sweet inticements oft provokes Proud rivals, till their furie turne to strokes. In pleasant groves the beauteous Heifer feeds; But they joyn battell, and in warlick deeds Gaine many wounds; their bodies bath'd in gore, Closing their horns most dreadfully they rore. The mighty woods, and heavens vast Court resound. Nor more these warriors pasture in one ground; Exil'd to coasts unknown, the vanquish'd goes, Moning his shame, and the proud Conqueror's blowes. That unreveng'd from him his love was tooke, And looking back his native Realm forsook. Then he improves his strength with all his care, Amongst hard rocks all night his lodgings are: There he rough leaves, and brisly Carix eats, And striving with his horns, his anger whets Against a tree; his blowes the winde excite, Raising the sand a Prologue to the fight.
Strength once regain'd, he doth to battell goe, And suddain chargeth his forgetfull foe. As when amid'st the Sea billows grow white; Rowling from th' ocean, gather to a height, And now at Land, gainst rocks it strangely rores; Nor less then Mountains break upon the shores, The deep waves boyle, whirl'd with a foming tide, And working casts up sand on every side. All men on earth, and beasts, both wilde and tame, Sea-monsters, gaudy fowle, rush to this flame: The same love works in all; with love ingag'd. The Lyoness mindelesse of her whelps, inrag'd VVanders the fields, nor foule Bears oftner take So many lives, nor greater slaughter make; Nor cruell Tygers, nor the raging Boar: Ah'tis ill wandring then, drie Lybias shore. Seest thou how horses will all over shake, When in their nostril's the known sent they take? Nor they with curbs, nor stripes can be debar'd, Nor Rocks, nor Rivers can their course retard; Though down they sweep whole Mountains with their waves. The Sabell Boare whetting his tusks, then raves Rubbing against a tree, and tears the ground, Hardning his shoulders gainst th' insuing wound. How was that young man took, when fierce desire In his hot blood kindled so great a fire! For he when all the elements, did fight, Through Seas turn'd Mountains swomme in hideous night, When at him heavens Artillery thunder'd round, And broken billows gainst the Rocks resound: Nor could his wofull parents him recall, Nor she whose Fate attends his funerall.
But the Mares furie above all is fam'de; For Venus with such rage their minds inflam'de. VVhen Glaucus Chariot Mares with furie stir'd. Did with revenging teeth devoure their Lord. Beyond high Gargarus, loud Ascanius stream, O're hils, and deepest floods, Love carries them, And straight with hidden fire their marrow burns: But most i'th Spring, when heat of blood returns. Then all to courting Zephire turne their face, And plac'd on Rocks, lascivious gales imbrace, And oft they pregnant prove without a mate, Big with the windes and (wonderous to relate) Then over hils and dales are carried on; Not to thee Eurus, nor the rising Sun, To Boreas, nor whence Auster doth arise, And with black showrs in mourning cloaths the skies. Hence comes that poyson which the Shepherds call Hippomanes, and from their groine doth fall. The wofull bane oft cruell stepdames use, And with a charme mongst pow'rfull drugs infuse. But time irreparable hasts away. VVhil'st we with love transported waste the day. Thus much for herds; Next be your care to keep The shaggie Goat, and drive the fleecie sheep: From this expect your glory, rustick Swaines: Nor am I ignorant how great a paines It is low things with glorious words to praise, And slender arguments to such honour raise. But me, love of Parnassus doth invite To hils untracted, there is my delight; VVhere no old path is to Castalia found. And now great Pales thee I shall resound.
First in warme Coats preserve thy flocks, and feed Till fresh spring give new livories to the Mead: Let straw and litter keep their lodgings warme, Lest cruell cold, the gentle offspring harme, Breeding the scab and rot; but Arbuts bring To wanton Goats, and water from the spring. Then free from winds against the winter sun Place thou their stalls, where Phoebus warms at noon. When cold Aquarius shall no more appear, Sprinkling chill dewes on the concluding year. And to keep Goats take thou no smaller care, Nor less shall be thy gain, then if they were In rich Milesian fleeces cloath'd, and sold, Blushing in Tyrrian purple for much gold. These still will breed, hence store of milk you get: The more the paile fomes with the drained teat, The more sweet streams from the prest udder spin. Besides they cut the beards and hoarie chin Of the Cyniphian Goats, and brisly hairs, Usefull for Camps, and wofull Mariners. But they in woods and high Lycaeus rove, Feeding on briers, and bramble beries love. Then home returne, leading their own fair strain, And scarce with full teats o're the threshld gain. But carefull keep from them cold windes and snow: Because they less the want of mortals know. And bring sweet food, for them green branches cut, Nor from the hay stack all long winter-shut. But when the spring the Western winds invokes; To Groves and Meads invite then both thy flocks. At the first dawn, in cold grounds let them feed, Whil'st day is young, and pearled is the mead. When dew to cattell deer, on soft grass lies, And the fourth houre heat musters from the skies;
And amongst shrubs the murmuring Grashopper sings; Command thy flocks then to the Lakes or Springs: Or let them taste sweet streams in pipes conveid; And when grown hot, to seek some cooling shade; Or Joves great Oke, preserved long from harms By ancient rites, stretching his mighty armes. Or where dark Groves are with thick branches made Awfull, and sacred with a horrid shade. To water then, and feed again, prepare At Sun-set, when sweet Vesper cooles the air, When the bright Moon relieves the thirsty ground, Halcyans on shores, and birds on trees resound. Why should I thee of Lybian shepherds tell? Their pastures, and how scatteringly they dwell? Oft night and day, for a whole moneth they feed, And unhous'd Cattel through vast desarts leade. In open field the Lybian Shepherd lies, With him his stock, his house, and Deities, His arms, his Spartan Dog, and Cretan bow. So doth the armed Roman Soldier shew Loaden in's march; then stands in well pitch'd tents, Before the foe could have intelligence. But Scythians who Maeotick Lakes command, And stormie Ister rouling golden sand, Where Rhodope doth to the poole extend, There in close stals the Cattell they defend. The fields no grass, the trees no leaves do boast: But snowie mountains, and a horrid frost Hides all the earth, at least seven Cubits high, Still cold, North winds blowing eternally. Nor can the Sun those gloomie shades displace; Nor when his horse mount the Meridian race, Nor when he cools them in the Western maine. There, icy setters straight swift rivers chaine.
Wheeles shod with iron the strong-back'd water bears, And where ships sail'd, now safe goe laden Cars. It breaks hard brass, cloaths freez upon their backs, Aud wine once liquid, suffers now the axe: And mighty lakes transform'd to ice; soone hard Grow drops of water on their uncomb'd beard. Meane while all heaven is dark with snow, sheep die, And under mighty drifts fair Cattell lie; Whole herds of Deer, new Mountains there infold; That scarse you may their lofty crests behold. Nor these with nets they snare, nor seiz with hounds; Nor are they frighted when the arrow sounds; But as they struggle under hils in vain, Kill with their Swords, whil'st they aloud complain, Then bear them home, triumphing with a crie. These under ground, in Caves securely lie. Whole Elms, and loads of mighty Oke are layd Upon the hearth, when the huge fire is made. They spend the night in sport; strong Ale they quaffe, And wanting VVine carouse sharp Cervice off. People so fierce nigh Hyperborean hills Under cold stars of th Artick Region dwels; Still beaten with the sharp Ryphaean blasts, Their body cloath'd with Sable Furs of beasts. But if thou wool esteeme, from thorns thy sheep, From burs and briers preserve: from rank grass keep. And with soft fleeces snowie flocks elect; But him (although the Ram be white) reject Whose mouth is alwayes moyst, with a black tongue, Lest he should change the colours of the young. But choose another through the spacious plaine, VVith a white fleece (if it may credit gain),
Arcadian Pan, thee Luna to the grove, Calling intic'd; nor didst thou scorne his love. Is milk thy care, then Lotus, Cythesus bring? And in their coats store of salt herbage fling. This makes them drink which more the reat extends, And with a quicker taste the milk commends. Some from the Dams hinders the tender Kids. And with hard muzzels from the pap forbids. VVhat they at morning milk, they press at night, VVhat they at evening gain, when day grows light The Swains to Market bring, or sprinkled o're VVith salt, they keep it for their winter store. Nor of thy Dogs have thou less care; but feed Fleet Spartan whelps, and thy Mollossian breed VVith store of whay; commanding such a guard, 'Gainst thieves by night, or wolves thou art prepar'd: Nor shall the fierce Iberian thee afright. Thou the wilde timerous Asse shalt put to flight. Oft hunt the Hare and Deer with full-mouth'd hounds, And thrust forth Boars shelter'd in wood-land grounds: And from high Mountains with loud shouts beset Sometimes huge Stags, and drive them to thy net. Next learn to burn sweet Cedar in their roomes, And smoke out Serpents with Galbanian gums. For ost amongst the planks a Viper lies, Deadly to touch, and light affrighted flies. Or else a Snake in sheltring roofs doth use, VVhich will on Cattell cruell bane infuse Hid in the ground: take thou a stake, or stone, And as he swels, and hisseth, knock him down. But if he threaten, yet thou mayst be sure, He will by flight his Coward head secure. His armed ribs being bruis'd, and harnes'd traine, Scarce rallying up his broken rear again.
In the Calabrian Groves there haunts a snake, Wreathing a haughtie Crest, and scalie back, And mingled spots on his long bellie shew. Who whil'st the rivers from the Mountains flow; Earth with the Spring dew'd, and the showrie South, He lives in fens, glutting his greedie mouth With fish, and croaking frogs; but when earth gapes, And Lakes are drain'd with heat, to Land he scapes: Rouling his flaming eyes; Then far and wide Rages with thirst, with heat much terrifi'de. Then let not me under heavens Canopie Sweet slumber seize, nor on the grass to lie Neere murmuring Groves, when he hath cast his skin, And rouling shines in want on youth agen; Leaving in's nest his egs, or else the young, And dares at Phoebus shake his triple tongue. The signes and causes now of each disease, I'le thee informe: foule scabs thy flock will seise When chilling showres invade lifes strongest hold; And horrid frosts wax grim with bitter cold. Or when foule sweat sticks to them lately shorne, And with rough briers their naked bodies torne. For wiser Shepherds the whole flock will take, And deeply plunge them in some cleansing Lake: Far in to drench his fleece the Ram is thrown, Who with the gentle stream comes gliding down. Or when they'r shorne, the lees of oyle apply, Or silver spume, commix'd with Mercuris, Idean pitch, and store of oylie tar, Scylla, Bitumen and black Hellebor. And no indeavor shall finde more successe, Then if the skilfull Swaine an orifice
VVith a sharp Launce shall open on the head; Corruption lives, and is by covering fed. VVhil'st the idle Swaine neglects to dress the sore, And from the Gods doth better things implore. VVhen in the Bleater's marrow aches breed, And putrid fevors on his spirits feed; It will be good t' avert the raging paine, By opening in his foot, the beating vein. So the Bisaltians were accustomed, And the most fierce Gelonians, when they fled To Rhodope, or Getan wildes; to quaffe, Mix'd with thick milk, the blood of horses off. If thou seest any to the coole shades draw, And sweet grass nibble, as they had no maw, Or lag behinde, or grazing to lie down, And ere they fould, to march away alone, Straight kill the guilty, ere the dire disease Infect the flock, and careless vulgar seise. Nor oftner is the floods disturb'd with winde Then sheep with rots, nor doth the sickness finde One to destroy; but suddainly doth fall On root and branch, stock and originall. If any th' Alps and Norick Castles knowes, Plac'd on high hils, and where Tymavus flowes; Deserted Realms, now he may see of Swains, And every where Groves, and forsaken plaines. Here, once the aire infected did beget A plague, which rag'd through the Autumnall heat: All kinde of Cattell, and of wilde beasts di'de; The grass was tainted, rivers putrifi'de; Nor was one way for death, but when the flame VVith burning thirst through feav'rous bodies came, Cold Rheums again abound; and the disease Their feeble limbs consumed by degrees.
Oft sacrifices, at the Altars plac'd With snowie wreaths, and flowry Garlands grac'd; E're Sacrificers could dispatch, fall dead: Or if before the Priest one slaughtered, The bowels on the Altars will not burne; Nor the Diviner answers can return. And scarce their knives with blood are sprinkled o're, And the top-sand be stain'd with watery gore. Then the fat Calf in richest pasture fals; And his sweet life gives up at plenteous stals. Hence Dogs run mad, and sickly Boars perplex't With a short cough; and with swolne jawes are vext. The Conquering steed, mindeless of war or food, Unhappie falls, and leaves the cooling flood, And with his feet the hard ground often beats. His ears now hang, and faint with troubled sweats Which neere their death growes cold; their skins are drie, And to be handled roughly do comply. To burning eyes short breathings grant no rest. Sometimes they grone; and deeply from their brest Fetch a sad sigh; blood from their nostrils flowes, And in lank jawes their tongue now rougher grows. To drench them with a horne of wine be sure: For to them dying this the only cure. Sometimes it kils; for thus refresh'd, they burn. (God bless good men, on bad this errour turn) With greater rage; and as cold death draws neer, With cruell teeth they their own members tear. The smoking Oxe is taken at the Plow, And from his mouth blood mix't with fome doth flow, Groning his last; whil'st the sad Plowman here Unyoaks (mourning his brothers death.) The steer, And mid'st his work the Plow leaves in the field. Nor shady groves, nor soft meads pleasure yield;
Nor streams which through the vales from mountains glide, And are more cleer then crystall purisi de. His sides grown lank, darknes his eyes o're spread, And to the ground falls, on his drooping head. What availes toyle or profit? what to turne Th'unwilling gleab? These not with rich wine burn, Nor surfets at high banquets taint their blood; But leaves, and simple herbage are their food. They drink pure fountains, and the running streams, Nor vexing care disturbs their healthy dreams; Then only in those Realms as fame hath taught, The Cattell were for Juno's offering sought. And unmatch'd steers her Chariot did convey To the high places where they honors pay. The Earth they dig themselves, and set the corne, Nor from the mountains with their own neck scorn To draw the groning Car. No woolf did plot By stratagem to take some wealthy coat: Nor walks nocturnall rounds about the sheep, A cruel sickness him at home did keep. And now the nimble Buck and timerous Doe, Amongst the Dogs, about the houses goe. And then the Oceans numerous race, and all Those kinds that boast from thence originall, Wash'd with the floods, as shipwrack'd bodies come To shore, and Sea-calves up fresh rivers swoom. No lurking hole the viper now availes, Nor dreadfull Serpents with erected scales. Nor safety from sweet air could birds receive, But falling, in the Clouds their spirits leave. All Arts now harme, the wise Physitions faile. Chyron, Melampus, know not what they aile, Pale Tisiphon rages, sent from Stygian shades, In open light, and fear and sickness leads;
Her greedie jawes by day rais'd high from ground. The Rivers, hils, and sandie banks resound With bleating flocks, and loud complaining steers. And carcasses in mighty heaps she rears, Whole flocks she kills; with gore the stalls are drown'd: Till they had learn't to lay them in the ground. Their skins unusefull, water could not rense Their bowels, nor the fire their entrails cleanse, Nor shear, for the disease; their fleeces full Of filthiness, Nor touch the tainted wooll: And those durst wear the loathsome garments, get Inflamed Carbuncles, a clamie sweat Seiseth their noysome limbs, and in few hours Th' infected bodies sacred fire devours.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF Virgil's GEORGICKS. THE ARGUMENT. How for the Bees fit stations to contrive. Of what, and how, to build the stately hive. In setling Realms, they oft divided are; And for their Kings contend in mighty war. Their Diet, Customs, Laws and Chastity: Their toyle and rest, they winds and rain foresee. Their stocks, their age, and Loyalty to Kings What their invention to perfection brings. What cures against Diseases to afford, And how th' whole Nation lost, may be restor'd. I'Le to Aetheriall honey next proceed, Heavens choicest gift, this too, (Maecenas) reade. Wonders admir'd, to thee of lowly things, In order their whole stocks, magnanimous Kings, Wars, labours, manners, Nations I'le recite, Slight is the theame, but not the glory slight; If pleas'd powers grant, and cal'd Apollo heare. First, for thy bees seek a fit station, where
No winds approach, (for them each gale forbids To bring home food. Nor sheep and wanton Kids Tread down the grasse, or heifers shake the dewes VVandring the plaines; and tender herbage bruise Thence speckled Lizards with pide shoulders drive Woodpecks, and other birds from the rich hive, And Progne who a bloodie hand did smeare. For all things these devast, in their mouthes bear The winged Bee, sweet food to cruell nests. Let Springs be neer, and Lakes green mosse invests; And a pure river gliding through the mead, Where Palme their gates, and branching Olive shade. That when new Kings shall forth their Colonies bring, And youth drawn out sport in the wanton spring; The neighbouring banks may them from heat invite, And willing trees with courteous boughes delight, Amidst; whether the water stand or runs, Lay twigs a crosse, and cast in mighty stones, That they on many bridges safe may stand, And to the warming sun their wings expand. VVhen stormy Eurus hath them tardy found, And scatter'd, or indanger'd to have drown'd. Let verdant Cassia round about them dwell; And Betonie which gives so large a smell: And of sweet-breathing Succorie store be set, And let them drink the dewes of Violet. VVhether of hollow bark thou dost contrive, Or else with limber twigs compose the hive: Make straight the gate: for cold congeales the wax, And heat by melting doth again relax: Both which extreams the Bees alike do fear. Nor they in vain those breathing cranies smear Of their low roofs with wax, indevouring still, Th' edges with balme, and pleasant flowrs to fill.
And for this use a glue they gather, which Excels all bird-lime and Idaean pitch. Oft in deep Caves, (if fame a truth report) Low underneath, they vault their waxen Court; And oft discover'd in a hollow Rock, Or in the bellie of an aged Oke. But thou their roomes with clay well-temper'd, seel; And with leaves cover, that no cold they feel. About their Court let no Yewes grow, nor bake The fiery crab, nor trust too deep a Lake: Or where bad smels, or hollow Rocks resound, And angrie echoes of the voyce rebound. Next when bright Sol makes winter to retreat Behinde the Earth, and opens Heaven with heat, Straight they draw out, and wander Groves and woods, Reap purple flowres, and taste the crystall floods. By what instinct I know not, then they flie To their own Courts, and their dear progenie. Next with great Art, their waxen Cels contrive, And the elaborated honey stive. But when thou seest a troup aspiring, flie; Drawn from their winter quarters through the skie; And curious hast with admiration spide A sable Cloud through crystall Sphears to glide; Then to sweet springs, and pleasant shades they goe, Here oderous flowres, and beaten Milfoyle strow, With honey-Suckles make a brazen sound, And beat the Cymbals of the Goddess round: They on charm'd boughs will stay, or else retreat, As is the custome to their parents seat. But if they draw to battell, (oft between Two Kings great discord, and sad wars have been) And straight thou mayst foresee the vulgar rage: Wilde for mad war; for those who not ingage,
The martiall note provokes, heard is th' alarme, Like dreadfull Trumpets when they sound to arme. They list proud troups in haste, their Spears they whet, Their light shields furnish, and their arms they fit, Guarding their King thick to the Court they goe, And with loud clamor challenge out the foe. Then when'tis fair, the open field they take, They joyne their battell, and they joyning make A noise scales heaven, and in close order all Strongly imbodied charge, then head-long fall. Not thicker haile doth in a tempest poure, Nor shaken Okes more plenteous akorns showre. The Kings amid'st the bands in armor shine, And mighty soules in narrow brests confine, Both resolute not to yield, till these or they Are to proud Conquerors fore'd to give the day: These huge commotions, and so mightie war, Suddain with thrown-up dust appeased are. But when both Princes you from battell call, Who seems the worst, lest he a prodigall Should waste the stock; command him to be slain, And let the best in th' emptie pallace reign. One shines with gold, whom glorious colours grace, Two sorts there are: the best, his noble face Hath blushing cheeks, with sloth the other pale His sagging bellie after him doth traile. As their two Kings, such their two Nations are; For one s deform'd, as when a traveller Through clouds of dust, extreamly thirsty gets And from's drie mouth a sulleid water spits. The other shines with gold, and glory grac'd; And equall spots upon their bodies plac'd. This Progenie is best, from these you may Sweet honey at the certain time conveigh,
Not only sweet, but also shall be fine, And which shall qualifie your sharpest wine. But when they wander, sporting through the skies, Forsake their hives, and cooling roofes despise, Let not their stragling minds seek idle things: Nor hard's the task; but cut their Princes wings, They staying at home, none dares to scale heavens arch, Or with spread ensignes from their camp to march. Them, let sweet gardens with fresh flowres invite, And old Priapus, who the thieves doth fright, And spoyling birds from thence with's awfull look, All safe preserving with his sallow hook. Set thyme about their roofs, and Pines remove From lofty hills if thou such labours love Weary thy hand with toyle, and pleasant bowres Plant round, and dew the earth with friendly showrs. And did not I, now to my Port draw neer; And striking saile my prow to shore did steer; How to adorne fair gardens I would sing, And Pestum, where there is a double spring. Why Succorie in pleasant streams delights, And verdant parseley swelling banks invites; And Cucumers grow plump along the grass, Nor would I Daffadils long in growth, orepasse; Or soft Acanthus, winding Ivie's store, And Myrtle so inamour'd on the shore. I call to minde neere high Oebalius towrs, Where slow Galesus waters Ceres bowrs, I saw an old Corycian, who injoy'd Few akers, not for pasturage imploy'd, Nor was it fit for corne or vineyard found. Yet he, mongst thornes, choice herbs and lillies round His garden Vervaine did, and Poppie finde, That wealthiest Kings he equal'd in his minde:
And late at night returning home well stor'd, He with unpurchas'd banquets lades his board. He in the spring did first sweet Roses pull; And could in Autumne apples soonest cull; VVhen stones with cold the cruell winter cleaves, And bridles up with ice the flowing waves. His soft Acanthus now he gently twinde, Chiding the tardy spring, and lingring winde. Therefore huge swarms, his bees first pregnant brought, And his full combes rivers of honey fraught, His Pines and barren Lindons fruitfull were; As many blossoms as his tree did bear, So many apples it in Autumne grac'd: And he the lofty Elms in order plac'd. Wardens, and Thorne, which now a damson made, And Planes which to Carousers are a shade; But these excluded by a narrow straight, I leave to others after to relate. Now I'le declare those gifts which were confer'd On bees by Jove himself, for what reward They follow'd tinkling brass, and Curets sound, And fed the King of heaven under ground. In common only they maintain their race, And like a Citie rang'd their houses place; And understrictest Laws they aged grow, Their native Countrey, and fix'd mansions know, Mindfull of winter, labour in the Spring, And to the publick store their profit bring. For some provide, and by a compact made Labour abroad; others within are stai'd To lay Narcissus tears, and yielding gum As the first ground-work, of the honey combe: And after they tenacious honey spread. Others the Nations hope, young Colonies breed.
A second part the purest honey stives; Untill the liquid Nectar crack the hives. There are by lot attend the gates, t'informe Approaching showrs, and to foretell a storme. To ease the loaden, or imbattel'd drive The Drones, a slothfull cattell from the hive. Work heats; of thyme the fragrant honey smels. As when the Cyclops the soft masse compels, Hasting for Jove huge thunderbolts to make: Some with the bellows air returne, and take; Others in water dip the hissing o're; Aetnean Caves with beaten anvils rore: They with much strength, their arms in order raise, And turne with tongues the mass a thousand wayes. So (if I may great things compare with small) Bees to their work for love of profit fall, Each hath his task, the aged Rulers are, And frame Dedalian roofs, and combs repair; But those that youthfull be, and in their prime, Late in the night return, loaden with thyme, On every bush, and tree about they spread; And are with Cassia and rich Saffron fed, Or purple Daffadils, and Lindors tall. All rest at once; at once they labour all. Early they take the field, at night again When Vesper them from feeding doth constrain; Homeward they draw; and strength decaid restore, And with soft murmurs throng about the dore. When they repose, all night they silent are, And pleasant sleep doth wearied limbs repair; Nor from their hives they stir, when rain is nigh, Nor trust their persons to a stormy skie. But safe they water nere their Cities wall; And oft with Pebles journeys make, but small,
As a light boat ballanc'd on raging seas, VVith which through vacant aire themselves they peise. 'Tis strange that Bees such customs should maintain, Venus to scorne: in wanton lust disdain To waste their strength; and without throws they breed; But cull from leaves, and various flowres their seed. Their Kings and pettie Princes they proclaime, Then Pallaces and waxen Kingdoms frame, But oft their wings are torne on Rocks abroad, And free they spend their lives beneath their load, So love they flowrs, and to make honey pride. Though soon the tearm of their short life doth glide, (For the seventh summer a full period gives) Yet their immortall race for ever lives. Their noble house for many years remains, And records keep of antient Princes reigns. Next not rich Aegypt, nor great Lydia, Parthians or Medians, more their Prince obey, Whil'st their King lives, they all agree in one, But dead, the publick faith is overthrown. They make the Common wealth a spoyle, and rend Their Waxen Realms, his life did all defend. They honour him, and with a martiall sound Circle about, and strongly guard him round. Bear on their back, twix'd him and death they stood, And purchas'd noble funerals with their blood. From these examples some there are maintain, That Bees derive from a celestiall strain, And heavenly race; they say the Deity Is mix'd through earth, the Sea, and lofty skie, Hence men and beasts, both wilde, and tame derive; And what so ere by breathing air survive. To this they after are dissolv'd, and then Return'd assume first Principles agen: Nor is there place for death; their spirits fly To the great stars, and plant the lofty skie.
But if their narrow Courts thou mean'st to spoyle, And seiz the treasure of the honey pile, Water with silence in their chambers spout, And with your hand extended smoke them out. Twice they swarme yearly, twice a large increase Their harvest brings; first when the Pleiades Her sacred brow above the earth doth shoot, And spurnes the scorned Ocean with her foot; Or when that star from watery signes retires, And sad in stormy waves conceases her fires. But when incens'd their anger knows no mean, For if you hurt them; they inspire a bane; And in the bodie fix'd their Javelins leave; And where they give the wound, their death receive. But fear'st thou cruell winter, and wouldst spare Pittying their broken mindes, and sad affair; Who doubts to cut them wax, and to persume With thyme? for oft base Lizards spoyle the coomb, And the blinde Beetle wasts the precious hoard, nd Drones free-quartered at anothers board. Or cruell Wasps charge with unequal arms, Or the Moths eating generation harmes, Or else Minerva's hatefull Spider sets About their Pallace gates, intangling nets. How much by fortune they exhausted are, So much they strive their ruines to repair Of their falne Nation, and they fill th' Exchange Adorning with the choicest flowrs their grange. But if (since Bees know our calamities) Their bodies languish in a sad disease, Which thou by signes to manifest mayst know, Their looks are chang'd, and their dejected brow Paleness deforms▪ when they to shades descend, In order wofull funerals they attend. Or else they mourn lingering about the dore, Or in their chambers privately deplore;
Till they with hunger, and stiffe cold grow numb. Then sadder notes are heard, a dolefull hum. As when rough Auster murmurs through the woods, Or as loud waves rore with incensed floods, Or dreadfull flames rage pent in furnaces. To burn Galbanian odour I'le advise, And bring the mourners honey in a cane, T'intice the wretches to known food again. Juice of Oke-apples mix'd with Roses dride; And richest wine, with fire well purifi'de, To these Cecropian thyme, and Centaurie joyne, And grapes which dangle on th' Psythian vine. There is a flower, which grows in meadow ground: Swaines call Amello, easie to be found: Which golden, like a mighty grove doth sprout: But the thick leaves, that shade it round about Are clad in purple; which the Altars oft Imbraceth with sweet wreathes, and garlands soft: Sharp in the taste; wise Shepherds gather them In flowrie vales, neer Mellas sacred stream. The root of these they mix with Bacchus blood, And at their gates leave plenty of this food. But should the whole stock faile, not one remain, From whom they should derive their house again; Th' Arcadians rare invention we must here Remember, who with blood of a slaine steer Oft Bees restor'd. I will recount it all And tell the story from th' originall. Where happy people plant Canopus soyl, And dwell neer spreading streams of flowing Nile, And through their Countrey painted vessels rowes, And where the stream from the tan'd Indian flowes, Which borders nigh the quiver'd Persian land, And verdant Aegypt mailes with fruitfull sand; Then spreading doth in seven large channels part, These Nations all are confident in this art.
First take a little place, for that use chose, Then tile it, and with narrow wals inclose, And let there be four windows next design'd, With oblique lights, made from each severall winde. Then take a steer; grac'd with a branching top, Of two year old; his breath and nostrils stop; And whil'st he struggles, him with beating kill, That the sound hide his dissolv'd bowels fill. Thus dead they leave it shut and under lay Green branches, thyme and freshest Cassia. This must be done, when Zephire calms the main, Before the Meads blush with new flowrs again, Ere her high nest the chattering Swallow makes. Whilst in young bones the cherish'd humour takes, Then moving Creatures, (wonderous to behold,) First without feet, then sounding wings unfold; Then boldly by degrees to heaven they tower, And sallie forth, thick as a summer showre; Or as a cloud of arrows in their flight, When the bold Parthians are ingag'd in fight. What God ô Muse! this strange art did invent, From whence had man this new experiment. When Aristhaeus left sweet Tempe's coast, His Bees by famine and diseases lost, Sad, standing at the sacred fountains head, Complaining much he to his mother said. Mother, Cyrene, who commands these floods, Why me, the noble offspring of the Gods (If Phoebus is my Sire as you declare) Bor'st thou the scorne of Fate? where is your care? Thou gav'st me hope, that I in heaven should reign; But now those honours mortall life sustain Of corne, and herds, got by such toyle, and care, I now must loose, though you my Mother are. Goe, and my fertile groves thy self annoy, And burn my stalls; with fire my corne destroy.
Hew down, and spoyle my vinyards; if to thee, So grievous are those honours granted me. Under the streams soft bed his Mother heard, Whil'st round her Nymphs Milesian wool did card, Staind with rich green. Drimo and Xantho, faire Philodoce and Ligea, their bright haire Upon their snowie necks dishevel'd lay, Spio, Nisaee, Cymodoce and Thalia, Lycorias, Cydipe; a virgine one, The other had pangs of Lucina known: Clio, and Beroe, both to th' Ocean borne, VVhom gold, and curious mantles did adorne. Ephyre, and Ophis, Asian Diope, And Arethusa swift her arms laid by. Amongst these Climene did vain cares relate Of Vulcan, those sweet thefts and Mars deceit, Gods many loves, from Chaos did rehearse VVhil'st they their soft webs ply, pleas'd with the verse. Aristaeus grief, then pierc'd his mothers ear; All on their crystall seats amazed were. But Arethusa first her golden head Advancing from a swelling billow, said, Dear sister, not in vain we troubled are, VVith such a sad complaint; thy chiefest care Poore Aristaeus, at his fathers streams Stands weeping, and thy cruelty condemns: Then said his mother, struck with suddain fear, Hast, hast, and shew him in, he may repair To the Gods Court; then bids the waves divide, To make her Son a passage: on each side Billows like Mountains stand; then she receives Him twixt the flood; and leads beneath the waves. He wondring goes, through Courts, and crystall Realms; Loud groves, and Caves, which water over-whelms; And with tumultuous waves astonish'd found All the great rivers, gliding under ground
Through divers wayes, whence Phasis, Lycus spread, And where deep Inepeus shews his head, And where old Tyber, and sweet Aniens flowes, VVhere murmuring Hypanis, and Lycus rose, Golden Eridanus, with a double horne, Fac'd like a Bull: through fertile fields of corne Then whom none swifter of the Oceans sons Down to the purple Adriatick runs. VVhen he to chambers arch'd with pumice drew, And that Cyrene his vain sorrow knew, To wash his hands, his sisters from the spring Draw crystall water, and fring'd towels bring, Tables they load with meat, and full Cups plac'd, Then with Pancheian fire the Altar grac'd. Here spake his mother, Let rich wine be payd Unto the sea; next to the Ocean pray'd, Founder of things, and to the nymphs, who woods Preserve a hundred, and as many floods. Now thrice on fire she casts the flowing wine, As oft with flame the lofty seelings shine. Pleas'd with the Omen then she thus began. Green Proteus dwels in the Carpathian maine, Prophet to Neptune, through broad seas he glides; And in his Chariot with Sea-horses rides. Now gone t' Emathia and his native shore: VVe Sea Nymphs, and old Nereus him adore. For the great Prophet all things doth foresee, VVhat is, what was, and what shall after be: This Neptune gave him, whose great herd he breeds, And nuge Sea-Calves beneath the water feeds. But him thou first must binde, ere heel'le declare Cause of thy losse, and prosper thy affair. Unless you force him, no advice he grants, And is inexorable to all complaints. Handle him roughly then, and binde him fast, And all his slights shall useless prove at last.
I'le bring thee (when at noon the Sun invades The scorched grass, and beasts retire to shades;) To th' old mans Cave; whom suddain thou mayst seize, As he in soft repose shall take his ease. But when th' hast bound him, and with chains subdude, With various transformations he'le delude; A savage Boar, fierce Tyger, scalie Snake, And a huge Lion with a shaggie neck; Or to escape shall thunder like a flame; Or glide from thee in a swift crystall stream: How much the more he changes to all shapes, So much more carefull (son) prevent escapes; Till his first forme returns, which thou did'st spie, When he in pleasant slumber clos'd his eye. This said she with a heavenly odour strews, Her son all over, and Ambrosian dews: Her comely tresses breathe celestiall air, And did his body with new strength repair. There is a Cave, worne in a mountains side, Where stormy winds oft forc'd the swelling tide, VVhich cuts it self into a land-lockd bay, VVhere once strest Mariners in safety lay. Proteus in this lies guarded with a vast Fence-work of Rock; here she the young man plac'd Shelter'd with darkness, from discovering light: But she to thin air vanish'd from his sight. And now hot Syrius through drie India hurl'd, Rag'd from the skie, and all the middle world The Sun inflam'd; grass burns, and to the mud The scortching beams boyle the exhausted flood, VVhen Proteus came to his accustomd place, About him the vast Oceans watery race, VVho sporting, off the brackish water shake, Then stretch't along the shore, sound sleep they take. He as a herdman in the mountains, when Vesper invites Cattell to house agen;
And bleating Lambs, the cruell wolves provoke, Sits on a cliffe, and numbers all his flock. He since so fair the opportunity shews, Scarce grants th' old man his weary limbs compose, But rusheth with a shout and bound him laid. VVho not unmindfull of his arts t' evade, Transforms himself into all monsters dire: Now he's a beast, a flood, and straight a fire. But when no slight prevail'd, he vanquished Himself assumes, and with a mans voyce said. O most undanted youth, by whose commands Found'st thou our Court? what seek'st thou at our hands? But he repli'de: Proteus, thou knowst, thou know'st; Nor of beguiling thee may any boast. Desist; I seek, commanded here by Fate, How to repair my now decayed state. The Prophet then rouling his fiery eyes VVith flaming beams, inraged, thus replies, And Destiny declares: No common God Displeas'd, on thee hath laid his heavie rod; A great plague is begun; this punishment, (And less then thou deserv st) hath Orpheus sent. For he incens'd (if Fates not interpose) For his lost wife, will yet procure more woes. VVho whil'st she swiftly by the river side From thee pursuing fled, unhappy Bride Saw not the mighty Snake, which lurking was Under the bank and hid in spreading grass. Alone the Dryades on mountains wept, The Rhodopeian towrs her funerals kept, Lofty Pangaea, and bold Rhesus coast, Getes, Hebrus, and Actian Orythia most. He on his well-tun'de instrument, alone His hapless love, thee his sweet wife did moane; And by himself thee on forsaken shores, Early and late, thee in his song deplores;
He Taenarus, and wofull gates of Dis; And horrid groves where dreadfull darkness is, And Manes past, to the stern King repairs, And courts not us'd to bend to humane prayers. He with his song, charm'd from the dismall Coasts, Of Eribus pale soules, and liveless Ghosts, Men, women, and magnanimous Heroes, here Boyes, virgins, young men laid upon the beer Before their Parents face: whom hellish mud And horrid reeds of th Acherontick flood, With slow fens of th' innavigable sound Bindes in, and Styx nine times incircles round. Hells court, and gates of death amazed were; The furies now not twist their snakie haire, Then silenc'd were loud Cerberus triple jaws, Ixions restles wheele stood at a pause: All these he past; then back returns, with faire Eurydice, to the Aetheriall aire, She following him (for so hells Queen injoyn'd) When fond thoughts seiz'd th' incautelous lovers minde: The fault was small, if fiends to pardon knew; He made a stand; as to the light he drew, Forgetfull, love prevailing o're his minde, On his Eurydice to look back, inclin'd; His labour lost, hels Tyrant promise brake, And thrice a sound rose from th' Avernian Lake. But she Dear Orpheus said, what thee could move To ruine both? why was so much thy love? Behold I am recal'd by destinies, Eternall sleep closeth my failing eyes; And now farewell; black night surroundeth me, Stretching weak hands, alas, not thine, to thee. This said; she suddain vanish'd from his eyes, And like smoke mix'd with winde, dispersed, flies, Nor saw him catch in vain the yielding aire, Earnest his mighty sorrow to declare.
Nor would hels churlish Feriman agen Transport him o're the Acherontick fen. What can he do? twice having lost his love, Or with what sute infernall spirits move? She sayling in the Stygian boat growes cold. Whil'st seven long moneths delaying periods told Under a Rock, (as fame reports) he kept; And at forsaken Strymons billows wept. Mourning in dismall Caves, Tygers, once fierce, Grow milde, and stubborn Okes move at his Verse. As mongst the Poplar shade in dolefull strains Rob'd of her young, sad Philomel complains; Whom scarce yet fleg'd, some rustick having found Took from the nest: but she doth woes resound Perch'd on a tree; and the whole night laments, Filling all places with her sad complaints. No love, nor other bed, could him intice: Alone he goes, through Hyperborean ice, And Tanais snow, wandring through bitter coasts, For ever wedded to Rhiphaean frosts: Pluto's vain gift Eurydice he mourn'd. The Thracian Dames because their beds he scorn'd, Him at their Bacchanalian orgies tore, And strew the young mans limbs about the shore. His head then from his Ivorie shoulders torn, Was down the channell of swift Hebrus born, And whilst his dying tongue could move at all; Eurydice, Eurydice, did call: And all the banks resound Euridice. This Proteus said, and lept into the Sea, And where he lept did make the fomie wave Under his body, with huge strokes to rave. Then thus Cyrene spake, to ease his care. My dearest son, now lay aside all fear, Since the whole cause is known of thy mischance, The Nymphs with whom in groves she us'd to dance,
Have sent this sad destruction on thy Bees, Then humbly them appease with sacrifice, And there the yielding Dryades adore; They will forgive, if thou with vows implore. But first know how thou shalt thy offering make. Foure of thy large, and best-fed bullocks take, Which now on tops of green Lycaeus use; As many of thy unbroke heifers choose, Then with great care for these foure Altars raise In the high Temples of the Goddesses: And from their throates let forth the sacred blood, Then leave their bodies in a shadie wood; And when the ninth Aurora brings the day, To Orpheus Ghost Lethaean Poppie pay, And a black sheep: then view the grove again Pleasing Eurydice with a fat Calf slain. He the Commands of's mother straight obey'd, Went to the temple, and foure Altars made: And foure of's largest bullocks forth he took; As many comely heisers never broke. And when the ninth day bright Aurora shew'd, He worships Orpheus, and the wood review d. A wonder not to be believ'd! he sees From the dissolved entrails swarms of Bees Which from the broken ribs, resounding flye, And in a thick cloud sallie to the skie. On a tall trees top-branch they cluster now, As grapes hang dangling on the gentle bow. Thus tillage, beasts, and trees, have been my theame, Whil'st mighty Caesar at Euphrates stream Thunders with war, and Conqueror Laws ordains For willing Realms, and heaven with valour gains. To mee sweet Capua breeding then imparts, Pleas'd with the study of contemned arts: There a bold youth, I chanted rurall aires, And Tityrus sung in cool shade free from cares.
THE FIRST BOOKE OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. JUNO a storme procures; the Trojans tost, By Neptune's favour gaine the Lybian coast: Venus Complaint. The King of Gods relates To her Romes greatnesse, and insuing fates. Hermes to Lybia sent. Venus appears, And in a mortall forme Aeneas chears. He visits Carthage, and lost ships regains. Dido the weary Trojans entertains. But whilst glad guests, full cups and banquets move, She takes a fatall draught, and drinks long love. I, That on small reeds once plaid rurall strains, And leaving woods, inforc'd the neighbouring plains To satisfie the greedy Villager, A gratefull worke for swains; now horrid war, Arms and the man I sing who first did come, Driven by fate, from Troy to Latium.
And Tyrrhen shores; Much toff'd by Land and Sea By wrath of Gods, and lasting enmity Of cruell Juno, suffering much by Wars Whiles he a Citie builds, and Gods transfers To Latium whence, Latine Originalls The Alban fathers, and Romes lofty walls. Say Muse the cause, what God prophan'd, or why Heaven's Queen incens'd, one fam'd for piety Did to such royles, dangers so great compell? What I can in heavenly minds such passions dwell? There was an ancient Citie. Carthage, south From Italie, opposing Tybers mouth, By Tyrians held: rich, fierce in War, vvhich place Iuno was said more than all lands to grace, Samos neglected, here her arms and here Her Chariot was, that this earths sway should beare (If Fates permit) she fosters and intends. But she had heard that from Troys stock descends A Progenie, should Tyrian Towr's deface: Hence of vast rule, in War a haughty race Must come from Lybias fall: so fates fore-told. This fearing. Juno minding Wars of old She for deare Argos first 'gainst Troy did wage; Her cruell griefe and causes of her rage Were still awake, deep Paris choice remain'd Fix'd in her breast, th' affront of forme disdain'd; And the loath'd stock: rapt Ganimed highly grac'd. With these more vext, on all shores Trojans cast, Reliques of Greeks and sterne Aeacides She far from Latium drove; round the vast Seas They wandred long inforc'd by various chance Such labour 'twas Romes Empire to advance. Scarce out of Sicilies view, their sailes they raise Glad, for the maine, and plough the foming Seas.
When Iuno thus, who nourish'd in her breast, Th' eternall wound; vanquish'd shall I desist? Nor yet this Trojan Prince from Latium turne Because the fates deny? could Pallas burne The Argive Fleet, and sinke them in the Sea For one mans crime, Ajas impietie? She cast Ioves winged lightning from a cloud, D'spers'd their Ships, with winds the Ocean plowd; Him breathing flame, his breast quite thorow struck With whirle-winds snatch'd, and on a sharpe rock stuck. But I heavens Queen, sister, and wife to Iove, So many years War with one nation move: And who will now Saturnias power obey, Or suppliant on our altars honours lay? Such things revolving, fir'd with discontent She to the Land of storms Aeolia went, Coasts big with tempests, Aeolus here confines In vast caves strugling gusts, and thundering winds In prison chains: they scorning their restraint, Round their darke dungeon roar with loud complaint. In a high tower, here scepter'd Aeolus swayes, Softens their furie, and their rage allaies, Else in their rapid course with them they'd beare, Sea, Land, high Heaven, and sweep them through the ayr. This fearing, them Iove in a cave imures. And under weight of mighty hils secures, Then did a King by firme decree ordaine, Who knowes to check, or when to give the reine. To whom thus Iuno then was suppliant. Aeolus (for Heavens great King to thee did grant, With wind the floods t' incense, or to appease) A race my foe now saile the Tyrrhen Seas, Bearing to Latium, conquer'd Gods and Troy. Raise thou a storme, and their crazde Fleet destroy,
Or through the waves their scatter'd bodies send. Twice seven most beauteous Nymphs on us attend, The fairest Deiopeia I will joyne To thee in wed-lock, dedicate her thine: Still to remaine for such especiall grace, And make thee father of a beauteous race. When Aeolus thus. 'Tis thy part to injoyne Commands, O'Queen, but to obey is mine. Thou in this realme and throne didst me invest, By thy means I with Iove and God, doe feast: Thou madst the storms and tempests me to feare. This said, the hollow mountaine with his speare He pierc'd ith side, winds as in mutinous bands Force their owne way, and thunder through the strands. They take the Sea, Eurus, and Notus raves, And stormie Africus from deepest caves Th' whole Ocean vext, tumbling vast waves to shore, Cries of men follow, shrowds and tackling tore: When from the Trojans sight, swift clouds restraine Heaven, and the day black night broods on the maine; It thunders, aire with frequent lightning shone; And all things menace quick destruction. Straight are Aeneas limbs dissolv'd with seare, He grones, and to the Stars his hands doth reare. Then said, most happy you, whose funerals Your Parents saw under the Trojan walls. Why was not I by thee, O Diomed slaine, Most valiant Greeian on the Dardan plaine? Why lost I not this life by that hand, where Hector the stout, fell by Achilles speare? Where great Sarpedon, where so many bould Heroes, shields, helmes, in Symois streams are rould. Then from the North a clamoring gust did rise Smote crosse their sailes, and waves advanc'd to skies.
Their oars are broke, about then comes the ship, And nigh ore-set, her sailes in water dip, A Mountaine breaking ore her weather side, Scoures all the deck: these a huge billow ride; Betweene the floods to them a yauning wave The bottome shewes, the sands with breaches rave. By South-winds drove on hidden Rocks three came, Rocks far from shore Italians altars name, Whose craggie shoulders range above the Sea; Eurus on sholes (a wofull sight) forc'd three, Bilg'd on the bancks, and stuck in beds of sands. One, true Orontes bore, and Lycian bands, In his owne view, a huge Sea from the North Breaks o're her sterne, the Master tumbled forth. Pitch'd on his head: but she thrice hurried round With a swift eddie in the Ocean drown'd. Some few appeare swimming on raging floods With arms of men oars, plancks, and Trojan goods. Ileoneus stout Ship now the tempest tore, Now bold Achates, next that Abas bore, Then old Alethes, through ript sides each takes In hostile waves, and founderd are with leaks. When Neptune th Ocean mix'd with horrid sound And the rais'd storme perceiv'd, from deeps profound Whole floods turn'd up: much mov'd from Sea did raise His favouring browes, and from high waves survaies: Driven through the Sea Aeneas Fleet he spies, With waves distrest, and furie of the skies: Nor Iunos fraud nor spleen to him was hid. Then Eurus Zephyre hailing, thus he chid. Have you such confidence of your high birth Without our License, Winds thus heaven and earth To mix, and dare you raise such hils as these? Which I—but floods inrag'd 'tis best to 'appease.
Nor shall I thus such crimes hereafter spare. Hasten your flight, these to your King declare. Not the Seas power, and mighty trident fell T' his lot, but mine; let him in huge rocks dwell Eurus thy house, in those courts Aeolus may Command, and in the winds close prison sway. Sooner then said he calmes the raging sea, Scatters thick clouds restores againe the day. The Ships Symothe did with Tryton raise And Neptune from sharpe rocks with's Trident weighs Opening vast Syrts, he calmes the raging tides, And with light wheels over the surface glides. As oft when a great people mutinie Ignoble vulgar rage; stones, firebrands flye, Furie finds arms; but if they chance to see A grave man meriting for pietie, All silent listning stand; he soone alaies With words the tumult, and their passion swaies. Thus ceast all fragor of the Sea, which when The father saw, carried through skies serene He his blest Chariot drives, and turnes his horse. To the next shores the Trojans bend their course, And weary to the Lybian confines glide. There was a place, far in, an Isle whose side Stretch'd made a port, which broke all stormes from Sea, And cuts it selfe into a land-lock'd bay. On each side mighty clifts, and two rocks were Threatning the skie, under whose tops a faire And quiet Sea; a trembling wood displaid Above, and darke groves gave a horrid shade. A cave was opposite with rocks o're growne, Within sweet springs, and seats of living stone, The Nymphs aboads: strest Ship within this sound Cable nere held, nor sharpe flook'd anchor bound.
Hither Aeneas vvith seven vessels bore, The rest now lost, much longing for the shore The Trojans make no little haste to land, And rest their Sea-sick bodies on the Sand. Then first Achates sparks strikes out of flint And feeds the fire with leaves, dry nourishment He next about the catching flame supplide. They wearied out, such as they had provide: Corne with salt water tainted, what they find, They dry with fire, and with a stone they grind. Meane while Aeneas climbs the rock, th' whole coast To Seaward views, if Anteus weather tost, Capys or any sayle he might discerne, Or Caicus arms upon his lofty sterne: But none appear'd. When on the shore three Deer, Feeding he spide, the whole heard following neer, And the long troop fed in the vales below. Aeneas stands takes his swift shafts, and bow, Faithfull Achates charge those weapons were, And first slew those who tallest heads did beare With branching crests, the vulgar then, and drove Th' whole heard with shooting to the leavie grove: Nor left till victor seven fat bucks he laid Dead on the ground, which his Ships number made. Returning then, these with his friends he shar'd: Wine good Acestes had in casks prepar'd, In Sicily, and gave his parting guests, The Prince divides: and chears their troubled breasts. Deare friends (for we have many sorrows past) You worse have felt, God these will end at last, You Scillas rage, and cliffes resounding wide Have past, and the Cyclopian rocks have tride. Courage recall, banish sad feare; delight It may hereafter these things to recite,
How through strange chances, through such dangers we To Latium bend, where blest seats destinie Fore-shews, where we Troys Realms may readvance: Live, and preserve yourselves for better chance. This said with weighty cares opprest, he feignes Hope in his face, within deep griefe restraines. They take the quarrie and prepare the feast; They streight unlace the Deer, and th' humbles drest, Some pieces cut, vvhich trembling spitted vvere, On shore some boylers place, and fire prepare, Strength they recruit vvith food, through the grasse spread They with fat venison, and old vvine are fed. Hunger alaid, and boards remov'd, much they Of lost friends talke, 'twixt hope and feare much say, If dead, and quite despair'd of, or alive, Most the good Prince doth for Orontes grieve, And Lycas and Amicus cruell fates, Cloanthus, Gyas much compassionates. When Iove from his aetheriall height survaies The fixed earth and navigable Seas, Shores, and spread nations, on heavens spire he stands And fix'd his eyes upon the Lybian strands. To him revolving in his breast such cares, Sad, having drown'd her sparkling eyes in teares Spak Venus. Thou, who by eternall Law Rul'st men and Gods, and dost vvith thunder avve. How could my sonne so highly thee displease? Or Trojans? vvho, suffering such miseries, In quest of Latium, loose the Vniverse. Hence Romans should arise in after yeares, Hence Lords should come from Teucers blood renevv'd, Who sea, and land should hold in servitude
Thou once didst grant, what changes thy decree? In Troys destruction this did comfort me, And sad, I fate with fate did counterpoise: Yet the like chance, the wretches still anoyes. What end great King grants thou to all their woes? Safe could Anteuor scape through Grecian foes, Pierce the Ilyrick straights, & inmost Realms Of the Lyburni, passe Timavus streams: Which like a Sea breaks nine wayes from a hill, And vvith loud vvaves doth the vast champaine fill. Yet here at length he did Patavium frame, Built Trojan seats, and gave to them a name, Then fix'd the Teucrian arms, and novv at ease Injoyes the blessing of a happy peace. But vve, thy race, heires to thy starry throne, Our ships being lost, are by the wrath of one Strangely opprest, and drove from Latiums shore, This vertues pay? thus dost thou Realms restore? The father of the Gods, and King of men, Smiling on her with such a looke, as when He clouds disperceth, and serenes the skies, Kissing his daughter, gently thus replies. Feare not my Cytherea, fates decree For thine stand fix'd, thou promis'd vvals shalt see Of strong Lavinium, and vvith high stars range Great sould Aeneas, my decrees not change. And since thou hast so much desire to knovv These things, the booke of fate Ile open novv: He shall great Wars in Latium vvage, subject Proud nations, Lawes impose, and wals erect, Three vvinters spent, and Rutilie ore-come Three springs shall see him crown'd in Latium. But young Ascanius, now Iulus, late Call'd Ilus, vvhilst great, Ilium held her State,
Shall reigne full thirty yeers, with moneths compleate, And from Lavinium shall transfer his seate; Then shall with mighty power long Alba reare. Here Hectors race must rule three hundred year; Till IIlia, Queen and Priestes shall bring forth Pregnant by Mars, at once a double birth. Then Romulus proud in's woolfe nurse yellow skin Shall gather men, and Martiall walls begin, And from his owne name stile the Roman race. To them no bounds of things, or times, or place, Power grant I without end; sterne June, here Who now earth, Seas, and skies, wearies with fear, Shall better counsels take, with us imbrace The Romans Lords of all, and the gownd race. Thus pleas'd: times come with sliding lusters, when Assaracus house shall make the high Mycene And Phthia tame, and ore proud Argos reigne, Then Trojan Casar springs of a faire straine, With Ses to bound his power, with Stars his fame, Julius, from great Julus, comes that name. Hee heap'd with Eastern spoyles shall be instald In heaven by thee, and shall with vows be cald. Fierce times then milder grow, wars laid aside: Old Faith, and Vesta, Romulus shall provide With Remus Lawes, suries dire gates shal bar With steele and brasse, within sits impious war On cruell arms, bound with a hundred chains, And horrid with a bloody mouth complaines. This said from heaven he Maias of-spring sends, That Carthage Lands, and new towers might as friends Trojans receive, lest Dido should deny Not knowing fates; he glides through ample sky, On fanning wings, and streight touch'd Lybian shores; His charge perform'd; mild grow the barbarous Moores
A God commanding first the Queen exprest, Calme thoughts to Trojans, and a bounteous breast. But many cares that night the Prince revolves, And with the dawne to search strange coasts resolves, On what shores driven by winds, by whom possest (For Lands he saw until'd) if man or beast. Which done to tell his friends, the Fleet did lie Vnder a hollow clift: from any eye, Obscur'd by trees, which gave a horrid shade: Only Achates his companion made. In his hand shaking two broad pointed Spears. When his faire mother in the grove appears; A Virgins face, and dresse, so Virgins be Of Sparta arm'd, or such Harpalice Who horses tir'd, and Hebrus could out-goe. For th' huntresse as the use, a handsome bow Wore at her back her haire expos'd to winds, Bare kneed, a knot her flowing garment binds. And first she said, young-men declare if yee Did this way any of my sisters see, With quivers guirt, they spotted linx-skins weare, Or chacing of the foaming boare did heare. Thus Venus said, then Venus sonne replide. None of thy sisters we, nor heard or spide: But who art thou, thy looks not mortall be, Nor humane voice, some Goddesse certainlie, Or Phoebus sister, or a Nymph you are. Be blest what e're; and say, to ease our care In what strange clime, on what coast we are throwne, We wander here, the place and men unknown, Drove by vast floods and winds, by this hand shall Before thy altars many offerings fall.
Then Venus said, too great such honours are For me, a quiver Tyrian Virgins beare, And to their calves bind purple buskins neat. Carthage thou seest, Tyrians Agenors seate; But Lybick coasts, nations by war unbroke. Dido reigns here, who Tyrian realms forsooke Flying her brother: long the injuries are, And circumstance, but things thus briefly were. Sychaeus was her Lord, his wealth beyond All Tyre, and she of him extreamly fond. To whom her father did espouse a maid With solemne rites, but Tyre Pigmalion swaide, Her brother who in wickednesse exceeds All those whom fury stirs to impious deeds. He blind with love of gold, Sychaeus too Secure, in secret at the altars slew: Sure of her love, he hides the fact, much feignes And a sick Lover with vaine hope detains. To her in sleep, her Lord unburied now Appears, raising a wondrous gastly brow: The altars shews, and's breast run through with steele, Did all close mischiefe of her house reveale; Perswades her leave the Land, with speed to fly, Where hidden treasure should her want supply In gold and silver a nuge masse, declar'd. Dido thus mov'd, both flight, and friends prepar'd: Those who did hate or feare the Tyrant, meet; And suddenly they seize a ready Fleet And lade with gold greedy Pigmalions coine Transport: A woman chiefe of the designe, Came to these parts where now huge wals, and new Towers of aspiring Carthage, thou mayst view: Call'd Byrsa from the bargaine, so much ground Bought, as a Buis hide might incompas't round.
But who are you? vvhence come? or whether goe? To her inquiring, he surcharg'd with woe From a full breast drew these. Should I recall O Goddesse things from their originall, And would you heare the annals of our woes? Vesper would first day in Olympus close. We from old Troy (by chance if to your eare Troys name hath come) through divers Seas did steere, A storme now drove us on the Lybian shore. I am Aeneas, who from enemies bore My Gods with me aboard, my fame above The stars is knowne, and sprung from mighty Iove, A race I seeke, and native Italie: I twice ten ships launch'd to the Phrygian Sea, What course my goddesse mother did ordaine, And fates, I have observ'd; scarce seven remaine, By waves and tempests craz'd: unknown, and poore Driven from Europe, and the Asian shore, I wander Lybick, wilds. Here Venus brake Off his sad tale, and interrupting spake. Who ere thou art, I judge that thou surviv'st Deare to the Gods, at Carthage who ariv'st. Therefore goe on, to the Queens Court repaire; For I, thy friends and fleet return'd, declare, And with chang'd Northerne winds to safety brought, Else me in vaine fond Parents augurie taught. Lo! twice six Swans in a glad company Ioves bird pursued through the Aetherial sky In Heavens broad tracks: now earth in a long traine They seeme to take or taken to disdaine; As they returne with sounding wings they sport, And Heaven surrounding, in a song consort. Just so, I say, thy friends and fleet have gain'd The Port, or with full sayls the Bay obtain'd.
Therefore goe on (she said) as leads the way, And turning did her rosie neck display, When her Ambrosian haire a heavenly sweet Breaths from her head, robes flow beneath her feet, Her Gate a Godesse shewes. He when he knew His Mother, thus, her flying did pursue. Why cruell too dost thou so oft deceive Thy sonne with feigned shapes? may we not give Right hands? heare reall stories, and reply? Thus blaming her, he to the wals drew nigh. But Venus them in obscure ayre did shrowd. The Goddesse vaild them in a mighty cloud; Lest any touch, est any them discerne, Or move delay, or cause of coming learne. She flies to Paphos, visits her own seat: Where in her fane a hundred altars sweat With Easterne Gums, and with fresh Garlands smoake. Then they the path, which most invited took. Now they ascend a hill, which much the town Ore tops, and looks on adverse Bulwarks down. The Prince admires the Pile, once cotages, Admires the Port, the paved streets and noyse. The Trojans worke, some lay foundations For wals, and towers, others rowle mighty stones, These draw out grounds, and with a trench inclose; Lawes, Magistrates, a holy Senate chose. Some make a Port, and these a great worke drew For Theaters, from rocks vast Pillars hew, High ornaments the future Sceans t'adorne, As Bees through flowrie meads i'th'sunny morn Worke in the spring, when hopefull youth they traine, Or when they stive their sweet, and liquid gaine, And with the purest Nectar stretch the Hive, Or ease the laden, or imbatteld drive
The Drones, a sloathfull cattell from the Cels. Worke heats, of thyme the fragrant honey smels. Blest men whose wals now rise, Aeneas said, And their high towers admiring, then survaid: Wrapt in a cloud (most wondrous) he walks in With people mix'd, and was of no man seene. Amidst the towne was a sweet shadie Grove, Where first with winds, and waves, the Paente drove An omen dig'd, which royall Iuno sent: A horse his head, which shew'd they eminent Should be in war, and still in wealth abound: Here Iuno's Fane did Tyrian Dido found, Wealthy with presents, and the Goddesse grace: Brasse Portals mount, with steps, and beams of brasse, And the joyn'd hinges rung vvith brazen Gates. First in this grove nevv objects mitigates His feare; here safety first Aeneas dares To hope, and better trust to sad affairs. Waighting the Queen, whilst there he all did see, Whilst he admires, vvhat the tovvns chance might be, The artists emulous hand, and works so rare, He savv in order all the Trojan War. War famous novv through the vvhole Vniverse: Atrides, Priam, and Achilles fierce To both: he vveeping then Achates said, What Realmes hath not our vvoe replenished? Lo! Priam here, revvard here vertue finds; Troy teares, and humane sufferings pittying minds, Feare not he said this same may helpe our need, Then did his fancie on vaine Pictures feed, Much griev'd his face vvith a large streame he drovvn'd, When he beheld hovv Trey beleaguerd round, Here Grecians fly, and Hector presses on, Achilles charges there, and Trojans run.
Neer this he Rhesus snowie tents survaid Weeping, his men in their first sleepe betraid, Bloody Tydides with great slaughter wasts, And to his campe the fiery horses hasts, Ere they dranke Xanthus, on Troys Pastures graz'd. Poore Troilus disarm'd, here flyes amaz'd; Too weake for thee Achilles back-wards flung Drag'd with his horse, by the empty Chariot hung, Holding the reines, earth soyles his neck and haire, Scribling the dust with his inverted speare. When the Ilian dames with flowing tresses went To unpleas'd Pallas fane, and robes present, Beating their breasts, sad in the humblest guise: But the angry Goddesse fix'd on earth her eyes. Achilles round Troys walls drag'd Hector thrice, And gold for his pale corps he made the price. Then a deep sigh he from his breast did send. When he the corps, spoyles, chariot of his friend, And Priam saw, vvhen unarm'd hands he rears. He knowes himselfe mix'd vvith the Grecian Peers, Knew Easterne squadrons, and black Memnons arms; Penthiselea raging midst alarms Her crescent sheelded Amasons brought on, Her naked breast guirt with a golden zone, Amidst the thickest bands she chargeth then, And the bould virgin dares encounter men. Whilst on these things the Dardan Prince did looke, And much admiring with the object tooke; Then with a guard, Queen Dido, the most faire, To she high Temple did in state repaire. Such on Eurotas banks, or Cynthus meades, Shewes bright Diana, when she dances, leads A thousand mountaine Nymphs on every side, Her golden quiver at her shoulders tide. Walking she all the Goddesses excels, Whilst joy Latonas silent besome svvels:
Such Dido was, so cheerfully she went Hastning the works, and future government, In Juno's porch, the temples mid-arch, round Guarded with arms on high she sate inthron'd; A woman gave men Lawes, and tasks assignes In equall portion, or by lot injoynes. When streight Aeneas did with throngs behold Anteus, Sergestus, and Cloanthus bold; And other Trojans, which the black storm bore And waves dispers'd unto a distant shore. Both were amaz'd, and both at once admire, 'Twixt joy and feare, to joyne right hands desire: But troubled with the unknown chance they shrowd, Listning Spectators in a hollow clowd. What fortune happen'd to his friends, and where They lest their Fleet, what chance had brought them there, For to beg quarter, from each ship were sent Choice men; who clamouring to the Temple went. After admission, and free audience had, Undiscompos'd bold Ileonus said. Great Queen whom Jove did grant new seats to build, Pleas'd that proud Nations to thy sway should yeeld. We tempest-beaten Trojans, thee desire To save our Navie from consuming fire. And neerer view our cause; the pious spare. Nor brought we to the Libick confines war, Nor come to drive rich preys: vanquish'd long since We lost such courage, and such insolence. There is a place the Greeks Hesperia stilc, An antient warlike Land, a fertile soyle, B'Aenotrians tild'; Posteritie they fame Since call'd it Italie, for their Princes name, Hither we steer'd,
When straight Oryon with a storme did rise, And us with furious Auster did surprise, And on the rocks with conquering billowes bore; A few of us swom hither to your shore. What a strange Nation's this? what barbarous land Such customes use? the hospitable strand We are denyd, by force prohibited Upon the margents of your coasts to tread. Aeneas was our King, for pietie, Justice, and prowesse, non more great then he. Which man if fates preserve, if yet he breath, If cruell shades receive him not in death? You need not feare, nor shall you e're repent That you did us in courtesie prevent. We have in Cicilie, Cities, Arms, and Lands, Where great Acestes, sprung from Troy, commands. That we draw up our Navie condiscend, To rigg them new, tackling, and oars to mend. That if our King, and friends be found, then we May steere our course with joy for Italie, And Latium seek. But if no help be found, And thou best Trojan Princei'th' tempest drown'd; Nor of Ascanius hope; Sicanian roads, Whence we sail'd hither, and prepar'd aboads, Old King Acestes, we at last shall finde. I leoneus said; the Trojans with one minde Gave full applause. Then Dido briefe and modestly declares. O Trojans feare not, and seclude your cares: To settle our new State we find so hard, That we our consines are inforc'd to guard. Of Trojans who? of Troy who ignorant are! Those Worthies, Valour, fury of that War?
Tyrians are not so dull, nor yet the Suns Chariot so distant from our City runs. Seek you great Italie, Saturnian lands, Or Erix shores, the King Acestes strands: I'le safe disinisse you, and supply your want. Will you alike with us, this City plant? This town I build is yours; your ships forsake, 'Twixt Tyrians, Trojans, I'le no difference make. Would the same wind had hither brought your Prince, But I will issue forth Commands from hence, That he be sought through all the Lybian coast, Should he in Desarts be, or Cities lost. Achates, and the King, with these words fir'd Long since, to break the gloomy clowd desir'd. Then bold Achates to Aeneas said, Great Goddesse son, what doubts may now disswade: Thy friends, and ships, all safe thou seest, but one Which in our sight, the raging Seas did drowne: All sutes thy mothers words. Scarce these he said, When suddenly the circumsused shade Purg'd to thin aire, and forth Aeneas stood, His garb, his face, and person like a God. Venus had trim'd his haire, youths beauty dyes His cheeks, she breath'd glad honours on his eyes. So Ivory grac'd by art, so Silver would, Or Parian marble shew, set in pure gold. And sudden unexpected did appeare; Then to the Queen. I, whom you seeke am here, Trojan Aeneas scap't the Lybick Seas. O thou alone, pittying our miseries! Who us Greeke reliques, spent, by various fates Of land and sea, thou joyn'st associates To thee, and thine: we, nor all Dardans straine Through great earth scatter'd can require againe,
The Gods (if there be any Providence, Or Justice, will the pious recompence) Sure must reward thee. O! what age of worth, What so great Parents, such as thee brought forth? Whiles convex'd hills have shadows, to the maine Whilst rivers run, whilst poles the stars sustaine, Thy honour; name, and same, shall last, what land So-ever me invites. Then his right hand I lioneus takes, his left Sergestus meets, Bold Gyas, stout Cloanthus; all he greets. At the first sight Dido was much dismaid, And wondring at so strange a story, said; What dangerous fate pursued thee Goddesse son, What forc'd thee, on these Barbarous shores to run? Art thou Aeneas whom faire Venus bare Neer Symois streams, Dardan Anchises heire? Teucer I call to mind expel'd his land To Sidon came, did Belus aid demand New Realms to gain: my father then subdu'd Cyprus, and conquerour held in servitude. Since then I understood the Trojan fate, Thy name, and every Graecian Potentate. He though a foe your valour did commend, And said himself, did from your stock descend. Therefore bold Trojans to our Court advance; We in such dangers tost, and various chance At length our selves did in this countrey plant, I know t'help others, taught by my own want. Then she Aeneas to the Court conveys, And the Gods honours on the altars payes, Next to the shores twenty fat beeves she sends, With them a hundred swine to feast his friends; And with the ews as many fatned lambs, With wine, Lyaeus joy,
But all within with royall pomp was grac'd. And midst the Hall a stately feast they plac'd. Wrought carpets with proud scarlet did infold Huge silver tables, where was grav'd in gold Her Grandsires acts in a long series stood Drawn from so many Princes of the blood. The King (for love paternall never sleeps) Sent down in hast Achates to the ships, To tell this to Ascanius, then repaire With him to Court, who was his fathers care. To bring gifts sav'd from Troy the long robe which Was purl'd with gold, and with imbroideric rich, A vail, the edge with bright Acanthus wrought; Fair Hellens dresse, which, she from Argos brought To Troy, and fatall marriages set forth; Her mother Laedas gift of wondrous worth. The Scepter too which once Ilion bore, Priams first daughter, the Pearl-chain she wore And Coronet, with gold and jemmes inchac'd. For these Achates to the Fleet did haste. But Venus now new arts, new counsells took; That Cupid should like young Ascanius look, And in the furious Queen he might inspire The flames of love, and pierce her bones with fire. Double tongu'd Tyrians, doubtfull house she fears: Fierce Juno frights, with night increast her cares. Therefore to winged love she briefly said, Deare son, my strength deare son, my chiefest aid, Who only sleights great Jave's Typhoan fire, I fly to thee, suppliant thy aid require. Thou knowst thy brother my Aeneas hath Felt on all Lands and Seas firce Juno's wrath,
And of our sorrow hadst as great a sence. Him Dido courts, and stayes with blandishments. Junonian entertainments I suspect, Nor she so great occasion will neglect. Therefore I plot first to deceive, and bind The Queen with flames, lest some power change her mind, That she with me Aeneas love involve. Which to effect, know this is my resolve. The Royall boy for Carthage do's prepare By his dear Father call'd: my greatest care Brings gifts preserv'd from Troyes flame and the deep. In high Cytherum him Ile cast asleep, And in Idalium's sacred mansions lay; Left he appearing should our plot betray. Assume his form onely one nights short space; Use art, a boy put on a boyes known face, That when glad Dido hugs thee at her lap At royall feasts, crown'd with the cheering grape. When she imbracing, shall sweet kisses give, Inspire hid flame, with deadly bane deceive. His mother love obeys, his wings he leaves And joyfully Ascanius garbe receives, But Vnus through Julus limbes distills Sweet sleep, and bears to the Idalian hills, And in soft Marjerom the boy she layd. Whose flowers imbrac'd him with a pleasant shade. But Cuptd then his mothers will obey'd, Bore gifts to Carthage, and Achates led. When he came in, the Queen was plac'd in state On golden beds, and in the mid'st she sate. Aeneas, and the Trojan Captains met, And raised high, they on spread scarlet set. The servants water bring and serv'd up bread, In chargers; some neat fringed towels spread.
And fifty Dames to serve the bill of fare, Had charge within, and Inscence to prepare. A hundred more, with youth of like age, grac'd Tables with dishes, and the goblets plac'd. Through joyfull halls in throngs the Tyrians prest, Commanded on imbrodered couches rest. Aeneas gifts th'admire, Julus prais'd, At th'Gods bright looks, and feigned words amaz'd: The robe, and curious yaile, they much commend. But Dido destin'd to a wofull end, Could not be satisfi'd, burning at the sight The Boy and presents equally delight. Aeneas neck when he imbracing held And the great love of a wrong Father fil'd, He Courts the Queen; she strange affection shews, Fixing her eyes, lays in her lap; nor knows What God betrai'd a wretch; but Cupid is Mindfull of Venus, blotting by degrees Sychaeus out, and tries with lively love Fix'd thoughts, and resolutions to remove. After the feast was ended, all tooke downe, They mighty goblets place, and Bacchus crowne. The ample Pallace rung with noyses mix'd, And shining lamps to golden roofes were fix'd: Bright torches vanquish the dark night with fires. Here, rich with jems, and gold, the Queen requires A bowle with wine, which Belus us'd, and all From Belus sprung, then silence through the hall. O Jove (for thou giv'st lawes to every guest) To Tyrian, Trojans let this day be blest, And still observ'd by our posteritie: Glad Bacchus and good Juno, present be, You favouring Tyrians keep this feast, she said. And flowing honour on the table paid.
Then having gently kist the swelling cup Gav't Bitias, he the full gold soon turns up, And drench'd himselfe in the overflowing draught. Next other Peers: What greatest Atlas taught On's golden harpe, long hair'd Iopas playes, Sols labours, and the moons, inconstant wayes, Whence man and beasts, whence showers, and lightning sprung, Wet kids, Arturus, Northern bears, he sung. Why winters suns haste so to touch the maine, And what delaies the tardie might restraine. Tyrians, and Trojans, praise with one consent. But the slovv night, unhappy Dido spent In various discourse; and long love quast: Oft asks of Priam, and of Hector oft, Novv in vvhat arms, Aurora's off-spring came, Of Diomeds horse, now of Achilles same. My guest from first originall relate Greeks trecheries (she said) and your own fate, And wandrings since, for now seaven years hath tost You on all shores, and drove to every coast.
THE SECOND BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. APollo's priest the Trojan horse assailes. Sinons false storie, with seigned tears, prevailes. Laocoon and his sonnes by serpents slame. The horse drawn in, the Greeks return againe. The City taken by their stratageme. Aeneas riseth from a troubled dreame, And gathers aid; resistance makes in vaine; The Pallace burnt, Polites, Priam slaine. Through sword, and fire, Veuus her son convaies. Glad Omens raise Anchises from delaies. Creusa lost, Aeneas from Troys sack, Ascends mount Ide, his father on his back. ALl silent, and with deep attention sate: Then thus the Prince spake from his bed of State. Unheard-of grïefs great Queen, you bid renew: How Troys unhappy Realm the Greeks o're-threw;
Whose sad destruction I my self have seen, And in her losse have no small sharer been. Which of the Dolops, Myrmidons, or fierce Ulysses souldier, such things to rehearse Could tears refrain? and now the dewie night s almost spent, rest setting stars invite: But if that you desire our chance to know, And briefe would hear, Troys finall overthrow: Though at the thought such horror I within My wounded soule concerve yet, Ile begin. Broken by war now many sliding years, And forc'd by fate; at length the Graecian Peers A horse frame like a mountain, by divine Minerva's art, the sides with wrought firre joyne. They for return feigne vowes; wide spreads that fame, Here secretly by lot, in the darke frame, Choice men th'inclose, and full the Caverns large, And the huge bellie, with arm'd Souldiers charge. In sight lay Tenedos, the Ile well knowne By fame, and rich whilst Priam held the Crowne: Now but a bay, to Ships a faithlesse rode. Here they arriv'd, in desart shores abode. We thought them gone, and for Mycene steer'd: Therefore all Troy from her long griefe was cleer'd, Gates opend, to behold Greeke Camps they joyd, To visit coasts forsooke, and places voyd. Here Dolops, fierce Achilles there abode, Here they joyn'd battell, there the Navie rode. Some wonder at chast Pallas gift, accurst, And the huge horse admire. Thymetes first Bids draw't within the wall, place in the fane, Either by fraud, or such Troys fates ordaine. But Capys, and the graver heads, advise Those gifts suspected, and Greeke treacheries
To drown i'th' Sea, and in the flames consume, Or vast caves pierce, and trie the hollow wombe. Th' inconstant route, in sides divided be. Laocoon first, with a great companie From a high tower ran chafing: then from far. What madnesse this? thinke you Greeke presents are Without deceit? believe the foe is gone? O wretched men, is thus Ulysses known. Either in this inclosed Graecians hide, Or 'gainst our walls this Engine they provide To view our houses, and the towne to force: Some deceit lurks, Dardans trust not this Horse, What ere it is, Greeks bringing gifts I feare. This said, with huge strength he a mighty speare At the beasts side, and crooked belly flung: Trembling it fix'd, the mighty Caverns rung, The Bulke being struck, and hollow, grown within. Had fate so pleas'd, had we not senslesse been, He had Argolick dens with steele constrain'd: Now Troy had stood, and Priams high Towers remain'd. Behold! mean while the Dardan Sheep-heards bring One bound with mighty clamours to the King. Who unknowne, fieely yeelds, this plot to lay, That he the towne might to the Greeks betray. Bold, and prepar'd for both, or to procure His ends, or most assured death indure. From all parts joyn'd, the youthfull Trojans flock, Glad to behold, by turnes the captive mock. Receive Greeks treacheries now; and from one crime Learn all. For as amidst, troubled, disarm'd he stands, And casts his eyes round on the Phrygian bands. Ah what land now, or what sea entertaines A wretch (he said) for poore me what remains?
Who have no place in Greece, Trojans incens'd Expect with blood, now to be recompenc'd. With which complaint our minds are chang'd, all rage Comprest, we bid him tell his Parentage. What news: how they might trust him captive made, Then casting off all fear at length he said. All truths what ere, to thee great King will I Confesse, nor that I am a Greeke deny; This first: though cruell fortune Synon hath Made wretched thus, she cannot false of faith. If you have heard of Palamedes name, From Belus sprung, his glory great by fame, Whom innocent, falsly the Greeks accus'd And by strange law, because he war refus'd Condemn'd to die, and him now dead lament. Hither at first, me my poore father sent In arms with him companion, neere of blood. Whilst safe he was at home, and his realms stood By counsell; we, bore also name, and state. But afterward by slie Ulysses hate, I speak things known, he to the pale shades went, Griev'd, I my life in woe, and darknesse spent; And mourn'd alone losse of my injur'd friend. Nor soolish held my tongue, what chance attend, If native Greece I ere touch conqueror, I vow'd revenge; with words, sharp malice stir. Hence my first woes; hence Ithacs gave out New crimes to fright, spreads 'mongst the vulgar rout Ambiguous words, conscious plots new designes: Nor rests till Chalcas in his project joynes — Why triviall things recount I thus in vain? Wherefore delay? if all the Graecian strain You in one listesteem? enough is told? Now let me suffer, this Ulysses would,
This with much treasure would Atrides buy. Then we grow earnest, to know how or why: Of such plots ignorant, and Pelasgian art. Who trembling thus proceeds with feigned heart. To raise their siege the Graecians oft desir'd, And Troy forsake by flight, with long war tir'd. (And would they had) whom ready, storms at Sea Did oft shut in, and rough winds terrifie. But more since we with ample beams did forme This horse, all heaven did thunder vvith a storme. Perplex'd, to th'Oracle, Euryphilus We sent, who these sad answers brought to us. The winds you first appeas'd with virgin blood, When first for Trojan shores, you Grecians stood: With blood you must, and a Greeke sacrifice Gain your return. When through the Camp this flies, Amazed through their bones shot trembling feare, Whom Phoebus meant, for whom such fates prepare. Ulysses here, with great stir, mid'st the bands From Prophet Calchas, asks the Gods Commands. Th'artists dire plot, many did to me Foretell, and wisely did the event foresee. Silent ten dayes, he cunning did refuse Any to name, and the sad Victime choose: At last, forc'd by Ulysses clamors, he Breaks silence, and to th'altars destins me. They all assent, what each himself did feare, Turn'd to the ruine of one wretch, they beare. Now came the fatall day, rites are design'd, Salt fruit they bring, my browes with garlands bind. I grant, I broke my bonds, fcapt death by flight, And hid with reeds, in a foule lake all night I lay: till they set saile, if so they would. No hope is left my Country to behold,
Sweet Children, or deare father now, which may For my escape be cal'd, sad mulcts to pay, And my crime expiat with their own death. You by the gods, by sacred truth, by faith Inviolate, I pray (if any be 'Mongst mortalls yet) pitty my miserie, Pitty a wretch so great injustice beares. We grant both life, and pitty, to his teares. And Priam first his mannacles to ease And chains Commands; and courteously said these. Who ere thou art, forget the Graecians gone: Thou shalt be ours; but now these truths make known, Why plac'd they this huge horse? who authours are? What would they? sacred i'st, or worke of war? Then skil'd in arts, and Graecian treacheries, His hands unbound he raiseth to the skies. Eternall fires, you powers from violence free, Altars, dire swords I scap'd, my witnesse be, And the Gods wreaths, which me your offering crown'd: Now from our sacred oath I am unbound, Now I may hate the Greeks, and all things hid Disclose; nor hath our Countreys lawes forbid. If thou keep promise, if thou Troy prove true, If truths, if great things I repay to you. The Greeks chiefe hopes, and confidence was laid Since first this war begun, in Pallas aid. But since that impious Diomed conjoyn'd With Ithacus, who all curst plots design'd, Fatall Palladium from the sacred fane Entring they snatch'd, the high towers warders flaine, Tooke the blest image, and with bloody hand Rudely the virgin fillets then prophan'd, The Graecian hopes ran backward, and declind. Broken their strength a verse the Goddesse mind.
Nor gave she fignes by doubtfull prodigies: Scarce plac'd within our campe, her burning eyes Shine with bright flames; and from her body flows Salt sweat, and wondrous, thrice from ground she rose, Bearing her target, and her trembling speare. Calchas cries streight, to Sea they must repaire, Nor Graecian arms, should conquer Troy, unlesse The Omens, and the Power return to Greece, Which they with them to Sea in vast keels brought. Native Micene now with faire winds is sought. Arms, Gods, and friends, prepar'd; remeasuring Seas Soone they returne: thus Calchas ordered these. This, being advis'd, they for Palladium left, For th'injur'd Power, to expiate the theft. This mighty frame, Calchas bid reare so high, And ribd with oke commands to touch the skie, Lest it within your ports, or walls attaine, Lest her old love, it should your Nation gaine. But if Minerva's gift you violate, Great woes (which may the Gods on them translate) The Phrygians shall, and Priams Realms attend. But by your hands if this your feats ascend, Asia 'gainst Greece, shall mighty wars maintaine, And for our off-spring, shall those fates remaine. Thus perjur'd Sinons craft, beliefe prepares, And vanquish'd those, with fraud, and feigned tears, Whom neither Diomed, Achilles, nor A thousand Ships could tame, nor ten years war. But now a chance fell out of greater dread, And their distracted minds astonish'd. In stead of Neptunes priest the annuall due A bull Laocoon at the Altar slew.
Behold from Tenidos, two huge Serpents came, (I shake to mention) through calme Seas they swam, And took the deep: to shore at once they bend, Their breasts erected, bloody necks extend Above the floods, their sterns divide the maine, Winding long backs, with a voluminous traine. The fomie brine resounds, to shore they came, Their burning eyes speckled with blood, and flame, And bissing mouths lick with a brandish'd tongue. Pale at the sight we fly: they march along, Laocom seeke; and first the slonder wast Of his two Sons the winding Snakes imbrac'd, And on the childrens wretched members fed. Next him, for aide with weapons furnished They seiz'd; bind with huge spires: and now twice could About his waste, twicescaly backs infold His neck, above his head tall creasts they reare. With both his hands he strives those knots to teare, And with foule blood; and gore his garlands dies, And to the Stars at once rais'd horrid cries. So rores a hurt Bull, having Altars fled, And the incertain axe shooke from his head. But the two Serpents to the high Fane went, And crawling to sterne Pallas temple bent: Under the Goddesse feet, and targe hide. Then through our trembling breasts strange terrors glide, The Trojans say, Laocoon had his due, Who at the sacred Oke his javlin threw, And at the side did cast an impious speare. All cry to sacred seats the image beare, And on the Goddesse call. We break our Rampiers, and our Walls divide, All ply the worke, cords to the neck are tide,
Wheeles to the feet, the fatall frame aspires, Pregnant with arms, boyes, virgins, round in Quires Chaunt sacred hymns, and touch the ropes with joy. It goes, and inennacing it enters Troy. O Country, Troy, where Gods once masions found; And, O you Dardan walls, in war renound! Foure times in th'entrance of the gates it hung; Foure times within the clash of harnesse rung: Yet we, blind, senselesse, draw with all our power The unhappy monster, to the sacred tower. Cassandra then, these future fates foretold, Whom Trojans ne're believ'd, so Phoebus would. Poore we to whom that day must be the last, Each where, with festive bows, the temples grac'd. But now the heavens were turn'd; night rose from Seas, Shading earth, skies, and Grecian treacheries. Trojans dispearc'd lay silent on the walls, And deep sleep on their wearie bodies falls. And now in Ships prepar'd the Argive band From Tenedos saile, and steere the well-known strand, Following by friendly silence of the Moone The Admiralls light: Synon forewarnd, as soone (Sav'd by ill fates) frees, from a dore of Pines The Greeks inclos'd; whom now the horse resignes To the fresh aire: glad, from the hollow oke, Tisandrus, Sthenelus, fierce Ulysses broke, Athamas, Thoas, Pyrrhus, Machaon, And Menelaus, by long ropes slide downe, With Epeus, who the engine did designe. Th'invade the town, buried in sleep, and wine, The watch was slain, and they by open gates Receive their friends, and joyn to their known mates. It was the time, first sleep the weary soule Possest, and heavens best gift on mortalls stole.
Behold! most sadly Hector then appears To me in sleep, shedding abundant tears: Drag'd at a chariot, black with bloody dust As e'rst, and through his swoln feet reines were thrust. Ah! how much chang'd, how from that Hector, whom Achilles spoyles once grac'd, returning home. Or darting Phrygian fire, on th' Argive Fleet. Squallid his beard, his haire with blood concrete, Bearing those wounds, those many, ne're Troys wall, He had receiv'd, weeping I seeme to call The man, and thus sad speeches did commence. O Dardan light! O Troys chiefe confidence! Why such delayes? O Hector from what coast Com'st thou desir'd? that thee, so many lost, After such labours, of the town, and men, Weary we view: what sad chance thy serene Looks hath defil'd? or why those wounds view I? But he to vain demands made no reply. But fetching deep from's breast a heavy grone Ah flie, he said, from fire scape Venus sonne. Troys high towers sinke, the walls the Graecians have. Enough for her, and Priam, could strength fave Ilium, this hand had sav'd her; and now she Her sacred things, and Gods commends to thee, Take these companions of thy fates, with these Build a great City, having past the Seas. This said, he wreaths, and mighty Vesta brought, And fires eternall from her sacred vault. Mean while with various cries the walls resound, And more and more (although in shady ground My fathers house remote obscurely lay) Loud noyse drawes neer, and clashing arms dismay. I shake off sleep, and mount the battlement With speedy steps, and stood with ears intent.
As when with rough winds, fire, in standing corne, Or mountaine floods, with a rapt torrent borne, Drounds the ranckorn and meads, toyles of the oxe, Woods head-long sweeps: amaz'd, on lofty rocks, The shepheard ignorant, receives the sound. Then faith was manifest, and Greeks treason found. Deiphobus ample frames now overturns By Vulcans rage and next Ucaligon's burns, With fire now shine the broad Sigean Baies, The trumpets sound, men higher clamors raise. Mad I take arms, arm'd voyd of counsell, then To aid the tower, with friends to gather men My bosome burns: rage, fury, judgement charms; And we conceive it brave to dye in arms. Panthus, behold! escap'd the enemies, Apollo's priest, Panthus Otriades, Bearing things sacred, vanquish'd gods, he led His Nephew, and toth' shore distracted fled. How stand things Panthus? what fort doe we hold? Scarce said. with a deep sigh thus much he told. The last dayes come, Troys unavoided date; Trojans we were, Troy was, and the high state Of Troy hath been: Jove, cruell, all to Greece Transfers, and Greeks the burning town possesse. That horse within the walls, that mighty frame Powres forth arm'd men, bold Synon stirs the flame Insulting others open gates possesse, So many thousands never came from Greece. Some on both sides the narrow passes guard, And drawn swords shining stand, to kill prepar'd. The watches of the out-workes they invade, Who in disorder weake resistance made. With Panthus words, and ayd of Gods I passe Through flames, through arms, where sad Erynnis was.
Where sorrow calls, and clamours heaven ascend. Ripheus, old Iphitus, companions joynd, By Moon-light brought, Dymas, and Hypanis, Throng to our side, and young Migdonidis, Who in those dayes by chance to Ilium came, Whom with fond love, Cassandra did inflame. The haplesse son brought Troy and Priam aid, But prophesies of the inspired maid Did not regard. Yet when I saw a fight they durst maintain, Bold youth, I said, your valour is in vain, To save the burning town, if you desire To meet your certain death, bravely t'expire; You see the chance; those kept this Realm, our Gods Their altars have forsook, and blest abodes; Then let's incounter death, fall bravely on, Vanquish'd mens safety is to hope for none. Our youth being thus inrag'd, as in dark night Wolves ravening hunt, spur'd by fierce appetite, Their whelps being left, wait with dry jawes; so we Through weapons rush, rush through the enemie To certain death, and through the City made, Black night surrounding with a hollow shade. Who can the cruell funeralls of that night Declare? with equall tears those woes recite? Th'old City falls, potent so many years: In every street, flaughter in heaps appears, Bodies in houses, sacred temples, thrown. Nor did the Trojans suffer death alone, The vanquished their courages recall, And now the Graecian conquerors doe fall: In all parts cruell grief, in all parts feare, And various shapes of death was every where.
Androgeus first of all, the Greeks came up To us, and follow'd with a mighty troop, He unadvised for his friends did take, And first with courteous language freely spake. Hast sirs, O sloathfull, what delayes you thus Whilst others ransack, burning Pergamus, March you but now, from the tall fleet? (this said) And straight (for we but doubtfull answers made) Perceives himself ingag'd, amidst his foes, And with the word astonisht backward goes, As one who on a Serpent 'mongst sharp briers Treads unawares, and frighted straight retires From his rais'd wrath, and purple swelling head; So at the sight Androgeus frighted fled. We fiercely charge, and round about them drew; Amaz'd, and ignorant of the place orethrew: And fortune did, this our first service aid. Here heightned with successe Chorabus said, O friends, where our first fortune way hath shewn For safety take, as she directs let's on. Let us change shields, in Graeoian armour go; Who fraud or valour questions in a foe? These shall give arms, thus saying he assumes Androgeus glittering shield and crested plumes; And fits an Argive sword unto his thigh. This Ripheus. Dymas, all the company: Each arm'd himself in recent spoilcs with joy, Then mix'd with Greeks, wanting our Deity, And through nights gloomy shades, oft on we fell, And many a Graecian soul we sent to hell. Some fly to th' Ships, and swift to safe shores bend, Others with base fear struck, again ascend The mighty horse, and in the known bulk hide. Ah, who may hope if by the Gods deni'd!
Cassandra lo! the Priamaenian maid, From Pallas temple drag'd, her hair displaid, To heaven her bright eyes raising then in vain; Her eyes, for cords her tender hands restrain. Inrag'd Choraebus not induring this Willing to die, leaps midst his enemies, All after rush, 'mongst thickest squadrons went. Here first by darts from the high temple sent, Our own destroy us, and sad slaughters make, By change of Arms and Graecian helms mistake The Graectans gather, stir'd with griefe and rage, And for the rescu'd Virgin all ingage. Then both th' Atrides, and his men drew up Fierce Ajax and the sterne Dolopian troupe. So advers winds, contest with all their force; West, South, and Eurus, on his Eastern horse: The woods resound, and fomie Nereus raves, And with his trydent stirs up dreadfull waves. Those we by stratagem had overthrown, And by nights help chac'd round about the town, Appeare, and first they knew our feigned arms, The difference of our language, and alarms. We are ore-powr'd; and first at Pallas fane Chorebus was, by Peneleus slaine. Next Ripheus fell, most faithfull to his trust: Nor in all Troy was known a man more just: Though by the Gods otherwise look'd upon. Hypanis, Dymas, were by friends orethrowne, Nor Phoebus Myter could deliver thee Panthus from death, nor thy great pietie. Troyes ashes witnesse, and last flames of mine, If in your fall I danger did decline, Or Graectan force: death, had my fate been full, This hand did merit. Thence with us we pull
Iphitus, Pelias, I phitus age detain'd, Pelias a wound he from Ulysses gain'd. Hence clamor calls to Priams Pallace, there A huge fight was, as if no war else-where, Nor in the whole town other funeralls. So untam'd Mars, Greeks rushing to the walls We saw strong gates with testudes they assaile, High pillars climb, and walls with sadders scale; Shields their left hands protect, oppose defence 'Gainst darts, their right hands seize the battlements. Dardans resist; down roofes, and towres they cast And with such arms, since they behold their last, Prepare to save themselves in deaths extreams: High honours of old Princes, golden beams They tumble down; others with drawn swords stood To keep the gates, and with strong guards make good. Courage restor'd, we to the Pallace made, To joyn our force, and give the vanquish'd aid. There was a porch with private gates, a way Well known in Court, behind the pillars lay; Often by which, whilst Ilium did remaine Haplesse Andromache, without a traine Old Priam us'd to visit, and did bring Her son Astyanax, to delight the King. Straight I this way the battlements ascend, From whence in vain their darts the Trojans spend. There was a towre erected wonderous high, And with proud Bulworks seem'd to kisse the skie, From whence all Troy accustomed to see The Campe, and Navie of the enemie. This with my sword I loos'd, and on that part Wherre jutting beams did from their mortisse start, We gave a shove; when sudden from that hight Thundring it fell, and on the Greeks did light:
But fresh men Charge, nor stones, nor any kind Of weapons ceast mean while. Pyrrhus just at the entrance in the passe Triumphs in arms, and shines in glittering brasse. So in the Spring a sterved Snake comes forth, Whom swoln, cold Winter drove beneath the earth; Now having cast his skin, he fresh appears With skining youth, and proud his bosome rears In towrie windings to the cheering South, His triple stings, brandishing in his mouth. With him huge Periphas, Automedon Achilles Charioteere, and Squire comes on; These seconded by all the Scyrian bands, Who on the roofes cast fire, and flaming brands. Through strong gates first, he with an ax did passe, And from the hinges tore down beams of brasse, Then hews huge pillars, cleaving knotty oke, And a large breach with a wide passage broke. The house within appears, long halls unfold, Prtams bed-chamber, and the Kings of old; The entrance they might see, arm'd souldiers guard, Within mix'd tumults, and loud skreeks are heard, The arched seelings howl with female cries, And c'amours to the golden starres arise. Then fearfull Matrons through vast buildings mix'd The posts imbracing held, and kisses six'd. With's fathers strength, Pyrrhus maintains the fight, Nor guards nor rampires, can resist his might: Gates with his battering Ram are overthrown, And from their hinges Jaumes are tumbled down. They force their way: the first they meet they kill, And royall Courts the basest souldiers fill. A soaming river not so fiercely goes, When breaking forth, his bancks he overthrowes:
And on the plaines with hostile billowes falls, Bearing with him, both carrell and then stalls. I saw how slaughtering Pyrrhus was inrag'd: To enter how th' Atrides were ingag'd: The Queen, a hundred Ladies, Priam view'd, And fires he hallow'd, with's own blood imbrew'd. He fifty Daughters did with marriage grace, Such hopes there was of his illustrious race. Beams rich with gold, and spoyles fall by their ire, And Greeks posses what's not possest by fire. But here you may inquire of Priams fates, When Troy he saw was taken, and his gates Torn down, through all the Court the foe to rage: Arms long unworn, th'old man, trembling with age Girds on in vain; a uselesse sword he takes, And desperate, where the foe was thickest, makes. Amidst the court, under heavens canopie An Altar stood, an antient Laurell nigh Imbrac'd the Gods with a declining shade: Hither in vain, the Queen and Daughters fled. But when in youthfull arms she Priam spide. Oh! my most wretched husband (straight she cride:) What counsell thee to put on arms did move? Into what danger dost thou run dear love? These times no such defenders will allow, No, if my Hector should be present now. Draw neer: this altar may protect us all, Or here in death we will together fall. Then she her husband by the hand did bring, And plac'd in sacred seats the aged King. Behold! Polytes one of Priams sons Having escap'd from slaughtering Pyrrhus runs
Wounded to seek some sheltring place, he flyes Through arms, through foes, courts, and long galleries, Whom raging Pyrrhus did with arms pursue: Now takes and strikes him with his javeline through. At last as in his parents sight he stood, He fell and powres his soule out with much blood. Here Priam though beset with death, abstain'd Neither from language, nor his wrath restrain'd. The Gods for this, who such a bold act dar'd, If any power in heaven such things reguard, They'l recompence, and due rewards bequeath To thee, who forc'd me see my dear sons death, And with his blood the Parents face defild. Achilles, whom thou father false hast stild Was no such foe to me, he blush'd when I Implor'd the law of arms, nor did denie Hectors pale corps should have a native tombe, And me again sent with a convoy home. This said, th'old man, a feeble javlin threw, Which could not pierce his sounding target through: But on the bosse did hang the harmlesse speare, Then Pyrrhus said: this newes my father beare, My cruell deeds remember to relate; And how that I his sonne degenerate. For thou shalt die; as soon as this he said, Through his sons blood, he dragging him convai'd Trembling to th'altars: then his haire he wreathes In his left hand, his right his sword unsheathes, Which to the hilts he buries in his side. So finish'd Priams fates, and thus he dide, Seeing Ilium burn, whose proud Commands did sway So many potent Realms in Asia. Now on the strand his sacred bodie lies Headlesse without a name or obsequies.
Amaz'd, then first strange feare surrounded me, I on my father thought, when I did see The equall aged King give up his life With a sad wound, and my neglected wife, My rifled house, and poore Iulus chance. Round I behold, what force I could advance; All weary had forsooke me, and leapt downe, Or in the flames, their wretched bodies throwne. Now by my selfe; in Vesta's porch I found Helen conceal'd, silent, on sacred ground Close hid she lay: a light those burnings vast Me wandring gave, as round my eyes I cast. She for Troys fall expects the Trojans sword, Greeke censures, wrath, of her forsaken Lord. Common Erynnis both to Greece and Troy, Obscure, and hated did at Altars lye. My mind inflames, rage my revenge did call. To give her punishments for my countries fall. Shall safely she behold her native soyle? A Queen in Sparta triumph in our spoyle? Her husband, court, children and parents see? Shall Trojan Dames, Phrygtans her servants be? Priam by th'sword fall? flames destroy his seat? So oft with blood the Dardan confines sweat? Not so. Although no memorable name Have female punishments, or such conquests fame; Yet I'le be prais'd to punish, nay to kill So curst a wretch; I'll satisfie my will Flames to revenge, and my friends ashes please. With rage I was transported saying these. When my blest mother did to me appeare, Never before in night she shind more cleere. Goddesse confest; such, and so great, as she Is seen to those above; and wringing me
Fast by the hand, from rosie lips she said, Deare Son, what rage hath such distemper made? Why rav'st thou thus? and where are our respects? Nor look'st thou first, where bedrid thou neglects Anchises now? lives thy Creusa yet? And young. Ascanius? which the Greeks beset On all sides round: did not I aid afford, Flames had devour'd them, or the enemies sword. Nor Helens beauty blame, nor Paris hate, The Gods, the Gods incens'd o'rethrow this seat, And from her deep foundations ruin Troy. Behold (for all these clouds which thus anoy Thy mortall sight, and thus thick mists display I shall remove, nor feare thou to obey Thy mothers will, nor her Commands resist.) Here where faln heaps, stones torne from stones thou leest Lie mix'd with ashes thus, and waving smoke, Neptune the walls with his great trident shooke, And the whole City turns up from her seats. Here cruell Juno guards the Scaean gates; And raging from the Fleet her favourites calls, Guirt with a sword. On high towres plac'd thou mayst Trytonia spie, In a bright cloud, the cruell Gorgon by. With strength, and courage, Jove the Greeks supplyes, And 'gainst Troys arms excites the Deities. Fly son, thy Labours finish, I'le be neer, And safe thee to thy fathers thresholds beare. Then she her self in nights dark shades conceal'd, And cruell shapes, great Deities reveal'd Themselves a verse to Troy. And now all Ilium seems in flames to burn. Neptunian Troys foundations over-turn.
As an old ash hath lostie mountains crown'd, With frequent axes hew'd, with steele cut round By striving swaines: she threatning nods, and now She shakes her tresses with a trembling brow, Till vanquished with wounds she gives a grone, And from the mountaine torne, lyes overthrowne. Thence led by her, I passe through foes, and fire. Weapons give place, and horrid flames retire. But when to our paternall seats I came, Our antient house, my father, my first aime, First sought to carry to the mountaines, he Refus'd to live, and would no exile be Ilium destroy'd: you in whose youthfull veines, He said, fresh blood flows, solid strength remaines, Take you your flight. If heaven would spare my life, these seats for me Had been preserv'd; it is too much, I see One fall, once to out-live this City took: Thus let, O thus the bedrid be forsook. I shall find death pitied by foes, who shall My spoiles seeke; Losse of Sepulcher is small. Hated by heaven, uselesse I live, since when The Father of the Gods, and King of men With thunder struck, with lightning blasted me. Thus he discours'd, and fixt remaind: whilst we Are drown'd in tears, my wife, Ascanius, With all the house, lest his delayes, might us With him destroy, tempting, to urgent fate. Yet he denies, fix'd in one posture sate. I arm again, and wretched wish to die. What avails counsell, what can chance supply. Think you dear Sir, I'le stir, you left behind; Can such strange words fall from a fathers mind?
If nothing heaven of such a town will leave, And you and yours you'l to Troyes ruines give, That death is neer, from Priams slaughter now Pyrrhus will come, who at the altar slew The father, and the Sonne before the Sire. For this blest mother, me through sword and fire Didst bring? To see my foe within my house, My father, wife, and young Ascanius Behold in one anothers blood ly dead. Arm, arm, the last houre calls the vanquished. Let me return and seek the enemie, Nor shall we now all unrevenged die. Here I gird on my sword, my target brace To my left arm, ready to leave the place. Loe! then my wife, clings fast unto my knee, Just in the Porch, and shews my sonne to me. Go'st thou to die, take us through all alarms, But if expert thou'st confidence in arms, First guard this house, Ascanius now contains, Where father, wife, once called thine, remains. At this the house rung with a wofull cry; When straight appears a wondrous prodigy. Betwixt our hands, in the sad parents sight, Lo! from Julus crown a flaming light Was seen to rise, and harmlesse fire did spread With a soft touch, and round his temples fed. We frighted haste to shake the flagrant hair, Water to quench the sacred flame prepare. But to the stars Anchises lift his eyes, His voice and hands advancing to the skies. Almighty Jove, if any prayer move thee, Look down, if we deserve for piety: Confirm this signe, O father, and grant aid. Scarce th'old man thus, when straight it thundered
On the left hand, gliding through shades, from skies A starre shoots blazing, and with much light flies, Which we beheld o'r the high roofs to move, And our course marking to th' Idean grove Conceal'd it self, then in a furrow broke And shining made those parts with sulphure, smoke. My father now perswaded left his bed, Adores the sacred starre, Gods worshipped; Haste, now I follow whether you shall please, O save our house, and race, you Deities, This is your Omen, Troy is yours; O Son, I yeild, and go now thy companion. Then from the walls, we hear the crackling flame Louder to sound, and neer the burnings came. Dear father on my neck your self sustain, Lay here your weight, such labour is no pain: What ever chance, one common danger we Shall equall share, to both one safety be. I shall Ascanius my companion choose, Dear wife observe my steps, but distance use, And you my servants list to my commands. Neer Troy a tomb, an antient temple stands, Of slighted Ceres, an old Cypres nigh, Which long your grandsires kept religiously, By severall wayes, to this let us repair. OurGods, and sacred things, dear father beare: For me unfit to touch, return'd from blood And so great battels, till the living flood Cleanse me again. Then o're my shoulder and my neck I ti'd Above my vest a yellow lions hide. I take the load, Ascanius did embrace My hand, and follow'd with unequall pace.
My wife behind, we past through parts obscure: I who before durst showres of darts indure And adverse ranks of thickest Greeks; now feare, Each breath of wind, the smallest noise I heare; Alike both for my sonne and burthen dread. I reach the gates, long wayes are vanquished, When sound of trampling feet our ears invades, My father spies them through the gloomy shades, And cries aloud, O sonne, fly, they draw neer, Their shining arms, and glittering shields appear. Nor can I give account what God unkind Trembling, amaz'd, did here distract my mind, Whilst uncouth wayes I choose, lest the known coast, Ah, by sad fate I my Creusa lost. Whether she dide, did stray, and tir'd gave ore Her journey, but I saw her face no more; Nor lookt behind, nor mist her till we come To sacred seats, and antient Ceres tombe: Here we all met, one onely thus bereav'd, Who me, her father, and her sonne deceiv'd, What God or man did not my frenzie call In question, what worse chance, since Iliums fall? My sonne, my father, and our Gods I did Leave with my friends, and in a valley hid. Troy I revisit, gird on shining arms All dangers to renew, through all alarms Ilium to search, again past danger trie. The walls I first, then gloomy gates draw nigh; Obscur'd with night, back step by step I went With wary pace, and eyes as vigilant. Horror each where, nay filence strikes a feare. Thence home, hoping by chance to find her there. Through all the roofes, the cruell Greeks I had, And eating fire rowl'd to the tops with wind:
Then flames ascend, fire towreth in th'aire. To Priams seats, and pallace I repaire. There Phoenix, dyre Ulysses, guard the spoils In Juno's temple and forsaken isles. From all parts hither Dardan treasure came, Sav'd from Gods tables, temples sunk in flame: Goblets of gold, rich robes in heaps are laid; Youth, fearfull matrons, orderly array'd Stand round about. Bold, also I the streets with clamour fill, And call through shades, ingeminating still Agen in vain, agen Creusa. Hear To me in quest, thus raging every where Appears her shade, and sad similitude: And her known form a larger shape indu'd. Amaz'd, struck dumb, erected was my hair. When thus she spake with words appeasing care. Why so much pleaseth thee a task so vain? O my dear Lord, since thus the Gods ordain. Neither must thou transport me from these strands; The King of high Olympus countermands. Thou shalt long exile plow vast seas, before Hesperia's found, where through a fertile shore The Lydian Tybers gentle waters glide. Glad things wait there, a Realm, a royall Bride. Spare for thy lov'd Creusa tears; for I Dolops proud seats, nor Myrmidons shall see, Or go a slave to Graecian Dames commands, Alli'd to Dardan and blest Venus. The Gods great mother staies me on these strands. Farewell and love our onely sonne. Me then Weeping and much prepar'd to speak agen, She left, in thin aire vanish'd; thrice I assaid T'embrace her neck, three times the fleeting shade
In vaine I with extended arms assaile, Which like a swift dream flies, or nimble gale. Then I revisit night thus spent my mates, Where was huge troopes of new associates, Men, women, youth numbers admiring found, And wofull vulgar to sad exile bound, From all parts met, ready with aide, and mind, To saile what lands soever I design'd. When the day starre from high brow'd Ida rise Ushering the morn, our gates the enemies Kept with strong guards: no hope left, I retire And take the hills, bearing my aged sire.
THE THIRD BOOKE OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. TOrne mirtle bleeds; slain Polydor complains, Not from a tree, blood flows, but from his veins His rites perform'd they leave the Thracian sh To Delos soile, Apollo they implore. Phoebus mistook, they plant in Creet: from thence Admonish'd by a dream, and pestilence They launch again, a storme at Sea. the seats Of Ravenous Harpies. dire Celaenos threats. Helenus; Priams sonne, in Epire reignes T'Andromache match'd, and Trojans entertaines. He shews what coasts of Latium they must steere. Aetna, the Cyclops, Polypheme appeare. To sad Dyrachium next Aeneas bends, Thence drove to Lybia, where his story ends. AFter the Gods had pleas'd the Asian State And Priams guiltlesse line t'exterminate, Proud Ilium falne, Troy smoking on the ground: To strange shores, divers exiles we are bound
By auguries of the Gods, and Ships provide Neer to Antandrous, under Phrygian Ide, Not knowing where to plant, what course to run; We gather men: scarce was the Spring begun, When to set sail to Fates, my sire commands. Weeping I leave the Port, and native strands, Fields where Troy was, exil'd am born through seas With friends, my son, Lars and great Deities. Far off the Thracians plow a warlike land And vast, which once Lycurgus did command: Troys antient friends, joyn'd with associat gods, Whilst fortune smil'd: here I our first abodes Brought by crosse fates, on winding shores did build: Which I Aeneades by my own name stil'd. To my blest mother, and Gods favouring Our enterprise, and to heavens mighty King, Upon those shores a snowy bull I slew. By chance a hill was nigh where Cornel grew, Whose top rough mirtle with thick prickles bore: I went, and from the earth green branches tore, That I with verdant bowes might th'altars dresse, A prodigy no language can expresse I saw: From the first plant which up I tore, The roots being broke; drops gush'd of purple gore, And stain'd the earth with blood: cold fear my knees Did shake, my veins congeal'd with terror freese. Again I pluck'd another tender bow, That better I might hidden causes know, And this rinde also a black blood did sweat. Amaz'd I humbly rurall nymphs intreat, And powerfull Murs, who rules the Getick field, To blesse the signe: the Omen prosperous yeild. On a third after my whole strength I true, And with my knees on th'earth did strugling lie.
Shall I be dumb or speak? a grone I heare Sound from beneath, and these words piere'd my eare. Why tear'st thou me Aeneas? spare the dead; Prophane not pious hands: Troy hath not bred Me strange to thee; from no root flows this gore. Fly cruell coasts, ah fly this treacherous shore. I'm Polydore, this iron crop of spears Hides me here slaine, and cruell javelins bears. Then was my mind perplex'd with doubtfull scar, Amaz'd struck dumb, crected was my haire. This Polydorus with vast summes of gold Unhappy Priam secretly of old Sent to the King of Thrace: but when he found Trojan arms fail, and Troy beleaguer'd round, The Dardan fortune, and her power declin'd, With conquering arms, and Agamemnon joyn'd. Breaks laws, kills him, and wealth with blood did gain. Dire thirst of gold, what dost not thou constrain In mortall breasts! When lessened was my fear, I to my father, and prime men declare The prodigy, and their advises crave. All vote as one, those impious shores to leave, And with full sails from tainted friendship fly. We Polydore interre, his monument high With earth erect, to Ghosts sad altars plac'd With mourning garlands and black Cypresse grac'd. Round Ilium dames with flowing tresses stood: Cups flowing with warm milk, and sacred blood We as the custome offer, and we lay The soule intomb, then lowd, last rites we pay. Whence, when we first might trust the sea again, Soft Southern breezes calling to the main, The waves appeas'd, we launch, and fill the strands, The Port forsake, Cities retrcit and lands.
A sacred Isle is plac'd amidst the seas Pleasing the mother of Neriades And the Aegaean Neptune most: this land, The heavenly Archer wandring to each strand, With lofty Mycon then and Gyaros binds, Made firme to dwell in, and contemne the winds. Here landing, a safe Port, and pleasant shore W'injoy'd, Apollo's Citie we adore. King Anias, Phoebus priest, and King of men Crown'd with blest wreathes, and Laurell met us then, And streight his antient friend Anchises knew. We joyne right hands, and to the Pallace drew. In his old temple Phoebus I implore. He would safe dwellings to the tirde restore; A stock, a lasting City grant unto The poore remains of Troy: all that the foe And fierce Achilles rage hath sparde: what way, Now must we seek? whom follow? or where lay The next foundations? Father now impart One blessed Omen, and revive our heart. Scarce said, when suddenly the temple shakes, Apollo's Laurell, the whole mountain quakes; Within the Tripos rung: prostrate to ground We fall, when to our ears approch'd this sound. That land, bold Dardans, did your sires maintaine, The same with joy shall cherish you again: Seek your old mother; there the Trojans shall For endlesse generations governe all. Thus Phoebus, then with joy, they all demand, And noise confus'd, where was that happy land, Apol'o to the wanderers had design'd. My father then, calling old things to mind. O Peeres (he said) your hopes now understand: Creete plac'd amid'st the Sea, is great Jove's land;
Mount Ida there, from thence we sprung; this Isle A hundred Cities hath, a most rich soyle; Hence our great sire, (hath not my memory faild) First Teucrus to the Rhetian Kingdoms saild, And sought a Realme; Ilium as yet unbuilt, And Pergam towers, they in low valleys dwelt. Hence Cybele, the Choribants, the hill Ida: with silence at the altars still. The Goddesse Chariot with joyn'd Lyons drawne. Therefore where heaven Commands, let us goe on, Appease the winds, for Gnossian Kingdomes steere, Nor long's the course, if so please Jupiter, Or ships in three dayes may reach Creete. This said He deserv'd honours on the altars payd: A bull to Neptune, such was Phoebus right To storms a black sheep to faire winds a white. Fame flyes that driven from his fathers seat, Idomeneus left deserted Creet, Lands and Courts, vacant of an enemy. We leave Ortygian Ports through Seas we fly, And green Denysa, Naxus viny head, Olearus, and white Parus, Cyclads spread Through seas, and floods, thick set with Iles we steer'd. The Saylers raise their cry, and their Mates cheer'd. Now let's to Creet, our Gransires countrey sayle; When at our sterne attends a rising gle. And then to th'ancient Curets shores we run. The wish'd for Cities, walls I there begun; Stil'de Pergamus; our men pleas'd with the name, I call to serve the gods, and high towres frame. And now our Fleet was drawn high on the sands, While in the choosing of new wives, and lands Our young men were employd, to whom I soon Gave lawes, and severall habitation.
When on the sudden a most sad disease, By heavens corrupted influence did seize The trees, and corne, 'twas a destructive yeare. They die, or at the best, faint bodies beare; Hot Syrius scorcheth then the barren fields; The grasse is burnt, nor food the parch'd earth yeilds; To th'Oracle my father then would have Us goe, and put to Sea, there pardon crave: What end our toyles should have, where his command Bids them they should addresse, for what course stand. 'T was night, when sleep profound did mortalls seize, Gods sacred formes, and Phrygian deities Which I from Troy, and through the burning towne Had brought, appear'd before me then laid down To take my rest, cleer by much light displai'd, Which through the windows the full Moon convaid. Then thus they spake, with these did ease my care. What Phoebus at Ortygia would declare, Lo! here he sings, and us to thee did send. We through Troys flame, did thee, thy arms attend, We in ships measur'd the rough seas with thee: And to the stars shall raise thy Progenie; And give thy city rule; great walls prepare For greater things; long flight, nor labour spare: Change seats, Apalla not advis'd these lands, Nor thee to plant in Creet tho God commands. There is a place the Greeks Hesperia stile, Aenotrians till, a rich and potent soile, An antient land, posterity, (they same,) Since cal'd it Italie, from their Captains name: These are our proper seats hence Dardan first, Old Jasius sprung this place our grandsires must. Rise, let thy aged father understand These truths, Corytus seek, Ausonia's strand:
For Jove Dictean fields denyes to thee. Such visions, speaking Gods astenish me, Nor was it sleep, their visages I knew, Their vailed haires, and present faces view. Cold sweat then flows through all my limbs, I rise, My hands, and voyce, extending to the skies, And did due offerings pay; which done to old Anchises every circumstance I told. He knows the double stock, the doubtfull race, Sees his new error of the antient place. Then said, Dear son, busies in Troys affaire, Cassandra only did such fates declare, Now I recall, these Kingdomes she foretold Due to our race, and oft Hesperia would, Oft Italie name, but who could understand, Trojans must come to the Ausonian strand? Or whom could then divine Cassandra move? Phoebus obey, best things advis'd, approve. This said, all glad performe what was injoyn'd. This seat we leave, a few being left behind, Set saile, in hollow keeles through vast Seas bore. After we took the main, nor any more Countreys appeare; every where sea, and skies; With night and tempest big a clowd did rise: The water horrid with the darknesse growes; Winds rowle huge waves, and mighty seas arose. We through vast gulphs are tost, stormes hide the day, And heaven is to the hurnid night a prey: Flames breaking often from the gaping clowds. Drove from our course, we wander through dark floods: Nor Palinurus knows in such a skie Or day, or night, or what course now to ply; Three dayes uncertain, with blind mists we erre, As many nights wander without a star.
The fourth day we did rising land behold, And far-off hills, which wandring clouds infold. Sailes struck, with ores the lusty Sea-men sweep The foaming waves, and brush the azure deep. Escap'd the floods, first me the Strophades Receiv'd, Isles mid'st the great Ionean Seas Greeks call the Strophades, which Celaeno tooke, And other Harpies, after they forsooke Phineas bar'd gates, and former boards through feare. No monsters are like these, nor more severe, A plague, or wrath of God, ere rose from Styx; The foule are Virgin-fac'd a loathsome flix Works on them still, hook'd clawes, and alwaies pale With hunger vex'd. This having reach'd, we for the harbor stand, When we beheld fat heards about the strand, And shaggie goats, no heardsman, on we fall Streight with our swords, the Gods, and Jove we call To share the prey: then tables we prepare On winding shores; and highly feasted were. When from the hills, did dreadfull Harpies rise, And swift they shake their wings, with hideous cries; Our meat they seize, and with foule tallons rend, And with a putrid breath dire skreeches send. Far more with-drawne, under Arch'd rocks shut in With trees, and with a horrid shade, agen Tables we spread, Altars with fire supplide. Agen from lurking holes, on th'other side, Loud troops with pounc'd feet, round our dishes swarm, And spoyle our meat then, that my friends should arme I gave command, and fight with that dire race. They did as I requir'd, and in the grasse They leave their swords, and hide their glittering shields, That when they sounding flew through ample fields;
Misenus with his trumpet might a signe Give from a hill: they charge, strange battels joyn, And horrid sea-fowle with their steele attempt, But no stroke hurts their plumes, their backs exempt From wounds, they with swift flight to heaven are born And with fowle prints forsake their prey halfe torne. Celaeno pearch'd alone on a high rock, Unhappy Prophetesse, thus silence broke. For slaughter'd cattell, and slaine bullocks, are These fights, O Trojans? or prepare ye war Us innocent Harpies from our realms t'expell? If so, hear this, these words remember well; What Jove Apollo, Phoebus me foretold, I greatest of the furies now unfold. Your quest is Italy, Italy you shall sayle, Enter her Ports, with the implored gale. But ere you shall surround your town with walls Dire famine for our unjust funeralls Shall make you eat your trenchers: these she said, And to the woods she flyes on wings displaid. Then sudden feare doth my companions seize, Cold blood benumbs, their courage falls, not peace Seek they with arms now, but with vows and praier, Whether they Goddesses or fowle birds are. But from the shore my sire extends his hands, Great powers implores, and sacred rites commands. You gods forbid these threats, you Deities Avert such chance; to save the pious please. And order gave to loose our cables then, And cleare our trembling anchorage agen. Pregnant our sayles, we fly through fomie seas, What course the South winds, and our master please. Woody Zacynthus now from sea arose, Dulichium, Same, high clift Neritos,
Ithacus rocks, Laertian realms we fled, And curse the shore cruell Ulysses bred. Leucates cloud-crown'd mountaines next arise, And Phoebus which the Sayler terrifies. Here tir'd we came, to the small Citie hast, Our ships possesse the shores, and anchors cast, Then we unhop'd-for land at length injoy, We purge to Jove, Altars with vowes employ, And Troys games celebrate on th' Actian soyle. Naked my friends wrestle in flowing oyle. To scape so many Graecian Cities we Rejoyce, and thus to have steer'd through th'enemy. Mean while the Sun had his great circle run, And North winds vext the Seas, Winter begun. A brazen shield which Abas wore I fix Upon a pillar, and this verse annex. These armes from conquering Greeks Aeneas bore. I bid them quit the Port, fit to their ore, Striving they cuffe the billowes, brush the tide. Pheacus airie turrets soon we hide, By Epire, to Chaonian Harbours bend, Buthrotus lofty Citie we ascend. Here fame incredible did my eares invade, That Helenus Priams sonne in Epire swaide, By Pyrrhus wife those realmes he did obtain: Andromache march'd in her own stock again. Amaz'd my bosome burns, with strong desire To see the man, and the strange chance inquire. I doe forsake the Navy, shores, and bay. Andromache, then solemne rites did pay To Hectors dust; with gifts his ghost implores Within a Grove nigh to false Sinois shores; Before the citie, made of sods she reares Two altars at his tombe; her cause of tears.
Seeing me advance; when Trojan arms she spide, Distracted, and with wonder terrifide; Her limbs grew stiffe; heat flyes, she sounding falls; And scarce at last thus she her speech recalls. This a true face? com'st thou thy selfe to me? O Goddesse sonne, liv'st thou? if dead thou be, Where's Hector? at these words she wept; her cry Fills all the place; to her distempers, I In briefe with faltring voyce short answers give. Through all extreames escap'd behold! I live; Doubt not, for truth you see. What chance attends thee left of such a Lord, Can any worthy fate one smile afford? Is Hectors wife turn'd into Pyrrhus bride? With lookes dejected softly she replide. O happiest virgin of King Priam's race, Who on the enemies tombe, and in the face Of Troy, didst suffer death, by no chance led Captive to touch a conquering masters bed. We from our countries flames through all Seas borne, Felt the proud youth Achilles off-springs scorne, Both slaves: who after with Hermione falls In love, and Lacedemon nuptialls. And me his slave to his slave Helenus joyn'd. But him Orestes, raging in his mind, Inflam'd with love of 's lost bride did pursue, Surpris'd, and at his fathers altars slue. Thus Pyrrhus dead, part of his Kingdome yields To Helenus, who stil'd these Chaon fields, From Trojan Chaon, all Chaonia nam'd, And Ilian towers hath on these risings fram'd. What wind? what fare transports thee to this land? What God thee ignorant brought to touch our strand?
Lives young Ascanius? draws he vitall aire? Whom Troy to thee. Of his lost Country hath he any care? How doth his fathers, or his uncles name Hector, his soule to manly acts inflame? This she said weeping and spent flouds in vaine. When from the City with a stately traine The Hero Helenus, Priams son appears. He knows his own, and to his Pallace steers Our course with joy; while his wet eyes afford A liberall teare to wait upon each word. Now I acknowledge little Troy, and small Pergamus like the great one; and did call The river by the name of Xanthus wave, And to the Scean gate imbraces gave. In their associate City Trojans rest. The King receives at ample ports his guest: Amidst large halls Bacchus in bowles they taste, Cups they present, in gold our banquets plac'd. One day succeeds another, gentle gales Invite to sea, soft Auster swells our sails. When I the Prophet move, this sute prefer. O Trojan born, the Gods interpreter, Thou Phoebus, tripods, laurell, thou the stars, Birds language knowst, swift wings thy augurers: Declare (our course all Oracles have said Shall prosperous be, this heavenly powers perswade Latium to seek, attempt prepared seats: Onely Selaeno sings, now dreadfull threats, Dire rage sad hunger) how we shall eschew Dangers so neer, and toyles so great subdue. Here with slain steeres, Helenus as the guise Implores the Gods, from sacred browes unties
His wreath, and by the hand, O Phoebus, me Leads to thy floores, struck with thy Deitie: From lips inspir'd the priest then prophesies. O Goddesse son (for thou must sail through seas, This doe the greater auguries designe, And King of Gods, that doth all fates injoyne By a fix'd law) from much take briefly these; Safer to search more hospitable seas. From Helenus knowledge fate the rest hath hid, Saturnian Juno hath my tongue forbid. First, Italy which thou conceiv'st is neer, And fond prepar'st those neighbouring coasts to steer, Long wayes unknown divide, far distant shores; In the Cicilian waves first try thy oars, Ausonia's briny flood; thy Fleet must goe By Circes Isle, and cut those Seas below, Before safe lands to plant in thou shalt find; And this the Omen, fix it in thy mind. When at an obscure stream solicitous thou Under wilde okes, shalt find a mighty sow, Pregnant, her farrow thirty, laid to rest: A white sow, a white issue at her breast: There ends thy toyle, thy City there erect. Nor let thy eating trenchers thee deject: Fate shall find means, Phoebus implor'd will aid. But these coasts, these adjacent shores evade, This Italy fly-wash'd with our swelling tide, For in those Cities wicked Greeks reside, Naritius here hath Locrian walls prepar'd, Idomeneus his arm'd squadrons guard Salentine fields: there Melibaeus, small Petilia joyn'd to Philoctetes wall. But when they ships transported reach the bay, And there arriv'd, vowes you on Altars pay,
With purple vailes, your cover'd haire attire: Lest in heavens honours, midst the sacred fire, Some hostile face, seen, should disturbe the signe. This pious use impose, on thee, and thine; In this thy chaste posterity instruct. But when to Cicilies shores faire winds conduct, Opening Pelorus narrow straights, then fly The star-board seas, and strands: long courses ply Through lar-board deeps, shave thou the left hand shore. Those coasts (they say) by a vast ruine tore, (Such change workes length of time) asunder start, And countries which before conjoyn'd now part: With violent waves Pontus Hesperia forc'd From Cicilie; Cities, and Towns divorc'd Shores, interwash since with a narrow tide. Scylla the right. Charybdis the left side Inexorable guards Thrice she doth drink Vast floods, which down to hels darke bottom sinke, Then belch'd again, lasheth the skie with waves. But Scylla keeps her den, and lurking caves; Ingaging ships in rockie mouthes that gape, A female with faire breasts, a virgins shape She is above the waste; beneath a Whale, And to her wolvish wombe, a Dolphins taile, Better for thee to seek Pachynas strand, And with long steerage to Cicilia stand, Then once fierce Scylla in vast caves descry, Or Rocks resounding with her blew dogs cry. Besides, if Helenus any prudence hath, Phoebus with truth inspire, if any faith, One speciall charge I presse. O Goddesse sonne Again, again, repeat, it must be done. Great Juno move with prayers, and her adore: The powerful Goddesse with free vowes implore,
With humble gifts subdue: victor at last Then steere Italian shores, Sicilia past. When thou hast reach'd to Cuma, and hast found Lakes sacred, heard in woods Avernus sound; In a deep rock the Prophetesse doth sit Foretelling Fates and doth to leaves commit The characters, and names, what verse she puts In those she counts, and in her cavern shuts: Firme they remaine, and keep their place design'd; Which, the dore opening, then a whisking wind Disorders, and the thin leaves doth dispierce. She not collects againe the scatter'd verse, Or cares to joyn, or place; not hearing fate They vext depart, and Sybils mansions hate. But let not such delayes disturbe thy mind, Though thy friends call to Sea, and a faire wind Invites with swelling sailes, yet first repaire To her, and Oracles beseech with prayer. Oh let her as she please our fate declare, She shall to thee, Italy, future war, Those labours how to beare, or wave, display: And honour'd she shall grant a prosperous way. These are the things, nor more may I advise; Goe, raise great Troy by valour of the skies. After these hopefull words the Prophet said, By his commands they to the Fleet convei'd Ivorie, and gold, and with a mighty masse Of silver load our keels, and Dodon brasse. A coat of maile with gold most richly wrought, A stately helme with flowing plumes they brought, And Pyrrhus arms, my fathers gifts, who then Recrutes the oars, and armeth all our men And horse and riders adds.
In the mean time Anchises bad prepare Our Fleet for Sea against the wind blew faire. Whom Phoebus Prophet with much honour calls. Anchises grac'd with Venus nuptialls, Twice sav'd from ruin'd Troy, th'art heavens care now, See thy own Italie, and possesse it too, But thou must steer much wide of this; behold! Where those parts are, Apollo did unfold, Blest with a pious son, farewell, I stay Too long, and comming winds with talke delay. No lesse Andromache sad, departing brought Vests hid in gold, with rich imbroyderie wrought. T' Ascanius (worthy him) a Phrygian cloake, And loading him with wealthy gifts thus spoke. Take these remembrances my own hand wove, The witnesse of Andromache's long love. Keep these last last gifts of thine: to me, O thou Sole Image left, of my Astyanax now: Such eyes such hands, thy face the same appears, Who now had been with thee of equall years. Then with abortive tears. I thus at last; Live happy you, your miseties are past. Us fate from fate commands you rest obtaine, Nor must you plow vast billows of the maine, Or seek still flying shores of Italy. Zanthus effiges, Pergamus you see, Which your selves built, a better fate have these I wish and not so obvious unto Greece. If ere I enter Tyber, fields adjoyn'd To Tyber view and wals to us design'd: Then seats allide, nations one blood with us, Having one fate, one father Dardanus, Latium and Epire both one Tro: shall be, And to our sonnes we shall these lawes decree.
From thence by neighbouring Ceraunia we By sea short courses steere to Italy. Mean while Sun set, dark mountains shades invest: Wee neere the Sea on earths lov'd bosome rest, Our oars being ship'd, dispierc'd along the shores Repos'd, deep sleep our wearied limbs restores. Night drove by th'houres scarce reach'd the middle skies, When carefull Palinurus did arise, Explores all gales, the winds tries with his eares: And notes each starre which glide in filent sphears. He the wet Kids, Arcturus did behold The Triones and Orion arm'd with gold. After he saw serene, and setled skies, He from his sterne the signall gave; we rise, Our course we stand, and our furld cnnvasse spread. Blushing Aurora rose, the stars now fled. When obscure hills from farre, low Italy we Descry: Achates first cryes Italy, With a glad shout, Italy haile out men. A Goblet crown'd, my sire Anchises then Fills with rich wine, and calls the Deities, Plac'd on the lofty sterne. Lords of the tempests, Gods of earth and seas, Propitious breath, blesse with faire winds the way. The wish'd gale rose: then opens straight the bay, The Temple, and Minerva's towers appeare, My mates strike sayle, their prowes to shore they steer. Bow-bent the Port lay to the Easterne flood, Dash'd with the brine, high cliffes opposing stood 'Mongst towring Rocks, this douhle guarded lyes In bayes obscure, from shore the temple flies. Here our first signe, foure horses I beheld Grasing about, whose whitenesse snow exceld.
My sire, then said, faire soyle, thou war dost beare, These are for battell, horses threaten war, But yet in Chariots they accustom'd joyne, With curbing reins of peace a hopefull signe. And here we armed Pallas did implore, Who first receiv'd us joyfull on this shore. In Phrygian vailes we at the Aitars stand Of Argive Juno; Helenus command With care performe, and her due honours pay. Our vowes in order finish'd, no delay But to hal'd bowlings, yards and canvasse yeelds. Greeke seats we fly, and leave suspected fields. Herculian Tarents bay, if fame be true, We saw, oppos'd divine Lacinia view. Cauloni towers, wrack Scylacaeum rose, Then farre from sea, Sicilian Aeina shews: Huge groning of the waves, beat rocks from far We heare: and broken thunderings at the bar. Sholes rage, the sands with billows mix: at this Anchises said, here sure Charybdis is, Those Rocks sung Helenus, and horrid shores. Haste, helme alec, and stoutly ply your oars. They doe as bid, first Palmurus stood Steering his prow unto the lar-board flood. With winds and ores that course the whole Fleet lay. Heaven we advance to in the crooked bay, Then sinke to hell with a descending wave. Three groans the cliffes, and rocky caverns gave, Thrice breaking fome, we saw the Planets wet. We weary, whilst the winds with Phaebus set, By unknown shores of the Cyclopians glide. The Port within was safe from storms, and wide. But Aetna with torne ruins thunders neere, Black clouds he throws oft through the Hemisphere.
Smoke, blazing sparks, in pitchy whirle-winds rise, And globes of flame exalted kisse the skies. Oft rocks, torne bowels of the mountaine vent, And liquid stones belcht to the firmament Break thick with grones, heats from the deep aspire. Fame is Enceladus halse burnt with fire This hill deprest, above huge Aetna laid, These flames he breaths, through tunnells broke convei'd, And when he weary turns, all Sicilie With murmure shakes, and smoke involves the sky. That night woods shelter'd us; huge monsters there We heard, nor causes of those founds appeare. For no star shone, nor were the Poles alowd Aetheriall light, all heaven was in a clowd, The Moon in nights tempestious vapors hid. Aurora from the East now rising, did Remove moist shadowes, and the day began. When from the woods a strange and unknown man Sudden appear'd; pinde, spent, wretchedly poor, Raising his hands came suppliant to the shore. We view him direly fowle, o're-grown his beard: His coat thornes pin'd, the rest a Greeke appear'd, Who native armes against Troy had borne. When he The Trojan habits, and our armes did see Something affrighted at the first he staid, And fix'd remaind, then to the shore he made With tears and prayers. Now by the stars I pray, And by the Gods, by heavens life-breathing day, O Trojans take, beare me to any strand, I know my selfe one of the Graecian band, Let this suffice, and sought Troys Gods by warre. For which, if so great our offences are, Strew me amongst the waves, drown'd in vast seas, If by mens hands I fall, my death shall please.
Upon his knees he then imbracing hung On mine: to tell his name, from what race sprung, And to declare his fortunes we demand, As a firme pledge to save his life, his hand Me sire Anchises freely gave the man: Who shaking feare of thus at length began. From Ithaca, Ach'menides my name; Haplesse Ulisses friend, to Troy I came With my poore sire: Ah had my fate fix'd there. But my companions struck with horrid feare In the black Cyclops den, forsooke their mate, And fled the dire abode: the monsters seat A vast, and mighty Cave, within all o're Was darkned with corrupted food and gore, And he so tall his head might knock the skies, From earth you Gods avert such plagues as these. His visage stern, a churlish voyce; his food Bowels of wretched men, and putrid blood. I saw his huge hand seize two of our men, He lying on his back stretch'd midst his den, And broke on rocks; filth drown'd the sprinkled flore; I saw him eat limbs flowing with black gore, The warme flesh trembling in his teeth. But thus Ulysses takes it not, or Ithacus Forgetfull, did, dangers so great decline. But when full gorg'd he lay buried in wine, His neck awry, stretch'd in his spacious den, Gobets with bloody wine, mix'd gore agen Belching in sleep; we the great Gods implore, And took our chance, surrounding him, we bore With a sharp lance his eye, which mighty did Lie single, in his frowning forehead hid, Like Phoebus lampe, or an Argolick shield: So glad revenge to our friends shade we yeeld.
But fly, O wretches fly these dangerous coasts, Your cables cut. Like Polyphenee, who in his Cave doth keep The woollie flocks, and milks th'imprisond sheep, A hundred cruell Cyclops wander more These lofty hills, and haunt this winding shore. Thrice Phoebe's horns their light replenished, Whilst I my life in wild beasts desarts sed In dens and caves, vast Cyclops view'd from high Trembling to heare their sounding feet, and cry: Shrubs, berries was my wretched food, the fruit Of stony cornell, and the herbs torne root. Surveying round, I saw you first arrive Resolv'd who e're you were, my selfe to give Your prisoner; 'tis enough their rage to fly, And if by men no matter how I die. Scarce said, when we discover from above Amongst his flocks, where Polypheme did move Like to a walking hill, known shores to find, A horrid monster, huge, deform'd, and blind. To ease his steps a mighty Pine he bore In his right hand his fleecy sheep before, His pipe, his comfort, and the only check To rising sorrow, hung about his neck. Ater he touch'd the deeps, and reach'd the flood, From his lost eyes, he wash'd the flowing blood; Groning he grindes his teeth, stalkes through the tides, Whilst the deep waves scarce touch his lofty sides. We trembling fly; aboard the suppliant put, So meriting, and silent, cables cut, And brush with striving o're the deeps profound. He hears and turns unto our voices sound.
But when no power was given to use his force, Nor could Ionian billowes match in course; He rais'd a huge cry, Pontus, all the sea Trembles, it shakes far frighted Italy. Aetna aloud from winding cavernes rores: But the Cyclopian race rush to the shores, And call'd from woods and mountains, fill the strand. We saw in vaine the Aetnean brothers stand With a sowre look, high heads to heaven they beare, A horrid councell, ayrie oaks so rear Their lofty tops, or spiry Cypresse stood, Such as Diana's grove, or Joves high wood. Drove with sharp feare cables in hast we clear, And with hoist sailes and prosperous winds did steer, But nigh deaths jawes Helenus shew'd a way Which betwixt Scylla and Charybdis lay, That course we stood, with turn'd sailes this pursue. When from Pelorus straits the North wind blew; Pantagias mouth's of living stone I cleer Megaras bayes I passe, by Tapsus steere. Haplesse Ulysses friend Ach'menides, Nam'd all these coasts remeasuring back those seas. In the Sicanian bay stretch'd, lyes an Ile 'Gainst rough Plemmyrium, which our grandsires stile Ortygia: Alpheus here they fame Under the sea by obscure channels came: Now Arethusa mingling with thy wave. To th'Isles great gods we rites commanded gave, Fennie Elorus fertile fields we lost, And shave Pachinus high clift rocky coast: Camerina ever fix'd by fates commands Farre-off appears, and the Geloian strands, And mighty Gela stild so from the flood. Far off high Agragas strong bulworks shew'd,
Which once bred generous horse; with prosperous wind Palmie Selinis thee I left behind: By Lilybeis rocks, and sholes I bore; To Drepanum thence, on that unhappy shore I landed, where with many tempests tost, Anchises th'ease of all my cares I lost. There my dear father wearie, me forsooke, Alas in vain from so great dangers tooke. Not Helenus, who such horiors did unfold This lasse declar'd, nor dire Celoeno told; Here was his travells bounds, this his last toyle. From whence, the Gods did guide me to your soyl. Aeneas having to their listning eare Told these sad fortunes, clos'd his storie here.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. DIdo complaines; her sister gives advise To cherish love, and offer sacrifice To favouring Gods. Juno craves peace; her ends Venus perceives, and smiling condescends. Aeneas, and the Queen to hunt prepare. A tempest. Juno thunders through the ayre. To one cave Dido and the Trojan came. Stolne love through Lybia spread by impious fame. Jarbas vext his father Jove implores. Hermes commands Aeneas from those shores. Eliza on the Trojan sword expires, Quenching loues flame in her own funerall fires. BUt long since Dido struck with great desire. Feeds a sad wound, and wastes in hidden fire. His valour, his high birth run in her mind: His face, and language, deep impression find,
Nor doth her care grant rest. Soon as the morn Did with Phaebean flames the world adorne; And from high heaven dismiss'd the gloomie shade, To her lov'd sister thus, she troubled, said. Dear Anne, what dreams disturb'd my troubled mind? What stranger's this our Court hath entertain'd? What noble looks? how valiant? arm'd? sure he (Nor vain's the faith) sprung from some Deitie. Feare shews degenerate minds. Ah by what fates Hath he been tost, what fierce wars he relates? Were I not full resolv'd, fix'd in my mind, No more in wedlock bonds to be conjoyn'd, Since my first love by death deceived me: Could I with maeriage, and those rites agree; I might perchance give place to this one crime. For (I confesse) since poore Sychaeus time, By fratricide our Gods dispierc'd; I find This only bends my thoughts, and wavering mind, I feele some Kindlings now of former love. But first earth swallow me, or mighty Jove Shall to the shades with dreadfull thunder smite, Pale shades of Erebus and deepest night, Ere shame I violate thee, or wrong thy rites, Who was my first love took all loves delights With him to's grave, there let him keep it still. This said, a flood of tears her bosome fill. More dear to me then day, shall grief thy flowre Of youth (said Anne) and solitude devoure? Children unknown, and Venus sweet reward? Hath dust a sense, or soules entomb'd regard? Grant, though no Lybian could your love obtain, Though you at Tyre Jarbas did disdain, Though glorious men of Africk could not move, Will you declare hostilitie to love.
Hast thou forgot whose fields thou plantst? here are Getulian seats, Nations untam'd by war; Numidians fierce, inhospitable sands, Wild Barceans: there, vast drowth deserted strands. What shall I say of warre from Tyre may rise Thy brother threats? Sure prosperous Juno, favouring Deities, Here with a storme the Trojan Navy cast; What City mayst thou see, what Kingdoms vast By such a Marriage, by the power of Troy What glories may the Punick realms injoy. First to the Gods with sacrifices pray, And then thy guest with courtesie delay, Whilst Winter and Orion vex the sea; His Navie craz'd, and skies tempestuous be. Thus she with love did her pierc'd soule inflame, Gave hopes to wavering thoughts, and banish'd shame. First in the temples, at the Altars, they Implore; and choice sheep as the custome slay. To Ceres, Phoebus, Bacchus; before all To Juno, mistris of rites conjugall. Holding a cup, most beauteous Dido now Betwix the hornes powres of a snowie cow: Or walkes before the Gods, and th'altars plyes Whole dayes with gifts, inspects the sacrifice, Beasts panting bowels hot consulted are. Ah ignorant Priests, what availes temples, pray'r, To ease th'inrag'd! whilst soft fire wasts her veins, And in her breast, a silent wound remaines. Unhappy Dido burnes, and furious roves Through the whole towne, as in the Cretan groves Th'incautelous hinde, by an arm'd shepheard shot: He leaves the winged steele, and knowes it not.
She through Dictean woods, and forrest flyes, Whilst in her side the deadly arrow lies. Now with Aeneas to the walls she walkes, Boasts Tyrian wealth, of her new kingdome talkes, Begins to speake, and stops words halfe exprest: And day declining she prepares to feast. The Trojan war she longs to heare once more: And on the tellers lips, hangs as before. And when departed Phoebus paler light Hath day subdu'd, rest setting stars invite, Alone she mourns, then on his couch she lies, And him though absent, thinkes she hears and sees; Or for the father doth his sonne imbrace, If so she might her raging love displace. Now towers not rise, nor Tyrians use their armes, The harbour stops, strong piles 'gainst all alarms Are at a stand, works interrupted lye, Huge Walls and Rampiers equalling the skie. When Joves dear wife perceiv'd how great a bane Had seiz'd the Queen, nor fame could her restrain, In these words Juno did to Venus say. You, and your son, bore gallant spoyles away, A mighty conquest got, and lasting fame, When two Gods fraud, one woman over-came. I find thou fearst those walls we now erect: And seats of lofty Carthage dost suspect. But to what end, why such debates? firme peace Rather conclude, and lasting marriages Let us prepare; thou hast obtain'd thy aims, Fond Dido burnes, her bones are pierc'd with flames. Let us in common with like auspice sway These men, let her a Trojan Lord obey, And Tyrian dowries Ile permit to thee. Venus (for she perceiv'd the fallacie,
To keep the Roman sway from Lybia's stand) Replide; who fondly would such things with-stand? Or rather would with thee in strife contend? If to thy promise fortune condiscend. Of fates I doubtfull am: if Jove will grant Trojans and Tyrians in one town should plant, Nations commix'd in firme leagues be conjoyn'd: Thou art his wife, try to perswade his mind. Goe. I'le assist. Great Juno then begun, Leave that to us; but how it shall be done, And by what means I briefly shall declare. Aeneas end the haplesse Queen prepare To hunt in Groves, when Titan next displayes The morn, the world discovering with his raies: On them commix'd with haile a storme Ile powre (whilst nets surround the woods, horse thickets scoure) And I all heaven to thunder shall excite; Their troops shall fly, hid in opacious night; The Trojan, and the Queen shall take one cave, I will be present, if thy aid I have In wedlock firme Ile dedicate her thine. There, Hymen them in private shall combine. These faire proposalls Venus not denide, Smiling when she her cunning drift espide. Mean-while the morning from the Sea arose: When through the gate, a troup of prime youth goes With nets, toyles, spears, and full-mouth'd hounds suppl And forth Massilians bravely mounted ride, At the Court gates the Trojan nobles staid, Whilst in her chamber the faire Queen delaid: In trapping rich with gold and purple, fit, Her proud horse stands, and champs the foming bit. With a great troop, she guarded comes at last; Her Tyrian habit a rich border grac'd,
Her quiver gold, gold did her haire infold, The button of her purple vest was gold. Then all the Phrygian Lords in order went, Sprightly Ascanius: but most eminent For person, and for honour, last march'd up, Aeneas, and to them conjoyns his troop. So Phoebus shewes, when Lycia he forsakes, And progresse to his native Delos makes; Revells begins; when dancing in a round, 'Bout th'Altars Crets, and Driopos resound. He walks on Cynthus tops, soft bowes infold His flowing haire, and binde with purest gold; His quiver rung; such was Aneas grace, Such honour shines, in his majestick face. After they come to the high mountains fide, And unfrrquented woods, behold! they spide Wild goats affrighted, running ore the clifts: On th'other hand, swift Dear put to their shifts, In a thick heard the open champaigne take, And lost in dusty flight the hills forsake. But young Ascanius in the vallies prides In his fierce horse, now these, now them out-rides: Wishing a Boare with those dull heards would blend, Or a fierce Lyon from the hils descend. Mean-while high heaven with murmurs loud contends, And straight a showre, commixt with haile descends. The Trojan Nobles, and the Phrygian traine, With young Ascanius, scatter'd through the plaine, Seek severall shelters, floods from mountains rave. The Trojan Prince and Dido take one cave. First earth and marrying Juno gave the signe: Fire ayre both conscious of the Contract shine, And Nymphs sit howling on the high-browd hils. This the first day of death, and first of ils
The cause; for neither forme, nor fame did move, Nor Dido judgeth this unlawfull love; She stiles it wedlock, gives her crime that name. Through Lybist's ample Cities, straight flies Fame. Fame is an evill, none more swift, which gaines By motion strength, in flying force obtaines, Small first by feare, to heaven advanc'd now shrowds, Stalking on earth her head amongst the clouds. To Coeus, and Enceladus, the earth Vext by the wrath of Gods (they tell) brought forth This sister last: swift footed, quick she flyes, A huge fowle Monster, in each feather lies A watching eye conceal'd, (and strange) she bears As many tongues loud mouths, and listning ears. A watch by day, on battlements she lights, Or lofty towers, and mighty towns affrights. Falshoods, and lyes, of as the truth she tells, And Nations then with various rumours swells. Things feign'd and reall, glad alike she sung. Aeneas from the blood of Trojans sprung, To marry him faire Dido condescends, And the long Winter in vast ryot spends Carelesse of rule, tooke with fowle lust: such things From every mouth the cruell Goddesse flings, And swift to King Iabrbas Courts she came And with these tydings did his soule inflame. This Joves, and ravish'd Garamantis son Had built within his vast dominion A hundred temples to his fathers name, As many altars, and the Vigil flame, The Gods eternall watch he hallowed, The soyle with blood of cattell daily fed, And with fresh Garlands flowrie porches drest, With the harsh rumour next, his soule opprest,
He at the Altars mongst the Gods (they say) Suppliant to Jove with rear'd-up hands did pray. Great Jupiter, to whom the Moors being plac d On wrought beds feasting now rich Bacchus taste. Seest this oh father? or in vain our hearts Quake at thy thunder, and when lightning darts From broken clouds with noise, is fond our fear? Wandring our coasts a woman purchas'd here A little seat, to whom we gave rich lands; To whom our lawes; and This our match withstands, And in her Kingdome Lord Aeneas states. That Paris now, with his effeminate mates, In his Maeonian hat, and perfum'd haire, Injoyes the prise: we to thy Temple bear Offerings, and have in vain thy name extold. Thus praying he the Altar fast did hold. Th' all-potent heard: then views the royall frame, And lovers mindless now of better fame. And such things then to Mercurie injoyn'd; Fly son with speed, and call the western winde, And to the Troian Prince on swift wings glide, Who now resolves at Carthage to abide, And promis'd seats neglects: this message bear With speed to him, and cut the yielding air. For him fair Venus no such promise gave, And therefore twice from Graecian arms did save; But one that should command Italian Realms Groning with war, pregnant with Diadems, A race must spring from Teucers noble line, That shall their Laws to the whole world injoyne. If him no glory of such acts inflame, Neither will strive to raise his own great fame, Will he his son the Roman towers envie? What strange hope stays him with the enemy?
Forgets he Latium and those promis'd Lands? Let him set saile; in brief bear these commands. This said, he his great fathers will obeys. And first on's feet his golden shoos he tyes, Which winged bore him over Sea and Land, Swift as the fleeting clouds; then takes his wand With which from hell he calls up dismals Ghosts, And others sends to sad infernal coasts; Gives, and takes sleep, and seals up dying eyes: With this drives winds, and through loud tempests flies. At last rough Atlas clifts, and rockie side, Who on his shoulders heaven supports, he spide. Atlas pine-bearing head, black clouds still binde, Snow hides his shoulders beat with showrs and wind, His horrid beard with crusted ice is froze, And from the old mans chin a river flows. Here first with wings dispsaid, Cyllenius stood; From thence then swiftly glides unto the flood, Like to a bird which haunts the deeps, and nigh The fishie Rocks, does with low pinions flie. So the Cyllenian race twixt earth and skies Cutting the aire, to sandy Lybia flies; And from his mothers father took his flight. As his wing'd feet did on a Cotage light; He saw Aeneas towrs and roofs prepar'd, A sword he wore with shining Jasperstard, Loose on his shoulders a rich mantle plaid Of scarlet die, which wealthy Dido made, The thread with fine gold mix'd. Who thus did say, Thou now uxorious dost foundations lay Of lofty Carthage, dost fair seats prepare, Of Realms unmindfull, and thy own affair: The King of Gods who rules both earth and skie, To thee from high Heaven sends this embassie,
And gave command with speed I should convey: VVhat Plot? what hope makes thee in Lybia stay? If thee no glory of such great acts move, And thy own fame thou striv'st not to improve, Hopefull Ascanius, fair Julus view T'whom Italy and Roman lands are due. From sight, this said, abruptly Hermes fled, And to thin ayre a farr off vanished. At this Aeneas is struck dumb with fear, Amaz'd he stood, erected was his haire Earnest to fly, and leave those pleasant lands, Admonish't strictly by the Gods commands. Alas what shall he do? or which way move? Or how begin to Dido mad with love? His swift thoughts he divides; this course he tries, Then that, and rapt, through all invention flies. At last as best on this opinion fals. Sergestus he, Mnestheus, Cloanthus cals: Bids private rig the fleet, tackling prepare, Gather their men, and a feign'd cause declare. Himself mean while would beauteous Dido move, Since she suspected not in mighty love So great a breach, and times of best access VVould choose to speak, and make his best address. VVith joy they execute what he propounds. But she (who can deceive a Lover▪) sounds The guile: at first perceives their future ayme, All things suspecting: the same impious Fame The furious told, to sayle they had design'd. Through the whole town she rages, vext in minde, Like Thyas, when the sacred things are stir'd, And dire trienials rais'd, Bacchus being neard, VVhen with loud shouts nightly Cytheron cals: Then in such words she on Aeneas fals.
Couldst thou perfidious use such subtile art? Such wickedness? and secretly depart? Could not our love, nor our conjoyn'd right hands, Nor perishing Dido stay thee in our lands? But thou wilt sayle under the winter star? Prepare to sea, when North winds frequent are? Faithless, if no strange country thou should'st gain, Unknown seats finde, did ancient Troy remaine Through swelling seas wouldst thou to Troy now stand? Or fly'st thou me? by these tears, this right hand, (Since nothing else remains to wofull me) Our marriage, our prepar'd solemnity. If I have well deserv'd, or ought was mine, Pity a falling house, change this designe If prayers have power: for thee I gaine the hate Of all my Tyrians, and the Lybick state; For thee alone extinguish'd is my shame, And what I climb'd the stars by, former fame. For whose sake leav'st thou dying me O guest? That name doth after husband only rest. Why live I? till my brother raze my wall? Or captive I to wrong'd Iarbas fall? If I had prov'd before thy flight, by thee Had off-spring, could a young Aeneas see Sport in thy Palace, with thy face, and look, I should not seeme so captive, or forsook. She said; but he fix'd by commands of Jove His eyes, and in his heart conceals his love. Then briefly said, those many favours I From you receiv'd, great Queen, L'le not deny, Nor shall I Dido's memory disdaine, Whil'st I draw breath, or life these limbs sustaine; But for my cause I'le plead; that I did plot From hence to steal in secret, feign it not:
I thee to be my wife did never take, Nor did I ever any promise make. If Fates gave leave to order my affairs At my own will; and to compose my cares; The Trojan towers I would again erect, And the poor remnant of my friends protect: Then Priams courts should stand, another Troy By this hand rear'd, the vanquish'd should injoy. But Phoebus now bids us for Latium stand, And Lycean lots for Italy command. This is my love, and this my Country is. If Carthage towrs thee a Phaenissian please, And the fair prospect of thy City like; Why should it trouble you that Trojans seek New seats in Latium, and Ausouia gain? And why not we in forreign Kingdoms raign? Oft as the nights moist shadow canopies The earth; as oft as radiant stars arise; My fathers Ghost, me warning, frights in dreams, Ascanius loss of the Hesperian Realms, And destin'd fields, my dear sons injury. Jove sent the Gods Embassadour to me, Both our heads witness, through the aetherial sky He brought commands; I saw the Deity Enter these wals; distinct his voice did hear. With plaints to grieve thee and my self forbear. Against my will I Latium seek. She turning, views him, having these things said, Rouling her eye each where, and round survaid With silent look: incens'd, then thus begun. Thou art not Dardans race, or Venus sonne, But thee perfideous Caucasus hath bred On cruell rocks, and Hyrcan tygers fed.
Why feign I? or why stay for greater woes? Turns he his eyes? sighs at our grief or shews Vanquish'd a tear a lover pitying? VVhat shall I say? great Juno, nor heaven's King View these with equall eyes: true faith is lost. In want him receiv'd, drove on our coast, And fond, with him part of my Kingdome shar'd, His friends preserv'd from death, his fleet repair'd. Ah how am I transported with fond love! Now Phoebus, Lycian lots, and now from Jove A strict command the Gods interpreter bears: Yes, heavenly powrs regards these things, such cares Disturb their quiet well,  make no sute To stay thee here, nor shall with words refute: Goe, sayle for Latium, Realms seek through the Seas: I hope if there be any Deities) That thou mongst rocks cruell like thee shalt fall, Where oft thou Dido by her name shalt call; And absent I will follow thee with fire: And when my soul shall in cold death expire, I'le haunt thee, and thy tortures I shall know, By fame, conve'd me to the shades below. Then midst her speech breaks off, and sick, the light Avoids away she flings, with draws from sight, Forsaking him perplex'd in mighty fear; As many things to peak he did prepare. Her maids support her sounding then and led T'her marble chamber, laid upon her bed. But good Aeneas though he strove to swage VVith comfort, grief, with words t'avert her rage, Oft sighing shook with mighty love, yet he Reviews his fleet, obeys the Deity.
Then Trojans labour, from all shores they come, Tall ships are launch'd, and well calk'd bottoms swoom, And from the woods branc'hd oke and oars unhew'd, Studious of flight they bring. Each where thou might'st have rushing Trojans view'd, As when large heaps of corne pillag'd by ants They lay in hoards, remembring winters wants, The black band march, the prey through grass is borne In narrow tracts; others the fuller corne VVith shoulders joyn'd sustaine, others the slow Compell, chastize, all parts with labour glow. VVhat couldst thou think, O Dido, at this sight? Or what sighs send, when from a turrets height Thou saw'st the shores wax hot, the sea to move, Commix'd with mighty murmurs? Impious love, What canst not thou compell in mortall brests? Again to tears, again to try requests She is inforc'd, and suppliant love obey'd, Lest dying she should leave ought unassaid. Anne, seest not how they hasten to the Port On all sides? how their sayls the winds do court? And the glad Sea-men crown their sterns? If I Had such woes fear'd, (sister) the misery I might have borne: thou must for wofull me This one thing do, the false man still lov'd thee: To thee he made his greatest counsels known, And thou the times of best accession To move his pity knowst. Dear sister goe, And suppliant, thus petition the proud foe. I did not swear at Aulis to destroy The Dardan race, or sent one ship to Troy, Nor yet defac'd his fathers sepulcher. VVhy gainst my sute stops he his cruell ear?
To a sad lover let him be thus kinde; Then he may sayle before a prosperous winde, Nor I th' old contract he hath broken crave, Nor that he kingdoms in fair Latium wave. Some rest I ask for love, a short reprieve, Whil'st my own fortune teach me how to grieve. This last request to thy dear sister grant, And at my death thou shalt no riches want. This said, to and agen sad Anna bears Her deep complaints: but he's not mov'd with tears, Nor can be wrought upon by all her woes, A God hath stop'd his ear, and Fates oppose. As Northern winds striving to overthrow Some ancient Oke, now here, now there they blow: Huge gusts resound: her bowes and curled locks Strew thick the earth; whil'st she stands fix'd mongst Rocks: How much to heaven her head advancing shoots, So much to hell descend her fixed roots. So daily she the Trojan Prince invades Now with these reasons, now with those perswades, And storms his valiant brest with mighty cares: Yet his resolves are six'd, in vain her tears. Unhappy Dido terrifide by Fates, Then wish'd to die: to look on heaven she hates. But this provok'd her more to leave the day: As gifts on incense-burning Altars lay, The sacred milk grew black (to mention strange) And wine infus'd, to putrid gore did change. This she to none, not to her sister told, Besides there was a temple to her old Husband of stone, which much she did respect, And had with boughs and snowie fleeces deckt. Here, she suppos'd she heard Sychaeus call When gloomie night upon the earth did fall:
And oft from thence the Owle extends her throate With death-presaging, and a direfull note. Many predictions her before did fright: Cruell Aeneas troubles her each night, And raving alwayes seems to walk alone, Still wandring far, without companion, And seeking Tyrians in a wilderness. So Pentheus saw troops of Eumenides, Two sons beheld, as many Thebes espies, Or like Orestes acted, when he flies His mother, who black snakes and torches bore, Whil'st the revenging furies guard the dore. Struck with the rage, vanquish'd with sorrow, now Resolv'd to die; the time, and manner how Contriv'd; to her sad sister thus she went, She clears her brow, and coversher intent. Sister, I have the means, rejoyce with me, Which may gain him, or me from passion free. There is a place in utmost Ethyop, nere The setting sun, the Oceans confines, where Great Atlas shoulders bears heavens starry frame. From hence a Priestesse, a Massilian came, Who kept th' Hesperian temple, did allow The Dragon food, and sav'd the sacred bough By sprinkling honey, drousie Poppy: she Can keep all mindes she please from sorrow free, Or send to paines, swift streams stop in their wayes, Call back the stars, and nightly spirits raise; Under her feet earth seems with grones to rend, And from the mountain stubborn Okes descend. Witness the Gods (sister) and thy dear head, Unwilling I to magick arts am lead. In the back court, a pile in secret rear, The arms, and garments from my chamber bear
The impious left; above those, place the bed Where I was lost, All be abolished Of the false man, the Priestess bids: This said, She silent was, paleness her lips invade. Nor Anne did think her funerals design'd By this, or that such rage possest her minde: Or fear'd worse things then when Sychaeus dy'd, Therefore did her commands. But Dido in the inward court did raise A mighty pile, where she in order layes Whole loads of cloven Ash, set torches round, Which she with wreaths, and funerall branches crown'd; His picture, cloaths, and sword which he forgot, Laid on the bed, too mindfull of her plot. Altars stand round; the Priestess with long hair Unto three hundred Gods thunders her prayer; Hell, Chaos, and the triple Hecate, Virgin Diana, who hath aspects three: Then sprinkling dews fain'd from Avernus brought, Drugs cut with brazen fythes by moon-light sought, And did with juice of deadly poyson brew Th' Hippomanes, on a colts foreheae grew, The love snatch'd from the Damme. She with a cake erecting pious hands, Before the Altars, on foot naked stands: With garments tuck'd she dying invocates The Gods, and Planets, conscious of her Fates, If any power regardeth lovers cares, Those just and mindfull, she implores with prayers. 'Twas night when weary limbs sweet sleep possest Through all the world; woods, raging seas, at rest: The stars had mid-night told, and silence deep Commands the sields; beasts, gaudie birds asleep
VVhich haunt the crystall fountains, or delight In wood land Countries, under quiet night Forget their labour, and their cares appease: But slamber could not hapless Dido seise. Her eyes ne're clos'd, or night her woes asswag'd: Cares double, and again love rising rag'd With a great flood of wrath when she revolves Thus with her self. Lo! what are my resolves? Shall I old suters court I did disdain? Suppliant implore Numidian loves again? Those I so oft despis'd? shall I submit To Trojan Laws, and follow now their fleet? Because that for my help they prove so kinde, And my great favours bear so well in minde. But grant I willing were, who'de give me leave, And me now scorn'd in their proud ships receive? Ah wretched woman hast thou yet not known, That perjur'd off spring of Laomedon? Shall I alone with haughty Seamen goe? Or raise the Tyrians to pursue the foe? And those who scarce I could perswade from Tyre, Shall again to try the Sea desire? Nay, rather as thou hast deserved, die; And with a sword conclude thy miserie. Won by my tears, thou sister, first with woe Did'st load the furious, and let in the foe. And why like wilde beasts, faultless might not we Live without marriage from such troubles free? My promise to Sychaeus I not kept. VVith grief opprest, thus she complaining, wept. But now Aeneas ship'd, resolv'd to weigh, All things prepar'd, in quiet slumber lay. To whom the God in the same forme presents. Himself again, with these admonishments.
In all like Hermes, both in voyce, and face, His yellow haire, and comely youthfull grace. Oh Goddess son, canist thou now sleep so sound? Perceiv'st thou not what dangers thee surround? Do'st thou not hear how the fair gales invite? But she's contriving now some strange deceit, Resolv'd to die, rage doth her blood incense: Fly'st thou not then whil'st thou hast power from hence? Thou shalt behold the sea to fome with oars, And fires and torches flaming on the shores, If thee Aurora here delaying finde: Fly; still inconstant is a womans minde. Then mix'd with gloomie night, thus having said. Aeneas at the vision much dismaid Starts from his sleep, and straight gives this command: Rise quickly, sirs, and to your tackling stand: VVith speed unfurl your sayles, yours oars now ply: To hasten flight, a God sent from the skie Bids Cables cut, and suddainly depart. Blest power, we follow thee, who e're thou art; And joyfully obey thy will again; Be pleas'd to aid, and prosperous stars ordain. This said, he drew his sword, with shining steel The hausers cut, all the like spirit feel. The shores forsook, the Navie hides the deep, They roule the fome, and azure billows sweep. And now Aurora with fresh beams had spread The earth, leaving Tythonius saffron bed. The Queen from a high tower, as dawn appear'd, Saw how with sayles a-trip to sea they steer'd, The Strands, and vacant Coasts without an oar. Then beating oft her beauteous brest, she tore Her golden haire, and said, Jove, shall he goe? And shall this stranger mock our Kingdome so?
Shall not the City arme and follow them? VVhat, will none launch our Fleet into the stream? Goe, haste, bring fire, sayle, row; what shall I say? Or where am I? What folly I betray! Doe impious deeds now touch thee hapless queen? E're thou gav'st up thy Crown, this should have been: Behold his faith, and promise, who (they say) Did from the foe his native Gods convey: And hath on's back his aged father borne. VVhat, could not I him limb from limb have torne? And scatter'd in the sea? his friends and boy At once with my revenging sword destroy? Then serv'd the son up for the fathers dish? But chance of war is doubtfull; 'tis my wish. VVhom should I dying fear? I should have thrown Fire on their feet, and burnt their floating town, And the whole race, father and son destroy, And last above them fall my self with joy. O Sun, whose eye views all the worlds affairs; And thou great Juno conscious of these cares: Nocturnall Hecate, who oft dost raise Loud cries through Cities, in cross meeting wayes, Revenging Furies, and you Gods that are Dying Eliza's, hearken to my prayer: Shew your deserved wrath: if he must gaine His port, that impious man those coasts attain; If Fate decree, and fix'd the periods are; Let him be vex't with a bold peoples war. Exilde, forc'd from his sons embrace; may he Seek aid, and his own friends sad funerals see. Nor when dishonour'd peace he makes with them, Let him lov'd life enjoy, or Diadem: But die before his day, the sand his grave: And with my blood this last request I crave.
O Tyrians, strive this Nation to supplant VVith restless wars this to my ashes grant: Never joyn leagues, contract no amities, And from our bones let some revenger rise, VVho Trojans may pursue with fire, and sword, Ah, may when ever time shall strength afford, Shores shores oppose, seas seas, our stocks debate VVith arms gainst arms maintaine, I imprecate. This said, her faucie each where did revolve, How best she might her loathed life dissolve. To Barce then Sychaeus nurse, she said, In native dust her own long since was laid. Dear nurse, my sister call, and bid her bring The cattell, the appointed offering, Let her with river-water sprinkle now, And binde thy temples with a sacred bough. Those rites which I to Stygian Jove prepare, I mean to finish, and conclude my care. Fire must consume the Dardan monument. This said, with an old womans pace she went. But the fierce Queen shook with an Enterprise So horrible, rouling her bloody eyes, Her cheeks were sported, pale with thought of death, The inner court by violence entereth, And furious mounts the lofty pile: then draws The Dardan sword, not left for such a cause. After the Ilian garments she survaide, And the known bed, with tears, and thoughts delaid A while she stops; then spake her last. To me Sweet spoyles, whil'st God was pleas'd, and destiny; Receive this soul, and free from cares: I have Liv'd, and perform'd that course my fortune gave,
And now the earth must my great shade seclude. I a farr City built, my own wals view'd; Punish'd my brother, pleas'd my husbands Ghost; Blest, too much blest, if never on our coast Troys keels had touch'd. This said, she kist the bed, Shall we die unreveng'd? but die she said: Thus, thus it pleaseth to the shades to goe. These flames at Sea may to the Dardan shew, And let our death sad Omens him afford. This said, they saw her falne upon the sword; Sprinkled her hands with blood, the weapon fomes. Then from the lofty Palace clamour comes: Fame wanders the distracted Citie round: The roofs with lamentations, groans, resound, And female shreeks: loud sorrows pierce the skie. No otherwise then if the enemy, All Carthage seis'd, or ancient Tyre; the frames Of men, and Gods, involv'd in raging flames. Her sister pale, dismaid, with trembling pace Beating her brest, disfiguring her face, Rush'd in, and cal'd the dying by her name; For this, O sister? was this fraud your aime? For this the pile, fire, Altars? ah! lost me, What shall I do? scorn'st thou my company? Dying, thou should'st have call'd me to these Fates, One sword, grief, hour, had finish'd both our dates. Built I this pile, and to our Gods did make My pray'r that cruell, thee I should forsake? Me, and thy self, dear sister, and thy town, Both Peers, and people, thou hast overthrown. Some water bring, that I may bathe the wound; And if that any breath be wandring found My lips shall gather it. Thus having said, She mounts the pile, her dying sister laid
With sweet imbraces closely to her brest, And groaning dries the black blood with her vest. To raise her heavie eyes again she tride, And fails, the deep wound bubbling in herside. Thrice leaning on her arms assaid to rise, Thrice turning on her bed, with wandring eyes Heavens light she sought, and finding groans again; Then royall Iuno pitying her long pain And tedious death, Iris from heaven commands To free her soul, and ease lif's strugling bands. Since she di'de not by death deserv'd, nor Fates, But suddain rage her day anticipates, Nor Proserpine did yet her bright hair take, Nor doomb'd her head unto the Stygian Lake. From heaven then dewie rose-wing'd Iris flew; She gainst the sun a thousand colours drew, Plac'd on her head, Sacred to Dis, from thee This charg'd I bear; Be from thy body free. This said, she cuts her hair, all heat expires, And with it life into the air retires.
VIRGIL'S AENEIS THE FIFTH BOOK. THE ARGUMENT. Dido's ascending flames sad Trojans see. Storms drive Aeneas back to Sicilie. Anchises rites renew'd. The annuall games. Iris from Iuno stirs the Trojan dames To burn the fleet. Aeneas prayes; a showre Prevents the mischief, quenching all but foure. Trojans set sayle. Venus of Neptune craves Safe passage for their Navie through his waves. The God assents Somnus with Stygian boughes Besprinkles watchfull Palinurus browes. Ore board he fals, the losse Aeneas spies, And weeping at the helm his place supplies. MEane while his course resolv'd Aeneas sailes, And the dark waves divides with northern gales,
Viewing unhappy Dido's wals, which shone With flames, the cause such fire had rais'd, unknown; But what a woman might in sorrow drown'd, Struck deep with grief and burning love was found; And by sad auguries Trojans understand. As they possest the deep; nor any land Now more in ken: seas every where, and skies; Freighted with night and tempest did arise A black cloud, waves grew horrid with the shade; Then from the high sterne Palinurus said, Ah! what huge storms surround the hemisphere? Or, sather Neptune, what dost thou prepare? Here bids them ply tough oars, stand to their tack, Then turnes her side to wind-ward, and thus spake. Great Prince, if Jove should promise, with this wind I should despair Italian coasts to finde; Gusts rising shift, the black west grows more loud: And the whole heaven condens'd into one cloud: In vaine we strive, nor make we any way; Therefore since fortune conquers, let's obey, Where she cals, sayle: kinde shores of Erix are And the Sycanian ports from hence not far, If rightly stars observ'd I bear in minde. Then said the Prince: I saw long since the winde Grew scarce, and you in vain strove: Roomer stand: To ease our weary fleet not any land More gratefull is, or I could wish for more Then the Dardanian Acestes shore, Whose lap infolds my fathers bones. This said, Faire Zephyre swels their sayles, the port they made, With a swift current in the Navie stands, And joyfull sailes at last to well-known sands. Acestes wondred from a mountains height To see them come, then hasts to th' friendly fleet.
A Libyan Bears skin rough with darts he wore; whom th' Ilian Dame to flood Crinisus bore; He mindfull ofs old stock, congratulates Them now return'd, and cheers with rurall cates, The tir'de inviting to a friendly feast. When the next morne had chas'd stars from the East Aeueas having warn'd from all parts round His friends to meet; spake from a rising ground. Ye Trojans sprung from the high blood of Gods; A year hath finish'd monethly periods. Since we inter'd the dust of my divine Father, and made the funerall altars shine: The day draws nigh (I guesse) which I must still Lament and honour (Gods, such is your will) An exile in Getulian Syrts were I, Or in Mycene took i'th Grecian sea; Yet annuall vows and solemn rites I'de pay, And heap'd up offerings on his Altars lay. Now we are present at my fathers dust, Nor without heavenly providence, I trust, Arriv'd all safe within a friendly shore, Glad honours celebrate, and winds implore: These rites he bid should annually be paid In temples dedicate, our City laid. Trojan Acestes will two beeves bestow On every ship; your Countrey Gods allow, And those Acestes honours at the feast. And if the ninth Aurora from the East Brings a clear day, does earth with beams disclose, I'le for the swiftest ship a prize propose, For him runs best, who bold strong nerves excite, Good at the dart, or shoots the nimble Flight, Or dare in fight a cruell Cestus trust; Come all, due Palmes receive, and honours just;
Give your applause, your temples crown'd with boughes. This said, his mothers myrtle shades his brows. This Helymus, this old Acestes did, Ascanius this, the youth all followed. Midst a great troop from thence, Aeneas went With many thousands, to the monument, And pour'd two bowles of rich wine on the flore, Two of new milk, and two of sacred gore, Strewing the place with purple flowrs, then said: Haile my blest father, haile paternall shade, And dust preserv'd in vain; heaven would not grant Latium with thee, and promis'd fields to plant, Nor (what ere) Lydian Tyber to be sought. This said, a huge snake from the secret vault With seven vast gyres, seven mighty fouldings glides, And gently wreath'd the tomb, by the Altar slides, His back with green was freckled, and a bright Purple, with gold, cast from his scales a light. As in the clouds the mighty bow displayes A thousand various hues, gainst Phoebus raies. Aeneas wonders, his long traine he roules Amongst the Goblets, and the standing bowles; Then feeds, and having tasted, harmeless went, Leaving the Altars to the monument. This made him more his fathers rites renew, And solemne sacrifice, suspecting now That either this one of his servants was, Or else the sacred Genius of the place: Five sheep he then did kill, as many swine, With black-back'd steers, and as the use, pours wine From bowls, and great Anchises soul implores, And Ghosts remitted from the Stygian shores. Then all his friends of their own plenty paid Glad offerings, and slain Steers the Altars lade;
Some spits prepare, and boylers plant of brass, They entrails rost, dispers'd upon the grasse. Th' expected day was present, with the dawn, Phaetous bright Steeds the ninth morn fair had drawn; Glad troops from all parts fill the shore, by fame Brought thither, and renown'd Acestes name. Some Trojans come to see, others to play. Amidst the Cirque, in view the prises lay, Wreaths, sacred tripods, palme the victors prize, With arms, a garment of rich scarlet lies. Gold, silver talents, and appointed games, A trumpet from amidst the heap proclaims. First from the Fleet four chosen gallies try Their ponderous oars, striving for victory. In the swift Pristis stout-oar'd Mnesteus came, Mnesteus who gave the Mnemnian house a name, Gyas in huge Chymera, a vast Hull, The Cities work, which lusty Trojans pull with triple oars, on three-fold banks. Next came Sergestus who gave Sergius stock a name I'th Centaur: Scylla bold Cloanthus drives, VVhence Romes Cluentian family derives. Against the foming shores a high Rock stood, VVhich oft was drownd, beat with the swelling flood, VVhen storms involve the stars, and seen again VVhen a soft calme doth overspread the maine, To sea-fowle a most gratefull station now. The Prince here fix'd the goal, an oken bough, The Saylors mark, by which they understood To turne, and bend long courses to the flood. They draw for place, in the high sterns behold The Captains shine, in scarlet clad and gold.
The rest with Poplar crown'd, their shoulders bare Glitter with oyle, fix'd on their banks they were: Their arms stretch't forth with oars, the sign th'expect, VVhil'st their insulting hearts are countercheck t. With trembling fear, and rais'd with love of prayse. Thence as the trumpet sounds without delayes All start, the sea-mens shouts the heavens ascend, And with long stroaks they fomie billows rend. All plow the waves, the gaping Ocean feels Their wounding oars, and force of thundring keels. In Chariot games more swift not Chariots are Borne through the Champaign, when they leave the bar. Nor Charioteers bending their bodies strain More at a loose, shaking the flowing maine. With loud applauses, shouts from parties then Favouring their friends, the woods resound agen, Including shores tumble the voyce about, And the struck hils echo at every shout. First Gyas swiftly through the billows glides With clamours great. Cloanthus next divides The waves with better oars, his pine a slug Lost way: next Pristis and the Centaure tug Who shall get formost, with an equall oar. Now Pristis, now great Centaure is before, And now together, they their fore-decks joyne, Whilst their long keels plow up the shallow brine. At last the Rock drew neer, the goal they make, When Gyas first a Conqueror bespake Menaetes at the helme. Why dost thou steer The starboard thus: love thou the shore: lie here: Binde Larboard cliffs; let them stand off (he said.) But still Menaetes of hid Rocks afraid Bore to the sea. VVhere goest thou? Gyas here Again cass loud; these clifts, Menaetes steer.
And close behinde him, lo! Cloanthus spies Shaving the Larboard rocks, and inward plies Betwixt the sounding tops, and Gyas ship. And suddainly the formost did out-strip, The goal being left behind, to safe seas came. But then great grief the young mans bones inflame: Nor tears are wanting; slow Menaetes, then Honour forgot, and safety of his men, From the high stern he tumbles in the flood; And at the helm, pilate and master stood Cheering his mates; to shore the rudder bends. At length the old man from the deep ascends, Menaetes clog'd with garments, dropping wet Seeks a high cliffe, and on the dry Rock set. The Trojans shout to see him fall and swim, And vomiting salt water, laugh at him. Sergestus, Mnestheus, now the two last, were Hopefull to beat retarded Gyas here, Sergestus first drew nigh the Rock, nor more Then his ships length a-head, part was before, Part emulous Pristis prest with fore-decks neer. When Mnesteus midst his ship his men did cheer, Now now rise to your oars Hectorian mates, Whom at Troys fall I chose associates; That force shew'd in Getulian syrts again Make good, and as before in th' Ionian maine, Or Malea's following streams; Mnesteus desires Not to be first, nor victory requires. Though O Let them thou please great Neptune gain, But to be last, this vanquish, such a staine, Such shame forbid. Then their whole strength they use, And with vast stroaks they shake the brazen prowes, The seas are past, and short breath shakes their sides, Drowth clams their mouths, sweat down in rivers glides.
Fortune her self the man wish'd honour brought: For whil'st too neer the rocks Sergestus sought An inner course, a fatall space betwixt, Unhappy on the cliffes he running fix't; The crags being struck, and oars contending rung In the sharp Rock, and the struck foreship hung; The saylers rise, staid with a mighty cry; Ir'n-headed staves, sharp pointed poles apply, And gather in the sea their broken oars. But Mnesteus glad, proud with successe, implores The winds, and with a band of rowers stood Through the safe seas, and glides to th' open flood. O'th suddain so a frighted Dove doth rise, Whose loved nest, in some dark pumice lies: And striking the house top with timerous wings, Amaz'd into the field at randome springs; Till with a slide, to calmer aire she comes, And cuts it without motion of her plumes. So Mnesteus through the frowning billows glides, So Pristis last the flying waves divides: And with a violent course her way she makes. Sergestus first on the steep rock forsakes, VVho strugling in the shallows, aid implores In vain: learning to row with broken oars. Gyas in vast Chymera next ore-tooke, And past, since she her Master had forsook. Cloanthus only left to be subdu'd, To him he bears, with his whole strength pursu'd. These their new glory, honours got despise, Unless they keep it, and to gaine the prize VVould sell their lives; success feeds them; they may Because they think they can obtain the day. And for the Goal with equall prows they'd stood; But that Cloanthus pray'd unto the flood,
With rear'd-up hands, and Gods call'd with a vow. You powers who rule the sea, whose waves I plow, Joyfull I'le place a white bull on this coast Before your Altars, and fat offerings cast In your salt waves, and purest wine I'le pay; This said, all heard him from the deepest sea: Neriades, Panopaea, Forcus band, Him old Portunus shoves with his great hand: Swifter then tempest, or wing'd shaft, he glides To shore, and in the harbours bosome hides. Aeneas (as the use) all summond; there Cloanthus with a herauld did declare Victor, and with fresh laurell vails his brows: And to the ships three steers with wine allows, And a great silver talent; then presents The Captains with especiall ornaments. A vest of gold he to Cloanthus gave, Edg'd with rich purple in a double wave; The royall boy in leafy Ida wove, Fierce, panting seems, as with his dart he drove Fleet deer in chase, whom Joves swift Eagle bears From thence aloft, trust in his hooked sears. In vain th' old Guardians hands to heaven did rear, And dogs their mouths spend, raging in the aire. But who by vertue second place did hold, He gave a curious male, wrought thick with gold, (Which he a Conquerour from Demolius bore Under high Ilium, on swift Simois shore) Both for defence and grace in arms; scarce this With shoulders joyn'd, Phegeus, and Saguris His servants bore: Demolius in times past In these arms swiftly stragling Trojans chas'd. Two brazen Caldrons to the third was brought, And two fair Cups with silver richly wrought.
And now all proud with honours thus assign'd; Their temples they with rosie Garlands binde. When from the dire rock scarce with much art clear'd, Sergestus his scorn'd ship, unhonour'd steer'd: His oars being broke, weak with one single rank. Such in the way a Serpent on a bank, Ore whom oblique, swift brazen wheels have gon: Or passenger left half-dead, hurt with a stone: Flying in vain, he long contortions wrests, Part fierce, with burning eyes, and hissing crests, Rising aloft, part main'd a wound with-holds, Tangling in knots his own coile him infolds. With such a rowing his slow ship made way, Yet sayl'd, she with full sailes possest the bay. The Prince the promis'd gift Sergestus gave, Glad he his ship and friends so well did save, Pholoe a Cretan borne, who skill profest In Pallas art, two twins hung at her brest. Pious Aeneas, this sport finish'd, led To a green plain, which woods incompassed With trending hils, the vale a Theater crown'd. The Heroe here, with many thousands round About him plac'd, did his high Chair ascend: Here those who would in the swift race contend He with rewards invites, and prises fix't. Trojans, Sicanians come, from all parts mixt. Nisus, Euryalus first. Euryalus most fair and youthfull was, Whom Nisus dearly lov'd; next him took place Royall Diores, Priam's famous stem, Salius and Patron next, conjoyn'd with them: From Epire this, Arcadia that descends, Helymus, Panopes, old Acostes friends,
Sicilian youths in woods accustom'd, came. And many more buried in obscure fame. To them thus spake the Prince; Hear, and regard None shall depart from hence without reward; Two pollish'd Gnossian spears I shall afford, And with a silver hilt a two edg'd sword: This honour each shall have, and I allow The first three shall with olives binde their brow. I to the first a brave horse furnish'd yield: The next an Amasonian quiver, fill'd With Thracian shafts, the belt a golden one Fast with a button of a polish'd stone. This Graecian helmet shall the third content, Thus having said they to their station went. The signall heard, the bar forsook; they came Like a swift showre, and at the goal they aime. First Nisus gains the start of all by far, Not swifter winds, nor wings of lightning are; Next him, but at great distance followed next, Salius, and after him a space betwixt, Euryalus was third. Helymus Euryalus pursues, next whom Diores hasts, now side by side did come; Strikes foot by foot, and had there been more space, Had got before, or doubtfull left the race: Now to the end they came, and tir'd drew neer, When Nisus in the blood of a slain steer VVhich wet the verdant grass, unluckie slides. Here as the young man, now a victor prides, Tripping, his steps could not recall agen; But fell in sacred gore, and mud unclean. Yet not unmindfull of Euryalus love, Rising, he gave to Salius a shove,
And tumbling with him, on the hard sand laid, Euryalus got first by Nisus aid, Out-stripping all with shouts and joyfull cries. Helymus next, Diores the third prise. Here Salius makes the Theater to ring Moving the Fathers with loud clamouring To grant those honours he's bereav'd on thus. Beauty, sweat tears defend Euryalus: Vertue with beauty joyn'd more gratefull is; Diores helps aloud, who the last prise, If Salius got the first, had won in vain. Then spake Aeneas, Firme your gifts remaine; None shall remove the palme, but I may yet My hapless friends mischance compassionate. Then a huge lions hide he Salius gave Rich-fur'd, with golden claws. If vanquish't have These things, said Nisus, and such pity be On them that fall, what gift's reserv'd for me, VVho with applause had the prime honour got, Had I not met with Salius spightfull lot? This saying, he his limbs and face defil'd VVith foul mud shew'd; The best of Princes smil'd, Bids the shield give him Didymaon wrought, VVhich he from Neptun's sacred pillar brought. The brave youth this fair present satisfies. After the course was done, dispos'd each prise, Now come the stout whose bosomes courage fill, And for the prize now shew their strength and skill, This said, two honours for the fight are plac'd, A Bull the victors, gold, and garlands grac'd, A sword and helme to cheer him got the worst. Straight from the throng then mighty Dares burst:
And his vast limbs with great applause were shown. He oft with Paris did contend alone. He huge siz'd Butes at great Hectors tombe, VVho from Amycus of Bebricia come Did overthrow, and with his conquering hands, Measur'd his length upon the yellow sands. Such Dares for the fight, his head rais'd high Shews his broad shoulders, and alternatly Swings his extended arms, and beats the winds. His match is sought, none that great concourse findes Dares take the Cestus, or himself present. To bear the palm from all he confident Before Aeneas stood; nor more delay'd, His left hand holding the bulls horne, then said. Great Goddess son, if no man dare resist, VVhy stand I here, command I be dismist, And grant the prise. Trojans with one consent Cry'd he the man should promis'd gifts present. Here old Acestes chides Entellus, as Near plac'd they sate, on beds of verdant grass; Entellus, valiant'st Hero once in vain, If thou let him untride, such honour gain: VVher's now thy God and Master Erix name In slight regard? and where is now thy fame Through Sicilie spread? and spoyls hung on thy walls? Then he: Not love of praise and glory failes VVeaken'd by fear; but me cold blood restrains, Benumb'd with age, and weakeness in my veins. Had I that youth which he with insolence Doth triumph in, from me long parted since, Gifts should not draw me, nor would I regard A goodly steer, nor stand upon reward.
Two mighty bats he casts in, this being said, With which the cruell Erix oft had plaid, And tride th' hard skins. All were astonished, Seven huge bull hides, sow'de stiffe, with ir'n and lead. Dares was most dismaid, and long denies, The mighty weight great Anchisiades, And immense fouldings, here, and there did roule: While in such words the old man spake his soule. Had any seen those clubs Alcides bore! And cruell battell fought upon this shore! These arms thou seest, which blood and brains yet smear, Thy cosen Erix in times past did bear; With these cop'd Hercules; I with these did fight Whil'st blood gave better strength; before the spight Of envious age had silver'd thus my brows. If Trojan Dares shall my arms refuse, If so Aeneas and the King shall please, We'le match our arms, for thee I'le these release; Fear not, lay by thy Trojan arms. This said, His thick lin'd vest he from his shoulders laid, His huge limbs, bones, and brawnie muscles shew'd; Then midst the place a mighty man he stood. When Prince Aeneas equall clubs commands, And weapons match'd he puts into their hands. Each stood prepar'd, themselves then raising high, Boldly they lift their arms unto the skie: Far back they draw their tall heads from the stroak, They joyne in fight, and blows with blows provoke. One trusting youth, best traversed his ground, Th' other in strength and sife advantage found: But with stiffe knees Entellus earnest slides, Whil'st short thick breathings shake his ample sides. Many blows past, yet neither had the best, Redoubled stroaks ring on their spacious brest,
And hollow sides, about their ears and brows A swift hand flies, and cheeks resound with blows. Unmov'd yet old Entellus stood, his skill And watchfull eye, warding his body still. As at a fenced City Dares lies, Or a high towre by leagure to surprise: This entrance, that, strives by his art to gaine, And with oft storming seeks to get in vain. Entellus rai'sd his arme, and high did rise To make a stroke; the coming blow he spies, And with his nimble body did prevent; Upon the aire the old mans strength is spent, And heavie, he with a huge weight comes down. In Erymanthus so, or Ida's Crown, Torne from the roots, tumbles a hollow Pine. Trojans applauding rise, Sicilians joyne, Clamour scales heaven; Acestes first runs forth To raise his equall aged friend from earth. But th' Heroe this retards not, nor affrights, He fiercer now comes on, rage strength excites, And shame with conscious vertue force revives. Then Dares headlong every where he drives With both his hands redoubling blows, nor stops Nor stayes. As in a storme the houses tops Rattle with haile, so thick he strokes bestows, And falls on Dares, with a showre of blows. Aeneas here forbids then to engage Further, unwilling that Entellus rage Proceed, so ends the fight, and thence conveyd Spent Dares, and with words appeasing, said. Hapless, what folly did thy minde bereave? Dost thou not more then humane strength perceive?
Yield to the God; then brought him off, this said. But Dares with weak knees tossing his head, His teeth all bloody, and gore vomiting, His faithfull equalls to the navie bring: The helme and sword appointed they receive, The bull, the prize unto Entellus leave. Proud of the palme, the Conquerour rais'd with joy, Then said, know Goddess Son, and you of Troy, By this, what strength I in my youth might have, And from what death you rescu'd Dares save. This said, as he against the bull did stand, Now his by fight, his bat pois'd in his hand, Rising, betwixt the horns he takes him full, And beats into his batter'd braine his skull. Dead he falls down, trembling on th' earth he lay; And thus much adds, Erix to thee I pay This better gift then Dares life, and part A victor here, both with my arms, and art. Forthwith Aeneas those would exercise The nimble shaft invites, and plac'd the prize. Brought from Serestus ship with a great throng A mast he fix'd, to it a pidgeon hung, This as a mark to aime at he made fast, And in a brazen helme the lots were cast. All being met; first place with great applause The bold Hyrtacides Hippocoon draws. Then Mnesteus conquerour in the navall game, Crown'd with fresh olives up glad Mnesteus came. Eurytion third; thy brother most renown'd Pandarus, who did once the peace confound, And first his arrow mongst the Grecians shot. Acestes last drew from the helme his lot,
And bold in youthful games will yet contend. Then with great strength their hooked bowes they bend; Each for himself, and forth their arrow drew; First through the skie from his loud bowstring flew Hyrtacides shaft, and cutting swift aire past, Then fix'd it self upon the adverse mast. It shook; the frighted bird flutters her wings, And every part with loud applauses rings. After bold Mnestheus stands, his bowe he bent, Taking his aim, his eye with th' arrow went; Though he was not so happy with the shot To hit the pigeon, yet he broke the knot, By which her feet to the high mast were tide; She down the wind in a dark cloud did glide. Then swift Eurytion did his shaft prepare, And ready, calls his brother in his prayer; As with spread wings thence the glad pigeon flew Through vacant aire, in gloomy clouds he slew. Breathlesse she fell, life in aetherial sphears Forsook, and falling the fix'd arrow bears. Acestes yet remain'd, the palm being got; Yet through the ample skie his arrow shot, Boasting his art, and sounding bowe; streight, here A future prodigie, and great signs appear, Such after-chance declar'd, and omens late Which dreadful prophets did prognosticate. For flying through moyst clouds, the arrow fires, And chalks the way with flames, then spent expires Amongst the winds; as often through the aire A meteor shoots, and stars with blazing haire. All are amaz'd: Trojans, Sicilians joyne In prayers; but great Aeneas lik'd the signe, And did Acestes joyfully imbrace, Then loading him with mighty gifts, thus sayes;
Best father take (for so would heavens great King By these strange signs we, thee prime honours bring) This cup inchac'd with figures thou must have, Which Thracian Cisseus old Anchises gave: The mighty gift my Sire he did present, Both of his love the pledge and monument, And with fresh laurel binds his brows. This said, Then over all Acestes conquerour made; Nor good Eurytion did such grace envy. Though he the Dove brought from the losty sky. Next he rewards him, broke the cord, and last Who fix'd his winged arrow in the mast. But Prince Aeneas, scarce this sport being done, Epytides, tutor, and companion T'Ascanius, cals, and speak in's trusty eare; If Julus, and the young troops ready were, The horses train'd, he with the band should come, And shew himself, arm'd at his grandsires tombe; Then streight commands the throng'd in People, here To make an open field, the Place to cleer. The boys march up, before their Parents shew On gallant steeds, whom Trojans as they go And the Trinacrian youth, with shouts admir'd. All as the use, bright helm'd, and brave attir'd, And with steel points two cornel javelins bore, Light quivers, some, and chains of gold they wore About their necks, that rich and curious be. Three troops march'd on, lead up by captains three: Twice six youth march in a divided band, Bravely drawn up, whom equal chiefs command. Young Priam nam'd from's grandsire first in Place Lead up his youth, Polites thy fair race,
Latium t'augment a Thracian courser bore With white spots dapled, and white feet before, Who lofty in his forehead shew'd a star. Next Atys, whence the Latine Atii are, Young Atys whom Ascanius lov'd; and last Ascanius who in beauty all surpast, Rid a brave horse, which Dido did present Of her dear love the pledge and monument. Each other youth was mounted on a Steed Of old Acestes, pure Trinacrian breed. The Trojans full of joy, did entertain With acclamation this ambitious train, Who by their faces their old Parents knew. When these they had seen, delighted with the shew, Epytides gave the signe, to them prepar'd, And makes his loud switch ring; no sooner heard, They ran together, in three squadrons, then Divide, and open at the word agen, Their courses change, and cruell javelins bear, They countermarch, the front becomes the rear; Alternate orbs with wheeling they include, Now arm'd they seem to fight, and now subdu'de They make retreat, then cheer'd they turn the lance, And peace concluding equally advance. As once the Labyrinth in high Crete (fame says) A thousand turnings had, with doubtful ways, Which did no signe unto the followers leave, But with perpetual errors did deceive. So youthful Trojans wheet, and in that sort, They flight and battell interweave with sport: As Dolphins who the swelling waves divide In Lybick seas, and wanton in the tide. Ascanius when long Alba he did frame Did first appoint this custome, and this game,
And th'ancient Latins taught to celebrate: What he and Trojan youth did, th' Alban state Their off-spring shew'd this greatest Rome from hence Receiv'd, and kept those honours ever since, The game, Troys youthful troops the Trojan names, Thus finished he his blessed fathers games. Here first inconstant fortune chang'd her brow, Whilst they with various rites perform'd their vow, From heaven Saturnian Iuno Iris sent To th'Ilian Fleet: winds breathing as she went: Revolving much, nor was her ancient spleen Yet satisfi'd; the Virgin swift unseen, Streight through the bowe of thousand colours flies, The shores she views, and mighty concourse spies, The port forsook, all from the Navy gone: But far off Trojan dames she saw alone, Who mourn'd Anchises, and the deeps survaid, And weeping ah so many floods (they said) And shoals must yet the weary passe, all pray For seats, toyld with the troubles of the sea. Skilful in mischief, in 'mongst these she prest, And lays aside her goddesse forme and vest, And streight old Beroe, Dorycles wife became, Who once had children, honour and great fame, And thus she did midst Ilian dames declare. O wretches! whom no Graecian in this war Vouchsaf'd to kill at home, unfortunate, For what sad end are you preserv'd by fate? Since Troys destruction now seven years are past, Whilst we by seas, dire rocks, and countreys vast, Raiing new Stars, are born through floods: whilst we Involv'd with waves, seek flying Italy.
Fraternal Erix, kind Acestes strands To plant in, build a city, who withstands? O country, and our Gods preserv'd in vain, Shall no place Troy be stil'd? shall we again Hectorian streams, nor Xanthus, Symois see? Come, this unhappy Navy burn with me. In sleep to me Cassandra did appear, She brought me fire, and said, Your Troy seek here, This is your seat; now is the time to act, Neptunes four altars see; let's not protract: The God himself courage, and brands, affords. Then cruel fire she snatch'd (using these words) And far off bran dishing she casts the flames, Rais'd and astonish'd are the Ilian dames. Here one, call'd Pyrgo, who by age took place, Nurse to so many of great Priams race; Said, This not Beroe, Dorycles wife, nor this A Rhetian dame; here divine beauty is: Mark her bright eyes, and breath; behold her face, Her voyces accent, and her stately grace. I now left Beroe sick, much griev'd that she Should only from such offering absent be, Nor could t'Anchises bring due sacrifice. Such things she said. But they the Fleet behold with cruel eyes, Doubtful 'twixt woful love of present seats They stood, or lands to them design'd by fates: When with spread wings to heaven the Goddesse glides, And the great bow under the clouds divides. Inrag'd and wondering then the Ilian dames With great noise snatch from private harths the flames; Some altars spoile, and boughs, leaves, fire-brands threw; 'Mongst painted sterns, banks, oars, with loose reins flew,
Vulcan inrag'd. When to Anchises tombe And to the theater Eumelus did come From the fire'd navy, and such tidings told, Then they in clouds black rising smoke behold. And first Ascanius, sprightly as he did His troop lead, to the camp disturbed rid; Nor by his fearful tutors could be staid; What new rage? whither now? what mean ye? said. Ah wretched women, you your own hopes burn, Not th'enemies camp; to your Ascanius turn: And at their feet his empty helm he cast, Which personating war, his forehead grac'd. Aeneas hastes; with him the Trojan bands; But they amaz'd, fled, scatter'd through the strands, To woods, and hollow rocks: their minds restor'd They know their own; their enterprise abhor'd, And Juno now is shaken from their breast; But not those untam'd fires could be supprest, Tow, smothering lives under the sappy oke; The vessels catching, vomit gloomy smoke; The cruel plague seiz'd the whole Fleet at length, 'Gainst rivers pow'r, and all the Hero's strength. Pious Aeneas then his garments rends, And to the Gods for aid his hands extends. All-potent Jove, if all the Trojans be Not in thy hate, if antient Pietie Humane affairs regards; these flames destroy; O father, save the poor remains of Troy; Or if deservd, with thunder strike me dead, And now orewhelm with thy right hand. Scarce said, When a black tempest rag'd; a mighty rain Fell without mean: the mountains, all the plain With thunder shook; condensing Auster sent A most black storm through the whole firmament.
The decks are fill'd; Oke once half burnt, growes moist Untill the flame was quenchd; four only lost, Sav'd from that plague. But Prince Aeneas here Shook with the bitter chance, now here, now there, Great cares revolving in his breast; if he Mindlesse of fates, should plant in Sicilie, Or take Italian shore. Old Nautes said, Whom Pallas with much art had famous made, Then to the Prince: What ere the mighty ire Of gods portend, or what the fates require, We must endure. Comforting, he begun Thus to Aeneas: O thou Goddesse son, Let us obey the fates; whatever chance, All fortunes vanquish'd are by sufferance. Trojan Acestes of a race divine, Unto thy counsels an associate joyn. Let him receive thy lost ships companies: And those now tir'd with thy great enterprise. The weary matrons, and old men select, The weak, and those whom dangers now deject; Here let them plant, and here a city frame, And from Acestes give the walls a name. He with these words of his old friend was cheerd, Yet in his breast still many cares appear'd. When nights black chariot had possest the pole, From thence he saw descend Anchises soule, And pouring forth such voyces, did appeare; O son, then life, whilst life remain'd, more dear! O son, bosied in Trojun fates! I am By Joves command sent hither; who from flame. Preserv'd thy ships, and pitied from the sky. Old Nautes counsel take, for Italy; And bold youth choose; a race thou must orecome Cruel by use of war in Latium.
But first to Pluto's dismall courts repair, And deep Avernus, where my dwellings are. I am not with sad shades, in implous hell, But with the blest in glad Elizium dwell. Chast Sybil shall conduct thee to the place, With much blood of black sheep: there all thy race, And new seats thou shalt know; and now farwell, Moyst night hath reach'd her vertick parallell; The cruell East blows me with panting steeds, He through thin aire like smoke thus saying, speeds. Aeneas then: Where hastes thou? to what place? Whom dost thou fly? why driven from our embrace? This said, he ashes stirs, and cover'd fire, The Trojan lar; and in old Vestas quire, Suppliant with holy bread, and full cups bends. Acestes raising first, and next his friends. Both his dear fathers will, and Joves command Declares: and what shall now resolved stand. Nor more advice, these did Acestes grant. They place the matrons; willing People plant: A city gave souls ignorant of great fame; Ships half-consum'd repair, new bancks they frame: Oars, cables fit, but few their numbers are, But of most lively courages in war. Mean while Aeneas plows their city wals, Houses allots, this Troy, that Ilium calls: Acestes joys in his new realms; and draws A Forum out, gives Conscript fathers laws. On Erix top, a fane nigh heaven was rear'd To Venus, and a sacred grove prepar'd, And a Priest added to Anchises tombe; And now the ninth day of their feast was come; Altars they grace: when soft gales calm the main, And breathing Auster cals to Sea again.
Through trending shores complainings loud ascend; Both day and night they with embraces spend; Those Women now, To whom before the Sea Seem'd rough, nor could endure the Deitie, Would fly, and every danger now contemn; With kind words good Aeneas comforts them, And weeping recommends t'Acestes care. To storms a lamb, three calvs to Erix are Offer'd, and then loose cables he commands, And on the prow, crown'd with cut Olive stands, Holding a bowl, and in the swelling brine He entrals casts, and powrs forth liquid Wine; Fair gales attend his sterne; the sailers sweep The curled waves, and brush the azure deep. But Venus mean while exercis'd in cares, To Neptune spake, and such complaints declares. Juno's sad wrath, and unappeased breast. Makes me descend to thee with this request: Whom neither time nor Piety can move, Nor fates can quiet, nor commands of Jove. Was't not enough with fierce spleen to destroy The Phrygian city? poor remains of Troy, To force through miseries; but bones and dust She persecutes; can such a rage be just? Thou know'st what storms on Lybian seas did rise By her commands, commixing waves and skies, And with Aeolian gusts what hils she rais'd, Thus daring in thy realms. Ah shame! behold, the Trojan Dames she drove To fire their Fleet; and their ships lost, did move Their friends to leave them on strange shores. I crave Those yet remain may through their billows have
Safe passe: Laurentian Tyber touch: if I Those wals require, granted by destiny. The deep seas Tamer then; O Erycine Trust to our Realms, from whence thou draw'st thy line. I also have deserv'd; who did withstand Heaven and seas rage so oft: nor lesse by land My care of thy Aeneas, witnessed Symois, Xanthus, when the Trojans fled Trembling before Achilles to their wals. Who many thousands sent to funerals. Full rivers groan'd, nor Xanthus to the Seas Could find his course; from strong Aeasides I in a hollow cloud brought off thy son Weaker in strength and Gods; destruction Wishing that perjur'd Troy these hands did rear. My mind is still the same; then banish fear; He shall in safety touch th'Avernid coast: One only shall he misse in th'Ocean lost; One life for many must be paid. At this the goddesse sad care intermits; The God his steeds conjoyns, and foamy bits Adds to the fierce, and with ejected rein, His azure chariot hurries o're the main. Billows give place, under his loud axe lie Waves level'd now, and stormes forsake the sky; Then varied shapes, and mighty whales appear, Old Glaucus troops, Inons, Palamon, there The active Tritons, Forcus finny train, Upon the left hand of th'appeased main, Thetis, Thalia, Spio, Panope, Melite, Nise and Cymodoce. Here Prince Aeneas flattering joys did find At last to raise his long dejected mind.
Then cheerfull to the sailors gave command. To rear the top masts, to their tackling stand. All pull at once; larboard and starboard hale: Unfurl the shetes, and hoyst the lofty sail, The wish'd gale drives them: Palinure preceds, And being admirall, the squadron leads. All steer as he commands. And now moyst night Had almost touch'd mid heavens vertick height. The sailor on hard benches 'mongst his oars, His weary limbs with quiet rest restores. When from aetheriall stars, soft Somnus glides, Removes the airy darknesse, shades divides, With a sad dream (poor Palinure) to thee, Upon the high sterne sate the deitie, Like Phorbas, and with these words did appear; Palinure, the sea it self thy ship will steere; A soft gale breaths, there is a time to rest: Lie down, steal sleep for eyes with toyl opprest, And I thy charge shall for a while supply, Palinure then said, scarce lifting up his eye; Wouldst thou I should a quiet sea beleeve, To this inconstant monster credit give? Should I Aeneas to false Auster leave, And serene skies, that me so oft deceive? This said, he fix'd unto the rudder lies, Holds fast, and on the stars he held his eyes. The God, behold, in Lethe steep'd, a bough Sleepy with Stygian strength, shakes o're his brow, And wandring eyes of him resisting clos'd. Scarce were his nerves in quiet slumber loos'd, Leaning, that part being loose on which he stood, He with the helm, fals in the briny flood, And oft in vain to his companions cries. With wings the God mounts the aetherial skies.
Fearlesse, the ship not slower, a safe course sailes, Nor in in his promise father Neptune failes. Neer Syrens rocks, once dangerous, now they stood, White with the bones of men, beat with the flood Hoarse waves resound; but when the Prince perceiv'd The ship to wander, of her guide bereav'd, Through nightly waves he did the helm attend, Much sighing the misfortune of his friend: O Palinure, trusting fair feas and skie, Thou naked on some coast unknown must lie.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT At Sybils cave Aeneas asks his fates; Inspir'd, she answers through a hundred gates. Misenus rites; the golden bough is found. Hells dismal passage, and the Stygian sound. Rude Charon pleas'd; a sop loud Cerberus takes. Sad souls hem'd in with nine infernal lakes. Dido is seen; Deiphobus appears. Hell and Elizium. Every thousand years Souls Lethe drink, and bodies reassume. Anchises shews his son those Lords of Rome Must spring from him; their character relates; And after lets him forth at ivory gates. THus he said weeping, and with full saile stands, Gliding at last to the Euboick strands. They turn from Sea their prows, their ships they moare, And the tall Navy guards the winding shore. The glad vouth leap'd on land, streight some desire To force from flint the hidden seeds of fire.
Some teare the shelters of wild beasts, the woods, Whilst others looke about for fresher floods. But good Aeneas sought high towrs which have Phoebus their Lord, dread Sibills woundrous cave, Secrets remote; on whom the God bestows An ample mind, and future things foreshews, To Dians growes and golden roofs they came, Daedalus flying Minos realms, (they fame) To swift wings trusting boldly, through the skies A way untracted to the cold North flies, At last on Chalcis towre he stands, where he First lighting, Phoebus, gave his wings to thee; And a large Temple built; whose porch presents Androgeus death, Athenian punishments, (A wofull thing) leven children, the demands Annually paid, with lots the sad urne stands. Crete that survayes the Sea was opposite; A bulls dire love, Pasiphaes stolne delight, The mix'd race Minotaure, his Monstrous son, The monument of her foule lust was done. The structure, and the Labyrinth here was seen; But Daedalus pitying th'inamor'd Qneen. The art and windings of that house betraies, Shewing the clew; thou Icarus in these Shouldst a great part (had grief permitted) shar'd; To draw thy chance in gold he twice prepar d, Twice fell the fathers hands, Soon the whole frame, They had survad; but that Achates came And did the priestesse of great Phoebus bring Deiphobe, who thus bespake the King; This is no time such sights to entertain; Then bids seaven steers from untouch'd heards be slaine, And as the custome equall sheep be paid. Having said there, the rites were not delaid,
And bids the Twojaus to the Temple come. A cave was cut from a rocks vaster wombe, Whence through a hundred gates, a hundred ways, Sybil as many prophesies convayes. As he drew neer, the Virgin cries; Be bold To ask thy fate; The god the god behold This said, her colour chang'd; nor had her face And comely tresses, the same form or grace: But her swoln bosome pants, a mighty rage Doth all the faculties of her soul engage: Nor humane voice, greater she seems to be Inspired with th'approaching Deitie. Trojan Aeneas, then aloud she said, Hast thou not made thy vowes? hast thou not praid? Nor vast gates of the fatal house till then Shall open. Here she silent was agen; And through the Trojans bones shot trembling feare; Whilst from his soul the King powrs forth his prayer. O Phoebus, thou that strov'st still to protect Unhappy Troy, and didst the shaft direct, And Paris hand to wound Aeacides: I, led by thee, strange lands and many seas To the remote Massylian shores have past, And realms extended unto deserts vast. We Italies flying coasts at length have took, But by our own sad fortune not forsook. And all you Gods and Goddesses that were Foes to Troy's glory, now that nation spare, And you blest Prophetesse humbly I intreat, (I seek but realms are due to me by fate). That we in Latium may find new abodes, And habitations for our wand ring gods; I then to Phoebus and Diana shall A temple build of marble; where Ile call
On solemn dayes, on great Apollo's name, And in our realm Chappels for thee Ile frame, In which the fates and fortunes of our race Which pleas'd you now foretell, shall have their place; And there, blest maid, Ile consecrate choise men. Commit not unto leaves thy verses then, Lest they to wanton winds a sport be made: But sing thy self, I pray. He ends, this said. But in the cave she furious takes no rest, Striving to shake the great God from her brest; Who tires her more, her raging mouth he frames, And by constraining her fierce bosome tames. The hundred gates themselves now open fling, And through the aire Sibylla's answer bring. Thou scap'd from dangers of the sea, far more Remain at land; the Trojans shall the shore Of Latium find; thy breast from such cares free, And soon repent: Wars, horrid wars I see, And Tyber swell'd with blood, nor shalt thou misse Greek camps, a Xanthus and a Symois, A new Achilles of a Goddesse come, And you shall Juno find in Latium. What people, what Italian seats in want, Shalt thou not sue to as a suppliant? A wife shall cause again the Trojan woe, And forrain marriage. Yet dangers fear not, but on bolder goe, What course thy fortune grants, thy first supplies Which thou least thinks, from a Greek seat shall rise. These horrid circumstances from her cell, Cumean Sibyl bellowing did foretell, With dark phrase clouding truth: then Phoebus shakes His reins, and her chaf'd heart more fury takes.
When she grew calme and her wild rage alaid; Aeneas spake; Not any toyle, O Maid, To me an new unlook'd for shape presents, I foresee all, and cast their worst events. One boone I crave (since to infernall realms This way conducts and Acherons dismal streames) That I my dearest father may behold. Open the way, inchaunted gates unfold; Him I from thousand weapons through the flame Brought on my shoulders, through an hoast I came, He me accompanied through all the maine And weake did threatning seas and skyes taine Above the strength, and temper of his age. Us at thy gates t' attend, he did ingage. O pitie then the father and the sonne Blest Maid, for all things can by thee be done. Nor Hecate plac'd thee ore those groves in vaine. If Orpheus could Eurydice regaine, Help'd by his Thracian lyres sweet harmony; Could Pollux by alternate dying free His brother and returne? why should I name Theseus, Alcides? that from Jove I came? Such things he pray'd, and by the altars hung. Then she replyde; Trojan Aeneas, sprung From blood of Gods: to hel's an easie way, Black Pluto's gates stand open night: And day But to return, and the bright aire to view, This is the worke, the labour of a few, Whom Jove esteems, or vertue hath rais'd high, And sprung from Gods Woods in the middle lie, And round, Cocytus motes with a black lake. If so great love, if such desires thee take, Twice to swim Styx, black hell twice to survay, And to strange toyles th' art pleas'd to give such way,
Hear thy first task. A golden bough doth lie, With shining leaves hid in a shady tree; Sacred t'infernall Juno this is said; This the whole woods, and obscure valleys shade: To visit parts below all are restrain'd Untill the bough with golden leaves is gain'd, Which to fair Proserpine must presented be. This pluck'd, another golden from the tree Sprouts with like metal; with your eye search round, And breake it gently off, when it is found. If fates call thee, it will with ease be gain'd, Else not by y violence constrain'd: Nor shall by thee with hardest steele be got, But now thy dead friend, ah thou knowst it not, The whole fleet with his corps contaminates, Whilst thou consulting at our threshold waits; Him first in quiet shade intombe; then bring. Black sheep, an expiating offering; Darke reasms deny de the living thou mayst then Behold. This said, she silent was agen. Aeneas with fix'd eyes, and sad lookes went, And leaves the cave musing the sad event; Faithfull Achates his companion goes With equall steps, dividing equall woes; Betwixt themselves many conjectures, whom She meant was dead, what corps they should intombe. When as they go, they saw Misenus left On the dry shore, by a sad death bereft. Misenus, none more excellent was found, T inflame to battell by his trumpets sound; Great Hectors friend, who with him fights atchiev'd, Whom, when Achilles had of life depriv'd, This valiant Heroe to Aeneas joynd, Who nothing was in feats of War behind,
But sounding his shrill trumpet towards the seas And fondly challenging the deities; Him, emulous Triton (if it credit have) Among the rocks, drown'd in a foamy wave. Groaning with great complaints, about they stand; Pious Aeneas chief: Sybils command Weeping they haste, and with heap'd wood the while Up to high heaven they rear his funerall pile, He visits an old wood, where wild beasts dwel, Elms ring with axes, and tall Cedars fell, They trunks of ash, and oke with wedges rive, And down the hils, woods of wild ashes drive. Amidst the works, Aeneas formost cheer'd His friends, and girded with like arms appear'd. When with a sad heart to himself he said, Viewing the mighty wood, and thus he praid; O that the golden bough it self would shew, In this huge grove, since all hath proved too true Of thee Misenus, which the Priestesse said. Scarce spoke: when from the skies two pigeons made Their flight to him, and to the green earth drew. His mothers doves soon the great Heroe knew: And joyfull praid; If through those tracts above Lies any way, direct me to the grove, Where the rich bough the fertile soyle doth shade: Blest mother help, still reay to my aid. These having spake, on cheerfully he went, Their flight observing, and what course they bent. But feeding they, no farther distance flew, Then they which follow with clear sight may view. Thence to Avernus noisome gulph they fly A nimble course, and cut the liquid sky: On seats descride, two boughs they pearch'd, whence raies Through branches of discolour'd gold displays.
As in the woods oft times a tree will shew, Fresh in cold winter, green with mislletoe; And a new leafe not from her own sap shoots, Embracing the smooth bole with blushing fruits. So from the shady elme the branches shinde, The spangles crackling with the gentle wind, Th'unwilling branch straight down Aeneas tore, And to the Prophetesse Sybilla bore. Nor lesse mean while Trojans Misenus mourn, And his sad dust with funerall rites adorn. First a huge pile with sappy pine erect, And cloven oke, with sable branches deckt: About the sides they mournful cypresse place, And with his shining arms the structure grace. Some water warme, the flowing Caldron swims Ore flames; they bathe, and 'noint, his frigid limbs. Then with a groan him on the biere they lay: Above his purple vest, known weeds display. Part, a sad work, take up the ponderous hearse, And as the ancient use, faces reverse Held to the torch; full bowls of oyl they turn, And gifts of frankincense congested burn. After the ashes fell, and flames decline, The reliques, and dry sparks they quench in wine, In brasse the bones then Chorineus urns, About his mates twice with pure water turns, And he from boughs of happy olive spread Light dews: and they being purg'd, the last words said. But good Aeneas a huge tombe did raise, On which his arms, his oare, and trumpet lays, Under a mighty hill which now they call From him Misenus, and for ever shall. This, done he did Sybils commands dispatch. There was a deep cave with a mighty breach,
With black lakes moted, and a horrid grove, Ore which not safely swiftest wings could move, Such were the vapours from those fowl jaws came; This place the Graecians did Avernus name. Here first he foure black bullocks did designe The Priest upon the forehead powring wine, Haire pluck'd betwixt the horns, on sacred flame Lays the prime gift, calling on Hecats name, Powerfull in heaven, and hell: with knives some stood Prepar'd, and sav'd in bouls the reeking blood, A black fleec'd lambe pious Aeneas slew, The furies mother, and great sisters dew, A barren Cow, thee Proserpine they bring, Then rear night altars to the Stygian King: And buls firme entrals on the flames did pile, And poure on scorching bowels purest oyl. When with the dawn behold! and rising sun, Beneath their feet earth groans, the cliffs begun Of the high woods to move, dogs in the shade Howle as the Goddesse her approaches made. Far, O far off from hence, be all prophane, (The Priestesse cries) and from the Grove abstain; And thou Aeneas draw thy sword, and go, Now courage needs, now thy great valour shew. This said, in th'open cave the Furious leaps, As fast he follows with undaunted steps. You Gods who souls command, and silent ghosts, Phlegeton, Chaos, nights vast dismall coasts. Grant I declare things heard, by your aid shew What earth and darknesse long hath hid below. Obscur'd through shades, and wofull night they past Through Pluto's empty courts, and kingdoms waste. As through dark woods, when a new moon displaid Pale beams, and Jove the sky hides with a shade,
And black night colour did from things compell. Just at the door, before the gates of hell, Sorrow repos'd, with her revenging Rage, Pale sicknesses and discontented age, Fear, with dire Famine, and base Povertie, Labour and death, shapes terrible to see. Then sleep allied to Death, and fond joys are Plac'd on the other side, with deadly War, On iron beds, Furies and Discord sit, Their viperous hair with bloody fillets knit. Here a dark elme, did ancient boughs display, The seat (as they report) where vain dreams lay, And stuck  every leafe: then a huge brood Of various monsters, biform'd Scylla stood, And Centaitrs in the porch; with hundred hands Briareus and the Lernian Hydra stands, Chymera hissing loud, and arm'd with fire, The triple shade, Gorgons and Harpyes dire. Aeneas draws, then struck with sudden fear, Opposing the sharp point to them drew neer. But that his learn'd companion him perswades, They were but fleeting forms, and empty shades, In vain he had attempted ghosts to wound. Hence led the way to th' Acherontick sound; With a vast gulph here whirlpits vext with mud, Boyling casts sands up from the Stygian flood. Charon the horrid ferry-man these deeps With dreadiul squallidnesse, and river keeps. His untrim'd cheeks were rough with hoary hair, Knotty his beard, his firy eyes did stare, Tye'd on his shoulders hung a sordid coat; He trims his sails, drives with a pole his boat, And in his rusty bark wafts Passengers; The God was youthful still, though struck in years.
Here all the scatter'd throngs rush to these coasts, Men, Women came, and valiant Hero's Ghosts, Depriv'd of life; boys, virgins, young men, here Before their Parents laid upon the bier. As in first cold of autumne from the trees The leaves fall thick, or to the shore from seas The birds repair in flocks, when early frosts Drive them from water unto warmer coasts. They stand, and first for passages implore, Their hands lift up, longing for th'other shore; But the grim wafter these, now them receives, But others far off on the sand he leaves. Aeneas wondring at the tumult, said Wherefore this concourse to the streams, O maid? Say what these souls require, why those the shores. Forsake, and other billows roul with oars. Brief, th'aged Priestesse thus to him replies. Anchises son, sure stock of deities, Thou Styx, Cocytus view'st, by this to swear And to deceive the power, the Gods do fear. All those sad troops thou seest, are not interr'd; That Charon; those he wafts are sepulcher'd. Untill their bones in quiet rest, before, None passe these hoarce waves to the horrid shore. A hundred years to wander here they'are bound, Permitted then to passe the Stygian sound. The Prince at this no further did advance, And full of thoughts, pitying their sad mischance, Leucaspes and Orontes there he spies, The Lycian chief, sad, wanting obsequies; Whom the black south o're set with tempest, when They sail'd to Troy, waves swallowing ship and men. Lo! Palinure the master next appear'd, Whom whilst by stars from Lybia he steer'd,
Fell mid'st the waves, and tumbles with the stern, Him when he could in so much shade discern, O Palinure, first said what deitie Snatch'd thee from us and drown'd amid'st the Sea, Speak; for to me still Phoebus words prov'd true, But onely in my hopes concerning you. He said, thou safe to Latium through the seas, Shouldst passe; behold! Are these his promises? Great Trojan Prince, Phoebus deceiv'd not thee, Said Palinure, nor hath the God drown'd me; For the torne rudder grasping with much force, As to my charge I stuck, and steer'd my course, With it I fell, by the rough seas I sweare, Nor for my selfe conceiv'd I so much feare, But that the Master wanting at the helme, Such swelling waves thy ship might overwhelme. Three stormie nights rough south winds carried me Through the vast waves; the fourth dawne, Italy Rais'd on a swelling wave I saw, and swam Softly to shore, and to firm footing came, When cruel men on me with weapons set, Grasping rough bancks, loaden with garments wet, Who ignorantly tooke me for a prey; The waves possesse me now, and in the sea The winds oft rowle my body to the shore; But by heavens pleasant light I thee implore, Py thy deare Father, and thy hopefull heire Take me from hence great Prince, or else interre (For thou hast power) and seeke m'in Velins bay. Or if thy mother Venus shew the way, (For I beleeve without some aiding God Thou com'st not now, to faile this dreadful flood) Then helpe a wretch, and me transport with thee, That I at last in death may quiet be.
This said, then Sybill thus her selfe exprest, Whence Palinurus, comes this strange request? Wouldst thou unburied, Styx, the furies Lake, Behold, and without leave these shores forsake? Desist to hope that fates will heare thy prayer; But take this comfort to appease thy care. The neighbouring Cities shall thy bones interre, And mov'd by omens, build thy sepulchre; Then to thy tombe pay yearly rites, and shall The place for ever Palinurus call. These words appeas'd his cares, and griefe ore-came, Proud of a countrey that should beare his name. Then on they went, and to the stream drew nigh. As Charon these from Stygian waves did spie Bending through silent groves, to his fad strands: Thus rudely first begins, and threatning stands. Who ere thus arm'd approachest to our streams, Your businesse tell: this is the place of dreams, Of shades, and drousie night; depart, nor can My Stygian boat transport a living man. Nor pleas'd it me to waft ore Stygian seas, Theseus, Perithous, nor great Hercules, Though sprung from Gods, men never vanquished. From our Kings Throne, in chains Alcides led Hels porter trembling, the other did combine To take from Plutoe's bed chast Proserpine. Then Sybill said, give not such way to rage, Here are no stratagems nor arms t'ingage A violence; let hels Porter ever lye In's kennell, and pale Shadowes terrifie; Still in her Uncles Court the Queen may be. Aeneas fam'd for armes and pietie, To see his father, through darke shades descends. If thee no shape of such affection bends,
Behold this bough (which hidden in her vest She shewes) then swelling rage forsakes his breast: Nor more he said, but the strange gift admires, The fatall bough not seen in many years. Then turns his sable vessel toward the strand, Thence drives those Ghosts sate waiting on the sand, Opens his hatches, and receives his freight. The craz'd boat groanes with great Aeneas weight, And leakie drunck much water; safe at last He with the Priestesse and Aeneas past, And free from foule mud, 'mongst black rushes lands. From triple jawes great Cerberus through those strdans Still barks, and huge in a vast kennell lies. When she his neck dreadfull with serpents spies, She casts to him a soporiferous bit: He opens his three mouths to swallow it, Then being laid, stretcht forth his long back lies Measuring his kennell with his mighty sise. Aeneas past, whilst Cerberus sleeps, and leaves The shores of irrenavigable waves. Then they heard voices, and a mighty cry Of Infants weeping, which in th'entrance lie; Whom from sweet life a wofull death did call From the loved teate, with timelesse funerall; Next, those who falsly were condemn'd to die, And did not without Lot or judgement lie. Minos being plac'd, a silent councell cals, And lives examines of the criminals. Next after these, those wretched Ghosts recide, Who nating life, have by their own hands dyde, And lost their soules: who now to live again Would not hard toyle and poverty disdain; Them fates deny, and the most dreadfull sound Binds in, and Stix nine times incircles round.
Not farre from hence they to large champaigns came, The fields of sorrow call'd, such was the name; Here those whom cruell love with griefe devours, Did haunt close walks, conceal'd in mirtle bowres, Nor in their death relinquish they their woes; There Phedra, Procris, and Euryphile goes, Shewing those wounds her son had made, he saw Pasiphae, Evadne, Laodomia, Coeneus with them, now woman, once a man, Whom fates restor'd to her own sex againe. Amongst these, Dido wandred the great wood, With a fresh wound, whom, as Troys Heroe stood, And drawing nigh, through obscure shades he knew: Such in her prime, the rising moon we view, Or seeme at least to see, through clouds displaid: Powring forth tears, then with sweet love he said; Ah haplesse Dido, truth that newes did tell Which said thou'rt dead, and by thy own hand fell. I was the cause; now by the stars I vow, By Gods, and faith, if any is below, Unwillingly best Queen, I left thy lands, But was inforced by the gods commands: Who now compell me through these shades to passe, Through deepest night, and this most dismall place. Nor my departure could I ere suppose Could thee, alas, ingage in so much woes. O stay, and part not thus. whom fly'st thou? me? We nere shall meet againe, so fates decree. These to her vext and frowning he declares Her to appease, but forceth his own tears: Fix'd on the earth her eyes averse she held, Nor was to change no more with words compeld, Then if hard flint, or Parian Rocks had stood: Then flyes displeas'd, and seeks some shady wood;
To her first Lord Sichaeus she repaires, Who answers all her love, and meets her cares. Aeneas no lesse strucken with these woes, Follows with tears, lamenting as he goes. Thence on they passe, to fields remote they went, And Groves where souls renown'd in war frequent; Valiant Parthenopus and Tydeus here With pale Adrastus shade, did first appear; Those much above lamented, in a train, He all those Dardans saw in battel slain; Glaucus, and Medon, Thersilocus he moans, Polybetes Ceres Priest, Antenors sons, Idaeus in's chariot arm'd; thick souls frequent Now on each hand, nor i'st sufficient To see him once, to tary they desire, And walk with him, his coming they inquire. But the Greek Captains, Agamemnon's bands, Viewing the mans bright arms through shadie strands, Shake with huge feare: part, as in times past, fly To seek their ships, part raise a feeble cry, And the rais'd clamour in the utterance dies. Here Priams son Deiphobus he spies, Wounded all ore; his mangled face appears, His face and hands, his head dispoil'd of ears, With a dishonour'd wound his ravisht nose; Him pale, and dire wounds hiding, scarce he knowes; At last with known voice spake: O valiant Deiphobus, of Teucers high descent, Whom could such cruel punishments delight? Who had the power? that last and woful night, I heard that thou with Graecian slaughter tir'd, Upon a heap of confus'd corps expir'd. An empty tombe I on the Rhetian coast Have rear'd, and thrice aloud implor'd thy Ghost;
There are thy arms and name; but thee not found, I could not bury friend in native ground. Then he: Nothing dear friend didst thou neglect; All rites are paid, my tombe thou didst erect: But my own fates, curst Helen me bereft, Drown'd in these woes, and she these monuments left. For as thou knowst, we past with false delight Never to be forgot, that last sad night, When through great Troy the fatal horse did come, And pregnant with an army in his wombe; She fain'd a dance, and Phrygian dames in wild Orgies she led, amidst a huge torch held, And cals the Grecians from a battlement. Tird with my cares, and drowsie, then I went To my unhappy bed, where in calme rest I slept as with the charms of death possest. Mean while my dear wife took my arms away, And from my head did my good sword convay, Opens the gates, lets Menelaus in, Hoping by this great act his love to win, And past offences to extinguish thus. They rush in (to be brief) with Ithacus Plotter of mischief; heaven such Greeks repay, If for revenge with pious lips I pray. But tell what chance thee living hither sent, Driven by storms, or by the gods consent? Or by what fortune brought, that thou resorts To these dark places, sad and dismal courts. By this the morn in her bright chariot ran Betwixt the poles to heavens Meridian, And th' whole time granted they had thus delaid; But Sybil them advis d, and briefly said: Night hastes, O Prince, and houres in weeping glide, This is the place where the two wayes divide;
the right, which to great Pluto's Pallace bends, T'Elizum leads; the left, to hell descends, Where wicked men receive their punishment. Deiphabus said, great Priestesse be content, I shall depart, and fill in shades the list. But go you on and better fates assist. This said, he takes his leave. On his left side, Aeneas then under a Rock espide A mighty fort surrounded with three wals, Where Phlegeton with a swift current fals Of flaming waves: rowling huge stones along, The gates on adamatine pillars hung; No strength of men, of steel, nor gods, has power This to destroy, high stands the brazen towre. Girt in a bloody robe Tisiphone keeps The entrance night and day, and never sleeps. Hence cruel lashes sound and groaning pains, Clashing of steel, and ratling of huge chains. Amaz'd Aeneas stands, and frighted said, What dreadful sights are these, declare O maid. What are these tortures? whence these hideous cries? Renowned Trojan, Sybill then replies, In this dire place none but the guilty are: When Hecate left these dark groves to my care, She shew'd me all their pains, and lead each way. Stern Gnossian Radamanth these realms doth sway, Hears and corrects their crimes, forcing to tell What they 'mongst mortals vainly did conceal, Sins which at late death unrepented were. Then fierce Tisiphone makes the guilty fear, Shaking her whip from her left hand extends Her twisted snakes, and cals the cruel friends: On groning hinges then th' inchanted gates Are open'd straight; seest thou what porter waits
In th'entrance there, what monster keeps the dore? Hydra with fifty ugly jawes: one more Cruell then this by far, within doth dwell, Whence two steepe wayes lead headlong down to hell: So far it doth beneath earths surface lye, As tall Olympus thrusts into the sky. Here young Titanians are, earths ancien race, Struck down with thunder to the lowest place. There saw I both th' lodies, those vast Gyants, who strove heavens fabricks to have raz'd, And Jove t'have thrust from heavens high Monarchie. And saw Salmonius in great tortures lie, Whil'st he heavens fire, and thunder imitates, Brandishing flames, and through the Grecian states, Borne on fowre steeds, proudly through Elis drives With fond pretence to heavens prerogatives: Who did in imitable fire and raine, With brasse, and speed of horne hoof'd horses, feign. Then through the clouds from Jove almighty came A dart, he sends no brands, nor earthy flame, And headlong him with inrag'd whitlwinds queld. Th'all bearing earths son Tityus, I beheld There, whose vast corps did nine whole acres fill, And a huge vulture with a hooked bill His bowels and immortall liver search'd, Fresh food for pains, and on's breast tiering peach'd, To his renewing veins allows no ease. What need I mention both the Lapithes, A black stone seems now falling on their heads; Golden frames shine with high and geniall beds, Before them cates, with kingly luxuries; But not far off the greatest furie lies, Forbids to eat, and rising from the ground, Swings her black torch, and makes a thundring sound,
Here those who living, did their brothers hate, Murther'd their sires, to clients us'd deceit, Or who alone brooding on riches lie, Lending to none, the greatest companie; Who slain for lust, who impious arms persu'd, Nor fear'd the trust of Princes to delude. Here meet their dooms: Seek not these woes to sound, Nor by what way fate did their souls confound. These roll huge stones, and stretch'd on wheels do lye. There Theseus sits, and shall eternally. Aloud through shades sad Phlegyas warning cries, Admonish'd, justice learn, nor Gods despise. This to a potent Prince his country sold, And laws enacted, and repeal'd for gold; This beds his daughter, and no incest spar'd; All dar'd strange crimes, and thriv'd in what they dar'd. Had I a hundred mouths, as many tongues, A voice of iron, to these had brazen lungs; Their crimes and tortures ne're could be displaid. When Phoebus aged Priestesse thus had said, Go on, she bids, and finish your intents, I see the Cyclops forged battlements And ports which stand with obvious arches; there To place the present, we commanded were. Then through dark wayes they went with equal pace, The mid path taking, and approach the place: Aeneas came to th'porch, and purg'd with cleere Water, the golden bough he fixed there. These rites perform'd, the Goddesse gift being plac'd, In joyful places they arriv'd at last, And came to groves where happy souls do rest In pleasant greens, the dwellings of the blest.
Here larger skies did cloath with purple rayes The field, which their own Sun and Stars obeys. Some in green meads their time in wrastling spend. Some gallantly on the bright sand contend, Some graceful footing with a song present. In a long robe the Thracian Poet went, On seven sweet strings he descants sacred laies, His hand now strikes, his ivory quill now playes. Here Teucers old line, a fair race appears, 'Most valiant Heroes, borne in be ter years, Ilus, Asaracus, and who built Troy's spires, Their arms and empty chariots he admires, Their spears stuck down, their horses through the ground Carelesly fed; and what delight they found In arms, or chariots, or brave steeds alive, That pleasure under earth did still survive. Others he saw on each side banquetting, And in a solemn dance glad Paeans sing, Shaded with odorous Laurel, by whose woods Eridanus rising, rowls his swelling floods. And here were those did for their countrey die, With Priests who in their lives vow'd chastitie; And sacred Poets who pleas'd Phoebus best, Or by invented arts mans life assist, And others in their memories renown'd, Their temples all with snowie garlands bound. To those about her thus Sybilla sayes, But to Musaeus first, who midst them was, And taller by the head then all the rest; Say blessed souls, and thou of Poets best, Where is Anchises seat to him we come, And the great streams of Erebus have swom. To whom the Heroe in few words again: We have no certain places, we remain
On beds of grasse, and walk in shadie woods And meadows ever fresh with chrystal floods. But if you please t'ascend this rising brow, I shall the most convenient passage shew. This said, he went before, and a fair plain Discovering there, thence they descend again. But old Anchises sought with mighty care Souls which in pleasant vales confined were, Which soon must view th' aetherial skies; where he Numbred his own renowned progenie, Their manners, power, their riches, and their doom. When towards him he saw Aeneas come, Through pleasant greens, joyful, his hands did raise, And bathing of his cheeks with tears, thus sayes. Thou com'st at last, and thy great love to me Hath vanquish'd the hard journey; I may see Thee now dear son, and change discourses here; Thus I forethought, and judg'd the time drew neer: Nor hath my care deceiv'd me; from what coast Through vast seas com'st thou, with what perils tost, That now I meet thee here? my mind misgave Lest thou in Lybia some mischance might have. But he: Dear father thy, thy woful shade Appearing oft, this journey did perswade: Our fleet hides Tyrrhen shores; grant, grant that we May joyn right hands, nor our imbraces flee. Large floods then drown'd his cheeks; thrice he assaid T'infold his neck, three times the fleeting shade In vain he with extended arms assails. Which like a swift dream flies, or nimble gales. When in a winding vale Aeneas fees A secret grove, and far off murmuring trees And pleasant seats, which Lethe warer'd; here People in numerous nations did appeare:
And as in meads, the bees, in the bright spring Sit on the various flowres, incircleing Bright lilleys, and all the fields resound with noise. Aeneas being ignorant, asks the cause, Struck with the sight, what were those streams, wherefore Such multitudes of men had fill'd the shore; Anchises then: Those souls to whom fates owe New bodies, where the streams of Lethe flow, Drink secure draughts, and long oblivion. These I desir'd to thee should be foreshown, And these our stock to number: whence the more Thou mayst rejoyce finding th' Ausonian shore. O sir, must such pure souls aetherial aire Review again, and to dull flesh repaire. Why have the wretches such a strange delight To visit day. I shall the cause recite, Nor will I hold thee in sulpence, dear son; Then thus Anchises orderly went on. At first the heaven, and earth, the liquid plain, The moons bright globe, and stars Titanian, A spirit fed within, spread through the whole, And with the huge heap mix'd infus'd a soule. Hence man, and beasts, and birds derive their strain, And monsters floating in the marbled main. These seeds have fiery vigour and a birth Of heavenly race; but clog'd with heavy earth, Which their dull limbs and dying members drown'd: Hence fears, and hopes, sorrows, and joy abound; Shut in dark flesh their natures they forget; But when their latest light and life is set, Not all woes leave them, nor all tortures quite Forsake the wretches there; and 'tis but right; Things strangely grown by custome into crimes, They must be punish'd for their mispent times,
And tortures feele; some in the winds are hung, Others to clense their spotted sins are flung In a vast gulph, or purg'd in fire they are: We all have our own tortures: then repare T'Elizium and some few blest seates obtaine, Till length of time purg their contracted staine, And leave a fire clens'd from all earthly sence, A pure aetherial intelligence. When thousand yeares have fil'd their period, All these God calls in troups to Lethes flood, To th nd that they forgetfull of what's past, May reascend, and bodies take at last. Anchises then his son and her (this said) 'Mongst busie troups, and noysfull throngs convaid, Then takes a hill from whence they might discerne Them march in order, and their faces learne. Now comes thy glory, and the Dardan race, Nephews which shall in Latium have great place. Illustrious souls, to whom our name must be. In briefe, Ile shew thee thy own destiny. Seest thou that youth, who leans upon his lance? Next lots shall him t'aetheriall aire advance: Sylvius, and Alban name, thy posthume race, Sprung from Italian blood shall next take place: To thee then old, thy wife Lavinia brings Him forth in woods, a King, and sire of Kings, From whom our race shall in long Alba reign. Next Procus glory of the Dardan strain, Numitor, apys, Sylvius nam'd from thee Aeneas match'd in arms and piety, If he at any time rule Alba. View Now thore brave youths, and what great strength they shew; These shall with civick wreaths their temples bound, Nomentum, Gabii, Fidena found;
These Collatine towrs famous for chastity Shall raise 'mongst hils, and proud Pometii, And Inous city, Bola, Cora frame, Thus cal'd hereafter, now without a name. Then Martial Romulus shall himself conjoyn Companion to his grandsire from the line Of great Assaracus, whom Ilia bare. Behold a double crown impails his hair; Jove this shall honour as himself (dear son) He shall to Rome give earths dominion, Her fame to heav'n advance, inclosing then Seven hils with wals, happy with valiant men. As Berecinthia crown'd with turrets rides Through Phrygian cities, joyfull: by her sides, Her race of Gods a hundred she imbrac'd, All heav'ns inhabitants supreamly plac'd. But here bend both thine eyes, this off-spring see, Thy Roman Caesar Julius Progenie Must heav'ns great axe next scale: this, this, the Prince That was so often promis'd thee long since! Augustus Caesar, sprung of Gods, once more To Latium shall the golden age restore, Where Saturn reign'd, and stretch his proud command Past Garamant and Inde: there lies a land Beyond the year and Sun, where Atlas bears Heav'ns axeltree adorn'd with shining stars; The Caspian and Meotick lands, when he Draws nigh, heav'ns oracles shall terrifie, And Nile shall tremble in his seven fold streams; Nor did Alcides know so many realms, Though the swift stag and boar he did subdue, And with his shafts in Lerna Hydra slew; Nor conqu'ring Bacchus who joyn'd tygers bent, With viney reins, from Nisa's steep descent.
Doubt we to raise our glory then, shall we Dispair to plant our selves in Italie. What's he far off grac'd with the olive bough Presenting offerings? his white chin I know; A Roman King, whose laws first setled Rome, And from small Curets, a poor soyl shall come To great command; next Tullus who shall break His countreys peace, and sloathful People make Who knew no triumphs, active in the Wan. Next him comes Ancus, one more haughty far, And swoln with popular breath; wouldst thou behold The Tar quine Princes, and the mighty should, Revengeful Brutus, who the fasces had, Sharp axes, and was first a Consul made. Who th'haplesse sire shall cause his son to die, Raising new war, for specious liberty: How ere posterity the fact shall doome, Him love of fame, and's countrey did o'recome. The Decii, Drusii, stern Torquates see; Camillus full of gold and victory. But these behold, whose like arms shine so bright, Concording souls, now hid in shady night: Ah when they live, what wars shall they maintain, Opposing each! what fights, what numbers slain! From the steep Alpes, and the Meotick towers. The sire descends, the son brings Eastern powers. Do not brave youth in such a war contend, Nor with such force your countreys bowels rend. But thou my blood who draw'st from heaven thy race, First pitty, and thy arms lay down. Fam'd with Greek slaughters he a Conquerour shall From Corinth proudly to the Capitoll His chariot drive; Argos, Micene, deface, And shall revenge on great Achilles race,
Old Troy, and temples which prophaned be. Who could forget great Cato Gracchi, thee Cossus, or the thunderboults in Warre Those Scipio's, who the Lybian conquerours were: Temperate Fabricius, or Serranus thee Holding the Plow! where will the Fbii me Ttansport! thou Maximus the only man Who by delayes Romes fortune must regaine, Others I grant shall mould respiring brasse, And cut in marble a most lively face; Some better plead, and some Astronomers, Describe heavens motion and the rising stars: Be thou ambitious how to govern best, In these arts, Roman, thou must be profest. That we a peace well grounded may injoy, Subjects to spare, and Rebels to destroy. Anchises said, they wondring all the while, Marcellus view, glorious in wealthy spoyle; This conquerour doth in vertue all orecome, And shall in mightiest tumults calme great Rome, The Punie wast, and Gaules most rebel swarms, And thrice to Romulus dedicate their arms. Aeneas here (for he a youth beheld March in bright arms, whose personage exceld But with sad lookes, and a dejected face) Said, who is this? with him keeps equall pace, Is he his son, or one of of his great stock? How like himselfe! what noyse! what suters flock! But black night with sad clouds, involves his head. Then with abortive tears Anchises said, Know not, deare son, great sorrowes of thy own: This to the world by fates shall be but shown, Then snatch'd away; Romes stock too great had seem'd, Should the Gods grant a gift so much esteem'd.
What grones from Mars his campe afflict great Rome, Tyber, when gliding by his new made tombe, What funeralls wilt thou see! nor any shall Like him who sprung from Troys originall Raise Latium's hope: and never Roman earth Shall boast her selfe to foster such a birth. Ah piety, ancient faith, th'unconquer'd hand, None shall him arm'd with any power withstand: Whether on foot he comes, to charge his foe, Or from his foamie steed makes blood to flow. O youth to be lamented, thou shalt be Marcellus, if thou break'st thy destiny. Handfuls of Lillys bring, and purple flowers, That I may strew this noble soul of ours, And heap with gifts. Thns through all parts they went And saw the vast aeriall continent. Then with his son alone Anchises came, And fires his mind with love of future fame; After to him he did the War relate, Laurentian people, and Latinus state, And how all toyles should be eschew'd or borne. There are two gates of sleep, the one is horne, From whence with passage free true visions fly: The other faire, shines with bright Ivory; This to the skies in sleep false Manes beares. These, whil'st to's son and Sybill he declares, Anchises lets him forth at Ivory gates. He streight to's Fleet went, and reviews his mates, And to Caieta came, where then abode His navie, and at anchor fafely roade.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. MAny strange signes and prodigies declare, A forraign Prince must wed th' Ausonian heire. Aenas enters Latium: threatned wants Turn'd to a jest; the promis'd Land he plants, And Embasies to King Latinus sends. A peace is made. Vext Juno stirs the Fiends, And calls Alectos aid, since heaven denies. A tame deere kill d, has bloody obsequies. The Queen and Turnus spur'd by hellish charms, From long peace Latium rous'd to impious arms. 'Gainst th old Kings advice, all streight ingage: Janus gates open'd, the fierce vulgar rage. The Martiall list. Camilla in the reare. AVirgin march'd, arm'd with a Myrtle speare. ANd thou Aeneas nurse Caietae, hast Given to our shoares a name by death, shall last; The place thy honour keeps, seal'd with thy name, Great Latium hath thy bones (if that be fame,)
But good Aeneas, Funerall rites being paid, Her Tombe high rear'd and swelling Seas alaid, Hoysts sayle, and leaves the port; fresh gales arise With night, nor the bright Moon his course denies, But with a trembling splendor guilds the flood. By the next lands Circaean coasts they stood. In unpast groves, there Sols rich daughter calls With usuall songs, burning in sumptuous halls Sweet smelling cedar, with nocturnall flame, Running neat shutles through a curious frame. Hence before night, is heard the raging sound Of Lyons chaff'd, refusing to be bound; And bristled Boars; hence, Bears in collars storm, And shapes of huge Wolves houle; whose humane form The cruell Godesse Circe there invests With fierce aspects, and chang'd to salvage Beasts: Lest pious Trojans were transform'd to such Entring the Port, lest they dire shores should touch, With faire Winds Neptune swel'd their sailes, and bore With prosperous flight, beyond that dangerous shore. And now the Sea blush'd with the morning beam, Aurora shining from her golden team, When the winds fell, a suddain calm againe, And oares now strugled in the azure maine. And here Aeneas spies a mighty wood, Through which ran Tyber, with a pleasant flood And nimble edies, bright with golden sand Into the Sea, about, and ore the strand; Much fowle did haunt, and in the channell throng; Then flying through groves, high heav'n pleas'd with a song. Here he commands to bend, and steer those lands, And glad he for the shady River stands. Now Erato, what Kings, what times those were, What was old Latium, when the stranger, there
First with his Fleet arriv'd, I shall recite, And what first made such quarrels, bring to light. Help Goddesse, help, I horrid warres shall sing, Armies, and Kings, rage did to funeralls bring, The Tyrrhen troupes, and all the Ausonian land Muster'd in arms, great tasks I take in hand. And bold attempts. Glad fields, and cities blest Now ag'd Latinus in long peace, possest. Whom, on the Nymph Marica as they fame Faunus begot, Faunus from Picus came, Picus O Saturne thee did father call, Of the high blood thou the originall. But to Latinus, heaven no sonne had left, For he was in his prime by fates bereft; One daughter was t' enjoy this vast estate, Now ripe for Marriage, and a Princely Mate. From all Ausonia, and great Latium went Many to win her, Turnus by descent From a high stock, and most for beauty fam'd A suter was, whom the great Queen inflam'd With much affection, strove to her to joyne, But threatning prodigies hindered the designe. A sacred Laurell, midst the Court did rear A lofty top, long kept by pious fear, Found by Latinus when he built that feate; Which then to Phoebus he did consecrate, And gave from this the Laurentines a name. When swarmes of Bees (a wondrous story) came With a great murmur, and a sudden flight Through the clear skies, then on the branches light, Cling to the Bowes, and hang upon the tree. Streight cryes the Augure a strange man we see, From those parts coming now, and forraign powers To Take these coasts, and rule our lofty Towers.
Besides, when chast Livinia did beare To Altars Virgin flames, her father there; Her faire long tresses seem'd to catch the fire, And crackling flames to burn her rich attire, Her royall dresse, and crown with jewels bright: Then smoak involveth with a pitchy light, And through the high roofs conquering Vulcan rould; But this, the wondrous prodigie foretold, That she in fame, and fortune should transcend; Yet to the Nation did great Warre portend. But troubled with these signes, Latinus moves His inspir'd Father, in th' Albunean groves Asks Faunus Oracles, where the sacred floods Sulphure exhales, in thick resounding woods. From hence Italians, all Oenotria, sought Answers to doubts; when gifts the priest had brought, Here he repos'd on skins of slaughter'd sheep, And under silent night prepares to sleep. When many wondrous fleeting forms he sees, Strange voyces heares, and talks with Deities, Confers with Acheron, and the deeps below. Here King Latinus Oracles to know, Then did a hundred choyce sheep sacrifice, And on their skins, and spreading fleeces lies: When the thick grove gave answer to this fence. Match not thy childe to any Latine Prince, Deare off-spring, nor those rites prepared grant: A forraign son mustcome, our name shall plant Amongst the Starres; from him a progenie. Beneath their feet shall all things govern'd see, Which Phoebus doth from Sea to Sea behold. These answers which in silent night were told, And Counsels, King Latinus not conceal'd: But to Ausonian Cities 'twas reveal'd
By flying fame, when first the Trojan bands Did moare their Fleet, on high and verdant strands, Aeneas his prime chiefes, and the young Prince Repos'd, under a spreading trees defence, Then feasts prepare on grasse, and cut their meate, (So Jove foretold) on cakes of purest wheat: And did with jucy fruit their bisket swell. Their victualls spent, as hunger did compell, They on the hard bread fall with violence brake, And with bold teeth assault the fatall cake. Nor spar'd their wheaten plates thus squar'd, t' invade: We eate our trenchers too Ascanius said. Nor saying more: this heard, an end affords To all their toyle, his father took the words, Amaz'd at the accomplisht prophesie. And streight he said, haile lands are due to me By fates, and haile you faithfull Trojan Gods, This seat is yours, and here are your abodes. Such secrets I recall my Sire did leave. Deare son, when unknown shores shall thee receive, And hunger shall inforce trenchers to eat: There expect rest, remember there to seat, And there build walls, and roofs with bulwarks plant, This is the famine, and remaining want Last ruine threats, Glad let us then, with early dawne prepare To search these coasts, and what the people are, And severall wayes discover from the shore, Now pay Jove boules, my father now implore, On tables place Anchises wine: his brows (Thus having said) he wreaths with Olive bows. The genius of the place, the first of Gods Tellus adores, with Nymphs, and unknown floods,
Nights rising starres, Idean Jupiter, And to the Phrygian Mother made his prayer, And parents which in heaven, and hell abode, Thrice from above thundred th' all-potent God, He brandish'd lightning in his hand did hold, Which in the sky sparkled with beames of gold. Here, through the Trojans spread a sudden fame, The day was come, their promis'd walls to frame, Joyfull they feast, and at the mighty signe, They goblets place, and crown the flowing wine. When the next day the world with beams displai'd, To search the Countrey severall wayes they made: And here the fountains of Numicus swell, Hence Tyber flows, and there bold Latines dwell. Aeneas then a hundred prime men calls, To beare his Embassie to the Royall walls. With Kingly presents, they with olives crown'd, Should for the Trojans tearms of peace propound. Without delay they haste what was injoyn'd: Whilst he slight works to a meane trench design'd, Erects a Fort, and camp-wise did begin His first aboads, and fenc'd with bulwarks in. Now going on, they to the walls draw nigh, When Latine roofes, and lofty Towres they spy, And gallant youth before the City just, Riding brave horse, and chariots tam'd in dust, Or cast light Javelins, or stiffe bowes to bend, And in the race, or Tilting to contend. When one with speed brought to the Royall eare, That great men in strange weeds, attending were, He commands streight to th' presence they be showne, And takes his place then, in his Grandsires throne,
Rais'd on a hundred pillars midst the Towne, Stood Picus Court, and Pallace of renowne, Awfull with groves, and mysteries profound. Here Kings first Scepters had, and first were crown'd, This was to them their Temple, and their Court, Here they at sacred festivals resort, And fathers, when a Ramme was offered, sate As was the custome, at long boards in state. Cut in old Cedar the Effigies there, Of antient Italus, Sabinus were, Who first set Vines, his hook still in his hand; Old Saturne and bi fronted Janus stand In th' entrance, with some of the ancient straine, Who bold in Warres were for their Countrey slaine. Then many arms on sacred pillars fixt, With captive chariots, battell axes mixt, Helms, and huge bars of gates, the posts adorne, With darts, and shields, and prowes from Galleys torne. Horse-taming Picus, a short garment wore, A little shield, an augure staffe he bore: Whose love, when slighted Circe could not gaine, She with her charming wand, and hellish bane Chang'd to a bird, and spots his colour'd wings. In such a Temple, in th' old Throne of Kings, Latinus sate, and calls the Trojans in, And thus with pleasant language did begin. Say Trojans (for your City we have known And stock, your voyage hath to us been shown) What is your sure, what cause inforc'd you come Through many swelling waves to Latinum? Mist you your course, or by some tempest tost, (For many so in the deep seas are lost) That thus you have enter'd, anchor'd in our road. Nor scorne our friendship; know from Saturns blood
We Latines sprung, who without Laws, or tye, Justice afford, like the old deitie. Now I recall, but time obscureth fame, That old Aruncus said, Dardanus came To Phrygian Idas cities, from that place To Thracian Samos, now call'd Samothrace: VVhom now from Tyrrhen Coryths city gone, Heavens starry court hath in a golden throne, And fills the number of the deities. He said; then Iloneus thus replies: Great King, from honour'd Faunus sprung; not tost By waves and tempests came we to your coast, Nor mist our course, we by advice were brought, And have with willing mind thy city sought, Driven from our realms, which once Sol looking down From high Olympus, saw of most renown. From Jove we sprung, the Dardan nation are Proud of their mighty grandsire Jupiter; The King himself deriv'd from Joves high race, Trojan Aeneas sent us to this place. How great a storm cruel Mycene hurl'd On Trojan fields, and by what fates, each world Of Europe, Asia, strove: if any man Dwell in far lands, beyond the Ocean, These he hath heard, or who so ere resides VVhere hot Sols lines stretch'd out, four zones divides, Through vast Seas from so great a deluge bore A small seat for our gods, a harmlesse shore, VVater and aire, common to all, we crave. Nor shall we be your realms disgrace, nor have Your glory light, nor shall forget your grant, Nor Latium irk Troy in her lap did plant. I. by Aeneas fates, and right hand swear, If any try'd his faith or force in war,
Us many Realms, (nor slight us that we bring These wreaths, and speak like men petitioning) And many Nations to themselves would joyne: But fate did us unto your shore design: Hence Dardan sprung, and here returns again; Us Phebus did with great commands constrain Tiber to seek, and blest Numicus spring, Besides small gifts of former wealth, our King Presents to thee, from burning Troy convaid. In this gold cup Anchises Offrings made: When Priam Laws establish'd, this, he bore, And he this sacred Crown, and Scepter wore, And robes, the art of Trojan dames. At Ileoneus speech Latinus bent A stedfast look, and fixt his eyes intent Upon the earth: the King not much approv'd Wrought purple, not with Priams Crown was mov'd; As in his daughrers match he was delaid, Fortunes revolving which old Faunus said: This was the son, fate told from forraigne strands Was call'd with equall auspice to these lands, Whose progeny in valour should excell, And by their prowesse, the whole world compell. Then joyfull said, you Gods assist our tasks, And your owne signe; take Trojan what thou asks. Nor I despise your gifts: rich fields enjoy VVhilst I am King, and what you brought from Troy. Aeneas, if such love he us intend, If to joyn leagues he hasts, and be stil'd friend, Let him approach, nor feare our amitie; T'imbrace your King, of peace shall th' earnest be. And to your Prince from us beare this reply: I have a child, paternall lots deny
And many prodigies from heaven debar To match at home: a son must come from far: This they foretell remaines for Italy, Whose stock shall raise our name unto the sky. This I beleeve is he, the fates require, And if my mind prompt rightly, I desire. This said, he chosen horses did command, Faire steeds three hundred, in high stables stand, And bids they should be to the Trojans led, Whom gallant trappings grac'd with skarlet spread: Gold portalls hung, gold did their breast infold, And with their teeth, they champ'd the burnish'd gold. The King a Chariot sent, which foure steeds drew Of heavenly race, fire from their nostrills flew, Of the same kind, who were of Circes breed, Stole by a Mare, leapt with a heavenly steed. With these gifts, and the answers of the King, The Trojans bravely mounted peace did bring. But then behold! from Argos did repaire Joves cruell wife, and flying cuts the aire. The Trojan Fleet, and glad Aeneas, she Saw through the skie, as far as Sicily; Sees how they houses build, and leave the flood, Now trusting land, with sharp grief fixt she stood; Shaking her head, thus forth her woes did powre: Ah hateful race, and Troys fate crosse to our: In Dardan fields, why did they not expire? Or captives took, why did not Iliums fire Consume these men? midst arms, through flames they past. My power I feare weary lies down at last, And I with hatred satisfied, rest. I bold, these fugitives with waves distrest,
My self and all the floods against them bent, And fury of the winds, and waters spent. How helpt my Syrts, Scylla, Carybdis vast? Since now through Tybers wish'd streames they have past, Free from the Sea, and us; could Mars destroy The mighty Lapithes? could heavens King annoy At Dians suit, so much old Calidon? What were those great offences they had done? But I, great wife to Jove unhappy I, Left nothing unassay'd, did all wayes try. Aeneas, I am vanquished by thee: But if my own power not sufficient be, Undaunted, aydes Ile seek where ere they dwell; Will heaven not grant my sute, Ile raise up hell; Grant, spight of us he must in Latium seate, And that Lavinia shall be his by fate: Yet we may work delay in such great things, And may destroy the subjects of both Kings. Let son and father joyne such rates being paid, Trojan and Rutile blood shall dowre thee Maid, Bellona give thee, nor alone a brand Shall pregnant Cisseis beare to waste the land: A Paris, and such births she shall enjoy, And funerall Fires againe for rising Troy. This said, she dreadfull to the earth descends, And from th' infernall shades, and seats of fiends Wofull Alecto calls, who breeds sad warre, Rage, Treachery, and all crimes that are. Pluto himself doth this foule Monster hate, And her owne sisters doe abhominate: So oft she's chang'd, and forms so dreadfull takes, And foule still pregnant with so many Snakes. Whom Juno with such words exciting said, Virgin nights daughter help, and now give aide,
Lest our unquestion'd name, and honour fall, Lest by these marriages the Trojans shall Latium enjoy, and great Ausonia share. Thou loving brothers canst provoke to War, Houses destroy with hate, both sword and flames Bring to their roofes; thou hast a thousand names, As many nocent arts; then quickly shake Thy pregnant breasts, and peace confirmed, break; Lay grounds for cruel war, make with thy charms Their wilde youth rage, require, and take up arms. Big with foul poyson thence the hag resorts To Latium, and Latinus lofty courts, And silent to Amatus chamber went, Who boyl'd with female care and discontent, 'Bout Turnus match, and Trojans comming there. At her Alecto from her snaky haire A serpent cast, and fix'd it in her side: By which inrag'd, she might th'whole house divide. It 'mongst her weeds did on her bosome roull, And her then raging with a viperous soul Unfelt, inspir'd: The snake's a chain of gold, A fillet now her tresses to infold; And each were glides. When first this pestilence Had with a strong infection seiz'd each sense, And fill'd her blood with fire: not yet the flame Her soft mind catch'd, nor through her bosome came. But as kind mothers use to speak she sayes, Mourning her child, and Phrygian mariages. Sir, will you give Lavinia to th' exild Trojan? thy self not pittying, nor thy child, Nor me, whom the false pyrate will forsake, And next fair wind to sea the virgin take. The Phrygian Swain so enter'd Greece, and bore Laedean Helen to the Troian shore.
Where's sacred faith? and care thou hadst of thine? The hand with Turnus thou so oft didst joyn? If that a son must come from foraign lands, Thou fix on that; and this thy sire commands: Sure I believe all countries foraign are Which we not rule, and so the gods declare. And if you Turnus linage view, he springs From Inachus and Acrisius Grecian Kings. When she had found perswasion was in vaine, And saw him fix'd, then wrought the viperous bane, Shoots through het bowels, spread through all her breast, Then troups of fiends the haplesse queen possest, And through the town distracted she did rove, So flies a top with strokes resounding, drove; Which boyes in huge rings earnest at their sports Through winding entries, and large vacant courts With scourges force; amaz'd the childish troup And smooth-chin'd band, admire the spinning top, That lives with strokes, so giddily she went Through the whole town, and people discontent. Then flies to th' woods like a wild Bacchanal, And more inrag'd, on greater plots doth fall. For she in shady hills her daughter hid, That so she might the Trojan banes forbid. And Bacchus cryes, The virgin's only thine, Who bears for thee javelins adorn'd with vine, For thee they dance, and save their sacred haire. Fame flies, the matrons all distempered are Like rage moves all, they leave their own to find New roofs, their tresses flowing in the wind. Others made heaven with hideous cries resound, Girded with skins, with viney javelins bound, Bearing a flaming pine, amidst the flings, And Turnus and her daughters hymen sings,
Rowling her bloody eyes loud she exclaims, With dreadful looks; Ió! you Latine dames, If any love in your chast bosomes yet Remains for me, the most unfortunate; If any care of mothers power excites; Bound tresses loose, with me act Bacchus rites. Thus through vast woods and wildes Alecto brings Amata, raging with infernal stings. After she saw enough her fury burn'd, Latinus counsel, his whole house oreturn'd: Straight the sad goddesse thence on black wings came Unto bold Turnus walls, whose seat they fame Danae built with her Acrisian race, Drove there by storms: from birds of old the place Ardea stil'd, Ardeas name now great. It chanc'd, then Turnus in his lofty seat Amidst the silent night, soft quiet took. Alecto leaves her shape, and furies look, And is transform'd to an old woman now, Plowing deep furrowes in her wrinkled brow; Binds her white hair, then olive branches ties, And she old Calybe Junos Vestal is, And straight herself presenting thus began. Tamely wilt thou, Turnus, such wrongs sustain? Thy crown transferr'd to th' Dardan Colonie? The King, the match and dowre thou shouldst enjoy, Denies, and now a foraign heire hath chose. Scorn'd, go, thy self t'ingratefull toyl expose; Tyrrhens destroy, yes, and Latinus guard. Great Juno bid, this News should be declar'd To thee in silent night: Arise with speed, Arm the bold youth, and through the gates proceed; March where the Trojan captains in the sweet Tyber now ride, and burn their painted fleet.
A god bids this: and if the King withstands Thy marriages, nor yields to thy demands, Let him in arms then Turnus valour try. Here the Prince smiling, thus did make reply. Not as thou thinkst, the news hath scap'd my eare, Of ships hath enter'd Tyber streams; such feare Thou need'st not fain, nor royal Juno will Unmindfull be of us. But thee, O mother, fond age doting still, Troubles in vain with care, and terror brings, Deluding with false fear of arms and Kings. Take for the Temple and the Statues care, Let men t'whom it belongs, make peace and war. At this Alecto rag'd: but whilst he spoke A sodain trembling all his body shook, His eyes grew stiffe, such shapes she did unfold, Hissing with snakes, her flameing eyes she roll'd; Repulsing him, who lingering did prepare To speak: two serpents darting from her hair. Then lashing him, from dire lips thus she storm'd: Lo! I whom doting age hath ill inform'd, Of kings and arms deluding with false feare, I from the furies seat am present here, And in this hand bring war and death. This said, at him a blazing torch she cast, And gloomy fire fix'd in his bosome fast. Great fear doth vanquish sleep, through all his limbs A salt sweat flows, in brine his body swims. Arm, arm, he cries; for arms the bed room sought, Love of steel rag'd, and wars curst madnesse wrought. Ire swels; As when fir'd bavins are applide With mighty noise to a full cauldrons side. Seas rage within, the boyling liquor steams, And fuming high, bubbles with frothy streams,
Nor self-contain'd, to heaven black vapours rose. He to the King and the prime Nobles shewes, Peace thus being broke, that arms should be prepar'd To drive the foe from thence, and Latium guard, Trojans and Latines both he could invade: Then cals the gods with vowes and prayers. This said, Rutilians strive each other to engage, This taken with his noble personage, His royal pedigree another charms, Him youth inticeth, and great deeds in arms. Whilst Turnus his Rutilians did inflame, The hag on Stygian wings 'mongst Trojans came, Where fair Ascanius did with course and snares Persue wild beasts, there she new art prepares. Here th'hellish Virgin cast a sudden rage Amongst the dogs, did with known scent engage More hot to chase: hence sprung the wofull jar, And first incens'd the rustick soul, for war There was a fair large Deer with stately crests, Whom Tyrrhens sons took from the mothers breast, And Tyrrhens fed, the royal cattel were, And those large fields intrusted to his care. This same, their sister Sylvia with great care Adorn'd his crest, and binds with garlands faire, Did combe and bath him in the chrystal ford: He us'd to hand, and to his masters bord VVandred in woods, and would return, although Late in the night, and his own dwelling know. This wandring far Ascanius fierce hounds chac't, When he by chance the pleasant river past, And hot on verdant banks prepar'd to rest. Then love of praise inflam'd Ascanius breast,
That from his bow he lets the arrow flie; Nor to his hand wanted a deitie. The sounding shaft did through his bowels come. But the Deer wounded flies to his own home, Entring he groans, and bloody, with sad voice Imploring aid, fils all the house with noise. Beating her breasts, first Sylvia complains, And cals aloud to aid, the sturdy swains: They (for in silent groves Alecto hides) Suddenly came; this a burnt stake provides, That a huge knotty club; what each man finds Rage makes a weapon, Tyrrhus cals his hinds As he by chance did cleave in four an oak, And threatning mainly, a sharp axe he took, But the foul hag watching her time to harm, Ascends, and sounds the pastoral alarm From a high roof, and her infernal voice Sends through a winding-horn: at the dire noise The woods did tremble, and the groves profound Thundred, and Trivias lake far off the sound, And sulphure Nar, and Velins fountains hear, And mothers grasp their children struck with fear. But then fierce Rusticks swift, where the alarms The trumpet sounded, rush with snatch'd-up arms From all parts, and Trojuns t'Ascanius aide From open camps like a full torrent made, In order draw; No rustick fight they make VVith knotty clubs, and a burnt pointed stake. But fierce with steel they charge, the dusky field With drawn swords dreadful, arms a splendor yield Struck with the sun, and easts to heaven a light As when with rising winds the waves grow white, Seas by degrees advance, then higher rise, At last roll'd from their bottom, kisse the skies.
And here young Almon, Tyrrhus eldest son, Was in the front by a swift shaft orethrown: For in his throat it stuck, and stopt his breath, Imprisoning th'aiery soul with blood in death. There many were, with old Galesus slain, Whilst he for peace oppos'd himself in vain; The justest man which all Ausonia yields, And once the richest both in stock and fields; Five bleating flocks, five heards he did command, And with a hundred plowes turns up his land. Now whilst the field with equal fortune stood, Alecto promise kept, when she in blood Had both imbru'd, and had first slaughters made, She leaving earth, to heaven her self convaide, Proud with successe, to Juno these declares. Pehold division ripen'd for sad wars! Now let them friendship joyn and leagues conclude, Since Trojans I with Tyrrhen blood imbrude. And to the act Ile adde this, if you please; The bordering towns to war with rumors raise, To love dire Mars them Ile inflame with charms, All parts shall aid, Ile strew the fields with arms. Then Juno said, Of jealousies and fears There are enough, firm stand the grounds of wars: Now they have fought, what weapons they have gain'd By chance at first, with forrain blood is stain'd. Let Venus great stock and Latinus joyn Such Nuptials, and such marriages design. But thee, great Jove who rules high heaven, denies Foldly to wander through celestial skies: Retire; what new emergencies betide Shall be my care. Saturnia thus replide, But she displaid her hissing wings with snakes, Stooping to hell, and heavens bright sphear forsakes.
There is a place 'midst Italy, which stands Under high mountains, fam'd through many lands; Which sacred vales, and a thick grove surrounds, And on each side with a dark shadow bounds, And in the midst a foming torrent grones, Ratling with mighty edies through the stones. Here the dire cave, and Plutos gates were shewn, And the huge gulph of gaping Acheron Opens foul jawes: hither Alecto flies, And hated, eas'd at once both earth and skies. No lesse mean while Saturnia perfects war To Court the shepherds flie, and stain friends beare, Young Almond and Galesus foul with gore: The gods they call, and the old King implore. Turnus arriv'd amidst these loud debates, And terrors of the fight ingeminates: That Trojans there should plant, the Phrygian race Should mixe with them, he thrust forth in disgrace. Then they, whose mothers Bachanalian rage Orgies to lead through deserts did engage; (Great was the Queens example) gathered are From every part, and weary Mars for war. Against the gods, and fate, and omens, all For impious war with strange perversnesse call; And clamouring round Latinus court they stood. But he like a fix'd rock against the flood, Like a fix'd rock, which when a breaking wave Tumbles against him and loud billows rave, Stands by his weight; the fomy clifts in vain Thunder, and back bruis'd weeds are roll'd again, But when no power mad counsels could prevent, And th'whole affair with cruel Juno went; Then did the king the gods, and heaven attest, Ah we are lost by fates, by storms distrest!
Wretches, your impious blood shall punisht be For this; and Turnus, sad rewards for thee Remains; when thou shalt late the gods request, I soon shall reach my haven, and find rest, Though glorious funerals want. Nor more he spake, But straight retires, and did the helm forsake. There was an antient use in Latium, Which Alban towns held sacred, and now Rome Greatest in power, observes; when they prepare 'Gainst Getae, Hircans, Arabs cruel war, Or march to India and the Eastern main, Or enfigns from the Parthians to regain. There are two gates of war, that name they bear, To dire Mars sacred, with religious fear; A hundred brazen doors, which lasting bands Of steel inclos'd; in th entrance Janus stands. Here when the Senate have a war decreed, The Consul glorious in his regal weed And Sabine robe, opens the groning gates Proclaiming it; and all the youth then waits, And doleful notes on brazen rrumpets sound. Then to the King 'gainst Trojans they propound War to denounce, and open Janus gates; He shuns the task, and foul engagement hates, And hides himself. Then Juno from the skie Descending, made th'unwilling gates to flie Open by force, and the huge brazen bars Saturnia breaks, and turns the hinge of wars. Ausonia rais'd now burns, rows'd from long peace; Some in the fields foot-squadrons exercise, Some break proud steeds, and use them to alarms; Wrapt in a dusty cloud, all mad take arms. This scoures his shield, his axe whets, oyles his spear, Proud to bear ensigns, and loud trumpets hear.
Five mighty towns to make arms, anvils lay, Tyber, Ardea potent Atina, Towrie Antemna, Crustumere the great: Helms of high proof they work, and shields compleat With sallow wrought; these shining breast-plates cast, Or with fine silver smooth-wrought Greves inchac't. Farewell all love, and honour of the plow! Their fathers swords again they furbush now: The trumpets sound, proclaimed is the war; These fit their casks, those neighing steeds prepare, This brac'd his shield, his golden mail that tride, And girds his trusty sword unto his side. Open your springs you Muses, raise my verse! What Kings provok'd to wars, what armies fierce Supply'd the field, with what men Latium fam'd Did flourish then, and with what arms inflam'd, Tis, you can tell for you did register; Only a slender fame did touch our eare. First proud Mezentius from the Tyrrhen lands The gods contemnor march'd, with armed bands: And Lausus next, his son, then whom more fair Was none, unlesse Laurentian Turnus were. Horse-taming Lausus wild beasts vanquished, A thousand men from Agelina led; Worthy in better times his realms to have swaid, And not Mezentius for his sire to have had. With conquering steeds, in's chariot next to these Came Aventine, thy son bold Hercules. Upon his shield his fathers arms he takes, A hundred serpents, Hydra girt with snakes, Whom Rhea bore in Aventina's wood Private, a woman proving by a god, After Alcides to the Laurent plain A conqueror came, when Geryon he had slain,
And Spanish bulls washt in the Tyrrhen wave. In war these piles and cruel weapons have, They fight with Tucks and with Sabellian spears; Himself on foot a Lyons huge skin wears, Rough hair, and white teeth, dreadfull on his head, Thus horrid, he the palace entered, Th' Herculean mantle flowing on his back. Two brothers then Tyburtian walls forsake, Whose brother Tybert gave the place a name, From Greece fierce Coras and Catillus came. Before the ranks amidst thick arms they bend, As cloud-born Centaurs from the hills descend, When snowie Othrys they or Omole Forsake; then to their flight the woods give way, And all the bowes with mighty fragor yield. Nor was he wanting did Preneste build, The race of Vulcan. who mongst cattel reign'd, Found on the hearths; all times this truth maintain'd. Rusticks a legion, Coeculus commands From high Preneste, and cold Anio's strands Whom Gabii, and rough Hernicis bred, With rivers cleer those rich Anagnia fed, Old Amasens: not all bore arms, or ring With shields and chariots: A great number sling Bullets of lead, and some two javelins beare, And on their heads did yellow bonnets weare Of a wolfs skin with their left foot they did March naked, a raw brogue the other hid. Well horst Messapus, Neptunes off-spring, whom Nor fire or sword had power to overcome, People in ease, uncustom'd to alarms Invites to war, soon taught to use their arms. These the just Falscians and Fescennian bands, Those held Soractes towres, Flavinian strands.
Mount Cymins lake and Capen groves; who sing Marching harm onious numbers of their King As midst the clouds when silver swans retire From their repast; they in a joyful quire Tune their long pipes; then all the Asian coast And floods far off resound. Nor think the brazen bands in that great hoast Confusion had: like thick clouds through the skie Of cackling fowl from sea to land they flie. Lo! antient Sabine blood, Clausus commands Great troups; himself great as his mighty bands. From him the race, and Claudian family come, After the Sabines shar'd a part in Rome. Great Amiterna, old Quirites, and Oliv'd Mutisca, all the Eretian band, Who Nomentum, those rosey Veline till, Tetricah, rough with rocks, Severus hill: Those plant Casperia, Folurus, and them Drink Hymel, Faber, and the Tybers stream. Cold Nursia, Hortine troups and Latines came, Those Allia parts, with an unhappy name. As many waves from Lybick seas are rowl'd, When stern Orion winter storms infold, Or as thick corn parch'd in the summer stands: In Hermus, or in Lycias golden strands, So shields resound, earth trembling as they came. Atrides sonne, foe to the Trojan name, Halesus strait his chariot horses joyns, A thousand fierce men brought: those blest with vines, Massica plow, Arunciau fathers train From the high hills, Sidicina neer the main. Those who left Cales, and who till the stream Of dry Vulturnus, Saticulus with them
And Oscian bands; these fight with javelins long, Put as their custome, fit with a soft thong; These Faulchions have, and leather shields protect. Nor thee, Oebalus, must our Muse neglect: Whom Nymph Sebetide to Telon bore, Now old he held the Telebonian shore: The son, not with his fathers realms content, To his subjection the Sarrastians bent; And those whom Sarnus watereth, forct to vield, Them Rufus, Batulus hold, and Celen field, And those fruit-bearing 'Bellas rampiers view, Who darts in the Teutonick manner threw. Their heads are arm'd with Cork-trees torn from vines, They shine in brazen arms, a brasse sword shines: With thee to war from hilly Nursia came O Ʋfens blest in arms, and great in fame, A cruel race, with huntings us'd to toyle In woods; Aequicola a barren soyl These armed plow and alwayes love to drive Fresh prey and plunder, and by rapine live. Next came a priest of the Marubian race, His helm green bowes, of happy olive grace, From King Archippus sent, Ʋmbro most bold, The vip rs blood, and hissing serpents could By chaims, or with his hand to sleep engage, Their bitings cure, and by his art asswage: But for the Dardan spear no help he found, Nor could a sleepy medicine ease the wound, Nor all those herbs in Marsian mountains be. Thee Angits grove, Fucinus cleer waves thee, Thee chrystal lakes have wept To war the fair race of Hippolitus went, Virbius, whom his mother Aritia sent
To Aegeias groves, in the Hymetian strand, Where altars fat of pleas'd Diana stand. After his stepdames art, Hippolitus kill'd, Paternal punishments with blood fulfil'd; Torne by mad steeds: T'etherial stars (they fame) And heavens supernal air again he came Restor'd by physick, and Diana's love; This much incensing the all-potent Jove, A mortal from infernal shades should rise, Phoebus son, who so great skill did devise With thun er sent to Styx. But Trivia Hypolitus did to fecret seats to convay, And to Aegerian groves confin'd alone, In Italian woods he finisht life unnkown, Where by a chang'd name he was Virbius stild. From Trivias fane, groves sacred, are exil'd All horses, since the youth and's chariot they Frighted orethrew to monsters of the sea. No lesse his son did horses exercise, And to the wars he in his chariot flies. Among the first most beauteous Turnus led, Marching in arms, and taller by the head: From his high crests three bushy horse-maines came, Chimera there, breathing Aetnean flame; Then louder roars, with fire more fiercely glowes, When in hot fight blood in abundance flowes. His polish'd shield, Io with gold adorns, A cow now cloath'd with hair, and drest with horns: Argus who kept the maid, and Inachus stood, Where with rare art his urn poures forth a flood. A cloud of foot did follow, the whole strands Shield-bearing squadrons hide; the Argive bands, The Arunci, Rutilii, ancient Sicanie, Sacrans, and shields of painted Labici:
Those plow thy shores, O Tyber, people tills Sacred Numicus, sow Rutilian hills, Circaeus tops, who Anxurs fields, where Jove Commands, and glad Feronias verdant grove: Where black fend Satyr lies, cold Ʋfens did Glide through deep vales, and in the ocean hid. Volscean Camilla march'd with these: she leads Regiments of horse; the Warrioresse precedes Bands bright in arms, her female fingers are Not us'd to Pallas arts: to cruel war The maid inur'd; or in her swift course borne T'outstrip the winds, and flie ore standing corn, Nor bruise the tender ear, she was so fleet Through sea to run, nor dip her nimble feet. From fields and houses, youth and matrons haste; How she with purple regal honour grac'd On her straight shoulders, marching, they behold Amaz'd: how th'button knit her haire with gold; Then how she did her Lycian quiver bears, And tipt with steel her pastoral myrtle speare.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. Aeneas is admonish'd by a dreame To seek Evanders aide, up Tybers streame. Arcadians solemnizing annual feasts, Aeneas and the Trojans make their guests. Cacus strange storie, and Herculian rites. The King Aeneas to his court invites. Fair Venus with sweet love her husband charms, And for her son obtains Vulcanian arms. Evander Pallas sends t' Aeneas aide. A league th' Hetrurians and the Trojans made. Venus presents the arms; a golden field With Roman victories charg'd, adorn'd the shield. AS Turnus had with warlike ensigns crown'd Laurentian towres, and made shril trumpets sound; As he the horse had rais'd, and forc'd to arms, Straight all disturb'd, great Latium in alarms Together take an oath, the fierce youth rave. Mesaphus, Ʋfens the prime conduct have;
With them Mezentius, who the gods disdains, Each where they presse, and fields deprive of swains. Venalus is sent to Diomede the great For aid, and to declare the Trojans seat In Latium: Aeneas who doth bring His conquered gods, sayes, fates decree him King: That many people to the Trojans joyn, His name in Italy spreads: what his designe, If fortune grant to him the hop'd event By war, to Diomed is more evident Then can Latinus or King Turnus find. Thus Latium stood: Aeneas in his mind All these revolv'd, tost with a flood of care, When his swift thoughts divide now here, now there, And carried divers wayes, through all things run. As waters trembling light, struck by the sun Or image of the radiant moon, gainst brasse, Now rais'd to heaven, flies wide through euery place, And to the seelings of high roofs is hurl'd. 'Twas night, when weary creatures through the world Both beasts and birds, soft slumber did relaxe; When prince Aeneas under heavens cold axe Upon the shore, his bosome fraight with cares Or the sad war, late for repose prepares. The genius of the place old Tyber rose From the glad stream amongst the pop'lar boughs: Of finest canvase was his azure weed, And his head cover'd with a shady reed. And thus his cares asswag'd. O race of gods Whem Troy hath brought from foes, to our abodes: Thou shalt for ever Pergamus protect, Laurentian soyl and Latine fields expect: Here are sure houses, here thy certain seats, Nor fear wars menacings; all the rage and threats Of gods give place.
(Nor think a dream vain fictions coyns) for thou Under wild okes shalt find a mighty sow, Pregnant, her farrow thirty, laid to rest, A white sow, a white issue, at her breast. There's certain quiet, there thy city build; Ascanius shall thrice ten years circles fill'd There great nam'd Alba raise: I speak things sure. Now by what means thou conquerour mayst procure A present ayd, list, brief I shall declare. Th' Arcadians here a race from Pallas are, Who to these coasts led by Evander came, And on these hills their city chose to frame, From Pallas Pallanteum stil'd the place. These war continuall with the Latine race. With these associate, leagues conjoyn with them. I by my banks shall guide thee up the stream, That thou with ores mayst stem the floods. Arise O goddesse son, with prayers bring sacrifice To Juno with the dawn; her wrath allay With humble vowes: Victor, me honour pay. I am whom thou beholdst, whose full stream glides Washing these banks, and fertile lands divides: Blue Tyber, heavens delight: large walls for me, And here a head to lofty seats must be. This said, the river dives into the deep, And from Aeneas flies both night and sleep. He rose, and viewes the bright Suns Eastern beams; Then in his hollow palms takes from the streams Water, the use: thus praying to the skies. Laurentian nymphs, nymphs where these floods arise. O Tyber, father, with thy blessed wave At last receive me, and from dangers save! And wheresoere, thou pitying of our woes Shalt glide; most fair, where ere thy water flowes,
Still I shall honour, alwayes presents bring. Horn'd flood, of the Hesperian rivers king, Oh now assist and give us present aid! Two vessels from the fleet he chose, this said, And tackling fits; his mates did oars provide: When he behold! the wondrous omen spide; A white sow, with as white a farrow laid, And through the wood on a green bank survaid. To thee, to thee great Juno this he slew, And with her issue altars did imbrue. Tyber did all that night his swelling flood Appease; his flowing waves in silence stood, And his streams levels like a gentle lake, That with their oars no strugling they should make. They haste their course, up with the tide they drove, The waves admire, and th'unfrequented grove Wonders, when glittering shields far off they spide And painted galleys through the stream to glide. They haste both night and day, long reaches made, And hid with trees, cut through a pleasant shade. Now the bright Sun had reach'd the middle sky, When they far off did scatter'd houses spy, And slender battlements with a little towre, But now to heaven advanc'd by Roman power; Then but a poor state King Evander had. Sraight prores they turn, and to the city made: By chance, th' Arcadian solemn rites that day To great Alcides and the gods did pay Before the Town, Pallas his son was there, All the prime youth, and the poor Senate beare Incense, and altars smoak with lukewarm blood. As they tall ships saw through th' Opacus wood To haste with silent oars; frighted, they rise, And at the sight, forsook the sacrifice.
Bold Pallas all forbids to quit the board, And hastens to them with a ready sword: Then from a bank far off—Sirs, what cause made Ye tempt strange shores? or whither bound? he said: What race? whence come you? bring ye peace or war? Then did Aenaeas from his stern declare, And in his hand the peaceful olive shewes: Trojans, and arms thou seest to Latines foes, Who us exil'd inforce with cruel war. We seek Evander; him inform, here are Troy's prime Commanders, who his aid intreat. Pallas amaz'd, struck with a name so great; Who e're, come forth, these to the King declare, And to our countreys gods a guest repaire! Then he receives him with a strict imbrace, The grove they enter, and forsake the place. When to the King Aeneas friendly said. O best of Greeks! to whom me fortune made A suiter now, and olive boughs to beare: Nor thee, though a Greek Captain, did I feare, From both Atrides though thou draw'st thy line; But me, thy own worth, th'Oracles divine, And antient Kin, thy fame through all coasts spread, Sent me to thee; and fates the willing led. Our Grandsire Dardan, who built Ilium (As the Greeks say) did from Electra come; He sail'd to Troy; she was great Atlas strain, Whose shoulders the actherial orbs sustain: Mercurie thy father is, whom Maia faire Conceiving, on Cylenes cold tops bare. But Atlas Maia, (if we credit fame) That Atlas got, supports heavens starry frame, So from one blood the stocks of both divide. This trusting, I no messenger imploy'd,
Nor try'd thee first by art, but my self came, And life adventuring, here now suppliant am. The same Rutilians which with cruel wars Presse thee, when we're expell'd think nought debars, But all Hesperia shall their yoak obey, Or whatsoere is washt by either Sea. Let us joyn leagues; we have stout men of war, And valiant youth that long experienc'd are. Aeneas thus, whilst he all ore survaid The Trojan, then Evander briefly said. Bold Dardan know, how I accept thy choice, And meet thy love! how I thy fathers voice And face recall, and have in memorie When Priam went Hesione to see, And Salamina view his sisters court, They did to cold Arcadian shores resort. Then budding youth had first my cheeks attir'd With a soft doun; I Trojan Chiefs admir'd, With wonder youthful Priam me possest: But most Anchises, taller then the rest, With great affection did my mind excite To know the man, and joyn right hand to right; Joyfull I led him round our battlements: He a fair quiver, Lycian shafts presents And a rich cloak to me, taking his leave, With golden reins, which since I Pallas gave Therefore I grant thy suit, and leagues conjoine; And when the morn with purple light shall shine, I will dismisse you both with aid and gold. Mean while (since friends you're here) these annuals hold, A sinne now to neglect; and keep our feast, Making your selves to friends a welcome guest. Then he commands to bring full bowls, and meat, And plac'd the Trojans on a grassie seat;
But to a bed a Lyons rough skin grac'd He brought their Prince, and in a chair he plac'd. The Priest, and chosen youth then altars spread With beasts fat entrails, serv'd with purest bread, And rich wine fill: The Trojans and their Chief Feast with rich offerings, and huge chines of beef. Hunger appeas'd, and feasted to the height, Evander said: On us this solemn rite By superstition, nor by ignorance came To be impos'd. From dangers sav'd, we do Yearly these honours (noble guest) renew. First on that hanging Rock with torne clifts look, And far-off scatter'd heaps, that house forsook Stands on the hill, whose tops such ruines have, 'Twas there the monster Cacus had his cave, And in those vast recesses his dire face Alwayes he hid, the sun nere pierc'd that place; Steeming with slaughters fresh on his proud dore Pale heads of men hung in their loathsom gore. Vulcan the monsters father, fire still flies Black from his mouth, he of a dreadful size. But time brought aid, and one of mighty fame. For the revenger great Alcides came, Proud with the triple Gerions death, and spoile: The conquerour drove his cattel to this soile, His herds possest the vale and rivers side. But furious Cacus, lest he ought untride Of wickednesse or villany should leave, Four stately oxen from their stalls did drive, As many well-shap'd heifers; these he hales, Lest tracts should be discovered by the tailes, Into his den, and in the dark rock hid, Nor any footstep to the cave did lead.
But when great Hercules remov'd his herd, Leaving those grounds, and to be gone prepar'd; Departing, loud they bellow, clamour fills The neighbouring woods, they mourning leave the hills: One cow makes answer, and from hidden caves Aloud complains, and Cacus hope deceives. But here great rage Alcides did provoke; He arms, and takes a ponderous knotty oke, And to the top of the high mountain flies. Now first we saw fear Cacus to surprise, And his look chang'd; he, then East-winds more fleet Hastes to his cave, for terror wing'd his feet; Shuts himself up, and down a huge stone flung With broken chains, which Vulcans art had hung With steel, and the strong gates guards with a bar. Soon Herc'les came, and raging every where Sought entrance, gnashing of his teeth he turns Now here, now there: thrice, whilst with rage he burns, Aventine sought, thrice did in vain assaile The marble dore, as oft rests in the vale. A rising sharp rock with torne clifts there was Behind the cave, a fit and lofty place Where birds of prey might build: this as it stood To the left hand, and leaning to the flood, He on the right hand shoves, and at the last Tears from the root, then down it headlong casts. At which great crack the lofty skies did thunder. Th' aftrighted streams retire, banks flie asunder: Then the huge cave, and Cacus courts appear, The dismal caverns all discover'd were. As when the ground torn with an earthquake, shewes Infernal seats, and doth sad realms disclose Hatefull to deities, and all hell in sight, Then pale ghosts tremble at the sent-in light.
Now he surpriz'd with unexpected day, Shut up in's cave, Alcides did assay With weapons from above, all arms he tries, And him with trees and mighty milstones plies. He (when he could not from the danger break) Vomits huge smoak, and (wonderfull to speak) Darkens the place with mist, blinding the sight, And mix'd with fire, thickens black shades of night. Nor did Alcides hold, but in he broke Amidst the flame, and rush'd through waving smoke; The den with vapour steem'd: he Cacus took, In darknesse belching fire, and in the lock He whirls him round, thrown down, he on him lies Grasping his throat and squeezing out his eyes. The dark house straight with open doors displaid, Back were the cattel, and base stealth convaid; Out by the feet the ugly corps he drew, On's dreadful eyes enough they could not view, The monsters hairy breast, and horrid brow, And fire within his mouth extinguish'd now. These rites, this day, posterity maintain Ere since, which first Potitius did ordain; And Hercules priests Penarians did seat This altar in these groves, which alwayes great Is stil'd by us, and great shall still remain. Therefore, brave Youth, in such high praise ordain Boughs for your hair, your right hands cups extend, Implore the common god, wine freely spend. Mixt-colour'd Poplar with Herculean shade. His tresses vail'd and bound with leaves; this said, A sacred bowl fills his right hand; straight all Glad powre on Tables, and the gods do call. Mean while the night falls from heavens spangled arch, When all the priests and first Potitius march,
Girt as they use with skins, and torches beare. Feasts they renew, and second course prepare, Tables they load, the Salii then dance round About the altars to sweet musick, crown'd With poplar boughs: here young men, there the old, Who far-ram'd Hercules brave deeds extol'd, And his twelve labours sung. How first he takes His step-dames monsters, kills her double snakes: How Troy, Ochalia, famous towns had been By him orethrown: what toyls by Juno's spleen And King Euristheus he did undergo. Thou cloud-born Hyleus, Pholus didst orethrow, Thou the dire Cretian monsters didst subdue, And at Nemea the huge Lyon slew. At thee shook Stygian lakes, hells porter then On gnawn bones lying in his bloody den, No form, not huge Typhaeus could confound, Though arm'd, nor Flydra though his heads charge round. Hail Joves true race, an honour to the skies, T'us be propitious and thy sacrifice. Such things they sang: but Ca us cause in higher Notes they resound, and how he breath'd out fire: The groves did ring, the hills with eccho storm'd. Thence, all divine solemnities perform'd, Homewards they all unto the city bent, And King Evander with the foremost went, With whom Aenaeas and his son did walk: And going, ease the way with various talk. Aeueas taken with those parts, admires, His quick eyes viewing all things round, inquires, And glad would hear records of former men. Evander, rounder of Rome's Palace then. Nymphs, native Fauns, these groves inhabited; Men, trunks of trees produc'd, and hard oke bred,
Who nor for law, tillage nor oxen care, Nor knew to gather riches, nor to spare: But these fierce hunting, and wild fruit reliev'd. When from Olympus Saturn first arriv'd, Who from Joves arms and his lost kingdom fled, He the fierce Nation in high mountains bred Reduc'd, and gave them Lawes: this Latium styl'd, Because these shores in safety him conceal'd. They said the golden age was when he reign'd, Since in such peace his kingdom he maintain'd. Then baser ages by degrees succeed, Which rage of war, and love of riches breed: Ausonian bands then, and Sycanians came, And oft Saturnian fields have lost their name: Thence Kings, and Tyber gyant like, whence we Have Tyber call'd this stream of Italie; The true old name of Albula is lost. Forc'd through all feas, expulst my native coast, All-conquering fate, and fortunes powerfull hand Have plac'd me here, and the severe command Of my blest mother the Nymph Carmens sent, And great Apollo's strict admonishment. Scarce said, he shews an altar as they came, And the Carmental gates, a Roman name, Which ancient honour Nymphs did dedicate To Carmens, skilful of ensuing fate, Who first declar'd the Trojans should be great, And Pallanteum a renowned seat. Next, a huge grove which valiant Romulus chose For sanctuary, he Lupercal shews To Pan was under cold rocks consecrate, After the manner of th' Athenian state. Then t' Argiletums sacred grove he led, And told the place where his guest Argus dy'd.
Tarpeia and the Capitol he shew'd, Now golden, then dark with a horrid wood. Dread of the place, then did the shepherds move, And oft they trembled at the rock and grove. This wood (he said) this mountains leavy brow A god inhabited, but uncertain who. Arcadians, here, think Jove himself they spide, Shaking his shiel, and on the winds to ride. These two dismantled towns thou dost behold, Are but sad reliques of the men of old: This, father Janus, that, Saturnus fram'd; Janiculum this, that was Saturnius nam'd. With these discourses, neer the Court they drew Of poor Evander, where they cattel view Lowing i'th' Roman change, and lofty streets. As to the gates they came he said, These seats Alcides enter'd, here he kept his court: Sir, wealth despise, and now thy self deport As did the god, with homely fare content. This said, he strait with great Aeneas went Under low roofs, and him on couches plac'd Softned with leaves, and with a Bears skin grac'd. Night fell, and with black wings the earth did hide; But Venus mind not vainly terrifide With Laurent threats, and with sad stirs dismaid, To Vulcan in his golden bed she said, And with sweet language divine love inspires. Whilst the Greek Kings with war and hostile fires Raz'd destin'd Troy, and her high towres distrest; No ayd nor arms did I for them request Made by thy art or power; nor thee, dear love, Would I to exercise vain labours move. Though much I owe to Priams high descent, And oft Aeneas hard toyls might lament.
Now by Joves will Rutilian shores they plant. O my blest power! I come a suppliant, A mother for a son craves arms. Dear Love, Thetis, Aurora thee with tears could move: Behold what realms conspire, what cities joyn Councel, by war to ruine me and mine. The Goddesse here round with her snowyarms In soft imbraces him consulting warms. Straight he takes fire, and through his marrow came Accustom'd heat, and did his blood inflame. So from a fiery breach crupted flies Shining with flame, bright thunder through the skies. Glad, straight she finds her plot, and beauty take. When bound with lasting love, thus Vulcan spake: What needs such far-fetch'd stories, goddesse? where 's Your confidence of me? had you such care, The Trojans then I might with arms supplide; Nor Jove, nor fate, that Troy should stand denide, And Priam ten years more to have remain'd. If you resolve, and have a war ordain'd, I promise both my art, my power, and care, What iron and soft Electrum can prepare, What fire and bellows may. Leave to perswade, Nor doubt thy power with us. Thus having said, He wisht imbraces gave, and to sweet rest Prepares, reposing in the goddesse breast. Then when he waken'd, after his first sleep At midnight: As a woman who doth keep Her self by spinning and Minerva's hire, Stirs up the ashes and the sleeping fire. Night adding to her work; long tasks she plies, And at her lamp her servants exercise, That chaste she might preserve her husbands bed, And her small children to supply with bread.
No drowsier at that houre Vulcan arose From his soft bed, and to his forge he goes. Near to Sycanian coasts an Iland lifts High shoulders up, and tall with smoky clifts: Eat with Cyclopen flames, a Cave lies under, And huge Aetnean vaults, which alwayes thunder, Where mighty strokes on anvils did resound, And bars of massie steel roare under ground In water quench'd, by forges breathing flame. This Vulcans seat, Vulcania the lands name. Hither the god descended from the sky, Where sparkling heats in vast caves Cyclops ply. Brontes, Steropes, nak'd Piracmon stand, A thunder-bolt half wrought they had in hand: Of such, great store from heaven to earth are thrown By angry Jove, the rest as yet not done. Three parts of hail, three of a watery cloud, As much of fire, and three of wind allow'd; Their work with flashe, noise, and fear they mixt, And dreadful wrath, persuing flame betwixt. Here haste they Mars his chariot, and swift spokes, With which he men and mighty towns provokes: These the dread shield of angry Pallas mould, And wrought her arms with Dragons scales and gold; The goddesse crest with twisted snakes they deck, And Gorgons head dissected from her neck. Cyclops, he said, take all these things away, Set by your tasks, and list to what I say. Arms for a bold man must be made; impart Now all your strength, and shew your greatest art, Break off delayes. Nor more he said. They hot All ply the work, and equal tasks by lot Receive; straight brasse and gold in rivers flowes, In a vast furnace hard steel liquid growes.
A mighty shield they frame, one should withstand The warlike store of all th' Ausonian land. Rounded with mighty orbs, seven orbs they make; Some with the bellows air retain and take, Others in water dip the hissing ore; The hollow vaults with beating anvils rore: They with much strength their arms in order raise, And turn with tongs the masse a thousand wayes. Whilst in Aeolian Caverns Vulcan sweats, Hastning the work: blest morn, from humble seats Evander rais'd, and chirping birds did call Up with sweet notes under his Palace wall. The old man rose, puts on his coat, and tyde His Tyrrhen sandals on, then to his side Girds a Tegean sword, next ore he flung A Panthers skin, which from his left side hung; From the high floor his double guard descend, And on their masters steps the dogs attend. T' Aeneas chamber went; for he had not Promis'd assistance, nor his word forgot. And full as early prince Aeneas rose, Pallas with that, with this Achates goes. Met, they salute; and in the hall being plac'd, Desired conference they enjoyd at last. And first the King began. Great Trojan prince, Thou safe, I never shall Confesse Troy vanquish'd, nor her kingdoms fall. Our aids are small for one so much renown'd; Here are we with the Tusscan river bound, There Rutils stop us, and oft storm our wall. But I great nations and rich kingdoms shall Draw to thy help; unlookt for chance presents Thee succour, and thou com'st by fates consents.
Not far from hence built on an ancient rock, Stands Agelina, where the Lydian stock Once fam'd in war, Hetrurian mountains plants. This flourishing many years, all former grants At last Mizentius by his proud commands Infring'd, and garrison'd with cruel bands. His murthers I forbear and tyrannies, The gods return the like on him and his! For he dead bodies to the living joyn'd, Puts face to face, and hand in hand combin'd: Strange torture! when foul gore and blood imbrues Their sad imbrace, and with long death persues. At last the weary subjects take up arms, And him, then raging, they with fierce alarms In's court besieg'd, his counsellors they slew, And wild-fire on his lofty palace threw. He scapes'mongst slaughters to Rutilian strands, To seek protection from kind Turnus hands. Now all Hetruria up in cruel rage, To bring their King to justice they ingage. Over their armies Ile make thee the head, Now sounding shores are with the Navy spread, Ready to fail; but their old priest withstands, Opening the fates. You choise Meonian bands Flowre of the antients, whom just griefs engage Against Mizentius with deserved rage: No 'Italian must so great a nation sway, Seck forraign Chiefs. This did th' Hetrurians stay, Affrighted by the gods admonishments. Tarchons ambassador to me presents The scepter, crown, ensigns to my commands, And would possesse me of the Tyrrhen lands. But feeble age with cold blood me retracts From such a task, too weak for valiant acts.
I would my son prefer, but that his line By's mother comes from them: Thee fates designe By blood, and years; the gods this meant for thee. Go, most bold Chief of Troy and Italy. To thee Ile Pallas joyn, my hope, and care, Thou being his master to inure to war And Mars hard toyles; thy prowesse us'd to see From's youth he may admire, and honour thee. Two hundred chosen horse well mounted all, I shall bestow, as many Pallas shall. Scarce said, the Trojan Anchisiades And good Achates stand, with fixed eyes; Who, many sad things troubled, then divine. When from high heaven fair Venus gave a signe. For from a cloud with mighty fragor brake A flash of lightning, all things seem'd to shake; From heaven a Tyrrhen trumpet sounds alarms, And oft they hear the ratling noise of arms, And armour saw shine through a gilded cloud Amongst bright sphears, and struck to thunder loud. Others admire; but Troy's great Heroe, these Perceives to be his mother's promises. Then said, O king, what these strange portents are Seek not to know, for me the gods declare. This my blest mother told, if war should rise, She would Vulcanian arms bring through the skies For my defence. Ah what great slaughters Latium wait on thee, On Turnus how will I revenged be! When Tybers waves, shields, helms, and men involve, Let them now arm, and to break peace resolve. This said, down from his lofty throne he came, And on Herculean altars stirs the flame,
And joyfull did the last dayes rites renew, And chosen sheep, he as the custome, slew. The same, Evander and the Trojans did. Thence he his fleet and friends revisited, And from their number chose the valiantest Who in the war should follow him; the rest Go with the stream, and down the river fell, That the glad news they might Ascanius tell. Trojans are hors'd, for Tyrrhen countreys bent, A matchlesse one t' Aeneas they present, Caparison'd with a mighty Lyons skin, Which covering him, with golden clawes did shine. Straight nimble fame through the small city flew, That troups of horse to Tyrrhen kingdoms drew: Matrons their vows redouble with their fears, And wars dire visage greater now appears. Evander then on them departing layes Weeping, his hands, and thus imbracing sayes— O Jove! wouldst thou my former youth renew, When at Preneste I the Van orethrew, And heaps of shields to ashes did compell, And with this hand King Herelus sent to hell. Three souls his mother gave him at his birth, (Strange to be told) thrice he must fall to earth, Thrice was to die: yet I not suffering harm, Took all those lives, and did as oft disarm. I then dear son not from thy'mbrace would be Depriv'd, nor should Mizentius over me Thus much insult, nor oft so neer our gate Slaughter our men, and town depopulate. But oh you gods, and greatest Jove, now bring Comfort, and pity the Arcadian King; And hear a fathers prayer, if power you have My Pallas to preserve, if fates will save!
If! may see him, and we meet again, Then life I crave, all labour I'le disdain; But him if fortune with sad chance persues, O now my wofull life now let me lose! Whilst doubtfull cares, and hopes incertain be, Whilst the sole comfort of my age, I thee Dear son infold with strict imbraces here, Before a sadder message wound my eare. His father these at his last farewell said, Whom falne, his servants to his court convaid. Now through the open gates the horsmen bent, Aeneas first with good Achates went, Then other Chiefs, Pallas amidst the bands In warlike habit and bright arms commands. As on the ocean Lucifer reflects, Whom Venus before other stars respects, Raising his sacred head, all darknesse flies. The fearful matrons crown the wals, their eyes The dusky cloud and glittering band persue. The troops through neerest wayes and thickets drew: A clamour rose, drawn up in rank and file, With trampling hoofs they shake the beaten soyle. There are large groves, neer Coeris frigid wave, Sacred of old, which hollow mountains have With gloomy firre beset, and clos'd with wood. The ancient Greeks unto Sylvanus, god Of fields and heards, this grove and least did grant, Who first did in the Latine confines plant. Not far from this, safely incamped lay Tarchon and Tyrrhens, all the army they, Saw from a height possesse a spacious plain. Here bends Aeneas and his warlike train, And weary, for themselves and horse provide. But Venus through the chrystal sphears did glide,
Fair goddesse, bearing gifts, in secret she Her son in winding vales far off did see. And thus to him her self discovering said, Behold the promis'd gift my husband made: Dear son, now fear not proud Laurentian spight, Nor to encounter Turnus in the fight. Venus thus laid, having her son imbrac'd, Against an oke the shining armour plac'd. Proud of so great an honour, each where he Roll'd his quick eye, nor satisfied could be, Trying on severall peeces, he admires The dreadful plumed helm, ejecting fires, And fatal sword, bloody habergion, Mighty and stiffe with brasse; such, when the sun Gilds a dark cloud with rayes, which far off shine. Then his soft greaves, gold, and Electrum joyne, And the rare workmanship on's spear and shield, Which Latian acts and Roman triumphs held. Vulcan, who well could future things foresee, Had grav'd there all Ascanius progenie, And wars in order as they have been fought. Laid in a verdant cave, Mars wolf he wrought, Fast on her teats the double off-spring sticks, Whom sporting, their kind foster-mother licks; She bending her smooth neck, delights the young By turns, and shapes their bodies with her tongue, Not far from this, Rome and the Sabine dames Rap'd from the Theater, and Circensian games; Whence to the Romans a new war arose. Here he old Tatius and stern Cures shews; After those Kings arm'd, reconciled stand Before Joves altar, goblets in their hand, And to confirm the league, a swine they slew. Not far from thence, four horses Metius drew
In sunder (but thou Alban shouldst have stood Unto thy promise) Tullus through the wood The traitors bowels with long dragging tore, And dew'd the sprinkled briers with his gore. Porsenna next, Tarquine to re-inthrone Commands, and with strict siege begirt the town. Romans for liberty their lives contemn. Thou'dst think at once he frown'd, and threatned them; Because the bridge the valiant Cocles broke, And Cleia scap'd from bonds, the river took. Upon the top of the Tarpeian tower Manlius the Captain stood, with all his power The Temple and the Capitol to watch, And new built courts, rough with Romulean thatch; And here the silver goose through ports of gold Flying, the Gaules to be in th'entrauce told. Gaules through the shrubs did to the towre ascend, Whom the dark shade and gloomy night defend. Their beards were golden, golden was their hair, They in branch'd cassocks shine, with gold their fair Necks be adorn'd; each shook two Alpine spears, And for defence a mighty target bears. Here dancing Salii, naked Luperci With woolly crowns those shields fell from the sky. Drawn in soft litters, here chaste matrons are Rites bearing through the city. Hence not far Hels courts and Pluto's gates he did designe, And for crimes, tortures: and thee Catiline Hung on a rock, fearing the furies jawes: The blest withdrawn, where Cato gives the Lawes. The deep seas golden image he ingraves Mongst these, but th'azure fom'd with silver waves. About the ring bright silver Dolphins glide, Brush with their sterns the deep, and waves divide.
Amidst thou mighst behold the brazen fleet, The Actian war, and all Leucates sweat, Ready to charge, prepared for the fight: Thou mighst have view'd with gold the billows bright. With him his Gods, the Peers and People came, Who standing on the stern, a double flame Darts from his brows, his fathers star appears. Agrippa there, with winds, heaven favouring, steers His squadron up, and brings his ensignes on, His brows deckt with a naval garland shon. Antonius here with strange and differing bands Both from the red sea and the Eastern strands, Forces of Egypt, and the Bactrians led, Th' Egyptian Queen (shamelesse) him followed. At once all charge, and with their labouring ores The whole sea fomes, plow'd up with thundring prores, They take the deep, thou wouldst suppose again That floating Cyclades swam upon the main, Or mountains did with mighty mountains meet, They with such force charge in the towrie fleet: Wild-fire they cast, swift steel, and darts are spread, And Neptunes fields grow with fresh slaughter red. With Egypts trumpets in the midst, the Queen Calls up her fleet, approaching snakes not seen. The barking Anubis, all the monstruous brood Of gods, 'gainst Neptune, Venus, Pallas stood Oppos'd in arms: Mars through the battel rav'd. From heaven sad furies he in steel ingrav'd; And proud of her torne garments, Discord goes; Bellona with a bloody whip persues; His bow Actian Apollo from above These viewing, bent: all with that terror drove, Egyptians, Indians, and Arabians fly, The Queen her self, with winds implor'd, to ply
Her sails appear'd, and with loos'd bolings went. Her midst the slaughters, the Ignipotent Made pale with future death, through waves to flie; Oppos'd to this did huge-limb'd Nilus lie, Spreading his garment, calls into his breast, To sheltring waves inviting the distrest. But to Rome Caesar with three triumphs rode, And on our gods immortal vowes bestow'd; Him ample fanes three hundred joyful greet, And loud applause did ring through every street, In all the Temples quires of Dames resound, Slain Steers before the altars strew the ground. He in bright porches of great Phoebus sits, And gifts of nations to proud pillars fits. Of conquer'd people, a long train proceeds; These, various all, in language, arms, and weeds. Here Vulcan fram'd Africans, Nomades, Lelegs, Cures, and dart-arm'd Gelones. Euphrates now glides softer, and Morine Furthest of Nations, double-horned Rhine: Daae Araxes, who a bridge doth scorn. Wondring how Vulcan did the shield adorn; And ignorant he glories in the frame, Then straight claps on his off-springs fate and fame.
THE NINTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. Iris commands bold Turnus to invade The Trojans, whilst Aeneas gathers aide. He draws the Army forth: attempts to burn The fleet, which scape, and into Sea-Nymphs turn. Euryalus and Nisus venture through The enemies camp by night and many slew. Their wofull deaths. Italians with the dawn To storm the town are from their quarters drawn. The Trojans sally forth; in whose retreat Turnus engag'd is shut within their gate. Many brave men he kils, then on he goes Single against whole regiments of foes: At last leaps ore the wall the river swam, And off with all his arms in safety came. WHilst thus affairs in severall places went, Juno to valiant Turnus Iris sent. Then in the sacred grove by chance he sate, Was to his sire Pilumnus consecrate.
To whom she thus from rosie lips began. What no god dares vouchsafe to any man, (Turnus) behold, at length time freely sends! Aeneas having left his fleet and friends, Is to Evanders palace gone: nay more, Past to the confines of the Tuscane shore; There arms the Rusticks and the Lydian force. What doubtst thou? now's the time; raise chariots, horse; Break all delay, their troubled camp invade. Thus saying, to heaven she mounts on wings displaid, And through the great bow midst the clouds she flies. He knows her, and his hands rais'd to the skies, Then with such words persues her as she went. Iris, heavens glory, who to me hath sent Thee from above? from whence this sudden light? I see heaven open, and behold the bright Stars wander round the poles: the signs obey'd, Who ere thou art, commands to arms. This said, From chrystal streams he water takes, then plies The Gods with prayers, and loads with vowes the skies. And now they took the field with all their force, Bravely appointed both in arms and horse. The Van Messapus, Tyrrheus off-spring had Charge of the Reare, Turnus the Battel led; And by the shoulders arm'd he taller shews. As in seven channels silent Ganges flowes With gentle waves; or when the fat-stream'd Nile Hides in himself, and leaves the fertile soile. The Trojan camp a sudden cloud espies Thick with black dust, and a dark smoke to rise. Caicus first from high works calls aloud, What body (sirs) advanceth in that cloud? Arm, arm, stand to your arms; ascend the wall: The foe draws nigh. Then, with great clamour all
The Trojans fill the works and bulwarks mann'd. For the most warlike Prince gave this command At his departing; Whatsoever chance, Not to give battel, nor to field advance, But keep their trenches, and their walls maintain. Therefore though shame or danger do constrain, They kept their gates obeyng that command; And arm'd, on towres the foe expecting stand. Turnus out-stripping the slow Regiments, With twenty chosen horse, himself presents Before the Town, on a brave Thracian born; His golden helmet crimson plumes adorn. Then thus he said; Who first will charge the foe? And as he spake, did his swift javelin throw Signal to th' fight; and bravely first rides out. They all obey, and follow with a showt: Admiring Trojans to such cowardise yeeld; That men should feare to fight in open field, And lie incamp'd. Vext he the walls survaies, And secks to enter by obscurest waies. As a slie wolf neer a full sheep-coat lies, Suffering both wind and weathers injuries, Growling till midnight, whilst the tender Lambs Exercise bleating safe beneath their dams: He sharp 'gainst th' absent raves; long want the cause Of greedy hunger, and blood-thirsty jawes. So Turnus anger burns, those warlike frames Viewing, and sorrrw his hard bones inflames, How to get in, and by what means to train The Trojans forth, and draw to th'open plain The Fleet which lay close by the Trenches side, Round with the stream and buswarks fortifide, He charg'd, and of his proud mates fire demands; And fierce, a flaming pine now fills his hands.
Straight they fall on; his presence courage bred; With black brands all the youth are furnished, They spoile the hearths; now pitchy vapours rise, And Vulcan mix'd with smoke, ascends the skies. What god, O Muse, could make such flames retire? And save the Trojan fleet from cruel fire? Though old the fact, yet lasting is the fame. When first Aenaeas did in Ida frame His fleet, and rig'd to sail the mighty seas. Cybele mother of the Deities Bespake great Jove. Dear son, thy eare incline To thy lov'd mothers suit, since heaven is thine. I many yeares did love a piney wood, There I had rites, there my high temple stood, Dark with black fir-trees, and a maple shade. These, when the Dardan prince his navy made, I freely gave. Now fear me much molests. To ease sad care, thy mother this requests: Let them no voyage craze, nor storm orerhrow; This grant, because they on our hills did grow. Then spake her sonne, who rules the worlds bright fires, Mother, why tempt'st thou fate? what's thy desire? Shall ships by mortals built, immortal be? And shall Aeneas safe all dangers see? Is such power given to any deity? But when their voyage ends, they anchor'dly On Latian shores: What ships escape the main, And set the Dardan on th' Ausonian plain; Their mortal form Ile change; of the great sea Goddesses make, as Doto, Galate, Who foaming Pontus with their breasts divide. This by the Stygian streams he ratifide, Banks full of sulphur, and the horrid lakes, Then with his nod he all Olympus shakes.
The promis'd day was come, times due by fate Were full; when much incens'd by Turnus hate Cybele sav'd from fire the sacred pines. Here in their eyes a wondrous light first shines, And from the East a cloud was seen to fly. Idaeans dance: words dreadfull from the sky Amaz'd the Trojans, and Rutilian bands: Fear not, O Trojans, neither arm your hands To save my fleet: Turnus shall burn the sea, Before these sacred vessels. Go, be free, And Sea-nymphs go; Cybele bids. They tore Their anchorge then, and sodain launch'd from shore, And with their beaks like Dolphins duck (most strange) Dive to the bottom, and to Virgins change. As many brazen prowes at shore did ride, So many beauties to the Ocean glide. All wonder fierce Messapus is dismaid, His horse disorder'd, and swift Tyber staid Murm'ring hoarse things, his foot from sea retreats. But not bold Turnus confidence abates: He cheers, now chides, then thus his men upbraids; This th'eatens them, Jove now withdraws all aids. Nor dare they Rutile sword nor fire abide; And now the Ocean is to them denide; No hope of flight, that part of help is lost, We have the land, such thousands in our host Of Latium arm'd; nor me those oracles daunt, If for themselves the Phrygians any vaunt; Enough for Venus fate, rich Italie That they have touch'd; and there are fates for me, This wicked nation to cut off with steel, Rob'd of my wife; nor do th'Atrid's feel Alone this grief, nor may Greece only arm. It might suffice once to have fallen, to harm:
Once was enough, all women then to hate. Whom these slight works, and this entrenched gate Grant small delayes t'assured funerals. Have they not seen in flames the Trojan walls To lie, which Neptune which his hands did reare? But valiant youth, who will with me appeare To force the trench, and trembling can ps t'invade. Vulcanian arms, a thousand ships for aide We need not have: let all th'Hetrurians come. Nor the dull theft of the Palladium They shall not fear, the high towrs warder's slain; Nor shall a horse dark belly us contain. Their walls by day I will with fire surround, Ile make them know not Argives they have found, Young Greeks, whom Hector did ten years prevent. But since the best part of the day is spent; What now remains, all things being carried right, But to refresh, and then expect to fight? Mean while to guard the ports, and fire prepare, To round the walls, was bold Messapus care. Twice seven Rutilian Captains chosen, then To keep the works; each led a thousand men, Who did with crests of gold, and purple shine. They scout, and watch by turns: on grasse, rich wine Freely they drink, at fires full goblets they Exhausted turn, the watch consume with play The restlesse night. All which the Trojans from their towres descride, And struck with fear, from port to port they ride, And arm'd, they bridges and strong bulworks joine; Mnestheus, Serestus, hastning the designe, Whom Prince Aeneas, should there danger fall, Prime Leaders made, and gave the charge of all.
The squadrons watch, the danger they divide, And take their turns, Each man his place supplide. The gate was Nisus charge, Hyrtacus son; Whom th'huntresse Ida sent companion With great Aeneas, one most fierce in war, Who well could shoot, as well could cast his spear. Euryalus joynd; for comelinesse and grace None was his equal 'mongst the Trojan race, Nor better arms became; now first was seen Soft doun to spread upon his youthful chin. One wa their love, at once they charg'd in warre; And now to guard the port, their common care. When Nisus said; Doth God our mind inspire, Or makes each man a god of's own desire? What ere it is, I can't to rest incline, My genius prompts me to some great designe. Seest thou the Rutils how secure they lie, Buried in sleep, and wine? few lights we spie, All silent are. Therefore receive my mind And resolution that I have design'd. The Peers and People would recall the Prince, And want now Spies to bring intelligence. If what I ask, they shall conferre on thee, (Fame of th'exploit enough shall honour me) Under that brow I think I have espide A passe, that will to Palanteum guide. Euryalus struck with mighty love of praise, Then to his earnest friend thus briefly sayes. In so great danger dost thou me decline, Alone thy self ingage in this designe? Have I with thee so ill my self behav'd, Serving our King, when seas and tempests rav'd?
Here is a soul, that values not to live; And life, to purchase so much fame, would give. Of thee I never harbour'd such a thought, O my dear friend, said Nisus then; Nor ought. No, as I hope great Jove will safely me Or other favouring gods, bring back to thee. But if (for such attempts great dangers wait) That I miscarry by mischance or fate, Thee I'de have live; of life thou worthier art, That to my ransom'd corps thou might'st impart Accustom'd earth; which if my chance denies, Yet grant my shade a tomb and obsequies: Lest to thy mother I the cause should be Of so much grief, who only follow'd thee, Nor great Acestes walls could her detain. But he. Thou weak excuses fram'st in vain, I fully am resolv'd; come, let's dispatch. This having said, strait he relieves the watch: All things in order, Centinels being plac'd, He to Ascanius did with Nisus haste. Now through the world all creatures sleep possest, Easing their cares, their hearts from labour rest. Prime Trojan Captains, and choice youth repairs To hold a Councel of their State affairs, What they should do; whom to Aeneas send. Amidst the camp they on long javelins lean'd, Bearing their shields. Nisus, Euryalus, crave Without delay, they might admittance have: Demurres in great affairs most dangerous are. The Prince bids Nisus first their minds declare. With thoughts unbyass'd hear you Trojan Peers, Neither prejudge the matter by our yeers. In wine and sleep Rutilians buried lie; For we our selves now did a way descrie,
Parts neer the gate, which next the ocean lies. Their fires wax dimme, black smok ascends the skies. If now our fortune you'll to us permit, Aeneas sought, at King Evanders seat, With mighty slaughter and huge spoil you may Shortly behold: nor can we misse our way; We daily hunting in dark vales below, Have seen the town, and the whole river know. Then old Alethes said, You deities In whose protection alwayes Ilium lies; Not us t'extirp you utterly intend, When to our youth you such true valour send. Thus having said, he with a strict imbrace Infolds them both, whilst tears bedew his face. To you for such attempts, what can we give? What shall I judge a worthy donative? Heaven and your merits first, shall grant the best; Pious Aeneas next, shall pay the rest: Nor yet Ascanius in his flourishing state Such your deservings ever shall forget. Nisus, but I (Ascanius then replies) Whose only safety in my father lies, Thee by Asaracus deities desire, And Trojan Gods, and Vesta's sacred fire; Whatere my fortune or my counsels are, I cast my self and them upon your care. Recall my father, let me see his face, And woe shall vanish in his dear imbrace. Two silver bowls Ile give, richly ingrav'd, Which from Arisba's sack my father sav'd: Two triphos, two great talents of pure gold, And Dido's gift, a cup of antient mould. But if we Latium win, and these realms sway, If it shall chance we conquerours share the prey.
Hast thou brave Turnus horse and arms beheld In which he prides? his bloody plumes and shield Shall not be shar'd; now Nisus, they are thine: Besides, my father shall twelve Ladies joyn, As many captive Lords compleat in arms, With all Latina's manours, parks, and farms. But thee, whose age mine in a neerer space Persues, brave youth. I take in full imbrace: Thou in all fortunes my companion be; My deeds shall seek no glory wanting thee; In peace or war, my actions and advice Thou most shalt sway. Euryalus replies, For any bold imployment no time shall Prove me unfit, what chance soever fall. But above all, one thing of thee I crave; I of King Priams stock a mother have, Whom (best of Parents!) Troy could not recall From following me, nor King Acestes wall. Her, unacquainted with the dangers, I Now unsaluted leave: Night testifie, And thy right hand, her tears I could not brook. But thee, I pray, now help her, thus forsook: Assure me this, and I shall bolder go Against all chance. Then from the Trojans flow Rivers of tears: the Prince most grief exprest, And now his fathers love affects his breast. And thus he said — Worthy this great designe, I all things grant: For she shall be my mother, only want Creusas name: nor is her honour small, That she bore thee, whatever chance befall. Now by this head, by which my father swore, What was my grant, if fortune thee restore
To us in safety, Ile thy friends afford. Weeping he said; and straight casts off his sword, Which with admired art Lycaon made, And with an ivory sheath adorn'd the blade. A lyons skin Mnestheus on Nisus prest, And good Alethes chang'd with him his crest. Now arm'd they march: as to the gates they bend, Both young and old with vows and prayers attend. And fair Ascanius, who above his age In manly care and courage did ingage, Many commands charg'd them to's father beare, Which vanished and flew in empty aire. They passe the trench; through gloomy night they go To th' enemies camp, with a great overthrow: Buried in wine and sleep the guards they spie, And all along the shore their wagons lie; Men amongst arms, wheels, reins and goblets laid, Spread on the grasse: When thus bold Nisus said. Now let us use our arms, th'occasion calls, This is the path: But thou, lest any falls Upon our reare, watch, and behind survay; These I'le destroy, and make thee open way. This said, he silent to proud Rhamnes went, Who then by chance slept in his lofty tent, And with loud snoring did his bosome move, A King, and Prophet, Turnus most did love. But by his skill he could not death evade: Three of his train he slew 'mongst weapons laid, And Rhemus squire: his charioteer he found Amongst the horse, and pin'd him to the ground; Then heads their Lord, and weltring in his blood Forsakes the panting corps; a purple flood Besmears the earth, and bed. Next Lamyrus slew With Lamus, and sprightly Serranus, who
Most beauteous was; he all that night had plaid, And vanquisht now in wine and sleep is laid. Happy if he had equaliz'd his play Unto that night, and gam'd it out till day. As when a hungry Lion fierce invades A flock of sheep, (dire famine much perswades) He the poor innocent beast struck dumb with fears, Growling with bloody jawes, devours and tears. Slaughter no lesse Euryalus did inflame, And many then he slew without a name. Fadus, Hebesus Abaris he kill'd, And Rhetus, who awake all this beheld, He frighted, under a huge charger hid: In open breast up to the hilts he did Sheath his bright sword, then drew it stain'd with blood; Dying, his soul he vomits with a flood Of wine and gore commix'd. Then on he went And to Messapus quarters, raging, bent: Where now their fires almost consum'd he spy'd, Their horses feeding, as the manner, ty'd. Then Nisus briefly said, Let us be gone, (Seeing him drawn with love of slaughter on;) For th'envious dawn appears: let this suffice, Our way is made now through the enemies. Nor arms of beaten silver they did mind, Rich hangings, massie plates they leave behind. Rhamnes rich trappings, and his girts of gold, (Which Cedicus sent to Remulus of old; When with that present he a league conjoyn'd; This dying, to his nephew he assign'd. After by war Rutilians made their prize.) Euryalus seiz'd, and on his shoulder ties, Claps on Messapus helm, with plumes displaid; Then left the camp, and through them safe way made.
Mean while, some horse came from Latinus seat, Whilst the whole Legion stood, drawn up compleat, To bring King Turnus some advertisement, Three hundred shield-men under Volscens sent. And now th'approach the camp, the trench drew nigh, When far off these they on the left hand spie: Euryalus helm through shades of gloomy night Did him betray, reflecting back the light. Not vainly seen, cries Volscens from the band, Stand, Who goes there? why arm'd? your busines? stand. They answer not again, but hasten flight Amongst the woods, and trust themselves to night. The horse beset the paths, all parts surround, And with a guard the severall passes crown'd. There was a wood shady with sable oke, Which thick briers did and thorns with brambles choke, Where a small path led through an obscure way; The tangling boughs, and burthen of his prey Euryalus stop'd, and fear his feet intraps: Nisus went on, and from the foe escapes, Past Alban lakes, which are from Alba nam'd, Where king Latinus his high stables fram'd. As for his friend, in vain he looking staid, Ah poor Euryalus, where art thou? he said; How shall I find thee out? Then through the maze Of the dark wood returns, and thousand wayes Seeks his own steps, and roves through silent briers. Noise, horse, and sounding trumpets straight he hears, And sudden the huge clamour understands, And saw Euryalus, whom all the bands With disadvantage of the night and lane Had round beset, much striving, but in vain. What shall he do? what arms, what forces trie To rescue him? should he, resolv'd to die
Charge midst his foes, and for brave death advance? Then straight, as he his arm rais'd with his lance, To the high moon, he pray'd: Assist me now Great goddesse, glory of the stars, and thou, Great Queen of all the groves and forrests, aid. If ere for me my father presents paid At thy blest altars; or if ever I From my own hunting did with gifts supply, Or grac'd thy shield, or sacred pillars deckt: Grant that I rout this troop, my spear direct. This said, with his whole strength a lance he cast, Through shady night the flying javelin past, And piercing Sulmons back, the staffe there broke, Yet through his bowels glides the knotty oke. From's breast a warm stream vomiting, he fell, And short breath panting, makes his bosome swell. All look about: he takes another spear, Cheer'd with successe, and pois'd it at his ear. Whilst they're amaz'd, through Tagus brows and arms Singing it flew, and in his hot brain warms. Fierce Volscens rag'd, nor any he espide Which threw the speare, nor knew which way to ride. But thou, for both shalt with warm blood afford Me satisfaction, first. This said, his sword He drew, and at Euryalus raging flies. But then aloud affrighted Nisus cries, Nor longer could conceal, nor such grief beare. At me, me; I, who did the fact am here; At me convert your steel, Rutilians bold, The fraud is mine; he neither durst, nor could; This heaven, these conscious stars shall witnesse such: He only lov'd his haplesse friend too much. Such things he said; but the drawn sword his chest, With violence pierc'd, and tore his snowie breast.
Dead he sinks down; bloud through his faire limbs sprung, And his neck falling, on his shoulders hung: As when a purple flowr cut by the plow Langueshing dies; or heads of Poppie bow Their weary necks, opprest with showrs that fall. But in bold Nisus charg'd, Volscens through all Alone he seekes, only at Volscens made; Though round about, him enemies invade, Wheeling his sword, no slower he rush'd on, Till in the mouth of the Rutilian He buried it, and dying kils his foe: Then wounded on his friend himselfe did throw, And there at last in quiet death did rest. You, if my verse have power, be ever blest, No age shall you forget whilst Trojans shall Plant the fixd Rock, of the high Capitol, Or Roman Fathers shall the Empire sway. But the Rutilian conquerours share the prey, And weeping to the Campe dead Volscens beare. Nor was lesse griefe, Rhamnes found slaughterd there, So many in one massackre, prime men Serranus, Numa; mighty concourse then Visit the corps, some not quite dead; they flore Fresh slaughter warm'd, and full streames fresh with gore, Messapus spoyles they know and glittering caske, And reins recovered by so hard a taske. And here Aurora with new light had spread The earth, leaving Tithonius saffron bed; Now when the Sun had shewd the world againe, Arm'd Turnus forth did his arm'd souldiers traine, And all the Iron rancks in order sets; Each man his wrath with various rumours whets,
When Nisus and Euryalus heads they bring, Fix'd on tall spears, and with loud clamouring (A wofull sight) came on The valiant Trojans the left hand made good, The right side was secured with the flood. They mighty trenches man'd with all their powers, And sad they stood upon their lofty towers, When well known heads they saw, t'increase the more Their swelling grief, flowing with purple-gore. Whilst through the fearful town flew swift-wing'd fame, And gliding to Euryalus mother came, Which from the wretch did straight all heat compell; Her yarn she tumbles down, her spindle fell: Out then with female cries, tearing her haire Distract she runs, and did to th' works repair: Danger of men and weapons she defies, Where thus with loud complaints she fils the skies. Thus view I thee, Euryalus? art thou he That shouldst support my age? thus leavst thou me? Nor to thy mother grant'st one complement, Before thou wast to such great dangers sent? Ah thou art left to dogs and birds a prey In a strange land; nor doth thy mother pay Thee funeral rites, nor close thine eyes, nor lave Thy wounds, nor cover with the vest I have Working both night and day hasten'd for thee, Which task in my old age did comfort me. Where shall I seek thee? in what coast remains Thy mangled limbs? what land thy corps contains? This the returns for all my love, dear son? For this have I by land and sea thus gone? Kill me, Rutilians, if you pity have, Dart all at me, and give me first a grave!
Or thou great Jove thy self in mercy shew, O father! this my body, hatefull now, Unto the Stygian shade with thunder send, Since else my woful life I cannot end. This pierc'd their souls, a sad grone past through all: Their courages in war undaunted, fall. Idaeus and sad Actor, by command Of Ilioneus, whilst she thus complain'd, Mov'd with Ascanius tears, lead her away By either arm, and to her house convay. But now from far loud trumpets terrifie, Follow'd with shouts, which eccho from the skie. The Volsceans haste, and straight a Testude form, Trenches to fill prepare, and works to storm; Some entrance seek, and strive to scale the wall Where men stood thinnest, and the guards but small. Trojans on them all sorts of weapons throw, And with sharp-pointed spears repell the foe, Train'd by long war a city to defend, Huge rocks and mighty milstones down they lend To break their fence-work, under which they slight All chances, and in danger take delight. Which now not serves; for where they thickest drew, On them a mighty heap the Trojans threw, Which beat the Rutils down, their shield-work broke. Nor more the hardy Volsceans undertook T'assault with engines, but by open force To drive them from their works: On th'other side dreadful Mizentius came, Brandishing fire, and casts in pitchy flame. Messapus that brave horsman, Neptunes race, Past trenches, and did scaling ladders place. O thou Caliope, inspire my verse Slaughters to sing, and funerals to rehearse
Which Turnus made! whom, each man sent to hell. With me that wars great circumstances tell, For this you know, and to relate have power. With transomes vast in prospect was a tower, A place of strength, 'gainst which th'Italians joyn Their force: this to orethrow, their chief design. With stones the Trojans in great flocks defend, And from their loop-holes deadly weapons send. A brand Prince Turnus cast, and blazing flame Fix'd to the work; which, with the wind, the frame Suddenly seiz'd, on burning posts fast stuck. Amaz'd, within all shake; and whilst they flock Contriving to escape, and make retreit Where was no fire; the towre with mighty weight Suddenly fell, heaven thunders with the sound. Half dead with the vast load, they come to ground, VVith their own weapons hurt; that cruel steel Did guard their breasts, they in their bosoms feel. Hardly escap'd Lycas and Helenor, Helenor the eldest, whom Lycimnia bore, Bondslave to the Maeoanian King did reare, And sent to Troy unlawfull arms to beare, With a white shield, and sword inglorious yet. He, when he saw himself with troops beset, And Latine bands on every side he found, Like a wild beast which hunters do surround, Runs on the weapons, and resolv'd to die Leaps through the toyles upon the enemie. So charg'd the desperate youth upon his foes, And where he saw the thickest squadron, goes. Lycas much swifter through the enemies And through their arms to the high bulwark flies; Then strives the tops of the tall works to reach, Endeavouring his friends right hands to catch.
Whom Turnus follows with as swift a course, And thus bespeaks: Fond, couldst thou hope our force Thus to escape? This said, him hanging caught, And down with great part of the bulwark brought. A silver swan, or hare Joves eagle bear; So through the sky, trust in his hooked sears, Or Marses wolf takes from the flock a lambe, Sought with much bleating of the mourning damme. They shout, they storm, to fill the trenches haste, And fire-works to the lofty bulwarks cast. Ilioneus with a stone, part of a hill, Firing the gates, did bold Lucetius kill. Lyger, Emathion; Asylas did orethrow Chorinaeus; This the dart us'd, that the bow. Caeneus, Ortygius. Turnus Caenaeus slew, Dioxe, and Ideas, as they did maintain Their towres, Privernus was by Capys slain. This first a slight wound got from Themella's lance; But he his hand did to the wound advance Fondly to bind it, when a shaft did glide On nimble wings, and pin'd it to his side; The breathing places of his soul it found, And panting lungs pierc'd with a deadly wound. In arms compleat stood Arcens gallant son, Of Spanish dye a rich coat he had on: A most fair youth, whom Arcens sent to have Breeding in Atars his grove near Symeths wave, Where pleas'd Palicus smoking altar stands. Mizentius laying by his arms, commands A sounding sling; then thrice about his head He whirls it round, and with the moulten lead He piere'd his temples through, and from his stand He layes hun weltring on a bed of sand.
Then first in war Ascanius (as they fame) A swift-wing'd arrow at the foe did aime: Before accustom'd wild beasts to persue, And stout Numanus with his own hand slew, Stil'd Rhemulus, who lately did espouse Turnus young sister, joyn'd to th' royal house. Boasting things fit and unfit to relate; Before the bands, puft up with his new state, He struts, and on with mighty clamour came. Again, twice captiv'd Phrygians, is't not shame To be besieg'd, and keep out death with walls? Behold, who seek by war our nuptials! VVhat god, or folly, caus'd you Latium steer? Here's no Atrides, no Ʋlysses here. We a hard race, use infants to the stream, In cruel ice and water harden them. Our children hunting use, in woods resort To break wild horse, and shooting is their sport. Youth in toyle patient, and inur'd to want, They plow the field; or arm'd, proud cities daunt. We spend our age in war, and goad our steers With our turn'd javelins: and when struck in years, Our courage fails not, nor our strength decayes; We crush gray hairs with helms, and still fresh preyes Delight to take, and live by spoils of war. You cloath'd in purple, and in scarlet are, Are pleas'd with sloth, in wanton dances pride; Your coats have hanging sleeves, your myters tide: True female Phrygians; men you are not: Go To Dyndimus, whose well-set tunes you know, Where lutes and harps of Bericynthian Ide Invites; and let Men war; lay arms aside. Boasting such things, words of so dire extent Ascanius not indur'd: his bow he bent
With a horse nerve; stretching his arms, prepares Before Jove standing supplyant thus, with prayers, Great Jupiter, grant my bold enterprize, I'le to thy fanes bring solemn sacrifice; And at thy Altars place a snowie steer, Who lofry crests doth like his mother bear; And buts with horns, his feet the sand doth spread. Jove heard and from the left-side thundered Through the clear skie; then sounds the deadly bow, As soon through Rhemulus head the shaft did go, And the wing'd steel did through both temples glide; Go, now, and valour with proud words deride, Twice captiv'd Phrygians you these answers send, Ascanius said. Trojans with shouts attend And loud applause, to heaven their hope advance. Then bright-hair'd Phoebus from the skie by chance The City and Ausonian bands survaid Flac'd in a cloud, and to Ascanius said. Go with new prowesse boy; so climb the stars, From Gods sprung, Gods to get; tis just all wars Under Assaracus house by fate should seise; Nor Troy shall thee contain. As he said these, He cuts the breathing aire, from heaven descends, And in old Butes forme t'Ascanius bends. Trojan Anchises Squire he was before, And faithfull kept a guard still at his door, Whom then to wait on's Son, Aeneas sent. In all points like th'old man, Apollo went, Such his white hair, complection, and his voice, And dreadfull arms, ratling with mighty noise: Who thus to fierce Ascanius then began. Trojan enough! Numanus thou hast slain, To thee Apollo grants thy first desire, Nor envies equall arms; from fight retire.
Having thus said, from mortall eves he fled, And far from thence, to thin aire vanished. The God, and heavenly shafts, the Trojans knew, And saw his sounding quive as he flew. Straight from the fight Ascanius they convey, And Phoebus power and his command obey. But they returue again to charge the foes, And 'gainst all dangers do their lives expose. Then clamor rounds the wals from tower to tower, They bend their bowes, and clouds of arrows poure. The earth is strewd with arms, with mighty blows Helms and Shields rattle: a huge fight arose; As from moyst, Kids when boysterous storms assail The yieldihg earth, and showrs commix'd with hail Swell to a flood, the skie with rough winds loud Drives wintry night, and tears a hollow cloud. Pandarus and Bitias, both Alcanors seed, Whom Nymph Hiera in loves wood did breed, Youths like their contreys firre, and mountains tall, Open a gate, which to the charge did fall Of their own chief; these bold in arms did go, And bravely challeng'd to the wals their foe; Within, themselves on either hand they place; And arm'd with steel, bright crests their heads did grace. Such as sky-kissing okes by twins that grow Near chrystall streams, or pleasant banks of Poe, Or nigh fair Athesis, to heaven they spread, And unlop'd boughs shake with a stately head. Ausonians rush, seeing the open gate, Bold Quercens then, and fair Equicolus straight With Martial Haemon charge, and Tmarus stout, Or with whole squadrons these would face about,
Or in the entrance of the gate expire. The quarrell heats, and more increas'd their ire. There Trojans gather with a mighty shout, Fight hand to hand, dare sally further out. A Messenger, whilst valiant Turnus fought Bravely 'gainst other parts, these tydings brought, Foes flesh'd with slaughter open gates afford. He leavs all businesse then, with anger stir'd To Dardan gates, and the proud brothers goes. Antiphates first, (for he did first oppose) (Sarpedons naturall son by a Theban dame) He with his spear 'orethrew; the javelin came Through yielding aire, and through his intrals glides, He from the wound a purple river bleeds, And in his lungs warm grows the sixed steel. Then he did Merops, Erymanthus kill. Next, Bitias with fierce eyes, and raging heart, Not with a spear (he yields not to a dart) With a huge Phalarick he did assail, Like lightning sent; neither his trustie mail, Strengthned with gold, nor two bull hides defend. The mighty fals, the earth a grone did send: Above his huge shield rung: As in times past On the Euboick shores of Baia plac'd, A stone pile sinks: which erst with mighty wals Stood in the Sea, now with a ruine fals, And in the shoales torn from foundations lies. Waves mix'd with waves, and the deep sands arise; Then high Phrochyta trembles at the sound, And the hard bed where Jove Typhaeus bound. Here bloody Mars, the Ausonians courage stirs, And in their bosomes strikes his sharpest spurs: But to the Trojans sends base fear, and flight. Each where they charge, occasion given to fight,
The God of War inflames their minds. As Pandarus beheld his brother slain, And what sad fortune might for him remain, He straight with mighty strength claps to the gates With his broad shoulders: many of his mates Then he shut out, and in hard conflict leavs, But many others rushing in, receivs: Who fond then saw not; urnus in the troupe Boldly break in, and willingly shut up, Like a huge Tyger 'mongst tame cattell found. His eyes seem fierce, his dreadfull arms resound: And on his crest tremble his bloody plumes, Whilst from his thundring shield, bright lightning comes. They know his hated face, and Gyant size, Which much th'amaz'd Trojans terrines. Then up to him straight mighty Pandarus made And raging for his brothers slaughter said. This not the royall portion from the Queen Which you expect, nor are you now within Ardea, nor your native Country (Prince.) This the foes camp; nor shalt thou 'scape from hence. Then Turnus smiling, calmly did reply, If you're so stout, come and your prowesse try; For thou shalt tell to Priam under-ground, That here a new Achilles thou hast found. He said, whilst Pandarus boldly did advance, And cast at him a rough and knottie lance; The aire receivs the wound, Juno being there Turns it, and in the gate she fix'd the spear. But this good sword which in my right hand I Command with so much strength, thou shalt not flie. Our weapons are not like, nor shall the wound. Then with his sword raising himself from ground,
He with a mighty blow his forehead cleaves, And on his downy cheeks a huge gash leaves. Shook with his mighty weight earth did resound, He stretch'd his dying limbs upon the ground; His arms besmear'd with brain, his cloven head On both sides hung, over each shoulder spread. The Trojans flie, routed with trembling feare; And if the Conqueror straight had took that care T'have broke the bars, and let his souldiers in, To th'war, and nation, that day last had been. But fury, and mad love of slaughter, him Drove raging 'gainst the foe And first he Gyges maim'd, and Phalaris slew, And spears from flyers snatch'd, at them he threw. For Juno did both strength and courage yield. Halys he kills, runs Phegeus through his shield. Alcander, Halias, Noemon, Prytanus slew, Whilst hot in fight, of this they nothing knew. And Lynceus, as he charg'd, and others calls, With his bright sword surpriz'd them on the walls: Whose head and healmet cut off at one blow, Tumbles far off. Amycus, then a foe To savage beasts; none better could annoint Weapons then he, with poison arm the point. Clitius and Creteus next, the Muses friend, Creteus that lov'd the Muses, verses pen'd; Pleas'd with the Lyre, he numbers set to strings, And still of horse, and arms, and battels sings. At last the Trojan leaders at the fame Of this great slaughter, in to rescue came; And up with Mnestheus bold Serestus bends, They saw the foe, and their amazed friends. When Mnestheus said, Where fly you? where d'ye go? What other strength or bulwarks do you know?
Shall one man, sirs, and round inclos'd with wals, Escape, and make so many funerals, And such great numbers of prime men destroy? Base cowards! Of your selves, and haplesse Troy Have you no pity? blush you not with shame For your old gods, and great Aeneas fame? With words like these encourag'd, boldly then In a thick body they drew up agen. But Turnus by degrees retreats from them, Toth' river and those parts lay neer the stream. At which more fierce the Trojans with a shout Presse boldly on, and gather round about: As when a troop a Lion hath beset With cruel spears, he makes a brave retreit, Although forbid by valour and by rage, Nor can, though willing, 'gainst such power ingage. So unresolv'd, bold Turnus did retire, Whilst in his bosome boyls a flood of ire. Yet twice, where foes were thickest, on he falls, And twice he drove that party from the walls. When from the Camp, in a full body made 'Gainst one, th'whole army drew; nor longer aide T'oppose such forces, Juno durst supply. For Jove had sent bright Iris from the sky, Who to Saturnia carried strict commands That Turnus should escape the Trojan bands. Therefore his shield and strength too weak he found, Orewhelm'd with darts, with showres of arrows drown'd; His hollow cask which arm'd his temples, grones, And solid brasse gives way to battering stones: His plumes are beaten off, nor doth his targe Sustain the blowes, nor thundring Mnestheus charge; Whilst thick their javelins a whole army throwes, No intermission: then a salt sweat flowes
Ore all his limbs, and a black river glides, And faint short-breathing shakes his ample sides. At last with all his arms a leap he gave Into the stream, which on his silver wave Receiv'd him, and on yielding billows bore From slaughter cleans'd, to's friends on th'other shore.
THE TENTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. Jove calls a Councel, and declares the fates: Venus complains: Juno recriminates. Aeneas, Tarchon, and the Tyrrhens joyn'd, Their men aboard, they saile with prosperous wind. The martial List. Ships turn'd to Nymphs appear, And sad Aeneas with their counsel cheer. Landed, they fight; the Plain huge slaughter fills. Aeneas, Lausus; Turnus, Pallas kills. Shap'd like Aeneas, a fantastick shade Turnus provokes, and thence to sea convaide. Mizentius, to revenge his son, again Entring the fight, is by Aeneas slain. MEan while heavens mighty courts are open, when The father of the gods, and king of men A counsel calls: from starry thrones, all lands He views, the Dardan camps, and Latian bands. And thus, all plac'd, he said: You deities, Wherefore so often change you your decrees?
And why in sharp debates ars you thus hot? Latium to war with Troy, granted not. Why this unlawfull strife? what jealousies made Or these, or them take arms, to fight perswade? Just time of war (nor hasten it) shall come, When cruel Carthage to the towres of Rome Through open Alpes shall great destruction send. Then may they all things spoile, with hate contend; But now desist, and make a happy peace. Jove brief; but beauteous Venus answered these At large.— Father, of men and gods eternal king, (For to none else may we petitions bring) Thou seest how Rutils boast, and Turnus rides Triumphing through the bands, who bold now prides In wars successe; nor Trojans wals defend, But they within their gates and works contend, With blood their trenches flow, and now their Prince Aeneas absent, wants intelligence. Must we be still besieg'd? must we again The walls of rising Troy 'gainst foes maintain? More armies yet? shall once more Diomed Against the Dardans his Aeolians lead? Then I new wounds, as I suppose, must feel, And I thy race, be pierc'd with mortal steel. If Trojans, without leave, for Latium made, Let them be punish'd, neither grant them aide: But if they all those Oracles obey Which Gods and Manes gave, who thy decree Can alter then? or why new fates ordain? Of our fir'd Navie why should I complain? Nor of the King of tempests, and those loud Storms which he rais'd, nor Iris from a cloud.
And now the fiends (which only were untride Of all the world) she raiseth to her side, And straight Alecto sent from Stygian waves: Who now through all th' Ausonian Cities raves. Nor am I mov'd for realms; whilst fortune stood We hop'd; let them now conquer thou think'st good. If no land thy sterne wife grants them t'injoy; By smokie ruines of consumed Troy, Father, I thee beseech; from arms detain Ascanius safe, preserv'd, let him remain. Aeneas may be tost through unknown seas, And whatsoever course fortune shall please He may pursue; Let me but save the boy, Ah let not cruel war the child destroy. Mine lorty Paphos, mine Amathus is, Cytherum and Idalian Palaces; Let him unexercis'd in cruel strife Of dreadfull war, there finish quiet life; Command aspiring Carthage then to lay Huge taxes on subdu'd Ausonia, And Tyrian Towrs that nothing shall debar. What help'd it us to 'scape from cruel war? To flie through Graecian fire, and to exhaust All dangers of the sea and countreys vast, Whilst Trojans for new Troy and Latium stand. We'had better built, on ashes of our land, Dwelt where Troy stood. Xanthus and Simois grant, And that again we Ilum may replant. Highly incens'd then Royal Juno spake; Why mak'st thou me deep silence thus to break, And in this place our hidden grief declare? What God or man Aeneas forc'd to war? Or to the king Latinus made a foe? Fate him to Italy sent; then be it so.
Drove by Cassandra's rage, have we enjoyn'd Him to set sail, and venture iife to wind? Or trust a boy with conduct in the war? Or Tyrrhen faith, or realms in peace to stir? What power of mine betraid him, or what god? Where's Juno here, or Iris from a cloud? It is unjust Italians should surround Troy with a leaguer, and on native ground Turnus should stand, the great Pilumnus heire, Whom bright Venilia the blest goddesse bare. Shall Trojans thus with fire and sword persue, Take spoiles, and lawlesse others land subdue; Match where they please, rob husbands of their bride; Make shew of peace, and yet for war provide? Thou couldst from Grecian troops thy son regain; Place empty clouds, and shadows for the man: Thou couldst to Nymphs the Trojan Navy change: But if we help the Rutils, this seems strange. Aeneas absent, wants intelligence; And absent let him: thou for thy defence Idalium, high Cytherum hast: why then Tempst thou seats big with war and valiant men? Did we declining Phrygia's realm destroy? Or they who mov'd the Greeks to war with Troy? What did to arms Europe and Asia stir, And to break peace by rape? Th' Adulterer Did he take Sparta by our conduct led? Did I give arms, or war with foul lust fed? Thou shouldst have then been carefull; now complaints Are but in vain falsly thou me attainst. Thus Juno pleads, and all the gods a noise With votes divided made; as when winds rise, And stopt by woods, a sudden mutmur send, Which doth a storm to marmers portend.
Then mighty Jove began who governs all, Silence imposd through the Olympick Hall. Earth to the Center shook, Heaven at a stand, The winds were laid, seas smooth as champaign land; Careful attend my words; and bear in mind. Since these two nations cannot be conjoyn'd, And your divisions never will have end: What hope or fortune doth on each attend? Twixt Trojans, Rutils, Ile no difference make. This Siege by fate, if Latins undertake, Or else by Troys ill conduct or advice: Let each the chance of his own enterprise And danger bear: Iove's the same King to all, The fates will make their way whatever fall. This by his brothers streams he ratifide, Which round about th'infernall kingdome glide, Banks full of sulphure, and the horrid lakes, And with his nod he all Olymus shakes. Then from his golden throne great Iove did rise, Attended to his Court by deities. Mean while the Rutils with great clamour came, Close to the gates, and hem'd the wals with flame; But in their trenches kept the Trojan band, No hope to 'scape, sad on high towrs they stand; To man their works but slender guards they place, Iasius, Thymetes, bold Hicetons race, With Castor, th' Assaraci and Tybris stood, With them two brothers of Sarpedons blood, Who them accompaned from the Lycian shore. Acmon with all his strength a huge stone bore, A mountains greatest part, who in the wars No lesse then's father, or his brother dares; Some Javelins cast, and others stones did throw; And these did wild-fire hurl, or use their bow,
Behold Ascanius, Venus chiefest care, Amidst the thickest, with his Temples bare. So shines a jewell set in purest gold, Made to adorn the head, or neck infold, Such lustre ivory doth to box impart; Or to Orician brazill wrought by art. His snowie neck, his flowing hair receives: And purest gold his tresses interweaves. Aiming thy shafts, and poisoning darts, the bold, Nations did thee, brave Ismarus, behold, In Lybia born, where men plow fertile lands, And rich Pactolus rowls his golden sands. And Mnestheus present was, whose late successe, When from the wals he Turnus did represse, Him honour gave; and Capys of great fame, From whom Campania doth derive her name. Whilst thus they were ingag'd in cruell fight; Aeneas sails through the dark seas by night. As soon as he to th' Etrurian army came, He'acquaints the General with his stock and name, What aids he needs, and what he hath declares: And what great force Mizentius prepares: And shews how fury Turnus doth incense, In humane greatnesse what small confidence Is to be plac'd; and humbly help did beg. Straight Tarchon forces joyns, and makes a League; Then freed by fate the Lydyans haste aboard, Under the conduct of a forrain Lord. Aeneas ship the Admiral, sail before, And in her prow two Phrygian Lyons bore. Ida above which Trojans much old take; In this Aeneas did his voyage make, And various chance of war did ruminate; But on his left hand youthfull Pallus sate,
And learns the stars by which through night they stand Their course, his suffering then by sea and land. You Muses, now open your sacred spring, And raise my notes, that I inspir'd may sing What bands Aeneas brought from Tuscan shore, Who man'd his ships which him to th' ocean bore. I'th' brazen Tyger Massicus first stands, From Clusus he a thousand youth commands; Who Cosas left, these darts and javelins throw, And bear light quivers with a deadly bow; Fierce Abas next, with compleat armed bands, On's stern in gold shining Apollo stands. His mother Populonia did present Six hundred expert; and three, Ilva sent. The Ile for inexhausted mines prefer'd. Asylas, gods interpreter, was third, Whom smoaking entrails, and the stars obey'd; He tongues of birds, presaging thunder sway'd; A thousand he did with sharp spears convey, Whom Latian Pisa that they should obey Gave strict command; and joyn'd in covenant, Who in the Ceres dwell, and those who plant By Minio's streams, them from old Pyrgians were, And from Gravisca of intemperate aire. Cycnus that bold Lygurian, neither you Cupavo I'le orepasse, who led but few: A swans bright plume did from his crest advance, Of his transformed sire the cognisance. Love was your only crime: for, as 'tis said, Whilst Cycnus mourning in his sisters shade For his dear Phaeton, in the poplar grove, And with his sweet Muse comforts his sad love, His hoary hair into soft feathers grew, Then mounting to the stars he singing flew.
His son accompanied with equal bands, Rowes the great Centaure; she through billows stands Threatning the waves, tall like a mighty hill, And the deep ocean plowes with her long keel. Ornus a band rais'd from his fathers shore, Prophetick Manto him to Tyber bore, Who gave to Mantua walls, and's mothers name: Mantua high-stock'd, but not from one race came: A triple kind, four tribes in each of them; But this the head, and strength o'th' Tusoan stem. Hence came five hundred, which Mizentius deeds Arm'd 'gainst himself, whom Mincius crown'd with reeds Brought down from antient Benachus, the brine They boldly plow in a most warlike pine. A hundred oars with bold Auletes come, Who sweep the waves, and make the billows fome. This mighty Triton bore, frighting the tydes With his shrill trump, his face and hairy sides Above presents a man, a whale the rest, And fomy waves resound beneath his breast. In thrice ten ships as many Leaders go Troy to relieve; and the salt ocean plow. Now day had heaven forsaken, and the bright Moons black chariot scales Olympus height. The Prince, (for no rest grants his troubled mind) Sits at the helm, and swells the sails with wind. But then, behold! amidst his voyage, bends To him a train of Nymphs, his antient friends; Whom blest Cybelle bid to rule the seas, And had from ships transform'd to goddesses. They swam together, and the waves divide; As many ships did once at anchor ride: They knew their King, and round about him dance. Cymodocea, of best utterance,
Seiz'd with her right his stern, her left hand laves (Raising her self from sea) the silent waves, And thus she spake: Sleepst thou, O goddesse son? Awake, great Prince, and clap more canvase on. We are those pines which once crown'd sacred Ide, Thy Fleet, now chang'd to Nymphs: when terrifide With Turnus, threatning sword and fire then we Our cables broke, and through the sea sought thee: Cybelle pitying us, this form did give, Sea-Nymphs to be, and under waves to live. Put young Ascanius is beleaguer'd round With arms, and Latines ever warlike found; And now th' Arcadian horse joyn with the bold Hetrurians, and allotted quarters hold: To send a party, 's Turnus main designe To keep the passe; lest both their forces joyn. Rise, and command thy friends with early dawn, To arm themselves, and brace thy target on Which Vulcan gave thee, and th'unconquer'd shield Did with pure gold on the large border gild. Next day, if thou conceive my words not vain, Thou shalt behold huge heaps of Rutils slain. This said, she takes her leave, and as she dives Her skilfull hand, the lusty vessel drives. Swift as a dart through billows flies the ship, Or winged shafts that nimble winds outstrip. So the whole fleet divide the briney seas, This, much amaz'd great Anchisiades, But yet the omen did his spirits raise: Then freely viewing heavens mighty convex, prayes, Mother of gods, thou who in Dyndimus prid'st, And towre-crown'd cities, and with lyons rid'st: O guide me in the fight! Dear goddesse, be Neer with protection, and blest augurie!
Whilst thus he pray'd, Aurora with new light Led on the day, and darknesse put to flight. First he commands that they should all appeare, Refresh their spirits, and for fight prepare. And now his Dardan city he beheld, Then from the stern he shews his glittering shield, At which a Trojan shout mounts to the stars; And hope thus added, more their fury spurs. Then thick they javelins cast: Cranes, not so loud Extend their voices from a gloomy cloud When they with clamour cut the yielding skie, And from a threatned tempest sounding flie. But the Rutilian King, and all the bold Ausonian chiefs with wonder did behold, Till they to shore saw the tall Navy stood, And winged vessels hide the ample flood. His crest now burns, flames from his plumes aspire, And Turnus golden helm did shine with fire. As in moyst night, a blazing Comet streams With bloody omens red, and Syrius beams Brings to sad mortals sicknesses and thirst, And heaven in mourning hangs, with influence curst. But nothing daunts bold Turnus confidence To march to shore, and drive th'adventurers thence; And thus, with words did sleeping valour rouse. You have obtain'd what long you sought with vowes, And now you have it in your power to fight; Then let your wives and fortunes you excite! Your fathers facts and fame to memory call; Let's sudden charge, and on them bravely fall, Whilst now they landing reel, with staggering feet. Fortune assists the bold. This said, he casts what forces out to lead, And whom to trust with walls beleaguered.
Me while Aeneas laders for his men Plac'd from the lofty ships: but many then Observ'd when waves retreated from the shores, Then leap to land; but others trust their ores. Tarchon supposing he a coast had found Where was no shoal, nor broke waves did resound, But a calme water with a swelling tyde. Thither he turns, and to his men thus cryde. Now lustie youth, now to your tackling stand; Drive in the ship, and strike that enemie land; And let the keel in its own furrow sit; To gain that landing, Ile my vessell split. This said, at once all stoutly ply their ores, And brought their foaming ships to Latine shores, Untill their fleet safe on dry ground did stand, And without harme the whole navie came to land. But thy ship Tarchon did not save her self, For whilst it hung upon a spightful shelf, Beaten with billows, it was bilg'd at last, And all her Souldiers in the Ocean cast; Whilst Plancks and broken ores did hinder them, And drew their sliding feet back with the stream. Nor Turnus us'd delay, but all his bands Gainst Trojans draws, and on the shore he stands, They sound a charge; and first Aeneas sets On rustick bands, and a good signe, defeats A Latine squadron, and bold Thero slew, Who at Aeneas desperately flew; Quite through his golden mail, and brazen targe, His sword in's bosome found a passage large. Then Lycas rip'd from's mothers belly kil'd, Sacred to thee O Phoebus, though a child, He steel escap'd: not far from thence orethrows Stern Cysseus and huge Gyas, dealing blows
With knottie clubs; nor could Alcides armes Nor mighty size, nor could in those alarms Their father help, who Hercules did aid In all th'adventures which on earth he made. Behold! whilst Pharon vainly boasts, he cast A spear, which in's clamouring mouth stuck fast: And nex'd unhappy Cydon, whilst he seeks His new love Clytius, fair with downie cheeks Aeneas slew, and of that love now freed Youth to him made; thou hadst lamented dy'd, But that thy brothers up against him drew, Seven, Phorcus off-spring, who seven javelins threw: Some harmlesse, on his shield and helme resound, Some Venus broke, not suffering to wound. Then did Aeneas true Achates call, And said, bring me those darts (nor this hand shall Spend one against the Rutilie in vain) Drawn from Greek bodies on the Dardan plain. This said, he snatch'd a javelin strong and large, Which well aim'd, pierc'd through Meons brazen targe, And through his breast and breast-plate passage made. Alcanor his bold brother giving aid, Bringing his dying brother of, by chance, Through th'arm sustain'd him flies the winged lance, And sticking in the wound with blood was dide: His hand, with slack nerves hanging by his side. From's brothers body Numitor, a lance Having pul'd forth, t'Aeneas did advance; But him it must not wound, the spear past by, And fix'd it self in great Achates thigh. Here youthfull Lausus up a squadron brings, And a rough javelin at bold Driophes flings; Under his chin, in's throat fast stuck the lance; Bereaving him of speech and life at once.
Down on his face he tumbles on the earth; And a deep sea of purple vomits forth. Three Thracians next, of Boreas high descent, And three of Ida's sons, from Ismar sent By severall ways he slew: Hales brings on Aruncian bands; next charge great Neptune's son Well hors'd Messapus: these get ground, now they, They fought in th'entrance of Ausonia: At warring tempests meet, in th'ample skies, With equall strength, and equall courages; Nor winds, nor clouds, nor seas give place; in doubt The battell stands, resolv'd to fight it out. So came the Trojans and the Latins on, Set foot to foot and close up man to man. But on the other side, where streams had born Down rowling stones, and shrubs from bancks had torn, Pallas beheld, th'Arcadian horse unskil'd To fight with foot, to shrink, and leave the field, Whom disadvantage of the ground compels To quit their horse, having no succour else In that extream; these he intreats and prayes, And now with sharp words did their courage raise. Where do you flie? by th'acts which you have done, By great Evanders name, and victories won, And my adventures for my Countreys praise: Trust not to flight, but charge the enemies; And where they thickest stand, there venture through; Your Prince, your Countrey, this requires of you. No Gods oppose, mortal 'gainst mortal stands, You have more courage; and as many hands; Before the Oceans waves opposed be, No land is left, are you for Troy by sea? This said, he charg'd amongst the thickest foes, Whom Lagus by sterne fates did first oppose;
Who whilst he lifts at him a mighty stone, Was with his spear run through the shoulder bone; Then back again he drew the fastned lance, Whom Hisbon could not, though he did advance, Relieve: for Pallas whilst he rush'd betwixt Him in his rage, with the same javelin fix'd, And gave him his companions cruell death; For he his sword in's swelling lungs did sheath, Next Sthelenus and Anchemelus he kil'd, Who boldly his step-mothers bed defil'd. Then Thymber and Larides were orethrown In Rutile fields, these twins, so like, that none Though well acquainted, could a difference make; Whose Parents oft rejoyc'd at the mistake. But Pallas now a sad distinction made, Lops Thymbers head off with th'Evandrian blade, And thy right hand for thee (Larides) felt; The half-dead fingers trembling, sought the hilt; Mov'd with this speech and valour of the man, Vex'd and ashamde, on the Arcadians ran, And here the valiant Pallas Rhetus slew, As in his chariot passing by he flew; (This only stay there was of Ilus chance, For he at Ilus aim'd his mighty lance.) And Rhetus hits, as cowardly he shuns Bold Teuthrus thee, and from thy brother runs With his deaths wound he from his chariot reels, And beats Rutilian Plains with dying heels; As when a swaine in woods makes many fires, When gales in spring, blow fresh, to his desires: Straight the main bodie's seiz'd; all meet again, And Vulcans bands triumphing spread the Plain; Whilst victor he the conquering flames survaid: So Pallas friends conjoyn'd to bring him aide.
But stout Halesus bends 'gainst all alarms, And puts himself in posture with his arms. Demodocus, Ladon, Pharetes did dispatch, Lops Strymons hands, which at his throat did catch: Then with a stone o'th' head takes Thoas full, And beats into his brains his battered scull. Halesus was in woods by's father hid, Foreseeing fate: but when the old man dy'd, Him destiny with cruel hands did seise, And by th'Evandrian sword did sacrifice, Whom Pallas charg'd, thus having made his prayer. O father Tyber! grant, this brandish'd spear May through Halesus bosome make its way! And to thy oke his arms and spoils I'le pay. The god inclin'd; whilst he did Imaon save, His open breast t'Arcadian lance he gave. But Lausus powrfull in the war, kept all His men undaunted, at this Captains fall. First Abas slew, who first maintain'd the fight, Th' Arcadians and Hetrurians put to flight, And you O! Trojans, scap'd the Grecian bands. They charge with equal Chiefs, and like commands; Double their fronts, so thick the iron grove They could not use their arms, nor weapons move. Here Pallas charges: Lausus did ingage Another party there; nor of their age Much difference was, and both most gallant men: But fortune had denide they should agen Their native country see; for whom commands Olympus starry palaces, withstands That they should meet, in single fight oppose; On them their fates attend by greater foes. Mean while his sister Turnus did advise Lausus to help: he through the battel flies
On winged wheels; and there where he espide His men ingag'd, he spake; Stand all aside, And let me only now with Pallas joyn, The honour of his death must needs be mine: I would his father were spectator here! This said, the field at his command they cleer. But Pallas, when the Rutils had retir'd, Then Turnus proud commands the youth admir'd; And viewing his huge body, was amaz'd: Yet with a cruel eye upon him gaz'd; And saying thus, against the Tyrant came: I shall obtain his spoils and mighty fame, Or noble death; each will my father please. Then briefly said, Forbear such threats as these. And with the word, drew to the open plains. Cold fear th'Arcadians blood drives from their veins. Turnus from's chariot lights, on foot to fight: And as a Lyon comes who from a height Hath seen a Bull, for battel to prepare; So in his march the King himself did beare. When Pallas saw he could him with his sance Reach, as he pleas'd; then first he did advance, If fortune pleas'd, would him, though weaker, aid: Then thus to Hercules in high heaven he praid. Oh, by my fathers hospitable board, Which thou a stranger honour'dst once; afford Assistance now to this great enterprise! Let Turnus me behold with dying eyes, Breathing his last, a Conquerour to seise His bloody arms! This heard great Hercules; And powring vain tears forth, he gave a groan, Then Jove with comfort thus bespake his son, Each hath his fate; Short and irreparable time Mans life enjoyes: But by brave deeds to clime
To honours height, this they by valour gain. How many sons of Gods at Troy were slain? Sarpedon there, my progenie, did fall; And Turnus fates for him already call, And he to his appointed date must yield. This said, his eye turns from th'Ausonian field. But Pallas with huge strength his javelin threw, And's glittering sword straight from his scabberd drew; It through aethereal orbs resounding flies, Where the high coverings of his shoulder lies; Then through the skirts of's shield a passage found, And gave to mighty Turnus a small wound. Here Turnus having pois'd a spear of oke, Pointed with steel, aiming at Pallas, spoke: See if our javelin will not better passe. This said, his shield plated with steel and brasse, So thick with bull-hides lin'd, trembling, it prest; And through his corslet pierc'd his ample brest. He from the wound in vain the warm spear drew, Whilst the same way, blood and his soul, persue. Falling on's wound, his arms above resound, And dying, bites with bloody mouth the ground. Then Turnus standing ore, Arcadians, tell Evander these he said; I Pallas send such as he merited: Whatere the honour is of obsequie And joy at funerals, shall my bounty be; Aeneas entertainment shall be paid Back with no small reward. Thus having said, And treading with his left foot on the dead, He seiz'd his belt richly embroidered, Wrought with a crime; in one nights nuptials slain So many youths, blood, bridal chambers stain.
And with pure gold skilfull Eurytion wrought, Which spoils now Turnus boasts proud to have got; Men not foreseeing chanee, and future fates, And to observe a mean in prosperous States. The time shall come, when Turnus will in vain Wish, with a Kingdomes price, Pallas unslain, And with those spoils he shall abhor the day. With groans and tears his servants Pallas lay Upon a shield, and round about him mourn, Great grief and glory to thy sire return, This thy first day in war, and this thy last, But yet thou heaps of slain Rutilians sawst. Not of so great misfortune only fame, But certain tydings to Aeneas came; Which told his army in great danger stands, And now or never aid his shrinking bands. Whoere he meets, he levels with his sword, And steele to him a passage did afford. Seeking thee Turnus with new slaughter proud: Pallas, Evander, favours they allow'd To him a Stranger, and those aids he brought Present themselves, to his revengeful thought. Four gallant youths, which were at Sulmon bred, As many which cold Ʋfens nonrished, Living he took: for shades an offering dire, Whose captive blood should due the funeral fire. At Mago then a dreadful spear he threw, Who stooping, 'ore him, the swift javelin flew; He suppliant then, grasping his knees, begun. By thy sires Manes, and thy hopeful son, This life, both for a son and father save. I have a Pallace, where I talents have Of hoarded silver, and huge summes of gold, Coind and uncoin'd. This victory can't withhold.
Nor one mans life so great a difference make. This said: Then thus to him Aeneas spake. The gold and silver which thou mention'st, spare To help thy children; Turnus in this War Hath bar'd all quarter since he Pallas slew, This to my father, and my son is due. Then, whilst he mercy craves, he seiz'd his crest And ran to th'hilts his sword within his brest. Hard by was Phoebus prest, Aemonius son VVith all his robes, Surplice and Mytre on, Known by his glorious arms, and glittering shield, Him first he charg'd, and drives through all the field. Then of him faln a sacrifice he made, And standing ore, hides with his mighty shade. Serestus takes his curious arms to be A lasting trophie, father Mars to thee. Ceculus, Vulcans son, and Ʋmbro, who Came from th'Martian fields, the fight renew, Whom the Prince meets: as Anxure did advance, He lops off both his shield and arm at once. For he devin'd t'himself some great successe, And vain Enthusiasmes, beleev'd no lesse; With his phantastick spirit he mounts the stars, Promising t'himself long life and hoarie hairs. Well arm'd Tarquitus then came boldly on, Whom the nymph Dryope bore, old Faunus son, Towards him Aeneas raging did advance, And through his shield and corslet drives his lance. Whilst he did many ways beg life in vain, And us'd perswasions quarter to obtain, Cuts off his head the warm trunck down did rowl; Then standing ore him, from a bitter soul Thus much he said. Thou so much fear'd lie there, Nor shall thy woful mother thee interre:
Or in thy fathers tombe thy body lay; Thou shalt be left for birds and beasts a prey, Or waves shall roll thee in the ocean drownd, And greedy fish shall lick thy bleeding wound. Anthaeus and Lycas next he followed, Who the prime squadrons of bold Turnus led. Stout Numa did, and bright-hair'd Camers chace, Sprung from great Volscens, who the richest was Of Italy, and rul'd Amyclean lands. As bold Aegean with a hundred hands Did belch from fifty mouths devouring flame, When arm'd against Joves thunderbolts he came; As many swords did shake, and sounding shields. So rag'd Aeneas conquering through the fields: His sword now warm, behold he next proceeds Dreadfull against Nyphaeus chariot steeds; But they far off, as him they saw draw near, Raging extremely, turn, being struck with fear, And rushing back, their Captain overthrew, And to the shore they with the chariot flew. But mean while Lucagus with white horse rides, In th'open plain his brother Lyger guides The winged chariot, and the reins commands, His drawn sword Leucagus brandish'd in his hands, Nor them Aeneas suffers to advance, But gainst them boldly he presents his lance. To whom then Lyger said, These are not Diomedes horse, nor dost thou see Achilles chariot, nor Greek enemie: Now, in this field thou life and war shalt end. Thus vapouring Lyger did with words contend. But the bold Trojan studied no reply, He throws his javelin at the enemy:
When Leucagus bending, having cast his speare, His left foot out, did for the fight prepare. Under his shield Aeneas javelin found Way to his left thigh with a mighty wound: He from his chariot tumbles down half dead, When in stern language thus Aeneas said: Sir, your slow horse have not your chariot lost, Nor were they frighted from the enemies host; But you your self your chariot have forsook, And strait he seiz'd the horses, as he spoke. His brother then disarm'd, himself submits, And craving quarter, he his office quits. Now for thy self and thy great parents sake, Brave Prince, O spare my life, and pity take! Aeneas said, You were more malepert: Die; for thy brother thou shalt not desert. Then he the closet of his soul displaid With his bright sword. The Dardan Heroe made Such slaughters then, and like a whirlwind raves, Or some huge deluge with orewhelming waves. Ascanius and his bands besieg'd in vain, Break through their ports, and sally to the plain. Mean while to Juno thus bespake great Jove: My dearest sister, and my most dear Love; As thou believ st, (nor doth thy judgment erre) Venus upholds the Trojans in this war; And not great strength, and lively courages. To whom then Juno modestly replies: Great Sir, why do you thus disquiet me Opprest with woe, fearing thy sad decree? Had I that power by love, which once was mine, And should be still; at least thou wouldst incline
That I in safety from the fight should bring Turnus to's fathers court. But now, great King, Let him be slain, and if thou think it good, Let cruel Trojans shed his royal blood, Though he from us derive his stock and name, Who from Pilumnus the fourth of spring came, And oft thy altars heap'd with sacrifice. To whom Olympus mighty King replies: If thou delayes from speedy death wouldst have, And for a time the haplesse young man save; And if thou thinkst it lies within my power, Turnus by flight save from the fatal houre. This I may grant: but if in your request Conceal'd you drive a further interest, So the whole fortune of the war again To bring about; thou foster'st hope in vain. Then Juno weeping, said: You may connive At what you dare not grant; and he may live. But now his woful destiny draws near, Or else I am transported with vain fear: Oh that false terror still would me delude! And thou, who mayst, wouldst better things conclude. Thus having said, from lofty heaven she flies, Girded with clouds, winds driving through the skies; And to th'Ausonian camp and Trojans made. Then she an aiery cloud, a hoslow shade Form'd like Aeneas, which (most strange) she drest In Dardan arms, and shield; a flowing crest Puts on his honour'd head; then made it talk, Speak without lungs, and like Aeneas walk. Such shapes they say, that dead mens spirits have, Or those in dreams our drowsie sense deceive. But the insulting shadow takes the Van, Calling aloud, and challeng'd out the man.
Turnus advanc'd, and's sounding javelin threw; The Shade retreats, and suddenly withdrew. As soon as Turnus did himself perswade Aeneas fled, swolne with vain hope, he said: What, fly'st thou Trojan, and thy bride dost leave? The land thou sought'st by sea, this hand shall give. Thus brandishing his sword, he eas'd his mind; Nor thought his hope did fleet before the wind. Behind a rock, by chance, in a calm bay With ready ladders a tall vessel lay, Which king Osinius brought to Clusine shore; Hither it self the fleeting shadow bore, And takes the hold; nor slower were Turnus steps, All stay he conquers, ore high bridges leaps. No sooner shipt. Juno the cable cuts, And to the sea the floating vessel puts. But through the fight mean while Aeneas goes Turnus to find and many overthrows. Nor longer the phantastick shadow lies Hid under deck, but vanishing, it flies Up to the stars, and with dark clouds conjoin'd: Whilst Turnus drives to sea before the wind, And both his hands did to high heaven advance, For safety thanklesse, ignorant of the chance: O Jove, he said, deserve I this from thee? And is't thy will thus, thus to punish me? Ah whether must I go? from whence came I? Where shall I land? or whither do I fly? Shall I Laurentian towrs behold agen? View my own camp, where all those gallant men Which did my fortune and my arms attend, Ah, I have left, to meet a woful end! I hear their dying groans; now now I view My routed army flie: what shall I do!
Oh that the earth would gape and swallow me: Or rather gentle winds, more favouring be, (For your assistance Turnus now invokes) Ah drive this vessel on obdurate rocks; Split on the sands where friends shall never see My corps, nor blasted fame shall follow me. This said, his mind on no resolve could place; Whether he should for this so vile disgrace Upon himself a punishment afford. And desperate in his bowels sheath his sword; Or leap into the sea, and swim to shore, And 'gainst the Trojans arm himself once more. Thrice he attempted both; great Juno thrice His rashnesse staid with soberer advice. The ship cuts billows, and with favouring tides To the old city of his father glides. Jove did mean while Mizentius soul enlarge, That with fresh power the conquerours he should charge. 'Gainst whom the Tyrrhens joyn; all 'gainst one man With deadly hate and cruel weapons ran. He as a rock amongst vast billows stood, Scorning loud winds, and raging of the flood; And fix'd remaining, all the force defies Muster'd from threatning seas, and thundring skies. Hebrus, Dolicaons son, he overthrew, Latagus with him, and Palmus as he flew; But with a stone, no small part of a hill, Dashing in s face, he Latagus did kill. Palmus comes ore maim'd with his wounded knee, And gave his arms, bold Lausus, unto thee. Next Thrygian Eavns, Mimas was orethrown, Of Paris age, and his companion, Whom, the same night the Queen gave Paris birth, Pregnant with fire, Theano did bring forth
To old Amycus: he at home was slain, But Mimas fell in the Laurentian Plain. He as a hunted bore from mountains bends, Whom, long, pine bearing Vesulus defends, And many years Laurentian marshes bred, Where he with mast and bul-rushes was fed, After he finds himself amidst their nets, He stands, and foaming, up his bristles sets, Against his rage the boldest dare not go, But with safe showts at distance javelins throw. So stood Mizentius 'gainst his Subjects rage, Yet none so hardy durst their King ingage; Put out of reach at him they cast their spears With mighty shouts; he not the proudest fears, But angry raungeth through the spacious field, Bearing a grove of javelins on his shield. Acron a Greek, but in Corytus bred, Drawn to this war, left his new-marriage bed: Him when he saw amongst the squadrons, drest In wedding garments, and a purple vest; As a starv'd lion who doth oft invade Some lofty stall, (for hunger will perswade) If he a nimble goat espie by chance, Or else a dear a tall crest to advance, Gaping he raves, and bristles up his main, And growling lies devouring of the slain? Then baths his mouth with blood. So fierce Mizentius rag'd 'mongst thickest foes, And most unhappy Acron overthrows. Breathing his last, beating the earth, he lies, And the strong javelin with his blood he dies. Yet scorns Orodes flying to orethrow, And through his back to give the deadly blow;
But runs and meets him; he by prowesse can More then by art, and charges man to man; Then on him down setting his foot and spear, Said great Orodes, once so fear'd, lies here: His Souldiers raise a shout. But dying, he Who e're thou art, said, I reveng'd shall be; Nor shalt thou long triumph, thy fate draws nigh, And thou with me, in the same field shalt lie. VVith a grim smile Mizentius then replies, Thou first shalt die: who rules both earth and skies, Let him dispose of me. Thus saying, he then His javelin draws from the dead corps agen: A hard and iron rest seal'd up his sight, And clos'd his eye in everlasting night. Caedicus, Alcathous; and Sacrator slew Hydaspes; Rapo, Parthens overthrew, And valiant Orses; but Messapus sped Clonius and Ericates he left dead; This tangled in the trappings of his steed; On foot makes th'other sure: next did proceed Lycius 'gainst him who Valerus did kill, Though he was cunning at his Grandsires skill. Salius, Autronius; Neacles, Salius slew, Who us'd the dart, and well a long bow drew. Now bloody Mars inrag'd on both sides fals, Matching their grief with equall funerals; Victors and those are worsted, both come on, And both retreat: flight is to neither known. The Gods in loves High court pity their rage, That thus poor mortals should themselves ingage. Here Venus sits, there cruell Iuno stands, And pale Tisiphone raves amidst the bands. But here Mizentius a huge javeline shakes, And to the field highly incensed makes.
So tall Oryon through the swelling tides Marcheth on foot, the waves scarce reach his sides; Or when he stalks more proudly on dry land, Bringing from hils an old ash in his hand; Whilst his proud head amongst the clouds he hides: So in his mighty arms Mizentius prides. Aeneas having spi'de him through the bands, Marches against him: He undaunted stands, Waiting th'approach of his magnanimous foe; And having took the measure of his throw: This hand which is my God, and this my spear Which now I poise, grant your assistance here. That cruell Pirates spoils and arms I now For thee a trophie, dearest Lausus vow. This said, at him he cast his sounding lance. But the swift spear did from his target glance, And far from thence through noble Anthor run; This was great Hercules companion, Who sent from Argos with Evander staid, And his abode now in Ausonia made. Thus hurt he fals, and haplesse views the skies, Remembring his dear Argos as he dies. His javelin then valiant Aeneas threw, Which through his brazen quilted target flew, Where three bull-hides tan'd did their force conjoyn, And fast it stuck, in bold Mizentius groyn. Whose strength now fails: soon as Aeneas saw The Tyrrhens blood, straight he his sword did draw, And whilst he was astonish d, rusheth on, This Lausus viewing, fetch'd a heavy grone For his dear father, and salt tears he sheds: Here thy sad death, and most renowned deeds, If antient stories have related truth, I shall not silence, O most noble youth.
Mizentius hurt, began some ground to yield, Drawing the hostil weapon from his shield; Lausus steps in and brought his father aid, And took the blow which fierce Aeneas made On his own shield; receives him with delays; At which a shout his glad companions raise: Whilst the hurt father from the fight withdrew, Defended by his son, Iavelins they threw, And 'gainst the foe their lances thick discharge: Aeneas rag'd protected with his targe. As when a showre descends of hail and rain, Straight all the husbandmen forsake the Plain; Under dry roofs himself the traveler saves, Or shelters under bancks, or rockie caves, Until the storm is o're: that when the Sun Returns, he may perfect the work begun. So was Aeneas overwhelm'd with darts, Bearing the tempest thundring from all parts: And Lausus he rebukes; now menaceth The bold youth thus; why hastenst thou thy death? And dost so much above thy strength assay? Thy Piety, fond youth, doth thee betray. But he no lesse rashly himself ingag'd; At which the Dardan Prince extreamly rag'd; And now is thread of life the fates had span; In him to th'hilts his sword Aeneas ran, And through the threatners shield, and arms it pass'd, And coat, his mother with pure gold had grac'd: I lood drown'd his breast, his soul her Progresse makes Down to pale shades, and the cold corps forsakes. But when his face great Anehisiades, And cheeks now wonderfully pale espies, He stretch'd his hand, then sigh'd with grief opprest, And now his fathers love affects his breast,
Saying poor youth, what fame for thee is due? What worthy gift shall I bestow on you? Take thy lov'd arms (if those thou dost regard) And with thy Royall Parents be interr'd, This comfort have in thy sad funeral, That thou by great Aeneas hand didst fall. Then checks his lingring friends, himself before Raising him up, his hair defil'd with gore. Mean while his father at the crystal streams Of Tyber cleans'd his wound, and eas'd his limbs Against a tree, on which his helm he hung, And on the grasse his pondrous armour flung; A choice guard round: panting, his neck did rest, Which bowing, with his beard cover'd his breast; Then asks for Lausus, and oft sends to find, And call him off, since 'twas his fathers mind. But the dead youth, his friends in sorrow drown'd Bore on a shield, slain by a mighty wound; Far off the crie his soul presaging knew, Then on his silver hair rowl dust he threw, And both his hands at once to heaven he heaves, Then thus complaining to the body cleaves. Dear son, was life to me so sweet that thou Whom: begot, for me shouldst suffer now, Must I thy father draw this vital breath, Sav'd by thy wounds, and live by thy sad death? O let me now to woful exile go, Since I behold this wound, this fatall blow. Oh son, my acts have blasted thy renown, Expuls'd by malice from my throne and crown; 'Twas I should suffer in this hatefull strife, And many deaths pay for this wicked life; Yet still I live, view heaven, converse with man; But Ile forsake them all. Then he began,
Thus saying, to raise his feeble thigh from ground, And though it fail'd him with so great a wound, Undaunted he, commands his horse provide. This was his comfort, this his only pride, On this through all his fights did Conqueror go, To whom he spake, declaring thus his woe; Of long life (Phoebus) we have had the proof, (If any time to mortals were enough,) Either we must Aeneas head this day, And bloody spoils in triumph bear away, Revenging Lausus: or if fates deny Assistance, we will both together die. For sure most valiant Steed thou'lt not admit A Trojan rider, nor a strangers bit. Thus having spoke, up sad Mizentius gets, And soon himself in comely manner seats; Then both his hands did with sharp javelins load; On his bright helm whole mains of horses fload. And straight he marches up; whilst mighty shame, Grief and distraction, did his soul inflame, Love provokes rage; and losse of honour, all. Then thrice aloud, did for Aeneas call. The Trojan knew the voice, and thus he pray'd, So may great Jove and Phoebus now perswade That thou begin the fight. And praying, with a dreadful spear march'd on. But he, why hast thou rob'd me of my son Most cruell man, and terrifiest me thus? Since no way else thou hadst to ruine us: Nor fear we death, nor any God regard. Leave of thy prayers, to die I come prepar'd; But first these legacies Ile on thee bestow. This said, he cast a javelin at the foe,
Another after, then another flings; And swiftly wheels about in mighty rings. Aeneas shield receives them; thrice he goes About him standing, and sharp lances throwes. Three times the Trojan turning where he stood, Bore on his brazen shield a mighty wood. Vext with delay, and plucking from his targe So many spears, and with the dangerous charge, Plotting all means, at last he did advance, And through his horses head he sent his lance; Who rising then, beats with his feet the skies, And tumbling backward, on his rider lies Oppressing much his arm extended out. Trojans and Latines send to heaven a shout. In, leaps Aeneas, and his bright sword drew, And thus he said; Where's proud Mizentius now, And that fierce courage made him once so bold? But he, as soon as heaven he did behold, And coming to himself recoverd breath; Why triumph'st thou, proud foe, and threatenst death? May I not die? Therefore I fought with thee, Nor made my son such articles for me. One thing (if vanquisht foes gain suits) I crave A burial: I know my people have Me in disdain; their fury, oh prevent, And grant my son and me one monument. This said, his throat receive th'expected blow, And on his arms his soul in blood did flow.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. Mizentius trophey. Pallas funerals. Cessation made. The King a councel cals. Diomed's answer Venulus relates. Drances, and Turnus, loud in hot debates. Aeneas gives the City an alarm. The King his Councel leaves, and Latines arm. Camilla's story. Troops of horse maintain A doubtfull fight: the bold Virago slain. The Trojans, flying Rutilie persue. Turnus inform'd straight from his ambush drew. Aeneas takes the passage, then march'd down To th' open plain, and lies before the town. MEan while Aurora from the sea ascends, Aeneas (although care t'interre his friends The time requir'd, much for their death dismaid) Early his vows to heaven a conquerour paid. A mighty oke, depriv'd of bowes, he plac d Upon a hill, and with bright armour grac d;
The spoils of King Mizentius to be A trophie, mighty God of war, to thee. His plumes bedewd with blood, and broken lance, And breast plate twelve times pierc'd he did advance. Then to his friends triumphing, (for a guard They made about him) he himself declar'd. Most valiant Trojans, the great work is done; What now remains, but that all feare we shun? The proud Kings spoils, here, our first offering, stands; Mizentius now serves under our commands. Next for Latinus walls let us prepare, And boldly arm, nor doubt the chance of war. Lest for their stay, any plead ignorance; When first the Gods shall please, we will advance Our standard, and our army forth shall lead. Nor for base fear let none excuses plead. Mean while let's beare our friends unto the grave; The only honour which the dead can have. Go, those brave souls with solemn rites attend, Whose blood for us hath purchased this land: Put first on Pallas mournful obsequies wait, And bear him to his fathers woful seat: Whom from sweet life a cruel death did call (Wanting no valour) to sad funerall. Weeping he said, and to the herse he bends, Where old Acetes Pallas corps attends; Who when Evanders squire, much honour won, But not so happy waiting on his son. Round him his servants, and the Trojans were, And Ilian dames, sad with dishevel'd hair. But when Aeneas enter'd, a huge cry, Beating their breasts, they raise unto the sky, And the whole court with loud complaining fild. Soon as he had dear Pallas corps beheld,
And the wide wound upon his lovely breast, With many tears, his grief he thus exprest. Brave youth, when better fortune came, did she For very spight, deprive us straight of thee: Lest thou shouldst see our conquest, and return Unto thy fathers Court in triumph born. I to Evander no such promise made At my departure when with mighty aid He me dismist; and fearful, did foresh ew We should incounter with a dangerous foe. But now perhaps glad hope his mind doth raise, And vows he makes with frequent sacrifice, Whilst to the dead, who's not indebted now To any God, vain honour we allow. These are the promis'd triumphs thou shalt see Perform'd by us, thy sons sad obsequie. Thus I discharge my trust But no base wound Shall by Evander on his corps be found, Nor shall he wish his life at honours cost. What strength hath Latium and Ascanius lost? This said, to raise the sad corps he commands, And sends a thousand chosen from the bands, Who should attend his last solemnitie, And with Evanders tears their sorrow Vie, And to a mourning father comfort be, Though small, yet gratefull in great miserie. Some busie, joyning verdant Arbuts were; And deck with oken leaves the stately Bier: Then the sad hearse, with boughs and branches shade, Where, on green rushes the brave youth they laid. Such the pase Daffadill or Violet Pluck'd by a Virgins hand: whose beauty yet And form remains; though from the stalk now rent Their mother earth affords no nourishment.
The Prince, two robes of gold and purple brought, Which with her own hand beauteous Dido wrought, And to Aeneas did present of old, And mixt the curious web with purest gold. Which for a hearse-cloth on the corps he laid, Then with a vail his comely hair did shade, And with Laurentian spoils did him adorn, Bids what he won, in order to be born, And horse and arms were taken from the foe; Then those to shades a sacrifice must go, Quenching the cruell flame with luke-warm blood, Their hands behind them bound, prepared stood. Next bids prime Captains hostile arms to bear, And names of slaughter'd foes upon their spear. They old Acetes led, with grief opprest, Tearing his hair, beating his wofull breast; Who falling down on th'earth extended lay: They chariots stain'd with Rutile gore convay. Ethon his horse in mourning next took place, And weeping with great tears blubber'd his face. This bore his lance, and that his shining crest, For Turnus being Couquerour, spoil'd the rest. The Trojans follow, and the Tyrrhen Peers, And sad Arcadians trailing of their spears. Next all the mourners march'd in order on; Then spake Aeneas with a heavy grone; Now we must others mourn in battel fel, Dear Pallas now eternally farewel, For evermore adieu. Nor more he said, But to the wals of the high City made. When from Latinus some were sent to treat, With olive vail'd, a breathing space to get, That he would please, the bodies of the slain, Which now in heaps lay scatter'd on the plain,
They might interre: for with the vanquished Should no contention be, nor with the dead; And those once stil'd his friends, he now would spare. Their suits, which not to be rejected were, Aeneas grants, and did their fears asswage. Sirs, what strange fortune forc'd you to engage In such a war, and us your friends to shun? Seek you a peace for those in fight orethrown? I'de rather grant it unto them remain. Nor had I come, but that the fates ordain These seats for me, nor had with you made war. Your King left us, for Turnus did declare. 'T were fitter, Turnus should in single fight Try't out himself; if he would put to flight The Trojan bands, and give the war an end, Let him with me then hand to hand contend; And let whom God, and's right hand favour, live. Go, and your haplesse friends due funerals give, Aeneas said; whilst they stood all amaz'd, And with deep silence on each other gaz'd. Old Drances then, who bore eternal spleen 'Gainst valiant Turnus did at last begin. O Trojan, great by fame, greater by wars, How shall I match thy honour with the stars? Shall I thy power, or justice first admire? Humbly our King shall know of thy desire: If fortune aid us, we shall him perswade To peace: let who so will then Turnus aid. To build your promis'd city we shall joy, And bear upon our backs the stones of Troy. All with one voice approve the words he said, And a cessation for twelve dayes is made. Trojans and Lutines wander here and there Through woods and mountains, and no danger feare.
Now mighty Ashes with the axe resound, And Pines that kist the stars, tumble to ground; Whole Okes they cleave, sweet Cedar is orethrown, And with wild Ash huge cars continual groan. And now swift fame this sad disaster tels; Evanders court the doleful rumour fills, Which said but now, Pallas the victory won. Swift to the gates amaz'd Arcadians run, And as the antient custome torches beare: With a long train of light the wayes appear, And all the field with funeral tapers shine. Whilst to these mourners the sad Trojans joine; Whom, when the matrons did behold draw nigh, They through the City rais'd a woful cry; When no perswasions could Evander stay, But in he comes, and falling down, he lay Fix'd on the herse, weeping and groning there, And long, ere thus his grief he could declare. Dear Pallas, th'ast not kept thy word with me, That thou in fight wouldst not so ventrous be. I knew how much new glory would inflame, And in first service the desire of fame. Woful first fruits! too hard such rudiments are In thy first lesson, which thou learnst in war. No God did hear my prayer, nor mind my vow; And thou blest wife, in death most happy now, That didst not live to see this sight; whilst I Now do survive my own sad destiny, And a most wretched father must remain. I should have dy'd, and Rutils me have slain For joyning with the Trojans; and for me, Not Pallas, should have been this obsequie.
Nor will I blame the Trojans, nor shall rue Th association which I made with you This chance belong'd to my gray hairs. But since Untimely death hath took my son from hence; I joy that thousand Volsceans fell before Him leading Trojans to th' Au onian shore. Nor other rites, dear Pallas, shalt thou have Then what Aeneas and bold Phrygians gave; What Tarchon and their Captains did ordain, Who honouring bear, trophies of those th'hast flain: For thee a huge one, Turnus, we had seen, If he of equal strength and age had been. But I the Trojans keep too long from war. Farewell; and to your King this message bear, That I loath'd life prolong, Pallas being gone; His valour must a father, and a son, Revenge on Turnus; this remains for him Whose worth hath plac'd in Fortunes best esteem. Nor joys of life I wish for but to stay Till I these tidings to my son convay. Mean while Aurora cleers the darkned aire, And brought to wretched mortals toyl and care. Aeneas then, and Tarchon on the shores Huge piles erect; and as their ancestors, Here their dead friends they brought, then kindle fire, And to high heaven clouds of thick smoke aspire. Thrice round about the burning pies they goe Gilded in shining arms; thee fires or woe Mounted on mourning horses they surround, A doleful cry they raise, lud trumpets sound; Arms, and the earth is water'd with their tears, And lamentations scale the highest sphears,
Some in the fire the Latine spoils do burn, Helms, swords, and reins, and wheels from chariots torn; Some their friends shields, well known in all alarms, Cast after them, and their unhappy arms. Whole herds of cattel and of swine were kil'd, And flocks of sheep brought in from every field. Their burning friends they view through all the strand, And round about the half-burnt piles they stand; Nor could be taken off, till dewie night Adorn'd high heaven with constellations bright. No lesse on th'other side, the Latines reare Innumerable piles, many interre, Many are to the neighbouring confines born, And to the city some again return. The rest, confused heaps of slaughter'd men, They burn uncounted, and unhonour'd; then The spatious fields with frequent fires are bright. When the third day from heaven drove gloomy night, Mourning they sweep the ashes from the hearth, And mingled bones yet warm, they load with earth. Now in the Court, and rich Latinus seat, Were loudest cries, and lamentations great: Here mothers sisters there the woful nurle, Children depriv'd of parents, weeping curse The cruel war, and Turnus haplesse sute, That he alone the quarrel should dispute, Who hopes to gain all Latium with the bride, Fierce Drances urg'd, nor could it be denide, That Turnus had been challeng'd to the fight. These warm debates their Votes made opposite. But he stands shaded with the Queens great name, And lasting trophies of's deserved fame. Amidst these tumults and commotions great, Behold then sad, from Diomed's Royal seat
Embassadours answers brought; they nothing could With so much toyl, expence, nor gifts, nor gold, No suit avail'd, they must seek elsewhere aide, Or with the Trojans must a Peace be made. Latinus faints under a load of care; Heaven anger, and their slaughter'd friends declare, Aeneas came by Fates authority. Then his great councell, all prime nobles, he Summond before him at his Royall Court: And through full streets to th'Pallace they resort; Then first his place old King Latinus took Holding his Scepter with a heavy look, And bids his Lords return'd from Diomed, say What they had brought, and his whole answer lay In order open: silence then being made, Obeying his command, thus Venulus said. My Lords, Tydides seat we saw, and past All dangers of the tedious way at last, And kist that hand the Trojans overcame. He Argyripa built, and gave a name From his own stock, now in Apulian Plains, A Conquerour he in setled peace remains. After admittance, we to audience came; Gifts we present, our countrey tell, and name, Who rais'd this war, what businesse brought us there; He full of honour did himself declare. Blest Nation of the old Ausonian race, Of Saturns realm, what chance disturbs your peace? And to a war so dangerous doth perswade? Whoe're did sacred Trojan fields invade (Those Ile omit, who under her high wall Perish'd by war, or Simois drown'd) we all Scatter'd throughout the world, had punishment: Such as would make Priam, himself relent.
Euboick rocks, and Pallas cruel star, And vengefull Caphareus witnesse are, We from that war were driven from coast to coast; Menelaus was t'Hercules pillars tost: And Ithacus, Aetnean Cyclops view'd. Why should I mention Pyrrhus realms subdu'de? Idomeneus, or his Kingdome lost? Or Locrians dwelling on the Lybick coast? Then the great Generall of the Graecian bands By his false wife was murdred as he lands. O're Asia now, th'Adulterer doth raign. The Gods with-stand my native soyl again, My house, and Calydon that I should see; And still most dreadful Prodigies follow me. My friends have wings, and soar unto the sky, And chang'd to birds 'bout rivers margents flie. Oh! what sad troubles my companions found, Whose doleful notes made woods and rocks resound, Which since that time should have been fear'd by me. When I inrag'd, assail'd a Deitie, And on fair Venus hand did leave a scar; Seek not my aid, not mine in such a war. Troy's fallen, nor more 'gainst Trojans will I fight: Nor to remember ancient woes delight. Those gifts you me present; t'Aeneas bear; We oft have fought, and chang'd a dangerous spear. Experience trust; arm'd how would he advance? With what a whirlwind would he throw his lance? If two like him Idaean realms had bred, Priam, th'Inachian seats had conquered; And Greece of her chang'd fortune had complain'd. Whatever us at Troys strong wals detain'd, Hector, and he, our victory with-held, VVhilst ten long years their lingring periods fil'd;
Both bold, most expert both in war; but he, Was most of all prefer'd for Piety. Make Peace then as you can, but still beware How you provoke such valiant men to war. Now best of Kings his answer you have heard, VVhat he concerning this great war declar'd. Scarce these were said, when a great mumur rose Of votes divided: as when water flows Delay'd by rocks, and floods imprison'd rore, VVhilst thundring waves sound 'gainst the neighbouring shore. VVhen all were setled, and their noise allai'd, Having the Gods besought, Latinus said. I won d, and better we had thought of all Before, rather then now a councel call, VVhen round about our wals the enemie lies. 'Gainst men undaunted, sprung from Deities, VVe have ingag'd; whom nothing could debar: Nor being vanquish'd will desist from war. What hope you had from Diomed, lay that by: For and although but small, you must relie Upon your selves. You see how things now stand, We're lost your strength is all in your own hand: I none accuse, what force we could, we brought; And with the power of the whole realm 'twas fought. Now in my doubtfull mind what councels are I shall unfold, and briefly will declare. I have some ancient forrest lands, which lie Nere Tyber west, bordring on Sicanie, Which the Aruncians and Rutilians plow; Their worst is pasturage, and their best the sowe. Let all that tract, and high-hils stor'd with pine, The Trojans have, and let us leagues conjoyn, And them associates in our Kingdome call; There let them dwell, and build their Cities wall.
But if some other shore they'd rather plant, And leave our coast, let s twenty vessels grant Built of Italian oke, or more provide, All our materials neer the rivers side. But first let our Commissioners be chose, Impowr'd with these Concessions, to ompose A setled Peace, and olive boughs to wear: And let them Presents gold and ivory bear; The nations honour, gown and chair be sent; Consult, and help in this great exigent. Then the same Drances vext with Turnus State, With squinting envie spur'd, and bitter hate, Rich, and most eloquent, but cold in war, Yet in debates a most grave Counsellor, And one t'apppease sedition excellent; Who from his mother sprung of high descent; But in obscurity his fathers name; He rose, and with these words stirs up the flame. Renowned King, the matter now you state Is not obscure, nor needs a long debate; For all confesse to see what woes must fall Upon this realm yet dare not speak at all. Let him free-voting grant and threats forbear, By whose contrivements, and crosse counsels are (Ile speak my mind though now he threaten death) So many valiant Chiefs depriv'd of breath. And now th'whole City drown'd in sorrow lies, Whilst he provokes the Trojans, and then flies, Out-braving th'aire: unto those gifts, which thou Intendst upon the Trojans to allow, Present one more, this one (Renowned Prince,) Nor be o recome by any violence: That thou a sire, thy daughter shouldst not give A worthy son, that we in Peace might live.
But if our hearts have so much fear possest, Let s sue to him, and gain by our request The King his just prerogatives, and law That we enjoy. Ah! whither wilt thou draw This wretched people to their ruining, O thou of Latiums woe the source and spring! In war's no safety: All crave peace from thee Turnus, and th'only pledge of amitie, I, whom thou calst a foe, nor do I care, Behold! petition first: Thy nation spare; Worsted, give ore; slaughter too much we'have seen, And our large country hath devasted been. But if that honour, and thy strength excite, And if the royal dowre thy soule invite, Something attempt, to meet the foe provide: Yes, Turnus so may gain the royal bride. We, poor unburied souls, multitudes lie About the field, and have no obsequie. But thou, if thou hast honour, if thou hast The prowesse which thy ancestors did boast, Behold who dares thee forth! Vex'd with these words, a deep groan passage made From Turnus breast, and highly mov'd, he said: Drances th'hast still full regiments of words, When war craves deed; Thou first of summon'd Lords Appear'st; but speeches will not serve these courts: Which safe thou utter st, whilst our walls and ports Keep out the foe, nor trenches flow with blood. With flashy eloquence then thunder loud, And charge thou me of flight, when thou dost send So many Trojans to untimely end; Grac'd with such trophies, now thy valour try, Nor far off need we seek the enemy.
Behold, eachwhere about the walls they throng! Come, charge; why stay we thus? Thy fluent tongue, And flying feet, in those thy martial strength Hath alwayes been Was I repuls'd, base man? turn'd I my face? Will any lay on me so high disgrace? Who Tyber saw with Trojan blood to swell; How with Evanders house his whole stock fell, When from the field disarm'd th'Arcadians ran, Pandar and Bitias found me no such man, When I shut in with hostile works and wals To hell did send so many funerals. In war no safety! Tell the Trojan so, And thy own party: Use all cunning too Vain fears to raise, and the twice vanquish'd race, Their power extoll, but Latin arms disgrace, At Phrygian forces now Greek Princes shake; Now Diomed and fierce Achilles quake, From th' Adriatick, Aufidus retreats, And when the timorous feins to dread our threats, On us layes scandals by pretended fear: Nor shalt thou lose that soul of thine forbear To tremble thus) by this hand; let it rest With thee, and dwell within that narrow breast. Now Sir to you, and your command, great Prince; If in our arms you have no confidence; If so we are deserted, lost, oreborn By one defeat, nor fortune will return: With unarm'd hands for peace let us intreat. But oh! were any antient valour yet, He seems to me the happiest of all, In that last fight, and the most noble soul, Who would not live to see such things brought forth, But rather dy'd, and dying bit the earth.
Yet we have wealth, and yet unbroken bands; And we have aide through all th Ausonian lands: Nor can the Trojans blood-lesse victory boast, They have their funerals, and as many lost. Why then at first so poorly lose we ground, And tremble, ere we hear the trumpet sound? The various work of time and many days, Often affairs from worse to better raise, Fortune reviewing those she hath cast down, Sporting restores again unto their crown. Will not Aetolians give their aid to us? Messapus will, and rich Tolumnius And prime Commanders many more will send; Nor small fame on Laurentian Lords attend, Camilla of the noble Volscean line, Leads troops of horse who all in armour shine. If me to fight the Trojan doth command, And I alone the common good withstand; So far from me victory not took her flight I should refuse for such a prize to fight. I'le meet him, had he great Achilles charms, And let him have like him Vulcanian arms. To you great King this life I Turnus now Second to none of my great fathers, vow, Aeneas cals me forth; that he may call Is my desire nor Drances rather shall, Whether it be the wrath of deities, Appease by death or glory win the prize. Whilst these hard questions thus debared were With differing votes; the Trojan Prince drew near, Which to the Court a speedy messenger brought, And with strange terror the whole city fraught. All are distracted, but the vulgar rage, Whom no small Provocations did ingage.
Arme, arme they cry, the youth are mad for Arms, The old men silent mourn; here, there alarms With factious tumults mix'd ascend the sky. As when by chance a flock of sea-fowl flie To lofty groves, or when loud swans do go Sounding through murmuring lakes, to pleasant Poe. On this occasion, Sirs, then Turnus sayes, Call counsels: yes, and Peace thus sitting praise Whilst they the town invade. Nor more he spoke, But streight the hall and lofty Courts forsook. Volusus draw forth now, thy Voscean force, And dear Messapus, let thy Rutile horse, Joyn'd with thy brothers, march to th'open plain. Let some make good the gates, and towrs maintain, Those in my conduct forth with me shall go. Straight to the wals the towns whole forces flow. The king his councell and designe forsook, And vex't with stirs, for better times did look, Blaming himself, that he did not declare, The Trojan Prince his son, and make his heir. Some trench the gates; these Pallisado round; For war, loud trumpets bloody signals sound. Women and children to the wals are sent, All must assist in this great exigent. When bearing gifts, the sad Queen with a train Of matrons went to Pallas lofty fane; Next her the virgin fair Lavinia goes, Those eyes dejected had procur'd such woes. The matrons enter, and the quire perfume, And with sad voices from high portals come. Pallas, arm'd virgin, Patronesse of war, O break thy self the Phrygian Pirats spear. Most warlike maid, tumble him to the ground, And near our gates give him his deadly wound.
Whilst Turnus for the battel arms in haste, And rough with brazen scales, straight on he brac'd Rut ilian arms, and golden cuishes tide, His head unarm'd, a sword girds to his side, Shining in gold; then quits the lofty towres, And in his hope the enemy devoures. So when a horse flies out in broken reins, And stables left, enjoyes the open plains; Either through meads he seeks a stud of mares, Or to accustom'd watering repairs; Wanton, his head erected, loud he neighs, His mane upon his neck and shoulder plays. Camilla meets him with her Volscean force, And bravely in the gates leaps from her horse. Then all the squadrons imitate the maid; And quit their steeds. Bold Turnus, then she said, If any confidence of the valiant be, To charge the foe, I dare; and promise thee, Alone the Tyrrhen horsmen to defie: Grant that I first may charge the enemy, Let your force guard the walls. Then Turnus said, Fixing his eye upon the valiant maid, Bold Virgin, glory of Ausonia, These great obligements how shall I repay? But now, since all the danger of the war Thy soul contemns, with me the honour share. Aenaeas (as fame tels, and scouts inform) Through th'plains light-horse hath sent to give th'alarm, Whilst from the rocks and mountains he comes down With the main body to assault the town. An ambush in the woods I have design'd, And in the passe, the hedges strongly lin'd: Messapus shall, and Tyburt march with thee, And to thy care shall the whole conduct be.
Messapus and the other Leaders, so Encouraged, they march against the so. There is a winding vale, for feats of war And ambush fit; the dark sides sheltred are With a thick wood, where leads a narrow path Through a strait passe, and dangerous entrance hath. Above the valley, in the mountains heights, Lay unfrequented plains, and safe retreats; If on the right, or left thou wouldst come on, Or guard the top, and huge stones tumble down. Mean while Diana from superior seats Swift Opis cals, one of her virgin mates And sacred train; and thus her grief declares. The maid Camilla goes to cruel wars, And with our arms she girds her self in vain; More dear to us then any of our train; Nor new acquaintance takes me with her love, Which doth the mind with sudden sweetnesse move. Metabus drove from's realm by force and hate; When he Privernus left, his antient seat, Scaping through fierce alarms of cruel war, With him the infant did companion bear; And from her mothers name, the change but small, Casmilla, did the child Camilla call; Her in his lap; he seeks the highest parts Of desert woods, opprest with cruel darts Which from each side came from the Volscean ranks, When Amasenus had oreflown his banks, And with a huge showre swelling hindred him, He careful of his charge, prepar'd to swim; Delaid with her dear love, all means revolves, And suddenly at last on this resolves.
The warriour then in his strong hand did beare Of solid oke a huge and knotty speare: His daughter swadling up in cork-tree rinds, Fast to the middle of his lance he binds; Then poising it in's large hand, thus he praid: Great Queen of forrests, blest Latonian maid, To thee the father doth this handmaid vow, Bearing thy arms through skies; a suppliant now To scape the foe. Goddesse, receive thy own, Which to th'inconstant winds is left alone. Thus having said, with mighty strength he flung The sounding spear, the swelling billows rung; And poor Camilla the wing'd javelin bore Ore the swift stream safe to the other shore. But Metabus, as th'enemy drew neer, Swam ore the river, pulling with the spear The maid 'Diana's Votresse from the shore. Nor dwelt he in wall'd towns or cities more, Displeas'd with vulgar rage and popular strife; But in high mountains led a shepherds life, Where in dark caves and groves the child he fed, And with the milk of wild mares fostered, Draining betwixt her prety lips the teat. When she her tender feet to ground could set, He loads her hand with a sharp spear, and tide A bow and quiver to the virgins side; For golden hair, for a long courtly gown, A Tygers spoils hung flowing from her crown. From her soft hand now childish darts she slings, And skilful round her head whirls smooth-thong'd slings; Kils a fair Swan, or a Strymonian Crane. Her many Tyrrhen matrons wish'd in vain For their own sons: but to Diana she For ever vow'd unstain'd virginitie,
And the eternal love of arms did swear. Would she had not engag'd in such a war, Nor with the Trojans strove, who dear to me The number fils of my chast companie. But now since she draws nigh a cruel end; Glide from high heaven, and to Ausonia bend, Where a sad fight begins, with signs of woe. Take thou this vengerul arrow and this bow: Who ever with a wound shall violate Her sacred person, give with this his fate; Let him be Trojan, or Italian, he In blood shall be accountable to me. Her corps unspoil d, wrapt in a cloud Ile bear, And with her royal ancestors interre. This said, through skies swift Opis thundred loud, Borne with a whirlwind in a dusky cloud. Mean while to th' wals drew nigh the Trojan force, Hetrurian Chiefs and all the troops of horse In order were drawn up: through all the plains Proud hories neigh, and strive with curbing reins; Here, there they turn, dreadful are th'iron fields With spears, the champaign shines with glittering shields: Messapus, Coras, and his brother brings Swift Latines, and the maid Camilla's wings Appear against them, and far off the bands Shake their proud javelins, raising high their hands With threatning points: th'advance of men at arms And neithing steeds, make dreadful the alarms. And now march'd up in distance of their lance They make a stand; then with a stout advance Spurring their steeds, at once from all sides powre Darts thick as hail, heaven darkned with the showre.
And now Tyrrhenus and Aconteus first, Each other charg'd, and their huge javelins burst With a loud crack; full breast to breast they met; As lightning bold Aconteus fell from's seat, Or stone which from some thundring engine flies, And leaves his life behind him in the skies. The bands are broke, and flying Latins cast Their shields behind them, and to th'City hast. Trojans pursue, Asylas follows hot, And now draw nigh the gates, the Latins shout, And turn their ready horse: then through the Plains The Trojans flie and slack their curbing reins. As when the sea mov'd with alternate tydes, Hasts to the shore; o're rocks now proudly rides A foming wave, a swelling billow beats 'Gainst highest bancks, then swift again retreats, Loose stones with him in much disorder sweeps, And shores forsaking, sinks into the deeps. Twice Tuscans drive the Rutiles from the fields, And twice they save their flying backs with shields. But the third time they charg'd with all their might, Break through and through, and man to man they fight. Then dying grones, then in a crimson sea, Helms, Shields, and slaughter'd men commixed be, And over all were half dead horses rowl'd: And a most cruell fight you might behold. Orsylocus cast at Remulus horse a spear, (Who durst not meet) and fix'd beneath his ear. The horse then rag'd, vex't with the grievous wound, And rising, cast his rider to the ground. Great sould Iola, Catillus orethrew, And huge in arms and size, Herminius slew. His head and shoulders naked, golden hair He wore for arms, nor so did danger fear:
Through his broad shoulders the swift javelin flew, And in his body did it self imbrue. The fields wax red: such funerals they bequeath, Seeking by wounds an honourable death: But midst these slaughters th' Amazon delights Quiver'd Camilla, one breast sear'd for fights. Now thick she javelins casts; and now she takes In her strong hand a mighty battel axe. Her golden bow Dianas armes resound, Hanging behind; if flying she gave ground At any time; as much she gal'd the foe, With deadly shafts from her reversed bow. Larina, Tulla, and Tarpeia, were Her chosen guard, who brazen axes bear, Italian maids; the bold Camilla these Chose to attend on her, in war or peace. So arm'd, the Thracian Amazons come on Warring about the streams of Thermidon; Such guard Hyppolyte, or with martial pride About Penthisilea's chariot ride; Then female shouts resound through all the fields, And virgin troups triumph with crescent shields. Whom first or last didst thou orethrow bold maid? How many in the earth by thee lay dead? Eumenius, Clytius off-spring first she slew, And his bare bosome with a spear thrust through; Casting a stream of blood, the purple ground Dying he bites, and turns upon his wound, Then Lyris, Pegasus one, his horse being slain; As stooping down to recollect his reine; Th'other, whilst he stretch'd his hand to aid, Tumbles with him, slain by the valiant maid. Amastrus next, was by her lance orethrown, Tereas, Harpalicus, Chromis, Demophon.
As many javelins as the Virgin threw, So many valiant Phrygians she slew. Ornitus in strange arms far of she spide, The hunter rode on an Apulian Steed, O're his huge shoulders a bull-hide was cast, And gaping with huge jaws upon his crest With silver teeth, a Wolfs head he did bear, His hand was arm'd with a rough knotty spear. Amidst the battell he a squadron lead, And wheeling taller shews by all the head. Him (and 'twas easie whilst he turn d) she laid Dead on the ground, and like a foe thus said. Thought'st thou in woods wild beasts thou didst pursue? The time draws nigh when female arms shall you Better inform: and this great honour bear Thy Fathers ghost, thov felst, b'a Virgins speare. Orsilochus and Butes men of might, Next fell by her; strong Butes she did smite Betwixt his Cask and Maile through the neck bone, Whilst his left hand hung with his larget downe. Orsilochus did with a large turne delude, Then wheeling the persewer she priued, Raising her selfe high with her mighty Ax, His Cask and Scull whilst he for quarter speaks, She cleaves at once his braines on's face did run. Struck at this sight was Aunus valiant son, In Aponine bred who whilst the fates gave leave, Was not the worst Lygnrian to deceive; He, when to shun the fight no way was seen Not knowing how t'escape the following Queen, Tride what his art could do, and thus began. What ame is't that a woman charge a man, And worst him better mounted? darst thou fight With me on foot? if so, then quickly light,
And know to whom vain glory grants the fame. Straight the bold maid whom anger did inflame, Gives to the next her horse, and in the field, Stands with a naked sword and silver shield. But the young man thinking his Plot had took, Swift as the winds the place and her forsook. And his reins turning, his swift courser rides, Dying his rowels in his bloody sides. Then spoke the Queen, puft up with pride in vain, Conceiv'st thou thus to 'scape from me again? Tricks shall not thee to thy false father bear; This said, on foot she cuts the yielding aire, Out-strips his horse, and straight his reins did seise, Then with his blood her anger did appease; As easie from a rock a Falcon flies, After a dove, soaring in lofty skies, And trussing up, doth in his pounces bear, Then blood and plumes fall scatter'd through the air. Whilst the great sire of men and deities Regardlesse view'd not this from starry skies, But stirs up Tyrrhen, Tarchon to ingage In cruell fight, and urg'd with no small rage, 'Mongst slaughter he, and slaughtring squadrons rides, And by their names, his souldiers cheers and chides; And those which shrunck, to turn again commands. And said, whence is this fear, base Tyrrhen bands? What breeds this terror? shall a woman beat Our stragling troups, and our whole power defeat? For what these arms? why march you with vain spears? You'r bold at Venus, and nocturnall wars, Or when for Bacchus sports, loud cornets sound, Or boards with banquets, and full goblins crown'd. Th'is all your care, and when the Priest approves Entrals and offrings call to sacred groves.
This said, amongst the thick'st he spurs his horse; And from his Steed puls Venulus by force, And desperate raging, grasping of the foe Carries away, laid on his Saddle bow Showts heaven ascend the fact the Latins view, But through the plaines the fiery Tarchon flew, Bearing both armes, and man, his javelins point Breaks of then in his armes he seeks a joynt, To give the deadly wound; he strong, his hands Keeps from his throat, and strength with strength with∣stands. So with a Serpent a swift eagle flies, Wreathd in her feet, and tallons through the skies, The wounded Snake winding himself defends, Brisling his scales a hssing tongue extends, She with her beake and pounces tears, and eats, And the soft Ayre with spreading pinions beats: Triumphing so bold Tarchon did convey, From the Tyburtine troupes the wofull prey, Their chiefs example and successe inlarg'd, The useane courage that againe they charg'd, When subtil Arun's one condemnd by fate Did with much cunning on Camilla waight: And to dispatch her, safest meanes he tride Where ere the Virgin through the troupes did ride, Thether by stealth his speedie course he makes, Now this way he attempts now that way takes; And round about her archeth every where, Then cruell shakes at her his deadly Speare. Chloreus Cybeles priest did then by chance, Shining far of in Phrygian armes advance, And rid a oming Steed, whom skins infold Plume wise commixd, with orazen Scales and gold, In Tyrian purple oravely he did shew, And Cretan shafts sent from a Lycian bow,
Which golden hung at's back; golden his crest, His swolne traine rustled, and his Scarlet Vest With burnish'd gold drawn in a knot he ties: His Coate was wrought, rich cuishes on his thighes, The Queen that she the Temple might adorne With Trojan Armes, or would her selfe have worne The golden spoyle, this man of all the foes She singles out, t'incounter him she goes, And carelesse through whole squadrons made her way, Inflam'd with female love, spoyle, and prey. Taking th occasion Arune threw his speare, And to the powers above thus made his Prayer. Phaebus who swayst Soracte, best of Gods, Whom first we'adore: to whom we burn whole loads Of scorching pines, and then passe through the fire With much devotion: grant almighty Sire, That our Armes may abolish this disgrace; Nor I desire the Virgins spoyles to place A Trophy, nor at any prey I ayme; My other actions shall preserve my name, That I may give this Plague her deadly wound, Then pleas'd I will return home unrenown'd. Apollo heard, and partly grants his prayer, The other part flyes with the fleeting ayre, He grants by him Camilla should be slaine But not to see his native Land againe, That the swift winds did carry from his eare; Then through the clowds resounds the flying speare, The squadrons look about, and all begin To cast their eyes upon the Volscean Queene; But she did nothing the great sound regard, Nor coming through the skie the Lance she heard, Till in her naked breast the Javlin stood, And thirstie takes a draught of virgins blood.
Trembling with feare her Ladies all rush in To keepe supported up the falling Queene. But Aruns frighted, did not now forbeare Basely to fly, his joy commixd with feare, Nor longer now would trust unto his Lance, Nor durst against the Virgins speare advance. And as a Woolf, when he some shepheard kils, Or mighty steere, flyes to the lofty hils Before that hostile weapons him distresse, And conscious of so bold a wickednesse, Cowring, betwixt his legs his tayle he casts, And struck with terrour to the Forrest hasts. So from their eyes affrighted Aruns bends, Hasting his flight and mingles with his friends. To pull the savlin out she dying tryde, But fast the steele sticks in her wounded side. Pale, she sincks down and cold death seales her eyes, And from her cheeks her rosie colour flies, Breathing her last: to Acca then she spake, One most she love'd who alwayes did partake Her cares, and councels, the most trustie maid Attended her; and thus she groaning, said. Sister, I once had strength, but now I fall, By a sad wound, and darknesse covers all; To Turnus hast and these my last words tell, That he fall on, the Trojans to repell, Adieu. This said, no more her reines she guides, And though unwilling, to the ground she slides; Then by degrees benum'd with cold she dies, Her yeelding neck now bends, her head now lies Prisoner to death, leaving her arms diseas'd, And life to shades flies with a groane displeas'd. The golden stars then mighty clammors smite, Camilla slaine, afresh begins the fight,
And a hot charge with all the Trojan force, The Tyrrhen Captains, and th'Arcadian horse, But Opis sent by Trivia, undismaid, Plac'd on a rising hill the fight survaid, 'Mongst cries of raging youth as far of she Camilla punish'd by sad death did see; She sigh'd and weeping said; ah Virgin such A punishment for thee, was too too much. Because thou Trojans boldly hast assaild; Nor hath Diana's service thee avail'd, Or quiver at thy shoulders to have borne: Nor will thy Queene forsake thee this a scorne In death, nor shalt thou without honour die, Nor unreveng'd, through earth thy fame shall flye, For who slew thee redeserv'd death shall come. Under the hill did stand a mighty Tombe, For th'ancient Latine King Dercennus made, Which high with earth an aged ke did shade; Hither the beauteous Goddesse swiftly flies; And Aruns from the Sepulchre espies. As him in bright armes swoln with pride she saw, Why said she dost thou shun us? hither draw, Come, and Camilla's Legacie receive: Diana's shafts shall thee of life bereave; The Thracian from her golden quiver drew An Arrow, and inraged bends her bow, And so much strength to draw the tree she set, Untill the crooked ends together met. To th iron head her left hand she did bring, Her right unto her bosome brought the string; Aruns at once did heare the aire resound, And in his breast the feather'd weapon round. He, now expiring, as he groaning sends His last breath forth, neglected by his friends
In dust of forraign fields forsaken lies; And winged Opis mounts unto the skies. Their Lady slain, Camilla's troops first fled, Rutilians next, Atinas followed; The officers desert their souldiers, all Now fly, and swift ran to the cities wall. Nor any could the Trojan charge withstand, By arms or strength death bearing in their hand. Their bowes unbent hung at their weary backs, And iron-hoof'd steeds the ground beneath them shakes. Then black and troubled clouds of dust appear, Darkning the sun, and to the walls drew near. Beating their breasts, the matrons female cries Send from the towres, and clamours raise to skies; Who first through open gates did entrance make, In, the foes troup with them commixed, brake: Nor could the wretches woful death avoid, But are at home just at their dores destroid, And under their own battlements their fates Receive by steel; when others shut the gates, And durst not open to receive within Their calling friends: sad slaughters now begin Of those the passe kept, and maintain'd the fight. Some shut out, in their weeping parents sight, Into the trench are tumbled headlong down; Others with loose reins desperately ride on, And tilt against the gates and massie bars. The matrons, in such danger of the wars, Mov'd with Camilla, and their countries love, Logs, blocks and stones do tumble from above, And these in stead of better weapons use, To save their country death they not refuse. Turnus mean while sad news heard in the groves, And him with mighty sorrow Acca moves.
Volsceans were scattered, and Camilla slain, Favour'd by Mars, they did the battell gain, Who now pursue and drove them to the gates; For so had Jove decreed and cruell fates. He from the hils then rose, with fury struck, And the rough groves, and dangerous passe forsook. Scarce out of sight into the Plains he drew, But Prince Aeneas marching he might view Down to the open Champaign, and at last The danger of the hill and forrest past. So both now march'd unto the Royal seat, Nor was the distance 'twixt the armies great. At once from far Aeneas view'd the lands Smoking with dust, and the Laurentian bands; And Turnus fierce in arms, Aeneas saw, Heard his horse neigh, and squadrons neerer draw. Straight they in fight had joyn'd, and battell gave, Had not bright Phoebus in the Western wave Wash'd his tir'd Steeds, night vanquishing the day; Intrench'd before the town both Armies lay.
THE TWELFTH BOOK OF VIRGIL'S AENEIS. THE ARGUMENT. Turnus resolv'd by fight to end the wars, Straight challengeth Aeneas; he prepares To meet. The Tim and Place appointed, both To observe articles, take a solemn Oath. Iuturna sent th'agreement to disturbe. Nor could the Trojan Prince his Army curbe. Aeneas hurt: Turnus incourag'd, then Enters the fight, and slaughters many men. Venus her off-spring cures. Inrag'd he goes To seek bold Turnus, amongst thickest foes; But missing him, attempts the Town to gain; Amata's wofull death and Turnus stain. WHen Turnus saw the valiant Latins tir'd With bad successe, his promise now requir'd, Himself now look'd upon he rages more, And courage takes. As on the Lybian shore, A wounded Lyon by the Hunters chac'd, Bold makes a stand, and chargeth them at last.
Breaking the spear, he shakes his curled main, And roaring, doth with bloody mouth complain. Such rage as this inflames bold Turnus breast, Who thus to th'King his troubled mind exprest. There shall be no delay in Turnus sword; Will the perfidions Trojans keep their word, And stand to their ingagement? I will fight; Perform great King for leagues the sacred rite. Either this Asian fugitive by me Shall perish, (let the Latins sit and see) And I this common mischief shall destroy, Or he victorious over me, injoy The fair Lavinia for his Royall bride. To whom the King undiscompos'd repli'de. Most valiant Prince; the more thy vertues be, So much more carefull it behoveth me Councel to take, and weigh each chance with care. Thine Daunus realms, and many cities are By wars successe and thy great valour thine; By wealth and power I have enough for mine. In Latium other Virgins may be found, Who for their high extraction are renown'd. Let me unfold these sayings which are hard, Without formalities, and my words regard; That I to no Italian Prince should wed My daughter, men and gods all prophes'ed. Took with thy love, with thy alliance took, And with my sad wives tears, all bonds I broke, The promis'd bride detain'd, took impious arms; Since you have seen what miseries, wars, what harms Insu'd, and thy own danger; we orethrown In two great battels, scarce defend the town; And swolne with Latin blood, yet Tyber boyls, Our bones make white the fields in mighty piles.
How is our mind with various counsels tost? What weaknesse changeth it? were Turnus lost, I should make peace; why rather then all strife Remove not I, and yet preserve thy life? What will thy own Rutilians think? what may The other Princes of Ausonia say? If (heaven forbid it) I should ruine thee, Seeking our daughter and affinitie, View wars events, and thy old father spare, Who now at home for thee lies plung'd in care. But words could nothing Turnus wrath asswage, The medicine makes him worse, and more to rage, Soon as he could, thus he began to say. What care you take for me, great Prince; I pray For me lay by: sire is sold cheap for fame, Nor we dear father feeble javelins aim And from those wounds I deal blood will appear. Nor shall his goddesse mother then be near, Him flying with a femall cloud to save. Nor with vain shadows shall our eyes deceive. But the Queen weeping, with wars chance dismai'd, Orewhelmed with grief, thus did her son disswade, Dear Turnus by these tears, if any love Of sad Amata thy kind bosome move, (Thou my sole comfort, and my ages prop, Who art our glory, and our Kingdoms hope, On whom our falling house doth only rest) O challenge not the Dardan I request. Whatever chance attends thee in that fight, I must bear part, and shall this hated light Forsake at once, nor captive will I see That fugitive my son in law to be. Lavinia heard her mothers speech; whilst tears Drown'd her fair cheeks, on which a blush appears
Like new born flame, and o're clear beauty flowes; So Indian-ivory stain'd with crimson shews, Or lilies amongst Province-roses plac'd: So sweet a colour the bright virgin grac'd, When mov'd with love Turnus beheld the maid, And more incens'd, thus to Amata said. My dearest mother, follow not with tears So sad an omen, him, who now prepares For strife of cruell Mars: the fatall houre Of death to stay is not in Turnus power. Idmon our Herald, go, this message bear Not pleasing to the Phrygian Princes care. Soon as the blushing chariot of the morn, With roses shall days infant brows adorn, Let him not draw his Trojans to the field, Let both the armies to cessation yield. With our own blood this war we shall decide, There let him strive to gain the royall bride. This said, he went to see his horse; their plight, And fiery mettall gave him much delight, Which, Orythia gave Pilumus, who exceed The snow in whitenesse, and the wind in speed, The grooms attend; they clap their necks, and rein Their well born heads and combe the flowing main. Next on he tride a sute of armour, which Was bright with gold, with Orycalcus rich: Then puts his sword on, and his target brac'd, And fits his crest with bloody feathers grac'd. Vulcan the sword for's father Daunus made, And hot in Stygian waters cool'd the blade. Then to a stately hall he did advance, Where 'gainst a pillar stood a mighty lance, Aruncian Actors spoyle: this down he took, And speaking thus, with mighty violence shook.
O never failing when I made my prayer, The time draws nigh, thou once wert Actors spear, And now art mine: O grant I may orethrow Th'effeminate Phrygian, and this hand the foe Dispoyl of armes with dust his tresses soyl Cnrl'd with hot irons, and moist with myrrhe and oyl. Thus mov'd with rage, through all his face did rise Sparkles of flame, fire shines in his bright eyes. As when a bull roars dreadful'y for fight, And doth his fury with his hornes excite; Charging a tree, out-braves the winde with blows, And sand praeludium to the combate strows. Then rag'd Aeneas in Vulcanian arms, And whets his wrath, preparing for alarms, Glad thus to end the war; his son and friends To comfort them, he shews what fate intends. Then he commands some to the King should bear Th'accepted challenge, and should peace declare. Scarce had the morning crown'd with golden rayes The hils, when Phoebus steeds forsook the seas, And from their fiery nostrils blew the light: When neer the city wall, lists for the fight, Trojans and Rutiles measuring did prepare. Hearths in the midst, and flowry altars were To common gods. Some water, fire, defign'd, With linnen vail'd, Vervaine their brows did bind. Ausonian squadrons, and the piled troop, March from the town, and Trojans all drew up, And Tyrrhen squadrons hast with various arms, Standing imbattel'd, ready for alarms. Amidst the chiefs in scarlet shine and gold, Assaracus off-spring, Mnestheus, and the bold; Asylas, with Messapus next took place; Messapus bravely mounted Neptunes race,
The signals heard; all cleer th'appointed fields, On earth they fix their spears, and rest their shields. Feeble old men, and fearful women haste With the unarmed vulgar, where, well plac'd The fight they might behold; on towres some get, Or houses tops, on battlements these sit. But Juno looking from a hill, whose name Is Alban now, (then without stile or fame) Did the whole army of the Latines view, The Trojans, and the royal city too. When thus the goddesse to a goddesse said, Who Turnus sister was, whom floods obey'd; Which gift Jove gave, king of the starry sky, In recompence of her virginity. Nymph, glory of the floods whom most I love Of all those Latine dames aspir'd to Jove 's Ungrateful bed, and plac'd in heaven with me. Lest us thou blame, thy sad condition see. Whilst fortune pleas'd, and fate to Latium gave Successe, I Turnus and thy walls did save. Now cruel fates attend the youth, and I Behold his day, and woful chance draw nigh; Nor I this peace, nor combatants will view: If ought thou dar'st, now for a brother do; Perhaps some better fortune may arise. Scarce said, when tears poure from Juturna's eyes, Beating her snowy breast. Then Juno said, This is no time to weep; thy brother aid, And save, if now thou canst; raise war again, And break the peace I'le the bold act maintain. Advising thus, she left her much distrest, And deep the wounding sorrow pierc'd her breast. Mean while both Kings draw forth in solemn state, Latinus in a gallant chariot sate,
Twelve golden rayes impail'd his shining browes, Declaring Sol his grandsire; Turnus goes With white steeds drawn, and shakes two mighty spears, Aeneas, Romes original, appears Bright in celestial arms: with him did come Ascanius the next great hope of Rome The priest in white did fleecie sheep designe, And the fat ofspring of the brisled swine, And cattel to the flaming altars brought: They to the rising sun, their hands well fraught With salt fruit, turn their eyes; beasts for divine Uses they take, and on their foreheads signe; And with full bowls and offerings th'altars lade, Then with a drawn sword Prince Aeneas prayd. Witnesse O sun, this Farth confirm the same, For which I through so many troubles came. Great Jove, and Juno, who will now declare For us I crave; and thou great God of war Who still in dreadful battels governst all. The sacred springs and fountains, you I call, And mighty powers which in high heaven reside, And gods which on the azure billows glide; If Turnus fortune shall the victory get, We shall return to King Evanders seat, Nor my Ascanius, nor the Trojan bands Bear arms against you, nor invade these lands. But if my valour to me conquest give. (Which may the Gods connrm, and I believe!) Latines shall not the Trojan power obey, I seek not rule, together they shall sway With equal lawe, and leagues eternal make; I'le joyn our gods, and let Latinus take The power himself: for me the Trojans shall A city build, which I le Lavinium call.
Aeneas said, then thus Latinus prayes, And looking up, to heaven his hands did raise; By the same earth, and sea, and stars I vow, The sun, and moon, and Janus double brow, And deepest gates of hell: Great Jove, hear these, Who with thy thunder dost establish peace. Altars and fires I touch, and powers invoke, Never by us shall this our league be broke; Whatever chance do fall, no day shall tell That I was drawn to break one article. First shall the earth be with a deluge drown'd, Or heaven shall sink into the Strgian sound: And as this scepter (he a scepter bore) Never shall sprout with verdant branches more; Which long cut down, no sap from earth recei es, And hath to th' axe bequeath'd both boughs and leaves: Which once a tree, now gold and art adorn, And is by princes of the Latines born. Thus they confirm the leagues in open view Of all the chiefs, and sacred cattel slew. Then from the beasts alive hot entrails pull, And load the altars with huge chargers full. But to the Rutiles now the fight appears Unequal, who are mov'd with various fears; And more when they him not so cheerfull saw, With heavy pace neer to the altar draw, And cast down looks, who whilst heavens aid he seeks Had lost the manly colour in his cheeks. This observation as Juturna viewd To spread, and seise the giddy multitude, Camerta's form she takes, whose grandsire won And rathers valour, honour for the son; And he himself most valiant; in she goes Amidst the bands, and thus strange rumour sowes.
For all these forces, is it not a shame One man t'expose? what, have we not the same Number and strength? Behold, before us stand Trojans, Arcadians, and the fatal band Those fierce Hetrurians, who hate Turnus so: We're two for one, if we should charge the foe. He rais'd by fame, shall with the gods survive T'whom he's devoted, and for ever live. Our countrey lost, we must proud lords obey, Who now sit still, and help to him deny. Thus being incens'd, the murmur louder grew, And more and more now through the army flew. Latines, Laurentians, who did late suppose An end of war, and rest from former woes, Are all for arms, the peace they much detest, And Turnus fortune doth their minds molest. To these another did Juturna joyn, Which mov'd far more; from heaven she gave a signe, Then which could nothing more their souls inrage, Or sooner make th' Italians to ingage. For Joves fair bird, cutting the arched skies, As at a loud-wing'd troop of fowl he slies; Then stooping down, he from the water bears A silver swan, trust in his hooked fears. Th' Italians, courage raise; for the whole flight With loud cries face about, (a wondrous sight) They cloud the heaven with wings, and through the sky In a full body charge the enemy; Vanquish'd by force, tyr'd with his load, he threw His prey i'th' stream, and to the clouds withdrew. The omen then, Rutilians did salute, And arms prepared with a mighty shout. And first the Augur bold Tolumnius said, For this with vowes so often I have praid.
You gods, I take your signe; and led by me Now draw vour swords out, valiant Rutilie. Those whom this stranger did with war infest, (As harmlesse fowl) and hath their realms opprest, Shall drive him hence, and force him to the main, Then with one mind array your selves again, And save your King in danger to be lost. This said, his spear against the foe he cast, The well-aim'd javelin sounding cuts the skies; At once, huge shouts, at once the squadrons rise, Desire of tumult now inflames their blood. But the sent spear, where nine bold brethren stood, Which by a Tyrrhen dame true to his bed Were to Gilipus an Arcadian bred, One in the midst where his rich belt did sit, Close to his side just where the button knit. As the brave youth in shining arms did stand, Went through his ribs, and stretch'd him on the sand, But the bold brothers in a body make, And stir'd with rage, some draw their swords, some take Their spears in haste, and mad, advance; a band Of Laurentines draw forth these to withstand. Trojans, Arcadians, Agelinians move, To try it out with steel they all approve. Altars are spoil'd, and storms of javelins poure, And from the sky descends an iron shoure. They seize the cups and hearths; Latinus flies, The peace being broke with injur'd deities. Some mount their horses, others straight prepare Their chariors, and with dtawn swords ready are. Messapus at this peace much discontent, Did charge a King in royal ornament, Tyrrhen Aulestes: who, as he withdrew Backward, himself on th'alter overthrew,
On's head and shoulder pitch'd; but with his lance Messapus fiercely did to him advance; And whilst he quarter cry'd, with his huge speare Slew as he sate above; then said, Lie there, To the great gods a better sacrifice, Th' Italians rush, and spoile him ere he dies. Chorineus from the altar snatcht a brand, With which, Ebusus charging boldly, gain'd A blow on's face, that set his beard on fire, Which burning smelt: he, as he did retire, With his left hand persuing of his blow, Did seize the hair of his amazed foe; And wrastling with him, brought him to the ground, Then with his stiffe sword gave the deadly wound. Podalirius, the shepherd Alsus slew, As 'fore the squadrons and first ranks he flew, And following with a drawn sword, overtakes; But his deaths wound bequeath'd him with an axe, The mighty blow clove to the chin his head, And all his arms with blood besprinkeled: A hard and iron sleep closeth his sight, And seal'd his eyes up in eternal night. But prince Aeneas naked hands extends, His head yet bare, and calls aloud his friends; Where rush you thus? what sudden rage is this? O stay your wrath! the peace concluded is, All are agreed; tis I must end this war: Let me then fight and lay aside your fear; A lasting peace I with this hand shall bind, These offerings me, and Turnus have design'd. Whilst these he said, behold with mighty sound A winged arrow gave the King a wound. By what hand shot, or whirlwind sent, unknown, What god or chance did Rutils so renown.
But Turnus, when he saw Aeneas turn, His Captains troubled, straight with hope did burn; Calls for his steeds, then arms, and from the plains Leaps in his chariot, and strait takes his reins, And many valiant souldier overthrowes, And ore them dying with his horses goes; Or with his chariot wheels whole squadrons tears, And at them flying casts their taken spears. So near cold Hebrus bloody Mars proceeds, Whilst his shield rattles, to his fiery steeds Giving the reins, then winds they fly more fleet, And farthest Thrace grones with their thundering feet: With him pale fear, and cruel anger rode, And treachery accompanies the god. Fierce Turnus so, his horse drives through the plain, Smoking with sweat, insulting ore the slain: From their swift heels a sanguine dew he spreads, And sand with streams of blood commixed, treads; And now he Sthenelus, Thamaris, Polus slew; These hand to hand, him afar off orethrew. Glaucus and Lades, both in Lycia born, Whom Imbrasus their father did adorn With arms of equal proof, either to fight, Or mounted, to outstrip the winds in flight. In th'other wing, Eumedes fierce came on With new supplies, old Dolons warlike son; His grandsires name, and fathers strength he had, Who in times past, when he a spy was made To view the Grecian camp; bold, for his hire Achilles horse and chariot did require. For this, Tydides gave him other pay, Nor bore he ere Pelides steeds a way. As afar off bold Turnus him did view Through th'ample sky, at him his javelin threw;
Then stops his horse, and from his chariot leaps, Whom falling down half dead on's neck he steps, Puls his sword from him, and the shining blade He colour'd in his throat, and thus he said. Trojan behold that land rhou striv'st to gain; And stretch'd out thus, measure th' Hesperian plain. To those dare fight with us, we alwayes yield Rewards like these; and thus they cities build. Next Butes with his spear He overthrew, Bold Cloris, Sabiris, and Dares slew, Thersilocus, Thymetes next did speed, As he was tumbling from his warlike steed. And as Edonian Boreas, when aloud He thunders raging on th' Aegean flood, To shore the bïllows follow; through the sky, Which way winds blow, the fleeting clouds do fly. So Turnus, wheresoere he way doth make, The troops give place, the bands to flight betake; He with's own force on like a whirlwind comes, The wanton winds shaking his waving plumes. Phegeus withstands him; though his fury burns, He stops his chariot, and his horses turns; Their foamie mouths he checkt, and whilst he hung Drawn by their mains, at him his spear he flung; Which pierc'd quite through his double mail, and found Passage to rase his body with a wound: But he defended with his target, made Still at the foe, and from his sword craves aid; When hurried with the wheel, and flying axe, He was at last orethrown, whom Turnus takes Betwixt his helm and gorge, and smote off's head, And left upon the sand his body dead. Whist conquering Turnus made such slaughters thus; Mnestheus, Achates, sad Ascanius,
Aeneas bleeding to the camp attend: Each other step on a long spear he lean'd; To draw the broken arrow he assayes, Strugling with pain, and tries the easiest wayes; They lance the wound, and where it lay conceal'd Cut deep; that they again might take the field. Japix, whom Phoebus lov'd most was there, Who once to him did such affection bear, That his own arts on him he did bestow, The spirit of Prophesie, with his harp and bow. That he might long deferre the fatall houre Of his old father, he the use and power Of Simples learn't, and to himself imparts, By study knowledge of despised arts. Aeneas chafing lean'd upon a spear, With sad Julus, and great concourse there, Nor is he mov'd nor troubled at their tears. Then old Japix many things prepares, His vest girt back in the Paeonian guise, And Phoebus powerfull herbs in vain applies, Vainly he labours to draw forth the steel, Tries with his Probe, and doth with pincers feel; No way will hit, no aid Apollo yields. Now horrour, more and more rag'd in the fields, Danger draws neer, dust hides the heaven from view; Horse charge, and 'midst the camp thick javelins flew; A wofull noise did now ascend the sky, Of valiant youth, who in fierce battell die. Here Venus troubled at her sons deep wound, Brought Dittanie, in Craetan Ida found, The stalk hath sprowting leaves, and on the crown A purple slower, not to wild goats unknown, When their rough backs the winged shaft hath gal'd: This Venus brought, in clouds her beauty vail'd;
To this she did fresh streams in gold infuse, In secret, and with sweet Ambrosian dewes, She odoriferous Panax did compound, With which th' old man not knowing, bath'd the wound. Then from his body, straight all anguish fled, And now the wound no more, though mighty, bled, The steel now uncompel'd follows the hand, And strength returns unto its old command. Bring armes, why stay you? first lapix cries: Inflaming courage 'gainst the enemies, This is no work of man nor did this art, My master Phoebus unto me impart, Nor have I drawn the steel, which deep did lurk, A greater God sends thee to greater work. Then for the fight Aeneas earnest, ties His golden cuishes to his manly thighs, Hating delays, brandish'd his spear; this done Buckles his shield, and claps his corslet on, And then his son imbracing, thus arrai'd, He through his beaver, sweetly kissing said; Valour, true honour, learn (my boy) from me, Fortune from others; this right hand shall be In war thy shield, and shall with realms endow; To riper years attain'd, remember thou Thy friends example; let thy fathers fame, And uncle Hector, to brave acts inflame. Thus having said, through open ports he makes, And mighty he a mighty javelin shakes. Anteus and Mnestheus straight a body make, And all the bands draw forth, the campe forsake, Then mighty clouds of dust obscure the field, And thundring feet makes the shook earth to yield. Turnus beheld them, as the troups did draw Forth from the works, and th' Ausonians saw,
Straight through their bodies runs cold trembling fear, But before all his sister first did hear, She knew the sound, and frighted fled amain. He hasts, leading his black band through the plain. As when a mighty storme flies to the shore, Through the deep sea, suspected long before By skilfull swains, who fear it will annoy, Their plants their standing corn and all destroy, The wind as Herbingers bring th' sound to land, So charg'd Aeneas with his Trojan band. And close together they in bodies drew. Tymbraeus, stout Osiris overthrew, Mnestheus, Archetius, and Achates sped Bold Epulon, Gyas left Ʋfens dead: Tosumnius the Augurer, he slew, Who 'gainst the Trojans first his javelin threw; Clamour scales heaven, now Rutilians yield And swift turn dusty shoulders through the field. Aeneas scorns to fight with any here, Who charge on foot, or horse, or cast a spear; He Turnus seeks alone through dusty mists, And only him demands unto the lists. Juturna that Virago struck with fear, Tumbles Metiscus, Turnus chariotteer Out of his seat, and snatch'd from him the reins, And leaves forsaken, falne upon the Plains. Acting his part, she gus the foaming bits, In voyce, arms, shape, like to Metusius sits. As when a swallow flies through spatious Courts Of some rich lord, and in vast hals resorts, Food seeking for her young, portches she rounds, And now about the chrystall fountains sounds. Thus mounted through the foe Iuturna makes, And with her thundring wheels all overtakes:
Then here her brother, and now there she shews, Nor lets him fight, but far from thence she goes. Aeneas so, turns here, now there he flies, And Turnus trac'd through scatter'd enemies; Calling as oft as him he had in sight: And spurs adds to his winged horses slight. As oft Juturna thence her chariot guides; What shall she do, tost with such various tides? Aeneas as he many plots prepares, At him Messapus (for he had two spears) Cast one of them, and sent with mighty force. Aeneas guards himself, and stops his course, Bending his knee; through's crest the javelin comes, And from his cask, quite sweeps away his plumes. Then for the treachery, his rage grew hot; When he perceiv'd his flying chariot, Jove, and the altars he to witnesse cals, Of broken leagues, then on the slaughter fals, No difference makes, with all he doth ingage, And gives full reins to his late curbed rage. What God can tell those slaughters? who in verse The funerals of the captains can rehearse, Which fell by Turnus on th' Ausonian Plain, Or count those numbers by Aeneas slain? Could Iove be pleas'd to see such wars as these 'Twixt nations that must joyne in lasting peace! Aeneas Sacro slew, (this fight first staid The flying Trojans,) nor he long delaid: Through's breast, where fate did easiest way afford, Mongst his short ribs he sheaths his naked sword. Turnus, Amicus, falne from's Courser, met On foot, on's brother next Diores set; To this advancing, death he did afford With his long spear, that slaughters with his sword;
Their heads cut off, he to his chariot bore, And hung them up, bloody with purple gore. He alo, Tanais and Cethegus slew, Three at one charge, and sterne Onytes too Of th' Echion name, whom dame Peridia bore, Brother from Lycia sent, and Phoebus shore; And young Menaetes who in vain denide To go to wars: neer fishy Lernas side He had his craft, and house, wealth was unknown, Whose father il'd a countrey not his own. As fires are kindled in contrary ways, Amongst dry woods, and sprigs of crackling bays, Or when with rapid course from mountains steep Sound foamy streams, and hurry to the deep, And both alike make devastations large. So stout Aeneas and bold Turnus charge; Their rage now boyls, and breasts unconquer'd bleed; With their whole strength, to slaughter they proceed. Muranus here, (boasting the antient name Of Grandsires who from Latine Princes came;) He with a stone orethrew, and on the Plains Measur'd his length: whom falne, and lost his reins, The wheels ran ore: thick blows swift heels afford, Of horses now unmindfull of their lord. Turnus meets Ilus mainly raging now, And casts his javelin at his golden brow: Quite through the helme it fixed in his brain. Nor could thy valour thee protection gain, Bold Graecian Creteus, from fierce Turnus ods; Nor from Aeneas charge, could his own Gods Cupentus save: his breast to th sword must yield, Nor to the wretch avail'd his brazen shield. Thee Aeolus, Laurentian fields saw dead, And the large Champaigne thy broad shoulders spread,
Whom not the Argive squadrons could destroy, Nor sterne Achilles who subverted Troy, Here was thy place for death, from Ida come, Laurentian fields thy body must intombe. Latins and Trojans, now are all ingag'd; Mnestheus, Serestus and Messapus rag'd. Well mounted, on bravely Asylas brings Up Tuscane bands, and the Arcadian wings, They battell joyne and strive with all their might; No reserve left, there was a cruell fight. The most fair mother of Aeneas here Puts in his mind to th'wals he should draw neer, And straight with's Army to the city go, Which sudden should the Latins overthrow. He, as he Turnus sought through all the bands, Bending each way, saw how Laurentum stands, From so much troubles safe, in quiet rest: A shape of greater war inflames his breast. Mnestheus, Sergestus and Serestus stout, Plac'd on a mount he cals, where round about Trojans might flock, nor shields or spears they laid Aside, whilst thus from rising ground he said, What I command obey; this Jove decrees; Nor slow move for the suddain enterprise. This town and city, cause of all this war, Unlesse they yield, and say they vanquish'd are, I will destroy, and levell with the ground Their smoking spires; till Turnus will be found, Must I expect? whilst he is pleas'd to fight Vanquish'd again, must I attending wait? Of all our woes this is the head and spring. Sue then for peace with slames, and fire-bands bring. This said, they cheerfull into order fall, And in a body draw unto the wall.
Straight scaling ladders were, and fire prepar'd: Some to the gates advance, and kill the guard: Others, all heaven with shafts and javelins cloud; Aeneas first, raising his hand, allowd Latinus blames: cals heaven to witnes then, He is compel'd to take up arms agen, They by hostility Peace had broken twice. Then 'mongst the People factious stirs arise; Some for the Trojans bid open the gate, And that they should march through the city straight, And to the out-works they their King do call; Others bring arms, and will defend the wall. As when a swaine finds in a hollow rock, A swarme of bees, and fils the place with smoke: Disturb'd they flie about their waxen seat, And with a mighty noise their anger whet; Smoke scales their roofs, within sad murmurs rise, And pitchy fumes advance unto the skies. When to the fainting Latins chanc'd a woe, Which the whole city did with grief oreflow. As the Queen saw the foe draw neer the wall, The gates beset, fire on the roofs to fall; Nor Turnus nigh, the city to maintain. Hopelesse, she thought in fight the Prince was slain. Struck dead with woe, I am the cause, she cries, I, I the spring of all these miseries. Thus raving she, her bitter grief exprest, And desperate, she rends her purple vest: Then on a beam, a knot for base death knit. Soon as the wofull Latins heard of it; (But first Lavinia tore her golden hair And rosie cheeks) they all in uprore were: And the whole palace rung with dismall cries. Hence the sad fame through the whole city flies;
Their hearts now fail'd; amaz'd Latinus went, And regal weeds, at his wives fortune, rent; Then for his ruin'd town opprest with woes, Foul dust upon his silver hair he throwes; Himself much blaming, cause he did refuse, And for his son did not Aeneas chuse. Mean while the warriour Turnus did a few Poor straglers to the farthest plains pursue; And by degrees now slower, and slower he rides, And lesse and lesse in his swift horses prides. Hither to him the wind strange terror bears, With clamours mix'd; and to his listning ears The cities confus'd noise and cries had blown. Ah what misfortune now disturbs the town! Why from Laurentum come such sounds! This said, Distracted in his mind a while he staid. His sister, who Metiscus shape had got, His charioteer, and drove his chariot, To him then spake: The Trojans there pursue Where victory opens now a way to you: Others there are that will defend the town. Aeneas drives th' Italians up and down, Thundring in arms; let us like slaughters make Amongst the Trojans, nor the field forsake, Since thou in strength and valour equal art. Then Turnus said — Sister, long since I knew thee, when by charms Thou brok'st the league, and tookst thy selt up arms. Now Goddesse, thou deceiv'st in vain: but who From heaven to suffer thus commanded you? Cam'st thou to see thy brothers cruel death? What safety else can fortune now bequeath? Did not these eyes behold Muranus, when He call'd to me aloud, and call'd agen?
Then whom to me (alas) was dearer none: The brave man fell, by a great wound orethrown. And haplesse Ʋfens dy'd, lest he should see Our foul disgrace; his arms and body be The Trojans prize. Shall I here tamely stay Till they destroy the town? Is that the way? Nor shall this arm Drances confute? shall I Retreat, and shall this land see Turnus fly? Is death so hard? You spirits, that dwell below, Oh send me aid; since heaven's declar'd my foe! To you my spotlesle soul not knowing t'offend, Worthy my predecessors shall descend. Scarce said; when Sages through the foe did come, His horse behold all over in a fome: In's head an arrow sticking, post he came Requiring aid of Turnus by his name. Great Prince, in thee is our last hopes, allow Some aid to us; Aeneas thunders now In arms about our gates, and threatens, he Will now destroy the towres of Italie; And ready with destruction fire-brands flie About the roofs. The Latines fix their eye Only on thee; all's lost, if thou not aid. Nor will Latinus longer be delaid Whom to call son, or with which side t'agree. Besides the Queen most, faithful still to thee, Is dead; and frighted with her own sad fates Hath made her self away; only the gates Are by Messapus, and Atinas man'd; Round these, on every side thick squadrons stand, An iron crop glisters with swords and shields, Whilst thou dost drive here in forsaken fields. Turnus amaz'd, with various objects stood Silent a while; great shame then boyls his blood,
Grief with distraction mix'd, and love did call, Stir'd up by rage, and losse of honour, all. Soon as his mind he recollected had, The walls (much griev'd) with burning eyes survaid, And the great town did from the wheels behold, When he might see amongst the bulwarks roll'd And the dry timber up a mighty flame With smoke towards heaven: then to a towre it came Wrought with huge beams, which he himself had made, And had with wheels and lofty arches laid. Fate calls now, sister, there is no delay: What God and hard chance bids, we must obey. I'le meet Aeneas; deaths worst forme Ile face; Nor longer shalt thou see my great disgrace: Grant ere the fight I may to fury yield. This said, from's chariot leaps into the field, And rush'd through foes, his sister sad forsakes, And swift he through the middle squadron makes. As a huge stone drove by a tempests power From a hills top, or carried by a shower; Or sliding years which time hath freed from thence, The mighty rock roll'd down with violence Bounds from the earth; and tumbling headlong then With it sweeps woods, and flocks, whole herds, and men: So through the broken squadrons Turnus goes To th' city walls: and where the sad earth flowes With streams of blood, where javelins cloud the skies, Waving his hand, with a loud voice he cries. No more in fight Rutilians Latines joyn, What ere the fortune is, it must be mine. I with my sword firm peace shall make. This said, They all retreat, and a fair space they made. But when Aeneas heard of Turnus name, Straight from the walls and lofty towrs he came.
And breaks off all delayes, quits all designs, And joyfull now in thundring arms he shines. So mighty Ahos, or tall E rix shew, Or antient Apenninus, when with snow Above the stars his lofty head is crown'd, And doth with tempest beaten okes resound. Rutilians, Trojans, and th' Italians, all Who did maintain, and those who storm'd the wall, Fix'd there their eyes, and from the fight withdraw. Latinus was amazed, when he saw Such mighty men, born in far distant land, Resolv'd to try it out, now hand to hand. Soon as the field with open lists appears, With a swift course far off they cast their spears; They charge then with their targets, and the ground Doth with a grone return the brazen sound. Then with their swords blow after blow lay on, Fortune and valour are conjoyn'd in one. So in great Syla or Taburnus height Two bulls with horns begin a cruel fight; Their frighted Lords retreit: the cattel stand Silent with fear, who shall the steers command, Whom the whole herd shall follow; whilst the foes Gore one another, dealing cruel blowes: In streams of blood their necks and shoulders dround, And with their bellowing all the woods resound. So with their shields they at each other flie, Whilst mighty fragor sills the ample skie. With equall beame Jove holds the ballances, And in each scale the various fate he layes Of both the Princes; who shall honour have, And whom deaths weight shall sink down to the grave. Here Turnus did his arm and sword advance, Then makes a blow, suspecting no mischance.
A shout the Trojans and the Latines made, Both sides are rais'd; but the perfidious blade Breaks in the stroke, and on the earth it lies. Flight now must aid; more swift then winds he flies, When a strange hilt he in his hand did find. Fame is, when he did mount his horses joy'nd In the first fight, and was for battell hot, He seiz'd Metiscus sword, his own forgot: And that serv'd long, while stragling Trojans fled. But when it came to arms by Vulean made, The mortal sword like ice broke in his hand, The peeces shining on the yellow sand. Therefore amaz'd he flies through th'open plain, Now here, now there; and wheels about again. For each side Trojans with a guard surround, There did a fen there lofty bulwarks bound. Nor slower Aeneas after him, though he Sometimes complained of his wounded knee. And swiftly at the heels he follows him; As when a Deer inclosed with some stream, Or struck with terror, when the arrow sounds, The hantsman neer with a full crie of hounds; But he a thousand waves tries for escapes, Frighted with nets and banks: Fierce Ʋmber gapes Ready to sene, and now so nigh doth get He bites, but cozen'd with an empty bit; Then clamours rise, the banks and lakes reply, And all the heavens thunder with the cry. He flying, then upbraids Rutilian bands, Cals each by name, and his own sword demands. Aeneas threatens death to any one Dares give him aid, and to destroy the town: This vows to do; at which they shake, dismaid. Too and agen they full five courses had:
For no meane prize they strove, or sporting strife, But they for blood contend, and Turnus life. Sacred to Faunus, here an Olive stood, On which those scap'd the danger of the flood, To the Larentian God did pay their vowes, And promis'd vests hang on the sacred boughes. Trojans without respect cut down this tree, That a cleare list might for the Champions be. Here stuck Aeneas speare with violence cast, And in the yielding root was fixed fast, The Dardan puls, that he with this the foe Might overtake, because he was too slow. Then Turnus frighted prayes, O Faunus heare, And pity, and dear earth detain the speare, If alwaies I your honours have maintain'd, Which now with war the Trojans have prophan'd. Nor with vain vowes he call'd the deities ayd; For whilst Aeneas strugling, was delaid In the soft stump, nor could the root constraine: Juturna, in Metiscus form again, Runs in and helps her brother to his sword. Venus with furie at the bold nymph stird, Then comes, and from the deep root puls the lance. Now brave in armes and chear'd they both advance, This to his sword, that trusting to his speare, And for the strife of panting Mars prepare. Mean while heav'ns mighty King to Juno said, As from a bright cloud they the fight survaid, What now remains deare wife, when ends our ods? Aeneas thou knowst, must sit amongst the Gods, And Fates to him have starry seats alow'd, What plot thus stays thee in a gloomy cloud? What! shall a mortall wound a God: or thou (For to Juturna thy power did allow
To bring the sword for Daunus sons defence) To give fresh courage to the vanquish'd Prince. Give ore at last, to our intreaties bend, Nor let such eating grief thee silent spend, Nor with such care so often trouble me; Time was, when thou couldst vex by Land, and Sea The Trojan race; and kindle cruel warres: Houses destroy, and Hymen mix with jars. More I forbid t'attempt: such things Jove spoke, When Juno said, with a submissive look. Because great Jove thy mind to me was known, Unwilling I have Turnus left alone. Nor shouldst thou see me solitarie sit In a cold cloud, and suffer things unfit: But girt with flames, our squadrons to excite, And draw the Trojans to unhappy fight. I must confesse, pittying, I did perswade Woefull Juturna to her brothers ayde: And greater things I for his life would doe, But not to use a dart, or bend a bow. This by th'inexorable Stygian floods I sweare, that only oath which tyes the Gods; And now I goe, and leave the wofull fight, But one thing I request, which yet no right Or Fate denies: for th' Majestie of thine, When with blest Hymen, they shall leagues conjoyne, (And may it be,) and Lawes of peace proclaime, Let not the Latins change their antient name, Nor let them be call'd Trojans I beseech, Nor yet to change their habit, nor their speech; Let it be Latium, and for ever be The Alban fathers in great Italie; Let Romans. by their valour conquer all. T'roy's tain: and with her let the name now fall:
The king of men and Gods, then smiling says. Thou art Joves sister, Saturns second race; Why in thy breast rowlst thou such floods of rage? Lay by that spleen, so vainly did ingage; I am o'recome, and thou thy sute shalt gain. They shall their customes, and their speech retain; And keep their ancient name. The Trojan race, Mix'd with so great a body shall give place. Ile adde their sacred rites, and I shall make Latins and Trojans, both one tongue to speak. A race mix'd from th' Ausonians thou shalt see Excelling men, and gods in pietie: Nor any nation more in war or peace Shall hononr thee. These words did Juno please, And satisfide, her mind being chang'd, she flies From the dark cloud and leaves the troubled skies. This done; Jove with himself contrives to call Iuturna, from her haplesse brothers fall. Two hellish hags there be, the Dirae height. Which to Megaera, were by dismall Night Born at a birth, and arm'd with serpents stings: Who gave them power to use resounding wings. These at Ioves throne, and cruell court appear; These stir in mortals jealousie and feare, When the Gods king, sicknesse and death prepares, Or wicked cities terrifies with wars. Iove one of these, sending from heaven, injoyns To meet Iuturna with ill boading signes. She to the earth in a swift whirlwind flies; So glides a Parthian arrow through the skies, With poison arm'd, or by Sydonian art Sounding through th'aire, with deadly bane, a dart: Unknown it comes, swift through the gloomy shade; So hasts Nights daughter, and to earth she made.
After she saw the Trojans, and did looke On Turnus bands; a small birds form she took, Which, or on tombs or roofs forsaken hants, And late in shady night her sorrow chants. Thus chang'd the hag at Turnus face did charge, And with her flapping wings she beats his targe. Here sudden numbnesse seis'd his limbs with fear; Amaz'd, struck dumb, erected was his hair. But afar off, as neer the Dirae drew Her sounding wings, woful Juturna knew, Tearing her flowing hair, her face infests With her own nails, and beats her panting breasts, How can thy sister, Turnus, aid thee now? Or what is left for me poor wretch, to do? How shall I save thy life? which way shall I Oppose my self against this prodigie? Fright me no more, foul hag; now I shall go; The sounding of your deadly wings I know: Nor proud commands of Jove deceived me, And this he gives for my virginitie. Why did he me immortal make? and why Took he from me the happinesse to die? Then I might give a period to this woe, And to the shades with my dear brother go. But I immortal am; yet wanting thee, Nothing that's mine, shall pleasant be to me. That earth would gape and swallow me! that now A Goddesse might descend to shades below! This said, her head with a green vail she hides, And with a groan beneath the river glides. Aeneas stands, and a huge javelin shooke, A mighty tree; and like a foe thus spoke;
What stayes thee now OTurnus? tis not flight Must end our quarrell, but a cruel fight. Transforme thy selfe into all shapes, and try What ere thou canst by strength or art apply. Desire with wings to the high stars to glide: And in earths hollow wombe thy selfe to hide. Shaking his head, thy proud threats feare not me, The Gods, (he said) Jove is my enemie. Thus having said, a ponderous stone he found, An ancient mighty one, which for a bound By chance just on the neighbouring limits lay, And for the meers all strife did take away; Scarce twice six men, this to their necks could reare, Such men as now the earth grown old doth beare. The Heroe running, with huge strength did throw Raising himselfe, this stone against the foe: Nor himselfe running nor yet going, knew; Or lifting, how his hand the huge-stone threw. His knees did tremble, and a cold blood flowes Through all his nerves; the stone with violence goes Through empty aire; but it fell short, nor went Half way to give the blow, where it was sent. As when in quiet night, sleepe seiles our eye, In vain we seeme some earnest flight to trie, But in the midst we faint, our voice doth faile, Nor speech, nor words, nor our known strength prevaile; So Turnus, what so ere his valour tries, Successe the cruel Goddesse him denies. Troubled, the Town and Rutils struck with feare Standing he view'd; and trembles at the speare. Where shall he fly, how scape the enemie, No Chariot, no Juturna can he see. Aeneas aiming, did himselfe advance, And at him maz'd, he throwes his fatall lance,
A stone shot from a batterer not so loud Thunder'd, or lightning from a broken cloud. Like a black whirlwind he the javelin threw, Bearing sad death; which through his armour flew, And through seven foldings of his shield it past, And sounding, in his groyn it fix'd at last. The mighty Turnus wounded, sinks upon His double knee; Rutilians gave a grone, And all the hils the voyce re-ecchoe round, And the tall groves reply the mournfuil sound. He suppliant then, did hands and eyes advance, And said, I have deserv'd it, use thy chance; But hast thou sense of a sad Parents woe? And such thy father was; then pity shew To aged Daunus; or if rather thou Wouldst take my life, my corps to friends allow. Thou haft o'recome; the Ausonians me have seen Mercy to crave; Lavinia is thine; Here end debate. Then fierce Aeneas stands Survaying him allo're, and staid his hands, And at this language more and more did melt; When on his shoulder he perceiv'd the belt Which Pallas's was, the golden buckles shone, Whom Turnus by a deep wound had orethrown, And on his back the hostile ensigne had. After those spoyls with grief he had survaid, Incens'd with deadly rage, shalt thou said he, Grac'd with my dear friends spoyls escape from me? Thus Pallas, Paellas thee an offering makes: And on thy wicked blood revenge now takes. Thus having said, with indignation stir'd, He in his bosome sheaths to th'hilt his sword. Straight numbing cold on all his body seiz'd, And with a grone, life flies to shades displeas'd. FINIS.
