w859 12255482 57393
AN ACCOUNT OF Mr PRYN'S REFUTATION OF THE Vniversity of Oxfords Plea. Sent to a Friend in a second Letter from OXFORD. seal of the University of Oxford ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS SAPIENTIA ET FELICITATE Printed in the yeare, 1648.
An Account of Mr. Prins Refutation of the Vniversity of Oxfords Plea. SIR, IN your last you seeme to wonder at, and accuse our silence, in that neither I, who am more particularly concern'd, nor any one else amongst us hath all this while an∣swered those Papers of Mr. Prin's, which he hath set forth against my Letter of the Privileges of the University, so that we may be thought, either hitherto unjustly to have claimed those Privileges, or at least by not vindicating them, to be guilty of the neglect of them our selves, and so to lye under the same crime, which we charge upon others. True it is, Sir, some there are, that may interpret it as an Argument of the badness of our Cause, (which our friends, perhaps, will impute to the negligence of our Patrones) Such espe∣cially, who being pre-possest with passions and interests, easily suffer the balance of their judgments to be weighed down with Mr. Prin's Answers, which though of them∣selves very light, and of no weight, yet having the ad∣vantage of mens particular hopes and fears added to
them, may turn the scales. Yet, I shall shew you that we neither want a good Cause, nor are wanting to it, where there is any considerable opposition made against it. And to this purpose for your and others satisfaction, I shal give you a brief account (not troubling my self to set down, or you, to apply Answers to his several pre∣tensions (as being unwilling to engage my self in an un∣necessary service) I say it shal be my task to give you the reasons) why we answer'd him not. And when I have done this, I make no question, but 'twill be thought suf∣ficiently answered, even by our not answering of him, and our silence will seem the best Confutation. These reasons, that you may have the lesse trouble, may be reduced to two Heads, The one taken from his parti∣cular performance in this his Answer: The second from the general reputation this man hath among us. For the first, the particularity of his performance in this his answer, I shal be able, I think, to contrive all that is necessary to be said into few words. 1. That the whole supellex of matter out of Books and Records which he there makes use of, came to his hands from the invaded sequestred papers of my Lord of Canterbury, and are, with some others of Lord Cott. &c. the greatest part of the substance on which he hath lived, and wrote books without number for these six or seven years. 2. That these are but the notes of his Lordships Counsel, and the story of the passages of that debate at Hampton-court about the Archiepiscopal power of Visiting the Universities. Wherein 'tis acknowledged, that the King, as things were then represented, did judge on the Arch-Bishops side. And though I might say to that mat∣ter, 1. That the opinions of learned men did not all agree
that the Arch-Bishops pretensions were true, til the King, who was acknowledged to have power to endulge or restore that privilege to him, was pleased to judge on his side, and so to instate him in the power: And 2. That the University of Cambridge is affirm'd to have been re∣solv'd to traverse that plea, and try it again, before they would submit to that Visitation: And 3. That even Ox∣ford it self, which was so much obliged to that Arch-Bi∣shop, did plead against it, and conceiv'd it an invasion of their Privileges, yet shall I not have the least need to look this way, in rendring the reason why we did not think fit to answer Mr. Prin; but onely observe from hence, that what Mr. Prin hath brought, being all gathered together on that one designe to make good the Arch-Bishops Visi∣tation, cannot be imagined to give a ful impartial view of the whole matter, the Kings right of Visiting (which is now our whole matter of enquiry) being not so much as questioned, or debated in those notes from whence all M. Prins stock is borrowed. In the third place, I am willing to passe over M. Prins mistakes in making use of these notes; yet can hardly choose but give you a taste, by mentioning one of them, as Pag. 36. where instead of the Arch-Bishops Visiting jure ecclesesiae suae Metropoliticae, & non per potestatem le∣gatinam he reads in perfect current non-sence, & non per potestatem legitimam, wherein if a man should take his word, he must be bound to confesse, that what the Arch-Bishop doth in this or the like Visitation, is not by any legal or legitimate power, which to have done, shal at ano∣ther time, perhaps, when it wil serve M. Prins turn, be an invasion of the fundamental laws and liberties of the Subject in the Arch-Bishop. A mistake about the pitch of
that which I have heard mention'd of him in his Romes Master-piece, where he renders these words [Judica∣vimus actutum favorabile sese interposuisse numen] [We judged that a safe and favourable deity had interposed it selfe] as if actutum were cut asunder into ac and tutum, and the copula ac construed, as if it were after, not before tutum. And another of the same mould was long since his translation of voluntas Dei beneplaciti in the Lambeth Articles, by the will of the well-pleased God, or somewhat, I remember, to that purpose. In the fourth place, I shall not need dispute the truth of any or all his allegations, but from all together de∣duce this state of the businesse between us: That to the right of Visiting the University, Foure pretenders there have been at severall times. 1. The Bishop of the Diocesse. 2. The Arch-Bishop of the Province. 3. The Pope and his Legats. 4. The King, and those which were enabled thereto by Commission from him. The Bishops rights and claims are long since laid down, all that looks that way, being so many years past, as the times whilst this place was in the Diocese of the Bishop of Lincolne, and 'tis a strange argument by which Master Prin concludes the contrary, viz. [That his jurisdiction continued till the 12. yeare of King Charles] because, saith he, in the Kings Decree at Hampton-court, there were these words, [Decla∣ramus quod universitates praedictae per Episcopos & Archi∣diaconos in posterum non visitentur, p. 40.] as if the wri∣ting in posterum in great letters, were sufficient to con∣clude that 'twas so till that time: Whereas 'tis cleare by the Decree, p. 38. that that was a caution put in, in just care of the University, that this sentence, or declaration of the Archbishops right, should not in futuro extendi ad
Episcopos, &c. and so farther prejudice the University. Then for the Popes and his Legats that never was ac∣knowledged since the abrogation of all forrein jurisdi∣ction here in the Reign of Hen. 8. and is clearly excluded by severall Statutes of the Land. As for the Arch-bishops Rights they have been urged, and pleaded, and opposed, and yet perhaps prevailed sometimes against the preten∣sions of the Universities exemption. And because I will not speak of anything that may bear a Controversie, I wil not examine the truth of that, whether the Arch-bishop had that power or no, which he appears by some Records somtimes to have exercised; but being content for once to take all for granted which can possibly bear a dispute, I shall only adde that it is also clear, 1. That Arch-bishop Arundells visitation (which is the main pregnant Testimony in that matter) was part of his Cancellario U∣niversitatis Can∣tabrig: Eliensis Dioecesis, nostrae. Provinciae Cant. p. 14. Nos in progressu visitationis no∣strae Metropol: in dictâ Dioecesi exercendâ vos & dictam Univer∣sit: &c. ib: Cu∣stodi Coll: Trin: Cant: Eliensis Dioecesis. p. 17. Provinciall visitation, taken in as any other Parish in the Province. 2. And by consequence that it was an Ecclesiasticall vi∣sitation, and such as the Bishops of the Diocesse had also before the University was exempted from them, and this will appear by the mentions of Facturi & re∣cepturi quod Ca∣nonicis convenit institutis, p. 17. & obedientiam recepit Canon: Ib: receptâ obe∣dientiâ Canoni∣câ & singu∣lis, &c. quae in visitationi∣bus cjusmodi de jure fuerint re∣quisita. p. 20. Canonica instituta, & obedientia, by the expresse mention of jure suo metro∣politico, and in formâ juris Ecclesiastici, by which his vi∣sitation was performed; and if against this it be obje∣cted that it extended to the visiting the University, as an University, yet all that can be argued from thence is only this, that the Ecclesiasticall power was then farther ex∣tended, then it hath been since the restraints (as partly ap∣pears by this, that till Henry the eights time the Foun∣ders being Lay-men did generally appoint Bishops to be the Visitors of their Colledges) not that it was a civill ju∣risdiction, and so this belongs not, nor can with any co∣lour
be applied to the Visitation now spoken of, which hath by the Commission power to hear and determine of breaches against the Laws of the Land, &c. and so is per∣fectly civill. 4. That whatsoever jurisdiction or power of visiting was, on is in the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, doth in time of vacancy reside in the King, and consequently, that since Mr. Pryn and his friends have been so succesful in their endevours, as to leave that Chair void so long, 'tis not imaginable that any such power, pretended to belong to the Arch-bishop, should be any where now but in the King. And so stil all this refutation of our Plea apparently belongs nothing to it, because supposing all to be true that is here pretended (of the Arch-bishops power, when there was an Arch-bishop) yet when Episco∣pacy it self is by him that refutes us, acknowledg'd to be taken away, and to us, that acknowledge not that, yet 'tis visible that there is no Arch-bishop of Canterbury li∣ving, nor pretence of Commission from him, but on the other side that all his power in the vacancy is divolv'd to the King, 'tis then about the pitch of one of Mr. Pryn's arguments, i.e. little lesse then fury to pretend against the Kings sole Visitation (at this time asserted by the U∣niversity) only from this proof, that there was once in the Arch-bishop some kind of right of some kind of Visi∣tation. The three former pretensions being thus plainly super∣seded, the Bishops and the Popes in integrum, and con∣festly, and the Arch-bishops so also at this time, when there is no Arch-bishop of this Province, nor divolution of his power, in this matter, to any but the King, It fol∣lows 1. that the 3 first things which Mr. Pryn undertakes
to prove, [1. That the University was anciently under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lincoln as Dioecesan, 2. That it was till this Parliament under the jurisdiction and visita∣tion of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury as Metropolitan. 3. That the Pope by his Legate hath visited both the Uni∣versities] are directly and visibly faln to nothing; and for the 4 thing, That there be particular Visitors of Col∣leges appointed by the Founders to whom the visitation of those belongs, and not to the King only, that is as little to this purpose (unlesse it be to prove that they may not in that other respect submit to this visitation) The debate or question being only of the University, which is a seve∣ral Corporation and Foundation distinct from the seve∣ral Colleges: and so likewise for the 5, [That the Univer∣sities exemptions were procured from Popes, and not from Kings of England] That, if it were granted, is as of litle force to conclude against us, because the exemptions which he means were only exemptions from the Arch-bishops Metropolitical visitation, from which if we pre∣tended no exemption at all, yet were we in as good an e∣state as we would wish for our present plea, because now in the vacancy that Archiepiscopal is swallowed up in the King, and when it was in the rivulet, was yet alwaies (since the Reformation) content to acknowledge this fountain. And then secondly, it follows as naturally as any thing can, that the Kings pretension remains the only one ima∣ginable at this time; and against that, (or for any other at any time but the Arch-bishops) there is no appearance of plea or proof so much as offered by Mr. Pryn. All which we that saw, could not permit our selves to be provoked by the shallowness of that one proof (from
the pretended Archiepiscopal power) to embroyl our selves in any farther contention, or to think his refuta∣tion worth refuting, any more then (we are told) the Committee themselves would hearken to it, when he of∣fer'd that to their ears which here he hath done to our o∣ther sense. Nor should I now have said thus much to it, did I not submit to your judgment (who demand it of me) blindly, and to the denying of my own. Now for the second, the generall reputation this man hath among us, If we behold him (not as a man, or as one degraded by this University, but) as a Writer, and view him as he is drawn out by himself in his Books, we look upon him as one from the beginning very confident and ready to undertake and manage any Cause in any facul∣ty, and to maintain it by what Arguments he pleaseth, having a strange dexterity wherein he goes beyond all the Artificers of the age, to prove his conclusion by me∣dium's most directly contrary to it, and to disguise his greatest enemies into as fair a set of correspondents and friends, as he hath any; to deal with Objections as ill ha∣bits of body do with Physick, turn all into the nourish∣ment of the prevalent humour. Such Topicks he used, when from my Lord of Canterburies Diary, he resolved to conclude his reproach and infamy, and gather thence a sufficient matter for a Charge to invade his reputation, if not his life; Whereas, in all the important and consi∣derable parts of that, it breaths out nothing but a most sweet favour to all that read it, so far that an Independent long since challeng'd Mr. Pryn to shew any Presbyterian alive comparable to that image there naturally drawn of that Prelate; so hath he converted hony into poyson, and hath sought to blast, at least to taint this garden of spices
with that venome he suckt thence, and that poyson which was his own foam he drops upon the flowers, and would have the Reader believe 'twas bred there. I shal trouble you with but one instance more (in stead of as many in the Bullion as he hath written Volumes, or in the coyn al∣most as there be leaves in those volumes) & that is out of a Book of his, entitled, ROMES MASTER-PIECE. And because the reputation of those, who ought to be most pretious to us, is so much concern'd in it, I will give it you a little at large. The subject of that Book is some Letters sent by Sir William Boswell's care to the Arcbb: of Canterb: wherein he tels him of a deep Plot to bring in Popery into this Kingdom, and mentions the principall Agitators of it; Senior Con the Popes Legate, and divers others, what waies they went to bring about their de∣signe, and as matters grew on, what resolutions they had taken up. And in brief he that shal read the Letters with his own eyes, and not through Master Pryn's spectacles, and, laying aside his Comment, look impartially on the Text, will clearly discern these two speciall truths there, 1. That the Papists were fully satisfied that there was no working upon the King to gain His Consent, and there∣fore resolv'd that He should be taken out of the way, presuming that they might then, through the better af∣fections of the Queen, and the tender age of the young Prince, with more ease compasse their purpose. 2. That the Arch-bishop was to be dealt with in the same manner, being so obstinate in his way, that Senior Con could ne∣ver in all his time get liberty of any accesse to him, or once to enter any Discoursse with him, (which particular is most notoriously known to be true by all that knew either the Court or Lambeth at that time.) These two
things I say (of the Kings impregnable resolution to keep to the Protestant Religion, and my Lord of Canterbury's obstinacy in the same so far as never to admit any Dis∣course with Con) being every where visible in those Let∣ters, and the foundation on which the bloudy designes concerning them were built. Yet hath it been in Ma∣ster Pryn's power by one slight of hand to conclude the direct contrary to both these in the midst of the whole story that affirms them. For being to translate these words of one Letter [Subolfecit interim Cunaeus ab Domi∣no Archiepiscopo regi sidelissimo totum animum regium esse pendulum, &c.] he makes a comma after sidelissimo, and then renders them after this manner. In the mean time Cunaeus (i.e.Con) smelling from the Arch bishop most trusty to the King, that the Kings mind was wholly pendulous (or doubtfull) &c. and in the Margine inserts his conclusion from thence, that the Arch-bishop and he had some fami∣liarity and acquaintance at first, and leaves the Reader to learn from his Translation, that the Kings mind was wavering and pendulous, and (as he puts in) [doubtfully] that is sure in matters of Religion. Whereas the most clear undoubted rendring of the words is only this, that Con discern'd that the Kings mind depended wholly upon the Arch-bishop, which be it true or false (all that is said is, that Con's sagacity had found it out) hath nothing in the earth to either of those senses. This particular you may think hath little to do with the busmesse we have now in hand about the Oxford priviledges, and I con∣fesse it hath not, but yet very much to that which I have undertaken to prove, that the reputation of his writings hath been such, that it might excuse any man from the pains of answering him; For certainly had it not been
resolved (ever since Master Noy promised to give John Taylor's Works to bear Master Pryn's company in Lin∣colns Inne Library) that his Books went for nothing, his proofs for no arguments, his affirmations for no testi∣monies, such a forgery as this would never have been permitted thus long to have gone undiscovered. This I confesse to be none of my own observing (for truly I have not had so many howrs to spare, as to play any of them away upon Master Pryn's works, till this last of his came out, wherein I was obliged to think my self con∣cern'd) but have heard it so punctually mention'd by a worthy Doctor in this town, who did observe it, that I am confident it will be found to be a true relation, and that my memory hath not fail'd in this account of it: I love not longer to insist on things that are personall to any man, and therefore shall adde no more, as to this first particular, nor indeed should I have said so much, but that it was the prime plain reason, which I discern'd really to move men to think it unfit to answer this Book, meerly because it was Master Pryn's; whom I think no man among us ever vouchsafed to answer since the be∣ginning of his writing against this Church or Monarchy, but only Mr. Widowes a man by the strangenesse of his parts fitted as 'twere on purpose to duell with him (as Donquizote with the wind-mil which no man else was Knight errant enough to encounter) about the bowing at the Name of JESUS. Ut non Compositi molius cum Bi∣tho Bacchius. And now Sir that I may not seem to have design'd a∣ny thing but obedience to your commands, or to desire in you, or any other, any thing but strict ordinary ju∣stice,
whilst you passe your judgment in this matter, I have thrown down all I had to say as rudely and sloven∣ly as I could, and by that means deliver'd my self from the danger of incurring you displeasure again for having consider'd style or language in my last Letter, which yet had no other ayme then to approve my self, Sir, Your obedient servant, Basilius Philomusus. Oxon. Jan. 20. The End.
