y46 r228705 13798680 101893
A Copy of a PAPER Written by the Late Dutchess of York, &c. IT is so reasonable to expect, that a Person always bred up in the Ch of England, and as well instructed in the Doctrine of it, (as the best Divines, and her Capacity could make her) should be lyable to many censures, for leaving That, and making her self a Member of the Rom. Cath. Ch. to which, I confess, I was one of the greatest Enemies it ever had; That I rather choose to satisfy my Friends by reading this Paper, than to have the trouble to answer all the Questions that may daily be ask'd me: And first, I do protest in the presence of Almighty God, that no Person, Man, or Woman, directly, nor indirectly, ever said any thing to me since I came into England, or us'd the least endeavour to make me change my Religion; It is a Blessing I wholly owe to Almighty God, and I hope the hearing of a Prayer I daily made him, ever since I was in France and Flanders; Where seeing much of the Devotion of the Catholicks, (tho' I had very little my self.) I made it my continual Request to Almighty God, That if I were not, I might before I dy'd, be in the true Religion: I did not in the least doubt, but that I was so, and never had any Scruple till Nov. last, when reading a Book cal∣led the History of the Reformation, by Dr. Heylin, which I had heard very much com∣mended, and have been told, if ever I had any doubt of my Religion, that would settle me: Instead of which, I found it the description of the horridest Sacriledges in the World; and could find no reason why we left the Church, but for three the most abominable ones, that were ever heard of among Christians. First, Henry VIII. renounces the Popes Authority, because he would not give him leave to part with his Wife, and marry another in her life-time. Secondly, Edward VI. was a Child, and govern'd by his Uncle, who made his Estate out of Church-Lands. And then Queen E. who be∣ing no Lawful Heiress to the Crown, could have no way to keep it, but by re∣nouncing a Church that could never suffer so unlawful a thing to be done by one of her Children. I confess, I cannot think the Holy Ghost could ever be in such Coun∣cels; And it is very strange, that, if the Bishops had no Design, but (as they ay) the restoring us to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, they could never think upon't, till Henry VIII. made the breach upon so unlawful a Pretence. These Scruples being rais'd, I began to consider of the difference between the Catholicks and Ʋs; and examin'd them as well as I could by Holy Scripture, which, tho' I do not pretend to be able to understand, yet there are some things I found so easy, that I cannot but wonder, I had been so long without finding them out: As the Real Pre∣sence in the Blessed Sacrament, the Infallibility of the Church, Confession, and Praying
for the Dead.Sheldon A. B. of Cant. After this, I spoke severally to two of the best Bishops we have in Eng∣land, who both told me there were many things in the Romish Church which (it were very much to be wish'd) we had kept; As Confession, which was, no doubt, com∣manded by God:Blanford, B. of Worcester. B. of W▪ That Praying for the Dead, was one of the Antient things in Christi∣anity: That for their parts, They did it daily, tho they would not own it: And af∣terwards, pressing one of them very much upon the other points, he told me, That if he had been bred a Catholick, he would not change his Religion; But that being of another Church, (wherein, he was sure, were all things necessary to Salvation,) he thohght it very ill, to give that scandal, as to leave that Church wherein he receiv'd his Baptism. All these discourses did but add more to the desire I had to be a Catholick, and gave me the most terrible Agonies in the World within my self; for all this, fearing to be rash in a matter of that weight, I did all I could to satisfy my self, made it my daily Prayer to God, to settle me in the Right; and so went on Christmas-day to Receive in the Kings-Chappel: After which, I was more troubled than ever, and could never be at quiet, till I had told my design to a Catholick, who brought a Priest to me, and that was the first I ever did converse with, upon my word. The more I spoke to him, the more I was confirm'd in my design; And, as it is impossible for me to doubt the words of our Blessed Saviour, who says, the Holy Sacrament is his Body and Blood; so cannot believe, that He, who is the Author of all Truth, and has promis'd to be with his Church to the end of the World, would permit them to give that Holy Mystery to the Laity but in one kind, if it were not lawful so to do. I am not able, or, if I were, would enter into Disputes with any Body; I only in short, say this for the changing of my Religion, which I take God to witness I would never have done, if I had thought it possible to save my Soul otherwise. I think I need not say, it is any Interest in this World leads me to it: It will be plain enough to every body, that I must lose all the Friends and Credit I have here, by it; and have very well weighed, which I could best part with, my share in this World, or the next: I thank God I found no difficulty in the choice. My only Prayer is That the  Catholicks f this Nation, may not suffer for my being of the Religion, That God  give  them, and then s  any Aictio in this World, so I may enjoy a blessed Eternity hereafter. St. James's. Aug. the 20th. 1670.
