10430 S111316 99846683 11669
An Epistell exhortatorye, admonishing an warning all faithful Christiās to beware of the false fained God of the aulter, and on∣ly to trust in the onelye lyuing God. ¶Ihon. iiii.¶ O Ye worship ye wot not what we knowe what we worship. THat same spirit (de¦re bretherē) which moued S. Paul to reproue the Cyte∣zens of Athens for theyr ydolatrye,Act. xvii. Act. 17. c. hath also moued vs to warn you by the Scriptures of the same of∣fence specially in worshippyng that vnknowen God on ye aul∣ter, which thing you doo igno∣rauntlye, and therfore we cer∣tifye
ād assure you by this pre∣sente.iii. Ro. 8. d i. par. vi. c Eay. 6. a Act. xii. f He. br. ix. c That God which made ye worlde, and all that therin is, dwelleth not in temples made with handes: neither is he day∣ly offred vppon your coniured aulters.Hebr. 9. c For than shulde he of∣te haue suffred syns the world begā.Hebr. 9. e But that did he ones for all, whā he offred vp him selfe. and with that onelye sacrifyce hath he made parfet for euer al thē yt are sanctifyed.Hebr vii d Hebr 10 e But nowe to our purpose, seing, Christ is not in your Churches made wt handes (as these forsaid scriptu¦res will witnes vnto you) how can you auoyde ydolatry in ge¦uīg that worship to an earthly thing, which is onely due vnto god? is not bread ā erthli thīg? & hath not the hādes of sinners made and fashioned it for your purpose? why doo you thā wor¦shyp it? And yf you say it is no
substaunce of bread. But the lykenes therof after ye consecra¦tyon (which is a blasphemouse¦lye) what wynne you by that? For God said you shal not wor¦ship the lykenes of any thing in heuen or earth.Exo 10 a Deut. v a But here par∣auenture some wilier then his fellowes, wyll say, we neyther worship the substaūce of bread nor ye likenes of breade, but we worshyp Chryst conteyned in ye bread. To answere this vipers whelp, we say yt the naturall bo¦dy of Chryst is neyther contey∣ned in the breade, in the church nor in ye hole earth as we haue proued before, neyther willeth he to be worshyped ī bread nor wine, but in spyrite ād treuth,Ihon iiii c Neyther can ye worship Christ wher he is not, but wher he is, that is in Heauen. For that sa∣me naturall body which Christ toke of the virgin mary, which
suffred death, which rose agaī which ascended into heauē, sit∣teth nowe on the ryght hande of his father, & if you wyll not beleue vs herin, searche these scriptures following. Psal x. c. xiiii. b Eccle. v. a. Iob. xv. d Esay. lxiiii. a lxvi a. Iohn. ii. c. vii. e. viii. c. xl. xiii. d. xiii. a. xvi. xvii. v x. d. 1 Col iiii. d. Heb. . a. ix. c. x. c. Mat. xiii. x. c. xv. b. Mat. xii. c. xxvi. f. 2. ii. xxiii. c. i. Tim ii. a. v c. Act . b. Phil. iii. d. Col. iii. a. Rom. viii. Ephe. i. d. iii. b. Might not these if you were men and not beastes, persuade you to the treuth & cause your cōscious to confesse the abhomi¦nable ydolatry with earnest re¦pentaunce for the same: Oh ye foles and slowe of hart to bele∣ue the scripturs.Luc 24 c If we say the treuth why do you not beleue vs?Ihon viii Oh ye children of the deuel wyl you neuer cease to peruert the straight wayes of the lord?Act  b Wyll you styll saye yt you haue Chryst,Ihon 1 a and he sayth you haue me not? Wyll you styll saye yt
Chryst is dayly offred amonge you,Hebr vii d and Saint Paule saith he was offred but ones for all? wyll you styll saye he is in the boxe and the holyghost saythe he is in heauen? Wyll you styll worship ye dead workes of your handes in steade of the lyuynge God? Oh ye foolyshe Sama∣ritanes wyll you styll worship ye wot not what, & seke Chryst ye wot not wher? did not christ himselfe reproue your contrey woman for this vayne worship¦ping, saying:Ihon iiii a Neyther on this mountayne nor yet at Ierusa∣lem the true worshippers wor¦ship my father, for the houre is come and now is, that the true worshippers shal worship only in spirite and veritie? And ther¦fore saith Paule.ama  a ii Tit a I thank God whome I worship and serue in my spirite & in a pure consciēce Loo, S. Paule saith not that
he worshypped God in breade, wyne, or in any other creature but in spyryte and treuthe, as his master had taught him be∣fore. Now wyll we shewe you the effect ād frute of your wise worshypping and so conclude. The effect is vayne. The frute synne and dampnatyon: vayne is the effecte. Because it is but onelye the vayne doctryne and tradicyon of men, which thyng Chryste him selfe confyrmeth. saing: In vayne do ye worship me teaching the doctrines and tradycyons of men.Math 15 a The frute that followeth ye doing is sīne, as thus.J 10 b S. Paul proueth the onely woorde of God to be the ground of faith. But this false worshypping is not grounded n the word of God. Ergo it cā¦not be don of faith wherfor we conclude with Paule that it is sīne,Rom 14 for whatsoev is not done
of faith is sinne. And without faith it is impossible to please God. Alas saith Esay,Hebr ii Esay 46 that mē shuld crye vnto hym which gy∣ueth none answere,Sapi 13. d or pray for lyfe vnto a dead thing. Is not your God a dead thīg? or tel vs what answere giueth he whan you crie vnto him? doth not the owls & swalowes, cats, rats & mise, flie & ronne ouer & about your God, lyke as they doo wt other ydolles?Baen vi c By thys might you know saith Ieremy yt it is no God. Yea, do not rats & mi∣se deuour & eate your God? & ti¦me cōsum & putrify your God? But what you do with hī after, fewe men may knowe. Shall ye naturall body of Chryst which was ye only price of our redēp∣tion be eaten of rats or myse? Or may tyme consume ye highe prest which remaineth for euer Oh ye priests of Bell,Hebre  be ones
ashamed of your liēg, for truly if Daniel may ones speke frely wt ye king, he will bewray your false iuggling. That it may be so & yt shortly we praye. Let no man iudge vs yt we any thynge herin derogate ye holy supper of Christ, for that we most highly esteme as the perfyght memo∣ryall of oure redemptyon and moost necessary food of our sou¦les.Cor xii 10 Eating and drinking therī ye very body & bloude of Chryst euē as our fathers did. But we only warne & reache you yt ther shuld be no strange God amōg you.Esa. xiiii c And that you shuld turne from these vayne thīgs vnto ye liuing God.Act 14. c To whome alone be all honour and glory. Amē. Sent from verbo dei whose aucthour is in cela Flee from worshipping of ydolles i. Cor. x. Beleue the Scriptures. Marc. i.v. And require no more then is commaūded you. Luc. iii c
