E592 12141969 54854
THE SOLE PATH TO A SOUND PEACE. Recommended to the Honour∣able House of Commons in a Sermon at their publike Fast. Feb. 22. By John Ellis, Jun: Preacher of the Word at Cambridge. I am the way, Joh. 14. In me ye might have Peace. Chap. 16. Nihil Grande est, pacem voce pretendere & opere destru∣ere: Aliud verbis sonare concordiam, aliud re exigere servitutem: volumus & nos pacem; & non solum volu∣mus sed rogamus, sed Christi pacem veram, pacem in qua non sit bellum involutum, pacem que non ut adversarios subjiciat, sed ut amicos jungat. Hieron: ad Theoph: adv: Joan: Hierosol: Quid dominationem pacem vocamus, & non reddimus unicui∣que rei vocabulum suum? Idem ibid. London, Printed by John Raworth, for George Latham, and John Rothwell, and are to be sold at their Shops in Pauls Church-yard. 1643.
Die Mercurii. 22 Febr. 1642. IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That Master Rows shall return thanks to Master Ellis, for the great pains he took in the Sermon he preached at the in∣treaty of this House at St Margarets in the City of Westminster (being the day of publike humi∣liation;) And is likewise to desire him to Print and publish his Sermon; And it is further Or∣dered, That no man shall presume to Print his Sermon, but whom he shall authorize under his hand writing. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. I permit George Latham, and John Rothwell to Print my Sermon. John Ellis, Jun.
To the Honourable House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT. WHat I had to say unto you, I expressed my self at large, in that which I now present you, with some fillings, which the time then per∣mitted not to tender: I shall now onely adde a word of excuse, and caution. Excuse I must, Because all that speak to you do so; my self much rather; Because hearing of this service, but some ten dayes before the Fast, in the midst of sorrow for the losse of an onely parent; I could not with that freedom of spirit, as I should, attend this businesse. But your pietie hath I hope herein supplyed my deficiency, in receiving the matter with all readinesse of minde; leaving the manner of handling to those weak stomacks that cannot savour wholesome food, without a great deal of curiosity in the dressing, Care, and Cleanlynesse, and Concoction we commend: The work of the Lord is not to be done negligently; Too much diligence we de∣cline; for that argues suspition, either of the food, or of the guest. We would have your faith and godly affection, stand, not in the wisedom of words, but in the power of God. I must also caution, Touching those words in the entrance of my discourse, [In a setled Church, the Ministry is to be puclikely admitted to that imployment.] I would not have it understood as an approbation either of any unlawfull office, or undue ordination in any particular Church; but in gene∣rall of all setled Churches. And that first in respect of order, That every man be not at his own disposing, but abide in that calling, whereunto God by the ordinance of man shall designe im. 2. Of advantage to his Ministry; that he may have
more boldnesse with them, who have acknowledged him as ap∣pointed to that imployment. Which call (as I conceive) lies chiefly in these particulars. 1. The inward ability, and upright intention of the heart, to do Christ service in that imployment. 2. In the publike approbation of such abilities after tryall had, by the Church, both Ministry and people of God, that are indeed able to discern. 3. A speciall call by some particular people to be their officer in that kinde (or an after approbation from them) or else a more generall commission from the Church, to a more universall imployment that way; such as was the sending of Paul and Barnabas, by the Church of Antioch Act. 13.. All which is to be understood especially of the administration of the Sacraments and discipline: For, as for preaching, it is a more common work; which yet no man is to do to the scandall of the Church wherein he lives, nor ordinarily without calling there∣unto, if it be done in a publike way. Which calling (as other Church affairs,) that we may have more agreeable to prima∣tive purity; we implore your assistance; as you can not effectually obtain the vigour of yours, without our service. Magistracy and Ministry, though they be not immediate re∣latives, yet do se mutuo ponere & tollere. So, as you are Gods hands to us; shall we labour to be his mouth to you, and for youIsai. 45.17.. To you; that no Councell devised against you, shall stand, so long as you make the advancing of This man, the Lord Christ, your aym: No weapon framed against you shall prosper Isai. 9.6.. And for you; That having such promises, you faint not, but proceed to the finishing of the work with power: and be like your Master, the great and wonderfull Councellor and Prince of peace Isai. 9.6., who when he begins, does use also to make an end Isai. 66.9.: That you may not be weary of weldoing, for in due time you shall reap if you faint not Gal. 6.9.. So prayes Your meanest servant In the Lords work. John Ellis, Junior.
The sole path to a sound Peace. MICAH 5. 5. This man shall bee peace: when the Assyrian shall come into our land, and when hee shall tread in our Palaces, then shall we raise up against him seven sheepheards and eight principall men. THat God might honour his Creature with a kinde of partnership in his greatest worke Introduction to 2 cor. 6.1. and that hee might hide pride from man, Iob. 33.17.23. by making him stoope to be taught by man like himselfe; and that every man might attend upon that imploy∣ment wherein the great Master hath set∣led him, 1 cor. 7.20. though all the servants in Gods house, are of themselves luc. 12.57. to take notice of the Masters will to doe it, yea, and also to admonish, instruct and comfort one ano∣ther from his works & word, 1 Thes. 5.11.14. yet some he hath set as officers to this onely purpose, Bph. 4.11.12;1 Tim. 4.15. Rom. 13. 6. and thats the Ministery; those who are (in a setled Church) publiquely admitted to this imployment, 1 Tim. 5.22. cap. 4.14. and therefore may speake, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Tit. 2.15. Now this entrance is not impertinent, because wee must first assert our calling if questioned, as now some do, before deliverie of our message, the Embassadour must first shew his letters of Credence, before his audience, Paul being to write to the Ro∣mans, in the very first words propo∣ses his vocation Rom. 1.1. Now our whole imployment is, as faithfull and wise stew∣ards to give to every one in Gods houshould his due portion in
due season, luc, 12.42. or rightly to divide the word of truth, 2 Tim. 2.15. that is to observe under what condition of providence those lye with whom they are to deale, and then to apply such portions of the word as suits with that estate, and being  Ezk. 13 ic∣ium. as it is the whole duty of the people of God, to attend to, apply and practise such parts of the word as their present estate whereunto providence hath brought them cals for, Iam. 5 13.14. because the word conteynes the whole Councell of God concerning us 2 Tim, 3 15. and the workes of providence are the finger of God pointing to that portion wee have need of now. This is a time of Iacobs troubles wherein hee knowes not what to doe, but his eyes are towards God, and a word from him, saying this is the way walke in it, will be welcome now, and it is a time of Rachels weeping for her Children, and some oyle to this wound of Spirit would bee suppling now;The Text And it is a time of Ionahs unfeared perils, and a voice of rowsing would bee usefull here, to save a drow∣ning, Now all these the Prophet Micah will helpe us to in the Text now read, which must be first opened to our understandings, and then from thence somewhat observed for our use and practice. First, Wee shall understand it in some measure if wee consider first the coherence,opened which will be playner if wee reflect upon, First, from 1 the time of this Prophesy. the time when and the persons to whome this pro∣phesie was spoken, that was in the dayes of Iotham, Ahaz and Hezechiah Kings of Iudah, the history of whom you have, 2 Kings. cap. 16.17 18.19. and 2 Chron. cap 27 28.29.30.31.32. Secondly, a occasion the occasion of the Prophesie, and that was the provoking sins, and the pressing calamities, viz. The Assyrian invasion, and the Babilonian Captivity, inevitably hanging over the head of that people, the former where∣of came to passe in the fourth and fourteenth yeare of He¦zekiah, a 2 King. 18.9.13. cap. 24 10. the latter in the time of Iohoiachin Kings of Iudah,
Thirdly, the scope of the Prophet which is 1 generall to all, (viz) the awaking of them from security in sinning to a seriousnesse in repenting. 2 special, 1 in respect of the wicked their conviction, 3 scope that being warned they might be without excuse. 2 in regard of those that belong to God, their humiliation, conversion, consolation and prepara∣tion for the evill day certainly comming upon them. Fourthly, 4 Arguments 1 humbling from 1 their sinne in the 1 variety of it. the arguments he useth for the attayning this end, which are of two sorts. I such as serve for convicti∣on and humiliation, and they are taken, from I their sinne, by opening I the variety of it. I against Gods corruption of his worship by Idolatry, cap. 17. and the contempt of his word. cap. 2.6. Secondly, against men by cruelty and oppression, cap 2. 2. treachery and dissembling. cap. 6.12. Thirdly, against themselves, intemperance, cap. 2.11. and pride, cap. 2. . and there is added by Hosea, who Prophe∣fied in the same time and to the same people, divers other sinners. Secondly, the degree, 2 degree. their Idolatry so grosse, that it was in a spiritual as whoredome, yea professed Harlotry in a bodily way, cap. 1.7. their oppression so horrid, that it was like plucking of the skin, tearing the flesh and breaking the bones, cap. 3.2. their intemperance so sottish, that they thought the Prophets that did not countenance it unfit for that imployment as, cap. 2. 11. is intimated their deceit, so abhominable that no relation naturall or civill could be a barre unto it, cap 7.5. Thirdly, the universality and spreading of it, I Over the civill state, the Princes hated the good & love the evill, 3 universall cap. 3.1. the rest of the people the best of them a Briar and the most upright a Thorne. cap. 7 4. Secondly over the Ecclesiasticall, covetousnesse of the Priests and Prophets as the end, flat∣tery and cruelty as the meanes. cap 3.3.5. Fourthly, 4 wilfull the willulnesle of their sinne, they transgressed not in passion but with deliberation. They imaginea ms∣these upon their beds. cap. 2.1.
Fifth, 5 Incorr rigible. lastly, the incorrigiblenesse of their sinne and security in it, the Heads judge for reward, and the Priests taught for hire, and yet say, Is not the Lord amongst us, none evill can come upon us. Cap. 3.11. And therefore when reproved for these things by the Prophets, they said, Prophesie not to them that prophesied. Cap. 2.6. A second sort or humbling Arguments are taken from the judgements determined upon their sinnes, 2 Arguments humbling from the judgements. which also may be proportioned to them. 1 Many. First, they were Various, warre having in the wombe of it all other calamities. Secondly, 2 Gievous. Grievous, Zion shall be ploughed as a field, Ieru∣salem shall become heapes and the Mountaine of the house as the high places of the Forrest, 3 Vniversall. Cap. 3. 12. Thirdly, Vniver∣sall The incurable mound had not onely laid the land waste, Cap. 7. 13. but was come up unto Iudah even to the ge of Ierusalem, 4 Deliberate. Cap. 1.9. Fourthly, it was deliberate judge∣ment pronounced long before the execution. 5 Determined. Fifthly, and lastly, an inexorable judgement, called therefore a Decree, Cap. 7.11. Cap. 3.4. Secondly, 2 Consolatory where. 1 A caution pre∣mised. for the comforting of Gods people, the Pro∣phet doth First intimate a caution, viz. that he would not be understood as if they were to expect a totall avoidance of the affliction, for the comming of it was a determined, thing: cap. 1.3.4. C. 7.13. that which they were to expect, was only comfort and incouragement against it; and that he first doth by proposing many promises of supportation in, 2 Arguments of comfort pro∣pounded, by pro∣mises. 1 Secondary. 1 Fundamentall in christ, who is de∣liverance from, and glorious times after the affliction of those dayes, Cap. 4. throughout. Secondly, By laying, downe the ground and giving a pledge of those promises in that fundamentall one touching the Messiah, Cap. 5. 2. who was both the meanes and the earnest of consolation in, and deliverance from all their adversaries and adversi∣ties, for that seed of the woman was one day utterly to breaks the Serpents head Cen. 3.15. and in the meane time the Serpent should never be able to doe more then bruise his hlps, accor∣ding to that all the promises of God are in him yea and in him
Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20 That is, sealed and delivered to the Church, hence the Psalmist being to improve the promises of deli∣verance, laies that as the corner stone, Thou hast made a Covenant with thy chosen, thou hast sworne unto 'David thy servant, Psal. 89.3. That is, unto Christ whose Type David was, as Peter expounds it, Acts 2. 30. Now that our Prophet might the more convictively set this encouragement on; First, he describes him particu∣larly, Described from, His place of birth. From his place, Thou Bethlelem Iudah art not the least among the thousands of Iudah, for out of thee shall come, &c. Cap. 5.2. Person.From his person; 'Tis he whose goings out were from everlasting, either in respect of his eternall generation, or in regard 'tis he that hath been al∣wayes proposed to the Church as the anchor of its hope, Cap. 2.3. Office.. From, his office, that he should be the Ruler and Shepheard of his people, Ver. 2. 4. Time of ap∣pearing.. From the time when he should be more fully manifested, and that was when she that travelled should bring forth, Ver. 3. That is either the time of the comming in of the Assyrian, or else the Babilonish captivity, and that following time till Christ, which should be so grievous, as if men were in travell according to that, Cap. 4.10. Thou shalt goe to Ba∣bylon, and there thou shalt be delivered: and that of another Prophet Ier. 306. Doth a man travelle with childe, that I see every man with his hands on his loynes: or else as others O siander in . think, 'tis to be understood of Christs Nativity of the Vir∣gin. Performances for the Church.. He describes him from his performances and suc∣cesse, he shall stand and feed or rule (for Rulers should be Feeders) in the strength of the Lord, and shall be great unto the ends of the earth. Secondly, he applies this to the secu∣rity of the Church in the generall, Ver. 4. They shall abide, that is, be protected by him in all places and occasions. 1 In Generall. a Applyed to the comfort of the Church in the present straight mentioned in the text whereof the Comfort thence applyed to the Church. To the particular judgements of the captivity na∣med before, and the comming in of the Assyrian which he names in the Text, which proposes him especially as a consolation against that enemy, as being then their most
potent Adversary, and indeed at that time master of the Babylonian, as appeares 2 Kings 17 24. The King of As∣syria brought men from Babell and placed them in the Cities of Israel; and besides, this calamity of the Assyrians hap∣pened before that of the Captivity; and we may adde, that the Babylonian is here included under the Assyrian as is intimated, Ver 6. They shall waste the land of Assyria and of Nimrod, which was Babylon, Ge. 10. 10. As also be∣cause they were one nation originally, Gn. 10. 10. 11. but devided after the death of Sardanapalus. The text hath the same sence though diverse pointings, severall readings and some variety of interpretation. Divers point∣ings. Diverse pointings, some Munster Trem. Vatbl ugat. Calvin. making the Colon at peace, thus, this man shall be peace: when the Assyrian, &c. because Athnach the Hebrew accent is a note of a more full pause as Gramarians observe; Latter English, Vatabl. in notis beviorh. Cmalio. others put the fuller stop further into the sentence thus, This man shall be peace, when the Assyrians shall come into ourland: and so others Asontanus. translatio corectior cum ntis brevio∣rib Vatable and the ancient English Which cleeres and varies the senso. reade it in a continued sentence to the end of the verse only distinguished by Comma's. And this Criticisme touching the distinction is not idle, 1 because nothing in scripture is so 2, because it cleares not varies some what the sence, for in the first pointing it is not so cleare when Christ should bee peace, and so not so comfortable as the other, which intimates that Christ should be peace even then when that so feared judgement should be upon them and it may also hint the referring of the former part to Hezekias time, the rest to those that fol∣low the Captivity. And the last pointing intimates that though there may be some thing in the distinguishing, yet for the scope of it, it is the same. Diven readings, divers readings, some rendring the particle this MI by the Adverbe: [he] shall be peace Calvin in loc. Hic eru pex. but they expound it by hee, i.e. Christ, others Septuag. by [thu] referring it to peace, thus thus shall be the peac, i.e. state of the Church shall be under Christ flourishing with reference to Christ,
othersThe last En∣glish by comparing this verse with the next, read it, This man shall peace, more plainly and agreeable to the scope, 2 the word that wee translate Shepheards, is ren∣dred by the Chaldee Kings; pf 78. ult because their office is to feed, as well as govern, hence David d Item ibid. fed the people with all his might, and rul'd them prudently with his power. And Cyrus is called Gods Sheepheard by the Prophet Esay 3. lastly, the word which wee expound principall men, Symmachus  exprsseth by Christs or anoynteds of men, because publike offices must have publike and solemne or∣dinations to them, the ceremony whereof was anciently anoynting, which also the root from  signifies from whence the word comes, Aquila Septuay. , N, 01, us u∣num. Caliin locthus (g) grave and serious men, for such onely are fit for workes of reformation, others (h) the biteings of men, because those that Christ and the Church shall choose for their Instruments of delivery, shall bite ana devour the adversaries, as vers. 8. the remnant of Iaacob shall bee as a Lion among the flocke of sheepe, interpretations vari∣ety of interpretations, some referre the words at least the former part of them, as they stand in our ordinary transla∣tion, to the comming in of the Assyrian in Hezechias time, & this is the first literall and immediate sence of the words as appeareth by the history, King. 18. whence it is evident that when the Assyrian came they were then and at no other time delivered from him, and Christ shadowed out by the legall worship, Col. 2.17. (which Hezekiah had newly 2 chon. 32.1. re∣stored) became peace unto them; others Calvin. referre the text to the deliverance from the captivity, and so by Shepheards and Pastors understand the Medes and Per∣sians, and specially Cyrus who delivered Iudah from capti∣vity and is called expresly Gods Shepheards as wee heard even now, and anoynted Esa 45.1 as also to the time of Hester munster in loc 5 cav. to the deliverance by Mordecay, and to the time of Anti∣ochus, to that by the Macchabees, vartablus others c lvin referie it to the time of Christs incarnation, and understand by the Assyrians, as the then most known enemy persynecdochen Speciei. the Romans,
and by the Shepheards and principall men, the Apostles and Evangelists, by the sword that of the Spirit the word of God  among i e greeks the sar elon. c times that . Lastly, f Calviain loc it is referred (a) not onely to the deliverance from the captivity and the following time till Christ, but also to the times under the Gospell, when the Church shall bee freed from all slavery, and rendred sui juris to a state of perfect freedome so that it shall have power to elect & ap∣point its own officers in Church & State, Change not the Identity of(saith my author) Wch diversity being but in some smaller particulars, detract nothing from the main purport of the words, which in all the former variety, hold forth for the, The summe of the Text; which Summe of them. A Cordiall to the Church against a fit of shaking, which it should not prevent, but strengthen nature under its abate, shorten and in time remove silicet, that Christ When the most formidable enemy should bee upon them, divides it selfe into. would comfort them, release them, and ruine their adversaries, which generall breakes it selfe into these three parts. 1 proposed. 3 partes. First, a supposition of the Churches future calamity, The Assyrian shall come into our Land. 2 The principall meanes of the Churches remedy. This man shall bee peace. 3 The instruments or manner of its deliverance; Wet will raise up against him seven Shepheards and eight principall men. And now should follow, explained the explication or the seve rals in each of these, but this will conveniently bee added to every part in their order, which shall bee considered, 1 severally, 2 joyntly, 1 severally, and so the first will admi∣nister an argument of humiliation (fitfor the time) unto the hardned; the Observations ghered  of consolation to the humbled, the consdered  severally from whence. of direction to the raised and resolved minde to do God ser∣vice, 1 of humiliation in this. Observation, That where Any, whether man or nation have beene scandalous and uncorrigible in sinning, the Lorduseth to bee towards such remarkable and inexorable in afflicting, Illustrated from  the Text in re∣gard of  severity of the judgement evi∣denced from. This the Text clearely holds forth, that this people were grosse in sinne and refractory against amendment, was shewed before in opening the Coherence, now that God
was severe & peremptory in correcting, besides what was said above, the Text it selfe intimates; First seuere, which appeares from the nature of the evill, namely, warr which hath the collection for variety, and the spirit and bitternesse for degree of all evill, ushered in by terrours, insomuch that as the Oratour sayes even by the very noise of a war, the profit of a whole yeares revenue is lost, whilst tillage is deserted, trading given over, and habitations forsaken, accompanied with silence of lawes, and administation of Justice, as at this day among our selves; so that impiety, in∣jury, and vice runne headlong without bridle, besides the violence, oppressions, bloodshed vastation, of a fruitfull soile as the Garaen of Eden before it, yet behinde it a desolate wilderness as wee see at this day in Germany, Ireland, and some shadow of it among our seives. 1 Thons ue of the evill. Prolege Mana Non, lum aaen∣us als sed etam met, aafer cltem, nam ec elnguun∣tur, agcul ura aeeru, e ao∣rnavga con∣u, ct. Followed with scarc, dearth and famine, with infections diseases, as plague and pestilence, and evill beasts, where such are, and therefore in scripture often put together, the sword, the famine and the pestilence, ler 15.1. c. 42.1. Eek. 14.11, 15 17.19. in a word so full of calamity, especially if in the bowels of a Kingdome as this was, that David, a souldier himselfe, chose rather a fierce plague or a long famine, than a short warre. 2. Sam. 24.14. From the instrument or enemy the Assyrian and Chaldean, for of both hee speakes, as was shewed before; from whom the affliction was like to bee more heavy, 1 because hee was I in himselfe I proud and insolent, as being 1 Master of the most ancient Em∣pire, and most From the person of  adversary as eeing  in himself.  proud. extended dominion in the world the suc∣cessor of Nmo a victorious Conquerourc comitis gen b. altes prtus ge∣ren uver. wheresoever hee came, and thence conceited his speciall favour with God, ()   null  Esa. 37.10.12. 10. and hereupon a boasting and scornfull Adversa∣ry, see him vaunting himselfe both against God and man.  Kings. 8 25. Let not the God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, be∣hold the Kings of Assyria have destroyed all Lands; that op∣posed them, Where are the Gods of Gozani &c. where are the kings of Hamath, Arpad? &c.  Gen. 10.10.11.
Thirdly, he was a cruell Adversary; cruelty alwayes ac∣companying pride, for the cruelty of the Assyrians, see the Prophet Hasea, who having in one place Hos. 9.3. prophesied of the captivity of Samaria and Israel by the Assyrians, saith in another, Cap. 13.16 I hat their infants should be dashed in pieces by them and their women with childe ripped up.  And for the cruelty of the Babylonians, the history of the capti∣vity relates the slaying of the Kings sonnes before his eyes, the slaughter of the Nobles and principall men, the burning of the house of God, and the Kings house, and of the Nobles, breaking downe the wall of Hierusalem, and carrying such multitudes into captivity, Ier. 52.10,11,13,14,24,25,27. Princes were hanged by the hands, the youths fainted in grinding, & the children fell under the wood, Lam. 5.12. nay they slew the young men with the sword even in the house of the Sanctuary, and had no compassion on young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age, 2 Chro. 36.17. and as the Babylonians and Assyrians were originally of the same nation, Geno. 11. so no doubt of the same spirit of cruelty and of pride. 3 An adversary that had in regard of his originall a seed of hatred against the people of God, 2 In relation to the Ghatch  an habaile nemy. an habit of enmity, for he was descended of Nimrod, and so of Cham, the ac∣cursed seed Gen. 10.11. and betwixt these an originall enmi∣ty. Gen. 3 15. 4 An adversary that had an actuall provocation from this people, 1. by Hzecias reformation of the worship of God against his will; for it seems he had a great influence into the Church too, as appears by Ahaz, upon his league with him, following of him in his superstition, 2 Kings 16. and this uses to provoke Idolaters exceedingly, that any should worship God in spirit and truth. Actually pro∣voked. By Hezekiahs rebelling against him, and that as himselfe confesseth, not without fault. 2 King 18.7.14 5 An Adversary whetted on by what he had gained al∣ready the ten Tribes 2 King. 17. and therefore the other two yet remaining, 3 Encouraged. that they should be left behinde was an eye-sore,
6 An Adversary ingaged to cruelty and violence by the end of his comming, which was to make an absolute con∣quest, and to make them of Tributaries and Subjects abso∣lute Slaves; for hee is not ashamed to tell them, that though they yeelded themselves, yet they were to expect to be transported into his Dominions, and others to be planted in their land, as he had done to the kingdome of Israel.  King 18.32. From he sub∣ject who were,  Gods people. [3] From the subject, or persons suffering, implyed in those words (our lan) for I they were the people of God, and what a calamity for those that were the Lords freemen to become slaves to those that were the vassals of Sathan? for Idolaters, what service they offer they do it to Devels, and not to God,  Cor. 10.20.2 Resced from him 2 They were the rescued people of God from this Adversary, when he car∣ried away the other ten Tribes,  Kings 17. and what indignity now to be overcome by him? Reformed. They were a reformed people of God. Industrious And an industrious people to secure the∣selves from this Adversary, 2 Cro. 30.11. Cap 32.4 and both these as it in∣creased the violence of the Adversary, so it augmented the calamity that they should lose their hope and the be∣nefit both of the one and the other. 4 Ingaged to cruelty. They were all the remnant of Gods people, Esay 37.4 and when Ioseph is not, and Simeon is not, then to proceed to take Benjami also, by whom shall Iacob arise or Abraham possesse the promise if Isaac in whom he received them must be offered up? From the de∣gree. From the degree of this affliction and its prevalency; the enemy should not come to, but into our lan, and not onely prevaile over the meanest, but should tread as Vi∣ctor in the stately Palaces, so indeed the story hath it, that he tooke all the fenced Cies of Iudah  King. 18.13. and came up to the wals of ersulem; yea, and as some Heron say, out of the Hebrew writers, took that too and left nothing to Hezekis but the Temple and the Tower of Davd. Incrorable judgement evi∣denced. Thing in the observation, is Gods peremptory determi∣nation of bringing the judgement, from whence he would not be removed, and this is intimated in the word shall,
which though often times is but conditionall, 1 From the Con∣tex. yet is here decretory, as appeares by the Third foregoing verse where 'tis said as of a concluded thing, that he should give them up till she that hath travelled, should bring forth: that is, till they should feele such calamitie as should afflict them, as a woman in travell, as Interpreters Cain, Tremel. Muster, and others. generally ex∣pound it, and Cap. 4.10. he sayes peremptorily, she should go to Babylon and be there delivered, and Cap. 7.13. having in the verse before promised a prosperous time of the Church; yet as expounding himselfe he sayes, notwith∣standing the land shall be desolate because of them that dwell therein, 2 From parallell places. as was mentioned before: and for this we have the consent of many Scriptures; 1 Threatning some whereof threaten so much: as after the making of the golden Calfe, though the Leves executed judgement to the slaughter of 3000 persons, Exod. 31.28. and the people suffered it, and Moses was so importunate with God that he had rather lose his soule then be denied; yea Verse 3. and the people mourned too when they heard God would not go up with them him∣selfe but send an Angell, Cap. 33 2, 34. yet God tels them in the day that he should visit, he would surely visit this sin upon them, Cap 32 34. and so in Deuteronomy Deut. 29.19,20, &c. upon their blessing them∣selves in their owne wayes against all the curses of the law, 'tis threatned that the Lord will not spare him; now sparing implyes intreating, but that the land should be made a de∣solation, carried into captivity; for that is pointed at, in that place as appeares by comparing the context, Det. 30.3. and we know what fasting and praying was before the capti∣vity, Ier 36 6. and before this comming in of the Assyrian, not onely by Micha 3.4 others: but Hezekiah himselfe and the godly then living, which yet God would not remove be∣fore he had made them know that he was the Lord, the Assyrian not being repelled till he had wasted and spoiled all the land, but two or three Cities at the most: and the captivity not returning till seventy years, not withstanding the lamentation of the Prophets, as Ieremy, and the many
fasts yearely celebrated Zach. 8.19 and not then neither with∣out much importunity, as appeares in Daniels fasting and humiliation Dan 9 not but that God would then have deli∣vered them, but that he might shew the difficulty of elu∣ctating from the punishing of so great a provocation, hee stirred up by his spirit such importunities in the hearts of his servants. And in the businesse of choosing a King, when God had before admonished them of it, and shewed them the manner of the King, and they would not be admoni∣shed; he tels them that therefore when they should cry out unto him because of their King he would not heare them, 1 Sam 8.18. according to that of the Proverbs, Cap. 1.24.28. because ye would have none to my counsell, and despised all my reproofe, they shall cry but I will not heare them, they shall seeke me early but shall not finde me, but they shall be filled with the fruit of their own devices; so also the Prophet Esay, Esay 22.12. of the voluptuous persons in the time of publike calamity. That this iniquity should not be purged untill they dyed, Shewing the execution of suh threats other places there are that shew execution done according to such threatning without all remorse or intreaty, no place being found for repentance, though carefully sued for with teares. Ely the High Priest being admonished of the disorder of his sonnes, and though admonishing them thereupon, yet not restiaining them, as the Lord had threatned, that the sinne of Eles house should not be purged with Offering nor with Sacrifice, in regard of the temporall punishment; so was it accordingly fulfilled in the death of his two sonnes, of himselfe, and the losse of the Priesthood for many yeares from his family: 1 Sam. 2.32. Cap. 3.13.14. Cap. 4 17.18.1 Kings 2.27. Gods dealing with David after the matter of Ʋriah, is well knowne, The childe must surely dye, the sword must never depart from his house, his owne sonne must rebell, and his owne wives defiled by him; horrid calamities, and yet we know that David deepely repented & greatly humbled himself before the Lord, 2 Sam. 12.10,11 12,13,14 25,26. Psal. 51. good Iosiah refusing the voice of the Lord by the mouth of the King of Egypt, is slaine in the battell, 2 Chro. 35.12. and Heze∣kiah
having received the peremptory denunciation of the Babylonish captivity, never so much as opened his mouth against it, Esay 39 8. Hence God forbids the Prophet Ieremy to pray for them, and tels them, though Moses and Samuel (persons that had great prevalency with him) should ne∣ver so earnestly intercede; yet his heart could not be to∣ward them,  7.16. Cap: 5.1. and in another, Ezek 14.14. he saith though Noah, Daiel, and lob, yet they should save neither sonne nor daughter, so this comming in of the Assyrian was peremp∣torily concluded notwithstanding Hezekiahs reformation, Esay 10.4. and that of the Chaldees notwithstanding Ioss, 2 King. 23 26. & the Babylonish captivity came, because the Lord would not pardon 2 King. 24 4. and the Corinthians 1 Cor. 11.30. were struck with mortality and no discovery of the sinne till many were ta∣ken away, or if it were discovered, yet the evill, though no doubt they repented, not removed, till by experience they had found that 'twas a fearefull thing to provoke the Lord to anger, and to fall into his hands for contumacy. I have been the larger in the proofe of this particular,  be∣cause there may be objected, Scripture. Diverse expresse places of Scripture, in the Prophet Ieremy the Lord saith, When I speake concerning a land to pluck up, and to destroy it, if that nation shall turne unto me with all their heart, I will repent me of the evill I thought to do,IC, 18.7,8. and Hosea gives the reason why they were delivered into the hand of the Assyrian, Because they refused to returne, thereby in∣timating that if they had returned, he should not, Hos. 11.5. o∣ther places might be added, also there may be, Reasons. obje∣cted reasons grounded in Scripture,  the generall tenor of it, which is to comfort those that are humbled with the hope yea assurance of seasonable deliverance.  The very ground the Scripture goes upon in comforting is this, that repentance (which if it be true includes an aversion, from sinne, and conversion to God in Christ, whose blood clean∣seth from all sinne, 1 Iohn 1.7. takes away the cause of affliction and therefore the effect must needs cease.
Answer by distin∣ction To the scripture wee answer by a double distinction, of Denuntition of judgement of denunciation of judgement where of some are purely mi∣natory and threatning upon supposition of non repentance, such as was that to the Ninevites, Ionah. 3. and these upon repen∣tance are alwayes diverted, others are Decretory or Deter∣mined absolutely foretelling what shal unavoidably follow, such was this of the comming in of the Assyrian, the Babilonish captivity, and divers others. And wee have ground for this distinction in that of Zephany, Zeph. 2.3. before the decree bring forth, seeke yee the Lord, and that of our Savi∣our Luc. 9.42 if thou hadst knowne in this thy day; and that of the Psalmist, P. 95 8. To day if you will heare his voice, harden not your hearts, intimating that if they should not so is that place interpreted concerning those that lived in the time of the preparation of the Arke, My Spirit shall not alwaies strive with mar, his dayes shall bee 120 years. I.e. hee shall have so long to repent. Gen. 6.2. If it bee inquired here when a threatning is minatory, and when peremptory the observation will hint an answer scilicet when the sinne hath beene very provoking, Q  and the impenitence very obstinate we may gather that the decree hath brought forth, and that the fierce anger of the Lord is comming on, as the Prophet spakes. Zech. 2, 2, Distinct,. of promises. A  distinction is of the promises of deliverance made upon repentance which are 1, 2. either for prevention of the evill that it shall not come, or remove all of it that it shall not continue for the first sort wee say they are to bee under∣stood with this proviso, that the repentance bee seasnable and speedy, and not delayed so long till the honour and Justice of God bee ingaged to a vindication, as hee speaks in the Prophet when he had reckoned some of their grosse impieties and their incorrigible impenitency, hee askes themselves the question, how shall I pardon thee for this, and shall I not visit for these things? Ir. 3.5.7.9. and for the lat∣ter sort we say that they also are to be understood in a double sence, literall and spirituall, in the former, they are
not alwayes fulfilled, in the latter they never faile, all things are not ours literally, and yet 'tis promis'd by the Apostles 1 Cor. 3.21. but as our Saviour speaks we have meat to eat which the world knowes not of Ih 4.32. & so a deliverance spiritual from the body of sinne, the power of darkenesse, the curse of the law, and the wrath of God, Rom. 7 24.5 but temporally wee may even for one sinne bee kept from entring into Canaan, Col. 1.13. and with David never have our Gal. 3.13. Th. 1.10. house without a judge∣ment. That the scripture doth not alwayes comfort with the hope of prevention of the affliction, no nor alwayes tem∣porall deliverance out of it, but with supportation under it, Cor. 10 13. Res. An 1. santification of it, Esa 17 9. finall freedome from all by Christ, Esa 25 8. and Reasons of the point. reward also of our patience under it, for the merits of Christs patience, it wee be in him, according to that of the Apostle, the light affliction works for us an eternall weight of glory.  Cor. 1.4. 2 the Scripture hath a greater mo∣tive to repentance then our deliverance, scilicet. I the love of God whom by sinne we have offended, and of Christ whom by it we have pierced, 2 the glory of God whom by our professed repentance wee honour, thereby testifying hee deserved better of us. Luc. 7.38. f 2 Cor. 5.14. Zech. 12.10. To the second reason wee say that though the sinne up∣on our humiliation and faith in Christ be taken away as Davids was, yet the affliction occasioned by the sin may long continue as his also did  Sam 12.10.11.12,13. not as a punishment, but as an exercise, as a prevention, or a warning to others as a clearing of Gods impartiality, that every mouth be stop∣ped, when he scourges every one of his own sonnes so se∣verely, if the end bee hard of those that obey not the Gospell. For the grounds of this, two sorts must be laid downe 1 negative; those that seeme to be, but are not; 2 posi∣tive, 1 appearing onely. those that indeed are the reasons of it. 1 The reason is not because he hates them, 1 appearing onely. though it is because he is highly displeased with them; those whom he
had sent into captivity he saith I will acknowledge them, I will set mine eyes upon them for good, I will be their God and they shall be my people, ler. 5. 6.7. and the Apostle assures us, that if we endure chastning, God offers him∣selfe to us as a Father to his childe in whom he delighteth, Heb. 12 7. and Christ tels the Church of Laodicea, That as ma∣ny as he loves he rebukes and chastens, Rev. 3 19. and Paul the Corinthians, that they were therefore chastned of the Lord (even with death) that they might not be condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11 32. 2. The reason is not because he will have satisfaction of them. For we finde that Davids sinne was pardoned be∣fore any affliction came: 2 Sam. 12.13. and that not upon us, but Christ, he hath laid the punishment of it all; Esay 5.3.6. that hee is reconciled by the blood of his Sonne, col. 1 20. which takes away all so cleerely that it leaves no spot or wrinkle, 1 Ion 1.7.9. no blame or accusation, Eph. 5.17. so that it being applyed by faith, God himselfe hath nothing to lay to our charge, Col. 1.22 Hib. 10.14. but we have full peace with him and joy and glory in him. Rom. 8.33,34. Cap. 5.1. Now then where remission of sin is, and recon∣ciliation to God, there is no more satisfaction for sin, Heb. 10.18. Object. But against this may be objected that of the Prophet Esay, Esa. 40.2. Comfort ye Hierusalem, say ye to her, her quity is pardoned for she hath received of the Lords hand double for all her sinnes; to which we answer,  that this and such pla∣ces are spoken according to men; as a father correcting his sonne in whom he delighteth, is said to be satisfied for the childs fault; not that he receives any amends, but the childe is amended, or his owne credit is repaired, which is all he aimes at.  It may be taken in Concreto, as the Church, the body is one with her head Christ, Eph. 22.23. in re∣spect whereof its sufferings are called the sufferings of Christ, Mat. 25.35. Col. 1.24. and Christs sufferings called the Churches sufferings; Rom 6.3,4,5,6. the afflictions of Christ abound in me 2 Cor 1.5., it may be taken in that sense. As in all their afflictions he is afflicted Esay 63.9., so they in him, but the
2 Reasons truly such are of foure sorts, Reasons truly such of 4 sorts.  in respect of the Church, 2 in respect of God himselfe, 3 of the ene∣mies, 4 of others: the reason in respect of the Church is;  that it may be rightly affected with, and to that end might have a right apprehension & true representation of the things that belongs to its peace, which are especially two; 1 sinne, where of punishment is the best glasse; for sinne as it strikes at God is infinite, and therefore cannot be apprehended in it selfe, but as God, in its effects, hence that of Ieremy, Ier 2. 15. The land is laid waste, the Cities burnt without an inhabitant; know therefore and see that it is an ewill and a bitter thing, that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God. [See] that referres to a representation; hence it is said in the Proverbs, Prov. 1.31. that those that refuse the admoni∣tion of God should eat of the fruit, that is, taste by affli∣ction the evill of their wayes. All the denuntiation of the Prophets to Manasseh, nor the bloody colour of his sinnes, could make him see the evill of them, till he was in captivity, and then he greatly humbled himselfe be∣fore the God of his fathers,  Kings 33.12. and this shewes also why great sinnes must have great afflictions, because the spe∣cies or image, if it be a true one, must give the dimensions, the true height and breadth of the body of sinne. If it be questioned whether God cannot some other way represent the sinne; Q . we answer God dealeth with the creature according to its nature; now whilest we are in a lower Sphere of understanding, we perceive not cau∣ses, but by the effect first; 2 The second thing to be ap∣prehended and is represented by affliction, is, Gods good∣nesse, which, as all our other happinesse we perceive best by wanting it. And it is to be apprehended, & is by afflicti∣on represented, And that 1 in ap∣position is sinne and the effects of it. 1 in opposition to sinne, and the ef∣fects of it: That of the Lord in Moses, Deut. 31.17. I will hide me till they say these evils are upon us because our God is not among us; and that in Hosea, I will returne to my place till they acknowledge their offence and seek my
face, in their affliction they will seek me early: Mos. 5.5. now affliction represents the goodnesse of God,  by way of comparison according to that of the same Prophet, Cap. 2.7. in affliction she will say, I will returns to my former hus∣band, for then it was better with me then now.  By way of illustration, two contraries being put together, doe the more set forth one another, hence Moses, Deut. 30.19. I have set before you life and death blessing and cursing.  By Way of experiment, 1 of the power of it, that in the multitude of afflicting thoughts that are in the heart; yet his comforts are able to refresh the soule, Psal. 94.19 2 of the excellency of it, if it be of such sweetnesse mixed with the gall of Asps, what would it be if it were tasted with∣out mixture? 3 in relation to the creature, as infinitely ex∣ceeding of it, whilest in the multitude of sorrowes that can refresh, yea and make exceeding joyfull, 2 Cor. 7. 4. Whereas these miserable comforters are they all, Prov. 11. 4. And this also shewes a reason why great sinnes must have great afflictions; that the height and depth and breath and length of the love and goodnesse of God in Christ, might be throughly discerned: When the Prodi∣gall is almost starved, how pleasant is the thought even of dry bread? Luc. 15.17. when the dejected soule is even at the graves mouth, then if there be a messenger, to reveale unto him Gods righteousnesse in his Sonne, it makes his flesh with joy come againe, as a young childes; Iob 33.23. Cor. 3.14.2. that they might have a through exercise of their graces, faith, patience, submission, that they might be perfectly con∣formed to the image of Christ. lames 1.34. Generall reason generall reason is in respect of God himselfe, in relation to his adversaries, that his honour may be salved, that he might shew he hates sinne most, where he loves best; hence it is that David must be severely afflicted, because he had made the enemies of God to blaspheme; which scandall that God might take off, he lets them see that in point of sinning, there is no respect of persons with him. Sam. 12.14. col. 3.25.
3 Reason is, eason 3 for the Adversary, in respect of them∣selves, that they may be convicted of Gods justice in their uine, and the horror that abides them; hence that of Peter,  Pet 4.17. if judgement begins at the house of God, what then the end of others? and that of the Prophet, Ier. 25.18. behold I begin to bring evill in the City which is called by upon my name, and shall ye be unpunished? Reason. Reason is, the admonition of others; so Moses, all Israel shall heare and feare, and doe no more any such thing, Deut. 13.11. the Apostle admonisheth that the judgements upon the people of God in the wildernesse were for our examples, that we should not lust after evill things as they lusted, lest also if we be partners in their sinne, we be sharers in their plagues. 1 Cor. 10.6.11.3 Vse. 1 Info∣mation 1 Of the evill of sin. If we apply this, it will first informe us, 1 of the true nature of sinne, that though it be his own people, and the dearly beloved of his soule, Ier. 12.7. so that his repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8. yet such is the malignity of sinne, that as a father, he must either draw blood, or lose his childe, and not suffer his soule to spare for his crying Prov. 19.18.. Oh therefore doe not that thing which he so hates. Ier. 44 4. Of the cause of our troubles It will informe us of the true cause why God hath shewed himselfe inexorable hitherto for Germany, Ire∣land, and our selves; wherefore we have fasted, and hee regards it not, and afflicted our soules and he yet stands off in this time of trouble; that we have spent our mo∣ney for that which is no bread, and our labour for that Which profits not: 'Tis not a mistaken Councell, 'tis not a neglecting army; these, where there is such, may be the instruments, but not the authors of our evill; no, 'tis the birth of a decree, Zeph. 2. 2. and the execution of the Ier. 13.13. judgement that is written for England; y 29.14. according to the tenor where of, the Lord hath filled all the inhabitants of the land, the Princes, and the Priests, and the Prophets, and the inhabi∣tants with drunkennesse, and I will dash them one against ano∣ther. And that there may be no prevention of it, the wis∣dome of the wise the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid.
Why? but how doth it appeare? what evill have wee done, to cause a decree of execution to come forth?  Resp. whatsoever this people were guilty of, Evidenced from the same occasi∣on that was in our Prophet vis. sinne showne to be parallell with theirs in its, 1 Variy. 1 Against the whole law. 1 None. that drew downe this calamity upon them, whether we reflect, I upon the severall kindes of sinne, against the whole law, some of us refusing to have any at all; and there are two sorts of them, moving upon a contrary principle: the first of prophanenesse, who will endure no yoke but that of Sathan, to whom they grinde, even when their eyes are out: who live like bruit beasts made to be taken and de∣stroyed,  in intemperance, uncleannesse, theft, sloth, &c.  Others upon a ground of perfection, that think it an in∣dignity to be tyed by Gods law to obedience; though the Apostle who indeed said, to a righteous man there is no law to condemne; 1 Tim 1.9. but yet confessed himselfe to be under one, to Christ. 2 Cor 9. 11. Nothing else. Others will have nothing but law and their owne righteousnesse by it, and name Christ but for fa∣shion sake, like the old Iewes, who having a zeale of God, if they might please him with their owne righte∣ousnesse, came short or the righteousnesse of God, Rom. 10.7. Mixtures of it. Mixtures, 1 of law and Gospell together, making (the new cloth) with Mat. 9.16.1 with the Gospel Christs right consnes, only as a patch to stop holes in their own old garment, whereby at length the rent is made worse; a greater injury then the crucify∣ing of him, for that was the occasion of his glory, his death for humbled sinners; this his shame, that he could not per∣fectly doe the worke he came for; and the greatest inju∣ry to the law. For they deprive it of its end, which is to bring to Christ, and leave him to do the rest. Rom. 10.4. With sinne. Of sinne and the law, buying liberty of God by one part of obedience, to transgresse in another: like Saul, that thought by reserving a Sacrifice, to pacifie God for spa∣ring the Amalekite, 1 San. 5.31. whereas he that off ends in one point is guilty of all. Iames 2 10.  precepti Against the severall precepts of the law, 1 In respect of the evill forbidden, 1 in the
first Table, Table. 1 Prohitions. 1 Idolatry. 1 Literall. literally, our forefathers superstition, Ido∣latry and persecution, and we are risen up in their stead a generation of sinnefull men, who are so farre from be∣wailing our parents sinne that we pursue it, by favouring the professors of such corruption, Papists, Arminians, Formlists, and hate with a perfect hatred the contrary zealously affected, whose chiefe fault in them is zeale, but not in their Adversaries; our Fathers slew the Prophets, and we fill their Sepulchres. But can you prove this charge? Proved. Hearken oh Heaven, and give eare oh Earth, yea all the Elements give in your testimony. The Earth in all the parts of it, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, France, Germany, yea America, and the utmost corners of the world, whither our persecutions of late dayes have driven many of Gods servants. The Sea, wherein many of them in their passages have perished, and The Aire and Fire unto one whereof, we have scattered the limbes of many of Gods people by the helpe of the other in this present warre. And Heaven, which hath been filled with their cries to the Lord of Sab∣bath. Iames 5.4. 2 Myltically, I Idolizing of our selves, and like Sa∣than, so farre puffed with our owne gifts, that we fall in∣to his condemnation, admire our selves, despise our bre∣thren, & walk nothumbly before God. Mic. 6.8. 2 Idolizing of the world, these having our first thought in the morning and our last at night, Phil. 3.19. 3 Idolizing men, of which our Prophet here complaines, that the statures of Omri, Mic. 6.16. were kept; and 'twas the vice of the Iewes in our Savi∣ours time, that were more tender of Casars honour then of Christs blood;  ohn 19.12. like those among our selves that trans∣gresse the Commandemnts of God boldly, but will seeme to keepe those of men conscionably. Mat. 15.6. Table. Bloodshed. 2 In the second table, to instance but in one; all the blood shed in the Scottish warre; that deluge of it over∣flowing Ireland; and those armes of this Sea that have
drowned so many, and daily doe amongst our selves, hath been occasioned by Papists, Arminians, Formalists, and prophane persons, proud spirits, the one for their end being subservient to the other, &c. All which we have countenanced and fomented, and on the contrary oppo∣sed or deserted those that appeared against them. Now can we wonder why, when we make many prayers the Lord doth not heare us? the reason is, our hands are full of blood, Esay 1.15. Injunctions to good. 2 The good enjoyned, 1 the distaste of it, and the meanes to it; prophecie not, say many of us to those that prophecie. Micha 2.6. Or 2 dainty mouthed in it, we rellish it hot, cannot endure sound doctrine, much lesse plaine preach∣ing of it, if nothing else but Christ and him crucified, 1 cor. 2.2.2. we must have him cloathed with a scarlet robe, a Crowne and a Scepter though it be borrowed of his ene∣mies, not satisfied with decent clothing him, but we must have idle adorning; it shewes an ill stomack that needs much sawce. Or 3. partiall and carnall judgeing of it, having the word of God in too much respect of the persons teaching it,Iames 2.1. 4 Backsliding from it, that in heart our soules draw back, 1 cor. 1.12. and then no marvell if Gods soule have no pleasure in us. Heb. 10.25.38, 39. Degree. The degree of our nne, such as make Christians a shame to Turks, Protestants a by-word to Papists, the pu∣rer sort to prophane men, to the dishonour of that Christ, Protestant religion and power of godlinesse, which we professe, Ezek. 36.20. it being so farre from correction, that it is, become commendable, covetousnesse in the effect of it, an honour; intemperance the glue of charity; oathes the ornament of our discourses; uncleanenesse a kinde of reputation; corrupt indifferency moderation and pru∣dence. Vniversality.The universality of our sinning; 1 Our Princes, i. e.
our persons of quality, (for they in the Hebrew Dialect are exprest by that word) many of them living by reason of 1 Monopolies, Patents, &c. not upon the sweat of the poores browes, for they brought them to that leanenesse, that there was no superduity for that excrement; but up∣on their flesh and bones, as our Prophet speaks, Cap. 3. 2. that could not warme themselves, but the needy was the colder; nor feed, but eating up the people they eat bread; nor array themselves, but the Orphans and the Widow were the nakeder. It is not enough to breake off this sin by more uprightnesse, but repentance must be testified by speciall workes of mercy, as satisfaction to the poore, as the Prophet Daniel speaks. Dan. 4.27. 2 Impropriations; living upon the pretious soule. Thou∣sands of soules famished through ignorant and unable Mi∣nisters, there being no sufficiency to maintaine better, are now crying in the eares of God, How long Lord, how long wilt thou cease to avenge our blood upon such a great person? such a Knight? such a Gentleman? such a Bishop? and it may be such a Colledge. Revel. 6.10. Not but that there is a difference; for some have had these put upon them in stead of better lands taken from them; in other places there is enough notwitstanding, and some have though little, yet too much in that imployment. But where an able minister may be had, and where meanes is not com∣etent, and where it was not forced on them, (if this will hold plea with God) there, those that doe it not, are without excuse. 2 The Ministery (for we must all this day take shame to our selves, as Daniel Daniel 9. speaks, we and our Fathers and our Princes and our people have transgressed thy co∣venant) they as those in our Prophet have fixt their ends, great estates, wordly fulnesse, high places, much ease; as our fathers did, so do we; Dumbe Dogs living to slumber, that can never have enough, that say, fetch wine and we will fill our selves: Esay 56.10. and the meanes they have used, such as
our Prophets complaine of, or 300 cruelty and flattery; they make the people erre, bite with their teeth, and cry peace, and those that put not into their mouth they even prepare war against them, as it is at this day; Levie hath not onely his tongue but his hand deepe in this blood, and not onely his pen in it, but even his sword too, if the report be true, that so many scholers were found dead at Edge-hill: If Ahab will have them say he shall goe up to Ramth-Gle∣ad, he shall have hundreds cry, Go and prosper, 1 Kings 11.2 if in Church matters Ahaz will have such an Altar as is at Da∣mascus, he shall have an High Priet that will doe accor∣ding to all that the King commands him. 2 Kings 16.16. If a novelty will take the people, you shall have those that will speake perverse things to draw Disciples after them. Acts 30.30. 3 The people themselves, 1 affected ignorance, 2 Mole-like earthinesse, 3 Grosse prophanenesse, 4 No∣table opposing the purity of reformation, lest they should be forced to be too heavenly, 5 Unworthy cowardize for want of making their calling and election sure, and so feare death more then hell, which by this they highly me∣rit: 6 Uncertainty and ficklenesse, a while a goe, an Ho∣sanna to the Parliament and a crucifie them to the High Priests, and now these can so perswade with them, that with the Keilites they will give up David, that they may secure themselves: 7 A spirituall wantonnesse, zealous a while after good things, but no sooner filled then cloyed with them, a Tim. 4.3. of all which we may say with him, the Pro∣phets prophesie lyes, and the great men (for so the word may be interpreted) beare rule by their meanes, and the people love to have it so, and what then shall we doe in the end thereof, Ier. 5.3. Wilfulnsse. the wilfulnesse of our sins, against light from God, against conviction of our owne conscien∣ces, against the strivings of the Spirit, as those of the old world, Gen. 6.3. so that many of us have beene faine to shut on eyes or hush our consciences, as Saul 1 Sam. 16.16. with compa∣ny, mirth, businesse, that we might not heare the clamour
of it. Or with Foelix, breake off the discourse of righte∣ousnesse and temperance, that we might not tremble at the judgement to come, Act 24.25. for the neglect of them. Incorrigible against. 5 Lastly, the incorrigiblenesse of our sinne. Admonitions. Against Gods mouth in his word and all his servants pressing it, Micha 2.6. against his hand opened, wherewith hee filled us with plenteousnesse, and would by this goodnesse have led us to repentance; Rom. 2.4. but we by turning this grace into wan∣tonnesse or security, have treasured up wrath against the day of it. Iudgement. Mercies. His contracted hand of judgement in the per∣secution of Queene Mary, the invasion of 88, the dan∣ger of November the fifth, the Pestilence in the yeer 1625, the calamity of these many yeares last past, yea and still upon us (for these things we must put often in memory, seeing the Characters of them so soone wash out of mens hearts) we may take up the complaint of the Prophet, Amos 4 6. I have given you cleannesse of teeth; sent all diseases after the manner of Egypt, &c. and yet you have not re∣turned unto me: and that of Esay, Esay 1.5. Why should ye be smitten any more? they will transgresse more and more: we have been like Solomons Drunkard, they have smitten me but I was not sick, wounded me, but I felt it not. Prov. 23.34. 3 Against the strongest remedies and firmest bonds of obedience, 4 Our own late protestation. the words of our owne mouthes, our solemne vowes and promises in our late Protestation, which is the last refuge of a Nation, Ezra 10.2.2 Chro. 15.12. Nehem. 9.38. and strongest engagement to obedience, and the violation of it a sinne, which God hath alwayes revenged with sweeping judgement, as the pla∣ces in the Margine will evidence, Levit. 26.25. Deut. 29.25. Ios. 23.15. Idg. 2.20. take but an instance or two, the comming in of the Assyryan, and captivity of ten Tribes, is ascribed to this. 2 Kings 17.15. And Daniel concern∣ing the Babylonish captivity mentions the oath; Pan 9.11. And when they had transgressed a Covenant but concerning the poore servants in letting of them goe free, the Lord breaks forth in fearfull threats which he executed accor∣dingly; I will faith he prolaime a liberty for him to the
Sword, and to the Famine, and to the Pestilence, and I will make you be removed into all the kingdomes of the Earth, and there your dead bodies shall be meat to the fowles of heaven and beasts of the earth. Ier. 34.15,16,17 And he asks concerning Zedekiah the question, Shall a man break the Covenant? though it were but with a man, Ezek. 17.15. and be delivered? What Thun∣derbolts then may we think God is sharpning against our faces? And Furnaces seven times hotter is be preparing for our torture. who have protested before God and man, for God and man in the highest things that concerne both the pure worship of the one, and welfare of the other, and yet not onely sleight but work many of us directly contrary to it: 1 Favouring Papistry, against Protestant Religion: 2 Ha∣zarding the Kings person in unnaturall warre. 3 Opposing the power of Parliament: 4 Betraying the liberties of the Sub∣ject, 5 and every person that endeavours to maintaine them: 6 Conceale and countenance the Contrivers against them: 7 And hereby destroy the union and peace of the three King∣domes: 8 And become guilty of all the blood that hath been shed in them, and so renounce our vow and Prote∣station. And doe we wonder that God visits for these things? and that his soule doth avenge it selfe on such a nation as this? Ier. 5.9. Reflect upon what was lately spoken to this honoura∣ble Assembly concerning the Covenant revenging sword. Mr. Arrowsmiths Sermon.Vse of exhort∣tion.Now if we have justified this people by running parallell with them in all their sinnes, upon whom the Decree passed, that the Assyrian should come in, we may not won∣der, that notwithstanding all meanes used to the contrary, yet he tread in our Palaces. 2 We may be hence exhorted; Not to adde drun∣kennesse to thirst, lest our chaines be made yet more heavie; if we continue and adde to walke contrary to God, he will not onely walke contrary to us, but will plague us yet seventimes more for our obstinacy; as he repeats these words foure times together in Leviticus, Levit. 26.8.21,24,8. there is a vaine con∣ceipt in men, as if God when he had deeply afflicted a Na∣tion would give over as satisfied; whereas we see in the
example of his own people, that he will have his will of us one way or other, if we refuse to do we shall suffer his will: Voluma Dei st aut a te aut de se. so in the Prophet Esay Esay 9.12,13,17,20,21. it is repeated three times in one Chapter, For all this his hand is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still; yea, and in the same place Vers 13. is the reason, for (saith he) the people turn not to him that smiteth them, neither doe they seek the Lord, therefore the Lord will cut them off head and taile, and branch, and root. In like manner in another Prophet, Amos 4.12. when he had sent them cleannesse of teeth, and yet they would not returne to him, he sends multitudes of o∣ther, as it followes in the text, and at the close he saith, because by these things they will not bee admonished, therefore prepare to meet thy God, there is yet a sorer judgement behinde. Pitty then Ireland, the Northerne and Westerne parts of this Kingdome that are almost de∣solate; pitty the children and those that suck the breast, pitty the wife of thy bosome; for if you goe on, wee can expect no better quarter of the Lord then he gave to his owne people, and that was upon their incorrigiblenefle. The children shall be dashed in peeces and the women with childe ripped up, (d) and so it came to passe as we shewed before. Go therefore thou intemperate, worldly, proud, cold, hypocriticall man, and sinne no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee, John. 9.14. 2 Exhortation must be such as is implyed here by our Prophet to his hearers, and that is to prepare to meet thy God O England. (f) 1 By a reall expectation of a deepe affliction, by considering 1 the severall aggravated, wilfull, grosse, scandalous sinnes of a nation that professeth godli∣nesse. 2 The horrid incorrigiblenesse of it, that not onely they say to them that prophecie prophecie not, but they persecute them, and if they speak, not only with the High Priests servant strike him on the cheek, but his mouth will command not a smiting on the mouth, but a laying by the heels, a confiscation of goods, a perpetuall imprisonment,
or a banishing out of the kingdome. It is a part of prepara∣tion to be resolved of the certainty; hence our Saviour (a) bids his Disciples sinke these things into their hearts that they should suffer, and our Saviour, if I must drinke they will be done. 2 By making sure of him who is here promised to be Peace, (especially to the soule,) even when the Assyrian should tread in the Palaces, this is the rock the stormes cannot shake, and those that are founded on it, the strength of man, no nor the gates of hell can prevaile against, this the Ark that the flood cannot reach, the Anchor by which we may ride out the tempest, of which more in the next part. 3 By considering 1 the equity of God in it, 'tis that we bargain'd for with him; Rom. 6.  Gen. 2.7. did we not agree with him for this penny, that if we did eat or drink intemperately, be wanton, worldly, prophane, cold, false, we would be content to dye the death? have we not procured these things to our selves? Ier. .17. why should therefore living men complaine, a man for the punishment of his sinne, Lam 3.39. this made not only Daniel confesse, that God was righ∣teous in all he had done, though in the captivity, Dan. 9.7. but even Pharaoh in those horrid plagues of Egypt. Exod. 19.17. 2 Consider the advantages, 1 To God we should say as they in the Prophet. Esay 66.5. Let God be glorified in our shame or ruine, let his honour which we have bespotted be recovered what ever become of us; it should be dea∣rer then our soules, as it was to Moses and Paul. Rom. 9.3. 2. To our selves, we shall be cured of that disease that would have proved deadly to us as the Prophet saith, Esay 27.9. all the fruit is that God may take away our sinnes, that though we dye temporally we may be but chastned of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world. Cor. 11.3. 2 False and hollow brethren in the Church, members of the Common-wealth, will be, as many have been already further discovered the Abiathars and Ioabs shew them∣selves
when Adonijuh raiseth a rebellion. 1 Kings. 2.21. 4 By humbling our selves before him, for it may be he will rest content with that; for though there be not a sudden & a totall removall, Sais st prostrasse. yet now there is more ground for this exhortation, especially now the evill is upon us, and so the decree in part satisfied, therefore partly Gods: it will obtaine certainly, 1 A mitigation for the Elects sake, that cry to him night and day, these dayes shall be shortned, Ioel 2.12.18. after 70000 yet when David cryes to God, and after all the land and Cities of Iudah, yet humbling Ierusalem is spared. Esay 37.33. 2 Support 1 Cor. 10.13. He will not suffer you to be temp∣ted above that you are able. 2 Cor. 12.8,9. 3 Sanctification Hebr. 5. 8. Though he were a sonne, yet learned he obedience by the things that he suffered. 4 Removall, Deut. 30. 1. When all these things are come upon thee and thou shalt return unto the Lord, then he will turn thy captivity. 5 Perhaps thy security. Mal 3. 17. In the day that I make up my Iewels I will remember them; every day of fast, every houre of prayer, is on the file. Rev. 20. 12. 6 Returne of thy prayer, Psal. 35. 13. I hum∣bled my soule with fasting, and my prayer returned into my owne bosome, though it did no good to them. 7 If you for∣beare, Hester 4. 14. If thou forbeare at all at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Iewes from another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall perish. Remember that of the Prophet, When the Lord called for weeping and mourning, and there followed eating of flesh and drinking of wine; surely, saith the Lord, this iniquity shall not be purged till ye dye. Esay 21.12. Vse 4. Is for direction, 1 to all those that seeke reformation and use sinnefull meanes to accomplish it, Surely the Egyptians shall helpe in vaine, and to no pur∣pose, Esay 30. 7. Esay 30.7. It were better for us if the will of God be so, to suffer for well doing then for evill, 1 Pet. 3.17. For then after our captivivity shall be accomplished God will visit us, and performe his good word towards us. Ier. 2.10. 2 Direction for this honourable assembly what they are
principally to labour in, and that is to cause the nation to breake off their sinnes by repentance; whilest that wilde∣fire is in the thatch, the water of fasting and of all other endeavours will but inflame the burning, Esay 1. 16. and if so we shall be fitted for the consolation which the second part of the Text propoundeth, for it is with reference to the former, and supposition of the effectu∣all working of it, when the Assyrian is come into our land, and treads in our palaces, upon our humiliation and application of our selves to him; then this man shall be peace; where three things are considerable. 1 The extremity; 2 The opportunity; 3 The parti∣cular remedy: the extremity, 1 When the Assyrian, then and not before, from the Obs. former. Observe, The Churches great deliverie, especially af∣ter great provocations, is not usually till it come to great extremity, but alwayes at the due opportunity. When the Patriarchs had sold Ioseph into Egypt, themselves were in bondage there foure hundred yeares, and eve∣ry day in worse condition then other: before Sub∣jects, after they became slaves, and afterward such, as it was not thought fit that they should live. And therefore care is taken to murther them in the birth: Exod. 1.16. When Moses came to deliver them where be∣fore they were but dying men, now they stunke in the nostrils of their adversary; Cap. 5.21. and when they were delivered, yet worse, for where before they were scattered in the land and some might hope to escape, now all gathered together fit to have the necke cut off at once; as Nero desired the people of Rome might have for the Sea before, and the Mountaines on each side, and the Egyptians pur∣suing, Cap. 1. so before God delivered the Israelites from the Philistimes, they were come to that low∣nesse, that they had neither Sword nor Speares nor a
Smith to make them. Sa. 13.19.22. And another time, not till one Goliah made all the Hoste of Israel runne like Sheepe, Cap. 17.. and the Famine in the time of I∣ram not removed, till a fourth part of a Cabbe of Doves Dung was sould for five peeces of silver, yea, till the women eate their owne children. 2 Kings 25.29. And the people of God not delivered from the enemy in the time of Iehosphat, till hee knew not what to doe.  Chro. 10.11. And Hezekiah not delivered from the Assyrian in out Text, till all the fenced Cities of Judah taken, and came up to the walls of Jeru∣salem; 2 Kings 18 3. And Christ came not to deliver, till the Scepter utterly departed from Iudah, and the Nation made slaves to the Imperious Romans; but when the condition is such, then comes the delive∣rance, as in all these examples appeares; for the vi∣sion of deliverance is for this appointed time, and in it it will speake and not lye. Hab. 2.3. Reason 2. The grounds of this truth are such as these. 1 In respect of God that the sole praise of the deliverance may bee his, Gedeons company were too many for God to deliver by; Iudg. 7.2. God is carefull that wee should not give his honour to another, which wee would doe if we were not fru∣strated of all other helpes, as in the Prophet; Esay 48.7. I told thee before, lest thou shouldest say, my Idoll did it. Reason 3. In respect of the enemy, that hee may bee manifested. First, in regard of his malice and cruelty, that hee may have opportunity to spit up all his venome, and exercise all his rage  that men might know the wickednesse of the men.
2. That they may be convicted, first, of their impotency in opposing God and his Church. That though they bring it to nothing, yet can they not then prevail, as the Sea, when the Waves come to that part of the ground that is lower then it self, yet it cannot overflow but their breaks Exod. 18.11.; Secondly, Of the Justice of God in their ruine, that they may be self-condemn'd before God do it, Ier. 2.19. thine own wickednesse shall reprove thee. In respect of the Church it self, That it may be through∣ly purged from its Tyn and drosse Isai. 1 25., and that the faith and patience of it may be throughly tryed 1 pet. 1.7.; and the graces of it publikely honoured 1 Sam. 2.30. Ʋse., as it was in the primitive perse∣cutions. For the consequence or use of this, it will be for our in∣couragement, The Apostle 2 Cor. 12.10. rejoyced in necessities, tribu∣lations, afflictions, for when he was weak, then strong; i. e. as he addes, for then the power of Christ was ready to rest upon him; Tis so withall the Church, It receives the sentence of death, that it might trust in him, who raised Christ from the dead. Our Saviour being to comfort his Disciples before his going, tells them of warre &c. and addes, when yee see these fulfilled, then lift up your heads for Luk. 21.28., &c. a strange way of comforting, but 'tis God way. Is Ireland gone; Do the States look on; does not Scotland help; is York, Newcastle, Oxford, Weles, Reading, Cirencester taken? does France, Denmark, Spain, and the Irish Rebels, all threaten; were all the fenced Cities taken, and came up to the Walls of London, as they did the other day; does mens hearts fail, and the Pillars of the Earth quake, those of whom we said, under their shadow we shall have peace; Let not your hearts be trou∣bled, The woman when shetravaileth, is neer delivery, and of obtaining a child; All these floods shall not drown, but make glad the City of God Psal. 46.3,4.; David was not delive∣red till he was in his own sence cut off from the sight of Gods eyes Psal. 31.22., Jonah not till he was cast into the Sea, came
into the belly of the Whale, and descended to the Rooks of the Rock Ionas 2.4. Peter not till he was to be brought to exe∣cution the next day Acts 12.6.. Paul not till he had received the sentence of death 2 Cor. 1 9.. Christ not till he was dead and bu∣ried; yea this Kingdom not till helplesse, and hopelesse, and this Parliament never so much advanced, as since there was but half an hour betwixt it's ruine and it. But perhaps it may be objected,  I may perish in my particular, and my estate be ruined, though the publike stand. Answ. 1. Tis more self-love then the Heathen would endure, some of them to be unwilling to sinke in their particular, so that the publike might be preserved. 2. Though thy bread, and thy life too, Regulus. Cata. Cic. &c. which it should sustain, be cast as it were upon the waters, yet in the morning, sow thy seed, in the evening, withhold not thy hand, for after many dayes it shall return Eccles. 11.1,6.. 1. To thy self, even the least cup of cold water, if given, because he that wants it, belongs to Christ, shall not loose his reward Mark. 9 41.. God hath upon ac∣compt every penny, every Journey, every tear. 2. To the Church for this losse of our estates and lives, are part of that extremity, that the Church must come unto, before it be delivered, and 'tis a speciall honour, that to us it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to beleeve in him, but also to suffer for his sake. Is the speciall remedy the thing it self, 3. Partic. of 2. gen. Pet. that should in this extremity bring seasonable deliverance; This man shall be peace, which must be first explained, secondly, distinguished, thirdly, some observation from thence raised. 1. Explained in the severall expressions of i.. Explained. This man, Where two Questions, First, What is meant by this man? Answ. The second verse of this Chapter compared with Matth. 2. 6. clears it to be Christ, 1. as the Jewish Writers themselves confesse, Herod asking where Christ should be born, the Scribes answer him at Bethleem, quoting this place of our Pro∣phets.
2. Question, Why is he here proposed as a con∣solation against this calamity of the Assyrian. Answ. 1. To signifie that Christ was he in all ages, that was the Cap∣tain of salvation to his Church, as is intimated, Vers. 2. His goings out still with the Church, have been from ever∣lasting. q. d. Fear not the Assyrian, you know on whose shoulder the Government lyes, hence it is said, by the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.4.. That the Jews in the Wildernesse tempted Christ. 2. Because Christ is the Foundation, Pledge, and Assurance of all other mercies to the Church (as was shewed before) in him all the promises of God, are yea, and Amen 2 Cor. 1.20.. And he that hath given us his own sonne, how shall be not with him give us all things else Rom 8.32.. 2. Shall be. Why not, shall bring, or procure? Answ. Because Christ hath a double relation to the Churches hap∣pynesse. First, as an efficient cause, obtaining it. 1. By his merit. 2. Conferring it by his power. Secondly, As the Object matter of it. Christ himself it is, in whom the Church rests satisfied in the want of all things, according to that of the Lord to Abraham, I am thy exceeding great reward Gen. 15.1.; which is also expressely affirmed of Christ by the Apostle, he is our peace Eph. 2.14., as the Husband is the Wives happynesse; as the procurer of it, hence called the Saviour of the body Eph. 5.23.. 2. As the chief part of it, as Elkanah to Hanna, Am not I better to thee then ten sonnes 1 Sam. 1.8.. 3. 3. Peace. Which hath a double notion, 1. Proper as Jehoram to Jehu. Is it peace Jehu. i. e. Is it all quiet 2 King. 9 22.. 2. Figurative, according to the Hebrew dialect by a Meto∣nymy of the adjunct, and a Synechdoche of the principall part, as pray for the peace of Jerusalem, saith the Psalmist. i.e. Desire all prosperity for it, as he expounds himself in the next verse Psa 1 22.6, 7.. Now both these is here understood, Christ brings both, as shall appear anon. The words of this particular thus opened, fall into this division. 1. The nature of the remedy answerable to the evill, and that's peace against Warne. Distingui∣shed. The time tis in
the future shall be. 3. The certainty of it, tis not onely shall in respect of time, but also in regard of the Assurance. 4. The procurer of it, This man. 5. The chief matter of it, and thats he himself, This man shall not onely bring, but Be the peace. 3. Observati∣ons the ce first implyed. Observations thence. From the first particular might be this, That Christ will be all in all to his Church. i. e. Not onely a seasonable but a suitable remedy in all its calamities.  From the 2.  That Christ will be waited for in this vision of peace; we must be of those, who not onely by faith, but also patience inherite the promise. From the 3.  That as God is constant in his judgements, so is he unchangeable in his pro∣mises; As the Assyrian shall come, so then Christ shall be peace: But passing these: from the 4 and 5, as that which is chiefly here aymed at, Observe, 2. Chiefly in∣tended. That the onely work of Peace-makers in a Kingdom, is to receive, retain, and advance the Lord Jesus. This I confesse might have been the use of a Doctrine hence deducible; but because tis most sit for the memory of this Honourable Assembly now in their Agitation of a Treaty for Peace, and because it necessarily flows from the Text, I conceived it not improper to be the principall Lesson. Of it must be given, 1. The minde. 2. The truth. 3. The use and advantage of it. 1. The minde and meaning. 1 Expounded in the severalls First, I say, The onely work. In regard of eminency, This is the one thing absolute∣ly necessary Luke 10.41., all other in comparison of this we may call with the Apostle, dung and drosse Phil. 3.8., idlenesse, or evil oc∣cupation. 2. By way of soveraignty, tis the Queen and end of all other imployments undertaken in order to peace, and so denominates, disposes, and makes them de∣sireable, according to that of the Apostle, I live not, but Christ in me Gal. 2 20., and to me to live is Christ; and whether yee eat, or drink, or whatsoever yee do, in word, or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Col. 3.17.. i. e. In order to him.  Col. 10,32. 2. I say, receive, retain, and advance Christ, for tis not
sufficient to give him some entertainment, but he must be bid to go up higher, till he come to his own place, that is, to the head of the Table both in Parliament and Convoca∣tion-House, i. e. the Church and State: the quarrell was, That they would not have this man to raign over them Luk. 19.: of which anon. 3. I say, advance Christ, signanter, not Religion onely, for Turks, Jews, Papists, Schismatiques properly so called (which rent themselves from Christ his Ordinan∣ces or People; not those that modestly refuse the counterfeit, or corruptions of them) all these compasse Sea and Land to make a Prosclyte Mat. 23.15., to advance Religion; yet are as far from Peace, as from Truth, because they either deny or divide Christ the Prince of it. 2. The truth of the Observation will appear, 2. Proved by the  fom if we shew, 1 That it is so; and then, 2 more fully, if we adde the causes why. The Text. 1. That the onely work of the Peace-makers in a King∣dom is to set up Christ, appears in the Text, which in this great calamity by the Assyrians, proposes no other means in the first place, but this: after wards indeed he mentions others, as the raising up of the seven Shepherds, and eight principall men; but these are authorized from, and acted by the former. 2. From consent of other Scriptures; it was mention∣ed before out of the Apostle, Col. 2.17. That Christ was the body of all legall worship, and the end of the Law Rom. 10.4.. Now Hezekiah ha∣ving restored this, builds his confidence of deliverance on it, as including Christ that Rok against which the gates of hell could not prevail: After these things were astablished, Se∣nacherib King of Assyria came and entred into Judah, and Hezekiah said, with him is an Arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to fight our Battells 2 Chron. 32.1.8.. The Prophet Esay in a case of Warre, by the invasion of Pekah King of Is∣rael, and Rein King of Syria, when the heart of Ahaz and his people was moved, as a Reed shaken with the
winde Esay 7.2.; How doth the Prophet remove this shaking fit? Why chiesly by proposing Christ, as the assurance of deli∣verance, cause the Scepter was not utterly to depart from Judah (howsoever it did from Israel) till Shiloh came: but because 'twas very unlikely so small a handfull should be able to withstand two so potent Adversaries, he proposes it in as unlikely an expression; A Virgine shall conceive and bear a son, and ye shall call his name Emmanuel; Ver. 15. that is, God with us, to help and save us: And then follows; Ver. 16. the Land which thou fearest, shall be forsaken of both her Kings which came against thee. Nay, and that promise of Christ in that place, is set as an Antidote against the terrour of this Assyrian calamity in our Text; for he addes Ver. 17,18,20, The Lord shall bring upon thy people the King of Assyria; and yet having laid down the promise of Christ before, he sayes, That butter and honey should every one eat that is left in the Land; and that there should no more come up upon it the fear of Briars and Thorns, Ver. 22.25. i. e. Christ not∣withstanding this affliction should bring them great pro∣sperity and security: So also in the next Chapter Esay 8.7. having threatned the coming of this enemy, Now therefore the Lord shall bring upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the King of Assyria, and he shall passe thorow Judah, and reach even unto the neck (Hierusalem) and the stretching out of his wings shall fill thy Land, O Emanuel; the Battell of which Warriour should be with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood, yea with burning, and fuell of fire (universall, you see, and extreme) he subjoyns as the on∣ly direction to the King and State; to whom he had spoken before, a repetition of this promise of Christ, for unto us a son is born, a childe is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, q. d. it belongs to Christ to secure his people: Therefore fear not, but apply your selves unto him, for unto us a childe is born, &c. Esay 9 5,6. And in the next Chap: Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Be not afraid of the Assyrian, the consumption decreed shall over-flow: But in
the next Chapter (though the same discourse) 'tis promi∣sed, There shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an En∣sign to the people: And it shall come to passe in that day, That the Lord shall set his hand again the second time, to recover his people from Assyria Isai 10.24.23 cap. 11.1.10,11.. And the Prophet Malachy; The day cometh, that shall burn as an Oven, and leave neither root nor branch; but unto you that fear my Name, shall the sun of Righteousnesse arise, with healing under his wings: And ye (by him) shall tread down the wicked Mal. 2.4 3.. 'Tis a dire∣ction to peace in the time of trouble, from the enemies of the Church. 3. From the greater to the lesse, from Gods own exam∣ple; the setting up of Christ is his onely work, when he would make peace in the world; he hath made peace by the blood of his son, and by him reconciled all things Col. 1.20.. Hence when the Kings of the earth and Princes were all in an uprore, he stills it with this, I have set my King upon him; and therefore now, O ye Kings, kisse him, lest ye perish from the way Ps. 2.6.11.. This work is called Gods Kingdom A majori. Gods own ex∣ample. because 'tis his whole businesse, as Kings in theirs; and whole con∣tentment, as we say one, is in their Kingdom, when they are about that they take pleasure in. Ab oppositio. 3. From the contrary none ever made peace, and exclu∣ded him, that prospered. Pilate and the high Priests would have peace with Caesar 10.19.12, 13. and the people M rc. 15.15.; and the people with the Ruler Ver. 11.; and they with the Romans 10.11.42.; and to obtain, they destroy Jesus: now Pilate would have peace with all, because an Adversary, and—laid violent hands upon himself; Euseb 1.2. c. 7. and the Priests and people did not so much oppose the Romans by this act, as provoked them by othes: Whereupon they came and took away both their place and Nation: And Maximinus, that he might enjoy a continued Peace, interdicts the profession of Christianity, and there follows a War with his own Subjects, wherein he alwayes went by the worse Idem lib 9. c. 7.. Ab Indu∣ctione.4. From instances in all the severall kindes of peace,
peace (as we heard before) is 1 literall, and so 1 negative, non-disturbance and quiet; this Christ brought here to Jerusalem, he shall not come against this city, nor shoot an ar∣row there Isai. 33.37.. 2 positive; 1 proper, 1 With God; bring justi∣fied by faith, we have peace with him Rom. 5.1.. 2. With men; A∣grippa, Festus, and the whole Councell all friends to Pauls person, though not to his Religion Acts 26.. 3. With our selves; My peace I give unto you; let not your hearts be troubled 10.14 27.. 2. Figurative, all prosperity; Butter and honey shall every one eat that is lst in the Land; and though persecutions, yet after ward many times much abundance, or with the af∣flictions many blessings Mark. 10 40.  may be inter∣preted with, or after persecuti∣on.. Solomon his Type the ri hest and wisest Prince: Constantine the first Christian Empe∣rour, the greatest Potentate of the world. We have seen the truth, come we to the grounds of the Point; which may be, 1.  or Reasons 1. Because Christ onely can stop enmity at the head; the beginning of strife is like the letting out of water Prov. 17.14, easi∣ly stopt at the Fountain; Now Wars and Contentions come from above; the star Worm wood which made the waters (i. e. the people, Revel. 17. 14.) bitter, fell down from heaven: By the anger of the Lord it came to passe that Zedekiah 2 Kin. 24.20. rebelled; And the lying Prophet from the Lord encouraged Ahab to the War at Ramoth-Gilead. Now Christ onely hath accesse to the Fountain head, God him∣self; 1. To intercede; 2. To satisfie, and so to pacifie: Now when that is done, he will make his enemies to be at peace with him Prov. 16.7. Reason 2.. 2. He onely can quench the Fire-brands; to him alone all power is committed, even in this kinde Matt. 28.18.. Now there are three Incendraries; 1. The Leviathans that make these waters boyl, as Job speaks Iob 41 31., great persons that move the multitude, as the Pharisees the people; now Christ governs these; By me Kings raign, and Princes, and all Judges of the earth Prov. 8.16; and therefore when they are in tumult, God sends Christ amongst them, as the master his son, when
the servants are together by the ears, and he stills them with a rod of Iron, and breaks them in peeces like a Potters Vessell Psalm .. 2. The unruly multitude; These he quells too, he calms as the noise of the seas, so the tumult of the people Psal 56.7.; so he over awed those of Nazareth, when they brought him to the brow of the Hill, to cast him down, he passeth through the midst of them, and goes his way Luk. 4.29.; so did he master the Buyers and Sellers in the Temple, who won∣dered, that no man laid hands on him, when they them∣selves were scourged out by him 10.2.15.. In vain shall David use courtesie, or Rehoboam threatS, one Absalom, or Jeroboam will seduce the Kingdom; but if they come with swords on purpose, if Christ do but ask them, who they seek, they go backward, and fall to the ground Ioh. 18.6.. 3. Divels; Those lying spirits in the mouths of Ahabs Prophets, and Rehoboams Councell that incense to warre and violence, these also are subject to Christ Luk. 10.17., for he hath spoiled them, and triumphed over them in his Crosse Col. 2.15.; so defeated he their project in the tumult at Ephesus, when by Demetrius the Silver-Smith, he thought to have made sure of Paul Acts 19. Reason 3.. 3. Because Christ is the Prince of peace, the master of this office, to whom the grand Commission of peace is directed; he shall be called the everlasting Counsellor and Prince of Peace Isai. 9.7.; hence he sayes, That all Judgement is committed to the sonne Ioh. 5.22.. Which is so large, that all differences full under some branch of it: if the question be what is truth in point of Doctrine? he is a Prophet who hath promised to lead his into all truth Ioh. 16.13.; if matter of power and authority; he is a King, and the Lord of them Revel. 17.14.. from whom they have all derived their authority, tis his part to shew the limits of their Commission, and keep them withinbounds, that they abuse not their power against their Master; if it be a matter of wrong or injury; he is a Priest, who will be both the Advocate to plead, and satisfaction 1 Ioh. 2.1..
so that tis to be busie in another mans office, yea invasion of the highest regall power to attempt peace, without first ingaging Christ. Reason 4. 4. He hath an inherent quality of pacification, a sof∣ting faculty; called therefore the anointed, and his name is as an oyntment powred forth Cant. 1.2.. Now the property of oyntment is to asswage heats, and allay tumors, the oyl of joy, he gives for the spirit of sadnesse, he makes the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard with the Kid, the Calf with the Lion, and the sucking Childe with the Ape, the wea∣ned with the Cockatrice Isai. 11.6,7,8; when I shall be lift up from the earth, I will draw all men (together) to me, though at never so much difference before Joh. 12.32.. Christ cast amongst men, is like the carkasse amongst the Eagles, that were be∣fore fighting for a Worm, they forsake their contention, and both feed on it Matt. 24.28; How did he smooth Pauls spirit, before a rigid persecutor; and the Goalers, who was now so full of pitty, that he washed the wounds, which before he gave, Christ so fills the soul, that it mindes nothing else; either with admiration, as Birds glaring upon the Glasse, that you may take them; or else with satisfaction, that the Assyrian may come into the Land So the anti∣ent English reads., and yet their hearts not quail for this evill tydings; they have provision within, they fear no famishing Ioh. 6.; and a sence without, they fear no slaughtering; for though the shell may be crusht, the ker∣nell cannot, their life is hid with Christ in God. Reason 5. 5. Because Christ is the principall matter, about which dissention riseth in these times and places; the Question is, Whether Christ or Antichrist shall raign. Tis the cause of Gods warres with men, as appears in the second Psalm. Yet have I set my my King, saith God, upon my holy hill of Zion: the Kings of the earth thereupon rise up, and the Princes take Councell together against: Hence a Com∣mission to Christ for warre against them, for subduing them with a rod of Iron Psa 2.. And the cause of mens warre one with another; This was in part the cause of the
Assyrians coming in, mentioned in our Text, as some con∣ceive Wolfus in, (not without probability, the Kingdom being now in vassalage to the Assyrian, 1 King. 18. who as it seems had much influence upon Religion there,) in that Hezekiah had made a Reformation, and restored Christ in the legall worship, against the minde of his Lord the Assyrian. This was the originall of the uproar at Athens, whether Christ or Diana should raign in Ephesus Acts 19.. This the pretended cause of the warres, betwixt Turks and Christians, Papists and Pro∣testants, Formalists, and the truly Reformed. So that if Christ be advanced, the cause taken away, the effect ceases. Application. 3. The use that may be made of this, is various, . Hence may be discovered, what issue the Adversaries of Christ are to expect, who shut him out. It cannot be peace, for the Prince of it is excluded by them; In Doctrine by Com∣mandments of men; in worship by devised Ceremonies; in Discipline by usurped Offices. They may have Councell and strength for Warre, But none for peace, for there is no peace to the wicked, saith my God Isai. 57 21.. For their Councell, they shall be taken in their own craftinesse Iob 5.13.. For their strength their Arm shall be broken Psal 10.15.. For both, they may associate themselves together, but they shall be broken in peeces, take Councell, but it shall come to nought. For God is with us, but against them Isai. 8 9.. Ʋse 2. 2. Humiliation might hence be urged for our ignorance of the way of peace, or our injury to Christ the Author of it. We have taken Councell for peace, but not of him, and covered with a covering, but not of his spirit; Therefore hath the strength of Pharaoh been our shame, and our trust in the shadow of Egypt, our confusion lsa. 30.1,5.. 3. We might hence also inferre matter of comfort, Ʋse 3. so farre as we have endeavoured to advance Christ; he must be taken out of the Church, before the hope of peace be removed from it. Object. But is not Ireland lost, many parts of Germany, and some of this Kingdom not much better.
Answ. 1. Had there been more of Christ, we may bold∣ly say, there had been lesse of warre. 2. If there be any thing of Christ left in them, even out of the Bethleem, as it is in our context, of the Palatinate, and Germany, of Ireland, and the wasted Countries of England, there will rise up in due season seven Shepheards, that shall yet bring peace unto the people; Let us keep close to our principle, Christ will be peace, and he will be with us, whilest we are with him 2 Chr. 15.2., and will create peace upon peace Isai. 26.3 12., and work all our works for us, as he hath done to other Churches, as France, Netherlands, Scotland, that have appeared for him. 4. Ʋse 4. It will serve for exhortation, and direction to all sorts. 1. The Magistracy, and especially to this Honourable Assembly; Tis no detraction from your Wisedom to be taught of God; no Arrogancy in me, to put you in re∣membrance from him. Your aym is to settle peace, and are now in agitation of a treaty for it: write this text upon your hands; Let it be as a frontlet between your eyes; de∣scribe it on the posts of your house of Parliament, where you consult about it [This man shall be peace;] Let it be the principall verbe, without which no sense in the dis∣course. Constantine is said to have carried a crosse in his Banner (which doth no more countenance its use now, then the Brasen Serpent, which being a Type of Christ, when once it obscures the Antitype,) that he might shew he expected victory, and peace from him, that was cruci∣fied on it: Paul ingages the Pharisees, whom he knew to be potent, in his quarrell Acts 23.6.; and David, God himself, arise ô God, plead thine own cause, remember how the foolish man blasphems thee daily Psal. 74.22.. Let me in one word propose a Motive to this, and in a few more some Means to it. 1. Twill save you much labour; Motive. what the Iron Barre, with the best strength cannot open, a Key will. The heart
of the King, and a great part of the Nation, which have held out hitherto, against all your humble intreaties, and forcible perswasions, yea, and seconding providences: Now Christ hath this Key of David Revel. 3.7., And he will give you favour with the King, and power over the Nation, as 'tis promised to those that keep his words unto the end Revel. 2.26.. 2. Twill be your honour; those that honour him, he will honour: an eminency of Nobility is put even upon the inquiry after peace, Those of Berea were therefore more noble then those of Thessalonica, because they received Christ in his Word, with all readinesse of minde Acts 17.11.. Much more will it be put upon the advancing of him, So that Generations to come, and the children which are yet unborn shall say, This is the Parliament, this the King (for so we pray) These the Lords and Commons, who were the restorers of the Chur∣ches breach, and the raisers up of its desolate places Isai 58.12.. 3. It will certainly compasse the work; we have the promise of the text, This man shall be peace; and the per∣formance of it, when the Assyrian came; and besides we have, 1. The faithfulnesse of a depositary, I know whom I have beleeved 2 Tim. 1 11.. 2. The credit of an undertaker, Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose minde is staid on thee, because he trusteth in thee Isai. 26.3.. 2. For the means and way, Means. the observation hints to three. 1.  Is that you admit and receive Christ intirely in his doctrine, worship, discipline. And if it be objected,  That this is done already, the answer is;  That Christ in∣deed hath had goodly Lodgings, honourable entertainment, much command in this house; but the Keyes of it to open and shut at his pleasure, and the whole Government of it hath not yet been committed to his hand, and laid upon his shoulder, and yet thats his right Isai 9.6. Cap. 22.22.; and much of what he hath had, hath been bestowed as courtesie, not as duety. Now the method of his admittance, lies especially in three things. 1. In breaking with his adversaries;
Asa when he would perswade Benhadad, King of Syria, to break his league with Baasha, King of Israel, useth this as an Argument. That there was a league betwixt their An∣cestors, which admitted not correspondency with each others Adversaries 2 Chro. 16.3.. Cast out the strong man, and the seven divels, which have long kept the house, superstition, formality, prophanenesse. Possession must be in an empty one. No man can serve two Masters, not Woman have two Husbands; we cannot be Christs, and Belialls. Cast him then out of the State, by abrogating the Laws, that give him; Title out of the Church, by removing such will wor∣ship, and opinions as give him footing; out of places of education, Schools, Universities, and Innes of Court, by cleansing that which is his feeding. 2. Means 2. We must breake our hearts, for breaking with him. A false wife must not onely forsake her former lovers, but humble, and be reconciled to her Husband 1 Cor. 7.11.: We must be∣wail as the Apostle intimates, with indignation, zeal, re∣venge, and weeping, fasting, and mourning with the Ni∣nivites, Jews, Magdalen, and the Corinthians; the super∣stition, covetousnesse, uncleannesse, and intemperance, which we have committed Iona. 3.8. Ioel 2.12. Luke 7.38. 2 Cor. 12. ult.. The people of God, when they were to be received again to favour, and returned to their own Land, we read of three severall solemn humi∣liations undertaken for them, and by them, mentioned in those three ninth Chapters of Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah. neither is this legall, but Gospel Doctrine; we urge not humiliation for satisfaction; when we have done all in this, This 2 parti∣cular cleared from excepti∣on. We are but unprofitable servants: but that by the Spi∣rit of God humbling us, we may befitted for mercy, which God cannot with honour to himself, or safty to us bestow, whilest we remain unbroken. The stain will not be taken from his truth; and we our selves shall return to that folly, the bitternesse whereof, we have not tasted by repentance. Christ therefore knowing, either how short, or slight en∣tertainment, he shal have with such, will not come in at all.
3. Means 3. Strike hands with him, passe a solemn act of perpe∣tuall service, Let him or our car Eod. 21.6.: plainly, as the Assy∣rian requires here, when he came into the Land 2 King 18.31; make an agreement with him; or as Hzekiah then, make a so∣lemn Covenant; for that is implyed in his Reformation: A Covenant Nationall. This in all publike calamities hath been the practise of the Church. In the great decay in the time of Aa, being en∣couraged by the Prophet Obed, That if they sought the Lord, he would be found of them; Grounds for it. They betake themselves to this, as the onely remedy; so the Text, They entred into Covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers with all their heart, and with all their soul 2 Chron. 15.12.. The like we have in Ezra, upon the fear of the breaking out of Gods speciall indig∣nation, upon occasion of taking strange wives, they slie to this refuge; Now therefore say they, Let us make a co∣venant Ezra 10.3.. And in Nehemiah, after the return from Capti∣vity, [they returning to their captiving sins again, after a particular confession of them, We make (say they) because of all this, a sure covenant, and write it, and our Princes, Le∣vites and Priests seal unto it Neh 938.. This is the onely way of appropriating Christ, because he is communicated by way of Covenant; 1. Betwixt God and him, in our behalf; I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant Psal. 89.3.. 2. Betwixt him and us; Behold my servant whom I have chosen; I have given him for a cove∣nant to the people Esay 42.1.6.. Hence the outward signs of receiving him (the Sacraments) are called Seals, which are adjuncts of Covenants. But you will say, This is done already, in 1. The Sacra∣ments; 2. In the late Protestation; 3. In these dayes of hu∣miliation. To which is answered; That the Sacraments are the first; and more generall striking off this Covenant; Rest. from which when there is an Apostasie in particular; a speciall one, that might humble for the breach, and binde more strictly to the observation of it, doth seem almost as needfull as the former. 2. The Protestation is made but
before God, not to him; neither is there any confession for sin past; nor is it so particular as the Covenant we exhort to should be: for we finde in the places before cited, espe∣cially in Nehemiah Neh 10 & cap 9., the Covenant to have expressed seve∣rally the sins, and duties concerning which they cove∣nanted: the Sacrifice was to be cut in pieces: and we have the example and successe of our neighbour Churches for our pattern and encouragement, in later times. It is therefore to be proposed to the zeal and wisdom of this Honourable Assembly, Whether there be not at this time amonst us, the same need as was with them, of Nationall, distinct, and publikely urged Form of confession and cove∣nant, (which upon speciall occasion, though not so in or∣dinary occurrences, is not onely lawfull, but necessary) which might contain such particulars as the wisdom of the Honourable Assembly of Parliament, 2. Form of it. by the advice of the godly Ministry, shall judge fit; As our guilt of blood in the former persecutions, and those of later dayes; Our cor∣rupting, or countenancing the corruptions of Gods Worship; Dumb Ministry, Pluralities, non-residency, Impropriations, favouring of Papists, hereticall and (truely) Schismaticall Opinions, unlawfull Offices in the Church, Oppressions in the Common-Wealth, by Patents, and such like; profanesse in conversation, as intemperance, uncleannesse, Worldly minded∣nesse, &c. Such a Covenant, because it hath reference to the publike no man may take the office publikely to impose; but to this Honourable Assembly, as the publike Authority of the Kingdom, it properly belongs. And though there be something of late by you in this kinde published, yet it is left Arbitrary; an exact urging of it, under a serious penalty, and more large and particu∣lar expressions, is that we sue for, and that by example of the Scriptures named; in one whereof, the mulct of non∣covenanting was no lesse then death 2 Chron. 15.30.: And for this we may take these few Motives: 3 Motives of it. 1. The Land hath not been expiated of the blood, Ido∣latry,
Persecution, Luxury, and Profanenesse wherewith it hath been long desiled, because there hath been no particu∣lar, formall, and Nationall humiliation enjoyned for them. 2. Sin will be much restrayned, mens hearts will trem∣ble, and their faces blush to commit those sins which be∣fore God and man they have renounced. 3. The Covenant of Grace it self, whereof such as this are but branches, would be better thought on, and more looked into. 4. It would certainly recover us, because this course never failed, as appears in the former examples; thence that of Shecaniah, We have trespassed against our God, yet there is hope in Israel concerning this; now therefore let us make a Covenant Ezra 10.2.3.. 5. Gods Honour would be recovered, which by our sins we have so much blemished, and caused the enemies of his Truth to blaspheme. 6. Our fear would be secured, by a certainty of Gods presence and protection against all perills; Enter into co∣venant With the Lord thy God, and unto his Oath, that he may establish thee to day for a People unto himself, and that he may be a God unto thee Deut. 29 12 13.: And yet this people, as those for∣merly named, were in generall Covenant with God before. 7. Our consciences howsoever will be cleared, and especially yours, in whose hands alone this power re∣sides, when we have done that Which is our duty to do; whereof this, in such exigencies as these (as was shewed before) is a speciall part. 8. It will be a great prevention of totall separation from this Church, whose main Argument is, That we are Christians at large, but come to no particulars, which they conceive essentially necessary. Hence, 9. Lastly, The godly Ministry would be better enabled to discern and repell Communicants; and the Brethren to
admonish one another. By this the Church of England might become as one Congregation, in serious profession, separated from the world, as that of Gods ancient people was, united to Christ, and enjoying holy Communion with him. Particu∣lar. 2. Retain Christ by stablishing him. 1.  In Corrobo∣rating the Laws already made for him. This will be taken by him, Retain Christ, as a speciall entertainment; For 1. then he will see he hath some assurance of continuance. 2. In every Law there is authority, and in all authority a vein of So∣veraignty; so that this will be as the putting of the Crown upon his head. 2. By enacting one Law for the execution of the rest, and especially this of urging the Covenant before men∣tioned at certain set times, as at every Sacrament, or as to your wisedomes shall seem fit. Thus when Christ hath assurance of quiet possession, he will set himself to do the Kingdom good; and of this we have proof in the Chur∣ches of Scotland, and Geneva; yea, in the example men∣tioned above in the time of Asa, upon the main Covenant they made another, That whosoever Would not seek the Lord, and stick to the Covenant, they should die the death, whether small or great, man or Women 2 Chr. 15 13.. Particu∣lar. 3. Advance Christ. 3. Advance Christ. The higher sphere the Starre moves in, the greater influence it hath upon the inferiour Orbes; hence when an excellent spirit was found in Daniel, he was set over all the Province of Babylon; where Christ is lowest, there is least peace; Witnesse Ireland, Wales, and the Northern parts of this Kingdom. And here might I take leave, I should present a Table, not of direction, but remem∣brance, in many severalls of our humble wishes in this particular, much of which, though proper to the Mini∣stry in point of advice and execution, yet all belongs to you in regard of injunction and authority. By giving him more room. 1. Then give him more room, that he may expatiate Himself; persons of great ability, must have large Provin∣ces
to command and act in; cast him into Ireland, Wales, and the Northern parts, and see, if his fruit be not peace. The Lamps in these Earthen Pitchers, when they break, will encourage Israel, and confound the Midianit's Judg 7.191. Let no Candlestick then be without a burning, and shining one, if it may be, nor any place without a Candlestick; some spheres are too large for the Agent; too great Congregati∣ons are more for the Priests, then the Ministers or Peoples benefit. Tis true here; We must divide if rule. By providing for him 2. Make provision for him. 1 Plentifully; Tis not thrift but folly to starve the light. Once indeed, and in one place upon a speciall scandall, 1. Plentifully. The Apostle Labours working with his own hands, but else where, he saith, That God hath or∣dained, that those that preach the Gospel, as well as those that did the Law, should live of it, and that Without muzling or straitnesse 1 Cor. 9 14.: A little oyl makes a dym Lamp; a small en∣tertainment makes the guest suspitious of his welcome. But Prudently 2. Prudently; We desire you should know his quantum and proportion, Our moderation must be known to all men Phil. 4.1.; and the Ministry especially must shew that the Kingdom of God is not in meat, and drink, nor of this world; they especially must exercise the life of faith for themselves and theirs, and having competency, be there With content Tim. 6.8.; those that will not, are unfit for this service. They must; be like Birds, that sip a little, and look upward. But this note may seem to some superfluous here, that think this ho∣nourable Assembly means not onely to pare the nails, but cut the flsh. Notwithstanding we doubt not, but that of crrours, you will decline the left hand one, as well as tother. By providing him servants. 3. Furnish him with Instruments; Christ here was peace, but the means of Communicating it, was by the seven Shepheards, and eight principall men. Fit Christ with servants. 1. By principling those places of educa∣tion, Schools and Ʋniversities with him, That they may
have more of Christ in them, and lesse of the children of strangers Isai. 2.6., especially youth, till they know how to refuse the evill, and choose the good. All sects season their Disci∣ples first with the Tenets of their Master; according to the story of the Abbot, that reproved the young Fryer for reading the Testament, bidding him first acquaint himself with the rule of Saint Francis; here if any where, that of Solomon holds: Train up a childe in the way he should goe Prov. 22.6. 2. Those that are inclined to Christs service in the Mi∣nistry, let them have tuition and direction in that, as well as learning; in other faculties, yea, and common trades, besides generall abilities, men take speciall information: in divinity theirs much more need, because the conse∣quence is farre more dangerous: and heer I know not whe∣ther the erection of Schools, or at least Lectures, for Pro∣phets, as well as Schollars, might not be as needfull to us, as it was sometimes to the ancient Jews. We sinde Samuel, Eliah, and Elisha, as Tutors unto the younger in this art of prophesying 1 Sam. 10.1.. And certainly much of the scandall taken from raw Ministers, 2. King. 6.1. would by this comse be re∣moved, when the Inceptors in this faculty shall be in∣stituted by the vcterani, and experienced souldiers of Christ in his warfare, not onely for 1. the knowing part of divi∣nity, but 2. and especially the practique. 1. For teaching; that they may be instructed, 1. How. 1. Orderly to informe the Judgement. 2. Effectually to break the heart. 3. Soundly to comfort conscience. 4. To quicken serioussly to the love of duty. 5. and lastly, Cleerly to resolve in point of practise. 2. When to do all these in their proper season. 2. For conversation, That they be lessoned to bear the yoak in their youth. and enured to meditations of self doniall, ne∣cessity of the Crosse and suffering, that vain glory, pride and affectation be supprest, if he be a novice in the experimentall knowledge of these things, he will be pust up, and fall into the
snare of the evill speaker 1 Tim 3 6., As we have the Apostle s Tim 2. 2. and other places. largely Catechizing Timothy in these particulars. 2. Suffer onely such to be put to Christ, for if a Generall have an unable or ill affected soldiery, the adversary will prevail; notwithstanding his valour and prudence. Now this we speak to you, for the Keepers of the Vineyard can not fence it, unlesse you give them Stakes. 3. Let there be a particular direction, when they enter upon his service; both for teaching, and worship; a fuller Ctechisme, for instructing youth, and an in offensive di∣rectory, drawn out of Scripture for Preaching, Sacraments, and prayer. 1. For Doctrine, we read of a form of sound words 2 Tim. 1.13. Heb 6.1.. And 2. for worship, we have Paul directing Timothy how to behave himself in the Church of God 1 Tim. 3.15. 4. Free them from other imployments, that they may not be intangled with the affairs, or cares of this life. That neither necessity, imployment, or superfluity, occasion them businesse in other mens matters; but that they may ddicate themselves wholly to the Lord, and the Ministry of the Saints 1 Tim 4.15 1 Cor. 16.15. 5. Binde them to give a constant reckoning of their industry. The children of this world; The Papists do so. 4. By unveiling his faces yet more fully. Unveil him, That men may see his face, it will cause men to break off their divisions, and to look on him, and so bring peace into the world. The glory of God and all his beauty appears in the face of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4.6.; and tis promi∣sed by the Prophet, that under the Gospel, They shall see the King in his beauty I sai;. 33.17.; but that cannot be till the veil be taken away 2 Cor. 3 16. in doctrine, worship, disipline, and conver∣sation. 1. Doctrine. 1. By a more exact wiping of the glasse. i. e. Translation of the Seriptures, which though for the bulk of it, that we have, be one of the best extant, yet being a businesse of that consequence, there is yet desired. 1. That it be published by common authority Quedomns tangis ab omni∣bus approbarl, debet.; this being done but by the Kings command alone. 2. Some things the
Aspect of the Starres then in their Zenith inclined the A∣gents to, perhaps besides their naturall motion. The signes then of greatest influence were. 1. Absolute Se∣veraignty. 2. Divine authority of Episcopacy. 3. Necessity of Ceremony. 4 To which may be added some unsound opini∣ons then luking in Church in favour of the first; perhaps it was, that the place,1 Pet. 2.13. which the former translations read, to the King as unto the Superiour, agreeably, as to other transla∣tions, so to the signification of the word , as themselves ren∣der it elsewhere Rom. 13 1., is translated Supreams; though in a right interpretation we deny not that he is so; but seeing the A∣postle useth a word which expresseth it rather in the Com∣parative, then the Superlative, it seems it might as well have stood here as in the former place, or else both rendred alike. In favour of the second, doublesse it was, That the word in Pauls discourse to the Elders of Ephesus Acts 20.28. ., is ren∣dred Oversecrs, which every where else they have transla∣ted Bishops. And it seems a plain fraud to translate that word Bishops, without an exposition, seeing they were onely Ministers of Congregations. And it may be to coun∣tenance the third, the word which is interpreted by them in one place Ordinances 1 Cor. 11 2., is rendred in another Traditi∣ons 2 Thes 2 15. The fourth hath lesse appearing countenance, because it durst not so evidently put forth his head, yet shews it self by the next thing we shall adde. But specially their birth in this kinde lost some of its beauty, by those stop∣fathers of the Church, who besides the prohibiting of the addition of notes (which they were willing, and at that time most a le to do, by reason of their consulting with many Copis, and Commentaries) did also alter their work after it came out, which charge we shall be able to make good. If it be objected, the cost will be great to the Kingdom. Answ. 1. If it be duety, that plea is weak. 2. If once throughly done, it will be for a continuance. 3. The profit will be beyond what the cost will come unto.
2. Illustrate the text with a clear, 1. Brief, for com∣mon use, and then secondly, more large exposition of it for the learned; The one whereof is now in hind, which it is to be wished might have passed the publike censure (for the more authority) of the Assembly of Divines designed by you, if it might have been before its publishing. 3. Make our contract of the Scripture, the 39 Arti∣cles more clear where doubtfull, more compleat where de∣fective, more contracted where superfluous, as Article 36, touching the consecration of Bishops; Rogers upon it, in his first edition, confesses it not to be any Article of faith, or at all held by the reformed Churches, (though there be no such thing in the following editions,) I instance but in this, because I have a patron of them for mine Author. 4. Command a full and intire body of all needfull truths, both positive and controversive to be compiled, that we might not be so often borrowing, and somtimes of the Egyptians, who often with the food, give poyson. Though sometimes Goliahs sword serves to behead the Master. Nor yet be doubtfull what the Church of England, explicately holds in all the main parts of Religion, both for doctrine and practise; nor let the fruitfull Womb be any longer dry breasted; nor glean in so many fields, what we might reap in one. 2. Unveil Christ in point of worship. 1. In preaching, that the affected, nice, speculative, philosophicall and too much controversall manner of Preaching, be by your Authority, as it was by King James In a Declara∣tion to that purpose. of glorious memory, damn'd and discountenanced. That in this service men may know chiesty, if not onely, Christ, and him crucified 1 Cor. 2.2., and see him as the Galathians did in Pauls Ministery, bleding, gasping, dying, crucified amongst us Gal. 3.1. I am enim & in ecclesis ist t qaeruntur, on saque Arostill∣corum simplici∣tate & ptale verborum, quasi ad Athenaeum Convenitur, ut oratio Rlxtoric art is fucata x∣datio, quasiquae. dam mriticul procedat in pub∣licum: ntam traditura popu∣los, quim savrem populi quesitura. Hio prooae;n'o lib. 3 Com. in Galat. Prayer. 2. In prayer, whatsoever was by Christ and his Apostles left arbitrary, binde it not on as necessary twill be a vail. What on the contrary is objected, holds as well against the Apostolicall, and first primitive Church; and is sufficient∣ly salved by a directory.
Sacra∣ments. 3. In the Sacraments; Those things that argue Christ imperfect in his institution; That suffer the Dogs to eat the childrens bread; and that have a shew of countenancing Christs enemy; these remove: that in this speciall Ordi∣nance Christs lustre may especially appear, and that these skreens keep not his spowse from immediate Communion with him 1 Cor. 10.16.. Discipline 3. Unveil Christ in point of discipline, you have re∣moved the Maskers and false Christs out of his Family, which like Theeves, or Cavaliers, commanded with inso∣lence the house that they had invaded by suttilty or vio∣lence. Now there are many Antichrists Joh. 2,18., though one prin∣cipall, take heed instead of one, of setting up another: Let serious inquiry be made, what Officers Christ hath set in his Church, and what work he hath appointed for them, and these settle. Conver∣sation. 4. Unveil him in the Conversations of men; that Heathens may see in Christians, Papists in Protestants, For∣malists in Professors, Christ living, cating, drinking, trading, pleading, fighting, that they may not seek, but have offered a proof of Christ speaking in us, and may be convinced by all, That he is in us of a truth, to their conversion or conviction. Govern∣ment. 5. Lastly, Set him over the Kingdom as Nebuchadnez∣zar did Daniel. Lay the Key upon his shoulder, unto whom the Government belongs; Let him be acknowledged not as an honourable guest, but as the sole Master over his own house, for it is part of his inheritance; so the donation runnes; I will give thee the Heathn for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession, and thou shalt rule them, be yee instructed now therefore yee Judges of the earth, and kisse the some, give him this Symbole of snl∣mission, least he be kindled and ye perish Psal. 2.8,9.10,11,12.. First then set him over the State in casting the whole body of the Law, with reference to this end the advancing of Christ, That the civill controversies may be subordinate
to the spirituall Peace. So Paul regulates the Law Suites of the Corithians by the discipline of Christ. 1 Cor. 6.1. Else, though we may be Christians in the state, yet not a Christian state; which is not presently for every Law made in favour of Christ; but when the whole Levell of them referre to him as their sole scope; and so may trudy receive denomination from him as their end; neither will this unsettle the for∣mer principle of our, and all Laws; Salus populisu∣prema Lex. Publike safety: for In him we shall have peace Joh. 16.33., a perpetuall one, Which no man shall take from us; yea Vers. 16., even when threatned with a most bloudy warre; yet then our Text assures us, This man shall be peace. 2. In the Schools, both Triviall and Academick: That whereas these are the waters that either make bitter, or sweeter, the City of God; and many times are like those of the dead Sea, not only savourlesse, but mortall; Throw in Christ, as Elisha did Salt into the waters of Jericho, and they will become Fountains of living water. To this end put them upon the study of the mystery of Christ; which is so great, that it cannot be well seen into, till we wholly give our selves to it. Hierome professes his neglect of other learning for many years, that he might, as it seems, attend this; not but that other knowledge is necessary, but so, That the handmaid be not so long served, that there be not sufficient for attendance upon the Mistresse. In promio li. ad Gelat. comment. plus quam 15. anni sunt, ex quo in manus meas, nunquam Tulli∣us, nunquim Maro, nunquim Gentilium lite∣rorum quibet author ascendit. Though this be not exactly to be imitated, yet is there great use to be made of it. 3. In Innes of Court, That whereas too often it falls out, that the hopes of Parents, Schools, and Universities almost ripe, are there blasted in the green fruit, because this sonne of righteousnessc shines so obliqucly either in teaching, or discipline: now, through your care, there may be ground of expectation, That your posterity there formed for pub∣like service, may go on with your work, and set up the Pinacles of that Temple, the Walls whereof you have raised to so great a height. 4. In negotiations of warre and peace, Whether at home or abroad. The raising up of the seven Shepheards
that should wast the Land of Assyrian with the sword, (in the Text.) It was by authority of Christ, and his Church; for so it follows, after the mention of them; Tis added thus; He shall deliver from the Assyrian; The warre was by direction from him, and order to him. State poli∣cie hath oftentimes betrayed the publike to a false peace, by not putting Christ into the treaty. Let nothing be con∣cluded now, that may make the heart of the righteous sad, by yeilding to any thing dishonourable to their Master; credi∣table to his Enemies, or frustrancous to their hopes, who have held, and set you up; they are the Pillars of the earth Matt. 13.29. sinke them not. 2. Advance Christ over the Church: thats more imme∣diately his own house  Tim. 3.15.. Let no man usurpe to himself an intruding power here, you would not indure it in your own. Let additions or detractions here, incurre your curse as well as Gods Col. 2.18. Nemorectoris partes sibi sumat. So Bezareads. Revel. 22 19.. If they can not shew. That they have received of the Lord, that which they deliver unto you 1 Cor. 11.23, let it be Anathema. These things if you do, Christ will be peace in the Common-wealth; whereas now nothing but bloudshed. Peace in our Schools of learning; whereas now nothing but contentions. Peace in the Church; where now nothing but Schismes. Peace with, or prevalency over forraign Nations, whereas now, it may be feared, they are in preparations of warre against us, and that upon great advantage. It was Abijahs encouragement unto vi∣ctory, and peace by it, against Jeroboam; That the Kingdom, Church, and worship of God was in that frame that God had set it 2 Chro. 13.8,9,10.. If it be objected that this Christening, as it were, the whole body of the Church and State in an universall de∣dication of it unto him, is not feasible; We answer:  That if Satan amongst the antient. Heathens, moulded the Common-wealth, to the square of
his worship; Qui Doctrinam Christi adversam dicunt Reip. dent exercitum talem, quales doctrina Christi esse mibi∣les jussit, dent tales Provinci∣ales, tales Mari∣tos, tales Conju∣ges, tales Paren∣tes, tales Filios, tales Dominos, tales Servos, tales Reges, tales In∣dices, tales deni∣que debitorum redditores & ex∣actores ipsius sisci, quales esse praecipit doctrina Christiana: & audeant eam di∣core adversam esse Reipublicae. Aug. ad Mar∣cell. epist. 5. and Mahomet rules in the state among the Turks, as well as in Religion; and Antichrist amongst his vassals hath been able to sway, the Scepter, as well as the Miter: Shall these be the strong men, and Christ the weak? Sure we are, that Gods own people had their Common-wealth squared according to the Church; and the Government of the Prince regulated by the precept of God; as at large is set down by Moses in the Law, touching the King Deut 17.14.. How∣soever; If you do what your duty is, withall your soul, and with all your might, This Court, and your persons, shall be guiltlesse: And the Kingdom, if they will not have the Lord Jesus to raign over them, shall know; That there have been Prophets to teach, and a Parliament to establish Christ among them: That there is; a more tollerable for Sodome and Gomorrah, then for this nation, hanging over them. Shake off the dust of your feet, it shall be a testimony against them. I began the exhortation to this honorable Assembly, with some Motives to the advancing of Christ, so let me end it. Consider therefore, That Christ hath done for you what in this kinde he requires of you. 1. He hath brought you into a relation of his own, which is of publike and common persons: He is the chief representative person, that ever was; being from all eter∣nity given a head unto the Church Eph. 1. ult.. Motives.  In like manner each of you stand for multitudes; some for hundreds, some for thousands, and some for ten thousands: tis Christ that hath bent the heart of so many (for to him is all power com∣mitted Matt. 28.18. over the hearts of men) to commit their lives, po∣sterities, and estates, yea souls to your faithfulnesse, wise∣dom and courage. 2. He hath continued you, when the adversaries device was onely to put you out, and non-Parliament you. He sate in heaven and laughed them to scorn; discovered their plots, enervated their force, and drew the hearts of the people, their purses and persons, to cover your heads in
the day of battle. Twas the men onely whose hearts the Lord touched that followed Saul, who was then zealous to fight the Lords Battells 1 Sam. 10.26.. 3. Christ hath advanced you, to be fellow souldiers with himself, in joyning the sword of the Law, with that of the word; to the slaying of the man of sinne, and casting down his strong holds: to purge his own house; set up his Lamps; to take off the yoak from the neck of his peo∣ple; to lay meat before them; to execute the Judgement, that is written against his adversaries. Hath delivered you from the strivings of the people; hath taught your heads to Councells of peace, your hands to actions of warre, and hath given you many glorious victories in the day of battell. (Though sometimes the people of God have sled before the men of Ai, because perhaps there hath been an Athan in the camp, or an Achitophell in the Councell, or an evill and unbeleeving heart to depart from the living God, not putting our trust in his help.) Now then for a recom∣pence, be ye also enlarged; Admit, retain and advance him, who hath done all these for you. 2. The observation will also afford a direction to the Ministry. who should be sonnes of peace; we preach-for peace, and behold warre: because we propose this opinion, and that reason, and the other authority, but not This man. Our pressing of the Law, should end in Christ; our ex∣hortations to holinesse, begin at him; so the Apostle in the Churches Catechisme, the Epistle to the Romans Room 3. c. 12. 3. This truth will direct also the people, who all gape for peace: That they take heed they spit not out Christ, for he is the Peace; both to the Kingdom; and (if they will receive him) to their Consciences but with this proviso; That he himself be the peace they hope for; because he that loves not the Lord Jesus, though never so desirous of his benefits, shall be, faith the Apostle, Anathema Maranatha 2 Cor. 16.21.. How can they expect peace by Christ; who oppose, or care not for his person, Ministers, Ordinances, and people?
Thus farre the second generall of the Text: the Last pro∣pounds. 3. Part of the Text. The means or manner how Christ will be peace, when the Assyrian shall come; and that is exprest in these words, We will raise up against him, seven Shepheards, and eight principall men. Which we should first have opened, but the discourse is much too large already; referring there∣fore the Text to Hezekiahs time, as was noted before, for then only they were, according to the letter, delivered from the Assyrian. And our Prophet was in Hezekiahs time Cap. 11. Observe: That a state being invaded in hostile manner, 3. Observa∣tion thence to the overthrow of their Laws, and Liberties, contrary to Co∣venants and Agreements, by those that should protect them; may defend themselves in the same Way; raise up Officers, and draw others into their society for that purpose. This will appear by considering, 1. Evidenced from the Text and The relation that Judah had to the Assyrians at this time; which was a re∣lation of subjection and servitude: and therefore tis said of Hezekiah 1 Kin, 18.7., when he brake this relation, that he rebelled and served not. 2. The occasion of this relation, and that was the securing of themselves in the time of Ahaz Cap. 16., Fa∣ther to Hezekiah, against Rezin and Pekah Kings of Syria and Israel. To which end Ahaz offers to Tiglath-Pilnezer, King of Assyria, his service; and by consent of the King∣dom, (as it seems) emancipates it to him, in a perpetuall homage, and league offensive, and defensive; whereupon he came and delivered them. 3. The violation; and that first on the part of Hezekiah Cap. 18 7., but that being reconciled, and satisfaction made, and accepted, (whereby the relation was again renewed, and he became Senacheribs servant) it was afterward broken by the Assyrian Vers 32.; who would have them now not as servants any more, but as slaves; and would have their persons: and estates to dispose of at his own pleasure: contrary to Covenants, which extended only to hommage and acknowledgement of his superiority and seig∣niory. Here upon the State. i. e. The King with the advise of his Nobles 2 Chro. 18.21., 1. Denies him; and 2. when he labours
forceably to put on what he had illegally required, he re∣sists him in the same way he came. i. e. By Arms: and withall solicites, and obtains the Egyptians (as Rabsa∣ke 1 Kin. 18.21. intimates) and the Ethiopians (as Interpreters Wolsius in loc. con∣ceive) to assist him: Judging, that as they were free frō the obligation of doing; so much more (being a state) from the necessity of suffering; unlesse God had given speciall command for it, as he did afterward to Zedekiah Jer. 27.12.. So Ahab King. 20.4. &c., when Benhadad King of Syria, to whom he was tributary, and his vassall; King. 20.4. &c. Other places., for he calls him his Lord the King King. 20 9., and con∣fesses himself to be his, and all that he had Vers 4.: yet when rea∣son would not satisfie; but besides the Dominion, he would have possession of all they had; Ahab, upon the advise of the Elders and people, refuses; the Syrian invades, they stand upon their Guard, and by Gods blessing utterly rout him. The parts of the Text joyntly. Considered whence a 2. It might be proved from the lesse, to the greater, the examples of particular men, against the violence of their Princes, in Scripture: as of David 1 Sam. 22.2. Cap. 23.12.: the people rescuing Jonathan Cap. 14 39.44, 45.: Elisha 2 King 6.32.: the Priests resisting Ʋzziah 2 Chron. 26.17., &c. if time permitted, might be freed from exceptions brought against them. 3. From the practise of the Church downward, as the Macchabees 1 Maccab. 2 66.; the Christians, as soon as they had Laws, as under Maximinus Euseb. lib. 9. cap. 7., and Valentinian Ambr. Epist. 1.5. cp 33.; the reformed Chur∣ches Germany, France, Ne∣therland, Scot∣land.: our own Bishops, as Jewell, Abbot, Bilson, Andrewes; and Princes; as Queen Elizabeth In Her pro∣tection of the Hollanders., King James In His league with them., and His present Majesty, in His expedition to Rochell: but this Ar∣gument being fully handled by others, we here passe it. Thus farre we have considered the parts of the Text severally; now consider them joyntly, and so there will flow this Observ. 5. Observ. That When such an adversary as was the Assy∣rian, shall invade such a Nation as was this of Judah at that time, Christ will then be peace to such a people. To cleare this: consider 1. what kinde of adversary the
Assyrian was. 2. Who the people of Judah were. 1. The Assyrian was of Cham the accursed seed Gen, 10.10. 2. A proud insolent enemy, full of scorn and contempt of the people of God 1 Kin. 18.23. 3. Full of blasphemy against God Vers. 35.. 4. Pretending Gods authority for what he did Vers 25.. 5. Pres∣sing the consciences of Gods people, with the most horrid crimes that might be against God and man; against God, overthrow of his worship Vers 22.; against man, rebellion Vers. 20.. 6. A cruell adversary, as was shewed before Vers. 29.. 7. An unreason∣able enemy, that nothing would satisfie but religion, bodies and estates Vers 32.. He would carry them out of their own Land. 8. A persidious adversary; for having accepted of Hezekiahs satisfaction, he yet returns with his Army Vers 14 17.. 9, A seditious adversary, appeals to the people Vers. 27.. 10. A flattering and fair promising Adversary Vers 31, 32.; but ayming at ruine of Law, Religion, Liberty, Estates Vers. 32.. 11. A slande∣rous adversary, against those that stood for the publike good, calling them deceivers, and imposters Vers. 29.. 2. The people of Judah were, 1. The people of God, who had Christ among them in the legall worship. 2. At this time, an humbling and reforming people; both in point of Gods worship, and of themselves. 2 Chron. 19. cap 30. cap. 31.. 3. A people sub∣mitting to any reason 2 Kin. 18.14.. 4. A resolved people to keep the Religion, Law, and Liberty, God had given them 2 Chron. 32.4.5., and industrious thereunto. 5. Prudent, to take all courses for their security, and to prevent any advantage to the enemy Vers. 3, 4.5.  King. 18.35. 6. A people that rested upon, and were obedient unto, under God. those of whose fidelity they had proofe 2 Chr. 32.8. 2 Kin. 18.36.. 7. Lastly, A people that carried it in a religious way, so as to keep God with them, depending especially upon him, and resigning themselves up to him 2 Chro. 32.7,8. 2. . Further proof of this by testimony of Scripture we shall omit, and onely hint to the reasons which may be: 1. Gods honour is engaged, both in respect of his peo∣ple; I Wrought for my names sake, that it should not be pollu∣ted among the heathen, in whose sight I had Ezek, 20 9.14 22. brought thee out,
three times repeated in that Chapter. 2. In respect of the enemy; shall not my soul be avenged on such a people at this Jere. 5.9.? 2. Reason.2. Gods truth only, which always, even upon humiliation hath promised deliverance, as multitudes of Scripture te∣stifie Deut. 30 1.2. Chr. 6 36. Jere. 18.17. Ezek 18. Joel. 2.&c.: much more when the adversary provokes him to do it, as Sol: speaks of rejoycing at an enemies hurt; that a man so doing, does provoke God to turn his hand from him Prov. 24.17.. 3. Reason.3. Gods constancy; being he hath once done it, we may not doubt him; for he is without variablenesse or shadow of change. The Jews plead this to Pilate, to do as he had ever done Mark 15.8.; and Christ himself; our fathers trusted in thee, and thou didst deliver them Psal. 22.4.. The Ʋse Ʋse. is for incouragement, and exhortation, The enemy hath done half our work by being so bad. Let not us by our hardnesse of heart, loose the benefit, by not doing the other. To conclude therefore: There remains a rest for the people of God Heb. 4.9.; and a Judgement written for his adversaries Psal 149 9. Let not us be as the old Israelites, whom God was forced to consume before hand, that they might not see the good he would do for his people Deut 2.14.. This do, therefore, and live: Humble we our selves this day under the mighty hand of God God Jam. 4.10., That he may lift us up: apply we our selves unto This man the Lord Christ, that he may be our peace. Resolve we to stand to our Protestation, of defending him with our Lives, Liberties, and Estates. And then in that day it shall be said: This (to wit, This man in the Text) is the Lord, and we have Waited for him; and we Will rejoyce in his salvation; for in this place, shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab(the false Brethren and implacable Adversaries of the Church) shall be trodden down, as Straw is trodden down for the dunghill Isai 25 9. Errata. PAg. 3. Line. 11. For Gods, read God; with a Comma. p. 6. l. 19. Put out so. Same page last line but one, for thus this, r. thus; this pag 7. lin. 4. fax Chaldee Kings, r. Chaldee, Kings, p. 21. l. 23. put out with. p. 25. l. 8. adde, if there were an before Ahab: and for will, r. would l. 10. after matters, adde, there were an: and after Ahaz, for will, r. would. p. 27 l. 28. after he, adde, Papist and Cavalier. p. 28. last line but one, for mouth, r. master. p. 30. 1 6 for partly Gods. r. ply God, p. 31. l. 10. for him, r. God, p. 39. l. 17. for him, r. my holy hill, l. 27. after Pilate, adde who, l 28. for because, r. becames FINIS.
