T2406 99833686 38164
A True ACCOUNT OF THE Trial, Condemnation, and Burning OF THE POPE AT Aberdene in Scotland, JANUARY the 11th. 1689. Which was supposed to have been performed by His Holiness in the greatest splendour, having come on purpose to congratulate the good Success the Roman-Catholicks had in this Kingdom, and more particularly in Aberdene: In order to which His Holiness being seated on a Chair of State, with his Crown on his Head, his Keys on his Arm, and clothed with Scarlet Robes lined with Ermine; Began his procession from the Colledge-Gate, about four a clock in the Afternoon, and was accompanied as follows. FIrst Marched a Company of Men carrying Links, six a breast. Next Marched the Janitor of the Colledge, carrying  Colledge Mace before six Judges in Scarlet Robes. Next Marched four Whislers Sounding. Then four Priests, four Jesuits, four Popish Bishops, r Cardinals, all in their Robes, at a competent di∣stance each from others, betwixt a Lane of Burning  boy's on each side. Then followed a Jesuite in Embroidered Robes, car∣ing a great Cross. Lst of all came his Holiness, carried on a Magnifi∣cent Chair of State, with his Privy-Counsellour the wil sometime appearing at his back, having a great ber of burning tapers about him. In this manner  carried thorow all the streets of the City, distribu∣ Pardons and Indulgences Gratis: And being come o the High-street, near the Cross, he placeth himself . Theatre Erected on purpose; where after several addresses made to his Holiness, one of his Cardinals is the following Speech. MOst Holy Father, of all the Earth the Prince, Who keeps the Keys of Hell, & Heaven, e're since Peters days: You God of gods on Earth, o can Bind, Loose, Save, Punish, at one Breath, Souls of Persons: Condemn both Kings & Crowns, o can make Souldiers Coats of Card'nals Gowns. at Joy is here! To see that You should Grace with Your Presence, in so Remote a Place: therefore to you Presents offer now, all the World to Baals gods must bow re's none dare Question Your Prerogative, t Holy Father, then for ever live. ll make all owne Infallibility, de, we'll add you have Ubiquity, e still at Rome, tho' ye have grac'd this day ith your own presence: Hail Father, Hail for ay. Pop. Good Cardinal, we know this is the time For to advance our Intrest, let's Combine, Spare ye no Arts our Lustre to support; Go search all Mines t'enrich our shining Court. You may sell Heaven, of Religion make a Trade, Indulgences in plenty can be had. Car. Most Holy Father, while Priest-craft bears the sway, We'll make Heaven's Gate a Lock to your own Key: 'Gainst Hereticks our Swords we'll quickly draw, And will perform this Your so Sacred Law: Hundreds of Thousands we will make to share On common Doom, no Sex nor Age we'll spare, No kneeling-beauties Tears, no Virgins Cryes, No Infants smiles, none spar'd with us, all dyes. About the time that his Holiness and the Cardinal is at this Conference, Enters Father Peters in great hast, who delivers his Holiness a Letter; upon Read∣ing whereof his Holiness falls a-Swown, and the Devil appears at his back to help him; upon sight of all which the Crowd cry. Now Babylon falls, come, come, let us pull down That Scarlet Whore, and break the Triple Crown: We'll Countermine her Plots, we will Combine, And ever pray for Religion and our King. His Holiness awakes, and being possest with an ex∣traordinary Collick, (the Devil all the while holding his head) Vomits Plots, Daggers, Indulgences, and the Blood of Martyrs, and cryes. Pop. Oh! We're undone. Oh! Mr. Devil, pray Help us with your advice, without delay. Dev. Hells Plots are ended, Israels GOD combines, To crush our Counsels, to break our Designs. Pop. Oh! Mr. Devil, pray then take me hence Unto your Court, since ye'll find no defence.
