e1064_17 99869055 169217
AN ORDINANCE For giving further time for APPROBATION OF Publique Preachers. blazon of the Commonwealth Fryday June 23. 1654. ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and His Council, That this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published. Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council. London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to His Highness the Lord Protector, 1654.
blazon of the Commonwealth AN ORDINANCE For giving further time for approbation of Publique Preachers. WHereas by an Ordi∣nance, Entituled, An Ordinance appointing Comissioners for appro∣bation of Publique Prea∣chers, It is, among o∣ther things, Ordain∣ed, That in case any person who since the first day of April, One thousand six hundred fifty and three, hath been placed in any Benefice or Publique Lecture, shall not, before the four and twentieh day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and four,
obtain approbation and admittance, in manner as in the said Ordinance is expressed, Then the person or persons, who have right thereunto, shall or may present or nominate some other fit and able person to such place; Forasmuch as divers persons concerned in that Clause of the said Ordinance, have tendred themselves to approbation, whose cases could not by the time aforesaid be determined, Be it Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the Advice and Consent of His Council, That the said Commissioners be, and hereby are Impowred to give Approbation and ad∣mittance to any person concerned in that clause of the said Ordinance, according to the rules mentioned and expressed in the said Ordinance, at any time before the three and twentieth day of July next, and that in the mean time no per∣son or persons shall present or nominate any person to any Benefice or Publique Lecture, in the place of any such person, for want of such approbation, by the time a∣foresaid, any thing in the said recited Ordi∣nance to the contrary notwithstanding. But if such approbation and admittance be not by the said three and twentieth of July obtain∣ed by the persons therein concerned, then such person or persons as have right thereunto may present or nominate some other fit and able per∣son to such place, according to the said Ordi∣nance. Fryday June 23. 1654. ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, That this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published. Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Council.
