A4099 669.f.12[96] 99869746 162887
At the Committee of the Militia of London the 3d. of Iune, 1648. Ordered, That Major Generall Skippon be desired to give Orders to Colonell Manwaring and Colonell Webb, and the rest of the Gentlemen, to the effect, as is in the following Writing. WHereas the Committee of the Militia for the City of London, have (upon a motion made to them from divers persons Inhabitants in this City) given full power and authority to Me to give Orders to all such as shall voluntarily Mount and Arme themselves or Friends, as a guard to my person, to assist in the suppressing of Tumults and disorders for the safety of Parliament and City: I doe hereby appoint the new Artillery-Ground to be their place of Generall Randezvouz in case of Alarm, unless some other place be here∣after expresly appointed; where they shall receive such further Order as the necessities and urgency of their foresaid employment shall require. Philip Skippon. At the Committee of the Militia the Tenth of June, 1648. ORDERED, THat Major-Generall Skippon be Captain of the Volunteer-Horse who willingly offer and List themselves under his Command for the safety of Parliament and City, and for the present, till such time as this Committee shall see cause to recall this Order. And the said Major-Generall Skippon is hereby desired and ordered to acquaint this Committee with the numbers of them, as they shall increase to the number of Two hundred; and not exceed that num∣ber, but by the approbation of this Committee. And this Committee doth further Order and Declare, That this voluntary action of any that finde Horse in this manner, shall not be made use of as a motive or occasion to the compelling any of them to finde Horse hereafter. Signed in the Name and by the warrant of the Committee of the Militia London, By Adam Banckes Clerk to the said Committee. At the Committee of the Militia London, the Twentyeth of June. 1648. WHereas this Committee have formerly granted, That two hundred Volunteers might Arm and Mount themselves under the command of Major-Generall Skippon: The same number is hereby confirmed and inlarged to the number of Three hundred Horse as formerly. Signed in the Name and by the warrant of the Committee of the Militia of London: By Adam Banckes Clerk to the said Committee. At the Committee of the Militia of London, the 2 of August, 1648. THe Committee of the Militia London, for the better satisfying of their fellow Citizens, and remo∣ving all jealousies in the City, have thought fit to publish these severall Orders above mentioned, for the inlisting and exercising of the Volunteer Horse, under Colonell Manwaring and Colonell Webb, which have been commanded by Major Generall Skippon, and the said Committee conceive, that these Horse have done very good service for preventing and suppressing of Tumults, and thinke fit to conti∣nue them till further Order. Signed in the Name and by the warrant of the Committee of the Militia London, By Adam Banckes Clerk to the said Committee. Aug. 2London Printed by Richard Cotes.
