B2912 E2132_2 99867295 119601
ΚΟΣΜΟΒΡΕΦΙΑ, OR THE INFANCY OF THE WORLD: With an Appendix of Gods resting day, Edn Garden; Mans Happiness before, Misery after, his Fall. Whereunto is added, The Praise of Nothing; Divine Ejaculations; The four Ages of the world; The Birth of Christ; Also a Century of Historical Appli∣cations; With a Taste of Poetical FICTIONS. Written some years since by N. B. then of Eaton School; And now published at the request of his Friends. London, Printed for Robert Crofts, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Crown in Chancery Lane, under Sergeats Inn, 1658.
Basilius Seluciensis: Deus cùm res creatas in morem scalae adaptaverit, per cas sui amantibus, ascensum ad se extruxit. Sermone pimo. Basilius Magnus: Deus fecit mundum: ut bonus, utilem: ut sapiens, pulcherimum: ut poten, maximum. Si haec didicerimus, nos ipsos agnoscemus, Dum cognoscemus, conditorem adorabimus, Domino serviemus, patrem glorificabimus, nutri∣cium diligemus, benefactorem reverebimur, autho∣rem praesentis et futurae vtae colere nunquam desi∣nemus. In Hexametr. Augustinus. Interrogavi molem mundi, dic mihi, esne tu deus meus? et responit voce forti: Non sum Deus tuus, sed per ipsum ego sum: quem quaers in me, ipse fecit te et me, et cum quaere supra te et supra me. In solilqūijs. Pro. 16. 4. The Lord hath made all things for himself. Pro. 3. 19. The Lord by wisdome hath founded the Earth, by understanding hath he established the Heavens. Psal. 8, 1. O Lord our God, how excellent &c.
To the Right Honorable, FRANCIS ROUS, Esq; Provost of Eaton Coll. and one of the Council to his High∣ness the Lord Protector: N. B. wisheth encrease of grace, and peace, in Christ here; and everlast∣ing glory hereafter. Right HONOƲRABLE, JT is now six years compleat, since I was through your favour, removed from my late reverend fathers side; and plac'd in that Famous, and flourishing School of Eaton: from whence, after somc continu∣ance there, haveing not the happiness (nor was I alone) to be transplanted elsewhere, in a Colledg of the same foundation: whi∣ther want of learning, or somewhat else, as much (what if I say more?) look'd upon
by many now adays, or both, were impe∣diments? I shall not now stand to deter∣mine; but sure I am, though I could be so forward as the best, yet was I as ardently desirous after knowledg as the most, and happily, I may truely say of others, what I should blush to say of my self; that in them was verified that of the Poet Juve∣nal, Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusta domi. Can vertue be advanc'd? now, vertue's poor; Thou bring'st nought (freind) goe get thee out of door. Neither doth it now repent me of going into that Labyrinth, though I could not get out by the same clue: for I confess it hath much bettered my knowledg, in the finding out many difficult intricacies in the most useful tongues. And that I might not be ungrateful unto you by whome I have profited, I thought it not amiss (espe∣cialy
knowing you to be affected with Po∣etry) to present you, for a new-years gift, these first fruits gathered at play-times there; they being the recreative condi∣ments to my Philological Studies; hum∣bly craving your Honors acceptance of them: And although they are not so fair, nor so ripe for your sake as I could wish them, yet are they as good as the third Lustrum of mine age was then able to produce, which I hope may render them the more pardonable, if they taste harsh and untoothsome. I cannot but say they are too mean to stand in competition with so great a favour; yet I conceive they may serve as well as the best, to testifie my un∣willingness to stifle your name in the Ri∣ver Lethe, or to rake up the glowing em∣bers of the encourageing bounty of my honorable Maecenas, in the ashes of Obli∣vion: My Muse therefore haveing no∣thing else, leaves these leafes with you
as a concise Epitomie of the volumi∣nous thankfulness own you by Canterb. Dec. 29. 1656. Sir, Your Honours obliged servant, and dayly Oratour. NICH: BILLINGSLY.
To the Candid Reader, Gentle Reader, I Little thought when first I composed these few lines, that they should ever appeare in publique view; but thy kind entertainment of my first Pilgrim that adventured a∣broad into the world, hath emboldned me (my friends likewise, whome I have cause to honor) very much encouraging me thereunto, to thrust upon thee this second also, which how well thou wilt use I know not, for that I must stand to thy courtesie; But I tell thee this beforehand, thou must not expect here any strong lines, high tow'ri fancies, and soaring inventions, which were (when I penned this) inconsistent with my boyish years. If the natures of Wells,
Rivers, Fountains, Springs, Trees, Plants, Flowers, Birdes, Beasts, Fishes, Starrs &c. delight thee to know, thou hast them here set down as well as I could, and I wish they were better for thy sake then they are: although, I must needs say, I colected them for mine owne pleasure and profit: For the first I found no better remedy to rouse my selfe out of my dumpish malencholy (to which I was naturaly enclined) then a fit of Poetry. For the second I conceived that my digesting into a little roome what I found scatered here and there in divers Authors, touching this subject (which is so exceeding compre∣hensive) might be advantageous to my me∣mory in the retaining of the several Species of things created, and that so my soul might rise up to a higher pitch, in admiring at the All creators glory. Thus (Reader) dost thou see how I aymed at mine owne ends in scribling this Tractate. Now my desire is thou maist find the same ends in reading
of it, that the Lyricks words might be made good in me; Aut prodesse volunt &c. To profit or delight, Poets take care; Or to doe both at once, delighted are, Thy freind to serve thee if thou pleasest. N. B.
The Worlds Creation, sung by Mr. Nicholas Billingsly, at fifteen years of Age. PEace to Du Bartas Ghost: no murthers here, Or should we touch our deare dead Sylvester Would vocal bloud out murther murther cry, With witnesses in gules, 'gainst Billingsl? No, no great souls, your weeks all yeares out-run, And like your world wait on Cnflagation. At first divinest love with brooding wings Made warme the worlds great egg, in which all things Like Atomes slept untill th' Eternal one Old nothing wakened to perfection. Since when some wits at Mose bush took light, Enough to blind the dim▪ey▪d Stagyrite: And by their numbers taught Philosophy; How, when began the worlds Eiphanic. Amongst the rst our friend not past fifteen, Who from his girdle upward's, epicene; Apollo-like, without a beard, nor can His doubtful chin betray him to be man. This Cockrel-muse betimes in his owne morn, Hath clap'd his wings, and sung the World is born. Wl: Iacob.
To my friend the Author of this Book cui Titulus est Κοσμοβρεφία Non sat erat legisse semel, bis terque libellum, Ipse quater legi, lectus & usque iuvat. Dull Panigericks are not worth a rush, Good wine will sell without an Ivy bush; A well compacted Poem will invite Each Readers pallate, whet the appetite: A comely feature needs no paint, and where Bright Sol doth shine, we need no Tapers there. Then take this Nothing naked as it is, A Metaphisick, Hymne, or Genesis: Du Bartus first, (let Bartas have his due) Imparted to us what Sylvester knew. My learned friend well mounted, ergo bolder, Vpon Du Bartas and Sylvester's shoulder, Did (Janus like) look backward and before And saw as much as all the rest, or more: Nay pregnant he, before his glass had run Full fifteen winters, was the Muses Son; Of nothing, he could something then indite, To non-plus him that was the Stagyrite. O cursed Heriticks! who dare to tell A race of men, before the first man fell: Read but this Book thou wilt beleeve as soon, Phantastick world's created in the Moon. Edvardus Browne Cantuar. Reg. Scho. Archi-didasc. Januar. 1. 5656.
— — God, the most great and mighty Architect, Did all of nought, but his owne love, erect; And by the pleasure of hi free good will, With wonderous works the heaven and earth did fill And on each creature in this Ʋniverse, Did strange and sundry natural gifts disperse: His boundless power, the dead from ground can raise And out of Sucklings mouths doth perfect praise: VVisedome he gives to men of elder yeares, And it in very young ones oft appear: VVitness the Author of this worthy Book, VVho at his age of fifteen undertook This his industrious and painful task, Gods wonders great in nature to unmasque: VVherein the reader may his soul delight Of God himself in haveing some sweet sight: VVhich should the heart to be set on him move, For his great goodness, wisdome, power and love. By R. Cr. Reg. Scho. Cantuar. Hipo didasc.
Amic suo Authore amore nec non affinitate conjunctissimo. Ternis rem grandem verbis, includere dictus Unus erat Patrum; sit tria verba liber: Seria mira bonis ponis graviter que libelum Musa dat; exiguum nec sale mole carens. Tho: Wotton. To my Son (in Law) upon his Poem. A Silly Ass for some disaster, Reprov'd the madness of his Master: And shall not I speak now in season, Who am a man endued with reason; Especially when God appears So merciful to tender years; In that he would his praise be sung By one that was exceeding young; To teach us how to bless his name, Who all-things did of nothing frame: My prayers shall still to God be sent, To bless his little instrument. Iohn Stodder.
To my deare Brother the Author of this Book called . VVHat write so well as this, and but fifteen? How ripe art thou in wit? in years how green? In the Aurora of thine age, betimes, How expert art thou in composing Rhimes? My Muse (alas!) scarce ever could aspire To make a verse; Apollo and his Lyre Are strangers to me; on the forked hill I never slumbred; never bath'd my Quill In Hipocrene: but haveing read thy Book Of the Worlds birth, my Pen in hand I took, And went to write, indeed, I could not chuse But make a verse, inspired by thy Muse. I well remember what a deal a doe I mae to fumble out a verse or two. VVhen on Apollo, and the triple Trine, I only did reply for Discipline; VVorth's in thy Book, and what care I who know it, Love wings my Muse; 'tis love makes me a Poet▪ John Billingsly.
To my good friend Mr. Nicholas Billingsly in Honor of this work, penned by him about the fifteenth yeare of his age. GOd that did all things out of Nothing raise, And hath from mouths of Babes ordain'd his praises When thou wast nothing but a suckling Muse. The Chaos of a man, he did infuse His grace so in thy heart, that thou in verse Didst portray out his glorious universe: To sing his praises, he did make thy Pen Distil celestcal Nectar: yea, and when Thou wert a stripling he did then adorne Thy fruitful head with th' Amalthean horn. Thou like another Grand-seir, to each creature Hast given a name according to its Nature: Of Trees, Plants, Stones, their secret mysteries Of Beasts, and Birds thou writest plaine Histories: Whiles others af thine Age mispent their times In toys and pastimes, thou in sacred Rhimes Applid'st thy self to celebrate the praise Of God that first hath lent unto thee days: And if such fruit thy tender buds bring forth, In riper age admir'd shall be thy worth. Jo: Swan. Cleric. Ian: 20. 1656.
To my friend the Author, on his Poem intituled , WHen I survey thy well-composed piece I stand amaz'd at thy rare Artifice Thy curious Pencil guided by a hand More skilful then Apelles could command, Hath, to the gretest Artists emulation, A stately Landskip of the Worlds Creation, Drawn to the life: my friend each polish'd line Is guilded o're with eloquence divine: VVhich feeds with loftier Ayers, juditious ears Then those causd by the motion of the Spheres. I'le only aedd, by way of approbation, Thy serious work's an heavenly Recreation, Francis Taylor. Cant. Jan. 1. 1656.
To his very loving friend, M. Nicholas Billingsly, on his acurate Poem. ATomes, say some, by chance together thrown The world was made of: sure had they but known Of this its nobler birth, not one would dare To say that chance could make it half so fair. Here Epicurus who is Picture drew, n lines like his opinion seldome true, In this composed piece, might at one sight Have seen to set both verse and judgment right▪ Thus Sir, takeing the blot from Poetrie, In this you make both it and truth agree. D. R. Col. Mert
In amici sui opus exquisitum Κοσμοβρεφίαν. . , . ; . Jo: Cox. E Coll. Mer▪ O on nuper Etnens▪
In Amici sui meriisim: Nicholas Billingsly amaenam Κοσμοβρεφίας Synopsin Carmen Enco∣miasticon, Januar. 16. 1657. In nova fert animus Lector? novus iste libellus Mira quidem dictu, sed nova sacra tenet. Protulit ex nihilo divina potentia cuncta: Infantem Mundum, Musa tenella canit; Musa diu laitans haec, Etonensis Alumni, Proripit in lucem; dant tria lustra senem. Accipias lectu dignissima carmina; fructus Si ribi; & Authori laus; honor atque Do. On the same: Those various Species which thine eye may look Vpon i'th' Volumne of the worlds grat Book, Six days was Midwife too; and then God ceas'd From working, yet from working doth not rest: For he it is supporteth all things still, By the Eternal purpose of his will. My friend (kind Reader) sends thee nothing less Then all-things pressing, from the sweating Press: A worke, some years agoe by him compil'd, At fitfteen years of age, a very child: The Muses nurst him on Parnassus tops, And fil'd his Quill with Heleconian drops; Which if thou mind, I make no question of it But thou wilt find pleasure co-chaind with profit. Tho. Carter. Cleric.
In Amici sui meritò Charissimi Mundi Cuna∣bula siue Κοσμοβρεφίαν. Carmine si molli vafrum traducere Ulyssem, Divorum{que} Ortua, truculenta{que} Cesaris arma Dicere Apollineis dignentur frondibus altis: Ab Jove principium prima{que} ab origine Mundi, Rerum primatias versu diducere causas, Quae laus? quod decus est aeterno marmore dignum? Scivimus Iliadas angusta in nuce coarctus; Ast hic in parvo cernendus Cortice Mundus; Omnia nempe tuo Serventur clausa libello; At nè cuique nihil justè videretur abesse, Et nihil extremum merito superadditur ipsum; Talia si scribas aevo miranda Minori, Qanta suis tandem seris speremus ab annis. Jo. VVind Interi. Templi alumnus et nuper in Coll: VVad: Commns.
Deo Ter Opt. Max. OH from thy Radient Throne above Look down on me, Great God of love: With sacred Light my Soul infuse, And wing, for flight, mine unfledg'd Muse, That she may like the morning Lark Mount up and sing: Lord I'me a spark; But if thy Bellows please to blow Me up, Oh then I needs must glow. My God to me a Being gave, To use those little gifts I have; Oh may I then to after days Make known my All-Creators praise; As by instinct the Loadstone draws The iron, as the Amber, straws; So let thy grace mine heart attract, Dear Lord! O make me have respect To all thy righteous Laws, begin To purge out all my dross: my Tinn Remove far from me; Oh inflame My frozen Spirit, to praise thy Name.
Let Heaven fill me to the brim Above the world, Oh may I swim. And (as it were) my soul divorce From Transient joys: Oh steer my course According to thy compass: Guid My reeling Pinace, make the Tide Tranquil, and let the milder gale Of thy sweet Spirit, stuff my Sail, Ʋntil I safely am arriven At the desired Haven, Heaven; Where I shall see the God of nature, And always praise the worlds Creator.
The Worlds Infancy. The Argument. God begins the Worlds Creation, Light from out of darkness brings. Giving wondrous Operation, To Wells, Rivers, Fountaixs, Springs. SECT. I. GOd, when besides himself there nothing was; But a rude Chaos, a confused Mass, Of things disordered; all together hurl'd, Did by his providence ordaine the world. And first his, power, and coelestial might, Cleare light extracted, from the shades of night, Then did he spread a glorious Curtain out, Spangled with Starrs, and glory round about, Embost with pearl, embroydered with gold, With Chrysolits, and Carbuncles enrould.
O work to be admir'd; what pen? what story! Can point▪ can blazon the Almighties glory. I wanting Eagles eyes, am over-daz'd, With too great light and winking stand amaz'd, Thus, thus, heav'ns Architect by's word of power, Edficated the aeherial Tower, The Mass he dissipating, drew from thence, The Center of the va Circumference, The soid substance altogether clung, And by g'omerica proportion hung, In figure of a Spaer; this naked globe He circumvested in a sea greene robe, The Elements, Earth, Water, Ayer, and Fire, Took each their station, Vucan did aspire To the sublimest Orb, Jove next in power Predomiates: next him, the watry Bower, Of curl'd-hair Neptune stands and last of all Doth drossie Vesta to the bottome fall: Vsta's inthron'd, Vesta that doth adorne, Her breasts wih flowers, and her lap with corne, Vesta sik down beneath her brothers sway Being of more solidity then they▪ The dry▪ and humid, heavy, and the light, Soft▪ hard, b'ing opposites doe disunite. Wet things with wet, cold things cōmix with cold, Hot things with hot, do correspondence hold.
From the Seas raging Tyranny, the Land Is kept (Oh pow'r) with slipp'ry walls of sand. Had the Sea leave to rāge beyond its bound Earth' Fabrick would (undoubtedly) be drown'd; But the Almighties force of arms asswage Th'impetuous threats of her imperious rage: The Sea (now mild) engirds the earth abou, And like a Snake goes wriggling in and out: The Mrine Empress lib'rally bestows Her store, and into divers Channels flows. A River in the late world brought to light Runs all the day, and resteth all the night. Conspicuous silver waved Euphrates, Pyes tribute to the domineering seas, The streams of Tanais, transparent Po And clear Erid'nus, from the Ocean go. The rive Erax, and the swift Meander, Whose winding Mazes in and out doe wander, (Much like the Lab'rinth of faire Rosamond Or that Daedalian frame which did abscond The monstrous Minotaur, in former dayes So intricate for their retorted wayes) Niphates bringing Tigers up and Phasis Fall on and Court with amorous embraces The fair Queen Glance; nimble-footed Rhene Whose earth-dividing course both run between
The Belgians, and the Germans, hath its motion From Phorbas, Phorbas Kingling of the Ocean. The Amazonian Thermodontin brooks, And Oax also to the Ocean looks. The river Jordan is a stream compounded Of Jor and Dan, by curs'd Asphaltis bounded. Gold-sanded Tagus, and the bow-string Tybur, Yellow Pactolus, and Cantabrian Iber, Take from the Seas their rise, the flowing Ganges, With wandring current through the orient ranges Septemfluous Nilus, and Armenian Tigris, Libanian Jordan, Aquitanian Ligris, Arcadian Ladon, and the Thuscian Arne, The Thracian Stroymon, the Campanian Sarne, Rhone, Incest, Lister, and the Marsyan tydes, Flow from, and to, the swelling Oceans sides: Caucasian Indus, which receiveth plenty Of pleasant rivers wanting one of twenty. And what doth Simois? and what Matrona, But waite and tend upon the Queen Diona? All rivers in the world, or smal or mighty Derive their lineage, from great Amphitrite, Hence comes our British Severn, Wye, Lugg, Um∣ber And thousands too innumerous for number. But stay my Muse thou hadst almost forgot The Kentish Medway one of greatest note
Next to that famous navigable Thames Whose breasts are silv'red with compounded streams Which bear up floating houses, what a train Of lusty watermen doth Thames maintaine? Who though with rapid force they'r backwards hurl'd Yet are they often forwards in the world. Great London is the Bow, the Thames the string The Boats are arrows which about do spring The Streams Sabbatical do rest and stay. In observation of the Sabbath day. Add here the German Savenire Pouhont, And med'cinable Spa in great account For its effecting strange unheard of things, Unparalel'd by none unless the springs Of Tunbridg famous in our Kentish county, For casting up their subterraneous bounty, Which relishing of Iron, and sulph'ry veines Cures well nigh all infirmities and paines, Nay lengthens life causing the fates t'unspin Lifes drawn out thred, hath any got the spleen? The dropsie? the vertigo? or the stone? These waters will yield remedy alone. Suppose th'art Lunatick, or Planet struck, Hear's that will help thee, if thou hast the luck To come and take it, is it thine endeavour To be rid of the Collick or the feavour,
Or the Obstructions of the Mesentery, Reines, Melt, and liver? wouldest thou fain be merry And freed from Melancholy? if you pleas To use these waters, doubtless, you'l have ease; Gouts Ischyatica's, the French-mans pox, And what flows from Pandora's opened box These Springs resist, and for your comfort here Green sickness, Maids, a remedy is neere. And you, disheartned Sarahs, do but come And drink, and you'l have an enlarged wombe. In brief, to cure all maladies, there dwells A Soveraign vertue in these Tunbridge Wells. Nor must I leave those Bristoll Baths which are For their effects so wonderful, so rare. All Aches Cramps, Convulsions▪ (and what not?) Dy in those waters naturaly hot. Well, I coud wish those Authors of disorders To much encreased in those Bistoll borders I mean that frantick self-afflicting crew Of trembling Quakers, with their Captain too Tongue-bored Nailor, branded in the forehead Wth B for blasphemy, were in those torrid And lding Currents forc'd to stand awhile My Geius tells me they'd at last recoyle fond conceits, and soon be a forsaking Their censuring others, and give over Quaking.
The ub'rous fountains and each conduit brings Its store of water from their bubbling springs, Of Neptune's stock Acidalus came down, Yielding her store, to the Baeotian Town. So Aganippe is a sacred fountaine, U'd by the Ladies of the by-fork'd mountaine, And Arethusa, whose mellifluous wombe Is sweet, nay sweeter then the hony-combe. What should I speak of th' Hippocrenian Well? And what shall I of the Clitorian tell? The first wherof the Muses haunt a brook The hoofe of winged Pegasus hath strook The other Fount, (it seems to me divine,) Can make men sober when ore took with wine, The Well Telpissa, is so cold so chill That it Tyresia, (as they say) did kill, Th' Ammonian Fount, is cold and hot by turns Cold in the day, and in the night it burns. 'Tis said the sportfull Eleusinian spring, Will dance when shepherds are disposed to sing, Clarean a Well (for it there needs no strife,) Doth lengthen eloquence, but shortens life, Sweet Helicon's a consecrated Well. To th'Muses, in it do the Muses dwell. Phineus, a Well, is wholsome in the day To drink, but hurtful in the night (men say)
The fount Cabura yields a fragrant smell, The well Halcyon, danceth very well, Cilician Cydnus, cures the gout. the spring Leucoges eye sight to the blinde doth bring, Cyzices quencheth hot Idalian fire, A draught of Lycus causeth life t'expire. All things doe in the gulf of Sylla sink. The Stream Anyger, casts a loathsom stink: Azanium is a Well which doth incline, Bacchus his Genial Friends to loath all wine. Athamas water setteth wood on fire Making the kindled flames for to aspire. There are a number more which he that looks Shall find set down in Learned Authors Books, My Muse hath touch'd the chiefest she hath read, And tir'd with search, discretion calls to bed.
The Argument. God doth in a lib'ral measure, Furnish these inferiour Bowers With a large unsumm'd up treasure, Of Trees, and Fruits, Plants and Flowers. SECT. 2. AS soon as Gods all pow'rful hand had laid The worlds foundation, to the earth he said, Lay by thy mournful weeds, unite thy powers, And make a garland of the choysest flowers, Embost with Gems, and Diamonds; then crowne Thy front, and put on an Embroider'd gown, Nay and the more thy glory for to grace, With liveliest colours beautifie thy face. Put one thy Periwig, all fruits, plums, pears, Shall hang like Iewels, dangling in thine ears. With that arose this new proclaimed Queen, Her Ebon mantle turn'd a galant green, Befring'd with flowers; the Gorget that she wore Was lac'd with Flora's pride, bestarched ore With Deaws, and rory mists, her hand did hold A royal Scepter made of burnish'd gold.
Rich Gems, rare Iewels, pretious stones are set Up charily in her wombs Cabinet. This stately Empress don's her dangling Tsses, And makes no more ado but tricks and drsses Her wanton bosome with delightful flowers, 'Gainst Ioves descending in his silver showers. The heav'ns as braclets, her pure hands bedeck The stars are Beads which goe about her neck, Her lilly neck so that fair Ʋenus seeks Her heav'n-stol'n beauty in her earthly cheeks, Wild Ash trees from earths swelling matrice spring The river Sallowes, fens forth Alders bring The Mirtle loves the shore, Vines doe enfold Their arms on hils, the Yew tree haunts the cold, The fruitfull Almond from earths wombe doth come The sweet-scent Aromatick Balsamum; The box-tree ever green, the tow'ring Cedar, The stately Pine, which doth in height succeed her The lovely Chery-trees sanguineous sap, Is nourished in Demegorgon's lap, The warr us'd Cornell, and the Mst-ful Beach, The fun'ral Cypress, and the velvet Peach, The Ambrosiack Cinamon, the Figg, The Pmpkin and the aged Oke (so big) The Iuniper which yields a fragrant smell, And Sea green Willows on the earth do dwell.
The Daphnean Lawrel tree, which doth not dread The thund'ets voyce, whose hair-abounding head Is never bald; but doth for ever flourish, Springs from the earth, it is the earth doth norish The never fading Palms; the beautious Firre Streight as an arrow; and the red'lent Myrrhe, The broad branch'd Plane-tree, with his spacious leaves The wanton Jvy which adhers and cleavs To other Arbors, groweth ev'ry where, The downy Poplr, The Piram'dal Peare, The Melt-tree, Weapons Needles Thred, affords Clothes-Honey, Sugar, Balm, Wine, Parchment, Cords The Vine suporting Eim, the pearly Plum, The balefull Pch-tree, sweating forth its gum. The fulsome Bullace, and the prickly Holly, The furr'd coat Chestnut, and the shrub Trifolly, The golden Orange, and the plush-coate Quince, Which ord'red well yields Marm'let for a Prince, The shade Linden, Goosberries and Wardens, The Mulb'ry Raspb'ry, Strawb'ry, grow in gardens All these and many more come from the earth Earth gives them nutriment as well as birth, The earth, mother of all things; suckles all Her vegetative ofsprings, great and small At Gods command Dame Tellus deck'd her bowers With verdent hearbs, and Odorif'rous Flowers,
Of sundry vertues, and of sundry hew, Some green, some red, some yellow, white, some blew. Here doth the Cardu's-Benedictus grow, Both to the plague and stone a deadly foe: Here jaundis-cureing, Horehound, which is good Against the Asthma; heer is Southern-wood Good against Feavours; here the Worm-wood eases All Surfeits, drunk'ness, Cholerick Diseases. Cough-chasing, Rocket, Rue-expelling vapors, Which dim the sight; the pallat-pleasing Capers Helping the Spleen; sweet-scenting Marjoram Is here; and there the Bawm of Abraham; Here grows the Beet; yonder the Daffadill; And there the fragrant spreading Cammomill; Here is Mint, Centory, and Columbine, And there the Cowslip and the Eglantine; See here is Ey-bright, Annis, Cummin, Carry, Dittander there, behold the hearb Cost-mary, Here is Germander, Melilot also, And Harts-tongue, Harts-horn, Harts-ease, there do grow Roots white and red, and chockly, Artycocks, Here maidens hair is, alias, Venus locks, Here thriveth Hyssop, Lavender, and Sorrel, Yonder the Night-shade, called Pety-morel, Here Palma-Christi doth it self expand, There Peneroyal, royaly doth stand.
Here groweth Parsly, yonder sprouteth Tansy; And here the Lovage, yon' the Lovers Pansy. Her's drowsie Popy, there are Dasies blowing, And sweet Angelica is yonder growing: Here Cic'ry springs, there Fumitory thrives, Staves-aker lives here, that the Lowse unlives. Here's sovr'aine Rhubarb, yonder is sweet Basil, There Fullers hearb, known by the name of Thasil, Yonder spread Mandrakes, the neglected Nettle, There doth its foot in Tellus bosom settle. Here's Sav'ry, Savery, and Helebore, (Of which they say Anticyras hath store) Parsnips, and Turneps, and Potatoes too, Coleworts, and Cabbage, and the Radish doe Rise from the ground; Elicampane, the Rape, And all plants els have from the earth their shape All sorts of grain Wheat, Barley, Oates, and Poder Whose sap-less stalks the stall-fed Ox do fodder. Burrage, and Bugloss, Fennel, Water-cresses, Dame Tellus with all these her bosom dresses, Now walk we (Reader) into Flora's Bowers, For recreation; here are curious flowers, To make fine Posies with; here here behold The purple Violet, and Marigold. Seest how these variegated beds do show As many coulors as the Rainy Bow?
Here's choyce of Pinks, & banks of Damask Roses Their sight doth pleas our eys, their smel, our noses The cleer fac'd Lilly smiles, so here great store Of Gil' flowers, Tulips, and—but what need more In vaine alas! in vaine I goe about To reckon all the branches which doe sprout From out Methymna; the Hyblean Bees, And yellow sands, neere the Pactolian Seas, Are not so numerous, the starrs give place (If numbred) to the Demegorgon's race, 'Tis night, and Titan his refulgent beams Doth hide their glory in the Western streams The third day left a universal shade, And heaven was pleased with the works he made.
The Argument. God doth the Canopy of heaven, With sparkling glittering Gems inlay. The twelve signes, and planets seaven. Strange effects, the Milky way. SECT. 3. THe morrow after, when the light be purl'd The yearly mantle of the new-made world; Heav'ns hand, still nilling to be idle, gilded The earths fair seeling, he before had builded. Starrs are heav'ns Scutchions, thick as Argus eyes They hang, and twinckle in the marble skies Of great or lesser magnitudes, each one Shine like the Iacynth and the Iasper stone. But farr more glorious, yea they go beyond The fy'ry Carbuncle, the Diamond, And golden Crisolit, their beauty shines So bright, nay brighter, then the wealthy Mines Of hot Arabia, or Pactolean Seas, The tailes of Peacocks, are but toys to these,
The purple Amethist, the Hesphesite, And costly O pall's nothing neere so bright; Earths rarest Iewells, mayn't with them compare, The costliest Gems are not so rich as they're: These pearls which garnish the aetherial story, Are lively emblems of their makers glory. These glittring Sphaeres, about the axle roul Which joyns to th' Arctick and Antarctick Pole: This part cold Boreas, and the North starr sees: Hot Auster, vieweth the Antipodes. The Ursa Major, and the Minor too, Their backs turn'd to it, round the North Pole go: The Dragon, which did keepe through watchful∣ness The golden Apples of th' Hesperides Much like the windings of a river flowes, His widened mouth like a Charybdis showes. Herc'les beneath him kneels, next whom the Crown Of Ariadne, on the earth shines down. Here Snake-engirted Serpentarius stands, Squeezing the bending Snake in's griping hands, Under him Scorpio exporrected lies: There Libra's beame, turnes in the Azure skies. Arctophylax here drives his waine; in's groyne The radiant lustre of a lamp doth shine; He treads on Virgo who a sheafe doth beare, Next whom appeareth Berenices haire,
The great Bears hind feet, on the Lion tread, Cancer and Gemini with his doub e head Are next, and neere to Leda's egg hatch'd twins Auriga holds strong wine; close by him shines The rainy starr of the Olenian Goate; Iove's nurses next Aix and Aelice note. Here prostrate on the floor, behold a Bull, Whose sublime horns with Starrs are beautifull: The brood-hen or the rainy Hyades See there, (some call them the Atlantides) The taile of Cynosure the little Beare Points at the widened Arms of Cepheus there, Whose sad wife Cassiopea next complains For her Andromeda, bound fast in chaines: Next winged Pegasus on high doth mount Whose hoof struck whilom th' Heliconian Fount; And just before the Dwarf in fetters bound or Triangulus is found. Two fishes, linked by their tailes ly forth, One Southward, and the other tow'rds the North, A sword in Perseus right hand out is spread, In's left the snaky haird Medusa'es head. He sits among the Pleiad's, his wing'd shoes. Most sweetly there the Lyre of Merc'ry goes. The Armiger of love, spreads here her wings, And there the Swan that her owne El'gy sings.
See where swift Pegasus his mouth is plac'd, There Joves Cup-bearer Ganimede is grac'd; Beneath whom doth arise the Capricorn, There Sagitarius doth the Heav'ns adorn, His winged dart flies from his boysterous string Betwixt the Eagles. and the Vulters wing. The Dolphin last of all swims in the North, Which sav'd Arion, in the Sea cast forth. (Sweet Jesu! beare me to the Port of Sion, Be thou my Dolphin I'le be thy Arion. Orion mounteth▪ nigh the Southerne Pole, With golden belt begyrt; his left-foot sole: He gently dippeth in the silver streams Of swift Erid'nus; next the Dog-starr gleams, Whose yelping frights the Hare; there swims the Whale. Pegasian Argo next is under saile, Which bore the Argonauts, and Peers of Greece, Together with the Colchian golden fleece. The Southern Garland, called Ixion's wheele, Lies under horned Sagittarius heele. Yonder is the Thuribulum divine; There doth the Kid; and here the Centaur shine. In folds, the truc'lent Hydra lies, enrould, On whome stands Corvus, and a cup of gold The Crater of the Powers: in the skies By th'egg-hatch'd breth'ren, litle Procyon lies.
See there the embroyred Bauldrick, and the starrs Thereon engrav'd, Supine Astronomers. The Ram, Bull, Twins, Crab, Lion, Virgo, Scale, Scorp, Archer, Capri. Aquar. Pisces, call: The Ram, the Bull, the Twins, shew in the Spring Crab, Leo, Virgo, doe the Sumer bring. Scale, Scorpion, Archer, gather corne together, Goate Gan'med, Pisces, rise in winters weather. Six Springs, and Harvests Aequinoctials share, Summer and winter's Solstice six declare. Seav'n wandring Planets, you may here see soon, Saturne, Iove, Mars, Sol, Ʋenus, Merc'ry, Moon. From these alone, from these aetherial flames The Seav'n days of the weeke derive their nam's, God placed in the Firmament of heaven These pilgrim-planets, all in number Seaven They and the golden Bauldricks thrice four pow∣ers, Have influence in these bodies of ours: They rule the Head, Neck, Arms, & Brest compleat. Back, Bely, Reins, Secrets, Thighs, Knees, Legs, Feet, Ther's many thousand nameless glittring globe, Here inter-woven in this spangled Robe. And in Earth's Tester, all with starrs set round The Lactea via of Jehova's found: This way doth lead to the Tribunal Throne Of thund'ring Iove, this is the way alone
Conducts to bliss, if thou wilt enter in Thy milk-white conscience must be free from sin: The way doth ly direct, thou canst not miss: ¶ A pure white conscience is the way to bliss,
The Argument. The Creation of the Sun And the Moon in full Carier, They alternately doe run Ʋnto either Hemisphere. SECT. 4. When heavens great builder had about enrould This Marble Gallery, with studs of gold; He made the greater, and the lesser light Alternately to rule the Day and Night; Illustrious Phaebus his refulgent face, The upper and the lower world doth grace, With equal splendor; his irradient beams Refresheth all things; his ignivomous teams Run restless races; his all-quickning power Gives life and breath to every plant and flower; Unto our sight it ev'dently appears, His revolution makes up days and years: He circulates in twice twelve howers time The Universe, spends half in this our clime,
And when his Chariots rapid wheels are whirl'd Into the Climates of th'inferiour world; He on the lower Hemisphere displayes His Rosy light and bright refugent rayes, Then pale-fac'd Phaebe riseth to fulfill Her nightly course, ascending up the hill Of the renoun'd Olympus, joys to spred The glittring glory of her new-made head, Silv'ring the world in her nocturnal race, She reigns as Empress in her brothers place And emulates his rayes, (although more dim) What light she hath is all deriv'd from him; She ev'ry month doth wax and wane and shew Now Semicircled like a half bent bow: But when Sol doth against her full face shine, Earth interpoz'd in the Eccliptick line; Her round cheeks are Ecclips'd, her masked face Admits the glory of its borrowed grace, She wears a Cypress hood and overshrouds Her shamfac'd count'nance, in the gloomy clouds. This Nights fair Lady, by her influence brings Admir'd effects to sublunary things. O sacred prudence, ev'ry day nay houer Sets forth the greatness of th' Almighties power, His pow'r fils all things, if I tow'r the skies I do behold it in those twinkling eyes.
Doe not I see it in the burnish'd Sun, And Moon, which round about their Circle run? And if from heav'n I to the earth descend, Are not his wonders there without an end Nay saile I out into the boundless Seas Gods goodness meets me; goe I where I please His mercies find me; if I take the wings Of fair Aurora, if I search the springs Of his abundant grace; and if I oul Even from the Arctick to th'Antarctick Pole. His favours doe prevent me; Sea and Land Enrich'd are by the All-creators hand. Dive I to the sulphureous pitt of hell, There, there th' eternall doth in Iustice dwell Look here, look there, nay turne I where I will I see Gods greatness and his goodness still. No Gods with him may equalized be; Where is there such another God as he? I stand amaz'd, on his stupendious name, O with what words may I express the same▪ And now the Major-General of day, (Whose eye doth all things in the world survay) Hastens his Chariot to th' Hesperian streams, Un-yokes his horses hides his blewing beams In Thetis bosom; by the western Seas He setting, riseth to th' Antipodes.
The sable Curtains of thick darkness spread To give us notice Sol is gone to bed: Night harnisseth her Stallions, and doth crown Her head with popy; in a mourning gown She widdow-like appears; a leaden mace Her sleepy hand engrasps, her steps deface The Chrystal-brow of day, and out she spreads The spangled Orb of heaven, about the beds Of ev'ry thing that draweth breath she closes All eyes and leavs them to their sweet reposes: All things doe sleep, the Lady of the night Entring her brothers place, borrows his light; Pale Luna rising from the Orient streams Of Thetis brandisheth her trembling beams: Th' Olimphick Tow'r sh' ambitiously aspires Concomitated with her sister fires. The perfect colours of all earthly things Are hid with dim-ey'd darkness sable wings: The fourth day left a universal shade, And heaven was pleased with the works he made.
The Argument. God replenisheth the waters With innumberd living creatures, Giving to them divers natures, Properties, and several features. SECT. 5. WHen rosy-fac'd Aurora did unfold Her dappled Curtains, fring'd with burn∣ish'd gold, And rudie Titan from his saffron bed Rowzed the glory of his early head: God spake the word, and fishes small and mighty Furnish'd the Courts of Sea-green Amphitrite; The family of Neptune soon amounted To a great number more then can be counted. Some of these wat'ry Citizens doe love, Salt habitations; others fresh approve. Nature hath given to these new formed creatures, Diversities of natures, names, and features. The Sturgeon loves to swim against the stream; These live in ponds, the Perch, the Roch, & Bream,
The retrograding, Crab the Canther chast, The Cephalus find in the Sea repast, He hides his head then thinks himself secure, The crafty Barble first unhooks the Lure. "Great Neptune's Sea Clark cal'd the Calamary, "About him doth his Pen and Penknife carry. The lowzy Arica feeds upon flesh, The Lamp'ry, Salmon live in waters fresh. The tongueless Carp, doth in the fish pond dwell The eyeless Cockle walketh from his shel. The Musick charmed Dolphin, feried ore Sea coast Arion to the wish▪d for shore. The fish Plagusia swimeth one her sides, The Remora resisteth winds and tides. Large Oars stu'd sails, and cleaving to a ship Strongly and straingly stops it, if you rip Thorn'd-foot Echinus, and him water give, He'l reunite his parts dis-joyn'd and live. The wide-mouth'd Labrax ever loves to yawn: She Pearl-fish, alwayes leagueth with the Prawne. Are you a hungry go and catch a Conger What fish is larger then the Whale or longer? His monstrous bulk doth like an Island seem, Around enclosed in a watery stream. The gilden Spirlings in cold winters weather, Ly round (to keep them warm) in bals together.
The wing'd Voligo 'bove the water flies; His head between his feet and belly lyes, The Wolf-fishc aught, ploughs with his taile the sand, And hiding there, escapes the fishers hand. From Margarus our Margerites doe come: The Meryx [Cow like] chews the cud say some. When the Milvago 'bove the waves doth fly, Tempests and stormes give o're immediatly. The Musculus (making his fins his Oars) Ushers the Whale from rockie shelves & shores. Ears to the belly of the Oysters joyne; The Oxyringus eyes most brightly shine. The Muscle and the speckled Leopard: The Peacock swimmeth like the heaven bestarr'd Pediculus the Dolphins parasite, Doth in the food, the Dolphin gets, delight. The bleating Sea calfe, hath an hairy hide. The fraud'lent Manifeet loves paciride. Th'adultrous Sargus, the Sea grunting-hog, The Turbet the Caerulian speckled frog. The Scarus much delights to ruminate The Scolopender swal'wing hook and baite Vomits his bowels? having los'd the hook It slips them in againe and is not took. The Stockfish is a fish that wil not boyl Unless you beat it with a stick a while
The bane-tooth'd Cuttle nigh destructions brink Absconds her body with effused ink, Which while it dazleth the poore fishers eyes From the surprizer then escapes the prize. The water's scale-backt golden-coated Ape, Is like the earths in colour and in shape. The Star-fish, by a natural instinct Burneth what e're it toucheth; would you think't? Tis said the Cramp fish will benum the hands Of him that fisheth, and a distance stands. The Lampreys life within her taile doth ly: From Purple-fishes comes our purple dy. Nature doth the Amphibious Sea-calfe give, By water and by land full leave to live, She breeds upon the land and by degrees Her young sh' accustoms to the briny Seas. A thousand colours (if't be true) 'tis strange (As in Hyena's) in her eyes doe range. The Sea grape squezed in the Vintage press, Of Wine will take away the irksomeness. The skin of Pompilous makes many a thong Of a great value ever-during strong. Th' Adult'rous Sargus changing mates behorns The pates of Hee-Goats which before had horns. Th' Vranoscop, alwayes his eyes round balls Bands (as it were) against th' aetherial walls.
Lexus a fish is enemy to man, And man to him, both are each others bane. And thou Thymalus, left almost behind, What fish more precious then thy noble kind? Can any thing in sweetness thee excell? Yields any odour a more fragrant smell? Above all fishes thou deserv'st the Palme, In that thou breathest like Arabian balme. The wry-mouth'd Plais, the Whiting, & the Mack∣rel: The slippry Eel, the Lobster, and the Cackrel Making the eater laxative; the Trout, The Herring King of fish, the Flownder, Pout, The Wraith, the Gudgeon, and the boneless Seal, And more there are, whose names I must conceal; A world of Paper, and a Sea of Ink, Would scarce suffice to hold them all I think. But ah! what do we? we must hast to th'shore The winds do rise, the waves begin to roar: Let's tack about, and strive the land to gain, Enough of roaming on the foaming main. Hark! Cliô hark! behold the warbling Quire, Call thee to play upon thine Iv'ry Lyre.
The Argument. Heer there is a winged nation Wandring in the feilds and groves, All of one kind keep, their fashion, God his fifth days work approves. SECT. 5. Now on the feather'd fowls bestow thine eyes, (Kind reader) and observe their properties. Mark how they fly and cut the flitting ayer, These clap their wings, and those do quite contrair Some run upon the ground, and some alway Do leap from bough to bough from spray to spray, These are delighted in the shadie gtove; Whilst others in the open champion rove. Some chuse to fly on high, and some as low, And some do fly as swift as others go. These hop about, while others love to sing The praises of their everlasting King: Some desarts haunt, some take a pride to shew Their 'pinions colour'd like the rainy bow.
The silvan Choristers in various notes. Send out sweet Carrols from their mus' call throats The warbling Philomel her Sonnets sings, So shril that at the sound each forrest ings. The milk-white Swan the river swims along, Dying, sings sweetest, her Elegious song. The pretty Linne, and the whistling Thrush, And Mavis chaunt in ev'ry thorny bush Eare▪charming Ditties, and in ample stry Devulge the greatness of their makers glory. Nature to speak the Cissa doth inveigle 'Tis strange to think how the Majestick Eagle The Armiger of Iove, with percing eye Dares to coufront the Sun's coruscancy. Amongst these aiery Cittizens we find The Cipphos tost with ev'ry gust of wind The gaggling-Goose, the Gssing, & the Gander; The brood-hen clucking, to and fro do wander: Th' indulgent Stork most gratefuly doth feed His aged parents, in their time of need: He boods and carries them; the kissing Dove Always lives single, having lost her love: Th' Hedg Sparrow norisheth the Cucko's eggs. The bird Apodes useth not his leggs. Hast thou the Iaundice? Icterus but eye, And thou'lt recover but the bird will dy.
The stately Cock, with his elated Crest Comes stalking on, new rowzed from his rest, His taile advanc'd, with a clear voyce he crows, He daunts the Lion and the light foreshowes, Fair weather followes when the Cranes soar high Fowl weather followes when a pace they fly. The greedy Corm'rant seeing storms before, With clam'rous noise doth hasten to the shore. The Cat fac'd melancholy Owl doth hollow The swift wing'd lofty winding garr'lous swallow Sings as she flyes; this Herauld of the spring, From frozen winter flyes with speedy wing. The great Bee backward flyes, the Black-Bird loves To lead a solitary life in groves. The Chough's fair body is about enroul'd With plumes of silver, mixt with plums of gold. The gnat-devouring Bat suckles her brood, And shreds (for she hath teeth) her gotten food. The prattling Parrot with his opned beak In human language takes a pride to speak. The Pel'can ares her breast her young ones slayn; And with her blood reviveth them againe. The chat'ring Py foretelling guests are neere. The chirping Sparrowes under house eves are. The scent-strong Vulter in his flight most slow, Loves Carrion touching not what mortals sow;
Five hundred miles doth putred Carrion smell (If all be true Historians do tell) The inauspicious Crow, th' unluckie Kite. The witless Woodcock, and the simple Snite: The long-neck'd hern, the wadling duck, & widge∣on The gold-finch, bull-finch, chaffinch & the pidgeon The Lapwing, Wagtail, Feildfare, and the Stare. The pleasant Phesant and the Partridg rare. The Kestrel, Martin, Puet and the Plover, The Rook, the Titmouse, up and down do hover. The Robin-red-breast flyeth too and fro, The Red-shank, Red-start and the Red-tail too. The rav'nous Raven and the pratling Iay, Proud of his borrowed plums, his plums so gay. The Iron eating Corp'sent Estrich runs As swift as doth a horse, Spinturus shuns No sacred place, for she a burning cole Hath from the Alters very often stole. The envious Peacock hideth out of spight His med'cinable dung from humane sight: Treads softly like a theif, but from his throat Yels out a horible Tartarian note; A pride he takes in flinging up his head, And doth abroad his starie spangles spread. The Bee with laden thighs doth whom return With prudent art doth tare the hony-comb
With flowry Tyhme (oh admirable thing!) So loud a humming voyce, so stiff a sting. Plant-wasting Locusts which without wings fly, The Moth, the Hornet, Butterfly, and Fly? The golden coloured Cantharides Are stiled infects; I may add to these Th' industrious Silk-worme which of Thisbian rine And leaves; for nobles silken-sleeves doth twine. Next in my way the Indian Griffin flyes, With's snow-white wings; his fierce and fiery eyes Ev'n dazle mine; four feet he doth not lack A purpe belly and a cole black back; His hindmost part is fashion'd like a Lion, His unked talents tare what he doth fly on. And lastly, although last of all, not least Th' Arabian Phenix passeth all the rest: The rarest bird that under heaven flyes, Glory's enthroned in her sparkling eyes. A golden collar goeth round her neck: A Purple colour doth her body deck; A goodly taile she bears: a plumy crown Upon her head appears; a scarlet down Adornes her back: search throughout ev'ry clime You'l find one only living at one time. Six hundred years she lives then being old Builds her a nest, a nest she doth infold
With fragrant Cassia, Cinamon, and Myrh, And such lke Aromatick sprigs, t'interr Her self therin; she makes hir selfe an Urn And fi'ry Titan with his rayes doth burne (His rags reflecting on her lab'ring wings) The crazy Phenix; from whose ashes springs A little worme crawling in fun'ral spices, And from that worme another Phenix rises. When God created had all winged creatures Divers for natures, discrepant in features, And gave them power with their nimble wings To soar alof, above terestrial thins: The fifth day left a universal shade, And heav'n was pleased with the works he made.
The Argument. Go crets beasts great and small, And appoits their habitation, On the earth, earth feeds them all All affords us admiration. SECT. 7. NOw radient Sol his morning beams displaies Gilding the mountaines with his pregnant raies. Th' Almighty God, he, who alone is able T' accomplish all things; furnisheth the Table Of earths fair parlour, with a sumptuous feast, Against the coming of some Lordly guest. The earth, the dm of all things, forth doth bring Millions of creatures, ev'ry creeping thing The earth doth suckle, 'tis the earth doth breed A world of hungry animals to feed On her provisions, ev'ry kind of beast Draws life (as well the greatest as the least) From her exub'rant breast; seest how the Fawns Do skip and frisk about the lovely Lawns.
The keen-tusk'd salvage Macedonian Bore: The greedy Wolf (t' whom Lambs are an ey-sore) The yoke-fit heifer, and the ubr'ous Cow, The horse, true drudg, to the laborious plough The slow pac'd burden-bearing long-ear'd Ass And bastard Mules do crop the tender grass. The gen'rous Spaniel, and the faithfull Dog, The belly-grunting mire-delighting hog. The Leopard famous for his speckled coat. The tim'rous Coney and the browsing Goat. The stinking Pole-Cat, and the mouzing Cat, Which sees as well by night as day the Rat That corn-devouring creature, and the Mouse. That haunts the corners of the statliest house, The Beaver much esteemed for his skin Must needs among the traine be railed in. The Armadilio besieged round With shells like armour, undermines the ground. Alternately his sex Hyaena changes, His eyes assume all colours which as strange is; Such Dogs as on his shadow light grow dumb: His feet stick fast whoever sees him come; Calling the shepherds from their thatched bowers, He slayes them, and their slutered Corps devours. The shagie Bear doth fashion out her yong, By licking them all over with her tongue.
The qick-eyed Linx, his back bespeckled all Can with hi sight impeirce the thickest wall. The suck-egg Weasil, and the harkning Hare, (Which ltters ev'ry month through out the yeare,) The hounds dceiveth by her winding flight, Rest all day (if not ras'd) and tun's all night, In paceull warrens, here are fleecy flcks O bleating sheep, there lurks the subtil Fox Loathsome for smell. the little eyeless Moles, And theevish Pict's lie hid in secret holes. The bob-taild Squirel doth a storme foresee, Seeming to be as weather-wise as we; The buff whose firm impenetrable skin Made into sheilds no shafts can enter in. The truc'lent Pnther, and the direfull Tiger, Devou their captives with undaunted vigor, The by-corn'd Girass doth the desarts like, His nck' as long as is a martial Pike. The Salamander liveth in the flame, It's extream coldness putteth out the same, Th' egg-hatcht Chamlion by the ayer is fd And turne t'all colours except white and red. The rough Baboone, and Eheop an Ape, Imitate man are most like men in shape. 'Tis fabled that the Naiades do make With their loud roarings ev'n th' earth to qkuae.
The thorn-arm'd hedg-hog; for his various amell, The Ortus famous; and the bunch-backt Camel. Slow pac'd Ignatus unto these I'le put It sings six notes fa, sol, la, mi, re, ut. The scaly Dragon, and the furr'd-coat Ermin, Locusts, and Catterpilers, such like vermn. The double-headed Amphisben, and Innum'rous insects creep upon the land, The ven'mous Viper doth her bood devour, Again the brood, inclosed in the bower Of their dams wombe; impatient of delay Break through their sides and so their dams do sly. The hoarse-resounding Grashoppers in thickes Do sing abroad; as doth at home the Cricke Earth breeds all repils ev'ry kinde of forme The Glow, the Palmer, and the Canker-worme, The Toad, (the earths unprofiable clog.) The hissing Serpent and the croaking Frog. The saffron-hating Crocodile will run On those that fly▪ but the pursuers shun. The dreadful Basilisk baneful eye doth slay Whom e're it looks upon, his breath (they say) Hs poysnous breath, will taint, nay mor, unlock The firmest Marbl, and obdurest rock. The horny-nos'd Rhinoceros will whet His horne 're on the Elephant he set.
The Lion next upon the stage I'le bring, Of men the terror, of all beasts the king. He cometh ramping, with his eyes bright shining, Most bravely minded, yet to preys inclining: The Crowing Cock, the rattling Carr, and fire, Do terrifie this beast, this beast so dire, This formidable beast is mild to those Who doe submit, but cruel to his foes: Gratefull to those his benefactots are; Humble to those that humbleness declare. The Elephant next claimeth excellence, This beast comes nearest unto humane sense; He knows his country speech, he's us'd in warrs, He worshipeth the Sun, the Moon, the Starrs: The greatest of all beasts the earth doth hold, He's proud of trappings wrought with burnish'd gold Adores the King, his most ambitious spirit Aspires to glory, glory to inherit. But oh! who can sufficiently declare Gods works, the which so full of wonder are! And now for to conclude earth doth produce All beasts, and ev'ry creeping thing for use; After their sev'rall kinds on earth they trade And God was pleased with the works he made.
The Argument. God a living soul sublime Breath's in man compos'd of slime, Of a rib he framing woman, Gives her for a help unto man. SECT. 8. GOd having made the world, and all therin, To frame a little world▪ did now begin; This little world is man, he formed last, Of the four elements the Proto-plast. The great, almighty, everlasting God Created Adam of a ruddy clod. God, was the true Prometheus, did inspire His earthly-nostrils with coelestial fire. Man like himself he made in sacred feature, And under his command brought ev'ry creature. This little world is in the great world plac'd, And with the title of a King is grac'd. This Micro-cosm instal'd by God alone Of the great world obtaines the royal throne,
The King of Kings gave to his regal hand The juridiction bot of Sea and Land. What things soever any eye can see Within the furnish'd world his subjects be: What birds soever in the ayer have motion, What fish sever glidea along the Ocean, What beasts soever on the hills do feed, Wht e're the melancholy desarts breed, What fruits soever on the eorth remaine, Are tributary to mans Lordly reigne. Man is the emblem of a divine nature, And lively picture of his live creator. All creatures pore on earth mans sublime face Behold's his maker, he is fil'd with grace And divine beauty, their terrestrial mnd Mind earthly things▪ man, only man's, enclin'd To heav'nly wisdome, his infused spirit Is most ambitious glory to inherit. Mans understanding and heroick sense Above all other hath preheminence. A nat'ral sense, beasts have as well as we, They touch, they tast, they feele, they heare, they see, Man's head is term'd the understanding's thrown, The intelectual pow'rs meet there in one. There madam Reason is enthron'd, her grace Reignes like an Empress in the highest place.
My lady Will, resideth in the brain; The Judgment there, there doth Minerva raigne, Light of the Micro-cosm our eyes are, wee The glory of the Lord by them doe see. Three humours do belong unto our eyn, The White, the Viteral, and the Christaline, Six Coates, as many Musckles arteries, Tendons, and Nerves attend upon our eyes, May not our eyes bee very well dfin'd The Looking-glass of Nature, and the minde. Our eyes are twinckling Lamps, what is our sight? But ristall-Casements for to let in light, The Optick sinews, or the Optick strings, Drw in the sight of sublunary things. The eyes, our anger, and our love, do shew, Strike fire in hatred, and in love they glow, One while they sparkle with Idalian fire, One while they glance; anoher while admire! They bolt in boldness, and in reverence sinke, They smile in laughter, and in greife they winke: In love they flatter, and in wrath seeme froward, They shew he glad, the sad, the bold, the coward, They well can put a difference betweene Such objects as are either foule or clean. Our cy-lids like Appentices prevent A world of dangers, which are incident
Unto our eyes, our eyes bright shining balls Are Bull-wark'd round about with fleshly walls. Man's nose is like a sink by which the braine Doth purge it self of phlegm, the nose doth drain All slimy Excrements, and doth convay Them (never to returne again) away. By it we breath and smel; 'tis that doth grace The man, and wonderously become the face. The ay'r doth in the nose the smelling stop Which else from out the nose would forthwith drop Our ears the minds informers do go round With winding mazes, evr'y kind of sound They can distinguish, at the shril, the flat, The acute, the gentle, and the aspirate. The ear's the dainty'st sence, it doth descry Base jarring Musick, from pure harmony: By these we move the brain, the brain by these Is rid of chol'rick superfluities. It is by these we (as it were) discern And let in knowledg, 'tis by these we learn All kinds of noise we'r taught to know th'rough these Mechanick Arts, and learned Siences. ¶ God gave one mouth, two ears, two eyes, that we Might little speak, though much we hear, and see, The mouth, the stomack's portal is, and by it We unto nature let in nat'ral diet.
Two folding doores of corral do convene Lest in the teeth deform'ty should be seen Our Iv'ry Teeth the feeling sence have got, Can tell you what is cold, and what is hot, They are the bull-warks of the tongue (to tame Th' unruly member), tis by them we frame And fashion out our words; foreteeth, and hind We use; they shred our food, and these do grind: Our teeth are busie Cooks (which without questi∣on) Makes our food ready for the first digestion. Our tongue and pallat by their tasting power Distinguish ev'ry relish sweet from soure. It is our tongue that's vocal, on our tongue The Lutes and Vials of our speech are hung: What thing soe graceful to a man as hair? How sliek! how comly does it show! how faire! The pillar of our head's, the neck; neere kin Unto the nether lip's, the dimpling chin. The greatest strength that man enjoys, consists Most in his shoulders, in his arms, and fists; How necessary are our hands, our hands Are handmaids to the body; man commands All kind of things by them, nature imparts Unto our hands, the Mastership of arts. With pliant joynts our fingers are upheav'd Apt to receive and kep the things receiv'd.
The servants of the mind they are, and do What is her pleasure to command them to: The left hand (uexperienc'd) stands and serves The right hand b'ing a skilfull artist carves: Nerves joine our bones, our bones do represent The timber of our fleshly Tennement. The main-spporting pilar of the frame Is cal'd the cine, the chine doth prop the fame Our thighs are plac'd beneath our hips and flnk Nxt Hams, the Calfs, below the knees the, shank, And in the Lesk, but just below the groine, (O shame to name!) our privities do joyne. Our feet are useful dangers for to baulk, One while to stand another while to walk. They are the bodies moving ground-work, all The fbrick (were it not for them) would fall. Mns outward parts are shown, I'e now begin To rip him up, and see what is within. His lungs, like bellows, are they which receive Contracted ayer, and the same regives; They puff up, at their taking air in, And shrink when they do let it out again, The pory lungs doth with it's spungie fan Refrigerate the heart: The heart of man Is made Triangular, the heart doth give Lfe to each part, without it none can live.
Th' hearts motion doth our bodies motion breed, The vital spirits from the heart proceed; She, she the conduit of our blood convays Her Crimson bounty thorough cleare blew-wayes. She mitigates the coldness of the spleen, And in the bodie regulates as Queen; If not by her, whence do our pulses beat, From her we do derive our nat'ral heat. She is the center of the bodie, whence All creatures draw their lives circumference. This pearle absconded in a Csket lies, Is the first living, and the last that dies. Man's stomack is a pot, wherein the mat Is recococted, he before did eat. The Mesaraick veins suck and deliver The Chile of what we eat through pipes, to th' liver. The belly is a buttery, wherein (Within the cupbod of th bowels skin) The grosser offals, that the stomack leaues Of its digestion adhers and cleavs. Whre tey remine, unil dame-nature plase For to exonerate such filthy lees. When God hd framed man with wondrous art, He after made his soul the nobler part; He did his dross with sacred fire refine And breath'd in him a soul. a soul divine.
A soul immortal; death with all its power, Nor Satan fiery darts can't it devour. God to the soul eternal essence gave, It had bginning, but no end shall have. Wit, Understanding, Memory, and Will, The palace of the soul inhabit still: How circular, how speedy is hir motion? She oundeth in a trice the Heav'n, Earth, Ocean: She scals heav'ns tower with her Egles wings; Finds out th'obstuce Originals of things; As aine, hail, snow, ice, winds, nor doth she won∣der At flsh of lightning, nor at claps of thunder. When thus his Image, man, the Lord had made Each way compleat, within himself he said It is not good, nor doth it please me well That man alone without an ayd doth dwell: I'le therefore make him one, his joy, his cear, His Dve, his solace, his beloved dear. With that the Lord, whose actions are so deep Past finding out, cast Adam fast a sleep; Seal'd up his eyes, and from his fruitless side Took ou a rib, and of that rib a Bride He fashion'd out; and did so nealy dearn The clft, that none the opening might discerne. Te wman made, God gave her unto man, And he (awke out of his sleep) began
T'express his joy unparlelled favour; I have an helper, the Almighty gave her To be my wife; Lo two, are made of one, Flesh of my flesh, and of my bne the bone. And since the Lord from out my sides did frame her She shall be woman, woman will I name her. (Nor is' a wonder why he call'd her so; For unto MAN at last, she prov'd a WOE.) For this cause shall a man his parents leave, And to his wife, his deare, adhere, and cleave. So they were naked seeking no redress, Nor did they blush, at this their nakedness. The sixth day left a universal shade, And heav'n was pleased with the works he made.
An Appendix Of God's resting day. Eden garden. Man's happiness before his fall. misery after his fall. The Argument. Six dayes expir'd, the seaventh day God rests, and doth his works survay. Eden is plnted, man in Eden May tast all fruits, but one forbiden, SECT. 9. When the great Architect had furnish'd all The upper Regions; and the lower Ball, He ceased from his works, and sanctifi'd Unto himself, for ever to abide. The seaventh day his glory it invested, And from hs workes, his workes so great, he rested.
The Lord of sabboths, hath this sabboth blest, As a rue Type of that eternal rest. Ket in hav'ns blis ull Kingdome, to the praise Of him that is the ancientest of dayes. By his examples, he would have us doe The like, and rest from wordly I bour too. This day of rest; our Saviour will come in Unto our souls, if we let out our sin. He sets wide ope, the portls, of his ears; To entertaine, (aguests,) our praise, our prayers. This day is Gods, on let us then adore him, And in his reverence, fall downe before him; That so we may here after be posses'd Of that true Sabboth, that eternal rest, Prepar'd for saints▪ and joyfull Rquiem sing, Before our great, and everlsting Kg. Six dayes are freely ours, bu one, in seaven, Is chaleng'd as a holy-day, by heaven; And yet how little of that day we spend Upon th servic of so great a freind! Alas! aas! how apt are we to think▪ That God beholds not, and his eyes do wink A our neglcts; but patience abs'd Turnes fury: ah! can, can we be excus'd, That thus transgress? no we have cause to feare, T'his leeden fet, Gods iron hands are neare.
Within the radient borders of the East, Where early Titan as a welcome guest Findes entertainment, God a garden planted For Man's sole use, wherin there nothing wanted To make it truly glorious, in it, he The worlds abrig'd Epitomie might see; Unfathom'd love spontaneously bestowing A paradise with milk and honey flowing: Upon a man, an animated Clod Must neds advance he goodness o our God. Here is the true Elizium indeed, Whose choyce variety of objects seed The greedy eye; seest here a divers hieu, Crimson, Carnation, Green, and joyful blew. This soyle bears fruit, all seasons in the yeare, You cnnot name the thing, but what is there. See here coole Abors, mark how bubbling Brooks Do gntly glide along in winding nooks: Here' speckled ammel beautifies the ground: And heav'n set Manna, ev'ry morn is found. Th rety birds (by nature taught) doe sing Mlodious nts, to their mellifluou King. How frgrantly lie-breathing Zphyr blowes Hs wee-heart Flora, gn'rously bestrowes The smiling Earth, with oderiferous flowers, 'Gainst Adam's wedding; pearly-dropping show∣ers
Enrich the grass; withou the help of ploughs Tellus partuiates; on the laden bouhs The mllow fruits do dangle, and do stand Ambitous (as t were) to kiss the hand. O what a lovely lustre doth adron The balmy ai! the Amathean horn Is giv'n to Adam (not to Hercules) Gemifluous Phion, golden Euhraes Silver-wav'd Hiddekel, Christal-ey'd ion, Water this heav'nly earth, this earthly Sion. Cloath'd are the Trees in geen; the stately Pne, And tow'ring Cedar, lovingly combine, A Bow'r with bending arches to compose: The shame fac'd Lilly, and the red-cheek'd Rose, Strive for priority: how all things smile And e'ne luxuriate! Oh delightfl soile! Amongst the trees wherewith th' Eternal grac'd This prime plantation, in the midst he plac'd Two speciall tees (both inordain'd for food, But seals the one of life, of knowledg good And evil was the second; to th' intent That Adam's life should not be idly spent Trine-une Jehovah did his steps direct To this blest Bow'r, and spake to this effect. Of all the trees that in the Ochard be I set them for thy use, one only tree
Sall be my rent; that tree thou shalt not tast, Which in the center of the garden's plac'd The rest are freely thine, by my permission, Rent-free: but yet on an imply'd condition: What I injoyne be studious to fulfill, Touch not the tree of knowledg, good, and ill; For by my sacred majesty, I vow, And by my venerable name, if thou Break but thy Lease, "thy vry lips that shall "Let in this fruit, shal let in death withal. But if thou please me well, this tree shal be A sacred pledg between thy God, and thee. My Vice-Roy shalt thou be, thy seed I'le bless, Thy seed for ever shal the land possess. Be thou obsequious thou shalt finde me mild, I'le be thy father, thou shalt be my child. He said no moe: Adam did: hen express His loyal duty, and his thankfulness. Glorious, and great, who hast insta'd me Kng Of ths vast Orb, and Lord of ev'y thing Within its larg dementions: Gratious Lord Thou gav'st me all, nay of thine owne accord. Ah Lord! what merrit? what desarts in me (To claime such hig-bred fvours couldt thou see) O bounteous love! oh love that is extended Beyond al bounds! O love uncomprehanded!
Ah! shall thy mercyes overflow my banks? And shall I ebb, in the returnes of thanks? Thou giv'st me life, and rare enjoyments too, To tell them out is more then I can do. And shall I not acknowledg thee? ah! sure No senseless stone can e're be so obdure. Take partial thanks, for as for to express Love to the life I cannot, I confess: Accept my mite, to praise I will persever Thine holy name, for ever, and for ever Ah! far be it from me to countermind What thou prohibit'st▪ shall th lib'ral hand Heap blessings on me? thou afford'st me all, Thy selfe reserv'st but one, and shall I fail To keep from thee thy right? shall my transgression Displease the Land-lord of my free possession. O no, I will obey, one onley Tree Shall put no varience 'twixt my God and me. Should I attempt so foul a fact, I were not Worthy to live; might then ods jstice spare not To vulnerate my soul, Oh might I feele Th' imprinted strakes of his revengeful steele. Great God! Oh may I rather cease to be, Then live t'offend, so good a God as thee? The Sun shall sooner cease, for to display On tender plants, his bright enlivning Ry:
Sooner shall sun-burnt India grow cold, And Icy Zealand hot, and heav'ns grow old. E're I from my first principles retreat, And disobey my God, so good, so great. Thus Adam liv'd in favour with the Lord, Enjoying all the joyes earth could afford. On while he walks along the bordred Alleys, Now up the hillocks, down anon, the valleys, And now by whisp'ring Brooks, takes sweet repo∣ses On beds of Lllies, and anon on Roses.
The Argument. The Devill in the Serpent's forme Tempteth to sin the woman first: She man; so done, the Lord doth storme, The Serpent, Eve, and Adam's cur'st. SECT. ult. Proud Lucifer, through vain ambition strove To equalize himselfe with God above: But of his pow'r Angelicl bereaven, He tumbled head-long down the courts of heaven: From a bright Pallace to a sulph'ry Cell, Made Monarch of (the land of darkness) Hell. Thus strip'd of all his quondam pleasures, he Greatly envieth man's felicity: Man is his eye-sore, man's supernal state The Object is of his insernal hate: He finding opertunity, began Slly to worke, the overthrow of man: His guils and wiles he palliates, and is Turn'd int' a snake, strange Metamorphosis!
His toyles he spreads, and covertly he waits To catch poore Adam, by his golden baits: And's plot the better to acomlish, he Ges wriggling up on the forbiden tree: Assaults the woman, with his baited gin, And thus he drawes the sily woman in. Serpent. Great Empess of the world: I humbly sue To be resolved of a doubt, which you Can satisfie me in: have you indeede Your apetite restrain'd? what many't you feed One evr'y pleasant fruit? why so? doth God Limit your pw'r? if so, 'tis very odd. Eve. Of all the trees that scited are in Eden, There is but one, no more thn one forbiden. The tree thou sest, there in the middle plac'd. We mst▪ on paine of death, not touch, nor tast. That God reserv's unto himselfe, for what I know not, but 'tis death to tast of that. Serpent. Psh, Psh you shall not dye, deaths bended Bow Shall never harme you; you shal never know
What doth belong to death; death cannot slay you, You are immortal; feare not death I pray yo; Touch, take, and tast, (beleive m) and your eyes Shall straight be op'ned; you will be as wise As he that made you; be but rul'd, and ye As Gods, both knowing good and ill shall be. Feare not, (faire Lady) eat, I as a freind Advise you not for any Private end, Or self-respct; you shall be deifi'd: Ambitious Jove, no equals can abide. Coy woman tast, behold their beautiful, And cherry cheeks, coy woman doe but pull. Cannot those mellow-delicates, invite Your wat'ring palate, to an appetite? Methinkes they should, taste, and you shall have skil, To know the diference 'twixt good, and ill. Why draw'st thou back? To the possessed Snake, The cre'lous woman this reply did make. Eve. Wisest of beasts, all that you spak is true, You counsel for the best, all thanks be due, For your great love your love whch doth transcend All merit of mine, thanks to my loyal freind: My life's to small to hazard for your ease, Freind I could give't, your speeches doe so please.
This fruit is marv'lous pleasing to the eye; And questionless, 'tis to the tast: I'le try. And eat thereof and give my husband Adam. Serpent. They bow to serve you, at your pleasure, Madam. Eve. Ah! how delitious is this fruit, how sweet! A finer Apple I did never eat. Husband, my love, come sit thee down by me, And taste the vertue of this sov'raigne Tree. Say, say my love, did e're thine eye behold A Tree so fair, so rare as this; be bold, As was thy Eve; and venter on't; for why? Come what come will, thou'lt fare no worse then I. Ah! hadst thou knowne my dearest what a bliss Attends the eating, thou hadst eat e're this. What? frownes my Adam? wilt thou not draw nearer, And taste my love, then whom my life's not dearer For Eves sake eat, and know both good and ill. Adam: Seeing thou invit'st me eat, my joy, I will. Ah! wee have sin'd in medling with this Tree, This cursed Tree; Oh whither shall we flee?
Undone! undone! we know not what to do, What course to take, Oh whither shall we goe? Lo we are naked, and we must confess Asham'd we are, of this our akedness, And blush to think on't, were not we of late All cloth'd in glory? but where's now our state? What have we got by our presumptious pride? But shame, which if we could, faine would we hid. Strange change! we have exchang'd, sad thing to tel, God for an apple, and a heav'n for hell. My conscience tells me what a gracious God We have offended; now methinks his rod He shakes in fury, now methinks his ire Threatens to burn us, with consuming fire: What thinkest thou, may not these leaves hard by Make aprons wife, for naked thee, and I: Quick, let's these broad Fig-leaves together sew, And hide the shame, we are asham'd to shew. Experience tels us that the things which tend To greater bliss, prove dang'rous in the end. The fruit that's pleasing, is not alwayes sound; Untoothsome Clerus is in hony found. That man-betraying Scorpion, did bring Hony in's mouth, but in his tail a sting. The fruit that seemed best, prov'd worst of all: Sweet in the mouth, but in digestion gall.
Eve. Hark! hark! methinks I hear (too true I feare) A thundring voyce come rounding in mine eare. I' me sure I hear't. I prithee Adam cease Thy querulous complaints, peace, husband peace. Ah me! vile wretch, 'is God, undon! undon! We have transgress'd, 'tis therfore time to run; Let's hide us in the Woods I feare, I feare, That he will catch us, naked, as wee are. A poor defence God-wot, what brazen Tower Can keep us safe from his all-ba'ring power. ¶ Such as doe strive, by hiding of their sin, To shut God out, do let the Devil in. The case is ours: the more we would conceale Our sins, alas! the more we them reveal. What place can us secure? where can we lie Absconded from his all-beholding eye? Dye, dye wee must, no wayes of our contriving Can save us harmeless? can wee gaine by strving? Are our bones Brazil, or our flesh of Seel? Can wee imagine that we shal not feele, The worst of his displeasure? dare we stand In opposition to th' Almighties hand? Or rather shal we with submissive tears Beg hard for pardon, w'have a Wlfe by th' ears.
The bellows, of our sins, have blowne the coales Of flaming vengeance to devour our souls. Adam. Pace, peace, I heare him too; he thunders now, Where art thou Adam, tell me, where art thou. Adam. Great God! thy voyce, thy dreadful voyce, I heard Rush in the garden, and I was affray'd: It was my shameful nakedness, did move Me to seek shelter in this shadie grove. God. Naked? who told thee thou we't naked? hast Thou eat the fruit, forbidden thee to taste. Gods mercyes Adam having thus bus'd, Accus'd the woman, but himself excus'd. Adam. All-glorious Lord, shee whom thou gav'st me, gave The fruit unto me, and I eaten have. God. Nefandious woman, ah! what hast thou done, That thus my awful presence thou dost shun?
Eve. Lord, I confess that my offence is great; The Serpent tempted me, and I did eat; The Rhet'rick of his tongue, did so delight Mine eares, that I obey'd mine appetite. Thus did his Oratorious delusion Lead me along, unto my sad confusion. The Serpent's curse. Because thou hast fallitiously deceiv'd The silly woman; thou shalt be bereav'd Of future happiness; thou, thou, the worst Of all the beasts: shalt not be least acurs'd, Dust shalt thou eat, and since thou hast done so, For ever shalt thou on thy belly go, Abhor'd of all; moreover I'le disperse Debate, and variance 'twixt thy seed, and hers. Her seed shall bruise thy head: And poysnous thine Shall bruise her heele, and round her heele entwine. Eves curse. And thou, nefarious bride, who hast betray'd Thy husbands trust, and wickedly obey'd The Serpents words; I will inflict on thee As bad a curse, as any curse can be.
In paine bring forth thou shalt; greifs shall encum∣ber Thy tortur'd soul; thy torments shal out number The minutes of thy life; ten thousand woes Shall plague thy spirit; and thrice as many throes Shall rack thy body, this disast'rous chance Shall cling to thee till thy deliverance. With all submission: thou, vile creature, thou, Thy servile neck, shalt to thine husband bow: He, shall rule over thee, and thou shalt stand As loyable, to his severer hand. Adam's Curse. Apostatized wretch, because thou hast Giv'n audience to thy wife, to boldly taste The bitter sweets of this reserved Tree, From which (on paine of death,) I warned thee. Curs'd be the earth, and all her smiling pleasures, Her gratefull plenty and exub'rant Treasures: Curs'd for thy sake, b' earth's amiable face, Let thorns, and thistles, grow in ev'ry place. And thou, for this abominable deed, Shalt feed on hearbs; I'le make thee get thy bread, With a laborious hand: thy sweetned meat Must now have sower sauce: thy toylsome sweat Shall stand in furrowes, on thy bubling brow, Earning thy living at the paiefull plough.
Thus shalt thou live; till death the thred divide Of thy fraile life, thy sorrowes shall abide. A number of diseases shall attend Thy loathed life; sins off-spring, death, shall send His Harbingers abroad, which shall anoy thee, And never leave thee, till they quite destroy thee. The never missing dart of death shall slay The britle Casket of thy soul, and lay Thy earth-ta'ne body in an earthly urne; For dust thou art and shalt to dust returne. Be gone; base Caitiffe, from this garden, flee, Such rare enjoyments sha'nt belong to thee. Be gone: be gone: no longer shalt thou please Thy del'cate palate with such caes as these: Worse fare shall serve thy turne: with ploughs goe wound Thy native soile goe dig, and delve the ground. 1 Tim, 1, 17. ,
To the reverend, his much Honored Freind, Mr FRANCIS TAILOUR Anagr. AL VAIN FOR C(H)RIST. With Paul ALL VAINE FOR C(H)RIST you doe account. So shall you to the heigth of glory mount. Honored SIR, THe Series of your favours did invite Mine unfleg'd Muse, to take a sudaine flight, On Peg'sus wings, 'twas that which did infuse A quickning life into my dying Muse. Can Helicon want lucid streames! can I Be dry of matter, you Mecenas by? I hate to be ungratefll, if I should Not make a verse the Rocks and Mountains would: The squestration of two hours time From serious Studies, I imploy'd in Rhime. Yet Nothing went about, with what I drew From Nothing, Nothing, I present to you.
Dress'd in a rude, yet in a sober, stile, Hoping you will at my endeavours smile. You hate (as wel as I) these dang'rous times, To cast your eyes on vaine and wanton Rhimes. And I could gladly spend my flitting dayes In penning Sonnets to my makers praise. To your protecting wings I therefore fly For shelter: ah! but when my serious eye Darts on your worth, and on my selfe looks down, I feare the wrath of a condemning frown. Juditious Sir, if that you please t' affect These embrio-lines 'tis more then I expect. But yet, I know your candour wil excuse, Since 'tis an ev'ning, not a morning muse. I crave not praise, but pardon. I have got Mountaines of praise if you disdaine me not. O may you live unto grand Nestor's day With silver age, and honor cown'd: so prayes Your humble servant, whose unboud dsire Is Phenix like, to burne in duties fire: Whose life's too smal to hazard for your ease, Sir, I am yours, command me when you please. N B. Wickham-brooks June 5, 1657.
The Praise of Nothing: The prince of Poets, wrot of Frogs, and Mice: Ʋirgil of Gnats: and Henisius of Lice: Witty Erasmus, Folly's praise did write And Drayton, did upon Madge-Owle endite. On Hazle-Nuts smooth Ovid versifies: And some do treat of Maggots, and of flies. One hath such stateliness t' a bald-pate given, That there is scarce an haire 'twixt it and heav'n. This lauds brave Bag-Puddings: whilst he composes The admirable honour of Red-Noses, And such poore petty things, and shall no story Be penn'd in honour of great Nothings glory Shal shee, from whence all things a being have, Lye dead, and buried, in oblivious grave? My muse shall praise her, though she can't comple Fine silken words, nor in ornated stile Blazon great Nothing, for shee seemes to be A Theam, more fit for Homr, then for me. I ma'l to her, men did not Temples frme, Like that at Ephesus, to Dianas name. Had I a world of eloquence I know Twere scarce enough all nothings worth to shw
I stand astun'd, (not knowing what does ail me) Mine eyes doe dazle, and my thoughts e'ne faile me. For to conceive her seenless parts, and Name, My words are waning to express the sam. I'le summon her t'appeare in her owne praise; (Though tongueless) yet imagine that shew saies Upon a stage, amidst a gazing throng Of glad Spectators, this triumphall song. Kinde auditors, be pleased to encline Your willing ears, to this poore speech of mine. Although that All-things in my place doe stan Mine age (as right) may claime the upper hand. Is't fit the Daughter, should her duty smother, And yeild no rev'rence t'her decripit Mother? Does it become her well? ought shee to owe No more respect? is this a seemly shew? Where is her storgie 'what, doth she not minde The empty wombe that bare her? oh unkinde! Ney had it been a freind, that should deceive me An ordinary freind, it ne're had greev'd me: But that my childe, mine owne deare childe, should seem To own me not is more then most exteam. Had I a mother, I should judge all honor, And love, too little to bestow upon her. She's grown so burlie, and I am so small, That I can hardly be discern'd at all.
The black spot on a beane, a Flea, a Fly, An Ant, a Nitt is not so small as I. All little things are pretty, and the taller Are more deform'd, then me ther's nothing smaller. Small as I am, yet of my shapeless feature God fram'd the world; and what (but God) is greater. No father had I, neither did I come From out the Closet of a mothers wombe. I was, and was not, substance have I none, No flesh, no blood, no sinewes, nerves, nor bone. Nor can I justly stiled be trub-hody, For I have neither hinder parts nor body. I'me cloth'd in emptiness, transparent cloathing As thin as Aire; I doe repast on Nothing, Chamelion like; and as a vestal Nun So chast am I, all company I shun. I lead a solitary life, for where The least thing is, be sure I am not there. Could you but try me, you would lighter finde. Then Cephus tost with ev'y gust of winde. I liv'd (though dead) from all eternity, What was there (can you tell) but God and I? Out of meere love hath not th' Eternal fram'd All things of me that are, unnam'd, are nam'd? Goe ask the starrie gal'ties if they be Deriv'd of any but of God and me,
By us those Squtchions, thick as Argus eyes Hang out and twinckle in the Marble Skies. Even as bright Phebe's borrow'd raies do shine By Titan, Titan does by Gods, and mine. Ask but the earth, if she did ever crown Her front, and put on an embroidred gown, 'Bout her grose waste, if ever she did ware Such fruits, like pendant-Iewells in her eares? If the blew heav'ns like braclets did her deck, Or starrs, like beads, encompassed her neck Before I was: ask her and if her Globe Was circumvested, with a Sea-green Robe. Ask her all this, and if that she denies Apparent truth; in flat and plaine, shee lies. Teli her from me, from me arise her Bowers: I fill'd her lapp, with oderiferous flowers. The warr-us'd Cornel, and the Mast-full Beach, The fun'rel Cypress, and the velvet Peach, The downy Poplar, the piramidal Pear The tow'ring Cedar and call Pine did rear Their heads from me: from me, a golden tindge Ceres receiv'd: a Jasper colour'd frindge Embellished the Meddows, Pastures, Land, All diapar'd with spangled Dazies stand. All Birds, Basts, Fshes, rarest gems rich mnes, From out my fruitful loyns, derive their lines.
I'me Alpha, and Omega; from me springs Both the begining, and the end, of things. When the rebellious world, for sin was drown'd Then only Noah's Arke and I was found. When flashing fire, and stifeling Bimstone, rain'd On Sodom, and Gomorah, I remaind. Rome's Capitol, and Troy's Palladium, Carthag, and Athens, are to nothing come. Where's Thebs brag, of her hundred gates but late∣ly? The Tow'rs of Babilon? where be the stately Long Obelisks? the Piramid's? where's now Mausolus Tombe? can any tell me how The Temple builded to Diana's shrine Doth stand? did they not all to me resigne. Say where is Pharo's Tow'r? can you behold Jove's simelachre, rich for burnish'd gold? Gold-pav'd Jerus'lem is, alas! bereft Of all her pompe, and she hath nohing left? Nothing is left, that is for some thing good; Grass growes where brave Daealan buildings stood Nay heavens shall melt, the universall frame Return to nothing, from the whence it came; Is Hercules alive; can he be glorious Sudbu'd by me? Thnk you that the victorious Undaunted Caesar, and great Pompey too, Two thunder-bolts of War, exploits can do?
Now they are dead? could the great Alexander Who weep'd, in that he could not be commander Of many worlds? could his brave acts and glory Keep him from being Nothing? could the hoary Age of grand Nestor save him from the Urne, When dust he was, and must to dust returne. Blind Homer, solid Virgil, none sets eye on Wise Cato's gone, the Dolphin caryd Arion; Stout Hector, am'rous Paris, Troy-bane Helleu, Subtile Ʋlisses, are to Nothing fell in. Where is Ampion, at whose Musicks sound The Theban walls were raised from the ground? The eared Oakes, shall never any more Dance after Orpheus pipes as heretofore. Caonean Doves, in the Dodonian grove, Shall ever cease more Oracles to move. Who wil beleeve that William once againe Can conquer Saxons? he and all his men Alas! where are they? are they not return'd From whence they came, and into nothing spurn'd? Where's bloody Mary, and Elizabeth, Of blessed memory, but kil'd by death. Where's now pacif'cal lames, misguided Charles? How many worthies, Nobles, Brons, Earles, Lords, Knights & Gentle-men were there, that have Took full possession of the gaping grave.
What are the rich but dust, as well as they That beg? Death is a debt which all must pay. Can Essex lad an Army, when to Leed His body is confin'd; Vantrump is dead, And the Armodo sunk, and its designe Was cross'd in eighty eight, and thirty nyne. All things of nothing made, to nothing tend, And what hath a beginning must have end. In time of dearth, there's nothing to be found But sapless stalks, upon the fruitless ground, Nothing but singults, mixt with hearty tears Can scale the fortress, of th' Almighties eares, Nothing so mercifull as God, he moans Repentant sinners, when he hear's their gaoans. Nothing but grace, conducteth unto glory, Then which there's nothing more untranstory. More could I say, but the descending Sun Takes off my Pen, with Nothing I have done. Iam desine tibia versus.
Divine Ejaculations. 1. MY God which art a brazen wall, A Bul-warke of consuming fire, Guard me and let my foe-men fall, Who; causleslly my fall conspire. Oh let thy favour be my sheild, So shall my soul maintaine the field. 2. Oh thou which giv'st thine Angels charge, To guide thy servants in their warrs, Do thou protect me, and enlarge My streightned heart, to sound thy praise, If with thy favour, thou surround me, No hell-borne mallice shall confound me. 3. Thou which thy children from he fire, And Dniel from the Lions Den, Hast freed? Oh free me from the ire Of bloody and malitious men. Thy grace can chase an hoast of evils, And Legions of infernal Devils.
4, When dang'rous waves on me did roul, By thy right hand, I sav'd have been: Thou heard'st the pantings of my soul. And when I knock'd did'st let me in. Thy court of mercy; nay thine ears, Were prone to heare my silent tears: 5. Although the tot'ring heav'ns quiver, And earth her loosned limbs doe shake, Yet hast thou promis'd to deliver, Who, thee their hope, and Anchor, make. And thou to thine a gratious God, Abscond'st them from thy flaming rod. 6. Thou from the chambers of the earth, From gates of hell, and shades of death, Hast power to save, and givest birth. Unto a body-bannish'd breath. O let thy quickning grace shine in My breethless soul, when dead to sin.
7. When as the clouds of thy displeasure (Portending stormes) together gather, Oh let thy fury know a measure, Remember th' art a loving Father. Though I'me a disobedient child, Make me as good as thou art milde. 8. In wisdome thou chastizest thine, And in the furnace of affliction, Their drossie souls thou dost refine; And by thy Judgments, stamp conviction. If thy corrections thou dost lengthen, Accordingly be pleas'd to strengthen. 9. Will he persist in wrath? and never Admit of thoughts of mercy? can The Lord abandon his for ever? O no, for he is God, not man. He vows, (and will his vows performe) His fury shall not alwayes storme.
10. O happy he whom God corrects, Therefore his chastening do not shun; The Lord afflicts whom he affects, As doth a father, his lov'd Son. Nor doth he alwayes fury like, For he doth stroke, as well as strike. 11. Who would not willingly endure A minutes time , little paine; If after that he might be sure Ten thousand years of cas to gaine? Afflictions light, and transitory, Yeild an eternal weight of glory. 12. Cleanse me from soul infecting sin, And purely purg away my dross, O do thou take from me my Tin; (And make me joy in such a loss,) O Lord my crooked wayes reforme, And be my pilot in a storme.
13. If thou affliction please to send To try my frailties, and weak graces; Make me look up, and learne to mend, That thou mayest hugg me with embraces. "The Law is rough, the Gospell calm, "Be that the Launce, and this the Balm. 14. Whither thy favour thou display, Or dost with flaming fury glow; O let me with the faithfull say, I doe by good experience know, All things shall worke for good to those Who God affect, whome God hath chose: 15. As my affliction Lord abounds So let m consolation, Pour Balsam in my bleeding wounds, And hide m' in thy pavilion. Although I ail yet I shall stand Supported by thy helping hand.
16. Great God! though my offences urge Thy heavie hand, yet Lord refraine, My Saviour's blood hath power to purge My scalet sins, though dy'd in graine. One drop can scour, and make them full As bright as snow, as white as wooll. 17. Thy rowning Justice stormes doe bring, But thy cleare mercyes them doe stop: I'le be content with a wet spring, So I may have a joyfull crop. Comforts will troops of greif destroy, Who sow in teares shall reap in joy 18. My God, my Rock, my Sheild, my Tower, My health, my strength, deliver me, From those three foes, that would devour, Ah! I shall fall unheld by thee. Thou only hast the power to quell Pernitious foes, Sin, Death, and Hell,
19. Thou Lord wilt lay no more on me When my weak back can bear no longer Either my burthen light shall be, Or else my feeble faith grow stronger. O let my well, prepared breast With what thou send'st contented rest. 20. The judgments of the Lord are just; Why should his judgments then dismay me? I in my God will put my trust, Although my God should please to slay me. O Lord before thee do I stand, As clay within the potters hand. 21. In time of want, grant I may live By faith, and on thy promise seed; Thou, Lord more ready art to give, Then I to ask, when I do need. O heav'nly Father, make it still My meat, nd drink, to do thy will.
22. O may I first thy Kingdome seek, And righteousness which flowes from thee▪ (So shall I be confirm'd though wek.) And other things shall added be. Ah Lord! shall I presume to trust Thee for a Kingdome, not  crust. 23. In poverty  ho my wlth, May I fear thee, and esche will, It shall be  my nvil helth; And my dry  with marrow ll▪ In thee it lies for to reses The fainting spirit, and trembling fresh: 24. O Lord, uphold  in my wll, For ah! my ee are  stumbl; Chain thou my tongue  sinfull , In all conditions make e humble? O give me gre o must i thee, So shall, it them goe well with me.
The Birth of CHRIST. To be propitious to him, while he sings, The mean'st of Poets oraves the best of Kings. GReat God of lights, be pleased to infuse Celestial light, into mine infant Muse. Be thou to me an unseal'd fountaine, whence I may suck joyfull streames; transport my sense, Above this Mole-hill earth, doe thou distill Into the concave of my trembling Quill, Those lucid drops of divine Oratory, From thy full Lembick, to set out the story Of thy Son's condiscention. I shall stray, If thou assist not, O be thou my way. Lord I am weak at best, direct my youth, That I may nothing write, but what is truth. O teach thou me though tender, and unripe, To play upon this slender Oaten pipe: Soe tune it Lord that I may breath upon it And sound thy praises, in a lasting Sonner. I care not for (so thou but guid my Quill) Swet Helecon, nor yet Parnasus hill. Make me an instrument to sing thy praise I crave a crowne of glory, not of Bayes.
It was the time when in the morning ruddy The thrice three sisters flock'd into my study, And having play'd upon their Ivr'y Lyre Such Rapsodies as Phebus did inspire. One of the nine (the other held their tongue) Caliope stood up and thus she sung. (The rest gave audience, by my desk I sit, And what she spake in Characters I writ.) All you whose teare-bedewed eyes espy The ill shap'd visage of your sins, draw nigh, Mark! and consider what the Lord hath done, To save lost sinners he hath sent his Son. And you whose eyes could never yet let fall A teare in earnest for your sins; come all, Come, and in heart-proceeding tears behave you, And doe not doubt, a Christ is borne to save you. "How can your frozen gutters chuse but run, "That feel the warmth of such a glorious Sun. Now Rosy-fc'd Aurora does unfold Her purple Curtains, all bfring'd with gold. And from the pillow of his saffron bed, Don-Phebus rouzeh his refulgent head. He newly leaving th' Oriental streames O Thitis, brandisheth her trembling beams, Lo now bright Phospher doth abroad display His early fulgor. ush'ring in the day
Of welcome joy: Now is the golden morn, Wherein the Saviour of the world is born. Borne, and of whom? a virgin, what is stranger? Where, in a Stable? and in what, a manger? O wond'rous meekness I he that might be born In a rich pallace, thought it not a scorn To rest upon a Cratch, and lay him down On locks of straw, and not on beds of down This child of glory (with his locks of Amber) Grac'd a poore stabl, not a princely chamber. His Mother in her travail had of Lawn No sheets; no vallents, nor no curtains drawn. Nor could she there (as she deserv'd) behold Brave Tapstry-hangings, all enrich'd with gold? No Scarle blankets did enwrap her child, Unspotted, holy, harmless, undefil'd; O object of delight! how amiable Are thy rare vertues! and how vile the stable In which they are inclos'd! there art thou lain, Thou whom the heav'n of heav'ns cannot contain. O groundless depths of thy humilitie! What? room for swearers, and no room for the For to be entertain'd? ah! had'st thou bin As bad as they, thou might'st have had an Inn. Foxes have holes, and ev'ry bird their nest, But Christ had not whereon his head might rest.
Bles't Son if God, oh! how hast thou debas'd Thy glorious self, h! why would'st thou be plac'd In such a homely bow'r; was't not that we Might by thy pattern learn humility? Art thou advanc'd unto the highest pitch Of fortune? be not proud, Christ was not rich. Art thou involv'd in gulfs of Povertie? Remember Christ was poore as well as thee. He's poore without, but all enrich'd within, Like other men in all things, saving sin. Our mediator, and our advocate, Is born but meanly, not in regal state. And all for sinners, oh! th' abounding love Of a sweet Saviour! he that was above Angels in glory; and might still inherit Investest honor, bears an humble spirit, And to b' as low, as low can be, hath chose; The inundation of his love o're flowes, Our thoughts conceptions thou dost expand Pure love; ah! what deserve we at thy hand But fire and brimstone? ah! what moves thee thus Dear Lord! what goodness dost thou find in us? Lord! what is man, that thou should'st mindfull be To save from torment, such awretch as he. Towards froward sinners he his avour turns; Oh! how our God in his affection burnes.
O love un parlel'd! uncomrehendd! Great God! h! whither is thy love extended! Cheare up poor sin-ick soul; rt thou oprest, And heavy laden, Christ will give thee rest? Rouz thee from sinfull sleep, ere break of day, Mark wat the Angl did to th' Shepards say? He aies to thee far not; lo now I bring Tidings of joy; for unto you a King A Siour is born, is bone to day, Where princel, David did the scepter sway: The wise-men see, conducted by a star A Sun-shine, brighter then the Sun by farr. O may we all unanimously run To view the rising of so clear a Sun. Lord let us not with Herod and the Jews, Hearing thy birth be troubled at the news. But joy in th thou comest to restore And save us sinners, who were lost before. This, this is he concerning whome 'twas said The womns seed shall break the Serpents head. This, this is he, whose raies cast such a fire, As should enflame our amorous desire. Who can behold so sweet a babe as this is, And not embrace him whith a thousand kisses! Before his sight, the purest Lamp seems dim, And light is darkness, if compar'd to him.
If he but shew the Sun-shie of his eye We doe revive, i he withdraw we dye. W by the splendur of his rayes, have bin Freed from the darksome dungeon of sin. Lod how inscrutable! oh how profound Ae thy way! oh! how deeply are we bound T praise, and please thee, and o be enclin'd To love▪ thee with our souls, our strength, & mind! Shine Sun of glory, let thy beams divine Revive our spirits, Shine, Sun of glory shine. Life of our suls, moe glorious to behold Then fruitfull Ophir's best refined gold; Do thou me in thy lovely armes embrace, And help me varnish thy atracting grace, With sacred Rhetorick; if on my tongue The Lutes, and Vials of the Angels, hung, Those Sonnets I could sound in endless dayes, Would not be correspondent to thy praise. O let thy lips, in a diviner story Declare thy graces, and divulge thy glory As Angels did, glory be to thee still, Peace on the earth, and unto men, good will. Be glad my soul whilst all the world records, With one cosent: Salvation is the Lord's. Th' eternal God, hath sent his onely Son To dye for us; we by his loss are won.
To Ela's note let us our voyces raise, And touch our Organs on their owder keyer, To us, is bn, to us, i sent from heaven, The Lord of fe; to us a Son is given. To us, that are  lesser then the least▪ Of mercies, this great mercy i exprest. With th Caliope spreads out her wings, And ck (as did the rest) a way she springs. Then for the present, rapture lef nay head, Inventio vanish'd, and my ncy .
In Natalim Christi. Acrosticon. Mens digesta cupit claruM resonare triumphuM Vulnifico exemit ChristVs nos Ditis ab ictV Numine dexter, ades spleNdescat pectore lumeN Divinum Deus; r Diet  bar illD Icta chelys, mutil I feriat laqueri CaeI Sol petit Antipodas aul Stellantis AlumnuS Alloquitur pecudum PAstor, pndit ealtA Lux micat, en! mundisa Lvator, Justitiae SoL Virginis è gremio exeritVr, (irabile dictV Amgelicis concuss Aremunt Terra Choros agitaT; Nympha cū Tethyde saltanT Ore Chaos gemit hOrrendo; reparabilis EcchO Rugit, et auratus s Rpitu confunditur aethR Iam soboles divina De , pro crimin  I Excelsà astrigeri o Eli delabr are E Sumit et humanaS, induus corpore formaS Vita Salus, mihi sis LaVs, Gloria ulcit JesV Sic meo plectra tuas, re Sonat pector LaudeS
A Hymne in Commemoration of the Gun-powder Treason. NOw the grisly God of Hell, With his onsters, fierce and fell, Which in pitchy Cevrns dwell Enter into consultation: And the Devil's Imp th [Pope,] And the Catholicks which grope In the dark, doe greatly hope For to see our desolation. E're our Queen Elizabet Had resign'd her latest Men and Devils undern Met to hatch a horrid treason. Garnet moves the King of Spaine To invade: King James his reigne New begun makes him refrain That designe b'ing rul'd by reason.
Seditious Catesby he recits To Winter, what he had as lights, From Parsons and the Jsui, On which the Powder-plo was grounded. These Caalmes with their cmplices (Foes to vertue,  to ) Swear to hide e nprizes Which shll be to them propounded. Powdr-Barreis thirty six; (Billet-wood and faggot sticks For to colour it) they fix, In a Cellar that was voyd. This conspir'd to overthrow King and Kingdome at a blow, What to do they faine would know, Faux a villaine they employ'd. A letter sent to th' Lord Mounteagle, To discontent did him inveigle, The King, like a Majestick Eagle, Saw with his jumens peircing eye; And  he  and ( the word ha wisely scan'd) The  cud not understand, The  sense he did disery.
The King commands, they search about, For to remove suspitious doubt; At last they find the traytor out, With a dark lanthorn in his hnd. The plo's reveal'd, and al their aims His gratious goodness God proclaime, In saving thus our soveraine James And all the Nobles of the land, Oh what for us the Lord hath wrought, He, he hath rescu'd us, and brought All our foes fond atempts to nought? Bloody mindes have bloody ends. In the secret-hidden snare, Which for us they did prepare, They themselves intangled are; Powder plotters powder rends. They that did our deaths conspire, And did very much desire We might dance in shets of fir, Their plots found out, they fled our coasts.
Some of them did a halter stretch, Guy Faux▪ a brazen-faced wretch, Had's head ercted on a cratch: Glory be to the Lord of Hoasts. Thrice blessed be this day, may not Th unaccomplish'd Powder-plot, By any Christians be forgot. O joyfull joyfull holy day! Let Bells in ev'ry Steeple ring, And ev'ry sort of people sing, And boyes their squibs and crackers fling, And bone-fires beany light display. Let all of us with one accord Extoll and magnifie the Lord; Who to this Island did afford So great, so straing deliverance! O sing we all waies to his prayse, Sweet Sonnets Hymnes and Lirick-Layes, Who doth preserve his Church alwaies, Praise God my soul, his praise advance.
GENETHLIACON, OR A Birth-song, in honor of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ his coming into the World. 1. FRom the skies Night slideth down; Cloathed in a sable gown; And her drowsie head doth crown, With a Poppy Coronet: Muffling up her scar-crow face; Holding forth a Leeden Mace; Thus she o're the world doth trace; With bright Sentinells beset. 2. Now the Magi from a farr From the Eastern borders are Lead by th' lustre of a Starr, To the place where Jesus lay: They, soon e're they him behold, Present presents manifold, Myrrhe and frankincense, and gold, And in praises spend the day.
3. And it hapned thus, that near Unto Bethlehem, there were Faithfull Shepherds, who with care Tended on their fleecy fold: Least that their flock-leading Rams, And the pretty baing Lambs, Should be whoried with their dams, For the Foxes were too bold. 4. Suddenly, a glorious light, Chas'd away the purblinde night; And from Heav'n an Angel bright To the Shepheards did appear; While their fleecy people graz'd, At this prodigy they gaz'd, And no little were amaz'd, For their hearts did shake with fear. 5. From the bosom of a cloud, Heavens Herald did unshroud, This Embassy out aloud, Fear nor shepheards; Lo this morn.
The glad tidings which I bring, Shall give you just cause to sing, For to you, to you, a King, And a blessed Saviour's born: 6. There, where princly David sway'd He which the worlds ground-work laid, Born is of a Mother-Maid, And involv'd in swad'ling clouts: Ever after shall all nations, In succeeding generations, Fill the heav'ns with acclamations, And the earth with joyfull shouts. 7. He which is inestemable, And to doe all things is able, Is inclos'd within a stable, Cradled in a silly manger: Where the stalled Ox hath fed, There your Saviour lays hs head, And a lock of straw's his bed, Go Swains, entertain the strang
8. When the Angel held his tongue, An heav'nly Hoast of Angels sung, (That the valted Regions rung) For they warb'led out most shrill, This harmonious mellody: Glory be to God on high, Peace unto the earth be nigh, And unto mankind good will. 9. Praised be Gods holy name, Let the world his praise proclaime, Happy time, wherein we came For to tend upon our fold: We are now redeem'd from hell, We that from our maker sell, We, curs'd we, that did rebell, Was there better news e're told. 10. Pretious Balm from Gilead springs, Unto us a Saviour brings, Healing in his balmy wings; Unto us a Son is given.
We will carol songs of praise, Euchaists, and Roud-delaie, On her Ho-boies all our daies. To the Emperour of heaven. 11. What we with our ears have heard, Hath unto our eyes appear'd, And shall be abroad decalr'd, By our mouths. O blessed birth! O! what God for us hath done, He hath sent his only Son, By whose loss we shall be won! Here is cause indeed of mirh. 12. Glory be to thee the Lord, Who according to thy word, Such rich mercy dost afford, As is treasured up in Jesus, O how doth our joy abound, May' in ev'ry corner sound, We are lost, but shall be found, We are pain'd, but Christ will ease us!
Soul. A Saviour is born; And is he born for me? Me; what? for me forlorn? O love beyond degree! Christ. These sides shall feel the spear; Blood shall my sides run down: Soul, I the cross will bear; And thou shalt wear the crown. Soul. Though the dull earth aspire, And sprightly flames descend: Yet shall my heart my Lyre, Praise thee without AN END
The four Ages of the World. 1 The Golden Age. TIme was (and pitty that it flew away) When peacefull Saturn did the Septer sway Of heaven and earth, there was no need of Laws, Nor jangling Lawyers. to proogue a cause; The riggid Plough, earths bowels need not tear, The earth untill'd spontaneously did bear Fecundious witnesses: no Lab'rours toil Need dress the Vineyards, or manure the soile, Plump Baccus to full bowls of sparkling Nectar Invites each pssenger; fair Flora deck'd her With her embroidred Robes, sets open wide Her flower-furnishd shop; with painted pride Makes every month to swell, her golden trammels Hold each beholding eye, she richly enamels The smiling meads, Zephyrus ever calm Bathes her in kisses of Arabian balm. On lovely-check'd Pomana's curled Tresses, Hang lovely ornaments; Bright Ceres dresses
The naked a'er with her locks, which sborn Like Hidra sprout againe; the ripned corn Prick up their golden ears, listning unto Soft wisp'ring Zephyrus his language, who Tenders his humble service, and doh stand Ambitious to defend them, and command Blastings to come not neer; their thanks to shew Their humble heads, the gratefull corn-feilds bow. All things were plenty: Terminus no bound As yet assign'd, unto the common ground: The world was but one field; each man content Enjoy'd those lauish gifts dame Nature sent. The yoke was stranger to the idle Bull: The sheep went cloathed in her naturall wooll, The Taratant'ra Trump, nor rumbling Drum. Nor Sword nor Helmite in the world was come. Mars had no Sons, tway-faced Jannus kept His temple barr'd while ev'ry motion slpt On slumb'ring feather beds of peace and quiet: Green hearbs, and accorns was their cheifest dyt Rivers of Nector flow'd in liquid gold, Hyblcan Honey-merchants were enroul'd. 'Twas alwaies spring, O what hirmonious notes The Birds did warble from their mus'call throates: Rocking the windes aslep, their charming Song Entic'd the silver streams to dace along.
Men rude and voyd of Arts no Citye build, Contented with such houses woods did yeild. The hollow of the hands were cups at first, Water was Nectar, to allay their thirst. &c. 2 The Silver Age. Saturn b'ing banish'd his supposed throne, (Seldom comes better when the old one's gone) Dayes Halcionian ceas'd, the Silver Age With beardless Jove, came mounting on th stage. Jove did contract the pleasures of the Spring, And the year into four Quarters bring. Gray Winter sbiv'ring comes, and sheets of Snow Upon this universal Bed doth strow. The waies are chain'd, Glaz'd are the silver floods; White Periwigs adorn the bald-pate woods. Extreamity of weather now compells Men to build houses, and procure them cells: Thick shrubs and barks of Trees they joyn together And make some briero's against wind weather. The earth displeas'd at this mutation, breeds The downie Thistle, and such usless weeds. No Wheat is reaped, nor no Barley mown, But what by the industrious hand is sown.
The yoaked Oxen groane, the lab'our brows Rain sweaty showers down: the boyst'rous ploughs Because until'd, earth would no longer bear For very madness do her bowels tear. 3 The Brazen Age. THe golden and the silver age is gone, Next by succession, comes a brazen one. Man's nature now is grown more fierce, and cruel, The fire of warr, is nourish'd by the fuell Of quarelsome debate, and such like crimes As Titan ne're beheld. Reciduous times! 4 The Iron Age. The last, and worst of all, the Iron Age, Acts its last part; who with unbridled rage▪ Sly fraud, hid witchery, hostile deceit, Hearr-gnawing envy, and pestif'ous hate; Claw-back deraction, cluch-fist Avarice, Loathed Oppression, and what ever vice Can well be thought on; gather to a head, And through the hospitable world doe spread.
Monumentum Exequiale OR Lasting sorrow for the death of the Reve∣rend, Pious, and Eminently-learned, Mr Tho Horn, late School-master of Eaton Colledg. Oh I am drown'd in grief, a Borean blast Hath torn my tackling, tumbled down my mast My Anchor's lost, my Cable is undone, And I, poore I, upon the quick-sands run: Could I command the gold in India shines, Arabian Mountaines, and American Mines, What e're beaths from Panchaa's spicy woods, What costly Gems enrich Idaspes floods: All would I give to him that could impart The least of ease to my corroded heart. Stormes have their calmes, flowings their ebs, but I Am the Charybdi of perpiexity
Ah me! ah me! Melpomene lament▪ This common loss, till all thy tears be spent. Lock not thy thoughts in silence: cloath thy mind In aiery garments: while the blust'ring wind Of greif, doth agitate thy yeilding breast, Oh how canst thou expect a minuts rest! Groan thunder then: salute the deafed skies With integrated sobs: let thy swoln eyes Be Islands, circled with a Sea of tears: And in thy Readers hospitable ears Lodge thy lamenting sounds: that they may flow As well as thee: and empty out their woe. What strange confused fragor's this proclaimes That Helicon's disturb'd? the Thespian dames Send to the groaning air, their hideous shreiks, Contunde their brests, and lacerate their cheeks With Adamantine palms, like Beldams tear Their Amber-locks, the Musick that I heare Are Bag-pipe sighs and loud O ganick moanes Mov'd by the weights of grief, see, see the stones Ev'n mlt away in tears: the Chappel's hung In mourning vestments: ev'ry eye and tongue Rings, rings, elegious Sonnets out, the Pewes Are drench'd in briny puddles. ah! what dewes Fall from the glazed pictures. how the Leed Doth seem to run abroad now he is dead!
Greif, Aqua-fortis lik, corrodes the barrs, And in his ashes rakes up glitt'ring stars: The earth is proud (O honorable thing!) To wear so rich a jewel in her Ring, And we, sad we, his Pupils, run about His Tombe, and weep untill our eyes be out: Why weep we so? alas! our pearly tears Can only deck his Herse, not in his ears Drop an enliv'ning power; let's then condole Our folly in lamenting him, whose soul Calcined soul, quitting this earth is flown Into the bosom of the Trine in One: Where we will leave him, still to be possess'st Of heav'nly glory, and eternal rest. Vivit post funera virtus.
His Epitaph: Tender hearts bedew your eyes, Here, beneath this Marble lies One was spir'tually discerned, Meek, wise, pious, vertuous, learned; And whose understanding parts Stor'd up all the lib'rall Arts. He distilled wholsome truths, On your hearts, Etonian youths; Rouze your Muses to his praise, Never dying pillars raise.
Terra Pilae fimilis. MEmphis conticeat Pyramidum decus; Chaldoei, sileant et Babiloniae; Ʋrbem coctilbus maenibus inclytam; Nec fanum Trivia tollat honoribus Vulgus mirificis: non variabile Mansoli tumulum Cares in aëre Pedentem vacuo, nive superbiant: Sublimem statuam mitis Apollinis Laudabunt alii: jactitat et labor Thebas centifores: et Pharos insula Miratur: merito dignus honoribus Rerum nonne opifex tergeminus Deus? Cujus mirabili terra potentia Perpinguis vaeno pendet in are Libraam remanens ponderibus suis? Tellurem in speciem conglomerat pilae Ne non sideribus circuit aureis.
Vita Principis censura. Principe plebs minor est, minor est ut numine princeps Principis illa subest legibus, ille Dei. Saxa gravem Chalybem post se Borealia ducunt, Regis amat nutus aemula turba sequi. Non magis agnus ovem sequitur, levis arbutus Austrum Nec magis à vitreis os simulatur aquis. Reg hilari gaudet, flet si rorantur Ocelli, Quod tulit, illa tulit, quod facit, illudagit. Ejus deliciae plebis sunt sola voluptas, Arbitrio vulgus statque caditque suo. Tertullus Apolos. Gratiae dulces, lepidaeque voces, Sermo facundus, locuplesque vena, Et lepos blandus domini beata Munera celfi. Suada, non castis animis inhaerens Clara, persuasit mala perpetrare, Profit ast vera pietate Suada Concatinata.
In Equum quendam atate consumptum hand veloci pede promoventem Hexasticon Non ego sum Trojanus equus, nec inutile lignum, Sed postis gradiens cum gravitate tamen: Qui velit insideat, liceat recreare; quid obstat? Nam bis millenis ictibus ire queam Ipse mihi dominoque salus, en! astra relucent Sublatus: in gremio Marspiter ipse meo. Englished thus: I am no Trojan Horse, nor fruitless stock, To tell the truth I'me a grave-walking block. Any, that will, may ide me for their pleasure, Two thousand stripes may make me go by leasure: I mind mine own, and Masters health, lo: Stars My sides reflect: I brood the God of warrs. Or thus I am no Art-made Horse, nor wood tht's waste, But a staid foot-pace, making no great hast. For recreation sake thou mayest (why not?) Com ride me: blowes enough may make me tro. Well fare my self, and rider, in these sides Starrs shine: Oh! in my lap Gradivus hides.
Inanis jactatio per hypotypofin. Bacchus ad arma vocat socios; sic unus et alter Obstrepit illius (reboant cellaria) potu: Nos erimus bello fortes, pia turba sororum Tartareis oritur a locis, crinita Megara Invida Tisyphone, nec non insignis Alecto (Crinibus in nodum contortis more Sycambri) Ignibus accensis adsunt sonuere flagello. Ibimus illaesi, metuenda per agmina fortes Contra pugnaces animos conjungere dextras, Num metuent? manibus pedibus{que} conabimur om∣nes Debellare hostes, nostris adversa potestas Viribus inferior, quàm despicabilis illa est! Flenda cruorifluis laceari terga flagellis Vidimus, en! humerósque premi sub pondere lasss Tamburlanus ego video mihi, ùque tricorpor Geryon, simulachra Jovis, Solisque colossus Postica Equus Cacipars antica virfuit ecce Est lupus in fabula, tuque es Antaeus arena, Tu lapides Turnus jacias, tu Monychus Ornos Hic Brontes Steropésque simul nudusque Pyrach∣mon Fulmina discutiant contortuplicantia bombis Telum, clava tridens insignia framea thyrsis Sint Jovis Alcidis, Neptuni, Martis, Iacchi.
Talia praeteria et dimittit fulgura pelvis, Adjuvet ignovomis flamis nos Aena chimera; Ʋesbius et Lipare strigens, Peta Crinon & Alpes Suppditant niveas pilas sic Sisyphus ingens Increpat, et Stentor furibundo litigat ore, Nc mora pugnator Corribantes araque pulsant Dumque tube resonant victoria nulla potita est. Querimonia de Solario. Absconde Titan purpureae facis Flaminas et obfusca nitidum jubar, Solarium hand luce fruatur, Abbrevians celerisque lusus. Non pullulabant tot nova guttura Lerne Chelidro, quot mala protulit Slarū hujus manch nator Fallere tempor a non sinentis Non visceribus Colchis inhospita Tum triste tulit virus in abditis: Horae advocant duri fugaces Innocuos pueros libellis.
Eheu! rapaces (phro lachrimabile!) Labuntur horae, Bosphoreos sinus. Mercatr horrescit Charibdim Cyaneas trabe Scyllamt atram. Vuipm dolosam mittis ovis fugi Caute eolumbe morsibus anguium Servantur, inprovisa at hora Japeti genus omne fallit.
Humilitas Triumphans, Seu de Regina Suecorum, coronam sibi abrogante. VIrtus munditiis culta suis nitit Excellens, Pario est marmore purior: Haec est ad superos strata rosis via: Felix qui pouit dulcia temnere Contentus minimis lucra divitiis. Thebanum Historiae laudibus evehunt Cratem, qui liquidum proijcit in mare Numorum cumulum non minimum se qui Anfractus Sophiae, cstraque Palladis. Quis non Phocionem tollat honoribus Claris ximium, munera Persica Peleo à juvene allataque spreverat? Agros Democritus deseruit suos Dives, fecit eos publica pascua: Expers muneribus Scipio publicis Prvatim usque diem vixit ad ultimum. Horum perspicua est n pietas virum! At multo his superat faemina nobilis, Regina indomita, et Gloria, Laus, Honor Suecorum; capii deposuit suo Iunctos Laureoles▪ & Diademata
Dat consanguineo: non juvat aureis Ostantaré suum stemma palatiis, Gaudet nec animos stringere in hosticas Junctis in cuneos Quadrupedantibus Turmas et valido milite consequi Victorum innumeris nomina mortibus: Nec calcat variis classibus aequora. Non vestis Tyrio murce tingitur Auri nec poculis, vinaque Lesbia Scintillant: cumulos despicit aureos. Contenta haec proprijs usibus aggerat Quantum sufficiat copiarumque opum. In Hortos. Laudabunt alij Lucani, et Adonidis hortos, Alcinoi, fulvos Hesperidumque trium. Sunt quibus, unum opus est patulis radiantia ramis Aurea carminibus pomasonare suis. Oxoniae, omnigenis herbis at nobilis hortus Nos juvat, Hippocriti Pharmaca cuncta frus Aspice plantam humilm pudibunda dat oscula ter¦ra Coutrahit et ramos tactilis herbae suos. Hic viridi recubare queas sub tegmine buxi, Fessaque floriferis sternere membera toris. Clara viri ingenui Waddhamia maenia et hortis Archimedeum cui cdit ingenium.
Parte tripartitus pelvis mdia effluit amnis Virginis en niveae prouit unda genas. Pictaque festivos tellus expirat odores, Et florum partu visicolore tumet. Aeolus insequitur ventos, hic orbe resedent Vertibili, glauco veste recinctus rat. Eucharasticon, in pluviam post solennes preces feliciter donatam. Anno 1653. IAm scelus Angliacum pulsaverat ostia coeli Horrentes strepitus imbibit aure Deus: Nec mora, non parvas dignas Jove concipit iras Dent ait hi poenas quas meruere pati. Sol calet et subito viridantia pascua flavos Induerant vultus, et decus omne fugit. Moesta Cors imbres sitibundo gutture flagra Nullaque caelsti rore madescit humus Angiica gens, liquido lachrimarum fonte resedit Abluat ut sordes voce rogatque Deum. Tum Dus anuerat, reserat cava viscera nubis Telluris siccas proluit unda gns. Quae nova jam rerum facies? laetantur agclli, Gauet et effuso Nectare terra madens.
Laetantur pccudes, et onusti floribus horti Purpureis rident; ridet et alma Ceres. Largius en! niveae tondent nova gramina vaccae Et referunt mulctris ubera tenta suis. Lucifer Eoâ sulget laetissimus arce, Et Veneris sparso purpurat igne genas. Dulcis odoratae Zephyrus dat basia Florae, Et trmulos ramulos mitior aura quatit. Nocte sub humenti Nympae, Satirique bicornes Exercent agiles laeta per arva choros: Tmpora suilibus gaudent redimire corollis, Lampsaio carpunt Lilia grata Deo. Aspice laetiijs laetentur ut omnia miris Festivos ducat laeta Thalia sonos. Noster Io Paean, sint carmina sancta canamus Gloria in excelsis pax sit, et alma solo. Imbremque pluviamque polo deducis ab alto, Nostraque muneribus vota minora tuis.
De Arietis ante Electionem Etonensem (pro more) venatione. ARgolici juvenes Colchi frigentis ab oris Auratum vellus surrspuisse ferunt. Ecce schole teneri nos Etonensts alumni, Corniger herbiferis vir gregis adstat agris; Currite vos juvenes, madefactos sanguine fustes Portate invicti, vellieris usus eat. Casta Diana'juvet, si non superare potestis Vos nemorum Dive, vos Driadumque chori. Quid fugis? ah demens frustra vitare laboras Lethiferum vulnas, mors properata venit. Turba juvenilis coeunt, mortemque minantur, Captus non bumili vindice caesus cris. Succumbens aris non uno est verbere victus Herculeis ictus fustibus ecce cadit. Corpus panicea sandapila jam coquus abdat Convivi vivis condite Sarcophagis.
Quaerimonia Etonensium de spe fere frustraneâ. Suggere moerorem ludi Etonensis Alumnis Melpomine tristes tristia verba decent. Quisque suos casus lachrymarum gurgite plangat. Induat atratam nostra Thalia togam Solvimur in rivulos, moesti rorantur Oeelli Flumine suspirij pectora nostra tument? Cura facit canos nos (heu!) juvenilibus annis, Collapsts macies errat ubique genis. Navita contrarijs ventis et fluctibus actus, Tandem exoptatam puppe retinget humum, Cogimur (heu!) longum duros sufferre labores, Atque evadendi copia nulla datur. Si causam rogites, Regina pecunia desit Nobis, O solum pondera pondus habent! Olim si terras moerens Astraea reliquit Certus sum nstro non reditura solo. Nummatis juvenes Academica dona beatunt Cum nihil atulerit nudus amcus eat Aurum si saliat laeva de parte mamiliae Nil saliat, satis est, crimina pauper habet. Saxa trahunt post terga sequens Magnetica ferum Capreoli sanguis durum Adamanta domat. O utinam traberent regalia tecta potnti Nos dextra, et socii mollia corda ferant!
An Acrostick Elegy upon the death of the late Reverend, and Famons Divine, Mr. Is he then dead? hoVv soon pays he his dEbt? Oh were it not (If God saw good) As yet; Surely this sa—Cred man, is gone to Take Eternity by th' hand; hE means t—O make Perptual hap—Piness his Couch, oN which He may secu-Rely lye, in glory riCh. Sound were his wOrds, his life & conversatiOn Yeilded a fragrant fVme; his contemp Lation Most heav'nly was; On earth (unparaLel'd Others in gift—Sand graces he excEll'd: Now grieving for This loss, poor Eton Dyes, Discharging volleys Of sad Ele—Gies; Saies she, alas! For me he spent his brEath, He dies, yet lives; Virtue surviveth death,
In obitum Dom. THO: WEAVER: M. A. Etonensis Coll. Socij: Acrostico-Epicedium. Tertres Pierides TexToris funera flerunT Hoc facimus pueri, CHorusōis clamitat, ah, aH Omnes deflemus n—Ostro Textore peremptO Me miserū miserum{que} ChoruM! dum flemus ademptuM Actionae socium▪ p—Atrem{que} gemente querelA Singult{us} potius, quā verSus edimus apto—S Victa jacet gravitas Vveaveri condita vultV Vincitur a fatis virt Vs (miserabile dictV Ecce jacet, simul ecc Ejacet gens musica MusaE Alliciunt cantus, cal Amos{que} dolente MinervA Vixit ut Hippolit—Vscaelebs, sine conjugis usV Extinctos cineres▪—En! Divae templa MinervaE Respiciunt, animus peRcaeli sidera ferta—R
On Ambition. AMbition is a Gyant, which aspires No higher then the heavens; it desires Reach at priority, she scorns to be O'retop'd, nay more, she will not, no not she: Honor 's her aime, 'tis honor is the thing That mounts her thoughts imp'd to an Eagles wing She climbs on Pelion, if that will not doe, On Pelion's back, she'll through mount Ossa too: Why not? sayes she, why may not I inherit What others have, since my transcending merrit Eclipses theis? what e're it cost me, I By right, or wrong, will get priority. I am no mungrel brat, but freely born To no mean fortunes, slavery I scorn: Be he a King, or whatsoe're he be I have as much right to be rich as he. I'le rout out all the black-coats, if I can, The greatest Clerk is not the wisest man: Of such new light my spirit hath discerning, As they cannot attaine for all their learning. My fingers itch to pull the Clergy down, And strike the Sarrs with my advanced crown.
A wise forecast! but what if men doe wonder At yong designes? know there's a God of thunder, Can crush your Giant-like assaults; his power Weakens the proud; remember Babels Tower. Ambious Phaeton his fond desire Ruin'd himselfe, and set the world on fire. Icarus flyes, but Icarus his wings Are cing'd, and cold, and head-long ruin brings. Aspiring Pharo perished through pride. And Bellisarius beg'd before he dy'd. Nebucadnezar striving to be full Of honor is become a belowing Bull. VVhile the Philosopher his eyes did pitch Vp to the Starrs, he fell into a dich. Claudius would be a God, yet doth he dread The voyce of thunder underneath his bed, Strange kind of Diety! his head he hides, Vanting Sosostrates in's Chariot rides, Drawn by those Kings he to subjection brought. So highly of himself King Hero thought, He would be brother to the Sun and King Of Kings: proud Soppho learn'd the Birds to sing, The great god Sappho for to rule alone Constantine drave his mother from her throne. Brave blades! but what, save Monuments of shame, Left they behind? our Levellers which claim
An interest in other mens estates. Shall, notwithstanding their projecting pates, Be cushed in the shell; and their intrusion Upon themselves, not others bring confusion: And though a goverment they lowdly baul, Both civil, and Eclesiasticall; Blow Pauls down at a breath they may as soon As work their overthrough: Dogs at the Moon May bark, but canno bite; The curstest Cow Hath shortest horns; Their stouter hearts shall bow Our upstart Zealots, and aspiring Elves, Striking at learning, shall strike down themselves.
EVCharIstICon, In PsaLMos IessaeI natI sVaVIsonos, FranCIsCo RoVs Generoso (Etonae PraesVLe) Paraphraste nVper eXCVsos. Ao MCCCCCLLXVVVVVVVIIIIIIII. Enl nova prela ferunt cultu limata Britanna Carmina fatidici nobile Regis opus. Dulcis Apollineas Spiras Francisee Camenas Suecing at nive as Laurea serta comas. *" Sacro  finis cursu, Philomela Poema; Finibus Angliacis sit sine fine sonus. * Ana Franciscus Rousius, gramma. * Ana Sacro  finis cursu. gramma. . : . .
Anna FRANCIS ROVSE, gramma. Anna RISE CAR OF SVN. gramma. RISE CAR OF SVN, convey thy purer light Into our souls, so shall they know no Night. IS Nestor then reviv'd? was ever Realm So blest as this, had ever any Helme So wise a Steersman? dost thou ask what Bee Drew Honey from the Fathers? this is he. Here's Davia's spirit iust, each Psalme, each line Seemes no Translation, but genuine. My soul take this Sybilla's golden branch To clear thy way so shalt thou safely lanch Through troublous Seas. Grave Sir (in whose rare mind The Sept'agint resides) when you refin'd The drossie English Psalms, upon your tongue The Angels sacred Lutes and Vials hung. I see a Phenix; whensoe're I look Vpon your are inesteemeable book; If mercy by a golden chaine e're drew His hearers by the ears, w'are drawn by you. Your Colledg-crowning gifts, content us more Then richest Jewels on the Indian shore.
Will the Majestick Eagle stoop so low As look upon poor sily flys? although The Eagle will not, yet you shine upon us. Bestowing Hony-dropin favou on us. Your flouds, we see doe oveflow the banks Of our deserts, and can we ebb in thanks? Scarce Atlas back is bg enough to bear Your goodness fiam t: supose there were No Sun to gild ou Hemphe, wee quite Should not be blind, ty psalm▪book is our light. Why gild I gold? The mr I doe endeavour T'aproach your worth, I'm further of then ever. Go on blest Sir, your Honorable ame Shall alwaies stretch, the vocal cheeks of fame. FINIS.
A CENTURIE OF HISTORICAL APPLICATIONS, With a Taste of Poetical Fictions: Being the fruits of some spare Hours. BY N.B. E.C.A. LONDON. Printed for Robert Crofts, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Crown in Chancery Lane, under Sergeants Inne, 1658.
To his Honored Ʋncle, Mr Iohn Wooton one of the Com∣missioners for the County of Hereford. SIR, Benefits bestowed oblige the receiver, thanks returned engage the giver: by the first I am made hopeless of requital: by the second you will be the more encourag∣ed to continue your benevolence. To sup∣press the rememberance of favours is impi∣ous, Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris; & to ex¦press them as I should is more then I can doe, and I know is more then you expect. Indeede though words (as it is in the Pro∣verbe) will butter no Parsnips, yet I con∣fess a verbal acknowledgment is somthing, and a partiall satisfaction better then none at all. This hath encouraged me to send you (as a test of my real thank fulness) these
unfledgd birds; hatched (to say the truth) in the dark, and brought to light when I could see none (scalding Rheums and Di∣stilations for a great while togeather over∣clouding mine eye-sight) which may ren∣der their blemishes, wants, and imperfecti∣ons, a little the more pardonable and ex∣cusable, with the judicious; such a one I as∣sure my self you are, and therefore my humble Muse falling flat at the feet of your clemency, craves so much favour at your hands, that you would please to ho∣nor this tender Fry of hers, so far as to brood them under the wings of your pro∣tection; she bringing you them as a smal present-from, Sir, Aug. 12. 1657. Your dutiful and most obliged kinsman NIC. BILLINGSLY.
To the Reader. Reader, VVhoever thou art, I here present thee with a Gallimawfery, a Moretum, a Hodge-podge, a Compound of many Simples; how well it will relish with thy pallate I can∣not tell: if thou likest it well and good, if not, there is I hope no harme done: I have no more to say to thee, only this; I bid thee farewel, re∣solving to remaine Thine, as thou deservest. N. B.
Historicall Applications, 1. Tis pretty sport to see the Cobtines stride Vpon a Hobby-horses back, and ride. Insipd Ideots! O prepostrous deeds! Steeds doe not carry them, they carry Steeds. Pleasures are Reeds, which yeild us infant play; Reader, we ride on Reeds as well as they. 2. The Alc'ran sayes, (which who will may beleeve) The Moon descended into Mahomet's sleeve: 'Tis strange! yet God doth his loves lamp impart T'a more coarcted room, what's that? the heart. O may the lustre of those rayes divine Be alwaies sparkling in this heart of mine! That I, inlightned by thy light may see, Great God! more clearly to discover thee. 3: The Tibaren's affix unto the Cross Those they love best; triumphing in their loss.
But we to part with darling fins are sorry: Though we may gaine thereby a crown of glory. 4. Th' Arabians instead of worser wood Feed Corm'rant Vulcans jawes with fragrant spices But ah! we chuse what's bad, refuse what's good, Offend the Lord of life with loathsome vices. My soul when zeal to kindle prayer begins. Cast out the filthy rubish of thy sins. 5: Chimerians think there is no Sun, Because it is debar'd their sight: The dark'ned soul doth groping run, If God absent his glorious light, Lord turne, with thy corruscant rayes, My darksom nights to lightsome dayes. 6. At the Cape of good hope the rib-made Sex With chaines of greasie tripes adorne their necks. Ev'n so those sins which in our eyes seem faire, In Gods, which are most pue, deformed are. What God abhors that mostly doth arride us, Disgrace we grace, and in our shame we pride us.
7. Amongst the Series (O had we less store) Is neither Theif, nor Murtherer, nor Whore. 8. If glass-wall'd Baumgar be a Court for Cats, Small entertainment's there for Mice, or Rats, Those noted theeves; 'tis dang'rous for a Mouse To seek for shelter in a Mouzer's house. Forwarn'd (they say) fore-arm'd, if that I were A Mouse, I'le warrant you I'de ne're come there. 9. Pheniceans slay their only sons t'asswage And mitigate their angry Demon's rage; They their Directo's do fall down before. Such love Gods well who sensless ones adore. 10. The Pegusi, to stave off further evill, Throw meat behind their backs to feed the Divel And think such puppy-dogs as come and eat Are the Devil's Caterers to bring him mear, Lord! when I offer up to thee my prayers, Let me behind my back cast mundane cares
Fill thou my soul with grace and on mine ill The Devil may feed and surfeit if he will. 11. Ʋulcan they say is lame, and reason good; For fire cannot go forward without wood. 12. The Turks rewards to their tormentors bring, Esteem the whip, O 'tis  pious thing. Lord when thou scourgest let not me repine▪ But kiss the Rod, because the Rod is thine. Give me to know that my ffences urge, That so with patience I may bear thy scorge: And if thou please to stroke, or please to strik, O may I love both equaly alke. 13. In Turky the Adulterers head is drest With the full paunch of a new slaught'red beast; And so, in pomp, is carried up and down, Through he throng'd streets of the admiting town. As wholsome laws with us are instituted, But ah! so strictly are not executed. Why mayn't an A or the Adulterers laud, Be a front-mark, as well as B for Baud?
Would all our Letchers, and each light-skirt Trull Were ship'd for Turkey, or the great Mogull. Or else wayes vsed heer theire lusts to tme So as to make them be asham'd of shame. 14. Men-eting Lestrigons all men will blame But ah! Oppressors do the very same: They grind the faces of the poor, and put In bags the chinck squeez'd from the hungry gut: They rob the Spittle, lab'rig most of all To raise themselves by their untimely fall. But let such know goods so unjustly got Shall prove a curse, and in their purse shall rot. 15. Midas his wish obtaines, his touch behold A fruitfull Alchimy turne all to gold. In tract of time that man may have, which bers Midas his wealth, Midas his Asses ers. How fond are our desires! we wish 'enjoy The things which do within a moment cloy. Rash Midas wish'd, but Midas did not think T'except from Generals his meat and drinke. Midas may say experiencedly, More hard to fill the belly then the eye.
Gold buyeth all things, but were all things gold, Food would be wanting, and our comfort cold. Art thou a muck-worme? go take Midas store; Midas was but an Ass and thou no more. 16. Least they pollute pure water in Batenter, To wash their hands the people wont t'adventure: Lord I am worse then they; my soul forbears To purge her foulness with repentant tears. 17. The wound-restoring Balm is said to grow Within the fruitfull vale of Jericho: Nor will it set its foot on ev'ry ground: Ev'n so in ev'ry heart grace is not found. That Balm for sin-sick souls, the Lord doth plant it Jn humble vales, when lofty Mountaines want it. Lord plant thy grace in my hearts bord'red ally To beat such fruits make me a lowly vally: Let Gileads Balm my sin-sick soul recover, And over me thy Balmy pinions hover: The grace of true repentance pour thou in Into my soul, and that will eat out sin.
18. The mouth-less Attoms by the aicr do live, And scent of odors; Lord be pleas'd to give Thy quickning spirit and loves fragranci, Unto my soul that I may live to thee. 19. Best in the night the Owl-ey'd Albans see; And in the day of grace how blind are we! 20. Our love to God is cold and hot by turns, Now cole as Alps, anon like Ena burns. 21. A wonder Epimenides hath bin To many, who have longer slept in sin. 22. Cyrus knew, by their names, his Souldiers all, To mind his owne, Corvinus could not call; Thy names in all thine attributes make known, To m, dear Lord, though I forget mine owne.
23. Dice, Bals, and Chess, first to the Idians came in; Occasion'd by a body-pining fmine: Th'Inhabitants finding no other way Lay open to redress, did fall to play Their empty belly to beguil; for easing Our saturated bodies, games are pleasing. 24. None, can in all felicity abound, Vntoothsom Clerus is in hony found. 25. Th' Esseni, neither lust nor money know, I'me sure, with us, thers none can say, tis so. Heathens are chast, content where are you come, You'l find it otherwise in Christendome. 26. The Persians affect a temp'rate Diet, Hate what the Parthians love, excess, and Ryot Though bodies meanly fare, let the full bowls. Of thy Nectarean word fill full our soules.
27. In Turky, fools, and Lunaticks are deemd The onely saints and who so much esteemed? And here in England, som account for holy. Fanatick Quakers, and the sons of Foly: 28. The Barb'rous Issedon's, their dead devo'ur Their drinking boul are skulls all gilded o're. So are our natures most inclind unto. Te things which lest thy should delight to do. 29. Closs sinners, their offences cloke with night. And like the Blattae hate the till-tale Light. 30. Gods favoure shins on us but we ('tis pitty) Are like the blind-eyd Chalcdonian citty. We take no notice, what our God hath done, But shut our eyes, and say there is no Sun. 31. An Ape resembles man, some men and Apes In gesture are alike as well as shapes.
Nay our Pragmaticks mny a task do set, Un followd by the busy marmoset. 32. Christ is our Esculapius, when to sin. We lveless are he quickens us agin. 33. Lord grant this boon (what e're thou else denyst) I may hae faith to build my self in Christ. So shall the lofty structures I shall raise Ge more then Cesiphon or Philon's, Praise. Dinas fane, and Athens Arsenall. Are slep'd in ruin, mine shall ver fall. 34. Christ's the true Alas, his vnshrinking shoulders Are our offnces Firmamens vpholders. 35 Sweet Jesus land me at th banks of Sion. Be thou m Dolphin I will be Arion, To sound thy praises on my warbling Lyer In emulatioh of that heavenly Quire. And Caroll sonnets, sonnets  whose sound The Hills may eccho, and the Dales rebound.
36. Gainst Satans grand assaults, Lord make my brest▪ Impenetrable as the Halcyons nest. And when the Arrows of Temptation fly. Against me, Oh! e pleas'd to put them by; O may it not be said his fi'ry dart Hath got the better of my yeilding heart. When he malliiously takes aim to throw His venom'd shafts from his lowd sownding Bow; Ah me! O may they (falling on the ground) Make no Impression, nor no raged wound▪ 37. Not long before great Julius Cesar's death, A sheep (having no heart) was found drew breath. But Hipocrites, and those that flatter do, Have, like the Pamphlagonian Partridg, two. 38. We wisely can avoyd Bosphorean shelvs. While on the Rocks of sin we split our selves. 39. Lord grant that I a Dedalus may be, To build a stately edifice to thee:
The heigh of my Ambition is to fram Within my heart a mon'ment of thy name. 40. Like the Saguntian Child from th' arth we come, And shall return into our mothers womb. O fleshly walls, and bony imber must Turn out their Tenant, thn return t dust Our breath is Gods, if he but take away The breath he lent us what are we but clay? Clay at the best, our matter and their forms Whn dead, are thorough fares for crawling worms 41 What was't a clock, Pompilius would know, Ad dys▪ with me why may it not be so? Befre thy gim-fac'd messeger thou send, O mak me wise to know my latter end. Deah stays or noe, may I be ready still Prepared, and then come he when he will. 42. Wit poysnous sins, let us not hste our ate, Last we, Domiius-like, repent too late.
43. Many have dy'd with grief, but over joy Did Sophocles and Panacrete destroy. Dangers enwrapd in every sudden passion; It often puts the senss out of fashion Then moderate thy joy, and when grief wounds Thy soul, besure to lim i with hounds. Observe a mean, and let thy footsteps be In the mid-road, avoyd Obliquitie. 44. Iove's bird to th'Wren will not be reconcil'd, Because he's Regulus, a Kingling stild: Let Soveraignty be kep'd, then the's no odds, There must be no pluralitie of Gods. Our God comands it so, nay jealous he Will have no rivalls, to the fourth degree He'le soundly punish, the successive race Of Polytheists who bow to Idolls base: But as for thousands, that observe his ways, Mercy shall them encompass all their days. 45. All the day long Gymnosophists will stand (Admired patiencel) in the scalding Sand.
On their alternate legs, and glare upon With eys, vnapt to wink, the scorching Sun. O Sun of God teach us t'apply this story, And make vs constant to behold thy glory. 46. Lord tune my heart turn griefs to songs of praise And troublous Nights to Halcyonian dayes. 47. If thou my sins Shouldst number by my hair Lord make my head (like the Myconian's) bare. 48. The swallowing down an hair? how poor a thing! And yet to prove an instrument to bring. Death to the Roman Fabius. may not wee. Depart as soon, who are as frail as he? Dangers Vnsen for oftentimes do skip. Betwixt the sparkling cup, and vpper lip. 49. Lord grant that as the Heliotrop Apollo. My heart the Sun of rightiousness may follow. 50. Lord raise up holy fear in me to flee From sin as creatures do the Linden-tree.
51. The Heathen Brachmens do contemn and scorn The fear of death, with hopes to be reborn. Small is that Christians faith who dreads to dye, When life is promis'd; and eternity! Happy that soul which dyeth unto sin, And unto righteousness is born agin. This death's a pregnant wombe, regeneration First-born to life, and heir unto salvation. Death is the Turn-key, for to let thee in The gate of life if thou be dead to sin. So live to dye, that thou maiest dye to live; And wear the crown God shall the faithfull give. 52. God angles, Souls unwilling to be took, Glanis like, bite the bait, leave bare the hook. 53. The Chnois dreaming that they shall be born. To heav'n up by their locks, will not be shorn: Is hea'vens hand short'ned? can th'almighty save not If he you length'ned hair to hold by have not? Rebellious Abs'lom wore the like, yer he Was not caught up to heaven, but to a Tree.
Although vpon the ground you traile your haire, Heav'ns high; short may you come, of coming there, God cant' a Glorious throne advance thy soul Although th' hast not an heir upon thy poul If to the eyes of God my heart seem faire, What care I for such excrements as hair 54. The Nabatheans so nglect their dead That their Kings are in dunghils buried Lord make me faithfull to the death, that I, May weare a crown of life if that I dye; To live to thee I would not wish to have A fair inscription, on a gawdy grave If so my soul unto her makr fly It makes no matter where my body ly. 55. At Bemavis sick people like to dy All night, before an idle Idoll ly: Fond people! think you that that sensless stones Can ease your sorrows, or regard your mones? My soul, when sick, cqin the grand physitan Of heav'n and earth, with thy deplor'd condition Bg hard for mercy at the thron of grace. And he'le give audience, and and at length embrce
Thee in his circling arms. Oh who'd not crue Vpon such easy terms, but ask and have Nay, he is readier to giue by farr. Then thou to ask, Oh his indulgent care! Ask but in faith besure thou shalt reciue, Thou canst not crave the thing he can not give Fear not if God but undertake the cure, Soon done, as aid, of health thou shalt be sure Can heav'n be false? hath he not promised rest, Unto th heavy laden, and opprest? Mans help is vain, God is a Help indeed, I wish no better help in time of need. 56. The Hirpian witches, with uncindged soles On mount Soracte walk on burning coal; So those that in security excell, Walk as it were amidest the flames of hell 57. Ther's difference in climes, Dcembers thunder Is not to the Italian a wonder. Lord when so'ere thy thundring judgments rattle. About mine eares let me prepare ' embattle Against my sins, not count thy voice a crime. Nr sent in an unseasonable time.
58 The Marsian Bears do fashion out their young, By licking rhem all over with their tongue, And we with Bears in this one thing agree, We put a gloss on our deformitie. 59. Aeschyl was killed by a Tortise-shell, Which from the tallons of an Eale fell; His fate foretold, into the opn ay' He gets; Gods judgments find us ev'ry where. 60. I read man only laughs, and sheddeth tears, And wanteth power alone to shake his ears: But sure I am, when discontent is bred, He needs must shake his ears that shakes his head. 61. Dame Martia was her infants living Tombe, When lightning killed it within her wombe Before sins come into their birth 'twere well If God would crush the Hydra in the shell.
62. Great Judah's Lion is as mild to those Who do submit. as furious to his foes. Sampson, that knockt so many to the ground, Within the carkase of a Lion found Sweet combs of Honey: the tender Spouse doth s In Christ, the fruits of the mellifluous Bee. His love is vey pleasing to her taste, He, he alone is his deare-hearts repaste. He is the Bee, the Honey, and the Hive, To active souls; the Drones away must drive. 63. If wisdome lies in beards, a Goate would be Plato, full out as wise, as grave, as thee. 64. Th' Antaei into woolves transformed were, And Ants tur'd men, at Aecs his prayer. If so, no mar'l they'r bloudily enclnd, And these laborious. Cat after kinde. 65. Lmpido was both daughter, wife, and mother, Unto a King; Queen Ann was such another.
Is not the Church the daughter of the High'st? Is not the Church the ender spouse of Christ? Is not the Church the Mother of us all? None dare deny't, I hope nor never shall. But are we kings? God and his Son I know Are Kings, and gret ones to, the Kings below. Are mean too them and but subordinae. But wher's our crown? we reign with Christ in state Thus then to God, to Christ to Saints (no other) The Church a Daughter is, a wife, a mother. 66. Kissing at first came in, that men might know If their wives drank Temetum wine or no To find her out, the jealous husband sip The reaking sent from the good womans lips Thus 'tis with us for sinister intents We vse a cloake of courtly compliments 67. Diomedean birds, have teeth to bite Yet fawning looks, such is a parasite. Friend me no friends, for if thou go bout To bite at me would all thy teeth were out.
68. The Gymeco-cratumens, are born The Object of imerious womens scorn Obeying husbands and comanding wues Both equally do lead vnnat'rall lives. I doubt not but ther's many could fford To wear the breeches would you sy the word; We't not for shame, Ile lay a brace of groats More breeches would be worn, and fewer coats Give shrowes the reines, if men will be such fools, How purely will they scold, they need no schools, To Learn them, or to traine them vp there o. No that (God knows) they naturally can do Their tongus run glb, and clutter out as thick As any hops thir dwelish Rhetorick. Such as will not believe this sex can prate Go vex the Oyster wiues at Billing's gate 69 No males belong unto the modest Chainy, Some females are so Chast that they love many They hate and love you in a trice, the while They'l frown upon you in their hearts they smile And when their tongues do bid you not come neer You may conclude your presence then doth cheer
O how they love to work contrary still, Thrust off, pull on, unwill the things they will; Now hard, anon, as pliable as war; A faire Encomium for th'unconstant sex. 70. Great men are multipl'd, but good men are As is the Dephanis exceeding rare; Were there as many men as good as great Virtue would more advance, and vice retreat. 71. The ggling of a goose, how poor a thing? And yet so strange deliverance to bring The Roman Capitol: oft great events Are brought about by weakest instruments. n Sampson's hand the Jaw-bone of an Ass Did slaughter thousands; purp'ling o're the grass. The Rock yeilds water smot with Moses rod; The smalest means prevails, if blest by God. 72. The Shrimp only for food waits one the Nacre, So we to serve our turnes do serve our maker. How servile are we? we affection bear To God not so much out of love as feare.
73. Like Quails, and Roe-bucks we love poyson, that Which most we should avoyd doth make us fat. Sin is a cut-throat, yet it is our will. To count him friendliest, when he means to kill. 74. I would not wish, so I be fair within, For Chios earth to beautifie my skin. While ceruss'd faces unto sin allure, May my chast soul b'unseperably pure: I care not how the world esteem of mee, So I be lovely onely vnto thee, Nothing can make me fine I must confess. O Saviour but thy robes of righteousness. 75. Our hearts all vice, as Amphitane gold draws, The Load-stone iron, as the Amber strawes. 76. A chillis-like god which inflicts the wound. In justice, can in mercy make it sound. The law is as a lance to cut the bile, The gosple pours in balme an healing oile.
O may that make me sensible of sin. And this revive, when I to sink begin. 78. I Tortoise-like, wish neither Teth nor Tonge. Rather then haue them instruments of wrong. Abusive language may I alwayes shun, By their lewd bab'lings many are undone. Silence is laudable; my judgment's such, Better to have no tongue, then one too much. 79. We like Lertes, and Augeas, Kings, Who dung'd their grounds, minde only earthly things. W pore still downwards, and are groveling still Below, like muke-wormes, ne're looke up the hill, The pleasant Sion; let the things of heaven Or sink, or swim, tey'r left at six and seaven. May I, who Christianity profess, Minde God and heaven more, and trifles less. 80. To three M's the Philosopher assignes Th'earths richs, Mettals, Minerals, and Mines▪
81. Poor Cincimatus, he which held the plough So lately, is become dictator now. Fortune on Peasants sometimes casts renown, Raises the humble, kicks the lofty down. Joy is the consequent of dull-brow'd sorrow, A subject now, may be a King to morrow. The active spirits of our age do climbe By gradual steps to dignities sublime: I speak in rev'rence to his Highness, who By Martial Valour hath attain'd unto The pow'r now in his hands, whom God doth bless With matchless and unparralel'd success: The Honorble title of a King, How modestly refus'd he? under's wing We are protected from the boyling rage Of home-bred foes in this rebellious Age Blessed be God, that under our own vine, We have the liberty to sup, and dine. 82. Support my faith with thy confirming hand, So shall it firme, like unmov'd Milo, stand. If thou withdraw and leave me but an hour Unto my selfe, how feeble is my power.
But by thy sinewy arme, great God upheld, The day is mine, my foe-men needs must yeild. 83. Christ's our Nepenthe, enemy to sadness Dispersing sorrow; and reversing gladness. Art thou, my soul, at any time cast down? O think on him; and thou wilt smile, not frown; Drink in, by faith, the Julips of his bloud, Oh that's a Cordial, thou wilt say 'tis good, O what can more refocilate the soul, Then streaming merits in a lib'ral boul. 84. The Prognean swallow, the cold country leaves, Hasts to a warmer one: a false friend cleaves, Fast in the Summer of prosperity. Let adverse Winter come, then farewell he. 85. God's word, like to Sybilla's golden branch Can make us through all difficulties lance. Soul tk it with thee, when thou wouldst oppose The storming fury of thy spiritual foes, As sin, and death: nay it hath power to quell The Divel, and drive him to the gates of hell.
86. On the pure Elements, four things live sole, Chamelion, Herring, Salamander, Mole. Tobaccnists, Pot-Leaches, Lechers, Misers, Of Ayr, and Water, Fire, and Earth are prizers. The fist makes the Tobacco pipe his dugg, And sucks the smoak of the burnt Indian drugg. The second, he, for his part, cnnot live Without full flaggons: And the third doth grieve If any step between and stop the flame Of his lust oward an alluring Dame; Whores are his hackneys, he is alwaies dull, But whn he's sporting with his pamp'ed Trull. As for the fourth, the Mser to be sure, Were't not for gold he could not long endure. S then this one, and that another likes; Wedded to that their own opinion strikes. 87. The Indian women, in a foolish spite, Will black their teeth because that dogs be white: As for the sparkish gallants of our Nation, They'r French-mens Apes in each fantastik fashion.
88. Wouldst thou repair thy memory? I think Thou may'st, if thou'l look Mneme fount, then drink. 89. Zisca commands his skin be made a drum, That the Bohemians still might overcome. Who, while he lives, is over sin victorious, After his death he shall not be in-glorious. 90. Malice inflicts on men more dang'rous wounds Then Porc'pines quills on the pursuing hounds. How sedulous are some to purchase woe For other men, what will not malice doe? 91. The ebbs and flows of, Egipts plowman, Nile, Do make a barren, or a fruitfull soile: Grace is this river, and the more it flows The more good fruit; if less, the lesser grows. 92. Panthers have crabbed looks though speckled skins, And fairest out-sides joyne to fowlest sins.
93. Anaxarete, whilst on the Rack he hung, Did in the Tyrants face spit out his tongue. To have no tongue it is the lesser evill, Then to recant by't, and so please the Divel. 94. Soul, though the flames should for a while subdue thee Like the Pyrrhean grove, God can renew thee. 95. Let I be like the Hirecinyan wood, Lord lop my sins, and in the roome graft good. Since the Creation that was never lop'd, Till renovation we do stand untop'd. Lord if thou hew us, hew us not in ire, Nor make us bundles for eternal fire To feed upon: our names are in thy rouls, And wilt thou cast out our immortal souls. 96. Taprobans, (not respecting persons) fling To merc'less Tygers their offending King. How happy were we if we could command Our head-sins, go, to the Arch-Tyrants land.
97. The Budmes fight unarm'd, the Sword, the Spear, They are the only weapons that they bear: Right Combatants of Mars they scorn to throw Cowardly Arrowes from the springing Bow. My life a warfare is, Lord, let thy word Thy deadful word, be as a two-edgd Sword To wound mine en'mies, O be thou my Sear, And it an Hoast besiege me I'le not fear. 98. Hold water in their mouths, forceing their wives The men of Burami lead quiet lives. A better way then this there may be found For both their ease, as this I shall propound. It argues wisdome when the wife doth scold, And clap her fists, the prudent husband hold His passion in, and when the husband chides, A wise wife her unruly member hides 'Twixt double doors: this well observ'd infrindges No Nuptial love, but keps them on their hindges. 99. Ignatius Leiola, the first Jesuite As ever I did read of, did delight
In giggling laughter, and why did he so? His teeth (it may be yellow) for to shew: A Jesuite I would not wish to be, Unless mine actions with my name agree: Laughter is Couen-Germane unto folly, Better is the extream of Malencholly: To too much Mirth it is not safe to leane; Nor too much Grief: There is a golden mean. O grant, dear Lord, I may be alwayes glad In thee, my God, or make me alwaies sad: If I must needs be poud, prmit not me To pride in any thing, great God, but thee; Unfold my lips, for to agnze my sin; Let me be foul wthout, so, fair within. 100. The Alc'ran tels us ther's a Bird nam'd Ziz, (I think more fabulous then true it is) So large, that when his wings abrod are hurl'd They hide the Sun and darken all rhe world, Thouh lile credit unto this be due Yet shall it's application be true. Sin is this monstrous bird, which doth obscuc God's Sun-like face: 'tis sin that doth immure Our souls from saith, 'tis sin that puts a skreen And walls of seperation between
God and the soul; 'tis sin that hath the power To cloath, in shades, this Micro-cosm of our: Thou which from darkness didst deduce the day, Banish such mists, let thy coruscant ray Break through the clouds of my opposing sin; That so thou maiest enlighten me within.
Poetical Fictions. 1. On Jupiter. IN Creta, Jupiter was born, of Ops; And Saturn nourished on Ida's tops, By the self-gelding Corribants, who plaid So loudly on their brazen drums, and made Such inkling sounds, and such obsteperous noise, That Saturn might not heare his infants voyce: The cheated god (thinks to secure his throne) Instead of Jupiter, devours a stone, Who was, no sooner grown to mans estate, But seeing how his father did await To drink his bloud, tumbles him headlong down, And he himself usurps the Regal Crown: The conquered god in Latium hides for shame, The land of Latium hence derives her name. 2 On Apollo. Latona's son in fioating Delos born, Vast Cyclops flew, his god-head lost, forlorn
Wanting employment sits him down to keep Thessalan Admetus fleecy sheep; Mercury gave to him his Harp; the Speare, Lyre, Buckler, on his Image painted were. The Muses father, Poets chiefest power, Auhor of Musick in the upper Bower; Sol was he call'd, Bacchus in earth, in hell Known by the name Apollo, he could tell Things long before they were, he first did know The Ar of Phisick, from his radiant bow His golden-footed messengers doth send Whose rapid force sing to their journeys end; In love with Hicynth, and Daphne, he Turnes him into a Flower, her a Tree. The Lawrell, Olve, and the Juniper, Unto Apollo consecated were; The Princely Cock, the Herauld of the day, The griping Goshauk▪ greedy of his prey, The silver Swan, and Crow, which can divine, Is off'red up unto Apollo's shrine. 4 On Bacchus. Jove's thigh-borne, Ivy crowned Bcchus nurst By Juno and the Nymphs, invented first
The use of wine, and over all the world He rides, fell Tigers and fierce Linces whirld His Chariots rapid wheels, he did subdu Innuerable Nations, and embrew His hands in tawny Indians bloud, he taught The Art to buy and sell, the first that sought Triumphall honour, he his Temples bound With Regal Diadems, and triumphs sound. The browsing Gat, and slugish Ass are proud For to be stiled his, see what a crowd Of wanton Satyrs, and Sileni, comes, Rending the ayer with their Kettl-drums; Loud bllowing sounds, the Menedes his Priests His Orgis, and his Bacchanalian feasts, With such vociferations celebrate, As would tire Fabius for to relate Their mad confused fragors: seem to mix The burning Axle with the frigid Styx. 5 On Mercury. GReat Atlas Nephew, Jove and Maias son, Th' embassador of heavenly powers puts on His Stag-like feet, and golden head, his wings, Quits the bright Court: with him along he brings
His snake-ingitted-soporiferous Rod, Because that men should know he is a god, Addicted much to exercise and motion Swims swiftly thorough the aerial Ocean: No sennuy force could weapons swifter fling From Scythian bows, or Balearick string, Then he doth scud along: Merchants to trade Instructeth how, tells Theeves for to evade As he (a theevish god) by slight of Art Was wont, when he did steale Apollo's dart; He quickly took (and was as quickly gone) Neptune's Mace, Ʋlcan's tongs, & golden Zone Of rose-cheek'd Ʋenus, king Admetus drove And would have rob'd the bolts from thund'ring Jove VVhat e're he saw he made, what could there be Secur'd from his light-finger'd Dietie? This active nimble god from heaven came, VVas Author, first, of the Palestrick game; The use of the shrill sounding Lute out found, And on mount Caucasus, Prometheus bound, Hundred-eyd Argus in a conflict slew, Freed captive Mars, and on a golden clue Let downe by pulleys, from his fluent tongue, The eares of his atentive hearers hung. Cylenius, in Egypt worship'd is, In the shape of Dog-headed Anubis;
Of him and Venus, an Hermaphrodite Of either sex was born, then from the sight Of the prodigious Gvants, having fled, He in t'a Stork was Metamorphosed. 6 On Mars. THe war-like god, great Jove, and Juno's son Caused the seed of discontent to run Throughout the hospitable world, fierc anger With flaming eyes, a strange confused clangor, Deafning the heav'ns, mad fury, pallid fear, Rageing oppression, jarring discord were His sad concomitants; with bloudy rod, Bellona waits upon this impious god, Vnto this all-devouring Diety: In Lemnoe men were sacrifiz'd, the Py That cheating bird, the watchful Dog, & brood— —Destroying Vulture, the stout Cock, and bloud— —Carowsing Wolfe, (true combatants of Mars) Were dedicated to the god of warrs. The Romans brag that they derive their line From him, make him their patron, and assigne To him his Salij, and do dedicate The years first Month, oh what inver'rate hate
Beares he to Pallas? for his missile darts At Iove-born wisdome fly, and lib'ral Arts Him Vulcan with his spouse a bed espies, And (angry) in a net doth them surprize: Keeps them close pis'ner from captivitie. Till Nptune by intreaies set them free. 7 On Ʋulcan. The sooty god of Iove and Iuno sprung, For his deformity from heaven flung, Fell down into the Island Lemnos, with The fall grew lame; made of the gods the Smith: There sets up trade. On sulphry Aetne's top, And Lpara sometimes he sets up shop; Where, with the one-yd mostrous Cyclopes, Broontes, Pyrachmon▪ and huge Steropes, Iove's thunder armour for the gods he made Against those Gyants which would heaven invade: To him the Lion, teri lest of beasts Was consecrated; in his honor feasts, And sacrifices, celebrated were Called Protervia, what meat they spare They burne: Gentiles with blazing torches run And when the wick is spent their race is done.
At Juno's suit he made Aenea's shield, At Thetis did Pelides armour yeild, The potent Queen of riches and the air He chaineth fast unto a golden chaire; His wife and Msrs he in adultry found, And them in Adamantine fetters bound. 8 On Cibele. Cibele, mother of the Gods call'd Ops, From helpful wealth, and Vesta fair with crops Of golden eared-labour-crowning crown, She cloaths the fields; and doth her lap adorn With verdent grass, choice hearbs, green trees, sweet flowrs Wife was she to the antient'st of all powers: This antique Matron weares a branched gown, And beares, upon her head, a Tower-like crown; Her right hand helds a Mace, her left a Key; To her, as Emblems of fertilitie, The teeming Sow is sacrific'd, then comes (Beating their brazen hollow-sounding drums) A traine of self-dissected Coribants, And round about the street for money dance, To please their great Cybele, she that found Out rural pipes, and first did Cymbals sound.
9 On Juno. The sceptred Queen of heaven, to thundring Iove Sister, and wife of marriage doth approve Goddess of riches, ever counted mild And helpful unto woman great with child; Saturne, and Ops, her parents; she was bred Up by the Flowrs, and by the Sea-Nymphs fed. Faire Iris, Ledeas twins, and Nymphs twice seaven Fidelious service, to the Quen of heaven, Duly performe, and dayly waite upon her, Respecting her according to her honour; In a rich Charriot, stately to bhold, Of beaten silver and of burnish'd gold, A yoke of yellow Lyons draw her round Her vast dominions; spangled star pa'd ground. The taile-proud Peacock, and the vigilant Goose, And ravenous Raven's sacred to her use: Her parties, to be married, off'rings bring, And do the gall behind the Altars flng: Her Temple open-roofed was, to enter Therein, no whore by Nma's law might venture. Her codjutor, who is wont to tye men To females, known is by the name of Hymen.
This hand a Torch, and that a red vaile holds, Therewith she modest blushing Brides enfolds; Iuno did shed her milke, rather then she A nurse unto feirce Herculee would be: Thence Lillius had their Alablaster look, From thence▪ the milkie way its whiteness took: This hand holds a Pomgranate, there doth stand A uckow on her other sceptered hand. 10. On Ʋenus. LOvs Goddess, thrice more radient then the morne Of Cetus testcles, and Sea froth born, Wih Rosy Chaplets her fair Templ's boun'd, And sometimes with the peaceful Mirle crown'd; Light Torches bears, and needle-pointed Arows, Prodromes of love, a yoke of lecherous Sparrows Sometimes do draw her Charriots, now she loves To couple silver Swns, then spotless Doves; Facundious Merc'ry, and the bounteous Graces, Perswasive Pytho, in their several places, Wite on her honour; who was said to saile To flow'ry Paphos, in a shell, a vaile Of sorrow-boading Cyperus she wore, When she Bore-kl'd Adonis did deplore.
Sometimes a wanton Goate she rides upon, And doth house-carrying tongueless snails tread on, Mars into Seas of wantonness did stere her, And reeling Bacchus was her Armour-bearer. Paris assign'd unto the Queen of love, The golden Apple which fall from above: Iuno prevails not though she proffers treasure, Pallas her gifts are slighted, it is pleasure Load-stone to vice, attracts the wanton eye Of injuditious Paris, wit may lie And starve, for him rich Iuno is neglected; And Vinus, who but Venus, is respected? Hellen is rap'd, he Hllen doth enjoy, A ten years warr ends in the fall of Troy: O dre effects of love! by Vulcan's jaws Troy was devour'd, but Hllen was the cause. 11 On Mixrva. JOve's brain-bred girle, the president of warr Princess of peace drawn in a fiery Carr, To her the Owl (To shew her clear discerning Of obstruse secrets) sacred was of learning. Of Arts of wisdome, she inven'ress was; Her Target (Egis call'd) though smooth as glass,
Did beare a Snake-hair'd Gorgon's head, thereon Who ever look'd was turn'd into a stone; She on a Dragon treads, gripes in her hand A Crow a Cock doth on her Helmet stand; A long Cloake (Peplum cal'd) she us'd to wear, And in the air wave her glit'ring Spear; Terrour and feare her waiting maids stood by her, Tutor'd by her, Prometheus stole fire, From Titan's burning Chariot, by which thing, He many Arts did to perfection bring: Her heav'n-sent Image, the Paladium Was by the vestal Virgins kept at Rome: The Trojans loosing, this their City, lost, Which in a Sea of stormy warrs was tos'd? Olives to her were sacred, for she found The use of Oyl, her the Athenians crown'd With decent Chaplets, made of Olive leavs; Her new-sound use of wooll, she spins, and weaves, A golden lamp to her was dedicated, At her March feasts the Mistresses awaited Upon their serving Maids, as Masters tended Upon their Men, till the Saturnal's ended. Jove's thunder she could use, and had the power To raise a storme, and qualifie a shower. Her heavenly seat is next to Jupiter, She went up into Diomedes Carr,
In Orcus pichy Helmet hid (so sly) That she was undiscern'd, by Mars his eye: Palas, Arachne turn'd into a Spider, Ambition loves no equals live beside her. 12. On Diana. Apollo's sister daughter unto Jove, And fair Laona, loves in woods to rove; And on the swelling hills: from her sure bow Her Arrows (messengers of death) doth throw, At swift-foot Dears, and tim'ous Hares, which hast For life, but meet with death; Diana chast Goddess of dncing, unto virgins mild: Propitious unto women great with child: An eye of watchfulness, this Goddess sets, Over the Fishers and the Hunters nets. The dancing Satyrs. Sylan Dryades, Nymphs▪ Hamdryades, and Orades. Do in her figh delight; in Heaven, Earth, Hell, Luna▪ Dna, Proserpine, do dwell; One and the same, Triform'd, and Trivis nam'd. Because, where three waies mt there she was fam'd This winged Godness easily restrans Fierce Lion force, and speck'led Leopards reines:
The all-united force of milk-white Stags, Through Marble plains her silver Chariot drags; Because, with hornes, she looketh beautifull, Men sacifized unto her a Bull; Nay more (while they Diana did invoke) With humane flsh her frequent Altars smoke. 13 On Ceres and Proserpine, Corne crowned Ceres Saturne and faire Ops Faire Off-spring smiles, upon her goldn crops Holds wealthy Plutus, who at her command Scatters his bounty with a liberal hand. Plenty and Hony-mouthed peace remaine Linck'd fast together by a silken chaine None to her sacrifice at any time Could ent'rance find, if conscious of a crime Faire Venu, Iuno and Minerus to; Did on a certaine time a Maying goe, Proserpine bare them company, who while Shee gathered Popy, with a pleasing toil Tricking her bosome, with delightfull flowres Grim Pluto whirld her to his pitchy Bowres For his Tartarian Chariots, Cerbous sings And fell Erynnis Scorpions have nor stings,
Ixions wheele stood still, Promtheus heart Feeles no corroding Vipers, Flouds impart Theire liquor unto thirsty Tantalus, The stone affordeth rest to Sisyphus: The lab'ring Belides have leave to play And solemnize this ioyfull marrage day Now Ceres mother takes a flaming Pine And sorrowing seeketh for her Proserpine And kindly entertained by Celeus Taught them how o sow corne; Triptolemus His Son by day, with milk, by night with fire, She nourished; while Celius did enquire Too curiously in this, him Ceres slew. Triptol'mus Chariot winged Dragons drew, Circling the world Triptolemus to men First taught the use of Corn; from Dis, his den Proserpine could not redelivered be Because she, of a fare Pomgranate tree (Which did in Pluto's Oachard grow) did taste; Yet she obtain'd such savour, at the lst, As to continue (after she was found) Six months above, as many under ground; Halfe a yeare here, as long assign'd to dwell Black Pluto's Queen, in the low Countries, Hell: Witches to Hecate, their Goddess, come; Unto her offred are the Hecatombe.
To shew th' unconstancy of wealth and store, Halfe moones upon their shoes the Romans wore. 14 On Pluto. Saturne's three sons shar'd his estate, heav'n fell To Iove, to Neptue Sea; to Pluto Hll. And all earth's golden entrails appertains, His triple-headed Ceberus bound in chains Of Adamant, holding a bunch of keys, Before the pitchy Pallace kennel'd lies; Horrible for his snakey hares, keeps cent'ry To guard hell's Monarch; Sybil in this entry (Which with a vig'lant eye he us'd to kep) Dd by her wisdome, lul him fast aslep; Thence Herc'les drag'd him, light doth make him spue, And of his foame the poys'nous Wolf-bane grew; The raiging Futies, the life-measuring Fates, Rapacious Harpies, waite within the gates Of grsly Dis, with Fun'rall Cypres crown'd, Who, galloping on his black Steeds, is found By fraud'ent Cheaters, cursed Perjurers, Oppressors, Lyars, and Extortioners: But very slowly halteth from his den, To honest, godly, conscionable men.
He cometh creeping when he wealth doth bring, Departing, fliteth with an Eagles wing. Who e're put on Pluto his Helme, he, Became invisible, and from danger free: With this same Helme coverd, Wisdomes Queen Fought against Troy, and was, by Mars unseen. How Pluto ravished his Proserpine, I lately told and shall not tel't again. 15 On Charon. The squalid son of Erebus and Night Old, but not weak, most terrible for sight; Vigorous, furious, coveteous, and sad, With greasy, sordid, ragged garments clad: In his old rotten, feeble, brittle wherry, Mens souls to the Elizium he doth ferry, Over the scalding Lakes of Phlegethon: Mournful Cocytus, joyless Acheron, Hateful Styx, (by which the Gods did sweare) Oblvion; causing Lethe, for his fare, Each Passenger a half-penny must carry In his sut mouth, or else for passage tarry: None but the dead t'his boat admitted be, Yet was Eneas, for his pietie,
Took in alive; Hercle enance found, Theseus by strength, Orus by's musicks sound; Alive, and with no fa these Champions come, Into the pitchy Realms of Barahrum. 16 On Mines, Eacus, Rhadamanthus, Iust Mins, husband to the beautiful Pasiphas, who intirely lov'd a Bull: Into a wooden Cow, which he did frame. Her, Dd'lus puts, the Minotaur thence came. No sooner was this known to Minos, but He Dedaelus and his Son Icarus shut With that same Mn-Bull Monster fed with men) Within his self-mde Labyrinth, and then Hveing obtain'd the savour of a clue Of threed, they made evasion, and flew From Cretae's Isle, with Artificial plumes, While unadvised Icarus presumes Too high a flght, his waxn wings did melt, And straightway fail'd, when they no sooner fl The corchng frce of Titan's fiery beames He fell and christned the Icarian streames. Theseus the man-dstroying Monster slew, And scap'd, help'd out by Ariadne's clue.
ove his three Sons to be hell's judges sent, Who in their way (by him directed) went Thorough a flow'ry Meadow, which was thought The field of truth, poor naked souls were brought To these impartial Judges, who were strict In dealing righteous judgment, and t' inflict Deserved punishment upon▪ offenders, Furies, and evill Genii, their atenders, With thund'ring whips of steell are ready still, To execute these righteous Judges will, On conscious souls; as bloudy murtherers, Adulterers, hollow-hearted fltrers, Claw bac'd detractors, glozing Sycophants, He which hath store of guilt no torment wants. Aeacus, Rhadamonthus, sit by one Another lovingly, Minos alone. Whn as Aegina was unpeopl'd then At Eacus prayers, Iove turn'd the Ants to men; His timely Orizons deliver'd Greece, From the devouring plague, which did encrease, And feast it self on flsh, carowsing bowls Of the infected bloud of dying souls.
17 Eumenides. THe snake-hair'd furies, born of Night and Dis. Eumen'des nam'd by an Antiphrasis; In heaven Dirae and in earth they be Call'd Harpiae, and in hell the Furiae, She Stygian Dogs of Pluto; Alecto With bloudy-burning Pine, runs too and fro; Envious Megaera riseth from her chair, And with her poysnous breath infects the air; The surnace of her mouth (beseig'd with fire) Contagious vapors casts her whip of wir Md drunk with bloud, makes such a dreadful soun As though the heauen, & earth, it would confound Spightful Tespeone with Scorpions stings Offenders, and her horrour-boding wings She stearnly shakes, and makes the guilty el Th' imprinted strokes of her revengful steel. These sisters, dredful for their brazen feet; Snake-hairs, loud-sounding scourges have their set With Apollo's sacred Temple porch, Dismaly tining their infestuous Torch; Worship'd they were, that they no hurt might doe, Who into their Achaian Temple goe,
Guilty of murther, incest, theft, or acted. Much like enormities, dd grow distracted 18 On the Harpies, Stryges, and Lamiae. Aello, Celero, and Ocypete, The names of he rapacous Harpies be; Who did, the met upon bnd Phenus table Pollute, and then devour (as runs the Fable) Their flat'ing counenance, and maiden fac, Do seem to promise and prtend embraces; Their Dragons tails, and tallons of an Eagle, Threat ruine unto those whom they inveagle. When as tra'lucet Phebe doth appear, The Striges and the Lamie domineere, Suck childrens bloud, with Hecatan charmes, Hurt Ctle, therefore from such noxious harmes They Carne to protect them doe invoke, And with their sacrifices Altars smoke. 19 On Chimera. Three shap'd Chimera, that much hurt had done, At last was killed by Belerophon,
A Lions head he had, his gulf-like throate Breaths fire, the belly of a wanton goate No wanting was to him, and least he faile Of spight, he had the poys'nous Dragons taile. 20 On the Fates. TH' inexorable Parce, borne of Hell, And night, three Sisters were assign'd to dwell Within a pitchy cavern, nature bindes Their souls in peacefull union: Cloth windes Flax on the Dstaffe, and the thred of life Is spun by Lachesis, the fatal knife Of Atropos divideth it in twain, Which done it cannot be conjoyn'd againe. The Series of things, Jupiter's scribes Will not divert, no, for a world of bribes: Cresus his store, the wealth that Midas treasur'd, Cannot prorogue the life that they have measur'd: Th'intreats of virtue, nor the threats of vice, Melts them to mercy; neither prayer nor price Wring out compassion, no fire can thaw Their frozen hearts, nor can affliction draw Their thoughts to pitty, they regard no mnes, Nor thunder of ingemenated groanes.
Noe stormy sighs, nor silent-pleading tears, Can force the rocky portals of their ears; They'r cloath'd in white, haveing their temples crown'd An Adamantine distaffe held, which round The spacious orb encircled, their extent And solid stableness, thereby was meant. By these three Fates is understood, by some, Time past, time present, an the time ro come. FINIS.
