B3 E708_5 99866201 166640
A Brief RELATION OF THE BEGINNING and ENDING OF THE TROUBLES OF THE BARBADOS, With the true Causes thereof. Set forth by A. B. a diligent Observer of the Times. LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden-Hall, and are to be Sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1653.
A Brief Relation of the Beginning and Ending of the Troubles of the Barbados, with the true Causes thereof. WHilest the Bloody Contention for the Peoples Liber∣ty was in its height among the English Nation, The Island of Barbados (by the Opinion of its Governor Concurring happily with the quiet Enclination of of the People) was bound up with Principles of Neutrality, it being a Place which could not ad any Assistance to either of the contending Parties in England, and as newly Setled stood in necessity of Supplies from both, and ther∣fore like subtil States-men they temporized with al new Commissi∣ons, came they either from the Parliament or late King, holding firm their Resolutions, until (the Parliament prevailing) multi∣tudes of the Royal Party being made Prisoners, were sent thither to be sold as Servants, and many Officers of that side to mend their Fortunes, applyed themselves to that Place, and in such consider∣able Numbers, That by the Civility of the first Setlers, they got in∣to the Principal Offices of that Government, and by degrees drew the People, if not absolutly to decline their former Peaceable Re∣solutions, yet in a great measure, to incline to the lost Cavalier Party, by making the Current of all Preferments and Authority to Stream to those that way affected: Among others of that Party who came thither, were two Brothers, Persons of good esteem once in their own Country; the elder, Colonel Humphry Walrond, bred a
Gentleman about London; the other, Edward Walrond, a Lawyer of the Temple, who finding the advantage of their parts, of the ply∣ableness of the People to receive any impression, and the plain o∣penness of the then Governor, little doubted but in a short time to gain the Government into their hands, and by that means amply to Repair their broken Fortunes out of the Estates of those Persons that had so freely supplyed their wants; Having therfore fixed an opinion in the good old Governor of their very honest meaning, as also in his Lady, in whom by reason of her quick and industrious Spirit, lay a great stroak of the Government: Their first step was to drive Col. Guy Molesworth out of the Island, who having been more Eminent in their Kings Service, the Brothers doubted would over-top them, when the Royal Party should Declare, and there∣fore cunningly Complained against him as a violent Cavalier, and one that said, It would never be well in this Island, until the Round-heads Estates were given to the poor Cavaliers: This setled the better opinion of them, and gave them means in a short time after to bannish him the Island upon some advantages, which they took against him: This act so plausibly performed, gave them encouragment to move further, and procure the Office of Treasurer and Master of the Ma∣gazines, and Capt. of the Platforms, to be put into the hands of Ser∣jant Major William Byam, a Souldier of Fortune, and one very fit for their turns; these things being fitted to their minds, they waited for an handsome occasion to get to the height of their Ambition, which soon after thus presented: The Inhabitants of the Barmudas having turned the well-affected to the PARLIAMENT off their Island, sent an Agent to Barbados, requesting them to make a League Defensive and Offensive, and to furnish them with Arms and Am∣munition to Defend that Cause they had Declared for; which (though the two Brothers were earnest to have granted) was by the great opposition of Col. James Drax denied, and only this gran∣ted, That for his Money he might buy what Ammunition he could get: This not taking, the yonger Brother did in the Name of the Governor Summon divers Gentlemen to meet, and there told them, That out
of the good opinion the Governor had of them, they were appoin∣ted a Committee to Consider of the Safety of the Island, which was now near a great deal of Hazard if not prevented, alleadging in a very long, set, & industriously, & well penned Speech, That there was a very formidable Malignant party in the Island which daily encreased, and would in time master this Island, and turn all well-affected to the King from thence, and there was but Two wayes to prevent this supposed Danger: The first was, Extirpation of them; the second, Toleration. For the first he and the major part voted, and then these Votes were carried to the Governor, but not made known to him, until an Oath of Secrecy was taken by him as was formerly taken by the Committee: Then an Assembly was called, where likewise after an oath of Secrecy by all present was solemn∣ly taken these Rotes were published, and after some Debates con∣firmed, and a Committee appointed to Consider of the quietest and most peaceable wayes of sending these Malignants into Exile. But before that was concluded on, Col. Modyford drew up a Bill for the way of Toleration, and at the return of the Committee presented the same, backed with so many Reasons in order to the peace and plenty of this place, that they all unanimously were so apprehen∣sive of it as they quite retracted their first Votes, and agreed to the latter way, at wch every man seemed well contented; but the Two Brothers, the yonger wherof having a ready wit, added such a miste∣rious oath to that law, & such severe cautions & clauses against non-confor∣mists & private conventicles, that this law so accompanied much dista∣sted the well-affected to the Parliament, which was no less then the Brothers both expected and desired: Before the publishing of this Law, Col. Drax and others, incited the honest Planters to Petition against it, and by strong Reasons given the Governor, prevailed with him not to publish it until their Petition were Answered. At the next Councel the Petitioners came, and the Governor now wel informed, declared for them; at which the Walronds in a rage rose up and divers of the Councel with them, and disserted the Gover∣nor, leaving only two to sit with him, at which time he stopped the
further proceeding of that Act, and dismissed the Petitioners; from thenceforth the Brothers openly Declared the Governor to be a Roundhead, cunningly make Libels against themselves and other eminent Persons to draw them into discontent, and publish the same, as made by their then declared Enemies, and to make them beleeve they were Persons in hatred equal with themselves, and so in fine by such Devices and Arts increased their party, and on May-eve, 1650. perswaded a plain, but over credulous Gent. Col. Shelly, to beleeve, That the Independants (for so they were now stiled) had a Plot to seize the Magazine, and put all that loved the King to the Sword: The same Jealousies they infused into the thoughts of Col. Read, who accompanied with Shelly and their Regiments, ad∣vanced against the old Governor at the Bridge, who suddenly a∣wakened by an Alarum, had then by chance got Force enough to take the elder Walrond and Byam Prisoners; but so inconsiderable were the Governors Forces, and so weak his Counsels, that he was forced to send the said Walrond to Shelly for a Parley, which was soon granted, and the next day plausible Articles drawn up, such as the elder Walrond pleased, and such as he thought would best cloak his design from Shelly, Read, and other his abused Accompli∣ces: But the poor old Governor now (though too late) saw throw the inside of his mischievous intentions, and therfore Commanded Col. Modyford (whom he had formerly forbidden) to Raise the Windward Regiment for his Restauration to that Authority which he was so easily fool'd out of; who immediatly issued his Orders to Leivt. Col. Burch for that purpose, which was by his activity ef∣fected in one night, so that Lievt. Col. Burch was upon his March with fifteen hundred Foot, and one hundred and twenty Horse, and became very terrible to the Walronds, and would undoubtedly have turned the Scale, had not the elder Walrond by commanding tears to wait upon his deceitful professions of Zeal, Faith, and Ho∣nesty to the Governor, prevailed with him to send a Warrant to Command Lievt. Col. Burch to Disband his Forces, and forthwith to repair to the Governor to attend his further pleasure: This point
so easily gained, made all men afraid to Act for the Governor, that would upon the perswasions of his Enemies be induced to Disarm himself and his freinds, and made the Walronds look on themselves as absolute Princes, taking upon them in a very Kingly way, To give Orders, raise Horse, grant Commissions, and like Princes indeed, To forget the Articles made, keeping only such as were for their advantage; impudently alleadging, That no other Promises ought to be kept, by Persons in their Condition. Whilest all men began now to yeeld them a true or feigned Obedience, the Lord Willough∣by who had been some while in the Road, gives notice to the Go∣vernor of it, and that he had Authority from the King and the Earl of Carlisle to be Governor, and according to his Commission desi∣red to be received: This new Pageant gave a mortal wound to the ill-got Principallity of the Brothers; for this man they could not Oppose without going against their declared Principles of Loyal∣ty to their Kingly stalking-horse; And yet they were so impudent as first privately with particular men they endeavoured to raise a Dislike of him, saying, That he was once a Roundhead, and might be a∣gain; and that as things stood, it was easie to obtain any thing from the King: And after did in publick oppose his Reception; and truly their former influence, coupled with their present industry, prevailed so far, as though not to Refuse, yet to suspend his Lordships Autho∣rity for three Months, in which time they made no doubt, but ei∣ther to gain him to their devotion, or send him to Antigoa; during this time, They Proclaimed their King, forced the innocent Delin∣quents from their Estates and Families, set heavy Fines upon them, and after made themselves a Committee for Sequestrations of all they had, and then tryed the Affections of every man, how they stood either to Them, or the Lord Willoughby: To some that were poor and Covetous, they promised shares of the Roundheads Estates: To others that were blindfold Cavaliers, they pressed the danger of Willoughby: To others who most regarded their Liberty, they prest the setting up of a Popular Government, which they did not stick to say was their intentions from the beginning, and that they loved it above all
other Formes In fine, to compass their ill begun designs, they obser∣ved every mans Affections, and applyed themselves to entertain them accordingly. These practices were as well observed as fea∣red by the Lord Willoughby, who was now to Countermine or be lost, and saw plainly he must be enforced to juggle as his Enemies did, and therefore to the Cavalier he was all King; and to the Mo∣derate party, he professed a Dislike of the present Proceedings; and finding them the greatest Enemies Walrond had, he made no scrupl privatly to unfold himself to one of the eminentest of them, therefore sending for Col. Modyford, he assured him, That all his Counsels should be imployed in Composing the present Distracti∣ons here, and preventing the future Differences which may happen betwixt England and this Place, for which purpose Capt. George Martin was sent into England with Instructions to gain him a Com∣mission from the Parliament, which he averred above all things to desire. The Moderate party verily beleeving his heart and words to agree, gave him Courage to take from the elder Walrond his Re∣giment, and from both of them all Power and Authority in this Island, caused the Acts of Sequestrations to be Repealed, and an Act of Indemnity to be made, bestowed many marks of Favor up∣on the former Sufferers, and their remaining Families, in so much, That all men generally looked on him as a blessing sent from God to preserve them against the Tyranny of the two Brothers. About this time Col. John Colliton came to this Island, to whom likewise his Lordship unfolded his thoughts, and desired him to Write to the Merchants of London, to procure a Commission from the State of England for him, and did assure both him, Col. Modyford, and Col. Burch of his constant Resolutions to persevere in Moderating and Composing all things, and wished them to assure all well-affected Persons of it. This honest clearness in all his Actions lasted until March, 1651. when a Passenger from England brought him Letters of the great strength the King of Scots had, and of the violent pro∣ceedings of some of the Planters against him, that Martin was like to be Hanged for speaking for him; and in fine, That the Inhabi∣tants
were to expect nothing but Fire and Sword, no Terms to be granted, and the great preparations of Force to subdue this place: Then, and not till then, he began to change his Game, and openly professed Defiance, and every day carressed and assured himself more and more of the violent Party, and yet cunningly promised the Moderate, That if ever good terms were offered, he would accept of them: This made most men joyn cheerfully in the putting the Island in a Posture of Defence; the most Moderate, like true English-men, re∣solving to sell themselves at a dear Rate, by chusing to die, rather then to live less Free then any of their Country-men: Suddenly af∣ter this, the Lord Willoughby growing still surer of the violent Par∣ty, caused new Sequestrations to be laid on the banished mens E∣states, killed and destroyed their Cattel and Stock, and did what mischief he could unto them all without distinction. At length the Fleet arriving, after Summons, and Refusal had past, Leivt. Col. Allen, and Mr. Francis Raynes, applyed themselves by Letter to Col. Modyford, therein tendring all things of Fairness and Civility; which the said Col. received with much contentment & shewed the same to the Lord Willoughby, pressing his Promise of Composure upon fair terms, which he not being able to deny, gave him Power by Letter to Treat, to know the Admirals Power, and next the Parti∣cular Articles he would insist on: All which by a private Treaty being perfected, and Articles agreed on, to the Contentment of Col. Modyford, and Lievt. Col. Burch, to whom he from time to time communicated his Proceedings, with which his Lordship being made fully acquainted, and finding now no possibility of longer Dissembling, plainly forsook all his old Promises, being encoura∣ged by the weakness of the Fleet, and the assurance of the vio∣lent Party now truly loving him whom they found so much of their own Disposition, and perfectly hating the Walronds for ever having doubted so true a Cavalier. In the mean time the admirable tem∣per Sir George Ayscue the States General shewed in the mannagement of these Affairs, cannot without breach of the laws of History be omitted, for he discreetly weighing how little he was able to do
by the Sword, being not provided with any considerable Land-Forces, the Enemy having at least five thousand Foot, and a thou∣sand Horse at several Posts quartered on the Sea-side, and conside∣ring they were English-men, found his best Weapon to be gentle and fair means, which he so ingeniously made use of, that though none durst speak well of him, yet most knowing Persons were well sa∣tisfied in their minds, that there could not be any danger in a sub∣mission to those that sent him; And knowing it a dull thing to be all Courtesie, for to keep up the spirits of his own men, and give the Islanders a tast what they could do, he beat up a Quarter at the Hole, and by the help of the Scots which came in the Virginia-fleet, another at Spikes Bay, both which were done in the night, and in both these was wonderous Succesful, and not having Power enough to prosecute these successes, retired his Forces to his Ships, not do∣ing any further harm, which he might have done by firing Houses, &c. The Prisoners he took he used extreamly well, which still en∣creased the good Opinion the People had of him, and forwarded his Designs more then some violent Persons about him could have imagined. The Moderate Party were now to seek what to do, and yet their ends being honest, they were bold by Leivt. Col. Burch to move a Treaty in the Publick Assembly, seconded by Col. Hawly, and Modyford, and brought it so far that a Committee was appoin∣ted to draw Articles, which they did to the liking of most at the first reading, but being put off to the next day, the Lord Willough∣by by himself and Instruments, had so dealt with the several Mem∣bers, that they Voted such Articles to be sent, as signified nothing but a Defiance: After this, followed Healths to the Destruction of them that would have Peace; Threats to all Moderate men; the Drunkards quibbingly alleadging. That all the Desirers of Treaty were Traytors: And then began the Lord Willoughby to be odious to all moderate and good Men; which being well observed by Col. Modyford, he thinking himself not further obliged to solicite so obstinate a man for his own good, or longer to continue under his Command, that had broke all Faith, & those Promises, for wch
only he first undertook to adhere to him; privatly advising with Col. Colliton, and calling Col. Burch then his Leivt. Col. Capt. Hooper, and other Officers to him, they Resolved to make the Lord Wil∣loughby by Force to perform, what by honest perswasions could not be obtained. And therefore having over-night had Conference with Capt. Pack, Col. Drax, and Mr Raynes on shore, who having Power from the General, gave him all the satisfaction that reason∣ably he could desire: On Saturday the 6th day of January, Colonel Modyford drew his Regiment together, consisting of a thousand Musketiers, and one hundred and twenty Horse, and in a short Speech made them so sensible of the present Distractions of the Country, of the likelyhood of their Continuance, the violence of some men even in Councel and the Assembly, whereby the Free∣dom of Votes and Debates were lost, the present wants of the Country, the willingness and abilities of those Ships that lay be∣fore them to give all possible Supply unto them, and finally the Articles which they offered, that they all Declared, That they would live and die with their Colonel in obtaining Peace upon those Articles: Notice hereof being given a-Board, a Letter with the Articles enclosed was presently disdatched to the Lord Wil∣loughby, perswading him yet to shew himself so much an English∣man and a Christian as by an happy Accord to shorten the miseries of this Island: but he was deaf, and that night beat up an out-Quarter of Horse: in the mean time Col. Modyfords house about seven miles in the Country was (by his order) made a Garrison for the State; the Prisoners at Capt. Middletons by them releived. On Munday the Rainbow came up, and Sir George came on Shore, had his Commission published, and at the same time the Lord Wil∣loughby was drawn down with about three thousand men, but could neither hinder the Proclaiming the States Interest, or disturbe the Peace-makers quarters, but that same night at midnight made a silent and shameful Retreat: Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday were so wet, that the Peace-makers could not advance against him; but the Friday being drawn out, and ready to March, the
Lord Willoughbies Trumpet with a Letter earnestly desiring Peace, stopt further Proceedings; On which Treaty the Island was deli∣vered to the State, and the People assured their full Freedom and Liberties, which they now happily enjoy. Thus may you see that by the excellency of one mans temper and Conduct, with Gods blessings thereon, this rich spot of Land, containing at least thirty thousand Souls, Reduced and United to their Native Country without Bloodshed, or any considerable expence of Treasure. Their wise General well knowing that there could not be a grea∣ter Service to the State, then to preserve his Conquests entire and without lesning, especially when they are to be made on his Bro∣thers and Country-men, which Succesful Rule of sweetness he practised while he remained Governor here, whereby he hath ab∣solutely confirmed every Soule here to be faithful to the present flourishing Government of our Nation. FINIS.
