B4986 E172_11 99860018 112123
THE Brothers of the Separation. OR A true Relation of a company of Brow∣nists which kept their Conventicle at one Mr. Porters in Goat Alley in Whitecrosse-street, where they were apprehended on Sun∣day, Aug. 14. 1641. As also, A Sermon preached afterwards in the same house by Iohn Rogers a Glover, wherein is shewed their wicked ran∣corous minds at full. This was justified by above twenty men of good life and conversation. Mark 13.30. Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not passe, till all these things be done. Printed at London by Tho: Harper, 1641.
The Brothers of the Separation. WHat good counsell hath our Saviour given us, and how little use we make of it? he bids us take heed in Marke 10. lest we be led away with the do∣ctrine of false Prophets, and yet how apt are we to beleeve the traditions of every frothy brained coxcmbe? To this intent I speake, here are so many Sects and Schismes lately sprung up here in this Kingdome, that they (like to the plagues of Aegypt) have over-run the Land: but the Brow∣nists, the brothers of the separation, beare the grea∣test sway, being upheld by too many of that Sect, they like to the Philistins bring their Goliah to fight their battels, but there is no doubt but there will a∣rise a David of truth to beat downe their soaring impudent thoughts. I have reasons founded upon such deepe grounds, that I doubt not but that the Reader wil easily grant what I shal here propound, to which purpose reade as followeth. In Goat alley in Whitecrosse-street here in Lon∣don, dwelleth one Mr. Porter, one who is not asha∣med to confesse himselfe to be of the separation: nay he is growne so foolish in his opinions, that hee keepeth weekly Conventicles in his house. These were held so covertly, that they there had meetings
Sunday after Sunday for a great while together undiscerned, but the house was so continually troubled with Crowes and Magpyes, that they could scarce heare what was spoken in the house: at last it pleased God to make their waknes known: and one Sunday the 14. of August last they were apprehended, and the chiefe of them committed to prison, but they stayed not there long till they were delivered, and every one at liberty againe, this was not enough though to make them dsist from their wickednesse, for they went on gaine in their old frailty, like the dog to his vomit, or the sow to her wallow, putting the poore senslsse birds in all the fault for betraying them, as they tearmed it, which the contents of the next Sermon which a Glover taught will manifest, for I had the chiefe notes from a friend which was at the relation thereof. He began first with an ex tempore prayer about an houre long, and then thus he proceeded. The text is the first Chapter of the third booke of Moses, called Leviticus, at the 14. verse, the latter part of the verse, Then hee shall bring his offering of Turtle Doves, and of young Pigeons. Dearly beloved brethren, if you have not for∣gotten your selves, wee were lately betrayed by two uncleane birds, the Crow and the Magpye; be not dismaid, for sure it was rather an enchntment of the wicked, then any thing sent from God, for I will prove them to be birds which are unclean and fit for no use, as you may rede in the elventh of Leviticus, the 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, verses, where there
is the Raven mentioned, which is cousin german to the Crow, for they are birds of a feather; and by the little Owle in the 17. verse, is meant the Mag∣pie, which is also a very uncleane bird; I shall also proove them to bee utterly unlawfull by circum∣stance. First, the Crow is blacke, being adorned with the very same colour which our Clergy weares, which signifies his blacke wickednesse, and that he is not worthy to keepe company with the just. Secondly, he never cries but he bows his head, as our late suprstitious Clergy have done, in so much that in the conclusion of this circumstance I utterly abjure the Crow, for thou art a favourer of the Ro∣mish Religion. Thirdly, the Crow is alwayes feeding on the dead carcases, for the old Proverb tells, that on a dead carcase you shall alwayes find Crowes, there∣fore I compare the dead carcas to sinners, and Crowes to the Devils, for I say they can be no bet∣ter then Dvils. To prove which, mark I pray you, the Crow is the last bird that goeth to roost, and the first bird that coms from his roost, having just the properties of the Devill, for he is up early, and downe late, seeking all he can how to devoure. I rests now that I prove the Magpy also to bee unlwfull for the company of man. Fst, hee is streaked with white on both sides, which should be n embleme of righteousnesse, but it doth resemble the Bishops lawne sleeves so near∣ly, that I cannot endure the sight of it.
Secondly, he hath a crosse on his backe of black and white, which fully denotes him to be one of the Popes disciples, whom I love as the devill loves holy water. Thirdly, in his chattering still I can understand him when he sayes & caetera, and that is the lan∣guage of the beast, which is most abominable: he also gets his living among dead carcases, which makes me resolve my selfe of it, that he is marked out for no good end. Now I have observed this also, that they will sit on the heads of swine, a stinking ditty creature, and I perswade my selfe, should the evill spirits en∣ter into those swine, they would sit fst whilst they were hurried headlong into the sea. Thus much for to prove these birds not fit for the society of man. Now must I a little vindicate our religion, because that many black mouth'd persons envying our happinesse, are never well but when they are spitting frth venemous words against our honest doing; these saies one will not keepe com∣pany with the wicked, when God knowes them∣selves are as whoring rogues, and whores, as ever lived under the coape of heaven; to whom I an∣swer. If the spirit of the flesh doe move a brother of the separation so strongly that he cannot resist it, I perswade my selfe that he is not to be faulted, al∣waies provided that hee doth not pollute himselfe with the wicked, but make use of a sister of the se∣paration. Then they will say again that we preach
in barnes and stables and the like, which say they is most abominable, for is it fit that they should make  barne, o a stable, or the like, the house of God, it  not to bee endured. To that argument I answer, that the sparrowes build their nests about the roofe of the house of God, and the swallowes on the top thereof, now where doe either sparrowes, or swal∣lows more often build then in the roofe and on the top of a barne, a stable or the like; and againe our Saviour chose a homely stable to be borne in, and I dare avouch that his word is never the worse for being taught in a barne, a stable, or any such like plce. Dearly beloved brethren, who are onely Gods e∣lect here from forth a multitude of people, consider what a hppie estate yee now are in, and into what a most damnable estate yee fall if yee slide: but I hve not done with the unclean birds and beasts as yet, for I will prove them worse as yet by shewing their contraries. The turtle doves, and the pigeons which are inti∣mated in my text, are such harmlesse and loving birds, that the one will pine away for the losse of the other, and againe they are as it were an Em∣bleme of us, for they alwaies keepe company with none but with turtles and pigeons, and againe they fly alwaies in feare of their lives by reason of the ravenous crowes, hawkes and, buzzards. This age gives the crows leave to prey upon the poore sillie doves; and that you might understand it the bet∣ter, I would have you know that these crowes here
divinely spoken of are our high soaring cleargie, who have lately rose early, and went to bed late that they might persecute the Saints of God. Wih these and such like base railing terms, he a mecha∣nick simple gull must offer to prophane the name of our great God, who is the alpha, and omega, the beginning and the end: His discourse was not so short, he that gathered the notes was more weary of hearing and writing, by much, then the other of speaking; for hee went on in a confused manner, without either division of his text, or any such matter. Here reader hast thou presented to thy view the whole force of what he spake. FINIS.
