B6361A 45789196 172509
By the COMPANY Of the Royal Fishery of ENGLAND. FOrasmuch as all Persons who may be desirous to Promote the Fi∣shery Affairs under the Management of this Company, may not have the conveniency of Resorting to the place in London, where the Books for Subscription of the Stock proposed for carrying on the same shall be exposed; and wherein (for the Satisfaction and Encou∣ragement of such as please to peruse the same) is contained a fair Tran∣script of the Letters Patents, Constitution or Frame of Government, and Articles, Terms or Conditions upon which All and Singular Persons may be Admitted into the said Company, and be Traders and Adven∣turers with them: And to the End the said Affair may become as Gene∣ral and National as may be; The Company hath thought fit to cause the Premises to be Abbreviated, Printed, and Published, in these Pre∣sents; That such as shall be willing to be concerned therein, may have the substance of the Contents before them for their Consideration, viz. First, The Abstract of the Letters Patents for their Incorporation, which is as followeth, viz. HIS late Majesty, King Charles the Second, by Letters Patents un∣der the Great Seal of England, bearing Date the 25th. day of Sep∣tember, 1677. was pleased to Constitute His Royal Highness, James Duke of York, Thomas Earl of Danby, and several other Persons of Honour; and others therein Named, and such others as afterwards from time to time should be Admitted into their Company and Society, to be Traders and Adventurers with them, to be One Body Politick and Corporate in Deed and in Name: By the Name of, The Company of the Royal Fishery of ENGLAND: To have perpetual Succession, Investing them and their Successors, with divers Powers and Priviledges, in order to the better Government of the said Company, and Management of their Affairs. And more particularly (amongst others) I. To meet Yearly for the Electing and Appointing a Governour, Sub-Governour, Deputy-Governour, and 12 Committees for a Court of Assistants; who, or any Three, or more of them (whereof the Gover∣nour, Sub-Governour, or Deputy-Governour to be always One) are there∣by Authorized to Act in all things according to such Rules, Orders, and
Directions as should from time to time be made and given unto them by the General Court; and for want of such Orders, Rules, and Directions, to Manage, Govern, Direct, and do what they should judge Necessary and Expedient to the well Ordering and Government of the said Com∣pany, and the Improvement of their joynt Stock and Trade, to all Intents and Purposes, as if the same were done at, and by a General Court of the said Company: And that the said Court of Assistants, or any Seven or more of them as aforesaid, as often as they shall find occasion may Sum∣mon a General Court. II. That no Assembly or Meeting of the said Company shall be deemed a General Court, unless the Governour, Sub-Governour, or Deputy-Governour, Six of the said Committees, and Five other Members of the said Company at least be present. III. That such General Court may admit other Persons to be Mem∣bers, and may Increase, Contract, or Divide their joynt Stock, as they shall think fit: And the Members thereof may Grant, Transfer, and Assign their respective Stocks. IV. That such General Court may Make, Ordain, and Establish such, and so many Good, Necessary, and Reasonable Laws, Ordinances, Or∣ders, and Constitutions, as to them shall seem convenient for the good Government of the Company and their Affairs; and may impose and set Mulcts and Amerciaments upon the breakers of such Laws, or may Remit, Pardon, or Release the same upon the Parties Submission. And upon Conviction of any Misdemeanor, may remove Offenders, and choose others. V. That they may Fish in and upon all the Coasts, Creeks, In-lets, Ri∣vers, Arms of the Sea, belonging to His Majesty's Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any of them; or any other His Majesty's Do∣minions, whereof the Fishings are not already Granted, Appropriated, or belonging to some particular or private Person or Persons, Bodies Politick or Corporate; and likewise in and upon the Main Sea, or any part thereof: And have free and full Liberty to Carry and Transport their Fish, and Oyl made of Fish, to all Ports, Places, and Markets, both in England and beyond the Seas, and to Sell the same for ready Moneys or Commodities. VI. That they may Erect Store-Houses, Granaries, Ware-Houses, Work-Houses; and may build and make Wharfs and Docks, in and upon any of His Majesty's Wastes, Commons, or Waste-Grounds, without paying or rendring any Rent or Duty to His Majesty for the same: And that neither their Masters, Skippers, Steers-men, Ships-Crews, Mariners, Fisher-men, nor others, Employed by the Company in their Fishings (whether Foreigners or Natives) shall be Impannel'd, Sworn, or Compelled to
Serve on any Juries or Inquests at Westminster, the Assizes, Sessions, or elsewhere. VII. They have also granted to them 20 l. for each and every Dogger which they then had, and which (within 7 Years) they should Build in England, or any other His Majesty's Dominions, the same to be paid Quarterly out of the Customs within the Port of London, without further Warrant or Directions from His Majesty. VIII. They have also granted unto them All and Singular Priviledges in the City of London, as fully and freely, as any Company of Merchants Established by Letters Patents or Charters do, or may have, Use or Enjoy. IX. That all and singular Admirals, Vice-Admirals, General Comman∣manders, Captains, Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Custom-House-Officers, and all other Officers, Ministers, Liege-men and Subjects of His Majesty's whatsoever, shall be in and by all things Aiding, Helping, and Assisting to the said Company and their Successors, their Factors, Agents, and Servants, in the Execution and Enjoyment of the Premises, as well on Land as by Sea, whensoever they shall be thereunto desired: As they tender His Majesty's Good-will and Pleasure, and will answer the Con∣trary at their Peril, &c. Secondly, The Abstract of the Present Constitution or Frame of the Govern∣ment; as also some Rules and Laws necessary to be Observed by the Persons concerned in Managing and Improvement of the STOCK. Sect. 1. THat the Chief Government of the Company shall be in, and consist of a Governour, Sub-Governour, Deputy-Governour, and 12 Committees, whereof 4 to be called Directors, and 8 Masters; and also of 15 Assistants, viz. to each of them one: Also 8 Wardens, and 25 Commissioners or Agents, for Scotland and Ireland, and as many of the other Members of the Company as shall from time to time be agreed to be admitted; who, or any 15 or more of them, together with the Gover∣nour, Sub-Governour, Deputy-Governour, and their respective Assistants, or one of them to be present; 5 or more of the Committees, 5 or more of the Assistants, and 5 or more of the other Members of the Company, are to have the chief Power of making Laws, and Ordering the whole Af∣fairs of the Company in their General Courts. Sect. 2. That the Court of Assistants consist of the Governour, Sub-Governour, Deputy-Governour; the 12 Committees and their 15 Assistants; who, or any 7 or more of them (whereof the Governour, Sub-Governour, Deputy-Governour, or their respective Assistants, to be always one; 3 of the said Committees, and 3 of the said Assistants) are to have the chief Directing and Managing of the Affairs of the Company, by their Orders:
And for want of such Orders, may do and execute all things as the Ge∣neral Court may. Sect. 3. That for the more Distinct and Regular Management of the said Affairs, the said Court of Assistants are divided into 4 Chambers, viz. (1.) The Fishery Chamber. (2.) The Stock or Store Chamber. (3.) The Treasury or Cash Chamber. (4) The Accompt Chamber. Each of which is to consist of the Governour, Sub-Gover∣nour, Deputy-Governour, and their respective Assistants, or one of them. One Director and his Assistant; two Masters and their Assistants, and two Wardens; who, or any three or more of them to be a Quorum, are to Act and Execute by Rules and Instructions, to be gi∣ven unto them under the Seal of the Company, and not otherwise, in their several and respective Chambers. Sect. 4. That there be other 28 Members of the Company, who shall be called Agents or Officers; and be employed in the respective 4 Chambers, as they shall be directed by the Court of Assistants. Sect. 5. That the Nomination and Election of the Governour, Sub-Governour, Deputy-Governour, and 12 Committees, shall be in and by the General Court Yearly, save that not above 5 of them shall be remo∣ved in any one Year, but for just Causes exprest, &c. The 8 Wardens and other Agents, Officers, or Commissioners for England, Scotland, and Ireland, to be Nominated by the Court of Assistants, or 16 of them. Sect. 6. That within 20 days after Publication of Subscriptions of 150 Thousand Pounds, a General Court shall be called for the Election of a Sub-Governour, or Deputy-Governour, and 4 Committees, by the New Subscribers: And afterwards Elections to be made on the 30 of November Yearly, wherein not above 5 Committees to be Removed, as aforesaid. Sect. 7. The Articles, Terms or Conditions touching the admitting of Persons into the Company are confirmed, as a part of the Constitution inviolably to be observed. Sect. 8. That all Subscribers, who shall not be chosen for Managers, &c. shall be Denominated as Traders or Adventurers, and their respective Shares, both as to Profit and Loss, Yearly stated and determined, as other the Stock of the Company. Sect. 9. That no Member of the Company, after the 30 of November next after Subscriptions are compleated, shall have any Vote in Elections or making Laws, &c. who shall not have 500 l. Subscribed, &c. Nor any Person be admitted a Member of the Court of Assistants, who shall not have 1000 l. Subscribed, &c. or be otherwise entituled to the like Sum, by Transfer, Assignment, or otherwise. Sect. 10. One Tenth Part of the clear neat Profits is set apart for bear∣ing
the Charges of the Company, Court of Assistants, and 4 Chambers, &c. also to pay Sallaries, &c. to the Managing Members, Officers, or Ser∣vants; and the Distributions and Proportions of each are thereby setled. Sect. 11. The Accompts of Profit and Loss are to be Yearly stated by the Officers in the Accompt-Chambers, each Year to end on the 10th. of June; the Court of Assistants are to Examine and Report the same to the General Court, on the 10th. of September following: And 9 of them to Sign the brief Account thereof, and each Ones Share of Profits to be paid amongst the Persons concerned. Sect. 12. In case of Loss in any one Year, the Stock is to be made good out of the next, before any Dividend, or Apportionment to Managers, Officers, &c. save that Servants Sallaries or Wages of 30 l. per An. and un∣der, may be advanced out of the Stock, and re-imbursed out of the next Years Profits; And, in case the Profits of any first Years shall not amount to 100 l. each Share, the same shall also be made up out of the after Years Profits assigned for that purpose. Sect. 13. Mentions, In what cases Persons may be dismist their Offices and Employments; and that the General Court, or Court of Assistants Judgment shall be final for the Determination thereof. Sect. 14. Sets the Fines on such as shall absent themselves from their At∣tendance, when Summoned, or upon Adjournments, or for not attending so many Hours as shall be agreed upon; unless in case of Corporal Illness, or License from their respective Chambers. Sect. 15. Directs the Custody of the Larger Seal, as also of the Letters Patents, Deeds, Evidences of Lands granted to the Company, to be kept locked up in the Treasury-Chamber under two Locks; whereof the Go∣vernour, Sub-Governour, Deputy-Governour, and Directors, to have the Keys of one, and their respective Assistants of the other, who are to pro∣duce the same upon all occasions of the Company or Court of Assistants: Also that the Trustees, and each Chamber, the Secretary of the Company, and the respective Commissioners, or Agents, for Scotland and Ireland, are to have one of the Lesser Seals, to be used by them respectively in the Company's Service. Sect. 16. If any Differences shall arise between the Members of the Court of Assistants, or several Chambers relating to the Company's Affairs, they are to be Determined by the General Court, &c. And the Refusers to submit thereto, to be dismist their Offices and Employments. Sect. 17. The Seven Trustees are named and settled, and three of the other Assistants: The other five Assistants are to be Elected by them out of such as shall become Subscribers to the New Stock of the Company. Their after-nomination and succession is also agreed to be in, by, and amongst themselves, or the major part of the whole fifteen.
Sect. 18. The Governour, Sub-Governour, Deputy-Governour, Com∣mittees, Assistants, and all Subscribers, before they be admitted into any Trust or Office in the Company, are to declare their Approbation of, and Acquiescing in the Constitution, and all After-Constitutions, Laws, and Rules of the Company, as is more at large therein exprest. Thirdly, The Abstract of the Forementioned Articles, Terms, or Conditions, touching Subscriptions, viz. 1. THat whosoever shall Subscribe and Pay in any Sum or Sums of Mo∣ney, towards a Joynt Stock for carrying on the Trade of the said Company, shall be admitted into the same, and have and receive all the Benefits and Advantages thereof, subject to the Constitution, Laws, and Rules of the said Company, and these Articles, Terms, and Conditions, &c. 2. That the Sum designed to be at present Subscribed, be 300000l. whereof 100000l. by the surviving Patentees, their Heirs and Assigns, and the other present Members; and 200000 l. more by other Persons. The same to be paid into the Treasury of the said Company in manner following, viz. The first Tenth Part thereof to be paid within 30 days from and after notice or publication of the compleating the Subscriptions of the said 300000 l. or of 150000 l. at least in part thereof. One Tenth Part more within three Months next after their respective first Payments, and the other remaining Eight Tenth Parts, by Eight equal next Suc∣cessive Quarterly Payments. 3. That one Tenth Part of each Sum so Subscribed, shall be appropria∣ted to and for the use and disposal of the said Trustees, and of such other Persons as they shall judge have heretofore been, or may hereafter be use∣ful for, or in promoting the Interest and Service of the Company, with∣out Accompt: So as same, nevertheless, shall be and remain in the Stock for carrying on the Trade thereof. And the remaining Nine Parts, to and for the sole Use and Benefit of the respective Subscribers, their Ex∣ecutors, Administrators, and Assigns. 4. That whatsoever further Sums shall at any time hereafter be thought fit by the Company to be Subscribed and paid in, for increasing the said Stock, shall be in like manner subject to the Payment of the like Tenth Part, &c. for, or towards the Reimbursement of the Subscribers said Tenth Part of the said first 300000 Pounds. 5. That whosoever shall Subscribe and pay in his first Payment, and shall not make his second, or any after-payments, by the respective days or times before limited, shall forfeit his first Payment to the use of the Company, and have Credit only for such after-payments as he shall make. 6. That all Shares, or Sums amounting to 50 l. and Assignments thereof,
shall be Entred and Registred, and Certificates thereof Exemplified un∣der the Seal, be given for the same, to such Persons as shall desire it. 7. That no Person shall be hereafter admitted a Member of the Com∣pany, unless he shall at the time of his Subscription, declare his approba∣tion of, and submitting to these Articles, and engage himself to observe and keep the same inviolably; and also all such Constitutions, Laws, and Rules of the Company, as they have or shall make, for the Management and Regulation of their Trade, pursuant to the Letters Patents and the present Constitution. By all which 'tis evident, That there is (1.) A Legal Foundation for this Undertaking, viz. By Letters Patents from his late Majesty of Great Britain and Ireland. (2.) A Regular Constitution and Laws for the Man∣agement of the Affairs of the said Company so as may be safe, and with Satisfaction to such as shall Subscribe and pay in their Moneys for a joynt Stock of the Company. (3.) Considerable Encouragements to the Sub∣scribers of the first 300000 l. not only by their Re-imbursement of their Tenth, by the Subscribers of the next 300000 l. but 3 per C allowed the Subscribers of the first 150000 l. thereof out of their first three Quar∣ter Payments, by equal Proportions, in case they make their Subscrip∣tions by the days limited. Some things might be published touching the great necessity and utility of the Undertaking, both to the Publick and Private, but divers have al∣ready written their Sentiments, and informed us of the Experiences of the Wealth and Power our Neighbours have arrived unto, by their Fish∣ings in these British Seas; which is an evident demonstration, that the Af∣fair duly managed, and diligently attended, will, with God's Blessing, ex∣ceed all the usual limits of Profits in other Attempts. Those who have taken pains therein, have also evinced, that each Buss or Fishing-Vessel of about 80 Tun (which will not cost above 1300 l. in Building, Equip∣ping, Victualling, and Wages, for one Year,) will produce at least 1000 l. per Annum clear gain to the Company (one half or third part thereof were sufficient Encouragement): Also, that we may Build, Equip, and Man our Vessels at less Charge than our Neighbours (which has not hi∣therto been considered, or put into the Estimate.) And that the Com∣modity may be rendred more grateful and acceptable by the Salt, and Methods for Cure and Packing to be used therein, and our Markets ear∣lier, (both at home and abroad) by six Weeks than theirs, &c. Some of those (who have asserted these things in Print) may be had and consulted, and to that purpose are enumerated, viz. (1.) Sir John Burroughs, Kt. in his Treatise, Entituled, The Soveraignty of the British Seas proved by Records, History, and the Municipal Laws of this King∣dom, written in Anno 1633. and printed Anno 1651. Wherein he gives
a distinct Account of the several Advantages made of this Fishery by our Neighbours. A Treatise worthy every English Man's perusal. (2.) Tobias Gentleman, an Experienced Fisherman, in his Treatise, Entituled, Eng∣land's way to get Wealth, and to Employ Ships and Mariners, Printed Anno 1614. (3.) A Treatise written by E. S. Entituled, Britain's Buss, which gives a very particular Computation as well of the Charge of a Herring-Fishing-Ship's Building and setting out, as also of the Gain and Profit thereby: Written Anno 1615. and Re-printed Anno 1630. (4.) Sir Ro∣ger L'Estrange, in his Discourse of the Fishery, briefly laying open, not only the Advantages and Facility of the Undertaking, but the Absolute Necessity of it, in order to the Well-being both of King and People, Printed Anno 1674. And (5.) Mr. Andrew Yarranton's Second Part of England's Improvement by Sea and Land, Chap. 7. [Of the Improvements of the Fishery] Shewing the way of Managing the said Trade to greater Advantage and less Charge than others can: Which might be also fur∣ther evinced by the Laws of this Kingdom, Relating to the Customs touching Salt, and Exportation of Fish into Foreign Parts, &c. But this Advertisement is conceived sufficient, and therefore shall be shut up with the Concluding Words of Sir John Borroughs's forementioned Treatise, viz. The Soveraignty of our Seas, being the most Precious Jewel of His Majesty's Crown, and (next under God) the principal means of our Wealth and Safety, all true English Hearts and Hands are bound by all possible means and diligence to Preserve and Maintain the same, even with the uttermost hazard of their Lives, Goods, and Fortunes. Memorandum, That the Substance of what is contained in most of the Treatises above referred unto, is in a Treatise, Entituled, A Collection, with some Observations touching the Royal Fishery of Great Britain and Ireland. Transcribed and newly Printed by Allowance of the Com∣pany, and may be had at divers Book-sellers in this City and West∣minster. Also, The Books will be opened for further Subscriptions, on Monday Morning, the 4th. day of November next, and so from day to day, at Mercers Hall in Cheapside, London, until the Stock Proposed be compleated: Which all Persons who intend to be concerned therein, are desired to take Notice of. FINIS.
