C1575 E425_21 R204564 99864039 161440
THE CAVALIERS Letanie. Lately compos'd by a vvell-willer to his Majesties Person, and all his most Loyall Subjects. Very fitting to be observ'd, and made use of, by all who desire Deliverance FROM, The damnable, execrable, unpara∣lell'd, and not before heard of, Detestable Actions, Proceedings, Designes, Humors, Conditions, Votes and Ordinances. Now fully, and most exactly practised, delivered, and divulged, by the only, (yet illegall) Governours, of these our sad, desperate, distracted TIMES. Qui legit, intelligat. (Seu) Qui habit aures ad audiendum, audiat. Printed in the Yeare 1648.
The Caviliers LETANIE. FRom th' envious spiteful Critick that reads. My ignorant Verses: from al sort of beads, From putrified Such as the house of Com∣mons. Members without any heads. Libra nos. From Hags, Hobgoblins, and divelish Witches, From damnable Vsurers with all their riches. From Alderman Atkins beshiting his breeches, Libra nos. From the sort of Rogues which are in White-hall, From As Crumwell doth. soaring too high, and then for to fal, From the hands of Mol-cutpurse; the Devil and all Libra nos. From being whipt on lasht in Bridewell, From vaulting or leaping in Dungeon or Cel, From singing and roaring and such like in Hell, Libra nos. From riding and sitting the great wooden Horse From cruell Tyrants 'thout any remorse From too much adhering with 'th Parliaments force, Libra nos. From brawling and fighting, and drawing of swords, From being prest to death between Boards, From the house of perjur'd detestable Lords, Libra nos. From the fury of a Lyon, the paw of a Bare, From a drunken-fellow that naught doth but sweare, From the mercilesse The Army. Tygers that lye every wher Libra nos. From the Laws of the Land or ought else to defile, From the Parliaments base and fraudulent guile,
From the words you have staid a terrible while, Libra nos. From saying the Pox or the Divell take you, From being commanded by the words ile make you, From all execrations but evil forsake you, Libra nos. From an Irish crag, and a faint-hearted Scot, From being back't or stew'd in a pot, From the tearm and acts of a drunken sot, Libra nos. From barbarous Rebels without any pity, From the crafty & subtile larg-conscienc'd Of Haber∣dashers and Goldsmiths Hall. Commit∣tee From the grand incomparable The Comōn-Counsell men. Fooles of the City, Libra nos. From being by our The Parlia∣ment our sup∣posed friends. friends supposed betray'd, From the sin performing the acts by them made, From being entrap'd by the snares of a Maid, Libra nos. From riding up Holborn hill in a boate, From beggerly He that caus'd a Counsel to sit about his couc∣kold-ship. Fenton that vapouring Goat, From the senseless stile of a Parliament Vote, Libra nos. From being any more thrust out of the lines, From the noise of a Dog that continually whines, From spoyling the King, and such fearfull designes. Libra nos. From walking within the compasse of Traytors, From Levellers and Adjutators, From being under the Parliament The house of Commons. praters, Libra nos. From too much keeping an evil decorum From the manyfold Treasons Parliamentorum, From Oliver Crumwell Cheif of all mischeif. Dux omnis malorum, Libra nos.
From all pretended Reformation, Such as we see in this our Nation, From plundering, robbing, and such tolleration, Libra nos. From superstitious Rosemary, and Bayes, From the Fairy Nymphs, when dancing their Hayes, From the Both houses of Parliament. Counsel that naught but wickednes saies, Liba nos. From my Lord Mayors horse that valiant beast, From his desperate rider, that My Lord Mayers. Asse at least, From commitring the sin of keeping the The Nativity of our Saviour Feast, Libra nos. From the Parliaments fierce Ordinances, From Tom of Bedlams frantick dances From ruinning the kingdome, and such like As the souldi∣ers make of it. fancies, Libra nos. From being like the Army hated, From the The Prison. Throne in which Charls they've reinstated, From by the O! that Com∣mittee. Committee to be sequestrated, Libra nos. From the inhumane barbarous crimes Committed these reformed times, From a As Harry Walker. man whose pates repleat with rimes, Libra nos. From the treacherous Against the King. Votes of the house of Comm. From the Parliaments accursed or Composi∣tion. summons, From every ones ire, especially a womans, Libra nos. From running into a Lyons den, From a villain that takes in the hundred ten, From the turbulent rout of Parliament men, Libra nos. From The Parlia∣ments. that vile companies resolutions, From their wicked acts, words and pollutions,
From their unheard of persecutions, Libra nos. From their many idle Declarations, From their severall Oathes and protestations, From doing as they have done by three England, Scot∣land, and Ire∣and. Nations, Libra nos. From being a prisoner in the Tower, From living under this tirannous power, From the hands of the Army that al would devoure, Libra nos. From the Parliaments newly invented delusions, That have hatcht in the land so many confusions, I say from their subtile disembling intrusions, Libra nos. From the house of Parliaments defendants, From Ireton and his vile attendants, From the false-hearted troop of base Independents, Libra nos. From the mighty They are now raisīg new breast works or forts upon Tower hill a∣gainst the Sea∣men. fort which they have begun, From falling into deep love with a Nun, From them that have parted the father and sonne; Libera nos. From the As Sir Tho. against the K. foot against the head that kicks, From my Lord otherwise L. Mayor. Fool and his Christmas tricks, From all sorts of pratling prophane Scismaticks, Libera nos From Cornhill Conduit and Cheapside Pumpe, From Generall Cromwell that naturall That Log of wood. Lumpe, From the company of those that drink or the rump, Libera nos. From the Common Parliament mens prwasions. From domestick foes, and forraign invasions, From having a hand in these In undoing the King and Kingdome. matchlesse occasions, Libera nos.
From the many perfidious late inventions. From Sir Thomas his manifold knowne intentions From these evident nurtur'd vile dissention, Libera nos. From being tost in Cupids, blanket, From abusing the word of God be thanked, From the inviting unto Grand-Pluto's Bauquer, Libera nos. From hearing the Widdows and Orphans cryes, From answering them just Parliament-wise, From prisoning a King, and such As they e∣steem petty like toyes, Libera nos. From being clapt one the back with a writ, From burthening our selves with the Citizens wit, From running headlong into the pit, Libera nos. From the Generall Army their wicked intents, To ruine the Kingdome unlesse God prevents, From such evill, prophane, unjust As our Engl. Parliament. Parliaments, Libera nos. From the lower House and the House of Peers. From our continuall caused fears, From generally all Parliamenteers, Libera nos. From very Rogues, and the ragged The common Souldiers. Rout, From The totall Commanders. surly Slaves, and Beggars stout, From the base enterprize Tom, Cromwel, and the rest. they goe about, Libera nos. From the seldome heard of innumerable curses, The Parliament have for filling their purses, From the Spoilers of Learning that should be it Nurses Libera nos. From Ludgate. Newgate, and Tower-hill, From both the Compters, or what you will
From being At the Sessi∣ons Barre. arraign'd my prayers be still, Libera nos. From the Soveraign, Sacred, three leg'd Tree, From Black Tom, and his posterity, From th'Arch Executioner Gregory, Libera nos omnes. That it may please thee, to re-inthrone Our gracious King into his owne, And keep him not In prison. thus as never was knowne, Quaesumus te. That thy totall Army may disband, That they no more oppresse the Land: That thou maiest Our Sove. honour, and not command, Quaesumus te. That all good things may settled be, As before to posterity; That every one may live in's degree, Quaesumus te. That the very scum of this our nation Abas'd be from their ostentation: That they may be turn'd to their pristine fashion, Quaesumus te. That the monstrous noise and rumours of Warre, Be from poor England removed far; That this word of command be pronouc'd, as you were, Quaesumus te. That this our Godly Parliament Dissolved be incontinent, That thou'dst make them honest against their intent, Quaesumus te. That the Common house of puny Brats, Pe cull'd, be pick'd and washt like Sprats, That some of them suffer as often do Th  Rats, Quaesumus te. That every one his owne may enjoy,
That thy men the people no more may annoy, That thy selfe and the rest might say vive le Roy, Quaesumus te. That our Lord the King may weare his Crowne; That Faction and Heresies quite be put downe. That to whom it belongs my have the The clergy. Gowne, Quaesumus te. That the Kingdome, the City, Militia, Tower Be yeelded to The King. him that ought to have the power, That those Vagabond slaves may not England de∣voure, Quaesumus te. That the manifest traitors wch have been the cause, Of disturbing the peace, and infringing the Laws. May instead of the neck, be hang'd by the jawes, Quaesumus te. That my good Lord Mayor for his valiant act, In charging the conduit, himselfe being backt, May for his fierce valour A whip and lash. receive what he lackt, Quaesumus te. That all our turbulent times may cease That our honoured King may have a release, Without which 'tis in vain to expect any peace, Quaesumus te. That of poor Widdowes you'd hear the sad ditties, That you'd banish extirpate all sorts of Committees. That peace may proclaim'd be through Country & City Quaesumus te. That thou thy selfe would'st deliver up all The forts and forces great and small, That thou wouldst descend, least you catch a fall, Quaesumus te. That last this visible distraction Be suddenly cur'd: that good satisfaction Be giv'n for the Kings and Kingdomes exactions, Quaesumus te. FINIS.
