C3986A R232028 99900138 137327
A Compendious ENCHIRIDION Touching most Distempers Incident to the body of Man, With the best and easiest Cures thereof. Wherein the Author desires the Reader seriously to consider the Particulars before Censure be passed. n all my Travels with Salvator Winter, and many years after with that famous Phisitian and Chi∣rurgeon John Ponteus; I never exacted on, or denied the Poor my skill and Medicines Gratis, but still my house to them was as free as an Hospital; the like never hath been performed but by your Friend and Neighbour JOHN CHƲRCH. ntlemen take notice, that besides the old Tract I gave you; I have now added for the good and benefit of my Countrymen, a true way of making some cheap and necessary Medicines; As Bal∣somes, Plaisters. Oyntments, Diascor∣dium and Mithridate. th the number of all the Bones, Veins, Muscles and Arteries in the Body of Man. Printed for the Author in the year 1682.
The Prologue. Gent. ALthough I have not time to give you a Catalogue of all the Famous and admirable Cures performed by me in mine own Country, and other places of this Kingdome, by reason it would be tedious for your reading, and too large for the Press; yet I am will∣ng to give a touch in short of some Cures performed by me amongst your neighcors, who were left uncured by some Chirurgeons, counted ble men. Nevertheless you may see that Gods blessing daily attends my endeavours. For when I am at work for the poor, my delight is o perform their cures Charitably, believing that God will crown my endeavours with success. Blessed be his glorious name for ever, Gentlemen, we are not unsensible that there are too many Preten∣ders in our time, who promising to perform great cures, have taken our mony, and left you worse than they found you. But my way is to erform your cures before you part with your mony. Some few Cures I shall instance in for brevities sake. I shall not stand on curious delivery, nor on high quaint termes of Art, although I am a great lover thereof: but in a low and plain way, o that the meanest capacity may understand, what with Gods bles∣ng I can do for them. As followeth. A Declaration of some Cures performed by J. C. irs, I will begin with the Eyes, being seated in the most noble and principal part, and are as Christal Windows to let light o all manual operations, For God hath hollowed out in the Scull wo Windows, into which the outmost Membranes of the Brain end two things fill'd like bags, with the Humours that come from he brain. In the midst of which there is a Pipe interwoven of an O∣acous thin Membrane, yet full of a most pure and Christaline Hu∣our, called the Apple of the Eye, in the which vision is made. This s compassed with a Net-work full of a watry or glassie humour. And
last of all that Membrane which is commonly call'd the White of th Eye: but Philosophers (because it is hard and polish'd over li horn) call it cornea; and this is transparent over against the Apple  the Net-work. Elsewhere it retains its whiteness. Now under th Root of the Apple lies the Optick Nerve, by which the image of th thing perceived passeth straight to the center of the Brain. For sig is only the resiliencie of the species from the object to the eye, &c. I couch'd Cataract's for Richard Smart a Hempdresser living  Cow lane near Smithfield, and many others to their comfort and m credit. I cured Mary Millard liveing within two miles of Chealtenham i Gloster-shire of the Falling sickness (who had been afflicted 14 years by anointing the Spundles of her back with my Balsom, and givin her my Essentia Mercurialis, &c. I Cured Humphry Blackwel living in Eastwell in Stockly Parish i Oxfordshire (being shot through part of his head with a Rammer  a Gun) with Linnimentum Archei, and Emplastrum magistpale cu Bitum. I Cured Margaret Carter living within three Miles of Bracklie i Buckingham-shire, who had been Blind for the space of 15 year With many too long to nominate. Also in the Diseases of the Eyes I commonly use Medicamen siv Collirium nostrum, made of Tutta Magistralis; wherewith I do not on¦ly cure watry eyes, but also the great pain of the Eye-lids: and als where there is flesh growing over the sight; that it seemeth to b past the cure of common Phisitians and Chirurgions that profes themselves to be very skilful in Occulism, or griefs of the Eyes. I cured John Ball of Bloxom near Banburie. He was a Baker, wh did suck his meat through a Quill two years, by reason of a Cancer i his face. I gave him Flores Veneris, and did use Oleum Vitrioli; an with my Balsom & Plaisters finished the cure. I Cut and cured Mar¦tha William of Michael Deane on my Stage in Gloster-shire, a Broom mans Daughter of a Hare or cloven Lip, who had been cut and muc abused by one endeavouring to cure it before; but left her very de¦formed. With many others, whom I have perfectly cured which for brevities sake omit. I Cured James Fisher, a Scholler of Oxford of a Fistula in his side between the Ribs and the intercostle Muscles, giving him inwardl
my Golden Balm, and using Flos unguentorum about the said wound; with Emplastrum Stipticum, and injections with Mel Rosarum, and Tents dipped sometimes in Egiptiacum. I Cured a Fistula in Ano for John Rogers living in Stratford on Avon. I Cured Robert Clements, living in a Village within a mile of Banbu∣ie of an Vlcer in his Leg. I Cured Anthony Michel living in Easom, who had 27 Ulcers or oles. Insomuch that it was threatned and doom'd to be taken off. Who I did perfectly cure, and others with the foresaid Remedy. I Cured a Wry-neck for John Scot living in Sadbury in Glostershire. I Cut and cured David Harris living in Dounings Allie in Bishops∣ate street, of a Wen being on the side of his neck, weighing above a ound and a half. And many others. Also I cure all Ruptures, or burstings, commonly called broken-ellies, either with, or without cutting, which are curable. And also l those tumours or startings out of the Navil. Cut and cured Samuel West of the Stone in the bladder, Malmsbury In the Dropsie, Ascites, I do sometimes use Tapping with good suc∣ess. I Tap't, and did extract from one Joan Gamble at times, 2, or 3 d 20 Quarts of undigested Urine, or water. Also I do often cure the ropsie, Tinpanies and Anasarca, with my Balsom, Fomentations, & ataplasms, giving Elaterium: I use Sudorificks, according to the age, rength, and constitution of the diseased parties. Cancers cut and cured 6 this year 1681 at Chippingnorton. I Cured John Prat of Keynton, Robert Savage of Long-compton, eorge Roberts of Shipton upon Stover, all of Cancers in the Lip. I Cured John Cox of Uffington, near Farringdon of a Cancer in the ugh of his Mouth which had by its continuance eaten through his w. Cured Richard Shirborn of Ascott near Burford, of a Cancer in his ongue left uncured by able Chyrurgions. I Cut and Cured the Tongue of a woman of Chippingnorton which d a latge Stone in the middle, weighing half an Ounce, to the miration of all spectators: who is now alive and ready to justifie e truth of it. Directions for the Composing of that incomparable Medcine called the Golden Balm. Take Olei Terebinth. lb. 4. Mirrhae ℥ 2 ss. Mastices ℥ 1. arcocllo
ʒ 2. Gum. Elemi ʒ 6. Gum. vel pinguedinis Palmae ℥ 7. Spirit. Vi Opt. lb. 2. Mix them together in a strong Glass, and infuse them i Balreo Mariae, 10 daies. Afterwards put to it Olei Hypper. lb. 1  Tereb. purissim. ʒ 4. Cerae albae ʒ 6. ellis 3. Misc. fiot Unguent. v alme. This Golden Balm or Unguent, is of so great virtue, that it  to be admired, for it's wonderful efficacie and operations, both in¦wardly and outwardly; for all great Squats, Bruses, Falls, give half drachm, or safely a whole drachm in Sack, or any convenient drink anointing the greived place outwardly. For all wounds, new or old, make pledget of fine Tow or Lin the bigness of the wound, and lay on any common plaister; as Dia chilon, or Deminio, and if the wound be deep, you may make Tent of the same. Also anointing any greived part, or painful swelling, it givet speedy ease, and asswageth. And for all Sinewes that are contracted, or shrunken. For Cramp and Convulsions, anointing the Spundles of the back. Truly it woul require a wise Pen, and a large Volume to set down all it's healin Virtues, and curious Operations. Of Physick, Chirurgery, and Anatomy. Also I am bold to give you a touch of Physick and Chyrurg¦ry: For I am much streigthned for want of time. The moving principle in a living man, is the vital soul, which nothing else but the spirit of life, thick and strong, mightily fillin and powerfully governing the bodies which it inhabiteth. For the body of man is Compound, and consisteth of Spirit, Fles Blood, Membranes, Veines, Nerves, Gristles, and Lastly Ton being as it were the props and pillars, least the frame should f Which are in number as followeth. The Head hath 8. The upper jaw 2. The lower jaw 1. The Tee are 32, sometimes but 28. The Spina hath 24. The Os sacrum 5. T Ribs are 24. The Breast bone 1. but composed of 3. The Cannenl bon 2. Th Shoulder-blades 2. The Ischium 3. In the Armes 6 In t
Feet 64. The great seedlike bones of the great Toes 4. If with some Anatomists you reckon 24 seed-like bones in the two hands, and so many in the two Feet, and two in each Ham, and the 8 bones in each Hand between the Carpus and the Metacarpus; and the bony sustance nexed to the Cuboides in both the feet. In old persons you shall have 4 more, which being joyned to 246, make up 302 bones expressed hus. Ter centum binis compactum est ossibus istud, Quod gerimus corpus, non est quod plura requiras. If you 302 bones chance to find, Few, or none, are left behind. The principle transmutation of the nourishment in man is by Pro∣eneration of the Four Vital humours, Blood, Flegm, Yellow and lack Choler. For the nourishment received being tempered (as in∣eed all bodies of the world are) of the Four Elements, is resolved in he body of a living creature into four again. The fattest part of it is rned into Blood: a part into Spittle or Flegme: a part into Yellow Choler, and a part into Black Choler, or Melancholy. For Melancho∣ by its terrene grossness, represents the Earth. Flegme, Water, lood, Air. Choler, Fire. But they differ in colour and relish. For elancholy is black, and something bitter. Flegme, white, and with∣ut tast. Blood, red, and sweet. Choler, yellow, and very bitter. Note that amongst those Four, Blood is most copiously generated, ontaining the very substance of our nourishment, to which yellow holer only adds a more easie penitration through all. Black Choler xes it again; and applieth it to the members. Lastly Flegm tem∣ers the Acrimonies of them both, (least they should Corode) ith penetrating and fixing: and gently agglutinates the blood to the embers. Hence it is that Phisitians also, with the Vulgar, speak of the lood, as if it were the only food of life. Now the principle concocti∣n in a living creature is threefold. 1. Chilification. 2. Sanguification. . Membrification. The First is made in the Stomach. The Second in e Liver. And the Last in all the members. Now the Stomach is e common Sink-port, or receptacle of all maladies. Crudity is the ed of all diseases. From thence gross vapours arise, causing in∣ations: the same condensed in the head, causeth distillation 1. he other member, of the body it causeth obstructions, whence fol∣loweth
rottenness or inflammation. Therefore let it be taken for gra¦ed, that he taketh the best course for his bodily health, that ende¦vours to prevent Crudities. Now the best waies to prevent them Temperateness: as in food, sleep, and daily exercises. O the stran virtue of Labor! whereby our ever to be adored God ordered o first Parents to get their bread and health in the sweat of their brow intimating that they should get their bread and health togethe which mistery, if the debauched and slothful Gentry of this Kingdo would rightly weigh, and seriously consider, they would not was their lives in idleness &c. I must beg your pardon, and break off abruptly, as touching the things: or I shall walk into so pleasant a field, that I shall not be ¦ble to get forth; I must therefore but only hint at things. Of the Quantities of Weights which are at this daie in use in preparing, and composing Medicines, For as much as the perfect knowledg of Medicines cannot be atai¦ed unto, without the knowledg of the quantities of Weights, whic are at this present day most commonly used in making and preparin Medicines. I thought good to declare them, as followeth. A Grain, is a Barly corn, taken out of the middle of the ear Granum. A Scruple, is twenty Barly cornes. Scrupulus. ℈ Three Scruples containes a Drachme. Drachma. ʒ Eight Drachmes contain one Ounce. Unicia. ℥ Quart; signifieth a quart of any thing. Quar. q Libra, is a pound And hath this Note. Libra. lb Semis is the half of every weight. Semis. ss Manipulus, is a great handful. Manipulus. M Pugilus is a small handful. Pugilus. P Ana, is of every one a like much. Ana. Ne parva averseris, inest sua gratia parvis. FINIS.
1. Artemisia Mugwort. GRows by the borders of Fields and High-way-sides, and it flowreth in August, and it is somewhat Astringent, and not o hot, pound it with Oyl of Sweet Almonds, and lay it as a Plas∣r, easeth the pain of the Stomack, also it cureth the Ach and aking and drawing together of Sinews 2. Tussilago Coltsfoot, It groweth in Watry-places, and moist fields, is of a drying na∣re; pounded with Honey, it cureth hot Inflamations, and St. An∣ony's fier being laid thereon, it is good for any Impostumations of e stomack. 3. Petasites: Butter Burre. t groweth in moist places: it flowereth in March, and it is ry in the third degree, being dried to powder and drunk in Wine, rovokes Sweat, it killeth Wormes, and is of great force against the uffocations or Fits of the Mother, it cureth all Ulcers or old thy Sores. 4. Britannica Bistort, They be of two sorts and flowereth in May, cold and dry in e third degree, being boyled in red wine and drunken stopeth e Bloody-flux, it also stopeth the overmuch flowing of Womens urgations and all other Issues of blood 5. Fumaria Fumitory. It grows amongst Wheat and Barley, hot and dry in the second egree, flowers in June, the decoction is good in all hot Col∣ectick humours, also against the fowl scurf or old sores butifying he skin and purging the body. 6. Chamaedrys Germainder. It groweth in stony Hills and Gardens flowereth in July, hot nd dry in the third degree, opens all obstructions of the Liver nd Spleen it bringeth down Womens natural purgations, it pur∣eth the body. 7. Bitonica St. Pauls Bitony. Male and Foemale, the Male Veronica, it groweth in sandy places
about Woods, the Foemale groweth in low moist places, they fl¦er in July, it is dry and something hot, it is very good for s¦pings and pains of the Kidneyes, i is good in old Coughs and ¦rupted Longs and Ulcers. 8. Ajugo Ground-pine. Grows in stony ground slowers in August; it is hot in second degree and dry in the third, it is good to apply to the Sti¦ings of any Venomous Beast, boyled in Vinegar and drunken d¦vereth the dead Child, dissolves congealed blood, anointing body with the Juice provokes sweating. 9. Chamaesiparissus Lavender-Cotten. Grows in Gardens if Planted, or else not in this Country flowers in August, it is hot and very dry; the Hearb drunke Wine is good against Serpents Scorpions, and any other kin poysons both to Man and Beast. 10. Steophularia Celandine, Grows about old rotten walls; flowers in May, hot and di the third degree, the Juice in Wine is good to wash fretting sor openeth the stopping of the Liver, it helpeth the Jaundice, very good in the Hemorhoids, the Juice of it mingled with W and wash therewith. 11. Pervinca Pervincle. Grows in moist shadow places; flowers in April, it is very and Astringent, the herb sodd in Wine and drunken stops the b¦dy flux, it stayeth the immoderate course of the flowers, an other fluxes of blood. 12. Crocus Saracenicus Bastard Saffron, They use to plant it in Gardens, it flowreth in August, hot i first degree dry in the second, the Juice of the Seed taken Broth helpeth the stopping of the Bowells and Guts, it is also ¦ry good for dropsys; the flowers drunk with honied water o¦eth the Liver and are very good against the Jaundice. 13. Tanacetum Tansie. Two sots, the one yellow, the other asmnald white, both f
in August, it is hot in the second degree and dry in the third;  seeds are very good to kill the Wormes, the same drunken in ine is for pain in the Bladder, and them that cannot piss but by ops, the Juice of the Herb is good for fits of the Ague. 14. Parthenum Fetherfew. It groweth in dry places by old walls; it flowreth in August, s hot in the third degree and dry in the second, Feverfew dry∣ and made into powder, and two drams of it taken in honey, very ll purgeth Melancholy and purgeth the Stone. 15. Abrotonum Sothenwood. It grows in Gardens flowers in August, it is hot in the third ree, it is good against the Scatica and stoppings of Urirne and mans natural Purgations the Seeds being steeped in Wine and nken. 16. Absynthium Wormwood. Hot in the first degree dry in the third, comforteth the Sto∣ck from hot Collerick humours, the decoction. 17. Buglossa Bugloss. There be five sorts, they all flower in June July and August, to grow in barren Soyl, the decoction of the Roots with Hysop Cresses being drunk every Morning drives out all manner of Wormes ingendred in the Body of Man. 18. Lingua Canis Dogs Tong. Grows about high-ways and Path sides, flowreth in June, the t rosted in hot Imbers and laid to the Fundament helpeth the ard Hemerhoids, pounded with Barly Meal and laid to any In∣tations or Wild fier is a Soveraign Remedy. 19. Barago Borage. is hot and moist, it is good against Roughness and Harshness e Throat, being boyled with water and honey is good allso st Mellancholly 20. Anthillis Ahillon. Hot and dry in the first degree, flowreth in June it groweth in
the Axen of this Herb is used in making Glasses; the decoc of it drunk is good against the Strangury and pain in the Re also very good for green wounds to heal them up. 21. Bardana The Clote Burre. Groweth by highways and dry Ditches, their season is in A being very good steeped in Wine to provoke Urine and brea Stone in the Reigns or Bladder, also for such as spet blood or ¦rupted matter, and in Ointments good for hot swellings. 22. Ranunculus Crowfoot. Grows in Ditches and standing waters, flowers in April,  against Tetters and Ringworms. The Powder of the Root o causeth Sneesing. 23. Poligranthemum Gouldenknobs. Grows on Grassy Downs and in Gardens, if planted flowe April, and almost all the Summer is hot and dry, seldom us Physick, the Roots are good to draw Blisters being outwardl ¦plyed. 24. Dipsacum or Ʋirga pastoris, Teasel. It flowers in June, and is planted in this Country, is dry i Second degree, an Ointment made with it is good for chops i Fundament. 25. Succisa Morsus Diaboli, Devils-bit Hot and dry in the Second degree: inwardly taken it ease Fits of the Mother, and breaks Wind, very good to stop Swellin the Jaws being outwardly applied. 26. Trisolium Trefoil. There be several sorts, and are hot and dry in the Third d and flowers in August, good to purge Worms, Natural Pu¦ons, and against the Strangury provokes Urine. 27. Alleluga & Oxys Wood Sorrel. Grows in shaddowed Woods, flowreth in April, is cold an it is good for them that have a cold feeble Stomach, the decoc goo for sore Mouths.
28. Gramen Couch-crass. Is cold and dry, it groweth in Corn Fields and in low places, it  good to boil in Wine for Gnawings of the Belly, very much pro∣okes Urine, and brings forth the Stone and Gravel. 29. Phaenix Way-bennet. Grows in the Borders of Fields, of nature dry and warm, stops he Flux of the Belly, and womens Natural Purgations. 30. Bromos Oatgrass. Grows on Borders of Fields, and by way sides may be found in ar, all the Summer is dry of complection: the decocton is good or stinking Breaths, or stinking smells, or corrupt sores in the Nose eing washed therewith. 31. Crataeogonum Stichwort. Grows under Hedges and Bushes, flowers in April, the Seed eateth and dryeth: Some write that if a Woman drinks the de∣cocton of the Seed three days after her Natural Purgations she may conceive of a man child if she conceive within Forty days. 32. Junci Rushes, there be Five sorts. Grows in low watry places, of dry complexion, they flowrer n July, it purges very much by Urine, the Seeds steeped and drunken in Wine stops any Flux in the Belly. 33. Arundo Reeds, there be Nine sorts. All hot and dry, they grow in standing Waters and by Brook sides, tis good in Dropsies, it provokes Urine and breaks the Stone the Ashes are good for Scald heads. 34. Hydropiper Water Pepperwort. Hot and dry in the Third degree, flowreth in August, groweth in Pools and Ditches, it washeth all cold Swellings, it scattereth congealed Blood being laid thereto; the dry Leaves being powdred may serve instead of Pepper. 35. Persicaria Arsemart. Grows in watry places, is cold and dry, is good to lay to fresh
wounds the Juice being droped in; good against Impostumation and Inflamations and such hot Swellings. 36. Staphisagria Stavisaker. Grows in shaddow places and in Gardens, flowreth in June, is hot allmost in the Fourth degree: Fifteen of the Seeds is strong Vomit taken in any convenient Liquor, carries of gross flam and slimy matter, it is also good with Vinegar to rub on Lousie Ap¦parel to kill Lice. 37. Cucumis Wild Cucumber. Grows in Gardens if Set there, flowreth in August, is hot an dry in the Second degree, is good against Dropsies, good for Squi¦nancy and the Swellings in the Throat. 38. Colocinihis Coloquintida. It grows in Spain and Italy and brings forth fruit in Septembe like unto great Apples being very full of Seeds; it is hot and dr in the Third degree: it purges Cholerick humours; a Scruple i enough at a time, for it openeth the Belly mightily, not fitin nor safe for the Vulgar to meddle with. 39. Sena Sene. It grows in Italy, it flowreth in June, hot in the Second de¦gree and dry in First: the Codds and Leaves in the quantity of  Dram gently purgeth the Belly especially Choler and Melancholy a very safe and harmless Purge. 40. Sambucus Eldar. Hot and dry in the Third degree, especially the Bark grows it shaddow moist places; flowreth in May, it is profitable in th Dropsey, the green Leaves pounded are good to aswage hot Swel¦lings and to ease the pain of the Gout. 41. Humilis Sambucus Deanwort. Grows near Highways, especially in good ground, flowreth it July, it is hot and dry. The Root boiled in Wine and drank is good against the Dropsey and purgeth watry humours.
42. Ʋitis alba Brion. Grows at the bottom of Hedges and Ditches, flowreth in May, ot and dry in the Third degree. The Root purges very well, rovokes Urine, good against Falling Sickness; very good against old Coughs and Paines in the fides being outwardly applyed. 33. Polytrichon Maidenhair. Grows in moist shadow places, the Hearb between hot and cold n degree keeps always green; good in all inflamations of the Liv∣r and Reins. 44. Lichen or Hepatica Liverwort. Grows on Stones in shaddow places, and flowers in July, is old and dry: good for inflamations of the Liver and foul spread∣ng Scabs. 45. Bursa Pastoris Shephards Purse. Cold and dry, binding stops blood and cools Inflamations, stops omens Purgation,. 46. Buphihalmum Ox-Eye. This is good against Melancholy and Madness. 47. Buxas Box Tree Leaves. Is hot, dry and binding, good against Tenams, or bitings of y Venomous Beasts, taken inwardly. 48. Calaminta Montana Mountain Calamint. Hot and dry in the third degree, provokes Urine, hastens irth, and brings the after Birth and terms. 49. Calendula Marigolds. The Leaves are hot in the second degree, loose the Belly with inigar it Cools greately. 50. Carduncellas Groundsel. Cold and Moist, it Purgeth Urine and Gravill. 51. Carduus B. Marie Lady Thistle. Far more temperat; the Cardus good against the Jaundice, ovoks Urine and breaks the stone.
52. Carduus Benedictus Cardus. Hot and dry in the second degree, a great Clenser good to the Stomack and Belly, resisteth Poyson, provokes Sweat. 53. Cataria Nepela Nep or Cat Mint. The Verme is like Calemint, only Genteeler. 54. Cauda Epuina Horse-tail. Is of a Binding, Drying Quality, very good to stop ble at the Nose or any other part, 55. Caulis Brassica Collworts. They are Cool and binding in Quality. 56. Ceniaurium Centauri. They Purge the Liver and Spleen very well, good for Wounds and green Sickness. 57. Centinodium Knot Grase. Cold in the second degree, binding stops any fluxes  Reines in Man or Woman. 58. Cerefolium Cherail. Being taken inward provokes Lust in old People. 59. Caepaea Anagalis Aquatica Brook-Lime. Hot and dry good for Scurvey and Maingy Horses. 60. Ceterachus Spleen-wort. Good for Mellancholy People, and Purgeth the Reines 61. Chamamelum Garden Chamomel. Helps Gripings in the Belly, and Purgeth the Reines. 62. Chamadvis Garmander. It opens the Liver and spleen and provokes Terms. 63. Cinara &c. Artichokes. They Provoke Lust and Purge Urine and Fluxes 64. Cicuta Hemlock. Cold in the fourth degree, good in all hot humours outwar ¦plied.
65. Consolida Regalès Delphinum Larks Heels resisteth Poysons and Venomous Beasts. 66. Contonaria Chaffweed. oyled in lye it kills Nits in the head, smoked in a Pipe it  good for old Coughs of the Lungs. 67. Cruciata Cross-wort. ry and binding good for wounds Inward or outward. 68 Crassila Orpine. is good for Bloody-fluxes being inwardly taken. 69. Crythamus Samphier. opens the Liver and Spleen, good for yellow Jaundice. 70. Cianus Blew-bottles. is good for broken Veins and inflamations. 71. Dictamnus Dittany of Creet. rings away dead Children, and hastens Birth. 72. Eruca Rocket. reatly provokes Lust being taken inwardly. 73. Euphragia Eybright. ry comfortable Herb for the dim sighted Eye. 74. Malabathrum Indean-leaf. Comforts the Stomack, helps Digestion and Apetite. 75. Foeniculum Fennes. easeth Milk in Nurses and Purgeth the Reines. 76. Fragerica Strawberry Leaves. s Inflamations in the Lungs, inwardly taken. 77. Fraxinus Aish Tree Leaves. s Rickets in Children and stoping of the Liver. 78. Galega Goats Rew. d against Pestilence, Feavers and the Falling Sickness.
79. Galion Ladys Bead Straw. Dry and Binding, good to stop Blood and Fluxes. 80 Genista Broom. It breaks the Stone, good in dropsies &c. 81 Geraium Doves Foot. Good for Collick, Breaketh the Stone. 82. Gratiola Hedg Hyssop. It Purgeth Phlegm and Dropsies very well. 83. Hedara Arborea Terrestries Ground Ivy Helps Burning and Scalding and old Ulcers &c. 84. Primula Teris Cowslips. The Leaves are good for pains in the Head and Joynts. 85. Herba Paris Herb Truelove. Good for Aposthumes and Inflamations in the privities. 86. Herba Tenti Anemone Windflower. It helps to Milk in Nurses, in Oyntment cures Leprosies. 87. Helxine Pellitory of the Wall. A cool moist cleansing Herb good for Inflamations. 88. Hippoglossum Horsetongue. It easeth hard Labour in women, and womens Purgations 89. Hipposelinum Alixander. It purgeth Urine and brings away the after birth. 90. Hysopus Hysop Helps old Coughs and Distillations upon the Lungs. 91. Hyosciamus &c. Henbane. A cold Herb, not to be taken inwardly but in cooling O 92. Hypericon St. Johns wort. Good for spitting of Blood, or to cure fresh wounds.
93. Inguinalis Aster Sharewort. It helps Inflamations in the Grine and Fundament. 94. Isatis Glastum Woad. The Side being bathed with it easeth the pains of the Spleen. 95. Lactuca Lettice. It provokes Sleep, and rest Drunkenness and Heart burnings. 96. Marvum the Herb Mastick. Hot and dry in the Third degree; good against Cramps. 97. Mellilotus Melilot. Inwardly taken it purgeth the Urine and Reins. 98. Melissa Bawm. A fine comfortable Herb for a cold Stomack. 99. Mentha Sativa Spear Mints It is very good Herb for to stop Vomiting. 100. Mentha Aquatica Water Mints. It easeth pains in the Belly and Reins. 101. Mercurialis Mercury. It purgeth watery humours and further conception. 102. Mezerion Spurg Olive. A dangerous Purge not fit for every one to meddle with. 103. Millefolium Yarrow. A healing Herb in wounds, and stops Bleeding. 104. Muscus Moss Of the Oak is useful for stoping womens Fluxes. 105. Myrtus Myrtle tree. The Leaves stop Vomiting and pissing of Blood. 106. Nasturtium Aquaticum Water Cress. It cleanseth the Blood, good for Scurvies and the Terms. 107. Nicotiana Tobacco. A famous Herb in Oyntments for cold Gouty humours.
108 Lavendula Lavinder. Very good for Swimmings, Palsies and Coldness of Brain. 109 Laureola. Laurell. It Purgeth upwards and downwards (I mean the Leaves.) 110. Lentisseus Mastick Tree. The Leaves and Bark stop Fluxes and spitting Blood. 111. Lens Palustris Ducks-meat. It cools Inflamations and hot Swellings in any Part. 112. Levisticum Lovage. It Clears the Sight, takes away Redness and Freckles. 113 Linaria Toad Flax. It openeth the Liver and spleen, and Purgeth the Reins. 114. Lingua Cericenae Harts Tongue. It stops all manner of Fluxes in Man or Woman. 115. Lupulus Hops. A Clensing Herb Purging the Liver and Spleen. 116. Malva Mallows. A fine Cooling Herb good to asswage hot Swellings. 117. Mandragora Mandrakes. Not fit for any inward use but in Cool Oyntments. 118. Marubium Whie Hore-hound. It is a very good Herb for the Lungs and Consumptions. 119. Ophioglosson Adderstongue. A very good Herb for Bruises inward or outward. 120. Origanum Organy. It helps old Coughs: in Oyntments it helps Itch. 121. Persicorum folia Peach leaves. A fine gentle Purge for Choler and Flegme &c. 122. Plantage Plantain. A very cooling Herb, good in all hot Gouts and Pains.
123. Portulaca Purslain. It cools the Blood and Liver, stops Fluxes and Terms. 124. Pulegium Pennyroyal. ovokes Urine and helps Virgins to their Purgations. 125. Quercus Oak leaves. hey stay the Whits in women and dry up old Ulcers. 126. Rosemarinum Rosemary. helps Stuffings in the Head, Palsies and Jaundice. 127. Rumex Docks. e of a cool and drying Nature; stops Fluxes. 128. Ruta Rue or Herb of Grace. esisteth Poysons, kills Worms, good against Small-pox. 129. Sabina Savin. xpells both Birth and after Birth and Terms. 130. Salvia Sage. rengthens the Senses, stops Vomiting, spitting Blood. 131. Salix Willow Leaves. ery good in Fluxes and spitting of Blood. 132 Sanicula Sanicle. very good to clens old Wounds and Ulcers. 133. Saponaria Sope Wort. erb much used in the Disease called the French-Pox. 134. Saluria Savory. y good Herb to Expel Wind in the Body. 135. Saxifraga Saxafrag. aks Wind helps the Collick and Stone. 136. Scabiosa Scabious. y clensing Herb to the brest and Lungs.
137. Serpillum Mother Time. It is a very good Herb to bring down Womens Terms. 138. Salanum Night Shade. It is a very Cooling Herb in Oyntments outwardly, 139. Soldanelle Bindweed. It Purgeth Dropsies and all watery Humours. 140. Sonchus Sowthistle. Good for Frenzies, Cools Heat of the Fundament. 141 Tamariscus Tamaris. It is good for Rickets in Children, and very Hot. 142. Thymum Time. It Clenseth the Brest, Lungs, Reins and Matrix. 143. Trenitalis Harts-Ease. They are good for Falling-Sickneses &c. 144. Verbascum, Thapsus, Barbatus Mullin. It stops Fluxes and the Hemorrhoides and Horses Cough. 145. Verbena Vervain. It is a very good remedy to cleanse after Child bearing. 146. Ʋiolaria Violet leaves. A fine harmless Herb, inwardly or outwardly cooling. 147. Vitis Binifera the Vine Tree. The Leaves are binding, cooling, stops Vomiting. 148. Vincitoxicum Swallowwort. A Poultice made of the Herb cures womens Breasts. 149. Urtica Nettles. They stopbleeding at the Nose, helps Plewrsies. 150. Umbilicus Veneris Navil Wort. A cooling Herb, helps Kiby heels, Burnings and Sca any hot Swellings outwardly. 151. Rosa Alba Rubra Damasena White, Red, Dam White good for sore Eyes. Red cheateth the heart.  purgeth.
Diascordium 106. ake of Cinamon, Cassia lignea, of each half an ounce, Scordi∣n ounce: Dittany of Creet, Tormentil, Bistort, Galbanum, n Arabick, of each half an ounce: Opium one dram and a half: el Seeds one dram and a half: Gentian half an ounce; Bole∣enick an ounce and an half; Earth of Lemons half an ounce; g Pepper, Ginger, of each two drams; clarified Honey two nd and an half; Sugar of Roses one pound; Canary Wine ten ces: make them into an Electuary according to art. It is a well composed Electuary, something appropriated to the ture of women, for it provokes the terms, hastens their labour, ps their usual sickness at the time of their lying in, I know hing better; it stops fluxes, mightily strengtheneth the heart d stomack; neither is so hot but it may safely be given to weak ople; and besides provokes sleep. It may safely be given to ung children ten grains at a time; ancient people may take a m or more: It is given as an excellent cordial in such feavers as e accompanied with want of sleep. Mithridate 106. Take of Mirrh, Saffron, Agrick, Ginger, Cinnamon, Spick∣ard, Frankincense, Treacle, Mustard Seeds, of each ten drams; e Seeds of Hartwort, Opobalsamum, or Oyl of Nutmegs by ex∣ression, Schenanth, Stoechas, Costus, Galbanum, Turpentine ong Pepper, Castorium, Juice of Hypocistis Styrax calamitis, Opopanax Indian leaf, or for want of it, Mace, of each one ounce: Cassia lignea, Poley mountain, white Pepper, Scordium, the Seeds of carrots of Creet, carpobalsamum or cubebs, Troch, cypheos, Bdelium, of each seven drams: Celtick, Spicknard, Gum Ara∣oick, Macedonian Parsly Seeds, Opium cardamoms the less, Fen∣nel Seeds, Gentian, red Rose Leaves, Dittany of Creet, of each five drams; Annis seeds, Asarabacca, Orris, Acorus, the greater Valerian, Sagapen, of each three drams: Meum Acacia, the bel∣lies of Scinks, the tops of St. John's wort, of each two drams and an half; Mallego wine so much as is sufficient to dissolve the Juices
and Gums, clarified Honey the treble weight of all, the win ¦cepted: make them into an Electuary according to art. It is good against poyson and such as have done themselves w by taking filthy Medicines; it provokes sweat, it helps conti watrings of the Stomack, ulcers in the body, consumptions, w¦ness of the limbs, rids the body of cold humours, and dise coming of cold, it remedies cold infirmities of the brain, stopping of the passage of the senses (viz. hearing, seeing, sm¦ing, &c.) by cold, it expels wind, helps the chollick, prove appetite to ones victuals, it helps ulcers in the bladder, if G say true; as also difficulty of Urine, it casts out the dead chi and helps such women as cannot conceive by reason of cold, i an admirable remedy for melancholly, and all diseases of the b coming through cold, it would fill a whole sheet of Paper to rec them all up particularly. You may take a scruple or half a d in the morning, and follow your buisiness; two drams will m you sweat, yea one dram if your body be weak, for then two dr may be dangerous because of its heat. Reader in my first sheet I told you the number of the Bones, being 3 according to the Latine Dictick, Thus Englished If you 302 Bones chance to find Few or none are left behind. The Muscles are according to the Best Anatomists 270: A for the Veins and Arteries they so disagree in their judgments th I think it needless to trouble my self or thee with setting here t number it being Little Material, unless their Names and Plac were given an account of which will be too long for this, and  design. FINIS.
