C3964 E654_12 99865155 117392
A DECLARATION Of Her gracious MAJESTY THE QVEEN of SWEDELAND; CONCERNING The King of Scots, the resigning up the Crown and Scepter; the Lawes and Govern∣ment of all Her loyall and liege People, to be inviolably kept and preserved; the Contract of Marriage; and a Re∣monstrance of Her Privy Councel, concerning the Day of Coronation. Written by Her Majesties own Hand, and published by special Authority. Febr. 16 London, Printed for George , 165. 1651.
THE DECLARATION OF THE Queen of Sweden, concerning the King of SCOTS; And Her Majesties Re∣solution touching the Contract of Mar∣riage, and resigning up the Crown. WHereas Her Royall Majesty the Queen of Sweden hath had sundry Disputes and Conferences with the Lords of Her Privy Councel, and the Estates of that Kingdom, touching the Government of all Her Majesties Loyal and Liege People; and having been much importun'd by the Lord Ver∣noon, and others of the said Councel, to resign up the Crown and Government to Prince Palatine
Charles, Her Majesty thought it meet and requisite, to declare unto all Her loving Subjects, Her graci∣ous Resolutions and Intentions; a Copy of the said Declaration followeth: A DECLARATION. E. R. WHereas many of Our Privy Councel have with preposterous rigor, and unreasonable severity, endeavored to kindle and blow up those horrid flames, the sparks of Discontent, which want not the least of pre-disposed fewell for an absolute Rebellion; and like some Cyclopick Monsters, whom nothing will serve to eat and drink, but the flesh and bloud of Our own Subjects; in whose common welfare Our interest lies, as much as some mens doth in their perturbations: who think they cannot do well but in evil times; As for Our resign∣ing up the Crown and Government to the Prince Palatine, We are cleerly of another Judgment; And truly it is the unfeigned Desire of Our Heart, to wear the Crown and Scepter no longer, then that His Glory may be Our End; and His Word Our Rule: And upon that Glorious Account We shall leave the successe of all to God, who hath many
many wayes to teach Us those Rules of true Rea∣son, and peaceable Wisdom, which is from above, tending most to Gods glory, and his Churches good; which we think Our Self so much the more hound in Conscience to attend with the most judi∣cious zeal and care, by how much we esteem the Church above the State; the glory of Christ above Our own; and the salvation of mens souls above the preservation of their Bodies and Estates. Since the publishing of this Declaration, there hath been high Disputes amongst the Nobility; and some have declared for the King of Scots, desire∣ing a contract of Marriage, the calling in of his per∣son, the day prefixed, and the general Attributes thereof to be solemnly declared, throughout the ci∣ties of Heidelburgh, Switzaon, and other places: But others of the Nobility are re∣solved to the contrary: However her Ma∣jesty hath declared, that she desires nothing more then the free Vote, and reall Consent, of her People: touching which, many of the Nobility inclines to her Majesties gracious will and pleasure; but others again seem to be of a contrary judgment.
The Copy of a Letter sent from the Hague in Holland. SIR, THe great and unparallel'd Nest of Bri∣bery is (in part) found out amongst our cunning, crafty, and subtil States, many of whom are now brought upon the stage, and will be handsomly cudgel'd and whipt for their Roguery. The Lord Wimmenon is threatned to be let bloud in the Neck∣vein, being now under inquisition; yet he seems not to be danted in the least; but very plainly told his fellow-states (at his Tryal) when they charged him, that they were as guilty as he, and that if they would not con∣fess, as he did, he both could and would prove it. A strong Argument to stave off prosecution! The number of those found out and impeached, are 26. A jolly compa∣ny; but a pack of as arrand Knaves, as ever
Europe afforded; And stands committed upon these ensuing Articles. 1 That they had held correspondency with the Enemies of the State. 2 That they had converted great sums of money to their own private use and interest. 3 That they had been partial in levying of Taxes, by favouring the Rich, and oppressing the Poor. 4 That they had most trayterously endea∣vored to subvert the very Rights and Beings of the People, by taking of great and intollerable Bribes, and continuing of heavy and burdensome Taxes, &c. These Articles of Impeachment being read, the prisoners at the Bar were required to answer to the Charge; which they did; And in defence thereof, began several eloquent speeches, protesting their innoceney in any of the said matters of Fact or Crimes laid to their charge: But upon the exami∣nation of Witnesses, and Evidence given in, it was plainly manifested, That they were guilty of those Crimes laid to their Charge; and in order thereun∣to, they were remanded back from the Bar, to the place of confinement; another Day being set apart for their further Tryall. This purge will greatly stir the ill humors of a corrupted Politick Body. And it will be very requisite, this Spring-time, to wring off
the Necks of these fine-fether'd Birds and Peacocks. The calling in of your Letters of Reprisal, gives great satisfaction to all in general, and seeds us with hopes of good successe of our Embassie. Our dayly prayer is, that we may agree with you: if not, we are unhappy. The Names of those that are to be tryed upon the precedent Articles ofHigh-Treason. The Lord Mousch. The Lord Ondenbock. The Lord Wimmenon. The Lord Van Asperen. The Lord Vervoorden. The Lord Ranswick. The Lord Arnhem. The Lord Bernt Van. The Lord Verbolt. The Lord Cappelle. The Lord Lentelo. The Lord Brouckhorst. The Lord Bercham. The Lord Lucassen. The Lord Rhynswode. The Lord Bormwal. The Lord Hardenbreck. The Lord Ploos. The Lord Loo. The Lord Ripperde. The Lord Andelo. The Lord Moleard. The Lord Verdria. The Lord Ondenbartshol. The Lord Intrina. The Lord Egbert. FINIS.
