C4488 E1045_5 R207952 99866966 119255
THE Lying-VVonders, OR RATHER THE Wonderful-Lyes, WHICH WAS LATELY Published to the World, in a Lying-Pamphlet, (called Strange and True News from Gloucester) Containing a Relation of the wonderful power of God, shewed for Inju∣stice at Fairford, by Frogs and Toads; And in the sudden death of the Clarks Daughter at Brokington in Gloucestershire. Presented to the view of the World, with some Observations in the end on another such like Pamphlet (The Lords loud Call to England) I. That the subtilty of Deluders may be discerned. II. That the simple may from their delusions be preserved. III. That the Lovers of Truth may be strengthned. IV. That all men about these Wonders may be satisfied. By ROBERT CLARK, Minister of Gods Word in Norleach. Fidei perfidia Error Veritati cedat. If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; beleeve it not: for there shall arise false Prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders, Matth. 24.23, 24. Their coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 Thess. 2.9. London, Printed in the Year, 1660.
TO THE WORSHIPFUL Andrew Barker and William Oldisworth, Esquires. Grace, Health, and Happinesse be multiplyed. SIRS, SO long as the enmity lasteth, betwixt the seed of the woman and the Serpent, so long must the Godly, (though mirrours of piety and grace) be subject to wicked mens unjust molestation, for the Just shineth, as lights in the midst of a crooked Generation; and the tongues of wicked men (the lying off-spring of the father of lyes) are un∣der such command of Satan, to act this restlesse malice against the truth and holy Religion, both in Doctrine and practise, that Godly men cannot expect to have their names free from reproa∣ches. It is no wonder then, that I find your names, (worthy and ever Honoured Friends) which (no doubt) are written in the book of life, and whom good men honour, abused upon Record, by one of Satans Emissaries, who seeketh to bring about the bad cause he hath in handling, by such bad and wicked means, as shamefull lyes. The which, the lesse ground and colour of truth they have, with the more clamor and impudency, he thrusteth forward into the world, endeavouring thereby (as if he were the first born of Satan) without all shame and fear, to darken the bright and shining light of your clean and unspotted Conversations.
That Lesson which the Devil taught his apt Scholar Machiavel (Calumniare audacter aliquid sultem haerebit) he hath perfectly learned; by confidently belying you, he hopes to fling some dirt of reproach in your faces, and that not only, because ye run not with him and his followers, but also, to make others to run wih them, to the same excesse of riot, of licentious Doctrines and practises, against the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints. What advantage Satan hath gotten in this age, as well as in other ages, by the strength of Lyes, to bring Gods Truths and our Holy Religion into suspition and disgrace, may be seen by the easie entrance that Calumnies make in the corrupt minds of men of these times, who will hardly be dispossessed of such preju∣dice. Faction and Schisme, being maintained by works of darknesse, and unconscionable deceits, the multitude are ready to drink in the venome thereof out of a Cup of Lyes, the which they greedi∣ly catch, and swallow down, though to the poysoning of their soules. It hath amazed me to consider how a lying Pamphlet will amaze the poore ignorant people of the Land, nay put men of more setled judgements at a stand; Nay did I not know the pro∣bate of it, by ocular and experimental demonstrations, I could never have brought my understanding to beleeve, that such groundlesse lyes, as this Pamphlet contains (called Strange and rue Newes from Gloucestershire) should have such a vent of be∣lief in the hearts of men as they have. Alas! That ever men in their wits, should believe such un∣truths, and yet they do; Though the wonders expressed therein be Lying-Wonders; and that, First, In their Original, as proceeding from the Father of lyes. Secondly, In their matter being bottomlesse and grosse falsi∣ties. Thirdly, In their end, which is lying and seduction: Yet the Current of them are so swift and dangerous, as greatly needeth to be stopt by some Sluce of contradiction. I therefore having some experimental knowledge of you (my
ever Honoured Friends) and the spreading infection of these lyes, which are scattered to eclipse your worthes, and to advance sepa∣ration, thought it my duty to stop the mouth of this Detractor, who with impudent face, and seared conscience, hath out-faced the world, by publishing to the world this Short and sudden Narra∣tive; being a plaine refutation of the Lyes therein contained, and a right demonstration of the truth of the matter, not only, to un∣deceive deluded poor souls, by acquainting them with the subtil∣ty of these Impostors, and to preserve others out of the snares of such Serpents; but to preserve also the preciousnesse of your names in the hearts of all good men, which the Relator setteth up as Buts to shoot his lying Arrows against, thinking thereby to wound your unblemished Reputations; that those honoured names of yours, which like a precious Oyntment doth not only persume your own houses, nay your Town of Fairford, but sendeth forth a sweet savor to all that know you, or ever heard of you, might not be (like the precious Oyntment of the Apothecary) corrupted with any dead Flies of slanderous, and lying reports. And if I may be thought of you to presume too much herein, I beg both your pardons, because this action proceedeth meerly from the passion of love; And all such actions (according to the Lawyers position) are not lyable to Law, at least pardonable in respects. Pardon therefore I humbly beseech you, this action of mine, which proceedeth from the love I owe to God, whose Glory I ought to advance; To the Church in general, of which I am a Member; to my Mother Church of England, of which I am a du∣tiful Son, to your Town of Fairford, as having spent some time in the execution of my Ministerial Office therein; to your selves and relations, whose Christian stedfast walking through these un∣setled times, I have with much comfort and benefit been an ob∣server, whose stedfast, pure, and holy conversation in these delu∣ding times, have not only strengthned your own assurances for the hope of happinesse, but have been props to them that live under you, dwell by you, and converse with you, to keep them from Apostacy, and Spurs to further their Christian race, provoking them by your pious examples, to presse the more towards the same glorious marke.
comb, by the holding up of the Pistol at her, and the uncivill Lan∣guage given her (the Truth of which I doubt of, Page 18. unlesse it was provoked by her uncivill Language) received such Terror, as brought upon her, such a sore distemper, and brought her nigh unto Death: but it was rather, the strange Newes of the Kings returne, by a Vote from Parliament, against whom, and his loyall Subjects and Ministers, the said Mr. Helme had highly acted; which made both their hearts sicke, and suddenly to remove from Winch∣comb (contrary to his often Engagement in his Pulpit, to his selected people, to live and die with them, notwithstanding the highest suf∣ferings) and to act the part now of a loyall subject, upon some other Theater, as it is not the first time he hath done it. As true likewise, Page 17. as those Souldiers (some whereof were emi∣nent Gentlemen of the County) who did in pursuance of their order from the Commissioners, upon that change of Government, endea∣vour to disarme the Fanatickes) did rudely ransacke any for Armes, or act any way so barbarously as to be stiled, The imbittered perse∣cutors in the County; when, their civill demeanours to all places, and persons, were such as procured no other returnes but flouts and Jeeres for their civilities, when they were just reproofes of the o∣thers vile carriages, not long before when the power was in their hands; The Rudenesse of whom, Two Famous Families in our Coun∣ty of Glocester have cause to remember, as Sir Henry Fredericke Thinne, and his Lady, who were plundered not onely in the grounds and stables of their, and other mens Horses, but in their closets of their sweet-meats, so that it is no marvell that their Prophets have such sweet Tongues; and Mr. John How, and his Honourable La∣dy, whose very persons endured a tedious restraint, beside; the losse of all his Horses, and imprisonment of his servants, and losse of his Estate too, had not our Soveraigne Lord the King come in for his Freedome. As true, Page 2. as our former dayes under the usurped Government, were times of Reformation, Page 1. and that some in Oxford were cut off for reading the Booke of Common-prayer, and that the Societies from whence those that are imprisoned at Redding, Page 25. for Refusing the Oaths of Supremacy and Alleagiance, are the more chearfull and the more increased. As true, Page 43. as the death of twenty or thirty Doggs at Graves-end
on the Kings Proclamation day, was a Judgement of God for pro∣claiming the King. Lastly, As true as Not Loyall Subjects, and Orthodox Mini∣sters, but such as professe disloyaltie to Soveraignty, Page 4. and seperation from the Church of England, be the onely people of God. For my own part, I am glad, That the Seducer hath no other foundation left him then lying wonders to build their Babel of Con∣fusion on, and that the Towne of Fairford have no more to render them odious to the world then A PECKE full of Lies. Let the Seducer Boast of the hand of God apparently gone out for them, and their wayes, Not an established Christian, that have read and studied the providences of God in these changes of Times, and Affaires, but may see the Hand of God apparently gone out a∣gainst all wayes of Separation; Their Counsells dissipated, their De∣signes Blasted, and those persons that have acted high against order, and Government in Church, and State, Psal. 9.16. snared in the workes of their owne hands; so that, notwithstanding the Crying up of the hand of God, by way of execution of Judgement in their new coy∣ned Lyes, God is certainly knowne in the Judgement that he hath executed; so that notwithstanding, that passage in the Letter that was written of that Mr. Fletchers abuse by J.D. who was no Mini∣ster at Badgington, but Cutler at Glocester, Page 19. (That Judgement is begun at the house of God) we will leave it to be interpreted by the Tongue of Magistracy, whose eye looketh over them, and us, who no doubt will tell us in some short Time, what will be expected of them, that neither owne, or obey the Gospel of our Lord Je∣sus Christ. Surely, God hath mingled a perverse spirit in the middest of us, Page 19. we have been sold for nought, and they that have ruled over us, have oppressed us very sore: The Bowels of our God are at this Time moved, his repentings are kindled together; The Salvation of Is∣rael is come (we hope) out of Sion; For God hath so turned the Captivity of his poore afflicted Church, that for the suddennesse and strangenesse thereof wee become like unto men that dreame; Psal. 126.2. fil∣ling our Mouthes with laughter, and our tongue with Singing: Psal. 44.4. So that the Lord our King hath commanded deliverances for us his people.
Now we know that the Kingdome is the Lords, and that he is Governour among the Nations: Now we know that the Lord saveth his Anoynted, having heard him from his Holy Heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand. Surely Salvation is nigh unto us his people, that glory may again dwell in our Land. Let the house of Israel (the Common-wealth) trust in the Lord, and blesse the Lord, who is our Help and our Shield. Let the house of Aaron (the Governours of the Common∣wealth) trust in the Lord, and blesse the Lord, who is their Help and their Shield. Let the house of Levi (the Ministers of the Lord) trust in the Lord, and blesse the Lord, who is their Help and their Shield. Let all them that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, and blesse the Lord, who is their Help and Shield. The Lord make all Deluders to mark that doom which St. Peter tells them, 2 Pet. 2.1. Who for bringing in privily damnable He∣resies, (without repentance) will bring upon themselves swift de∣struction. The Lord open the eyes of all such as are deluded, or subject to de∣lusion, that they may mark them which cause divisions and offen∣ces, contrary to the Doctrine which they have received, and to avoid them, Rom. 16.17. The Lord so unite the hearts of His Majesties Loyal Subjects, that differ not so much in Doctrine as in Discipline, that by their unseasonable Differences, they give not advantage to Deluders, who daily wait for it, threatning the better use of it then hath been made of former advantages, who will then appear to the Kings Loyal Sub∣jects, and the true sons of the Church of England, worse then the Frogs of Fairford, that (as they fained them) troubled only the house of the Lords of the Town, and the Justice adjacent, like the Frogs of Aegypt, that covered the Land sparing not the Kings chamber: worse then those swarms of Flies, that covered (as they fained them) (though only seen in the Orchard) the Garden of the Lords of the Town, but like the swarms of Flies wherewith the Aegyptians were
plagued, which like the unmerciful Tyrants which God threatned to wicked men, night nor day shall give any rest. But the Lord we hope who hath a mighty arm, a strong hand, and high right hand, which hath brought such mighty things to passe, in giving great deliverance to our King, by stilling of the tumults of the people, and preserving him from the violence of those assemblies of wicked men, and causing the captivity of his Loyal Subjects to re∣turn, will so order the affairs of this Nation by his providence for good, that the enemy (that is now enraged through Gods crosse dis∣pensations to them, breathing out such notorious lyes (as thick mists) to darken the way of his providence over his Church and People) may no more magnifie himselfe, but under the protection of the All∣mighty, (who is our Rock, our Shield, and a wall of fire about his Church) and under the shadow of our Most Gracious Soveraign (who under God is the breath of our Nostrils, the Light of his poor Israel, the Repairer of our breaches, the Restorer of our decayed pathes, nay Pater patriae, The Father of our Country) may live happily. Into the hands of the which Allmighty God, the King of Kings, who have the hearts of all men, and the events of all things under his Rule and Governance, and into the hands of our most Gracious Soveraign, with those Renowned Worthies in Parliament, who are but Gods instru∣ments for the effecting of his designs; I, with all the Lords People, do commend this poor dispised Church, and distracted State, waiting in hope for that time, when through Gods providence, and their pru∣dence the Church of England, which through lyes, errors, and divisi∣ons, now seemeth to be disfigured like the Daughter of Antichrist; shall through an established Government shine like the Spouse of Christ; and this Common-wealth of England, with all other of His Majesties Kingdomes and Dominions, which have long lain among the Pots, be brought forth at last with silver Wings, and be made the glory of all Lands, which is the desire, as well as the hope of him who wisheth well, not only to the peace of our Jerusalem, both Church and State, but to thy Soul.
The Lord establish thee according to his Gospel, and keep thee from falling, and present thee faultlesse before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy. This is the desire of Thy Friend in the service of thy Faith, R. C.
THE LYING WONDERS, Or rather THE WONDERFULL LIES of Glocester-shire discovered. WHere Christ and his Gospel cannot prevaile, there the Devill, being armed with power, and efficacie of Delusion, commeth and prevaileth; the Soule of man, being such a Tenure, as cannot want an Oc∣cupier. No sooner Gods Spirit departed from Saul, but presently the evill spirit commeth upon him; so no sooner, men cast out of their hearts the love of the truth, but the beliefe of lyes will enter, and take possession; if they once depart from the Faith, 1 Tim. 4.1. they will presently give heed to Seducing Spirits, 1 Tim. 4.1. Our present Age is a Theater, whereon (with some) Lyes are acted more then Truth; which is a signe, they Love Lyes more then Truth, nay preferre lyes before it, who employ their minds to devise Lyes, their tongues to speake Lyes, and their hands (by writing) to spread them, as if they were the very children of the Devill, given up to the Father of Lyes. The Devill for craft, and cunning, is called the Serpent, the old Serpent, who deceiveth the whole world, and his subtilty he sheweth, by translating himselfe, though he be a Devill of Dark∣nesse, into an Angel of Light: and in the shape of a Serpent he beguiled Eve. What a world of men have learned this Art, from their Fa∣ther the Devill? who are as cunning growne, as the Devill him∣selfe to deceive, and may as well be called Serpents, as the De∣vill;
and to this end (Protheus and Camelion-like) they can shift themselves into any shape; where Lyons skins will not serve, they can use the Foxes Taile: We know that the best Drugs have their Adulterates; The most current coines their clips: Hypocrites can easily cloake, their worst intentions, with the best religion; and therefore, no wonder it is to see them, put on the rare, and excellent Jewel of Grace, to Grace themselves with∣all; that under the semblance of pietie, they may bring about their horrid designes. Oh the Hypocrisie of this age! The Mystery of iniquity doth busily worke amongst us; The Impostor bestirres himselfe, be∣ing with his Father the Devill, come downe with great wrath, knowing that he hath but a short time, Rev. 12.12. What a Great Mist of darknesse, of blacke darknesse, hath he raised, and doth dayly raise to obscure the bright Sun of grace? he knoweth, he cannot now by open force destroy the Church, and therefore striveth to cloud the beautie of the Church, from the eyes of the world, by damnable and hellish untruths; That thereby he may beguile the simple, into the wayes of Seperation, from the Church of England; that thereby they may be led into errour, and held therein at his pleasure. Oh what senslesse, bottomlesse, and Grosse Lyes, are raised by Sectaries, to keepe men from our publicke Assemblyes! and to allure them, to joyne with them, in their private Conventicles! and what a strange, and incredible beliefe of them, is there en∣tertained in the world! How this English Nation, who have ever professed themselves, to be the Defenders of the Truth, is at this time deceived with a Cup of error; we may plainly see, by the entertainment, that One Lying Pamphlet, hath at this time, in the ears and hearts of men that live at a distance, which is lately thrust forth in Print by some deluder, stiled, (Strange and True Newes from Glocester.) The which Pamphlet (Christian Rea∣der) I doe here cry downe; assuring thee, That it is but the in∣vention of some vile deluder, who would wound thy Christian Faith, under pretext of Christian Faith; and under a profession of Friendship, prove thy Great Adversary. We all know, that open Mischiefe, is easier to be avoyded, and prepared for, then that which is more secret, and undiscerna∣ble;
and the death of the Soule, is a worser death then the death of the bodie: Therefore (as a True Minister of the Gospel, that wisheth well to the soules of all men) have I set up This my Light, to keepe men out of those secret pits, which are digged, and those indiscernable snares, that are layd for their soules; Which though I know, will be most unwelcome to the Sepera∣tists, being men of giddy spirits, and impotent prejudices, against any thing settled, either by civill, or Ecclesiasticall Constitutions, and Customes in Church and State, to whom I shall be as Mi∣chaiah to Ahab; Yet, I hope, it will find Acceptance with thee, and all such as professe themselves to be Lovers of Truth, and haters of Lyes, and love and desire the prosperity of this our Sion, both Church and State. And if you please to follow my Light, it will direct Thee (Reader) unto; 1. The Notorious Lyes, that are in the Inscription of the Pamphlet. 2. The Monstrous False Newes enclosed. 3. The Grosse Hypocrisie of the Author in the Conclu∣sion. First, Concerning the Inscription. The Title of the Pamphlet, is this; [Strange and True Newes from Glocester]; Tis strange, but not true, and it would have been strange Newes indeed, had it been true. From Glocester] I verily beleeve, the Author doth highly A∣buse that Famous City, by making it the fountaine of those lyes; and this is not the first time that that City hath been thus abused by such Deluders: who for the more generall, and speedier vent of their delusions, and for the more generall, and easier beliefe of them, maketh their lyes to take rise from thence; But I dare acquite Glocester of the coyning of these Lyes; There be severall Mints out of Glocester, as Cicister, Fairford, Stow, Burton on the water, Kempford, and Norleach, where are men as famous, for the promoting of such coyne, as at Glocester; and indeed the very impression on the coyne (though the Author concealeth his Name) giveth to many hereabouts, a manifest Guesse, who was the coyner thereof.
But what is the Newes? 1. A perfect Relation, of the wonderfull and miraculous power of God, shewed for Injustice at Fairford, by an Innumera∣ble Company of Froggs and Toads. 2. A Great and Terrible Earth-quake, the Running of Blood, and Hail-stones of a pound and an halfe weight in France. 3. The wonderfull Example of Gods Justice, in the sudden death of the Clarks Daughter of Brokington, in Glocester-shire. Observe the Workings of this Serpent, which is after the working of Sathan, with all power, and signes, and Lying Won∣ders, 2 Thes. 2.9. The relation of which he calleth a perfect Relation; though every string in his Relation be out of Tune, he would not have his musicke to sound amisse, which discovereth the Author to be of the seed of a Serpent Serpentina Soboles.: whose wayes of un∣dermining of Gods Church, is as the way of a Serpent on a Rocke unknowable, Pro. 30.19. When they cannot suppresse it by force and crueltie, they will undermine it if they can, by craft and lyes: Though the Relation be altogether counterfeit coyne, yet it must passe for currant. And that it may so, The Author (as a chiefe Emissary of Sa∣than) courts the worlds Beliefe of it, with a knowne impudent Lye; calling the Relation, not only a perfect Relation, but telling us, That the Relation is entred according to Order; The which Or∣der, he would have us beleeve, to be from the present power at Westminster, when it is from the Court of Hell; but no questi∣on, the printing of these lyes, were like his daily walking, Dis∣orderly; so that if the Inscription stumble, and fall from Truth, what encouragement have we to thinke, that the Newes enclo∣sed, will stand upright? I confesse, for the French Newes, I had rather beleeve, then The Author is lame. Travell, to find out the certaintie of it: but for our Glocester∣shire Newes, I have weighed in a Ballance, by a strict inquirie, and find them (notwithstanding this Faire Colour, the Author hath drawne over it, in calling a perfect Relation) Grosse Lyes; The which (let the Author be what he will) must needs proceed from a man of an evill Conscience, though he hath not such an impudent Face to prefix his name to it.
Secondly; Concerning the Monstrous false Newes inclosed. THat Great and heavie Judgements of God have attended those that have reviled, and injured Gods chosen people (as the Author beginneth his Newes) Those Scriptures alledged by him, 2 Kings 2.23, 24. & Exod. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. & 14 Chapters, are sufficient Testimonies. But who the Author meaneth, by These his chosen people; and how the Froggs and Toads at Fairford, and the death of the Maid at Brokington, may be said to be Gods Judgements on the Revilers of those his chosen people, craveth our inquirie. No question, by [These his chosen people] the Author mean∣eth the Company of Christians (as if all the rest of the Towne were Heathens) which met together at Fairford on the Lords Day in private, in opposition to the publicke worship of God; and those that met at Brokington, on the third of June, where was, those Famous Gifted Brethren, Brother Collet, and Brother Collins; and those that met in the Market-place at Stow, to heare him whom the Author stiled, John Belcher (as if he be not wor∣thy to be one of the Brotherhood, as well as the other, and is not as precious, an humble, and tender-hearted man, as Brother Collet.) But how these can be thought to be the only Chosen people of God, I leave to any Rationall man, and true Christian to Consider of; being Men of Turbulent Spirits, preferring their own houses before the Temple; Meetings in the Market-places, before our publicke Meetings in our Churches; The Jewish Sabbath, before the Christian; being enemies to all Ordained Ministers, crying up themselves to be the only Propagators of the Gospel, who under the name of Truth, have brought in damnable heresies, and by good words, and faire speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple: Surely, if these be the only chosen people of God, God hath precious children indeed. And as for the Armie of Froggs and Toads, which the Infor∣mer saith, he saw at Fairford, and the sudden death of the Clarks Daughter when they met at Brokington; how they can be thought to be examples of Gods Judgements, on those the Informer nominateth, putteth me to a stand.
Indeed, The Author speaking of his Relation, which he pub∣lished, saith, that it is sufficient to reclaim any rational man whatsoever: Had the Relation been (as he calleth it) a perfect Relation, he might have had the better hopes of it; but that Lyes should reclaime any rational man whatsoever, I must beg the Au∣thors pardon, not to believe: And the fulnesse of both which stories. I come now to present to the eyes of all rational men to consider of. The true Accompt whereof, is as follow∣eth. I. Concerning the Authors Relation about the Frogs and Toads, which he reporteth to have seen at Fairford. THe Author in the beginning of his Relation telleth the world of a company of Christians met together, (as if there were no Christians in the Town but them) their businesse being to serve God, according to their present apprehensions, (what zealous worshippers of God be these, who having no rule for their wor∣ship, but their present apprehensions, must needs differ therein as their apprehensions differ) at the place before named, that is, I conceive as the Inscription telleth us, at Fairford, but whither the Church or House was their meeting-place, the Informer is silent, but sure it must be at the house of some knowing eminent Christi∣an, because the Informer saith there was none but a company of Christians met together: Not the Church, the house of prayer (where is the presence of the blessed Trinity, God in his Son, by his Spirit, The presence of Gods Angels, the presence of his Minister, and of the greater number of people assembled to enjoy his Ordinances, whose Ranks being likened to Beds of Spices, which is an Holy Place, set apart for Holy uses, wherein the pow∣er and glory of an holy God is to be seen and felt) that is an abo∣mination to those Christians. The which Meeting being collected (not by the noise of Bells but of some Tinckling Cymbals) was disturbed by the rude mul∣titude, who were (as I am informed) little children, whose usage must needs be cruel, uncivil, and dangerous; so dangerous it see∣meth
to be, that nothing but a Justice of the Peace could appease the wrath and fury of those children, to whom some zealous per∣sons repaired (whose Residence was nigh) for his Assistance. But the Justice (saith he) being encouraged thereunto by the Lord of the Town (differing from them in Judgement) was so far from assisting them, as that he rather spake hardly unto them by way of threatning. Observe here the tender Consciences of these zealous persons; who though they are over-grown with an Anti-Magistraticall Jaundice, having envious and implacable eyes against Magistracy, and are men of such high minds and heady passions, giddy spirits, and popular principles, that they are impatient of any thing Au∣thoritative, yet will storm if the Justice deny to them his Assi∣stance. But who is this Justice that dare be so bold as to discounte∣nance these Zealots? and who is that Lord of a Town, that will not vail Bonnet to these Pleberans? Though they are both famously known in their County, and else-where, yet they are not here named, and as I conceive out of malice, That those (Justa parentaliae) praises which all that know them, give (as most due) to their accomplished worth, might not give check to their Demonial Malice, and unjust Calumniati∣ons. As for the Justice of Peace; He is very well known to be a lover of Justice, and of tender Conscience, in the execution of his Office, in the distribution of Justice: And as concerning this particular (his denying of Justice to these Zealots who made Application to him) I know, as he did not approve of their irre∣gular meetings, being done in opposition to our publick Assem∣blies, so neither did he of the rudenesse of the children, having no Law to countenance them; Whose care for the administration of Justice was proportionable to the Offenders, and offence, and as for his speaking hardly to them, I dare behold to say, that he rather hardly spake to them that way. As for the Lord of the Town, though his obedience to the word of God, Loyalty to Soveraign power, and love to his Country, would never admit him to countenance such Meetings, yet I know such is his zeal to Justice, and his inclination to peace, that
he will neither promote disturbances, or by any encouragement give any stop to the execution of Justice, knowing that Justice will in its due time find them out. And this I am bold to certifie the world thereof, being a man very well instructed in the knowledge of those Worthy Gentlemen, as having spent since these late Revolutions of times, some time in the execution of my Ministerial Office, in that Town of Fair∣ford; so that the sting of those Calumniations that is thrust in their Reputations, can never wound them, who have in their Country ever lived, live, and no doubt so long as God permits life, will live in their deserved Reputations, for their Loyalty to their So∣veraign, zeal to Justice and goodnesse: Silly therefore is the charge which this Phanatick have drawn up against these Worthy Gentlemen (which though it be no wonder in him, or any other of his Tribe) yet I will assure thee (Reader) is one of his grosse lyes. The other is worse concerning the Progs and Toads, which he calleth the judgement of God shewed on unrighteousnesse and ungodlinesse. Though there might have been a great number of small Frogs and Toads lie upon the ground, and yet no wonder to see them, or judgement on the Town by reason of them, they ha∣ving not a personal but equivocal Generation, as fallen in Rain from the Clouds, being before drawn up in Attomes, and genera∣ted by the heat of the Sun, and so no miracle, being a work not sur∣passing the whole power of created nature; Miraculum proprie quod fit preter ordi∣nem totius na∣turae. Aquin: Yet there was no such Spectacle: The Informer might see at that time of year Frogs and Toads enough, by reason of so many Ponds, Ditches, and Moo∣rish places as be about Fairford, and need not stand in any by∣place to behold them; but not such well Disciplined Frogs and Toads, as can march in Rank and File, turn to the right, or left hand, keep Court of Guards (as the Informer telleth us they did) about the house of the Lords of the Town, and the house and per∣son of the said Justice, and make at last a sudden retreat, that is, from the house of the said Justice; (They may be till this time upon duty, about and in the house of the Lords of the Town for any satisfaction that the Informer giveth us, concerning their quit∣ting his house.)
Indeed for the great Army of Frogs and Toads, for their order∣ly march, for their strict observance of duty, for the reproving of the said Justice by his Maid-servant, for the impression that her expression left on her Master, for the vanishing of the said Frogs and Toads upon his countenancing those Zealots, and discoura∣ging and punishing the rude multitude; The world is extreamly beholding to the Authors invention, being very glad that neither he or his brethren, have any other materials left them then lyes to build their Babel. Let this Relation travel whither it may, as it may travel farre, having a Pamphlet for its passe, yet it carrieth enough with it, as doth give all true Christian hearts occasion to suspect it, and needed not be followed by the Hue and Cry of a loud, and general voice of contradiction. But though the Relator faineth an Army of Frogs, which had received a Commission from the Allmighty to plunder the houses of the Lord of the Town, and the said Justice, or to bring them away Prisoners upon refusing of doing Justice upon the multitude that disturbed those Fanaticks at Fairford; Yet I shall without hypocrisie certifie the world. That the Town of Fairford (though it hath been freed from the Aegyptian plague of Frogs, yet it hath not been freed from the general plague of England) Some spirits came often there in the likenesse of Frogs. See in Rev: 16.13. what St. John saw, when the sixth Angel powred out his Vial on the great River Euphrates, it was three unclean spirits like Frogs, came out of the mouth of the Dragon, out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. Where observe the principal Agents are the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet: By the Dragon is meant Satan himself the father of lyes; By the Beast, Antichrist with his whole body; By the false Prophet, any false Teachers belonging to the Kingdome of Antichrist: The three unclean spirits that were belched out of their mouths were First, The spirit of pride which came out of the mouth of the Devil, the Dragon. Secondly, The spirit of blasphemy, which came out of Anti∣christ, the Beast. Thirdly, The spirit of a lye, which came out of false Tea∣chers, which belongeth to the false Prophets.
The which unclean spirits are said to be like unto Frogs; Now what St. John saw come out of the mouth of the false Prophets, we may ordinarily at Fairford, as well as in other places of the Coun∣ty, see also; Namely the spirits of lyes, and that in the likeness of Frogs, the which unclean spirits resembleth Frogs in these parti∣culars. First, Ranae ex limo natae. Frogs have their beginning and life out of filthy Ponds, and Pools, and do most delight in filthy Ponds and Pools, whence they had their beginning and life; So doth these unclean spirits which are like Frogs, fetch their life and beginning from the Ponds and Pools of filthy errors, and stinking abominations of doctrine, and do continually delight in those most filthy Ponds, and Pools of corrupt doctrine, out of which they fetch their be∣ginning and life. Secondly, Called by the Poet, Ranae Clamosae. Frogs doth importunately croak, and make a noise about the Ponds, and moorish places where they are, being cal∣led therefore Ranae, from the Hebrew word,  which is vehemen∣ter exclamare; So doth these unclean spirits (like Frogs) croak in those places where they frequent, by sounding out their errors and heresies, with importunate clamors, haunting the poor simple peo∣ple with loud and incessant importunity. Thirdly, Limoso{que} novae saliant in Gur∣gite Ranae. Ovid. Frogs do hop and skip from place to place; And there∣fore a Frog is called in Saxon, Hopper ab Huppen, saltare, to leap or skip, because he doth hop and skip about with his four feet; So do these unclean spirits skip and hop about the Countrey, They are now here, now there, to day in this place, to morrow in another; Nay before their Kingdom shall be abolished, they will hop far to propagate. Fourthly, Rana anima amphibium coaxans. Varro. Frogs are both for water and land; Varro so describes a Frog to us to be an animal which croaketh on the water, as well as on the land; so do these unclean spirits (being for water as well as land) they live and croak in both places; when their Proselites have any need of washing of their foul bodies, then ye hear them croak on the waters; when they are willing to eat their broken bread, then they croak on the Land. Fifthly, Ranae apibus mimicae. Plin: Frogs are great enemies to the labouring Bees that gathereth Honey; so are these impure spirits like Frogs, sore ene∣mies both to the true Preachers of the Gospel, and established
Christians, the true lovers of the Gospel, which like painful Bees yeeldeth and gathereth the Honey of the truth, and by medita∣tion and conferences franieth their Honey-Combes within their Hives. Sixthly, Ranae ictus apum non senti∣unt. Plin. Frogs have such skins as they feel not the stinging of Bees; no more do these impure spirits, so singular they are in their own opinions, and so hardned in their Resolutions, that the sharpest sting of reproof, from those labouring Bees (Gods Mini∣sters) cannot make them sensible of their errors. Seventhly, Ranae linguae mirus in Magi∣cis usus. Plin. The Inchanters and Witches maketh great use of the tongue of a Frog; so these impure spirits which are belched out of the mouth, like the tongues of Frogs, are of wonderful use for the inchanting of the hearts of simple people, for these being the Prophets that have sweet tongues, mentioned Jer. 23.34. Who having taught their tongues to speak lyes, with sweet words and fair speeches, deceiveth the hearts of the simple; So that knowing the Inchanters, we need not ask our simple people, as St. Paul did the Galatians, O ye foolish Galatians! who hath bewitched you from knowing the truth? Eightly, The use of Frogs is that they may be instruments which God useth sometimes for the punishment of wicked men: so those Frogs which did cover the Land of Aegypt, were sent to take revenge on the sins of the Aegyptians; these impute spi∣rits which resembleth Frogs, is a greater punishment to the peo∣ple of England, in that they have the souls of people, which God permitteth in his Church, not only for the good of his Church (they being like the Nations which God left to prove Israel, Judg. 3.1.) but for the just punishment of wicked men, who will not obey and stick to the truth, 2 Thess. 2.11. Ninthly, The plague of Frogs, was the next punishment upon the Aegyptians, to their waters which were turned into blood; so these impure spirits, which at this time, like that Aegyptian plague of Frogs covereth the Land, followed our bloody waters of afflicti∣on; No sooner were our waters turned into blood, but these im∣pure spirits like Frogs sprang up, and filled the Land, nay we find them in our streets, in our market-place, in our very houses. These (not such Frogs as the Relator speaketh of) are often seen at Fairford, The which impure spirits in the likenesse of
Frogs, are often to be seen hopping and skipping about their streets, nay they are known to creep into their houses, often fil∣ling the same, but not the houses of the Lord of the Town, or of; the Justice adjacent (as the Relator expresseth) their housen are better disciplined then to be harbor for such filthy vermine; but the housen of some men of giddy and unstable brains, whom these Inchanters have bewitched with their sweet tongues, whose houses they make as filthy Ponds and Pools of stinking errors, and vile abominations of doctrine, wherein they do most delight, and where they do importunately croak, whose croaking noise did in∣vite the children of the Town to enter into one house (who be∣came like a stone cast into a Ditch where multitude of Frogs are) making them for that time cease their croakings, The which judg∣ment the Lord did not send upon Fairford for injustice, as the Relator saith, but for their not receiving the love of the truth: Mark that place, 2 Thess. 2.11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should beleeve a lye: For this cause, what is that? Mark the precedent words, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. And this is not a peculiar judgement on Fairford alone: We have such filthy Ponds and Pools of corrupt Doctrine at Norleach, wherein are often to be heard the croakings of such Frogs, but they are not so troublesome to the ears of many at Norleach, as they are at Stow, Burton on the water, and other places adjacent. But indeed not a rational man but may perceive this judgment to be a general judgement; Men have so fallen away from truth, that they are given up to strong delusions, to believe lyes; So that these impure spirits in the likeness of Frogs, may be seen hop∣ping, and heard croaking, in most places of the Land. But my hope is; That as the plague of Frogs on the Aegypti∣ans was not an everlasting plague, but removed by the prayer of Moses, Exod. 8.12. So neither this punishment of Frogs on England, but may in time be removed from the Nation, by the endeavours and prayers of sound Christians. Prayer which is Vis Deo grata, Tertul: is of great efficacy with God, for the removal of this judgement, and therefore let all Christi∣ans pray.
The voyce of the Gospel is likewise of great force to stop the mouths of these kind of Frogs, though never so clamarous: Veritas menda∣cio longè forti∣or. Mini∣sters must now (if ever) appear for the truths of God, and be able to convince the Gain-sayer, and the people must labor to be well grounded in the Scripture, which is profitable for doctrine and re∣proof; 2 Tim. 3.16. And both Ministers and People must be valiant for the truth, and contend earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints. The Law of the Land is of no small force to stop the hoppings from place to place, to silence the croakings of these Frogs; Let but Magistrates, which for their Office, in Scripture are called masters of restraint, but shew their zeal for God in the execution of Justice on such troublers of Israel, and we shall find them soon to vanish. The Informer faineth the vanishing of those Frogs and Toads (which he fained likewise to be at Fairford) to be upon the Justice of the Peace his countenancing the Zealots, and discountenancing and punishing the Disturbers. If our Magistrates would but countenance those that are Lovers of peace and truth, and discountenance and punish those that are the Disturbers of peace and truth; These hopping Frogs would quickly stop their journeys, and these croaking Frogs soon change their notes. That the eyes of the Inhabitants of Fairford, and all other pla∣ces (which are visited with these impure spirits, which cometh to them in the likeness of Frogs) may behold no more such horrid Spectacles, that their ears may be no more afflicted with their odious croakings, that their conversations may not be disturbed with their hoppings and crawlings. FIAT JƲSTITIA. II. Concerning the Authors Relation about the death of the Clarks daughter at Brokington. COncerning the Meeting at Brokington; I find by inquiry, that at the time and place expressed there was such a meet∣ing, when and where was B. Collet, and B. Collins, and some from
Stow, and other places, but John Belcher I find by the Authors relation was not there; and that precious humble tender-hearted man (Brother Collet) was in exercise, and that Sarah the daughter of Thomas Woodward, Clark of Senington, about 17 years of age was there with her mother, and that the Maid did dye there suddenly, is a truth which cannot be denyed. But that the hand of the Lord of Hosts went out against that Daughter for her opposing, and reviling them, and uttering hard speeches against them, their meetings and wayes, is as far from truth, as these troublers of Israel are from peace. For both the Daughter and the Mother to whom the Relator attributeth opposition, and reviling, are known to be so far guilt∣lesse of it, as that they are great Lovers of these persons, great approvers of their meetings and wayes; Nay the Pa∣rish Clark himselfe, the Maids Father (as I am informed) is one of their Followers, who performeth his Office at Church, and when he cometh Home, performeth his Devotion with them. And as for the Demeanor of the Daughter at the present exer∣cise, she was observed to behave her self with great attention, and devotion, and solemn silence, not a word she uttered, nor gesture expressed she, as could plead her guilty, either of any dislike in her selfe, or any disturbance of the Exercise; so that I wonder at the grosse impudency of the Informer, that dare excommunicate her out of the number of those chosen Ones, and publish her to the world as a Reviler of those chosen people of God. Now for the manner of her death, it was thus; The Clarks Daughter having some children to look unto, which were without Doors, was bidden by the wife of one Thomas Timbrill, to go forth to look to the children, she went forth and fetched them and came in, and gave a sudden screek, and fell down dead be∣fore them all, whose Corpse after some rubbing and chafing (there being no appearance of life) was carried into the passage, at what time (as it is related) came that Esquire Mr. Heiden, that led that party of the Troop, to disturb their meetings; and the death of the Maid having dissolved them, he without any injury done them, forbad only their disorderly meetings for the time to come, and departed.
This I find to be the truth, and to this I have the attestation of some of those neighbours who were present, and of many others, who (since the publishing of the death of this Maid as a wonder∣ful example of Gods Justice) by them have of the truth hereof been informed. For my part, I dare not say that she was in her sudden death, made any example at all of Gods Justice, no otherwise then as death is the wages of sin; but an example of the frail, and brittle condition of man, whose breath is in his nostrils, which may sud∣denly vanish; and therefore Brother Collins answered well, when Mr. Heiden charged them with the death of the Maid, We have not (said he) killed her, but the Lord hath done it, in whose hands is your breath and ours; wherein Brother Collins doth seem to dif∣fer much from the Relators censure, who maketh her to us, not an example of Gods Justice, but a Spectacle of mortality, to usher us in the School of death, that we may allwayes be watchfull in an holy preparation for our change. As for those that doth look upon her death as an example of Gods Justice on the Maid; I think them to be of the safer judg∣ment, that conclude her to be an example of Gods Justice, for frequenting the Meetings of such Impostors, who under the co∣lour of spreading the Gospel, corrupt the pure Doctrine of the Gospel by their vile errors, and base opinions, and instead of spreading the light, fight against it, by their despisings of the Mi∣nisters of the Gospel, the holy Ordinances of Christ, and of all those that desireth to walk in the light thereof; rather then an ex∣ample of Gods Justice for revilings and hard speeches against them, who was a zealous follower of them, and out of whose mouth was heard no such reproofs. And as for that wise and zealous Oration of the Clark her Fa∣ther, who after that time spake (as he did before) saying, These are the People of God, were the Clark so gifted a Brother as Brother Collins, as precious humble tender-hearted man as Brother Collet, as great an Oracle as John Belcher, it would as little evidence his Daughters death to be an example of Gods Justice, as canonize them for the people of God.
And as for their much peace, and freedome from Molestations in their Meetings to heare John Belcher in Stow, in the Market∣place, and other places, which they have enjoyed (as the Infor∣mer saith) since this remarkable hand of God; I beleeve that neither John Belcher, nor that gifted man B: Collins, nor that precious humble tender-hearted man B: Collet, will attribute it (though the Informer doth) as an effect which followed upon the Death of the Clarkes daughter. But being as Full of State-pollicy, as they are of spirituall Revelations, I know they cannot but conclude their peace and and freedome, to proceed either from the wisdome of the State, forbidding all publicke disturbances, and the Loyalty of peace∣able Subjects, who in their conversations subscribes to Govern∣ment, or from the clemency of the State, by conniving (not approving) of their separations, and divisions; upon which cle∣mency of the State, they have mightily improved themselves, who must know, they are not favoured, though not punished, who may have (though the State sitteth silent for a while) in a short time by the prudence of the State, their errors set in or∣der before their eyes. But their great Boasting of their much peace, and Freedome, that they enjoy now in Market-places, and other places, putteth me in mind of the difference between Loyall Subjects, and Re∣bellious Sectaries; The Sectaries without disturbance have now their Freedome to publish their errors and lyes in the very Mar∣ket-places, but we could not heretofore enjoy our Liberties in our Churches, to publish Gods truths without high distur∣bances. And seeing they have so much peace and freedome from Mo∣lestations in the Market-places, I would they would take this Counsell from one that wisheth their conversion, not their de∣struction, their safety, not their perill; that neither the Relator that boasteth so much of freedome, neither any of the Brother∣hood that doth enjoy it, use any more their peace to provoke warre, by blowing up all Coales of dissentions amongst us, and their Freedome to set Rebellion againe in a Blaze, to fire both Church and State; If so, Let them be men as well Gifted as Brother Collins, as precious humble tender-hearted men as Bro∣ther
Collet, and have as much Freedome in the Market-place of Stow as John Belcher, The hand of Justice may soone find them out; when by the hand of the Magistrate, God may in the very Market-places, where they proclaime their Rebellion, make them more evident Examples of Gods Justice for their Rebellion, then was the sudden death of the Clarkes Daughter of Brokingo for her revilings, who was a Sister, a Disciple, one that against them was not heard to open her Mouth. Now Reader, If thou beest a Rationall man, whom the Infor∣mer by his Relation would reclaime, and to whose Judgement I have recommended this Narrative, thou canst not but find, the Newes from Glocester, to be strange, but not true; and the Au∣thor (who ere it be) not to be (as he stileth himselfe) The true Informer, but an Hypocriticall Lyer. And as his Notorious Lyes proveth him a Grosse Hypocrite, who hath spoken these Lyes through Hypocrisie, so doth his Conclusion lay open his Hypocrisie to the view of any indifferent Reader. Lastly, Concerning the Grosse Hypocrisie of the Author in the Conclusion of his Pamphlet. THe Relator telleth us, that much more was expressed, both in the Letter, and by sundry personall evidences, this can∣not be applied to the Newes from Fairford; there he certifieth us, that he was an eye-witnesse, being in a By-place, to see what would be the issue of those Froggs and Toads: and here he speaketh of a Letter, wherein somewhat and much more was ex∣pressed; (And saith he, also by sundry personall evidences) but this I am sure, had the Relator any Greater evidences of cruel∣ties and indignities offered by such spirits as he specifieth, they could not have escaped the presse, herein being little said (the truth being uncased) to cry up any cruell usage of them. Now whereas the Author and Printer (who are said to deli∣ver only the Truth in Generall (when they have branched out the Lying Wonders in particular circumstances) doe desire a kind acceptance of the Reader, I cannot see how it can be gran∣ted by any Reader, who is a Lover of Truth; but only by sedu∣ced
persons, such as are fettered to other mens vile opinions, and held fast under their power; to whom I crave to urge that reproofe which the Apostle urged to the Corinthians, 2 Ep: 11.19, 20. Ye suffer fooles gladly; ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devoure you; so say I, to all such seduced per∣sons, ye suffer fooles gladly, to worke on your affection, to fasten on your persons, to spoyle you, to carry you away from the Truth, as a Beare, Wolfe, or Lyon, carry away their prey; becoming as Leopards and Blackmoors, whose spots and uglinesse of base o∣pinions, can never be washed away, who have cause to feare their owne condemnation; for when God shall send such strong delusions, as shall produce such an effect in the hearts of men, as to cause them to beleeve a lye; the end is, that they might be damned, 2 Thes. 2.11. But though we cannot grant a kind Acceptance of these no∣torious Lyes, yet we may embrace the counsell they give us, which is to amend that which is amisse, either in the Relation which is full of lyes, or in our selves being full of Frailties. For the amending of what I have found amisse in the Relation, I have performed my endeavour, by bringing these lyes to the Light of Truth, whereby Truth may be discerned from errour, and for the amendment of what we find amisse in our selves, let us daily begge the Assistance of Gods Spirit, to enlighten our eyes in the knowledge of the Truth, and to lead us into all Truth, and preserve us therein by his Allmighty power even unto Sal∣vation. Here I should have finished, but that the Relator or Printer, o both, hath given me cause of Jealousie, to conceive that as they will not owne me for their Fellow-Christian, so I dare not own them for my Fellow-Subjects, who seemeth by their unusu∣all phrase in their Conclusion, not to owne King Charles for their King, but some other King to Raigne over them. GOD SAVE OUR KING. BY the phrase [Our and not The] some are of the opinion, they meane not King Charles, to whom they are apparent Enemies, but Christ, whom they make a cloake for their wicked∣nesse;
Though I am of opinion, that there be many that in this Nation owneth no other King but Christ, yet should they meane him here, they could not but discover a great deale of ignorance, in thus praying for him, That God would save him, who is our Alone Saviour. But I am more apt to beleeve, that seeing This Government doth not please them, and they expect some Alteration of Go∣vernment, of which some are very confident, expecting through fresh divisions to have the sword againe in their hands, of which they say, they will make better use then they have done; That they meane some eminent Commander, whom God in time may raise up for their protection in their licentious practises. But God who hath already Blasted their designes, I hope will so order, by his powerfull providence, the Affaires of this Nati∣on, that such cruell and Tyrannicall Spirits, shall be so farre from sitting any more at Sterne in the Ship of this Common-wealth, as they shall for ever be kept under Hatches; And that this Our Gracious Soveraigne (whom the Lord miraculously hath preser∣ved, and restored to be a repairer of our breaches, and a restorer of our decayed paths; whose name was, is, and will be ever pre∣cious, among his sound-hearted and Loyall Subjects, and whose Princely Dignity is adorned with such piety, Temperance, and humanity, as will be stedfast props to uphold his regall Authori∣ty) shall sit immoveable in his Throne, shining therein above all other men in a parcell of Gods Majesty, by righteousnesse esta∣blishing his Throne, and by Judgement the Land, Prov. 16.12. Prov. 29.4. and so make us his Subjects by his wise Government a happy people, and his Kingdomes the glory of all Lands. GOD BLESSE KING CHARLES. FINIS.
