C6038A R224618 99895627 153140
Octob. 30. 1693. WHEREAS it was witnessed against Shadrach Cooke on Tuesday the 17th. of this present Month, at the Old Bailey, That he did forge a Pasport to France in my Lord Nottingham's Name. I Shadrach Cooke, Priest of the Church of ENGLAND, having utterly disown'd the Fact at the Time and Place aforesaid, do here Again, upon the Receiving the Blessed Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, and as I hope for any Benefits by my Saviour's Death and Sufferings, solemnly declare that I am altogether lgnorant and Innocent of this Matter, and that I know nothing directly or indirectly relating thereunto, either as to my self, or any other; and that I am not con∣scious of any thing in any sort or kind, nor ever was concerning the Counterfeiting my Lord Nottingham's Hand or Seal. This I de∣clare upon the sincere Faith of a Christian, without any reserve, in the full and due Sense of these Words, or any other, that can express or signify an undisguised intire Innocence in this Case. I do here also declare, That I do from the very bottom of my Heart, as becometh a Christian in this most holy Duty, forgive such that raised this great Scandal of me, or that occasioned my Suffering upon it. SHA. COOKE. Declared in the presence of us who did Communicate with him. Ralph Taylor, D. D. Simon Lowth, D. D. William Carr. Rich. Hughes.
MAny having been led into a Mistake by, and some still cavelling and disputing upon, these Words, [Mr. Cooke said that what he did was out of a Principle of Conscience] published in a Paper entituled, The Proceedings, &c. printed for Ric. Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick-lane, As if Mr. Cooke had really own'd, and justify'd the Fact charg'd upon him by pleading Conscience for it. I Ralph Taylor, D. D. out of a due regard to Truth and Peace, and out of a sincere desire to satisfie all unpreju∣dic'd Enquirers after the same in this particular, do declare, That being present at the Old Bailey on the 17th. of this Month, when Mr. Cooke was call'd to answer what was laid to his Charge, I did then observe the said Mr. Cooke most vehemently to deny,May all the Judgments and Punishments, that God has in Store for Sinners, light upon my head, if I am not altogether Ignorant of what I am charg'd with, in Thought, Word and Deed. even with an Impre∣cation, The Imprecation. what was testify'd against him con∣cerning his Counterfeiting my Lord Not∣tingham's Hand and Seal; and did hear him very Solemnly and Zealously assert his Innocence, as near as I can remember, in these Words; Ʋpon my Salvation I did not do it: As I hope for Mercy in Heaven I seal'd no such Paper: Ʋpon the Word of a Priest I did no such thing. And what he said of Conscience was before he spoke to the Fact wherewithal he was charg'd, and had reference not to what was testify'd or done concerning that particular Fact, but to what he himself had omitted, and not done, during the long time of his being in Custody, as the means of pro∣curing his Liberty: Nor was there any thing then said, that I could perceive by Mr. Cooke, that might give the least colour or occasion, to any there present, who heard and observ'd him, to apprehend that he own'd the Coun∣terfeiting of my Lord Nottingham's Hand and Seal, or that he should say, That he did it out of a Principle of Conscience. Ralph Taylor. Octob. 25. 1693.
