D1139 E703_17 99866234 118499
A DESCRIPTION & PLAT OF THE Sea-Coasts of England, from London, up all the River of Thames, all along the Coasts to Newcastle, and so to Edinburgh, all along Scot∣land, the Orchades, and Hitland, where the DƲTCH begin their Fishing. AS ALSO: All those parts over against us, as Norway, Denmarke, the Sound, Holland, and Zealand. VVith the Depths and Showlds about these places, in what Depths men may see the Land. Of the Tides and Courses of the streams about these foresaid places, with the Courses and Distances, and how these Lands doe lye one from the other, and from other Lands. With the heights of their degrees, and minutes, in their respective places where they are Scituated. Ʋnto which is added: A List containing the Monethly wages of all Officers, Sea-men, and others serving in the States Ships at Sea: And as to the wages to common Sea-men, to their shares in Prizes, and relieving of sick and wounded; which is referred to the Commissioners for ordering and managing the Affairs of the Admiralty and Navy, with power to see the particulars aforementioned put in executi∣on, and to give such Orders from time to time, as shall be requi∣site for the effecting thereof. Usefull not onely for Sea-men and Marchants, but for all that desire to know where our Fleets lye, either on the Coast, or the Neighbouring Lands, that any man may be as experienced in the Sea-Coast by this Card, as they have been by Land, by the six Mapps of England, wherein the Villages and smallest Places were knowne to travell unto them, and where the Land Armies did lye. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Tho: Jenner at the South-entrance of the Royall Exchange. 1653.
A List, containing the Monthly Wa∣ges of all Officers, Sea-men, and others, serving in the States Ships at Sea; and as to the Wages for Common Sea-men, to their Shares in Prizes, and relie∣ving of sick and wounded, which is referred to the Commissio∣ners for ordering and managing the Affaires of the Admiralty and Navy, with power to see the particulars afore-mentioned, put in execu∣tion, and to give such Orders from time to time, as shall be requisite for the effecting thereof. Officers Names. 1 Rank. 2 Rank. 3 Rank. 4 Rank. 5 Rank. 6 Rank.   l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. A Captain. 21 0 0. 16 16 0. 14 0 0. 10 10 0. 8 8 0. 7 0 0. A Lievtenant. 4 4 0. 4 4 0. 3 10 0. 3 10 0.             A Master. 7 0 0. 6 6 0. 4 13 8. 4 6 2. 3 17 6. The Captain to the . A Mosters Mate, or Pilot. 3 6 0. 3 0 0. 2 16 2. 2 7 10. 2 2 0. 2 2 0. A Mid-shipman. 2 5 0. 2 0 0. 1 17 6. 1 13 9. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. A Boat swain. 4 0 0. 3 10 0. 3 0 0. 2 10 0. 2 5 0. 2 0 0. A Boat swains Mate. 1 15 0. 1 15 0. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. A Quarter-Master. 1 15 0. 1 15 0. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. A Quarter Masters Mate. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. 1 5 0. A Carpenter. 4 0 0. 3 10 0. 3 0 0. 2 10 0. 2 5 0. 2 0 0. A Carpenters Mate. 2 0 0. 2 0 0. 1 16 0. 1 14 0. 1 20 0. 1 10 0. A Gunner. 4 0 0. 3 10 0. 3 0 0. 2 10 0. 2 5 0. 2 0 0. A Gunners Mate. 1 15 0. 1 15 0. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0. A Quarter-Gunner. 1 6 0. 1 6 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. A Chyrurgion. 2 10 0. 2 10 0. 2 10 0. 2 10 0. 2 10 0. 2 10 0. A Chyrurgions Mate 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. A Corporal. 1 15 0. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 5 0. Yeomen of the Jeers, Sheats, Haliards, and Tacks. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 8 0.            
A Purser to be Clerk of the Cheque. 4 0 0. 3 10 0. 3 0 0. 2 10 0. 2 5 0. 2 0 0. A Steward to take charge of the Victuals. 2 0 0. 1 16 8. 1 10 0. 1 10 0. 1 6 8. 1 5 0. A Cook. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 4 0. A Master Trumpeter. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 4 0. Other Trumpeters. 1 4 0. 1 4 0.                         A Cock swaine. 1 12 0. 1 10 0. 1 8 0. 1 8 0. 1 6 0.       An Armorer. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0. 1 5 0.             A Gun-Smith. 1 5 0. 1 5 0.                         Yoeman of the Powder-Room. These to have the pay of an able Sea-man. A Stewards Mate. These to have the pay of an able Sea-man. A Cooks Mate. These to have the pay of an able Sea-man. A Cock swains Mate. These to have the pay of an able Sea-man. A Swabber. These to have the pay of an able Sea-man. A Cooper besides three shillings and four pence a Moneth, Adds money. These to have the pay of an able Sea-man. ALL able Sea-men fit for the Helm and Lead, twen∣ty four shillings by the Moneth; whereof one shil∣ling to be paid to the Chest, Minister, and Chyrurgion. All others, not capable of performing the duties afore∣said, nineteen shillings a Moneth, Boyes and Gromets excepted. Gromets fourteen shillings and three pence a Moneth, and Boyes nine shillings and six pence, whereof one shil∣ling to be paid to the Chest, Minister, and Chyrurgion. The Captain, Master, and Boatswain of each Ship, doe before the payment of their respective Ships Compa∣nies, rate the Wages of each Ships Company, certifying the same against each mans name according to their Abilities; and to that end to signe the Sea-Books with the Purser: And in case of the discharge of any from
the Ship, the foresaid persons are to certifie upon the Ticket whereby they are discharged, their abilities, and rate them according to the aforesaid distinctions. The Treasurer and Commissioners of the Navy have power to determine all cases or differences that may a∣rise. Such Mariners and Sea men as shall voluntarily come into the States service, shall have the same allowance of Conduct-money as the Prest men have, they making it appear to the Commissioners of the Navy, how far they have travelled to enter themselves into the States Ser∣vice; and shall also have the benefit of the Chest. As to the Shares in Prizes. All Captains, Sea-men, and others, that doe or shall serve in any of the States owne, or Merchants Ships im∣ployed in their service, shall have from the State for e∣very ship or Prize, Merchant-men, or men of War, laden or light, ten shillings for every Tun, and six pound thir∣teen shillings and four pence, for every piece of Ord∣nance, whether iron or brasse, to be paid by the Colle∣ctors for Prize-Goods, within three dayes after the pay∣ment of the Wages (in case Adjudication be made of the ship in the Admiralty Court) to be shared and divi∣ded amongst them proportionably, according to the re∣spective Places and Offices in the ship in which they ser∣ved. All Captains, Sea-men, and others, to take and have to themselves as Pillage, all such Goods and Mer∣chandize as shall be found above the Gun-deck, for eve∣ry man of War sunk or destroyed by fire, ten pounds a Gun, upon Certificate by the Councell of War. All common Sea-men shall out of the Proceed of Pri∣zes, have one Moneths pay at the coming in, and paying
off their severall Ships, to be paid by the Treasurer of the Navie. As to sick and wounded men. Sick and wounded men on board, five pounds for six Moneths service for every hundred men. Ʋpon the dis∣charge of sick and wounded men, payment of their Tick∣ets and Conduct-money. All Majors, Bayliffs, or other Magistrates in any Port-Townes, to take care for all necessary accomoda∣tions at the charge of the State, for the reliefe and cure of such sick and wounded men as shall be sent on shore. A convenient House be provided in or near Dover, Deal, or Sandwich, as an Hospital for the Receipt and Accommodation of wounded men that shall be there sent on shore. All Hospitals in ENGLAND, imployed for the cure of wounded and sick people, be reserved during this War at Sea, for such as shall be wounded in the service of the Navie. The Tenths of all Prizes, taken or to be taken, cu∣stomarily due to the Lord High-Admirall, be appointed for defraying the charges of sick and wounded men as aforesaid, and for the reliefe of Widows, Children, and impotent Parents of such as shall be slaine in the service of the Common-wealth, at Sea; and for Meddals, or other Rewards to such Officers and Sea-men of the Fleet, as shall be found to have done any eminent or extraor∣dinary Service.
A DESCRIPTION and PLAT of the Sea-Coasts of England, from Lon∣don, all the River of Thames, all along the Coast to New Castle, and so to Edenburgh, all along Scotland, the Orcades, and Hitland, where the DƲTCH be∣gin their Fishing. The First Demonstration. In which The East-side of England, and Schotland, is shewed, from the River of London, to the New-Castle. BY two wayes men may saile into the River of London: from the southwards, along by the North Forland, and by the northwards along by the Naes. if you will saile in there from the Southwards, then you must first shun the North Forland, it is there showld a good wayes from the shore, bring the north For∣land also not more southerly from you then southwest, that you do not run on against the North-grounds, which lye farre to seawards. Coming by the land, run alongst by it, but come not so neere it, that you leese sight of the spire of the steeple of Margat behind the land, for then you should come too neere it; but if you keep so far from the shore, that you can see the foresaid steeple above the high land, or keep it even in your sight, then you cannot take hurt of the south grounds. Coming thwart of Margat, then you are past the foresaid showlds or south grounds. Run then boldly
towards the shore, and within two cables lengths along by it, for to avoid the north grounds, which lye farre to the southwards towards the land. Saile on so west all along by the shore, untill that the Roculvers (which are two steeples upon one Church) come one in the other, and then you shall run in sight of the first boy upon the Lasts, which by eh upon the to resaid marks of the Roculvey a be∣ing by it you can also see the other boy which lyeth like as the first also on the north side, and over against it on the south side standeth a Beak on, there you must saile through betwixt them both, leaving the boy on the starboard side, and the Bakon over against it on the larboard side. From thence you may with little ships, or ships of little draught, but not with ships of great draught, at high water run o∣ver the Swallow on west-north-west toward, Sheppy, for it is there showld water, with ships of great draught you must run through the Fishers deep towards Black tayle. You may also run from Margat with small ships along by the shore upon the lead at high water, even unto Sheppy, but in sailing along there you must cast your tides well, for the flood falleth very strong into the Swallow, and the ebbe to the contrary very strong out. When you come by Sheppy,Sheppy. run within two cables lengths along by it, for to avoid the taile of the Spaniard, untill that you be past Quinsborough,The Spag∣mard. edge then off from the south shore for to avoid the Noere, which is a sand that shooteth off from the River a good wayes to the east∣wards, upon the outermost end whereof standeth alwayes a Beakon whereby you may know it,The Noete. run along to the northwards of it, leaving on the larboard side, and along in the middle of the channell into the sea-reach for to a∣void the grounds which lye off from the north shore, goe in so along towards Gravesend. To sail with ships of great draughts along by the north For land up into the Thames, you must (when you are past the buyes upon the Lasts) sail through the Fishers deep toward Blacktaile, which lyeth from the second buye upon the Lasts,Fishers deep. unto the first buye in the Fishers deep,
northwest, and northwest, and by west, which lyeth upon the north fide of the sand, which men doe call the Spani∣ard, these two buyes lye a great way one from the other. Sailing from the buye upon the Lasts, it is a great way, all showld water, so that you must run over there with high water, but coming near the buye upon the Spaniard, it is by little and little, deeper water. He that will saile o∣ver here, must reckon his tides well, the flood falleth there along towards the southwest almost thwart over the deep, and the ebbe to the contrary. The second buye in the Fishers Deep you must leave on the starboard side: being past that, you come against the Blacktaile, to the southwards of the Shoebeakon into the right deep. The east poynt of Sheppy shall then lye about south from you. From the Shoe-beakon the course is southwest to the point of Blacktaile, there runneth off a hook which men might (at unawares) sail within (co∣ming from the northwards) in five or six fathom, but if you keep from the shore in seven fathom, you cannot saile within it. From Black-tail to the Beakon upon the Noere, the course is west-south-west, leave it on the larboard side, as before is said, and run it along the River, in the middle of the Channel betwixt both lands unto Graves∣end. For to saile into the River of London coming from. the northwards,For to sail in∣to the River of Lond: from the north∣wards. you must come neer the coast to the north∣wards of Orfordnes, which is to the northwards of all the sands, there lye Albrough, Dunwich, Walderswike, Sowle and Covehit, all betwixt Orfordnes and Leystaf. Covehit is a sharp steeple like as also Leystaffe, but Sowle and Wal∣derswyke, Albrough and Orfordnes, are all flat Steeples, Sowle and Dunwich lye both upon the high land, betwixt them both is a valley, therein you may see Walderswike,Sowle.when you are thwart of it.Dunwich. Dunwich is the best to be known of all these foresaid places: it hath two flat steeples, and on both sides some trees. To the soutwards of it lyeth Al∣brough,Albrough.which is also very good to be known, it hath one high flat steeple with three mils, the two stand to the
northwards, and the third to the southwards of Arbrough when you are thwart of it, but sailing to the southwards, they come all three to the southwards of it. The Land without Albrough, and to the southwards of it is very low, flat and chindely land. Betwixt Albrough and Dunwich, about half wayes be∣twixt them, lyeth a wood, which is at both ends high, and in the middest low with a saddle; this you shall common∣ly see first when you fall with land thereabouts, and is the best to be known for to know the coast by; the land with∣out it, and to the southwards, is very low flat chindely land.Orfordnes. About two leagues to the soutwards of Albrough lyeth Orfordnes, betwixt them both stand also two woods of trees, which shew themselves a far off like Castles or Towers. Or fordnes is a flat steeple with a thick or broad castle, which hath also a thick flat steeple, almost of fashion like the steeple of Rarop, open above with holes in it like Bellholes. Before Dunwich you may anker, there is good lying in eight or nine fathom somwhat soft ground. Before Al∣brough is the best road of all the coasts thereabouts, in six and seven fathom. East from Albrough about two leagues,Aelbrough Knock. lyeth Albrough Knock, this is a sand which at low water is not deeper then seven or eight foot: you may sound round about in five fathom, but it is not good to come nearer it: with sea winds you may discern it plainly, by the breaking of the sea upon it; but with landerly or westerly winds, and fair weather, the sea breaketh not upon it; he that runneth thereby to the northwards with an ebb, shall see it com∣monly ripple very much upon it, like as upon most the English bancks, and not indeed upon the bancks, but a∣gainst them, for upon the showlds or middest of the banks is the smoothest water, like as you find every where. VVhen as Albrough is west from you,Marks of Ael∣brough Knock. and the two stee∣ples of Orfordnes are one in the other, there you shall find Albrough knock. These are sure marks of that Sand.
The Whiting, or Whiting sand, is somewhat a long small sand lying before Orfordnes, and the chindely land to the southwards of Aelbrough, and lyeth along the reach, but the south end lyeth further from land then the north end, there is at low water not above six or seaven foot water upon it. Coming from the northwards, men saile commonly to the westwards of it, that is through betwixt the land and Whiting-sand, towards the Naze.Whiting sand.Men may also saile along to the eastwards of it, through betwixt Whiting-sand and the eastermost poynt of the Court, or Court-sand, which some doe call the Rib.The Court. The north end of the Whiting lyeth along close to the shore, and lyeth from the steeples of Orfordnes southeast and by south, it is so exceeding steep and needle too, that you shall have the one cast nine, the next cast five fathom, and then you are no more but a ships length from it, be∣fore you can heave the lead againe you shall be upon it. When you sit with the foreship against it, it is at the stern five or six fathom deep. Along the inner side it is also every where so steep, that you cannot sound it, but on the outer side you may run along by it in five fathom upon the lead, untill you come within the sands. When as you come from the northwards and will saile through within the Whiting, you must run close by the shoare, and south w. about by the poynt of the chidle to the southwards of Aelbrough, untill you come within the north poynt of the Whiting, when the steeples of Or∣fordnes come to be north-west and by north from you, then you are right thwart of the north poynt of the Whi∣ting, being within it goe againe more southerly, to wit, southwest and by south towards Balsy cliffe. If you should fall to the southwards of Whiting, or els coming from the southwards will saile in there to the northwards, then bring the steeples of Orfordnes west∣northwest, or northwest and by west, but for all not more northerly then north-west from you, and saile so right in untill you come by the Chindle strand, then run in a∣long
by it, as is before said, and then you shall run far e∣nough along to the northwards of the Whiting. If you will saile in to the eastwards or the southwards of the Whiting, then bring the steeples of Orfordnes north north-west, or north-west and by north, or northwest from you,For to run in to the east∣wards of the Whiting. and saile in so right with them, untill that the wood of trees, that standeth upon the next poynt to the south-wards of Balsy cliffe, come to Balsy cliffe, which shall then stand about west-southwest from you, keep that aforesaid wood to the southside of the cliffe, and saile in boldly right with it, and then you shall run right in the the faire-way in betwixt the Whiting, and the tayle of Court-sand, but if you bring the foresaid trees more then a hand-spikes length without the cliffe, you shall not fail to run on against the poynt of the Court. That afore∣said wood of trees is very good to be knowne, because thereabouts stand no other trees. Or bring the steeple of Balsy w. s. w. from you, and saile in so right with it, until you come by Whiting sand, in five or six fathom, and lead it in so by it upon the lead, untill that you come by Balsy, or that you get deeper water. When you come near Balsy, whether you be come in from the northwards, or the southwards of Whiting sand, you must keep somewhat off from the shore, because of a little riffe, or small tayle, that shooteth off from the shore, thwart of Balsy-cliffe, which you must avoid somewhat, with ships of great draughts, there remaineth at low wa∣ter upon it no more then two fathome, you may com∣monly perceive it well by the rippling of the tide. You may also saile in to the southwards of the Ribb, (that is,For to sail in at the channel through the Court. the taile of the Court, or Court-sand) thus, bring the steeple of Balsy north north w. or a little more north∣erly from you, and saile in so right with it, and so you shall run in to the northwards, or through the Court, at a channell of eight fathome depth, the east side of this channell is steep, come no nearer it then eight fathome, but by the west side you may run in about by the Court,
upon the lead, untill you come within the sands. Balsy hath a high flat steeple,Balsy. and lyeth somwhat with∣in the land behind the cliffe, when as you come from the northwards, you may see Balsy to the northwards, or the westwards of the cliffe, but you saile it altogether behind the cliffe, so that at last it cometh out againe to the south∣wards of it. If you will saile to Harwich being past Balsy,For to sail in∣to Harwich. then bring Balsy to that steep point to the southwards of Bal∣sy, where trees stand upon, keep these marks so standing, and run so along by the shoare, untill that you be over the point of the Chindle, the marks thereof are two high trees within the land, when they are about N. n. west from you, then they come one in the other with the steeple of Harwich, and then you are right over the poynt of the Chindle, and then you shall get deeper water, four and five fathome, or somewhat more against the highest water. Run in then about by the poynt, the channell ly∣eth in right N. but in the middest of the Havens mouth lyes a suncken rocky and stony ground, which you must avoid, you may saile in about it on both sides, by the one shore or the other, but along by the east shore it is best, be∣ing within it, you cannot saile amisse, to take hurt, if you doe not saile bluntly against the shore, there you may ankor all over, where you please, before the Towne, in five, six, and seven fathom. You may well also goe fur∣ther into the bight, there it is clean every where. The fara∣way betwixt Orfordnes or Whiting-sand, and the Naze lyeth most s. w. and by s. and is six, seven, and eight fa∣thom deep, in turning to windwards you may run to the shore in five and four fathom, but close to the sands it is deeper, to wit, eight, nine, and ten fathom, the nearer the sands, the deeper water. But to saile from Balsy to the Naze,The Naze. you must mark the steeple of Balsy, when it cometh within a Capstone-bars length neare to the s. end of the cliffe, then keep them so standing, so long untill that the house upon the Maze come over the two fields, which lye on against the High∣land,
or come over a black head upon the sea-side, saile then right in with them, untill that the steeple of Har∣wich come to be n. n. w. from you in the little valley of a red cliffe, leave then the first marks, keep the steeple of Harwich in that little valley, and goe on s. s. e. untill that the third poynt of the Naze come without the two other poynts, so you shall run through betwixt the Naze and the Course, there remaineth at low water no more then eight, ten, and at some places twelve foot water, therefore it is not good to run through here, unlesse that it be a quarter flood, or with a ship of great draught at halfe flood, there it is very uneven of ground, rocky and stony. The poynt of the Naze is very foule, and uneven, the nearer the shoare thwart of that poynt the showlder, but the nearer the sands the deeper. When that the third poynt of the Naze cometh with∣out the two other poynts, or the other land, and that it doth againe begin to deep off, to wit, four or five fathom, then goe southest somewhat southerly, or southwest and by south, unto the bye upon Longsand. Thwart of the Naze is Long-sand very steep, so that it cannot be well sounded with the lead by them that are not there very well acquainted,Longsand. but somwhat more to the southwards you may run along by it in four fathom, and three fathom and a halfe, untill that you get the buy upon Longsand in sight of you. The n. shore to the southwards of the Naze is also flat, you may run along by it also upon the lead, without any danger. The buy upon the Longsand lyeth in two fathome and an halfe,Buyes upon Longsand & the Spits. at halfe flood, you must leave it on the larboard side, and the Buye upon the Spits, on the starboard side, which lyeth a little showlder, they lye about south and be east, and north and by west, a musket shot one from the other. The Course betwixt the two buyes, is south-southeast, and northnorthwest, but you must reckon well your tids,The Spits. whether you run through there with a flood, or with an ebb. Upon the Spits betwixt the two buyes, is at halfe flood at least three fathom and a halfe, or al∣most
four fathome, in the right channell, a little to the southwards of the buy upon the Spits stand two masts a∣bove the water, of a lost ship, which are good marks.Whitakers Beakon. Be∣ing over the Spits, the course to Whitakers beakon is s. southwest. About halfe way betwixt them stand also two masts more on the same w. side,Middle-plate. and over against these masts ly∣eth a middle plate, whereupon lyeth a buy on the west side: the fareway is along to the west-wards of this mid∣dle-plate, through betwixt that foresaid Buy, and the Maste. To the northwards of that foresaid Middle-plate, go∣eth out a Channell by the south-side of Long-sand, which you may saile out and in, called the Kings deep. If you come from Whitakers-beakon, past the Middle-plate, so far that you get sight of the buyes of Long-sand, or Spits, goe then boldly e. n. e. and n. e. and by east into sea, or upon the lead along by Longsand, but if you should run into sea, to the s. wards of the Middle-plate, you should with an e. n. e. way saile within the Hook of the Mouse. This Kings-deep is a ready Channell,Kings deep. and is used almost forall ships for to run out at. For to run in at this channell out of the sea,For to sail in∣to the Kings deep. then bring the poynt of the Naze northwest from you, and saile in so with it, untill that you come near Goemfliet or Long∣sand in five fathome, goe in then along by it about west∣south west, and southwest and by west, and keepe the sounding of Long-sand, and so you shall not faile to run in sight of the buy upon the Spits, and the foresaid masts to the southwards of it. From Whitakers beakon to the Shoebeakon the course is s. s. w. somewhat westerly, coming thwart of the Shoe∣beakon,Shoe beakon.then lyeth the east poynt of Sheppy about s. from you. From the Shoebeakon the course is along s. w. to the poynt of Blacktaile,Blacktaile. there runneth off a Hook, which men might saile within, coming from the northwards, but if you keep from the shore in seven fathome, you can∣not take hurt of it, but in five fathome you run within it.
The like Hook is also a little to the southwards of the Shoebeakon, which you might unawares saile within, co∣ming from the southwards. From Blacktaile to the beakon upon the Nore, the course is w. s. w. The Nore is a sand,The Nore. lying from the south poynt of the maine land of the River, far to the eastwards, therefore leave the beakon on the larboard side, and goe on west along amidst the channel, into the River, betwixt both the lands, as heretofore hath been said in the descrip∣tion of the Fishers deep. From Aelbrough along by Dunwich to Covehit, the coast lyeth north and by east, somewhat easterly, and south and by west, or somewhat westerly five leagues, but from Covehit or Leystaf, north and south two leagues Ael∣brough, Dunwich and the sands lying thereabouts, are described here before. Betwixt Dunwich and Covehit lyeth the Haven of Sowle,Sowle. which is a little showld River, a little within it divideth it selfe into three parts, upon the northermost arm lyeth Sowle, upon the middlemost Walderswyke, and upon the souther most Dunwich.Dunwich. Covehit hath a high sharp steeple, thwart of it lyeth a bank not far from land, which falleth at low water, but at halfe flood you may saile through betwixt it and the land in three fathome, upon the outer side it is very steep, so that you cannot come nearer it then nine or ten fa∣thome. When the steeple of Easton is westnorth west from you, then you are to the southwards of the bank, & when the steeple of Covehit is s. w. and by w. from you, then you are to the northwards of it. Two leagues to the northward of Covehit lyeth Ley∣staf,Leystaff,and two leagues more to the northwards of it lyeth Yarmouth. The steeple of Leystaf is a high sharp steeple, and standeth a great musket shot within the land from the houses, so that in sailing along you may bring the steeple on both sides of the houses. Off from Leystaf begin the bank or Holins of Yarmouth, & lye along to the n. wards past Yarmouth, until thwart of Winterton there goe di∣vers
marks, for those that are there acquainted; you may saile through within these banks, off from Leystaf, untill past Winterton. If you run through from before Leystaff within these banks, then look out for the fire-beakon,For to come within the banks of Yar∣mouth. which stands by Leystaf, which at two little white houses, the one standeth beneath upon the chindle on the sea-side, and the inner∣most upon a little Hammock, somewhat further within the land. When they come to the southwards, they shew themselves to the northwards of the Towne, but come at last thwart of it. In the night there is alwayes fired upon them, for to saile in there also by night. Bring these fore∣said fire-beakons n. w. and by north, or somewhat more northerly from you, and saile in so right with them, ei∣ther by night or by day, the Church of Leystaf cometh then to the southwards of the Towne, over a Countrey House by the water side: when you come against the Channell, there is at low water no more then three fa∣thome depth, keep these foresaid fire-beakons one in the other, or bring the innermost rather a little northwards of the outermost, for to avoid a little plate, which lyeth on the south-side of the Deep, but the Channell is indif∣ferent wide, run untill you come against the strand in two fathome and an halfe, or two fathome, so neare as you will or can and goe then up northwards along by the shore, you shall then (being sailed a little to the north∣wards) meet with a flat, whereupon remaineth at low water lesse then two fathome depth, with laden ships you must ankor before that flat, and stay for high water, it floweth there about eight foot up and downe, so soon as you are over the flat it will be five, six, and seven fathom deep, edge then to the shore, and saile toward it, and then you come before the Brew-house, there is the road where you may ankor in four, five, and six fathome, from thence n. wards towards Yarmouth along the shore is all over good ankoring and good ground. About an English mile,Haven of Yarmouth. or somewhat more to the s. wards of the Towne Yarmouth, is the Haven of Yar∣mouth,
it hath two wooden heads, where you must saile in betwixt them both, against the highest water, when the strongest of the flood is spent, at halfe flood it is dange∣rous, because of the strongest tide, which should lighlty carry you into the bight,Road before Yarmouth. against the shoare (against your will) it is also best to run in along by the southerhead, there it is deepest. At Yarmouth in the road, men doe commonly ankor to the northwards of the Heaven, right thward of the Towne, in five, six, seven, or eight fathome, the nearer you ankor to the sands, the deeper water you shall have, but all good sand, and soft ground. If you will saile into the road of Yarmouth, through the Holmes, then bring the sharp little steeple, that stand∣eth to the northwards of Yarmouth within the land, over the broad Castle, or bring the Mill to the north side of the Towne. Keep these marks so standing, and goe in so west n. west, you shall find in this channell not lesse water then eight or nine fathome at halfe flood. This channel is called S. Nicholas channell:S. Nicholas channell. On the north side it is deep∣est, being come in, the road is right before the Towne, in five and six fathome. Thwart or over against the Haven of Yarmouth, goeth also a channel through the Holms, for to saile in through there coming to the southwards, then bring Southon on the north side of the Haven, the great tree betwixt North∣en and that flat little house or Castle, saile in right with them, and keep these marks so standing, untill that you be within the Holmes, within them lyeth a plate on the starboard side, a little to the n. wards of the Haven, called the Middle-ground, you may saile about it on both sides, on the inner side in five fathome, but towards the Holms, or about to the eastwards of it, in eight and nine fathome. From Yarmouth to Winterton the coast lieth n. and by w. and n. n. w. two leagues. If you will saile from Yarmouth forth through with∣in the banks to the n. wards, saile along by the land, and keep the sounding of the shore in five, six, and seaven fa∣thome, untill that you have the two fire-beakons (which
stand a little to the northwards of the Castor) one in the other, saile then right with them, either by day or by night (in the night there is fired upon them) you shall so run over a flat, through betwixt two buyes, which lye each of them upon a taile of a sand, saile boldly in with the foresaid fire-beakons, untill that you come againe near the shore, in five or six fathom, being come by the shore, run then again along by it, and keep the sound∣ing thereof as before, all along untill you come before Winterton. Thwart of Winterton runneth off a dangerous riffe, which is dangerous to saile about by night,Riffe of Wi∣terton, or Winterton Nesse. if men doe come too near it, which is upon the end so steep, that (in three fathom, or two fathom and a halfe) you shall not be a ships length off from it, but when as you (co∣ming from the southwards) keep your selfe in six or se∣ven fathom, then you cannot saile too near to it. To the s. wards of that riffe upon the land, standeth a fire-tower which is very good to be known, with a fire-beakon, and also a little white house, when these come one in the o∣ther, then you are thwart of the point of the riffe. To the northwards of this riffe upon the Land, stand two white fire-beakons, whereupon there is fired by night, for to avoyd this riffe. When as you come thwart of the point, then are these also one in the other, so that these doe serve for thwart marks, and the other to the south∣wards of them, for long marks, for those that will saile about it from the southwards. Coming from the n. wards along the shore, in five or six fathom, untill you come by the fire-beakons, upon the n. side, you must keep some∣what off from the shore, before they come one in the o∣ther, or else you should run on against the riffe. When they are one in the other they stand s. w. and by west from you, and when as the high fire-beakon to the south∣wards of Winterton, cometh to be s. w. somewhat more westerly from you, then you are thwart of the point of the riffe: you may not also run about far within that riffe, for then you should lightly be foule to the grounds
to the eastwards of it, especially when you come from the northwards, for there it is not very wide betwixt them both. From Winterton to Haesbrough poynt, the course ly∣eth n. w. three leagues. Betwixt Haesbrough and the Admirals house stands a ruinous Tower upon the strand, when as you keep it and the steeple of Haesbrough one in the other, coming from the northwards, then you run right upon the point of the foresaid riffe. Four leagues without the land lyeth Winterton sand, the s. end thereof lyeth about e. and the n. end n. e. from Winterton. Thwart of Admirals house, not far from the shore, ly∣eth also a little plate where no ships can goe over, but if you goe in fix or seven fathom, you cannot saile too near it, you may also run through in two fathom, betwixt this plate and the land. From Haesbrough to Cromer, the Coast lyeth along north-west and by west, and west-north-west, three or four leagues. Of the Depths and Showlds about these Plates, and in what Depths men may see the Land. Five or six Leagues n. and by e. and n. n. e. from the n. Forland, or from Marget, lyeth a bank called Kentish Knock, upon it is three fathom water, being by it you may even see the Land from below. Five Leagues n. e. from this bank it is twenty fathom deepe. N. e. and by n. from the North Forland, nine or ten Leagues, and about e. from the Naze, eight leagues into the sea, lyeth a bank called the Galloper, of five, six, and seven fathom depth. The Westrocks is a stony ground, lying between the Court and Longsand, where is no more then two fathom water at a halfe flood. Without that sand, or Harwich, five Leagues from the
Naze it is 20. and 22. fathom deep, being there you may see the Land. Thwart of Orfordnes you may see the Land from be∣low, in two and twenty fathom. Five or six Leagues without Leystaff and Yarmouth, s. e. and by e. into sea, it is 27. and 28. fathom deep, there you may see the Land. Four leagues e. and by s. from Land, without the Holms of Yarmouth, lyeth a bank called the Newsand, which is not deeper then two fathom. E. n. e. at least seven Leagues from Land, thwart of Yarmouth, it is 15. fathom, the ground red grosse sand, with little round stones, being there you may even see the Land from below. Thwart of Winterton and Cromer, seven or eight leagues from the Land, it is 18 and 19 fathom deep, and there you may see the Land. Winterton sand lyeth 4 or five leagues from land. n. e. from Winterton. What Moon maketh High-water at these places. At the North Forland a north and south Moon ma∣keth High-water. Within the Thames a s. and by e. Moon. Before the Thames, at Harwich and Orfordnes, a s. s. e. Moon. At Leystaff and Yarmouth, a s. s. e. Moon maketh High-water. Without the banks of Yarmouth, and before Cromer, a s. e. Moon maketh full sea. Betwixt the Banks of Harwich, and the Holmes of Yarmouth, the flood falleth s. and the ebb n. Thwart of the banks of Winterton and Cromer, the flood falleth s. s. e. and the ebbe n. n. w.
Of the Tides, and Courses of the Streames. From the n. Forland the flood falleth to the Rocul∣vers, and over the Brakes w. s. w. and w. and by s. Without about Goodwin, towards Kentish Knock, the flood falleth n. and by w. and n. n. w. there cometh the flood also against it from the n. wards, and meet one a∣nother by the Gallopper, with very great rippling, and noyse (whereof this bank is also called the Gallopper) and falleth to the westwards, into the sands and chan∣nels, and also to the eastwards towards Flanders. Betwixt the n. Forland and Orfordnes, the stream fal∣leth without the sands, s. and by e. and s. s. e. When you are to the n. wards of the Gallopper, then you can reckon no ebbe, then that which runneth along England to the n. wards, the streams fall there all along the Coasts. To the s. wards of the Gallopper, the ebbe goeth to the contrary, to the s. wards, and the flood to the n. wards. Courses and Distances. From the n. Forland to the n. end of Good wine, the Course is s. and by e. One great league. From the n. Forland to Kentish Knock, n. e. and by e. and n. n. e. 4 or 5 l. From thence to the Orfordnes n. 12. l. From the n. Forland to the Gallopper, n. e. and by n. 9. l. From the Gallopper to Orfordnes n. n. w. 9 or 10. l. From the n. Forland to the Wielings, the Course is e. somewhat northerly, about 27. l. From the n. Forland to the Mase, the Course is e. n. e. or somewhat more easterly, about 33. l. From the n. Forland to the Tessel, or Marsdiep, n. 45. l. From the Naze or Harwich to the Mase, e. 29. l. From Orfordnes to Tessel, e. n. e. 39. l.
From yarmouth to Leystaff, to Waloheren or the Wick∣lings southeast, and s. e. and by s. 38. or 40. l. From the point of Cromer or Schield, to the Tessel, the Course is e. 40. or 42. l. Of the Heights of these Lands. The North Forland lyeth in 51 deg. 25. min. Orfordnes lyeth in 52 deg. 12 min. The Second Demonstration. In which The Coasts of England are set forth, between Cromer and Orkney. THe land lyeth from Cromer to Bornum first w. n. w. and w. and by n. and then west, and west and by s. 9. or 10. leagues. From Cromer to Blakeney it is three or four leagues.Blakeney.At Blakeney standeth a high steeple, which you may see along farre over the Land, when it cometh to the little steeple, then you have the first buy of the channell, which lyeth at the s. end of the Pole, which is a sand at the w. side of the Channell of Blakeney, go from the first buy to the other, and along by them, untill you come with∣in the Haven; this is a Tide-Haven, where men doe lye dry at low water. Four leagues to the westwards of Blakeney lyeth Wels,Pol and Py∣per.betwixt them both lyeth the foresaid showld, called the Poll and Pyper, there it is showld a far off at Sea. At the west end of this showld, goeth in the Deep of Wels, the beakons that you must saile in along by, stand all along by the Pyper. When Hoebrom standeth east-south-west from you, then you are to the westwards of the Pyper, thwart of it is good road in six fathom.Wells. Wels lyeth then
southeast from you, and the trees stand then also against the steeple, then you may saile open into the Haven of Wells, along by the foresaid beakons. Betwixt Wels and Bornum lieth a bank, you may ride under it in five or six fathom, at halfe flood there is upon it no more then two fathom water. He that will saile into Bornum,Bornum. must goe in at high water, and he must bring the steeple against the Black-house, and saile so in by the beakons, leaving them on the larboard side. These are all Tyde-havens. From Bornum to Chappell the course is west-south∣west two leagues,Chappell. to the northwards of it lyeth the Sonck, which is a sand that falleth dry at low water. You may saile about it on both sides of the Sonck unto Lin.The Sonck. For to saile into the Easter channel of Lyn,Easter chan∣nell of Lyn. then saile about to the eastwards of the Sonck, and bring the wood of trees, over the point of Sitsein or Suytson, and Chap∣pell east from you, then goe in s. e. and by s. and you shall find the first buye, then in s. and by w. and s. s. w. and by little and little more westerly, untill you come about the point, there the buyes and beakons shall shew you the way. When you come about the point, then you may run through the sands, into the northern channell, and saile out againe by the same into sea, by the buyes and marks that are thereof. This norther channell lyeth into sea n. e. and n. e. and by east, and is very well buyed and bea∣koned. You may also saile into the westwards of the Sonck,Wester chan∣nell of Lyn.to wit, south and by east in all along by it, and so run to the first buye, and then from the buye along by the beakons unto Lyn before the Towne. When you come from the eastwards, you may well run through within the Sonck, along by the land, close along by Chappell, and in south and by west unto the foresaid first buye. For to saile from Cromer or Blakeney,Boston deep. to Boston deep, you must goe on west and by north, untill you come by the land betwixt the Hommor and Lagernesse. From the
Sonck lyeth a long bank, called the Flats,The Flats. north into sea a league, which at low water falleth dry at divers places. You run with the foresaid west and by North Course (when you are by Cromer or Blakeney a little without the land) along without, or to the northwards of this bank, at high water, you may well goe over it, the ground on the east side goeth up flat and plaine, run boldly to it without fear, untill you come in four or three fathom, he that useth his lead can take no hurt of it, but on the inner side, that is, on the west side, it is very steep, so soon as you be over the showldest, you shall get suddenly deep water, and good sand ground, under it, or within it, it is good riding for easterly winds. For to saile into Bostom deep,For to sail in∣to Boston deep. through within the Knock, or Elleknock, you must keep the sounding of the shoare in foure or five fathom, so long untill that the poynt of Lagarnes be west-north-west from you. Betwixt the shoare and Elleknock remaineth at low water five fa∣thom in the middest of the channell,Elleknock. but Elleknock fal∣leth dry at low water. When that Lagernesse is west-northwest frrom you, then goe on south-east, through be∣twixt Elleknock and the showld (which shooteth off from the shoar to the westwards Lagernesse (untill that you get againe depth of six or seaven fathom, in this go∣ing over remaineth at low water no more then two fa∣thom, but it floweth there about three fathom up and downe. Being over it,Longsand. then goe on south-west along be∣twixt Longsand and the showld, which lyeth off from the shoare, there it is deep betwixt them both, nine and ten fathom, you may sound both sides (as well the showld which lyeth off from the Land, as Longsand) in five fa∣thom, but the flat is somewhat steeper then Longsand. For to saile without Elleknock into Bostons deep, co∣ming (as is before said) to the west land,Ingoldmils. you must look out for the two steeples of Ingoldmils, standing somwhat to the northwards of Lagernesse, bring them one in the other, and then they shall stand about north-north-west from you, keep them one in the other, and goe on south-east,
untill that the trees upon the poynt by west Lagernesse, come without the poynt of Lagernesse, and then you run through betwixt Elleknock and Dogshead that is a showld without Elleknock) when these afore∣said trees come a handspikes length past,Dogs head. or to the east∣wards of the poynt of Lagernesse, then goe on south-west and then you run right into the deep, betwixt Elleknock and Longsand, and so you shall find betwixt Elleknock and the poynt of Longsand, five fathom depth, being past Elleknock, it will be eight, nine, and ten fathom deep. If you will saile out of the sea into Boston deep, and not along by the Land, as is before said, then bring the foresaid trees a handspikes length without the poynt of Lagernesse, which shall then stand from you about west-south-west, saile in so right with them, untill that the high-land within Lagernesse or Winfleet begin to come even without the poynt of Lagernesse, which shall then be from you somewhat more northerly then west, then you are within the poynt of Longsand. Or else there stand three little houses on the sea-side, about halfe wayes be∣twixt Lagernesse and Ingoldmils, when they come to be north-west from you, and those foresaid trees without the poynt, then you are also within the poynt of Long∣sand, goe in then s. w. betwixt Elleknock and Longsand, as aforesaid. A little past Lagernesse lyeth a showld or plate about the middest in the fareway, but nearest Longsand when the trees upon the poynt to the southwards of Win∣fleet come in the second valley of the high-land within Winfleet, then you are right thwart of this showld, edge therefore to one side or other, rather towards the showld, there is widest, keep boldly the sounding of the showld, and run southwest along by it, untill that the steeple of Boston come over the steeple of Butterwyke, that is also a flat steeple (but smaller then that of Boston) standing in a wood of trees,Butterwyke. thwart of it runneth the showld som∣what off with a poynt, being past it, goe on west-south-west, all along by the foresaid showld, untill that the great steeple of Boston come over the second Mill; there
it is good anchoring by the west shore in five fathom at low water. He that cometh there at low water, must an∣kor and stay for the tide untill halfe flood, before that you may not saile further in from thence, and then you shall not also finde more then two fathome upon the showldest. From thence to Deep lyeth in along by the beakons about south to the third beakon, being past that w. s. w. and then by little and little more westerly and norther∣ly, but run all along by the beakons, leaving them on the starboard side, at last on north into the River. Upon the poynt of the River standeth a house, which is a sheep house, before that you come by it, it seemeth as if there were no opening, by reason that it is all even green land, run in by it, all along by the land, being past it, the River doth open it selfe. Being come within the poynts, you must run in betwixt two dikes, a league up, untill you come before the Towne, in the River it is at halfe flood every where deep enough. When as that you come a little within the houses of the Town, on the lar∣board side, there you must let fall your ankor, and stay untill that the water begin to fall, then you shall have flood enough for to drive to the Key, there you must fast with one Cable, it doth not begin to ebbe there, before that water be fallen three foot. An east and west Moon maketh in Boston deep the high∣est water, but before the Town an east and by south and east-south-east Moon. He that cometh from Boston, and will saile out at the deep with a high water, let him look out for the foresaid high-land within Lagernesse, when that cometh behind the point of Lagernesse, then he may boldly set his course whether he desireth to be, either to the eastwards, northeastwards, or northwards, there is no thing then that can hurt him. From Lagernesse to Hommer it is about seven leagues, most north, betwixt them both, about a league to the southwards of the Hommer lyeth a place called Saltfleet-haven, a little to the northwards of a sharp steeple called
Wilgrip.Plate by Salt∣fleet Haven. Thwart of that foresaid Saltfleet-haven, about an English mile from the shoare, lyeth a bank, or sand-plate, not very great, which at low water falleth almost dry, you must run about without it, and leave it lying towards the land from you, but yet for need you may also saile through within it. For to saile into the Hommer coming from the north∣wards,For to sail in∣to the Hom∣mer.you must saile along by the shoare, and run about by the north poynt, but coming by the poynt you must keep somewhat off from the shoare in four or five fathom, for to avoid a little taile, which lyeth off from the poynt, being about it, run to the little Island, which lyeth a little by west that foresaid n. poynt. If coming from the southwards you desire to saile to the Hommer, then bring the Pawle steeple (which is a high sharp steeple standing on the north side of the Hom∣mer) a little by south the north poynt of the Hommer, or over that foresaid little Island, and saile so right in with it, untill that you come by that little Island, being come by it, leave it on the starboard side, and run in close by it, for to avoid a great sand called the Bull, which ly∣eth off from the s. shoare almost unto that little Island. When that you come within that little Island, then bring the two Beakons (which stand upon that little Island) one in the other, keep them so standing, and saile so on the westwards towards Grimsby, you leave the buye up∣on the Bull, lying then on the larboard side, and run a∣long to the northwards of it: In this faire way it is se∣ven and eight fathom deep. You may not come nearer the Bull,Road before Grimsby. then in six fathome. Before Grimsby you may ankor in three or four fathom at low water, it floweth there at least three fathom up and down, a west-south-west, and east north-east Moon, maketh before the Hom∣mer, the highest water. Within the foresaid little Island, at the n. poynt of the Hommer, you may ankor in three or four fathom, there lye commonly ships that are bound out, and tarry for the wind. From Grimsby in along to Hull, the Course is w. n. w.
to the end of the bank, or ballast plate, which you must leave lying on the n. side. On the s. side there lyeth also a little plate, there standeth commonly a Beakon upon it, that you must leave on the larboard side, and run along to the n. wards of it, being past it, you may run along by the south shoare in three fathom. The faire way there is four, five, and six, and thwart of the said Beakon, eight and ten fathom. When you come to the end of the bank, you must edge up to the w. wards about by the poynt on the s. side, but there runneth off a Flat which you must avoid. Being a little about that poynt, you shall see the Towne of Hull lye before you, there you may ankor be∣fore it in six, seven, or eight fathom: an e. and w. Moon maketh full sea before Hull. He that will ankor upon the Ballast plate, let him bring the flat steeple, which standeth a little to the n. wards, or the e. wards of Hull to the high poynt of Pael, and keep them so standing untill that he come to the Plate, there it is best for to ankor up∣on it. From the n. poynt of the Hommer,Flambrough head. called Spurn-head to Flamborough-head, the Course is n. and by w. eight or nine leagues, betwixt them it is showld water of six, seven, and eight fathom deep. Flamborough-head hath many white spots, and chalk hills, especially upon the n. side toward Fyley. Flamborough hath a Head or Piere. A league to the w. wards of it, on the s. side, lyeth a lit∣tle Towne called Burlington, which hath also a Piere.Burlington.You may ankor there in the buy in six or seven fathom. Three leagues by west Flambourgh head lyeth Fyley,Fyley.in a round bay to the southwards of a poynt that lyeth out, which hath a Piere or Head, where you may lye with∣in it, but it falleth there dry at low water. Without the head of Fyley lyeth a rock under water,Fyley bride.called Fyley bridge, betwixt it and the Piere you may well lye afloat with a ship of an hundred lasts, in five fa∣thom at low water, and have shelter for a n. e. and e. wind. From Scarbrough the Coast lyeth along by Robbin-hoods bay, untill before Whidbye,Robbinhoods bay. Whidbie. most n. w. but past
Whidbie the land falleth in w. n. w. and by little and lit∣tle more westerly unto the Tees. Robbinhoods bay is a good road for a s. s. w. and w. wind, there men lye in seven or eight fathom. Whidbie is a tide-haven, which falleth dry at low wa∣ter, at the e. side of the Haven, runneth off a riffe of rocks, whereof you must take heed. For to saile in there, you must run in betwixt the two Beakons, untill that you come in betwixt the two lands, and ankor there. From Whidbie to the Tees the Coast lyeth most w. n. w. and w. and by n. about seven leagues,Huntleyfoot. betwixt both lye Huntleyfoot, and Redcliffe. Huntleyfoot is a high hill, lying on the sea-side, about four leagues to the east∣wards of the Tees.Redcliffe. Redcliffe lyeth about halfe wayes be∣twixt Huntleyfoot and the Tees, it is a cliffe of such ve∣ry red earth, that when the sun doth shine against it, it is to see to like red cloath: these two are very good marks for to know this Coast by. Close to the southwards of the mouth of the Tees lye three Riffes, which lye about a halfe league e. n. e. into sea, which are very foule and stony, and fall dry at low water, upon the n. side they are very flat, so that you may sound about by them in five, six, and seven fathom, but on the s. side are so steep that coming near them, and sounding in thirteen and fourteen fathom, you should be upon them, before you should be able to heave the lead the second time. A league and halfe to the n. wards of the Tees lyeth Hartlepoole, upon a poynt that lyeth out almost like an Island. For to goe in there you must run in to a bight to the southwards of the Towne within a head, untill you come against the Towne, there you shall lye dry at low water. About halfe wayes betwixt Hartlepoole and the Tees,Hartlepoole.runneth off also a riffe of rocks thwart from the shoare, a good wayes into sea, come no nearer it then five or six fa∣thom. There standeth a Mill to the northwards of the Towne Hartlepoole, if you keep that to the west side of
the Towne Hartlepoole, then you cannot saile upon that foresaid riffe, but if you bring the foresaid Mill a little to the westwards of the Towne, so that you may plainly see through betwixt the Mill and the Towne, then you shall not faile to saile upon that riffe. For to saile into Teese coming from the northwards,For to sail in∣to the Teese.you must observe these marks following. A good wayes to the northwards of Hartlepoole, a little to the south∣wards of Sonderland, and a little within the Land, lye upon the high-land two Hammocks, one close to the o∣ther, very good to be knowne,The Paps. of fashion like womens breasts, called the Paps, keep these two Hammocks even without the poynt of Hartlepoole, which shall then stand from you n. w. and by n. and saile so on to the south∣wards, and you shall fall before the Teese, and shall not saile too near the sands that lye out before the mouth of the Teese, and lye off about a halfe league into sea. On both sides, as well on the n. side, as the s. side of the Teese, stand two little white houses for fire-beakons: If you come from the n. wards, and get sight of them, then bring first the two southermost one in the other, which shall then stand from you s. and by e. saile right in with them, untill that the other two, which stand on the n. side of the Teese, come also one in the other, then leave them on the s. side, and saile in right with them that stand on the n. side, and so you shall run in amidst the channel, there is upon the barre, or showldest, at low water, no more then five foot, but it floweth there with a common tide, at least two fathome, up and downe. A s. w. Moon maketh there full sea. If when you come from the south wards, you will saile into the Teese, then bring the inner∣most of the two fire-beakons (which stand on the n. side) at least a handspikes length, or the length of a capstone barre, to the n. wards of the other, and run so w. wards towards them, until that the two fire-beakons on the s. side are one in the other, then saile in right with them, as hath been said, untill that two fire-beakons on the n. side come one in the other: when you have them one in the
other, run in right with them, untill that you come by the n. shore, and then close along by it. When as that you come so farre in past the first fire-bea-beakon, to wit, that you may see Hartlepoole betwixt the two fire-beakons, there you may ankor in three, four, or five fathome, or when Hartlepoole cometh betwixt the foresaid fire-beakons, then goe s. s. w. until that you come by the s. shore, there it is also good ankoring. Fur∣ther it is Pilots water unto Stockton, for there within, the Deeps doe shift oftentimes, and that in short time, three, four, or five times in a summer. He that will saile in there with northerly winds, and a floud, must reckon well his tides, for the floud falleth strong to the southwards over the grounds, and should there be lightly carried behind the bank to the s. wards of the buy, which lyeth upon the point of the bank. Besides this foresaid channel,For to saile in to the new channell. there runneth yet ano∣ther channel through the grounds, which lye off from the n. poynt of the Teese. For to saile in there, you must take mark of the two high lands within the land, to the s. wards of the Teese, bring them within a handspikes length one of another, or bring the Paps to the w. side of Hartlenope, then shall also the two foresaid high lands come within a handspikes length near one to the other, saile in right with them, and so you shall run right into that new channel, along through that aforesaid land, and come against the buye (upon the sands, on the s. side of the Deep) again in the right fareway. When that you get againe deeper water, or have the two fire-beakons on the n. side one in the other, then goe in towards them, and further, as hath been before said. About seven leagues to the n. wards of the Teese, lyeth the River of Sonderland, a little to the n. wards of the Paps, which are very good marks for to know the land by thereabouts. When the Paps are s. s. w. from you, and that you are about an English mile from the land, then you are right before the River of Sonderland, the ground is there about indifferent clean, but somewhat stony, you
may ankor there in four, five, and six fathome. On both sides, as well on the n. point, as the s. point of the River, it is stony. On the n. point standeth a Beakon in the wa∣ter, there you must run in, within a little ships length a∣long by it, being past that, you shall get deeper water, to wit, a fathom and a halfe, and two fathome at low water, but upon the barre remaineth no more then three foot: with a common spring and high water there is about two fathome and a halfe, or a little more. After this aforesaid first depth of a fathome and a half,Sonderland.or two fathom, you shall meet again with a stony floore, about three ships length broad, upon it is at high water about eleven or twelve foot deep, according as the Tides shall run, being over it there, it is againe deeper. A little past that is a narrow place, where a long ship shall scarce be able to wend within it, it is wide enough, and every where good ground. From the Teese to Tinmouth the Course n. n. w. eight or nine leagues. Tow leagues to the fourth wards of Tin∣mouth lyeth the point of Sonderland, but close to the s. wards of Tinmouth goeth in the river of Newcastle. From the point of Tinmouth shooteth off a ledge of rocks, you must saile in by it, leaving it on the starboard side. The marks for to saile into the River, are two fire-towers, or fire-beakons, which stand upon the n. shore, bring them one in the other, or the innermost (that is the highest) a little to the n. wards of the outermost or lowest, and saile so right in along by the aforesaid ledge of rocks on the n. side, and so you shall have upon the showldest two fathome at halfe flood: a s. w. Moon maketh there full sea. The s. shoare is flat, you may lead it in there with the sounding pole for ships that goe not deep, in ten foot at halfe flood. When you come within, run all along by the n. shoare, until past the little Town Sheels, edge then over to the other shoare, untill you come through the crooked reach, there the river lyeth up againe to the n. wards, and then to the s. wards, to Hawke-bil, and about by it to the Towne Newcastle.
Seven or eight leagues to the n. wards of Tinmouth,Bly.lyeth the Cock Island, betwixt them both about halfe wayes lyeth a River called Bly, where the French men do much saile to fetch Coale. From the n. point of this Ri∣ver runneth off a ledge of rocks a great shot of a cast piece about s. e. into the sea, but the s. side, and the Coast to the s. wards of it is very clean and sand-strand. Upon the s. point stand two Beakons, if you will sail in there, bring them one in the other, and sail right in with them, and then you can take no hurt of the foresaid ledge or riffe of the n. poynt. When that you come by or thwart of the outermost of the two foresaid Beakons, you shall see there by it another smaller Beakon, that standeth upon a little ledge of rocks, that shooteth off from the s. point, leave that on the larboard side, and run in along close about n. wards of it. The foresaid ledge of rocks on the n. side re∣maineth at high water (a good wayes from the land, and also at a spring tide) above water, within it is a bight, there it is good lying for a n. or n. e. wind, and there re∣maineth at low water two fathome depth. In the mouth of the River it is with an ordinary tide, and high-water, about two fathome deep, or somewhat more, and it floweth there two fathome up and downe, so that at low water it falleth almost altogether dry. The Cocker Island is a very little Island,Cocker Island and not high, it lyeth about a halfe league from the land, you may come to an ankor in it for an e. s. and s. e. wind, but the wind coming to the n. wards of the e. maketh there a bad road, for you must lye betwixt the Island and the maine land, where you have no shelter for a n. wind. On the s. side of the Island the ground is foul, and a little to the s. wards of the Island runneth off a foul ledge of rocks from the shore untill thwart or past the Island. He that cometh from the s. wards must keep the Coast of Bambrough without the Island, or else he should not faile to saile upon the point of that foresaid ledge. Betwixt the ledge and the Island it is also very narrow, so that a man standing at low water mark upon the rocks
of this ledge, should almost be able to cast with a stone to the Island. For to sail in there, take heed unto these marks hereafter described: There standeth a house upon the sea∣side, which is a Salt-kettle, and also a Castle somewhat further in within the land, which doth shew it selfe high enough, bring them one in the other, and then they shall stand somewhat more n. then w. from you, and run in so right with them, and so you shall run in amidst the chan∣nell, between both, being come within, edge up behind the Island, and ankor there in five or six fathom.Staples. About this Island there run also many more divers lit∣tle Rivers into the land, but they fall most dry at low water. From the the Cocket Island to the Staples, the Course is n. n. w. eight or nine leagues. The Staples, that are high Islands & rocks right to the e. wards of Bambrough, lying at least three leagues from the land n. e. into sea, a little to the n. wards of them, lyeth the Holy Island,Holy Island. to the s. wards or the w. wards of the Holy Island is a Bay, where you may lye landlockt almost for all winds, against the Castle is the best road: you may also run in there from the s. wards, through betwixt the Staples and the maine land. Betwixt the Staples and the Holy Island, lye two sunk∣en rocks, which at low water come very near,Goldstone Plough. even with∣in the water, the westermost towards the Holy Island, is called the gold stone, the eastermost by the Staples, is cal∣led the Plough. For to avoid them when you will saile through betwixt the Staples and the Holy Island, whether you come from the s. wards or the n. wards, then bring the steeple of Toustenbrough over the Castle of Bambrou, and keep them so standing, & then you shall run through betwixt them both, this channel lyeth so through n. e. and s. w. From the outermost end of the Staples to S. Abbens head, the Course is n. w. seven or eight leagues. From Holy Island to S. Abbens head it is n. n. w. seven or eight leagues.S. Abbens head. To the n. wards of S. Abbens head men do run in
unto Lieth and to Edenbrough in Scotland. S. Abbens head, and the Island Bas lye e. and w. four leagues asunder. The Island May and S. Abbens head, n. w. and s. e. four great leagues. May and Bas lye one from the other, s. w. and by w. and n. e. and by e. three leagues and a halfe.The Bas. The Bas is a high round Rock, clean round about, which you may saile along by on both sides. Be∣twixt the Rock and the s. shore it is ten and twelve fa∣thom deep, but the common faire way is along to the n. wards of it. Between S. Abbens head and the Bas, it is most part a clean Coast, but without ankor ground. The Island May is greater then the Bas, and also very cleane round about,Island May. except on the e. side, there it is foule. From S. Abbens head along to the n. w. of the Bas, the course is w. and by Nore, and w. n. w. four leagues, and from n. by the Bas to Inchkieth w. and w. and by n. about five leagues.Inchkieth. Between the Bas and Inchkieth by the s. shore lye many rocks, little Islands, and foul grounds, where at divers places is road, but not to be used, but by them which are there very well acquainted. Inchkieth and the Island May lye s. w. and by w. and n. e. and by e. seven great leagues asunder. Inchkieth is somewhat a long smal Island, a league to the n. wards of it lyeth an out-point on the n. Coast called Kingornesse,Kingornesse. before it and about it lye some little Rocks under water, but a little to the e. wards of the point is good ankor ground, and road for westerly winds. Between that point and the Island May, or the point of Fifines on the n. shore lye divers little ha∣vens, whereof some of them doe also yield out Coals, but are little or nothing used by the Hollanders. On both sides of the Inchkieth is good ground, and good lying, as well for w. or e. winds. From Inchkieth to Lieth it is s. e. a league.Lieth. Before Lieth about half an English mile from the shore lyeth a Rock, upon which standeth a Mast (with a crosse or some other thing of wood upon the top of it) for a Beakon. At high water the sea floweth over it, and at low water it falleth dry. With a spring tide at low water men may go
on foot to it. From the e. side of that Rock lyeth off a Riffe almost unto Inchkieth. You may also run through to the s. wards of Inchkieth, betwixt that foresaid riffe on the s. shore, but it is not to be done but by them which are there exceeding well acquainted, there it is altogether full of rocks and foule ground. When as you saile in to the n. wards of the Inchkieth you must leave the foresaid Mast on the larboard side, and run about to the n. wards of it, and then towards the s. shore, and ankor about halfe an English mile by w. Lieth, and also halfe an Eng∣lish mile from the shoare, in six, seven, or eight fathome. Lieth is the Haven of Edenburgh, a tyde Haven which fal∣leth dry at low water. From Lieth to Queens Ferry there lye on both sides many Rocks, some above and some under water.Queens Ferry In the Narrow before Queens Ferry lyeth a little Island called Inchgrave, which you must run along to the n. wards of, on the s. side it is with a stone bank (where men may goe over at low water) fast to the maine land: along to the n. wards of it is clean and deep. Within that little Island lye Caryn and other places more where men doe lade Coales. Under the e. side of the point to the n. wards of Queens Ferry, is good road in two, three, or four fathom, ac∣cording as you lye far from the shore. A league n. from the Island May lyeth the point of Fifs∣nes,Fifsnes.lying from S. Abbens head n. w. and by n. five great leagues, from thence to Dondee it is n. n. w. five leagues. Dondee is a good Haven,Dondee. which goeth in betwixt two high lands, being within men doe ankor before the Towne. Farther in upon the River, lyeth another Town called S. Johns, which you may goe up to at high-water.S. Johns. Between the point of Fifsnes and Dondee lyeth also the Baye of S. Andrewes, there is also good ankor ground.S. Andrewes.Four great leagues n. and by e. from the point of Fifsnes, and n. e. from S. Andrewes,Inchkap. lyeth a great Rock called the Inchkap, which the sea floweth over at high water, and at low water it falleth so dry that the Fishermen goe upon it.
Seven leagues to the n. wards of Dondee lyeth Monros,Monrosse.a good Haven. First you must saile in there amidst the Channel, and then edge up to n. wards, and ankor before the Towne. Betwixt Dondee and Monrosse lyeth an out point cal∣led Redhead,Redhead. about a great league to the s. wards of Mon∣rosse. There standeth a high Tower upon the Land cal∣led Albrot. From Monrosse to Stone-bay,Stonebaey. or De Torre, the Course is n. e. and by n. four leagues. This is a deep bay, and a good Haven for those that are bound to the s. wards, where men may lye land-lockt with many ships. Three leagues to the n. wards of it lyeth Aberdine;Aberdine. in this Havens mouth it is three fathom deep. The w. point is somewhat foule, therefore you must run in by thee. land, untill you come within the Haven, and ankor be∣fore the Town in four or five fathom. Up to the n. wards is a great Bay, but is showld on both sides. There goeth through a little Creek towards old Aberdine, which is an old ruinous Towne. From Aberdine to booknesse the Course is n. n. e. 12 or 13 leagues.Booknes. Betwixt them both lieth a tide-haven. Booknesse is a high Hill, and lyeth upon the s. side of the point. To the n. wards of Booknesse lyeth a Bay as a Ha∣ven, called Spy,Spy. or Spilaers, from thence the land lyeth in w. and w. s. w. unto the Haven of Rosse or Luvernes. To the n. wards of Rosse lyeth an out poynt called Cape Terbate, right in the bottome of the bay betwixt Catnes and Booknes, distant from Booknes about 19 or 20 leagues.Ceterbate. In this Bay are many Havens and Sounds, which are deep enough for to come into with great ships. It is from thence to Catnes 26 leagues n. e. and by n. Cat∣nes lyeth from Booknes n. w. and n. w. and by n. 21 or 22. leagues. From Booknes unto the outermost Orkanes it is n. and n. and by w. two and thirty or three and thirty leagues. The Orkneyes are one and thirty Islands in number, first Wayets or Elhoy, which lyeth next to Scotland, five
leagues about the point. About n. n. e. off from the point of Catnes, lye two little Islands, Pits and Pichlantsscare there you may run through to the w. wards betwixt El∣hoy and Scotland. To the n. wards of them lyeth an Island called Heynda, with another Island called Platta, to the n. wards of Plat∣ta lyeth Mayland or Ponoma. On the n. side of this great Island are all the Havens where the ships come to. Upon the e. side of this great Island lyeth another I∣sland called Kabunsa, to the n. wards of it lyeth another Island, at the n. e. point of the great Island, you may al∣so run through there towards Papewester, and leave Sand a lye on the starboard side. Close to Papewester lyeth Fara, to the s. wards of it is Sirza, to the e. wards of Sirza and Fara lye two Islands, in the midst of all these Islands, called Eeda and Chap∣noza. Sanda lyeth to the n. wards of all these Islands, but Pa∣pa and Stronza lye to the s. wards of Sanda. To the e. wards of Stronza lyeth an Island called Cul∣stella, that is the eastermost Island of all, the northermost is called Ronalze or Northernanse. Eleven or twelve leagues n. w. from the great Island lye two Rocks, the one under water, and the other above water, he that cometh from the w. wards must take heed of them. Of the Depths and Showlds about these Plates, and in what Depths men may see the Land. Thwart of Winterton and Cromer, 7 or eight leagues from land, it is eighteen and nineteen fathom deep, and there you may see the land. N. e. and n. e. and by n. from Cromer, lyeth a Bank, whereupon remaineth at low half flood no more water them four fathom, from thence you may see the land indifferent well. N. and by e. from Blakenry lyeth a Bank whereupon remaineth at halfe flood no more water then five fathom.
In eighteene fathome thereabouts you may see the land. From thence to the point of Chappel it is all showld. About n. n. w. and n. and by w. from Winterton-sand lyeth the bank before Crommer, five leagues without the Coast. To the n. wards of the Hommer of Hull you may see the Land in twenty five fathom. Flambrough-head men may see the land in five and thirty fathom. Scarbrough men may see from below in five and forty fathome. Of the Tides, and Courses of the Streames. about these foresaid places. Before Cromer a s. e. Moon maketh high water. At Blakeney, Wels, Bornum, and Lyn, an e. & w. Moon. Before the Hommer of Hull an c. n. e. & w. s. w. Moon. From Blakeney to Flambrough-head the flood falleth s. e. and the ebbe n. w. At Flambrough and Fyley, in the Peer, a w. s. w. Moon maketh full sea. At Scarbrough and Robbin-hoods bay a s. w. and n. c. Moon. In the Teese and at Hartlepoole also, a s. w. and n. e. Moon. Before the River of Newcastle, a s. w. and n. e. Moon maketh also the highest water. Thwart of Flambrough-head, Scarbrough, the Teese, and also thwart of the River of Newcastle, the flood fal∣leth s. e. and the ebbe n. w. To the n. wards of the Teese, the flood falleth s. s. e. along the land, and from the Teese to Scarbrough s. e. and by e. On the Coast betwixt Tinmouth and S. Abbens head, a s. e. and n. e. Moon maketh High-water. At Lieth in the Haven, a s. w. and by w. Moon, ma∣keth full sea.
The flood falleth along these Coasts s. s. w. and the ebbe n. n. w. At Orknes and Booknes a s. w. and n. e. Moon maketh high-water. The floods come about from behind Scotland, from the w. wards through betwixt Fairhill and Orknes, and make there about full sea with a s. w. and n. e. Moon. From Booknesse the flood falleth s. along the Coast towards Lieth, and the ebbe n. to the contrary. In this fareway it is deep forty, fifty, and sixty fathom, in forty five and fifty fathom you may see the Land. In this fareway in the summer the first Herrings are caught. How these Lands doe lye one from the other, and from other Lands. From Cromer to Blackney, w. n. w. 3 or 4 l. From Blackney to Bornum through within the sand west 7 l. From Boruum to Chappel w. s. w. 2 l. From Chappel to Elleknock, or the n. point of Boston∣deep, the Course is n. w. and by n. 5 l. From thence to the n. point of Cromer, n. and n. and by west 7 l. From the n. point of Hommer to Flambrough head n. n. w. 9 l. From the point of Crommer or Shield to the Tessel e. 40 or 42 l. From the n. point of the Crommer to the Tessel e. and by s. and e. s. e. 60 l. From Flambrough-head to Fyley, n. w. 3 l. From Fyley to Scarbrough n. w. 2 l. From Scarbrough to Whidbie, n. w. and by w. 5 l. From Whidbie to the Teese, the Course is first w. n. w. and afterwards w. and by n. 7 l. From the Teese to Tinmouth n. n. w. 8 or 9 l. From Whidbie to Tinmonth, is n. w. and s. e. 16 l. From to Cocker Island n. n. w. 8 or 9 l.
From Tinmouth to Staples n. and by w. 16. l. From Staples to Barwick w. n. w. 3 l. From Barwick to S. Abbens head n. n. w. 5 l. From the Staples to S. Abbens head n. w. 8 or 9 l. From S. Abbens head to the Bas, w. 4 l. From the Bas to Inchkieth w. and w. and by n. 5 l. From S. Abbens head to the Island May, n. w. 4 l. From S. Abbens head to Fifines, n. w. and by n. 5 l. From Fiftines to Dondee, n. n. w. 5 l. From Tinmouth to Scuytenes n. e. 104 l. From Tinmouth to the Naze n. e. and by e. easterly, 130 l. From Tinmouth to the Scawe, e. n. e. 136 l. From Tinmouth to Holy land, e. and by s. easterly 106 l. From Fifines to Stone-bay, n. and by e. 16 l. From Redhead to Monros n. w. 4 l. From Monros to Stone-bay, n. e. and by n. 4 l. From Stone-bay to Booknes n. n. e. somwhat n. 16 l. From Aberdine to Booknes, n. n. e. 12 l. From Booknes to Phyloort, or Spyloort, n. n. w. 3 l. From Phyloort to the poynt of Elgyn, west 10 l. From the poynt of Elgyn to the Haven of Rosse, or Lu∣vernesse, w. and by s. somewhat southerely 7 l. From Cape de Terbate to Catnes, n. e. and by n. 16 l. From Booknes to Elhoy, w. n. w. 5 l. From Booknes to Catnes, n. w. and n. w. and by n. 21 l. From Booknes to the Orkanes, n. and by w. 26 l. From Booknes to Hanglip, or the s. end of Hitland, n. and by e. 53 l. From Booknes or Scuytenes e. and by n. 69 l. From Booknes to the Naze, e. somewhat s. 88 or 90 l. From Booknes to Bovenbergen in Jutland, e. & by s. 104 l. From Booknes to Holy land, s. e. & by e. easterly, 123 l. From Booknes to the Tessel, s. e. southerly 125 l. From Booknes to the Holmes before Yarmouth, s. s. e. somewhat easterly 96 l. From Aberdine to the Holmes before Yarmouth, south∣east and by south 93 l.
Heights. Yarmouth lyeth in 52 degrees, 52 minutes. The n. point of the Hommer of Hull in 53 d. 20 m. Flambrough-head lyeth in 54 d. 5 m. Scarbrough in 54 d. 12 m. Tinmouth, or the River of Newcastle in 55 d. S. Abbens head in Scotland in 56 d. 12 m. Booknes lyeth in the height of 75 d. 50 m. Catnes in 58 d. 32 m. The greatest or the outermost Island of the Orkneyes in 59 d. 8 m. The Third Demonstration. Wherein Are set forth the Coasts of Fairhill, Hitland, and the Islands thereabout, as also the Island of Fero, and some Islands behind the North∣west corner of Scotland. THe Island Fairhill lyeth from the e. point of the Or∣kanes n. w. and from Booknes n. and by w. about 37 leaguer.Fairhill. On the w. side of Fairhil is at some places foul ground, but upon the s. e. side is good ankor, there you may an∣kor every where. Fulo lyeth from Fairehill n. w. and n. ten leagues,Fulo.betwixt them both lyeth the southermost point of Hit∣land, lying from Fairhill n. n. e. seven or eight leagues, and from Fulo e. and by s. four leagues. The s. w. Coast of Hitland (to wit from the souther∣most poynt to the n. w. point) lyeth northwest and by north, seven or eight leagues. On the same s. w. side o∣ver against the Island Fulo lyeth a Sand-bay, where men may ankor, but on the e. side of this bay it is somewhat
foule. From that northwest or west poynt off to the n. end, the land of Hitland lyeth north-east and south-west, seventeen or eighteen leagues. Two leagues to the n. wards of the foresaid w. point, lyeth the Haven of S. Magnus,S. Magnus. which is a broad Sound, within it is good ankor ground in sixteen or seventeen fathom depth, according as you shall be far within the land. On the north side lyeth a high Rock, which you mustrun in to the southwards of. And on the s. side ly∣eth two or three Rocks, which you must leave on the starboard side, when you saile in there. Even to the eastwards, about the s. poynt of Hitland, lyeth a faire Sand-bay, where you may ankor in twelve or thirteen fathom, from thence to Hanglip the Course is n. e. somwhat westerly nine or ten leagues. Betwixt Hanglip and the south point lyeth an Island,Hanglip.which you must sail about on both sides, within it lyeth Hambrough Haven, or the Scottish Haven, which is a lade place for the Hamburgers and Scots. There lyeth also a high steep point to the s. wards of Hanglip,Hambrough Haven. to the south∣wards of it men doe run into Broad Sound, the chiefest Haven of all Hitland, which is deep & hath clean ground, there men doe lye handlockt for all winds. From the Broad Sound lyeth a Sound in along to the northwards,Broad Sound. through the land, which cometh out againe into the Sound to the northwards, and so maketh an I∣sland of the land whereupon the high hill Hanglip lyeth. When as you will saile in there from the northwards, that is, to the northwards of Hanglip, you must run in nearest by the south shore, and edge to it betimes. In this channell betwixt both lands lye two Islands or Rocks, the greatest lyeth nearest the north shoare, and the smal∣lest nearest the south shoare, betwixt them both lyeth also a suncken Rock, which at low water is uncovered, and at High water you may know it by the breaking upon it. When as you will saile in here, you must leave the fore∣said greatest Rock, with the suncken Rock, on the star∣board side, and the smallest Rock on the larboard side,
there is upon the showldest three fathom and a half water. Within this Haven lye also two Havens at the n. point, which lye into the land, where is good lying. When as you will sail from this foresaid Haven through within unto the Broad Sound, you shall meet scarce half wayes with a Rock, from which lyeth off a riffe towards the west shoare, thwart of it you must run close along by the west shoare, for to avoid that riffe. To the northwards of Hanglip, the land of Hitland ly∣eth n. n. and by e. and n. n. e. at last north, and at some places you may saile in through Hitland, especially to the northwards of Hanglip, where a faire broad Sound lyeth northwest through, there is good ankor ground to find at some places, for those that are there acquainted. From Hanglip to the n. e. point of Hitland, the Course is n. n. e. ten leagues, there lye some out-rocks called the Out-scares. From thence along to the n. point of Hit∣land,Out-scares.the Course is n. about four leagues. A little about the east point goeth in a fair Haven cal∣led Bloem Sound, lying in south-west.Bloem sound. On the west side lyeth a long Rock, you must sail in to the eastwards of it, and ankor a little within the Haven, it is there within all clean sand ground, and good lying. Bloem sound ly∣eth in first (as hath been said) south-south-west after∣wards, south and south and by east, on both sides is good ankor ground, there you may sail altogether through, and come out againe through Jellesound into sea, about the Island Fero. The greatest and chiefest Islands of Fero,Names of the Islands of Fe∣ro. are 12 in num∣ber: as Suydro, Satrdo, Moggenes, Wage, Stromo, Ostro, Calso, Cuno, Bordo, Wydro, Sreyno, and Fulo. The little Islands of Fero are ten, as Little Dymen, Sto∣er Dymen, Schuyvo, Dalifles Hesden, Trallo, Colster, Mogge∣sholme, the Monk, and the Bishop. Besides these are yet some Rocks, and little Islands, to seven or eight in number. The southermost great Island, called Suydro,Suydro, lieth most south-rast, and north-west, about seven or eight leagues.
At the s. e. end of this Island lieth a high Rock, called the Monk,Monk Somby. or Sombie, after the name of the first or south-ermost Haven in Suydro. Betwixt the Monk and the s. e. end of the Island Suydro, is a Race or Well, which men must avoid, especially with spring tides. Upon the west side of the Island Suydro, are no Ha∣vens for to save any ships in, but it is altogether high steep land. On the north side are may Havens, where men may saile into and save ships, as Sommersound or Hest, Hof∣wyke, Urobie, Quaelbie or Rane, all broad sounds of Havens, a Countrey-man or Pilot can bring you in there every where to your desire. From the northwest end Suydro to Moggenesholme,Moggenes∣holme.the westermost and outermost Island of Fero, the Course is north-west, and by north, and north-north-west, a∣bout eight or nine leagues. At the east end of Moggenesholme lieth Moggenes, to the eastwards of it lyeth the Island Wage,Moggenes. Wage. and to the east∣wards of Wage goeth in a faire sound from the south∣wards off from the Island Sando, about Hesten, and the I∣sland Colster, for you may run in about these Islands on both sides, and leave the great Island Stromo on the east side, and so come into Wage. In the middest of the Sound of Wage, goeth up a haven to the eastwards into the great Island Stromo, therein you may ankor in ten or twelve fathom, but the Sound is at least twenty fathom deep. Moggenes and the north-east end of Fero, lye east-north-east, or a little more northerly, and west-south-west, about fiften leagues asunder. Betwixt them both lye ten Islands, and betwixt each Island, is a faire broad and deep sound, whereof the fourth off from Moggenes is cal∣led Somsound. All these Sounds lye most north-north-west and south-south-east through the land, and upon all these Islands stand Churches,Somsound. except upon Ostra, which neverthelesse is a great Island. From the south-east end of Suydro to Scalhead, or the south-east end of the Island Sando, the Course is north and by west about five leagues. Betwixt Suydro and San∣do
lye the little Islands, Little Dymen, Stoer Dymen,Little Dymen Stoer Dymen.Schavo, and Dalsfles. From Scalhead untill within the Island Mulso (lying before Stromo) the Course is n. and by w. four leagues, there you may every where ankor, where you will, in twenty, thirty, or forty fathom.Stromo. If any man coming in out of the sea, desireth to see a good road or haven, under the Islands of Fero, he shall keep that middlemost great I∣sland Stromo n. w. and n. w. and by w. from him, and then he shall see upon the middest of the Island Stromo, a high steep hill called Schelling,Schelling. which he must saile right in with, and so he shall meet with that foresaid Island Mulso, a low Island, which you may saile about on both sides, but it is best for to run in there at the s. south end, under the Island is all over good ankor ground. Right over against this Island, on the great Island,Torshaven. lyeth Tors∣haven, the chiefest Haven of Fero, where all the trade of Merchandize is. From Torshaven or the Island Mulso, to the north-east end of Fero, the Course is north-east, and north-east and by east, about twelve or thirteen leagues, betwixt them both lye seven Islands, and betwixt each Island, as hath been said, goeth a broad sound through the land, lying through about north-west, north-west and by north, and north-north-west. The north end of Fero is about four leagues broad, and lyeth north-west, and south-east,Fulo.and is called Fulo, thwart of it lyeth the Bishop. He that desireth to sail off from Mulso into Somsound, let him go on north-west and by north, three leagues, un∣to the point of Bordenes,The Bishop. up north-west off from Bordenes, and then he shall espie a Church upon the I∣sland Calso, which he must leave on starboard side, and go in along west-north-west untill he come into the bight of the Island Ostro, and ankor there in seventeen or eighteen fathom. These Island of Fero lye in a triangle, it is from the s. e. end of Suydro to Fulo, or the n. end of Fero n. n. e. and s. s. w. twenty one leagues asunder.
From Scotland westwards, and to the northwards of Ireland, lye many Islands, whereof we shall here describe some with so much perfectnesse as thereof is yet known. The names of the principall Islands lying there, are these:Names of the Islands. Areu, Ila, Jona, Mulla, Bragedall, Hun, Lewis, St. Patricius, St. Maria, St. Golane, St. Petous, Epth, and St. Kilda, these are the greatest; there are yet some small I∣slands, as Rona, Chent, Trauta, Fladde, Grand Melul, Petit Melul, Stalpan, Cannay, Rum, Egghe, Mule, Cutte, Cranden∣brough, Gronsay, St. Karbo, Lismont, Swynoy, Machare, Gegay, Caray, and Navarsay. All these Islands doe lye and belong under Scotland, and are those which by the Cosmogra∣phers are called Insulae Hebrides. The Island Barre or Rona is the northermost Island ly∣ing behind Scotland,Barre, or Ro∣na. and lyeth from Fulo about w. s. w. thirty seven, or thirty eight leagues, it lyeth by two other little Islands about a great league one from the other. The Islands of Lewis lye from Rona south-west distant sixteen or seventeen leagues, and from the north end of Lewis to S. Kilda, it is s. w. and w. sixteen leagues. On the east side of S. Kilda is a good road for a w. and n. w. wind. This Island lyeth by the other little Islands, whereof the two are not very great, upon that which ly∣eth to the westwards you may see some houses stand, and these two little Islands lye ten leagues to the westwards of the great Island of Lewis. Upon the coast of Lewis lye also two rowes of great Rocks, like as if they were little Islands lying one from the other south and north, some∣what easterly, about seven or eight leagues. The southermost lye by three little Islands, but the northermost lye by eight small little Islands or Rocks. The Island of Lewis is divided into many parts, the which men may sail through at many and divers places. Lewis with the Island belonging to it, lye s. s. w. and s. and by w. about twenty nine leagues. But on the east side goeth a broad sound through of five or six leagues. Men sail in close by the Island of Lew∣is, about s. s. w. until past the Island Cheut.
From thence the Sound lyeth through betwixt the great Island Bragadul and Lewis, s. and s. and by w. to∣wards the west end of Lewis, called the Ephts, then you must leave Mulla and Ila, with many other Islands on the larboard side. Jona, Ila, Mulla, and Bragadul, are four of the great∣est Islands which are lying on the west coast of Scotland, and lye close by the main land, but there are many Ha∣vens and Sounds, so that there you may saile in and about them every where. At the n. w. point of Ireland lye also some Havens, which you may saile through and round about them all. Betwixt Rona and Orkney lye also some Islands, wch also you may saile through betwixt, and round about. He that falleth with these Islands, must be very carefull and circumspect, for the most part of them are inhabited by wild and savage people. In Lewis and the Islands thereabouts, a s. w. and n. e. Moon maketh the highest water: and likewise also with∣out the n. poynt of Scotland. Of the Tides, and Courses of the Streames. In Hitland within the Havens and Sounds, a s. s. w. & n. n. e. Moon maketh full sea. The flood runneth there to the eastwards, and the ebbe to the westwards, especi∣ally at the s. end and n. end of Hitland, and so fall thwart through the sounds and havens. In the Islands of Fero a n. and s. Moon maketh the high∣est water. Under the Islands of Fero goe very hard tides, with great turnings, the flood commeth there out of the west, and w. n. w. and the ebbe out of the e. and e. s. e. and fall so along through the Islands, there you must reckon your tides thereafter: When you will saile from the one Island to the other, there are two Wels, or Mealstreames, the
one at the s. end of Suydro, and the other a league with∣in Scalhead, at Quaelnes. Although the tides doe run so strong through these Islands, yet neverthelesse it floweth not there four foot up and downe. How these Lands doo lye one from the other, and from other Lands. From Fairhill to the north-east poynt of Orkneyes, south-west 9 or 10 leagues. From Fairhill to the south-end of Hitland, south-south. west, and south and by west 7 or 8 l. From the north end of Hitland, to the Rocks of Rocol, west-south-west 127 or 128 l. From the south end of Hitland to Fero, west-north-west, and north-west and by west 61 l. From the north end of Hitland, to the s. end of Fero, w. and west and by north 58 l. From Hitland to the east point of Island, the Course is n. w. and by w. about 130 l. From the north end of Hitland to Gryp north-east and by east 125 l. From Hitland to Stadt east-north-west 67 l. From Fero to Rona the course is s. and by e. 45 or 46 l. From the s. end of Fero to Rokol s. w. westerly 85 l. From Rona to Lewis the course is s. w. 16 l. From the n. end of Lewis to S. Kilda s. w. 16 l. From the s. end of Lewis to the n. w. point of Ireland, the Course is s. s. w. about 27 l. From S. Kilda to the n. end of Hitland, north-east and by east 39 l.
Of the Heights of these Lands. The s. end of Hitland lyeth in 52 deg. 48 min. The n. end of Hitland lyeth in 60 deg. 45 m. The s. end of Fero lyeth in 61 d. 15 m. The n. end in 62 d. 20 m. The Island of Rona lyeth in 58 d. 46 m. The n. end of Lewis lyeth in 58 d. 18 m. The Rock Rocol lyeth in 58 d. 20 m. The north-west poynt of Scotland lyeth in 30 minutes. 58 deg. FINIS.
