D1974 E616_11 99865843 118094
Before the Lords second coming, OF The last Days To be visited, Signed with the Tyrant Pharaohs Overthrow. ACTS 3. 22, 23. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren, like unto me, &c. And it shall come to pass, Every soul which will not hear that pro∣phet, shalbe destroyed among the people. September▪ octo: or November Printed in the year, 1650.
The most Mighty his Messenger, ELEANOR DOUGLAS, Dowger; Daughter of Lo: Audeley, Lo: Touchet, E: of Castlehaven: To them of England, France, Scotland, Ireland and Wales; BRethren of these distracted. Do∣minions, hereof in a word, with∣out which, that tryed Gold in the fire coveted, and whitened Rayment, eye∣salve, of that sort or anointing, do but bathe an Ethiopian, spur Balaams ass, since other Balm or way none beside, when have tryed all, but by the word to try the Spirits, whether counterfeit or current, Scriptures to search, those Mines, a business worthy of as serious dispute as whatsoever: namely, whe∣ther for blaspheming against the holy
Ghost hath not brought upon us this judgement unexpected, wherein de∣lay no less perillous then heretofore pernicious, untimely tasting that pa∣paradice fruit, whose precious gates when as come to pass set open, The chrystal flovving living fountain to all passengers free, supposed to have been dryed up: The reserved Tree of Life likewise given gone, month∣ly rendg its golden Largess, at∣tain'd not to its maturity till now: whose wholsom leaves dispersed, daily for asswaging the Nations festered wounds assign'd, so requisite those Su∣pernaturals against unnatural waged wars: These not the first time pressed, But Gallio cared for none of these mat∣ters, (Acts 18.) although deny the holy Ghost; by consequence The Lord
that bought them. Moreover accom∣panied with frequent Blasphemies, by the Trade called Religion set abroach, Scriptures not more in thraldom to Romanists, their state of Ignorance, then the holy Ghost endeavored to be enslaved (Arrogancy the worst) by them stiled Our Reformers and Deli∣verancers, distraction of no common consequence, destructive to concord among Brethren-Nations, in their Brothers eye nrrowly observ'd, di∣scern a mote: Execrable Opinions theirs, nevertheless a Beam such a mountain in their own, esteems it not considerable: Foes of our grand Freedoms and Liberties, whatsoever they pray, Thy Kingdom come, say in their hearts, Torment us not before our time; not onely intrenched Sion a∣bout,
have scaled new Jerusalems wals, undermined her Bulwarks: But out∣stripping Savages of late have slain most barbarously our tvvo Sacred Ambassadors, Those VVitnesses as impreached (Revel. 11.) The last days, whose Ringleader the foul Beast as∣cended out of the Abyss, by undeni∣able evidence charg'd with the gift of Prophecies Lamp extinguisht, troden under foot that holy City, &c. ex∣chang'd for their gifts sent one to an∣other, or Symony, triumphing over their corps, because tormented them with their published Commission, te∣stified that solemn Oath taken, (Rev. 10.) of Tyrant times being cut off, and unhappy generation, such to be no more. And so much for these precious
passages, all plainly speaking of Pro∣phecies return or resurrection, like the Eagles renewing her strength, immu∣nities not inferior to former times, withal informing what Mutiniers in Court and City, against these 2 books in special of the Prophets, Daniel and John, both which men revived but by a touch, &c. the one continuing until King Cyrus, the other until the Cities destruction, Types and Figures be∣fore the Churches Deliverance time: How long in captivity under Tyrants, Lawless wretches, not unlike those ruines of the Temple, darksom un∣inhabited Vauts in the possession of Owls and their Mates, whose Houses and Riches become their Heaven and god. And so come to Times Mystery,
his golden Hour-glass, whereof thus, (Revel. II.) he where bidden to arise, &c. his casting it up to be forty two Moneths, in short as much to say, By three yeers and a half, pointing to the number of Seven, extends not onely to the Seventeenth Century, but ex∣presly to the present Jubile, from that moiety or dividing of Time, so over and over prest by those sealed VVrits of theirs: The Prophet Daniel his multiplyed weeks, as informs, saying Seven weeks, and Seventy weeks are determined, &c. And in the midst of the week, &c. but several voyces all in one, expressing the aforesaid Jubile or fiftieth yeer, appointed that of pardon, whereof our Lord on this wise, It is impossible but that offences will come, (Luke 17.) But wo unto him,
&c. no less then Great Britains neck-Verse, that shall offend one of these, stiled his Little ones, a Mill-stone then other Ornament more proper for such a one, as in reference hereto, bears date even his last return (an. 49.) seven times seven. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again, thou shalt forgive (or receive) him: bear witnes the Disciples, Lord increase our Faith, to wit, Defen∣ders of the Faith stiled, never at so low an ebb, as that sure Oracle replyed, had they Faith as a grain of mustard, &c. Need not fear the day of Iudgement tydings, or Worst of Tyrants conclu∣ding it, how faring with them when the Son of Man revealed, vers. 24. one taken the other left, demanded where Lord such Massacre, and woful wars
refers them to the Roman Ensign, the Eagle, where the corps, &c. And so much for this, be it known to all, Touch not mine anointed, do my Prophets no harm, with a touch of Times week its Mystery, the most Su∣preme, set at nought for Onions and Garlick, those anointings in sted of Canaans Grapes and Olives, by Ox∣ford Naamans, are not the Rivers of Damascus better? So proceeding with Sodoms Map of those two Prophets crucified, exposed like some Malefactors not suffered to be interr'd, where three days and half (and years) beside sounding the gene∣ral Resurrections Alarm, Months for∣ty two, theirs contributing thereto, for a time, times, and dividing of Time, with one consent crown the Seven∣teenth
Century, 500 years fulfiilling a period, shadow'd under Hyergly pick figures, how honor'd the Spirit of pro∣phecy then powred out, as by those two in Sackcloth Liveries, their agree∣ing in one, and them whoso hurts or dishonors with untimely death repaid, fire proceeding out of their mouths. At whose word (that wine) VVa∣ters turned into Blood, VVars fore∣shewed, restrain the Heavens, smite the Earth vvith Plagues as often as they please, stiled The two Olive Trees, and Two Candlesticks, expelling dark∣ness; the healing nature of Oyl not unknown, requires no farther ampli∣fication, shewed to be the Books of the greatly beloved Man, and that Disci∣ple whom the Lord loved: So, Come, saith the Spirit, and Come, saith the
Bride, and those will take gratis: and If any man take away, &c. for I testifie unto every MAN: Lest the last Error worse then the first, when the bad Spirit tempting, and the woman. Thus passing on, when the Spirit powred out a passage when opened in Heaven, the Holy Prophets giving thanks, the time come of their awake∣ning, opened also the gates of Hell, such an uprore about Father Times being cut off, those tydings the City setting on fire, the Nations stung, their time come forth to be judged, (Rev.) the Devil wilde for company, loses no time by Sea and Land, because his but short greatly wrath. On all sides thus, how the Mystery abounds of Iniquity, witnes our wan∣dring Stars, visible in this horrible
Age, so many though charg'd with abusing their Tolleration or Liberty of conscience: no wonder, when higher Powers express no better use made of theirs, then by leasing and scoffing to abuse the Holy Ghosts long-suffering, of vvhose Apostacy and Erroneous actings, extending to delay of the day of Iudgment, not sensible of ou en∣trance thereinto: And detaining the Kingdom of Heaven from the true owners, By reason of certain Reserves or doubtful Speeches, matter of Re∣ality failing, our fluent Tertullus's in∣form: Because said, Of the day and hour knows no man, and to Thieves approach likened by night; hold forth, need not be beholding, or farther consolati∣on expected for Sion, that fear causless, lest set at nought their Trade, no far∣ther
watch requisite, teach the good man of the house may take his ease, (Mat. 24.) as upon that mistake went abroad of that Disciples not dying, ta∣ken for a second Elias, Job. &c. Be∣cause of the conceal'd day and hour, which matters not: Go on in defer∣ring amendment, sufficient tokens come forth of the last Day, though pricking the hearts of very Iews. Of which store not all expended, Aarons distillings, or her renowmed anointing to the end of the world, ten∣dred not by way of ostentation or self∣ends, seasonable as looking towards Sodom: Shewing extant on Record in several Courts since an. 1633. and asore to a year, a Month, and the very day, under her hand, foreshewed matters then of highest nature of late executed
as by so many years durance under∣gone, since then when deem'd impos∣sibilities or distraction. As farther, by credible persons to be testified, no few about the City, how accompanied with Miracles no inferior ones: Beside Devils, also dumb Spirits cast out, most outra∣geous of all other, with as ample com∣mission and convincing testimony, as ever Moses and Elias, if not a greater, except the Age become more deaf or unmoveable then that pillar of Salt, Lots metamorphosed wise, her Exe∣cution sign, or then our Wyldshires stonage wonder, as proper for Pha∣raohs of these days. And as closes (displaying his pede∣gree off-spring of the Prophet David, saying, I come shortly) with that Bene∣ction,
Blessed are they that do his Com∣mandment, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, whose Leaf wi∣thers not or changes: And may enter in through those everlasting gates, twelve of the new City, so Monethly Humiliations and other like Supersti∣tions observ'd, no other then (Dan. 3.) when ye hear the sound, &c. Whoso falleth not down, &c. and If any man buy or sell, save he that hath the mark of the Beast, &c. alike acceptable, lea∣ving the other undone, (to be excom∣municated with Dogs, &c.) Be it or∣dain'd (even) upon pain of Death. Deo sit gloria, &c. From the Queens Bench. September, &c. FINIS.
