d551 e435_26 99865424 117664
THE DECLARATION AND RESOLUTION OF Divers Officers and Souldiers under the command of Major General Laughorn, concerning the procee∣dings of Col. Poyer, Governour of Pembroke Castle in Wales; And their Resolution touching his Excellency the Lord Generall. Also another late Fight betwixt the Forces under command of Col. Poyer, and the Parliament Forces belonging to his Excellency the Lord General. And the great danger of Adjutant General Fleming, and di∣vers other Gentlemen, by Poyers surrounding them, with their gallant successe thereupon. LONDON: LONDON, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.
ANOTHER LATE FIGHT BETWIXT The Forces under command of Col. Poyer, [and the Parlia∣ments Forces belonging to his Excellency the Lord Generall, neer the Garrison of Pembroke. Honoured Sir, WE have lately received intelligence of Col. Hor∣tons advance towards Pembroke Castle, with a gallant party of Horse, and it is said he will be there within few dayes, We dayly expect the comming up of the other Forces designed for the said service, which if speedily performed, will be the only means of bringing Poyer and his Confederates under subjection and feat. There hath lately been another Fight betwixt the Enemy,
and the Bristol Forces belonging to Col. Overton, within three or four miles of Pembroke town, which conflict con∣tinued not long, by reason our Forces were over-powred, yet they defended themselves with such Heroick and unanimous spirits, (although very deeply ingaged) that they denyed to yeild, unlesse upon honourable terms and conditions, which terms, after some dispute, were granted them, as will appear by the inclosed paper. The Enemy came down with a strong party of Horse and Foot, and thought to have surprized them in their quarters, but by the great vigilancy of the Bri∣stol party, they were timely discovered, and gallantly repul∣sed; for further satisfaction whereof, I shal refer you to the inclosed. Worthy Sir, THe miseries of the destroyed County of Pembroke doe very much increase. This Evening a Vessell arived here that came yesteray morning out of Milford and brings newes that Poyer is near 500. strong in Foot, and that Captain Addis Troop, one other Troop of Major Generall Laughorns horse, are fallen in to him, which amounts to about 100. he is dayly raising more Forces both of Horse and Foot, and to that end doth frequently muster the Country into Pembroke town, who do out of pure feare obey him, and doh make very full appearances before him, with Bils, Holberts, and such other weapons as they can get, and out of them vpon Satterday last he pressed 100. men, besides what hee hath pressed since in the Country, he hath sessed all the Country Parishes about him to a tax, neer trible as much on any parish as the three moneths Sesment for the Army is, which he forceth the Inhabitants to bring into him in money or provision▪ or both, & such as do refuse he threatneth to plunder, hee hath imprisoned Mr. Lort, Mr. Bowen, and Mr. Poyer, with severall others, and made them all pay their ransomes.
On Tuesday last a little before night, the two Companies of souldiers that went down by water from Bristol, landed neere Hentlan in Milford, and on Wednesday were set upon by the two troops of Horse, and about 100. Foot of Poyers in Pulchran Church, and Church-yard, but they maintained the place, and are not taken as the report was, but had conditions upon treaty, to march away with their arms, and are gone to Cardiff, upon en∣gagement not to land again in Milford. The same day Poyer beset Hentlau house, where was Mr. White, Mr. Roger Lort, Adjutant Generall Flemming, Mr. John Lort, and severall other Commissioners and Gentlemen that were met together, about the accommodating and quartering of the new landed souldiers, all of them are and was in great danger of taking, but they also by a stratagem escaped, and are got on ship-boord. One Butler a Colonell of the Kings Army, a grand Malig∣nant, commanded the Foot that were about the House, and had provided bars of Iron, sledges, and other instruments, for the breaking open of the doors of the house. By this, and what hath formerly been certified, you may see the setled resolution and activenesse of Poyer, and his adherents to raise a new war, which I am confident will grow to such a head on a sudden, if not timely prevented, in those malignant and dis∣contented parts, as will not easily be overcome. The disbanding of Maj. Gen. Laughorns Forces goes on very successefully and peaceably. The several Companies and Troops disbanded, being as followeth. Col, Lewis Foot his Company. Cap. Jones troop. Cap. Lloyds troop. Col. Lewis troop. Capt. Griffiths troope of Dra∣goons. Cap. Thomas Vaughans troop. All these shewed a willingnesse to obey the Parliaments Orders, notwithstanding they received Orders from Colonel Powel on pain of death to be that day at Carmarthen, & bring three dayes provision with them, Col. Horton it is thought by
this time hath entred Pembrokeshire, and confined Poyer to a narrower compasse then he had. Some troops of Major Gen. Laug∣horns men are gone with him to testifie their fidelity to the parli∣ament against those which revolted, which with some others joy∣ned, makes him about 12. or 1300. strong. Likewise Lieut. Col. Read with 8. Companies of Col. Overtons Regiment, are marched after, very well appointed, and at the coming away of the last Messenger, were as far as Cardiff. Poyer as yet hath but very few Horse, nor is not able to keepe the field, but will be again sufficiently penned up in the Castle, up∣on the appearance of the additional Forces sent down. Brecon. April 8. 1648. The Copy of another Letter from the West. Worthy Sir, OVr troubles here are great, Poyer and the Welsh-men still continue their insolent carriage, and that they have secured most of the Committee whom they took. But there are ships come into the Harbour to block them up, and to prevent the comming of any reliefe unto them. The number of the Rebels are not so great as is reported. Their whole Body doth not amount to a thousand, although it it is rumou∣red they are at the least four or fiue thousand strong. The In∣habitants adjacent are very much incensed against them, by reason of their great burthens and oppressures, occasioned by their present plundering both of provision, Goods, and Chat∣tel: Poyer hath declared the grounds and reason of his pre∣sent Engagement, and entertaines all that comes to him: hee hath summoned in the Inhabitants in those parts. Bristol 9. April. 1648.
A Letter sent from the City of Bristol, touching the resolution and proceedings of Col. Poyer. Noble Sir, THe affairs here are in a very sad condition, our feares dayly increase, and the Country is divided; for the ma∣lignant party gives out high speeches, and divers of the Ca∣valry resorts to Pembroke Castle, for the assistance of col. Poyer, and it is to be feared, they wil very much indanger the publique peace of these Counties, and prove a great ob∣struction to the proceedings of Parliament, &c. Their num∣bers increase, but not to that heigh as is reported, although it be rumoured that they are 4. or 5000. strong, but I can assure you to the contrary, that they do not consist of above 8. or 900. Horse and Foot, and divers of them slightly ar∣med, the greatest part of them are such who its thought will hardly change many blows. We do also further heare, that the Forces designed by his Excellency the Lord General are upon their march, Colonel Horton (we heare) is upon his march, as also Sir Hardresse Waller, and Col. Okey, with their Regiments. The Country-men are summoned in to Pembroke, but upon what occasion we know not, unlesse it be to fortifie the town, which is very probable. We dayly expect Col. Horton with his Regiment, who (its said) is upon his advance towards Pembroke, for the blocking up of the insolent Revels; but we are informed, that the cause of his so long stay, is, because hee expects a Randeavouz with the rest of the Forces appointed for that service, which is all at present, from Bristol 9. of April 1648. Your most obliged Servant, James Gibson.
Postscript. SIR, VPon the close of this Letter here arrived a Gentleman from Cardiff, who doth assure us, that the greatest part of Major General Laughorns Forces have subscribed to a Declaration, wherein they protest against any confedera∣cy or complyance with Poyer and his Confederates in this a∣ction, and that such of their Souldiers as have or shal goe in to him, they have and will look upon as Enemies and distur∣bers of the peace of the Kingdom, and that they are resolved and ready to aid and assist his Excellency the Lord General against any party or parties whatsoever. By all this, yet we hope this storme in Wales so much heightned by Malignants will suddenly be blown over, and their malignant expectations to engage a new War in those parts frustrated. Bristol April 9. 1648. Imprimatur, G. M. FINIS.
