E1536 669.f.11[29] 99869292 162679
FIVE ORDERS AND ORDINANCE Of Parliament, For payment of Souldiers. VIZ. 1 For fuch Souldiers as conforme to the Votes of both Houses sent downe to the Army, shall receive the benefit of those Votes. 2. For one Moneths pay to certaine Officers in the Foure Lists. 3. For one moneths pay to certaine Officers whose Accompts are not Stated. 4. For six weekes pay to those Officers whose Accompts are Stated. 5. For appointing of severall persons Treasurers for receiving and paying of monies to the Souldiers, at Weavers-Hall in London. Die Veneris 11 Iunii 1647. ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That all such Officers or Souldiers of the Army, as shall come off and conform to the Votes sent down to the Army, shall receive the benefit and advantage of those Votes. Hen, Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. Iunii 15. 1647 ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Treasurers at Christs-Church do pay upon Saturday next, unto the officers nominated in the foure lists or to their Executors or assignes, reported to this house about November last past, one moneths pay accor∣ding to the establishment of the Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax for their present relief, untill such summes of money other∣wise ordered towards their satisfaction may be received. Hen▪ Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom, Com. 15 Junii 1647, ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament that the Treasurers at Christ-Church do upon the sixteenth of this instant Iune pay unto those officers in Commission that are now attending in this town whose accompts are not yet stated (upon producing sufficient cer∣tificates under the hands of their respective Commanders in chief, which shall containe the time of their actuall service for the Parliament and qualities) one moneths pay of their arrears according to the establishment of the Army, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax and upon the determination of their accounts according to the ordinance and instructions of the 28 of May last, 2 moneths pay more with the same secu∣rity for the remainder as is voted and ordered to the officers of the said Army, providd hat this extend not to the Officers of the trained Bands or Auxi∣liary Regiments of this City, or to the other officers for whom other provisions hath been lately made by any order of both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, or to any other Officer whose name is not already listed, or shall not be listed before the said sixteenth of this instant in the list lately brought into this House by Collonell Sands, Collonell Devoreux, and others, and to be by them compleated, Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. June the 15. 1647. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament that the Treasurers at Christ church do upon Thursday next pay unto the Officers a Commission (who have attended in this Towne and have their accompts stated by the authority of Parliament though not according to the instructions lately published, and have received no money thereupon) six weeks pay, according to the establishment of the Army, under the com∣mand of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and indorse the summe so paid upon every such account, provided that this extend not to the Officers who are already otherwise provided for, by order of both, or either Houses of Parliament. And it is further ordered and declared that such officers whose accounts are stated by authority of Parliament, and not already satisfied, and shall not be willing to stay to have them determined according to the instructions aforesaid, may hereafter present Lists of such acounts by the Committee of the Military Garden to this house to the intent they may receive the same pro∣portion and securities given to others upon such accompts. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. WHereas, by a former Ordinance bearing date the sixteenth of this instant June, 1647. it is ordained, that the summe of 22000 l. to make the 5000 l. formerly charged upon Weavers Hall 27000 l. be paid by Alderman Bunch and the rest of the Treasurers at Weavers Hall, and to Mr. Pococke, Mr. Greenhill, and the rest of the Treasurers at Christ-Church to be issued as by the said Ordinance is appointed. And whereas divers of the Treasurers aforesaid are not in Towne which hinders the execution of the service: It is therefore ordained by the Lords and Commons, that Mr. Blackwell and Mr. Ashurst Citizens of London, shall be and are hereby added to be Treasurers for the receiving and issuing the money aforesaid together with Mr. Greenhill and Mr. Pococke, and that the acquittances of them, or any two of them shall be susficient discharge unto the said Alderman Bunch, and the rest of the Treasurers, at Weavers Hall. And it is further Ordained, that the said Treasurers shall have the allowance of one penny in the pound for performance of the said service, and for satisfying of the Officers, and such as they shall appoint under them in such manner as they shall thinke fit. And whereas by another Ordinance of the same date, divers Field-Officers and Auditors are nominated and appointed to renew and examine the severall Accompts and Certificates of the Officers which are to receive any money from the said Treasurers. It is further Ordered and Ordained that any three Field-Officers with any one of the Auditors nominated in the Ordinance aforesaid, signing such Certificates, Tickets, or accompts, it shall be a sufficient Warrant and discharge unto the said Mr. Pocock and the rest of the Treasurers by this and the former Ordinance appointed, for the issuing out and paying the money aforesaid unto the Officers, according unto the severall Ordinances already passed in that behalf. And whereas Mr. Pocock, Mr. Greenhill and others, have formerly been appointed Treasurers by an Ordinance of the date aforesaid▪ for the receiving and issuing out of ten thousand pounds to the private Souldiery. Forasmuch, and in regard of other employments, they cannt conve∣niently attend that service, It is therefore ordained, that Collonel Gower Anthony Bickerstaffe Mr. Iames Story, Mr. Maximilian Beard, Citizens of London▪ shall bee, and are hereby nominated and appointed Treasurers for the receiving, issuing and paying the ten thousand pounds aforesaid. And that they or any two of their acquittances shall be a sufficient discharge unto Mr. Alderman Bunch, and the rest of the Treasurers at Wea∣vers Hall. And it is further Ordained, that the said Collonel Gower and the rest of the Treasurers hereby appointed, shall bee allowed one penny in the pound for themselves, and their Officers employed in this service in such manner as they shall think fit. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that these Orders and Ordinance be forthwith Printed and pub∣lished. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. LONDON, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honourable House of Commons, 1647.
