E1918 669.f.9[6] 99870825 161104
official insignia AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, For reliefe of the Subiect, who have been prejudiced by stopping and discontinuing of Writs of Error, Which said Writs are to be sealed with the Great Seale of England, Ordeined and Established by both Houses of PARLIAMENT. THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration the great prejudice and inconvenience that may & doth accrue to the subject by the stopping and delay of Writs of Error, and also by discontinuing of Writs of Error by the Courts not sitting in the Exchequer Chamber, and by the not effectuall putting in execution the Commands of the Great Seale of England ordeined and established by both Hou∣ses of Parliament; Doe Order and Ordeine, that all Writs of Error brought in any of His Majesties Courts at Westminster, sealed with the said Great Seale and attested under the hands of any three or more of the Commissioners of the said Great Seale, whereof one Lord to be one, shall be signed by such of the Iudges as are or shall be the ancient Iudge then attending the said Courts or any of them respectively, and that such signing by any one of the said Iudges in the absence or vacancy of the Chiefe Iustice, or any other antient Iudges shall be as good and effectuall as if the same had beene signed by the Chiefe Iustice or other antient Iudge, any law, usage or other matter to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And be it further Ordeined, that whereas divers Writs of Error returnable in the Exchequer Chamber are discontinued by the not coming of the Iud∣ges there without any default of the parties prosecuting the said Writs, Be it Ordeined that new Writs of Error being taken out, the Iudges of the Court to whom they shall be directed shall allow of the said Writs of Error in the same manner as they allowed the former Writs, that so Execution may be stayed till the same can be determined, And that all Iudges, Officers, and Ministers, and other persons shall duly performe, obey and execute all such things as they or any of them shall be commanded or required to doe in their severall offices or places by force and vertue of the said Great Seale, as they should or ought to have done by force or vertue of any Great Seale of England, under paine of answering their Contempt therein to both Houses, and losse of their places. 15 May▪ 1644. ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. H. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed at London for Edw. Husbands. 1644.
