E2787A 669.f.3[18] 99868574 160576
After debate about the Printing and Publishing of the Orders of the 16th of January last, which followeth in these words, Ʋiz. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, in the High Court of Parliament: That the Divine Service be performed, as it is appointed by the Acts of Parliament of this Realme. And that all such as shall di∣sturbe that wholsome Order, shalbe SEVERELY punished according to Law. And the Parsons, Ʋiccars, and Curats, in their severall Parishes, shall forbeare to introduce any Rites or Ceremonies that may give offence, otherwise then those which are established by the Laws of the Land. 9o September 1641. Resolved upon the Question, That the Order of the 16. January, 1640. shalbe Printed and published. Lords assenting, Bishop of Lincolne. Lord Mowbery. L. Cleveland. L. Dunsmore. L. Dover. L. Denby. L. Portland. L. Carnarvan. L. Coventree. L. Newarke. Lords disassenting, Lord Keeper. L. Privy Seale. L. Bedford. L. Mandavil. L. Newport: L. Whorton. L. Clare. L. Hunsdon. It being put to the Question, whether the Lords would Order that it should be voated that the said Order of the 16th of January should be Printed and published, before a Conference desired with the House of Commons concern∣it. We whose Names are underwritten did disassent; and having before the puting of the Question demanded our right of Protestation, did accordingly make our Protestation: That We held it fit and necessary to have the consent of the House of Commous in those things which concerne so neerly the quiet and Government of the Church: And therfore we desired to have a Conference with the House of Commons before any Conclusive Order were Printed or published herein; Especially the House of Commons having but lately brought to us, (and desired the consent of our House unto) certaine Voates of theirs against divers Innovations, in, or about the Worship of God, lately practised in this Kingdome, without Warrant of Law. And therfore to acquit our selves of the dangers and Inconveniences that might arise by the Printing and publishing of the said Order of the 16th of January, as binding to the whole Kingdome, without desiring the consent of the House of Commons, We did protest our disassents to this Voate: And doe thus enter it as aforesaid. Lord Privy Seale. L. Bedford. L. Warwicke. L. Newport. L. Clare. L. Hunsdon. L. Mandavill. L. Whorton.
