E3071A 99896795 136930
Englands VVarning-Piece; OR, A Caviet for Wicked Sinners to remember their latter end. To the Tune of the Rich Merchant Man. ROuse up dull sinners all amend your lives with spéed Unto the Lord for mercy call you never had more néed, Cast off your wicked sins and throw them quite away Séek out for grace while you have space and go no more astray, Then lets with speed repent before our time be past For every man, woman & child must yield to death at last. What cruel hainous sins are raiing in this land Men take delight to disobey the Lord's holy command, For some so ud are grown they love their sins so well Before they will their es amend thy'l run headlong to Hell▪ The covetous miser he do  his bags of Gold, 'Tis his delight both day and night his treasure to behold, His riches and his wealth his only god he makes Before he will relieve the Poor hee'l rather from them take. then let us, &c. Also the Blasphemer that takes God's name in vain If he do'nt repent he shall take part Of Hells eternal pain, Then Cristian people all fly from that deadly sin With speed I say-without delay a goly life begin, then lets with speed repent before our time be past The Drunkard minds his drink and runs in sin each day Upon the Lord he doth not think but only goes a stray. His wealth he doth confound his body he destroyes Besides he doth consume his Soul, by lsin he heavenly ioyes, then lets with speed repent before our time be past, For every man woman & child must yield to death at last. And in these dayes each one are spiteful at each other The Father envies his own Son and the Sister hates the Brother, For now both old and young their hears to malice give The rich doth enoy at the Poor and hates to sée them live. then, &c. Whordome that crying sin, is us'd both day and night, In chambering end wantonness too many takes delight, But lt all such beware though here they be secure, Yet certainly at last they'l find a God most fast and sure. then, &c. The hateful sin of Pride is used frequently, In City Countrey and in town, as you may plainly sée For loy person mends their Robes and rich attire Which wi  at the last so Hells eternal fire then, &c. These are the crying sins which are used in these days But I wish all men would strive for to resrain their evil wayes Lest that some judgments great God doth upon them poure, By sending Famine, Plague & Sword our bonies to devour, then, &c. What sad Calamities hath haped to this land For o make men their sins refrain yet they'l not understand. But dayly will presume to follow wickedness, For day & night some do delight God's laws for to transgress, then, &c, But I wish all such as these to have a special care, Lest that God's vengeance on them fall before they are aware. For if that his fierce wrath be kindle on a flame, He will confound all such as doth despise his holy name. then, &c. Then let us séek for grace to him that sits on high, That wein Heaven may have a place to rest Eternally For who knows how soon but Death may on us seize. Then let's fear the Lord with one accord and not his Will  plee. Then let us with speed repent before our time be past, For every man, woman and child must yield to Death at last Printed for . Burton at the Horshoe in West. Smithfield▪
