F2491 E324_6 99861313 113445
A Fuller RELATION OF Sir Thomas Fairfax's ROVTING ALL The Kings Armies in the VVest, UNDER Prince Charles, the Lord Hopton, the Lord Goring, and all the rest at Torrington: With the manner of the FIGHT, and the number kill'd and taken on both sides. AS ALSO The blowing up of Torrington Church: Hoptons Horse shot under him; and the great dangers His Excellency escaped during the Fight. With Copies of LETTERS to Members of the House of Cōmons, and from Scoutmaster-Generals quarters. With a List of all the particulars since the coming of the former Letter. Commanded to be Printed, and are Published according to Order to prevent all false Copies. London, Printed for Mathew Walbanck, Feb. 21. 1645.
The copy of a Letter from one of the Clerks of the Army to a Member of the House of Commons. Honoured Sir, ON Friday the 6. of Feb. instant, Prince Charls sent out Warrants to the East hundred of Cornwall, and the West hundred confines, as far as Leistthiel and Foy, to summon them in to send men to proportion a number for compleating par∣ties to keep all the passes on the river between Salt∣ash and Stratton, upon Tamari ostium, and to all the other hundreds and parts adjacent, to send all the Forces they could raise, to joyn with the Army at Blank Torrington, with great threats to those that should fail them: The 7. instant divers men were pressed in those parts for both those services, and men dispatched for the keeping of the passes afore∣said, and many were forced come in to joyn with Hopton at Torrington: On the 8. instant, a party then at Liston were sent for to come up to the ge∣neral Rendezvouz; they promise their Landlords, that if they would disburse a sum of money to ena∣ble them to march, they would remove, not letting them know the General (who is now Hopton) had sent for them, telling the country people, they wan∣ted shoes for their Horses, and their Saddles mend∣ing,
Bridles and Clothes, &c. very unfit to march: and by this stratagem they got money, and yet ad∣vanced not before they plundred them; the Ene∣my (to encourage the Cornish to come in) tell them that the King is coming to them with a great army of eight or ten thousand horse and foot, and say he hath conquered all parts by the way; that Chester is relieved, and the siege raised at Newark. On Monday the 9. the General had a resolution to crush the Enemies new levied Forces at the first, and advance with all his strength for that purpose, only leave Sir Hardres Waller with a sufficient strength to maintain the siege against Exeter, viz. three Regi∣ments of Foot, and two of Horse, with the coun∣tenance of all the houses and Fortifications kept by them; the Enemy in Exeter, as we are informed, Feb. 10. by some that came out from thence, will be easily perswaded by pinching necessity to sur∣render; and if those in the Field under Hopton had but any rout, then they would be the readier in Exeter to deliver up that Garrison, points of Ho∣nour being the chiefest thing that keeps them back from it; the poor in the City, many men, women and children, are ready to starve, and many cry for bread, seeing nothing but ruine before them, except they surrender, if relief come not (which is very
unlikely:) Feb. 10. the Prince sent out Warrants for those in Cornwal to advance, so many as were ready, and with all speed to hasten to Tor∣rington, and those designed for the purpose, to help the passes on the Rere, to prevent our Forces from breaking in upon them that way; they had then got about Fifteen hundred horse to mount part of their Foot, for a design with the rest of the horse to break through, if they could, over Exmore; and therefore the Cornish had the charge of the guard∣ing of their own county pressed upon them the more; but many of them especially the Gentry, and those who had other thoughts before, were much discontent that they would now leave thē to themselvs. Friday the 11. the General went to Tiverton to secure those parts; and we had news, that Hoptons Foot were come to Torrington, where they were strengthning that Garrison, about eighteen miles from us: The Enemy had a general Rendezvouz within a mile and a half of Barnstable, the country teport them to be about five or six thousand, some say more, horse and foot: but for our march, upon notice of the Enemies procee∣dings, on Tuesday the 10. of Feb. we marched (as was resolved Munday the 9. at a Councel of War) from Chimley to Crediton, about 12 miles ill way, and hard quarters. Sir Hardres Waller, with Col: Butlers and Col: Sheffields Regiments of horse, and one Regiment of Col: Weldens, and also Col: Herberts and Col: Shaptoes, are left, with the rest of the Foot and Dragoons in the Garrison, to continue the Leaguer before Exeter; powder, and other ammunition proportionable for the Design left with them, and Orders for the managing of the busines there by Sir Hardres Waller. From Tuesday the 10. till Friday the 13. our Forces staid at Crediton, expecting the coming up of Major General Skippons Regiment, and Col. Overtons, and Col: Cooks Brigade, either all or three Regiments of Horse, and the Dragoons, are to be with us speedily. Sa∣turday the 14. Col. Overtons Regiment are to follow with the Gene∣rals Life-guard, and the rest to speed after, we resolved not to stay for them: we had with us, the Generals own Regiment, Col: Hamonds, Col: Harlows, Col: Lamberts, Col: Fortescues, and Col: Ingolabies of Foot. The Lieutenant Generals, Col: Sir Robert Pyes, and Col: Riches of horse. We have sent up Sir Hugh Pollard the Governour of Dartmouth to London. The Enemy have made some Sallies out of Exeter, but unwil∣ling to engage orces, so that much hath not been done there, but we hope they cannot hold out long. The General returning, we immediatly advanced Saturday the 14. instant, our head quarters were at Chimley, we had a Rendezvouz on a Moor in our way, but staid not, this gave the Enemy a notable Alarm,
and therefore, to make the Enemy the more secure, though Sunday the 15. we advanced with intentions for Torrington, yet partly by reason of the ill weather, and partly to put the Enemy into a carelesse posture, we retreated to our former quarters. Munday the 16. we had a, Rendez∣vouz, wherein we spent not much time, but marched to Stevenson, it being night at our coming thither, and glad we reach'd it so soon; from thence we drew out our forlorn hope that night, resolving to fall upon the enemy who thought themselves secure enough in Torrington, we had of that party about 1000. which marched immediately to the Hill beyond the Park, where they were engaged with the enemy, who received our forlorn, fought with them, and we took some prisoners, and our body coming up, God gave a good successe. They had made many protestations the day before to keep Torrington against as in case we did advance, having there three thousand horse or moue, and above two thousand Foot, some say seven thousand horse and foot at the least: But on Munday, Feb. 16. about ten a clock at night by the light of the Moon we fell upon them; they made very resolute opposi∣tion against us from the Towns: Hoptons own horse which he char∣ged with, was shot under him at the gate, they kept it to push of Pike, but through Gods goodnesse we (at last) entred the Town, and then so scattered them, they all ran avvay, some tovvards Barnstable, vvhither Hopton is supposed to be fled: but most vvent Westvvard to∣vvards Stratton, the Cornish having quit the passes on the river before, they left their arms, vvhich they had throvvn dovvn in the streets so thick, that they troubled us to passe, vve pursued still scattering them, vve follovved them, and scattered them in the pursuit: There vvas in the Church (vvhich vvas the Magazine) about eighty Barrels of Gun∣povvder, in vvhich place vve put in divers of the prisoners that vve had taken, but either by some accident or desperately, the povvder vvas fired, and blevv up the prisoners, the Church, and all therein, and took divers houses about it: some of the Lead fell into the Generals quarters, but did not much hurt, God be praised: vvee are still pursuing the vi∣ctory: they opposed us in some Lanes, vvhere divers vvere slain on both sides, but God gave the successe to us, vvho are still pursuing the Victory. Torrington: 16. Feb. 12 at night.
Another Letter sent from the Scoutmaster-Generals quarters. Honoured Sir, OUr head quarters were at Chimley on Saturday the 14 of this in∣stant February, which place the enemy had left before: On Sun∣day the 15. we advanced from thence, with intentions to fall on the enemy in Torrington: but the weather falling out wet, we retreated to our old quarters. Yesterday we had a timely Randezvouzs and came to Stevenson at almost night: we drew out our forlorn hope, and made a party of 1000. or there abouts, to the hill beyond the Park our forlorn and theirs fought for it, we took divers prisoners: The ene∣my were in all 3000 horse, but they say 4000. The foot we 2000. they say they were 2500. which were all in and about Torrington, which place they had garisoned, and were resolved to make it good. About ten a clock at night we fell on the enemy, and began to storm the Town, and indeed (to speak truth) they did defend it awhile ve∣ry gallantly to push of pike; but God put such a courage into the hearts of our men, that they went on, till at last it pleased God we entred and beat them through the Town, and scattered them several wayes: most part of them ran away Westward, in the way to Stratton, we followed after them, and still scattered them in the pursuit. After that we were entred Torrington, it so hapned that 80. barrels of Gun∣powder was set on fire, by some of the prisoners which we had there, blew up the Church and divers houses: some of the lead fell into the Generals lodging, which was about halfe Musquet shot from the Church, but God be thanked did us no hurt there: It is yet too soon to informe you of the particulars what is taken, but of that I shall shew you by the next. Torrington, Feb. 17.1. in the morning. Another Letter sent to a Member of the House of Commons. SIR, IT hath pleased the Lord to give us further successe against the Enemy in these parts, and to thwart their great hopes of gathering the great Army they so laboured for. Yesterday, the General, Lieutenant General, and the rest of our ces then at Chimley, advanced with a resolution to fall on Hopton in Torrington, whether he had gathered all his strength. I must passe over many things, to give you
accompt of the most materials; which is in brief thus, That before we went from Chimley, the General Ordered fourty pound gathered by the Constables of Chim∣ley, for the Enemy, to be disposed of for the poor of the Town, who had quar∣tered our Souldiers. There was a Randezvouz of Horse and Foot in Dunnington and Belvoir Moors, about a mile from Roborough, where they were drawn up in Battalia: in which time, we had not the sight of any enemy; our Forlorn of Dragoons being about 80 came in immediately after 200 of the enemy were gone out of the Town, but they faced them on a Hill, but durst not adventure to charge; our Forlorn of Foot, Horse and Dragoons pursued, alarm'd them at Squire Rolls House, which they were beginning to fortifie: It is a fair strong house about a mile from Torrington. Vpon our approach 200 of the Roysters Firelocks, and Musket∣tiers, quitted the House; and they with a Brigade of Horse fled before fourty of our Dragoons, and about 200 horse. Our Army drawing up upon a Heath neer the house, had the first view of the Enemy, who faced us with several parties on a Hill, not a∣bove half a mile or more distance: after this, the Forlorn hopes on both sides met, and skirmished for about two hours; our men made their Forlorn to retreat: where∣upon they drew forth a Reserve in the first Charge. One Reformado, Clerk of Col. Weldens Regiment, was shot in the Privities, after he had charged a great part of the Enemy, killed two, and was coming upon the third. Our men brought in prisoners continually, and got ground of the enemy, 800 horse being sent after those engaged, and a Regiment of Foot after them; by this it was dark. Whereupon, the General, and the rest of the field Officers had a Councel of War to debate, whether we should fall on before day or no; by this we heard their Tattoo to beat, by which we knew they were still in the Town: thereupon command was given to march up, which was done with as much willingnesse and freedom as could be, the foot marching al∣most up to the knees, sixteen Dragoons were sent to fire under an hedge neer the Enemy, to try whether they would defend the Town or no; they gave fire very feebly upon our men again. Our first word was Emanuel, God with us, and a Furr Bush in our Hats; theirs, We are with you, and an Handcarchiff tyed about their right Arms; but in regard they had taken some few of our men prisoners, and got the Word and Signal, the word at this Onset was Truely, and a Handcarchiff or white mark in our Hats, several parties were drawn forth after eight of Clock at night, which were met by the Enemy; our men disputed about six several Closes with the enemy, they still lining the hedge, but still retreating when our men came to their Barracadoes and Works, the enemy fired more close then ever, so that by the report of Commanders that have been engaged in the service, it was as desperate a service as was in the most violent storm that was made since the march of the Army, their men having the advantage of strong Barrcadoes, and Works, and Hedges, which much amazed our men; at last our men got over, beat the enemy from their defence, and gave way for the horse to enter, who disputed the streets with the enemy. Sir ohn Digby, Brother to the Lord Digby often charging against our men, at last they were beaten quite through the Town, throwing away their Arms for haste, which was no sooner done, but about eleven of the Clock, the Church where∣in the Magazine was left, was blowed up, conceived by a train which they had laid on purpose; there were 84 Barrells of Powder in it, besides other Ammunition: the Church was rent all to peeces, both Stones, Timber, Lead, and Steeple; great store of Lead was cast over the Houses into the street, one of which fell within two Horses length of the General. The Generals Groom had his horse shot under him,
next to the General; the Enemies Horse sled severall wayes, some towards Barnstaple, others tawards Cornwal; the Ammunition in the Church was all or the most part they had for their Army. Upon the blovving up of the Church, which vvas the most terriblest sight that ever I beheld. A party of the Enemies horse fell again into the Tovvn upon our foot, vvho being amazed at this sudden accident, began to flye, till Captain White told them our horse vvere coming, vvhich caused them to retreat upon our firing, and to appear no more. There vvere Three thousand foot in the Tovvn, being all their old Cornish foot, and Greenviles and Gorings old Souldiers. We took near Three thousand horse, besides vvhat our horse have taken in the pursuit, vvhich vvas last night. We have many prisoners, many of vvhich vvere blovvn up in the Church. We have some of our ovvn men vvounded, but fevv slain; about fifty of the Enemy slain, Three hundred Arms broken and vvhole taken. Feb. 17. 6 in the morning.
The Report of the last Messenger from the Army, since the Date of the last LETTER. WHen the Forlorn hopes first met, which was about three of the clock on Mun∣day in the Afternoon; their Forlorn hopes came up the hill half a mile to meet us, their horses and ours skirmished in the Lanes, and we routed them; after our Forlorn, the body marched up, and beat them from thirteen seve∣ral hedges, which their foot made good with much resolutions to the outer works: they Re∣treated back into the town, and afterwards stood it out and fought very gallantly, till our men got over the works, which was about ten
or eleven at night, (the works were only for winter Quarters, with some works made up to keep off our horse, it being their head Quarters, the Lord Hopton lying there) we flancking of them, and following the charge so hot, they threw down their Arms, and every man ran for his life: which being in the night, most got over the back-sides and so escaped, leaving the streets all bestrewed with Arms, and about half an hour after we entred the Town: Colonel Hamond commanded the party that first entred, who seeing the Enemy flye, endeavoured to take so many of them as they could. Some of the Prisoners we took were put into Torrington Church: The number uncertain, some say, One hundred and fifty, others not half so many, none being able to give an account of it; But they had not been any of them put there priso∣ners above half an hour or therabout, but an unhappy accident fell out (how none can tell, some supposing it might be the result of a train intended to destroy our men: others, that it was a desperatenesse of the Souldiers; yet some think it was only an accident by some fire that fell casually and carelesly amongst the powder)
about eighty barrels of Gunpowder (which was taken in the Church) was blown up, with a great quantity of Match, Bullet, and other Ammunition, to a great quantity, all things proportionable to the said eighty barels of pow∣der aforesaid. There were six of our men that were upon the Guard then in the Church-yard, and three of them were killed out-right, and the other three dangerously wounded; one horse killed in the street; the walls of the Church all fell and dispersed abroad, there standing not a∣bove the height of six or seven foot, the Timber, glasse, stone work, lead, are all lost being dis∣persed and torn in pieces, and the men in the Church lost by the vehemence of so great a blow, which was a most sad spectacle to the be∣holders as ever was seen; the blow was like the shot of Granadoes: We feared a treachery; horses ran to and fro, for the blow was so great as any Ordnance could give, Hell it self could not make a more hideous sulpher. The General was then within pistol shot of the Church in the street: four streets off the lead of the Church fell; in that street where the General was, all very near to him, one street within five or six
yards of His Excellency, but neither the lead, stone, timber, nor any material of the Church did any hurt to any of our men, save only those six in the Church-yard. After this most sulpherous blow, yong Digby with some others, were upon a Retreat back in∣to the Town, which our Centry perceiving, fired upon him, which made him put spurs to to his Horse, wheel'd about, and vanished, our foot still pursuing their Victory, and so also did the Horse to the uttermost. Our Horse pursued them after all this, to compleat the Victory, if it were possible; the Enemies Horse, some fled towards Barnstaple, others toward Cornwal, both which wayes they fled in a panick fear.
A List of the particulars of what was taken, and how many killed at this Victory against the Enemy at Torrington. 100. slain in the Church. 50. or thereabouts slain be∣sides. 80. taken in the field be∣fore the taking of the town. 150. considerable prisoners. 2000. foot gone home. 1000. dispersed in by pla∣ces. 3000. Arms taken. Prince Charls was then at Launceston in Cornwal. Sir Edward Hide was with him, and 100. of his Life∣guard, with some other horse and foot. General Sir Ralph Hopton was then at Supper, his horse was killed, he fled to∣wards Barnstable. The Lord Capel fled toward Cornwal in the way of Stratton. The horse fled several ways with the Officers great and small, some towards Barn∣stable, but most towards Cornwal. Hopton was at Supper when he fell flouting and jearing against Sir Thomas Fair∣fax. 200. horse taken in the town all Hoptons Treasure there, and many papers of great consequence. The General would not permit the Souldiers to plunder the town, but set guards upon them to keep them off. There was no Ordnance for it was onely a winter quarters. 40. Colours, and Standards taken, but very few of the Standards had any of the Colours left upon them, it being conceived that they took them off, and the Standards were most of them broken, we conceive purposely, because they could not carry them a∣way. The foot are totally quelled there being not above a thousand left, probably, ever to joyn, and those we have taken say they were forced. Their Horse we are pursu∣ing, wee hope to give a good account of them also. FINIS.
