G1146 E123_25 99872284 156158
ANTI-CAVALIERISME, OR, TRUTH PLEADING As well the Necessity, as the Lawfulness of this present VVar, for the suppres∣sing of that Butcherly brood of Cavaliering Incendiaries, who are now hammering ENGLAND, to make an IRELAND OF IT: WHEREIN All the materiall objections against the law∣fulness of this undertaking, are fully cleered and answered, AND ALL MEN THAT EITHER LOVE God, Themselves, or Good men, Exhorted to Contribute all manner of assistance hereunto. BY JO: GOODWIN. Be not afraid of them: Remember the great Lord and fearefull, and fight for your Brethren, your Sons, and your Daughters, your Wives, and your Houses. Nehem. 4. 14. All that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. Mat. 26. 52. Det Rex Legi, quod Lex Regi, .i. Imperium ac potestatem. London Printed by G. B. and R. W. for Henry Overton, At his Shop in Popes-Head-Alley.
ANTI-CAVALIERISME, OR, TRUTH Pleading as well the Lawfulnesse, as the Necessity of this present VVar. THAT which some in the Gospell spake in great amazement, by way of glorifying God, upon occa∣sion of an unexpected breaking out of his goodnesse and power, in a miraculous cure, It was never seene after such a fashion (Mar. 2. 12.) may now be uttered by the Inhabitants of this Kingdome, with astonish∣ment, to the everlasting shame and infamy of men; upon occasion of the late breaking out of that fire of rage and cruelty, which yet burneth in the midst of the bowels of it, and threatens to consume the very foundations thereof, except it be seasonably quenched by a gracious raine from on High. And as all that saw that in∣humane butchering and quartering out into pieces of the Levites wife by her owne husband, cryed out, and said, There was no such thing done or seen, since the time that the Children of Israel came up out of the Land of Aegypt, untill that day, Judg. 19. 30. So doubtlesse whosoever shall consider what bloody and horrid intendments and attempts against this Nation, have passed the hearts and hands of some of her own Children, may truly say, There hath no such thing been done or seen in the Land, since God first caused men to dwell on the face of it▪
What shall we think of that Legion of Devils (I had almost called them) who now possesse the Land, and after the manner of Devils indeed, seek all to rent and teare it in pieces; I meane that Colluvies, that heap, or gather∣ing together of the scum, and drosse, and garbage of the Land, that most accursed confederacy, made up of Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, Phi∣listims with the Inhabitants of Tyre, of Jesuits and Papists, and Atheists, of stigmaticall and infamous persons in all kindes, with that bloody and but∣cherly Generation, commonly knowne by the name of Cavaliers? Have they not thorough some black art or other gotten the chiefe treasure of the Land, the King, into their possession, setting him still in the Front of all their desperate designes; which are these, and their fellowes: 1. To pull those Stars out of the Firmament of the Land, to dissolve and ruine that Assem∣bly▪ which is by interpretation, or representation (which you will) the whole Nation. 2. When they have opened this doore of hope unto themselves, to turn the Lawes, and present frame of Government upside downe. 3. To make havock and desolation, to roote out the Generation of the Saints rush and branch, men and women, young and old fearing God, out of the Land. 4. To make rapine and spoile of all the goods and possessions, at least of all those that withstand them, and are not brethren in iniquity with them. 5. To build up the Walls of Jericho, to put Lucifer againe into hea∣ven, I meane, to advance the tyrannicall Thrones of the Hierarchie to their former heighth, or higher, if they know how. 6. By their authority and power to excommunicate and cast out all the pure and precious Ordinan∣ces of God out of his House, and to supply this defect with Antichristian, and spurious institutions. 7. To spread that Veile, or covering of Antichri∣stian darknesse again over the face of the Land, which God by a most gra∣cious hand of providence had rent and taken off many yeares since; to lea∣ven the whole lump of the Land, the second time, with the soure leaven of Romish error and superstition. 8. And lastly, as is much to be feared, when they have served their tūrnes with, and upon the King, and used him as an Engine to get all the stones together for their building, then to make rub∣bidge of him, as if they had honoured him sufficiently, to cause such sacred designes as these to passe thorough his hands, and made him instrumentall, or any wayes accessory in such Angelicall atchievements. Doe we thinke that the light of the knowledge of God shines in the hearts and consciences of these men? Have these men the minde of Christ amongst them? Doe they know who is the Lord? Or doe they not thinke rather, that Baal, or Belial is he? Have all the workers of iniquity (saith David) no knowledge▪ that they eat up my people as they eat bread? Psal. 14. 4. i. e. That they in∣jure, vex, and consume them with no more remorse, regret, or touch of
conscience, then they eat and drinke to preserve their naturall lives: as if such men as these, the people of God, were made for the same end and pur∣pose to them that bread is, viz. to be eaten up and devoured by them. Have they no knowledge (saith the Prophet) that they dare attempt such a thing as this? Implying (as it should seeme) that to vex, molest, persecute, and destroy the people of God, argues the most profound ignorance, and thickest darknesse in the mindes and understandings of men, that can likely be found there; and that the weakest impressions or glimmerings of any true light of knowledge, would keep men from dashing their foot against this stone howsoever. If men had but as much knowledge of God, as Pi∣lates wife had in a dreame, they would take heed of having any thing to doe with just men. And these things (saith our Saviour to his Disciples concerning those that should kill them, and thinke they did God service therein) these things (saith he) they shall doe unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me, John 16. 3. If men had the least degree of the true know∣ledge of God in Christ, they must needs have some knowledge of his Peo∣ple and Children also: and if they know these, this knowledge would be as a hooke in their Nose, or a bridle in their Lips, to keep them from falling foule upon them, as the knowledge of Christ the Lord of glory, would have kept the Princes of this world from crucifying him, had it been in them. And since we are fallen upon the mention of those men who are ready in a posture of hatred, and malice, and revenge, with other preparations an∣swerable hereunto, to fall upon us, and our lives and liberties, both spiritu∣all and civill, upon our estates, our Gospell and Religion, and all that is, or ought to be deare and precious unto us; and in our miseries and ruines, to render our posterities more miserable then we, and have advanced their de∣signe this way to that maturity and heighth, which we all know and tremble to think of: Give me leave in that which remaines, to excite and stir you up, from the greatest to the least, both young and old, rich and poore, men and women, to quit your selves like men, yea, and (if it be possible) above the line of men, in this great exigency and stresse of imminent danger that hangs over your heads, and threatens you every houre, Oh let it be as abo∣mination unto us, as the very shadow of death, to every man, woman, and child of us, not to be active, not to lie out and straine our selves to the utmost of our strength and power in every kinde, as far as the Law of God and na∣ture will suffer us, to resist that high hand of iniquity and blood that is stretched out against us; to make our lives, and our liberties, and our Re∣ligion good against that accursed Generation that now magnifieth them∣selves, to make a prey and spoyle of them, to make havock and desolation of them all at once, if the Lord shall yet please to deliver us out of their
hands. Let not our Lives, our Liberties, our Estates, be at all precious or deare unto us in this behalfe, to expose them, be it unto the greatest danger, to prevent the certaine and most unquestionable ruine of them otherwise: Let us resolve to put all into the hands of God, to prevent the falling of all, or any thing, into the hands of these men. There is neither man nor wo∣man of us, neither young nor old, but hath somewhat or other, more or lesse, a Mite or two at least to cast into the Treasury of the Publike safety. Men that have strength of body for the War, and fingers that know how to fight, let them to the Battell, and not feare to look the enemy in the face. Men and women that have only Purses and Estates, let them turne them in∣to men and swords for the Battell. Men that have heads, but want armes and hands for outward execution, let these study and contrive methods and wayes of proceedings: Head-worke is every whit as necessary in such a time and exigent, as hand-work is. They that have neither hands, nor heads, nor estates, let them finde hearts to keep the Mountain of God, to pray the ene∣mies downe, and the Armies of the Lord up: Let them finde tongues to whet up the courage and resolutions of others. This is a service wherein women also may quit themselves like men, whose prayers commonly are as masculine, and doe as great and severe execution, as the prayers of men. As for little Children that know not the right hand from the left, and so are uncapable of exhortation, or putting on this way, by their weaknesse and innocency (innocency I meane, as concerning the enemies, and giving them the least cause or colour of their bloody intendments, as likewise in respect of the crying sins, and horrid provocations of other men) they doe every whit as much towards the furtherance of the service, as men doe by their strength, by their wisdome, by their estates, or otherwise; as we see inJon. 4. 11. the case of Gods sparing Niniveh. The sixscore thousand Children that knew not their right hand from the left, were the great intercessors, and chiefe mediators in the behalfe of the City with him. Yea, the bruit beasts themselves▪ the Cattell, their case and condition working upon the good∣nesse and graciousnesse of God, were contributors too in their nature to∣wards this service: As is to be seen in the last clause of the place cited fromJon▪ 4 11. the Prophet Jonah. And should not I spare Niniveh▪ &c.—and also much Cattell. Therefore now I beseech you that are capable of the great evils and dangers that threaten you, and are even at your doore, be not you wanting and backward in any thing that is in your hand to doe, if it be possible, and as far as in you lyeth, redeeme your lives with your lives, your estates with your estates, your Religion with your Religion, out of the hands of those men, set them all to work for their own maintenance and preservation: yea, if you know how to create more strength then you have, or to improve
your selves seventy times seven fold above the proportion of any your pre∣sent abilities, I beseech you doe it; at least be willing (as the Apostle beares the Corinthians witnesse they were, in a case not altogether unlike) above that you are able, that so you may be sure to give out your selves to the ut∣most of your ability, the more freely. Give me leave to set an edge upon you, to quicken and encourage you, to strengthen your hand to the worke, by the tender only of two motives, or considerations unto you. 1. Consider that the cause, wherein you are desired and exhorted to ap∣peare, and to engage your selves to the utmost, is like unto the Law of God it selfe in those excellent qualifications of it: it is just, and holy, and good: there is nothing in it that should make you ashamed either before God, or justly-judging men, nothing that needs make you tender, or holding off in point of conscience. You are to stand up in the defence of your Lives, your Liberties, your Estates, your Houses, your Wives, your Children, your Brethren, and that not of this Nation only, but of those two other Nations likewise united under the same government with this, in the defence of those Religious and faithfull Governours, that Honourable Assembly of Parliament, whose power and priviledges you stand bound by your solemn Vow and Protestation unto God, (besides many bands of conscience other∣wise) to defend and maintaine with your lives, power, and estates. Yea, in defence of his Majesties royall person, honour, and estate; all which are now in eminent danger to suffer by that accursed retinue of vile persons that are gathered about him, as Ivie about an Oake, which never suffers it to thrive or prosper, till it be torne off from it. This, men that have their eyes open, may easily see and discerne; though others make a mock and a scorn of such an assertion, as ridiculous: But so did Lots sons in Sodome, by that saying of his unto them, That the Lord would destroy the place and City where they were, Gen. 19. 14. which yet was a serious and solemne truth: Yea, and further, you are exhorted to stand up in defence of the true Protestant Re∣ligion▪ for the name and honour of your God, your Ordinances, and (which ought to be of very deare and precious consideration to you) for the safe conveyance of that great treasure of the Gospel over unto your po∣sterities that are yet unborne. Here is nothing in all this but what the ma∣nifest Law of God, and the common light of nature, not only warranteth and alloweth in all men▪ but even leadeth, perswadeth, yea, urgeth and pres∣seth them unto. Now how should not the goodnesse, equity, and righteous∣nesse of the cause be as precious seed, out of which a generation of sons and daughters shall be raised up unto it? Yea, and be spirit and life to the under∣takers thereof? And encouragement unto them, to plead it with the highest
hand of meanes and endeavours they are able to lift up? When there is a cause that hath the image and superscription of God upon it▪ so full and lively as this hath, is it not pitty it should want Orators to plead it, that it should suffer and fall to the ground, and none be found to take it up? Indeede if there were any occasion to make a stand in matter of consci∣ence, if there were any thing doubtfull in the cause recommended to you, a∣ny thing to detaine your judgements and consciences in suspence, whether it were lawfull for you or no, to appeare in it, there were just cause to spare and to forbeare you, at least for a time, till you should be fully satisfied. But now the righteousnesse hereof being as cleare as the light, or as the Sunne at noone day, why tarry you? why are you not up in your might before this, to maintaine it to the uttermost? Yea, but say the Rabbies and great Disputers that stand by your enemies and strengthen their hand that they can not depart from their wickednesse, that cover, but it is with the covering of the flesh, and of the spirit of the world, not with the covering of the Spirit of the Lord: It is not lawfull (say these men) for you to oppose them, nor to contend any wayes by force against them, because by opposing them, you resist the King the Lords anointed, whom God commands should be obeyed and submitted unto. If you conceive him to be your adversary, yet you ought to oppose him, (or rather that adverse disposition of his against you) onely with prayers and teares, and supplications unto God for him, and with petitorie and humble addresments unto himselfe, but to make no outward resistance at all. To this I answer, 1. By way of concession, that the King is to be obeyed, and that by the expresse commandement of God. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, as supreme, or unto Go∣vernors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evill doers, &c. 1 Pet. 2 13. Here is submission to the King required in expresse termes, and they that yeeld not the submission here required, resist the Ordinance of God (as the Apostle Paul speakes, Rom. 13.) and by such resistance shall receive to themselves (viz. without repentance)  judgement, or condemnation: God will severely judge or punish them for this resistance. And for my part, I from my soule could wish and desire that the sad distra∣ctions and contstations betweene the two opposing parties in the land, might come to a comprimise, and be issued and ended upon this point: that party that makes most conscience of keeping that commandement of God which requires submission and obedience unto Kings, to be submitted unto by the other; and that to yeeld, and sit downe, which is most defective this way, and in whom lesse conscience of such obedience appeareth. Only
two things I desire may be taken notice of from this Scripture where sub∣mission to Kings is commanded: First, that a King or Kingly Government, is  an ordinance of man, or an humane creation (as the Origi∣nall properly signifieth) which yet we know is no lesse generally then im∣pudently, and in the face of expresse Scripture to the contrary, denyed by the Divinity and learning of the malignant faction, who by swelling the Prerogative of Kings to a monstrous and most unnaturall proportion, as if they had a minde to make it crack before they had done, have consulted all maner of miseries and calamities to the world, as well to Kings themselves, as to their People. Submit to every Ordinance of man (saith Peter) for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King, &c. Therefore he supposeth the King or Kingly Government to be the Ordinance, or creation, or creature of man▪ And it is evident that so he is; for there were Kings over the Heathen Nati∣ons, with the forme of whose government God did no wayes intermeddle by way of any command or appointment concerning it, long before there was any King over See Gen. 14. 12. &c. Israel. Nor was it the order or command of God, that there should be any King over Israel, but he was highly offended with the People for desiring it. Is it not now Wheat harvest? (saith Samuel to the People) I will call upon the Lord, and he shall send thunder, and raine, that you may perceive and see, how that your wickednesse is great, which ye have done in the sight of the Lord in asking you a King. And though he condescended in a passive way, that they should have a King as they desired, yet as he tells them by the Prophet Hosea, He gave them a King in his wrath, and bid them in effect take him at their perils, if they would needs have him, he should deale but hardly by them. He would take their sons and daughters, and make them servile to him, as you have it. 1 Sam. 8. 11. It is true, in this sense a King, or Kingly power and government may be said to be from God. 1. In a generall or indefinite consideration, as it is a government, not sim∣ply, or in it selfe unlawfull: For it is the will and appointment of God, that there should be some government or other in every society of men, yet not any government neither, not any that is unjust, unreasonable, or ty∣rannicall: And in this sense all formes of government that are lawfull and just, whether they be simple, as the three commonly known by the names of Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy; or whether they be mixt, having somewhat of two, or all of these simples in them, are equally and indiffe∣rently from God: not any one of them determinately, or with exclusion of the rest. For suppose all Nations and Societies of men in the world, from the foundations thereof untill now, should have set up and exercised only one and the same form of government amongst them, as viz. That which we call Aristocraticall (like that in the Low-countries, by some chosen
amongst them, whom they call States) so that neither the Monarchicall, or Kingly government, nor yet the Democraticall, nor any other government whatsoever had been ever practised in the world untill this day, we must not thinke that the world had herein sinned, in not using any other, no nor yet neglected any Ordinance of God. Because it is no ordinance or appoint∣ment of God that any particular Nation or society of men, should have ei∣ther this or that speciall forme of government amongst them, but only that they should have some kinde of government which is just and lawfull. Therefore Kingly Government is no Ordinance of God in this sense, viz. as imposed upon any Nation or People by way of duty or precept to use and set up amongst them. But being set up in any people, it is warranted, and countenanced by God as lawfull, and obedience & subjection streightly enioyned thereunto. And therefore the Apostles expression, Rom. 13. 1. is very expresse and punctuall this way. Let every soule be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power (.i. no iust and lawfull form of government) but is from God, the powers that are, are ordained (or rather ordered ) of God. The powers that are: Why doth he say the powers that are, are ordained, or ordered by God? Doubtlesse to shew, that there are some powers or formes of government, in actu signato, (as the School-men speak) that is, in respect of their species or kinde, which are not in actu exercito, actually exercised or taken up, nor need they be taken up by any State or People in the world. But for those that are, .i. that are de facto established, and set up by any People among themselves, (speaking only of those that are lawfull) these (saith he) are ordained, or rather ordered by God: .i. God by speciall instinct and work of providence (q) inclines the hearts of severall Nations, some to imbrace and fall upon one, and some upon ano∣ther, some upon that which is Monarchicall, or Kingly, others upon that which is Aristocraticall, some upon that which is Democraticall, &c. and withall commands, that that which every Nation or People chooseth for it selfe, should be obeyed and submitted unto by those that have chosen it, and live under it, so long as it continueth: For the time is comming, when Christ will put downe all rule, and all authority, and power. And this is1 Cor. 15. another sense wherein Kings or Kingly Government may be said to be from God, or to be the Ordinance of God, viz. because where it is established and set up, he had a speciall hand in ordering and guiding the hearts of the People to choose it, before others, and withall commands it to be obeyed, as a Government that is lawfull and authorized by him, not as commanded and enioyned by him. Thus you have the first thing made plaine to you, which was observed from the place in Peter, which was, that Kingly power or authority is
directly and properly the creation or ordinance of man, though there bee that in it also, which in a sense may give it the denomination of an Ordi∣nance of God; viz. 1. As warranted or countenanced by him. 2. As order∣ed and taken up by those Nations, who have subjected themselves unto it, by the speciall disposall and work of his providence. The second thing I desire you would take notice of from the same Scri∣pture, is this, that subordinate Authority, and inferiour Magistracy and pow∣er is as much the Ordinance of God, as Soveraignty and supreame Autho∣rity it selfe is: and that God by one and the same command, requires us to submit our selves to inferiour Magistrates or Governours, as well as hee doth to Kings themselves. Reade the passage againe. Therefore submit your selves to all manner of Ordinances of man, whether, &c. So that it is a sin of the same nature, and renders a man obnoxious to the same danger or displea∣sure from God, to be found in disobedience to subordinate Rulers under the King, as to the King himselfe▪ But this for answer to the Objection in the first place, by way of concession or grant, That the King doubtlesse is to be obeyed. But secondly by way of exception I answer further, that though the King be to be obeyed and submitted unto, yet this obedience was never intended by God to be universall, but with limitatation, viz. In such commands wherein a mans obedience to the King should not be found disobedience against God: for in these cases, That of the Apostles Peter and John to the Rulers▪ Elders, and chiefe Priests, must take place. Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right in the sight of God to obey you, rather then God, Judge yee. The debt of obedience to God must alwayes be paid, whosoever looseth by the hand: Though the truth is, that there is no creature, King nor other, that can lose any thing due to him, by any mans obedience unto God. The Apo∣stles were so confident of the righteousnesse of their cause in disobeying their Rulers in that, wherein they obeyed God, that they feared not to make their Adversaries themselves their Judges therein: Judge yee. If a King should command me not to pray for the generall good, or peace of the Church or State where I live, or to forbeare the doing of any thing, which I conceive I am bound in conscience unto God to doe for the publique good, I am not in this case any whit more bound to obey the Kings com∣mand, then the Apostle Peter and John were to obey the command of the Rulers and Elders who charged them to give over preaching the Gospell, or then Shadrack, Meshach, and Abednego were, to worship the Golden Image, because Nebuchadnezzar commanded it. This limitation is plainly enough expressed in that very Scripture, wherein we heard obedience unto Kings commanded. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves (saith the Apostle) to
every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake. If we ought to submit for the Lords sake: .i. Either for that love we beare to him, or out of conscience of that obedience which we owe unto him, we ought not to submit in any thing whereby God may be dishonoured or disobeyed. It is senselesse to thinke, that any thing can, or ought to be done for the Lords sake, which cannot be done but to his dishonour, or (which is the same) with disobedience to him. Yea, but it will still be objected, though it be true, that Kings are not to be obeyed in any of those commands that are unlawfull, in an active way, we are not alwayes to doe what they would have us doe, nor to cease or for∣beare the doing, of what they would have us forbeare; yet are they even in such cases to be obeyed passively: Men are to suffer patiently any punish∣ment they desire to inflict upon them, for refusing any such obedience; or however, they are not forcibly to resist. To these things likewise I answer: 1. That the unlawfull command of a King, may possibly be of that nature and condition, that a Subject cannot disobey it, but by a strong hand, and taking up of Armes, though not pro∣perly or directly against the King, yet against the command of a King. In such a case, disobedience to Kings by a strong hand, and with forcible re∣sistance, is not only lawfull, but even matter of duty and obedience unto God. For instance, A Christian hath solemnly vowed and protested before God, to defend the lives of his godly and faithfull Governours to the ut∣most of his power: or whether he hath made such a Vow and Protestation or no, it is not much materiall in this respect, because he stands bound in conscience otherwise, and by the Law of God, to doe it. Now suppose such a man cannot performe this Vow, or doe that which is his duty to do other∣wise therein, but by a strong hand, and taking up Armes; In this case, if a King commands such a man not to take up Armes in relation to such a de∣fence, it is evident that this unlawfull command of a King cannot be diso∣beyed, but by taking up Armes against it. There are many other cases of the same consideration and rule with this. 2. I answer further, That it is one thing to offer violence to the person of a King, or Ruler, or to attempt the taking away of his life; another to se∣cure a mans own life, or the life of another, whom we know to be innocent, and much more the publike safety, by strengthening a mans selfe to with∣stand the violent execution of any unjust command from a King, by those that have no right or lawfull authority at all, to doe any such execution upon us. As for offering violence to the person of a King, or attempting to take away his life, we leave the proofe of the lawfulnesse of this, to those pro∣found disputers the Jesuits, who stand ingaged by the tenour of their pro∣fessed Doctrine and practise, either to make good the lawfulnesse thereof, or
else to leave themselves and their Religion, an abhorring and hissing unto the world. As for us who never travelled with any desires or thoughts that way, but abhor both mother and daughter, doctrine and practise together, we conceive it to be a just Prerogative of the Persons of Kings in what case soever, to be secure from the violence of men; and their lives to be as con∣secrated Corne, meet to be reaped and gathered only by the hand of God himselfe. Davids conscience smote him, when he came but so neare the life of a King, as the cutting off of the lap of his garment. But as concerning a forcible withstanding, or resistance making, against a violent execution of any unjust command from a King, attempted by those that have no rightfull or lawfull authority to do such execution either upon us or others, yea though the King himselfe be at hand to second his in∣struments in the execution of such commands, we have sufficient warrant for the lawfulnesse hereof in the Scriptures themselves. When Ahab sent a Cavaliere (you may call him) a man of blood, to take away the Prophet Elisha's head, as he sate in his house amongst the Elders, 2 King. 6. 32. did Elisha set open his doore for him, and sit still till he took off his head, in obedience to the King? No, he bestirred himselfe for the safeguard of his life, and called upon others to stand by him, and assist him against that out∣rage and violence intended against him: yea and this without any brand or blemish of any rebellion or disobedience to the King; yea though he spake somewhat roundly and freely of the King himselfe. See yee not (saith he to the Elders that were with him) how this son of a murtherer (meaning no beg∣gars, no lesse then Ahab himself, the King) hath sent to take away mine head? Take heed when the Messenger commeth, and shut the doore, and handle him roughly * at the doore: Is not the sound of his Masters feet behinde him? Sure∣lyEt oppri∣metis, vel opprimite. Arias Mont. Compri∣mite. Jun. & Trem. he that went thus far, for the safety of his life, when he was but in danger of being assaulted, would have gone further if occasion or necessity had been; and in case the Kings Butcher had got in to him before the doore had been shut, if he had been able, and had had no other meanes to have saved his owne head, but by taking away the others, there is little question to be made, but he would rather have taken, then given a head, in this case. So when Saul the King would needs have had Jonathan put to death, yea, and had bound himselfe with an oath or curse to hve it so (yea and that twice over for failing) the people knowing that Jonathan had committed nothing worthy of death (though the King thought he had) but that con∣trarily, he had deserved well of the State, and had mightily delivered Israel, (as the words of the Text are) delivered him by a strong hand out of the hand of Saul. 1 Sam. 14. 45. Neither is there the least aspersion or imputa∣tion cast upon this People for this fact of theirs, as if they had beene any
wayes injurious or disobedient to their King. Nay it appeares by the sequell of the Story. that Saul himselfe, though a man not of the best disposition, when the turbidum intervallum, the fit of passion was over, took it no wayes amisse at the hands of the people, that they had resisted him, in that unrea∣sonable and inconsiderate designe of his against Jonathan: but went on, and raigned peaceably over them. David in like manner, being unjustly persecuted by Saul, and those gracelesse and base flatterers that assisted him in that ungracious designe, and being in danger of his life by them, did hee either sit still, to see whether God would in an extraordinary and miracu∣lous way protect him or no? Or did he submit himselfe to Sauls mercy, and lay downe his life at his feet? No, but on the contrary, he provided himself with weapons, the best that were to be had. 1 Sam. 21. 89. And willingly entertained for the safeguard of life, and to make resistance against Saul and his party, all the help of men he could come by, making himselfe an head or Captaine over them. 1 Sam. 22. 2. And yet all this while David was but one single man, and that of a private and mean condition in comparison. And this (my Brethren) is the very case that is now before you, or if there be any difference in respect of a justifiablenesse in the one above the other, all the advantage which certainly is very much, lies on your side; your scale is much the better weight. Thee are sons of Belial that are risen up against you, full of a spirit of hatred and revenge against you▪ who part∣ly in plaine words, and without Parables▪ partly by their insolent carriages and behaviours towards others of the same spirit and cause with you, threa∣ten you with the utmost insolencies they can execute upon you, and (in ef∣fect) to stretch the line of miserable and wofull Ireland over you and your City, and whole Nation. These either have, or preend to have a Warrant or Commission from the King to doe what they doe, to make prey and spoile of you, your lives, and liberties, and all that you have; just as the Messenger had from Ahab, that was sent to take away the Prophets head (as you heard) or as those had from Saul, that went to lay hold of Jonathan to put him to death. Now then the question is, whether it be lawfull for you to stand upon your guard in this case, and to seeke the preservation of your lives, and of those that belong unto you, wives, and little ones, &c. and if there be no other likely meanes for your safety, to destroy the lives of those that seek to destroy yours; whether the command of the King (suppose such a thing were, which yet I much question) to wicked instruments to take away your lives, or the lives of those whom you are bound, by oath or o∣therwise to protect; whether (I say) such a command ought more to pre∣vaile with you to sit still and suffer the destroyer to execute his Commission upon you, to take away your lives, or the command of God and nature
which lies upon you to defend your lives, and the lives of such others, as we spake of, when they are assaulted, or in danger of assault? This fairely and unpartially is the State of the present question. The great Prophet Elisha (as we heard) and the people of Israel under Saul, and the man according to Gods own heart, resolved the question clearly enough by their practise. If it be here objected and said, it is true, such acts as you have related were indeed done by these men: but, Quo jure, whether they did well, or lawfully in so doing, is yet in question: An act done by a good man, fearing God, is not therefore good, or lawfully done, because such a man doth it: The ancient Fathers were generally Polygamists: yet the plenty of their practise is but a defective proofe of the lawfulnesse of Polygamy. In like manner, the actions mentioned, having no testimony of approbation from the Scriptures, may very possibly be workes of darknesse, though done by children of light; yea, though there be no expresse brand of unlawfulnesse set upon them by God: for Polygamy it selfe hath this negative testimony of its innocency. To this I answer, first in generall: That though the goodnesse and holi∣nesse of the person be not sufficient to authorize an act for lawfull, yet whilst the unlawfulnesse of it be clearly evicted by a contrariety in it to some com∣mand of God, it is a strong presumption, that an act performed by such a person, is lawfull: To the instance of Polygamy in the Fathers: I answer, that it was apparently a breach of the seventh Commandement, and contra∣ry to the first institution of marriage by God; the tenour whereof, accord∣ing to our Saviours own extract out of the ancient Record, runs thus, Mat. 19. 5. And they twaine (not they three, or they foure, or more) shall be one flsh. And besides, it is plainly branded and condemned by the Spirit of God, as sinfull, Mal. 2. 14▪ 15. as the generall vote of Interpreters upon this place carryeth it. But there is not the least intimation given throughout the whole Scriptures, of any thing sinfull or displeasing unto God, in what ei∣ther Elisha, or the people, or David did, in the particulars mentioned. Those acts of Solomon, commanding Joab and Shimei to be put to death, without any tryall or due processe of Law against them, 1 King 2. and so that of David, giving away Mephibosheths estate to Ziba, onely upon a dis∣pleasure conceived against him, with some others of other Kings of Judah, of like consideration, smelling too ranke of prerogative oyle, are much more questionable in point of lawfulnesse, and of farre more difficult reconcilia∣tion with principles of reason and equitie, and with the Law of God it selfe then those other. But, 2. To the particular I answer. First, for the fact of the Prophet Elisha, calling out to those that were with him, to lay hands upon him that came
armed with the Kings authority and command, to take away his head, and to shut the doore against him; that in this he did nothing but what was plea∣sing unto God, appeares from the circumstance of time, and that posture of spirit, wherein the Prophet thus contended for his head against him that would needs have had it from him. He was now full of the Spirit of God, and of prophecy: and was in that very instant, wherein his head should have beene taken from him, ready to cry out as a woman in travaile, and to bee delivered of that gracious message, which immediatly followes in the begin∣ning of the succeeding Chapter. Now that so holy a man, and so great a Prophet, should in that very point and instant of time, wherein he was full of the Spirit of God, and ready to deliver a message from him of that high importance and unexpected grace to his people, fall into the soule sinne of rebellion against his lawfull King, is doubtlesse an incredibilitie of the first magnitude. Secondly, the Elders or Statesmen of the Kingdome, who were present, complyed with him in his motion, and assisted him in his opposition against the Kings messenger, who came for his head; laid hands upon him, and suffered him not to enter: which appeares from hence, because the Prophets head stood still upon his shoulders. And this is yet a further confirmation of the lawfulnesse of that resistance, which he made, because it is unreasonable to thinke, that persons of that qualitie, and who cannot be conceived but to have understood themselves sufficiently in a businesse of that nature, being the Peeres or chiefe officers of the Kingdome, should have involved them∣selves in the danger and guilt of rebellion against the King: which (doubt∣lesse) they had done, had that act of the Prophet, wherof they were abettors, had any streine or touch of Rebellion in it. Thirdly, and lastly, the King himselfe (it seemes) comming very shortly after into the place where the Prophet and Elders were, finding the execu∣tion, which in hot blood he had commanded, not done, the heate of his passion being somewhat over and abated, sate downe amongst them, and never so much as reproved either Prophet or Elders, for making the re∣sistance they did to his messenger: which it is like he would have done, and that upon high termes, had he conceived either the one or the other to have beene within the verge of a Rebellion; or any other injury or indignitie offered either to his person, or to his Crowne and dignitie. Againe secondly for the people who delivered Jonathan out of the hand of Saul, there is no colour to conceive any thing unlawfull or unjustifiable therein. Evident it is that themselves looked upon this fact before it was done, not only as a thing lawfull for them to doe, but as matter of dutie, and that which in conscience they were bound to doe. That expression of theirs
implies as much: Shall Jonathan die, who hath so mightily delivered Israel? God forbid. (1 Sam. 14. 45.) As the Lord liveth there shall not one haire of his head fall to the ground. They conceived, that it had beene a sinne of a very high nature in them, if they should not have appeared for his rescue and delive∣rance, whom they not onely knew to be innocent, and to have done no∣thing worthy of death, but also to have wrought with God for their delive∣rance. Nor is it easie to conceive what other ground or motive should have induced this people to runne the hazard of the Kings displeasure in Jona∣thans protection, then conscience onely: though its true, there is no inti∣mation given of my complaint made, nor of any offence conceived by Saul against the people for this fact of theirs, which is another argument of the lawfulnesse thereof, yea and of the unprejudicialnesse or in-offensive∣nesse of it to Sauls kingly Throane and dignitie, considering how tender and jealous Saul was of these, and how impatient of the least touch (yea though but imaginary onely) in them, as appeares in the sequell of his hi∣story, especially by his violent persecution of David, upon very light and loose grounds of suspition this way. Lastly, concerning Davids gathering a strength of men and armes to him, whereby to make resistance against Saul, or rather against that bloody association which conspired with him in a most unjust way, to take away his life; evident it is, 1. That David, all the time of this his unjust persecution by Saul and his complices, being still in eminent danger of his life, was more soft and ten∣der conscienced then ordinary, and more afraid of sinning against God; yea and prayed both more frequently and more fervently unto God to bee preserved from sinne, then at other times; as appeares by many Psalmes composed by him, during this his triall. Now it is a thing altogether incre∣dible, that a man otherwise according to Gods owne heart, under the best and softest frame of spirit and conscience, that ever he liv'd in, and whilst hee made it his earnest prayer unto God daily to be kept from sinne, should so fouly miscarry, as to live in the sinne of Rebellion against his lawfull King without repentance. 2. That he respected and honoured Saul very highly, and was very tender of doing him the least harme. It is said, that his heart smote him, be∣cause he had cut off but the lap or skirt of his garment, 1 Sam. 24. 5. using more∣over these words to his servents, whose fingers itch'd to have made sure worke with Saul; The Lord forbid that I should doe this thing to my master the Lords annointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the anoynted of the Lord,, vers 6. Therefore certainly David in defending himselfe against
Sauls Cavaliers with armes and men, neither offended God, nor wronged Saul himselfe in the least measure. Yea, 3. Saul himselfe overcome with this expression of Davids love and faith∣fulnesse unto him, acknowleded his innocencie, and the uprightnesse of his heart towards him, vers. 16. Is this thy voyce, my sonne David (saith Saul) and lift up his voyce and wept. And said to David, thou art more righteous then I: for thou hast rendred me good, and I have rendered thee evill. And thou hast shewed this day that thou hast dealt well with me, &c. Saul did not onely ac∣quit him from those high crimes, of treason, rebellion, sedition, &c. but from all manner of injury or iniustice at all done to him. And if Saul a∣gainst whom the offence (if any) had beene committed, iustifieth him, who shall with any colour of or equitie condemne him? Lastly (for this particular) the holy Ghost himselfe gives this expresse testimony concerning David; That he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and turned from nothing that he commanded him all the dayes of his life, save onely in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, 1 King. 15. 5. whereas, if that fact of his, defending himselfe by force of armes, against Saul and his con∣federates in blood against him, had beene of any such interpretation as some would make it, (by making other cases like unto it) as either treason, re∣bellion, or the like; doubtlesse this had beene an higher and greater matter of exception against him, then the matter of Vriah it selfe. But yet further that their practise in the particular mentioned respectively, and so yours, being onely conformable thereunto, was, and is every wayes iustifiable; and of perfect consistence with the rules of reason, equity and all good consci∣ence, and no wayes derogatory to Kingly power and authority, I remon∣strate and prove by this one consideration. Men that have no lawfull authority or power to take away the lives or goods of men, may very lawfully be resisted in any attempt they shall make, to doe either; and if their lives miscarry in such attempts, they have their meanes in their owne hands, (as we say) their blood is upon their owne heads. This I suppose is a pregnant and knowne principle both in reason and religion. If a man assaults another upon the high way, and seekes to take away his mony or life from him; if the person assaulted slayes the other se defendendo (as the Law speakes) there is neither Law nor conscience will take hold on, or reprove him for it. This proposition is manifest. I go on therefore and adde, But men can have no lawfull authority or power, by any warrant or com∣mission from a King to take away the lives, or goods, of those that are inno∣cent and have not transgressed the Law, no not of those that are not in a lawfull way convicted for transgressors of the Law.
Therefore such men as these may lawfully be resisted in any attempts they shall make either upon our lives, or our goods, notwithstanding any War∣rant, Commission, or command they have, or pretend to have, from a King to doe it. And take that along with you which apparently followes from hence: If such persons so assaulted may lawfully resist such assailants, then may they every whit as lawfully provide themselves before hand of such meanes, where with they may be able to make the resistance when time comes. As, if it be lawfull for a Traveller to kill a Thiefe upon the way in the defence of his life, or money; certainly it is lawfull for him to ride with a Sword, Pistoll, or the like, wherewith he may be able to doe it; It is ri∣diculous to grant the lawfulnesse of an end, and to deny a lawfulnesse of meanes necessary and sufficient to attaine that end. But some (it may be) will deny that proposition, which affirmeth, that those men have no lawfull power or Authority to seize upon mens lives or goods who are innocent, and as yet so reputed by the Law, having the authority and command of the King to doe it. That therefore no unjust, or unrighteous command of a King, can enable any man with any lawfull power to put in execution any such command, I thus demonstrate (though indeed it be a thing evident enough in it self without any demonstration) no King can derive any power or authority to another, to any minister, officer, or the like, but only that wherewith himselfe is invested, and possessed of, either formally, or by way of eminencie and surplussage. But no King is himself invested with any authority or power to doe any thing which is uniust, or unrighteous therefore hee can not impart or give any such power to another: and consequently those that attempt or doe any thing by vertue of any uniust command from a King, had every whit as good doe the thing upon their owne heads and authority, without any warrant or commission from the King at all the fact as touching the lawfullnesse of it, is but of one and the same consideration in both cases. Now that a King himself hath no power or authority at all▪ to doe any thing that is uniust or unequall, is yet more evident then the former, thus: All power that a King hath in point of government, is derived upon him, either by God, or by men, or both: but it is a truth of the cleerest evidence that neither the one, nor the other, neither God, nor man conferreth any power upon him to doe unjustly. Concerning God, there is not the least question to be made: he gives no man Authority to sin; but layes his Authority and command upon all the world to doe righteously: and as for men, supposing they be but reasonable men that have conferred the power upon a King, it cannot be thought, or once imagined, that they should give a power out of themselves, against themselves; a power to in∣jure,
or to wrong either them or their posterity. And though they should be conceived to do a thing so inconsistent with reason and even common sence, yet such an act of theirs, were a meere nullitie: the King was never the more possest of any such power, because they that are supposed to have con∣ferred it upon him, had it not in themselves, nor the least right or power to derive it upon any other. Yea, but (will the malignant Doctors) still object and reply, who shall be Judge in this case, Whether the command or commission of a King, gi∣ven to an Officer, or other subiect, to be put in execution, be uniust, or no? Is it not fit, that rather the King himselfe should be iudge in this case, then every private man? Is it fit to give way or allow, that every private man should scan, examine, iudge, and determine either the righteousnesse or un∣righteousnesse of the Kings command? Doth not such a liberty as this tend to dissolve the bands of obedience to Superiours? To poure contempt upon Kings and Rulers, and to fill the world with confusion? To this I answer, First, that for many things that are commanded by Kings and Superiours, there needs little or no examination or sitting, whe∣ther they be lawfull, or no. Their unlawfulnesse is written (as it were) in their foreheads, with such Capitall Letters, that he that runs may reade it. A man needs no skill either in Arithmetique or Geometrie, nor the use of any rule or square, to try either whether the bow be streight, or the string bent and crooked. Halfe an eye is sufficient provision for this decision. The command of that Idolatrous King Nebuchadnezzar with his Nobles, that men should worship his golden Image, was so notoriously wicked, that those three servants of God, Shadrack, Meshack, and Abednego, were not carefull to answer the King concerning it. Dan. 3. 16. that is, they would ne∣ver take time to study or consider whether they should obey it, or no. Such was the command of the Elders and Rulers to Peter and Iohn, When they commanded them that in no wise they should speake or teach in the name of Iesus. Act. 3. 18. 19. Besides many others both upon Sacred, Ecclesiastick, and Civill Record, of like condition and importance. 2. If it be not lawfull for inferiours to examine and enquire into the commands of Kings, and other their Superiours, whether they be lawfull or no; then is there a necessity lying upon men by way of duty, to make men equall with God, and to iudge them as unerringly, as universally righ∣teous and holy, as he; which a man of conscience will hardly forbeare to call blasphemy. The sequell is evident: Because men can rise no higher in their thoughts and apprehensions of God himselfe in this kinde, then to iudge him absolutely and unquestionably righteous, worthy to be obeyed, in whatsoever he shall command, without examination.
3. If men were either bound to, or lawfully might obey their Superiors without all examination, there would be no place left for that command of our Saviour, wherein he prohibites his friends and servants, to feare those that could only kill the body; meaning by such, either only, or principally Kings and Rulers, who are commonly said to have potestatem vitae & ccis, power of life and death. There is no reason to thinke, that either Kings or Rulers should take away the lives of those that will comply with them in all their desires▪ and commands: and as little reason is there for any man to thinke, that men should run the hazzard of being killed, by disobeying the commands and will of Kings, if they might safely, and with the peace of a good conscience obey and comply with them. 4. It is no more disparagement or dishonour to Kings or Rulers to have their commands examined by those to whom they are directed and given, then it was for Paul and the rest of the Apostles to have their Preachings and doctrines examined by the inferiour sort of Christians that heard them. These were every whit as great (if not far greater) in Spirituall authority and dignity, as Kings themselves are in politique and civill. Now the Holy Ghost is so far from reproving those, who examined the things which they heard from Paul himselfe, that he hath left it upon Record as matter of espe∣ciall commendation to them, That they daily searched the Scriptures, whether things were so or no, as he had taught them, Act. 17. 11. Yea, the Apostles themselves were so far from looking upon it, as any matter of prejudice to them or their reputations, that what they delivered and taught, should bee brought to the touch-stone by those that heard them, that they required this at their hands by way of duty, and exhorted them unto it. See 1 Cor. 10. 14. 1 Thes. 5. 21. &c. And yet far greater reason is there, why the teach∣ing of the Apostles should have been , .i. priviledged from ac∣count, then the commands of Kings: because they had a promise of such a presence of the Spirit of truth with them, that he should lead them into the way of all truth; whereas Kings, both in the framing and publishing of their Commands, are left to an arbitrary assistance from heaven, after the man∣ner of other men. 5. The wrath of God hath been revealed from heaven, .i. hath been shewed in very remarkable and exemplary manner, upon those who have swallow∣ed the commands of Kings, and submitted unto them in things unlawfull. Those Officers that obeyed King Nebuchadnezzars command in casting those three innocent servants of God into the fiery furnace, were suddenly consumed by the flame that came out of the furnace; whereas those that streined at the Kings command, & exchanged it (as the Scripture phrase is) meaning (I conceive) for the commandement of God, obeying this in the
stead, remained untouched of the fire in the midst of the furnace, Dan. 3. 22. So the men of Israel that had obeyed the commandement of Saul in giving their assistance to him for the persecuting of David, were punished together with Saul, fleeing and falling down wounded before the Philistines, as Pe∣ter Martyr hath well observed upon 1 Sam. 31. 1. So of that great Host of Assyrians, that joyned with their King in an unlawfull war against the Church and People of God, there were 185000. slaine in one night by an Angel, 2 King. 19. 35. To passe by all other examples of the severity of God in this kinde, that is most worthy consideration, which is recorded, 2 Chron. 24. It is said, ver. 17. That after the death of Jehoiada, the Princes of Iuda came and did reverence unto the King, and that the King hearkened to them. Not long after, They conspired together against Zachariah, a faithfull Prophet of the Lord, for dealing faithfully with them, and at the Kings com∣mandement, stoned him with stones, in the Court of the house of the Lord, ver. 21. But (saith the Story, ver. 23.) it came to passe at the end of the yeare, that the host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Iuda and Ierusalem and de∣stroyed all the Princes of the People from among the People, &c. The just re∣venging hand of God, singling out from amongst many thousands, those persons by name, who had obeyed the King in a way of unrighteousnesse, though they were the chiefest and greatest of them, and in that respect (in all likelihood) kept furthest off from the danger, and had more outward provision for their safety, then others. 6. (And lastly for this) If this liberty we speak of, of examining the commands of Kings and other Superiours, were granted unto, and used by those that are in subjection, it would not devest or bereave Kings or Rulers of any obedience at all, that were worth the having or receiving from men, or that were truly honourable or safe for them to receive. All that in reason it could be conceived to doe in this kinde, is to prevent and cut off all such obedience from Kings, which would endanger their cutting off, and their States and Kingdomes with them. If this liberty, or duty rather, of exami∣ning the Commands of Superiours, had been preached and pressed upon the consciences of men with that authority and power, which the truth and high concernment of it will beare, or rather (indeed) required, those crownes might have flourished upon the heads of Kings, which now begin to droope and languish; and those Nations enioyed abundance of peace under them, the foundations of whose safety are now shaken. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgement, because he willingly followed the commande∣ment, viz. of King Jeroboam, who commanded the worshipping of the golden Calfe. Hos. 5. 11. Here is the fruit of the forwardnesse of a Nation to obey and comply with an Idolatrous King, even to be oppressed and bro∣ken
in judgement▪ .i. Not only to be forely afflicted, but utterly ruined and destroyed, and that in a course of iustice, and of the righteous proceedings of God against them. In this cup of trembling and astonishment which they were compelled to drink from the hand of God, there was none other in∣gredient, but their own wayes; and that which it seemes was predominant in the mixture, was their forwardnesse to side with their King, in that false Religion and worship which he maintained. And for the ruine and destru∣ction of Jeroboam himselfe and his house, that is much considerable from the pen of the H. Ghost, that it is not ascribed so much to his sin & wickedness in commnding Idolatry, as to the sin & wickedness of the people in obeying. And this thing (saith the history, speaking of Jeroboam's Calfe, and command given to the people to worship them. 1 King. 12. 30) turned to sin, meaning to a provocation of a very high nature, to such a sin, which even rooted out and destroyed the house of Jeroboam from the face of the earth. Cap. 13. 34. But how, or by what meanes did Jeroboams Calves and Idolatrous commands concerning them, turne to such a sin or provocation, as was his ruine? The Holy Ghost ascribes this to the obedience of the People in this behalfe: And this thing turned to sin: for the people went to worship before the one, even unto Dan. Clearely implying, that that sin which was the ruine and rooting out of Ieroboam and his house, was not so much his wicked and Idolatrous command, considered simply and in it selfe, but as it found obedience and subiection in the people. The people in true accompt, who magnified Iero∣boam in his commands, above God in his, were they that ruined both Iero∣boam and his house. And generelly, all that Kings and Princes gaine, by an unlawfull subiection and obedience from their People, is little else but the kindling of the fire of Gods iealousie against them. I am the Lord (saith God, Esa. 42. 8.) this is my Name: and my glory will not I give to another, .i. I will not suffer it to be given to, nor to be received by another; I will sell it deare to him that shall own it, and will recover it out of his ruine. We know Herod was smitten by an Angell from heaven, and soon cast up that morsell of divine honour which he had swallowed, by a miserable, shame∣full, and loathsome death. As those that make Images of wood, stone, sil∣ver, god, or the like, to be adored and worshipped, doe the greatest iniury that may be to those poore innocent creatures; they expose them to the fu∣ry and iealousie of God, whereby they commonly suffer a dissolution of their beeing before their time, as the brasse whereof the brazen Serpent was made, did, being broken all to pieces, when incense was once offered unto it, 2 Kin. 18. 4. and the gold whereof Aarons Calfe was made, being burnt in the fire, and stamped and ground small, even to very dust, and this also cast into the river, Deut. 9. 21. So they that will devest the great God of heaven and earth,
to cloath Kings and Princes, or whomsoever, with the spoiles of his Name, as all those doe, who obey them with disobedience unto God, as in one sence they make them gods, so in another, by making them gods, they make them indeed more men then they were, more obnoxions to his dis∣pleasure, who hath the command of their life and breath. Consider that pas∣sage (to omit many others of like importance) which you shall finde, Esa. 1. 31. And the strong, .i. the Idoll, either because in the Idolaters conceit, it is strong like a god, or rather strong, in respect of the firmnesse and dura∣blenes of the matter of it, Shall be as Tow, and the maker therof, as a Spark: they shall both burne together, and none shall quench them. Marke well: How strong and durable soever the matter is, whereof the Idoll is made, whether it bee the best heart of Oake that can be gotten, or the hardest and firmest stone, silver, gold, or the like, or if there be any thing more durable, and more re∣sisting corruption, then these, yet being made an Idoll, it becomes as Tow, i. of a very weake and perishable nature: and the maker of it (saith he) shall be as a Sparke, viz. to set this Tow on fire; meaning that he is the cause both why that good substance, which was made into an Idoll, perisheth so suddenly, and likewise of his owne perishing by the hand and iudgement of God. In like manner, when men or women shall make Idols of Kings and Princes, and great men, and fall downe before them, and worship them with divine worship, as all they in effect doe, who yeeld obedience unto them against God, what doe they else but shake the very foundations of their lives, and present beeings in the world, and call for the fire of Gods iealousie from heaven to consume them: Whereas on the contrary, those that soberly, and out of conscience refuse to obey them upon such termes, I meane, against God, they doe them as good service, if they would please so to apprehend and interpret it, as Mordecai did to King Ahashuerosh, when he revealed the Treason of the two Eunuchs against him. He that refuseth to obey a Superiour in an unlawfull command, giveth notice to him, that his foote is in a snare of death, and that his preservation stands in his desi∣sting and repenting. I shall mention only one obiection more wherewith that unhappy lear∣ning of the contrary side, useth to be very importune, and to triumph much in it. The Christians in the primitive times submitted themselves with pati∣ence to those most uniust and cruell commands of the heathen Emperors, when they sent their officers to put them in execution, and to take their lives from them: they never resisted, nor stood upon their guard, but tooke even death it selfe, yea, and many times torments worse then death, pati∣ently. And whereas this might otherwise be sufficiently answered, that they made no resistance, because they were not able, they had no considerable
strength to make good any resistance; to take away this answer; They usually cite a place out of one of the Fathers, Tertullian by name, wherein heSi enim & hostes ex∣ertos, non tantum vindices occultos, agere vel∣lemus, de∣esset nobis vis nume∣rorum & copiarum?—Ex∣terni su∣mus, & ve∣stra omnia implevi∣mus, urbes, insulas, ca∣stella, mu∣nicipia, concilia∣bula, castra ipsa, &c.—Cui bello non idonei, non prom∣pti fuisse∣mus, &c. Tertul. Apolog. Cap. 37. disclaimes this ground of their patience in suffering, writing unto the States, or Senators of the Empire, affirming, that they had a considerable party of Christians in their Dominions, whereby they were able to have made resi∣stance against them. Because this objection is matter of so much confidence and triumph to the adversary, I shall desire leave to examine it the more thoroughly, and to search the bottome and foundations of it in my answer to it, I shall first speake to the testimony propounded, and consider the validitie or likeli∣hood of the truth thereof; and secondly, (for argument sake) the truth of it being granted or supposed, we shall indeavour to shew of how little force or concernment it is, any wayes to disable the truth of that position we have in hand, which justifieth a resistance against the violent execution of any unjust command from Kings, in those that are assaulted under pretence thereof; therefore as concerning the testimony of Tertullian, touching the sufficiencie of strength the Christians in his time should have to resist the Emperour and all his power. I answer. First, that this Father might easily be mistaken in taking the proportion, and making the estimate of the strength and power of Christians within the compasse of the Roman Empire, in comparison of the strength of those that were ready to oppose them. This was no point of faith, nor of Chri∣stian Religion; and therefore a devout father might easily fall under a mis∣prision herein. The common saying indeed is, that unicuique in arte sua credendum, i. e. every man is to be beleeved in his owne art or profession, but no rule of charitie or reason bindes us to believe another in any thing which belongs to the art or profession of another, and wherein him∣selfe is little versed or exercised. Now to weigh the strength of a King∣dome, State, or Empire, (as it were) in a ballance, and to make an esti∣mate of, and compare together the power of severall parties or divisions of people in it with so much exactnesse, as to determine which is the stronger, and which the weaker, belongs to the profession and imployment of a States-man, not of a Divine, orminister of the Gospell, of one that sits at the sterne of the empire, not of one whose heart, and time, and strength are taken up with the studie of the mysteries of heaven, yea for a States-man himselfe to be able upon sufficient grounds, precisely to determine such dif∣ferences as we speake of, I meane betweene the strength and strength of different parties in a State, where there is any neerenesse or appea∣rance of an equality, wil require both double diligence and treble sufficiency in him otherwise.
2. How easily might he mistake and miscarry in a matter quite beside his profession and course, who not long after miscarryed so grievously in his owne, as to turne Montanist, who called himselfe the Holy Ghost, and to approve of the dreames and furious fancies of those two vile women, Maximilla and Prisca (Montanus his wicked associates) for true prophe∣cies. Yea stayed not here neither, but joyned himselfe with those Here∣tiques called Cataphryges, who condemned second marriages as adulterous and prohibited by God: besides divers other misprisions in his owne pro∣fession, which would take up too much time to insist particularly upon: a memorable example and warning (as it were) from heaven, how unsafe and dangerous it is to build upon the authority of men. 3. It is well observed by one, that there is an aptnesse and pronenesse of inclination in much devotion, in persons devoutly given, to over-value the workes and piety of other men. Now this Father out of such a principle or inclination as this is, desirous to extoll and magnifie the patience of Chri∣stians, might easily draw in such a circumstance as this for such a purpose, upon very weake and slender grounds for it. 4. It is generally observed and knowne by the writings and records of these times, that even in the pious and Orthodox Fathers themselves there were some touches and steines, some fibrae of that roote of bitternesse which afterwards grew ranke, and flourished above measure in the times of Popery, yea and brought forth fruit abundantly unto death. I meane, an inclination to credit and countenance their Religion in the sight of the hea∣then and the world about them, by very slender reports and relations of things, as of Miracles, Visions strange accidents, &c. which are general∣ly rejected, as fabulous and false, by the sounder and more considerate knowledge of these latter dayes. 5. Supose there might be considerable numbers of men of the Christian party in the Empire (though to me it is one of the things I least beleeve) to withstand the heathen party therein, yet doubtlesse these were kept under, as the Israelites were in Aegypt, when they began to multiply. It is no wayes likely, that if they were any wayes formidable for their numbers, that they should be suffered to have any proportion of armes or meanes, either of of∣fence or defence, in case they were assaulted. It being contrary to all reason and rule of State, to suffer a party of an opposite Religion to the State, and worshipping another God then the State allowed, growing to any conside∣rable numbers within them, to have farther any such proportion or quanti∣ty of weapons, armes, or meanes in any kinde, whereby they might endan∣ger and become formidable to the State. Now then granting that which this Father spake concerning the numbers of Christians amongst the heathens,
that they had number for number, man for man, and in this respect might seeme to ballance them, and be able enough to resist them; yet wanting armes and other meanes of defence, wherewith it cannot be conceived but that the adverse party abounded, it had been in vaine for them to have made resistance when violence was offered unto them. And thus much for the first part of my Answer, to shew the questionablenesse, or rather indeed the great unlikelihood of the truth of that testimony, which is brought to support the objection propounded, which otherwise would fall to the ground of it selfe. I goe on to the second part of my Answer, which is to prove and to shew, that though the testimony be admitted for truth, yet the objection will not reach the question, or case in hand. Therefore suppose we the Father that spake as we have heard, viz. That the Christians under the Heathen Emperours should be able enough to have defended themselves, yea to have opposed the Emperour himselfe with his party, spake nothing herein but the truth; yet it doth not follow, that all those of his profession, I meane all the Christians that were scattered up and downe the face of the Empire should have the same apprehensions with him herein, should thinke themselves strong enough to resist their adversa∣ries, in case they were opposed. Those particular persons that were called out here and there, some after others, to suffer, might very probably, yea, could not lightly but conceive and thinke, that if they should have made any resistance against them that came to lay violent hands upon them, and to put them to death, they should have but enraged their malice against them the more, and so have encreased their own torments: yea, and happi∣ly have provoked the Heathen party, to rage so much the more against their Christian Brethren, who yet remained amongst them. So that in those that were called to suffer, it had been both want of wisdome, in respect of themselves, and of charitie in respect of others, if they should have made the least resistance against those unjust and bloody officers, that were sent a∣gainst them to take away their lives. If it be here replyed and said; yea but the whole body and partie of Christians throughout the Empire, having sufficent strength might have agreed to have risen up at once, and have suppressed their adversaries, if they had Judged it lawfull. To this, Answer hath in part been made already: as first, that it is no waies probable that they had any sufficiencie of strength, no not of men, to have made good such an attempt, much lesse that they had any competent provision of meanes otherwise, which had been requisite therunto. Secondly, that though it should be granted, that they had a sufficiencie of strength both wayes, yet is it no wayes necessary that therefore they should
all be of the same minde and judgement touching this sufficiencie; that they should all be perswaded that their party were strong enough to deale with their adversaries. We know that many attempts, projects, and underta∣kings which have been in treaty and agitation, have been deserted and laid aside, only through the different judgements and apprehensions of those that vvere concerned, and to have been engaged therein, touching the ex∣pedience or feaceablenesse of them. As that proiect of Achitophell for the immediate and close following of David, was deserted by Absolon, and his2 Sam. 17. 4. party, and not put in execution, because of the different advise which Hushai the Archit gave. A late instance hereof vve had likewise amongst our selves: that dangerous designe of bringing up the Army out of the North against the Parliament, proved abortive, the execution of it never seeing the light of the Sun, through the different opinions of those that were, & were to have been in speciall maner concerned therin; some conceiving it to have been a proiect deserving the name of none such; others no wayes daring to adventure themselves, their lives, and fortunes, nor some (perhaps) their consciences, upon it. In like manner for the Christians living within the Romane Empire, to have made head and risen up ageinst the maine body and State of the Empire to suppresse them, had been an enterprise of that dangerous and grievous consequence, in case it had miscarryed: especial∣ly the grounds of the successe of it being so uncertaine and weake as they were, that it hath not the least appearance or shew of likelihood, that ever it should be generally consented unto by the whole society of the Christi∣ans; without which there was no attempting the putting of it into execution. To this may be added. 3. That suppose the Christians wee spake of had been generally confi∣dent of their strength and had made little question but that they might have carried it against the Emperor and his; yet having no invitation, coun∣tenance or command from any Authoritie, rule, or lawfull power in the Empire to attempt any such thing, their case was farre differing from ours who are invited, countenanced, encouraged, and some waies commanded by as great and as lawfull an Authority as this state hath any, to doe what you have been exhorted to doe in opposing the rage and violence of that malignant and blood-thirsty generation, who having stollen away the heart of the King, make use of his name to make havock and spoile of your Lawes, Liberties, Estates, Lives, Religion, yea of the Peace, Honour, and safety of the whole Kingdome. It is the expresse command and ordinance of God that inferiour Magistrates, and Rulers should be obeyed as well as Kings, as we observed formerly out of that of Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Therefore submit your selves unto every, or all manner of ordinance of man, for
the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as unto the Superiour, or unto Go∣vernours, as those that are sent of him, for the punishment of evill-doers, &c. So that inferiour Governours are by the expresse Commandement of God to be obeyed, as well as the Superiour. Now then put the case that the in∣feriour Governour requires that which is only honest, agreeable to the Laws of God and of Nature, as, viz. that we should doe our best to defend our selves against those that contrary to all Law and conscience assault us; the superiour, that which is contrary to both, viz. to sit still whilest our Lawes, Liberties, Estates, Lives, friends, godly Magistrates, and Religion it selfe, are indangered, and ready to be taken from us; the question in this case, whether we are to obey the inferiour or superiour Authority; (the command of God indifferently extending it for obedience unto either, in things that are lawfull) is easily resolved, except men will complaine and say it is darke at noone day. When it shall be substantially proved unto us, that an unlawfull command from a superiour Magistrate, dissolves and makes void that commandement of God, whereby we stand bound to obey the inferiour, in that which is lawfull; We may then have cause to make a demurre touching the goodnesse of the cause; but till then we may be bold to say, it is day, when the Sun shineth. This then is a difference very consi∣derable, between the case of primitive Christians, and ours, in the point in hand, supposing they had power to defend themselves against the persecu∣ting agents and instruments of the Emperour, yet had they not any coun∣tenance or command from any Authority in that State to doe it, which we have in ours. 4. Still supposing (that which yet is never to be granted, till it be better proved) that the Primitive Christians we spake of▪ had a sufficiency of pow∣er, to have defended themselves against the persecuting Emperours, and did it not, yet there may be this reason given, why they should rather patiently suffer, than make resistance, because whilest they were yet heathen and un∣converted to the Christian Faith, they consented to that power or authority in the Emperour, whereby he made those bloody Edicts for the persecuting and murthering of poore Christians. Now it had been a very unreasonable thing and justly offensive, both in the eyes of God and men, if the same persons who had established a power or authority in the hand of a Ruler, should have resisted or opposed him, or his Agents and Ministers in the ex∣ecution of it. A servant of God, though he sweares or bargaines to his owne hurt, yet must he not change, as you have it, Psal. 15. 4. But wee are un∣der no such ingagements, or bands, and therefore have a liberty which they had not: For though a mans consent to an unlawfull power, be in ab∣solute and simple consideration a meere nullity, and such a power never the
more lawfullized thereby; yet by all rules of reason and equity, such a con∣sent ought to be a bar against him that hath given it, that he shall not, for any carnall benefit or advantage, breake out against him that exerciseth this power by vertue of such consent, meerly for such exercise sake. 5. Be it granted that the Christian party in the Romane Empire was ve∣ry great (as is pretended) yet could it in no sence be called or looked upon as the whole State or body of the Empire, as the Paril mentary Assembly is amongst us. This in a representative and legall consideration, is the whole body of the Nation, and of all the persons in it, having the same power and authority by Law, and in conscience too, to do every whit as much in eve∣ry respect, as the whole Nation, and all the particular persons therein could have, if they were met together. Now that may be lawfull for an entire bo∣dy or society of persons to doe, which may not be lawfull for a part, or some few of the society, save only in conjunction with the whole. The Parliament (we know) being interpretatively, and in consideration of Law, the whole body of the Kingdome, hath a lawfull power, both to doe and command many things, which a far greater part or number of men in the Kingdome, have not; no, all the Kingdome besides hath no such power, as they: and many things may be done very lawfully, and with a good conscience, by vertue of their appointment and command, which could not be done upon any such termes without it, though a thousand times more men or persons then they are should command them. 6. Supposing they had such a power as we have oft supposed (but never granted positively) and that it was lawfull for them to have made resistance accordingly, yet may God by way of speciall dispensation▪ and for very great and considerable ends of his, hide this liberty we speake of from their eyes; that they should not see it to make use of. Wee know there were many in the Apostles time, who eat hearbs, when as yet it was as lawfull for them, in respect of any command of God to the contrary, to have eaten flesh; but yet they did better to content themselves with hearbs, when God had not revealed and cleared up this liberty unto them. And yet they did as well as they too, who seeing their liberty in this kinde by the cleare light of the Gospell, did take it, and eate flesh. Consider that passage of the A∣postle, Rom. 14. 6. He that observeth a day, observeth it unto the Lord: and he that observeth not a day▪ observeth it not unto the Lord. He that eateth, eateth unto the Lord▪ for he giveth God thanks: and he that eateth not, eateth not unto the Lord, and giveth God thankes. Whereby it is evident that the forbearance of some actions by some men, wherein they approve themselves unto God, doth not at all prejudice or gainesay the like acceptation of others in their doing them: yea that some men may be bound in conscience to forbeare
that, which another with a good conscience may doe. And this doubtlesse is (if the testimony of Tertullian mentioned be true) the case betweene those Primitive Christians, and Christians in these dayes. They might out of tendernesse of conscience, and out of an apprehension of some unlawful∣nesse in it, forbeare to vindicate themselves against those bloody bucthers, that were set on worke by the Emperours to destroy them: and yet Christi∣ans in these dayes, seeing their liberty in this kinde, may as lawfully resist those that shall come against them in the like manner, as the other forbare it. If it be here objected and said that it is no wayes like that the Church of God should generally be ignorant of such a libertie as wee speake of and challenge, if there were any such liberty indeed; is it credible that God should hide such a point of truth as this from them all? I answer first, It is not necessary to suppose that it should bee hid from them all without exception: it is sufficient for our purpose if it were hid from their teachers, and those that were leaders to the rest, upon whose judgement (in things of this nature) the generality of people then much depended. But secondly, if there were many ministers of the Gospell and teachers▪ even in the Apostles times themselves, that were ignorant of that liberty which the Gospell brought with it to the world, for the eating of flesh, the non-observation of dayes and of circumcision, &c. or at least were so faire ignorant, that they were not able to informe and satisfie the generall sort of Christians therein, it may very well be conceived, that some hundreds of yeares after, when the light began to darken and wax dim (in comparison) they might now be generally ignorant of such a point of li∣berty as this we now speake of, at least so farre ignorant, as not to be able to satisfie the generalitie of their people therein. Especially if we consider, Thirdly, that from the dayes of the Apostles, untill their numbers and strength were raised and increased to the supposed pitch of a sufficiencie to resist (which was not lesse then neere 200. yeares) there was no occasion, of studying, or looking into the point: they had beene in never the better case, whether they had had that liberty we speake of or no; and therefore it is no marvaile if they neglected the searching after it. And when cases of conscience (as this was) lie unstudied and uninquired into, neither is it any marvaile if the resolution or state of the truth in them, bee not generally knowne. Fourthly, that Spirit of courage, patience and constancy, which God poured out abundantly upon his Church & servants in those times, where∣by they were so strengthned and incouraged to suffer, that martyrdome seemed a desirable thing unto them, might be a speciall reason and meanes to take them off from inquiring into, or so much as thinking what their
lawfull liberty might be in the case we speake of. Men that have a full estate in faire rents, as much as they can well spend, and as their heart desireth▪ are not like, have no occasion to busie themselves in studying the case of usury, as whether it be lawfull to take increase for the lone of mony, or no; which he that hath his estate in mony, hath. Whilst the Israelites were fed by God in an extraordinary way by Manna from heaven, there was no necessitie or occasion for them to plough and sow. So whilst Christians were furnish∣ed with an extraordinary strength from heaven, to offer themselves up in martyrdome, their edge must needs be taken off hereby, as from seeking meanes to escape it, so from studying cases and questions about the lawful∣nesse of escaping. Fiftly, whilst there lay a confessed necessity of suffering upon Christians, i. e. till the supposed strength of resistance came to them (which as was noted before, could not be much lesse then 200. yeares) Martyrdome was so ex∣tolled and magnified by the generall acclamations of the ministers, and continuall panegyricks, and orations made in praise thereof, that it is like no man would for a long time be endured, that should teach any doctrine that might any wayes seeme to take men off from the desire thereof. As there are many doctrines and points of Religion amongst our selves that have beene a long time taught with so high an hand, and generally received with so full an applause, that it is not safe for any man to appeare so much as in a seeming opposition to them, (though with never so much modestie and tendernesse.) But, Sixtly (and lastly for this) whether God was pleased to make use of one or both of their particulars last mentioned, or any other like unto them, as a meanes to hide that libertie of resistance wee speake of from the eyes of the primitive Christians, or no; certaine it is, that the frame and tenour of his after dispensations, did require, that such a libertie should be hid from them; or at least that they should not make use of it; as on the contrary, the nature and purport of those dispensations which God hath now in hand, requires that this libertie should be manifested and made knowne un∣to Christians. We know that according to the counsell and foreknow∣ledge of God, Antichrist was then to come into the world: as now wee know that he is about to be destroyed and cast out of the world. Now this is a generall rule, looke what truthes were necessary to be shut up and con∣cealed from the Churches of Christ, that Antichrist might passe by, and get up into his throane; the discovery and letting out of the same into the world, are necessary for his pulling downe. For certaine it is, that Anti∣christ could never have gotten up into that throane, whereon hee yet sits and shewes himselfe in his sacrilegious glory, had not God by speciall dis∣pensation
suffered him to make many truths his footstoole. If all truths had beene clearely taught in the Church of Christ, and accordingly received and beleeved, it had beene impossible that ever such a monster should have got∣ten into the temple of God, that should exalt himselfe above all that which is called God. But God causing a dead sleepe (as it were) to fall upon those truthes, which should in speciall manner have opposed him, hee had the opportunity without much contradiction or noyse to steale and convey himselfe into that Cathedram pestilentiae, that chaire of papall state, which yet he possesseth. Now amongst many other truths that were of necessity to be laid asleepe, for the passing of this beast unto his great power and autho∣rity, and for the maintayning and safe-guarding of him in the possession hereof, this is one of speciall consideration; that Christians may lawfully in a lawfull way, stand up to defend themselves, in case they be able, against any unlawfull assaults; by what assailants, or by what pretended Authori∣tie soever made upon them. For had this opinion beene timeously enough, and substantially taught in the Church, it would certainly have caused an abortion in Antichrists birth, and so have disappointed the divell of his first∣borne. Had not the spirits, and judgements, and consciences of men beene as it were cowed and marvellously imbased and kept under, (and so prepa∣red for Antichrists lure) by doctrines and tenents, excessively advancing the power of superiours, over inferiours, and binding Iron yokes and hea∣vy burthens upon those that were in subjection, doubtlesse they would ne∣ver have bowed downe their backes so low as to let such a beast goe over them, they would never resigned up their judgements and consciences into the hand of such a spirituall tyrant as he. So that you see, there was a spe∣ciall necessitie for the letting of Antichrist into the world, yea and for the continuance of him in his Throne, that no such opinion as this which wee speake of, whether truth or untruth should be taught and beleeved; I meane, which vindicateth and maintaineth, the just rights, and liberties, and privi∣ledges of those that under authority, and subjection unto others. Whereas, now on the contrary, that time of Gods preordination and purpose, for the downefall of Antichrist, drawing neere, there is a kinde of necessitie, that those truths, which have slept for many yeares, should now be awakened: and particularly that God should reveale and discover unto his faithfull ministers, and other his servants the just bounds and limits of Authoritie, and power, and consequently the just and full extent of the law∣full liberties of those that live in subiection. Evident it is, that they are the commonaltie of Christians, I meane Christians of ordinary ranke and qua∣litie that shall be most active, and have the principall hand in executing the judgements of God upon the Whore▪ Consider that place, Revel. 18. 4, 5, 6.
And I heard another voyce from heaven say, goe out of her my people, that yee be not partakers in her sinnes, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her sins are come up unto heaven, and God hath remembred her iniquities. Reward her even as she hath rewarded you, and give her double according to her workes, and in the cup that she hath filled to you, fill her the double. Now that this service shall be performed unto God by them (Christians I mean of under rank and qualitie) contrary to the will, desires, or commands of those Kings and Princes under whom they live, it appeares by that which immediatly followes, verse 9. And the Kings of the earth shall bewaile her and lament for her, which have committed fornication and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see the smoake of her burning. It is evident that the people of God spo∣ken of before, were subiects to these Kings, that should bewayle the whore in her ruine; for they are such as come out of Babylon; which could not be, except they had lived under those Kings that were Babylonish, and had given their Kingdomes to the whore, and by whom Babylonisme had been countenanced and set up. And that these (or at least the greatest part of them) should no wayes consent to the destruction of the whore by their subiects, it is evident by this; they should waile and lament over her, when she is destroyed. As for that which is found in the former Chapter concer∣ning the 10. Kings (Rev. 17. 17.) Into whose heart God hath put it to give their Kingdomes or power to the Beast, where it is said, that these should hate the whore and make her desolate, and naked, and eat her flesh, and burne her with fire; I conceive this is not meant of the persons of Kings, but of their States and Kingdomes, i. e. of the generalitie of their people under them. 1. The expression, will fairely, and with full consonancie to the Scripture language elsewhere, carry this sence and interpretation; the bodies of States or Kingdomes indefinitely taken and considered, being usually signified by their heads, as Dukedomes by Dukes, Kingdomes by Kings, &c. as wee have had occasion formerly to observe more at large when we produced se∣verall instances from the Scriptures of this kind of phrase. I shall (for the present) be your remembrancer onely of that one, Dan. 7. 17. with verse 23. where verse the 17. the foure great Beasts are said to be foure Kings that shall arise out of the earth. Yet verse 23. it is said that the fourth Beast shall be the fourth Kingdome upon earth, which shall be diverse from all Kingdomes, i. e. all the other three Kingdomes formerly expressed by three Kings. I could di∣rect you to severall other Texts of Scripture where the same manner of speaking is found; but that I hasten. 2. If we take the word, Kings, pro∣perly, i. e. precisely for the persons that are the heads and chiefe rulers of Kingdomes, in that Scripture, and will say, that these shall hate the whore and make her desolate, &c. I apprehend no possibility (for the present) of recon∣ciling
this place, with that other mentioned, Rev. 18. 9. Where it is said, that the Kings of the earth who have committed fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall bewaile her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning. Certainely they that shall hate her, and helpe to make her desolate, and to burne her with fire, will not bewayle her, nor lament over her, after such a manner, as is farther expressed in that which followes in this Chap∣ter. As for that Exposition, which by the Kings of the earth that should bewaile and lament over the Whore in her burning, understandeth Cardi∣nalls, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, &c. who in their port and pompe are as Kings, it seemeth not probable; I rather conceive these to be the Merchants of the earth that should weepe and waile ever her, because no man buyeth their wares any more, vers. 11. and who are said to have waxen rich, by that long trade and trafique they had had with the world, in those Babilonish commo∣dities. Therefore they are the ten Kingdomes indefinitely considered. i. persons living within the ten Kingdomes, not the ten Kings perso∣nally and properly taken, that shall hate the Whore and make her desolate, and burne her flesh with fire. Now this promise and prediction of God concerning the destruction of the Whore by Christians of inferiour ranke and qualitie, can hardly be conceived however it should be fulfilled or take place, except the judgements and consciences of men should be losed and set at libertie from the bands and fetters of those enslaving Doctrines and apprehensions, wherewith they had beene formerly oppressed and made servile above measure, to those that were in place and authority over them. Thus then we see a ground and reason fully satisfactory, both how and why the Christians in the Primitive times, whilest Antichrist was in comming, might well be ignorant of that liberty, the knowledge whereof would have kept him from his Throne; and also why that liberty should now be revea∣led by God and taught unto his people; the ignorance whereof would still keepe and continue him upon his Throne, when Gods Will and Plea∣sure is that he shall be throwne downe. And this for Answer to the Ob∣jection last propounded; and for the sixt Particular, by way of Answer to the maine Objection. But, 7. (And lastly) whatsoever the credit or authority of Tertullian may be for the strength of Christians in Primitive times, to make resistance against their enemies▪ & how justifiable, or commendable soever the patience & subjecti∣on of these Christians in suffering as they did, may be by some conceived to be, supposing they had such a power to have defended themselves, as is supposed; yet most certaine it is, that as well the authority of the one as the submission of the other, yea and both together, being both Apocriphall, are
too light to weigh against the authority of the practice of that great Prophet Elisha, who made resistance against the Kings Messenger, that was sent a∣gainst him to take away his head (as we instanced to you in the former part of this Discourse) as also against David, a man after Gods own heart, who being but a private man, strengthened himselfe as well as hee could, both with men and armes, yea and with Goliahs sword to boote, to defend him∣selfe against the unjust and bloody persecution of Saul; both which ex∣amples (besides others of like importance) are Canonicall. Elisha must not be censured as an evill-doer, nor David condemned for a Traytor, or Rebell, either because Tertullian saith, that there were Christians enough in the Romane Empire, to make their party good against the Emperour & his wicked instruments, nor yet because these Christians did not stand up in their owne defence, having sufficiency of strength to have done it. Thus we see there is nothing at all in the patience or submission of the primitive Christians, so much urged and insisted upon, to discountenance that cause and service, wherein your best concurrence hath been desired, of any consi∣deration or concernment that way. To rise up in your owne defence, in the defence of your lives, your estates, your liberties, your wives, your chil∣dren, your friends, your lawes, your religion, against those, who without any lawfull Authority or Warrant either of God or men, are risen up with all their might, and all their power to make havock, and spoile, and ruine of all, is no wayes offensive either in the sight of God, or reasonable men. And (to conclude) if any man be afraid that Martyrdome should suffer by this, as either that the glory hereof should be eclipsed, or that all oppor∣tunities of expressing our selves unto God and Jesus Christ in such a ser∣vice, should be cut off, and taken away by such an opinion. I answer, No: The glory and praise of Martyrdome will remaine as entire, with this Do∣ctrine, as without it, and the opportunities of shewing our selves in our love and faithfulnesse unto Christ in such a service, will no wayes be di∣minished hereby. For first, the glory and praise of Martyrdome or suffering for Christ, doth not consist in lying down, and suffering proud and wicked men to ride over our heads, in sitting still whilest our estates, liberties, wives, children, friends, are ruined and destroyed before our faces, when God puts an op∣portunity into our hand to defend them; the name and Gospell of Jesus Christ would rather suffer losse by such a patience as this, then any wayes gaine; it were more Infidell-like, then Christian, not to make the best pro∣vision we can, for the safety of those that are so neare to us in such a case. But the grace and glory of Martyrdome lyeth in this; First, when a man is resolved to professe the name, and faith of Christ, what danger soever hee
incurs, what losse soever he sustaines, or is like to sustaine by it. Secondly, When it comes to the necessity of suffering, that he baulkes not, nor saulters with Christ: that he is not any wayes ashamed of him, or any of his words, or wayes. Thirdly, When a man disdeignes deliverance upon any base termes, or by unworthy meanes, that scornes to fly away for the enjoyment of any rest, except it be with the wings of a Dove (the Scripture Embleme of innocency) which is covered with silver wings (as David speakes) and her feathers like yellow gold. It is ever honourable to fly with such wings as these. Fourthly (and lastly) when God doth not open a doore of lawfull escape unto him, either by flight or otherwise, but hedgeth him up (as it were) with thornes into the hand of the persecutor, that he patiently and with meek∣nesse and composednesse of spirit, without any breakings out in one kinde or other, without any expression of discontent either against God or man, submitteth himselfe unto the stroke, in what kinde soever it falls upon him. And secodly, for opportunities of Martyrdome, of suffering for Christ, and that in numbers more then we desire, they will not be wanting, though we shall not-suffer every base Cavalier, that saith he is for the King to cut our throats, or to plunder our Cities, Townes, or Houses, to commit out∣rages and insolencies upon Wives, Children, Friends, &c. 1. It is a suffering for Christ (and so a degree or kinde of Martyrdome) to suffer those things which we doe, in feares, in dangers, in distractions, in runnings, or removings up and downe, in disappointments of our affaires, in the losse, expence, or forbearance of our estates, by those men of Belial, that are as thornes in our eyes, and scourges in our sides, only or chiefly because we will be that in open and constant profession, which by the grace of God we are inwardly and in the truth of our soules; because we will not prostitute our consciences to the lusts of their Father the devill, we will not give the right hand of fellowship to them, in those desperate courses of wic∣kednesse and prophannesse wherein they are engaged, and wherein (it seemes) they meane to weary, yea and weare themselves out before they will give over. 2. We lie open to the hatred and malice, to the mockings and scoffings, to the rayling and revilings, to the slanders and lyings of the whole malig∣nant party round about us; and that because we hold forth the Lord Jesus Christ in his holinesse and purity, in his power and authority over the world, in his truth, and faithfulnesse, in his mercy, and goodnesse, in his glory, and Majesty, in our lives, and conversations. And this is a Martyr∣dome too, or suffering for Christ. 3. (And lastly) we know not how soon or suddenly we may be called out by God, to suffer even a perfect and compleate Martyrdome indeed, to
lay downe our lives for Christ; when God will hedge up every way of escape against us with thornes, and leave us in Peters streights, To stretch forth our hands, and have another to gird us, and to lead us whither we would not. John 21. 18. So that we shall leave occasions, and opportunities enough, even as many as God himselfe ever made, for the expressing of our love and faithfulnesse unto Christ and his Gospell in wayes of suffering, though we stand up like men, and quit our selves with all our might, and all our strength, against those assacinates, and sworne Sword-men of the devill, who have conspired the death and ruine of all that feareth God in the Land. Only for a close of all that I have to say in this point, let me adde this one thing by way of caution, that opportunities of suffering Martyrdome will not alwayes continue in the Church for the servants of God: yea, the time draweth neare, when they shall cease and be no more. The sad retinue of the first things, (as they are called Rev. 20. 4) which hath been a long time in passing by, even for many Generations, is now almost quite passed; God is now bringing up the reere of this host of sorrowes, and when this is passed, he will turne the wheele of his providence and dispensations, be∣tween his own Church, and the Synagogue of Sathan. That side which hath been down hitherto, shall be upward, and that which hath been above, shall be below: Now the devils Saints, and the Children of the Whore, even all fearefull and unbeleeving ones, and abominable, and murtherers, and Whoremon∣gers, and Sorcerers; and all lyars, they shall be called to their Martyrdome, and the Saints of the most high shall give them double, of their owne cup. Revel. 13. 10. They that led into captivity hitherto, shall now goe into captivity themselves: and they that killed with the sword hitherto, shall now be killed with the sword themselves. And who they are that shall now lead into captivity, and slay with the sword, you may informe your selves, Rev. 18. 6, 7. Reward her, even as she hath rewarded you: you, viz. in your Brethren, that have walked in the steps of the same faith and holinesse with you: And give her double, &c. This is the honour which the Saints shall have, to execute the judgement that is written, upon the whore. Another motive to strengthen your hand the same way, may be to consi∣der, that as the cause recommended to you is every waies justifiable, so is it a matter of the highest & deepest concernment unto you to stand by it & ad∣vance it to the utmost you are able, yea (if it were possible) above & beyond what you are able to do. All your interests, relations, & concernments in this world are bound up in it: yea, it narrowly concernes you in relation to the world which is to come, your everlasting estate and condition is not light∣ly concerned in it. First, what have you in this world amongst all that which you call yours, any wayes deare or precious unto you, but that the
line of this cause, whatsoever it proves, is like to be stretched upon it: the cause which is now depending and pleading between you and your adver∣saries, will certainly be either the rising or falling of it. 1. For your Estates, these are already designed, by your enemies, for a reward and recompence of their labour and travell in procuring your ruine. Your silver, and gold, your houses, and lands, with all your precious and pleasant things besides, must call you Masters no more, if you fall into the hands of these devourers. If they prevaile, they will be like a sweeping raine (as Solomon speakes) that will leave no food. You must looke for no other mercies from them, but those that are cruell; you heare daily from divers parts of the Land, of what spirit they are in this kinde▪ what spoyle and ra∣pine they make of the precious substance of your Brethren, where they have opportunity to fall; notwithstanding they are not yet in a posture to their mindes, to follow this occupation of ruine and spoile, as they desire and hope to doe. They have a bridle of some feare in the jawes of their fury, they cannot stay by their work, they cannot gather in their harvest so cleane as they desire. But if they doe these things being but yet in the valley, what will they doe, if they should make good the mountaine? if they commit such insolencies as these in the day of their feares, what will they doe in the day of their power, if ever this Sun should arise upon them? I beseech you consider this, you that have lived at ease, and in all fulnesse hitherto, and have wanted nothing of all that your hearts could desire, to make your lives comfortable unto you; that have had food, and rayment, and lodging, and harbour, upon such termes, that your flesh it selfe, though apt enough to murmure and complaine, hath yet been ashamed to complaine of any want or scarcity in any kinde; tell me how, or what will you do in such a day, wherein your faire necks, that never had yoke upon them to this day, shall be wrung and galled, and torne with those Iron yokes, of poverty, naked∣nesse, hunger, cold, contempt, want of all things? Will not the dayes and yeares of your former plenty and fulnesse be seen upon you in abundance of sorrow and extremity? And is it not in vaine for you to thinke that this cup shall passe by you, that you drinke not of it, if ever it be in the power of those enemies of yours we speake of, to make you to drinke? Doubtlesse they must want of their will if you doe not drinke, yea and suck out the ve∣ry dregs of it. Whereas on the contrary, if you shall only this one time make good your standings against them, and break this enterprise, as far as humane reason is able to judge, and according to the ordinary course of Gods admistration of things in the world, they are never like to rise up a∣gainst you, nor to endanger the peace of your outward enjoyments the se∣cond time. If you will now be perswaded to give out your selves like men,
to advance the cause in hand, that which you doe is like to be a bulworke, and an impregnable defence for the time to come, to your possessions, and estates, against all violence and oppression of men in this kind. 2. For your liberties, this is another pretious possession of yours in the world. I speake here onely of your civill or politick libertie, which is of equall accommodation and desirablenesse (if not of superiour) with your estates: and this likewise will certainly be oppressed and seized upon, and turned into a miserable slavery and bondage, if that bloody generation shall carry the day against you, and make themselves Lords over you. That of Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 19. is like to come upon you in this case: of whomsoever a man is overcome, of the same he is brought into bondage. It may be you are not generally so apprehensive and sensible of the pretiousnesse and sweet∣nesse of your liberties, as of your estates; you doe not place so much of your outward comfort and contentment in the one▪ as in the other. The rea∣son whereof I conceive to be partly because wee are generally borne free, and therefore take no care or paines to come by it, whereas many are borne poore, and to inherit little but what they can get by the sweat of their browes: partly because libertie is as plentifull amongst us as silver was in Solomons dayes; which was therefore little esteemed because it was as plen∣tifull as the stones in the street, and as the wild Figtrees that grew abundantly in the plaine; there is none amongst us but is as free as another; but there is great difference in respect of estate; partly also, because we see few in any suffering or hard condition, we heare few cryes or complaints for want of liberty, whereas we both heare and see daily what hardship and things grie∣vous to flesh and blood, are endured by many, both men, women and chil∣dren, for want of meanes, and an outward estate. Haply for these and other reasons that might be given, our liberties are not so high prised with us as matter of estate is; but if we did judge righteous judgement (as our Savi∣our speakes) or if we had but the sensible advantages and quicknings to raise our thoughts and apprehensions concerning our liberties, which wee have in reference to our estates, and which many others in the world have, in reference to liberty it selfe; we would thinke our liberties every whit as worthy to be placed at our right hands, as our estates. I must not stand to discourse the benefit and sweetnesse of this blessing of libertie; concer∣ning which, many great and excellent things might be spoken. I shall onely say this, that if we lived but a while in those States, where the poore subject is yoked with an Iron yoke of bondage, and bowes downe the backe, and grones under the heavy pressure of usurpation and tyrannie, as under the great Turke, or in the State of Persia; yea or in France it selfe (which is neere at hand) and did but observe the miserable and hard termes and
conditions, that by reason of such slavery and bondage they live under, then a dram of that libertie which yet we enjoy, would be as pretious to us, as a drop of could water would have beene to the rich man in hell, when he was so grievously tormented in those flames. Now then this is that which I hold forth unto you in this motive to be considered of, that if ever you shall suffer the hand of the Malignant partie, which is now up in rage, and great fury against you, to find their enterprise, if the day falls to be theirs, you must looke to be dealt withall in your liberty, as in your estates; there will no partialitie be shewne by these men betweene them, they that will not spare you in your estates, neither will they favour you in your liberties: they have bands, and chaines, and fetters already prepared for your hands and feet, and Irons that will enter into your soules. You must know that they are animated and acted against you, with the spirit of that fourth beast in Daniel, which was unlike unto all the others, very fearefull, whose teeth was of Iron, and his nayles of Brasse, which devoured, brake in pieces, and stampt the rest under his feet. They are of a Lordly, insolent, domineering and tyrani∣zing spirit, sporting themselves in their cruelties, and delighting to ride over the heads of men, that they can get under them. Therefore now con∣sider (I beseech you) how intolerable and grievous a thing it is like to bee unto you to beare the yoke of that cruell bondage and slavery which these men have prepared for your neckes; to live by the lawes of their lusts and pleasures, to be at their arbitterments and wills in all things, to doe and to suffer, to have and to possesse as they shall appoint and thinke meet for you; how intollerable a condition (I say) this is like to prove unto you, who have beene free men and women all your dayes, and have had the disposall of your selves and of all your wayes, and of the good things that the pro∣vidence of God hath cast in unto you upon your labours or otherwise. Oh you will finde the change very sharpe and terrible, beyond what I am able to expresse, or your selves for the present, able to apprehend. Whereas on the contrary, if you shall hold out this one impression and onset which they are now making upon you, and make good the ground you stand on against them; you shall breake their cords in sunder, and cast their bands from you for ever; you shall make such an intaylement of this pretious inheri∣tance we speake of, your libertie, to your children, and childrens children, that they shall never be able to cut off. If they be but now broken, they are not like ever to make themselves whole againe: if you will be perswaded to be men of wisedome once, you may be men of comfort and peace ever after. 3. For your wives and children, these (I make account) are another part of your pretious injoyments in this world: But as for these, neither are they like
to finde any better quarter in their kind from these bags of blood and base∣nesse, then your liberties and estates in their kind. Nay as these are capable of the impressions of more of those vile affections which rage in these men, so are they like to suffer upon termes yet more grievous, even according to the utmost of their capacities in this kind: The rage of their lusts (I meane of many of them) is as barbarous and cruell, as the rage of their crueltie it selfe. And what measure you are to expect both in the one and in the other, in lust and crueltie towards these, your wives (I meane) and children; them∣selves have proclaimed in your eares aloud in those patternes and examples of this kinde, which in severall places of the land, they have set for them∣selves to follow in their future course. I presume you have heard of divers insolencies and outrages of abomination committed by them with an high hand, such as have made both your eares to tingle in the hearing. Therefore consider and weigh it well with your selves: put your hearts up∣on deepe and sad, and serious apprehensions of it, how grievous and heart∣breaking and soule-cutting a sight it would be unto you to see the honour and chastitie of your wives, & daughters plundred by the barbarous lusts of those brutish men, who are ready to poure out their abhominable filthi∣nesse and uncleannesse where ever they be-come, and when they have done execution upon their honours, with the lusts of uncleannesse in the Front, to bring up the lusts of crueltie in the Reare, to doe the like execution upon their lives and blood. Assure your selves, that the divell hath the driving of them, and he will make them runne and keepe his pace, as far as ever the strength of any vilenesse and wickednesse in them will hold out. And so for your little ones that are not for their lusts: it is much to bee feared that in that respect, they will double their cruelties upon them, as you have heard (I presume) that their Brethren in Ireland, baptised into the same spirit of blood and abhomination with them, have done. Oh, bow can you beare the thoughts of such a day likely to come upon you, wherein your young children shall be taken by the hand of an inhumane monster, and dashed in peeces against the stones, or torne one limbe from another, or tossed upon the point of the Pike or Speare. Assure your selves that the day of all these astonishing things, and perhaps of things more intollerable and astonishing then these, is like to come upon you, except you will bee perswaded to re∣deeme it, and buy it off, at the rate of your utmost endeavours, and of all you are able to doe to prevent it, if God will vouchsafe the grace and mer∣cy to you, to let you have it at any rate. 4. That honorable Senate of both Houses of Parliament, consisting of most of the worthies of the Land. (I meane for men of their ranke and qualitie) to whose unwearied labours, and diligence, and faithfulnesse, and zeale,
and expence, under God, you and your whole Nation owe your lives & liberties, both spirituall and temporall, yea estates and all your sweet enjoyments hitherto; and in whose peace and preservation all you yet in∣joy, as farre as reason is able to discerne and judge, is bound up; (so that I may well reckon these amongst your temporall enjoyments) these are like to perish and to be cut off by the right hand of iniquitie, if that generation of men whose bloody cruelties you both have beene heretofore, and are now againe exhorted with all your might to oppose, shall ever get the upper hand. We know it is this assembly, that have stood by you and stucke close to your liberties, and the truth and purity of that Religion you pro∣fesse; that are the bulwarke and defence against the furious impressions of those wicked ones, upon you, and all that is yours; And they know as much too, and looke upon them accordingly: they are they that have rob∣ed these beares of their whelpes, that have shaken the foundation of Po∣pery, Prelacy, and prophannesse in the Land; and that are at worke up∣on it night and day, to make it a land of righteousnesse, which is an element that these kinde of Creatures know not how to live in. And in this regard, these are the men of their rage and hatred above others; these are the mountaines that stand in their way; and what will they not doe, what will they not suffer to remove them, or cast them downe, and make them into a plaine? doubtlesse they are sicke, and long for their blood, as much as ever David longed for the waters of the well of Bethleem. And if they shall ever be but able to dissolve the power and proceedings of this Parliament now sitting, the way will be open and ready for them, either to stave off all Parliaments for the future, or (which is of more dangerous con∣sequence of the two) to make them themselves: and so the Sunne of the glory and peace of this Nation is like to set upon it for ever. Therefore now consider (I beseech you) of how lamentable and unsupportable a con∣sequence it would be, if this Spring should be troubled (as Solomons compa∣rison is) if these righteous shall fall before these wicked ones; and Cava∣liers Swords drinke Senators blood: And how would it be a blot upon you, and make your memoriall an infamy and reproach throughout all genera∣tions, if it should be said, that you sate still and did nothing, but keepe up your mony, while these men perished at your side, who had beene a guard and safety to you and to all that you had: yea that laboured and travailed with the honours and safetie of the whole Land, and were ready to cry out, and to have beene delivered, but that in the very breaking forth of the chil∣dren, your covetousnesse, and your unfaithfulnesse, and remissenesse betray∣ed them into the hands of their enemies, who cruelly destroyed both Pa∣rents and Children at once. Not to feede your enemie when hee hungers, or when he is thirsty, not to give him drinke, is by the Holy Ghost himselfe
interpreted; to be a revenging your selves on him; and withall to be a mat∣ter of high displeasure and offence unto God. I beseech you, if not to save the life of an enemy when it is in danger, nay if not to supplie such necessi∣ties of his, which yet perhaps doe not touch his life, be a sin of that provo∣cation in the sight of God; What sin will that be, or by what name shall it be called, or what shall the measure of the provocation of it in the eyes of God be, when men shall suffer the greatest and faithfullest freinds they have, that for a long time together have laboured for them in the very fire night and day, in the very midst of their sore conflicts and strivings with men, and that cheifely for their sakes, to perish by the hand of their ene∣mies, when it was in their hand and power to relieve them? Surely men must create a New Name, and God will create a new punishment or hell for such a sin. 5. (And lastly for matter of this worlds concernment) what doe you thinke of your lives themselves; if those men of blood shall carry the day, and ever come to set up their banners amongst you? Will they not be sold as cheap as Sparrows were among the Jewes, five for two farthings? Nay, will they not be trodden down and trampled upon like clay and mire in the Streetes, by the foot of the pride, and rage, and insolency of these men? Would not your flesh be as a feast of fat things unto them, and your blood as new Wine? Or if they did spare your lives, would it not be only out of a desire and intent to adde unto your miseries, to gaine opportunity of in∣flicting many deaths upon you? Perhaps they have learned a deliberate cruelty, from that bloody Emperour Nero: who when any person that was accused, and under the stroke and dint of his power; desired of him that he might be dispatched, and put to death, was wont to make answer, Non ita tecum in gratiam redii: .i. He was not yet so far friends with him, as to give him leave to die: he meant to have more satisfaction out of them, then so. So if these men give you your lives for a time, you must not looke to have them given you upon such termes, as God sometimes in common destru∣ctions gives his servants their lives: viz. For a prey, or booty: No, they will be given you only as meanes or engines wherewith to torment you. It may be they will desire to reserve and keep you aliue, to make spectators of you, of all that bloody Tragedy they meane to act upon all that belongs to you, in setting your Houses, and Cities on fire, in taking away your goods, in of∣fering villany to your wives, and your daughters, and then mangling and massacring them when they have done. And then when they have through∣ly scourged you with such scorpions as these, it is like they will deliver you into the hand of death. Certaine it is, that the spirit that works in these cursed children of disobedience which are now your adversaries, lusts not
onely to your temporall ruine and destruction, but to your ever∣lasting ruine and destruction also, as farre as it knowes how to bee active in it. Our Saviour himselfe seemes to imply as much, Matth. 10. 28. where he commands us not to feare those which kill the body: but are not able to kill the soule: as farre as they are able to goe in hatred and malice against the Saints, they doe goe, they doe kill the body (saith our Saviour) Hee doth not say, feare not those that can kill the body, but, which doe, actually, frequently and from time to time, kill the body, but are not able to kill the soule; doubtlesse intimating, that if they were able, they would kill body and soule, and all. And somewhat more plainely (I conceive) Joh. 10. and I give unto them eternall life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man plucke (or pull) them out of mine hand; cleerely implying, that the divell and his instruments, wicked men, are ready to pull and tugge hard to get even his elect themselves out of his hands, out of that hand of election and grace, which hee hath layd upon them, and whereby he holds them fast. Thus the story of the martyrs re∣port, that when the Popish Prelates, and Priests were ready to have execution done upon that faithfull servant of God John Husse, they used these words, Now wee commit thy soule unto the Divell: And when Hierom of Prague, through long and grievous imprison∣ment grew very sicke, and (as himselfe thought) neere unto death, desired that hee might have a confessor (being it seemes, conscienci∣ous this way) the story saith, that very hardly, and with great im∣portunitie it could bee obteyned: which shewes, that it was griefe and torment to his enemies, that hee should have any thing, that in their opinion might bee a meanes to save his soule, after hee was dead; besides many other like streynes of the same spirit, which that story presents unto the diligent Reader. Now then, there be∣ing a spirit of this profound, deepe, and divellish enmitie against you, working in the Bowells and inward parts of these men, to desire not onely your temporall, but eternall death also, it is none other like, but if they suspect and doubt of the strength of their arme, for the sending of you by death into Hell (as I make little question but they doe, they have no great hope of hunting your soules into the bottomlesse pit, which is reserved for their owne) they will themselves create a Hell for you, as full of torment and cruell burnings as they can make it, and cast you into it them∣selves
before you die, and so be gotten out of their reach. So that there is nothing to bee looked for from these men but death, or that which is worse then death, a life to contribute towards the increase of the paines and sorrowes of your death: and so indeed death howsoever. Therefore I beseech you consider the weight of this branch of the present motive also. Will you thinke of keeping or saving your estates, to the losse or imminent danger of your lives? Shall you not keepe your money to make a goodly purchase, if you bring all these great evills and miseries upon you thereby? Though in many other cases you might make much gaine and advantage by making the Divell a lier, yet it will bee your wisedome, to justifie him in that his saying; skinne for skinne, (or rather skinne after skinne, or, skinne upon skinne) and all that hee hath will a man give for his life, If you have so much of men in you, as Sathan your enemy supposeth (it seemes) that you have) to value your lives at any such rate above all your possessions whatsoever, shew it this day, and make a for∣tification and bulwarke of all that you have for their defence and safetie; Solomon (we know) made some hundreds of Targets and Shields of Gold: it should not be grievous to any man to sacri∣fice his estate, his Gold and Silver upon the service of his life. There is a time to keepe (saith Solomon) and a time to spend, or to cast away, Eccles. 3. 6. Certainely of all other, that is no time to keepe, when a mans life lies at the stake, and is in all likelihood not to bee redeemed but by casting away. Thus much for your temporall and outward injoyments, they are all involved and concerned to the utmost, in the present occasion and service, which you have beene exhorted, to promote and further with all your strength, and all your power. But secondly, it were well (at least it were lesse to bee layd to heart, it were a matter of farre lighter moment and importance) if your outward concernments onely, though it were even to life it selfe, were imported in that great occasion, which is now on foot, and hath beene againe and againe recommended unto you; but behold greater things then these. Your spirituall concern∣ments also, are like to suffer, and that in a very high degree, if Gog and Magog prevaile, if ever you come to bee at the allowance of Cavaliers, Papists, and Athiests, that have taken the field against
you, for the things of Heaven. You are like to have stones in stead of bread, and Scorpions in stead of Fish. Those golden Pipes, by which Heaven and Earth are (as it were) joyned to∣gether, and have lively communion each with other; I meane your pure ordinances of worship, which have both the wisedome, and grace, and goodnesse of God abundantly in their frame, will be cut off, and others of Lead laid in their stead; ordinances I meane of an humane constitution and frame, whose chiefe sub∣stance, or ingredients will bee the wisedome and will, i. e. the folly and corrupt affections of men, by which, not Heaven, but Hell, and the world will bee joyned together, and the trade and traffique betweene both places, much quickned and ad∣vanced, ordinances which will bee ready to bee cast as dung into your faces by God, when you have beene exercised in them. You must never looke to see the goings of God in the Sanctuary, as you have done, to see any more visions of life and immortalitie let downe from Heaven unto you, in these houses of vision: those excellent ravishments and raptures of spirit, those takings up into the third Heaven by seeing him that was greater then Solomon in all his glory, will cease from you. Those pure streames of the Gospell will bee all bemired and soyled, when they are given unto you to drinke: Yea hap∣pily and poysoned too, by the influence of the corrupt minds and judgements of those that shall give them unto you. You must looke to have the Gospell turned upside downe, and to be made to stand in perfect conjunction with Hell, with loose∣nesse, wickednesse, and prophanenesse, and in opposition to Hea∣ven, Grace and Holinesse; to be made a Savour of death to those that shall bee saved; and a Savour of life to those that shall pe∣rish. It will bee made to frowne upon those that are godly, and to looke cheerefully and comfortably upon loose men. So that if your soule shall lust for these Sommer fruits, if you shall desire to have communion with God in communion and fellowship with his Saints, If you shall desire at any time to bee rained upon by a shower of life and peace from Heaven; you must repaire againe to the woods and mountaines, or to the co∣vert of some close and secret place, where you must eate the bread of your soules in perill of your lives; as your forefathers did in
Queene Maries dayes, on with danger of suffering whatever the malice and revengefull spirit of your enemies shall thinke good or can devise to inflict upon you. Therefore now consider, you that have had the liberty of your Sanctuaries, and of your publike assemblies, that have beene fed with hony out of the Rocke, and with the finest wheate of Heaven, you that have had an open and free trade to Heaven, and have had glorious returnes from them day after day, to whom the Ministe∣ry of the Gospell, hath beene as the wings of the morning, as Cha∣riots of fire to carry you up and downe as it were in spirituall state and triumph betweene Heaven and earth; Oh how will that day be as the shaddow of death unto you, wherein you must ex∣change your Quailes and Manna from Heaven, for the Garlike and Onyons of Egypt, when you shall heare the Pope and his Hierarchie preached up to the Heavens, and Jesus Christ with his Saints preached downe to the earth, and made to sit at their footstoole, when your soules and consciences shall bee compassed about with lies and errors and the Commandements of men, in the Ministery of the word, in stead of those spirituall and glorious truths, which were wont to bee as so many Angels sent from the presence of God to comfort you; doubtlesse if ever you saw the heavens opened over your heads by an effectuall and sound Ministery, and Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God in glory, as Stephen did, if ever you smell the savor of life by Jesus Christ preached; the day wherein such a ministery shall bee taken from you, will bee like the day wherein the Sunne shall bee covered with Sack-cloath, and the Moone turned into blood, and the Starres in the Firmament of Heaven lose their light. The change will bee every whit as sad unto you, as that was unto David, when hee was driven from the Sanctuary and presence of God, and compelled to dwell in Mesech, and make his habitation in the Tents of Kedar. If this exchange made him cry out, woe is me: you must thinke it will bee a double woe unto you, when the Arke of God shall be taken from you, and Dagon set up in its stead, when the dispensations and administrations of Heaven, which were spirit and life, the light of Gods coun∣tenance it selfe unto you, shall bee exchanged for the statutes and ordinances of Rome, which are like tombes and sepulchers, ha∣ving
nothing in them but rottennesse and dead mens bones. If such a day were now upon you, what would you give to buy it off? and is not the purchase of the prevention of it worth as much? It may be there are some amongst you whose soules and con∣sciences were never yet engaged, eyther by the puritie or power of any of the ordinances of God; who never yet knew what it was to bee kindly touched from Heaven by any spirituall admi∣nistration; to such as these it is like Dagon may bee as good as the Arke; the devices and inventions of men, as beautifull, as savory, in the house and worship of God, as those ordinances themselves which have the perfect image and superscription of God upon them: a ministery that is low, and cold, and set in consort with the Earth, and the things thereof; as that which is calculated for the Meridian of Heaven, and breathes life and immortalitie in the faces of mens soules continually. If such as these lend but a dull or deafe eare to the motion, cannot finde so much as two mites in their estates to cast into the treasury of God, it is not much to be marveiled at. But for you that know how little the chaffe is to the wheate; I beseech you to have this sence of the businesse re∣commended to you, that when you have done the utmost of what you are able to doe for the advancement of it, you would yet un∣fainedly desire to doe more. Thirdly, To engage you yet further to give out your selves fully & freely as you have bin exhorted, you may please to consider, that as all your pretious interests, whether in the things of this life, or of that which is to come, are deepely concerned in it, so are all the like interests of all your brethren, the godly persons in the land concerned likewise. And if the cause should suffer or miscar∣ry, it would bee as a sword that would passe through all the righ∣teous soules throughout the land; it would bring such a day of sorrow, lamentation, and woe upon the generation of the ser∣vants of God throughout the Kingdome, as scarce hath beene heard of in all ages: it will cause all their hands to hang downe, and their knees to wax feeble, and their hearts to wither as the grasse; it will fill all their eyes with teares, and their hearts with heavinesse: there will bee no end of those great evills and miseries which will come upon them in that day. The breach that will bee
made upon them will bee like the great breaches of the Sea which cannot bee repaired. It was a night of much sadnesse to the land of Egypt, when God slew in every house one through∣out the whole Land: the Text saith, There was a grievous cry throughout the whole land of Egypt upon it: But this cup was given to the Egyptians to drinke: And yet this stroke fell not so sore upon them neither, as the miscarriage of that great action wee speake of, would doe upon the Israell of God amongst us. That did but touch the Egyptians in the lives of one in every Family respectively: but the stroke which is now lifted up, and likely to be given in the land, whereever it light, should it fall upon the right hand, upon the people of God, it would wound them all, and that very sore, yea and that not in some, but in all their concern∣ments and injoyments whatsoever, as well in those which relate to this world present, as in those, whose accommodations are more peculiarly for that world which is yet to come (as hath beene shewed already) If ever that mountaine of prophannesse, which now you are exhorted to put to your shoulders to remove, shall be establshed, doubtlesse it will magnifie it selfe against all that is called Holy in the Land; it will lie heavy and oppresse, if not overwhelme and bury under it, all that have the marke of the li∣ving God upon them. Therefore I beseech you consider what you doe: If this great evill shall come upon the Church and peo∣ple of God amongst you, and you bee found dull and heavie, negligent and remisse in the preventing of it, and not improve your selves to the utmost that way, when as it hath beene so fully and feelingly, and frequently both represented and recommended unto you, shall you not bring the guilt of it all upon your heads? Shall you not bee looked upon both by God and men, as ac∣cessaries (if not principalls) in all those sore afflictions and ca∣lamities, which in this case shall fall upon them? will not God re∣quire their sorrowes, and their teares, and their troubles, and their afflictions, and all the extremitie they shall endure at your hsnds? When I shall say unto the wicked (saith the Lord to his Prophet Eze∣kiel) Oh wicked man, thou shalt die the death, if thou dost not speake and admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked man shall die for his iniquitie, but his blood will I require at thine hand, Ezek. 33. If God will require the blood of a wicked man at the hand of his Prophet
in case he did not seeke to prevent it by admonishing him: will he not much more require the sorrowes, sighings, troubles, teares, extremities, blood of a whole nation of Saints, at the hand of those by whose unfaithfulnesse, coldnesse, covetousnesse, negligence in any kind, they shall come upon them. The Sonne of man (saith our Saviour) goeth his way, as it is written of him: but woe be to that man, by whom the Sonne of man is betrayed: it had beene good for that man,Matth. 26. 24. if he had never beene borne: In like manner the Church and people of God amongst us may yet suffer grievous things, but woe bee to those, whomsoever they bee, bee they fewer, be they more, bee they rich, be they poore, by whom their peace and safety shall bee betrayed. Fourthly (and lastly) All our owne concernments and the con∣cernments of all our deare brethren in the faith throughout the land, are bound up in the businesse, which hath bin so frequently and affectionately recommended unto you; so are the like con∣cernments of others of our brethren also, partakers of like preci∣ous faith with you, in other lands and Kingdoms, bound up like∣wise herein; though not all (perhaps) in the same degree. There is a common report of a strange sympathie between Hippocrate's twins, that they alwayes cried together, and laughed together. And doubtlesse there is some such simpathye betweene all the Re∣formed Churches (as we call them) in these parts of the world: amongst which likewise I comprehend those plantations of our Brethren of this Land, in America, and other Westerne parts, at least betweene all that are truely faithfull and sound in that professi∣on which they make in these Churches. I doe not speake here of that inward or spirituall simpathie, which in respect of reciprocall affections and mutuall tendernesse, intercedes betweene all the true and living members of the mysticall body of Christ, though never so remote asunder, but of that mutuall dependencie which the out∣ward affaires and condition of every one hath, upon the condition of the other, so that the prosperitie and well established peace of any one, hath an influence into, and contributes more or lesse towards the like establishment of the other: As on the con∣trary, the shaking, trouble, ruine, or destruction of any one wea∣kens the strength, and impaires more or lesse the securitie of all the other. So that they must needs all weepe together, and all laugh
together. Now then, this is that which I say and hold forth to your Christian and godly considerations in this motive; that the action wherein the Church and people of God in the Land are now inga∣ged, and which is yet depending betweene them, and their adver∣saries, will in the issue, close, and fall of it, bee of very remarkable concernment to all the Saints of God in all those other Churches mentioned; if it falls on the right hand, it will bee the riches, strength, and increase of them; if on the left, it will be the dimi∣nishing, shaking, and impairing of them, therefore consider I be∣seech you, the great weight and importance of the opportunitie that is before you, if through your zeale, and forwardnesse, and faithfulnesse to advance it, and the blessing of God upon it, your present service shall prosper, your light will be like the lightning which (as our Saviour saith) shineth from the East even unto the West: the heate and warmth and living influence thereof, shall pierce through many kingdomes great and large, as France, Germany, Bo∣hemia, Hungaria, Polonia, Denmarke, Sweden, with many others, and finde out all the children of God, and all that are friends to the Kingdome of Heaven, and will bee a cheering and refreshing to them: Especially to your brethren in their severall plantations in farre countries; and most of all to those in these united and neere kingdomes, Scotland and Ireland, it will be as a feast of fat things, and of wines well refined: and particularly to poore bleeding, dy∣ing Ireland, it will be as a resurrection from death unto life. Now then in-as-much as God hath set you this day, as the Sunne in the firmament of Heaven, from whence hee hath an opportunitie and advantage to send forth his beames, and to furnish and fill the world with his light and influence round about him; since you have the commodiousnesse of such a standing, that you may doe good to all that is Gods, I meane to all the Saints in all their di∣spertions and quarters throughout so many kingdomes, and such a considerable part of the world as hath beene mentioned, so that you may cause them to rise up before you and call you blessed; I beseech you doe not betray this first-borne opportunitie of Hea∣ven: looke upon it as a great and solemne invitation from God himselfe unto you, to do greater things for the world, at least for the Christian world, then ever you did unto this day; or then ever you are like to doe the second time, yea then any particular Chri∣stian
State ever did, or is like to doe while the world stands. God hath prepared and fitted a Table for you large enough, if you will but spread and furnish it with such provisions as are under your hand, that you may feast, and give royall entertainment, to the whole houshold of faith, almost throughout the whole world at once. And shall it now seeme any great thing in our ages, or bee in the least measure grievous unto any man or woman of you, even to lavish his gold out of bagges, to bestow his whole substance to devest himselfe of all he possesseth in the world, even to his shooe Latchet, to furnish and set out such an occasion as this is, like it selfe? Shall not the very conscience and comfortable remembrance of such a thing as this done with uprightnesse and simplicitie of heart by you, be a thousand times better then any superfluities of silver or of gold, or of meates, or of drinkes, or of houses, or of or of jewels, or apparell whatsoever? Nay if we shall bring povertie and nakednesse, and hunger and thirst upon our selves, to purchase and procure it, will it not bee better then an estate, then cloathing, then meates and drinkes unto us? will it not take out the burning, and allay the bitternesse of all these? Doubtlesse the honour and conscience of the fact, will beare all the charges, and answer all the expence of it to the full. The opportunitie and occasion is so rich and glorious, that it calls to remembrance (as sometimes the sha∣dow doth the substance) the great opportunitie that was before the Lord Jesus Christ, for the salvation of the world: We know that he being rich, became poore, that the world thorough his po∣verty might be made rich. You have the patterne in the mount be∣fore you: See that according to your line and measure, you make all things like to it. FINIS.
