g1010 E392_19 99862073 114222
Gold tried in the fire, OR The burnt Petitions revived. A Preface. June 14th 1647 COuteous Reader, I shall give thee a short Narative of some passages upon the following Petitions, first con∣cerning the large Petition: Divers printed coppies thereof being sent abroad to gaine subscriptions, one whereof was intercepted by an Informer, and so brought to the hands of Mr. Glyn Recorder of London, and a member of the Commons House: who was pleased to call it a scanda∣lous, and seditious paper: Whereupon it was referred to Co∣lonell Leighes Commitee (it being that Commitee appoynted to receive informations against those men who preached with∣out licence from the Ordainers) to finde out the Authours of the said Petition; upon this a certificate being drawn up, and intended by the Petitioners, to have been delivered to the said Commitee, for vindication of the said Petition, as will appeare by the certificate herewith printed; and notice being taken of one of the petitioners named Nicholas Tue, who red the said certificate in the Court of Request; for the Concur∣rence of friends who had not formerly seen nor subscribed the certificate: and for his so doing he was sent for presently before the said Commitee, and for refusing to answer to Interroga∣tories, was presently by them Committed, and still remaineth in prison, it being at the least three Moneths since his first com∣mitment. Likewise Major Tuledah, was upon complaint of that Com∣mitee, the next day committed by the House; but since discharged
upon baile, without any just cause shewn for either of their Commitments: and others of the Petitioners abused, and vi∣lified by that Committee; some of them offering to draw their swords upon the Petitioners. All which, with more was ready to be proved to the whole House, but could by no meanes be obtained, though earnestly desired, by a Petition, presently de∣livered into the House, humbly desiring the examination of these miscarriages; but after eight weekes attendance, with much importunity; after many promises and dayes appointed to take their Petition into consideration, they obtained a very slight answer: which was that they could not like of their Peti∣tion. Occasion being taken sodainely after to commit one of the Petitioners named Mr. Browne to the prison of Newgate; for his importunity in desiring an answer to that Petition, after many promises and delayes. Shortly after the slight answer obtained to the said Petition, the Petitioners thought good to deliver a second Petition to the House, to see if it were possible to obtain a better answer to their just desires; hoping that they would better consider of things, but after attendance and im∣portunity, they obtained an answer in these words. That the Parliament had Voted it a breach of priviledge, scandalous, and seditious, and that Petition, and the large Petition, to be bur∣ned by the hand of the Hangman; which was accordingly done by Order of the House, in these words. Die Iovis 20 May, 1647, Resolved &c. That the Sheriffes of London and Middlesex, be required, to take care that the Petition and paper be burnt, which accordingly was done, before the Exchange, two dayes after the said Vote and Order of the House. And shortly after this the Petitioners prepared a third Peti∣tion, which is the lat Petition herewith printed: and after much importunity with the Members of the House; after al∣most two dayes attendance, obtained so much favour from one of the Members, as to present that Petition to the House, and after all this could obtaine no other answer to that Petition;
but the House after long dispute thereupon passed this Vote. Upon the 2d. of June 1647. That no answer shall be given to the Petition at the present: and two dayes after the Petiti∣oners attended the House, for a further answer delivering copies of their Petition to the severall Members of the House, but could obtaine no further answer thereunto; but received ma∣ny vilifying, and disgracefull speeches, from severall Members of the House: and so after a whole dayes attendance, departed without any hope, to receive any answer to their just desires in the said Petition. And thus I have faithfully, and truly (though briefly) given ye an account of the proceedings upon the ensuing Petitions. Now let the judicious and considerate Reader judge whether the Petitioners have received equall and even dealing herein from this present Parliament: the Petitioners being such who have laid out themselves, both in their persons and purses, far above their abilities; who have not valued their lives, their childrens lives, nor their servants lives, nor estates, to deare for the service of the Parliament, and Common-wealth. And is this the reward they shall receive, after they have thus laid out them selves? Nay, they have just cause to feare that they and their friends are men appointed to utter ruine, and destru∣ction; otherwise what meaneth all the rayling, reviling, and reproachfull speeches of their Ministers, and Agents, out of the pulpit and presse, to stirre up the rude multitude to fall upon them, and destroy them; is not this ingratitude in the highest degree, shall not the very Heathen rise up in judgement against such a generation, of degenerate men as these? Who could say, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris. You cannot chuse but take notice of severall Remonstrances, and Petitions presented to the House from these men, who call themselves Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons, of the City of London in Common-councell assembled, what high affronts they have offered to the Parliament; yet they have in some measure by steps, and degrees, answered the Remonstrances, and granted their Petitions, and you may observe what answer they have given to their last Petition, for raising of Horse, &c. (The tendencie whereof may be of very dangerous conse∣quence
if well weighed) which is thus. Mr. Speaker by com∣mand of the House, expresse unto them the true sense the House hath of their constant good affections to this Parliament; and that no alterations whatsoever can work any change in their duty, and love; for which he is to give them the hartiest thanks of this House. I could enlarge my selfe, but I affect brevitie, and the judi∣cious and considerate Reader, may enlarge himselfe in his own thoughts: well weighing the matter in the said Remonstran∣ces, and Petitions; and upon due consideration may judge whe∣ther their Petitions, or the Petitions burnt, vilified, and dis∣graced, deserve most thanks, or tend most to the safetie of the Parliament, and Common-wealth. And will hence forth conclude, that as there is little good to be hoped for from such Parliaments, as need to be Petitioned; so there is none at all to be expected from those that burn such Petitions as these. If the endeavours of good Common-wealths-men in the House could have prevailed, these Petitions had not been burnt, nor the Petitioners abused; but the sons of Zerviah were to strong for them, that is to say, the Malignants, and Delinquents, the Lawyers (some few excected) the Monopolising mer∣chants, the sons and servants of the Lords; all these joyning to∣gether, over Voted them about 16 Voyces; but God in time, will we trust, deliver the people of this Nation, from their de∣ceipt, and malice; and therefore let us not sorrow as men with∣out hope, nor be discouraged, but goe on and persist, for the just liberties of England, a word to the wise is sufficient. Fare∣well, By a well-wisher to truth and peace. Printed in the yeere 1647.
