F935 E573_4 99865373 117613
A TRUE RELATION OF THE Twenty weeks Siege of London derry, By the Scotch, Irish, and Dis-affected English, with the Daily Proceeding Passages thereof: As also the number of men killd, and taken Prisoners on both sides. RELATED In two Letters from Captaine Henry Finch, one of the Captains of London derry, and one of the Aldermen of the City. To His Friend in London. LONDON, Printed by R. I. for S. G. and A. W. and are to bee sold at the Exchange, and at Westminster. 1649.
A True Relation of the twenty weeks Siege of London-Derry, By the Scotch, Irish, and Dis-affected English. London-Derry 19 June 1649. Worthy Sir, LAtely I have received none from you, My last to you was the 14 of Februa∣ry of all passages; with some relation of the alteration since, but I thought it would never have come to this height, as then there was a grumb∣ling, and presently it grew hotter, and in the Lagon they began to deny the payments agreed upon, so as Souldiers were sent out for Distresses, and brought in some money, but Sir Alexan. Stuarts Quarters re∣fused to pay any. March 22. Two Troops of Horse went to Lether∣kenny
¦keteers went out to make good the horse retreate, but went not a mile off.) where wee tooke 45 prisoners, killed 16. whereof one was Maj. Belfore an able soul∣dier, and a wise man, and another Captaine. 30 and odde. of the prisoners were exchanged for so many boules of meale, the rest being Lieu. Col. James Gal∣braith; 2 Majors, 1 Captain and other Officers and Country men, who are reserved for ransome or other ends; brought eight coulors, and narrowly escaped many other Commanders, and all this without the losse of one man, one hurt. 26 We begin to fire our Sabberles over the Bog, and pull down the cabines, ditches, and cut down all the Orchards and Gardens. May 2, A party of our men went over the water and fired some of the houses, killed some men, and brought away some plunder. The 3. All the Cowes wee had about the Derry (which was about 80) was taken by the enemy, which was very grievous to the poor people, and many hous∣holders. The 5th. They came with their Tents and laid close siedg to Derry within Cannon shot of the towne, and in one night intrenched themselves beyond expectati∣on, which daily since the enemy have been strength∣ening. May 13 Our Horse upon the Strand beyond the Gallows, was charged with a stronger party of their Horse, but God gave us the Victory, and five of theirs was laid dead, and only one was brought alive into the Town, being shot thorow, and exchanged for one
of ours then taken, but he dyed within a few dayes after his return, we had little hurt. May 15 Another Skirmish by the Bogge side, where was three prisoners of theirs taken, and six kild. 17 We gave an allarm in the night, to the other side of the water, with our Boats, but landed not, yet raised the whole Country from Strabaine to Magilli∣gan. 19 They desire a Treaty, which was continued to the 23 day, but it was on their parts feignedly, not with any reall intentions, and so to no effect, but to gain time to secure their leagure by making new works which our ordnance did annoy. 26 A comfortable supply of wheat came from Lon∣don, with a boate laden with barley, taken by the Convoy bound for Dublin, which was landed for our store, but my Lord gave satisfaction for it to the ow∣ner, with a small Barke wherein was some few Cowes and Horses, which were taken by the said Convoy being bound for Scotland. The same day came Sir Robert Stuart and Col. Mer∣vin to the Leagure which (as is said) had been broke up that night had they not come. 29 They took two Prisoners of ours in the night out of their beds lying without the Bishops gate, which were restored for one of theirs. 30 Our men went over the water, and burnt some houses, some men killed, and plunder taken. June 1. All our Horse, 150 Foot, went over the water, the Horse went to Goldsmiths new Towne, fought with a party of Horse and Foot, routed them, fired the Country, killed about thirty, took two pri∣soners,
more they might, but would not, brought over some English, took a prey of 300 and odde cowes, as many sheep, some horses, with other plunder, fired and killed to the very Mough without any losse, onely one man, which lost himselfe in a glotious attempt, and God was mercifull in shewing so great a mercy to so few hands. 3. The Cows being too many to keep for eating up our grasse, and not fit to kill, so many as were not usefull, was sold to the Enemy for 10 s. a peece, upon parrole, and was currantly paid. 8. The Enemy in one night had built an incredible peece of work within almost musket shot of our Towne, upon the top of the hill upon the way of Bal∣lymackerooty: upon which my Lord President drew out all his Horse, and about 200 Foot marcht up to the worke, who immediately left it, gave alarm to the Leagure, our men marched round about it, a party of Horse encountred theirs, routed them, and our other part of horse comming in, gave them the chase for two miles, killed 25, took prisoners 6, got many horses, good store of cloaks, some arms, and came and threw downe their new worke, and after sent a challenge to the Leagure to come out and fight them, standing in Battalia above an houre within Musket shot of their Leagure, but they came not out, nor gave any answer to their summons, although they were more then three for one; much shot was exchanged this day be∣tween their Musketteers and ours, but no hurt done to our party, many slightly wounded, but none mor∣tally; the charge of Horse was in sight of the Towne bravely and resolutely given and received on both
sides, but admirable was the successe, and divine pro∣vidence did shew it selfe mightily therein in the chase they fired two miles, and beat up all their out-guards, some of their powder in the Leagure blew up, and kill'd one man. 13. A new Fort which were a building at the Windmill was near finished, being throwne downe by the Enemy this night, the wind being high, he was not discovered till done. 15. Three companies of English came in about 200. besides officers, without victualls or cloaths, and a great defect in Armes, not above halfe armed, which is supplied by my Lord President in some measure. 18. White Castle was this night plundred by some of our men, and the Sea-men, got some Mault, Barly, meal, and much other luggage from thence, and other places. 19. The Scotch boat that was taken with the Cows and Horses bound for Scotland before mentioned, was manned out, and this day brought in two other small Scotch boats bound for Scotland from Colraine, laden with staves, Clobords, Rounds, and some butter, but they missed of their maine designe, being a Bark laden with Butter, Tallow, and other good commodi∣ties, &c. As if the Lord President had had a foresight, or some inspiration of this businesse, before any appea∣rance was here, caused some 80. Horse, and about 100. and odde Foot, to come hither Feb. 5. out of Connough, and made stay of all manner of victualls and provisions, of which at this time of the yeare this
Towne was never so furnished, which hath mightily disappointed our adversaries, who did believe one month would have starved us, but praised be God, af∣ter three months siege, there is not one sicke or feeble body among us, and now in a better condition then the first day of the siege, our greatest want is and will be firing, there being no other firing but old houses and trees got out of Orchards; for we suppose provi∣sions will be plentifully sent us by the Parliament, which we daily expect: It is not without a great pro∣vidence of God, that salt Beef, Herring, salt Cod, salt Salmon, at the time of the year drinking little (some nothing) but water, should prove so nourishing as it doth, and not rather breed diseases. This is a part of the proceedings here since my last; but should I write you the laborious care, industry, and vigilency of our Go∣vernour, scarce once in a week going to bed, nor slee∣ping at most times above two hours in twenty four, the gallantry of our horse, and stoutnesse of our foot, with every particular action. I should be too large, I shal I fear, lose the conveyance of this by my prolixity. So I conclude, with commendations to your selfe, friends, and rest, London derry 15. June, 1649. Your assured friend and servant, Henry Finch. I cannot say punctually that just so many men were killed at the skirmishes mentioned, yet by the report of the Souldiery, and of the Country, they were rather more then lesse.
London-derry, August 15. 1649. Worthy Sir, MY last I writ to you, was of 19. or 20. of June, since no occasion hath presented, nor none came from you, nor indeed from any place else, all passages having been obstructed. June 24. What had past from the beginning of our siege to that time, I advertised; since the most materi∣all are: Most of our horse, and 100 foot before day, went to surprise the Enemies horse-guard, which lay at Mervins Mill, a mile of the Towne, but were discove∣red by the guards on the other side of the water, the alarm being given, they took horse, and left the place, killed three men, and tooke nine cowes, so we took the plunder, and fited the Mill, and foure or five houses. 28. These dayes past was spent in pulling downe of houses, and the mills, bringing home the wood for firing, and the stones for horse-mills, onely one day a skirmish of the foot, where the Enemy lost foure men. 30. The Presidents brother, and other officers of Connaugh (the number of twenty horse in all, who were long before expected with their forces) came hither, having made a cessation for a month with the Scotch, but were to returne in 48 houres, which they did, but July 2. in the time of their stay, a great skir∣mish was almost all day between our foot and theirs, our horsemen being all in Towne dispatching busi∣nesse with their friends of Connaugh, onely a few
which guarded the horses, 12. whereof went to se∣cond our foot, which was presently encountred with a like party of theirs, which had scarce exchanged their pistols, when 100 and odde horse comes amaine upon those few, and all their foot upon ours, beat our men to the walls, and with a full carrear came all a∣long the wall within pistoll shot thereof, and close un∣der our new work, firing all the way; yet blessed be God, we lost not a man, five of theirs was kill'd, and 2 taken prisoners, some of ours hurt, most recovered; in probability had the horsmen been out, and our foot had Ammunition, which they had not, having spent it in the skirmish, a glorious day had been on our parts. Sligo sold to Clanricard by Henderson, whereby Con∣nough his lost. These eight dayes past, have resorted to the Enemy great numbers of horse and foot, and daily skirmishes, and have brought to their Leagure 12 peeces of Ord∣nance, whereof they shot three peeces, carrying 4 l. bullet, but being without effect, they have made no more use of them. Col. George Monroe came to them with a party of horse and foot, who more then a month before, came to them with (as reported) 3 or 400 horse, 12 or 1500 foot English, Scotch, and Irish, which have miserably harried al the Country, retaken Colraine, and those parts. 12. They built a Fort at the Knock of Ember, to stop shipping and boats to come to us (which for 20 daies past, mightily relieved this place out of Em∣stoun with fresh victualls) and having many hands, by noon, had made a defensible peece of worke; to slight which, and to get their Ordnance, the President sent
Cap. Keyser (a Parship here) with 100 musketteers in boats, but they were so provided, that after exchan∣ging on both sides good store of shot both great and small, the ship and boats went to Culmore, and could not returne. 13 Keyser went his way without leave, taking a great disheartning to lose him, who stood us in great stead, and 100 of our best men which would not re∣turne. 16 They vapoured very much all day, but approa∣ching something too near, two of their horses, and one man was kill'd by one of our peeces of Ordnance, which indeed is all the hurt I know they have done: some fault there is in platforms. 19. This day came about 400 horse, and 150 Dra∣goons of Connaugh forces on the other side the water, unexpected by us, and brought Humfry Galbraith and Dean Bartly, and a Lieu. prisoners, immediately they send downe a party of their horse to bring off out 100 men went with Keyser, who had lived the week past upon Emstowne, wanting nothing, but taking what they pleased. 20. The last night they remove their siege, and our men this day bring all their Cabins & Huts that was in the Trench, and made of it for firing about 20. or 30 li. 21 The enemy within a mile of the Towne draws up into battalia both horse and foot, and seem resolved to fight, ours the like, but the ground being bad, and night approaching, nothing was done. 24 A party of 24 of our horse being sent out to dis∣cover the enemy, met with a party of theirs of 80, sent for the same end, charged and routed them, took two
prisoners, both English, whereof Henry Pige, Col. Mer∣vins Barber was one, 11 horses killed, 9 or 10 men, without any losse to us, onely two men hurt; this night a party of 100 horse, and as many Dragoons, were sent into Emstown for contribution. 25 The Enemy appears in great numbers, not lesse of horse and foot then 3000. which put us in a great fright, our party out of Emstowne not being returned, about noon they drew into Battalia, so did we, and stood about an houre; when they marched to Ems∣town to get between our party and us, who by Gods providence came only time enough to get the shelter of Culmore, but so neer were they, that the Van beat up our Rear, one quarter of an houre longer had in∣dangered or lost them all, a part of their prey they did take, but brought 500 Cows besides Sheep, &c. The way not passable on this side, they Ferryed over at Culmore, and came on the other side, but by that time they came here, the prey was reduced to 200, or lesse. 26 The Lord of Ards, ordered by the Prince to be Governour, or Commander in chiefe of Ulster, by commission, wherof he sent the Lord President a Co∣py and a Summons in a threatning way, sets down before this Towne, at a little more distance then the former Leagure; but in the night forty of our men gave them a hot alarm, and put them in a cruell con∣fusion. 27 One of our Scouts was shot by an Ambush of Musketeers, wee took severall prisoners this day go∣ing to their Leagure, all saying they would not rise till they had the Town.
21 A little before noon the enemies foote drawes neer our horses, then a grasing, and before they could wel bridle were upon them, but they presently moun∣ted and gave them the chase, cut and killed very ma∣ny this was upon the side of the hill, the enemies horse were ready but out of sight, fell in the pursute of the foot, ours discovered them, who having spent their shot were glad to retreat a maine speed, and were fol∣lowed with much eagernesse; at the foot of the hill the enemies charge was received by a few of our horse, the main body of horse not moving as they say for want of Commanders, however great was the con∣fusion, and the enemy followed our men to the wind-mill or as neer the town, but immediately they ralli∣ed and faced about: the enemy made an orderly re∣treat, but so as the dispute was hot, this Skirmish con∣tinued near two hours all in much confusion, yet bles∣sed be God we had no more losse, when once all was in hazzard, we lost four men upon the place, two dy∣ed n xt day, 12 or 14 wounded, I think most is past the worst; Of the other party, Lieu. Col. Ro. Galbraith, dange∣rously wounded, Cap Fleming, of Phaughanvaile, Li u. Macklehan a bloody fellow, some other Officers, and about 30 or 40 in all kild: taken prisoners 1 Lieu. 2 troopers of theirs, of ours eight, whereof one dyed. We have two ships at Culmore, came up to try the Fort to come by, the winde fell calme so as they could neither come up nor return, between them and the Fort was discharged 80 pieces of Ordnance, without any great hurt on either side. 29 While our horse came home the enemy removes
in great hast and leaves their new leagure, marching away, gave order to the Country to shift for them∣selves, as they did when they l ft their former leagure; we settle a Garrison at John Elumes house. August 2 and 3 We burn Carganes, Sir John Cun∣inghams Newtown Colmacktreene; and St. Johnstown. 4, 5 and 6. Some overtures and interchanging of letters have been about exchanging of Prisoners, and offers of Treaty; but nothing done more then the pri∣soners exchanged, who came hither the 6th. 7 Upon some Articles of agreement, came Owen — Oneale with 300 Horse and 4000 foote to our releife, and incamped on the other side of the water. 8. O Neal sent to summon Goldsmiths town which was rejected, a party of our Horse and Dragoones with 500 of Oneales foot marched into Emstowne for a present releif of Oneals men and ours, but their con∣tribution being not ready; they take of the readiest 160 cowes and 30 or 40 Oxen. 9. Oneale by a party of his again comes to Gold∣smiths town, attempts to scale the bawne but were put off with the losse of a Captain and 30 or 40 Souldiers. Sir Robert Stuart with so many as would side with him marched away, would have had the Country gone with him, promising to return suddenly with an Army of 10000. 10 New Buildings or Goldsmiths towne quitted and taken by Oneale wherein was good store of mault and other provisions. 11 Their new Fort called Charles Fort upon the water was surendred to the President wherin was 180 men 11 Peeces of Ordnance and 4 small Drakes upon
one carriage, little Ammunition or provision. The Souldiers left all their Armes: but their pow∣der-bags, hornes, Bandaleeres, &c. being laid upon a heap (through accedent or negligence) blew up and burnt severall of our Officers and some Souldiers very sore, and some horses, one or two in danger of death. Two peece of Ordnance were taken at new Buil∣dings. 12 Eale Castle delivered up a Serjeant and two file of men left in it, Mogerline, Lieu. Col. Jam. Galbraiths house delivered up, and Cap. Gore and a party of 20 or 30 left in it. 13 Rophee Castle Summoned but rejected the Sum∣mons. Cap. Kilner came to town (having till Saturday at night past, in a manner been kept prisoner by the Scots) who then left them, the English and Irish return thither who hath about 40 good men, armes and ammunition and will suddenly be strengthened. The Scots in these parts all fled to Ballicelly and Ballicastle which they victual & intend to make good. 14 A party of our own horse and foot and some of Oneals marched with 3 peeces of Ordnance to Rophee Castle to beleagure it. The whole Country in effect comes in, submits, and gets protections. Thus briefly have I given you a relation of our businesse which you may beleeve to be true, a few daies will either strengthen or alter our conditions much, the grand party of the Scots drawing to heads I hear Mr. King is going down for aide, Now thinking I have been over tedious, communicate this to such and so many of our friends as you think fitting to whom I desire, with your self to be remembred, I rest, your assured Friend. Henry Finch. FINIS.
