h115 e385_15 99861970 160208
A Touch-stone, OR, Triall and Examination of a SERMON, Preached by Master Haslewood of Sut∣ton at Hone in the County of Kent: And upon true Touch, found to be Reprobate Silver, (False, and Dangerous Doctrine) Wherein are handled these 3. Particulars, 1. The unlawfulness to call any Meeting-house, the House of God. 2. The Church. 3. The Temple of God. By R. H. A Lover of Truth. MATTH. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine, the traditi∣ons of men. COL. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black-spred Eagle at the West-end of Pauls. 1647.
To the READER. And in especiall to the Inhabitants of the Parish of Sutton, at Hone, in the County of Kent. HAving a desire that the truth might not be clouded or eclipsed by the mysterie of dark∣ness and false Doctrine: I have ventured to come upon the Stage, who am the weakest that hath put Pen to paper; but knowing that God is not tied to means, but hath promised that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings he will perfect praise, was pressed to make vse of that small talent to his glory; though it be but plain, yet it may satisfe the plain Christian, and con∣vince the greatest opposer: therefore reade with desire to know, not with prejudice against the truth for the persons sake; but love the truth, for the truths sake; and the God of truth lead you into all truth, and keep you from every errour, which are the earnest prayers, of, Him who would be Joyfull to see Christ more exalted, An∣tichrist more layd naked. R. H.
A Touch-stone. A Speech intended to have been spoken in the Parish Meeting-house of Sutton at Hone, in the County of Kent. Decemb 1646. I Shall in all humility and meekness desire liberty to speak a few words concerning the Doctrine delivered last first day in this place, in which I desire only Gods glory, the vindication of the Truth, and good of poor ignorant People. You know friends and neighbours, you had one here a∣mongst you, that taught the Doctrine of the Gospell plainly (or the greater sin if you know not) and not for lucre of gain, as is known to most of you, not having received one penny from you (an ill requitall for his great pains) as God and your own conscience can best witness a sad sign you were not worthy of it; and now so far as I conceive, the Lord hath, for a just Judgement, suffered one to come amongst you again, that (not unknown to some of you) threatned to starve your souls, and I fear it is too true, if God prevent not; and my soul bleeds to think of your condition: and may be God hath sent me, a poor instrument, to warn you once more to come out of your ignorance, or else, for a witness against you, being a witness to the Truth that hath-been preached here, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospell of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thess. 1.8.
It seems there hath been lately taught in this place, that this is none other then the house of God, and these are the gates of Heaven, from that place Gen. 28.17. By which doth appear gross ignorance in the party that so delivered it. And my Reason is: Because if we well weigh and consider the place, there was no materiall house at all, nor any gate; unless he will make the visionall ladder the gate or house, or the heap of stones under his head: but by the ladder was meant Christ Iesus, the one end reaching to heaven shewed his divine nature, and the other end to the earth, his humane nature: shewing or holding forth thus much; had not Christ descended from heaven, and took our nature upon him, and gave us a part of his divine nature, we could never have ascended up to heaven: but that which makes Jacob to speak those words, was the Lords presence appearing to him, in a way of promise, in bles∣sing of him: so that indeed when God appears to any soul in any place with promise of blessing, there is the house of God and gate of heaven opened to the soul, and the rich treasure in that house manifested to be his. And now for any man to raise that doctrine from Scripture which it will not warrant, nor in no wise beare, (to me) is no less then blasphemy, because it derogates from the power and spirit of the word. To make difference of places for the worship of God under the Gospel, as one place to be more holy then other, contradicts the practice of Christ, and his Apo∣stles, and Christs own words, John 4.21. Now that which doth so, is a great sin, (1) but that it contradicts Christs practice, is evident, Mat. 5.1, 2. The first Ser∣mon we reade Christ preached, was on a Mountain, though at that time the Tem∣ple was in use, being not rent till his death, that is, the Vaile, which is the Type, or shadow, Christ himself being the substance, and Mat. 13.1, 2. He preached in a Ship, and on the Sea shore, as also Mark 4.1. and John 4.20, 21. There Christ tels the woman, there was no set place of worship, and Mat. 24.1, 2. There the disciples take notice of the outward beauty of the outward Temple, not meaning the Anti∣type Christ Iesus, which it held forth, and Christ tels them there shall not be left one stone upon another, And why so? To bring men wholly off from looking upon any externall and materiall holiness, to the internall holiness which is in and by Christ, for though the Temple was holy in regard of Gods command and appoint∣ment; who commanded and gave pattern how it should; be done to a very pin and ring, and nothing of man either over or under, yet I say, for all that it was to vanish, [But the holiness that is in and by Christ, shall never decay.] That Temple was gold within and without; either to shew the glory, beauty, and pure perfection of Christ in both natures, or else to shew what Christ was in his spirituall Temple [his Saints] pretious grace in them, and glorious profession of the same outwardly. The worship under the Law did consist much in carnall Ordinances, as sacrifices, purifyings, and the like: but the worship of God under the gospel is spirituall, the worshipers spirituall Ioh 4.23, 24. Now here lyes the great evill, mos men are un∣der a legall spirit, and are for carnall places, carnall worship, and worshipers; but we dare not trust in such lying words, crying the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Ier 7.4.2. As it contradicts Christs practise and word, so also the pra∣ctice of the Apostles, both whom we are to imitate, and not our own humane in∣ventions, and vain imaginations, for which certainly God will call us to accompt, and demand who required these things at our hands, Is. 1.12. We see Christ Ie∣sus was pleased to poure out the gifts of the spirit upon his Disciples, being met in an upper chamberActs 24. compared with Acts 1.13, 14. (and herein Mr. Haslewood play'd the Sophister, who speak∣ing
concerning the meeting, said it was not in a Hall, or Parlor, Barn, or Stable, but would not speak out the truth: for I desire to Querie to him, or any other, why a Hall, or Parlor may not be every way as convenient as an upper Chamber? or a Barn, as well as the open field? but that he is pleased to flie as far off from truth as he can, for fear it should overthrow all he had said before, and lay him naked to his own shame, but this is just as Satan did by Christ, to bring half Scipture, Mat. 4 6.) And the Apostle Paul preached daily in the market place, Acts 17.17. and Lydia was converted by a river side, Acts 16.3. and Paul preached from house to house, Acts 20.20. and in his own hired house. Acts uit. 30, 31. And now brethren, I hope you see, or the Lord help you to see that the Doctrine then taught you is false, and erroneous, and the Lord open the eyes of your understanding, that you may know all truths, as they are in Jesus: but I shall shew you one thing more, which is this. 3. The promise of Christs presence is not tyed to places, therefore we are not to be tyed to places, Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, &c. Now, though it is true, the place speaks of gathering by Christs power (for that is meant by name) for the work of binding, or loosing (receiving in, or casting out) yet it is true in the other sense, and will very well agree with Analogie of divine Truth; that if two or three godly persons meet together to seek the Lord, he will be found of them: or, by two or three, may be meant a small number, Christs-flock is but little, Luke 12.32. Now to speak a little what a Church is: It it sometimes taken for the rude multitude assembled, but that improperly. 1. Negatively: A Church is no materiall house, for that is the most improper speech, the former being more proper then this: and the reason▪ because never in Scripture (to my best knowledge) called a Church, therefore no fit name so to call it, neither can it be so taken. For these Reasons: 1. Paul is said to persecute the Church, Did the Apostle go and pull the Lime and Stones in pieces? Acts 8.3. & 22.4. 2. Christ Jesus is said to be head of his Church Ephes. 5.23. and is that a body fit for so glorious a head? 3. Christ gave himself for his Church, Ephes. 5.25. but none sure is so weak to conceive that Christ gave himself for Lime and Stone. 4. Christ is said to nourish and cherish his Church, Ephes. 5.29. but it cannot be said so of that. 5. Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might present it to himself a glo∣rious Church, Ephes. 5.27. but those shall perish and come to nothing. 2. Affirmat. The Church of Jesus Christ in Scripture language, are those whom he hath purchased and redeemed to himself, as a peculiar inheritance: which Church is a company of visible Saints, called and separated from the world by the Word and Spirit of God, to the visible profession of the faith of the Gospel, being baptised in∣to that faith, and joyned to the Lord, and each to other by mutuall agreement in the practicall injoyment of the Ordinances commanded by Christ their head and King: This definition we shall explain upon occasion. Object. But it may be objected, that the publique place may be called the Temple of God. Answ. It cannot be properly called the Temple of God: 1. Because the Scripture no where calls these places so▪ There was never but
one Temple and that was at Jerusale which is now demollisned, and never to be reared again, which, as I said before, did type out Christ: but the Antitype being come, there is no farther need of the type: besides, that in every particular, as I shewed, was of Gods appointing, and therefore might be so called, but that which is by mans appointing ought not to be so called, for that would be to assume a pow∣er to our selves, which only belongs to God, which is to make any thing holy. 2 The Temple of God in Scripture language (which is the wholsome language of Canaan) is denoted to be the Saints, or sanctified ones, as 1 Cor. 3.16. & 6.19. 2 Cor 6.16. 1 Pet 2.4 5. Heb. 3.6. Now I shall not only give you those collections from Scripture, which the Lord was pleased to bring into my thoughts, but also shall give you the Synods judge∣ment concerning this particular, viz. As no place is capable of any holiness, under pretence of whatsoever dedication, or consecration: so neither is it subject to such pollution by any superstition for∣merly used, and now laid aside, as may render it unlawfull, or inconvenient for Christians to meet together, &c. Now if it be demanded why we will not hear such as these men be: I answer. 1. Because they are but blinde leaders, and then we know what the Scripture saith, Mat. 15 14. Luke 6.39. 2. Because we are commanded to turn aside, or withdraw from those that have a form, and deny the power, 2 Tim. 3.5. Now I desire liberty to speak a word in the behalf of myself, and many thou∣sands more that suffer under the name of Heretiques, Schismatiques, Seditious, Re∣bellious, and what not, and by those who are learned according to the Letter, and would fain be thought so, as according to the Spirit, though no fruits nor effects of it at all. 1. It was so from the beginning, and will be sorfor Christ the great Prophet hath foretold it: Christ Jesus was so esteemed, Mat. 9.34. & 12 24. and by whom was he so esteemed? It was by the Pharisees, a strict sort of Professors, who fasted three times a week, and gave of all they had to the poor; but some make a wicked use of this, therefore they are so strict say they, they are Hypocrites; nay, but from hence we shall draw Christs conclusion Mat. 5.20. Except your righteousness ex∣ceeds (not comes short) shall in no wise enter into the Kingdome of heaven. There∣fore if they shall do so much and go to Hell, what shall become of them that come fore of what they did: they were strict but in a formall way to be seen of men, or to please men: there is nothing more like the power of godiness, then a form, yet nothing more against it. Therefore the greater danger, that a man had need of a quick sight to discern between them; none greater enemies to true professors, then formall professors; they cannot endure that any should go beyond them: these were Christs enemies all along, and again Luke 23.2. There they accuse him of Se∣dition, and one that perverts the Nation: & who were these? They were the Priests, those learned Scribes, which should have been for Christ, but they were most a∣gainst Christ, as you may see ver. 13, 14. & 23. of that Chap. At last you may see the voice of the Priests prevailed with Pilate against Christ: you seldom found them for Christ, his cause or people. And if Christ was so used, can his servants expect better? No sure, Math. 10.24, 25. Ioh. 15.18, 19. and so Paul was accounted a pestilent fellow (that is such a one that did infect all that came neere him) a mover of Sedition, Act. 24.1, 5, 6.
and by whom? See ver. 1. Ananias the Priest, if there be any thing to do against God, and his people, be sure you shall find a Priest among them: thus I have proved that it must be so. And so we are accused for Hereticks, but as they could prove nothing against Christ and his members: so blessed be our gracious God, they can prove nothing against us, except it be in the case of Daniel, concerning the worship of our God, Dan. 6.4. For though we are accused, arraigned, and con∣demned, and sentence of death passed upon us, (daily in the publick,) yet to this day we could not come to a faire tryall, which is not Christian-like, nay worse then the Heathen, who would not pass sentence till they came face to face, Acts 23.35. now the word holds forth, Tit. 3.10. Him that is an Heretick, after the first and second admonition reject; but we cannot obtain admonition, and therefore far from absolution (an excellent Popish Tenet) but sure such have forgot the rule Math. 7.12. do unto all men &c. And although they have nothing justly to charge us withall, yet we have them, (I mean such that are time-servers, and turne any way the wind sits fair; no point of the compass amiss: they are never out of their way, because they were never well in.) as: 1. To be loose and scandalous, in their lives, giving bad examples to their flocks, being Clubbers Drunkards, Gamesters, and what not. 2. To be great incendiaries in the kingdome, the Fomentors of all our pinch∣ing miseries, by their evill and wicked Doctrine, as witness the first war with the Scots, who gave large contributions, and prest almost in every Pulpit to give towards it. But then should we not have thought their learning should have taught them more wit? No, for it is only God by his spirit, must teach true spi∣rituall wisdome; hath not this war been a Prelaticall war? and hath not God been Just to bring them into the pit they digged for other, and to hang them on Ha∣mans Gallows? Where then is the wise, where the Scribe, where is the disputer of this World? 1 Cor. 1.20. Did God honour them with that Reformation we have in part received? No, It was the Noble Gentry, and poor country, and City Members with their unwearied prayers cries, and tears, and Petitions, that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings he might or dain strength, Psal. 8.2. Mat. 11.25. Now these false Priests and Prophets, are alwaies more in number then the true, and gain more in great mens favours: poor Amos he must not come neer the Court, Amos 7.13, 14 Truth must not come neer great mens houses: what, poor shep∣hards heards-men, Mecanicks, tell plain and naked truths, and think to finde friendship at Court? No, by no means, but you shall see what sad woes the Lord pronounceth against these false Prophets Ier. 5.21. Chap. 14.18 & 23.25. And observe well that remarkable place, (and Oh! that it were written on every one of their garments that are such,) Ier. 23.13.14, 15, 16, 17 & Ezek. 22.25, 26, 27, 28. with many more places which would take up much time to recite 3. We charge many to usurp their callings to the ministery, because neither God called them nor the Saints. 1 God called them not, because they have not so much as gifts, cannot pray without book; And God never called any to an office, but gave them gifts, meet for the work he called them to. 2 The Saints did not call them, for they cannot away with such teachers, and I know no other call now, Miracles ceasing, but an inward, and an outward, and power lies in the Church, not in one or two mens powers.
Now Reader I have in short given you my weak thoughts: and fully declared un∣to you what I did intend by the permission of God to speak, (but I fear God hath reserved some great judgement for this place) for which I am accused, sentenced, and condemned already, (before my tryall) by the malignant Presbytery (I mean such who are meer time-servers (not true servers of God) that were before Ma∣lignants now turned with the state, and only wait, for the tide turning again (of which we have too many) though by all that are godly, either Presbyters, or other, I know cannot but be approved, being the way of God, [that if any man hath any thing revealed that stands by, the first should hold his peace:] and because we can∣not have this Gospel-Liberty, we are forced to withdraw from such, lest we should be partakers of their plagues. Now all that I desire is, that the Lord would open the eyes of poor ignorant people, and that those that are spirituall, would improve their interests to the utmost. That the Lord would be pleased to move the hearts of the Magistrates, to pity poor ignorant people that want light, to use all possible means for the encrease of soul-saving knowledge, by indeavouring to send forth some godly conscientious men, whose eyes are not upon gain; till which time wee cannot expect a Reformation, as is expected; but a Deformation and disobedience to God and man: For it is only the Gospel that teacheth both: which shall be the earnest prayers, of, Yours for the Service in the Gospel, R. H.
