h1444 E206_5 99871202 157709
THE VNLAWFVLNES AND DANGER OF LIMITED PRELACIE, OR PERPETVALL PRECIDENCIE IN THE CHVRCH, Briefly discovered. 3 Iohn 9. Diotrephes, who loveth to have the preeminence receiveth us not. Ambitio non patitur quemquam in ea mensura honorum conquiescere, quae quondam fuit ejus impudens votum. Seneca de beneficiis. Lib. 2. Ambition suffereth no man to rest in that measure of honours, which sometimes was his impudent wish. Printed in the yeare 1641.
To the READER. THE causes which to this day have hindred the determination of this unhappy controversie a∣bout Church government in the Reformed Churches, are no other: But first, The Iudge∣ment of God punishing the unthankfulnesse of this Age, for the incomparable benefit of the Gospell; and in great wisdome and loving kindnesse, trying and exerciseing his Church, that they who are approved may be made manifest. And secondly, The corruption of the heart of man, loving preeminence, and preferring himselfe to his Brethren, which maketh him, although but a Bramble in comparison of the Olive-tree, the Figge-tree and the Vine, to say and to make others to speake in the eares of men, Whether is better for you, either that all the Sons of Jerubbaal (which are threescore and ten persons) reigne over you, or that one reigne over you? and up∣on this followeth the blindnesse and error of the minde, in depending more upon the prejudice of custome and constitu∣tions of men then upon the judgement of Scripture to be be∣leeved for it selfe. Yet hath the Lord his owne appointed time for ending of Controversies; and if the period of this debate be now approaching (as it appeareth to him who looketh with observation to the working of God, the inso∣lencie of the Prelates, and the Prayers and desires of the people) a few of the many considerations pressed in former times will, by the blessing of God, prove sufficient and
effectuall for determination. They who are acquainted with the Reformation here, and in other Nations, will not much mervell, when the Winter is past, and the spring time commeth; That with the sweet breathings of Zephy∣rus, at sometimes there be whirlewinds and contrary blasts; and when the Flowers appeare upon the earth, that the weeds also set up their heads. But the diligent hand of the faithfull Labourers, will purge the Vine-yard of these noy∣some Herbs, which have taken rooting in the time of Pre∣lacy. That this Prelacy may be removed root and branch, and the Ministery of Christ be established in purity and power, is the purpose of this paper; and the Prayer of the writer for the welfare of Sion.
THE VNLAVVFVLNESSE AND DANGER OF A LIMI∣ted PRELACIE: Or perpetuall presidencie in the Church briefely discovered. IN the Church of Christ, Offices in this Church which are of men, sup∣posed to be un∣lawfull. It may and ought to be taken for a Supposition, and as a principle undeniable, that all the Offices, and Vocations, in the House of God, must be of God, and not of Men; and that such as are of Men and not of God, are unlaw∣full: for this was presupposed by Christ himselfe, in his dispute with the Pharisees; the Baptisme of Iohn whence was it, from heaven or of men? Matth. 21.25. Marke 11.17. Luke 20.1. By the Pharisees them∣selves in the same places. By the Apostle, Gallat. 1.1. Not of men, neither by men: but by Iesus Christ, and God the Father. Againe, Hebr. 5.5. No man taketh this honour unto himselfe, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. And by these who are our adversaries in this cause, both while they disput against the univer∣sall Episcopacy of the Pope, and use the words of Tertullian, which may be throwne backe upon them∣selves, Quiestis? quomodo et unde venistis? quid in meo agitis nomine? and while they dispute against us for the Diocesan Bishop, and will prove Episcopacy, by divine right, knowing that the assertion of the prin∣ciall
Office and Calling in the Church, meerly up∣on humane right, were a challenge of the Scriptures, that they are not perfect; and an exalting of the wisdome of Men above the wisdome of Christ: al∣though Man can no more make the Office, nor hee can give the Grace; and from Christ both the Institu∣tion of the Office, and the blessing of the Officers, must come. It is therefore supposed to be no lesse unlaw∣full to adde an Office to divine Institutions, then it is unlawfull to take away an Office warranted by divine Institution; the one making it maymed. We are forbidden praecepto negativo to presume to governe the Church by humane wisdome: Wee are commanded Praecepto affirmativo, to follow the rule of divine wis∣dome: And we are warranted praecepto comparativo, ra∣ther to follow Christ them Antichrist; for so must we speak, because it cannot be denyed by any, but such as deny the Pope to be Antichrist. This then being for a principle presupposed, if we will not shut our eyes against the light, and involve our selves in subtilties, which the wit of Man set on worke by his owne ambition, and the love of preemi∣nence, hath invented against the plaine truth of Scrip∣ture obvious to every one who desireth to know, The Office of a Bishop, as he is conceived to be a Pastor above other Pastors: whether in power, or in degree and dignitie, with be found in it selfe, and not onely in respect of the abuse of his power, or of his degree and dignity, to be unlawfull. The Office of a Prelate is not found in Scripture. Because the Scripture intending to expresse the Offices and Officers of the Church, and speaking so often of them and of their Gifts and Duties; and
that not upon occation, but of set purpose, as Rom. 12.2. Cor. 12. Eph. 4, doth neither expresse, nor imply any such Bishop: Shall we suffer our selves to thinke that the Apostles, so well acquainted with the will of Christ; Acts 1.3. so fully taught of things pertaining to the Kingdome of God, and so faithfull in the delive∣ring his Commandements, that the Officers may know how to behave themselves in the House of God, and keep themselves pure: 1 Tim. 3.15. and in charging them in the sight of God to keepe his Commande∣ments without spot, 1. Tim. 5.21. 1 Tim. 6.13.14. would not in some one place or other distinctly and positively speake of the office, gifts, priority or power of such a Bishop? Have they been so carefull in expressing the office, gifts and duty of the meanest Officers Act. 6. and did they speake no∣thing of the greatest? would they have neglected the weightyer matters of the Law of Christ? no surely, these they would have done, and not have left the other undone. All the Officers of the New Testament both or∣dinary, and extraordinary, No difference in Scripture betweene a Pastor and a Bishop. are designed and distin∣guished by their names, or Compellations, as Apo∣stles, Evangelists, Presbyters, Deacons. The extraordi∣nary and superiour, have upon good reason, the names of the ordinary, and inferiour common unto them, as the Apostles are called 1. Pet. 5.1. Elders. But this is not reciprocall, for the ordinary and inferiour are never called, by the names of the extraordinary and superiour: the Deacon is not called an Elder, nor the Pastor by the name of the Apostle, or Evange∣list. It is true that Barnabas is called an Apostle Acts 14.4. and 14. because he was an Apostle of Christ as Paul was. Titus and others 2 Co. 8 13. and Epaphroditus Phil. 8.23. are onely called Apostles or Messengers of the Church.
Whence it must follow, that the Office of a Bishop is not an Office superiour to the Office of a Pastor, since the name Bishop is common to the Pastor; and that the Office of a Bishop, and the Office of a Pastor, are not different, but one and the same office. Since the names are altogether common in all the places of the New Testament. Acts 20.28. Phil 1.1. 1 Tim. 3.2. 1 Pet. 5.1. And the Syriacke Inter∣preter hath translated the one by the other. Tit. 1.7 What reason can there be, while the Officers are distingui∣shed by their names, and the names of Bishop and Pa∣stor are common, but that the Office of the Bishop and Elder is one and the same Office; the one name signi∣fying, sapientiae maturitatem, and the other Industriam curae Pastoralis, saith Beda. No Bishop of Bishops, or of Pastors in Scripture. We finde, that in the Ministery of the New Testa∣ment there is a comely, beautifull, and Divine Order: one kinde of Ministers both ordinary and extraor∣dinary, being placed in degree and dignity before another, as the Apostles before all other Ministers, the Pastor before the Elder, and Deacon: But we doe not finde in Ministers of the same kind, that one hath majority of power, over others, or priority of de∣gree and dignity before others, except upon the morall respect of age, zeale, gifts, &c. No Apostle is in degree above other Apostles, no Evangelist above other Evangelists, nor Elder above other Elders, no Deacon above other Deacons: upon what ground then from Scripture? can wee beleeve or conceive that one Pastor is in degree superiour to other Pa∣stors, or that, in all other sorts of Ministers, ordinary and extraordinary, there's all be a parity in their owne kind, and onely in the Office of Pastors, an ine∣quality. The whole power, and all the parts of the Mini∣strie
which commonly are expressed, Every Pastor hath power of ordination and Jurisdiction. by the pow∣er of Order and Jurisdiction, are in Scripture made common to the Pastor and the Bishop; for the Pa∣stor hath power to Preach the Word, and mini∣ster the Sacraments: As one of the Presbyterie hee hath power to lay on hands, and ordaine Mini∣sters, 1 Tim. 4.14. and hath not onely the Keyes of the in∣ward and private Court of Conscience, but hath al∣so committed unto him and his fellow Presbyters, the Keyes of the outward and publique Court of Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction and censure, and both wayes to bind and loose in: when the Apostles first planted the Christian Churches, and when they were to depart and were neare unto death, they re∣commended the care of these duties, in all the Chruches unto the particular Pastors, or Bishops. Act. 15.6. Act. 16.4 Act. 20 28, 9. 1 Cor. 5. 1 Cor 14.32 40. 1 Th. 5.12. Tit. 1.9. 1. Tim. 5.12. Heb. 13.17. And therefore the Pastor, and Bishop are in Scripture, one and the same in power and degree, neither hath the Bishop any degree, or power, order or Jurisdiction, but that which hee arrogateth to himselfe, for the honour of his Priesthood, and for setting up his Monarchicall power, against the word of God, nor ought any such power bee given him. A point which is strongly proved by our Divines, against Papists and Prelates. Ecclesiasticall power was not committed by Christ to any one but to many, Power ecclesi∣asticall, not gi∣ven to one, but to many. It is not said, tell the Bishop or any one of the Church, but tell the Church, Mat. 18.17. nor was it exercised and acted by any one of the Apostles alone, for Paul not a lone, but with a Presbyterie, laid hands upon 1 Tim. 4.14. Timothy, and the Apostles, not alone, but joyning with the Elders, Act. 15. did determine controversies, and di∣scerne censures, the same also was the practice of the Apostolicke Churches at Corinth, Thessalonica,
and in Asia. In all which the Discipline of the Church, was exercised by many, and not by any one. And therefore to exalt a Bishop to any part of his power or any degree of Eminence, above his Brethren for exercising this power, is against the Institution of Christ, and contrary to the pra∣ctice and patterne of the Apostles and Apostolicke Churches. All majority forbidden the Officers. All majority and preheminence in this kinde, is expresly forbidden by Christ, the Kings of the Nationas, &c. Luke 22, 25. according to this the Apostle Peter, disclaimeth not pride in majority, but majority it selfe 1 Pet. 5.1. Non est dictum sola humilitate sed veritate saith Bernard, Non sed prohibet Christus, non modum rei, sed rem ipsam, say others. O∣ther wayes, that which Tacitus writeth of Otho, might have beene applied to them, Omnia servili∣tr pro dominatione; and the temptation of the Disci∣ples was not tyranny, but superiority, Christ spea∣keth to them sometimes of Thrones of glory, in the Church Triumphant, never of any throne of Dig∣nity in the Church Militant: If any such throne whether of Ecclesiasticall authority or perpetuall presidence, had beene lawfull, would hee not at sometimes have taught them, what it was, and with what cautions and Limitations they were to pos∣sesse it, as that you shall have precedency of de∣gree, Precepts in the Gospell to be interpreted ac∣cording to the rules of the Precepts of the law. but not of power; of dignity, but not of autho∣rity. These and the like argments Militant, not onely against the exorbitancy of Prelates, but against the Prelacy of the Ministers of Iesus Christs, and if wee will as indeed must understand the commande∣ments of Christ in the Gospell, Mat. 5.19 , 27, 33, 43. according to the
rules agreed upon, in the interpretation of the pre∣cepts of the Law, we must confesse that not onely the Tyranny, the Pride, the Pompe, the Priority and power of Lord Bishops, but all the parts, all the de∣grees, meanes, causes, Incentives, occasions, pro∣vocations, beginnings and appearances of these evils are forbidden, and that we are commanded to stop the way with thornes, Hos. 2.6. least they returne to their former lovers, and to hide all their earerings, that they be not found againe. Gen. 35.4. Rule of refor∣mation from the prime times.If the reformation of Episcopacy be intended, we must not take our rule, and patterne, from ancient and Primitive times, but from the first times, and from the very beginning, as Christ in the matter of divorcement, did not speake of Davids, or Abrahams, or Lamech's times, but of Adams, saying, but from the beginning it was not so, so must we in the mat∣ter of this divorcement ascend, not to the times of Augustine or Cyprian, or Ignatius; but to the times of Christ, and the Apostles, and to the first Institution of the Ministerie, at the beginning, and so much the more, because many of the Fathers, did unwittingly bring forth that Antichrist, which was conceived in the time of the Apostles, and therefore are incompe∣tent Judges in the question of Hierarchie, and upon the other part, the lights of the Christian Church, at and since the beginning of Reformation have di∣scovered many secrets, concerning the Antichrist and his Hierarchie, which were not knowne to for∣mer ages, and have shewed us, that at the beginning there was no kinde of difference of a Bishop, from a Presbyter. The way of defection is broad and easie, of which we have domestick examples. In this Iland in
fewer yeeres the Church of Scotland suffered a great Eclipse, in fewer yeers ours was greater, and darke∣nesse had covered the Land, if the Lord had not pre∣vented us. Suppose Episcopacie were shaven and stript na∣ked of all externall, Limited Pre∣lacy unlawfull and heterogeneall pompe, and power, and of the internall power of sole ordination and jurisdiction, suppose nothing were left unto the Bishops, but a perpertuall presidence in Church assem∣blies, and Synodes, Suppose him to be chosen by the Clergie, and to be subject to their censure, as other Ministers, and suppose all the cautions, and limita∣tions, that can be devised be put upon him, to keep him within his bounds from exorbitancie, yet still is he such a plant, as God never planted, rooted not in Scripture, but in the Earth, and bringing forth such fruites, as can neither bee acceptable to God nor profitable to men; This degree and primacie of order, by which hee is lifted up above his bre∣thren, cannot bee separated from some primacy of power, and when it meeteth with ambition, and op∣portunitie of advancement through the favour of Princes, or the neglect of another time, whether carelesse or more carefull about other matters, it shall gather strength againe, and regaine what it now looseth, by the rasour of Reformation, shall of a Consull make a dictator, and pull downe the house which it made even now to shake. Election doth nor hinder his power to be Episcopall, for not onely inferiour Bishops are chosen by their Chapters, but the Pope also by his conclave of Cardinals, neither will this hinder his power to be Episcopall, because it is under a Synod, for the best of the Papists hold
that the Pope subject to an oecumenicall Councell. Woefull Experience hath taught, that from this perpetuall presidence, and Primacy of order, Prelacy and Popery inse∣parable. as the first step of the ladder, Antichrist hath mounted up, to the Primacy of power, to Archiepiscopall digni∣tie, to be a Patriarch, and at last to be universall Bi∣shop and Antichrist, and shall we now after the my∣stery of iniquitie is made manifest, allow him in this land, the first step of the Ladder, establish him there∣by, and not turne him quite off, and overturne the ladder it selfe? this were a dangerous recidive, this were twise to make shipwracke, and the second be∣cause wilfull, worse then the first, where before wee were patients, now to be agents in so great an evill, and to make that which was before, against our will, our evill of paine, now by our wilfull errour to be our evill of sinner: were it not better, by the totall ruine of Episcopacie to give example, to other Churches, whose eyes are upon us, by doing the like, to pull downe the Pope? to put him out of hope to rise againe in this Church, and to make all Papists despaire to regaine this Kingdome to the Roman re∣ligion? it being their owne declaration, that were all England once brought to approve of Bishops, it were easie to reduce it to the Church of Rome. Cutzen pol, Li, 2. c. 18. Limitation of Prelacy will proue weake, by the example of the Church of Scotland. All bonds and limitations, although many, al∣though strong, although made never so wisely, will prove but weake to keep them in order, and beare downe their aspiring Ambition, which our neighbour Church of Scotland, for the greater part, did not be∣leeve at first: and which we could hardly be induced to beleeve now, were wee not taught by their ex∣ample:
for in the yeere one thousand sixe hundred, the Church of Scotland being met in a General As∣sembly at Montrose, these cautions and limits were agreed upon; the Kings Majesty consenting: 1. That the Minister chosen to this place shall not be called Bishop, but Commissioner of such a place. 2. That hee shall neither propound to the Parliament any thing in name of the Church, without their expresse warrant and direction; nor shall he keepe silence, or consent to any thing prejudiciall to the weale and liberty of the Church, under the paine of depositi∣on. 3. Vnder the paine of Infamy and Excommu∣nication, he shall at every Assembly give accompt of the discharging of his Commission, and shall sub∣mit himselfe to their Censure, and stand to their de∣termination whatsoever, without appellation. 4. He shall content himselfe with that part of the Be∣nefice which shall be assigned him, not prejudging any of the Ministers in their livings. 5. He shall not dilapidate his benefice. 6. He is bound as any other Minister to attend his particular Congregation, and shall be subject to the tryall and censure of his owne Presbitery and Provinciall assembly. 7. Hee shall neither usurp nor claim to himselfe any power of ju∣risdiction in any point of Church government, more then any other Minister. 8. In Presbiteries, Provin∣ciall and generall assemblies, he shall behave himself in all things, and be subject to their censuring, as any of the Brethren of the Presbitery. 9. At his admissi∣on to his Office, he shall swear and subscribe to fulfill all these points, under the paines foresaid, otherwise not to be admitted. 10. In case he shall be deposed, he shall no more voyce in Parliament, nor injoy his Benefice. 11. He shall not have voyce in the Gene∣rall
Assembly, unlesse he be authorised with Com∣mission from his own Presbytery. 12. Crimen ambit, shall be a sufficient cause of deprivation. 13. The Generall Assembly, which the advise of the Synod, shall have power of his nomination or recommen∣dation. 14. He shall lay down his Commission annu∣atim, at the foot of the Generall Assembly to be continued or changed, as the Generall Assembly with his Majesties consent, shall think fit. 15. Other cautions to be made, as the Church shall sinde occa∣sion. The godly and sincere Ministers disliked this course altogether, and some did protest against it: but others loving preheminence above their Bre∣thren, and hunting after fatter Benefices did con∣sent themselves, and perswaded others to consent unto it, but did aftewards breake all these bonds, and finding themselves unable to give account, according to the Councell given to Perecles, they procured that there should bee no free Generall Assemblies, lest they should be called to account, and when they were challenged of their perjury, and perfidious dealing, their Printed Apologie de∣clared their perfidie to be double, Refut. libel, de regim Eccles. Scotae pag. 89. cum viderit breviz in quibus vo∣luntatur in∣certa, & an∣cipitia repe∣ter pedem, nec vertet terga sed sen∣sim recedit, in tutum. Senec. Epist. 22. which wee will expresse in their owne words, because they may bee usefull at thit time, and teach us what may bee ex∣pected from their fellowes: Conditiones aliae protem∣pore mag is quo contentiosis rixandi ansa praeriperetur, quàm animo in perpetuum observandi acceptae. What then may be hoped for in this Land, were people have beene inured to this yoke. Prelates have beene in possession, the Court is near to shire upon them, and where there be no Nationall Assemblies, but such Provinciall Assemblies, where these new Bi∣shops shalbe Presidents; or if National Assemblies
shall be appointed, shall they not either be fordid∣den to meet, or shall they not be overruled by these Bishops, that in a short time, they shall not only re∣cover their wonted power and pompe, by the con∣sent of the Assemblies, and thus, be come deeply rooted, and with greater difficulty removable then before, but shall also double their tyranny, manet alta mente repostum, and thus our last state shall be worse then the first. This perpetuall president, Prelacy not the cure, but the cause of Shis∣me. or moderate Prelate which was at first, and is now pretended to be a remedy against Schisme, hath not only proved a remedy worse then the disease, by making way to the greatess Bishop, the Antichrist, but likewise doth foment and increase the disease it selfe of Schisme and Division: for beside that it shall maintaine a shamefull Schisme against all the Reformed Chur∣ches, especially against the neighbour Church of Scotland, which will cause continuall jealousies, and heart-burning betwixt the two Nations, if we shall allow and establish Episcopacy, which we did be∣fore but tolerate, and they have found and judged upon good reasons to be intolerable, It shall rent the bowels of the Church and Kingdome within it selfe; the Parliament shalbe divided, some for it, and others against it; and of these who shall be for it; there shalbe subdivisions, some for one limitati∣on, and some for another: after the Parliaments Authority shalbe for it; the body of the Kingdome, at least the godly and Religious shalbe against it. Whence shall arise almost in every Parish no small debate and contention, and many sorrows and dis∣contents, instead of that universall joy which is ex∣pected through the whole kingdome. The Ministers,
and whole Clergie shall be rent asunder, is their Ser∣mons, Lectures, and Polemick writings and Pam∣phlets; some defending the old Episcopacie, some the new; and the sounder part oppugning both, and still pressing a further Reformation; some gaping for Prelacies, and getting them; others enraged for want of them; a third sort still living in hope of preferment; and the remnant opposing all this com∣petion, and emulation. And although this Prelacie were appointed, and received with generall consent of Parliament, Pastors and People (which no man will expect, who is not a stranger in this Church and Kingdome) yet who can hope that this Tree shall bring forth the fruits of truth and peace in this Land, at this time, which it never produced in any time or place since the beginning? There can be no peace to the Body, till the bad humour now stirred be purged out; and when this Ionah is cast into the Sea, then shall there be a calme. The worke also shall be more easie, and the labour much lesse in rooting up the Tree, then in lopping the branches, which will take a long time, and much debate and deliberation. In Christian Policie, Prelacy against both Christian and common policy. that Government of the Church is most usefull for Kings, and Kingdomes which is best warranted by the Word of God, by whom Kings reigne and Kingdomes are established Religion, and Righteousnesse are the Pillars, which God hath made for upholding his Majesties throne. Prelacie and Ceremonies are invented and framed by the wisdome of Man, for setting up, and supporting the Popes Monarchie; no Ceremony, no Prelat, no Prelat no Pope. 2. Which serveth most to the pre∣servation of pietic, righteousnesse, and sobriety, against
their contraries, which where they reigne as they doe alwayes where Prelates have place, and power, are the certaine causes of many calamities and judgements, and of the changes and periods of States, Kingdomes, and Families. 3. Which maketh the face of the Church and Religion in a Kingdome most beautifull and glo∣rious, not with Prelaticall pompe and splendor, like the Kings of the Nations, but with sound faith, a pure worship, and holy life: And 4. Which conduceth most for truth and peace against Heresie and Schisme: for which effect, Church Assemblies of Ministers, equall in order and degree, meeting in Presbyteries, Provinciall and Nationall Assemblies, are power∣full meanes; as the experience of all the Reformed Churches hath taught us, and against which Prelacie hath a naturall antipathie, it being the nature there∣of to love greatnesse, and to grow bigge by the divisi∣on of the Church: and therefore the Prelacie will beare with all Religions, provided they be not Anti-episcopall, will not onely suffer Heresies and divisi∣ons to arise and grow, but will foment them, that the parties may depend upon him as their Judge, Contzen. polit. Lib.  c. 19. and that the thoughts of others may be drawne from his Mitre to other matters. Againe, in common policie, that Governement of the Prelates should be shunned, because he is a super∣fluous and unprofitable member, the Sonne of God having provided for all the necessities of the Church by Officers of his owne appointment. Shall that be esteemed to be good policie in the Church, which no wise man would judge to be good aeconomic in his owne house, no Magistrate would admit in his owne charge? shall Servants or subjects, appoint one
to rule over them at their owne pleasures; or shall we thinke that a Minister hath abilities for all the parts of his function, and shall not be able to pre∣side in an Assembly, or is there none in the assembly fit to be president but one? 2. because the Prelate is an unprofitable burden, requiring in his greatest moderation a revenue more then ordinary, and serveth for no good use, neither to Church, King, nor Countrey. 3. Because the Prelate, by his power, with Prince and Peere, and by his usurpa∣tion and tyranny over the People, divideth be∣twixt the Rulers and the people, and maketh the Civill government, which without him would bee light and easie, to be heavie, and grievous to the people. 4. Because a Pastor no sooner becommeth a Prelate, but he beginneth to howle with the Wolves, although he looke like a Shepheard; he turneth his backe upon his Pastorall charge, or looketh downe upon it, and his fellow Brethren, as below him, and setteth his face toward the world, hoping by time to be loosed of his bands, and to become one of the greatest Officers of estate, and blowing the bellowes of division betwixt the King and his Nobles, and betwixt the King and the Church, that his service∣ablenesse may appeare the more, and hee may bee warmed by the fire which hee hath kindled him∣selfe. They will now accept of Limitation, and it may be some of them call for it. But did any of them speak of late against the exorbitancy of their Bre∣thren, or will they heare of moderation afterward? If we will lay aside prejudices, we may clearly per∣ceive that the Church, perfect in Officers, may be governed without Prelates, with more honour to God, with more love and respect to Authority at
home and abroad, with greater riches and glory to the Crowne, with more contentment to the people, greater peace amongst our selves, and greater terror to all our enemies. The different use of the names of Pa∣stor and Pre∣late, dange∣rous. Although we doe not contend about words, yet the appropriation and Monopoly of names in mat∣ters of this nature, hath in it more realty then at first. We do observe there is no inequality, nor dif∣ference of Office, power, or degree, betwext a Pastor and a Bishop. It is against reason to call on Pastor by the name of a Presbyter or Minister, and another by the name of a Bishop: the differences of the names doth beget conceptions of different degrees and Offices, doth procure worldly respect; and in processe of time, anthority to one Presbyter above another, and so maketh way to Episcopall Monar∣chie, is alreadily mistaken through ignorance or in∣advertency, as implying a relation, not to a parti∣cular flocke, but to other Pastors, and a whole Dio∣cesse, and hath been in the Church of Scotland dan∣gerously misapplyed by many, conceiving the name of Bishop, which onely designed the benefice, to be the name of the Office, and thereby presuming that the Office of a Bishop still remained there, which was also our errour concerning the government of that Church, till we were better informed of late: against this no better remedy then that the thing being abolished, the name be no more appropria∣ted. When the time of perswasion cometh, a few arguments are sufficient. Neither doe we intend, nor can any man expect, nor doe the weighty affaires of those, whom this matter most concerneth, suffer any large debate about it, volumnes are stuffed with arguments on both sides, conscience of dutie in this Article of
time, observation of providence, courage for the cause of God, and contempt of the world, will helpe our resolution against the subtilties, sophistications and wranglings of humane wit, which will no more receive satisfaction, in this question of the regall office of Chirst, nor the Papists will suffer themselves to be silenced, in other controversies, about this or his other offices. When the appointed time cometh of the ending of long lasting debates, it is not unlike unto the rising of the Sunne after a long Winter night, and the eyes to see, are more usefull, then ar∣guments to perswade, the wayes of god are made knowne, and darknesse can no more prevaile against the light, in no Theme have colours and praetexts beene more multiplyed, then in this of Prelacie, the ambition and avarice of the heart of man quickning his spirits, and giving life to his braines, for his owne miserable ends, but to an indifferent eye, and a minde unpartially disposed and not interessed, they suddenly disappeare and evanish: nothing is more pretended then antiquity, although they can say with Cyprian, consuetudinem veritate majorem non esse, although disputing for their dignitie, they put the purple robe of authority upon the Fathers, yet when the Papists dispute against them by this authoritie, they quickly put it off againe, and although they boast of the Fathers, and will prove the superioritie of Bishops, from severall forcible arguments out of antiquity, yet finde they disappointment and empti∣nesse, where they desire most to abound, for nothing in all this cause is more pressed, by the strongest a∣mongst them, then that the Angels of the Churches of Asia, were Bishops like unto themselves, and yet
not want of will in them, and diligence in read∣ing of the Fathers, but the Fathers (whom they would have to pronounce not . O childe, but , O sonne of lupiter) writing on the place, are mute, and doe faile them, turning their glosses another way, but this and all other their pretences are answered, and the whole matter of true Church governement, treated at large many yeeres agoe, without a word of reply from the Bishops or their Clergie, who yet try all Authors, if they can finde so much as one sentence, even in dedicatorie Epistles (which use to be more encomiastick then dogmati∣call) to speak for them. It hath beene the greatest praise of civill powers, that they have exceeded all who went before them in the reformation of religion: Motives to a full reforma∣tion. Asa tooke away Idola∣trie, but Iehosaphat removed the high places also, Hezekiah did more, he brake the brazen serpent, but Iosiah destroyed the Idole Temples also, who there∣fore hath this restimony to the end of the world, that like unto him there was no King before him, that turn∣ed to the Lord with all his heart, with all his soule, and with all his might: neither is this a dispraise to Re∣ligious Princes going before, who according to their measure of knowledge, and as the times would suffer, did reforme Religion; nor a disgracing, but rather a promoting and perfecting of the worke of Refor∣mation begun by them. The matters of the King∣dome of Christ, the head and Monarch of his Church are in hand, in which, as in our own matters we have no power to dispense, or to decline to the right hand or to the left; and to rest in a lukewarmnesse or Samaritanisme, which may make our condition
afterward to be restlesse, and provoke the Lord to make us a reproach. The changes, and revolutions which we heare of in other Kingdomes, are docu∣ments, that the divine Providence is about some great worke, in which we are now called to act our part, in the sight of men and Angels. Non tantum praesentis sed vigilantis est, occasioneus observare pro∣perantem, Senec, Epist. 22 The opportunity of Re∣formation is rare and singular, and cannot be paral∣lel'd in any History, and therefore to be used in all re∣verence, with heavenly prudence, and abstractnesse of spirit, from earthly considerations. We are zealous of our owne liberties, let us be more zealous of the li∣berties of the Kingdome of Christ, that both we our selves, and the Posterity may have a well grounded and blessed Peace. FINIS.
