H1277B E410_13 99863943 116161
A THREE-FOLD CORD To unite Soules for ever unto GOD. 1. The Mysterie of Godlinesse opened. 2. The Imitation of Christ proposed. 3. The Crowne of afflicted Saints promised. As it was compacted by M. Richard Head, M. A. and sometimes Minister of the Gospel, in his Labours at Great Torrington in Devon. Published now, after his Death, for publike profit. ECCLES. 4.12. A three-fold Cord is not quickly broken. LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Fr. Coles, and are to be sold at his shop in the Old-Bayly, at the Signe of the Halfe-Bowle, 1647.
To the Readers. HOnest Readers (for I dare bespeak no other) This Posthumous Worke of the Reverend Author, given to my perusall by his survi∣ving Consort, with desire to make it of publike benefit, is fit for none so much as for you, who are delighted in Honest Things. Other Hi∣strionicks, Athenian and wanton Readers, are taken up with Play-Bookes, Newes-Bookes, and Scandalous Pamphlets; yet would they turne their eyes upon Spirituall and serious Discourses, it might prove better worth their labour, even to make them better. To all therefore that desire to be good, or to doe good, I shall commend this little Worke, as not unbeseeming their view. The severall Tractates are not large, as perhaps the subjects of them might desire, they being of great extent; yet a short and swee representation of them will make none losers, who may reade some of them in larger Volumes, set out to the full. 1 Tim. 3.16. Matth, 19.28 Jam. 1.12. If the Mysterie of Godlinesse, the Imitation of Christ, the Crowne of afflicted Saints, be matters delight∣full to you, you may passe through this little Garden, and crop sweet Flowers, growing upon every Root.
The Subjects doe garnish enough the Labour of the Au∣thor, and his Labour enlighten's them. My prayer is, that by this Light your Soules may be guided to ob∣taine this Mysterie, this Christ, this Crowne here bla∣zoned: Your labour then will not be lost in Reading, nor mine in perswading you thereunto. The God of Spirits write in your hearts what you reade here; in him I am, Yours, bound to serve you for Jesus sake, GEO: HUGHES. August the 7. 1647. I Have read these three pious and profitable Sermons; the first, inti∣tuled, The Saints Inheritance; the second, The Mysterie of Godlinesse; the third, The reward of Imitation, and doe license them to be printed and published. JOHN DOWNAME.
THE SAINTS INHERITANCE. A Sermon Preached in Torrington the second of February, 1642. JAMES 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures tentation; for when he is tryed, he shall receive the Crowne of Life, which the Lord hath promised to those that love him. WEE have here an Argument unto patience, and chearefull suffering, verse 10. Let the rich man rejoyce, when brought low, to an ebbe, like a River emptied. Durus hic Sermo; this is a hard saying, who can beare it? 'tis hard for any, especially for a great man to endure vexations, per se: harder yet? to endure them with joy. True 3 and therefore, that the man brought low may not onely endure his pressures, but endure them with joy, the Apostle encourageth him thereunto, propter aliud; from, or for some∣thing else; and this no lesse then a Crowne of immortall Glory: and so would have him to goe chearefully on; assured, that his labour shall not be in vaine in the Lord. In the words we have, first, a proposition; and then, secondly, the proofe thereof.
In the proposition, first, the subject, or person spoken of; and secondly, the , or thing a firmed of him. First, the subject, The  dinari pitch, ; looke a little back, and you shall see him, vers. 9. Let the brother of low degree rejoyce when exalted; and let the ch man rejoyce when brought low. 'Tis then some great man the Text here speakes of, some great man in adversitie; and yet not simply so, but one, who being in adversitie, is there by temp∣ted; and yet (which is worse) , endueth the remp∣tation, neither shrinking from it, nor sinking under  and there lyes the point of Christian braverie and gallantrie. By tentation, in this place then, we are to understand afflicti∣ons; whether from within, by a prick in the flesh, and the buffer∣ings of Satan; or whether from without, by the molestations of malicious and malignant enemies, by the revisings and re∣proaches of the ungodly, by unkindnesse of friends, and the ∣tinesse of such as have beene neere and deare unto  king from us the choyse of our affection,  24.16. calls the pleasure of the heart, and  fo the eyes; or whether the Lord lay his hand upon our bodies, in some painefull and pining Sicknesse: in a word, whatsoever af∣fliction the Lord be pleased to lay upon us, suppose it be that wee cannot make lesse, by imparting it to others; all is to rie us. Afflictions are but Tryals. 1 Obser.Dear. Der. 8.2. And thou shaft remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these fortie yeares in the Wildernesse, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thon wors  of any thing within us, for hee understands all our thought long before; Hell and destruction are before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the sones of men? But that what is in us, may he made  both to our selves  whether it be Pride, Impatience, or any other whatsoever Rebellions  Faith, Hope, Love, Patience and other the lovelyest Graces of Gods holy and sanctifying Spirit, which
like the tares in the darkest night, are most illustrious in blackest times of trouble and adversitie. Thus also would the Lord trie our uprightnesse and sinceritie: imes of Peace, Plnie, and Prosperitie there is rooe for Satans objection against us, as against holy job Doe those, and there, serve the for nothing?  not thou thus and thus bles∣sed them? And it may be that many in those better dayes served God son the blessings of his left hand, &c. Like little Children, who say their Prayers, to have their Breakfast. But when in times of great afflictions, when God is turning his Children our of doores, a begging exposing them to eminen dang now to serve the Lord, now to adhere unto him, chusing rather to have our bodies torne from our soules, then our es from our Re∣deemer: This demonstrates, that we are not base and cenarie; that though we cannot serve God without wages, yo did not serve him for wages; but at least, primarily for himselfe, and the lovelynesse of his Nature. Afflictions then are no arguments of Gods displeasure ay, 1 Vse. Instruction in Truth, when blest and sarctified, they are arguments of his love and fa∣vour; and  ey are, when by them God separates what he hates, from he person whom he loves. I know (saith David) that out of very faithfulnesse thou hast caused me to be afflicted. And againe, Blssed is the man whom thou chastisest, and chest in thy Law. Not therefore blessed, because afflicted; but therefore blessed, because by afflictions made wiser, made more holy, more humble, &c. Afflictions, like Jonathans Arrowes, are sent, not to hurt  but to wrne us like the Sheph Dog, sent out, not to bite, but to bring us in from straying, and so from danger. And if Afflictions be Tryals; 2 Vse. Instruction to Die. then must we, when under them, (as now at this time all of us, in respect of the publie) especially looke to our selves: for now as the losing, or the ving of some speciall Grace, or Blessing. Now God is trying me, whether I will repent of my sinnes, goe home to my Fathers house, whe∣ther I will hold out in my journey to Canaan, or backe againe to Egypt, &c. Truly, what you are in affliction, that you are, and no more.
Is there any among you, 3 Use. Comfort. who being under afflictions, lives by faith, manifesteth his graces, is thereby drawne neerer to God, in a spiritual disdaine of all things here below? Is there any here that truely and experimentally can say of his trouble, It good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learne thy Sta∣tutes? Psal. 119.71. Reade here an argument of Gods fatherly love; hee scourgeth every sonne whom he receiveth: and then say of thine affliction, thus turning thee from sinne and death, as David to Abigail, when she turned him from his fury; Blessed he the Lord God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me: Oh, the memory of this may doe you good another day; It fol∣loweth: As afflictions are tryalls, so 'tis said of the great man under them, , a word made up of two, and so would speake unto us two points: 1.2 Obser. When God is pleased to lay afflictions on us for our tryall, we must , stay in those afflictions, till he that layed them on, shall please to take them off. 'Tis said of Joseph, that till the time was ome, the Word of the Lord tryed him; God knowes as how, so when, to deliver his servants: in the Mount he will bee seene; and therefore in whatsoever afflictions we are, we must wait his will and pleasure, and stay his leysure too, Dan. 11.35. And some of them of un∣derstanding shall fall, to trie them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time ap∣pointed: And Isay 28.16. He that beleeveth shall not make haste: The Plaister must lye on, till the Sore be healed; wherefore, Jam. 1.4. Let patience have her perfect worke. This makes against those who can indure afflictions for a while, but if a little lengthned, 1 Vse. Reproofe. they grow weary and impatient; saying as hee in 2 Kings 6.33. Why should wee walt on God any longer? Away they goe to some indirect and unlawfull wayes; or else they murmure, repine, blaspheme, &c. And truth is, there is too much impatiencie in the best, Mica 7.4. The best of them is as a Bryar, the most upright is sharper then a Thorne-hedge: They kick, but it is against the pricks; and so by their impatiencie they only hurt themselves, they make their
burthen more heavie, and God more angry: Read and tremble, Numb. 11.1. And when the people complained, it displeased the Lord, and the Lord heard it; and his anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the Campe. Heb. 10.36. Verily you have need of patience, that when you have done the will of God, 2 Vse. Exhortation. you might inherite the promise: where∣fore, as our Lord and Saviour adviseth, Luke 21.19. In pa∣tience possesse we our owne soules; this shall save us from the evill of affliction: Quamvis non ab exteriere & alieno tamen ab intimo & nostro, August. Though not from the evill that is without us, yet from the evill that is within us. Abide patiently: Might you for the least of the sinnes Rome calls veniall, have not onely deliverance from troubles, but great preferment, yeeld not on any tearmes; Heb. 11.35. And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtaine a better Resurrection. Let not God goe in these your wrestlings, till with Jacob you have got a blessing. Have you not heard of the patience of Job? Jam. 5.11. And have you not seen the end of the Lord? So soone as the Just Man, seeing the folly of his impatiencie and distemper, yeelded and submitted; the Lord made an end of his afflictions. See Job 40.4.) what he saith, Behold I am vile, what shall I an∣swer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Now heare the Lord, vers. 6. Then the Lord answered unto Job out of the Whirle∣winde, and said, Gird up thy loynes now like a man, &c. And surely (as David sings) The patient abiding of the just shall never be for∣gotten. Nay, if thus you suffer, you shall be more then conque∣rers, through him that loved us. Revel, 12.11. And they over∣came him by the blood of the Lambe, and by the word of their testi∣mony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. But they are malicious men, by whom you suffer, Object. (say you) and this is that that moves you. Be it so, and so it ever was, Sol. is, and will be. Gal. 4.29. But as then, he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit, even so it is now. But then say I: First, If because they revile, rayle, reproach you, you againe
revile, reproach, and rayle on them as fast; what difference is there, inter provocantem & provocatum, Tertll. betweene you and them? onely this; they sinned first, and you sinned next. Secondly, Who, or whatsoever be the instruments of your af∣flictions, 'cis God permits them, he hath an hand in all your trou∣bles; Art. 3.6. Job 2.10. Is there any evill in the Citie (saith the Lord) and I have not done it? Say then as Job to his Wife, Shall  receive good at the hands of God, and shall wee not receive evill? Say wee (as our Lord and Saviour) Shall I not drinks of the Cup my Father giveth me? As for the molestations of the wicked; as Pilate unto Christ, threatning him with crucifying, because he spake not when he was spoken unto, John 19.11. They could have no power ver you, were it not given them from above. Here then you must also see the hand of God, and lay your owne hand upon your mouth. See what David doth, 2 Sam. 16.10, 12. And the King said, What have I to doe with you, ye sonnis of Zerviah? So let him curse, because the Lord hath said unto him, Curse David; who shall then say, wherefore hast thou done so? It may be the Lord will looke on mine affliction, and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day. Psal. 38.12, 13, 14. They also that seeke after my life, lay snares for me; and they that seeke my hurt, speake mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long: but I, as a deafe man, heard not, and I was as a dmbe man, that openeth not his mouth, &c. Nay farther, Wee must not onely , but ; not only not shrinke from, but not sinke under the pressures God is pleased to lay upon us. So then the next point is, 2.4 Obser. When God is pleased to trie us by afflictions, we must not onely suffer them to the end, but all the while with strength and courage; not onely with constancie, but magnanimitie. If (saith Solomon) thy heart faile thee in the day of trouble, thy strength is small. Wee must stand up under our burthens, as the Palme-tree under weights; not onely, not stooping or declining, but springing up the more towards Heaven.
As in the Deluge; the higher the Waters rose, the higher still mounted the Arke: so the greater our trouble; are, the higher must wee goe in our thoughts towards, God. 2 Cor. 4.8, 10. Wee are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; wee are perplexed, but not in despaire; alwayes bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. Say wee then of our severall pressures (as it is, Ier. 10.19.) Truely this is my griese, and I will beare it. Vse. Counsaile. They who being un∣der affliction, doe either shrinke from it, or sinke under it, are Cowards both alike. If at any time, either through the great∣nesse, or the length of any miserie, our hearts begin to faint, check wee our selves, and say as David, Psal. 42. Why art thou ast downe, O my soule, and why art thou so disquieted within me? Trust in God, for I shall yet prayse him who is the health of my coun∣tenance, and my God. To this end, labour wee for spirituall strength: My Grave (saith God, as to the Apostle, so to all in like case, 2 Cor. 12.9.) shall be sufficient for thee. And Philip. 4.13. I (saith the Apostle) am able to doe all things through him that strengthneth me: Under∣stand him, transcendently; strengthned by Christ, wee shall be able, not onely to doe, but to suffer any thing for his sake. Labout wee for courage, fortitude, heavenly-mindednesse; so shall nothing be hard unto us: Aliquando vincitur quis, non quia fortior, sed quia cum timidiore congressus, Tertull. Wee are some∣times beaten, not because weake, but because more cowardly and fearefull. Well (say you) here is the Man that suffereth, and thus suffereth; a Man that both stayeth in his affliction, and stands up under it: What then? Secondly, The thing affirmed of him. He is blessed: And hence shall I commend unto your tenderest Meditations, two Instructions. First, As we would be blessed, we must first be tryed by some af∣fliction or other.
Acts 14.22. Where you see the way to Heaven lyes; first, through tribulations; secondly, through many tribulations; and this, thirdly, necessarily it must be so. God hath appointed it, 1 Thess. 3.3. That no man should be moved by these afflictions; for your selves know, that wee are ap∣pointed therecunto. And if wee goe forth by the foot-steps of the flock (as it is in one of the Songs of Love) wee shall finde, all that are now in Heaven, to have gone this way. Heb. 2.10. For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many Sonnes unto glory, to make the Captaine of their salvation perfect through sufferings. And, Heb. 13.1 Wherefore, seeing wee also are compassed about with so great a Cloud of Wit∣nesses, let us lay aside every weight, &c. Iames 5.10. Take my brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. And this way must all follow after. Whosoever (saith the Apostle) will live godly in Christ; note that, in Christ, that is, in opposition to the world, must suffer persecution. Blessednesse at the first required nothing but obedience active, Doe this and live; but since the Fall, it requireth obedience passive also: the way to Heaven is by weeping-crosse, Heb. 12.6,8. For whom the Lord loveth he chastenth, and scourgeth every sonne whom he recerveth: if ye endure chastening. God dealeth with you as with sonnes; for what sonne is he whom the father chasteneth not? Those eight Beatitudes, or rather eight parts of Beatitudes, (which is one and intire) in Christs first Sermon upon the Mount, if you marke them, run most of them in obedience passive: wee must goe to Canaan through the Wildernesse, amidst Scorpions, and by the waters of Marah. They then are much deceived, Vse. Conviction. who thinke to passe hence, à de∣licits ad delicias, from fleshly and worldly pleasures and delights to the joyes of Gods presence: deceived they are, as they shall one day find, when it shall be said unto them, amid their torments, and too late repenting, as unto Dives; Remember thou hadst thy pleasure upon earth.
Art thou yet at ease in Sion. &c? Counsell. Well, thou myst yet suffer, nay thou must, there is no scaping in a mist; though going forth wind and tide serve thee, yet suddenly both may turne against thee. 'Tis reported of Nero, that having a faire Empresse, hee used sometimes to take her by the chin; saying, Here is a saire face, but when I list I can cut it off: So say thou of all thy sairest externall blessings; here is a strong body, but God can when he pleaseth turne it into dust; here are sweet children, but God can when he will take them from me, &c. Provide for a storme, and the rather, because now the heavens lowre, our bankes are bro∣ken downe, and the tide is breaking in: O let us no longer, like little children, play with cockle shells upon the shore. Art thou under any affliction, any distresse, any extremity, &c? be not dismayed, the worst of the wayes of God are better then the best of the wayes of sinne; for these lead to the chambers of death, 1 Pet. 1.12 thinke it not strange, nay think of it both as right and comsortable; for this is your land-marke, now may you assure your selves, that you are in the way, onely looke not back to Egypt againe, nor sit still as weary, yet a little farther, and you are happy, Heb. 12.11. Now no chastening for the pre∣sent seemeth to be joyous, but grievous; neverthelesse, afterward it yeeldeth the peaceable fruit of Righteousnesse, unto them which are exercised thereby. It followeth, Secondly, As they who would be blessed, must endure tentation; so they that endure tentation, shall be blessed. Rom. 8.17. And if childrens then heires, heires of God, and joynt∣heires with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may bee also glorified together. Revel. 2.10. Feare none of those things which thou shalt suffer; bee thou faithfull unto the death, and I will give thee a crowne of life. Nay, they are already blessed in the comfortable assurance of Gods love and favour. Away then with all Bildads and Zophars, Vse. Reproofe. who would draw hard conclusions on Gods people in their affliction, as if God loved them not: Oh let their mouthes be tyed up in silence for ever. Blessed (saith my Text) is the man that indureth tentation; and who can curse where od hath blessed? See here with admiration, Advice. the goodnesse and graciousnesse of
our God, who though he might command our obedience, both active & passive, upon the allegeance we owe unto him is yet plea∣sed to suger his precepts with sanctions; with propositions & pro∣mises of reward. He blesseth us as the good old father, Ephraim and Manasseth with his hands a-crosse. How happy are wee to serve so good a Master; but how happy shall we be, if wee doe him good service? Is there any among you, who being in troubles, is thereby of∣fended, whose feet begin to slip, whose treadings are almost gone? O looke out with Moses to the recompence of reward, so shall you hasten home, and sweeten your thoughts by the way as you goe; the dayes are sharp, but then they are short; the wayes are soule, but not long; Heaven is hard at hand, and a day is com∣ming will make amends for all your sorrowes and sufferings; hold on, and the Crowne is yours. Afflictions are tryalls; and these, as wee would be blessed wee must indure; yea, if wee indure them, neither sinking under them, nor shrinking from them, we shall be blessed. Blessed is the man that indureth tentation; and why blessed? the proose of the proposition followeth, for when he is tryed, he shall receive a crowne of life, &c. And here you see the blessednesse of the patient man: First, defined. Secondly, assured. 1. 'Tis defined. 'Tis a Crowne of life: A Crowne speakes State and Dignity; whatsoever we are now, we shall ere long be Kings, and walke in long white Robes: You (saith Christ) that have followed mee in the Regeneration; that is, in the day of new birth to all the world, in the day of Restauration of all things; shall sit on twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28. But what is a Crowne without life; Better (saith Salomon) be a living Dag then a dead Lion. True, but the patient man shall have at last, not only a crown, but a Crowne of Life, 2 Tim. 4.8. Honcesorth is lad up for mee a Crown of Righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous Indge shall give me at that day; and not to me onely, bus unto them also that love his appearing: So then,
Howsoever wee have here beatudinem viatonm, such and so much happnesse as belongs to Travellers, Observ. yet is the fulnesse, the heaghe of blessednesse behinde, beatitudo patriae, wee are now the sonnes of God, 1 Joh. 3.2. Neverthelesse, it doth not appeare what we shall be; but when Christ shall appeare, we shold appeare in glory with him. Above (saith the Apostle) are such things as neither eye hath seene, ner eare heard, nor ever came into the heart of  to conceive: The sum of all, is Gods beatificall vision. In Heaven is the perfection of all good things; fulnesse is the perfection of measure, everlastingnesse is the perfection of time, infinitenesse the perfection of number, immutability the perfe∣ction of state, immensity the perfection of place, immortality the perfection of life, and God the perfection of all; Psal. 16.11 In thy presence as fulnesse of joy, at thy right hand there we pleasures for evermore. See here the extreame folly of worldly men, Vse. Reproofe. who for peri∣shing, and vexations vanities, are content to part with a Crowne of immortall Glory. Worse yet are they, who for the pleasures of se, which are but for a season, momentanie, ye abortive, perishing are they bud, forseit eternall blessednesse: Wee laugh at little children, when they let goe things of worth for trisles, rattles, a nut, an apple: but certainly many among us are much more childsh; They let goe Heaven and all the riches, joyes, and happinesse thereof, for things that can doe them no good, may doe them much hurt; and when all is done, cannot abide with them. See here againe a ground of patience and cheeresull suffering; your losses are many and great, Counsell. but if you have not lost Heave, you have lost nothing: Maries better part is that which cannot be taken away: Your crosses are many and great, remember there is a Crowne of life behinde, &c. Wherefore (as the Apostle, Colos. 3.) take your affections off from things here below, and set them on things above; looke to the Crowne of life reserved for you: Amid all crosses, and in the houre of death, live in the comforts of this hope, and raise your mindes accordingly; live like those that doe beleeve, and expect an Heaven: Heb. 10.34. For yee had compassion of me in my bonds, and tooke joyfully the spyling of your goods, knowing in your solves
that you have in Heaven a better and an induring substance. See here a crosse with a Crowne. But what assurance? wee see blessednesse defined, but how is it assured? The assurance is two-fold. 1. In regard of promise, God hath said. 2. In regard of those to whom the promise is made, They that love him. First, Obser. God hath said, Blessed is the man that indureth tentation, for he shall receive a crowne of life. Hath God said it, and shall not he doe it? He (saith the Apostle) is faithfull who hath promised; Againe, all his promises in Christ are yea and amen. If we confesse, 1 Ioh. 1.9. God is faithfull to forgive; a strange argument, one would thinke, we should rather feare revenge, then expect for∣givenesse of sinne from the Justice of God. But God is as just in performing the mercy he hath promi∣sed, as in executing the vengeance he hath threatned. See here a sure ground of hope, Use. Counsell. the word and promise of our never-failing God; a sure ground (I say) wherein hope, which is our Anchor, may strongly fasten, to secure our soules in any tempest; as to hope without a promise, or upon a promile, o∣therwise then it stands, is to let our Anchor hang in the water, or catch in a wave, and so to expect safety: So to depend upon the promise of God, and so as the promise is made, is to settle, to stay, to save our selves against all stormes. Wherefore, take the Lord at his word, Cast not away your hope, (saith the Apostle, Heb. 10.35, 36.) And why? because there is a promise, whereby with patience and doing the will of God, we shall bee sae amid all surges here, and at last happily arrive on the shores of peace. What (say some) will you have us to stand where no bottome is? Dub. will you have us to hang in the ayre? Oh slow of heart to beleeve; Sol. doth not the world, earth, and sea, depend on the Word of God; as you may see, Heb. 11.2. Through faith we understand, that the worlds are framed by the Word of God, so that things which are seene, were not made of things which  appeare. Howsoever among men, an argument from authority is not
alwayes sound, because all men are lyers, farther then truth speaks for them; yet some you know have borne such sway with their followers and disciples, that their bare word have carried assent, , such a one said it, hath stopt all further oppositions; And when God sayth this or that, shall not wee beleeve him? Psal. 9.10. They that know thy name will trust in thee, for thou ne∣ver failest them that seeke thee. Secondly, as God hath promised a crowne of life to the patient man; so his farther assurance is, 'tis the Crowne God hath pro∣mised to those that love him: And hence a two-fold observation. First, Obser. Eternall blessednesse belongs by promise, onely to the holy; to these onely is the promise made, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; Revel. 22.14. Blessed are they that doe his Commandements, that they may have right to the Tree of life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City. See here the gates of Heaven made fast against all the ungodly; Vse. with Balanm, they would dye the death of the Righteons, but they will not live the life of the Righteous: They would be happy, but they will not be holy; how unequall are these thoughs? how un∣possible are these hopes? In good duties (as one observes) they seperate the meanes from the end; they thinke to come to Hea∣ven, though they move not a foot, turn not their faces that way, though they live in the generall neglect of all good duties: As if a man bound from hence to London, should sit downe here, and yet think to attaine his journeyes end. Againe, in evill things, they separate the end from the meanes; they promise them∣selves an escape from hell, though every step they take tend thi∣ther. Mal esse volunt, misers esse nolunt mo dco sunt mali t non sint miseri, Aug. Let these reade Deut. 29.19, 20. And it come to passe when he bearth the words of this curse, that he blesse himselfe in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walke in the imagi∣nations of my heart, to adde drunkennesse to thirst, the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousie shall smock against that man, and all the curses that are written in this Book shall lye upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from un∣der Heaven. Farther, See here a necessity of an holy life; as wee would bee
everlastingly blessed, we must live holily; for without holinesse, none shall see the Lord: Hee that would finish his colours in brightnesse, must be sure to lay sutable grounds; and hee that would finish his life in glory, must necessarily begin and end in grace: Away with the black colours of sin, they are an ill foun∣dation; 1 Joh. 3.2, 3. Beloved, now wee are the sonnes of God, and it doth not yet appeare what we shall be; but wee know, that when hee sha11 appeare, me shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is; and every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himselfe, even as hee is pure. 'Tis the Crowne God hath promised to those that love him; hence by the by, are two Questions. First, Quest. 1. Why is it not rather said, 'tis the Crowne God hath promised to those that doe beleeve, or obey, &c? First, Note this ove arising from faith in Christ, in whom alone s the accep∣ance of per∣ons and du∣es. because faith workes by love, and good duties done out of love are acceptable, because they are the gifts of friends: Wic∣ked men may abound in outward workes, they may pray, heare, &c. all which howsoever materially good, and in common ac∣ceptation be commanded, may yet bee made sinne (and indeed too often are) because the doing of them doth not necessarily, and from within, respect either the command, or the comman∣ders glory, but are only reducible unto him, and may in the mean time looke another way; so that the goodnesse of those duties is not in the duties themselves, but in the right manner of do∣ing them; wherein if wee faile, the things are no longer good, at least to us. Secondly, wicked men, as they cannot beleeve, so neither can they love, because these things are essentially good in themselves: And although wee neither doe them, nor can doe them with that strength and perfection the Law requireth; yet cannot the doing of them in faith be totally and altogether sinfull, because they take Christ into their performance, and doe intrinsecally, and in the very substance of the work respect God in him. Thirdly, they who doe what God commands, obedientially in saith, respect both the commandement, and his glory that gives it: he that workes, not onely out of common conviction, but in and with this filiall affection, out of love; this is hee that
through Christ pleaseth God, both in his person and all his perfor∣mances. Secondly, Quest. 2. Why is it not rat her said, 'tis the Crowne God hath pro∣mised to those whom he doth love? Because our love is better knowne unto us, Answ. being within us; then Gods love, being without us; especially in such dayes as these of great calamity, wherein we are prone to doubt of, and to question the love of God; if God be with us, why is all this evill fallen on us? Now that we love God, wee may be sure; not conjecturally, but certitudinali scientia, certainely and infallibly. O how I love the Lord, (saith David) Psal. 116. And wee (faith the Apostle) have received the Spirit of God, whereby wee know the things that are given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. And being assured that we love God, we may be sure that God loves us; Ille prior in amore, 1 Joh. 4.20. Howsoever our love to him, in respect of his to us, bee as the running of a little streame, to the flowing of the great Ocean; or as the thirst of one, to the Fountaine where he drinkes: yet for as much as his love to us, begets our love to him; therefore if we love him, we may be sure he loves us. Now as touching the second observation. He that indureth tentation is blessed; and why? because he shalt receive a Crowne of life; And why shall he receive this? because 'tis the Crown God hath promised to those that love him: But why to the patient man? because by his patient suffering hee shewes his love to God more then any. Now (saith God to Abraham, on the point of offering up his onely sonne) I know thou lo∣vest mee. As the patient shew their love to God by suffering, Observ. so will the Lord shew his love to him by rewarding. The Covenant betweene God and us, stands in mutuall stipu∣lations of love. Wherefore, we having shewed our love to God, by patient suffering for his sake; it remaines, that hee experi∣ment his love to us in rewardfull retributions. 'Tis just with God (saith the Apostle) to render to you that are troubled, rest and peace, &c.
It sufficeth not then, Use. that wee suffer, unlesse wee suffer in love; and if wee love, wee shall serve, and suffer long, as Jacob for Rachel, and think all nothing, only because we love. Love is that lively motive, which makes our obedience full; 'tis that vertue which comprehends all other vertues. Gradn emi∣nentia; for if we doe and suffer out of love, we are at the highest pitch possible attainable. Love (saith the Apostle) fulfils the Law, nor can any vertue so long hold out; 'Tis as strong as death, Cant. 8.6, 7. Acquaint your selves with Gods transcendent excellencies, but above all, set your thoughts a working in deepest and humblest meditation of his love to you in Christ. God loved us, loved us first; loved us being enemies; yea, so loved us, as to give his Sonne to us; yea, as to give him to death for us, to an accursed and shame∣full death; and he asketh nothing of us but this, that we beleeve in him, and so hee good to our soules: If Faith be in the worke, Love will break out, yea break out into teares of joy, to an ex∣rasie, Psal. 31.21. Psal. 116.1. I love the Lord, because hee hath heard my voyce, and may supplications; because hee hath inclined his eare unto mee; therefore I will call upon him so long as I live, Gal. 2.20. The result of all is this: Wee must suffer and indure afflictions, Obser. as out of love, so with joy. The Argument. That which makes for our eternall blessednesse, is to be indured with joy: But Afflictions makes for out eternall blessednesse; erge, not that we are to rejoyce in our afflictions, but in the act, ex∣ercise of our patience, or rather Christs working them in us; and so in the assurarce of Gods love and favour: as the penitent not in his sinnes, but in his teares for sinne; Acts 5.41. And they departed from the presence of the counsell, rejaycing that they wene counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name; And 2 Cor. 12.10. Therefore I take pleasure in infirmies, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christs sake. But be you therefore cheerefull in afflictions, they are but for a few dayes, and then comes glory: Every Bird can sing in a cleare Heaven, onely the Nightingale sings in a storme; Rom. 5.2, 3.
By whom wee have accesse by faith, into this grace wherein wee stand, and rejoyce in the glory of God: and not onely so, but wee glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation worketh patience, &c. If your hearts grow heavie, recover your selves with David, Psal. 42.5. Why art thou so sad, O my soule, and why so disquieted within me? Trust in God, for I shall yet prayse him, who is the health of my coun∣tenance, and my God. Soli Deo gloria. THE MYSTERIE OF GODLINESSE. I TIMOTHIE 3.16. And without controversie, great is the Mysterie of Godlinesse; God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seene of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, beleeved on in the World, received up into Glory. WHat the Evangelists speake of Christ by way of Historie, the Apostle here discovers as a great Mysterie: Without all controversie great is the My∣sterie of Godlinesse, &c. Where, behold (as in a Scale of Gradation) first, a Mysterie; secondly, a great Mysterie; thirdly, a great Mysterie of Godlinesse; fourthly, a great Mysterie of Godlinesse without all controversie.
Next, the Veyle being as it were rent, wee see what that great Mysterie is, God made manifest in the flesh. So then, the Apostle here shewes you, first, that there is a My∣sterie; secondly declares what that Mysterie is. First, a Mysterie: This word in its owne language speaks some sacred and secret thing, full furnished with matter of knowledge, but not clearely understood; either because there is something betweene us and it, or because it selfe is too hard for us: and Mysteries there are many. 1 Cor. 13. If (faith the Apostle) I knew all Mysteries: thereby giving us to understand, that there are Mysteries of severall sorts, some greater, some lesser: whatsoever others are, this is great. Secondly, a great Mysterie: . This, saith the Apostle, speaking of Marriage, Eph. 5.32. is a great Mysterie, because it shadoweth forth unto us the Union that is betwixt Christ and his Church: But, Thirdly, 'tis not onely great, but godly; a Mysterie of Godli∣nesse: Godlinesse is the scope of it; it teaches not onely to be∣leeve what God promiserh, but to obey what God commandeth: and godlinesse (faith the Apostle) is great gaine; it hath the pro∣mise of this life, and the life to come: its therefore a Trade (saith one) of a good returne, which way soever you looke. Nay more; Fourthly, the Mysterie here is not onely great, a Mysterie of Godlinesse, but all this without controversie. There are many great Mysteries in the world, but not great without controversie; nay, not without great Controversies. The world you see is full of des∣perate Disputes about Truth, whilest Truth her selfe lyes neg∣lected in the middle; like Moses his body, when the Devill and the Archangel strove about it; dead, and buried, no man can tell where: Religion (as one complaines of old) is even lost in Questions about Religion: wee pull so violently in our unpro∣fitable Disputes, that at length breaking the Rope, wee sall more asunder, yea, the one side, if not both, must at last fall to the ground. But what is the Mysterie here? so great, so godly, and both without controversie. God made manifest in the flesh.
So that here is, first Height, God; secondly, Depth, in the flesh; thirdly, Breath, manifest; that is, God not onely made man, but shewing himselfe a man. First, Height, God, Job 6.26. Secondly, Depth, God in the flesh, that is, the Godhead not abso∣lutely considered, but as personally restrained to the Sonne; and to him not simply neither, as he is God, but as a Person subsisting in the Godhead. The Word was made flesh, saith S. John, that is, the second Person; , The Word of God: who, as wee be∣gat words out of our thoughts, beget his Sonne out of him∣selfe, as it were by thinking within himselfe an eternall Gene∣ration. Not the Father, nor the holy-Ghost is made man, for then there should have beene two Sonnes, but the middle person betweene both: as to preserve the integritie of the blessed Trinitie, so the better to undertake the office of Mediation betweene God and man. But yet, though Father and holy-Ghost had no communion with the incarnation of the Sonne, , Damascen, otherwise then by assent, and approbation: yet for as much as the Sonne is of the same substance with the Father, co∣eternall, coessentiall with him, God blessed for ever, Amen: for as much as the Word and Deitie are both one subject, should wee exclude the nature of God from incarnation, wee should make the Sonne of God not to be very God. Undoubtedly therefore, the Nature of God, in the Person of the Sonne, is incarnate: and therefore, though incarnation may not be granted to any Person, but one; yet may it not be denyed to the Nature, which is com∣mon to all. Now this second Person assumed not the person of one man; for then had that onely beene saved, which was assumed: but Wisdome, to the end shee might save many, built her House of that nature which is common to all: nor did he assume a person al∣readie made, for then should he have two persons, the one assu∣ming, the other assumed: he tooke mans nature to his Person, that is, not onely the body; but the soule of man, that so the whole man, body and soule, might be saved. Yea, he tooke not
onely the substance, but the properties and qualities of our na∣ture. Wee may say of him, as S. James of Elias, he was , a man of like passions with us; in all things like us, saving in sinne. But how without sinne? Hee came not from Adam, as wee doe, and therefore had not the corruption of Adam, as wee have: hee tooke the substance of our nature, but not by the way of ordinarie generation. Hee came of man, but not by man: hee was the immediate fruit of the wombe, but not of the loynes, and so is sree from the touch and taint of our corruption; hee is the holy thing. Moreover, hee was conceived by the holy-Ghost: As Mary was the passive and materiall principle of this precious flesh, so was the holy-Ghost the active and efficient; both stopping the course of originall sinne in the Virgin, and sanctifying the materials, from the first moment of her Conception. But is not Christ then the Sonne of his owne Spirit? No: Fathers indeed beget their Children out of their owne substance, but the holy-Ghost onely framed flesh for him, from whom he himselfe proceeded: They both made the handmaid of the Lord, whom from thence, all generations shall call blessed. It followeth, thirdly, Bredth. Thirdly, not onely is God made flesh, but made manifest in the flesh; hee pitcht his Tabernacle among us: The Word (saith S. John) was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us. He came (faith the Apostle) on the forme of a servant, he went about doing good. Wee have seene him with our eyes, wee have heard him with our eares, felt him with our hands, say his Witnesses. And why all this? Why made flesh? And why made maifest in the flesh? first, That God might be satisfied in the same nature wherein he was offended: secondly, That Satan might be destroy∣ed in the same nature wherein he destroyed man, Heb. 2.14. See here what God can doe in a piece of Clay. To worke curiously in Gold, or Silver, much commends the Workman: but to doe the same in mouldring Earth, commend: him more; so is it here: 'Tis a Sile borrowed from the Councell of Ephesus.
Thus also would God restore us to our lost glory: Rom. 3. All have sinned (faith the Apostle) and come short of the glory of God. For the restoring of this age, wee must back to God againe: But alas, there is no comming neere him, for he is a cousuming fire; and who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Besides, He (faith the Apostle) wells in laght inaccassible. 1 Tim. 6.16. Could wee come neere him, wee cannot see him, for he is invisible. Behold, the Snne of God is made the Sonne of Man, that wee by this might be made the Sonnes of God, 2 Cor. 3.18. Gal. 4.4, 5. Thus also would God advance the nature of man, disgraced by sinne, and made odicus unto him: because wee could not come to him, he comes to us, in our flesh is made man; just as if a King should lovingly and gracionsly returne to that Citie, from whence not long fince he) turned away in great and just displeasure. He (faith the Apostle) tooke not the seed of Angelr; Heb. 2.16. may mo, he in no wise tooke the s of Angels, but the seed of : Quantite fe∣cit, ex his me pro te fact us est, agnosce, Bern. Thus also would God make our nature terrible to the Devill; who overcome by Christ, in our fles, des not be so bold with man: as a fish that sees or feeles the hooke, takes heed of it, so &c. And in all this, would God have us give him the glory of his infinite Wisdome, who found out that way of Life the Angels could never thinke of, for ever must admire: as also of his Ju∣stice, and Mercie, who rather then he would have finne to goe unpunished, or minunpardoned, would have his owne Sonne to come in the flesh, and so to die for . And because the God head in Christ is made flesh, therefore is Christ both God and  in one Persoh. There are in him two distinct nats; and these so distinct, that they remaine both uncompounded and unconfounded, and make both but one Person. Now whereas wee say, the Se of God made the world, the Soune of man by his death saved the world, &  comra the reason of these offe and cironlar speeches, is the hypostaicall union of both natures in one Person howbeit, wee must not ascribe that to the  ine challengeth; or that to
the Divine, which the humane hath right unto. Understand there∣fore, not the one or the other nature, but the Person in whom both natures are: In him, that is, in the Person, Coloss. 2.9. hvelleth the fulnesse of the God-head, . The reason of this Union: He that must redeeme us, must die for us; for without bloud, no redemption: and therefore he must be man. He must not onely die, but overcome death, and apply the merits of his death unto us; and therefore he must be God. And God is Christ, Emannel, God with us; God and Man in one Person: Man, to die for us; God, to vaquish death: Man, to be bound; God, to loose the sourowes of death: Man, to speak from his Father to us; God, to speak to his Father for us: if altogether like Man, longe esset a Deo; if altogether like God, longe esset ab hominibus: therefore both. August. He came to redeame us from Sinne, Death, and the Devill: as God he would not, as Man he could not; therefore, as God and Man he doth it. Thus Mercie and Truth are met together, Righteonsnesse and Peace hath kissed each other. You have here Jacobs Ladder, the top whereof reacheth up to Abrahams Bosoms, whilest the foot thereof is here below, at Jacobs Loynes, that wee may ascend up into the New Jerusalem. It being with the Sabines and the Romans (as wee reade in the Roma Historie) as with the Tribe of Benjamsn, where every one catcht a Wife of the daughters of Shiloh: and as they were joy∣ning battaile, the Women being daughters to the one side, and Wives to the other, interposed themselves, and by their peculiar interest on either side, tooke up the Quarrell. (Whatsoever the Cause of the unhappie Quarrels among us may be, sure I am, wee have greater and dearer Arguments 10 make us Friends, if wee could thinke of them.) But to my purpose. God and Man are enemies; the reconciler of both, must have an interest in both: behold Jesus Christ, God and Man. John 20.19. G to my Brethren, and saynte them; I ascend to my Father, and year Father; to my God, and  God. When Christ shall enter our appearance in his Name, and shall say to his Father, Heb. 2.13.
Behold I, and the Children which thou hast given me; This shall make God and Man friends againe. And me thinkes, the conside∣ration of this, should make us all friends. How this that you have heard, first, is a Mysterie; considering the premisses, you will easily grant it. The whole Gospel is a My∣sterie, Coloss. 2.2. it is the Mysterie of God, and of Christ. Magnum Sacramentum, say the Rhemists, following the vulgar, as by the Conventicle of Trent they must: but the word in it own Language speakes a Sacred Secret, Th , 1 Gor. 1.7. Though the Gospel be every where preacht, yet is it not by every one understood, 'tis still a Mysterie. The naturall man (faith the Apostle) perceiveth not the things of God, none but they to whom its given, understand this, none but the Sparituall To you (faith Christ) is given to know the Mysteries of the King∣doms; note, Mysteria  regis: and then, they that know, know but in part, but darkly; the rest know nothing. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. The Gospel is hid to those that are lost. Now, whatsoever in the Gospel is most mysterions, the inoarnation of the Some of God is more yet. Secondly, 'Tis a great Mysterle, both in the making, and in the mafesting of it. First, in the making; That God should be made Man: Had he come in the shape of an Angel, or in the beautie and glory of any other Creature, above or under the Sunne; or had he come in the beautie and power of our nature; or as on Mount Tabor, be∣tweene Moses and Elias, when his face was as the Sunne, and his gar∣ments as the Lightning; this had beene abasement enough: but to come in the flesh of man which is but dust and ashes, oh this is that de basement beyond expression! Every precious thing is abased, by mingling with a worse; and still the worse the thing is, wherewith mingled, the more the de∣basement. If then Gold be abased, by being mingled with Silver; much more, when mingled with rust or Iron, or with the drosse of Lead: This debasement of Christ, oh it is infinitely more, then if the Sone of the greast  in the World should (if it were possible he might) be turned into the basest Creature on the face of the earth.
See Proverbs 30.4. Who bath ascended up into Heaven; or descon∣ded? Who bath gathered the Winds in his fists? Who bath bound the Waters in a Garment? Who bath established all the ends of the Earth? What is his , and what is his Soes Name, of thou canst tell? You may reade the first Letter of his Name, in Isay 9.6. Won∣derfull. And wonderfull he was, and did derously, when he appeared unto Manaa, Judgers 13.18, 19. B all the Wonders that ever were; Creation and all from thence; and that which shall be last of all, but not least of all, the Resurection from the dead, must give place to . You have here the highest pitch of Gods Wisdoe, Goodnesse, Power, Glory, and Mercie; if any thing may be said to be high∣est, in that which is infite, and exempt from all measure and di∣mension. Dan. 2.11. 'Tis a  thing a say Chaldeans to the Question propounded them by the King of Babel, and none can shew the like, except the gods, whose dwelling is not in flesh. But here the raritie lyes in the contrary; He who is over all, God blessed for ever, is come in our flesh, &c. 2 Chron. 6.18. But will Gad in very deed dwell with  earth? Behold, Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens cannot containe him; how much lesse this house that I b built? Words of wonder. But see here a greater matter: the Sonne of God is made the sonne of man; clothed with our flesh, and . Deus asciur, the great, Jeh is become a  sagens where, Eternitie hath put on our mo; He that is in∣corporeall, is cloathed with our flesh; the Ancient of dayes is become an infant. Made of a Woman, borne of a , that it was given for a signe unto bel, long before the ac∣complishment; a figue of Gods, owne ching, one Ray of the Wonders, in the depth, breath, on the beight above. Isa. 7.14. Bo∣hold, a Virgin shall  a Sonne, and shall  his name E∣manuel. That the Sonne of God, should be made the some of , made of a woman, yea, that woman which he himselfe made: That her Wombe then, and the Heavens now, should containe him, whom
the Heaven of Heavent cannot contain: That he should be both God and Man in one Person, and both distinctly; and so have a Father in Heaven, without a Mother; and on Earth a Mother, without a Father: That his Father should be greater then hee, and yet hee equall to his Father: That ee should be before Abraham, and yet be borne well-nigh two thousand yeares after him: That hee should be Davids sonne, and yet Davids Lord: That hee should have neither beginning nor end of dayes, &c. Let Egypt cease to talke of her Mole-hils of Brick, Ephesus of her Temple, Babylo of her Walls, Rhodes of her Colose; here is a Wonder, infinitely beyond all; God is made flesh: Nay more; Secondly, made manifest in the flesh,  What may be knowe of God, (saith the Apostle, Rom. 1.20.) is manifest in the Creatures: but here you have, God made manifest in the flesh of Man. God himselfe is hid from our eyes, Isa. 45.15. Truly, O Lord, thou art hid from our eyes. So that God himselfe is a Mysterie; and that which makes the Myster the greater, God is hd with Light: Hee dwells (saith the Apostle) In Light maccessible, 1 Tim. 6.16. But what have wee to doe with an hidden God; a God that cannot, will not be see? Make us gods (say the people unto Aaron) may goe before us, Ex. 32. Behold here, God not onely made, but made manifest in the flesh. And behold here a lower degree of abasement: Men, espe∣cially if great, howsoever abased, cannot endure to have their basenesse knowne; Oh, tell it not in Gh. Even Nao, in her distresse, is ashamed of her Name: Call m no more beautifull, but bitter, far the Aloghtie hath dealt bitterly with me, Ruth 1.20. But Christ is not onely made flesh; but made manifest in the flesh: yea, so sarre from being ashamed of it; that a little before his death, hee gives a Charge, to have it preached all over the world. And if the incarnation of Christ be a Mysterie, so great a My∣sterie; them must wee learne, silently to : its no shame, to be ignorant of the things wee cannot know; nay, 'is Docta ignorantia, Clv. Wee are sick of our Mothers Disease: wee
would aine know; the Tree of Knowledge is goodly to behold, and because we thinke it to be matter of great wit, to finde out secrets; we venture too sarre, and to our oneurt; Exd. 20. God is faine to set-imits unto his people, that they presse not too neere the Mount. Secret things belong to God; we must heere fall downe in the worship of admiration, ever praising him in a mysterious ignorance. More especially in this great mystery of Christs Incarnation Who (saith Esay that Evangelicall Prophet) can declare his generation? Credere  jussu, discutere non peraissum, Ambrof. The Virgin Mary was over-shadowed by the Holy Ghost; so that God him∣selfe hath as it were veiled the truth; and therefore we may not, must not too earnestly pry into it. And yet wee must look into it, 'tis the mysterie of Christ, and therefore must be learned of every Christian, so farre as it is re∣vealed, Ioh. 17.3. In the Arke of the Covenant, the Cherubins had their faces towards the Mercy-seat, (the type of our Savi∣our) to point out unto us, that this is the mysterie the very An∣gols desire to stoop and looke into, 1 Pet 1.12. Unto whom it was re∣vealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the shings which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the Gspel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent downe from Heaven, which things the Angels desire to looks into: Wee must therefore make our initiation into the Schoole of Christ, by praying to him, hearing from him receiving his Sacraments. Oh hon (saith David) that hearest prayers, to thea shall all flesh come: as proper∣ly may we say, O thou that art manifested in the flesh, to thee shall all flesh come; Heb. 10.19, 20. Having there fore brethren holdnesse to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Isus by a now and living way, which e bath consecrated for us, through the voile that is to say, his Flesh; and having an High-Priest over the House of God, let us draw neere with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evill conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, &c. Lastly, if the incarnation of Christ be so great a myster, then it calls for revererce, in all the parts and pleces of our service; how precise were the Heathen, and to this day are, in their prepara∣tions
unto devotions? The Orator could say, Caste jubet lex adire sacra; how much more ought we? &c. Whosoever calleth on the Name of the Lord, let him dpart from iniqulty, 2 Tim. 2.19. Thirdly, this myster here, is not onely great, but godly; a my∣sterie of Godlinesse. The Devill had his mysteries, for to whom but him did the Heathen of old their sacrifices, their greater and lesser Elnsinea, to Bacchus, to Ceres, and the rest? 1 Cor. 10.20. But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. Antichrist hath his myteries also, the very word mysterium is written in his fore-head, there is not the least Ceremony among their many, but is very mysticall; their Durand hath given the world a book of them, and he calls it his Rationale. We also among our selves have our mysteries too and never so much as now, &c. too much of the Serpent, too little or nothing of the Dove Religion is made a stalking horse unto policie, &c. But the mysterie here, is a mysterie of godlinesse; the Gospel speaketh and preacheth piety, reveales Gods wonderful love unto us. Velatio deitat is revelatio charitutis, Iob. 3.16. God so loved the world, that e gave his onely begotten sonne; that whosoever belee∣veth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. This calls us to an holy and godly life: as Christ manifested him∣selfe in our flesh, so must we manifest Christ in our loves and conver∣sations: O use not this deare name Iesus, (not make wanton of his precious blood) but in your prayer and intercessions. A mysterie not onely signifies as a Ceremony, but operates and workes as a Ceremony doth not. The myster of iniquitie began to worke in the Apostles dayes; no a mysterie workes, as other Agents doe; it makes them in whom it workes, like it sele; wherefore as ours is the mysterie of godlinesse, so must ee but selves be godly; Christ must appeare in us; our light must shine; &c. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. For the grace of God that bringth salvation, hath appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this pre∣sent world, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Iesus Christ; Nay more yet, as our
mystere of godlinesse is great, so must wee increase in godlinesse every day more and more; we are mysticall enough, aboundant, yea, and manifest too in the wayes of flesh and blood; O let us be as skilfull, as full, and as open in the wayes of life and peace; Gal. 6.16. And as many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Fourthly, and lastly, the mysterie of godlinesse here is not onely great, but great without controverie; all that beleeve it, doe in ad∣miration acknowledge it. But did not Simon Magus oppose it? Were there not some, who both thought and taught, that Christ was not God; some, that he was not man? Were not the Pharisees, Sadduces, Herod, people, Elders, all against Christ? Were not his Apostles, when he was gone, evill intereated for his sake? Was not Peter drunke, and Panl a mad man with them? Was the Gospel of Christ any more with Leo, then with them, a fable? Are there not some a∣mong us, as with whom the profession of Christ is reproachfull? Un Christana, say the Italians, when they mean a foole, or a block∣hend; Even so it is with as, if not worse, saith Salvian: of what esteeme is Christ among Christians, when the very name is a∣counted base among many? But, saith the Apostle, We know in whom we have beleeved; and what is foolishnesse to the world, is the wisdome of God to the perfect: the proposition therefore is most true, Great is the my∣teni of godlinesse, without all controversie: Let us therefore make no controversie about it we have already too many in the world, at the best unprofitable; I would they were gone out of the world, and their authors more wise, or gone with them. Let us humbly and heartily submit to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and then when he which came once in great humility to redeeme us, shall come againe, he will take as with him, and we shall see him as he is, 1 Ioh. 2.28. And now little children abide in him, that when be shall appeare, we may have considence, and not be ashdmed before  at his comming. Soli Deo gloria.
THE REWARD OF IMITATION. MATTHEVV 19.28. And Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that yee which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Sonne of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, yee also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. THe words are a promise made by our Lord and Saviour to the Apostles, but extended to the Gentiles, and so to the whole family of God; for as they exclude Judas (though present when Christ spake) by reason of his apostasie; so they include us, though many Generations after, through many Generations, being beleevers. The scope is to infringe those argnments of discouragement in the wayes of God, which Satan and our owne corruption may and doe too often presse us with; What profit is there in serving God?
To strengthen us against this objection; Ye (saith Christ) who have followed me, &c. answerable whereunto is that of his; if any man serve me, him will my Father honour. Observe in the words. First, a president of Christian Imitation, Yee that have fol∣lowed mee. Secondly, a reward of that Imitation, Yee shall sit on twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Thirdly, the determinate terme, or time of this glory, , , in the renovation, and instauration of the whole world, when Christ in his Throne of glory shall declare himselfe to bee the Sonne of God. First, the president of Imitation. Yee that have followed me; Obser. Christ is the example, wee are all to follow; hee cryes unto us as unto Matthew, Come and fol∣low mee. But who is able to finde the way of a Serpent on a stone, Object. the way of a Ship on the Sea, or of an Eagle in the ayre? these (saith Salomon) are indiscernable; and are not the wayes of Christ much more unsearchable? His name is wonderfull, hee rides upon a Cherub, and makes darknesse his pavilion; If discernable, yet (saith the Apostle) hee inhabits Eternitie, and dwells in Light inaccessible. The workes of Christ are of two sorts; Answ. first, incommunicable; secondly, communicable. Incommunicable, As the work of his merit and mediation, these cannot be imitated; for, saith the Apostle, There is but one Me∣diator betweene God and man, the man Christ Jesus, no other name given, whereby we may be saved: They have not to doe with the Censer to offer incense, who have not to doe with the Altar to offer Sacrifice. Incommunicable also is the worke of Go∣vernment and influence into his Church, his dispensing the Spirit to the quickning of the Word, his subduing his ene∣mies, his gathering together his people; these are all per∣sonall Honours appertaining unto Christ, as our Head and Saviour. Communicable: The actions of Christ; whereof by his Grace
others have been, and may be made partakers; and these are ei∣ther extraordinary, or ordinary: Extraordinary, for ministry and service, not for sanctity, or salvation; such were the miraculous workes of the Apostles, by way of priviledge, and temporary Dispensation to them granted. Ordinary, and universall, belonging to all his Members, as praying, fasting, doing good, &c. Wee are then to follow Christ, not in all things he did, but in those things onely which he himselfe did, and hath commanded; he in the ordinary way of his obedience, must be the type and patterne of ours. Pirst, Active. Did Christ readily do what his Father commanded him? so must wee; when they sought unto him to make him King, he resused that honour, and wet unto a Mountaine: So ought we even to dye unto the honours and pleasures of this world: How can you beleeve (saith Christ) if yee seeke honour one of another? Was Christ meek, and gentle, and courteous? so ought we to be, and that be∣cause Christ was so. Learne of me (saith he, Math. 11.29.) for I am humble and meek: And Jo. 13.15. having washt his Disciples feet; I (saith he) have given you an example: not that we are to wash one the others feet, (for this was a custome onely of that age and place) but that wee are to be of like affections one to the other; all humble: Let the same minde be in you that was in Christ, Philip. 2.5. Secondly, Passive. Christ suffered, so must we; Hee suffered (saith the Apostle Peter) leaving us an example. If any man (saith Christ) will be my Disciple, let him deny himselfe, and take up his Crosse daily, and fol∣low me: So that in suffering, we are of Christs own Order, Chil∣dren of the Crosse; and if wee suffer with him, wee shall be glorified with him, Rom. 8.17. Heb. 12.1, 2. Christ not onely suffered, but in suffering, submitted unto his Fathers will; Not my will, but thine bee done; So was ee as a Lambe before the shearer, dmbe. Thus ought wee to doe in all our sufferings: Si filius quante
magis servuns, Bern. So shall wee possesse our selves in an holy silence. Lastly, Christ being to bid the world sarewell, prayes for his enemies, Father forgive them, they know not what they doe: Thus ought we, not onely to forgive, but also to intreat God, that hee also would forgive them that hate, or hurt us. We must follow Christ through the whole walke of his morall obedience; his whole life was a living, and shining, and exem∣plary Precept; a visible Commentary on the Law of God, Et Nyssen. Christianitie is nothing else then an imitation of our Maker. Wee must bee holy a hee is holy, not in respect of equality, but quality; Tam non tantum, we must bee as truly and sincerely holy, following him as Peter, E∣longinque, a farre off, or as a little Childe his Father; Non passibus equis, so fast as wee can; saying, as the Church in one of her Songs of Love, Draw us, and wee will runne after thee. The Reasons. First, this is one of the ends why Christ came into the World; for first, hee came to Redeeme us, and then to sanctifie us. This is hee (saith Saint John) that came by water and blood; by blood, to take away the guilt; by water, to take away the filth of sinne. Secondly, without this Imitation of Christ, no sanctification; for we are sanctified when wee are renewed unto God, re-indued with the Image of God, whereunto we were at first created. Now in an Image there are these two things: First, the similitude of one thing to another. Secondly, a deduction, derivation, or impression thereof on some other; from which againe wee take a third, a fourth, &c. in want of which we alwayes run to the Originall, the prototype. Now as for the Image of God; its holineffe, Colos. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him. This in our first Creation did gloriously shine in our faces; in Adam wee lost it; and therefore wee must all to God a∣gaine for it.
But this cannot be, wee cannot come so neere him, as to looke into him, for he is a consuming fire, hee dwells in light inaccessible, 1 Tim. 6.16. Who onely hath immortality, dwelling in the light, which no man can approach unto, whom no man hath seene, nor can see. You see, if wee could come neere him, yet wee cannot see him, for he is invisible: No man  see him and live; All have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, Rom 3.23. So that wee may as easily see that which is invisible, and at∣taine that which is unapproachable, as of our selves to become holy againe, unlesse the Lord shall please, through some veile, to exhibit his Image unto us; or through some Glasse, shall make the same to shine upon us: wee shall live and dye without it, strangers from the life of God. Behold, the Sonne of God is made the Sonne of man, God made manifest in the flesh, 1 Tim. 3.16. So that through his hu∣mane Nature, as through a veile, wee have accesse to the holiest of all: Hee is the Image of the invisible God, Colos. 1.15. and by him are wee made the Sonnes of God, Joh. 1.12. Partakers of the Divine Nature, 1 Pet. 4. and 2 Cor. 3.18. Wee all with open face, beholding as in a glasse the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: So that as Christ is the Image of his Father, Heb. 1.3. so are we the Image of God; but with this difference, Christ us imago equa∣litatis, Christianus imitationis; As the Image of an Emperour (saith Augustine) is, aliter in nummo, aliter in filio; so the Image of God is, aliter in Christo, aliter in Christiano. The renewed are the Image of God, Non quantum ad naturalia (as the Schooles teach) though therein us yet be some remaines of our lost glory; but as renewed by Christ. Thirdly, the quality of the mysticall body, where of Christ is the head and Saviour, requires this imitation; hee is our head, Heb. 2.10, 11. For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sonnes unto glory, to make the Captaine of their salvation perfect through sufferings; For both hee that sanctifieth, and they who are sanctified, are all one; for which cause hee is not ashamed to call them Brethren, and Heb. 4.15, &c.
Fourthly, Christ is the summe of all Scriptures, and therefore necessarily the rule of all holinesse: as the Apostles did, so must wee, preach nothing but Jesus Christ. How too blame are those, 1 Vse. who are so farre from following Christ, that they follow man, any man, the worst, the most, and thinke it their safest way. But if great men, if men in Autho∣ritie doe so, and so, then all is out of doubt. Their Religion is to them as their Coyne; all goes for Currant, that is stamped with Authoritie, and allowance of the State. Nay, what phan∣tasticall Spirit so idle and ridioulous, that hath not many Disci∣ples? What jugling Impostor so despicable, and infamous, that hath not many followers? What rebellious Sonne of Belial, or Atheisticall Ruffler so execrable and odious, that hath not many observers? What Ignatian Viper, or devillish Jesuite, Monochus Damonnicus, so prodigiously wicked, so trayterously audacious, that hath not many favourers and attendants? Habet & Dio∣genes suos parasitas, the Cynick is not without his approvers, and admirers; whilest Christ, the Sonne of the living God, sits alone, like a Pellican in the Wildernesse, or a Sparrow on the house top. But the men are good, &c. Yet are they but men: and all men are Lyars; may both de∣ceive, and be deceived. Peter was a good man, yet once dissem∣bled: so was Barnabas, yet snatcht away by example, into the like dissimulation. You see in the Scripture, the failings of the Saints to hang on record; not that God either delights to see them, or others to gaze on them, for he hath cast them all behind his back, and blotted them out of the Booke of his Remembrance; but that the Apostles admonition might ever be thought on, Let him that standeth take heed lest he fall: Cavenda tempestates flenda naufra∣gia, Aug. And that wee might not thinke it safe to follow good men, no, not the best men in all things, nor would good men have us so to doe; Follow me (saith Paul) as I follow Christ, 1 Cor. 12.1. Some there are so farre from following Christ, that they goe before him: These are they that despise Government, and speake evill of things they understand not.
Others worse yet, are so farre from following Christ, that they runne from him; called after, they will not returne: having nothing to plead for themselves, they make their Will their Master, and so have as many Lords over them, as Affections in them: all under the Curse of Cha, a slave to their slaves; one to his Pleasure, another to his Profit, a third to his Vani∣tie, &c. If God move by his Spirit, that is resisted; if hee allure by his Mercies, they are abused; if threatned by Judgements, they are neglected; if called by Ministers, they are reviled, &c. Oh, when men thus pull away their shoulders from Christs Yoake, when they turne their back on God, set up mounds against the Gospel, Non-plus Gods mercies; this is an heavie signe, that God hath left them unto themselves, a very plague of plagues: See Psal. 81.11, 12, &c. What remaines, but that wee send them to the Judge with this Scrowle on their fore-heads, Domine noluerunt incantari? Some there are who follow Christ, but not constantly: Sequnn∣tur sed non assequuntu, Bern. With Orpha, they goe a little way, and then returne into their owne Countrey. Set wee the example of Christ before us, 2 Ʋse. in all the things wee doe: If the thing be unlawfull, and yet wee finde our Lusts swaying us that way, aske wee this question; Would Christ have done this, or doth hee allow it? &c. If the thing being both lawfull and expedient, yet if not sutable to our person, wee must here respect Christs allowance; in all other things, wee must re∣flect on his example. 1 John 2.6. He that saith he is in Christ, ought to walke as he hath walked. First, Religiously: Beginning all things with God, sanctifying every Creature and every Ordinance with prayer; and this longer or shorter, as the occasions are more or lesse serious, do∣ing all things by the warrant of the Word; contemning our owne will, that wee may doe our Fathers: chusing rather to lose life then our obedience, as if there were but one will betweene God and us; doing all things for God, and reserring all unto his glory.
Secondly, Christ walked holily, so must wee, for without holi∣nesse noe shall see the Lord: if wee live like monsters, Christ will never owne us for his members. Thirdly, Christ walked fruitfully in his Calling, Acts 10. Hee went about doing good: hee watched and apprehended all occasi∣ons of being helpfull unto others, to their soules, to their bodies. Thus should wee spend our dayes, and not as the most doe, who bring the day to an end without the performance of any thing, the remembrance whereof may comfort them at night; nay, doing things hurtfull both to themselves and others, and thus continually. Thus account: So much time spent in idle Games, so much in unprofitable Companie, which might have beene spent in hearing, reading, praying, meduation, exercise of hu∣miliation for my soules health, or in workes of mercie, for the benefit of my afflicted Brother; did ever my Lord and Saviour thus walke, thus converse? Fourthly, Christ walked justly towards man; never deceived any by thought, word, or deed: There was no guile found in his mouth. Never covetousnesse entred his heart; hee gave every man his due: An admirable patterne of Civill Righteous∣nesse. This must wee follow, wee must walke as hee walked, &c. Fifthly, Christ walked in the Light; and this, a three-fold Light: first, in the puritie of his Nature; there was no darke∣nesse in him at all; , none at all: in his minde, no darke∣nesse of ignorance; in his will and affections, no darkenesse of disorder: secondly, in the light and puritie of holy conversation; hee never committed any workes of darkenesse: thirdly, in com∣munion and fellowship with his Father, who dwells in Light in∣accessible. Thus must wee walke. First, full of the Rayes of spirituall understanding; the Word of God not onely dwelling in our heads, but in our hearts; and in both, , richly. Secondly, acting that Spirituall life, in our lives and conversation walking as Children of the Light, and of the Day: Qui male agit odit lucem.
Thirdly, Embracing communion with our God, and rejoy∣cing therein, as also in the place and meanes of his presence. Though worldly men are then onely merry, when the thoughts of God are banished their hearts, yet are the Saints of God no longer well, then in his presence. 1 John 1.7. If wee walke in the Light, as he is in the Light, wee have fellowship one with another, and the blond of Jesus Christ his Sonne cleanseth us from all sinne. Ye that have followed Christ: you that have framed your lives according to his example; you, who together with him, are of the same minde; those are they that follow the Lambt, whither soever he goes. Thus you have the Saints; and in them their motion: but what of these? You (saith Christ) shall sit on twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Here is their Quies. The degrees here are many; wee shall arise with them, in our discourse, according to their order. First, They shall sit. Wee are here full of labour, subject to many changes, alterations, and discontentments. Man (saith Iob) shooteth forth like a Flower, and is cut downe, he va∣nisheth away as a Shadow, and never continueth in one stay: But a day is comming, wherein wee shall rest from all our labours. Revel. 14. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, they rest from their labours: wherein wee shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sunne light on us, or any heat, Revel. 7.16. Wherein God shall wipe away all teares from our eyes, Revel. 21.4. You see in nature, all things labour to attaine their last perfection: so our bodyes here, subject to mutabilitie, to Diseases, the Stone, the Gout, Feavers, by which Death entring within our Walls, surprizeth the Castle of our hearts; and thus are wee still in motion, to our last Exit, alwayes tending to perfection: whither when wee come, and arrive up above Sunne, Moone, and Starres, wee shall sit downe with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the Kingdome of Heaven.
The Needle touched by the Load-stone, never gives over his trembling motion, till it stand against the North Pole, till it come to its Point: so wee, having once touched Christ, the true Load-stone of our Soules, by faith, neither are, nor can be at rest, till wee rest not onely in him, but with him; Then shall our bodyes be immutable; then shall wee sit downe and rest for ever. Be of good comfort, your labours in E∣gypt, your travailes in the Wildernesse shall not last for ever; a day of rest is comming. In the meane time, let us take the advice and counsell the Apostle Peter gives, Acts 1.19. Repent, and turne unto the Lord, that your sinnes may be done away, when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Thus the followers of Christ shall one day sit, and rest them. It followeth; Secondly, They shall sit on Thrones. What these Thrones are, is no lesse unprofitable, then curious to enquire: its like they shall be of the Aire, because (saith the Apostle) wee shall meet the Lord in the Aire; and if conforme to that of our Saviour, it must be so: for he shall ride in the Aire, and make the Clouds his Chariot, Revel. 14.14. I looked, and behold a white Cloud, and upon the Cloud one sate like unto the Sonne of man, &c. But whatsoever these Thrones are, they promise two things, sweetest Rest, and greatest State. Sweetest Rest, and tranquilitie, full acquiescence, not onely to their bodies (as you have heard) but to their soules. Their bodies shall be free from the paine of travaile, and the mu∣tabilitie of corruption: their soules shall be free from the waves of trouble, and the conflicts of passion: no feare, no griefe, no wrath, no desire, nor carnall affection, shall any way disturbe the quietnesse of their sweet Repose; they shall be, as satisfied with the fulnesse of the Lord, so also secured by the omnipotencie of his greatnesse. And as they shall enjoy sweetest Ease, so shall they have grea∣test State: for as to sit, speakes Rest; so to sit in the presence of God, speakes Greatnesse and Dignitie; and this infinite, and most incomparable.
But why twelve Thrones? Chrysostome and his followers, confining the words to the Apostle, makes the soule of every Christian to be a Throne, or place of residence, thus; They that receive the words of John, are the throne of John; they that receive the words of Peter, are the throne of Peter, &c. But surely the words extend farther, and have respect to CHRISTS Tribunall, where all the Elect have their se∣verall places, and sit at Table with him in the Kingdome of Heaven. Augustine thinkes the number twelve therefore to bee here used, because of the perfection of it, and so falls on a Platoni∣call mysterie. But not to trouble you with curiosities, the certaine num∣ber of twelve, is here put for an incertaine, a finite, for an in∣finite; so that by twelve Thrones, wee are to understand an universality of Thrones, provided for the Saints in the high∣est places; For, saith Christ, in my Fathers House are many Mansions. Thirdly, On those Thrones they shall sit and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. They shall judge. There is a judgement of power and authoritie, and that be∣longs to God the Father, for hee is Iudge of the whole earthy: There is a judgement of honour, and delegates, that belongs to Christ, as hee is man; for the Father hath given all judge∣ment to the Sonne: There is a judgement of assession, and wit∣nesse of consent and allowance, and this belongs to the whole company of Gods Elect. They shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. All Israel, not exempting Levi; yea, not onely all Israel, but all the world, and all the creatures therein, though never so eminent and sublime in glory, 1 Cor. 6.23. Know you not, that the Saints shall judge the World? Yea, Angels, Devils. And how? as members of the mysticall body, whereof Christ is the head and Saviour. Christ and his Church are one, and there∣fore whatsoever is given to him, is also given to her. Christ
the primary Judge shall passe the Sentence, and the Saints shall approve it, and rejoyce therein; they shall triumph in the truth of divine Justice, with the sweetest notes of praise and jubilation. See here the glory and honour of Gods people, their ad∣vancement and super-exaltation above the Starres of the mor∣ning, they are Citizens of Heaven. When God shall come to judge the world, thousand thousands of Angels shall come with him; but yet as his ministers and servants: the Saints shall fit with him, as his familiars and associates, upon Thrones, and that ever Thrones, and all the glorious hoast of his noblest creatures; their judgement (as the Schooles distinguish) is not condem∣nationis sed manifestationis, they condemne none, onely they shew forth the praise and glory of God, in the justice of the Sentence on them whom Christ condemnes. Here then is ground of support to all the people of God; you are now troubled and molested by the Devill and his agents, malicious adversaries, you groane under unjust Censures and accusations; bee content, a day is comming wherein the Saints shall judge both the evill angels, the Devils, and all their malicious instruments. Let our care be in the meane time, so to live and converse here, as to be worthy of that honour then; farre bee it from them that are to judge the world, so to live, as to justifie the world by their prophane and impure conversation. Thus they that follow Christ, shall sit on twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. But when? In the regeneration, when the sonne of man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory: Wherein you have the determinate time of Glory. Where observe, First, A Position, in the regeneration: Secondly, an Expo∣sition, that regeneration wherein Christ shall sit in the Throne of his Glory. The Position, The regeneration, that is, the Resurrection, or otherwise the
redemption of our bodies. A time is comming wherein all creatures shall be as it were new borne. Mortality shall be swal∣lowed up of life, and this corruptible shall put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. Our bodies now subject to many infirmities, to hun∣ger, nakednesse, thirst, cold, many diseases, dull and heavie in the service of God, shall then bee immortall, and therefore needing no bodily refreshments: immortality shall chuse death out of nature, and command sleepe from the eyes; then shall our bodies have strength to performe their owne actions: Were such an Elixar to be bought, your Chymicks talke of, as would free us from all diseases, and repaire the ruines of old age, who would not give all hee hath to have it? and such an one there is in the hands of God, an Elixar of immor∣talitie. 'Tis better (saith Christ, Matth. 18.8.) for a man to enter into life, hurt and maymed, then having two hands, two feet, and so all parts intire, to be cast into hell fire: True it is, were it pos∣sible; but of this we may be sure, we cannot goe to heaven, ei∣ther imperfect, or without glory. Particularly. First, wee shall have all the parts of our bodies perfect, and intire, though now maymed or deformed, yet than wee shall be perfect. 1. Because then all things shall be reduced to their former estate of beauty and perfection, that namely the body had in its first creation. The Heavens (saith the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.21.) must containe Christ, till all things be restored. 2. 'Tis said, Revel. 21.4. There shall be no more death; If no more death to the whole man, (saith Tertullian) then no more death to any part of man. It's better (saith Christ, Mat. 18.) for a man to goe halt, Object. or maymed into Heaven then, &c. Understand Christ, Ex hypothesi, not that any shall goe to heaven maimed, but that if possible, i were better so to doe, then to goe to hell with all the glory of the world. Neither doth Christ there speake of the body, but of the soule, and the conclusion would be this; that it is farre better for a man to lose any, or all his limbes, for the saving of his
soule, then to lose his soule, and so to goe into hell with all his members. Feare not then to lose a legge, or an arme, or an eye for Christ, every member then shall bee restored againe. Hast thou lost any member for Christ, or otherwise? trouble not thy selfe; remember, he that gave Malcus his eare againe, who was his enemy, will much more restore to thee thy parts who act his friend. Secondly, our bodies shall not onely be intire, but beautifull and lovely, though now deformed; much more, when stained with the pale and gastly colours of death; yet then we shall be exceeding faire, farre beyond the most exquisite beauty of any that lived ever since Adam, for wee shall then be as Adam in his innocencie, on whose beauty and splendour the beasts of the field stood gazing. Salomons Temple was full of beauty and glory; the second Temple, the former being destroyed by the Chaldeans, was howsoever faire, yet farre short of the former, in re∣spect of beauty; but our bodies in that Day, shall bee restored to greater beautie and lovelinesse then ever they had. O what paines doe the crooked take, to make their bodies streight, or at least to appare so, or not so crooked as they are? How farre send they for complexion, and how deare doe they buy it? and this at last makes them more deformed; per∣fect beauty is not to bee had, till the Glorious morning of the Resurrection; and the way to have it then, is to bee Reli∣gious now. Thirdly, our bodies shall bee full of splendour; howsoever now darke and obscure, yet then they shall bee as so many shining Starres, Dan. 12.3. They shall shine as the Sunne in the Kingdome of their Father, Matth. 13.43. Moses returning from God, after his fortie dayes conference with him, was so full of shining Glory in his face, by the Reflection of the Glory of GOD, that the people could not behold him: How full of Glory shall our bodies bee, when wee shall abide with God, not fortie dayes onely, but for ever and ever?
Fourthly, our bodies shall be immutable, and immortall, sub∣ject to no change, not needing the Elements, or Elementary food. God doth with us, as the Goldsmith with his Gold or Silver, first melts our bodies by death, and then makes us up againe to a more glorious forme, as Vessels of Honour to stand before him in his Temple for ever. A sweet meditation, espe∣cially in the time of sicknesse, and in the houre of death, against the crawling wormes, and the place of silence. I know (saith Iob) that my Redeemer liveth, and that hee shall stand at the lat∣ter day upon the Earth, and though after my skin, Wormes de∣stroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my selfe, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reines be consumed within me, Iob 19.25, 26, 27. O what meanes doe many use, to keepe themselves alie, yea, to preserve the bodies of their friends, being dead, from putrifaction, they imbalme them in Spices, and lay them up in Marble, yet all will not do, the bodies of Kings and Queens must yeeld to rottennesse, onely a good life makes our bodies immortall. Fifthly, Our bodies shall bee spirituall: 'Tis sowne (saith the Apostle) a naturall body, 'tis raised a spirituall body; For then they shall bee sustained by the Spirit without meat and drinke; not as Moses on the Mount for fortie dayes onely, but for ever and ever; and whereas now the flesh lusteth against the Spirit; there being a Law in the mem∣bers, rebelling against the law of the minde; Then the bo∣dy shall bee subject to the Spirit, and in all things attend on him. Sixtly and lastly, This body (saith the Apostle) is sowne in weakenesse, it riseth in power; whereas now wee are weary of kneeling in prayer, weary of Prayer it selfe; Insomuch that Aaron and Hur must attend Moses, to hold up his inseebled hands; but then shall our bodies bee able to performe their owne actions, without desatigation; they shall then bee able to move themselves any way with ease, upwards, downwards, backwards, forwards, more easily then now to lift up an hand; and hee shall change our vile bodies, and make them like
unto his glorious body, according to his mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himselfe. Yea, not onely man, but the Heavens and the Earth, shall in that day bee as it were new borne. Behold (saith God) I create a new Heaven and a new Earth; So it is likewise in 2 Pet. 3. Whereas the Heavens now give raine and snow, &c. then they shall exhibit Christ, Matth. 26.64. Hereafter shall yee see the sonne of man sitting on the right hand of power, and comming in the clouds of Heaven: Whereas the Heavens are now ever whirling, and wheeling about, alwayes winding up the thread of mans life, then they shall stand fast for ever; the Heavens shall rest from their motion, and receive a greater perfection of brightnesse and claritie: The ayre shall be purged from ob∣scurity; the fire from consuming quality, the water from pu∣trifaction, the earth from weeds and all hurtfull creatures, yea from barrennesse, she shall bring forth as before the Fall, with∣out labour and Husbandry. And all this for the comfort of the Saints, who are to passe this way into Heaven, in their long white Robes, as Princes through some Gallerie, into their Chambers of Presence. Then this Earth, howsoever now a Valley of Teares, shall be unto us a Doore of Hope in the Valley of Achor. The wicked shall see this, and by it, as through a Crevise, the glory of Hea∣ven, but themselves shut out of both. But when shall this regeneration of the Creatures be? When the Sonne of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory. First, Christ shall come to judge the quick and dead: so it is said, Acts 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the peo∣ple, and to testifie, that it is hee which was ordained of God, to be the Judge of quick and dead. So againe in the 17. Chapter, verse 31. Because he hath appointed a day in the which hee will judge the world in righteousnesse, by that man whom he hath or∣dained, whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that hee hath raysed him from the dead. And so wee beleeve. Hee knowes all, even our most secret thoughts: Hell and destruction (saith Salomon) are before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the sonnes of men? All things are naked
and broken up before him; and as hee knowes all, so hee is able to punish, and that not the body onely; hee can cast both body and soule into Hell. Revel. 20. Whosoever was not found written in the Booke of the Lambe, was cast into the Lake of fire. First, this should teach us feare and trembling; Knowing the terrors of the Lord (saith the Apostle Paul) wee perswade men. And (saith the Apostle Peter) if yee call him Father, who without respect of persons judgeth every man according to his workes, passe the time of your sojourning here in feare, 1 Peter 1.17. Secondly, learne from hence to looke to your Packes: see what Wares you carry with you; for in that Day, all must be opened. Thirdly, learne hence to agree with your adversarie while you are in the way. If you were to dye to morrow, what would you doe to day, how spend your time? And yet you may dye sooner: Take heed, At the Tree falleth, there it lyes. Fourthly, Art thou injured, slandered, mifused any way? Remember, a Day is comming, wherein all must stand at Christs Tribunall. You (saith Corah, with his Complices, unto Moses and Aaron) you take too much upon you, Numb. 16. And what doth Moses answer? To morrow (saith hee) the Lord shall shew who are his. And 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. But with me it is a very small thing, that I shon'd be judged of you, or of mans judgement; yea, I judge not mine owne selfe, for I know nothing by my selfe: yet am I not hereby justified; but he that judgeth me, is the Lord. Therefore judge nothing before the time, untill the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darknesse, and will make manifest the coun∣sels of the heart; and then shall every man have prayse of God. Fifthly, Art thou afraid to appeare before the Judge? Remember, it is thy Saviour th dyed for thee. If Pharaohs Butler feared not to got before him, because Joseph had assu∣red
him of Libertie; how comfortably then are wee to ap∣peare before the Judge, being alreadie assured, all shall goe well with us? Hee is our Judge, who is our Saviour, and Me∣diatour: a most comfortable Meditation. I am your Brother (saith Joseph unto his Brethren) I am your Brother Joseph: This could not but comfort them, howsoever conscious of their injuries done him. So it is here. Sixthly, It Christ must be our Judge; how warily then, and holily, are wee to live now, that wee may not be ashamed at his Comming? Peter being on the Seas, and seeing his Master on the yonder shoare, girds his Coat about him: One would thinke, hee should rather have cast his Coat from him: No, no, hee was to appeare before his Master, and hee would ap∣peare comely. 2 Cor. 5.10. For wee must all appeare before the Iudgement-Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that hea hath done, whether it be good or bad. Seventhly, Happie are all they, that are gone out of them∣selves into Christ: for, Rom. 8.1. There is therefore now no con∣demnation to them which are in Christlesus, who walke not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Observe further: As Christ shall come to judge the world; so being come, hee shall sit in the Throne of his glory. Dun. 7.9, 14. I behold, and lee are like the Some of Man  wh the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of dayes, and they brought him neere be∣fore him; and there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdome, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve hi; his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not passe away, and his Kingdome that, which shall not bee destroyed. Match 34.30. And then shall appeare the figne of the Sonne of Ma in Heaven. What this figne is, me thinkes may be ga∣thered from verse the 27. As the Lightning commeth from the East and passeth to the West, so shall the comming of the Sonne of Man be M, saith Christ  here is Christ and there is Christ  shall be the signe of
my comming, even the bright and splendour of my Body; obscuring all other Lights, and awakening all the World. That it shall be this, is manifest, Revel. 21.23. And the Citie had no need of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lambe is the light thereof. If wee tell you of Christs Glory at his Transsiguration in the Mount, you will tell us of that of Moses comming from his fortie dayes conference with the Lord. But the difference is grear. First, the glory of Moses was onely in his face; that of Christ all over his Body: secondly, when Moses veyled his face, none could see his beautle; but that of Christ appeared through his garments. Thirdly, the glory of Moses made the people afraid; but that of Christ was amiable, and lovely: Bonum est, esse hit, said they that were with him. Fourthly, Moses could not communicate his glory unto any, but Christ (saith the Apostle) shall make our bodyes like unto his glorious Body. Since the Glory of Christ was such at his Transfiguration, what will his Glory be in that Day, when hee shall sit in his Throne? Hee came in the forme of a servant, was a man of serrowes, knowning infirmities; Our sinnes, like continuall droppings of water, putting out the Lumpe of his life. But when hee comes againe, O what beauty, what resplendant Majesty! But what of all this? In that day, they that have followed Christ, shall sit on twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Observe, First, the Saints shall partake of CHRISTS GLORY. Secondly, They and none but they. Thirdly, Nor they, till then. First, the Saints shall partake of Christs Glory. God hath said it, and you know hee is faithfull who hath promised; All his promiser are Ye, and Amer.
See here what a good Master we serve. The World payes, his followers with trouble and carefulnesse, the Flesh payes her followers with corruption and filthinesse, the Devill his with despaire and wreednesse; but Christ his with Glory, and Blessednesse. To hasten your desires homeward, and to sweeten your affections by the way; with Moses, looke up to the recompence of Reward; God gives you leave so to doe. Secondly, as the Saints shall partake of Christs Glory, so none but they shall partake thereof, Psal. 50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. So Mal. 3.17, 18. And they shall bee mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jawels, and I will spare them as a man spareth his owne sonne that serveth him; then shall yee returns and discerne betweene the righteous and the wicked; betweene him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. Againe, Mal. 4.2, 3. But unto you that feare my Name, shall the Sonne of Righteousnesse arise, with healing in his wings, and yee shall goe forth and grow as Calues of the stall, and yee shall tread downe the wicked, for they shall bee as ashes under the soles of your feet; in that day I shall doe this, saith the Lord of Hosts. This point, like the Red Sea, opens it selfe for the passage of Gods people into Heaven, and then closeth againe on the un∣godly, to their destruction. You that live prophanely, &c. you are lost men, you are of the forlorne hope; for 1. Joh. 3.2, 3. Beloved, now are wee the Sonnes of God, and it doth not yet ap∣peare what wee shall bee; but wee know, that when hee shall ap∣peare, wee shall bee like him; for wee shall see him as hee is, and every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himselfe, even as hee is pure. Gather hence a necessity of a godly life; if wee will be happy, wee must be holy; Revel. 22.14. Blessed are they that doe his Commandements, that they may have a right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City. This also the
Glory promised and expected calls for. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having there∣fore these promises, dearely beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filt hinesse of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holinesse in the feare of God. Alexander, invited to a Race with Plebeians, could an∣swer. That Kings ought not to run but with Kings: So nei∣ther Christians, but with Christians. Thirdly, as the followers of Christ shall bee partakers of Christs Glory, and they onely, so they onely in the Regeneration, when Christ shall come in his glory, not till then, that is the day of our Redemption. First, therefore, wee are to long and look out for this Day. Job 14.14. If a man dye, shall he live againe? All the dayes of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come. Rom. 8.22, 23. For wee know, that the whole Creation groaneth and tra∣velleth in paine together, untill now; and not-onely they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even wee our selves groane within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our body. Then is our Iubile; the Trumpet having sounded, and liberty proclaimed, wee may enter into our possessions. Secondly, wee are to comfort our selves against all troubles in assurance and expectation of that Day, Colos. 3.2, 3, 4. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the Earth, for yee are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God; when Christ who is our life shall appeare, then shall wee appeare with him in glory. Recordatione temporum, meliorum spero, said a Roman, beholding the rubbish of old Marble, the ruines of ancient building. But looke forward to the day comming, and the glory thereof: me thinkes this should much comfort us; surely  would, if wee did beleeve. How joyfull will it be to meet with our Saviour in that day, when the thought of it is so refreshing? Rabboni, saith Mary unto Christ, when her eyes were opened to see her Savicur, whom before shee supposed to be the Gardner: as if shee should have said; What, have I found thee, whom I have so desired, so longed for? If thus it were with Mary
then; How exuberant beyond expression, yea imagina∣tion great, shall our joy in that Day bee, when wee shall sit on Thrones with CHRIST, and all partake of his Glory? Thirdly, wee are in the meane time to waite on, in the use of all holy meanes, Heb. 10.36. For yee have need of patience, that after yee have done the will of God, yee might receive the promise; for yet a little while, and hee that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. 1 Ioh. 2.28. And now little chil∣dren, abide in him, that when hee shall appeare, wee may have confidence, and not bee ashamed before him at his com∣ming. Amen. Soli Deo Gloria. FINIS.
