H2081 E475_5 99864782 162467
HIS MAJESTIES Going from the Isle of WIGHT AND The Answer of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common councell, to the Lord Fairfax his Letter to the City of LONDON. ALSO, A Letter from the Lord Generall Fairfax, concerning the Citizens of London that have guarded the Parliament, and the Head-quarters now at St. Iames, the Mewes, and other places about the City. WITH The Armies Appeal from the Parliament to the Kingdom, and a Letter from the Parliament to the Lord Gene∣rall. A full Relation touching Col. Hamond, and other passages in the Isle of WIGHT. THe Originall Papers were read, and this is published for generall satisfaction to the Kingdom. London, Printed for Richard Robinson, 1648.
A LETTER From the Isle of WIGHT Concerning the ARMY. MUnday Nov. 27. comes a letter to the Parlia∣ment from Col. Hamond (Governour of the Isle of Wight) and in it another inclosed from the Lord Gen. commanding him to come to the head quarters; as also an intimation that some Orders were given to Col. Ewers, to be Goxernour of Carisbrook ca∣stle, and for securing the person of the King. After the Parl. had debated this businesse, they voted that Col. Hamond should still continue Governour of the Isle of Wight; and ordered that a letter from the House
should be sent to the Lo: Generall to acquaint him with these Votes, and to desire him to countermand his Letter, for calling Col. Hamond to attend at the Head-quarters, in regard they thought him fit to con∣tinue his command in the Isle of Wight. Col. Hamond conceives himself to ow immediate obedience to the Lo: Gen. orders, for that the Parlia∣ment had made him commander in chief of all the for∣ces, &c. and his power was derived by Commission by his Excellency, and thereupon leaves the command of that Island to Col. Ewers, and the rather for that Col. Hamond was informed that Col. Ewers had pow∣er in case of refusall to force the command of that I∣sland, which might upon the offer of the least resist∣ance occasion a very great trouble and disturbance in the Kingdom, but whether Col. Ewers, or Major Rolfe hath the present ustody of the person of the King, was not yet known. The Commissioners are comming away and it is said that on Munday last which was the last day of the Treaty, his Majesty was at liberty, and the Commissi∣oners solemnly kissed his Majesties hand, and took their leaves. The 28 of November went from London to the head∣quarters at Winsor, divers of the City agents and pro∣pound that the Generall engagement of the people might be hastned in saying the remonstrance lately presented to the house give not sufficient satisfaction desiring no time might be lost in the going on in that great work, which was taken into consideration by the Gen. Councell. Major Cromwell which brought Col. Hamonds
letter before spoken of, and was imployed to carry un∣to him the Votes of the House for Col. Hamond to continue his command in the Isle of Wight, returned by Windsor thinking that the said Col. might be come thither by that time, and having not the Lord Genera passe he was one night deteined at Windso, and this day taking his journey towards the Isle of Wight, he met about Faraham Col. Hamond, comming towards the Head-quarters and with him Col. Ewers, and divers other Officers then Major Cromwell delivered the let∣ters and votes of both Houser of Parliament for Col. Hamonds stay in the Isle of Wight, to which he said he would give obedience and hastned to return back again to his former charge but some of those with him. The 30. of Nov. the Generall Councell of the Army passed a Declaration, shewing that they had made their applications to the present House of Commons for a∣voiding of dangers, and setling the kingdom in peace & righteousnesse, with equall constitutions of Parl. to bee ratified by an Agreement and Subscription of the peo∣ple; but they find their Remonstrance wholly rejected, and the consideration put off till there should bee no place at all left for it: yet do they not presume that the things propounded by them, must be considered, save for the Reason, Justice, and publike concernment there∣of. And seeing the prevailing part of the House wilfully shut their eyes, and stop their ears against any thing of Light or Reason, they find no place left for any chari∣table hopes concerning their errour in such evil wayes. Neverthelesse, the Army assume not a standing power acknowledging that lyes most properly in those whom the people doth chuse, and trust to judge for them.
But considering that such power where it is, is com∣mitted but in trust, and that neither this, nor any other people, did ever give up their naturall capacities of common Sence or Reason, as to the ends and Innda∣mentals of that trust, and that as to the breach of such trust, there is no higher formal power of man in being to appeal unto for judgment, so as we cannot but ex∣ercise that common Judgment which in our naturall capacity is left to us. And though in smaller failers of such trust, which might be born without hazard of de∣struction to that Interest and those people, for which especially the trust is, or where the Trustees were of an indifferent equall constitution, in reference to the whole, or where we had an orderly and open way left for a just succession of another formall and proper Judicature to be apealed unto in due time; we should not oppose or hold forth our private judgments to the least disturbance of that orderly and peaceable course of judgment so establisht; yet we are so fully convin∣ced of the destructivenesse of those evils we have de∣clared against, as that we dare with confidence apeale to the common judgments of indifferent and uncor∣rupted men. The Army do therefore desire and propound. 1 That the Majory of the Parliament would be sensi∣ble of the evill and destructivenesse of their late way, & apply themselves to the speedy executing of Iustice, with the righting and easing of the distressed people. 2 That so many of them as are toucht with a sence of these things, would by protestation acquit themselves of breach of trust and withdraw from that persist in the guilt thereof.
A Letter sent from the Lord Gen. Fairfax, to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common-councell of the Ci∣ty of London. My Lord and Gentlemen, BEing upon an immediate advance with the Army to∣wards London, we thought good hereby to give you no∣tice thereof. For the ground and necessity loading us re∣unto we refer you to our late Remonstrance, and to our la∣ter Declaration concerning the same. We have onely this ther to add, That as we are for from the least thought of plunder or other wrong to your City, or any the places ad∣joyning which we hope your former experience of us will give you cause enough to credit us) so for the better pre∣vention of any disorder in the Souldiery, or of any abuse or inconvenience to the Inhabitants in the quartering of the souldiery at private houses, we earnestly desire. That you would take a present course for the supply of Money to pay these forces, while we shall be necessitated to stay there; upon which we assure you, we shall so dispose of them into great and void houses about the City as much as may be possible, as that few or none of the Inhabitants shall be troubled with quartering of any soldiers at all: And for the pr∣pose, we defire that 40000. li. may be forthwith provided upon these curity of your arrears, to be ready to be paid out to the Forces to morrow night if possible: And we shall be ready to receive from you any intimations for the further prevention of hurt or inconveniences to the City in this businesse, I remain Your most assured friend and servant, T. FAIRFAX. Windsor 0. Nov. 1648.
The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common-councell sate all night in debate of the B. Gen. letter to the City, and came to this result, viz. That the money should be paid forthwith, and a Committee was chosen to carry a letter to the L. Gen. to this essect. May it please your Excellency, THe Lord Mairr, Aldermen, and Common councell of the City of London, have debated in Common councell your Lordships letter of the 30. Nov. last, & have agreed that the 40000. li. required for the Army (to whom is at least 80000. li. due from the City) shall be paid this pre∣sent Saturday, or the greatest part thereof, desiring that no violence or iniury be done to the City. Signed MICHEL. The last night came a Letter from his Excellency for discharging the horse of the Mewes which former∣ly garded the house, his excellency lets them know that he intends to make that his head quarters for his horse ad those that addresse themselves to the Army shall be accepted, &c. It is reported with much confidence the King is this day to be removed from the Isle of Wight to Harst caSle, whereof col. Ewers is Governour, the head∣quarters of the Army were this day at Hammer-smith and at night are expected at St. Jameses, and many of the Horse are already come to the Mewes. FINIS:
