h2939 E2138_2 99867319 119626
A BLACK-SMITH AND NO JESƲITE: OR, A True relation how I VVilliam Houlbrook Black-smith of Marlebo∣rough was betray'd by Cornet George Joyce, who carried the King prisoner from Holmby; and of the unjust impri∣soning of me: And my several examina∣tion: before Bradshaw, and his bloody Crew: With my Answers unto all of them, as you may read in the following Discourse. Written in the time of my imprisonment, and now put to publick view. Luke 21.14, 15. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not what ye shall answer; for I will give you wisdom which all your adversaries shall not gainsay. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sould by Francis Lash, next door to the Pauls-head Tavern at Pauls-Chain, 1660.
To the Right Worshipful Henry Hungerford and Ief∣fery Daniel, Esquires, Burgesses for the Town of Marleborough. Worthy Sirs, YOU have here pre∣sented the result of a few melancholy nights spun out in recollecting what the minds Intelli∣gencer had record∣ed from the single eyed Cyclopean cru∣elty and unthought of heat in framing Chariots and hammering out thun∣der-bolts and other engines for Mars. Verily did not Zeal burn within me, as
impatient of concealing such fire-brands, I should not dare thus boldly to scriblle and grate your (now) serene, sedate spirits with such an ignoble pe∣dantick story of Royalty ravished with the disguised wild-fire of Aristocrasie, which heaven only knows how many heads of this Kingdom it might have blown off, had they not (as wanting sufficiencie of the fool to act the knave artificially) being too confi∣dent of effecting their designs, in due time discovered their dark Lan∣thorn. Honoured Sirs, The noble respect you were wont to manifest towards all industrious atchievements, as also some friends did incite me not to to defer the divulging this (though rude, rustick, incomposed) Table-talk; hath imboldned me to crave for it a shelter under the shadow of your benigne wings from the contagi∣ous breath of heated tongues. I am far from presuming to deline∣ate
these Monsters, so as to undertake to derive their Pedegree, to fadom their bottomless profundity, or calcu∣late the knaverie, simplicitie, instabi∣lity or independencie either of their lives or actions: but yet I have adven∣tured in Loyalty to my Soveraign, o∣bedience to your selves, respect to my friends, and fidelitie unto all, to present you a true (though not so ar∣tificial) survey of a single plot, which had almost been unwittingly purcha∣sed of the intending usurping Land∣lords, had not their Achitophel-like Counsels been soon defeated, and they soon after confounded in their own de∣vices, for which Divine Providence, and a continuance thereof, is, and I hope ever shall be the daily prayer of him, who devotes himself, to fear God, ho∣nour the King, and unfeignedly to serve you, William Houlbrook.
THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader. CHristian Reader, it was not my thoughts to ever appear in Print, nor do I now in any vain-glory, or to expect any praise from men; but being moved by some Friends, and having most part of it written by me ever since I was in New∣gate, and having witnesses in the Coun∣trey
that knew how it was acted: I have thought good not to pass it over with si∣lence; for it is not for any private ends that I do it, but that the world may know what bloody men we have had in this Na∣tion that went under the Notion of Reli∣gions men, when indeed they were Devils; as witness that blasphemous Petition of Praise-God Barebones, for which he had the thanks of the Devils Imps, to have Church and State ruined; but there be many other Presidents of as great a na∣ture, and therefore I shall not name them here; but we have had such wicked Go∣vernments that no man did dare to speak his conscience. Seeing now it is Gods Love and mercy to settle us in our anci∣ent form of Government, of King, Lords and Commons, let us submit thereto, ac∣cording to our duty; For we all see the danger in rejecting the Lords Anointed, and to what great extremities these poor Nations were brought into by endeavour∣ing to ruine one another: & I desire all per∣sons that shall find fault with me, to exa∣mine
their own selves, and not to look too much abroad, and all people to obey their King, and all Souldiers to remember our Saviour Christs Command; and in their doing so, we shall live a peaceable and qui∣et life, according to Gods Command, and shall never be brought under such bloody men again. So leaving thee to the ensu∣ing Discourse, I rest, Thine to serve thee, William Houlbrook.
A BLACK-SMITH And no Jesuite; Or, The Smith of MARLEBOROƲGH. THE twenty eight of Ju∣ly 1659. Cornet Joyce, Cornet Smale, Quar∣termaster Tynne, Mr. Waldron, and Corporal Carter, came to Marleborough with a∣bout
twenty Souldiers, which Soul∣diers quartered at the George at the towns end; but Cornet Joyce and the rest of his Confederates, went into the Town; Joyce quartering at the White-hart, and the rest at the Angel; having thus dispersed themselves, I was sent for to shooe Cornet Smale's horse, which I did; being called into the Chamber to receive my due, I went, not suspecting any designe; but after payment, Tynne, Waldron, Smale, and Carter, were exceeding inquisitive concerning news; I told them I could not inform them of any, being from home till last night at Sarum Assises: What news there? I made answer, great complaints of bad trading, and great Taxes, and the poor ready to famish. Tynne. Is it so? said Tynne; now thou shalt see honest Smith that in a short time things will alter, for thou shalt see the Rump turned out. Smith. Say you so sir? truly I am
very glad of that, for then I shall have some work, and likewise all other tradesmen. Smale. Truly honest Smith, I see thou art right, for I have lost all that I had for being for the King. Smith. Sir, be of good comfort, for a good Conscience goes beyond riches, and no doubt but God will raise you up again. Then they asked me what friends the King had thereabouts; I said there are many that would be glad to see better times. Tynne. But honest Smith, dost thou know of any who have sent any thing to carry on our Kings Interest? thou needs not be a fraid, (said he) for we are as faithfull true subjects to the King as any persons can be: then they all said, we have lost our estates, we have ventured our lives, and there∣fore thou needest not doubt or fear us. Smith. No, for my part I have no cause: then they call'd for Beer,
and did drink the Kings health, and I pledged them: then they said the Rump was Cheaters; and my answer was, they said true enough, for they had not only cheated the King of his right, but many thousands more. Tynne. It is very true indeed, for these Members which sit now at West∣minster have Cheated me of a brave estate. Waldron. And so also have they of mine, and I would not for fourty pounds but that I had known thee, for thou mayest do us a great deal of good, to help on our Interest. Smith. My answer was, that any good which I could do, I would do with all my heart. Smale. Well honest Smith, tell what persons be here abouts as will do us any good, for our desire is not to be Governed by this Rump all the daies of our lives. Smith. You speak well sir, for they did pretend the Bishops was la∣zey,
and would preach but once a year, and Hazelrig and the rest have gained their estates, and they will not preach at all; and added also, that self-inte∣rest had been the cause of all divisions, for there is no more Religion: then one of them went our of the room, and called Tynne out after him, and left only Cornet Smale with me. Smale. Honest Smith, what do you think of Captain Burges, and Mr. Thomas Baly? Smith. They are very honest Gen∣tlemen, and would be glad to see bet∣ter times: But sir, did you never hear the Letter as came from Hell to this Parliament, otherwise called the Rump? Smale. No, pray tell us what it was; so I did. Smith. It was directed, To our Right and Trusty, Welbeloved Mem∣bers now sitting at our House at West∣minster; or in their absence, To our
good promoters of our Good Old Cause. The Contents followeth. Right dear and Welbeloved, Whereas you according to the Trust that we have reposed in you, have gone on with the work of Reformation, and desolation of all our good people of Eng∣land, we returne you thanks; hoping you will persevere so to the end; And our desire is, that you wll send as few to Hea∣ven of those you Murther as you can; for we must give you a hint of your former mistakes in Charles, Love, and Hewit, cum multis aliis, (here you must under∣stand the Divel mistakes, in speaking Latin to those as cannot understand Eng∣lish) And we would not have you cloy us with so many stinking Lobsters, I mean your Red-Coates; for if we shall think it convenient to continue you any longer on Earth, we shall come and keep our Court amongst you at White-Hall; therefore we would not have you sell it, nor yet So∣merset-House; it may be thought meet
if you sit long, to make it one of our eens Palaces. Dated at the Stygian Lakes, in the Infernal shades. Pluto. This I told them, and many other things which made them very merry; and all this time they called for Beer; and when one had drunk unto me, then another did begin; so they kept me drinking til Ten a clock that night, and they did endeavour to keep all out of the Room, Tapster and Chamber∣lain, because they should not hear what they did say unto me. Then one of them went to Cornet Joyce at the White-Hart, and told him that they had got a Black-Smith at their Inne, who would do them a great deal of good, and wished him to deal warily with me; for they could do no good upon me, if he would but trie me they knew it would be worth their labour in coming; so he promised them in
the morning he would attempt what they desired: All this was done un∣known to me, (and all this I was told by the Chamberlain afterwards.) Ha∣ving proceeded thus far, & it being late, they began to prepare for bed, so away came I home, and told my Mother and a neighbour what had passed. The next morning Cornet Joyce did send for me, to come and shooe his Horse, and I went; but it was as a Bird to the snare, by the cunning of the Fowler. As soon as I came to the Hart, he was standing at the stable doore, and was clothed like a Farmer, and so I thought him to be; and he desired me to naile his Horse, which I did, and he gave me six pence for my labour: sir, this is too much, no, it is not said he, for thou dost deserve it, for I perceive that thou art a good workman. Joyce. Welcome honest Smith, go up into my Chamber, and I will make thee drink into the bargain. Smith. I being come into the
Chamber, Joyce called for a pint of White-wine and sugar, and some To∣bacco and Pipes, and caused me to sit down with him, and drank unto me. Ioyce. Come honest Smith, here's a health unto the King; and threw his Hat under the board. Smith. Seeing that, I plucked off my hat also, and said, with all my heart; and pledged him. Joyce. Come honest heart? as a comfort unto thee, Ile tell thee news, if thou dost not know of it already. Smith. What is that sir, I pray? Joyce. I will tell thee, there is to be this day seventhnight a Rendez∣vouze of about ten thousand men at the Forrest of Dean for the King, did'st not hear of it? Smith. No indeed Sir, not I; I never heard of any such thing. Joy. It is very true; for a friend of mine at London hath sent down 50000. l. into the West, and ten thousand Case
of Pistols to carry on my Masters in∣terest; how thinkst thou of that, ho∣nest Smith? Smith. Very well; God prosper you. I am glad to hear such news; for God knows, Sir, I should be wil∣ling to venture my life for the King, so I might do him any service. Joyce. It is a sad thing for a man to be banished from his right, and for seeking after it to be proclaim'd a tray∣tor by those that are Traitors them∣selves, and murderers too. Smith. Then he shewed me the Kings Commission, telling me that the King had given him power to raise Forces for him, and I did read his Commission, and there was the Broad Seal on it, signed Charles Rex. Having laid this as a foundation to the mischief intended, he proceeds to ask of me many questions; first about Captain Burges. Joyce. Dost thou think that Cap∣tain Burges is right for us?
Smith. Pray Sir do not question that, for he is a very honest godly man; and I am sure he is willing to have a Government setled, and not be governed by the Fagg-end of the Nation, as we are now (the more is the pity.) Joyce. I believe he is honest, be∣cause he hath not raised his Troop all this while; but dost hear honest heart? dost know of any that hath given any money or Horses to carry on our Ma∣sters interest? Smith. No indeed sir? I do not know of any that have. Joyce. But dost know of any that will? Smith. Yes, there are as honest men hereabouts as any in the Land. Joyce. What dost think of the Lord Seamour? Smith. He is a gallant, noble, and worthy person. Joyce. But dost hear honest heart? dost know of any interest which he
hath carried on for my Master? Smith. No indeed sir; I do not know of any interest wherein he hath engaged himself in reference to the King. Joyce. But dost think if we should make trial of him to aid and assist my Master, that he would be willing? for, if we should take away horses by force, we shall lose the good will of the Countrey; therefore if we can gain such men as he whereby to carry on our design without oppression, we shall be in a more likely way to prosper. Smith. Truly sir, you may make trial and see, but he lives very pri∣vately, for they have been pulled and baited up and down, so that I think they will have but small stomack to meddle any more, unless they see an opportunity. Joyce. Well Smith, what, dost thou know my Lord Marquesse? what dost thou conceive of him? Smith. Truly, a noble Lord.
Joyce. Dost thou know of any in∣terest he hath carried on for my Ma∣ster? Smith. No indeed sir, I do not know of any. Joyce. Dost think that Captain Burges doth carry on any design for him? Smith. No indeed sir, I do not know any of them that carry on any design for him; but I conceive they are all his good friends. Joyce. Dost think that the Lord Marquess will do my Master any good, to let me have any money, or horses; for that as we do, it must be done before the Militia be raised, or else we shall be disappointed. Smith. You may go and try sir; for if you go to him, I believe he will do what may be done with the safety of his life and Estate. Joyce. But honest Smith, if thou wilt go and carry these Letters to these men, thou shalt be well paid; which
Letters are in number four; one for the Lord Marquesse, another for the Lord Seamour, one to the High She∣riff, and the other to Mr. Webb of Og∣bourn a Minister. Smith. I cannot go, to morrow be∣ing Saturday, and our Market day, which requires my being at home; therefore I pray go your self. Joyce. Honest Smith, what thinkst thou of Mr. Byfield, Mr. Proffit, Dr. Chambers. Smith. Truly they are honest true hearts, and would be glad to see better times. Joyce. Dost think we may trust these Presbyterians? for thou know'st they have been false to my Masters Father. Smith. Pray sir, do not question them; there were some indeed who were not right; but they that were so, have suffered deeply for it: For Quakers, and Anabaptists, and others of the Phanatick sort have been so vio∣lent
against them, as to pull them out of the Pulpits, and cast dirt in their fa∣ces; as that now they will prize a good King when it is Gods will to send him. Ioyce. But dost hear Smith? where is your meeting place? Smith. At Mr. Thomas Baylies. Ioyce. What is Mr. Baylie? Smith. An honest Royal heart. Joyce. But if we should speak with him, he having no horses, will be use∣less in this matter. Smith. But sir, Mr. Byfield of Col∣lingbourn hath two, he may have one of them. Joyce. Well honest Smith, what horse was that which the Duke of Buckingham bought here? Smith. A very good horse indeed sir. Joyce. Dost hear he is going to carry on my Masters Design? Smith. No indeed sir, I do not hear so; but he bought one or two horses
by the way, and one there; and said be would buy some more if he could light upon them worth money, and therefore it may be like enough. Joyce. Well honest Smith, the Lord Fairfax is to be General of all these Forces as are raising now. Smith. I am very glad of that in∣deed sir, for he is very well beloved in the Army; if he could have had his will, our King had never been beheaded. Joyce. Thou sayest right honest Smith; but dost hear no reports of it whether it is so or no? Smith. No verilie sir; I did never hear of it untill now. Joyce. But dost hear Smith; dost know of any who are to carry on my Masters design? if thou dost know; do so much as tell me, for I shall be as true as thine own heart. Smith. There are many true Royal hearts that are gone down towards Bathe.
Joyce. Who in particular, honest Smith? Smith. One of them is one of Lon∣don, one Mr. Maskell. Joyce. And how can'st tell honest Smith? Smith. Why, he had some di∣scourse with me? Joyce. What discourse was it you had? Smith. He said sir, that there was an interest carrying on, and he did hope I would fight for my Countrey as well as the rest. Joyce. O! I do know him, for he is an honest blade! a good number of such men would do well, do'st know of any more? Smith. No indeed sir. Joyce. What company had he with him here? Smith. Why sir? he had two or three with him. Joyce. What were they? Smith. One of them was one that
was a prisoner; and Thurlo that wicked fellow would not suffer him to have the use of Pen, Ink, or Paper; but he said he should be even with him: he is as honest a Gentleman as you ever came near sir. Joyce. There is no doubt of that; for there is none but honest men do carry on my Masters interest; and there is no doubt, that if ever my Master King Charles shall come, he is so Roy∣al a Master, that he will reward all those that are true and faithful unto him: For my part honest Smith I have lost all for being faithful for my Ma∣ster; for truly, if I had known of any interest carried on, I should have told them of it: But do'st know Mr. Bond of Ogbourn? Smith. Yes very well sir? Joyce. When did he come out of France from my Master?
Smith. I cannot tell sir, whether he was ever with the King or no; or whether he be at home; but I am cer∣tain he is as honest a true heart for the King, as any in these parts. Joyce. Do you know Master Par∣rom? Smith. Sir, I know him very well, for he hath suffered very much for the King, poor Gentleman! Joyce. Thou sayest verie right honest Smith; but when did'st see him? Smith. Indeed sir I have not seen him a great while. Joyce. If I could but see him, I should make known our Designe unto him, for he would be very joy∣full to hear of it. Smith. You say right sir; I, for you need not doubt but that he would be glad to hear (as well as ma∣ny others) of the bringing the right Heir to his Estate again, from which
Oliver Cromwel that Grand Traitor, and the rest of his bloody Crew hath banished him, murdering his Father before his own Palace Gate, the like whereof hath not been known in former Ages; for I have read of all the Reigns of the Kings and Em∣perours, and cannot find the like case. Joyce. Thou sai'st right honest Smith; for it was the Horridst thing that ever was committed; but God will find them out, I will war∣rant thee, for God will not let in∣nocent blood go unrevenged. Smith. Upon these speeches the tears did stand in mine eyes, which he perceiving, did take notice of it; and told Bradshaw of it when I was brought to London, as you shall hear in the following di∣scourse: sir said I, Oliver Cromwell did pretend that the King was a Traitor,
and that he did violate the Laws of the Nations; but pray sir consider what he hath done; for he was the greatest Traitor that ever Hell hatcht, for first he puts his Sovereigne Lord King Charles to death: and when that was counted a High Breach in the King to demand Five Members, he most Trai∣terously turned them All out; for just as Richard the Third did, so did he; and likewise he brought, like the Di∣vil, as he can, Religion for all his bloo∣dy Actions; as if God had ordered him to Murther his King, which God and man knew was innocent, and whom he ought to have obeyed, and not to have slaine: But what is't that a Tyrant will not do? Ioyce. Thou sayest right honest Smith, for he was the grearest Tyrant as ever was read of, which I did finde unto my sorrow; and these his Imps which now sit be as bad as he, for they
seek after other mens revenues as he did, for they are bloody-minded men all of them. Smith. You say right sir, for if Hell had been picked there could not a more wickeder pack been found out, for they all seek after blood, and other mens estates; and there they sit and Vote estates one for another, and lay great Taxes upon the Nations, but ne∣ver looketh after a Trade for the Na∣tion whereby they might be able to pay them; and fetcheth Martin and others out of Goal as are in for debt to sit in the House, because they lack Mem∣bers to stand for the Good Old Cause; as if there were not men enough in the Nation, as will stand for the Good Old Cause as well as they; but this cause as they name, is not the Cause as ten∣der-hearted Christians would have; for these seek after other mens estates, for Martin to make him rich; and the
rest will not be in debt as long as there is money in the Nation. Joyce. Thou sayest right honest Smith, for my estate and other mens must pay their debts. Smith. But sir, did you never read Mr. Prin's Books? he discovereth what their Good Old Cause is: That man hath done as much good as any one man in the Nation; and there is no doubt but the King will reward him for it. Joyce. Indeed honest Smith I have seen many of his Books, and have read many of his passages, but cannot hear of any thing as he doth Act, and thou knowest that my Muster cannot be brought in with Books, but with Armes. Smith. You are right sir for that, but there is a time for all things, and I believe when he can see an opportuni∣ty, he will not be wanting. Ioyce. But when didst see him. Smith. I saw him about a week a
go at the signe of the Bear in Marle-borough. Ioyce. And whither was he go∣ing? Smith. Down towards the Bath, I think. Ioyce. And hadst thou any discourse with him? Smith. I was with him there, and did speak with him by the means of a Londoner that was there. Ioyce. But what discourse had you with him? Smith. Truly very little, for I went in only to see him, and I only said I was glad to see him, for I had heard good report of him, for I had read many of his Books; and he re∣turned me thanks, and made me drink; so I went from him, and did never before nor since see him. Ioyce. But did he not speak about a rising there? Smith. No indeed sir. Ioyce. That is a wonder they do
not tell him of it, for he would be a good friend to my Master; had I but spoken with him, I would have given twenty pounds if I had been there. Smith. You might have been there for half the money sir. Ioyce. But do'st hear honest Smith, Dost know the Lord Herbert? Smith. Yes sir, very well. Ioyce. Do'st think he will do us a∣ny good, for he hath been right for my Master formerly? Smith. You need not question that sir, he is so still; for I assure you that he is as honest a Noble Lord, as any is in the Western parts. Ioyce. Do'st know of any Interest he hath carried? Smith. No sir, there is none that I know of, but he will not be back∣ward when opportunity may serve. Ioyce. Thou do'st know a great ma∣ny Travailers as come up and down, dost not?
Smith. Yes sir, I know a great many. Ioyce. I wonder thou wast not Trappan'd amongst them. Smith. No, thanks be to God he hath preserved me hitherto; but in Old Nolls time I was very fearfull, because he set many such persons a∣work. Ioyce. How didst carry thy self be∣ing alwayes amongst them. Smith. I have read the 13. of the Romans, and there I finde that we must be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but is of God; and except that power do command any one to do that which is not accor∣ding to his Word, then we must suffer and not resist; for there is Scripture for it: Whether it is lawful to obey God or man judge you? Ioyce. So honest Smith, thou art in the right; for we all ought to do so. Smith. I must now take my leave,
for I am in much haste, for all my work lieth to be done, and to Morrow is our Market-day; and so I give you many thanks for all your loving kind∣ness and favours you have shewed me. Ioyce. Nay, pray honest Smith stay a little longer. Smith. I cannot indeed sir; and so I departed from him, and when I came down the stairs, I went for my shoo∣ing basket into the stable, and as I came back again, I saw Cornet Ioyce go forth towards the Angel unto the rest of his Crew; but God knows I could not believe any otherwise, but that they had been as honest as any men in England, for their pretences made me believe no otherwise of them: I seeing him going forth to the Angel, I went to the Chamberlaines who heard most part of this discourse, and desired them to say nothing of what discourse had passed between Joyce and me, and them; because if they did, we should be called to question about it,
and these honest Gentlemen might be ruined. Chamberlains. We will not speak a word to any Christian. Smith. Pray do not; for God prosper him and all others that be in Arms, to get him to have his own, whose right it is. Chamberlains. We will all keep secret. Smith. So I went home to my shop, but all this time I did not know what their names were, nor what they were, but when I came to my shop, I was sent for to shooing unto the Kings Arms, and being there, after I had shooed the Gentlemans Horse, he made me drink: and then I desired Mr. Sadler the Inne-keeper to go into the Court, for I had some news to tell him: so I told him what Ioyce had told me. Sadler. I am very Joyful of it, but is it true? Smith. It's very true, for I have seen the Kings Commission Signed
Charles Rex. Then my Brother came for me, and told me there was a Gen∣tleman stayed at the shop to speak with me: so I went to my shop, and when I came, it was one of them that was at the Angel the night before, as I have related already, whose name was Cor∣poral Carter. Carter. Smith, prethee go along with me to shooe a Horse. Smith. Where is your Horse sir? Carter. At the signe of the George at the Towns end. Smith. I cannot go sir, for I shall lose more the while, than I shall take of you. Carter. Pray go, you shall be pay'd over and above for your going down; for you shooed the Gentlemans Horse so well at the Hart, that I would desire you to shooe mine too. Smith. Well Sir, any good as I can do you, Il'e do with all my heart: so I went along with him, and as I was going along with him, my Mother called me.
Mother. William, whither are you going? Smith. To the George to shooing: Mother. To the George to shooing; to the George to undoing, I am afraid. Smith. Why Mother; what need I be afraid to go? for I know of no hurt I have done to any one; so along I went with him, and as I looked be∣hind me, I see Ioyce, and Tynne, and Smale and VValdron coming after whispering, and still I did think they were friends to the King; so when I came to the George, the horse did not want a shooe, but I was to take one off, and set a better on; and as I was a shoo∣ing of him, these four blood-suckers as I have named, came by me, but said ne∣ver a word, but went up into the Chamber; and when I had shooed the horse, the Souldiers called me in to take my money; so I went in and received six pence, and they made me drink so long, as it cost me the six pence as I received for my work; then
the Corporal as had me down, said he would give me a Flagon of Beer; which had, and there was one Ia. Brown with them, who was for the King for∣merly, and seeing him, I took them to be very honest men: and told them their horses were very poor and unable to do them any service. Souldiers. We have better horses when occasion serves. Smith. So you had need Sirs, for the Rump's souldiers have very good horses, if they should take you, you will be utterly ruined; God preserve you; if I could gain a good horse, I would not be long behind you to Act for such a Cause, as God owns, as he doth this. Souldiers. Time may come, you may have a horse honest Smith, to your hearts desire. Smith. Then Joyce and the rest sent down an Order to the souldiers, to provide for a March, and it was then time for me to march too; so I took
my shooing basket, and as was go∣ing, Iames Brown called me back. Brown. Honest VVilliam, do me a Courtesie: Smith. What is it honest Iames? Brown. It is but to go to the end of the Village along with me, to be a Witness to the receiving of some Money. Smith. Any good as I can do you, Il'e do it with all my heart; so I went along with him, and being about the middle of the Village, I looked back, and saw a led horse coming after with five or six a horse-back, and four or five a foot, which made me wonder what it meant; But I thought the led horse had been for Iames Brown; so I went a little further, and being near the house, which I was to go unto, they said, Ioyce's Crew. Come Smith, get up and ride. Smith. Why so, we are hard by the house.
Ioyce's Crew. You must get up, and ride. Smith. How Gentlemen, is it so? is this the money, the receiving of which I was to be a witness to; Gentlemen, pray tell me what you ae, and whither you will carry me, and Il'e go with you with all my heart, but before Il'e go with you, know∣ing not whom you are, nor whi∣ther you will carry me; upon which I took a case of knifes out of my pock∣et and drew one, they being afraid, lest I would do them some hurt or my self, fell all upon me and took away my knives; Iames Brown broke one of them on his knee, carried the other to Ioyce: so they searched my pockets, took from me one shilling, the Picture of Oliver Cromwell with an Owl on his head, and the Letter as the Devil sent to the Rump (as it was said) ha∣ving so done, they set me on horse∣back with main strength, and tied my legs under the Horses belly with
a great cord, Iohn. Forty of Hun∣ger ford, was ambitious of that im∣ployment: then they had me away to a place called Shabourn out of the rode by Woods and Lanes for fear I should be taken away from them. (Christian Reader) little dost thou think what a Condition I was in, not knowing that they were, nor whi∣ther they would carry me! fearing al∣so lest they would they have mur∣dered me in the Woods; from Shabourn, their Order was to carry me out of VVilt-shire into Berk-shire, and so they did: there I stayed at an old mans house with a cord about me, till nine a Clock at night, at which time there was an Order brought from Ioyce, to carry me away to Reading, but they would not tell me so, until I came to Newbury, so they set me a horse-back again, and the same man tied me as before: the horse as I rid on, was a pitiful stumbling creature, he fell with me twice upon his knees, if
he had fain on his side, it had broken my legs short of; at break off day, we came to Newbury, where they with much intreaty untied my legs. Souldiers. We have a very strict charge given us, our lives are at stake, if you should get away; you are not to be lost for twenty thousand pounds. Smith. If I did offer to run, then you might do what you would with me. At nine a Clock in the morning, we came to Reading, where I was con∣veyed down to Major Evelling, to whom they delivered a Letter they had from Joyce, when he had read the Letter, he called me up stairs to him. Evelling. How now honest friend, this will be a brave voyage for you; if I could speak so much for the good of the Nation as you can, I would give twenty thousand pounds; come honest friend, you must go to London
pre∣senrly for the Council of State, do ex∣pect your deing there this night; there is a Packet gone up to them about you already. Smith. Sir, is this your Love to me to be brought all night with my legs tied, and have me now to London? no Sir, you shall draw me at the horses tail, be∣fore I will, until Munday; for if I am worth twenty thousand pounds to you, you may well keep me till Munday: then it was ordered, I should stay till Munday the first day of August, then I was to go towards London: I asked Major Evelling what I should do for meat while I was there, for I had no money. Evelling. You shall have some meat. Smith. Then I was had to the Red Lion, where we had meat and drink, which came to two shillings; thence I was carried unto the Sign of the Angel, where I supped and lay all night: the next day being Sabbat-hday, when I
rose in the morning, the souldiers up∣on my entreating, were willing to go to Church along with me. Souldiers. If you go to Church, you must pluck off your Apron. Smith. I will Gentlemen. As I was going to Church, there comes a Corporal from Major Evel∣ling to have me unto the ship, unto three prisoners more. Smith. Why friend, said I, we are going to Church, pray come again af∣ter dinner. Corporal. No, you must go along with me; for a Church belongs not to you, nor any of your Crew. Smith. What Crew is that you speak of. Corporal. Your bloody Presbyteri∣ans. Smith. They are not so bloody as you are, Sir. Corporal. Well, you must go along with me. Smith. Well, Il'e go along with
you; and when I came to the place as∣signed for me, they put me in a Room with two more prisoners: a porter that was taken a carrying Letters to the La∣dy Howard, and a poor sea-man, which sea-man did cry out for Beer most mi∣serably, but could have none, so that he was forced to drink his own water; the Porter gave him a Flint that he used to strike fire with, to put in his mouth to quench his thirst, he fell asleep with it in his mouth, and had lik'd to have choaked him: seeing this bad usage, I was amazed, in thinking what I should do, having no money: then I called for some Beer, and made the Tapster believe I had money, by speaking these words, that it was a good turn as I had some money, or else I should be but in a sad condition: by which words, I had some Beer and Tobacco, I made the sea man and the Porter drink: then the sea-man spoke to me. Sea-man. The people of the house
de∣sired me to come off the Bed, and said I must lie on the Boards. Smith. Do not, lie still where you are; It being Sabbath, I desired them to lend me a Bible, but their answer was, that a Bible did not belong to me, nor none of my Crew; I asked what Crew, and they answered, the bloody Presbyterians: Well then, shall I have any dinner? then they had me down in the Kitchin to dine with the servants; but there was but little meat; God keep all good people from the Ship at Reading. After dinner, I was had up into the Chamber again; and at night we were all removed into another Chamber, where we lay the next day, being Munday, we were ordered to provide our selves ready for to go to London, so we came to Coates's Coach, where there was great contest whether they should tie my legs, or no, as I did sit in the Coach, but at last, it was carried in the Negative, by the means that one of
the souldiers was one of my ac∣quaintance, then we went into the Coach, being four of us; that was, one Mr. tradling a Gentleman of Wales; the Sea-man, Porter, and my self, and we went by the way of Sunning, being two miles beyond Reading, and there they did take up in the Coach three Passengers more, a Gentlewoman and her son, and an Anabaptist, the Ana∣baptist fell in discourse with me. Anabaptist. Upon what Account are you carried prisoner. Smith. Because I would not bring innocent blood on the Nation. Anabaptist. I lament your conditi∣on, because of your hard usage. Smith. But when I had turned my back, he Ioab like, speaks to the soul∣diers to tie my legs, and said I was the shrewdest fellow as ever he did dis∣course with, but they did not hearken to him. So when we came to Cole-brook, we had a good dinner: and the Gentlewoman pitying of me, paid four
shillings six pence towards the dinner: so along we came towards London, but by that time we came some four miles, I had an occasion to dis-burthen my self of Natures due. Smith. Pray let me come forth out of the Coach. Souldiers. No, you shall not, it is only a pretence to get away from us, you may do it in the Coach if you will. Smith. with all my heart, I do not care; pray make room for me, hold up your legs, so I untied my point. Coach-man. Pray Gentlemen, let him out of the Coach, for there will be a stink to poyson us all. Souldiers. Wee'l let him forth: Come Smith, go to the middle of the Village. Smith. Il'e go to yonder end of the Village with all my heart: or if you will not let me, Il'e do it in the Coach. Souldiers. We, wee'l go along with you.
Smith. So I went to the ditch, and they with me with their pistols in their hands: now Gentlemen, I think, you will make me do it for fear, if you watch me so narrowly. Souldiers. We do not care for that, we can do no less; for our lives lie at stake, if you escape. Smith. So I went into the Coach again, and about seven a Clock, we came to London, being the first day of August, the Coach carried us down to White-hall, where many people did re∣sort to see what prisoners was there, so I came out with my Lether Apron be∣fore me. Gentlemen. What have you brought here? Smith. A Black-smith. Gentlemen. Why, what hath he done? Smith. I do not know siir, without it be for a present supply to fill up the House, for I hear they want Mem∣bers.
Gentlemen. How now, what do you jear at White-hall gate? come along with us? Smith. So we were had in, and all other people kept back, because we should be seen from the rest: we went through several Rooms untill we came to the Council Chamber-door where Serjeant Dandy came forth to take their names as came up with me, after he had taken them, he enquired farther. Dandy. Is there not one Mr. Hol∣brook here? Smith. There is one Mr. Holbrook a Black-smith here; upon that he look∣ed upon me, and seeing my habit, he went into the Counsel and told them what I was, upon that, out came the Lord Sidenham and looked very eager∣lie on me. Sidenham. Are you a Black-smith? Smith. Yes my Lord; and I have heard very good reports of this Ho∣nourable Court of their merciful deal∣ings, and I hope I shall find it so now.
Sidenham. You are some Jesuite Ile warrant you? for you are no Black-smith. Smith. Why my Lord? have you such thoughts of a poor Black-smith. Sidenham. Because you give such answers. Smith Why my Lord? If you have read the History of K. Henry the 8th, you shall find there was a Black-smiths son whose name was Thomas Cromwel that was Vicegerent unto the Kings per∣son, and one of his Privy Counsellors. And if you read the History of Scander∣bag of the Turks, my Lord, you shall find there was a Black-smith that command∣ed all the Armies when all the Officers fled, and gained victory. And if you have read the Lives of the Emperours, you may find one of them was a Black-smiths. And if you read the History of Queen Mary, you shall find six Black-smiths that suffered for a good Consci∣ence. And if you read the Heraldry of Arms, you shall find that the highest
Coat of Arms in the three Nations belongs to the Black-smiths. Sidenham. What, do you come with your Peddegree my merry blade? come Serjeant Dandy look to this fel∣low, for he is some Jesuite, and hath transformed himself into a Blacksmith habit, because we should not know him. Dandy. What, shall I set you down a Black-smith, or a Farrier? Smith. I am a Smith, I am no Far∣rier. Dandy. Ile set you down a Farrier. Smith. You will not set down a lye sir, for I am a Black-smith. Dandy. Then Ile set you down Black-smith. Smith. Then he called for a File of Musquetiers to guard us unto the Irish Guard in cotland-yard, where we lay on the boards with some other pri∣soners; the next day I was sent for to the Council, where was the Lord Bradshaw, the Lord Disborough, and Sir Henry Vane,
Bradshaw. What a woful fellow hast thou been for to endeavour to bring these Nations in blood, in car∣rying on the interest of such a blood∣sucker andO Vil∣lain. ☞ Traitour as Charles Stu∣art is? But come my merry blade; if you will be ingenious, and reveal the enemies of the Common-wealth, you shall see what we will do for you; you ought to be encouraged, & not discou∣raged; and to be rewarded, and not punished; remember thou hast a soul, thou must seek to save it, and a Con∣science; do not stretch it, neither must you lye. Smith. (My Lord) if I should not reveal the enemies of the Common-wealth, as should seek to act against such godly people as you are, I am worse than accursed. Bradshaw. You speak well my mer∣ry blade: I wish we may find it so. Smith. William Lenthal the Speaker came and told them that the Parlia∣ment would desire their company to
carry on the work of the day in prayer. Bradshaw. My merry blade, go into the Council-Chamber, and be Royal, and you shall not lose by it, for we must go. Smith. (Ha thought I) when the Fox preaches, beware the Geese. Then General Lambert was going out against Sir George Booth; all went but Disborough, and he had more mind to examine me than go to prayr; and whil'st they were at prayer, he was at his prey; so they had me in the Room, and Disborough came in after smoak∣ing. Disborough. Come honest Smith, dost thou know me? Smith. No indeed my Lord, I do not know your honour. Disborough. My name is Disbo∣rough. Smith. Is it so, my Lord; you was one of the Major-Generals then, my Lord. Disbo. But dost hear honest Smith;
do'st know Captain Burges of Marle∣borough? Smith. Yes, very well my Lord. Disborough. Why is he made Ran∣ger of the Lord Marquesse Forrest. Smith. Trulie my Lord I cannot tell; but as nigh as I can Ile tell you; he being a man of power, and the Common lying open, and many offen∣ders living thereabout, he is put in for a strict terrour unto the offendor. Desborough. Is that all do'st think? Smith. Yes my Lord, that is all as I know of? Disborough. Did'st never hear of any design as he carried on with the Lord Marquesse of Hertfod? Smith. No indeed, my Lord. Disborough. But thou know'st ho∣nest Smith, that one good turn asketh another? Smith. That is true, my Lord; for if you would let me have my libertie, I should pray for you? Disborough. Thou need'st not doubt
of that, if thou wilt be royal, and re∣veal the enemies of the Common-wealth: But dost know of no design as is carried between them? Smith. No, my Lord. Disborough. Well honest Smith, what dost think of these bloody Pres∣byterians? Smith. Truelie you give strange titles. It is true, some may be bad, but you may put more confidence in them, then in a great many you do put in trust. Disborough. How so Smith? Smith. Why my Lord, they that engage to be true for all Govern∣ments, will never be true to you. Disborough. Say you so, my merry blade! Smith. Yes my Lord; and I can bring a History of Constantine to make it appear. Disborough. Come, let's here that. Smith. Well, you shall my Lord: This Constantine was born here in
England, and was the first Christian Emperour that ever was; Hellena was his Mother; and Constantinus was his Father; he was buried at York, and this Constantine built Constantinople the chiefest Citie now in Turkey, and there he lieth buried; this Constantine made a Proclamation, that all those persons that were his servants, that would not bow and worship unto an unknown god, should not be suffered to be in his Pallace, to try their pulses; and of three hundred and odd servants, there was not above fourty but did forsake him; they chose rather to go to hell with their riches and honour, than to be with God, and suffer afflictions. The Emperour seeing so few, wept bit∣terly; well said he; them that be true unto God, will be true unto their Prince; and them that are false unto God, will be false unto their Prince; so he turned them out that forsook God for their honour; I hope this will be your Rule, my Lord.
Disborough. What, dost come as a Counsellor unto me? Smith. No my Lord; I come as a poor Black-smith. Disborough. It is an unhappy one then. Smith. Then he went to examine me about many other persons, and I seeing many writers behind, I thought I had need to have as many eyes as Ar∣gus had to be amongst these men; well though I, Ile set you to work; so I went on upon Histories as followeth. May it please your honour, my Lord, to call to mind the Ancient Histories, you shall find that William the Con∣queror was begotten of a Skinners daugh∣ter, his Fathers name was Duke Ro∣bert, and his Mother was dancing under a May-pole when Duke Robert first fell in love with her (and was Crowned three times a year) and he reigned twen∣ty years, and eleven moneths, and odd dayes, and could scarce have his length
and breadth in the earth, for all he was a Conqueror: And then William Rufus his son reigned in his stead, and he pulled his brothers eyes out, he loved honour so well, and he was killed in the New Forrest in Hampshire by the glancing of an arrow shot by one Tirell, a just judgement of God upon him for his Fathers destroying so many Churches; therefore two more of his loynes was killed there too. And after him reigned Henry the first, which was the first inventor of Yards and Ells, and his eyes and braines was buried at Roan in Normandy, and his body was wrapped up in Oxe hides, and salted, and buried at Reading, which hath been a mighty place for Tanners ever since. Disborough at last looked back on the Clerks that write. Disborough. What do you write there? Clerk. What your discourse is, my Lord? Disborough. Strike it out, strik't out, here is stuffe indeed; we shall have Speeds Chronicle by and by.
Smith. Now my Lord is going to seek unto God by Prayer; but I be∣lieve it was done before he came: Then Serjeant Dandy had me down in∣to the Cellar at White-hall, where se∣veral men had the Cellars to sell drink, and bread; and I seeing this, thought to my self that Cardinal Woolsey did ne∣ver build it for that use; so when I had dined, I was had up again; but as yet they were not come from their fa∣sting, so I was had to the Irish Guard in Scotland yard, and did not go again untill the next day. That night I had a kind of a blind Certificate came from Marleborough, which was procured by my Mothers weeping and making great moan, to acquaint the Council that I was a Black-smith, and kept a great charge from the Parish, so that if I should be debarred of my libertie, the charge would lie on the Parish; so you see what a weak Certificate they sent in my behalf; if it had not been for my charge, they had not car'd if I
had been ruined: the next day I was fetcht again, where was Bradshaw, and the Lord Whitlock who was Presi∣dent. Bradshaw. Come my merrie blade? you came yesterday and promised us to be nigenious, and did only tell us a few merrie tales; come, wee'l send you to a place that shall make you reveal our enemies; are you so harden'd in your wickedness; come, you must prepare your self for Newgate. Smith. Newgate, what, the Metro∣politan Goale of the Nation? no meaner a place, my Lord: Now Chri∣stian Reader, my sorrow comes; they sent for two Messengers, and gave them Order to convey me in safetie unto Newgate; Whitlock signed the Warrant; then seeing all would not do, I showed my blind Certificate to the Lord Bradshaw, as some of them whose heart the Divel had hardned, had sent me, to do me no good; I wish that their hearts had been no worse
towards me, and their Conscience so good as mine was towards them: for he that is the searcher of all hearts knows how I was put to it, to bring them into trouble by the means of Joyce that bloody fellow Brad∣shaw received the Certificate from me, and did read it. Brashaw. A Black-smith! you may be a Black-smith, and carrie on the in∣terest of Charles Stuart: a charge, what do we care for your charge? the Parish is bound to keep them. Smith. My Lord, they will be but poorly kept then. Bradshaw. Then you must complain to the next Justice of Peace my mer∣rie blade! Smith. My Lord, I had as good complain upon a Senator of Venice, as to do anie good upon some of them. Bradshaw. Go my merrie blade along with them. Smith. So they had me up to New∣gate, and the Keepers were called, the
doors being shut; so they came and read the Warrant, and put me into the Dungeon where it was verie dark. Smith. Pray let me have some light. Keeper. You must buy some Candles if you will have anie, for you must have none without money. Smith. I have no money; so that I was fain to lie all that night, and the next day in the dark; then I sent to a friend in Town and borrowed five shil∣lings; in the mean time the Keeper came into the Dungeon. Keeper. You must give me fourtie shillings, or else Ile put Irons on your leggs. Smith. I have no money. Keeper. You must give six pence a night for lying on the Mat. Smith. I have no money. Keeper. Then you must lie on the floor, for Ile take away the Mat. Smith. Well, I will pay you sx pence a night then; the which I was
forced to promise, there being almost nothing but dirt and piss which was thrown down from the common side; and there was a house of Office at one end, which made such a stink that I was readie to be poisoned: Nay, had been, if God had not raised up a friend for me, in particular Mr. Samuel Prof∣fit which brought me Cordial waters and Syrrups, which was the saving of my life under God; the next day there was an Order from the Council of State of bring me down. Keeper. If you have anie money, you may hire a Coach and go down to the Council; it may be for your deliver∣ance. Smith. What will a Coach cost? Keeper. A shilling. Smith. Then I came to the door, and there was a Coach, so I gave a shil∣ling for the two keepers; the Messen∣ger that came did ride in the Coach with me; and when we came, there was only Bradshaw ad Cornet Joyce,
which was newly come out of the Countrey, because he could go no farther in his enterprize, untill they made me Knight of the Post, to swear that all that he did write was truth: when I saw him there, my heart rised exceedinglie at himSmith to Joyce.; Are you come sir, it is well if you have brought a good Conscience with you; so Joyce did deliver a sheet of paper written on both sides. Bradshaw. Come my merrie blade; you have told us merrie tales all along, but now here is something of conse∣quence come against you; come hear your charge; did you not say there was a number of honest men in your Coun∣tie? Smith. Yes my Lord. Bradshaw. And that these men car∣ried on the interest of Charles Stuart. Smith. No, my Lord. Bradshaw. Come my winding-blade, did you say this or not?
Smith. My Lord, some I did say, and some I did not say. Bradshaw. Answer Negative or Af∣firmative. Smith. Why should I say there be no honest men, when there be my Lord? Bradshaw. Come my merry Blade; we do not speak of that; don't play with the halter. Smith. Why then my Lord, set down, No: Bradshow: If there be honest men, come to the next my merry blade; did you not say there was a number of good horses in the County? Smith: Yes my Lord. Bradshaw: And that those horses were kept for the interest of Charles Stuart? Smith: No my Lord, do you not know upon what interest men keep horses for? some for hawking, some for hunting and some to ride to Markets and Fayres.
Bradshaw: Come hearken to your charge; you shall have play time enough with the halter. Smith. Shall I say there be no good horses when there is, my Lord? Bradshaw. Sirrah, we do not talke of good horses, but what persons do keepe them for Charles Stuart. Smith. Truely I do not know my Lord, so you may set downe. Bradshaw. Come to the next; you said you had received divers Letters from Mr Prynne, and had delivered them to many persons in Wiltshire to carry on Charles Stuart interest; to the Lord Marquess one and the Lord Sea∣mor another: Mr Byfield, Mr Profit and Mr Sheriff, each of them one, Mr Webb of Ogbourne and Mr Thomas Bayly, Do∣ctor Chambers and Colonel Popham, with many others, had meetings at Mr Thomas Bayly's to carry on this design; how say you to this my merry blade! Smith. Truly my Lord, without this Joyce had bin with the Devil for
Advice, I cannot see how a man could invent such forgeries. Bradshaw. How my merry blade, will you be hang'd, drawn & quartered come, you shall have fair play; must all this be concealed? you shall smart for it soundly; is there not meetings at Bay∣lie's? Smith. Yes my Lord. Bradshaw. What do their meetings tend to? Smith. To seek unto God for a blessing on your endeavours, if you act for God, my Lord. Bradshaw. Come, you are a wind∣ing Blade; what horse was that that the Duke of Buckingham bought at your Town? Smith. It was a very good-prized horse, indeed my Lord. Bradshaw. Why did he go to such a high price? Smith. Because they belong to Dukes and Earls, I think. Bradshaw. Was it not to carry on
the interest of Charls Stuart, that he hath bought that horse? Smith. I do not know indeed my Lord; Then he shaked his head. Bradshaw. Do you not know whe∣ther M. Woodbride of Newbury, and M. Fowler of Reading, do carrie on any interest for Charls Stuart? Smith. I know of none my Lord. Bradshaw. What did you make at Bath? Smith. I went to receive some mo∣nie that was there due to me. Bradshaw. You carried Letters to Mr. Pierce and Mr. Harrington, to carry on the interest of Charls Stuart. Smith. It is no such thing my Lord; it is as false, as God is true. Bradshaw. Come, what Alderman of London was that you had discourse with. Smith. I do not remember my Lord. Bradshaw. Do you not? we'le make you.
Joyce. Yes, my Lord, we have other Witness as will prove that he had discourse with him; if you please to read along my Lord, you shall finde one Thomas Goddard's hand to it. Smith. There Joyce set down names that I never spoke to him of, and all to see what I would say; so knowing what discourse Joyce and I had, I told them that he said there was an interest car∣rying on for the King, and he hoped, I would fight for my Country as well as the rest: so they sent for that honest Gentleman down to White-hall, and kept me there, and would not have me away untill I had confirmed what Joyce had set down. And when he was there, they made me come in. Bradshaw. Come, Is this true as is writ in this paper which I have here in my hand? Smith. He holds a paper in his hand, and would not let me see it, nor read it; and I must say that that was
true, or else I must be hanged: I an∣swered, My Lord, what I said to Joyce, is true; but if he hath writ anie more then I said to him, it is false: so the Gentleman by great providence was released: then they come to the Exa∣mination of me again. Bradshaw. Cornet Joyce, will you swear this is true as is written in this paper? Joyce: Yes, my Lord, I dare swear it is true. Smith. Ha my Lord, he will swear as much against you, if there were but a change of Government. Bradshaw. Come my merry blade, it will not be a time for you to dallie; therefore be ingenuous. Smith. Pray my Lord, let me speak a few words for my self. Bradshaw. You speak! away, away. Smith. Why my Lord, pray let me have as much priviledge as Paul a∣mongst the Heathens had, that is, to speak for my self, my Lord.
Bradshaw. Why, you do not count us Heathens; do you? Smith. No not I my Lord; but as Paul had that priviledge amongst the Heathens, I hope I shall have the same amongst you thar are godly Christi∣ans. Bradshaw. Come my winding Blade, what have you to say? Smith. Why my Lord, Joyce did tell me at the Hart, that he was an A∣gent of Charles Stuari, and that a friend of his at London, had sent down into the VVest, fifty thousand li. and ten thousand Case of Pistols; he drunk the Kings health, and shewed me the Kings Commission. Bradshaw. VilOh my merrie Blade, we do allow him that, to try you and such as you are. Joyce. Hark, he can remember what I said, but he cannot remember what he said! Smith. But my Lord, that which he laieth to my charge, is false: and
my Lord I have witness to swear what he said. But what he saith of me, there is none will swear but himself. Bradshaw. Well, we do allow him in it. Smith. Do you so my Lord? why, you told me my Lord, when I came first before you, that I should remem∣ber I had a soul that I should seek to save, and a Conscience I should not stretch, and I must not lye, and may he lye my Lord? hath he a conscience, and may he stretch it? hath he a soul, and may he damn it my Lord? Bradshaw. What my merrie blade, do you come with your Application? wel'e shew you fair play my merrie Blade: come, call the Keepers of New∣gate in. Smith. The Keepers are come. Bradshaw. You must look after this fellow verie narrowlie, for he can peach above fourtie men, and he will not; but we will make him, ere we have done with him.
Smith. So away they had me, and when I came to VVhite-hall Gate, they called for a Coach. Keepers. You must pay for the Coach. Smith. No, I will never pay for a Coach to carrie my self to Goal. Keepers. You had as good pay for it, for you shall before you come out of prison. Smith. So they had me away to New-gate, and as soon as I came; they put two great chains on my legs, and put me into the Dungeon again, and pulled my coat from my back for fees; then I bought some candles, and when they were lighted, I was in a worse condition than before; for the Rats did so run about me, that I was driven to keep a stick in my hand to keep them from me, yet I lay there seven or eight days and nights, being in a sad condition▪ for the chain was so little for my legs, and their beating of them made them swell very much, so
that they entred into my flesh; at last, the Keeper seeing me in that conditi∣on, said, Keeper. If you will give me a shil∣ling, I'e take off one of your chains. Smith. I will. The Keeper fearing I would not live, let me out into the Masters Prison; there I stayed a week before I was had down to the Council; then I went, where was Disborough, Bradshaw, Vane, Colonel Berry. Bradshaw. Come my merrie Blade, what are you convinced of your bloo∣die actions yet? mith. Trulie my Lord, you lay that to my charge which I know nothing of. Brad. Come my merrie blade, what Arms did the Lord Herbert carry down in his Coach? Smith. None my Lord, that I know of. Bradshaw. Did he carrie none to carry on the Interest of Charles Stu∣art.
Smith. Indeed I did see none my Lord. Joyce. Well there is one at Marle∣borough, as will justifie, that you do know of it. Smith. What is he sir? Joyce. It is one Thomas Goddard, and he will justifie more than this too. Smith. Then you may fetch him, for I know nothing. Now this Ioyce when he was at Marleborough, did provide a Writing, and did desire Mr. Goddard to put his hand to it, for it was a thing of no value, because he could not write, nei∣ther did he understand what was writ, put a mark, which had like to have un∣done my self and all the rest: so I sent down unto Mr. Goddard, and he sent me word he knew nothing, upon vvhich I escaped their snare. But to go on vvhere vve left. Bradshaw. Come my merrie Blade, vvhat design is that vvhich Mr. VVil∣liam Pryn is going to carry on?
Smith. None that I know of, my my Lord. Bradshaw. Do you not know? wel'e make you know before we have done with you. Smith. My Lord, let me keep a good conscience according to your own desire. Bradshaw. No, my merrie Blade, it is not my desire, you should conceal the enemies of the Nation, so as to wrong your conscience, as you do: Come my merry Blade, did you see any of his Books? Smith. Yes my Lord. Bradshaw. And what doth he write. Smith. He writes, that this Parlia∣ment that sits now, is a Rump: the Clerks writ this down. Bradshaw. Did not there come Mr. Clark to this Prin at Marleborough? Smith. Yes my Lord, there was one Mr. Clark as vvas vvith him there? Bradshaw. And vvhat did he do there?
Smith. Trulie my Lord, I do not know. Bradshaw. Do'st think he did car∣rie on any interest with him against us? Smith. None, my Lord, that I know of Brad. Well, my merry blade, you shall have fair play, but do not play with the halter. Smith. Fair play, my Lord, is to be tryed by the Common Law; and then my evidience may be tried as well as yours; and then my Lord, I shall have the priviledge of twelve men, and that is the priviledge of every English man, for everie Emperour to be tryed by twelve Emperours, and everie King by twelve Kings; and I by twelve per∣sons according to my degree; that is the Common Law, my Lord. Brad. Do you know Law so well? we will show you Law; for the Parlia∣ment have given Order that there shall be a high Court of Justice to trie all plotters.
Smith. You may do what you please my Lord, for I am but a poor Black-smith; but yet I have read the Common Law, and cannot find of anie Court higher than a Court of Parliament. Brad. Come my merrie blade, you shall find a court higher. Smith. Nay my Lord, if you please, I will send to Marleborough and have their Letters to vindicate me. Disborough. There is but three ho∣nest men in Maleborough. Smith. Who are they, my Lord? Disborough. Mr. Hews a Minister, Mr. Keynes, and Mr. Blisset; but I fear Mr. Blisset is poysoned in drinking too deep in the Presbyterian cup. Smith. I will send down to them, my Lord, and gain their Letters: I sent to them, and Mr. Hews did for me as it I had been a Child of his own, and so did Mr. Blasset, in making known unto them how I was betray'd, and Trapand, and that it would be a disgrace unto their Government.
Then some of the Council sent down to Mr Hews the Minister, to know whether I was a Black-smith or no; and he did acquaint them that I was a Black-smith; and if they did know what I was, as he did, they would not have kept me so long a prisoner; all which they did, notwithstanding there were some bloody-minded men per∣swaded them to the contrarie, but I am the more engaged ever to pray for them. Bradshaw. Can you write, or no? Smith. Yes, I can my Lord. Bradshaw. Keeper of Newgate, look after this fellow, and keep him from Pen, Ink, and Paper; for he hath re∣ceived Letters, and Papers from those in the County to conceal them. Smith. There is no need of that, my Lord, for I know nothing of them, but honest men. Bradshaw. Mr. Carter of Marleborough hath left off his pleading, to act against us, and you know it well enough my merrie blade.
Smith. No my Lord; truely I know of no such thing. Then they had me away again to Newgate by the Order of Disborough, Vane, and Bradshaw; where three Gentlemen came and gave one shilling six pence to have me over to the Celler to drink with them, whom I did not know. Gentlemen. Pray sit down with us; what is the reason that you are used so cruelly? Smith. Because I would not swear that all the forgeries as Joyce, and Smale, and Tynne, and others had in∣vented, was truth, to bring innocent blood on the Nation, when there hath been so much spilt alreadie. Gentlemen. But you need not lie in this condition if you would but speak truth; for thou knowest that these Presbyterians are bloodie, and thou can'st not wrong them, say what thou wilt; for surelie they are in the plot, and therefore thou needest not scruple swearing.
Smith. Trulie, for my part I know nothing but honestie by them, and therefore they shall rack me before I will wrong my Conscience to bring innocent blood on the Nation. Gentlemen. We thought to have spoken for you, and got you out; but seeing you are hardned in your wick∣edness, you may lie by it for us. Smith. Then I was had to prison again, and the next week I was had down to the Council; and when I came there. Bradshaw. Well said Bradshaw, will you set your hand to this writing? Smith. Let me hear what it is first, my Lord. For I remember the History of Q. Mary, that she provided had a wri∣ting to put her sister to death; but King Philip reading it over did save her life, and himself out of the snare; therefore Ile read it before I will set my hand unto it, my Lord. Bradshaw. He read it. Smith. So he read it, and it was
such lyes, that it made my hair stand an end, and my heart trembled, for the whole scope of it was to bring the number of fourtie men to ruine, which I would not. Bradshaw. Come my merrie blade; seeing you will cast away your self, and will no reveal the enemies of the Com∣mon-wealth; prepare your self for death, carry him away to Newgate. Smith. So they had me away to Newgate again, and as I was going out of the Chamber, I did meet with one Mr. John Dove of alisbury, Pray sir commiserate my condition. Dove. What art? Smith. A poor Black-smith of Marle∣borough that was betrayed by Cornet Joyce which carried the King prisoner from Holmby; and he will cause my life to be taken away, if I will not swear that all that he saies is true. Dove. Thou shalt be hanged for meO Villain! right or wrong, if you will not reveal these Traitors as Joyce hath named.
Smith. So away they had me to prison, at which time the Sessions was in the Old Baily, where they had me, and made me give three shillings ten pence for Bail-dock monie; then was I call'd to the Bar, where the Order was read which the Council of State had sent up with me, which was as follow∣eth; viz. William Houlbrook commit∣ted for high Treason for holding correspon∣dence with the enemies of this Common-wealth, by Bulstrode Whitlock Presi∣dent. To which there was no answer demanded of me, as I hoped there would, that I might have been tryed by the Common Law, that my Evi∣dence might have been heard as well as his; for I much feared the High Court of Justice (as it was called) but having nothing said to me, I was carried to Newgate again; after which, I was had again before the Council where Brad∣shaw was. Bradshaw. Be honest, and remem∣ber there is a God, and do not con∣ceal
the enemies of the Common-wealth as you do? Smith. If I did know of anie as did act against such godlie Christians as you are, if I did not reveal them, I was worse than accursed. Bradshaw. You are a hollow-heart∣ed blade, you can please all Govern∣ments. Smith. Then my Lord, I am the fit∣ter to live in the Common-wealth, for my work lies so amongst them, that I must do it alwaies, provided with a good Conscience. Bradshaw. But do'st hear my mer∣rie blade; why di'st thou weep when thou wast with Cornet Joyce at Marl∣borough? Smith. Why my Lord, it was be∣cause I did understand he was a going on a design against such godlie per∣sons as you are. Brad. No my merrie blade; you wept, because thatO Villain. Tyrant Charles Stuart did non enjoy his own again, as you termed it.
Smith. No my Lord, it was not so; for vvhat I said to him, vvas onlie to trie him. Bradshaw. O my merrie blade! if he had not medled vvith you, you vvould never have medled vvith him. Smith. You say right, my Lord; for it did not belong to me, because you had put him in trust to do t. Brad. Why, my merrie blade, do you meddle so much with State mat∣ters as you do? cannot you follovv your Trade, and let them alone. Smith. Truelie my Lord, the peace and vvelfare of this Nation doth as much concern me to look after, as it doth your Lordship. Brad. Come, what is Rachley of Marlborough? doth not he carrie on the interest of Charles Stuart? Smith. Not that I know of, my Lord. Brad. Doth not he entertain some of Charles Stuarts friends in his house?
Smith. Why my Lord? if any comes to his house, he must not turn them out of doors, because his house is a house of entertainment, and there is no reason for it, so long as they do not act against you, my Lord. Brad. Come, he is a notable youth, he was one of my Lord Cottingtons Stewards. Smith. What if he was my Lord? so long as he acts nothing against you, it matters not. Brad. Come my merrie blade; see∣ing you are so hardened in your wick∣edness, provide for death; we thought to have bestowed riches, and honour upon you, but now there will be no hopes. Smith. I beseech you, my Lord to show mercy unto me, and let me not be sent unto Newgate again; for the allow∣ance of the Prison is but bread and wa∣ter. Brad. It is no matter, it is too much for you.
Smith. Then he raged like a Lion, and would not let anie one ask me a anie question but himself. Then came in the Lord Disborough; my Lord, pray come to dinner, you will do your ho∣nonour much wrong by keeping your self fasting, and so long in examinati∣ons Bradshaw. Pray my Lord, hold your peace; if you will not look after the welfare and peace of the Nation, I will; and I have lighted on a cross-graind fellow, that I cannot get one word out of him. Smith. Why my Lord? You gave me Order that I should keep a good Conscience, and so I will; for I can bring two or three witnesses, and they will justifie that I said no such words unto Joyce as he layeth unto my charge. Bradshaw. You bring witnesses! you shall find that one witness vvill be e∣nough for a Commou-vvealth against yours.
Smith. Then he called the Keepers of Newgate in. Bradshaw. Carrie this fellovv avvay, and bring him again next Thursday, then he shall have his revvard. Smith. So they had me away again to prison, then I sent to my Mother to desire her if she could do me any good, that she would do it, for on Thursday I did expect death; so she went unto Mr Hews the Minister and Mr Blisset, two of the three as before mentioned, who writ letters to the Council on my behalfe. I also sent to Captaine But∣ler, and his brother Major Butler, they being men that I had been acquainted with at Marllborough who spoke for me, and told Col. Berry that was their Co∣lonel, what I was, that I never acted any thing for any Government; that I kept a great charge from the Parish; and well read in histories; and desired, him to speak for me, which he did and did me much good; then I sent to the Lord Strickland who proved my
very good freind; for in speaking for me, he indangered himself: There was also one Mr Booth in Iremonger Lane London, who marryed Master Proffets daughter of Malberough, who was very kind and loving unto mee, in visiting and relieving of me when I was in the Dungeon with Chains on my Leggs, by going downe to my Lord Siden∣ham and others on my behalf; But Sidenham reply'd I was a dangerous fel∣low, and Committed for high treason; and therefore wished him to be careful for fear of bringing himself into trou∣ble: But he answered, my Lord, I doe not justifie him; if he hath deserved to be hanged, let him be hanged; but pray my Lord, let him be fairly tryed: and let him be removed out or that na∣sty Dungeon wherein he lyeth, and there shall be good security given for his forth-coming, or to let him be re∣moved into a more aiery prison for his health; but yet I could never hear of any thing that Sidenham did for me;
for he (good man) was perswaded I was a Jesuite. When Mr. Booth gave me this Relation, I thought I should have lost my life, and the rather, because my friends met with Joyce in Cheap∣side, and desired him to have mercy on me; he did say that I was a Rogue to go to make him a lyar; but before he had done with me, he would have me hanged, drawn, and quartered; which friends of mine did come and acquaint me of it. So I made a Petition and sent it down to the Lord Fleetwood, and when he read it, he did much detest a∣gainst the bloody actions of Joyce, and his crew; so he went unto the Coun∣cil and told them it would be a dis∣grace to their Government to hearken to such a bloodie fellow as Joyce and the rest of his crew were; so they gave him a favourable answer; the next night there came Major Goff of Marlborough that knew Joyces actions, and what bloodie designs he went upon, so that he went down to the Lord Fleetwood,
and told him it was a scandal to Reli∣gion to uphold such a bloodie person as Ioyce was; for he knew that I never acted anie thing against them. The next day being Thursday, I was had down again, where was Bradshaw, and Col. Morley, and one more. Brad. Have you lighted upon any trappanners in Newgate? Smith. Upon which words I was at a stand, fearing some had informed against me; for there were many such in that place. Brad. Why do you not answer? Smith. My Lord, Newgate is pre∣pared for such persons; and I wonder my Lord, Joyce hath not been sent thither all this time, at which some of them smiled, which made me rejoyce. Bradshaw. Come, we are willing to shew you mercie. Smith. Are you so my Lord? then blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, it is Christs own Ser∣mon my Lord. Bradshaw. Well, we see you are but
ill beloved in the Countrie where you live; for there's but few few friends as speak for you in this your time of ad∣versitie. Smith. I am as ill beloved in the Countrie as you are, my Lord. Brad. Upon the same account as I am! Smith. I do not know that my Lord; it is for being faithful to the Common-wealth. At which the Coun∣cil fell a laughing. Brad. I believe that I am beloved ill enough, thou saist right in that; come, what security hast? for thou must be bound in a Bond of two hundred pound. Smith. No less my Lord! I was ne∣ver worth so much in my life. Bradshaw. What securitie hast thou? Smith. If you will have two sub∣stantial men, there is the Lord Strick∣land, and another Lord. Brad. What, no meaner persons!
it seems you are beloved my merrie blade; two meaner persons shall serve. Smith. Then there is a Major and a Captain, my Lord. Brad. Meaner persons than they will serve. Smith. Then here is a Cook and a Coachman my Lord. Then he spoke to the Clerk who proved my good frind. Brad. What is this Cook? Clerk. A verie honest man my Lord, he lives but at Chairing-cross. Brad. Let him be one then; what's the name of the other? Smith. I shall desire to speak with him first, my Lord. Brad. Take the Cook now while he is here, and let him go on his Paroll till he bring the other. Clerk. Yes my Lord. Smith. Pray my Lord, as you say you are merciful to me, I desire it may extend a little farther. Brad. What is that you would have?
Smith. I would have my fees abated, my Lord, for I am but a poor Black-smith, and have nothing but what I earn by the sweat of my brows, and I have paid much monie alreadie. Brad. ☞ If you will not pay your fees that are due to the Keepers, you must lie there and rot for me; you may thank God we give you your libertie. Smith. If it must be so my Lord, I cannot help it. So when the Cook had signed the Bond, who was my verie good friend in my extremitie, whom I am ever bound to pray for, Door keeper. Come Smith, you must come in. Smith. Yes, I am a coming. Brad. Come, you must take the Engagement. Smith. What is that my Lord? I never took ame. Brad. If you mean to have your li∣bertie, you must take one now. Smith. Pray let me hear what it is my Ld, first, because I shall make conscience of what I take.
Bradshaw. You shall. The Clerk read the Engagement: You shall be true and faithful unto the Common-wealth of England, as it is now established, with∣out King, single Person or House of Lords; And you shall be ready upon all Summons that shall be sent from the Parliament or Council of State, to make you personal appearance before them: And you shall not Act nor encourage any one to Act a∣gainst this Government. Bradshaw. What say you to this, Smith? Smith. I conceive my Lord, that the Contents of the words, is, that I must be true and faithful to you as long as you are our Governours; and so I do not act against you, it matters not who do: I shall be very faithfull, my Lord. Brad. I wish you be. Smith. My Lord, you may know the tree by his fruits, and me by my actions. Then the keepers had me away again to Newgate, until I had payed
my fees: so I sent to some freinds, and borrowed the money, so I paid them their due as they said, which was one shilling for the coach to White-hall, and one shilling: the keeper for going with me one shilling up again; and three shil∣lings 6 d. a week for my lodging, with many other such like unreasonable pri∣zes, that it cost me eleven pound in all, although I had great relief from my freinds in City and Country. Then I went to the Coachman for him also to engage for me, whose name was Ed∣mund Poynes, who went along with me and signed the bond; and as we were coming from the Council we met with Cornet Smale. Smale. What are you at Libertie? if you are at Liberty, and will not bring these persons in, as you have peached, it will make all the faithful friends of the Parliament forsake them. Smith. It is you that have peached them sir, not I; it would be happie for the Parliament, if they were freed
from such servants as you are. Away I went from them. Now Christian Reader, thou maist finde what per∣sons these have been by this true Re∣lation from first to last: Then I went home in Esquire Riches Coach of Sun∣ning, who was my verie good friend; and when I came home, there I heard what Joyce and his Crew had done when I was in prison; First they went to the high Sheriffe, and said, Ioyce. Why do you not raise your troop? Sheriff. because I had no order. Ioyce. I have then. And shewed his or∣der (but his Commission was out seven or eight daies before he came there) so that the Sheriff escaped the snare: then Smale went to the Sheriff, and told him that I had peacht him of great crimes, and wished him to send for Joyce; for he was very sorry he should be brought into trouble, Joah like, pretending love, yet meaning to mur∣der him. Then Joyce plaid upon Mr.
Rashly, and desired him to drink the Kings health, for he had lost all for be∣ing for the King; but his wife knowing him, by that means he escaped the snare; then they went to Mr. Web Minister of Ogbourn, and said, if he would do any good for the King, this was his time, for they were his Agents; but by Gods providence, that good man escaped the snare; then they went to Mr. Hunt of VVick by Marleborough, and said they were Farmers, knowing him to be for the King, and suffering much for him; they plaid upon him, but he escaped the snare: Then Tynne came from the Angel to the Hart, & pretend∣ed himself to be for the Parliament, and I think he was for the Devil: Ioyce pretended to be for the King, so Tynne took Ioyce prisoner, and Ioyce cried out he was undone, for the Round-heads had taken him prisoner; and desired the servants to rescue him from them, but the servants by Gods providence did not: but the Chamberlain told Tynne,
if he would lie with Ioyce, he would make a bed for them together; but Tynne said, Ioyce look'd like an honest man; therefore he would crust him to lie by himself; for he did believe he would be forth coming: But to reveal all the Actions that were done, it would be too long: so after I came from London, down came that bloody Villain Smale, who laboured so hard to have me mur∣therd, because I would not bring these Noble men into trouble; he came to the White Hart, and told Mr. Rashly, that I had peach't him and Capt. Bur∣gess of great crimes at the Council, but the Clerk being a friend of his, he caus∣ed him to strike their names out, when he did all he could to bring them into trouble, and threatned me I should be hang'd, if I did not bring them in, and yet all this did he, because they should not mistrust him that he had any hand in the bringing of them in, and Iudas like, pretending to love them, yet en∣deavoured to betray them, in setting
down what they pleased, and bringing me to swear that all was true, to carrie on a fair shew amongst men, as if they were innocent and bore them no ill; and when they came to London, they must be believed, and not; I if I had twenty witnesses, it must go against me: And if this be the good old Cause, (as the Rump have cried out so for) to bring so much innocent blood on the Nation, when there hath been so much spilt already, I must say with the Letany good Lord, deliver us from such men. Thus I have made known ac∣cording to my weak abilitie, what mi∣sery I have gone through, and what ado I had to keep a good conscience a∣mongst them that did long for blood. If God had not been with me, I had ne∣ver been able to escape with life: for Ioyce would have sworn through an inch-board (as the Proverb is) but he would have brought these Noble men to Ruin, and then we should have had a Thanks-giving day throughout the
Nation for joy, as if God was the Au∣thor of their bloodie and traiterous actions, and Ioyce might damn his soul by lying, because he was for a Com∣mon-wealth: but I must not, which was my happiness. Let all the world judge what they were. Now (Christian Reader (as God hath been pleased in much mercy to look down upon these three poor Na∣tions, to bring us under that ancient form of Government, of King, Lords and Commons, let us seek unto God by prayer, for a blessing on our gracious Soveraign Lord King Charls the se∣cond, to submit and obey him, which is our dutie, and then we shall have hopes of being setled in peace after so manie years distraction. And now Christian Reader, I have shewed thee how Ioyce and the rest en∣deavoured to ruine verie many of the Nobilitie and Gentrie in this Nation, as afore-mentioned, by their false in∣formations, to gain their Estates; and
how they appeared like Angels, when indeed no better then Devils; and I have made known to thee what persons they were, and how these Villains worked upon me at first, and their Actions to the last; yet by the provi∣dence of God, I was delivered from them, and kept a good conscience, which is my comfort. Therefore from such bloody men, God keep all good people; which is and shall be the daily prayer of him, Who is thine to serve thee, William Houlbrook. To God be all the Glory, Amen. FINIS.
