H3284 e569_17 R206312 99865485 117729
A HUE AND CRY AFTER RELIGION and JUSTICE. Lost in the year 1641. and hath not been heard of since CHARLS the first, left the City of LONDON. With the Descriptions, Marks, Causes, Symptomes and effects thereof. Also the practices of Injustice and Irreligi∣on, with the execution thereof, Cha∣racterized. Printed in the Year 1649.
A Hue and Cry after Religion and Justice. O Yes, — O yes, — O yes: If a∣ny man or woman can bring us tydings of the greatest losse that ever came to this King∣dom and City, since CHARLS the first left the place; you may know her by these marks, her head is fil'd with divine learning; from her eies drop the heavenly dew of sacred Scripture; her tongue is not tipt with fil'd oratory, but truths holy me∣thod; in one hand shee carries Charity, in the other Justice: In her heart the word of God; her feet fixt upon a Rock; and on each side stands Faith and Hope: her hand∣maids that attends her, true Doctrine and sincerity: since we lost this inestimable (not to be priz'd) Jewell, is crept in irreligion, she carries these marks about her; her head is fild with Schismaticall inventions and opinions, bringing up Atheists, Anabaptists, Seperatists, Arrians, Indepen∣dents, and the Devil and all; that by their damn'd heresies, has begot more sects and schismes (religious I cannot call them) then the blind Mollossians had Idols, who for every day in the year had a severall God; and by these swarms of Locusts, the whole land hath been infected, and involv'd in bloud and destruction of Prince and People: from her eies drop the tears of faction and dissimulation: The Crocadiles of Nile, are no more killing, nor destructive to the body, then their hypocrisies to the soul. The dissem∣bling zelots (like the picture of Mary Magdalem, are pou∣ring forth their penitentiall tears in formality; you shall know him by these characters (I mean a holy brother or a Saint of Reformation) he is the disgrace of learning
when the want of litterature, or the abuse of understan∣ding in the speech or error, which begets Idolatry: he is an enemy to God, in the hurt of the People, and his own woe, in the abuse of the sacred Word of God: He is the shadow of a Candle that gives no light, but that which leads to darknesse: The sheep are unhappy that live in his fold, when they shall either starve or feed on the ground: he breeds this war in the wits of his audience, when his life is contrary to the nature of his instructions: He lives in a Room where he troubles a world, and in the shadow of a Saint is little better then a Devil: he makes Religi∣on of sin, and with a counterfeit humility, covereth im∣comparable pride. In sum, he is the picture of hypocrisie, the spirit of heresie; a scandall to the Church, and cala∣mity to the Common-wealth. Irreligion, are like golden pils, that seem fair to the eie, but are bitter to the tast; shee hath her eloquent glos∣ses to deceive the ignorant, and delude the simple with erroneous doctrine; she thunders out what torments are appointed for pride, malice, vain-glory, Adultery, Mur∣der, Religion, and covetousnesse; when shee her self is the nurse of all these vices; In one hand she holds fast Charity; and though she will take from the poorest, yet the father∣les and widow shall not be reliev'd with a peny; she per∣haps will pray for you; but if her prayers were worth a peny, she scarce would part with them; sometimes a large oration for the poor shee will make to stir up good peo∣ples charity; and what's the cause? that shee may catch the fish, and give the poor the shell: she is not only the Tyth-taker, but the gleaner of the harvest; leaving nothing to feed the hungry, but the stubble of the field, stuffed with the weeds of schisme and Rebellion; these are the tenths of the times, and these are our ages charity. In the other hand shee holds forth large volumes of soul-cheating doctrines, in which is writ such cunning sophistry, such perswasive oratories, deluding principles, and counterfeit characters of seeming honesty, with such ample quotations out of Scriptures, as if her heare and
tongue were Relatives, when they are as far distant as the North Pole is from the South; these are the State Iuglers of the Church, the black Saints of the times, the righteous of the Land, that love peace and truth, and yet have banisht and destroyed both; these are the upright Pilots, that hath split us upon Rocks of desparation: the true guides that lead a stray all that follow them. On each side of her stands dissimulation and deceit; her foot fixt upon the world and worldly things: her attendants are time plea∣sers, or temporizers, such who (more for coyn then con∣science; more for Revenues, then Religion) walk in sheeps clothings, but inwardly they are ravening wolves; these are the Monsters of our times. Truth saies, 'tis better save then kill; falshood saies, 'tis better kill then save: Truth saith, give unto God the things that belong unto God, and unto Caesar the things that belong unto Caesar: falshood robs both God and Caesar of their due. Truth saies, have not an evil thought of thy King, not in thy pri∣vate chamber; Falshood studies to deprave with calumnious language (him whom God hath set over us, to be obeyed and honoured of all honest men) but to depose and mur∣der, is the doctrine of Devils. Religion warrants us to pray for the King; Irreligion counts it a sin (makes it Treason) to mention him in our prayers, or once to hear his name, and superstition to behold the Lyon and Ʋnicorn in any Church-window; or painted cloath. If any one there be can bring tydings thereof (for true Religion is lost) let them bring news to the Cryer (the man in the Moon) and they shall be well rewarded for their pains, and have M. Peters large revenues that is given him for his false doctrine; unlesse it be that which the Butcher cudgel'd out of him; and M. Walker (the supposed Hebriti∣an) his large benefice of Ʋxbridge, and instead of the pilla∣ry, leave him the Gallowes. And so God save King CHARLS the second.
Wonder of Ages how is Brittains State, Whose Glory once the World did wonder at; Thus Metamorphised: and of late become, The scorn and scandall of all Christendom. Did ever Land with blessings more abound then this? Oh this do's as it were confound My senses; when I think what once we were; And what in these distracted times now are: Nay, what as yet we may be; can a Land, Against it self divided, safely stand? Such is our sad condition; whilst that we, Thus strangly 'mongst our selves doe disagree: And what is worse, we still pretend the Cause To be Religion, Liberties and Laws; For which we struggle thus: when as we know, By sad experience, it is nothing so. Then tole the Bell, Religion gasping lies; And bid farewell to Lawes and Liberties. Till CHARLS the second, our dread Soveraign shall, Return in Triumph to content you all. FINIS.
