H3367 E403_1 99862329 160450
THE HUMBLE Acknowledgement AND Congratulation of many thou∣sands young men and Apprentices in and about the City of London, to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. With his Excellencies Answer to the same. Dated at Ringston August 19. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. Signed, John Rushworth. Secr. Aug: 20 LONDON, Printed for Laurence Chapman. 1647.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captaine Generall of all the Forces in ENGLAND and WALES. The humble acknowledgement and Congratulation of thousands of young men and Apprentices, in and about the City of London. Most worthy Generall, THe extremities of this Nation grow∣ing great (the Enemies thereof be∣ing strong, and confident of suc∣cesse) and the visible meanes of our deliverance broken, and almost totally consumed, then it pleased the good hand of heaven to call forth your Excel∣lency, and those worthies with you (your faith∣full Commanders, Officers, and Souldiers,) to save this poore and distressed Kingdome, and although at first your strength was small, your encourage∣ments few, and your enemies many and powerfull, yet with all thankfulnesse we acknowledge, you
were not deterred thereby; but over looking all, (eying that Almighty power, by whose providence you were set a part for so great a worke) you marched out in his might, and became prospe∣rous; your enemies fell before you, their armies were vanquished, their strong holds surrendred to you, and the joyfull day of Englands peace, and longed for deliverance not onely dawned, but showne forth upon us; these clouds of feares, of ruine, of slavery, and oppression (which had till then beset us) began to scatter, and in our hopes and expectations were vanishing quite away. And when, againe, our restlesse enemies (seeing their open force could not prevaile) betook them∣selves to hellish policy, and under the face of friends and actions for common good, had laid surer (as they hoped) the foundations of their own boundlesse power and greatnesse, the restau∣ration of their former tyranny, and the finall ruine of our Lawes and Liberties; and for that purpose had contrived the disbanding (and that with dis∣grace) of your Excellencies Army, as the onely ob∣stacle in the way of their Designes; then it pleased our good God againe to appeare, and your Excel∣lency, with your faithfull Commanders, Officers, and victorious Army, with their industrious Ad∣jutators, became (we gratefully acknowledge) hap∣py instruments in his hand, to discover and oppose those wicked Designes; whereby the dying hopes of this distressed Nation againe revived, ere long to see a happy settlement of its peace and free∣dome.
And when againe, our malitious enemies had scattered their poyson in this great Citty, expect∣ing the venome thereof would diffuse it selfe, not onely here, but from hence (as from the heart) into all the parts of this Kingdome, and had there∣by so far prevailed, as to force the Parliament in∣to a compliance with them, to engage many of the Grandees, and some of the Youngmen of this City to prepare and act for a new war, and in op∣position of your Excellency, to joyne themselves in a dangerous Bond and engagement, and (ha∣ving forcibly gotten the power and Militia of this City into their hands) listed and armed many vile and dissolute persons, Reformadoes and renegado souldiers, and by their hands had begun the tra∣gedy of Warre and bloodshed in this City, at the Guildhall thereof upon peaceable and unarmed men, and threatned the speedy ruine of the well∣affected therein, who would not joyne with them in their barbarous and destructive practices. Then againe we do with all thankfulnesse acknowledge) that your Excellency with your renowned Army, became a blessing unto this City and Kingdome, and with incredible speed (drawing together from parts greatly remote each from other) came sea∣sonably to the helpe and deliverance of this City, (then with all its might acting towards its own ru∣ine) and setling the Parliament of England, who by the tumults raised, and encouraged from that City, was dispersed, and forced to quit the Hou∣ses, and depart thence, to your Excellency for protection.
All which your most worthy services for your native country, as we cannot but with all joy and thankefulnesse acknowledge, so we doubt not, but the memoriall of them will be a crown of glory and honour upon your head, and upon the heads of your faithfull commanders and souldiers to all posterity. And although we could not (as we would ma∣nifest our hearts in a visible acting for you in this late time of need, yet let your Excellency be plea∣sed to accept of our refusals to joyne or comply with any thing bearing a face of opposition to you, (notwithstanding the threats of death for so doing) as an undoubted testimony of our resolution, to live and die with your Excellency and your army, in setling his Majesties rights, the Parliaments priviledges, and the peace and freedome of this Nation, the which we doe still retaine, and shall further manifest, as God shall give an oppertunity, and your Excellency require it at our hands.
Gentlemen, I Have received your congratula∣tion of the late endeavours of this Army, and great successes with which God hath blest us against the open and secret Enemies to the interest of this Kingdome, manifesting with many cordiall expressions your good resentment of our late procee∣dings in prosecution of those publique ends, for the accomplishment whereof you have not onely declined and refused compliance with the Kingdomes Enemys, but have freely tendered a joynt adventure of your selves with us when occasion shall require: All which I cannot but gladly receive with a thankefull accep∣tance, returning the like acknoweldgement of your good and honest offer, as you did of our endea∣vours, and doe desire that you will continue still in your severall places the promotion and pursuance of those publique ends afore-mentioned, and I doubt not but the same Divine providence that hath been our guide hitherto will still direct us and all honest men going hand in hand with us toward an happy
conclusion of our present troubles and distractions, and setling of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom in safe, peace, and freedome. Kingston, August 19. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellenc Sir Thomas Fairfax. Signed John Rushworth, Sec. For the young men and the Apprentics in and about the City of London, who subscribed a Paper, entituled, The humble Acknowledgement and Congra∣tulation, &c. FINIS.
