I147 e468_13 R205334 99864742 116974
THE ndependents Declaration AND REMONSTRANCE To the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND DECLARING Their full Resolution and Intentions touching the Kings Majesty, and the Treaty; And their Protestation to both Houses, concerning their proceedings in the said Treaty, and concluding of a Peace with the KING. ALSO, eir Proposals to the House of Commons, touching the trust reposed in them by the People of England, shewing, that if they act against the truth reposed in them, the People are bound in conscience and duty to act against them. Whereunto is annexed, His Majesties new Propositions read in both Houses yesterday; and a joyfull Message sent to the Citizens of London. With His Majesties Proposals touching the Army, and the Independent Party. Imprinted at London for Nathaniell Gibson, 1648.
A Joyfull MESSAGE FROM THE ARMY To the Citizens of London; declaring their resoluti∣ons and intentions concerning the Kings Majesty, and the Treaty, &c. Gentlemen, and Fellow-Commoners, VVHereas, there are divers false sugge∣stions and charges laid upon the army by the adverse party in & about the city of London, meerly to blast their candid intentions, and to make them odious in the sight of all men, by
branding them with the Badge of Disloyalty; saying They would trample down Government, and reign them∣selves as Kings; but I can assure you, their hearts are of known integrity and faithfulnesse, both towards King, City, and Country, and are resolved to see the King invested, the Kingdom setled, and the Liberties & Fran∣chises of the City of London firmly preserved and maintained, without any violation whatsoever; and as a testimy of their fidelity, have declared that they will use their utmost endeavours for the composing of all differences, and inthroning of the King in his Royal Throne at Westminster, and unite Him with His great Councell of England, which God grant may speedily be effected. This is the sense of many in the Army, al∣though divers objects against the same; especially the Northern party, and their Adherents, who have presen∣ted their Remonstrance and Desires to both Houses, as followeth. Humbly desiring, That Justice may be impartially and speedily executed upon the grand Delinquents of the Kingdomes, especially such as have been the onely promoters of this last Rebellion, who are traytors by the Law of the Land, and ougt to be made exemplary without partiality, there being no exception therein to excuse any particular person (though the highest and greatest Incendiary and Delinquent) from Justice, who have confessed themselves guilty of all the bloud, ra∣pine, murther, & almost utter ruine of these three poor dying, and last gasping Kingdoms, with whom a Treaty must be had when they are twice conquered, and when God hath delivered them up into the hands of his peo∣ple to the end Justice may be executed on them, and
their lives sacrificed as traytors to all future Genera∣ion. Further remonstrating and declaring, that with unexpressible grief of heart, they find the affections of Parliament alienated from them, in slighting their just and lawfull addresses, thinking them not worthy of an answer thereunto, whereby they conceive themselves in the capacity of enemies, or not free men, which will ustly challenge the same from them, as being their Deputies and Trustees, or else petitioning for things unjust, though they know they are according to their solemn League and Covenant, and their own procee∣dings and printed Declarations, upon which they inga∣ged with them, and for them; and without which, we should never have drawn a sword the second time in their quarrel. And declare, that if their intentions fur∣ther appear (as they have too much of late) to side with, and act for their enemies, and against the interest of them, and all the free Commons of England, in ma∣king their enemies and conquered slaves to be their masters and commanders, they must look to and de∣pend upon the law of nature for their preservation a∣gainst those divellish and malignant principle, to which they declare themselves open enemies, and resolve to he utmost of their abilities to oppose, with the losse of lives and fortunes. Protesting, still to keep their first integrity without spot or blemish, and not bow their knee to Baal at the Kings Command, neither at the Par∣iaments, and that if they act against the truth reposed in them by the people, the people are bound in consci∣ence and duty to act against them, Salus populi being Suprema Lex. Here endeth the Remonstrance.
His Majesties Message to all his loving Subiects. THis present Treaty is conceived to be the main Object of the whole Kingdom, whose eyes are fixed thereupon, expecting the happy tydings of Peace, to be sent forth by the blessed Dove with an Olive branch in her mouth, throughout all the cor∣ners of the Nation; and (in all probability) they are now ready to issue forth in streames of joy, to water the Plants of this late flourishing and fruitfull Island. For his Majesty (upon a conference with the Dukes▪ Marquesses, Bishops, Earles, Lords, and the rest of the Commissioners on his part) hath declared his unanimous Resolution for a mutuall agreement and compliance with his two Houses of Parliament, to all things by them desired, which may tend to the peace and safety of all his liege people throughout his Realmes and Dominions. And upon Thursday last delivered his gracious an∣swer and Royall Assent to the Commissioners at the Treaty, to the paper of Ireland, in all things by them desired, which was as followeth. That his Majesty doth condescend, That an Act of Parliament be passed, to declare and make void the Cessation of Ireland, and all treaties and conclusion of peace, or any articles thereupon with the Rebels, with∣out consent of both Houses. And that according to their Desire, He is pleased to settle the prosecution of the war in that Kingdome in his two Houses, to be managed by them: and that He is willing to assist and adhere to them therein, promi∣sing upon his Royall Word to do no Act to discoun∣tenance or molest them.
To the second clause therein inserted, His Majesty doth agree, That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be setled in that Kingdom by Act of Parliament, in such manner as both his two Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon, after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines sitting at West∣minster. To the third Clause, His Majesty giveth this An∣swer, That he will give His Consent that the Deputy Governour or Governours, and the Presidents of the severall provinces of that Kingdome, be nominated by his two Houses of the Parliament of England; as also all other Officers whatsoever, being limited for twen∣ty years from the 1 of July 1648. This Answer seemed very satisfactory, and upon re∣ceipt thereof the Commissioners presented a paper to his Maiesty for payment of the publique Debts of the Kingdom, which caused a large debate upon Friday; and after severall Arguments laid down by the Com∣missioners on both sides, the King promised to give a fi∣nall Answer the next day. And for the rest of the Propositions, there's no doubt but a speedy concurrence will be given to them all; for the Nobility and Clergy on the Kings side have de∣clared to his Majesty for peace; his Maiesty concurs with them therein, and hath promised to dispense with Episcopacy, and to settle the Directory, rather then to leave his people unsatisfied, or involve them in a fur∣ther effusion, or streams of bloud. And the Parliaments Commissioners goe hand in hand with them, promising to leave no means unattempted that may conduce to the peace and safety of all his Maiestie Realms and Dominions. Newport 16. Octob. 1648.
Newport 16. Octob. 1648. Letters from the Isle of Wight say, That the King and the Commissioners are almost come to a finall end and agreement, his Majesty hath passed the Bill for re∣calling all Honours conferred on any person by him since 1642. as the Parliament desired; and on Satur∣day told the Parliaments Commissioners, That the dayes alotted for the Treaty drew towards an end, and there∣fore he thought it time to present his paper of De∣sires, which were three. 1 That He might come to Lon∣don with Honour, freedom, and safety. 2 That He might have recompence for the yeares his Revenue hath beene kept from him. 3 That there may be an Act of Oblivion. And his Majesty saith, That He hath something to pro∣pound touching the Army, and those which they call the Independent party, which will give satisfaction to both, and prevent future differences. FINIS.
