i639 e124_31 99872851 125297
A PROCLAMATION published by the Lords Justices and Councell OF IRELAND, To annull and make void all Protecti∣ons unduly granted to the Rebels by certaine Commissioners in divers Counties in Vlster, &c. contrary to their instructions and the intenti∣on of the State. Printed at Dublin by William Bladen, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and now reprinted at London for Edward Husbands, 1642.
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
❧ A Proclamation, Published by the Lords Iustices and Councell of Ireland, to annull and make void all Protections unduly granted to the Rebels by certaine Com∣missioners in divers Counties in Vlster &c. con∣trary to their Instructions, and the inten∣tion of the State. W. Parsons, Jo. Borlase. WHereas in the beginning of this hideous and detestable Rebel∣lion, We the Lords Iustices and Councell, desirous, if it might be, to give some sudden stop there∣unto, so to prevent the spreading thereof, and the growth of it to that heigth to which it hath sithence risen, and concei∣ving that at that time the multitude was by evill Councell or false rumours, sedu∣ced to partake in that Rebellion, who not knowing the truth and depth of the combination, We did think, could not so wretchedly faile in their duty and loyalty to their most gracious King and Sove∣raign, as so universally to persist in their
course of disobedience to His Maiesties authority, but would with treatable and faire admonitions, laying before them their great danger and the iniquity of their enterprise, have returned to their obedience; Wee therefore on the 27 of Oetober last authorised divers persons ot quality and trust for the several Coun∣ties of Down, Antrim, Armagh, Mo∣naghan, Cavan, Tirone, and Ferma∣nagh (amongst other powers then en∣trusted with them) to parly with the Re∣bels, or any of them, and by Proclamati∣on, or otherwise, to proffer his Maiesties grace and mercy to them, or any of them, and to receive such of them into his Ma∣iesties grace and mercy as should submit themselves and desire the same. Yet We held it fit then to accompany the said Commission with our letters to the said Commissioners, wherein we signified to them, that although by the said Commis∣sion we gave them that power, yet wee did then let them know, that for those who were chiefe amongst the Rebels, and Ring-leaders of the rest to disobedi∣ence,
that we adiudged them lesse wor∣thy of favour than the others, whom they had mis guided. And therefore for those principal persons we required them to take care not to be too forward (with∣out first consulting this Board) in profe∣ring or promising mercy to those, unlesse they the said Commissioners saw it of great and unavoidable necessity: which power entrusted by Vs with the said Commissioners was then granted, in re∣spect of the comuncture of affairs at that tune, and to answer the then sudden ex∣tremities in the publike service. And wheras we have now received informa∣tion that a long time after the said power entrusted with them, and when the state  the Countrey was far different from  Condition wherein it stood, at the is∣suing of the said Commission, and after the generall Conspiracy was fully disco∣vered; and that the Rebels of all degrees and conditions had with hatefull and bloody obstinacy declared their purpose to extirp the British throughout the whole kingdom, without hope of recon∣cilement,
other then by ye strength of his Maiesties forces; some of the said Com∣missioners (notwithstanding the premo∣nition given them by our said Letters, & without consulting this Board therein) have given Protections of late to many of ye said Rebels, being principal persons & Freeholders, which protections are (in sundry respects) found to be a mighty hindrance to his Maiesties service in those parts, and tending to his Maie∣sties losse and disadvantage. And albeit we are informed that those persons so protected, have by their mis-behaviours since the protections granted to them, violated the expresse, or implyed conditi∣ons of all protections, which besides the unseasonablenesse of the granting of them, contrary to the intent of our d¦rection in our said Letters, might iustly give cause to have those Rebels immedi∣ately faln upon and cut off. Yet in regard we who are entrusted here by his Maie∣sty for the government of this his King∣dom and People, are so tender of his Maiesties honour, as we neither have
done, nor will do any thing, that by any construction, can be interpreted a breach of any word given by Vs, or any other authorised by Vs. We think fit before we proceed to the iust correction of those Rebels, hereby to publish & declare, that all the said Prote∣ctions granted since the first of March last to any person or persons whatsoever, in the County of Downe, or other Coun∣ties above named, shall at the end of ten dayes next after the publishing of this Proclamation at Down-Patrick or Strangford in the said County of Down, or at any other publike place in any of the said Counties respectively stand vod and be annulled, repealed and revoked. And we doe hereby accordingly from and af∣ter the said ten dayes revoke, repeale, make void and annull them, and every of them, to all intents and purposes, as if they had never been granted, and do or∣der that from and after the said ten daies, they be of no force, nor derive any benefit, protection or security to any of the parties to whom they were so granted. And this
Proclamation Wee require the Sheriff of the County of Down, and the seve∣rall Sheriffs of the said severall Coun∣ties respectively, to cause to be proclaimed and published at Down-Patrick and Strangford aforesaid, and at some pub∣like places in the said severall Counties respectively, that so all persons whom it may concern may take notice therof, and that hereafter when by the power and Strength of His Maiesties Army the said Offenders receive due punishment for their high transgressions, they may not have any colour to pretend the least breach of word in this Seate or any the Ministers thereof: Given at his Majesties Castle of Dublin the 19 day of August. 1642. La. Dublin. Ormond Ossory. Cha. Lambert. Ad. Loftus. I. Temple. Tho. Lucas. Ia. Ware. Rob. Meredith. FINIS.
