J1127 E121_18 R22589 99871793 124210
JOYFULL AND WELCOME NEVVES FROM SHREVVESBURY: Declaring the Proceedings of both Armies neer Shrewsbury, with an exact Relation of a Battell fought before the Wals of the said Town, October 3. 1642. Also a true Relation of a Battell fought in Wiltshire, by the Earle of Pembroke, with 500. men, against the Lord Coventry, with 1000. Horse and Foot, Octob. 4. Wherein 40. Cavaliers were slaine, 20. taken Prisoners, and all the rest put to flight, with the losse of 10. men. Brought by the last Post, Octob. 6. Likewise Prince ROBERTS Propositions to His Majesty concerning the knighting of certain Officers under His Command. Printed for Th. Rider. October 7. 1642.
JOYFULL NEWES FROM SHREWSBURIE: Declaring the proceedings of both Ar∣mies neere the said Towne, with an exact Relation of a Battell fought there, Octob. 3. Also a true Relation of a battell fought by the Earle of Pembroke in Wiltshire, with 500. men, against the Lord Coventry, with 1000. horse and Foot, October 4. HIs Excellency having left Lud∣low in a good state and conditi∣on, commanded Colonell Hales and Captain Brown to draw out a thou∣sand Foot and six hundred horse, and foure Peeces of Ordnance, and forth∣with to advance with all expedition to∣wards Shrewsburie, which they accor∣dingly
did: but so soone as the cavali∣ers had information of their coming, they marched out of the towne with a∣bout six thousand horse and Foot, and with all expedition they could came and met Captaine Browne: but soon were their joyes overwhelmed with sorrow: for before they had many blowes, the Earle of Essex came in with his Forces, which soon caused the Cavaliers to be∣take themselves to flight, the Earle of Lindsey their chief Generall being sorely wounded, and 50. of the cavaliers slaine, and not above nine of our men at the most. This was upon the fourth of O∣ctober, and the day following it was ex∣pected that there would be a generall meeting in the field of both Armies. Prince Robert, who hath since his coming into England beene very active to levie men, and raise Forces against his Majesties great Councel; the high Court of Parliament, having had some oppo∣sition lately at Worcester by the Parlia∣ments Forces, and gaining some honour
by reason that it was his happy fortune to win the day, and to take 3. of our Co∣lours, yet need he not boast of this: for in this skirmish he lost as many men as we, besides one of his chief comman∣ders, Wilmot by name. His Highnesse having received this opposition at Worcester, immediately marched with all his Army towards Ludlow, and when he came thither, he with all expedition sent to the Kings most excellent Majesty; and in the mes∣sage he sent he propounded these parti∣culars, viz. 1. That as he had formerly begun, in obedience to his sacred Majesty, to use his best skill and endeavours to aid and assist his excellent Majesty, and to pre∣serve his royall Person in safety, so doth he hold the same resolution still. 2. That seeing those noble and he∣roick spirits which he hath chosen to be Commanders under his Highnesse have so bravely behaved themselves, and have had such happy and fortunate successe,
Therfore he doth humbly desire, that His Majesty would be pleased to knight some of them which are now come to His Majesty, because it wilbe a great in∣couragement to all the rest of the Army. There were lately certain Letters sent from Scotland to the Parliament, and read in the House of Commons, dire∣cted to the Lords and Commons now assembled in the high Court of Parlia∣ment of England, in manner of a Re∣monstrance, wherein they did declare the sense that they have of the great di∣stractions and distempers of this King∣dome, tending to the subversion of the long established government thereof, and the confusion of the whole State, and in the end would prove the distru∣ction of that their Kingdome of Scot∣land; and therefore the Lords and Commons of that Kingdome are resol∣ved to present a Petition to His Majesty, with such reasons as they conceive may move him to an accommodation of peace & agreement with both his Hou∣ses
of Parliament; but if the same should be rejected, they are resolved to assist the Parliament with force of armes, to de∣fend their just cause, and to bring all de∣linquents and incendiaries that have di∣sturbed the peace of the Kingdome, and caused these troubles, to condigne pu∣nishment, which the House with great joy and much thankfulnesse accepted of. A true Relation of the Battell fought by the Earl of Pembroke against the Lord Coven∣try in Wiltshire, October 4. THe right honourable, the Earle of Pembroke, having (as he suppo∣sed) setled the County of Wilt∣shire in good order, he returned toward the Isle of Wight: before he came thi∣ther, he received information by Letters from some part of the county, that about 1000. Cavaliers were come into that county under the command of the Lord
Coventry, whereupon he soone retur∣ned againe, and brought along with him 300. horse and foot, and as he passed a∣long, divers of the Trained Bands came in to assist him against the said Lord and his followers, and upon the 4. of Octo∣ber they both met in Wiltshire, and after some debate they charged one against another, the fight continuing fiercely on both sides, at last the Earle obtained the victory, killing 40. cavaliers, and ta∣king 20. prisoners, the Lord Coventry being forced to escape away disguised. The Earl obtained this victory with the losse of 10. men, and hath setled that county in a very good posture, and peaceable condition. FINIS.
