J653 e735_22 99862855 115033
A Shock of Corn Coming in In its Season. A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Ancient and Eminent Servant of CHRIST WILLIAM GOUGE, Doctor of Divinity, and late Pastor of BLACK-FRYARS, London, December the 16th, 1653. With the ample and deserved Testimony that then was given of his Life, By WILLIAM JENKYN (now) Pastor of BLACK-FRYARS, London. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Ball in Pauls Church-yard. 1654.
portrait of William Gouge, Professor of Theology EFFIGIES GUIL:GOUGE S.S. THEOLOGIAE PROFESS: QUI OBIIT ANo. 46. Dui 1653. AEtatis 79. Ministery in Black fr: Lon: The Simile vs'd by the Temanite Of a ripe shock of Corne exprest him right. How weighty were his eares with worth? and he Who bent with Age, bowd with Humility. He (ripe) is reapt this harvest time we mourn, Heere harvest-joy, onely befell the Corne. From th' World (the feild) to ye grave ye barne hees gon Yet tho he lost the feild, he th' Victory won. Our Corns now bread. for men those workes of his Are bread for God, himself now shewbread is.
A Shock of Corn Coming in In its Season. A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Ancient and Eminent Servant of CHRIST WILLIAM GOUGE, Doctor of Divinity, and late Pastor of BLACK-FRYARS, London, December the 16th, 1653. With the ample and deserved Testimony that then was given of his Life, By WILLIAM JENKYN (now) Pastor of BLACK-FRYARS, London. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Ball in Pauls Church-yard. 1654.
To my much esteemed and beloved Friends, the Church of God in the Precinct of BLACK-FRYARS, LONDON. YOu have (already) a double right to this Dedication; it is yours first as this ensuing Sermon was preacht, next as it is publisht. 1. This Sermon was preacht, as among you and to you, so concerning him who of late was your worthy Pastor, and by him who is (though unworthy, yet,) your Pastor. 2. This Sermon is publisht, though a∣gainst my own inclination (for I know no∣thing by any my services, but what more de∣serves my blushing for their weaknesse, then publication for their worth) yet at the earnest entreaty, as of many others, so of sundry of your selves.
But there is a third and (that) a better right which I desire you may have to this en∣suing Discourse, and that is a right to it by practising of the truths contained in the Sermon, and by imbracing the Doctrines, and imitating the graces of your late emi∣nent Pastor commended in the following Te∣stimony. My Sermon slights not your patronage, but it earnestly sues to you for your practise. And tis my desire, that the unreformed who shall reade the Relation of Doctor Gouge's faithful pains among them, may with god∣ly sorrow for their unprofitablenesse under his ministry, say what Pharaohs Butler did in the apprehension of his ingratitude to Jo∣seph,Gen. 41.9. I do remember my faults this day. If the dust of a living Ministers feet, and the sweat of his brows, shall be a testimo∣ny against a gain-saying people, how loudly will the dust of a dead Ministers
grave cry against them! Tis but a sorry piece of devotion, with the Jews to paint the Sepulchres of the Prophets, and to com∣mend them when dead, with our lips, whom living, we discommended by our practise; and yet as Sampson could take honey out of that dead Lion, with which he fought, and which he slew, when alive, it roar'd upon him, so nothing is more ordinary then for the wicked to voice up dead Ministers for sweet and blessed men, whom in their life-time for lift∣ing up their voice against their sinnes, and labouring to rend them and their lusts asunder, they bitterly opposed. Though when Moses was dead, the people would have worshipt him as a God (and this the de∣vil knew and lik't when he contended to have had his Sepulchre made known) yet when he was living, they would have destroyed him,Jude 9 & he fear'd stoning by them. Even wicked Joram calls dying Elisha,Exod. 1 the Chariots of
Israel and the horsmen thereof. 2 Kin. 13.14. The Papists, and common Protestants, who now speak highly of Christ and call him their sweet Saviour, had they lived in his dayes, and heard him Preach against their sins, would have hated him more then now they hate the godly, for having but a drop of his Fountain, and but a faint reflection of that holiness which much more gloriously shin'd forth in him. As it may be a work of much credit, so it is a work of little cost to extoll the deceased servants of Christ. By their voices, sinners are not molested in the prosecu∣tion of their lusts, nor urged to any unpleasing duties. It is not then the crying up of depart∣ed Saints and Ministers with our words, but imitating of them with our works and the praising them with the Language of the conversation,Horo andi proptr imi∣tatioem, non ad an-di proper religionem. Aug de verr l. c. 55. which shews the sincerity of our love either to God or them; The bark of a tree may be carried away, upon a mans shoul∣der
without any pains or difficulty; but it re∣quires strength and labour to carry away the body of the tree; men may easily run away with the outward shell of good words and pro∣fessions, but the heart and life of Religion, which is that of the heart and life, men can hardly away with. The dint of this dilem∣ma, will not be shunned. If the Ministers doctrine and life were bad, why are they so much as commended; if good, why not more then commended, why not practised and imitated also? If Christ were not a good master, why did the young man call him so? if he were a good master why did he not follow him also? You will not be offended with me for my plain dealing; If I be Jealous lest this holy man hath bestowed his labour in vain upon many survivors; they will (I trust) re∣member whose jealousie it imitates, Pauls;2 Cor. 11. and of what nature, he saith, his was, a godly
jealousie. If I fear the flattering of some more then of others, it is of those whom I love most: you have by calling me to be your Mini∣ster, laid a strong engagement upon me, to beware of soothing you into destruction, and to put you in remembrance of promoting more vigorously the power of godlinesse, and of set∣ting up Christ more throughly in your hearts, houses, and congregation, in the expectation of, and supplication for which, I rest, dear and much esteemed Friends, Black Fryars, May the 8th. 1654. Your faithfull and affectionate servant for the good of your souls. William Jenkyn.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers, WEre Prefaeces and Apologies sutable either to the service of the Day, or the disposition of the Speaker, I might prefix a large Apologie to my ensuing Discourse. Should I preface my own unworthinesse to undertake, or insuffi∣ciency to go through the following employment, I might possibly by some be more suspected of pride, than commended for modesty. I am not ignorant that a proud heart, may oft lye under a self-deba∣sing tongue. And I have heard of some who put their prayses to usury, they dispraising themselves for a while,Robinsons Observations. that so they may receive their praise again with advantage. Touching my self there∣fore, I shall onely say, that the dear respect which I owe and bear to the memory of this excellent man, Saint, Minister, Doctor William Gouge, hath made me break through the deep resentment of my own insufficiency to go through this work; and yet withal, that against this inability of mine, I have these three things which relieve me (and these I should not mention to the inlarging of a Preface, which is best when least, did they not tend to the honouring of this servant of Christ, which is one end of our meeting this day.) 1. First, I look upon that as my (and not my least) encourage∣ment to this service, which most may think my greatest discourage∣ment from undertaking it, and that is the eminent worth of this Excellent Man, whose Funeral this day, we celebrate; were I ei∣ther to commend some prophane person, or some professor whose worth and unworthinesse did hang in aequilibrio, and appear so even∣ly ballanc'd, that none could tell which of them outweigh'd the other, I might wound my conscience, blast my reputation, or (at least) tor∣ture my invention, either to finde out matter of commendation, or a fit manner of expressing thereof. But (Brethren) I think, I have as little cause, as ever had any who preached in this place, upon the like occasion, either to fear reproofs from my own heart, or my many hearers, for giving a large testimony to the worth of this Excellent
Man, or to study solicitously for matter of praise, which is (as it were) Myrrha Libera, Myrrhe which drops freely of its own accord with∣out any squeezing or constraint. 2.Lachrymae au∣ditorum laudes ministrorum. It is likewise my encouragement, that you (my Auditors) bear a share with me in this Funeral and following commendation. As the tears of a people are a Ministers praise, when he himself preacheth in his life-time, so is their sorrow for him no small commendation to him when another is preaching of him after his death. I doubt not but very many in this great Assembly come hither, not to gaze, to see and be seen, but to mourn for the death of this eminent servant of Christ, and to sprinkle some tears upon his Funeral Herse. Confident I am, that could you turn your sorrowful insides, outward, (like that people who were wont to shew their funeral mourning onely by turning the inside of their apparel outward) that mournfullest expres∣sions would be as common among you, as true mourning is suitable to you, and that Sable would as well cover the People as it doth the Pulpit. If the Angels were so forward to attend upon a Lazarus when he dyed, as to carry him to his place of rest, what readinesse should there be among Lazarusses, full of the sores of sin and misery, to respect the Funeral of this dead Angel? I call him Angel, for so he was in his life time in regard of his Office,. and as an Angel now after his death, I doubt not but he is in Heaven. 3. My third encouragement is this: I am call'd this day to per∣form a greater Work then to praise him, I am to preach the Word to you. God who hath called me unto the greater, to speak from him∣self to you, I trust will enable me to perform the lesser, I mean, the speaking concerning this Reverend Man to you. I know, you long to hear what I shall say of him, and haply some do so, because they would give vent to their sorrows, though by their Eyes. I shall gratifie your desire when I have first delivered my Errand from God to you, the sum whereof you shall finde written, in
The 5th Chapter of Job, Vers 26. In these words. Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of Corn cometh in, in his season. THe words were spoken by Eliphaz to inforce that dehortation given to Job, Vers 17. De∣spise not thou the chastening of the Almighty: that is, Cast it not off with a wearisome aversness, and loathing, nor reject it either as unprofitable and unuseful, or as disgraceful and dis∣honourable to thee, nor slight it as a thing of which no notice is taken, &c. This counsel he backs with an ar∣gument drawn from the benefit that should accrue unto him, by a submissivenesse under the afflicting hand of God. Eliphaz shews, that at length, the mercy of God, shall appear for his good; and that both, First, by pre∣servation from evils (Vers 19. He shall deliver thee from six troubles, yea in seven, there shall no evil touch thee) and also, Secondly, by the bestowing of blessings, Vers 23, 24; 25. Thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace, &c. Yea he declares that Job shall not onely be happy in his life-time, but also even at and after his death, in the words of my Text, Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn cometh in, in his season.
In which words, you have this two parts consider∣able. 1. A godly mans arival at his Port, or terme, Thou shalt come to thy grave. 2. The seasonablenesse of this arival, in a full age, like as, &c. In the former, I take notice of two particulars, 1. What that place or Port is, the grave. 2. What that kind of passage to it is, which here is promised. Thou shalt come to it. The Later, the seasonablenesse of the arival; is set out two wayes, 1. Properly, in a full age. 2. Metaphorically, or by way of resemblance, like as a shock of corn cometh in his season. 1. I begin with the former part, and therein with the first particular, the Port, or place it self, to which even the godly must arive, The grave. This hath been the place where the holiest men have met, and to which the dearest Saints, the Jobs of God, have come. The grave (I say) is their term, their Center.Gen. 25.8. 1 Kings 2.1. Zech. 1.5. The holy Patriarchs of old, Abraham the friend of God. The godly Kings, David went the way of all flesh. The Prophets live not for ever. The Apostles died; and thus it is In regard of 1. Themselves. 2. Others. 1. Themselves as they are 1. Men. 2. Sinfull men. 3. Good men.
1. They are men. Their bodies consist of corrupti∣ble principles, and are earthen vessels and Cottage. Every day they daub them over (as it were) with food, and labour to keep them in reparations, and to make them tenantable for the soul, but alas all will not do, they cannot long be shord up, down they will at last and crumble to dust. Even the props wherewith they are kept up, are but rotten, meats are corruptible,. Isid Pelus. l. 1. ep. 65. bread is cald that which perisheth. How can such structures, then, stand long? the truth is their falling begins (as Isidore of Pelusium speaks) with their very building; and being men they are subject also to the same acci∣dents, and casualties with others. 2. Sinfull men. Tis true sin is in them, and not in them: in them, not as their love but their load and vexation. And death doth befall them, and doth not befall. Doth befall them, as afflictive to sense, as a cure of their woes, as a consequent of sin; but not as a curse, or a wrathfull punishment; but yet this repeated addition (and he dyed) subjoyned to the relation of the long lives of the ancient Patriarchs, shewed the immoveable certainty of that threatning of death against Adams sin, notwith∣standing the deceitfull promise of the devil. 3. They are holy men. And to the grave they must come. First, For a resiing place. Here is not their rest,Rom. 7.24. Rom. 6.7. 2 Cor. 5.6.8. 1 Thes. 4.16. their works at length follow them, and they shall not follow their work any more. Secondly, They must be perfectly freed from sin, which till death they cannot be. Thirdly, They must have their Crown of life; and Fourthly, Shall for ever be with the Lord, who loves his children so well, that he will not alwayes suffer them to be abroad, and absent from him. 2. In regard of others, they must come to the grave.
First, Some are unkind and cruel to them, and haply they hurry them to the Port of the grave with a bluste∣ring storm and tempest of persecution. The Saints (especially Ministers) of Christ are set in the forlorn hope, and commonly the bullet soonest hits them. Se∣condly, Some idolize them, deifie them: how many, when adored, hath God grownde to pouder, as Moses did the Israelites Calf, and removed them from men, when we have made them equall with God. Its the great sin of the times either to deifie or nullifie men. God loves neither. Thirdly, The living must prize them, and get much good by them in a little time. He who hath a book lent him, but for a little while, makes the more hast to read it over, the Prophets and Saints of God live not ever, nor are given us to use as long as we please, they are but lent us, and we must improve them speedily. God hath held the candle of a Saints Life, and a Ministers Doctrine to many idle professors many a year, and he oft puts out this light to punish them for their negligence. Since then, even the best must come to the grave, let them study to do much for God while they live. The grave is a place of silence and rest. The living, the living they praise and are employed for God. Short seasons require speedy services. The near∣nesse of death should put us upon holy serviceablenesse during life, as for the preserving of a sweet and precious remembrance of our selves in that generation which fol∣lows so especially for the transmitting by our examples, holiness to Posterity, that so a seed of Saints may be con∣tinued in the World, when we are dead and gone. And truely as otherwise we shall die while we live, so here∣by we shall live when we are dead, and be like civet, which, when tis taken out of the box, leaves a sweet savour behind it.
2. Let not any settle themselves securely in this World, he is a mad man, that will go about to build a house upon a quaking quag-mire, upon a rotten foun∣dation. The longest lived of those long-lived Patriarchs lived not a thousand years; God hereby shewing that the longest life of any of the sons of men is not able to reach to that space which in respect of Gods Eternity is not a day. Expect not Eternity in this life.Vid Rivet. in Gen. Let us live as if we were alwayes dying, and yet as such as are ever to live. Set not up your hopes, your expectations here; the grave will rub off all our worldly grandeur, as a narrow hole sweepes off all the apples, that the foolish hedge-hog loads her prickles withall. Labour to be taken off from the world, before you are taken out of it. 3. Thirdly if Saints must come to the grave,3. Joh. 9.4, 12.35. get good by them, while they live. Walk and work by the light while you have it with you. Neglect not to get good by the godly, in hope to enjoy them longer with you. Thou mayst bewail thy over-slipt opportunities when tis too late. I will not let thee go except thou blesse me, you know it was the speech of Jacob to God. O Lord, (say thou) let not not such a Saint go, such a Minister die, till thou hast blessed me by his meanes, let not his light be put out, till he hath shewed me the way to hea∣ven, better. 4. Fourthly if Saints must die, you that live, stand up in their stead, if God take away pillars, be not you as reeds. Supply their departure by your piety and use∣fulnesse. 5. Lastly must Saints die? here is comfort in many respects; they shall come to the grave, they shall die, but their souls shall never die, the second death hath no power over them; they shall die, but secondly the Church
shall never die: they shall die, but thirdly their works shall never die, these shall follow them: they shall die, but fourthly, their God shall never die: the Prophets of God, Do they live for ever? but the God of the Prophets lives for ever. Lastly, they dye, and therefore why should not we be willing to dye, to fare as they fare. Not onely the wicked but Saints dye. A godly man was the first who dyed. If death were not advantagi∣ous, it should never be the lot of Gods beloved. 2.2. Branch of the first part. This Port or place of the Saints, the Grave, affords us somewhat more for meditation. It is a mercy not on∣ly to have a house to hide the head of the living in, but to have a sepulchre in which to hide the head of the dead. It is a mercy to have a grave. Great was Abrahams provident care to purchase a burying-place for his dead. God himself buried Moses his dear servant: nor was the contention of the Angel about the body of Moses, to hin∣der its burial, but onely to forbid the Devil to be pre∣sent at it. When the Kings of Judah are recorded, their burials are also frequently mentioned; and those of the highest merit were buried in the upper part of the sepul∣chres of the sons of David, 2 Chron. 32.33. Nor was it a small judgement of God inflicted upon Baasha and Jeza∣bel, to be buried in the bellies of Dogs:Ier. 22 19. Or upon Jehoi∣akim, that he should be buried with the burial of an Asse, contemptibly cast into a ditch. Or upon the king of Babylon,Isai. 14.20. that he should not be joyned with the kings in bu∣rial. Neither was that a slight imprecation,Psal. 63.11. Let them be a portion for Foxes. Nor a small threatning, Jer. 14.16. That the people should be cast out into the streets, and have none to bury them; and that the bones of the kings, & priests, and prophets,Jer. 8.2. should be taken out of the grave, and laid open to the sun and moon. Nor a small complaint, that the
enemies of the Church had given the dead bodies of Gods saints, to be meat to the fowls of the heaven, and their flesh unto the beasts of the earth. Want of burial is so hateful, that some have been more restrained from sin by the fear of not being buried, then of dying. And David commends the burial of a dead Saul: nay Jehu com∣mands the burial of the remains of a cursed Jezabel. The practise (therefore) of giving the body decent bu∣rial is very commendable Sutable it is, that the body, a piece of Gods workmanship so curiously wrought, Psal. 139. should not be carelesly thrown away. Yea, it hath been repair'd, redeem'd, as well as made by God. It is partner in redemption with the soul, and bought with the precious blood of Christ: The body is also sanctified for the spirits temple. The ointment of sanctification rests not onely on the head (the soul) but runs down al∣rests not onely on the head (the soul) but runs down al∣so upon the skirts, (the body.) The chair where the King of glory hath sate should not be abused. With the bodies of our deceased friends we lately had sweet commerce; haply they were very beneficial to us. The body of a faithful Minister was an earthen Conduit∣pipe whereby God conveighed spiritual comforts to our souls The body was once a partner with the soul in all her actions, it was the souls brother-twin; what could the soul do without it? whatever was in the un∣derstanding was conveighed by the sence. The soul sees by its eyes, hears by its ears, works by its hands; yea, which is more, there is an indissoluble union between the dust in the grave, and the glorious soul. Church∣yards are but sleeping-places, and (as they were called a∣mong the Jews) houses of the living. A great Heir is re∣garded, though he be for the present in rags: and which is more, our very bodies are the members of Christ, and
of that lump, whereof he was the First-fruits. Hence is discovered, the more then heathenish Bar∣barousnesse of the Papists, both in denying and recal∣ling burial, digging up the dead again, as they dealt with the bodies of Paulus Fagius, and Peter Martyrs wife; Heathens themselves have shewen greater humanity; witnesse that of Alexander, in allowing enterment to the dead body of Darius, Hanibal to Marcellus's, Caesar to Pompey's. The comfort of Saints is, that God keeps every one of their bones; and that as he left not one out of his book, when he made them at first, so that neither shall one be missing when he will remake them. Nor is the superstitious folly of Papists about the bodies of the dead, lesse reproveable then their inhumane cruelty, I mean, their religious reverencing of the reliques of the deceased. Though the Devil could not obtain a license for this sin (according to some) from Michael, yet hath he obtained a command for it from the Pope. To name this practise is to confute it. Its idolatry, derogation from the merits of Christ, ridiculousnesse, (for Popish Histo∣rians tell us, that the bones of the worship'd have after∣ward proved to be the reliques of theeves and murde∣rers & to such a proportion are they increased, that they are rather the objects of derision then adoration.) Yea lastly, its injuriousnesse to the saints, who in pretence are honoured (whose bodies hereby have insepultam sepul∣turam are kept from their honour of rest, and brought into a condition threatned as a curse) are more then e∣nough to procure our abhorrence of it. To conclude this;  the care (yet) of a dead body should not be com∣parable to that of the living, ever-living soul: what profit is it for the body to be embalmed, and entombed richly, and the soul to be tormented eternally? As great
a folly is the respecting of the vile body, joyn'd with the neglecting of the precious soul, as for a frantick mother onely to lament the losse of the coat of her drowned childe, never laying to heart the losse of the childe it self. Chiefly look after thy soul and God will take care of thy body, it shall be embalmed to eternity, though it should be eaten up with the beasts of the earth. This for the first, the Saints Port or Place,The second particular in the first part of the Text. the Grave But secondly, what kinde of passage shall he have thither? Eliphaz saith, He shall come to the grave: And this notes that his passage to the grave shall be willing, and uninfor∣ced. He shall get thither by coming, he shall go, as it were upon his own feet, he shall not be hailed and drag∣ged, and pulled thither against his own minde. It shall be his portion to be willing to dye; his soul shall not be required of him, taken from him by force against his wil, as his was Luke 12.20. No, he shall be one, that is pleased with the thoughts of his departure, and desires with Paul to be dissolved.1 Kings 19.4. One that may say (as Elijah,) Lord take away my soul; and with Simeon, Lord,Luke 2.29. now lettest thou thy servant depart: He will open the door cheerfully, when his master shall but send his Sergeant Death to knock; he will meet Death (as it were) half way, Death shall be his priviledge as well as his task; with Peter and John he running to the sepulchre, not being urged, drag'd to it Necessitatis Ʋinculo, by the bond of necessity, but making toward it Voluntatis Obsequio, with the holy forwardnesse of his will. Thou shalt come. By death Saints are freed, from the reach of, as well as hurt by Sa∣tans temptations: From the evil company of the ungod∣ly, from divine desertion, from the burden of sin and corruption, from the painful and laborious employ∣ments of their places, from all bodily infirmities and
diseases (death is the best physick,) from all Gods fa∣therlike chastisements,Minus pie vi∣vis, si minus persecutionem pertuleris. Gr. ep. 27. l. 6. from an unkinde, persecuting unquiet world (that bed of thorns) they love not the world, and therefore they linger not in it. They are in love with heaven, where they shall have the consum∣mation of grace and glory, and enjoy the sweet soul-ravishing society of their Friend, Husband, Saviour, Head; and therefore as their better portion Christ, so their better part their heart, is there already. He hath perfumed the grave for them, and made that narrow noisome place, a place of ease and sweetnesse. Ever since Christ trod and walk'd upon the sea of death, they may say (as Peter to Christ) Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water. Christ by his death hath la∣boured, and they when they dye, do but enter into his labours. In a word: Sin the strength and only weapon which Death can use, is by the merit and spirit of Christ, taken away; so that death is now become a stinglesse Serpent, and a toothlesse Lion; a tame, disarmed enemy, or ra∣ther the bare name and notion of an enemy. The un∣willingnesse of Gods people to dye, is not because they judge that death is not good for them, but because they think not themselves good enough for death. How unlike to Christians, do they then shew themselves who are so loath to dye, that they will not come, but must be drag'd to the grave, yea, to the very thoughts thereof, who though they cannot live without misery, yet neither can they be content with that, which as they cannot avoid, so will put an end to all misery. Oh how unsuitable is this distemper, to those who both profess they desire that Gods will may be done, & that they are pilgrims and strangers upon earth, and that heaven is their countrey, their fathers house!
2. How excellent is the grace of Faith, which makes a beleever cheerfully to come to that, to which another must be drawn and dragd, I mean the grave! To a be∣leever, when his faith is on the wing, life (as Paul speaks of his) is not dear, and death (as he speaks of his) is desired.Acts 20.24. Phil. 1.22.23. It was as hard to make Paul patient when he thought of living, as to make another patient when he expected dying. Faith is the alone mantle which divides the waters of death: so as that a beleever sees he may go through them dry-shod. That grace which throwes the Crosse of Christ into these waters of marah, and thereby makes them not onely wholsome but plea∣sant. Its our duty to labour for such a spirit, as to be willing to die: to Come to the grave. If it was Christs desire to die for us, should it not be our longing to live with him. To this end, First, clear up thy interest in Christs death, the death of thy death: the blood of Christ makes pale death look beautifully. He was a curse, and death is thereby a blessing: this horn of salvation dipt into the waters of death, makes them not onely poisonless but wholsome: death hath left its sting in the sides of Christ. He that beleeveth in him, shall never die. Secondly, In looking toward death, look likewise beyond it: even as far, as the benefits which follow it: view that blessednesse which is invisible. Consider not death as it shews it self to an eye of sence, but as its manifest to an eye of Faith, not as an enemie to man, but as changed by Christ into a friend, yea the best friend, next Christ himself. Thirdly, Oft meditate of death: let it not sur∣prize thee unawares: let it be an acquaintance not a a stranger: die before thou diest: death onely seems a great businesse, to those who are to go through it all at
once. Fourthly, Hate sin: the love of sin makes men fear death; and he who hates sin must needs love death, because thereby sin shall be wholly abolisht. The love of sin is the arming of death, and an armed enemy must needs be formidable, Fifthly, Wean thy self from the world:Omnia ista no∣bis accedant ut sine ulla nostra lacera∣tione discedant Sen. ep. 74. an empty traveller, will sing when he meets with the thief; he who looks upon himself as possessing nothing in the world, fears not a stripping by death: let not the world cleave to thee, as a shirt which sticks to an ulcerous body, and so pulls skin and flesh away with∣all. The loose tooth comes out with ease, but when it stands fast in the head its drawn out with much pain. If the world and our affections be fastned, the parting will not be without much difficulty. I come to the second part of the text,2. Generall part of the Text. and that is the seasonableness of a Saints coming to the grave: and First, it is set out properly. In a full age. Tremelius renders it, cum senio, with old age, Pagnine in maturitate, in ripenesse. Ʋatablus in senio. The uulgar latine in abundantia, in abundance, which some expound of abundance of honours and riches, others of abun∣dance of years and long life; and indeed the Hebrew word , signifies old age, or a full age which stands in the abundance of years: and therefore I know no rea∣son why we should by giving other interpretations, raise a dust to obscure the sence. But yet withall here is imported a happy, blessed old age, such an old age as is a promise, and is in scripture frequently cal'd a good old age, and therefore this full age may include a threefold fulnesse (to name no more.)1. Maturitas civilis. Gen. 15.15. 1 Chro. 29.28 First, a Civill fulnesse, or maturity, and so a full age is an age full of honour, peace, and riches, so it is said, that David died in a good old age, full of dayes, riches and honour, this civil fulnesse being not onely considered
actively when men have set their houses in order, setled their Estates, when they are ripe, and fit, for death, in regard, they have made their will, and fitly disposed of their goods (the neglect whereof for fear of death, being a childish folly, for death is never awhit the nearer, because we place it before our eyes nor the further off, because we will not see it:) but passively also, when God hath bestowed upon men a full estate, and especially a good name, when they go not out in a snuff of disgrace, and the sun of their life, sets not in a cloud, but they are buried with honour, and leave a sweetly per∣fumed memoriall behind them, their name living when their bodies are dead. In this respect Jeroboams son died in a full age, being honoured with the lamentations of Israel, and Jehojada who was buried honourably in the chief of the Sepulchers of the Kings of Judah. Secondly, here may be recomprehended a Religious fulnesse,2. Maturitas spiritualis. and that in three respects. First, when a person is born again, hath gotten grace into his soul, and an interest in Jesus Christ, of whose fulnesse he hath received and grace for grace, John 1.16. whereby he hath a meekness to die: and thus yong ones may be of full age even before they are one and twenty, they may be old young-men; as on the contrary; old sinners, or sinners though of an hundred year old, may be cal'd young or childish old-men: young Josiah had his full age,Aetas immatu∣ra, pijs matura est, et plus illis est annos decem vixisse, quam inpijs centum. inercer. in loc. in this respect, before he died, and (as Mercer well notes on the text) a green age is to the godly a ripe age, and they live more in ten years, then the wicked, in an hundred. Secondly, when a person not onely hath grace, but also is beneficial, usefull, doth much good in his time, is diffusive of holinesse, full of good works, serves his
generation, and hath done his work, before he fals a sleep, hath his Dorcasses coats to be seen after his death; it is only our doing good that makes us called good, we are not called good men, for the good, which we have within us, but for the good that is performed by us; that blessed Hilarion died in a good age in a full age who having served Jesus Christ seventy years, when he came to die said, Go forth O foul. In this sence Elijah saith, according to some) it is enough.Isai. 65.20. Unlike to others who are infants of dayes, that have not filled their dayes, which are like emptie, white paper, having nothing written in them. Thirdly, when a person is satisfied, and contented with that time, and age which God hath already given him, and is (as the Scripture oft expresseth it) full of dayes, having lived as long as himself desired, or as heart could wish, accounting (as Elijah speaks) that he hath lived enough. Thus Abraham, Gen. 25.8. Isaac, Gen. 35.29. David, 1 Chro. 23.1. Job chap. 42.17. Jehoiada, 2 Chro. 24.15. are all said to be full of dayes,Rarus qui exacto con∣tentus tempore vitae, cedat, uti conuiua satur. Hor. sat. 1. Omnino rerum sum satur prae∣sentium. to them there was not so much an irksome tediousnesse, as a fulnesse and satiety of life: they were as willing to leave this world, as men are wont to be to rise from the table when they have eaten their fill. It was an expression sutable to a godly man when he said; Lord I am cloyd with these present en∣joyments (for indeed they cloy us, but they do not satis∣fie us) there is the second, a fulnesse of age, in regard of a Religious fulnesse. Thirdly,3. Maturitas Naturalis. there is a fulnesse of age in regard of a na∣turall fulnesse, which is the fulnesse here principally in∣tended, (though the other be not excluded) and this naturall fulnesse of age is twofold. First, here is intend∣ed senectus sera a late, long, ripe age,Senectus sera. in respect of the great number of its years; he shall not be taken away
by an immature, untimely death, when he hath lived out but half his dayes, the candle of his life shall not be blown out, no, this lamp shall not be put but go out; all the oyl shall be spent, his vital moisture shal be dried up, & gone. In a word: He shall not be taken away in the midst of his dayes. There is a prediction, Psalm 55.23. that the wicked shall not Dimidiare dies, half their dayes;juxta editio∣nem vulgata. i. e. live out half those dayes, which according to the course of nature they might reach unto. But Eliphaz here intends that Job shall go, though surely, yet slowly to heaven, and shall not be as the corn upon the house top, that wihers, before it be grown up, but shall come to his full measure of yeers, and live as long as (according to the course of nature) could be expected. 2. In this natural fulnesse is contained Senectus sana,Senectus sana vegeta. an hail, youthful old-age, sound, strong, vigorous, and that both in respect of body and minde. 1. Of body. When men are free, for the most part from such bodily infirmities, and annoiances as old age is wont to be infested withal, and are without, though not such weaknesse as necessarily accompnaies the decay of nature, yet such pains, aches, and diseases, as are wont to annoy that age. Health is a mercy at all times, even such wherin others are wont usually to enjoy it; but especially is it a blessing to enjoy it in that age, wherein men most commonly want it. Health in infectious times is a singular mercy, and so is it in old-age which is sub∣ject to so many diseases. It is not so much the decay of bodily strength, as pains and diseases, which make old age burdensome. How choice a priviledge is it to be fat and flourishing even in old age, (as it is spoken in another regard, Psalm 92.14.) not altogether unlike to Moses, who being an hundred and twenty yeers
old when he died, his eye was not dim, nor his natural strength abated, Deut. 34.7. Or Caleb, who Josh. 14.11. saith of himself, that he was as strong as eighty five yeers as he was at fourty, for war. Here was a Spring in Autumn, a good healthful old age, : not an old age, sick, diseased, squalid: the bones (here) are not full of the sins of youth in regard whereof there are some men older at thirty, then others are at sixty: they are old, when they are young. in regard of the diseases, they have brought upon themselves by their intemperance. 2. Of minde. When men are not (though old in yeers) crazy in their intellectuals, but the parts of their minde are green and youthful, they being not (as some) twice children: a great blessing it is for young men to have the parts of old men in regard of prudence; and for old men to retain their youthful and pregnant abilities of knowledge, fancy, memory, apprehension; and the eyes of their minde not to grow dim and dark with old age. Thus this season of coming of the grave, is set forth properly, in a full age. 2.2 2. Branch of the 2. Part of the Text opened. Secondly, it is described metaphorically in these words, Like as a shock of corn cometh in, in his season. These words A shock of corn, may as well be rendred A heap of corn, the word signifies both; either corn before or af∣ter its threshing. This corn is said to come in. The word in the Original imports to ascend: and corn may be said to ascend by bringing, carrying, laying of it up, and it comes in in its season, when it comes in, in its full matu∣rity and perfect ripenesse: and so a Saint shall come to his grave, in a mature age, like unto a shock of corn in its season and ripenesse. But why is a full age compared unto the fully mature and ripened corn? In sundry re∣spects.
1. First in reagard of the variety of seasons that ripened corn must go through, before it be ripe. There must be storms, blustering windes, nipping frosts, sun-shine, & rain, go over it, before it come to maturity; and the frost is as good to kill the worms, as the sun is needfull to quicken its growth: and who is there hath-hath lived to a full ripe age, that is not as ripe corn in this respect; witnesse Jacob Joseph, David, Paul, &c. When man of yeers, but hath been a man of variety of conditions in the world, but hath met with his stormes and windes, with his unkinde usage, and a troublesome state here below? And its good it should be so; we should not be willing to be cut down by the sickle of death, nor long to be taken into the barn, (laid up in the quiet grave) were not the field stormy and rainy, the world boisterous and unquiet. The world is too much loved now when it is troublesome; oh how much desired would it be were it altogether delightful! 2. Secondly, a full age is as a ripe shock of corn in re∣gard of the diversity of ages, and periods of a mans life. 1. First the corn is sown in the ground, so the seed is thrown into the womb. 2. Secondly, the corn doth Herbescere, it is green in the tender blade, and grows like an herb, and this is as our childhood. 3. Thirdly, the corn doth grow to a stalk; it doth adolescere grow and shoot up to some kinde of stature, and this is our youthful age. 4. Fourthly, there is a full ear afterward, and that is in the manhood, when a man is come to some fulnesse of abilities, and endowments to transact his calling, to go through his duties, and employments. 5. Fifthly, there is a maturity, the corn comes to be ripe, sear, dry, and this is old age.
Sixthly, there is the cutting down of the corn, and this is by the sickle of death as this godly man once said the sickle of death will cut down all my diseases, and pains and troubles. Seventhly, after it is cut down it is laid up in the born: when we are cut down by death, we are put into our grave, that is our barn. Eightly, when it is put into the barn, then it is threshed and fanned; there will come a day of Judgement where∣in there shall be a disquisition, a sifting, and fanning, of all the actions, that have been done ini the World. Ninthly, it is set before the Master, upon his table for his use: the people of God shall be presented before the presence of glory, they shall be Shew-bread in Hea∣ven; they are for God, and shall be with God, for ever, I am (said Ignatius) to be grownd with the teeth of the wild beasts, that so I may be as manchet, fine bread for my Master. Thirdly, a full age is as ripe Corn, in regard of the cost that is bestowed upon corn, before it comes to maturi∣ty; how much labour is laid out! how much pains do men take to raise the expectation of an harvest! How much plowing, harrowing, dunging, weeding doth corn require before it be carried in! and it may be, that though it hath been a yeer or two in the fitting and pre∣paring for a crop, its cut down by 2. or 3. harvest men in a day or two. A Parent hath laid out a great deal of cost, it may be in the Educating of a Child, in the University, bringing him up in the Arts, nurturing him and polishing him with choisest Education, and then death comes, and cuts him down with his sickle in a few houres; when a man is full of wind and swoln with gifts and knowledge, death comes with a little prick (as it
were) of a pin, and lets out all the wind again, and all mans thoughts perish. Fourthly, maturity of age is like the maturity of corn in regard of hopefulnesse; the husband-man sowes in hope, every one expects a harvest, if he hath had a seed∣time: old age is that which men both covet and expect. If Satan and security be a mans teachers, he will say, I shall live long enough, let the Ministers, and examples of mortality say what they will. No man is so old but he hopes to live one yeer longer; and the youngest hopes to live to old age. Fifthly, a full age is like unto ripe corn, in regard of continuation. No tooth nor foot of the beast hath cropt or trod it down. All the blasts that have befallen it, all the storms that have bin cast upon it, may make it bend, but yet till the harvest comes, it is not cut down and de∣stroyed utterly: thus it is, here, till God take us away by death, till our time is come, nothing shall take us away, when that is come presently we are gone; our times are not in our enemies hand, for if so, we should not live long enough, they are not in our own hands, if they were, we should live too long, but they are in Gods hands, my times (saith David) are in thy hands, Psal. 31.15. Sixthly, a full age is compared to ripe corn in regard of fitnesse for the barn, and for the masters use, ripe corn is onely acceptable corn, onely good corn, onely such as pleaseth the tooth of the feeder; they that are ripe in yeers, should be ripe in grace; they that are full of dayes should be full of Holinesse; they should be fit for Hea∣ven; if any, they that have one foot in the grave should have the other in Heaven; they that have white heads should not (as the swan which under her white feathers
hath a black skin) have a black heart. In a word (we say) toward harvest, corn ripens night and day, (it is a coun∣try proverb:) when a man growes old, he shouldl grow Heavenward might and day. Oh he should live more in one day then heretofore he hath done in a whole yeer. A full age is as ripe corn, in regard of the certainty of harvest, and cutting down: The corn which hath stood longest, meets at last with a sickle: they that have lived longest must die at length, and be cut down with deaths sickle; the longest Summers day, hath a Sun set; though thy age be a Summers age, yet it must end. Its possible, corn may be troden down and devoured by the beasts of the field, withered with scorching heat, or destroyed with floods, but should it escape all those dangers, to be sure, it must meet with a sickle at the harvest. Though a man escape a violent death, and the many diseases in∣cident to youth and manhood, at length he must have a disease, whereby he must die. A Nestors a Methusalems age must end. The sailes of our Times as well as of Time, are daily winding up: unto all the descriptions of the great age of the Patriarchs before the flood, its added, and he died. 8. Lastly, a full age is as ripe corn, in respect of the near approach of its cutting down: ripe corn hath not long to stand; the young-may, the old must dîe. How long have I to live (said old Barzillai) that I should go up with the King? Grey hairs are deaths harbingers, which with their white strokes, mark and take up lodgings for death, the King of terrours. And thus! I have opened both the branches of this se∣cond part of my Text: the former setting form the sea∣son of a Saints coming to the grave, properly, the second Metaphorically.
The use that I shall make of this second Part in both its branches, put together shall be two-fold. I shall apply what I have said. 1. To our selves. 2. To the occasion. For the first, there are then these following in∣ferences that I draw from hence, if (as I have de∣scribed unto you) a full age be here promised, and such as is like unto ripe corn; I Note then in the first place, The difference between godly and wicked men. The godly mans age is a full age to him, he is fill'd with age, and hath a satiety of life; Its far otherwise with the wicked. I read not of any one of them in Scripture of whom its said, that he was full of dayes none can be full of Time, but he who hath had a taste of Eternity: the wicked never think they have enough either of the wealth or life of this World. By their good will they would never die. The miseries and calamities of this world sometimes in∣deed may make them impatiently weary of their lives; But the godly in the midst of all their worldly solaces and enjoyments, health, honour, wealth, &c. are fill'd with dayes.Gen 46.30. Jacob said now let me die, when he was in the midst of his greatest worldly rejoycing by the unexpected mercy of seeing both Joseph and his sons. David was full of dayes when he was also full of riches and honour. The wicked may be angry with the troubles of this; but a Saint is enamoured with the Beauty of the next life, a wicked man may be weary of life, but a Saint is also desirous of death. I observe, the nfulness of shortning our lives; a full age is a blessing promised, yea a choice blessing, first, then those cowards are hence worthily reproved who shorten their lives by Duels the greatest cowards in the World, who being pursu'd with a disgrace, will run as far as hell be∣fore
they look back. Secondly, those that shorten their lives by intemperance that dig their graves with their teeth, that are felons of themselves,Lascivis bre∣vis est aetas & rara senectus. that swallow, not on∣ly their estates and lively-hoods, but their lives also down their throats: these (I say) unkindly prevent this kinde and sweet enjoyment here promised, a full age; they being grown old by diseases, before their time, making their tumors, rheums, and other distem∣pers to prevent their old age, to be sure the vigour and vivacity of it. These do that against themselves, which the very Devils desired to shun, they tormenting them∣selves before their time. Luxury is the greatest enemy of health, and hinderance of old age. How many by being cast away in the surges of riot and drunkenness, fall short of the Port of a full age? 3. Thirdly, great is the sin of deriding at old age, and contempt of old men in their full age, as when men voice them twice children, silly men, Dotards; these scoffers imitating those children that called the Propeht bald∣pate. I remember a smart and fit answer which an old man once gave to a scoffing youngster; the young man telling the old, that his memory grew weak and frail; well (replyed the old man.) though my memory be now fail, yet know: that I have forgotten more then ever thou didst remember. If he that mocketh the poor, certainly he that despiseth the aged, reproach th his Maker. The aged must be both honourable,Prov. 17.5. Lev. 19.2. and honoured, before whom thou must rise up. They who will not honour old Fa∣thers seldom find their dayes to be long in the land which God gives them. 4. Fourthly, I note from hence, That all the creatures should not onely be improved spiritually, but particularly im∣proved, even to the putting of us in minde of death: even
the shocks of ripe corn, the ripe wheat that is in the field, should make thee consider, that as that same corn must shortly be carried into the Barn, so thou must be tum∣bled into the grave; thy sleep should make thee think of the sleep of death; the Autumn should put thee in minde of the day of thy fading, falling leaf: the setting of the Sun, should make thee forecast the setting of the sun of thy life, the harvest should make thee think of deaths reaping sickle, the dead creatures upon which thou daily feedest, should convince thee that the feeder cannot live alwayes; the putting off thy clothes from thy body, should instruct thee, of putting off (shortly) the clothes of thy body. The blood of the grape that thou drinkest, was pressed and shed, before thou couldst come to the sweetnesse of it. The skins which clothe us were the cast sutes of dead beasts. When thou puttest on thy clothes in the morning, thou shouldst think of being clothed with new robes of the resurrection. Oh could you do thus, you would not onely think of, but expect death in all places, as death expects you every where: Death may lie under your trencher, may be at the bottom of every cup. The delights of the crea∣ture, should not extinguish the suggestions which they give us of mortality. The Ancients had their sepulchres in their places of pleasure, their Gardens: and (of old) some were wont to roll a dead-mans skil upon their table, after their greatest feasts. 5. Fifthly, note that old age is a blessing. 1. A full age, like unto the ripe corn is here promised, as an encou∣ragement to duty, and the contrary is threatned as a curse. God foretels that there should not be an old man in the house of Eli.Gen. 15.15. 1 Sam 2.32. Psal. 55.22. Its the curse threatned against the wicked, that they shall not live out half their dayes, and be
like the corn on the house top, which withers before it be grown. 2. Secondly, it is laboured and contended for, as a great blessing; they that despise it, yet desire it and would count it a mercy. All thy food is taken but to patch up thy cottage, that so thou mayest live till thou art an old man: Physicians are but Pilots to conduct to the haven of old age. All the physick that the Apothecary pre∣pares; all the Physitians prescriptions are but helps to old age; beyond old age thou canst not go, to old age thou wouldst fain go. 3. Grace is not onely an honour to old age, (as it is indeed to every age,) But old age is a great honour also to grace; they cast a mutual lustre upon one another. The oldest presons most commend grace in having, because in keeping it; grace beautifies the youngest, but it is not beau∣tified so much by any as by the oldest. These shew that after all the solicitations of sin and vanity, grace is (yet) the best, and their best beloved, and that though they have served Jesus Christ so many scores of yeers, yet that they esteem him the best master, and are not weary of his service, but that they account it impossible to change it for the best of temporals, unlesse to losse. O how glo∣rious is it, when there is the silver crown of gray hairs, and the golden crown of grace upon one head! How amiable a conjunction are the golden apples of grace in the silver picture of the hoary head! 4. Fourthly, its an age of the greatest growth and perfection of grace, the bringing of our graces to the greatest fulnesse in this world. Old men (if godly) are spiritual hoarders; they have been laying up of grace all their dayes, and adding grace to grace, day after day, and yeer after yeer; sermon after sermon, ordinance
after ordinance: and a great many littles have by this time made a mickle. And how comfortable is it for a godly old man to recollect, that he hath not onely got much grace throughout his long life to himself, but in∣strumentally bestowed much grace upon others: Chil∣drens children are the crown of old age (saith Solomon) Pro. 17.6. but no children are so glorious golden, and gliste∣ring a crown, as those who are spiritual. Oh how hap∣py is it for a godly old man to be able to say, Lord, I am not onely my self thy childe, but I have brought forth children to Jesus Christ throughout my life, and who (now) are come to a great number. 5. Fifthly, it is in some respect the most advantagi∣ous time of doing good:Levit. 19.32. Dan. 7.13. Prov. 16.31. Prov. 20.29. its an honourable age, (as ma∣riage) honourable among all men; a kinde of resemblance of Gods antiquity who is called the ancient of dayes. The gray head is called beauty, and a crown of glory. Now as our duty to do good, so our opportunity of doing it to others, follows our receiving or honour from others. Besides, old age brings wisdom and experience, and there∣fore makes men more able to give wise and wholesome counsel to others. It was a good expression of him who call'd an old mans head the house of wisdom.Domicilium sapientiae. . Clem. Paed. . Seris venit usus ab annis. Ovid. Met. l. 6. The most prudent Roman Convention, the Senate, was so called from old age; noting, that wisdom is commonly the en∣dowment of old men. The rash and foolish counsellors of Rehoboam were young men. Old men are sometime as eminent for wisdom, as young men are for strength. And its as rare to see a young man prudent, as an old man strong. By grave and good counsel and advice, the strength of the head, the aged may be more helpful, then the yonger may be by their hands. A few gray hairs may be more worth, then many yong locks, and green heads.
The night is the best time for counsell, and so it is best to take counsel of Men, in the night of their age, when they have past through their troubles, difficulties and mani∣fold experiences, when as they are quiet, and sedate, and there is not the noise and hurrying of passions to disturb and distract them. And then old age is a fit age for the doing of good in regard of the prayers of old Men, I should ordinarily chuse, a young mans strength and an old mans prayers to be employed for me. I count it a choice blessing to have a stock of prayers going in an old mans heart, for me; God loves to hear the prayers of his old servants, when the hands of old Moses were up, his prayers were acceptable, though his hands were held up; we make much of the words of a dying man, and God eminently regards them. Hence old men are wont to give their blessings. i e. to pray for blessings from God: old Jacob blessed Pharaoh, &c. Sixthly, Old age is highly commendable for its safety. And old Saint hath passed through those dangerous storms and difficulties that a poor young one is now sail∣ing toward; he hath done living almost, the other is now going and beginning to live; a young Man is happy, that doth live well, but an old an is happier, that hath lived well, he is by death beyond the temptations, the difficulties, the passions, that a young man lies ingaged to, and this is the fourth Corollary, that old age is a bles∣sing. Ʋse 6. Though the coming to the grave in a full age, in a age wherein one is like to a shock of ripe Corn, be a promise, yet is it to be understood rightly; all Gods peo∣ple do not alwayes die in full age, in regard either of civill or natural fulnesse; but yet if even such a fulnesse be good for them, they shall have it; and it shall note be
bestowed, if it be not for their good. Honour thy father and thy mother, (as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee) that thy dayes may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee. Mark that Deut. 5.16. If it shall go well with thee. Gods people shall have old age, if God see it may make for their welfare, God sometime sees that old age would tend to the outward trouble and misery of his servants, by war, captivity poverty, famine, so that it would not be a good old age; and therefore he in mercy denies it them. Josiah was taken away,2 King. 22.20. before he was an old man, that he might not see the evil that should come upon the place where he lived, or much more if God sees by old age, that they shall be brought under temptations which (it may be) they are not able to overcome, he will not suffer them to go out to battle in their old age, as the people said concerning David, as the Lord lives thou shalt not go out to battle, lest the light of Israel go out: if God sees that thou shalt meet with such great stormes and tempests as thou art not able to withstand, he will take thee to himself, and shelter thee in the grave. In a word, if Gods people be taken away before they are old, and have a full age, they are taken away unto a full age, unto the full age of grace and glory in Heaven. God will give them an eternall life, and is not God in that way, as good as his word in promising a long life, and are they any losers? doth God break his promise in not giving them an old age in this world, if he give them an everlasting age in the next? If thy fa∣ther had promised thee an acre or two of Land lying in a barren Heath, or Common, and afterwards (in stead thereof) gives thee a thousand acres of rich Meadow, doth he break his promises with thee, if the Lord promise to give an old age, and in stead thereof give thee Heaven
and Eternall life, doth he not exceed his own promise as well as thy merit? That man breaks not his word, who having promised ten pieces of brasse, gives instead of these an hundred pieces of gold: as Herod, when he promised half his Kingdom unto the daughter of Hero∣dias, if he had given the whole Kingdom to her, he had not broke his promise, so when God promises not half nor the thousand part of Heaven in promising long life, he falls not short, but goes beyond his word, in bestow∣ing Eternity of blisse. Besides, God promises no good to his people in this world but that which shall be a furtherance to the obtaining of the chiefest good; if it be a bond to binde them to God, not if it be a snare to in∣trap and hinder them from God, and he should be un∣just and unkind in bestowing an earthly good upon thee, if he sees that it would stop thee from that which is Eternall. Ita disponit de minimo ut non fiat periculum de maximo. God so disposeth of thee here in regard of this, that thou mayest not be in danger of losing Eternall life. In a word remember, the people of God die in a full age, whensoever they die! though they die young, yet they are imbalmed for Eternity. 2. Besides they are satisfied and filled with their daies: the wicked never live out half their dayes, no when they live to be never so old; the godly live fully, though they die never so young: they die old, if not according to the course of nature, yet according to the course of their desires. Lastly, Old age is not to be abused by the aged themselves, 1. It must not be abused by ignorance, how shamefull is it to see a man whose hairs and wrinckles speak him an hundred, but his knowledge of Christ speaks him not
ten, who is an alphabetical old man (as one calls him,) who is in the worse sence twice a child, that doth not know his right hand from his left in Religion, that though he should be a teacher of others, had need him∣self to be taught the first principles of the Oracles of God. 2. Abuse not old age by prophanenesse, oh how sad is it for a black heart to lodge under a hoary head, for one to be ripe for the grave, and ripe for hell at the same time. Let old men take heed of recollecting former youth∣full follies with delight. O let them be more bitter to remember then ever they have been sweet to commit, 3. Abuse it not by unprofitablenesse, and negligence, what art thou almost at thy Haven, and doest thou sail so slowly? art thou in danger of losing Eternity, and doest thou run no faster. For shame, old Christians up and be doing you have but a little paper to write in, oh write the closer: improve your time; you have but a little time to work, your candle is almost burnt out. O work the faster; your sun is almost set, O labour with the more Christian diligence and vigor. THus I have given you the Application of this part of the Text to our selves, give me leave to speak in the next place something in the Application thereof to the occasion. And indeed to it I might here apply both the Parts of the Text. Out of the former part you have heard that the grave is the Port and place even of Saints: here is a Saint, an old eminent Saint, and yet (you see) the grave is his place to which he is arrived he is laid down in this his bed, and sleeps in the Lord, his grace could not exempt him from the grave: And fur∣ther God hath given him a grave, an honourable peace∣able
buriall: he is not buried as some have been in the bellies of beasts, but laid to rest in the bosome of the earth: he is not a portion for foxes, but a spectacle of Saints, I say of Saints, who love his memory, to whom as his Doctrine was profitable, so now is his memory sweet and Savoury, he hath perfumed the world with the sweet ointment of his preaching and example, and now he is taken out of it, the Savour is left behind; the great numbers of spectators and tears that attend his Funerall, speak the honourablenesse of his interment. But then he comes to his grave too, and so likewise he is the man in my Text▪ this servant of Christ, came willingly, he was not pulled and dragged to the grave: death was his familiar acquaintance, it was his privi∣ledge as well as his task; when his good Sister said to him in his sicknesse Brother I am afraid to leave you alone; why Sister (said he) I shall I am sure be with Jesus Christ when I die: the meditation of death was not more frequent then sweet to him: he chewed upon this morsel, death, every day: he did not go about to swallow it down all at once (as some foolish sinners do) when he came to die, for then he would have found this great morsel too big for him; but by holy Meditation he took it down dayly piece by piece; he lookt (as it were) so frequently from the top of the mast into the sea of death, that at length it seemed to him not onely a not astonishing, but an or∣dinary, familiar, pleasing spectacle. His soul was upon the wing, and was bent heavenward, even when it was in the cage of his poor carkasse, and when the violence of his disease began to break open that cage, I say not how patient, but how joyfull was he! much he longed to be with Christ, and in effect he would say, why is his Chariot so long a coming; well, he is in the grave, and he is come to the
grave. Thus the former part of my text is applicable to him. But that which I principally intended, was the application of the second Part of the Text to him: namely, the seasonablenesse of the godly mans coming to the grave▪ Come he is to the grave like the man in my Text, in a full age like as a shock of corn, &c. If you con∣sider his birth, this ripe shock of corn, Doctor William Gouge brought this day to the barn of the grave, sprang at first from Mr. Thomas Gouge of Stratford Bow, a Gentle∣man of eminent quality, and of Singular piety in his generation. If you look upon him in the growing years of his youth, he was an Eaton Scholer, and he was there fitted for the University, and sent to Kings Colledge in Cambridge, where he was so Studious, and profited so much by his studies, that he was made modorator in the Sophisters Schooles. He took all his degrees in their order, and did perform all those acts, that were re∣quired of him publikely, for the taking those de∣grees He was a close Student in the University, and emi∣nent for his knowledge in the learned Languages, and in the Arts, very well versed in Logick and Philosophy, of both which he was chosen the Lecturer in his Colledge. Nor yet was he there lesse noted for his piety, even in his younger years, he was not once absent (neither morning nor Evening) from the publike and solemn worship of God in the Colledge performed twice every day, for the space of nine whole years together. He read fifteen Chapters in the Bible every day, and when he lay awake in the night, his course was to Meditate of what he had read in the day-time, so deceiving the tediousness of his waking and depriving himself also sometimes of the sweetnesse of his sleeping hours, though by a better and greater sweetnesse. Thus you have seen him in his
growing years. Next look upon him in the full eare when he had taken all this pains to furnish himself with the Egyptian Jewels of University-learning and accomplish∣ments, he was fit to come into the Canaan of the Church to deck & adorn the spouse of Christ: he entred into the Ministry, when he was in the thirty second yeer of his age: an age sutable to that calling which being so weighty, he durst not undertake rashly, and unadvisedly, (I wish all those whom it concerns would take notice of it, and example by him herein:) he laid up, before the laid out, he first laboured to fit himself with endowments, and not till then, did he put himself upon imployment. He was a scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven,Mat. 13.52. like an hosholder which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old. He succeeded that eminently faithfull ser∣vant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Stephen Egerton in the charge of Black-Fryars, to which he was unanimously chosen. But (as I said) I principally look upon him in his ripe and full age And first God bestowed upon him a Civil maturity and ripenesse of age:His Civil maturity or fulnesse of age. First, he had much ho∣nour, How great was the confluence of hearers which in former times not onely from all parts of this famous City, but of many parts of England, frequented his Lectures at Black-fryars (for so great was the flame of his pains, that he heated those who sat a great way off from it) and when the godly Christians of those times came to London, they thought not their businesse done unless they had been at Black-fryars Lectures: and great was the benefit which many godly people, and young Ministers professed that they (then) reapt from his la∣bours. How was this place wherein you honour him at his death by your unwonted and great numbers, thronged in his life time! and so great were the As∣semblies
that here met to hear him, and withall his tender compassion toward the multitudes of his hearers, that out of this Pulpit he was wont (before he began his Sermons) to observe what Pues were empty, and to command his Clark to open them, for the ease of those who thronged in the Isles. He was worthily not only for his years, but his prudence, and abilities accounted, a fa∣ther among the London Ministers, and honoured as such: he was chosen to be a member of the Reverend Assem∣bly of Divines, & was one of those learned Divines who wrote lately the large Annotations upon the Bible. He was for his wisdom and faithfulnesse, worthily chosen a Trustee for buying in impropriations, wherein he approved himself most faithfull and conscientiously carefull to discharge the trust committed to him: nor was he altogether without the blessing of a fulnesse in respect of a wealthy and plentifull Estate in the world. I know there are some who look upon a Ministers wealth as his crime (when they can espie no other) who out of covetousnesse, care not how little they themselves be∣stow upon Ministers, and out of envie are readie to voice them to possesse much more then they do, and therefore do not instead of an hundred set down fiftie, but instead of fifty, set down a thousand: many such back friends, hath this reverend man met with; for his Estate, though it were not so small as either for him or his, to be ashamed of, yet neither was it so great as for any to envy, or as some have reported. For thus much I can assure you from those who very well know, that his personall Estate is found short, by some hundreds of pounds, of his Legacies and gifts, & his reall Estate is not half so much as sundry have voiced it. And yet had he
been such an one as some have maliciously and falsly censured him, an usurer, he might have had, though lesse grace, yet more money, and yet as much grace also, as (I fear) most of those have, who so unworthily have asperst him. This I can assure you from many who fully knew his course, and Estate (particularly from the mouth of his eldest son, my reverend brother) who can testifie what I am about to say in this par∣ticular upon oath, that in all his life-time, he never did either directly or indirectly, neither by himself or any other for him, put any money to use, and so far was he from doing so, that sundry can testifie, he was scarce ever out of debt; for he had divers chil∣dren before the inheritance which he had by his fa∣ther came to him, and from the time of his fathers death, till his children came of age, he laid out, for his brother, sisters, and their children, above two thousand pounds; yea in those times, wherein he was charged to have put money to use, he paid interest for six hundred pounds, which with the principall, he himself paid, though it were anothers debt: and for these 20. years last past, he purchased not one foot of Land, unlesse ten pounds per annum; and he would often say that after his death, the world would know how much they were mistaken in judging of his Estate. And yet through the bleffing of God upon him, he was both rich in contentment with his Estate while he lived, and left a comfortable subsistence behind him for all his surviving children when he died, and as his children (I trust) shall finde the blessing of the latter, so did he in his life-time, expresse the grace of the former, in refusing great and to him, inregard of his naturall disposition (as
he oft professed to me) desirable preferment (as particu∣larly that of the Provostship of Kings Colledge in Cam∣bridge, offered him by an honourable hand) much more advantagious in worldly respects, then that of his Living of Black Fryers, and this he did for the ten∣der respect which he bare to the souls of his people, to which God had called him. But for no fulnesse was his age so eminent,His spiritual fulnesse of age. as for that which principally deserves commendation. I mean spi∣ritual fulnesse. This I shall briefly consider, both in re∣spect 1. Of what grace he had, and 2. What good he did. 1. For the former. In the general, he had received of the fulnesse of Christ, that grace for grace whereby he was made meet for glory, and which was suitable to his state and station, both as a Christian and a Minister: but more particularly, there were three beautiful gra∣ces which eminently shin'd in this godly man; in which he seem'd higher by the head and shoulders, then other Christians, and then most Ministers. 1. The first was the grace of humility; though others knew not when his face did not shine, yet he knew not when it did. And yet he easily could observe the least glymps or appearance of any worth in another, and would acknowledge it. He knew not that worth which had a beam-like big∣nesse in himself, but he easily espied and respected that of good which was but as a mote in another. This I have alwayes (almost) observed in him since it was my hap∣py unhappinesse to have occasion to be so frequently in his company by reason of my employment among his people. He was, as its said of Nazianzen, , high in employments and abilities, low in his disposition and resentment of his worth. So
eminent was his humility, that he charged his Execu∣tor to whom he committed the care of his Funeral, that there should bee no Green-staff laid upon his Herse, though this was the usual respect given to those who in their life-time had been Governours of Bridewell (one of which number, yea, and Benefactor to the house this worthy Doctor was) and that he should not affix any Escucheons to his Herse, though he were a Gentle∣man anciently descended; as if he had thought that the poverty of Christ was his patrimony (as Ambrose said) and Coat of Arms,Paupertas Christi meum patrimonium. Ambr. and his interest in him, his greatest and best atchievement, or as if both living and dead, he would be (as the Apostle speaks) clothed with humility. 2. A second grace which eminently appeared in him was that grace of Faith. I observed in him as great a study to advance Christ as to debase himself; frequently (of late) I have heard him say, When I look upon my self, I see nothing but emptiness & weakness, But when I look upon Christ, I see nothing but fulnesse and sufficiency: when the hand of his body was weak and shaking, that of his soul (faith) was strong and steddy. When he could not hold the cup at the Sacrament, nor evenly carry it to his mouth, by reason of his weaknesse and shaking, with what a firm and fixed affiance did he lay hold upon Christ, and with what a strong and eager appetite, did he apply the blood of Christ to his soul! And how sweetly have I heard him breathe out joyful thanksgi∣vings for his refreshment by the blood of Christ, when he was returned to his house, after the Lords Supper; when he could hardly creep with his body to the place where it was celebrated, nay, was forced to make use of the strength and support of others to hold him up,
his faith swiftly ran, nay, was upon the wing in carry∣ing him to Christ. When worldly supports failed him, his health, strength forsook him, he made JESUS CHRIST the staff of his old age, oft professing as his great misery and impotency without him, so his holy and humble recumbency upon him. 3. A third grace wherewith this holy man was (even to common observation) beautified, was that of pati∣ence under the hand of God: the truth is, he was of a meek and quiet spirit toward man. I have not heard that ever he was moved to anger by any injuries or disgraceful and false reports wherewith hee was as∣perst. They were as bullets shot against a mud-wall, which there sink and dye: when dirt was most abu∣sively cast into his face, there never (in my observa∣tion) was blood fetcht into his face, by wrath and passion: he was truly meek in spirit. So amiable was the meeknesse of his carriage toward his wife, that for twenty two yeers (for so long they lived to∣gether) there was never heard any one word pro∣ceeding from him toward her, sounding like an angry one. But for his patience under the afflicting hand of God, I know not whether it were more admirable or imitable. Though by reason of the bitternesse of his pains by the stone and sharpnesse of urine, and that Le∣thalis arundo (as he oft called it) that deadly arrow in his side (which hee knew could never be pluckt out of it but by death) I mean his Asthma or difficul∣ty of breathing, which he got by an excessive cold in attending upon publick employment: notwith∣standing, I say, by reason of these, I have heard him groan a thousand times, yet never did I hear
him grumble once. Never did he complain of God for his suffering, though oft of himself for sinning. Never did I hear him say great sufferer! but often great sinner! and yet he would overtake that expression a∣gain, with the discoursing of, and comforting himself in a great Saviour: and in the depth of his torments he would say, well, yet in all these, there is nothing of Hell or Gods wrath. His sufferings never were so deep but he could see to the bottom of them. And as the grace he had was great, so secondly, in this spiritual fulnesse of his age, I consider the good he did: Look upon him in his family, and there you will finde him both indulgent toward the bodies of his children, and servants, and yet especially careful of their souls, witnesse his constant labour in catechizing them, and daily dropping upon them with holy instructions. He was the husband of one wife, a widower eight and twenty yeers, and he had thirteen children by that his one and onely wife, whereof eight lived to mans and womans estate: all his sons he brought up to learning, desiring that they might have all been im∣ployed in the Ministery, it being that calling which to him was as full of pleasure as imployment; his la∣bours wherein, he went through so delightfully, that he oft professed to mee, that the greatest pleasure which he took in the world, was in the employments of his calling, in regard whereof, he hath told great persons, and particularly the Lord Keeper, that he en∣vied not the greatnesse of his place; and yet he was a very close (I had almost said a severe) student, and was at his study, every morning (Winter and Sum∣mer during his health) by five a clock in the morn∣ing
and alwayes by four in the summer, and oft sooner, so that he had done that which might have been counted a dayes work, before many began their study. And indeed it was his desire to perform his secret worshipping of God before day-light, that so he might have the benefit of the whole day for his study, and he would oft say (as Demosthenes spake concerning the smith) that he was ashamed that those of others callings, should be at their work, before he was at his: so that none could give him that reproof which I have read a certain Religious man gave to a Bishop who slept too long a mornings,Surrexerunt passeres et sterunt pontifices? the sparrows are up, and chirping and yet the Bishop is in bed and sleep∣ing. (If he laboured to make the sleepy Bishop ashamed by the rising of the sparros, oh how should sloth∣full Ministers be ashamed of their idlenesse, when they hear of this painfull servant of Christ Doctor Gouge) The Parish of Black-fryars will be a standing and a constant witnesse of his delighting to do good. At his first coming to it, the old Church in regard of the great thronging from all parts to his Sermons, being found far too small for the auditory, he procured fifteen hundred pounds by collections at his Lectures and by Letters written to his Friends, whereby it was en∣larged to this Stately and Beautifull structure without any briefes at all. He was ever very Charitable to the (especially) godly poor, of which (yet) he would make no report vain gloriously. In his life time, he set a part as aHis own ex∣pression. sacred stok, a portion for the poor, proportion∣able to all his receipts, which he faithfully distributed. He preached for many years together thrice (constant∣ly) every week, and how pithy clear, Judicious his
Sermons were, not onely the confluence, and applause of his Auditors, but especially the benefit which they reaped from them will abundantly testifie. For five and forty years together, he did once every moneth ad∣minister the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, not so much as once interrupting that course; and if upon some urgent occasion, he was necessitated to be from his charge, he would not fail to be present at it upon the Sacrament-day though his other employments never so loudly called him off. In a great part of the fore-mentioned long space of yeers (during the time of Prelatical Innovations) he was a sweet refreshing shade and shelter, and even as streams in a dry scorching wildernesse, to the old godly Puritanes (now accounted to be a name of honour, though heretofore a nickname of disgrace) by admitting them to the Lords Supper at his Congregation, who could not either at all, or at least purely (in regard of Superstitious gestures genuflexions, &c.) enjoy that ordinance at home. He preached to his people by his life as well as by his lip: he was (as one speaks of John Baptist) all voice, and such in his practice as well as his Pulpit. How unblameable, temperate, holy, was his deportment in all places! how exemplary was he to the flock! He was not like some of whom I have heard, that they preach so well, that its pity they should ever be out of the Pulpit, but they live so ill, that its pity they should ever be in the Pulpit. He was as of a most sweet even and peaceable temper himself, so of much for∣vvardnesse to compose, and (vvhich is not every peace∣able mans happinesse) much prudence in composing all differences among his people, among vvhom he
was (as some of them have told me) as it were a Justice of Peace, as well as a Minister of Peace. If he could not (as what man can) hinder dissentions from being born, he would not suffer them to be long∣lived. As it was his contentment and crown laboriously, during his healthfull years, to Preach, so notwith∣standing his forementioned pains and infirmities, he did Preach, as long as he was able to get up into the Pulpit, and this (I question whither it can be a paraleld) Commendation, I shall adde, He Preached so long as that it was a greater difficulty for him to go up into the Pulpit, then either to make or Preach a Sermon, and that both because of the growing weaknesse of his body, and the constant if not increasing ability of his parts and judgement, even to his last. In snort, he would have accounted it a mercy, if he who Preacht so much in his life, might also have dyed Preaching. To all this I might adjoyn his great industry in, and usefulnesse by publishing in Print many excellent and pithy discourses. Here I might mention his Printed Catechisme, his clear and judicious Annotations upon that part of the Bible contained from the first of Samuel to Job. His book called the whole Armour of God, another called Do∣mestical duties, his Comment on the 116. PsaA Treatise. Gods three arrows, and his Exquisite (and I question whether to be paraleld) exposition of the Lords Prayer, and that Elabo∣rate Comment of his upon the Epistle to the Hebrewes which (after many yeers preaching) he went through in his Sermons at Black-Fryars, and which he fully pre∣pared for the Presse, before his death, excepting one half Chapter; a work of excellent worth, both con∣sidering
the Subject (noble, and difficult) and the great paines and dexterity of the Commentator; and which being now in the Presse shall (I trust) short∣ly see the light, though in regard of its bignesse the coming forth thereof cannot be so speedy, as is desi∣red, and as the book will (I am confident) when publisht, be useful. To conclude this head of his spiritual fulnesse of age, he was one who may be fitly called both one of a thousand, and also a thousand men in one, for his excellent endowments, for his usefulnesse in his employments. 3. Thirdly and lastly,His natural fulnesse. for his natural fulnesse and ripenesse of age; he was one to whom my Text is applicable in that particular also. He was aged seven∣ty nine when he died, so that he had the full age, which (as I said before) was senectus sera a late,Senectus sera. long age. But then I confesse, he runs not fully parallel with my Text in respect of that branch of naturall ful∣nesse of age, which (I told you) was Senectus sana, a strong, hayl, vigorous, diseaselesse old age. No; his forementioned diseases, and bodily infirmities of the Stone and Asthma, here would make me halt, were it not for this double consideration (in regard of which I cannot onely excuse his crazinesse in old age, but even highly commend him under it.) 1. His disea∣ses came not upon him, in, much lesse by any sinful or unwarrantable courses; envie it self dares not tax him of intemperance, in eating, drinking, pastimes, (hee hath been oft heard to say hee never took a journey meerly for pleasure in all his life;) No, his diseases came either by his laboriousnesse in study∣ing, preaching, watching, or attending in all wea∣thers
and seasons, upon his work at the Assembly. He received his wounds in his Masters service, they were all scars of honour, he was not worn with rust, but whetting. 2. This I shall adde as his honour under his crazinesse of body, that when he was most decre∣pit and feeble, he had the blessing of a Senectus sa∣na,Senectus sana. an hayl strong old age, in regard of his parts of minde, his intellectuals, which were as vivid, quick, and vigorous in reasoning and disputing as when he was fourty yeers of age, in the greatest of his bodi∣ly strength. And this few can more fully know then my self, by reason of my frequent occasions of conversing with him, especially upon the Lords dayes, when often after the evening Sermon propound∣ed those Theological doubts to him, concerning which I desired to draw forth his apprehensions; yea, of this which I now say, the whole Ministry of London will attest the truth from their own experience, by cal∣ling to their mindes that learned, cleer, and polite Sermon of his, lately preached in Latin at Sion Col∣ledge before them all. And the truth is, this con∣tinuance of the use of his reason, and abilities of minde, was the reason why he adventured so long as he did, to frequent the publick Assembly, yea, and to preach, notwithstanding the crazinesse and weak∣nesses of his body. I can study my Sermon, said he, I can preach my Sermon, and shall I forbear preaching because I am so weak as not to be able to go? I will be carryed rather, and carryed he oft was. So that indeed the blade of his minde was too sharp for the sheath of his body, the wine too strong for the cask, and his abilities of minde too vigorous
for his weak diseased carkass. I now draw to a con∣clusion: some will say, I have not commended him enough, I confesse it, nor can I. Others that I have in his commendation said too much, I confesse it too, but my meaning is, too much perhaps for their li∣king, too much (I sear) for their imitation. But since he who thought that seventy nine yeers on earth were not, nay that eternity in heaven, is not too much to serve and praise his and our Lord, let not us think that half an hour is too much to scatter a few flow∣ers on his Herse, they being such as were planted by his own labour, or such rather which grew out of his own worth. Errata. FOr the marg. note pag. 8. r. the second point of the first branch, p. 14. marg. r. accedant non adhaereant, p. 15. l. 17. r. comprehended, l. 22. r. meetnesse, p. 17. marg. r. vulgatam, p. 38. l. 26 r. fifth. FINIS These books are lately printed, and are sold at the Ball in Pauls Church-yard. Mr. Jenkyns second part of his Exposition of the whole Epistle of Jude. Mr. Kendal of the Perseverance of the Saints, in answer to Mr. John Goodwin. Mr. Sheffeild of Christ, under that clear and glorious resemblance of the Sun, Mal, 4 2. Jus Divinum Ministerii, by the Provincial Assembly of London. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Dr. Hill, Master of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, by Dr. Tuckney.
