J724 E155_5 R23440 99871999 156851
JESƲITES PLOTS AND COUNSELS Plainly discovered To the most unlearned: Which hath satisfied many about these present distractions. VVherein is laid open the Jesuites endea∣vours to bring all States to Monarchies, and all the Commons in Monarchies to Slavery, and how they have been put on foot here in England. Also how their counsels brought Germany into these long and blouay wars, and endeavoured to bring Poland into slavery. LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet. 1642.
JESUITES Plots and Counsels plainly discovered, &c. AS our Brethren of Scotland (after evill Counsellors had loaded them with as ma∣ny reproaches of as high a nature as now are laid against the Parliament) were yet found loyall Subjects at last, when as they had made way to enforme his Majesty of the wrongs done to himself and his Kingdoms thereby, so we hope will this Parliament at length be found, who have con∣flicted with the same Counsellers to undoe England and Ireland, which endeavoured to undoe Scotland, and who have done no other acts of State against his Ma∣jesties mind, then they did. This Parliament is hated above all other, because it hath found more Delinquents, and especially because it cannot be broken at pleasure; and ever since that Act was passed, all wayes have been taken to dissolve or de∣stroy it, even before these bug-beares of Hull, or the Militia were hatched. And now that all other plots faile them, they would render them odious to the peo∣ple, that they might help to doe it: And what wonder if those that have counselled to break so many Parlia∣ments, laboured to divide Parliaments, hated and scor∣ned Laws and Parliaments these many yeers, should now be active against this lasting Parliament? It is wel known, the Jesuites plots & counsels are utterly against Parliaments, and all Government where Commons have any hand, because one man is easier dealt withall
then many: And therefore the State of Venice (though they be Papists) have banished them, as haters of their kind of Government. It was long since said by a great Statesman, that the Jesuites counsels were followed lesse or more in all Kingdomes, both where they were loved and where they were hated, but in States Republiques. not so easily. And to that end have they laboured these 100. yeares as stories tell us, to bring people every where to slavery, and Kings to be absolute. And about that time, the King of Spaine guided by their counsels, lost the Low Countries by endeavouring to make them slaves. And who sees not, that such Counsels have prevailed too long among us here, especially since the French Queen and her Jesuites came into England; who is indeede accounted the fire-brand of all Chri∣stendome; and so men may easily see the rise of all our miserable distractions at this time: and what reason Parliaments have to oppose them and fence Kings against them, lest the Jesuites subtile Coun∣sels enable our Papists (as it was in Germany, at the beginning of their civill wars) to divide the Prote∣stants, and make them helpe to destroy each other. It hath been declared in Parliament, that those which have put Ireland into bloud, did hope to have begun first with us. And what plots have been assayed in Scotland to bring all to confusion, by some of the same hands that are now against us, before his Majesties journey thither, and when he was there also, are not yet forgotten. And the Papists, though they play under board, in all these have set Protestants against Prote∣stants, except onely in Ireland, where they were ten to one, and also thought themselves sure of friends at our Court, (and perhaps then in Parliament too) potent
enough to stop all succours from the poor Protestants there, and so feared not to declare to fight for Popery, and to root out all Protestants Irish or English. In all other places they easily draw to them such as are ob∣noxious to the Laws, as Papists, Arminians, and other offenders are here that live against the laws. And what wonder if they be active against Parliaments, and for the Kings prerogative, whither they must fly for shelter against the Justice of Parliaments. Oh that the Lord would please to make England wise by all the misery of our neighbours about us! especially When the Emperour la∣boured to re∣duce it to sla∣very, Germany, who hath suffered such long and wofull calamity, and was brought into it by the same wayes the Papists now go about to bring misery upon us: For they pretended the authority of the Emperour, whom they had on their side, and great love and friendship to those Protestants called Lutherans, and laboured to incense them against those Protestants called Calvinists, who are reformed farthest from Popery; and did at length so divide them, as that the D. of Saxony with his great strength took on the Emperours side, and so the Lantgrave of Darmstat and others who had great countreys under their command. And most of the rest stood Neuters, as the chiefe Duke of Brunswick, Luneburg, Aunsbach, and the Cities of Ausburg, Norimberg, Wormes, &c. Yet the Marquesse of Baden being a Lutheran, and some other, took part with the Calvinists, foreseeing the treachery of the Emperour and his Papists. Those that stood Neuters, durst not trust the Papists, and yet out of ill will would not joyne with the Calvinists. And thus things stood under bloudy wars about a dozen years, till the Emperour and Papists began (notwithstanding all their faire promises) to oppresse the Duke of Saxo∣ny
and other Lutherans that sided with them, as well as those that stood Neuters; and then the Lutheran Princes as well as the Calvinists, called in the King of Sweden to their aid against the Emperour and his Pa∣pists, who with great diligence and wisdome united all Protestants together when it was too late, and that goodly large fruitfull countrey was almost wasted and desolated, and till this day, after 20. yeeres miserable wars, the Papists, with the help of neighbour Papists abroad, stand in defiance against the Protestants so uni∣ted, and all the power of Swedeland also: and yet at first the Protestants were two to one, if they had then stuck together. Which had they done, I beleeve (as I heard some of the Princes of Germany say when I was there) the War had been quickly and happily ended. And our quarrels would soone be ended, if the Lord please to give all Protestants wisdome to side with the King and Parliament, and joyne them together, not with King and a faction of Papists and Arminians that would engrosse his Majesty to themselves from his Par∣liament: As the Scots wisely and loyally did to their e∣ternall honour and safety, who intended no disloyall act against the King, but onely came to remove evill counsellors from him, and accordingly sent their Peti∣tions before them. All this well considered, will satis∣fie the common Objection now made against this Par∣liament, That although we have hitherto obtained much good thereby, yet now they are like to bring all to confusion and ruine▪ For if such Counsels as afore∣said have been and still are followed, had we had no Parliament, we must have lost Religion and Liberties forever, or else those illegall taxes, burdens, and su∣perstitions put upon us, and the injustice of all Courts
racking us, must needs have put us into worse confusi∣on, having no head and lawfull power to guide us. And since the sitting of this Parliament, if they had suffered all things, and not resisted as they did, they would cer∣tainly have been dissolved or destroyed, and then where had all the new Laws been as wel as the old? They that so easily brake the old, could break the new, and bring up all Courts and Taxes againe. And those that have dealt so with us already, and would have made a bloudy War upon the Scots, and practised so much treachery and falshood against them, who are yet found loyal subjects, and honest men, and have bin alwayes ready to hinder all succour for our brethren of Ireland, what hope can we have so long as any of them are suffered about his sacred Majesty? The example of the late King of Poland may also teach us the wicked practice of the Jesuites, who be∣ing a man of great parts, of a very just and sweete nature when he was young; was yet by those counsels brought to endeavour the ruine of that State, who free∣ly chose him, and made him a King, being one of the most free and potent States under a King, of the Chri∣stian world. They might assemble in Parliament for six weekes once every yeere if need were, and aske the King no leave, as I have beene told by some of their own mouthes, and then take downe all Officers of Court and Kingdom if faulty, and set up new. They might have every Noble-man his guard of some 200. some 300. men, &c. yet by subtile dividing the Great men and favouring Factions, especially the blasphe∣mous Sect of Socinians who are further from Popery, (which was the Kings Religion there) then any other:
For that little truth of the blessed Trinity and of Christ, which Papists maintaine with us, they de∣ny and count it to be Popish doctrine: yet these were favoured, and did much increase. And if that King had lived to this day, he was in an easie way to have enslaved that free people, and overthrown their glorious state: For when some of the free Princes of that State, and Lords went to advise with the Duke of Lituania thereabout, he told them it seemed too late now, and his advice should have been heard long ago. Indeede now at the election of this new King, they have setled all in its ancient splendor againe. These things are well known to those Merchants that traded that way in those times. FINIS.
