L1438 E608_22 R205929 99865152 165704
A Letter from AMSTERDAM Conteining the full relation of the Procee∣dings of the Prince of Orange Against that City, and the transactions betwixt him, and the Citizens, their opening of the Sluces to drown the said City, with severall other passa∣ges thereupon, and the Copy of the Prince of Orange his Letter the Magistrates of the City. WITH An exact relation of the five days seige or blocking up, of Amsterdam by the Prince of Orange, and Grave William of Nassaw. TOGETHER With a particular discovery of the whole design and opening the Sluces to let in the Sea, which hath over flown great part of the Land. LONDON Printed by Bernard Alsop for T. P. and are to be sold at the Royall-Exchange in Cornhil. 1650.
Letters from AMSTERDAM CONTEINING The full relation of the Proceedings of the Prince of ORANGE, against that City, and the transactions betwixt him and the Citizens, their opening of the Sluces, to drown the said City with seve∣rall other passages thereupon, the Copy of the Prince of ORANGE his Letter to the Magistrates of the City. SIR, I Doubt not but the news of the Armies comming down against Amsterdam; hath by this time dispersed it self throughout Europe, but the occasi∣on and the transactions between the Prince of Orange, and the Citizens may be worthy of your observation, viz. The Prince having a high dis∣pleasure
and indgnation against the Magistrates of Amsterdam contrived away whereby he intended to surprize this rich & famous City by a stratagem, and to effect this design without giving cause of suspicion what his intent was, He ordred Grave William of Nassaw to empty all frontier Garrisons, upon pre∣tence of conveying the old Prince of Orange in∣to Germany, and to be ready at the same time with his horse to enter the City, which was contri∣ved to be done on Saturday the thirty of July about 3 or 4 in the morning at the opening of the Gates; for effecting of which design with the more certainty and secrecie, about two hundred foot souldiers were put privately into several Turf boats, which were to come up to the City at the same time by water, and lying undiscovered, were to fall in at the very same instant when the horse should enter the gates, and surprize the Guard at the Regulaters high-way, which being done, he thought good to make the City with∣out any resistance. But so it was, that when the Plot was almost ready to be put in execution, it pleased God to disappoint al their purposes, partly by reason of the great rain which fell all Friday (July 29.) in the afternoon, and all the same night, which made the ways very deep and rotten; so that the Prince his horse having a long march, of four and twenty miles ty∣red. Then they turned to a City about ten miles off, but the Citizens refused to passe through or let them in, in regard they knew not what they were; where∣upon they were forced to march another way, which was to their great disadvantage, and that nigh
being very dark, and wanting good guides, they mis∣took their way, which hindred them above three hours time, by reason whereof they could not get unto Amsterdam before nine of the clock on Sa∣turday, which was six houres after the time appoint∣ed to enter the City, so that before they got thither, their design was discovered to the Magistrates, by the Post of Hambrough, who accidentally fel mongst the horse, when they were doubtfull of their way, which made his company very acceptable to them, in regard they might make use of him to be their guide, but when he perceived their design, he stole away from them and hasted to Amsterdam, and made known to the Magistrates, what he had learned by riding a while amongst their troops. Grave William perceiving that Providence fought against him (to the losse of the time appointed, and best opportunity) was filled with discontent, and quartered his Forces at Over-Qirtie, which is three miles from the City, attending there to re∣ceive further Orders from the Prince of Orange, who was at the Hague, and had there impriso∣ned many publique persons that were sent from Dort, Horten, Delf, and other places, and so confi∣dent was he, that the design on which he had sent Grave William, would take effect, that he told the imprisoned with his own mouth, Amsterdam was his own, but immediately after news was brought him to the contrary, which so much startled him that its aid, he took his hat, threw it one the ground, and set his feet upon it. When his heat of passion was over, he hasted away and on Sunday came to
Grave William, but his comming was to little pur∣pose, for so soon as the Magistrates of Amsterdam, received the information from the Post at Hambo∣rough as aforesaid, they caused all the gates of the City to be shut up, and the booms to be lockt, which are as so many gates by water, and put all the City-Garrison into arms, with their muskets ready char∣ged with bullet, They also caused severall Brasse Guns to be mounted on their works, and sent many vessels well man'd and provided to lie upon Sinster, which is an inland River, and some men of war rode at Anchor upon the Tij, which is an arm of the Sea, So that good guards were quickly placed about the City, both by land and water, and the apparence of men in their Arms was the more speedier for that at the beat of Drum they were commanded forth in the name of the Magistrates of Amsterdam, which was a thing not usuall. The city being in such a posture of defence, Grave William moved the Prince to block up the city at a di∣stance on the South side of Tij, conceiving that if they could keep provisions from it, in time he should ob∣tain his Desires. But the Magistrates wisely foresee∣ing the danger, caused all the Sluces to be opened, on Sunday about noon, it pleased God a little before to turn the wind Northwest, which usually brings in much water; by this means all the low grounds for many miles without Amsterdam lay under water in short time, so that the Princes horses could have no grasse, nor make nearer approaches, unlesse upon banks, where above three a brest could not march
and then it must have been upon the mouth of the cannon: hereupon on sunday the Prince sent a Trum∣peter into the city, and 4 of the Cities Councel was sent to the Prince at several times, on Munday, Tues∣day, and Wednesday, and stayed all Tuesday and Wednesday night with him; in all which time seve∣ral other messengers came from him to the Magi∣strates. During all these transactions, several Let∣ters came from the most eminent towns in Holland, and from Utritch to the Magistrates of Amsterdam, certifying their dislike of the Princes proceedings, and several other Magistrates came also in person, af∣firming the same, which much encouraged the City, and disheartned the Prince, who on Wednesday was commanded by the States General (as is reported) to appear presently in the Hague, and in four and twenty hours to cause all the Forces to repair to their several Garrisons; and to that end on Thurs∣day morning as soon as the day appeared, he remo∣ved from before Amsterdam, at which there was no small rejoycing. During the Prince his absence from the Hague, there hath been mutenies, and the inhabi∣tants would have plundered the Princes Court. Thus you have a Relation of the 5 days blocking up of the famous City of Amsterdam, who in the Hague (no doubt) will prosecute the chief authors of this design, of which more hereafter.
A Copy of a Letter sent by his Highness the the Prince of Orange, to the right worshipfull the Burgamasters, and Governours of the City of Amsterdam. RIght worshipfull, wise, discreet, and singular good friends; Being last time in your Citie, I was so strang∣ly entreated by you, that (to bee no more subject to the like) I have appointed Count William of Nassaw, with certain Troops in your Citie, with an Order, to keepe all things therein in peace and tranquillity. To the end, that what I have further to propound unto you, touching the service of the State, may not be in∣terrupted by some ill-meaning people: To which J desire you to put too your helping hand. And relying hereupon, we commend you to the protecti∣on of the most High, and remain, Your good Friend C. P. d' Orange. Hague, 29. Iuly, 1650. FINIS.
