L1625 E292_22 99860955 113082
A LETTER Sent to the Right Honourable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker to the Honourable House of Commons: Concerning the raising of the Siege of TAVNTON by the Parliaments Forces. BY a worthy Gentleman in Sir Thomas Fair∣fax his Army. Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parlia∣ment, that this Letter be forthwith Printed and Published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed by Edward Husbands Printer to the Honourable House of Commons, Iuly 10. 1645.
To the Honorable William Lenthall Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons. SIR, I Writ to you yersterday, of Gorings Ad∣vance against Taunton, after he had drawn off as far as Black Down, which he did in hopes our men would have drawn out and engaged; but seeing himself beguiled in his design, he re∣turned again, had hot skirmishes; but our forces gave him entertainment, and killed abundance of his men: And on Thursday noon, drew off again, facing the Town till night, and Quartered on Fryday night at Ilmister: The Generall Advanced on Fryday to Beu∣minster, twelve miles from Dorchester, his Horse into Crookhorne, where we fell on the Enemy, took a Lieu∣tenant, and divers other of Sir Rob: Welches troop, being on their Rear; we sent another party between Sherborn and Somerton, and fell on their Van, and took some Prisoners there also: This so Alarumed the Enemy, that they broke down their bridges. There are three Regiments of Horse, and six hundred Dragoones in
pursuit of them, and to bring intelligence of their mo∣tion: Our poor Foot (being impatient of the Relief of their friends at Taunton) Marched sixty two miles in five dayes, and offered at Dorchester, after twelve miles march that day, to march all that night to Relieve Taunton, hearing that Goring was fallen on again; as yet none of our friends in the Town is come to us; we expect them this day about noon: and then a Ge∣nerall Councel of War being called, there will be a resolution taken, how to order our marches after the Enemy, with secrity to the West: But our poor foot must a while refresh themselves, before they move, and our Horse are yet in no condition to follow farre: I cannot, in this Letter, tell you of the straights of the Town, or any other particular, but that the Enemy hath left the Siege, and our friends at liberty (the Lord be praised for it) though this be a service of great concernment to the Kingdom, and the West in particular; yet I account the quieting of the Club-men, and the reputation our Army hath with them by relieving this Town, and marching quietly through their Country, and making the Ene∣my flie, is of more concernment, then at first is appre∣hended; one Holles the violent Ringleader of the Club men, came to Dorchester with 4 others from the Club∣men, for leave to Petition the Parliament; he was most peremptory and insolent in his Carriage, and but for his being sent as a Messenger, he had been committed, as this man is the head of that giddy-head faction in Dorsetshire, so his Brother for Wiltshire; fellows that delude the poor Country-men: whom I hope we shall undeceive before we return, and some
stay we must make to salve that sore, for it is not yet half cured: The Club-men fell upon Goodale, Colo∣nell Pindars Messenger, took his Letters to the Gene∣rall from him, his horse and Armes; the Governour of Lime fell upon them, and killed eighty of them, they dared him to fight; the Governour of Lime is hurt, and the Mayor was unhorsed; this was on Thursday last. From the Lady Strode; House, neer Beuminster July the 5. Saturday, five in the morning. THe Messenger not being gone, I thought fit to adde that the Army is marched this day to Crookhorn, where the Generall now is, and hath met with a Letter from Colonell Weldon, of the liberty they now are in: many wounded, and driven to great extremities, espe∣cially for Ammunition: There is a second and third Reserve of Horse and Dragoones gone after the first party, to fall on the Rear of the Enemy: News is come, they are neer engagement, the issue I know not: Lieutenant Generall Cromwell is gone in person, to take care of the mannagement of the pursuit; our Horse are harrasted out, yet go after the Enemy cheerfully: we hear nothing of the Treasure, which will prove much to our prejudice; for now the Souldier will live on free Quarter, and discontent the Country. If ever an Army deserved to be trusted with a fortnights Pay before hand, this doth; for they never presse for mo∣ney, till they be extreamly necessitated, and in arrear. Crookhorn, July 5. 1645. two in the afternoon.
THe Messenger staying till the Generall returned from the party that pursued Goring, I may adde this, That our Horse pursued them to the Bridge called Load bridge, which the Enemy broke down, and made good against our Horse, having a strong Breast-work raised. The Generall instantly Commanded a Bri∣gade of Foot, with a Train, to march (notwithstanding their wearinesse) to beat them off that passe: The foot marched as cheerfully, as if they had not felt a long march: but the Enemy broke down another Bridge, nine miles hence, a little on this side Somerton, and be∣fore we could make up this Bridge to passe with our Horse, they broke down the other Bridge, and made a Breast-work; yet our Horse Commanded by Sir Robert Pye, Charged them near the Bridge, and took a Cornet and some others Prisoners: but by rea∣son of their Dragoones at the Bridge, our Foot and Train being not able to come to us, we could not possibly force them thence this night; for the Ge∣nerall returned, leaving six Regiments of Horse besides Dragoons, to watch their drawing off, and so make up the bridge as fast as may be: At Ilchester we cannot passe, for the Enemy hath a Garrison there: I doubt we shall not possibly engage them, by reason we are not in a condition to follow; besides our great work is yet to do, the settlement of the West: This bearer, Master Craven the Messenger, went with us af∣ter the Enemy, and can inform you more particularly: I much fear Goring will wheel into Dorsetshire to joyne with Malignant Holles, and the Club-men. But Gorings disorderly running away, perhaps may daunt them that they dare not: I believe on Monday
the Generall will go to Taunton with a few horse (where Master Ash and Master Moor are) to see what is needfull for that place. Crookhorne, Iuly 5. twelve at night. The Generall left the Foot that pursued Goring at South-Petherton, five miles from Crookhorne: The Ene∣mies Foot, being not 2500. eight piece of Ordnance, and thirty Carriages, marched by six this morning from Somerton towards Wells, and some Club-men with them. The Messenger yet staying longer; I adde this, That the Club-men are risen in Somersetshire, hath disarmed an hundred of Gorings men, taken their Draughts from them: Goring makes a halt about Long-Sutton: our whole Army marches this morning to engage them if possible; the Bearer can inform the House more. Crookhorne 6. July, two in the night. SIR, PArdon my scribling, I am forced to do things in haste, you have thtee dayes passages together in the inclosed. Crookhorn, July 7. two in the morning. Iust now another is come out of Gorings Army, in∣formes of his stay in hopes of the Club-men to joyn with him: I believe our Advance will interrupt him: more hereafter. FINIS.
