L3195 E341_26 99861536 113673
The Love and Faithfulnes of the Scottish Nation The Excellency of the Covenant, The Vnion between England and Scotland, cleared, by Collections, From the Declarations of Parliament, and, Speeches of severall Independent Brethren. By Θεοφιλοσ. Jerem: 34.8. The King Zedekiah made a Covenant with the people, v. 11. Re∣pented: v. 17. Therefore thus saith the Lord, v. 18. I will give those men that have broke my Covenant, v. 20. into the hands of their Enemies. John 15.14.Ye are my friends, if ye do what soever I command you. The way to keep all things in Union, is for every man to keep within his bounds; the swelling beyond tends to the breaking all in pieces. Mr. Bur: Irenicum p. 112. Nihil perniciosius quam divisio, nihil melius quam Vnio. Plato de Rep. Si pacem diligis, Belli ne feceris mentionem. Sen. de Moribus. LONDON: Printed by F: Neile for Tho: Ʋnderhill at the Signe of the Bible in Woodstreet. 1646.
The Preamble. THe times we are fallen into are times of Fear, and there∣fore had need be times of Prayer: It is the best use a Christian can make of fears to turn them into Prayers: Never more profession and lesse practise since the crea∣tion of all things: Confusion and desolation is at hand, yet who considers it? How are mens tongues and pens employed to work division, not between man and man, Brother and Bro∣ther onely; but between Kingdom and Kingdom, and between such King∣doms as are obliged by the strongest bonds, this state of mortalitie is capable of: this is it that heightens our misery, and without timely prevention will work our ruine: God will (certainly) avenge the quarrell of his Covenant. It is not many dayes since a Paper came abroad by a namelesse Author, hinting at the Brotherly Respects of England to Scotland, with an addition of large Encemions of this Nation for their voluntary and free assistance, in the times of their progenitors, when they were in great distresse; since which there are two severall Pamphlets, bending their strength against the City Remonstrance; one of which Report speaks Mr. John Goodwin the Author of, the Dialect (at least) one of his Frater∣nity: both of them concurring to disparage our Brethrens proceedings, and all of them triumphing at the prize of a Brotherly Confession. I am igno∣rant of the end, and fully assured of the unseasonablenesse and need∣lesnesse of such memorandums, which our Brethren so frequently have made mention of in their Declarations and Remonstrances unto this Kingdom; more particularly in their Reasons for assisting England upon the request of both Houses of Parliament in the yeer 1643. Ʋn∣lesse it be to endeavour a withdrawing of that Brotherly love and respect we owe unto them; At the best it reflects upon their present expedition into
England, as if it were but a bare requitall of former kindnes, and this not fully granted; although it be acknowledged by the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and our Independent Brethren, as a busines of so great con∣cernment, which should oblige England in thankefulnesse unto them for ever; which doth certainly evidence something more to be in their under∣taking in the behalf of England, then is talked of by undiscerning Spi∣rits, that watch for any thing that may in the least manner reflect upon our Brethren (though of no concernment) to their dishonour, which they con∣ceiving these Papers do lay bold upon them as a fit opportunity to slander their reall and cordiall Endeavours for our peace and happinesse; contrary to our Vow and Covenant, made with them before the Lord (Jeho∣vah) whose Name is holy; which is of so lowe esteeme in the words and thoughts of many, as if such obligations were of so lowe an allay, that there were no necessity of keeping and observing them; contrary to the De∣clarations of Parliament, and the professions of our Independant Bre∣thren; some of them having been imployed as Commissioners to crave the assistance of our Brethren of Scotland, and to manage that weightie businesse of entring into a solemn League with them, which will more plainly be evidenced by taking a view, of the sever all Declarations of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the Letters and Speeches of our In∣dependant Brethren; an Extract of which, followeth. June 16. 1646.
Declar. & Resol. of Parl.THe Lords and Commons in Parliament, have with approbation and thanks, received from the Com∣missioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, a clear ma∣nifestation, of the respect, which the Lords of His Majesties secret Counsell for that Realm do bear to the welfare and peace of this Kingdom, In the expression of their affections, wherein they were pleased to se∣cond the desires of the Generall Assembly of that Church for Ʋ∣nity in Religion,Note. and Ʋniformity in Church-Government, in His Majesties three Kingdoms:—wherein as we have satisfied our own reason, so we hope we shall satisfie the loving and Christian de∣fires of our Brethren of Scotland;—And as we resolve, according to the Nationall Covenant betwixt the two Kingdoms, to be care∣full of the peace of Scotland as of our own, so we doubt not but their Lordships and the Nation of Scotland will be carefull to ex∣presse their brotherly kindnesse to us.—We acknowledge it an Act of love to us,Note. and of wisdom for the good of both Churches— that our Brethren of Scotland have bestowed their serious thoughts, and earnest desires for unity of Religion; that in all His Majesties Dominions there might be one Confession of Faith, one Directory of worship, one publick Catechisme, and one form of Church-Government. And although it will hardly be obtained punctually and exactly,—yet both intending the same end, proceeding by the same rule of Gods Word, and guided by the same Spirit, we hope by Gods assistance to be so directed, that we may cast out whatsoever is offensive to God, or justly displeasing to any neigh∣bour Church, and so far agree with our Brethren of Scotland, and other reformed Churches, in all substantiall parts of Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, that both we and they may injoy those advantages and conveniences which are mentioned by them, in this their Answer, in the more strict Ʋnion of both Kingdoms, more safe, easie, and comfortable Government of His Majestie, &c.— The main cause which hitherto hath deprived us of these and other great advantages, which we might have by a more close Ʋnion with the Church of Scotland,—is the Government by Bi∣shops,
—(which) makes us desperate of that most beneficiall and de∣sirable Conjunction, with them, untill this great impediment be removed, &c.—Upon which we do declare,—that this Government— is evil, and justly offensive.—And according to our former Decla∣ration of the 7th of February our purpose is to consult with godly and Learned Divines, that we may not onely remove this, but settle such a Government, as may be most agreeable to Gods holy Word, most apt to procure and conserve the peace of the Church at home, and happy union with the Church of Scotland, &c.—This being the Resolution of both Houses of Parliament, we do desire our Brethren of Scotland to concur with us in petitioning His Ma∣jesty, that his Royall Authority may be applied to the conserva∣tion of a firm unity between the two Kingdoms, and that they likewise will think good, to send to the same Assembly (of Divines which were to meet the fifth of Novemb.) some godly and learned Divines of that Church,Note. whereby an Ʋniformity in form of Church Government may be obtained, and thereby a more easie passage made to the setling of one confession of faith, one Liturgie —of the publick worship, and one Catechisme in all three Kingdoms. A De∣claration and Resolution of Parliament, Sept. 23. 1642. Declar. Parl. to Kingd. Scotl. We Lords and Commons, &c.— Do hereby declare to our Bre∣thren the Estates and other Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland, that not onely according to our resolution and promise signified in our former Declarations, we have nominated and appointed Jo: Earl of Rutland, &c.—To be Committees and Commissioners of both Houses of Parliament—for setling all matters concerning Debts and Accounts, in which this Kingdom stands ingaged to them; but more especially to desire their present and speedy aid and as∣sistance for security of Religion, and Liberty of both Kingdoms,—Note. being an effectuall means for preserving the peace of both King∣doms according to the late Act of Pacification, by which both States stand obliged to help one an other;—We do earnestly re∣quest our Brethren of Scotland, to hasten the aid desired, and to consider, that although in these straits and perplexities of want and danger, they shall not receive such plentifull entertainment as might at other times be expected;Note. yet they cannot fail of great honour and advantage by this undertaking,—and they may rest assured that in all opportunities the two Houses of Parliament,
and this Nation will be ready to expresse their thankfulnesse, &c. A Declaration to the Kingdom and Estates of Scotland, Septemb. 13. 1643. Declar. of Parl. to Assembly of Scot∣land. The Lords and Commons, &c. acknowledging with humble thankfulnesse to God—the Christian zeal and love which the Ge∣nerall Assembly of the Churches of Scotland have manifested in their pious endeavours, for the preservation of the true reform∣ed Protestant Religion, from the subtle practices and attempts of the Popish and Prelaticall party, to the necessarie reformation of Church Discipline and Government of this Kingdom, and the more neer union of both Churches,Note. do earnestly desire that Reverend Assembly to take notice that the two Houses of Parliament fully concurring with them in those pious intentions; & for the better accomplishment thereof, have called an Assembly of Divines, — and likewise nominated and appointed Jo: Earl of Rutland, &c.— Committees and Commissioners of both Houses to the King∣dom and States of Scotland. Who—have received directions to resort to the Generall Assembly of the Church of Scotland, and propound and consult with them, or any Commissioners depu∣ted by them, in all occasions which may further the so much desired Reformation in Ecclesiasticall matters in this Church and Kingdom.—It is likewise desired, that that Reverend Assembly will according to their former promise and Resolution, send to the Assembly here, such number of Godly and Learned Divines, as in their wisdom they think most expedient for the furtherance of this work, which so much concerns the Honour of God, the prosperity and peace of the two Churches of England and Scot∣land. A Declaration, &c. to the Generall Assembly of the Church of Scotland. Septemb. 13. 1643. Mr Mar∣shal and Mr Nyes Letter. We cannot but communicate unto you the good hand of God with us in the work—imployed in—we have had to do with the Convention of States, and Assembly of Divines;—the gravest and wisest that we have seen, and who we think are more sensible of our Condition then we are our selves.Note. The leading men both of the Convention and Assembly,—and the whole body of the Nation looking upon it as the cause of Christ.—We know multitudes are prejudiced against them, as if we might expect no help from them but for their own ends,Note. but if you dare give any credit to
our faithfulnesse, and most diligent inquisition and observation, — let us prevail with you to beat down all such unworthy thoughts and jealousies of them, they are guided by God in this work, and we are perswaded will bring glory to Christ, and requitall of all our former love to them.—Note. We scarce ever saw so much of Christ for us as this day in the Assemblies carrying of this businesse. — Surely the arm of the Lord in this assistance extends it self to∣wards you, In the Mount the Lord will be seen. A letter from Mr. Marshall and Mr. Ny appointed Assistants to the Commissioners of Scotland. Edinb: Aug. 18. 1643. Mr Nye his Speech. The Goodnesse of God procuring succour and help to a sinfull people, ought to be matter of fear and trembling, even to all that hear of it: Jer. 33.9. We are to exalt and acknowledge him this day who is fearfull in praises, swear by that Name which is holy and reverent, enter into a Covenant and League that is never to be forgotten by us, nor our posterity.—Note. And such an Oath as for matter, persons, and other circumstances, the like hath not been in any Age or Oath we read of in sacred or humane stories, yet sufficiently warranted in both.—Consort and Harmony a∣mongst men, especially amongst Saints, is very pleasing unto the Lord. It when but two or three agree and assent unto any thing on earth, it shall be confirmed in heaven: And for this because they gather together in his Name, much more when two or three Kingdoms shall meet and consent together in his Name, and for his Name, that God may be one, and his Name one amongst them. Ʋnity amongst his Churches and children,Note. must needs—be very acceptable unto him:—We invocate the Name of the great God that his vows, yea, his curse may be upon us if we do not this; yea though we suffer for so doing,—that is,—to advance the king∣dom of—Christ here upon earth, and make Jerusalem once more the praise of the whole earth, notwithstanding all the contra∣dictions of men. What is this but the contents and matter of our Covenant? What do we vow?—Is it not the reformation of three Kingdoms, and a reformation universall doctrine, Discipline,Note. and worship in whatsoever the Word shall discover to us.—And if in the Churches of Scotland any more Light and beauty in matters of Order and Discipline, by which their Assemblies are more order∣ly: —we shall humbly bow and kisse their lips that can speak
right words unto us in this matter, and help us into the nearest uniformity with the word and minde of Christ, in this great work of Reformation.—This Oath is such, and in the matter and conse∣quence of it, of such concernment, as I can truly say, it is wor∣thy of us, yea of all these Kingdoms, yea of all the Kingdoms of the world.—And surely it can be no other, but the result and An∣swer of such prayers and tears of such sincerity and sufferings, that three Kingdoms should be thus born, or rather new born in a day;Note. we are now entring upon a work of the greatest moment, and concernment to us, and to our posterity after us, that ever was undertaken by any of us, or any of our forefathers, before us, &c.—It is a duty of the first Commandment, and therefore of the highest and noblest order and rank of duties; therefore must come forth attended with choicest graces. Fear, Humility, and in the greatest simplicity and plainnesse of spirit in respect of those with whom we Covenant:Note. we call God as a witnesse betwixt us, who searcheth the heart, With him wisdom and strength, the decei∣ved, and deceiver is his. Job 12.19. He hath wisdom to discover, and strength to punish, if our hearts be not upright to our Brethren in this matter.—As it is the last oath you are likely to take in this kinde, so it is our last refuge, tabula post naufragium: if this help us not, we are like to remain to our dying day an unhappy peo∣ple, &c.—And as for you, Reverend Brethren, that are Ministers of the Gospel, there is yet an other obligation will lye upon you; let us look to our selves, and make provision to walk answerable to this our Covenant,Note. for the Gospels sake; it will reflect a great aspersion upon the truth of the Gospel; if we should be false or un∣constant in any word or promise, though in a matter of lesse conse∣quence, &c. Mr Ny Speech at the taking of the Covenant by the Parliament and Assembly of Divines, Septemb. 25. 1643. Mr. Soli∣citor his Speech. I conceive there is no need to acquaint you with the benefits that will redound to this Kingdom, and the advantages we shall have by a nearer association with them, and by their coming in, to this purpose for our assistance.—This great Cause now in agitation by this means will be much secured; it will be assured to us, that the Event and the successe of it will be made a great deal the cer∣tainer; —Thus we stand in case they are not called in, the losse so great, that is the losse of all, the event is so uncertain. Secondly,
it will be for our profit, it will ease the warre,Note. it will make the charge, and the burthen of it to be lesse;—without their coming, I am afraid there will not be that force on the one side, as to make the other side out of their estates to pay these debts, which their coming in, in all likelihood will make them do; which if these debts be paid out of their estates and land, I know no incon∣venience will come to the Kingdom by it;—If they come not in, con∣sidering the ingagements on both sides, and considering the par∣ties, who we must compound with, I say, the cure is like to be very imperfect; their coming in, I hope,Note. will make it perfect.—So that if there were nothing else in it, but that we were like to have the better peace, and on the better terms, and what ever it be, it is likely to be kept the better, to us and our posteritie, that were much to our advantage.—We have it from our own Committee there, and from all hands, that it is impossible (they should under∣take for our assistance) without some sum of money; And if we con∣sider how they have been exhausted heretofore,Note. I think we may easily beleeve it,—their Army that is in Ireland having been 14 months without any pay at all, they are fain to supply them with necessities, which hath been fourscore thousand pounds, else that Army must have starved. We know they had two yeers war, we promised them a Brotherly assistance, and there is an Act for it, but it is known, by reason of the troubles we have here at home we have not payd them that; so that considering the poverty of that Kingdom, it is certain, it is not a pretence of theirs (for not com∣ing) but it is really so. Mr Solicitor his Speech at Guildhall, Fri∣day, Octob. 6. 1643. Mr Bur: his Speech.There hath lately been the most blessed Ʋnion of two Nations, as ever was in the world,—let us now reach forth our hearts and hands unto our Brethren in Scotland, let us come up fully to this our Engagement, and rejoyce in it,Note. for certainly that Nation is a Nation that God doth love, a Nation that God doth honour, and by those many expressions of his love, shewed that he doth intend to make them speciall instruments of the great things he hath to do, in this latter age of the world; It is a Nation that is united the most firmly under heaven, we may truly cal it aA name that contains in it self al vertues, Commended for Brotherly love. Philadelphia.—Had we had the like union amongst us,Bright: on Revel. O what great things had we done long before this time. A Nation it is that hath engaged it self to God in a higher way, in a more extraordinary way,Note. then
any Nation this day upon the face of the earth hath done;—A Nation that hath reformed their lives for so small a time, more then ever any people that we know of in the world have done;— A Nation that God hath honoured by giving as glorious successe unto, as ever he did unto any;—And although they be of them∣selves a poore people, and of little strength,—yet they have kept the word of Gods patience, and God hath kept them in the house of temptation; God therefore is with them. (How happy should we be, if we may have them in a near Ʋnion with us?) A people that have carried themselves,Note. with as great wisdom, and order in the most difficult work that ever a people did undertake, in those by and intricate paths that were before untroden.Note. —Was there ever such an Example since the world began, of a people coming out of a poorer Countrey, into a fat and rich Countrey, and having those opportunities that they had to enrich themselves, to go away so as they did?—A people—that began to rise for their Liberties, when the generality of this people here, were ready basely to bow down their backs, and put their necks under the yoke: and had it not been that they had been willing to have endured the brunt we had all been slaves at this day.—They now desire 100000 l. what is this to 300000 l. in pay? to five Counties, to the plunder of a whole City? what reasonable terms do they proffer to come among you? Do but give them 100000 l. advance, and they engage themselves for three moneths and ten dayes, and in the Winter time to be in the Kingdom,—and willing to depart again with∣out any more, when they have done their work. Mr Jer. Burroughs Speech in Guildhall, Friday Octob. 6. 1643. Sir H: Vanes Speech.In obedience, to the Commands of both Houses, we that are lately come out of Scotland, and have been eye witnesses of the af∣fection of that Nation to this Cause, and of the deep sence they have, of the present state of affairs, here in this Kingdom, are wil∣ling to make the same report,—to you of it as hath been done to the Parliament, that you may take a right measure of those things, and not be carried away with mis-apprehensions, and mis-informations from those that disaffect the Cause, and would wil∣lingly abuse your thoughts, and belief herein.—For the affection of that Nation, we have had many experiences of it, and of their ready and chearfull complyance, with the desires of this King∣dom, even when they were in their greatest distresses and cala∣mities:
—The affairs then of this Nation were in a much lower condition then now we find them to be, yet notwithstanding those many invitations,—promises,—Note. and— secret practices among themselves, to make them set loose from the Cause of this Kingdom, yet so sensible were they of the danger of Religion here, of the near relation they had to their Brethren of England, —that they were ready to break through all difficulties, and to expose them∣selves to all danger to take us by the hand, and to joyn cordially with us in the maintaining of this Cause.—And that they might evidence the truth of their intentions, they speedily enter into COVENANT with us.) And this not onely in their own persons, but injoyned it throughout the whole Kingdom,—(and) in such a manner, as that the greatest and powerfullest Enemies of it among them durst not shew their heads to oppose it.Note. —They are as sensible as your selves of the great burthen and extremities that this Nation doth at this time groan under,—(though) their Nation hath not been without troubles,—great charges and burthens that have lain upon them, and particularly even for the advantage of this King∣dom: —(Besides) they have made it apparent by severall particu∣lars,Note. that before this Army—will be brought to the Rendevouze upon English ground,—it will stand them in very neer a 100000 l. which must be at their own charge and expence, over and above what they desire from us: They likewise have let us know, that they desire not to presse us beyond our strength in matter of mo∣neys, but onely so much as may render the service in them feas∣able, which we expect from them.—Note. They are—so willing in them∣selves to come to our assistance,—that if any thing lay in their power, either by the morgaging of their own private Estates, or if there were money sufficient in Scotland, that they could render themselves master of, they would be willing to contribute any thing of their own for the necessities of this Kingdom, so much they are affected with this Cause. Sir Henry Vanes Speech at a Common Hall, London, Octob. 27 1643. The Kingdom of England is to pay in ready money to their Brethren of Scotland—the sum of 100000 l. sterling—by way of ad∣vance beforehand,Note. which is to be discounted back again unto the Kingdom of England by the Kingdom of Scotland upon the first monthly allowance which shall grow due to the Scottish Army, &c. Article 6.
No Cessation,Note. nor any Pacification or agreement for Peace what∣soever shall be made by either Kingdom, or the Armies of either Kingdom, without the mutuall advice and consent of both King∣doms, or their Committees in that behalf appointed. Article 8. Articles of the Treaty agreed upon betwixt the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, and the Commissioners of the Convention of the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, at Edin. Nov: 29. 1643. It was far from our Intentions that the Scottish Army should neither be provided for by us,Note. nor yet suffered to provide for their own subsistance, &c. The Parliaments Answer to the Scots Com∣missioners Papers. Printed April 14. 1646. Deciar: of Parl.We do declare, that our true and reall Intentions are, and our endeavours shal be to settle Religion in the purity thereof, accor∣ding to the Covenant:—And to keep a good understanding be∣tween the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, according to the grounds expressed in the solemn League and Covenant, and Treaties: Which we desire may be inviolably observed on both parts. A Declaration of Parliament, April 17. 1646. If any man shall except against this my endeavour,Conclu∣sion. I desire him to remember, the tenour of our Covenant binds me as well as o∣thers to use all lawfull means, to accomplish the end of our Cove∣nant, and this I conceive derogates no whit from the rule; nay, it is belowe a Christian not to attempt a matter of publick con∣cernment for fear of being mis-judged. I shall winde up all with those two observable passages in Mr Burroughs Irenicum. One you shall find in p. 11. Truth is the bond, that keeps to Ʋnity, but Er∣rour is wilde, you know not where to find it, nor your selves if you give way to it. The other is in pa. 276. Peace it was the chief master-piece of Gods work, there is more of the glory of God in this, then in all that God hath done: This is and shall be the ob∣ject of the admiration of Angels and Saints, the matter of their praises to all eternity. This being so, how neerly doth it concern those that shall be heirs of the same kingdom, partakers of the same glory, Saints in light, to make it their chief study to keep the Ʋnity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.Ephes. 4.3 Ephes. 4.3. Τελος.
