L511 E394_10 R201624 99862124 114273
THE LAST VOTES FROM THE ARMIE: Iune 26. 1647. Communicated To the Commons of England, and the Citi∣zens of London. Wherein they declare, Their full Resolutions, concerning their mar∣ching up towards the Suburbs of London. As also, their last Reasons and Propositions, touching the over-awing power of divers persons, against the faithfull Worthies of England, assem∣bled in Parliament, and their besetting and shutting up of the Doores against them. London, Printed for Thomas Watson, June 28. 1647.
THE LAST VOTES FROM THE ARMY Kind Sir, THese are to certifie you, that your pre∣sent proceedings at this instant in your great and spacious Metropolis, doth not a little perplexe the hearts of di∣vers within the Army; and the most hard and cruell censures which we now undergo, doth not a little stirre up our spirits, to be
spectations and Auditors of the innumera∣ble sr of tongues, whose mouths a open against our present proceedings; yet never∣thelesse, we doubt not, but to make it appear to all the world, our candid intentions, and resolutions, for the preservation of his Maje∣sties Royall Person, the Being and Priviled∣ges of Parliament, the Liberty and Proprie∣ty of the Subject, and the good of the whole Kingdom in generall; And although there be many false aspersions cast upon the army, concerning our neerer approach towards your City, by saying, that wee come for the lucre of gain, more then for the Kingdomes good; and that we have many amongst us, whose aymes are, at the rich plunder of the City. But I can assure you, these inveterate sug∣gestions are utterly false, such barbarous ac∣tions we detest and abhor; and I dare say this, in behalf of the Army, that there are none amongst us, but would willingly sacri∣fice their lives for the good and preservation of that famous City, having sundry times en∣gaged with them against the common-ene∣my of this Kingdome.
But we hope our future actions will make it evident, that all our former proceedings tended only to the peace and tranquility of this Nation, and that our actions and endea∣vours were oly for the stating of his Maje∣sty in his Royall Rights, and preservation of the peace of the Kingdome. And therefore the Army thought it meet to declare against such members, whom they found enemies to the peace thereof; but we do begin to discern some obstruction in the said businesse, which is the only cause of the publishing of the ensuing Reasons, touching the said party, viz. That since the same difficulties or prejudices lye yet in their way (as to the particular charging or proofe of those things against the Members and the Parliament) though so often put upon it in our for∣mer Papers, yet through the powerfull interest of the persons guilty, hath not taken any cognizance, what Members or others have so abused them, to draw the Parliament to such dishonour and inconve∣niences, We cannot but againe more fully and clear∣ly assert (as we have in former Papers, and shall yet more particularly, if neede be, remonstrate) That di∣vers things lately done and passed from the Parlia∣ment against the Army, as particularly the order for suppressing the Petition, that high Declaration a∣gainst
it, and against all that should proceede in it, putting the faithfull Servants of the Parliament and te Kingdome out of the Protection of Law, and ex∣posing them as Enemies to the State, &c. to the for∣feitures of the Estates, Liberies, Life and all, but for going about in an humble, peaceable, and inoffen∣sive way, to desire what was undenyably their due, and dearly earned, and many other such like procee∣dings, both against the Army and others, do carry with them such a face of Injustice, Oppression, Arbi∣trarinesse and Tyranny, as (we think) is not to be paralleld in any former proceedings of the most Ar∣bitrary Courts against any private men, but hath boought in insufferable dishonour upon the Parlia∣mentary Authority and Ptoceedings, which we are, and others ought to be deeply sensible of, hath ten∣ded to disoblige all men, especially Souldiers, or Subjects, and hath conduced to all other the sad effecta and worse consequences expressed in the Charge, an gives us other cause to conclude, Than those Worthies who have formerly acted and car∣ryed on things in Parliament for publique good, Right and Freedom, are now awed or over-born by a prevailing party of men of other private Interests crept in, and that neither we, nor any other can rea∣sonably epect Right, Freedom or Safety (as private men) of to have things acted in Parliament for pub∣licpve good, while the same parties continue there in the same power, to abse the Name and Authority of Parliament, to serve nd p osecu e their privae Interests and passions, and (under the privileges of
parliament) to shelter themselues under the worst of evils or mischiefs they can do, though to the Ruin of the Kingdom. And lastly, considering the mulitudes of Refor∣madoes and othe Souldiers swarming about the Ciy (whom the persons we have charged and their com∣plyces have at their beck to bring up to Westminster when they please, and that by their frequent in ul∣tuous confluences thither, besetting and somtimes blocking up the Parliament doores, threatning, and offering violence, to the persons of the most faithful Parliament-men, the just freedome of parliament seemes to be taken away, or at least for the present a∣bridged, insomuch as those Members who have ser∣ved the Kingdome hitherto with most faithfulnesse, diligence, and integrity, for the publike good, many of them dare scarce come to the House, or if they d, they come in feare and peril of their lives; and when they are there, are awed, discouraged, or disabled from discharging teir Consciences, or doing their duties to the Kingdome. A great part of our army quarters about Uxbridge, and a party of horse are marched up further from us. It is said, the Kings Maje∣sty lay at the Earle of Salisburies house upon Thursday night last. Wee are in great expec∣tation of an answer from the Parliament to the late Remonstrance presented to both Houses. Thus, for the present, I remain Vxbridge Iune 26. 1647. late at night. Yours, to his power, WI. L GIB
The Desires of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Army. J do hereby strictly charge and com∣mand all Souldiers of the Army. Horse and Foot, and all others whom it may concern, not to offer any violence, or doe any prejudice at all to any country man or other whomsoever (in their persons, or goods) either in quarters, or upon their March thorow the Countries respective∣ly, as they tender the honour of the Ar∣my, and as they tender the avoyding of the severest punishment that may be infli∣cted upon such offendors by a Counsell of Warre. Tho: Fairfax. FINIS.
