M1908 E549_18 R205637 99864957 117190
A MESSAGE SENT From the Princes Court in Holland, to divers Citizens OF LONDON, COMMUNICATING His Design and Resolution against the Parliament of Eng∣land, and the Army; And His Message to the Emperour of Germany, the King of Spain, and the Queen of Swethland, sent by the Marquesse of Newca∣stle, and the Earl of Brainford. WITH The Promise of the King of Denmark, and the Duke of Lau∣rain; and severall Proposals presented by Mr. Murrey, for a speedy Randezvouz and conjunction in Scot∣land, and the Lord Hoptons Declaration thereupon. ALSO, The Resolution of the Parliament of England, touching the Prince; and a new Declaration from the Estates of SCOTLAND. Die 4. Aprill, 1649. THese Papers are perused and examined, and appointed to be printed, and published without let or molestation. Imprimatur. THEO: JENNINGS. Imprinted at London, for G. Laurenson, Aprill 5. 1649.
A MESSAGE From the HAGVE To the Citizens of London. Concerning the proceedings of the Prince of Wales, and a Declaration of His Resolution, Intention and Designs, touching the Parliament of England, and the Army. Right Honoured, THe Ambassadours from Swethland, Spaine and Denmark have received audience at the young King of Brittains Court (for so he is here cal∣led) and have received a favourable construction and congratulation from his Majesty, their Embassie from their severall Masters being wel rescented by the court
Favourites; they promise him great ayd and assist∣ance, and say they will endeavour his restauration to his just Rights and Dignities; but its probable their De∣sign may be frustrated, before they can accomplish or fa∣ciliate their work for England. For many here conceive it irrecoverable, unles it be by the power of the Sword, and for that end, the Prince hath sent the Earl of Bran∣ford as Embassador to Swethland, to negotiate with the Queen for 10000 Horse and Foot, to be designed against England. The E. of Newcastle, and another Lord have also received Instructions from him, and are dis∣patched to Germany and Spain, with a message from his Highnesse, to the Emperour and the King, to nego∣tiate likewise with those high and mighty Potentates, for other relief and Supplies, God put you in a posture and readinesse, to attend the motion of all their Designes, Mr. William Murrey is come hither out of Scotland, & hath presented several propositions to the Prince, viz. 1. That his Highnesse would be pleased to fix and set down his resolution for that Kingdom. 2 That Hee would be pleased to sign the Covenant, 3 That Hee would unite and joyn with the Marquesse of Argyle; by which meanes he may become the head of the Co∣venanters, and in a short time have a strong party of his own, and be able to fling off the Covenanters again at pleasure. Touching which particulars, many rationall arguments arose at the Councel table, and after some dispute in reference to his going into Scotland, the L. Hopton (in the presence of the Prince) declared a great dislike thereof, saying, That they was a perfidious & per∣jur'd people, and that if he cast himself vpon them, they would betray his person, and deliver him vp to the mercy of men. Montrosse also declares against his going thither
and saith, That the Sword is more honorable, and that he doubts not but to see all disloyall Scots and Eng∣lish fall before him, (standing in a Magesticall posture and laying his hand upon his Sword) But a Gentleman standing by replyed, That an English Axe might prove as fatall, as a glittering Scottish Sword; upon which speeches the Gentleman was apprehended, and com∣mitted to safe custody. The Duke of Laurain hath sent a message to the Prince, touching the Articles of Mar∣riage between his Highnesse, and the said Dukes daugh∣ter; wherein he proffers 200000. l. in money, and 8000 horse and foot to maintain at his own charge for eight months, but nothing as yet concluded. Hague 1 Aprill, 1649. These particulars were inclosed in a Letter from the Hague, and directed to divers Citizens of London. On the 3. of this instant, about two of the clocke in the afternoon, the common-councell of the city of Lon∣don (according to an Order of Parliam.) assembled at Guild-hall, London, where was held a common Hal for the election of a new Lord Major, for the remainder of this present year, and upon debate thereof great dis∣pute arose amongst the grave Senates of this renowned Metropolis; some voting down one Alderman, others crying up another: divers being in nomination, viz. Al∣derman Penington, Alderman Woollaston, Alderm. Folke, and others; but at last they came to this result. That they would desist from further dispute therin, & close up the period of their consultations, with this Resolu∣tion, That Alderman Andrewes should be elected Lord Major of the City of London, for the remainder of this present year, which was accordingly assented to: the late Lord Major Reynaldson being degraded of his Mayoralty, and committed prisoner to the Tower for these ensuing Reasons following.
A Declaration of the late Lord Mayor of the City of London. THe Lord Major of the City of London, being summoned by the Parl. of England to attend that honorable House, for his contempt, in disobeying the Orders of Parliament, and neglecting and refusing to proclaim the Act for abolishing the kingly office in England and Ireland, within the said City; in order whereunto, his Lordship was brought to the Barre of the House of Commons; and after some Queries pro∣posed, concerning his non-performance thereof, He re∣plyed, That according to the Oath of Allegeance which he had taken, he could not (in Conscience) proclaim the said Act for the abolishing of the Kingly Office, and Govern∣ment of Kingship, declaring, That the businesse was onely proper for the Sheriff of the City. And being remanded from the Bar, the House voted as followeth: Resolved by the Commons of England assembled in Parl. That the Lord Major of the City of London, for his contempt in disobeying the Orders of Parl. bee fined 2000. l. Resolved, &c. That he be committed prisoner to the Towet of London for two months, and be degra∣ded of Mayralty. Resolved, &c. That an Order be forth∣with drawn up, and immediatly sent to the Common∣councell of the said city, requiring and impowring them to elect a new Major with all speed; and in or∣der thereunto, the severall companies within the said city are required to meet (this day) for the election thereof. A new Declaration from the parl. of Scotland. Sir, The Committee of Estates conveened at Eden∣burgh, begin to wave and deviate from their former Resolutions for the investing of Charles the second, & are now resolved to assume the power of a free Stae,
their proposals to their young King taking no effect; for upon the representing of the same by their commis¦sioners, His Highnesse was pleased to return this an∣swer, viz. That he was not (as yet) satisfied in consci∣ence touching the lawfulnesse of the covenant, & their Uniformity of presbytery, and therfore could not give them a positive answer, touching his present signing & entring into covenant, desiring further respite of time to consult thereon. 2 That he gives the parl. of Scot∣land many thanks for their Offers and Loyalty to assist and protect him, and for their fidelity and cordial affe∣ctions towards the preservation of Soveraignty in ac∣knowledging him their true and lawfull King by un∣doubtfull Succession; but withall desires, that they will take the advice of him and his Councel in reference to Religion, Crown and kingdom; to the end, that both he and they, may (with stability of mind) six their Reso∣lutions upon a Rock of unmoveable principles. The Estates conveened having received this message, voted it unsatisfactory, and that 10000 Horse and Foo∣should be forthwith put into a posture, for a conjunt¦ction with England, offensive or defensive against all opposition to either Nations, from abroad or at home and have nominated and made choise of commissioners to be expedited to the parliament of England with a message, for the faciliating of this work, and intimating unto them the transaction of affairs in this Nation. For so soon as they understood their young Kings resolu∣tion, that he was determined for Ireland, they begin u∣niversally to decline their first engagement▪ and have caused an Edict or Act to be proclaimed at the Mar∣ket Crosse, exhibiting all persons whatsoever from a∣cting, abetting, or contriving any thing tending to the
inthroning of Charles Stuart the second, untill such time that he shall give full satisfaction in matters of Religion, and other publike affairs, tending to the salty and preservation of this Kirk and Kingdom; insomuch, that the Royal parsy are much discontented therear, & upon the proclaiming thereof, assembled together, fell upon the Bayliffs, and other magistrates of the city, killed and wounded many, crying out, God blesse King Charles the second. But by the speedy coming in of the trayned Bands, the adverse party were routed, and ma∣ny of them apprehended, and committed to safe custo∣dy. But from the North we have received a strong al∣larum, which is, that 5000 Gourdons have Bodied, & have surrounded Lieu. Gen. Lefley, and that 2000 more are come in to their assistance, commanded by the L. Oglesby, they declare for Charles the second. The Lieu. Gen. is in very great straights, but the Committee of Estates are sending 6000 Horse and Foot to relieve him; you will hear of sudden action. Edenburgh 29. Martii, 1649. The Parliament of England taking into their serious consideration, the manifold calamities of this bleeding Nation, occasioned by the great plottings and designes of the adverse party abroad, and the domestique ene∣mies at home, do declare, That Charles Stuart, and all o∣thers who have been acting in the plotting, designing, or assisting the Rebellion in Ireland, shall be banished as enemies and traytors to the Common-wealth and shal dye without mercy, where ever they shall be found within the limits of this Nation. FINIS.
