M2560 E1026_7 99867677 168870
A LEAF Pull'd from the Tree Of Life: Medicinall for the healing of Englands DIVISIONS. Or, A Glimpse of the Excellency of a Kingly GOVERNMENT. Proving it to be 1. Most Godly. 2. Most Christianlike. 3. Most Ancient. 4. Most Safe for the People. Written out of Love and Good Will to the peace and tranquility of the three Nations, of England, Scotland, and Ireland. By JOHN MOORE. Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the Potters Clay— For I am the Lord, I change not.— Let England then take heed of endeavouring to change the mutable decrees, and Counsells of God— And whether it be more lawfull for the Rulers of the Land to follow the Counsells of God, or the wills of a giddy-headed people. Let them consider— They have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisedom is in them— Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his Nostrills, for wherein is he to be accoun∣ted of— London, Printed for E. Brewster at the Crane in Pauls Church-yard, 1660.
To the true and faithfull Philanthopos Jesus Christ, God and man: his poor unworthy servant prostrates himselfe; begs par∣don for his sins, and prayeth for a blessing upon the Councills of the King and Parliament. ALmighty Prince, to whom all power in Heaven & earth is given, whose only prerogative it is, to be King of Kings; and Lord of Lords: who hast a name given thee, which is above every name, to which all things in heaven and earth owe obeisance, and the bowing of the knee, without whom the sons of men can do nothing but that which brings shame and confusion to themselves: Pardon and forgive me all my sins and transgressions which I have committed from my child-hood against heaven, and in thy sight. Be gracious and mercifull to this sinfull Nation wherein I dwell, by giving a blessing to those that are appointed by the hand and providence to settle our peace, and establish our Laws. Thy name is wonderful, Counsellor. O, exalt this name of thine amongst them; do thou so guide them with thy counsells, that they may do wonderfull things whereof the people may rejoyce. Thy name is the mighty God, exalt this name of thine amongst them, by putting courage into their hearts, and Loyalty into their souls; that they may en∣deavour the establishment of, and conform them even  such a Government, which most resembles thy divine Majesty, that gives thee thy own Title of King of Kings▪ and Lord of Lords, that hath thine own
its branches springing out from thee. Thy name is the everlasting Father. O! do thou beget godly purposes, and self-denying practises amongst them. Let them bring forth such Acts of righteousness to the people that may be own'd and patroniz'd by such a Father: thy name is the Prince of Peace, O, make thy self known to them in this name also, that they may study peace, delight in peace, rejoyce in peace, seek nothing more then peace, and in his, Lord give them such a prosperous, and an advanta∣gious issue, that they may deservedly be called England's blessed peace-makers. Let thy name O Lord be thus hal∣lowed in the midst of them, that theremay be a submissive preparation for the coming of thy Kingdom, that they may do thy will on Earth, after the same manner as it is done in heaven. Let them be so far from coveting o∣ther mens goods, and making a prey upon other mens E∣states, that they may be content with their daily bread; forgive all their imperfections, and give them hearts to forgive submissive offenders. Keep them from falling into the temptations of Satan, and the snares of the world. Deliver and protect them from all evill, and harm intended against them, by men or Devills, for the King∣dom, power, and Glory of all this belongs wholly to thy self from henceforth and for evermore. Amen, Lord Jesus. Even so Amen.
To the most Christian Prince on Earth, Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defen∣der of the truly Ancient, Catholik, and Apostolick Faith. Dread Soveraign, WHen I first penn'd the ensuing lines, it was in the later end of the month February, and the begin∣ning of March, 1659. at which time I intended the Dedication of them to Englands happy Parli∣ament, (now sitting at Westminster by your Royall Autho∣rity) and since by reason of my own remoteness from Lon∣don, accompanied with a necessity of attending my Mini∣stry) they could not come forth in print by the time I in∣tended, (viz.) at the first sitting of the Parliament; the de∣crees of heaven having been since executed for your safe re∣turn to your native Birth-right, the Crown of England: I was necessitated to retract the Dedication of them to the Parliament, and being unwilling that those things should dye in the Birth, which had gone ou their full time in the womb of my heart and hand, (the publishing of them be∣ing earnestly desir'd by many of your faithfull subjects) I did resolve to midwive them into the world; by adventu∣ring upon your Princely Clemency to prostrate them at the feet of your Royal protection, hoping they wil find that fa∣vour at Court, as to have admittance to kiss your gracious hand. I shal not trouble your Majesty with a tedious Epistle, lest the Gate should be bigger then the City. Only let me beg this liberty, to seal this my bold attempt with my prayers to the most high; that he would ever vouchsafe to bless you, in your Royal person with length of days, health, and safety in your spirit, with the comfort and councills of his own in your heart and soul with meekness, truth, and righteous∣ness:
In your Royall relations with oneness of hearty lov and unity of Faith; in your Privy Councill, with wisedom and fidelity. In your Parliament with speciall care to your safety and honour. In your Nobles with Loyall affection. In your Magistrates, with uprightness and justice. In your Ministers with soundness of Doctrine, good Discipline, and Piety of life. And in all your Subjects from the highest to the lowest, with unfeignedness of heart rendring to their King what they owe unto him, both by the Law of God and the Laws of the Nation. Yea, whosoever of us will not o∣bey the Law of our God, and the Law of our lawfull King, Let judgement be executed upon; whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to im∣pisonment, from either of which rebellions, the Lord keep the very thoughts of him, whose heart rejoyceth at the E∣stablishment of your Kingly Throne. To which, in life, or death, I am resolv'd to be A servant faithfully devoted John Moore. From my study at Wechicombe near Dunster in Somerset, June 25, 1660.
To the Impartial, Moderate, Self-Denying READER. WHO ever, or of what state soever thou art, if thy conscience be not sear'd with the hot Iron of rage and fury against thy own flesh, thy brethren the sons of Adam; if thy heart be not full of burning coals of anger and re∣venge? if thy judgment be not blinded with Selfe-Interest? if the edge of thy affections and desires to peace, be not blunted with delight in War? if thy will be any way inclin'd to beat thy sword into a plough share, and thy spear into a pruning hook? if thy hand be not glew'd to the gain of oppression? if in the School of Christ thou hast learnt any thing of self-denyall? if thou dost ingeniously confess and owne the sacred Scriptures to be the only ground of Faith and rule of a Christians life; and that they are reall testimonies of truth? I doubt not but that the ensuing lines wil find acceptation with thee, being written only out of love and good will to the generall peace and welfare of my Country. For my part I do confess that in the beginning of the late war, my judgement did lead me forth to own the Parliaments proceedings both in relation to the extirpation of Popery, and also to the reducing of the Kings person from amongst some evill Counsellers, who were then thought to animate him a∣gainst the Parliament, but never with the least intent, either to destroy his person, or race out a Kingly Government; nor was there any such intent in the Parliament then (as could be appre∣hended by any, having taken a solemn Covenant to the contrary) untill their divisions unhappily began: and a Tyrannicall En∣gagement forc'd upon the people, under pain of being ruined, in  they refused it: a thousand times better it is for England  religious Covenant be revived and put in force, then an  Engagement violently forc't upon the peoples consciences
perpetuated. If any one ask, what shall they do then that have taken the Engagement? why let them take it off the File of their hearts, acknowledge their errour, and be sorry for it; for my own part I am clearly of this mind, that God is as much honoured, and it savours as much of an ingenious Spirit, to confess an errour, as to profess a truth. My advice therefore to the servants of God, and to all the inhabitants of the three Nations shall be this: cheer∣fully, & heartily to submit to that form of Government, which was by God ordeined of old, and setled in heaven by an everlasting de∣cree; the onely visible means to keep us from destroying one ano∣ther, to restore us to peace, and heal our breaches. I have called this small Tract, A Leafe pull'd from the Tree of Life, because it is gathered from amongst the Laws and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, the Alpha and Omega of all Rule and Government in the world, the faithfull counsellor in heaven and earth, and the chief commander thereof; to the reading whereof without premeditated prejudice, I commend thee, and take my leave with this assurance, that I intended nothing therein but a Declaration of my faithfull love to Englands peace, and therein I hope to abide A servant faithfully devoted, JOHN MOORE.
A Glimpse of the Excellency of a Kingly GOVERNMENT. CHAP. I. That it is most Godly. THe great and mighty God, the holy, just, and wise God, who made and formed all things by the pow∣er of his Word, and guideth and governeth all things by his Word of Providence; did in the beginning settle and place all things in good or∣der and equipage in every sphere of his Dominion, both in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath; wherein all his crea∣tures (sinfull man and Apostate Angells excepted) have kept the same order wherein their Creator at first had set them in the firmament of Heaven, those coelestial bodies keep their constant course: the Moon and Starrs observe the motions of the Sun; whom God hath seated there as chief amongst them, who also knoweth his going down, and those other inferiour bodies do observe his setting, and uprising; as it were acknowledging his superiority over them. Thus the Heavens declare the glory of God and the Firmament sheweth what his hand hath made; ob∣serving
therein their Makers will. Next the Fowls of the air are subordinate to the Eagles as Supream; the Beasts of the earth have a Lion, whom they acknowledge their Head Governour; which made the Prophet thus write, When the Lion roars, all the beasts of the Forrest tremble: Under the earth, in the waters of the Sea, the Fishes have their Leviathan; concerning which creature tis observable, that he hath solely or chiefly but two enemies, the Sword-Fish and the Thresher, the rest giving place to the greatness that his Creator hath given him; and who are they at this day, that are the chiefest enemies to the Supream Government of a single person, but the Souldier who lives by his Sword, and the factious Sectary with his Threshing, Level∣ling principles. By the forementioned things we may clearly see, that in heaven above, in the earth beneath, and in the waters under the earth, there is an observation of Soveraignty to one in chief; neither do they alter or change it, but continue in it, only mans heart being corrupted with the disloyal princi∣ples of the fallen Angels (who for refusing to own Christ for their Supreame Head, were cast down headlong from Heaven to Hell) will scarcely owne any Order, but such as proceeds from their own disorders; nor own any su∣pream Government, but that which makes every one a Go∣vernour. The consideration of this makes me call to mind a worthy say∣ing of the Aldermen and Members of the Common Council, in the time of their imprisonment in the Tower of London, written in their Declaration and Remonstrance from thence: the words are these, And seeing with too transparent eyes, both Nature and Religion turned Antipodes, acting themselves into a self-Antipathy, as if man above all subluary creatures was on∣ly compound of all contrarietis; seeing the foundation (on which next under heaven our hopes depend) of our Laws, our Religion, our proper Rights and Priviledges (we say not Oaths and Pro∣testations) blown up by the very roots, by such a strong tempe∣stuons violence, which beats down all things before it, making the leftiest Cedar level with the lowest shrubs until it hath vented it self into an universal destruction. Of the truth of this sad Clause of their Declaration, wofull
experience hath been the sole School-Mistress in England; for by reason of Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, and Engage∣ments, and the violent forcible breach of them doth the land mourn; and whilest the Lord hath looked for, and expected Ju∣stice, behold oppression; and for righteousness, but behold a ge∣neral cry and complaint of the poor and needy, the stranger, widows, orphans, and fatherless; so that except the Lord do put it into the hearts of some faithfull, godly, self-denying per∣sons, to put in practise a speedy remedie for the healing of the Land of these and other such foul enormities, hateful to God and destructive to Mankinde; we may justly fear that he will say, Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation and People as this, who think to establish Religion with blood, and tye the stakes of Government together with cords of iniquity, whose lips have spoken lies, and their tongues have uttered pervers∣ness, wherein few or none call for Justice, and scarcely any plead for truth; where the Cockatrice Eggs are hatcht; and the Spiders Web woven, and in whose hands is nothing else but the act of violence, where their feet run to evil, making haste to shed innocent blood; whose paths are full of wasting and de∣struction, where they fast for strife and debate, where they do not loose the bands of wickedness, nor undo the heavy bur∣thens, nor let the oppressed go free; nor break any yoke; where none seek for peace, neither will they be acquainted with the ways thereof: Where they are seeking them out new ways, as if they intended to serve a strange God: where judgement ss turn∣ed away backward, and justice standeth a far off: Where truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter: Where they grinde the faces of the poor, and sell the needy for a pair of shoes: Where the people have used oppression, and exercised Robbery by a Law: Where the sins of Sodom are rife; for this was the sin of Sodom, Pride, Fulness of bread, and abundance of Idleness was found in her; neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy: Where the Governours prize their own Ordinances above the Ordinances of God, and the Subjects thrreof more afraid to violate the former, then pro∣fane the latter. Ah sinfull Nation! laden with such iniquiies as these, the head whereof is sick, and the heart thereof faint,
and from the sole of the foot, even to the head, there is little or no soundness or solidity in it, but ful of wounds and bruises, and putrifying sores of division, which to this day are not yet closed with the balm of Repentance, and returning to God, nor bound up with the white Fillet of peace, nor mollified with the pretious men▪ of unfained love. This, even this is Englands state; but what is the reason that we are so full of divisions? that the heart of England pants and beats, and is so out of frame and order, so disquieted with∣in her self, is it hence, because the foundation of government is out of course? and if such foundations be destroyed or be out of course? What can even the righteous themselves do? but sit down by the waters of confusion and weep; or else consider whether there be not a way for them to return to such a founda∣tion of government, which may be instrumentall for their deli∣verance from confusion, the healing of their devisions, the ob∣taining of their peace, without which we shall never reap the true benefit of any mercy, which made the Poet excellently sing forth this Verse. Sit pax cum lignis, Si vis ut adiat ignis. Let peace blow thy fire, If warmth thou deire. But then the Question will be, what that Foundation of go∣verment is, tha is most likely to effect it; why truely the que∣stion is soon answered, and 'tis this, that government which hath it's foundation in the holy Scriptures to which the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles have submitted, to the law and to the Te∣stiomony, for whatsoever is not according to that word is full of darknesse and confusion. I once heard a godly and a reverend Di∣vine, (Mr. Newton of Taunton) deliver this doctrine in the Plpit; that the Scripture God is our God, and in this case answerable to that I say, let the Scripture government, be our government; for if the Scripture be the only and sufficient ground of Faith, and rule of life for the eternall peace and wel∣fare
of the soul; there is certainly a sufficiency in it for the ground and rule of government pertaining to the body, so that we need not go beyond the Scriptures to look us out a new form of government, or new Titles for governors, except we are wil∣ling to continue war in our gates, the Scripture saith, that when the people chose them new Gods (which I understand by the context of the words to be governours, who in Scripture are called Gods) then was warre in their gates; even of civill warrs and bloody divisions. Now this is as clear as the Sun at noon∣day Jud. 5.7, 8 to every sober-minded Christian, that is not drunk with self-Interest, not overcome with a spirit of Giddinesse, that the foundation of goverment, which is commended to us by God in the Scripture, did, and was to rest and reside in a single person, known by the Names or Titles of Kings and Judges: and to contradict the perpetuation of it (untill Christ himself come) there is not one line in the whole Bible as I remember, and I believe I have read the Bible over threescore times; and as the Apostle saith, that he that keeps the whole Law and failsin one point, is guilty of all, so if wee own the Scripture as the ground of faith, and rule of life in some things, and renounce it in other, having no command for it) we must unavoidably be guilty of sliting the whole, for the Scripture was not given in old time by will of man, nor is it to be altered or chang'd by mans will, nor any thing to be added to it, or taken from it, upon pain, that every one that shall so do, shall have his name blotted out of the Book of Life, and for an addition, all the plagues that are written in the same book inflicted on him; if ever we would then enjoy our peace, our lives, libereties and estates, our wives and children with tranquility, joy and comfort, it must be by a chearfull submission to such a foundation of government, which God in his wisdome hath appointed, and thought meet for us, and made obvious to our eye in his sacred records; let then the exhortation Jer. 6. 16. which the Prophet Jeremiah hath spoken to us in the name of the Lord be acceptable to us. Who bids us to stand in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and we shall find rest for our souls▪ Let us consider and ex∣amine, whether it be not better (though we should be loosers
by it to imitate the servants of God of old, and walke in their steps & paths, then for our own ends to dance after the pipe of the covetous, drunken, swinish, slovenly Dutch, and the lustfull, a∣dulterous Venetian; where under the government of the one all manner of intollerable blasphemies are tollerated, and under the dominion of the other, most abominable beastlinesse counte∣nanc't; yea rather let us set our eyes to behold, have our ears of∣ten to hearken to, our minds bent to contemplate, our hearts to ponder, our lips to speak of, our hands to lay hold of, and our feet to tread in the paths of such a goverment, which hath these properties attending it. First, most Godly, Secondly, most Christianlike, Thirdly, most antient, Fourthly, most safe for the people. Now the govenrment of a single person is most godly for these reasons following. First, because it was brought forth in time, and establisht in the Nations, according to the eternall purpose, and determi∣nate counsell of God; who worheth all his works, and bringeth to passe all his actions after the councill of his own will, and not after the counsell of any other, neither of Saints nor Angells. Shall mortall man be more just then God, and shall man be more pure then his Maker? behold he put no trust in his servants, and his Angells he charged with folly: how much lesse on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the Moth? they are destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding it: doth not their excellency which is in them go away, they dye, even without wisdome; where is he than that can direct the spirit of Lord? or being his Counsellor, can teach him: with whom took he counsell, and who instructed him, when he divided to the Nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, and set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel? when he establisht a Judge for a governor o∣ver the sons of Jacob? and placed Kings, to rule over the Na∣tions of the Gentiles? did not the Lord establish these things by a Law and a decree, more unchangable then the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alter not? is not the Lord perfect in his counsells? yea is not the Lord righteous in his ways, and holy in all his workes? hath the Lord any where revealed or de∣clared
in his Word, that he would alter his Counsels, or fru∣strate his own Laws and Ordinances concerning the Govern∣ment that he had subjected the people to? Where is that Coun∣sellor, that can enlarge the counsel of the most High? Or give a clearer sense and a fuller understanding of his Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and Judgements, then he himself hath given by his Holy Spirit, the true Interpreter of his minde? If not, then Wo be to him that striveth with his Maker: Let the Potsheard strive with the Potsheards of the earth, and not with the Al∣mighty; for surely there is no Counsel against him shall stand; their turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the Potters clay: And that Form of Government that issued forth from God, and hath its foundation in God, shall be establisht in the earth; for it is most godly, and it shall continue till Christ himself shall come, The Alpha of all Kings by Gods decree, And the Omega of all Kings must be. A second reason to prove it most godly is, because it carries the Image of Gods essence with it, who in, and of himself is one, the Lord Jehovah is One, and in heaven (the place of his glorious residence) there being no division, God hath given the Regiment and Government unto one Person, even to his Son; so that in Heaven it self, where nothing but holiness and godliness is practised, is the Government of a single Person establisht: The Father loveth the Son, saith John, chap. 3.25. and hath gi∣ven all things into his hand: and Christ himself saith, That all power in heaven and in earth was given to him: And elsewhere, the Holy Ghost saith, That God hath given to him a name which is above every name: Can we then write after a more godly pat∣tern of Government then is already written in Heaven by Gods right-hand. All the Laws, Ordinances, and Statutes that Moses delivered to the children of Israel, he was commanded to make them all, after the Pattern that was shewed him in the Mount, where he was with the Lord forty days and forty nights for advice and counsel, how to ordet and establish all things both in Church and State, in the performance whereof he was
faithfull to his trust; so then that which hath a heavenly and a holy face, cannot have an ungodly visage: I would here be understood, not to mean corrupt persons in the Government, but the Government it self: For it is obvious to every eye, that corrupt wicked persons may bear rule in that form of Govern∣ment, which in it self is truly godly, being instituted by God himself, as in the time of the Law in the Office of the Priest∣hood, and under the Gospel in that pure and holy Office of A∣postleship; yet the Function and Calling remained still a foun∣dation of Godliness, whereof Christ himself was the chief cor∣ner Stone. So that although there be a just and lawfull ground for persons to speak against, reprove, and oppose wickedness and tyrannie in Governours, yet they have no just and lawfull ground to lay hands upon, and destroy the Government it self. For al∣though it be granted, that Kings, Princes, and Judges, may sell themselves to work wickedness, exercise Tyrannie, and live ungodly; yet it is certain they did not derive it from the Go∣vernment it self, nor doth it countenance them in any such thing: for if corruption in Governours be any way a lawfull ground to race out the Form of a lawfull Government, there is never any Government likely to be establisht in the earth, that any of the sons of the first Adam shall have the managing of; for by this means a gap will be open'd and a way made for the violent breaking down of All Earthly Government, if once the people apprehend themselves to have any power, or can gather themselves together, to make the least resistance: A thing which Christ himself would never do, although he had all power in hea∣ven and earth given to him; nor hath he left the least precept, or the least branch of a Command, to any that believe on him, or profess his Name, to do any such thing; but hath left them in subjection and conformity to that state of Government which was then in the earth, when he himself was in Person up∣on the earth, and to continue till he come again in Person. So that,
CHAP. II. The Government of a King is most Chri∣stian-like. FIrst, It is most agreeable to, and suitable with his own Pra∣ctice, as he was the Son of Man, in the time of his resi∣dence and abode upon earth: Two examples there are extant in the writings of the Evangelists, wherein Christ owns a Kingly Government, the first in Matth. 17.24. And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received Tribute-money came to Peter, and said, Doth not your Master pay Tribute? He saith, Yes, And when he was come into the House, Jesus prevented him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? Of whom do the Kings of the earth take Custom or Tribute? of their own children or of strangers? Peter saith unto him, Of Strangees: Jesus saith unto him, Then are the children free: Notwithstanding, least we should offend them, Go thou to the Sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh, and when thou hast opened his mouth thou shalt finde a piece of money▪ That take and give unto them for me and thee. Wherein three things are chiefly noted: 1. A question of the Kings Servants to Peter, whether his Ma∣ster did pay Tribute; or in effect, whether he did conform him∣self to, and own the Kingly Government then in Judea: 2. Pe∣ters sudden answer that he did, he saith, Yes. 3. Christ justi∣fying Peters answer for truth, and making it good by action; wherein he was so far from disowning the Government it self, or from giving offence to the Ministers thereof, or disputing their Authority, that he set his Divine power on work, and wrought a miracle for a testimony of it. The second is in Matth. 22. from ver. 15. to ver. 22. where to the question of the Pharisees and Herodians, who would glad∣ly have heard him speak the least word against Herods Kingly Power, urging him to declare his dis-affection and non-appro∣bation of the Government, he returns an answer consonantly
to his former action, in these words, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods: And it will not be unworthy of a serious consideration, that he was born, educated, lived, and died, under the same Form of Govern∣ment; in all which time, there was not the lest appearance in him of opposing it, nor a word spoken by him of his dislike of it; and whatsoever he did, or spake, was the command, will and pleasure of his Father Joh. 16. 31. Joh. 6.38. Joh. 8.29.. Secondly, besides his own practise in the time of his Pilgri∣mage on earth, he told his Disciples that after his departure, he would send them the spirit of truth from his Father, which should guide them into all truth. (Mark that word, into all truth) which without all peradventure, was not only into the knowledge of Divine Mysteries, but also how to demean themselves toward all men, and what Government they should live under, and submit unto. Now what that Government was that the Holy Ghost did advise and counsel them, yea, command them to sub∣mit unto, and pray for, these Scriptures following do shew, 1 Pet. 2.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Pilgrims and Strangers, that ye bstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; having your conversation honest a∣mong the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glo∣rifie God in the day of visitation: Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supream, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well; for so is the will of God, that with wel-doing, ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men; as free, and not using your liberty as a cloak of malitiousness, but as the servants of God; esteem all men, love the brotherhood, fear God, Honour the King. From these words of the Holy Ghost it is clear to me, that we may as well go seek us a new Gospel for our souls; as a new Government for our bodies; but the Lord hath not left us to our own choice in either, except he intends to ruine and destroy us. O Lord, for thy Names sake, Give not up thy servants in Eng∣land to their own hearts lst, and suffer them not to walk in their own Counsels; for if thou leave them to themselves, they
will ruine and destroy one another, and make themselves a scorn and a laughing stock to all their Enemies. O give them hearts to hearken to thy word, and obey thy voice: Let the counsel of thy holy Spirit be seasonably and timely acceptable to them, lest they repent it when it is too late. The second Scri∣pture is, Rom. 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; for there is no power but of God; the powers that be are Ordained of GOD, whosoever therefore re∣resisteth the power, resisteth the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, &c. Wherein the holy Ghost sheweth, that the Government that was then establisht in the earth, was establisht by a decree and an Ordi∣nance of God, and that those did contract the guilt of sin and judgement to themselves that did gainsay or resist it, because they did resist Gods Ordinance. The third Scripture is, 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Wherein the Holy Ghost sheweth Christians, that it is not only their duty to sub∣mit unto that Government that by Gods Ordinance and De∣cree was then establisht in the earth; but also to pray for the safety, welfare, and prosperity both of the soul and bodies of those that were supream Persons in the Government, as the fruits of godliness and honesty. As in Martial Discipline it is observable, that good and dis∣creet Souldiers observe their Leaders, and hearken to the word of Command; for want of which they fall into disorder, and lay themselves open to be spoiled of their enemies; so without doubt, it would be both wisdom and discretion in Christians, to observe the practise of those that liv'd in the Primitive times of the Gospel, that were the first Professors of Christian Religi∣on, that lead the Van of Practical godliness, and to be followers of them, as they were of Christ; and this will lead to the third thing.
CHAP. III. The Government of a KING is most Ancient. THat it is most Ancient, I think none are so sottish as to de∣ny it, and therefore there needs but little to be said in it. Yet for satisfaction to some that are beating the Bush to start something from the Form of a new government; this much I shall insert, that Melchisedec, who is recorded in the Scripture without Father, without Mother, without descent, having neither beginning of day, nor end of life, was constituted a King on Earth, and exercised a Kingly Power and Government over the faithfull Servants of God then living; to whom and to whose Government, even Abraham (whom the holy Ghost stiles the Father of the faithful) did most gladly submit. This was the first Form of Government that the people of God, Gods cho∣sen people were subject to, and under which they first received a blessing. And whereas it is written that Melchisedec was with∣out beginning of days, or end of life: so also his Government (I mean a Kingly Government) had no beginning, and shall have no end, because it came forth from, and was founded in the eter∣nal God, and unto him shall return again, and have its center for ever in him. Alas, the Government of a Free-State (as some cail it) is a new thing (or there is no such thing) having not one sentence in the Book of God that testifies any such thing (ex∣cept Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and the two hundred and fif∣ty principal men of the Congregation, did intend to establish such a Government, when they told Moses that he took too much upon him to list up himself above the Congregation of the Lord) and is therefore both invaluable, and inconsiderable to a Kingly Government, having nothing of the Image, or Superscription of the King of Kings engraven upon it; nor so much as the shadow of Antiquity to countenance it.
CHAP. IV. That the Government of a KING is most safe for the People. ANd as the Government of a single person is most Ancient, so it carryeth most of the peoples safety with it: this also is clear from Scripture and Reason. Moses the Servant of the Lord, from the tenderness of his heart to Israels safety, and fearing least the late distemper of Corah and his Accomplices might be revived after his death to their utter ruine and destru∣ction (after that the Lord had told him, that he should not go into the Land of Canaan, but that he should go up into Mount Nebo and die there) earnestly prayed unto the Lord in these words, Let the Lord the God of the Spirits of all flesh, set a man (not men) over the Congregation, which may go out before them, and which may go in before them: And which may lead them out▪ and which may bring them in; that the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep without a shepherd, Numb. 27. 16, 17. In this Scripture, the Holy Ghost shews these two things: First, Moses his earnest desires for the Peoples safety. Secondly, His Proposition to God, of what he apprehended might be the most effectual mean for the people to attain it (Let the Lord set a man over the Congregation) and in the 3. verses following, the Holy Ghost shews these things; First, Gods ap∣probation of Moses his Proposition: Secondly, his consent and grant, of his charitable and loving Petition for the peoples safe∣ty. And me thinks the Lord speaks thus to him, Moses I have read thy Petition, I finde it honest, just, and godly, and no way contradicting my mind and will: I have therefore granted thy request, I have considered thy wisdom in propounding such an effectual means for the peoples safety, as the placing one Head Governor over them, and I approve of it, it likes me well, and it shall be done. Be it therefore enacted in Heaven by God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost (three Persons
and one God) that the government of a single Person, be esta∣blisht upon earth, as the most effectual means for the preserva∣tion, peace and safety of the people thereof, and that they be conformable and obedient to it: And whereas Joshuah the son of Nun hath been hitherto faithfull, godly, and upright in all his ways, and was not consenting to the seditious, and Govern∣ment-despising principles of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and hath followed me fully in my Ordinances and commands, which I have given to Israel, he shall be the man that shall be their Chief governour, thus we may see what government was best pleasing to God, and most suitable to his minde. Israel had a Judge by a heavenly Ordinance; and the Nations of the Gen∣tiles a King by an eternal unalterable decree. The Reign of Kings▪ to generation came, Judges being qualify'd receiv'd the same. Secondly, The greatest time of safety that God hath promi∣sed to his Church and People on Earth, in the great union of Jws and Gentiles, will be in the time of a Kingly Government, and from thence shall they receive an abundance of indulgen∣cy; for this is the word which the Lord hath spoken by the Prophet Isaiah, Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sns in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried on their shoulders, and kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing Mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. In this Scripture, the Lord hath promised, that he wil so bring about and work such a change upon the heart of Kings; that they shall be so far from being persecutors of his Church or Exercisers of Tyrannie over them; that they shall embrace them with the arms of love, and stoop to them with Congies of love, that they shall give the right hand of fellowship to them, and take sweet counsel together in the house of God, that they shall be their chief and choicest friends, using their power for their protection, whereas formerly they have been great ene∣mies
and destroyers thereof. Now if a Kingly Government should be raced out and abolished: How shall the Church of God have Kings for their nursing Fathers, and Queens for their nursing Mothers. But besides these Scriptures, reason it self will tell us, that it is more safe for the people to enjoy a Government invested rather in one person then in a multitude of men; for a Nation may very fitly be compared to a private Family, consisting of many Servants; which can never be well ordered, wherein there are many Masters: for, if according to the words of our Savi∣our, no Servant can well serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and desise the other: How then can he serve more then twice two hundred. Amongst many there may be much division, in one there can be but little, if any. In unity there is safety; in Di∣vision confusion. This is not a bare conjecture, or a supposed thing, many late years sad experience hath confirmed it for Truth. How prone men are to division, we need not ask; and how bitter the fruit of it is, we have been made to know by ta∣sting the forbidden fruit: I mean by doing that in obedience to men, and their Ordinances which God hath expresly forbidden in his word. A Ship must needs sail in hazard and danger of being cast away, that hath many Pilots of equal Authority at the Helm, let the Marriners handle their Ropes as skilfully as they can, and the wind blow never so fair: Nor is there any real like∣lyhood, that a sick person should be in safety or recover health that hath a multitude of Physicians about his sick bed. If Eng∣land then would be healed of the Falling-sickness, and Convul∣sion Fits of Division: Let them apply to their stomacks the Leaf of a godly Christianlike, Ancient Government, and they shall be healed, or else never. Probatum est. FINIS. —Regúm est Parcere subjectis, & debellare superbos. Humanum est errare, sed diabolicum aest perseverare.
