M790 E280_1 99860836 112961
Die Mercurii April. 30. 1645. ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that Sir William Mas∣sam, do from this House give thanks to Mr. Marshall for the great paines hee took in the Sermon hee Preached this day at the intreaty of this House, at St. Margarets Westminster (it being the day of publique hu∣miliation) and to desire him to Print his Ser∣mon. And it is Ordered, that none shall pre∣sume to Print his Sermon, not being authorized under his hand-writing. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. I appoint Stephen Bowtell to Print my Sermon, Stephen Marshall.
THE STRONG HELPER OR, The interest, and power of the Prayers of the destitute, for the building up of Sion. Opened in A SERMON BEFORE The Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, upon the solemn day of their Monethly Fast, April 30. 1645. BY Stephen Marshall, B.D. Minister of Gods Word, at Finching-field in Essex. JER. 29. 12. Then shall yee call upon me, and yee shall goe and pray unto mee, and I will hearken unto you. PSAL. 10. 17. Lord thou hast heard the desire of the humble, thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thy eare to hear. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold at the signe of the Bible in Popes-head Alley, 1645.
TO THE HONORABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. THE Lord that now makes it his great work to build up Zion, and settle his Arke there, in its place, hath made it your great honour, that hee hath taken you into a partnership in so bles∣sed a work; Hee make it your happinesse,
that your Faithfull indevours being crown∣ed with a blessed successe, both the present and after Ages may deservedly call you the Repairers of the breach, and restorers Esa. 58. 12. of paths to dwell in. It is pity such buil∣ders should want either fair weather, or a sure Scaffold to build on; but you will not be discouraged, whilest you think how in great repaires, all use to lie on heaps, and remem∣ber, what the ablest of Gods Master-build∣ers in this kind have met with, it is enough that Jerusalems Wall may be built in trou∣bleous times. God can lay the beams of Dan. 9. 25. Psal. 104 3. Luk. 17. 6. his Chambers in the water, and Faith can plant Sycamines in the Sea; it was a con∣fused Chaos, without form and void, full of darknesse, which this goodly Fabrick of Heaven and Earth was at first made out of, and there were Evenings as well as Morn∣ings all along in the Work, however it went on, each day adding distinction and beauty, and the last, perfection, so that God beheld
all and saw it to bee very good. It is the same creating God, that must order our pre∣sent confusions, and raise up our ruines, in which your humble and faithfull Prayers, will be more usefull then your ablest Coun∣sels. Moses, Elias, our Saviour, the great builders and repairers of the Church, are every one of them recorded to have fasted forty daies and nights, when they were upon that Worke, it much commends Prayer and Fasting to all who are at any time ingaged in a like service; that was your businesse, when this Sermon was Preached, which, if either in the delivery it did any whit help your Spirits then in prayer, or in the pub∣lishing, it may now or hereafter, ingage you, when you most diligently look to your Work, more earnestly to look up to God in it, it will bee the joy, as it is the prayer of Your Servant in this great Work, STEPHEN MARSHALL.
A SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable House of COMMONS at their Monethly Fast, Aprill 30. 1645. PSAL. 102. 17. Hee will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer. I Began the handling of this portion Intreduction. Shewing the scope of the Text to bee a Circumstance which highly magnifies the work of Gods bullding up of Sion. of Scripture the last publique solemn Fast, before the Honourable House of Peeres, and I then shewed, that these two Verses doe containe two such remarkable circumstances, which al∣wayes accompany the building up of Zion, as doe justly render it the most glorious and excellent work in all the world, most wor∣thy
of all mens observation and admiration, so that all the Kings and all the Nations might well stand amazed at it, and it deserves to bee writen, that all the Generations to come may praise God for it; the first is, that when ever the Lord doth build up Zion, hee doth appeare in his glory, hee never shews himself more like himself, never more magnifies those excellent perfections of his Wis∣dom, and Power, and Mercy, and Holinesse, and Truth, then hee doth when hee builds up his Church; This I handled before that Honourable House the last day, at large, and now this Honourable House having comman∣ded my poore labours, to bee a furtherance of your hu∣miliation, and prayer, that you may be the assistance of God be carryed on the better in your great work of help∣ing the Lord in building the Church, while like so many Nehemiahs, you are building with the Trowell in one hand and the Sword in the other; I could not think of any more fitter, more suitable, or seasonable Theame, then to goe on to open the second Circumstance, which ac∣companies the building up of Zion, which you have in these words, When the Lord doth build up Zion, hee will re∣gard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer; All the prayers that his forlorn and desolate people had been offering up many yeeres before, when (it may bee) they despaired of ever meeting with any comfortable re∣turn, And containes I a plomise of Gods regarding his peoples prayers. they should now finde their Jubilee, they should now have a full crop, of all their seed gathered in with joy; when the Lord doth build up Zion, hee regards his peoples Prayers: The summe of the Text is, A grati∣ous promise of Gods hearing his peoples Prayers; Hee will regard the prayers of the destitute, or hee will turn to them, What it is for God to regard prayer, what not to despise. or hee will looke upon them, hee will behold them; the meaning plainly is, hee will grant them thus, that is, first
positively laid down: secondly, it is also laid down nega∣tively, Hee will not despise them; and in this negative, there is another affirmation, rather stronger then the for∣mer; for when God is said not to despise, the meaning is, hee doth highly value it; with God, non spernere is magni∣facere, as An humble and a broken heart, O God, thou wilt not despise, that is, thou dost highly esteem it; so also here Psalm. 51. 17. however these poore afflicted ones had imagined, because God had made them no return that hee did scorne them and their prayers, hee would now let them to their com∣fort know, that all their prayers lay before him, and were very highly regarded by him; They had sown in tears, they must now reap in joy, now they should finde that their prayers were like so many Talents put into Gods bank, which they should receive into their bosome with advantage, hee would no longer cause their heart to faint with deferring their hope, hee would now regard the pray∣er of the destitute, and not despise their prayer. Which gracious promise of God, to regard the pray∣ers 2 This promise respects, of his people, hath in this place a threefold aspect; First, Wee are to consider it in relation to the persons, whose prayers shall bee regarded, and that you have in this 1 The persons, who. word, hee will regard the prayer of the destitute; And Secondly, This regarding of prayer doth respect the Time, when 2 The time, when. hee will regard it; When the Lord doth build up Zion, hee will regard the prayers of the destitute; And Thirdly, This regarding of the prayers of his people, hath an 3 The matter, wherein their prayer shall bee regarded. aspect upon the matter, wherein hee will regard them; when hee builds up Zion, hee will regard their prayer, that is, (as God willing you shall heare anon) that their prayers shall be the means of building Zion, he will build
Zion, as that which their prayers have been the means of, and have drawn from him; when the Lord shall build up Zion, hee will regard the prayers of the destitute; I begin with the first of them: The persons, they are here called the destitute; hee will The Persons, who: regard the prayer of the destitute: the Hebrew word, which is here translated destitute, doth properly signi∣fie 1. Myrica, a low shrub, humilesque Myricae, low shrubs The destitute who they are. that grow in Wildernesses, some think they were Juni∣per shrubs, some a kinde of wilde Tamyris, but a base low shrub, that grew no where but in a desolate forlorn place; and sometimes the word in the Text is used, to signifie the Deserts of Arabia, the sandy desert place of Arabia, which was a miserable wildernesse; Now when this word is applyed to men, it always means, such as were forsaken men, despised men; such men as are strip∣ped of all that is comfortable to them, either they never had children, or else all their children are taken away from them, and all comforts banished, and themselves left utterly forlorne, like the barren heath in a desolate howling Wildernesse; these are the people of whom my Text speaks, that the Lord will regard the prayer of the destitute: and this was now the state of the Church of God, when they offer'd up this prayer, and yet by faith did foretell that God would grant such a gratious an∣swer. And this promise as relating to these persons, affords Hence two lessons. us two excellent lessons. First, Into what a miserable low and forlorn condition, God often lets his Church fall, before hee doe appear for their de∣liverante; Observat. 1. The Church of∣ten brought very low before deliverance. Psal, 102, 6, 7, 8, 9. They are desolate and forsaken, left like the Deserts of Arabia, like the broken shrub of a tree, that no body regards: Such was their present condition; you
have it in all the former part of the Psalm, Like a Pelican, like an Owle, as a desolate Widow, they eate their meat with ashes, and mingle their drink with weeping: to this condition did God let his Church come, before hee did appear as a succourer, and a helper of her; I confesse God doth not always so, sometimes hee doth keep the feet of his people from falling: sometimes assoon as e∣ver they fall, hee snatches them up with his right hand; sometimes hee lets heavinesse fall upon them for a night, and sends them joy and deliverance the next morning; but frequently, yea, and ordinarily, before the greatest mer∣cies, he lets them be brought into a most miserable con∣dition, so that they shall have no humane hope ever to come out of it; So they were in Egypt wasted out in an iron fornace; so they were in Babylon, when their bones Psal. 141. 7. lay scattered upon the earth, as Chips in a timber-yard; and it was ordinary for the Church to complain before her deliverance, that she was like a bird in the fowlers snare, as a Lamb falne into a Wolves, or Lions den; and Psal. 124. 7. ordinary for God to acknowledge, that when hee comes to deliver them, he chuses them, and findes them in a Efa. 48. 10. furnace of affliction. And this is true not onely of the Church in generall, but you may read the same of abun∣dance of Gods dearest Saints, who have been brought and reduced to extremity of misery, before ever he appear∣ed for their succour: Thus it was with David and Daniel, and the three Children, and Paul, and multitudes of o∣thers. And this the Lord doth for these two causes: First, It usually thus betides Gods people through their own Reason 1. From their own folly. Psal. 38▪5. foolishnesse; themselves are the causes why they come so low; David in the name of the Church, confessed, I am brought into great heavinesse, I lie roaring all the night long,
my wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my own foolish∣nesse; for first they offend God, their gratious God, and when they have offended him, they continue impenitent∣ly in sin; and when God appeares, and begins to correct them, they kick with the heele against him, and will not take notice of his hand, but goe on obstinately; They impute it to any thing rather then Gods displeasure, will not confesse their sin, their uncircumsized heart is not humbled in them, when they lie as a wilde bull in a net, Esa 51. 20. full of the fury of the Lord; they kick and fling, fret and vex themselves, suffer and murmure, smart and re∣pine, but will not renounce their own counsell, nor lay down their arms of rebellion; and thus like foolish sons, they stay longer then they need, in the place of the break∣ing forth of children; and this God will not beare from them, but now by long and tedious trials, and by being thus brought to great extremities, their hearts are softned and melted, the pride of their spirits broken; they search and try their wayes, their foule stomachs are emptyed of that glut which lay upon them, they cast off their carnall confidence, and self-conceitednesse; when they have been bound in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction, then they see their own works, then their ears are opened to Job 36. 8, 9, 10 Discipline, when with the Prodigall, they have eat husks with the Swine, and are ready to dye with hunger, then they think seriously of returning to their Fathers house, and so hereby are made the fitter for their deliverance. Luk. 15. 17. And Secondly, Hee likewise doth it for his own glory; for the lower they are before hee appeare for their succour, the more Reason 2. For Gods grea∣ter glory in their delive∣rance. Joh. 11. 34. honour doth he gain to himself in their deliverance: This reason Christ himself gave it, in the 11 of John, when they told him that Lazarus was sick, and Christ knew he
was sick to death, yea, that hee was dead, but This sick∣nesse (said Christ) is not unto death, but that the Son of God might bee magnifyed; as if he had said, Lazarus shall dye, and goe to the grave, and lie while he is ready to stink there, not that I delight to have Lazarus brought low, and looked upon as a dead man, but that my glo∣ry might the more appear in raising him up; so when the Lord hath brought his people into such a low, for∣lorn condition, that all help and strength seems to be gone, then for him to come in and succour, this advan∣ces his glory many wayes, the glory of his wisdome, and of his love and of his power, &c. for such causes as these doth God let his Church come to be destitute, before he seems to regard their prayers. I note this onely to this end, that it might teach you all Ʋse. To teach us to judgeour selves of our present distresses. to be charitable Judges of the strange and various admi∣nistrations of our God towards almost all the Churches in Christendome at this day: indeed if we look upon the state of almost all the Christian world, we cannot but say it is very low: Germany hath now for six or seven and twenty yeers been an Aceldama, a field of blood; in Ireland the slain not to be numbred, their widows multiply∣ed Jer. 15. 8. like the sand of the Sea shore; Scotland been shaken, and harrassed, miserably; and England which hath been as a Garden of God, now is conflicting with the saddest of all judgements, and bleeds and melts away, and sinks dee∣per into the quick-sands of desolation every day then o∣ther; All our Physitians have hitherto proved of no va∣lue: no balm yet found to cure our wound, no plaister will as yet cleave to our soare, the storm still increaseth, our Anchors all come home, and we are even at our wits end, and every where the displeasure of the Lord seems to bee on all the Churches, as if he would bring such a Nahum 19.
desolation upon them, that affliction should not rise up the second time. Now (beloved) in these deep and de∣plorable extremities, learn to judge wisely of the state of Christs Church and people, think it no more strange to see the Church of God tossed and afflicted, then it is to see the Sea tossed with waves, or the lower region to be full of storms, and tempests; but when you do see these things, be you withall assured, that the Lord loves his Church, and all his Saints too dear, to be lavish of any one drop of their blood; he prefers the meanest of his people be∣fore all the Kingdoms of the world, and will give them for ransomes for his redeemed ones, he thought it not too much to redeem them with the blood of his own Son; Esa. 43. 34. be you therefore fully assured that it is not out of any slighting of them, that these troubles are upon them, but rather that in all these conflicts hee hath holy aimes, and ends, which it may be we cannot yet dive into; and let us not look too much upon the dark side of the cloud of Gods providence, when we cannot see the bottome of his Counsels; let us not hang down despairing hands; Let us be contented that we are of his Court, though we be not admitted to be of his Privy Counsell; and let us set this down for an assured conclusion, That how low so∣ever the Lord brings his people, he will bring them back again from the depth of their miseries; let us in the mean Psal. 68. 22. time, as the Prophet said, he would doe, Search and try our wayes, and be humbled before him, but let us also be∣leeve upon plain trust, and waite upon God, who at this day Lam. 3. 40. hides his face from the house of Jacob, and let us look for him untill hee please to return again. Secondly, As the Lord sometimes makes them desti∣tute before hee regards them, so hee will regard the pray∣ers of the destitute; this sad title, that they are destitute, is
set downe here as an argument that God would regard their prayers, which affords us this instruction. That the prayers of the most forlorne, and despised, and Obser. 2. The prayers of the destitute are highly regarded by God. abased, of all Gods people, are in the highest regard with him: Whose petitions soever are laid aside, God will be sure to regard and read over the petitions offered up by the desolate, their prayers are most prevalent, and most acceptable with God. I might give you an hundred places, where God saith it expresly, he heares the poore, he regards Isa. 49. 13. Job 34. 28. the despised, he will save the afflicted, he will comfort the di∣stressed, his eares are open to their cry. David, who well un∣derstood all the topicks of Prayer, all places from whence any argument might be drawne to prevaile with God in prayer, made this his usuall argument, Heare me Lord, for I Psal. 18. 4, 5, 6. Psal. 143. 1, 2. am desolate; attend to my cry, for I am brought very low; heare me speedily, my spirit is overwhelmed; as if he could lay such a claime to be regarded when he was destitute, that God must faile of his word, if he failed then to regard his pray∣ers. And there is good reason why they above all others should have their prayers regarded by God. Because they pray in their prayers: Prayer is the pow∣ring Reason 1. They pray in∣deed. Psal. 101. title. out of the soule to God; so saith the title of this Psalm, A prayer of the afflicted when he powres out his soule. Now even Gods owne people, when they have ease and liber∣ty, and are in no straits, it's too ordinary with them to powre out words, when they doe not powre out prayers, and to be in a bodily posture of prayer, when the inward man is little affected; they often pray without a heart; but Prov. 18. 22. the poore and destitute speak supplications before God, they poure out their soule and spirit, and that is prayer in∣deed. And secondly. The destitute and forsaken have no other to flye to but Reason 2. They look for help from God onely. God onely, all other succour failes them, and he hath much
engaged himselfe in his Word, never to desert the soule that betakes it selfe to him; He shall deliver the needy when he cryeth, the poore also, and him that hath no helper: Now Psal. 142. 4. this forlorne and desolate wretch looks on his right hand, and none will know him, other refuge failes him, no other cares for his soule, he hath onely a melting heart, and a mourning eye, and these are fixt upon God alone; and therefore no wonder though he be regarded. And then thirdly, The desolate, of all others, will value an answer of pray∣er; Reason 3. They will prize an answer. let God doe any thing for a poore forsaken wretch, it's highly prized: any almes to a Begger at the door, who is ready to starve, if it be but a crust fit for the dogges, yet (I say) to a starving Begger it's a greatefull thing: When the poore and needy seek water, and there is none, when their tongue Esa 41. 17, 18. faileth for thirst, and the Lord pleaseth to open rivers to them in the wildernesse, O how acceptable and welcome is it! And fourthly, God will regard the destitute, because in truth his fa∣therly bowels know that there is more need that he should Reason 4. They most stand in need of fa∣vour. succour them, then any other: he hath put those bowels into earthly parents, that if any of them have many chil∣dren, the sickest, the weakest, the simplest, the most de∣spicable of all the rest, hath the greatest care from the fa∣ther, and from the tender-hearted mother; among all the test of the children, there is not such an Orator to pre∣vaile for themselves or others, as the sickest babe: And even so it is with our good God, he knowes the condition of the poor, how every one treads upon a worme, he well considers, that he who is so weak that he is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp despised in the thought of him who Job. 12. 5. is at ease: he knowes that few will look to the destitute, unlesse it be to scorne, despise them, brow-beat them, and
turne the back upon them; and therefore he himself will regard them: he commands us to deale our bread to the hungry; to bring the poore, who are cast out, to our house; when we see the naked, that we cloath him; that we draw out our soule to the hungry, and that we satisfie the afflicted soule; yea, he commands his very enemies to regard his out-cast and afflicted; let my out-cast dwell with thee Moab, be thou a covert to them from the face of Isa. 18. 7 10. the spoiler; how much more will his owne tender bowels yerne towards them? This also is a lesson of singular comfort to every affli∣cted Ʋse 2. To encourage such to pray. soule, to assure them their prayers and supplications are tenderly regarded before God: I have often observed such poore forsaken ones, who in their owne eyes are brought very low, that of all other people they are most desirous to begge and obtaine the prayers of their friends, when they see any that hath gifts, and peace, and cheer∣fulnesse of spirit, and liberty, and abilities to performe du∣ties, O how glad they are to get such a mans prayers! I beseech you, will you pray for me, will you please to remember me at the throne of grace? whereas in truth, if we could give a right judgment, all such would rather desire the poore, and the desolute, to be mediators for them; for certainly, whom∣soever God neglects, he will listen to the cry of those that are forsaken and destitute. And therefore, O thou afflicted and tossed with tempests, who thinkest thou art wholly rejected by the Lord, continue to poure out thy soule to him, thou hast a faithfull promise from him to be rewar∣ded, he will regard the prayer of the destitute. Why then doe they so long goe without their answer? Quest. why are they and their prayers destitute? To this you will have a satisfying answer in the next branch of my Text, which is the aspect that this promise Ans.
of Gods regarding prayer, hath unto the time, when he will doe it; when the Lord doth build up Zion, he will then regard the prayer of the destitute. At another time it may be he seems not to regard them, while he lets Zion lie waste, he seemed to despise their 2 Consider this text in relation to the time, when God will regard his peo∣ples prayers▪ prayers; but when once the time is come, that the Lord will build up Zion, he will then regard the prayer of the destitute; then it shall well appeare hee will not despise their cry any longer: There you will have a full answer to this doubt, and I conceive these words, not despise, are added purposely to prevent or answer this doubt; poore afflicted ones are ready to suspect Gods good will, and to think they are despised, because they have not a spee∣dy answer, but in that day, it shall appeare how farre God is from it. And this circumstance of the time, when God regards them, affords us two other notable lessons, which because And thence, they are exceeding seasonable, I shall (the Lord assist∣ing me) enlarge my Discourse upon them; whereof the first is this. That the prayers of Gods afflicted people, which may seem for a long time to bee slighted, and despised by the Lord, are Observ. 1. That prayers which seem long despised, are yet highly regarded, and will bring a timely answer. yet highly regarded by him, and will bring a timely answer. This I think lies plain in the Text before you in the be∣ginning of the Psalme; There was crying for audience, and that his face might not continue hid, that he would incline his eare, but there was no audience to be obtain∣ed; but now when the Lord builds up Zion, he will re∣gard them, he will despise their prayers no longer, that is the first: And in this Lesson there are two branches Cleared in two branches. 1 The prayers of Gods people may seem to be despised. to be cleared before I come to apply it. First, That the prayers of Gods own servants may for a long time seeme to bee despised.
Secondly, However they may seem so to be, yet they are highly regarded, and will bring a timely answer. First, they may seem to be despised: despising, espe∣cially from God, is a very sad word, and sinks very deep, it implies three things, which all may betide the prayers of Gods own people. First, A silence in God, a sitting still, taking no notice of their prayers, to let them powre out their soules, and the Lord be as if their prayer never came to his eare; that is one thing in despising, and the best of it so the Church complains, O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hearest Psal 23. 2. not; and elsewhere, Keepe silence no longer, lest if thou be as one that heareth not, I become like unto him that goes down into the pit: very often shall you heare the people of God complaining, that they pray, and pray, and the Lord regarded not; this is very sad, as if a childe should lie sick, mourn, and cry to the Mother, and she sit by it, and not so much as cast an eye towards it; enough to break the childes heart; But Secondly, In despising, there is more and worse, when their prayers are entertained with a distaste and displeasure, expressing a manifest dislike against them; and even that sometimes betides the prayers of Gods peo∣ple; so Asaph complained in the name of the whole Church, How long Lord, wilt thou bee angry with the prayer Psal. 80. 4. of thy people? And this the Lord sometimes shews, by bringing upon them the very thing which they pray a∣gainst; as if a Childe should beg pardon, and then the Mother take it up, and whip it; when Retro omnia, when all things goe crosse to their prayers, when they ask bread and God gives them a stone; Job found it so, the very thing that he feared and prayed against, came upon him; Thus also it proved to Israel in Egypt, when they cryed
to God, because of their burthens, their burthens were increased upon them: but in despising, there is a third thing which is sadder then all this. Thirdly, Not onely silence, or expressing some distast, but doing this with scorn and indignation; as he did to Miriam, when he spit in her face; so the Lord doth of∣ten seem at the prayers of his own people, not onely to be angry, but even with scorn to shut the doore against them; This Heman felt, Psal. 88. who cryed day and night before God, when his Soule was full of trouble, and Psal. 88. 17. 14. yet then God vexed him, and afflicted him with all his waves, and seemed to abhorre and cast him off; As a man would take an unwelcome guest by the head and shoulders, and turn him out of doores, and bolt them af∣ter him; and thus the whole Church of God complains, that she did cry to the Lord, and complained of her sin and sorrow, and the Lord then set her as a But to Lam. 3. 44. shoote his Arrows at; and so also Job professed God did unto him, not onely bolt the doore against his pray∣er, but when he mourned and complained, the Lord did then take his Arrowes of indignation, and shoote at his very heart, and gnashed his teeth upon him; and so did our Saviour Christ to the poore woman, when she came and prayed, Lord helpe mee; thou Son of David helpe mee. Math. 15. 26. At first he seemed not to regard her, would not answer, the next time he stayed, and when she had delivered her petition, he called her Dog, to her face; enough to have cut the womans heart in peeces: This is wofull indeed, this cuts to the quick, and comes near to one of the sad∣dest judgements threatned against his enemies: You shall call and I will not answer, but will laugh at your calamity, and Prov. 1. 26, 27. mock when your fear cometh. So you see the prayers of Gods own people may for a long time seem despi∣sed:
But then the second branch is: That even then are they highly regarded, and will bring 2 Yet then they are highly re∣garded. a timely answer. That they are so, I might give you abun∣dance of proofe; David observed it in the 31 Psalme, one time he prayed, and God gave him such an answer, that he thought himself despised, I said, (saith he) I am cast out of the sight of Gods eyes, when he prayed, God turned Psal. 21. 23. him out of his presence, yet follows: Neverthelesse thou heardest the voyce of my prayer, when I called upon thee. And so in Egypt how long did Gods people mourn there? and their burthens increasing, it is like they thought God had wholly rejected them, yet God told Moses, Exodus 3. I have heard the cry of my people in Egypt; But this will abundantly clear it, that the prayers of the afflicted are said to be upon Gods file, before God, Let these my prayers 1 Kin. 8. 59. bee nigh unto the Lord night and day, they lye leiger be∣fore God, they are called a memoriall, they are alwayes in his sight, and he is therefore called in the Scripture, The Acts 10. 4. Luk. 1. 13. Gen. 19. 29. 30 22. Psal. 20. 3. Psal. 65. 2. And will bring a timely answer God hearing Prayer, God hearing Prayer is one of his at∣tributes, hearing is a participle of the present tense, as if you cannot speak to him, under the notion of God, but you must conceive him hearing prayer; hearing the pray∣ers of his people at all times: he is said likewise to remem∣ber the prayers of his people, to carry them in his minde, to have them in his thoughts, and which makes all more Esa. 49. 8. 2 Cor. 6. 2. clear, he hath promised not onely to heare, but in the best time to answer them, in an accepted time I have heard thee; The Lord would thereby intimate that hearing is one thing, and answering is another thing, and there of∣ten is a distance between them, but all that distance of time, God is but consulting as it were of the fittest op∣portunity, and the best way to answer the prayers of his people.
The examples are not to be numbred, of the timely an∣swer of such prayers: David in the 22 Psalme in his owne name, in the person of Christ, in the name and person of the whole Church, begins with a sad complaint, O my God I cry in the day time, but thou hearest not; but in the same Psal. 22. 2. with verse 24. Psalm concludes as comfortably, he hath not despised nor ab∣horred the affliction of the afflicted, neither hath he hid his face from him, but when he cryed unto him he heard. Abraham had long prayed for a sonne before any answer came, yet when in all probability he had given over praying, he re∣ceived a full answer: So did Zachary and Elizabeth, Luk. 1. so did Cornelius, Act. 10. and those slaughtered soules, Luk. 1. 14. Rev. 6. who cryed, How long Lord, holy and true, &c. at last Acts 10. 3, 4. Rev. 6. 10, 11. with Rev. 8. 3, 4. received a full returne. The building of the Temple after the 70 yeares captivity, was a work long on the wheele, even the time of 7 Princes reigne, yet the prayers for the accomplishment and perfecting of it, were all answered and fulfilled in their season, and came (as God promises the returne of prayer shall be) like the former and the lat∣ter Hosea 6. Joel 2. 2, 3. Jer. 3. 3. raine in due season. And you will grant that this is so, and must be so, that their prayers must be thus regarded, if you consider but these five things which meet in them. First, when the afflicted people of God doe powre out Reasons of it. their prayers to the Lord, they doe that which he com∣mands 1. them to doe, they have his expresse commande∣ment They doe his commandements herein. Psal. 50. 15. to doe it, Gall upon me in the day of trouble, now that which Gods people do in obedience to his command, cannot be despised by him: it would reflect upon his ho∣nour, if duties and performances of his owne will should not be regarded. Secondly, when the afflicted soule prayes, Gods owne 2. Spirit prayes in them; for they know not how to pray as they His Spirit prays in them. Rom. 8. 26. ought, but it is the Spirit of God in them that makes intercession;
and however the Lord might be thought to quench the spirit of his poore sinfull ones, he will never quench his owne spirit, he must needs regard that. And thirdly, when ever Gods people doe thus pray, 3. Jesus Christ intercedes for them, as his Spirit makes inter∣cession Christ mediares for them. Rev 8. 3. within them upon earth, so Christ makes inter∣cession for them in heaven; Hee is the Angel of Gods pre∣sence; and the Lord cannot but regard that which is pre∣sented unto him, by the hand of one whom he alwayes loves. And fourthly, They themselves are very dear to God, they are in∣finitely 4. beloved, even those despised ones; he hath none They are dear∣ly beloed of God. in heaven or earth dearer to him, then his afflicted ones are: This argument Christ himself uses to assure them their Prayers will be regarded; in the 16. of John, You Joh. 16. 26. shall ask in my name (said he) and I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father himself lo∣veth you: when you come to pray to him, you come not as to an enemy; and though I be your Mediator, it is between you and a friend, not between you and an ene∣my, My Father loves you dearly: we that are evill can give Luke 18. 7. good things to our Children, because we love them; how much more will our heavenly Father doe it? This argument our Saviour also presseth most sweetly in the parable of the unrighteous Judge, who through impor∣tunity did right to a poore Widow, and shall not God much more do it for his Elect ones, his beloved ones? And fifthly, 5. He hath ingaged himself by innumerable promises, to He hath pro∣mised to heare them. Psal. 50. 15. Isa. 49. 1 King. 8. 33. ad finem. the poor, the desolate, and the afflicted, that they shall be answered by him, Call upon me, and I will an∣swer thee, in an accepted time I will answer thee; many a time hath God engaged himselfe for
it; and he that commands his own servants, if they look Psal. 15. 4. for his favour, that they keep their promises, though it be to their hinderance, though it should be to an enemy; cer∣tainly Psal. 89. 34. himself will never alter the thing, the word that is come out of his mouth, to them who are so dear to him, as his Saints are; and therefore their prayers must needs be before him: But it may bee demanded, Why then do they seem to be despised? and why doth the Lord de∣fer Quest. Why then doth he deferre and seem to despise them? to answer them? I Answer, First, God doth not alwayes defer them; sometimes before they call hee doth answer them, and while Answ. He doth not alwaies so. Iso. 65. 24. Gen. 24. 45. Dan. 9. 23. they are speaking hee doth heare; and as Abrahams servant noted of himself, even while he was praying Rebekah came: so have many of Gods servants found; so did Daniel, as soon as he had done praying, about the time of the Evening Sacrifice, the Angel Gabriel being caused to fly swiftly, brought him a gratious answer, and told him that in the beginning of his supplication he re∣ceived his answer: sometimes the harvest overtakes the seed-time; especially, when their prayers are offered up Jer. 29. 11. when Gods appointed time is come, or when their need is instant and extream, when the fluctus decumanus, when the tenth and terrible wave is ready to overwhelm them, Psal. 143. 7. he gives them leave to say, Heare me speedily, and he will not fail them: when Peter is ready to sink, he no sooner cryes Lord save me, but Christ presently gives him his hel∣ping Mat. 14. 30. and saving hand. But, secondly, it is not alwayes aske and have, after asking must be seeking and knocking, and seeking and knocking again; and when it is so, God defers them for two excellent ends: The one is his own glory, the other When he doth it's for the glory of his Soveraignty. is the good of his people. First, his own glory is exceedingly advanced by it; for
in dealing after this manner he doth assert; First, his own Soveraignty in dispensing his mercies, so as it may appear that it belongs to him to dispose of things and times at his own pleasure. You know great Lords and Princes make it a great part of their Soveraignty, to have Suiters wait upon them; and it is the great glory of the Lord Jehovah to have his people lie long before him, with their petiti∣ons in their hands: and withall it asserts his free-Grace, it manifests, that whenever he doth answer the prayers of His Free-grace. his people, that it is free favour, were it their due; his Ju∣stice would not let him keep the labourers hire an houre from him; he commands us not to doe it, but that wee Lev. 19. 13. may know that all is free, he will have us wait his leisure; And thirdly, Herein he likewise manifests his own wisdome, that he And his Wis∣dome. can and will make both the prayers of his people, and his answers to them, when they come together, each of them appear beautifull in their season, that as his wis∣dome is manifested in giving them an heart to pray in their season: so you shall see it manifested, in giving his an∣swer in his best season. But besides, in the second place, Hereby he doth marvailous good unto his people who 2 For their good many wayes. thus wait upon him. For, first, He doth hereby prepare them for their answer. And secondly, He thereby prepares the answer to be the better for them. First, he prepares them to be the fitter for an answer: hee traines them up in these three or foure excel∣lent things, while he seems to despise their prayer. First, 1 Hereby hee teacheth them to pray. Hereby they grow marvailously dexterous in the art of prayer, he teaches them to pray by suspending his answer to prayer; you shall find in the Scripture, that those
men, who have been the greatest wrastlers with God, have been such, whom God hath longest put off, before Psal. 88. Mat. 15. 22. Gen. 32. 24, 25. 1 Sam. 2. he hath answered them; Heman, and David, and Hannah, and I know not how many of them that have offered up most soule ravishing prayers, were such as have prayed till their throats have been dry, and their voyce hoarse, and complained from years end to years end; God here∣by makes them skilfull, and excellent Artists at it. And then, Secondly, Hereby doth the Lord train them up in humility; there 2 Trains them up in humility. is nothing in the world humbles a Soule more, then to be long mourning before the Lord for a mercy, and the Lord not to relieve him in it; nor is any Soule so fit for any thing, as an humble Soule; David that had been long without his Kingdome, when he came to have it, Psal. 131. 1, 2. 2 Sam. 6. could say, O Lord, my Soule is like a weaned childe, and very vile and base in his own eyes: by being long de∣layed, they come to be privy to the wickednesse of their own hearts; even as a horse that hath any infirmity, he will shew it in a long journey; a leg that hath any im∣perfection will discover it in a long walk, and so will the secret corruptions of our hearts discover themselves when God delayes us, hereby we shall discover the pride, murmuring, discontent, self-ishnesse, and what ever else is naught in our spirits, and thereby come to be made wondrous low in our own eyes: and Thirdly, Hereby the Lord likewise traines them up both in Faith 3 Exercise their Faith & Hope. and Hope: he hereby exerciseth; and thereby increaseth both these excellent Graces in them. Thus was it with Abraham, Rom. 4. Thus with the poore woman, Mat. Rom. 4. 19. Mat. 15. 2 Cor. 1. 8. Esa. 8. 17. 15. Thus with Paul, 2 Cor. 1. brought even to despaire of life, brought under the sentence of death, that he might learn to trust and hope in God. Thus Esay, in the
name of the whole Church, Esay 8. and innumerable o∣thers, have learned both to beleeve and waite, when God hath seemed to hide his face from them. And then, Se∣condly, By this long delaying of them, as he fits them the bet∣ter Makes the answer of their prayer more comfortable. for the answer; so he fits his answer the better for them, for then is the mercy alwaies both the greater, and the sweeter: great ships that goe long voyages, be∣fore they come home, are usually most richly laden; an Oak is long growing, but proves a great tree, and long-lived, whereas a Gourd which grows up in a night, in another night is smitten with a worm and dyeth; a bles∣sing that is long a comming, is ordinarily a great one when it doth come; The Lord makes the mercy the swee∣ter when it comes. Isaac that hath been begging many a year, when he comes, he is an Isaac, a Son of laughter; When Hannah had long wept for a Childe, when he comes, he is a Samuel, and he proves a very sweet childe to her; Solomon was a childe of teares, a son of his Mo∣thers Prov. 31. 2. vowes, but was a pleasant Childe indeed; so was John Baptist, to his Parents, who were past children be∣fore he was born: much prayer, many tears laid out for Luk. 1. Prov. 13. 22. a mercy before it comes, are all abundantly repaid in the greatnesse and sweetnesse of it, when it doth come, Hope deferred, maketh the heart sick, but when the desire commeth, it is a tree of life. But whether I have answered the case of Conscience fully, or no, sure I am, the Lesson is most plain, that though God may seem to despise his peoples prayers, they are all before him; and will bring an an∣swer in due time. This is a most comfortable Doctrine. And I shall onely make a comfortable use of it in two Branches. Application..
The one is to our selves, in respect of our present di∣stresses. This present lesson may more refresh and establish 1 Consolation in relation to our present work and trou∣bles. our hearts, in assurance of a good issue in this great work wherein we are ingaged, then a million of Gold, or the assistance of a potent Army. We have a huge conflict, we grapple with enemies, that are strong, wise, vigilant, that are many, who have all the Antichristian, and Ma∣lignant part of the Christian world joyned with them; and besides all this, I am perswaded, we now grapple with the revenging hand of God, for the sins which this Na∣tion hath lien in, this hundred years; God doth now re∣member them, and visits the Kingdome for them, the idolatry, the blood, the Apostasie, and innumerable o∣ther evils, and abominations, our troubles are very great, and the event may seem very difficult, and doubtfull; but let me tell you, here is that, may counterpoise all, and sup∣port us against all discouragements, and make us comfor∣tably conclude of a good issue; We shall over-master all that are against us, we shall over-match them, because the spirit and power of prayer is on our side; we have had (these three or foure years especially) the spirit of prayer powred out, (I am perswaded) in the greatest measure that hath been, since the Apostles of Christ li∣ved upon earth; and our prayers have not been in vain, though the full return be not yet made, we have had the first fruits, many a sweet in-come we have had already; But know (Honorable and beloved) they are all filed up before God, there is not one of them lost; they will bring another manner of return then yet they have done. And not our prayers only, but the prayers of all the Christian world are before God in our behalf, our cause is Gods, the work we are ingaged in is the building up of Zion, and therefore there is not a good man in the world,
no not at Oxford, who prayes, Thy Kingdome come, but prayes for us, who are indevouring the raising up of Christs Kingdom; now these prayers are all before God, and must bring a comfortable answer in due time; Nay, this comfort reaches yet further, not onely wee that are now alive, and our prayers, but all the Worthies who are now with God, their Prayers pray for us; Though we must say of them as the Church did of Abraham, they know us not; they are ignorant of our condition, yet their prayers which they offered up while they were on earth, and longed to see this work proceed, are now really assistant to us; Daniel and Jeremiah did as really build the Temple and City, as Zerubbabel, and Nehemiah, though they were dead long before; That look as the blood of the Martyrs cryed for vengeance from Abel to Zacharias, and thereby reach a present persecuting gene∣ration; so the prayers of those who loved Zion, do blesse and reach all the workmen now imployed in the rearing up of the Church, their prayers speak as Abels Faith did when he was dead, and rotten, insomuch that I may con∣fidently conclude, that the two Houses of Parliament, and our Armies (as unworthy as we are) are daily car∣ryed upon the wings of many millions of prayers, that have been offered up to God these many years, they are all before God night and day; God is only waiting the fit time; and therefore, I beseech you bear up your spi∣rits against all other discouragements, the Lord will in the most accepted time let you know, that all that have ever said to him, Lord, remember England; Lord, purge thy Church in England; Lord, set it up there; down with Prelacy; stablish Liberty; make way for Christ; they are all before God, and must prevaile; and therefore cer∣tainly our comfort may be greater, ten to one, then our
discomfort need be, though all the Nations of the world were sworn against us: You shall, God willing, have more of this before I dismisse you, let this taste suffice at the present. And Secondly, It is also a most comfortable lesson to poore, afflicted, dejected spirits, who mourn and wrastle with God for Ʋse. 2. their own distresses: There may be many such in this As∣sembly 2 Consolation to particular distressed soules this day, who pray every day, it may be with Da∣vid seven times in a day, ten times in a day, but the heart sinkes for want of an answer; as wicked men think, they shall never be reckoned with for their sins, because di∣vine vengeance seems to sleep, so do poore soules con∣ceive Psal. 50. 21. that because God at present seems to slight them, he will never regard them. I have oft heard many a sad soule lament after this man∣ner: Did but God heare my prayers, did he but accept me, I would with David, call upon him as long as I did live, might but my prayer come up before him, and Psal. 116. 2. be lookt upon; but to be thus as a despised reed, a scor∣ned poore creature, (as I confesse I deserve to be) this daunts my soule, that I dare not pray, I am even ready to give over; O (saith the sad heart) I beg mercies, and I taste wrath, I beg grace, and I feel corruption, I beg ease, and I indure torment, I beg love, and I finde displea∣sure, all goes backwards; God casts my prayer out, shuts it out from him, and this, this wounds the soule; let me to such a sad soule speak a few comfortable words from the Lord; I take this for granted, that the things thou dost beg, are according to Gods will; thou darest not beg an unlawfull thing; I take it also for granted, that thou that dost call upon God, dost indevour to depart from iniquity, that thou darest not call upon the name of God, and walk in sinfull waies, but thou wouldest
be his servant; and I likewise take it for granted, that thou dost not expect or desire audience for any ones sake, but for Christ Jesus thy Saviour, to whom thou look∣est; this I hope God witnesses with thee: Why, if so, then it seems the onely evill that oppresses thy spirit, is, God doth not answer thee, he doth not give thee such a return of thy prayer, as thou desirest: But know thou, Gods answering of thy prayer must not be measured by thy sad apprehensions, but by his own word, which word assures me that all thy prayers are before God night and day; and for his present answering of thee, it is no to∣ken of his displeasure, that he does not give thee a sudden answer; his forbearance is no deniall, the best of all his Saints have cryed and prayed, till their throate hath been dry, and God hath seemed not to answer: David had prayed long for an answer, Psal. 69. 3. when he com∣plained, Hee was weary of his crying, his throate was dry, Psal. 69. 3. & 119. 123. Cant. 3. 4. 2 Cor. 12. his eyes failed while hee did waite for his God. The whole Church long sought him whom her soule loved, and found him not; and Paul thrice, that is, many times be∣sought God to remove the messenger of Satan, which was sent to buffet him, and was fain to wait still, so that thou art not alone in being thus delayed: Nay, I tell thee fur∣ther, God hath many wayes of regarding and answering Prayer; Sometimes he may regard a prayer, which he ab∣solutely denies, when the thing would not be good for him that begs it; So he peremptorily denyed Moses his prayer to goe into the Land of Canaan; But if the thing be good, and according to his will, deferring of it, is no denying of it; if in the mean time, while before God an∣swer thee, he vouchsafe to uphold thy heart by his Spi∣rit, as he did Davids, Psal. 73. 22. I was as a beast before thee, neverthelesse thou upholdest mee by thy right hand. If he
now and then dart in a beam of love, which is as the fire from Heaven to assure thee thou art accepted, if he sta∣blish 2 Chron. 7. 1. Psal. 35. 13. thee, nay, if he doe but draw thy heart out to con∣tinue to pray to him, if he make thy Soule more hum∣ble, and vile in thy own eyes, if he more wean thee from the creature, and train thee up to wait upon him, truely (friend) it is ten thousand times better, then all the time that thou spendest, thou hast a large recompence in Gods doing thus much for thee; this is to be preferred be∣fore thousands of gold and silver: but I tell thee more, not one of thy suites will be lost, no they are all before God, he reads them over every day, and what thou hast been begging this seven years, this twenty years, he dayly remembers them, and in his heart answers them all; Whatever thou hast sown in tears, thou shalt reap in joy; be content, though at present thou seest nothing but darknesse, doe as Elia's servant did, who went seven times to look for rain, till the seventh time he saw no∣thing, and then but a very little, yet that little soon pro∣ved a great deale. It may be thou shalt not see the answer a great while; possibly not till thy death come; Old Simeon a good gra∣tious man had many years begged of God, that he might see his Salvation, yet he never got Christ in his arms, till he was ready to depart the world, then he got his full answer; so it may be when thou comest to die, thou shalt have hosts of answers stand round about thee, nay, peradventure the greatest returns of thy prayers shall be when thou art dead and rotten in thy grave; what thou hast begged for Gods Church, thy prayers shall produce it, when thou art gone; what thou hast begged for thy husband, wife and children, it may be God will give thee the greatest return of them when thou hast no being in
this world; and for thy self while thou livest, when it may be, thy heart is dull, and thou art unfit for prayer, and canst not pray; the quickning prayers which thou didst offer up many years agoe, God is then remembring them, when peradventure thou fearest he is taking advan∣tage of thy present dulnesse and distemper. Therefore goe thy wayes on, and waite upon him, treasure up thy suits, be it against corruption, against tem∣ptation, for thy Family, for the Church, waite Gods time, the vision is for an appointed time, it will come in the end, that is certain; every tear, every sigh, every short ejaculation, is continually before him, he hath a bottle for thy tears, as well as a bag for wicked mens sins, a treasury for thy prayers, as well as for their blasphe∣mies: let his present answer be what it will, beleeve any thing of him rather then a rejecting of the supplications of the poore who seek him in his Sonnes name, hee hath promised it, and is faithfull and cannot deny him∣selfe. Another thing I observe from this circumstance the time when, the time of regarding them, is, when he builds up Zion, and that affords us another lesson as seasonable for this present auditory, viz. That when the Lord doth build up his Church, hee doth Obser. 2. The Lord an∣swers all his peoples prayers when he builds up Zion. Jer. 14. 11. Rev. 6. 10. then answer all his afflicted peoples prayers. Sometimes God will not be prayed to, or if he doe, his answer shall bee, waite a while; but when he builds up Zion, then the Lord answers his peoples prayers, then he sits in his Court of Request to heare petitions, then he holds out his golden Scepter to every poore supplicant. There are three things that God is laid in the Scripture to remember when he builds the Church; Hee then re∣members his enemies, when the new Jerusalem comes
downe from heaven, then great Babylon comes into mind before God, that she may be repaid: then secondly, God uses to remember his Covenant, hee remembred for them his Covenant; and thirdly, then also doth God re∣member the prayers of his people, and this God willing I shall make good to you, for the truth of it, you shall finde it fully expressed in the 29. of Jeremiah 10. 11. speak∣ing of the time when he would bring them back to build Jer. 29. 11. the Temple, then (saith the Lord) shall you call upon mee, and I will answer you; then, it may be, now he would not, but then I'le answer you; then you shall seek mee with your whole heart, and you shall find me: so in the 25. of Isaiah, in the day that God builds up his Church for that Esay 25. 9. is the great promise of that Chapter, the Prophet tells you that his people should then sing a song of praise, whereof this is one part, Loe, this is our God, we have waited for him, loe, this is our God, and he hath saved us; wee have waited, that is, we have prayed, and attended his leisure, now wee have an answer of all. To make this lesson more cleare I shall indeavour to cleare these two things. Cleared in two branches. First, when the Lord doth build up Zion, he doth then remember the particular wants, the particular requests, which his Saints have offered up to him; the Lord casts it so, as Then God re∣lieves their par∣ticular wants. to make Zions refreshing time, concurrent with the re∣lieving of the wants of his particular people, that as in executing of vengeance, when he is to execute vengeance upon a nation, he will remember particular malefactors, what they have done in their persons; so when he comes to build up his Church, hee remembers the particular fuites, that his holy ones have offered up to him; and of this I could give you many testimonies; In that day he will let every prisoner out of prison, he will binde up the wounds of every wounded soule; he will make the blinde Esa. 61. 2, 3.
to see, the lame to walk, the deaf to hear; In that day, in the 31 of Jeremiah, the Lord will satiate every wea∣ry Jer. 31. 25. soule, and replenish every sorrowfull soule, in that day when the Lord erects his new Jerusalem, there shall be a tree of life, the leaves of it shall heale the diseases of all the Nations; In that day he gives strength to the Esa. 25. 4. Esa. 35. 3. needy in his distresse, a shadow from the storm, then he strengthens weak hands and confirmes feeble knees, then every wildernesse is filled with pooles of water, then Christ will powre out abundance of his Spirit, as David at his Coronation remembred all his friends, and dealt to all the people every one a bottle of Wine: So the Lord at that day delights to make their personall com∣forts joyn with the publick and Common weale of his Church and Kingdome. This is one way how this Do∣ctrine is true, that then the Lord regards the prayers of his people, when he builds up Zion. But the second is the main. Secondly, The Lord doth then answer the prayers of This building up of Zion, is the sum of all their prayers. his people, when he builds up Zion, because in truth the building up of Zion, is the all in all, of all his peoples prayers; that is, as Solomon saith, Money answers all; so whatsoever particular suites Gods people have offe∣red up, the building up of Zion hath been such a request, that the answering of that, answers all others; whatsoever he denies them, it skils not, they have enough, they are abundantly satisfyed, they will clear all books, and break all Tallies with God, they will give in all other bills whatsoever, if this be but done; that this is so, observe I beseech you, wheresoever in the Scripture you read of the Deut. 32. 1 Kin. 8. 2 Chron. 20 Esa. 62. Dan. 9. Ezra 8. Neh. 1. 12. 14. prayers of Gods people, (as by the way, you shall hard∣ly read of any godly man, but you shall read of his pray∣er) you will finde that the strain and the stream of all
their prayers runs for Zion, read Moses his prayers, Jo∣shuahs prayers, goe on to David, to Solomon, to Ezra, to Nehemiah, and the severall Prophets; read all their pray∣ers, and you shall finde that Zion is the bulk of them all; In thy good pleasure doe good to Zion; and though there are many particular suites to themselves, yet what they beg to themselves, is only begged as a means, but when they beg for Zion, they beg it as an end: Thy Kingdome come, to Gods people, is next to Hallowed bee thy name; It is more to them then all the rest of the Lords Prayer, Give us our dayly bread, Forgive us our trespasses, Leade us not into temptation, Deliver us from evill: They are all infe∣riour to Thy Kingdome come; the building up of Gods Church, is that which hath swayed all with the Saints in all their prayers; And it must be so, it can be no o∣therwise with true godly men, if you consider either the relation that the Church hath to God, or that which they have to the Church. First, that of the Church, to Christ, it is his Love, his Dove, his Fair one, his Spouse, his Jewell, that which he hath laid all his own glory upon; one to whom he stands in all relations, which argues intimative dearnesse, and tendernesse, what-ever is done to them, is done to him∣self, Yee did it to them, therefore yee did it to mee. The Churches cause is his; Her rising is his glory, her reproach Matth. 25. is his dishonour: Arise, O Lord, plead thy own cause, re∣member how the foolish people reproach thee, forget not the Psal. 74. 22 2. voyce of thy enemies, when the Synagogues of the Church was pulled down, when the Church was wasted; And to themselves likewise, it is their Mother, in whose womb they have laine, whose breasts they have sucked, it is the Magazine wherein all their treasure is laid up, a vessel wherein all their wealth sinkes and swims, if the Church
be safe they are safe, and no thought of safety if it mis∣carry; salva Ecclesia salva omnia, as they were wont to say of Rome, Salva Roma, salva patria, salva omnia; so next un∣to God the Church is their all, and therefore the building up of Zion, the welfare of the Church of God, must needs be the answer to all their prayers. Give me leave to pre∣sent you with a twofold Use of this Lesson, and then I ha∣sten to that which I chiefly intended. First, this Lesson may serve to every of you for one of Ʋse 1. For examinati∣on, a notable discovery whose hearts are right with God. the greatest discoveries of your owne spirits that can be, whether in truth your hearts be right with God? thinke how you could answer this one question, Would the Lords building up of the Church, the setling and establishing of Religion in purity and peace, would that be to thy soule the answer of all thy prayers? art thou able to say it before God, Build but up Zion and I have enough? No man under heaven can say it but a Saint, and there is not a Saint upon earth but may say it, I know it lies in the bottome of his soule. But how shall we know it? Ile give you but one way of tryall; If the welfare of Zion, the building up of the Church be the summe of all thy prayers, then it is likewise the summe of all thy endevours, thy studies, thy time, thy wit, thy parts, thy interest, what ever may be called thine, are mainly laid out in promoving, in helping forward the welfare of Zion. This you shall finde cleare in the book of God, that as all the prayers of Gods people run upon Zions welfare, so now (I say) in the second place, all the endevours of all that prayed for Zion run to help it forward, Zion was the summe of all their prayers, and of all their joyes, and cares; no joy to them, like the joy they had in the prosperity of Zion, when the Lord at any time turned back the captivity of his people, they were like men that dreamed, their mouth was filled with laughter, and their Psal. 126. 1, 2.
tongue withjoy; and no sorrow like that which was caused by the affictions of Jacob, then they would even dye with 1 Sam. 4 13, 18 19. Neh. 1. 4. Dan 9 Psal. 13. 7. Esa. 22. 4. griefe, then they would name their children Ichabod, then they would mourne and not be comforted; and consequently all they had or could contribute was most readily affor∣ded. The Prophets and Apostles cold preach as well as pray, and all their Sermons were for Zion; Kings could plot, project, counsell, &c. as well as pray, all their plots and projects were to build up Zion; Souldiers could fight as well as pray, all their warres were the warres of God; Rich men could lay out money as well as pray, all their wealth was a Sacrum to God, a devoted thing to him, when the Church needed it, their penny went as willingly as their Pater noster: other learned men, if any man could write histories, if any Poet could make songs, all was laid our about the Church, about furthering the welfare of it; or if any were found among them who would professe love to it, and joine in prayer for it, yet mind their own affaires, build their owne houses, and let Gods house lye wast, they are branded for degenerate, hypocriticall, ignoble spirits, These were the Potters, and those who dwelt among hed∣ges, there they dwelt with the King for his work; a base peo∣ple, Haggai 1. 4. 1 Cllto. 4 23. who would tarry in Babylon to get wealth, and not go up with their brethren to build the house of God; and even thus may we judge of our selves. And therefore I say to you, Honourable Senators, that are Noble-men and Gentlemen engaged in this great work, the present service you are called to, if really you doe make the building of Zion to be the answer of your prayers, it is the great Par∣liament project this day, to settle the Church; I know when Nehemiahs work was to build the walls of Hierusa∣lem, one halfe of his servants were faine to carry the Arms Neh. 4. 16, 17. while the other built, and many times those that built
were faine to have a sword in one hand, as well as a trow∣oll in the other hand, but the swords and atmes were to defend the trowell, the work of the trowell was the great project: So will it be with you, you will with that Empe∣rour, Ezra 6. 7, 8. Ezra 6. 7, 8. provide that all things shall be provided speedily and care fully for this house of God, that govern∣ment be setled, Ministers provided, encouraged, maintai∣ned, the Sacraments and other Ordinances kept pure, and not be at quiet till the Cap-stone be sot upon the head of this building. I know Armies must be provided for, and Garrisons secured, yet they will be looked upon but as meaner; Religion, the establishing of it, will be the end, yea your Liberties will be but as meanes, Religion will be the Cap-stone, the Creame, and Oile, which swims on the top of all, if your hearts be but right with God: Therefore (I beseech you) consider in secret what answer you could make, whether you can call in your soules to witnesse, that after all your combustions, labours, & losses, if God would but establish England a beautifull habitati∣en, the people made holy, that the Lord might own them, and the three Nations joyned in a Covenant might be one stick in the hand of the Lord, in a holy, plous, religious Esa. 4. last. way, that the flocks might have every one their shepheard, and the glory of God the defence on every congregation; if for these things you sweat, and toile, and care, it is an evident token your hearts are right with God. And if any of you, the rest of the Assembly, do make account that the building of Zion is the answers of all your prayers, then if it have your prayer it will have your penny, you'll goe, ride, run, and travell, and nothing will stick with you, if this be your main suit: Indeed in the true notion and interpretation of prayer, it is nothing but the craving of Gods blessing upon our endevours in those
things which he hath appointed us to do, toward the ob∣taining of any mercy, we little better then mock him, if we onely pray, and set not our shoulder to the wheele. And were this carried close to mens consciences, how sad∣ly would it speak to many, who can abundantly satisfie themselves with joyning in a few dry prayers for the Church, and in the meane while they grudge the bestow∣ing of any other cost? they can find work enough to build their owne houses, and drive on their owne projects, let God (if he please) take care to build his house, and do his owne work himself; let all such hypocrites know, that God will indeed doe his work without them, and their formall prayers will returne, not with comfort into their bosomes, but with vengeance upon their heads. But much more sadly doth it speak against those, whose lives and subtle machinations retard this work, who to their utmost hinder the work of reformation, and would not have it goe on, for feare their lusts should be yoaked, and yet set out Prayers, and themselves seeme to joyne with them, that God would build up Zion; this is most abomina∣ble hypocrisie. I remember I have read of one of the Empe∣rours of Germany, that had taken the Pope prisoner, who commanded throughout the Empire solemne prayers to be made to God for the Popes deliverance out of prison, and he himself kept him in prison at the same time: so these wretched men say, O pray for the peace of Zion, pray that God would build up Zion, and themselves waste it, some by their wicked lives, others by their pernicious counsels, some by their lusts, some for feare the Word of God and Ordinances should yoke them; they pretend to build the wals of it, and yet endevour to undermine the foun∣dations of it: God in mercy grant that no such be found among our selves; but if in truth this be our great
care, and study, and endevour, to see the work goe for∣ward, that we count nothing of ours so well disposed of, as what is cast into this common treasury, it speaks the heart indeed to be right with God. Is it so, that when God builds up Zion he answers all his peoples prayers, even their private prayers, as well as Ʋse 2. Exhortarion to all to pro∣mote this work this great one? then (I beseech you) let this move every one of you to help forward this work, even out of holy self-love; you doe not know what a water'd Garden God may make your soule and family, when he builds up his Church. Certainly, if a man were sure not to get any good to his owne soule, yet if he might see the prosperity of Zion and Jerusalem, he should think it a very blessed sight; so thought he who pen'd the 106 Psalme, Remem∣ber Psal. 106. 4, 5. me, O Lord, with the favour thou bearest unto thy people, that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice with the gladnesse of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine inheri∣tance: So thought John the Baptist, though he was sure he should decrease when Christ did increase, yet to him it John 3. 29, 30. was the fulfilling of his joy, to see the people flow in un∣to Christ, when (as the Bridegrooms friend) he could heare the Bride-groomes voice rejoicing with his Bride: But, which is more, thy peace shall be concurrent with Zions peace, the Lord will satiate every afflicted soule, in the day when he refreshes Zion; let this therefore draw out all your hearts and bowels. Remember an argument God uses in the 29 of Jeremy, to them that were captives in Babylon, Seek the peace of the City whither I have caused you Jer. 29. 7. to be carried captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof ye shall have peace▪ What, must they pray for Babylons peace? for Nebuchadnezzars peace? that like a Dragon had swallowed them, and like a Lion had crushed their bones? Yes, pray for the peace of that kingdome, because
in the peace of that Kingdome you shall have peace. O how much more should every one help forward Zions peace, thy mothers peace, the Spouse of Christs peace, because thy soule shall never have so much grace, thou shalt ne∣ver be so holy, thy children never so blessed, all about thee never made so happy, as when the Lord God shall build up Zion; therefore O pray for the Peace of Zion, they Psal. 1. 32. 6, 7. shall all prosper who love her, as he said there, For my brethren and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee: So say thou, for my owne sake, for my children and compa∣nions sake, I will seek to doe thee good: especially let it pre∣vaile with you, Honourable and Beloved, you noble Pa∣triots and Parliament men, further it with all your might, Go up into the mountain, cut downe wood, build the house, that Haggai 1. 8. Mal. 3. 10. God may take pleasure in it, and prove God, whether upon your selves and families he poure not out a blessing with∣out measure: you little imagine what a blessing the Lord will give, when once this work is done; it may shatter and hazzard some things, carnall friends and secret enemies may fall off from you, but your labour will be rewarded abundantly. I humbly commend this to your wisdoms and faithfulnesse, God hath called you to this work, it would be your great glory to have it done in your hands, and it would not be for your honour to have it done by other hands, but done it will be, I assure you, the Church will be reformed; If you should altogether neglect it, sit still and hold your peace, or if you should make but a halfe worke of it, a patched reformation, help and deliverance will come Hester. 4. 14. from some other place: No stone great enough could be laid in the mouth of Christs sepulchre to keep him from rising, nor can any power prevent the building of Zion, when the appointed time is come, no not though all the Nati∣ons of the earth should be gathered together against it,
The remnant of Jacob shall bee as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grasse, that tarryeth not for man, nor wait∣eth Zach, 12. 3. Micah 58. for the Sons of men; the work is upon the wheeles, and there is one engine at work that will effect it, if all others faile, and that is the spirit of Prayer; which what efficacy it hath for the building of Zion, will appear in the last branch of my Text. And that is the matter wherein God will regard their 3 Consider this promise of Gods regarding the prayers of the destiture, in re∣spect of the thing wherein they shall be re∣garded. prayer, When the Lord builds up Zion, he will regard the prayer of the destitute, that is, hereby it shall ap∣pear, that he regards their prayer, because at their pray∣er he will doe it; it shall be done as the fruit and effect of his peoples prayers: which affords us this Doctrine. That the Lord will have the building of Zion, the refor∣ming, Last Doctr. The building up of Zion, the fruite of Gods peoples pray∣ers, proved, and repairing of the Church, to bee the fruit of his peoples prayers; this is the main scope, then God regar∣ded their Prayers, when he makes all the world know that at their request, and for their prayers sake, he did now arise in glory to build up Zion; the truth of this ex∣cellent lesson will appear, even to a demonstration, if you please but briefely to consider these three things: First, Gods Providences speak it so. Secondly, and so doe his Commands. And Thirdly, his Promises. First, His Providences speak it; there are two Provi∣dences 1 From Gods Providences. of God, use to appear at the building of Zion; which alone were sufficient to shew that Prayer is the great builder on our part, that it is indeed all that we can doe; God usually lets it come to such irrecovera∣ble ruine, that nothing we can do, besides prayer, is able to doe any thing, that it may appear that on our part prayer doth all, Nil nisi vota supersunt. When all other Anchors are come home, when all other Cables are brok, when all other friends have forsaken, and all props
snapped apeeces, that either prayer must doe it, or they have nothing; that is the time he ordinarily chuses to build up Zion, as himself said Deut. 32. When hee saw Deut. 32. 36. their strength was gone, there was none shut up or left, who might be a helper, then hee himself would judge his people and repent hm for his servants. So when they were as a woman with childe, near the time of delivery, the children come to the birth, and no strength to bring forth, not any in the earth to be a deliverer, then they cry unto the Lord, and he delivers them; this is so plen∣tifully Esa. 16, 17, 18. to be found in the Scripture, that I may forbear (especially in these straights of time) to produce particu∣lar instances. Secondly, The other providence is this: That when God builds up Zion, he then uses to powre out the Spirit of Prayer upon his people, more then at any other times, he then fils them with his Spirit, which inclines their hearts to be vehement, and earnest with him for that very thing. Zephyrus vere flat, this gale ne∣ver blows so sweetly as at such times, Jer. 29. Then you Jer. 29. 11. shall pray, and I will answer; In that day he powres out the Spirit of supplication and mourning upon all his peo∣ple; Then he makes all his people say with them, Esa. 62. 1. For Zions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Hie∣rusalems Zach, 12. Esa. 62. 1. sake I will not rest, untill the righteousnesse thereof goe forth as brightnesse, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth. And this is so sure a note of it, that Gods people durst make Propheticall conclusions out of the Spirit of Prayer powred out, as in this very Psalme, The Psal. 102. 13. time to deliver her, the set time is come; How know you that? Thy servants pity the dust of it, thy servants are weeping and mourning before thee; therefore the time of Zions deliverance is come; take all the times of building
the Church, and you shall see that great builders have been great praying men; Moses the great builder could fall down before God forty dayes and forty nights to∣gether; Deut. 9. 8. David, Solomon, Elias, Ezra, Nehemiah, all their prayers built more then their hands did; Luther a migh∣ty man in it, and the Ministers who joyned with him, in∣defatigable and potent in prayer; yea, the Spirit of Prayer uses to ebbe and flow in the Church, according as God purposes to retard, or hasten the work of the building of the Church; insomuch as the Spirit of God, drawing out the hearts of his people, to doe that which he would have done, doth Prophesie or foretell what God means to doe. There uses to be such a concord and harmony between Gods secret purposes and his peoples Prayers, their pray∣ers as such expressions of his sacred will, that they e∣ven seem to decree a thing by Prayer, and God esta∣blishes it in Heaven: the prayers of Gods people for the building of Zion, is as a John Baptist before Christ, on∣ly makes way for him, as the Morning star, which assures you the morning is at hand: Now these two Providen∣ces, Gods doing it at such a time, as they have nothing left but prayer, and this powring out the Spirit of pray∣er at that time, do sufficiently tell us, that God will have prayer to be the great Builder on our part. Secondly, His Commands speak it as plainly; this is a good rule in Divinity; Look whatsoever God Almigh∣ty 2 From his command. commands us chiefely to doe in reference or relation to such a work, that would he have us look upon as the great instrument on our part, to effect it: as when God commands us to beleeve, for the forgivenesse of sins, you may thence conclude that Faith is the great instrument of our Justification; So when God commands us to attend
upon the word, for our Spirituall life, for our comfort, for our edification, you may boldly conclude, that the ministery of the Word, is to be the great instrument of all these things; And therefore because God above all that we can doe, commands that his people should pray for the building of Zion, you may conclude that he will have prayer the great instrument on their part, for the building of it. And God hath abundantly injoyn∣ed his people that they call upon him for it; You shall call upon mee, Jeremiah 29. Then you shall call upon mee, and I will doe it at your call; and the 36 of Ezekiel; All Jer. 29. 11. this will I do, (saith God) but for all this, you shall pray to mee, I will bee sought at your hands for them; So again, Psal. 122. Oh pray for the peace of Hierusalem, and Jer. 51. 50. Let Hierusalem come into your minde, and Esa. 62. You Psal. 122. 6. Jer. 51. 50. that make mention of the Lord, give him no rest till hee esta∣blish, and till hee make Hierusalem a praise in the earth. And then▪ Thirdly, His Promises are innumerable, he hath said 3 From his promises. directly, when they do pray for it, he will not faile to perform it to them; then you shall call, and I will answer, and then, you shall seek mee, and I will bee found of you, saith the Lord, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, They shall pro∣sper. 1 King. 8. 46. If Gods people bee carryed away captive, &c. and in their bondage pray to him, hee will hear, hee will return them, His eyes shall bee open night and day, to their supplication, to hearken unto them in all that they call for. Insomuch that by vertue of these pro∣mises, which God hath made to prayer, for the building of Zion, wee may conclude a kinde of Omnipotency in prayer; because it can rule that hand that is Omnipo∣tent; Prayer can wrastle with God, and by his own Hose. 12. 4 with Gen. 32. 26. strength prevaile over him, and (with reverence wee
speak it) hee cannot stand before the power of it, hee could not waste his Church unlesse Moses would give Exo. 32. 10. 14 over praying, Let mee alone that I may destroy them, and when hee would not let him alone, hee yeelded to him. And therefore himself saith, if it concern my Sons and Daughters, command mee, ask mee any thing. The time would faile, and I might weary you with delight, to tell you what admirable effects prayer hath had in this kinde, what Armies it hath overthrown, what unexpect∣ed blessings it hath seasonably brought in, what dry bones it hath raised, what weak builders it hath helped, when they have been reforming the Church; how it hath stay∣ed the Sun, turned the Sea backward, chained Kings and their Nobles, with fetters of iron; There is nothing that the hand of God can doe, but when the spirit stirs his people to pray, in relation to the Church, all shall bee done; insomuch as it is noted of Luther, that when once in great danger, God powred upon him, and the rest of his company, a spirit to pray instantly and servently, when they had done praying, hee cryed out, Vicimus, wee have got the day; for hee knew that God was ingaged; so that if you lay these things together, the Providences of God ordering it so, that there uses to bee no other means left but prayer, and furnishing them with abundance of the spirit of prayer, and commanding them to use it, and ingaging himself to doe it, you may boldly conclude that the Lord will have prayer the great meanes of the Churches building. Now if you demand, Why, or wherefore is it that pray∣er should be able to doe so much? I answer, The truth is, it is God alone doth all, and he takes none in to help him, propter indigentiam, but pro∣pter mun-ficentiam, it is not for his need, but for his glory,
that he will have any helpers: Now besides all you heare before, concerning the prayers of the afflicted, that it is Gods Spirit prayes in them, and they are his Children, and Christ their Mediatour, and his promises are made to them, I say, besides all these, there are two other great Reasons, why God hath made over the building of the Church, unto Prayer; so far as the Creature shall have any thing to doe with it. One is, because this way onely is suitable with his glory, Reason 1. This way God provides, that himselfe alone shall have the glory. he cannot take any to be partners with him in any work, with preservation of his own Majesty and glory, save on∣ly humble supplicants, any partner but prayer would lessen him; But this well-becomes the Majesty and great∣nesse of God to take in such helpers. For first, it magnifies his free grace wonderfully, that he will please to doe it, when his partners in the work shall not be able to plead any thing they have contribu∣ted, but tears and supplications; And whereas some de∣mand whether freegrace would not be more magnifyed, if God did it without prayer? I Answer, Gods free grace is many wayes manifested, and magnifyed in his regarding of his peoples prayers, sometimes his free grace prevents our prayers, vouchsa∣fing us what we never prayed for or thought of, Hee doth above what wee are able to ask or think, sometimes in exceed∣ing our prayers, Hee asked life of thee, and thou gavest him Ephes. 3. 20. Psal. 21. 3. 1 Kin. 3. 12. 13. length of dayes for ever and ever, Solomon asked wisdom, and God gave him wisdom, riches, and honour, some∣times he as much magnifies his free grace in crossing our prayers. So he did Moses in his suite to goe over Jordan, and Pauls in being delivered from the messenger of satan, it being best for them both to be denyed. But oftentimes God manifests and magnifies his free grace more, by do∣ing
it at the prayers of his people, then if he did it with∣out them; because he doth thereby shew his free grace as well to their requests, as to their need; As if a friend should supply my need, it is a great favour, but if he will please to shew his love to my petition, as well as his compassion to my need, it is a double favour; So God shews a double free grace, when he is pleased to let such a great work be done at the request of poore contemptible sinners, that are fit for nothing but death and destructi∣on. With men (it may be) he who asks oft and long for such things as men can give, payes very dear for them, but it is not so betwixt God and man: the least favour which God can give (though granted upon long suite) must needs bee acknowledged a free favour to such ill-deserving creatures as we are, and to have his favours conveighed in a way of prayer, no wayes derogates from the freenesse of the mercy, especially because our pray∣ers are so weak and poore, and the mercies of God (espe∣cially this of building up of Zion) so great, that I can∣not say whether he be a more silly or proud foole, that will not confesse that God casts in the mercy gratis, though hee have cast in his prayers: yea, that the mercy is the grea∣ter, when it is done with any respect to his supplicati∣ons. And then besides, God provides for his glory herein for time come; for you shall finde, the Lord is wonder∣full jealous of using any instruments, who will be prone to come to share with him in his glory; he loves not to set such instruments a work, as will ingrave their own name into the work that shall be erected: and therefore when Gideon had an Army of two and thirty thousand, I will not use these, (saith God) they will be like enough to say, Our own hand hath saved us; He will have such in∣struments
of whom he will be sure they shall not offer to lay claime to his glory; Now brethren) God is wholly confident of Prayer, that it will never undermine him in his glory, he hath no jealousie of it; but what he doth to the weeping eye, and the mourning heart, at their hum∣ble request, when they have got the thing, all the glory which they will desire is, to come back again, and cry, Grace, Grace, all was grace, all was favour. Thus pray∣ing David, when he had dedicated one thousand three hundred cart load of silver and gold, toward the buil∣ding of Gods house, all the glory he took to himself, was but to admire Gods goodnesse in giving him a heart to offer it, and that God was pleased to accept it at his hands. who am I Lord, that I should have a heart to give any thing to thee? of thy own have I given thee; Thus will Prayer give God all the glory; But when mercies are not fetched in by prayer, ordinarily God hath little praise for them, either they are imputed to chance or industry, friends, or wit, or one creature or other, these rather wears the glory then God, but mercies wone by prayer, are worne with thankfulnesse, it alwayes layes the creature low, and exalts free grace highly: This is one reason why prayer is so effectuall in this great work. Ano∣ther is, Hereby hee doth greatly honour his people, hee puts a great deale of glory upon his Servants, when he Reason 2. For his servants glory. is pleased as at their request, to lay the foundation of a new Heaven, and a new Earth: This is a great honour to them, to be thus owned by him to be such powerfull advocates; When Job friends came to make their peace with God, and God would not accept them, untill Job prayed for them; Goe to my Servant Job, and he shall pray Job. 42. 8. for you, for him will I accept, else I shall deale with you ac∣cording
to your folly. Was not this a mighty honour put upon Job? When God told Abimelech that he and his Gen. 20▪ 7. house were but dead men, unlesse Abraham prayed for them, did he not thereby highly honour his servant? When Ahashuerosh takes Queen Esther to him, and bids her ask to the half of his Kingdome, and at her request grants her her life, and the lives of all her people, it was a great honour he put upon her; So God hereby magni∣fies his love to his: that they may have his eare, and be able to doe such great things with him. And besides, as it is a glory to them, so it makes the building up of Zion, infinitely more comfortable and use∣full And benefit. to them; any thing that a gracious heart hath ob∣tained by prayer, it prizes so much the more, we will know how wee part with what wee came hardly by; When Moses could tell the people, such a time I fell down before God for you, forty dayes and forty nights, and such a time I besought the Lord for you; hee knew the worth of those mercies, and tasted the comfort of them; When the Saints can say: this we begged at Gods hands, and this wee sought God for, it will infinitely ingage their spirits to value it, and walk worthy of it: And not onely so, but their sweetnesse and comfort in the use of it, will be the greater when they shall see the travaile of their soule, it is a great satisfaction to them; Bathsheba much rejoyced in Solomon, and Hannah in Samuel, and Sarah in Isaac, because they were the Sons of their vows, Prov. 31. 2. 1 Sam. 2. of their prayers, as well as of their womb. Many excellent Uses may be made of this Doctrine, I shall indevour to presse two or three which are most sea∣sonable, and then I have done.
Is the building up of Zion the fruit of Gods peoples Application. 1. Instruction, what under God hath been our greatest help, even the prayers of Gods people. prayers? Is prayer the great Master-builder on earth? then I beseech you learn to whom and what under God, we may most of all attribute the severall mercies and deli∣verances which we have received. It is true, God only hath been our help, every stone which hath been laid into this building is an Eben-Ezer; we may write upon every stone, Hitherto God hath helped us, but among all our friends on earth none to be compared with prayer. God hath poured out a Spirit of prayer upon his people, Old men, Maids, and Servants, as well as Ministers, and Gen∣tle-men, and Noble-men, all that feare God, have been knocking at heaven gates with all intensenesse of Spirit, with all earnestnesse, that God would save poor England, and build up his Church amongst us; and give me leave to say it, without derogating from any of your worth, un∣der God we have been most beholding to prayer: Mis∣take me not, I know there are worthy ones amongst us, that have done excellently; many of our Nobles have done worthily, many of this honourable Assembly have been excellent instruments, many of our Souldiers, Counsellors, Ministers, Citizens, and Commons, have willingly put all they have into this great Lottery, and when the Lord comes to reckon up his helpers, not one of them shall be forgotten, not a night they have wat∣ched, not a journey you have took, not a drop of blood they have spent, not an estate any of you have hazzarded, not any paines you have took, which the Lord God will forget, but he will remember all; and your selves in hea∣ven, and it may be your posterity on earth, shall know that God hath associated you with himself to help for∣ward this great work; but for all this, when all is done, let us say, Saul hath slaine his thousands, but David his ten thou∣sands;
All these have done worthily, but among all pray∣er hath done the greatest of all the rest: How often hath prayer fetched God into our Armies, and rallied them againe after they were routed, and given us the day after we had lost it? How often have Moses hands lift up upon the Mount, helped Joshua fighting in the valley, and co∣vered his head in the day of battell? How often hath prayer brought God amongst our Counsellours, when they have been at a losse, and directed them, and discovered some desperate plot, turned the counsels of Achitophel into foo∣lishnesse? How many in every place (who have served the Lord in this great work) hath prayer helped at a dead lift? Prayer hath hitherto saved the kingdome. I remember a proud boast of our enemies, when we had lost Bristoll and the Vies, they then sent abroad even into other kingdoms, a triumphant paper, wherein they concluded all was now fubdued to them, and among many other confident ex∣pressions there was one to this purpose, Nil restat superare Regem, &c. which might be construed two wayes, either thus, There remaines nothing for the King to conquer, but one∣ly the prayers of a few fanatick people; or thus, There is no∣thing left to conquer the King, but the prayers of a few fanatick people, every thing else was lost, all was now their owne: And indeed we were then in a very low condition, our strong holds taken, our Armies melted away, our hearts generally failing us for feare, multitudes flying out of the Kingdome, and many deserting the cause as desperate, making their peace at Oxford, nothing almost left us but preces & lachrymae; but blessed be God, prayer was not con∣quered, they have found it the hardest wall to climbe, the strongest Brigade to overthrow, it hath hitherto preserved us, it hath raised up unexpected helps, and brought many unhoped for successes and deliverances; let us therefore
under God let the Crowne upon the head of prayer, ye Nobles and Worthies, be ye all content to have it so, it will wrong none of you in your deserved praise, God and man will give you your due, Many of you have done wor∣thily, but prayer surpasses you all: and this is no new thing, prayer hath alwayes had the preheminence in the building of Zion, God hath reserved severall works for severall men and severall ages, but in all ages, and among all men, prayer hath been the chiefest instrument, especially in the building up of Zion. Let me in the next place shew you what esteem you should all have of prayer, and praying men, who have li∣berty Ʋse 2. In what high esteem prayer and praying men ought to be. to have the Lords eare, who have the Spirit of pray∣er powred downe upon them; while you live have them in high esteem: what David said of Goliahs sword, There is none to it, is true here, No helpe like the help of prayer. There are foure things wherein prayer is beyond all other Foure things wherein prayer is more excel∣lent then all other helps. helps whatsoever: The one is, It is the most absolute, the most universall medicine in the World, it is a Catholicon, it is good for every thing, it is offensive and defensive, it will do good in the Army, in 1. the Parliament house, in the Assembly, in the City, every It is a most universall re∣medy. 1 Kings 8 33, ad fir em. where: Solomon teacheth this 1 Kings 8. from the 33 to the latter end of it: whatsoever plague, whatsoever sick∣nesse, whatsoever other evill, of pestilence, war, famine, if they pray, help will come; it is of such a large extent, there is no enemy but it will conquer, no sore but it will cure, no misery but it will heale, no danger but it will pre∣vent or remove; the healing tongue of prayer is like the Tree of Life, which healeth every disease: Others may Pro. 15. 4. be good for something, but Prayer for every thing. Nay, secondly, it is not onely a help in any evill, but in 2. any extremity of evil: A man, a State, a Church, a Peo∣ple, It will help in any extremty.
can be in no such extremity, as to be past prayers help; if prayer takes them in hand there is helpe for them: if God poure out the Spirit of prayer, if Esay can lift up a Prayer, when the child is come to the birth, and no strength to bring forth, prayer will doe it. I have read of a stone, I think they call it Dioscordis, that if it be put into the mouth of one newly dead, it will revive him again: I know not how true that is, but certainly there is no extremity so great but prayer may help, if any help may be found in heaven or earth. And then thirdly, It will help at any distance: They talk of some kind of Weapon-salve, that will cure at a great distance, but 3. It helps at any distance. prayer will doe any thing at any distance. Look what is said of God in the 139 Psalme, If you goe into heaven, or Psal. 139. 8, 9. hell, or the utmost parts of the sea, or any of the corners of the earth, Gods hand reaches there, and elsewhere; he is a God afar off as well as a God at hand: the same may we say of praier, it wil passe through sea and land, relieve any distres∣sed garrison, strengthen any of our Armies. They say Ar∣chimedes could sit in his Study, and with his Engins defend Syracusa both by sea and land; this may a praying man do upon his knees in his Closet, he may bring helpe unto the uttermost parts of the world. And then It is speedy, it will help at an instant; it is like Elias his 4. cloud, which his man saw when he was at prayer for rain, It is the most speedy help. a little cloud like a hand, which presently spread over all the heavens: the Angel Gabriel could not flye more swift∣ly, then prayer will flye to help at any extremity, at any distance. O that these things were studied and beleeved, how highly should we then esteeme it! what encourage∣ment then should we give to prayer and praying men! how much would we then endevour to have our Armies
furnished with praying Ministers and Souldiers? all your Garrisons, Assemblies, Committees, well stocked and sto∣red with praying Saints? nothing would be too hard for them: you would, if you rightly consider this, be more carefull to keep them all in a posture of prayer, then in a posture of defence. Lastly, with which I shall end, because God will have prayer the great means of building up the Church, I most Ʋse 3. Exhortation to all who can pray, to ply the throne of grace earnestly beseech you that this means may never be wan∣ting in any of you, who have it to contribute: O, pray, pray, pray, do not with-draw from it, use it as the first, and last, and best remedy of all others, turne not your back up∣on it: O doe not as (men say) some great ones doe, make the dayes of prayer, and the times of prayer, the times they chuse for their owne pleasures, or businesse, and thereby plainly discover themselves to be of Machiavels religion, who counsels a Prince to set up a shew of Reli∣gion ad captandum populum, to awe their people, but them∣selves not to be under such rules: let us really attend it, and give God no rest night nor day, untill he establish our Jerusalem a praise in the earth; and this every one of you who are godly may doe: Every one hath not money to contribute, nor strength, nor wisdome, but every graci∣ous heart can pray; there is not a Maid, not an Appren∣tice, not a Servant, not the meanest in the Congregation, that hath the Spirit of God in them, but is this thing, you may come in to be Master-builders; you may do as much as any Parliament-man, or Assembly-man, or any what∣soever, if the Lord give you but a praying heart; therefore I beseech you follow this work. Two Motives I pro∣pound to quicken you, the one is, 1. We may justly say, our prayers hitherto have not had Motives there∣unto.
a miscarrying wombe, nor dry breasts, we may say with the Psalmist, Verily God hath heard us, he hath attended to 1. Prayer hath done much al∣ready. Psal. 66. 19. Jonah 2. 7. the voice of our prayers: and with Johan, When our soule fainted within us we remembred God, and our prayer came in unto him. Never had an unworthy people more experi∣ence of the power of prayer then we have had: The Ro∣mans once in a great distresse, took the weapons out of the Temple of their God, and with them got a glorious victo∣ry over their enemies; O how many victories have these Sanctuary-weapons obtained for us! he is a blind man who seeth not visible returnes of prayer; and God hath so ordered our affaires, that what the noble Generall said at the first victory we obtained at Edge-hill, That there was never any thing wherein there was lesse of man, and more of God: So in most of our businesses we may truely say, Man hath failed, and God hath helped, that is, prayer hath prevai∣led: you have a good handsell; a good encouragement to goe on. Secondly, And truely our extremities and difficulties are such, which yet remaine to be conquered, as can be overcome 2. Our need as great as ever. by nothing but prayer: All your Learning, Counsell, Strength, your Wisdome, your Treasure, and what ever else you have to contribute, are not like to deliver us, un∣lesse prayer bring God in for our helper. You know the Kingdome is brought low, and though we have a consi∣derable strength both in the Armie, the Citie, and the Navie, yet you know divided Kingdomes doe not stand, and God hath for our sins brought this great judgment up∣on us, that we are divided and subdivided into minutula frustula, into the least bits of all, in Church and State, every where there are heart-burnings, divisions among our selves, and a potent enemy very vigilant to take ad∣vantage,
and many Malignants every where, ready to blow up and encrease our distractions; many mens estates undone, and brought to poverty and beggery, and if these bloudy wars continue, ere long famine and desola∣tion will come upon us, beside all the guilt of our former and later provocations: these all are visible before your eyes, and all your helps are not like to doe it suddenly, unlesse God come in, unlesse prayers fetch him downe: Therefore pray (I beseech you Noble-men, Gentle-wo∣men, and all other) pray, pray, follow the Lord, and re∣member this is the Strong helper, which must save, or we perish; we have as much need of prayer as ever we had, therefore you who are the Lords remembrancers, and have his eare, ply the Throne of grace diligently, let not your heart grow sluggish, remember what the Prophet said unto the King, who smote with the arrows three times, and then stayed, Thou shouldest have smitten five or 2 King. 13. 19 sixe times, and then thou shouldest utterly have smitten Syria, till thou hadst consumed it: Say thou so to thy owne heart, Thou shouldst in these dayes have prayed 10000 times more then thou hast done, go on now with it, humbly spread our sad condition before him, plead with him dai∣ly, thou canst not want arguments; tell him it is his owne cause, we are engaged by him, and for him; tell him how long, and how much his people have suffered under their oppressors, and how violently they rise up still to spoile all; that there are abundance of his Saints engaged in this work, and they will never give him rest, till he have set up Jerusalem to be a praise upon the whole earth: and when the unworthinesse of the Kingdome comes in, and ob∣jects against us, that we are a sinfull wretched Kingdome, fit to be destroyed, you may still find answers and argu∣ments
enow in Gods grace and favour: He hath begun to build, and surely he will not be like the foolish builder, that begun and then gave over; he himselfe blames them who goe about a work and not goe through with it; tell him, we will give him all the glory of it, and serve him better if he will give us grace; that if our enemies pre∣vaile it will be worse with his people then ever, his name will be more dishonoured then ever. Thus follow him with a mourning heart, & a melting eye, & do it constant∣ly, doe it daily; I confesse these monethly Fasts are grown to a most wretched formality in many places, the Lord of heaven teach us how we may be more quickned in this great work of prayer; and let every one who hath any in∣terest in heaven, remember Bradfords usuall Motto and ex∣hortation, Pray, pray, pray. But before I dismisse you, I must put in this caution; A caution to be remembred, not every man, not every prayer will doe it. You must not thinke every man, and every prayer will be thus effectuall; Alas, no: here are (it may be) three or foure thousand people at Church, God onely knowes whether every fourth man hath a praying Spirit; It is 1. Not every Man. not every man who will pretend to pray, whom God will accept: When they fast (saith God of the wicked Is∣raelites, Jeremy chap. 4.) I will not heare their cry; when Jer. 14. 12. they offer an oblation I will not accept them, but I will con∣sume them: Doe not (I beseech you) thinke that the prayers of Blasphemers, and Drunkards, and Whore∣masters, and Scorners of God and Religion, of those that pretend to be for him and are against him, doe not (I say) imagine that God will regard such as these are, though they cry, Arise and save us; I will not say to these men, Pray not, but I will say to them as Pe∣ter did to Simon Magus, Pray, if it may be possible, that
the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee, for thou art in the gall of bitternesse; but be you assured that these mens prayers will not come into the shot of those that shall build Gods Church, or deliver us; No, no, the Phi∣losopher could teach thus much, who when they were at Sea in a Tempest, and all went to their prayers, and among the rest a profligate wicked wretch amongst them went to his prayers, the Philosopher called to him, Hold thy peace, lest the Gods heare thee, and drown us all for thy sake. He who would be one of this num∣ber whose prayers shall come before God, must be acquainted with God; Acquaint thy selfe with God, be at peace with him, then thou shalt make thy prayer to Job. 22. 21, 27. him, and he shall heare thee, but these men have no ac∣quaintance with him, he will say to them as the evill Spirit said to the sonnes of Sceva, Paul I know, but who are ye? so the Lord will say, Prayer I know, but what are ye? Doe you whore, and drinke, and sweare, and lye, and abuse my Name and Ordinances, and think you of praying? No, no (beloved) these are not the people, beleeve it they are not, they are the prayers of his Saints, and of his Saints onely, which he regards. 2. Not every Prayer. And then secondly, as it is not every man, so it is not every prayer will doe it; I know it may be a weak prayer, a prayer where there may be very weak utterance, weak gifts, and weak judgement and memory, yet it may be ac∣cepted, God knowes how to interpret the meaning of his owne Spirit in them; but they must not be dead prayers, livelesse, formall, slight, perfunctory, customary prayers, not the saying over of prayer, as if a Lesson were onely read out of a book, without spirit, understanding, devoti∣on; but prayer must be prayer, it must be the pouring out
the soule, it must be fervent prayer, it must be humble Psal. 102. Title Jam. 5. 6. 1 Tim. 2. 8. Heb. 10. 22. Psal. 66. 19. Ezek. 14, 4. prayer, it must be from a pure heart, and faith unfained, it must be prayer offered up in the name of Christ, in the strength of the Covenant of grace; these things must at least be aimed at and endevoured in prevailing prayers. These things deserve to be prosecuted more fully, but I feare I have already transgressed upon your patience by the length of my Sermon, I commend it to your thoughts, and let us by prayer commend it and our selves to God, that we may joyne with them, and be num∣bred among them whose prayers he will heare for the building up of Zion. FINIS.
