N1 E1023_7 99872131 168861
An Epistle NARRATIVE OF THE Barbarous Assault and illegall ARREST of Freder. Turvill, Esquire: By Sixteen Bailiffs, with the death of one of their Followers. To a Gentleman in the Country from a Friend of both newly arrived from be∣yond Sea, that accidentally was an eye-wit∣nesse of all Passages. Quod genus hoc hominum? Quaeve hunc tam barbara morem Permittit Patria? Virg. lib. 1. Aened. London, Printed, 1660.
An Epistle Narrative of the Bar∣barous Assault and Illegal Arrest of Frederick Tur∣vill, Esq by Sixteen Bailiffs, with the death of one of their followers. Deare N. AFter so long absence from thee, and what I was willinglier to part with, in the unstable state I left it, my Country; thou mayest perhaps rather look for an account of my travails into Forreign Nations; stuff'd with some of Mandivels lyes, then a homely Narra∣tive of any Domestick accident. But a sad mischance ro∣lating to a dear friend of ours commands my Pen, and forces me to assure thee, I have not any where abroad a∣mongst people civilized by Law, or Religion, been an eye-witnesse of an action more Barbarous, yet authorised and licensed by a pretended legality, then what the second day of my residence in London, presented to my veiw. It made me, I confesse, sadly phansie, that where Gentlemen of Noble extraction were so much abused by base people, under the Cloak of law; all those Regicides were not ex∣tinct that pretended by law to cut off the head of all laws their King. It was on the 17th. of this current, that from a Balcone of my lodging in Covent garden, I beheld the Plazzos com∣paring them (ut parva magnis) to that of St Mark at Venice, or the Portici di Bologna, when at a distance, I took particu∣lar notice of two Gentlemen walking together, whom by. the comeliness of their deportment, and studied negli∣gence of a manly gate, I concluded, improved travailers
I was, I must need say, pleasing my self with this reflection, that as there is no Munkey more ridiculous in my eyes, then an English Monsier, who crossed the Seas for fashion more then designe, and made it his some moneths study to wag his head and heels, as lightly as his Feathers, or swear in an affected passion à Je reniege dieu! So our Nation may, in this regard, thank and excuse its late mis∣fortunes, that the unconstant changes of Government, and constant persecution of the loyall party hath forced so many gallant spirits to quit their Native home, who by wise reflection on the Manners, Natures, Policies, and Go∣vernments, of other States and Kingdomes, have impro∣ved themselves to such a height of Wisdome and Gallan∣try, hat we need not yeeld to any Nation in Europe, as before in Military, so now in Politick and Civill affairs. These were my thoughts relating to the two Gentlemen, who had but one Footman attending on them, when be∣hold! on a suddain they were surrounded by a cluster of rude but sturd, fellows; with swords drawn, hangers and o∣ther weapons, as if they intended a murder. One of them making at the foremost of the Gentlemen) whom I could not yet discern to be our dear and noble friend. Mr. Frede∣rick Turvill) was by him several times bid to stand off upon his perill; but he forcing in, gave not our friend leave to draw his sword, though he had his hand on it, who ha∣ving a long leaguer Cloak thrown round his left shoulder, could not presently draw; wherefore quitting his sword, he whipt out a Dagger, presented the point, not offering to stab, or thrust at him, but rather retiring some paces backward towards the wall in the posture of a Legall de∣fence; but the Fellow (whose name was Gerard) pressing still on, and endeavouring to close, ran himself upon the Dagger, which passed into his breast, and he forth∣with fell to the ground Another of the Crew in the very instant caught hold of Mr. Turvills right hand, to avoid whose hold, he changed his Dagger to the left, and with it struck him that held him: Now three more of the company made at the defendent with their hangers,
and after some blows closed with him, but could not wrest from him the Priniard, with which, though held, he put off two passes made a his body which ran through the sleeve of his shit and doublet. Gerard in this inte∣rim, still alive to reenge, arose again, and making at him, cryed out: Thou Rogue, God damn me, thou hast kill'd me! but by a push was turn'd again upon his back. It was worthily observable, that our noble friend being as you know, but of a moderate size, and very neatly tim∣bred, yet, as unconcern'd in danger, in the vehemency of his Passion, uniting all his spirits, could not be worst∣ed by all these burly, strong and boystrous fellows; two of whom I could plainly discern, he threw with apparent ease to the ground, whilest others hung upon his arms and shoulders. There it was to be seen, how much a clear and neat strength born on by an active resolution, and an undaunted courage, can prevail against the boy∣strous fury of a lubberly rout, whose souls are duller and heavier then their louty bodies, and would leave a doubt of their final Resurrection, were there not a seve∣rer Judge to condem them to hell, then they find here to condemn their bodies to a Gallows. My quill is too slow to accompany the active performances of our noble friend, who being now overpowr'd more by their weight then their motions and almost pressed to the ground, overturn'd two of them in a dark cellar, and fell with them, 'tis true; but you may easily imagine the nobler element would be still uppermost: there, I suppose he lost his weapon, who would have caught at lightning, to dart in their faces, and himself in the dark, but not his courage. And here I must not omit to tell how bravely the other Gentleman behaved himself all this while, who with his Sword, kept the other twelve in play, being on∣ly seconded by Mr. Turvills man, who unadvisedly not keeping close to him, was disarmed, which the gallant person perceiving, and not seeing his friend any more, re∣tiring a step or two, pluckt out a Pistol, at which the Baylisss drew back, and gave him opportunity to make
an honourable retreat. Thus was noble Turvill arrested and carried over to the Rose Tavern, before either I or any other Gentlemen knew him, much less came in to rescue him, all this being done in less time then you can read it. He was there confined to a Chamber, all the Baylisss standing about him with drawn swords, six of them be∣ing wounded, wheere he saw Gerard sprauling on the ground, lye Cursing and Swearing, and charging his fel∣lows to impute his death to our Friend, till he spewed out his revengefull soul no doubt to hell, whether it was car∣ried by a bloody Oath, and imprecation; He left these villaines heires of his revenge, for they proved so fatih∣full executers to his damnable Will, that they still thirst after his blood, although it be certainly proved, they had no Warrant at that time against Mr. Turvill, and credibly reported, that they missing their aym in executing ano∣ther Arrest, resolved amongst themselves to serve it on the first Gentleman they met, and by consequence, gave oc∣casion to their followers death, who was no Bailiff himself; yet they added Robbery to their Roguery, and pickt Mr: Turvills pockets under pretence of searching for Pistols. What horrid abuse is this of the Law, that a nest of rogues let flye where and at whom they will, should attempt not onely an Arrest without Warrant a robbery instead of an arrest, but venture at the life of a Person of quality, whose life ought to be as dear to his Country, as it concerns the Nation, that all such rascalls should be hanged. Quod ge∣nus hoc hominum? aut quae tam barbara morem Permittit Patria? Tis grown now to that height of barbarousnes, that nei∣ther Streets, nor Houses, nor Courts of Justice, scarce Churches themselves are free from these Vermin, and but one day in the week exempt from their attempts: Were it not safer for most of our Gallants in Town, that have courage to enter at a breach in the face of an enemie and the mouth of a Cannon, to travaile amongst Beares and Wolves, where their defence were justifiable and honour∣able, then to walk our streets (where every man ought to have publique freedome) under the sight of these Monsters
that watch at every doore, and start out of every hole, with forged right to warrant their mischief? may they not at every turn cry out, Per insidias iter est, formas{que} jera∣rum? After these legall Thieves had rob'd Mr. Turvill, not thinking themselves defensible in their basenesse, nor daring to trust their own cowardliness any more in the o∣pen streets amongst Gentlemen and honest people, that had all their mouths full of Mr. Turvills defence, and praise of his civility, gallantry, valour, and worth. They call'd the Constable to their assistance, brought forth our friend, to conduct him to Justice Blake; multitudes they were, and I cannot devise how it came to pass, that, we could not possibly get together above two or three Gentle∣men in all that time to rescue him, though all the people generally spoke high his praise. Two there were, whose gallantry shall alwayes be by me admired, for they per∣formed against the multitude, as much as could be done by men, till in dispute my friends man, made his escape, after whom they crying; stop the murderer! We suppo∣sing our Friend had been disingaged, made good and safe our own retreat. But soon after to our excessive grief, I un∣derstood, he was brought before Justice Blake, from whom I could no wayes expect any civility for a Gentleman, though his wife be a Gentlewoman of good extraction, and much civility. He is said to be of principles destru∣ctive to all Titles of Honour, and one who was more like to favour his equals, then give respect to his betters. Dearest N. O may those happy and glorious dayes hasten upon us with golden wings, which we hope for by the means of this free ensuing Parliament, wherein a Crown may be restored to majesty, Titles to Nobility, Ho∣nour to Worth and Gallantry, Subjection, Quietness, re∣spect and loyall Obedience be found in Subjects, and a
perfect Reformation of all Abuses, Cheates, Trepans ta∣ken from the Law, and insolence from the under rout of People. Let us in the interim comfort our selves with these loyall hopes, and let me live no longer, if I live to see any one hair of noble Turvills head to perish for this Gallant, Noble and Just Defence of his worthy Person. Thine N.
