P1710A E329_2 99858981 111042
Master Peters MESSUAGE FROM Sir Thomas Fairfax, Delivered in both Houses of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled: With the whole state of the West, and all the particulars about the dis∣banding of the Princes and Sir Ralph Hoptons Army. Also the totall routing of Sir Jacob Ashley himselfe, and 1500. taken Prisoners, their Carriages and Ammunition also taken by Colonell Morgan and Sir William Brereton. Commanded to be printed at the desire of divers Members of Parliament, and published according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, 22 March, 1645.
Master Peters Messuage from Sir Thomas Fairfax. Master Speaker; AFter the Lord had appeared for our Army at Torrington, and had written his name in such visible characters before the faces of many, counsell was taken to pursue the Ene∣my into Cornwall, and the rather because the scattering of that body of Horse would after an especiall manner pro∣mote our future designes, not onely in order to Exce∣ter, but also to our Easterne imployment, I shall there∣fore give you an accompt, first of the steps we made into Cornwall; secondly, of the state of the Country; thirdly, the condition of the Enemy; fourthly of our owne Army. Upon our advance, the Generall gave me a Com∣mission to apply my self to all means and expedients I could think of, for the stopping of the East parts of Cornwall from rising and joyning with the Enemies Horse, Foot being that which the Enemy (onely) wanted, and those they brought to Torrington blown into severall parts, and scattered, with a purpose not to appeare againe. Accordingly I rid to Plymouth, (though not without much difficulty) riding forty miles very neer the Enemies Guards; I dealt at Ply∣mouth
with the Governour and the Committee there, who offered me all their furtherances, had Passes of them for any I should imploy into Cornwall, and was much engaged to Mr. Raw, of that place, (a discreete able man, and industrious) who undertooke to agitate my desines with the Enemy, and deserves exceeding well for his faithfulnesse and wisdome therein. When I was thus thoughtfull how to ingage the Cornish Foot from rising in the East, (whose exam∣ple would have had a present influence on all the County) it pleased the Lord to send in one out of Cornwall, of very good quality, (and much interes∣sed) who came disguized into Plymouth, having the same designe with my self, for strong affections to the Parliament and their Cause, assuring me, that 3000. men stood ready to joine with the Enemies Horse, yet that there were good hopes, that the leaders being rightly informed, might not onely prevent it, but conditionally close with us. Their chiefes were old Master Colliton, Colonell Edgcomb of Mount Edgcomb, Master Thomas Lowre, and Lieutenant Colonell Scawen. To these I applyed my self (by writing) and decla∣red what I had in Commission from the Generall, and sent it by the party by me imployed, who returned again, and gave me hopes, and yet professed much jea∣lousie on their part for the true performance on what I promised; and therefore to shorten my worke I offered my selfe an Hostage to them, till the Gene∣rall should make good what I promised. By the next return they invited me into Cornwall, where foure of them should be ready, in the behalfe of themselves and others, to treate with me, and as
they saw cause, to accompany me to the Generall. I adventured over to them, and there found Master Corriton, M. Thomas Lowre, M. Glanvill, the eldest Son of Serjeant Glanvill, and Major Trevise; who being per∣swaded of the truth of what I had engaged my self for, were perswaded to go to the Generall with me, and truly I found them very ingenuous, who had long be∣fore distasted the Court way, and abhorred the practises of many of the Kings party. By this time the Generall had entred Cornwall, and (at Stratton) our men beate up a Guard of the Ene∣mies, and took 300. Horse: these Cornish Gentlemen, finding my words made good unto them, were much convinced and affected, receiving from the Generall Protections for themselves and that side of the Country against the violence of our Souldiers, as also Letters of recommendation to the Parliament, for this their service, which tooke such effect, that not onely these 3000. men, ready for their march, retired to their hou∣ses, but also the whole County where we came, either came in to us, or sate still; and truly these Easterne Gentlemen are very considerable, and I am perswaded the old Master Coriton, (who suffered for Magna Charta, with Sir John Elliot,) will returne to his interest againe, with many more of them. Upon our advance the Enemy retreated, the Gene∣rall lay at Bodman to refresh our men, and to undeceive the County, if by any means we might, which the Lord himself was pleased to help us in, even to wonder, by an Irish Frigot, coming into Padstow, and bringing Letters to Hopton and others, from the Earl of Glamor∣gan, that esuited Papist, assuring them of ten thousand Irish ready for England.
These Letters the Generall commanded me to read, at a great meeting of the Country men, in a field neere Bodman, which had such successe, that the arguments I used unto them, and what I read was received with divers acclamations. Upon this day fortnight a strong Party of ours was sent out to fall upon their maine Guard, under the command of that honest and worthy Gentleman Col. Rich, who accordingly met with one thousand of the Enemies Horse, routed them, and put them to flight, and tooke two hundred Horses, and one hundred Pri∣soners, amongst whom Master Generall Perts, who is since dead of his wounds, in whose pocket a copy of a Letter to the Princes Counsell about him, was found to this purpose. That the Kings condition is so low is not our fault▪ we are not able to breake through the Enemy, nor strong enough to fight them; therefore are resolved to compound for our selves, and leave you to doe what you please. Sir, it came from the Military part. Divers small skirmishes we had with them, Lieute∣nant Generall Cromwell himselfe, with some of his horses are setting out Parties and Guards, and attending their motions, adventured himselfe according to his wonted manner; and now the Enemies head Quarter being at Truro, and their chiefe strength not above five or sixe miles from us, the Generall resolving to fight them, or drive them to the Sea, sent them such Pro∣positions with a Summons, as he did conceive would take off much of their Forces, and bring them all to a sudden agreement; and upon the sending of these, ad∣vanced still forward, and in our advance they met us with a desire of a Treaty, which accordingly was yeel∣ded
unto, and held sixe daies, there being matters not a few to be considered of, as appears by the Articles. Upon the last Lords Day, upon a Downe a mile from Truro, after I had Preached to our men, and di∣vers of the Enemies, they began to deliver up their Armes and Horses. The first Regiment was a French Regiment, under the command of Mounsier Laplane on Sunday last, yet I must much commend the civility of our Souldiers herein, that they let them passe without mocking, or jeering, or offering any affronts to them. On Munday there were three Brigades more disban∣ded, and on Tuesday the rest according to the Articles; If it shall be objected, That the Generall dealt too gent∣ly with the County, or the Souldiery part there, I answer. 1 That the constitution of both the one and the other required it, the Souldiers being a strong Party, and in the Enemies Country. 2 The people needed it, and the same weapon pro∣ved their cure that made their wound, Hoptons mode∣ration, civility that first deceived them, and the Gene∣rals now joyned with faithfulnesse tooke the scales from their eyes. 3 That we have all this year found it our advantage; 4 Meeknesse, sweetnesse and courage have been alwaies stirring in our Generall for digniority; we know that Caesar dando, sublenando, ignoscendo gloriam adeptus est, but of the Generall we may say by the like meanes, Patriam bene adeptus est. 5 We beleeve, that the Conduct of this Army de∣light not to drinke blood.
6 The Parliaments aimes are not destructive, but reductive. 7 We look upon it as the Spirit of Christ in these latter times, and of the New Testament, to save, and not to ruine; and the Heathen could say: Magnanimo satis est praedam prostrasse leoni, Pugna suum finem, cum jacet hostis habet. And this I am bold to adde, That such is the Pro∣vidence of God, that if we had fought and beaten them, we should not have scattered them as now they are; God hath restrained from the Enemies themselves this acknowledgement, that their Gods is not like ours; their men not like ours, their Actions not like ours: the very words of one of their chiefe Commanders were these: That their men counselled with drinke in their heads, ours with wit in their heads; our men silent∣ly prosecuted and effected their worke, their men va∣poured and did nothing: we had a Conduct and Coun∣sell, they acted without both; yea, that this Army was not to be fought against. And all the Enemy are engaged never to take up Armes against the Parliament, except some very few onely. For the Country, the Gentry came almost all in unto us, the Cornish Souldiers brought us and laid downe their Armes at the Generalls foot, many of them professing they would but goe home and attend him. Some of the Arguments I used in speaking and preaching to them in their publike Assemblies were;
First, for the Parliament, they did as a Iustice of Peace, sent out a Counstable to apprehended such as had broake the civill Peace: The Cunstable beaten back from his office, hath more helpe sent him, Towne and Cuntry who are re-resolved to pursue his disturbers, our taking up of Armes was not against Cornish men, nor any perticular men, nor any perticular County, but against such as disturbed both them and us, which if they deliver them to us; we had the end of our travells. Secondly▪ I used an Argument of utily, wishing them to consider how they could subject without trade which are from the City of London, and other parts of the King∣dome. Thirdly, What havock the Irish and French might make upon them if they landed; of which Gorings desperadoes have given them a taste. Fourthly, How comfortably, and safe they might live un∣der the Parliament, who are loath to loose such a Tribe as they were. Fifthly, I answered a common murmuring amongst them, that their Country was never conquered. They were tould, that our Army was never conquered neither, and yet we were willing to wrestle with them in their one way, by embracing, and huging of them, they should conquer us, and we would conquer them, we would win the day, and they should gaine the field, or their fields: If they lost a ser∣vice Bke they shuld have a better worship: Sixthly, was from experience, the were wished to tract all the Parliaments proceedings, and the Armies in other Counties; whether they had had better Ministers, and better Magistrates placed then before. Seventhly, was taken from the practise of the enemie, and this quaerie was put to them, what good the enemy had
done for them; whether their Examples, and Practises, Councels and indeavours, had led hem to more holinesse, justnesse, and ex∣actnesse. Many of them confessed, they were received by ill reports brought of the Parliament, and the crueltyes of this Army, by Hoptons flateries, and the Courtiers, and by the Kings, and Princes Personall apperance amongst them: and by their promises to them honouring of them, as more perticular appears, by this Dclara∣tion of the Kings, hanged up in every Church in the Country. CHARLES R. WEE are so highly sensible of the extraordinary merit of Our County of Cornwall, of the zeale for the Defence of Our Person and the just Rights of Our Crown, (in a time when We could contribute so little to Our owne Defence, or to their Assistance in a time when not onely no Reward appeared, but great and probable dangers were threatned to Obedience and Loyalty;) of their great and eminent Courage and Patience in their indefatigable Prosecution of their great Work against so potent an Enemy, block't with so strong, rich, and populous Cities, and so plentifully furnished and supplyed with Men, Arms, Money, Ammuni∣tion and Provision of all kinds; And of the wonderfull successe with which it hath pleased Almighty God (though with the losse of some most eminent Persons, who shall never be forgotten by Ʋs) to reward their Loyalty and Patience by many strange Victories over their and Our Enemies, in despight of all humane Probability, and all imaginable disadvantages; That as Wee cannot be forgetfull of so great deserts, so We cannot but desire to publish to all the World, and perpetuate to all Time the Memory of these their merits, and of Our acceptance of the same. And to that end Wee doe hereby render Our Royall thankes to that Our County, in the most publike and most lasting manner We can devise, commanding Copies hereof to be Printed and publi∣shed, and one of them to be read in every Church and Chappell therein, and to be kept for ever as a Record in the same, That as long as the History of these Times, and of this Nation shall continue, the memory of how much that County hath merited from Ʋs and Our Crowne, may be derived with it to Posterity. Given at Our Campe at Sudeley Castle the Tenth of September, 1643.
And lastly, their lude and ungodly Ministers had councel∣led them, and exampled them to the greatest part of their mi∣sery, I make no doubt, they may prove a People of Gods praise, may they but enjoy a faithfull Magistracie and Mini∣stry; for which, my most earnest and humble request is to this Honourable House: me thinkes they cry at every Gate, bread bread, for the Lords sake. I wish there were some Evangelicall Ministers in each County of the Kingdom, that poor People might know there is a God; that they might fear him, and love him, and be ac∣quainted with his Son, who is theirs and our life. The County is all cleerly reduced, except Pendennis, Helford, and the Mount; which the very Countrey (I hope) will bee willing to reduce themselves, Feymouth Harbour is free to us; we have taken St. Mawes Castle, with Twelve peices of Ord∣nance in it, and one called the Roaring-Meg, a choice peice of brasse: the Generall is sending Eastward some of his forces, towards Barnstable and Exeter, and intends (having blockt up Pendennis) to return himself. There came two out of Exeter to us, who caried in Propo∣sitions with them; and of Barnstable we hope to give a good account shortly. At Foy upon Munday last, we took a ship called the Greene Knight, having 16 peices of Ordnance, and richly laden, they being ignorant that the Harbour was ours. Your Affaires have a good complexion upon them at pre∣sent; and doubtlesse, whilest you imploy good men▪ they will be good for you. I have observed in the whole Tract of this Western Work, divers promises fulfilled; As that the Lord would send an Hornet amongst them: that is, a Spirit of fear, and that they shall fly when none pursues them: wee could seldome make them stand any where; they never offered to beat up a Guard
of ours at any time, though they had Four Thousand ighting Horse. I had been tould in their quarters where I lay, as 3. times my lot was to lie in Hoptons own quarters in bed, where they tould me upon everie Alarme, the shkings of Belshazer was up on them, one passage aboue the rest was this, 40. of them lie∣ing in an house at Saint Auste, two Coults that wre feeding upon a Common▪ in a could night, came for shelter to the side of the house. hey took an Alarme within, charged the Coults to stand; but they not understand the Language, kept on their way, put them to such a fight, that they tum∣bled one upon the back of another to get away. Sometimes I thought of that promise in the first Psalme, that they shall be scattered as Chaffe before the winde, they are gone into severall Countries. Sometimes, the Lord saith he will bring his wheele upon them, and break them, we saw their power broken, their Councells broken, their intrests broken, their expectations broken, who would have broke the verie Axeltree of the State. Sometimes I thought of the Prophesy; when the Lord saith he would powre contempt upon Princes▪ especiallie when I read writings from te Prince, thus, dated at our Court at Sillie: And though he be unwilling to play with words, ye I could wish that that place, and name might ever be the portion of those that councell Princes to their own Ruin. Jncedit inscilam cupiens vitare quietem. Manie of such like punishes have been fulfilled in our fight.
And now I must be thankfull to those Gentlemen of this House, that have beene carefull for Moneyes▪ Cloathes, and Ammunition for the Army, being the Sinewes of Our Worke, and yet must complaine; that after many Letters written from place to place, we have not had one ship from the Parliament upon the Coast, to joine with us in any De∣signe, or to meet the Enemie vvhen they vvent avvay vvith their Welsh: onely Captain Plunkets Ship lying at Plim∣mouth was willing to do their utmost, and Sir George Ascugh, that commands the expedition, brought us the last money to Foy, and is earnestlie seeking out vvhich way to serve us to the uttermost. I would say something for my selfe, and yet so prove an Atmbe, as not worth a minute of your time; though you have been pleased to bear with my rudenesse. Since my last being in the City, I have beene by some re∣presented as one scandalizing of others; which as it hath no truth in it: so I blesse God, that there is a Parliament to ap∣peale unto, and I know not the cause hereof, but from my forwardnesse and faithfulnesse to the Work in hand. This I am bold to say, Though it should be accompted a Crime to serve the Parliament, and I might be sory for the Despi∣ers, wich it shall never make me weary of my Duty, nor my Ma∣sters. If in my death the State might be a gainer, I have some∣times thought I might be willing to come to that trial, if my life may serve you, you may command it, for I must make the same profession that he did to Caesar, that your former fa∣vours have done me that injurie, that I must live, and die ungratefull.
These are my last Requests, and the very sithings of my soule, that First, since the Spirit of God hath done all your Workes for you, that Spirit may never be sadded by you, that glads yours: It hath been an old Jesuiticall practise, to beat Reli∣gion with Religions: I say no more. Secondly, that you may live to see that Top stone laid; to which you may all cry grace, grace. Thirdly; And lastly, That when your soules shall sit upon your trembling lips, and take care of your bodies, your ac∣compts may be as comfortable, as your pains have beene in defatigable, and more. So prayes HUGH PETERS. We hear for certain, that Greenvill, Culpepper, Sir Ni∣cholas Crisp, and divers others are in France, Hopton and Wentworth, and divers others were going from Penthancts thither on Tuesday last: the French and others have leave to take shipping at Plymouth▪ 20 or 30 are allowed to go t the King: divers Irish and Welsh are gone into Pendennis, where there are many distractions, and Sir Henry Killegrew most vilde and violent, who upon Sunday last burnt the ancient house of that name, called Arwennock, now belonging to Sir Peter Killegrew. The Prince remains still in Scillie, ex∣pecting what end his Father will make with the Parliament. The same day a Letter was sent to Mr. Peters as followeth▪ Mr. Peters, THE House of Commons have comman∣ded me to give you notice, that they have
appointed a Day of Thansgiving (for these blessings upon our Armies) upon Thursday come Sennight, and that they have desired your selfe, and Mr. Carel to Preach upon that Day at Christ-Church. Your affectionate Friend, OL. St. JOHN, Satterday the 21. of March 1645. Mr. Peters being to preach at Brides, Sunday the 22. of March, a paper was delivered to him of News, which Major Temple (who was in the fight) brought, of the routing of Sir Jacob Ashley: of which here followeth a Copie. This morning, March 21. Col. Morgan his Forces, with the Forces of Sir William Brereton (who were joined the night before) fell upon Sir Jacob Ashley and all his Forces intended for Oxford, to joine with the King, and at Stow in the Oulds (in Gloucester-shire, after a sore conflict on both sides) Sir Jacob was totally routed; himfelf and 1500. taken prisoners, and their Cariages: out word was, God be our guide, the word of the Enemies was, Patrick and George. Stow, March 21. 1645. FJNJS.
