P3774A R42541 36282275 150173
A Proposition for an ample Equivolent for the Intend∣ed Duties on Wines, which will be ruinous to all the Traders and dealers therein; abating his Majesties Cu∣stoms near as much as it will raise in this Duty; be de∣structive to the Navigation, and a means to prohibit our Woollen Manufactures and Fishery in Spain and Portugal, which Consume near one half of all the Woollen Manu∣factures that are exported. 1. That every Tun of Wine Imported pay by the Im∣portor 5 l. per Tun more then the present duties, in ready Mony, which after the rate of 16000 Tunns will amount unto 80000 l. 2. Lead to pay 20 s. per Fother at the Mines and draw back 10 s. upon Exportation 60000 l. 3. Tobacco Consumed in Ireland pays now but 3 d. per pound; let it pay as much as Tobacco Consumed in England, because it cannot be brought into Ireland any otherway then from England, and being once Imported there, cannot be exported again 30000 l.   170000 l. A Proposition for an Equivolent for the Intended Duty of 12 l. 12 per Tun upon Wines, which will not only hinder the Importation of them, and so lessen that Revenue on which there are Loans, and in Consequence the Credit of the Exchequer; But prove destructive to the present Traders therein, both Merchants and Vintners, very much abate the Exportation of woollen Manufactury, and our Navigation. 4. It is therefore Humbly proposed that the subsidy of Tunnadge and Poundage Inwards may rather be Augmen∣ted and Encreased to half as much more then now it pays: (which it is Humbly Conceived will be an Ample Equi∣valent) whereby all Merchandise will bear its Proportion, and Raise the Mony more Certain without Making more Officers, or any Addition of Charge for Collecting, And may be Comprehended In a very short Act. It is Humbly offered to this Honourable House, to accept of Either these Equivolents, or Out of Both these Proposals, to take such Parts of them, and to add unto or Diminish from them, as to their great Wisdom shall seem Meet.
Equivalent for the Intended Wine Du∣ties.
