P3490 669.f.8[36] 99870801 161087
Prince Ruperts cruell VVarrant. BY vertue of the Authority and Power given to me, from Our Soveraign Lord, King CHARLES, under the Great Seal of England, as Generall under His Majesty, of all His Majesties Forces of Horse, already raised, or to be raised, within His Majesties King∣dom of England, and Dominion of Wales; For the Defence of the true Protestant Religion, His Majesties Person, The two Houses of Parliament and their just Priviledges, And the Liberties and Proprieties of His Subjects: I Do strictly charge and cōmand you and every of you whom it may or shall concern, All delayes, pretences and excuses whatsoever set aside, immediatly after sight hereof, To send in to Thomas Jay, His Majesties Commissary Generall for the provifions of His Horse Forces, lying at▪ Ambrose Bartons house against the Talbot in Tocester, All possible provisions of Mans-meat, and Horse-meat. And I do also hereby strictly charge and command you in like manner, To send in to Lieutenant Colonell Green, His Majesties En∣gineer, lying at the Signe of Betty-Briggs or The Running-Mare, in Tocester aforesaid, As many lusty and able Pioneers or Labourers, with Shovels, Spades, Pickaxes, Mattocks, crows of Iron, Hand-barrows, VVheel-barrows, Bags and Baskets to carry Earth, as you can possibly finde and provide within your Constablery. In the punctuall performance of these my commands of His Majesties present service, you and every of you whom it may or shall concern, must in no wise fail, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost perills; As the totall Plundering and Burning of your Houses, with what other mischiefs the licensed and hungry Soul∣dier can inflict upon you. And for your so doing, this shall be to you and every of you sufficient VVarrant. Given at Easton-Park, under my Hand and Seal at Arms, this First day of November, Anno 1643.To the Constable, Officers and Jnhabitants of Cortenhall, in the Hundred of Wimer∣sley, in the county of Northampton. Rupert.The Constables are required, in person to give an account of their doings, to the Commissary Generall and Engineers. Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Warrant be forthwith printed and set upon posts. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, November 13. 1643.
