P4007 E986_20 99863275 115465
Loyalty Banished: OR ENGLAND IN MOURNING. BEING A perfect Narrative of the present Affairs and Proceedings, between divers Members of Parliament, and M. WIL. PRYNNE, neer the Lobby at WESTMINSTER. With the several Speeches made in the House, by Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Sir Henry Vane, Master Hungerford, and Mr. Ansley; and the Answer and Re∣ply of the said Mr. Prynne thereunto, by virtue of the power and Summons, derived from King CHARLES: Together with his Proposals to the People; and the Names of the secluded Mem∣bers cast into HELL, by the power of the SWORD; and what proceeded thereupon. As also Mr. Prynnes demands to the Parliament, in the Name of all the Commons of ENGLAND. Printed in the Year, 1659.
ON the seventh of this instant May, Mr. Prynne walking to Westminster-Hall, (where he had not been six daies before) meeting with some old secured and secluded Members of Par∣liament, summoned by King Charles his Writ and Authority, for these onely ends (expressed in all Writs of Summons to the Lords, and of elections issued to Sheriffs of Counties for electing Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of Parliament, and in the Indentures themselves by which they were returned members;) To confer and treat of certain, great and arduous affairs, concerning the defence of the King, Kingdome, and Church of England, and to do and consent to those things which shall happen to be therein ordained by Common counsel, (of the King, Lords, and Commons,) touching the aforesaid businesses: which Parliament began at Westminster the third day of November, 1640. They shewed him a Declaration of the Officers and Counsel of the Army, made in such hast and confusion, that they mistook the month wherein they made it dating April 6. instead of May 6. published by them that morning, (which declaration the day before, was presented to the speaker of the said Parliament, at the Rolls, by divers Officers of the Army, in the name of Coll: Fleetwood, and the Counsel of Officers of the Army, in pre∣sence of many Members of said the Parliament) containing their earnst desire, That those Members who continued to sit since the year 1648. untill the twentieth of April 1653. would return to the exercise and discharge of their trust. Upon which Mr. PRYN, if he could enter the House, intended to send for the rest of the Members walking in the Hall to come in unto them: and to move that all surviving Members of this Parliament, might by joynt consent particularly be sent to, and invited to meet and sit in the House at a convenient day, before any Vote or Order passed by them then sitting, thus suddainly convened without any notice (which would be interpreted rather a surprize, and un-Parliamentary practise, both by the absent Mem∣bers and the whole Nation, than any obliging Parliamentary Vote or Or∣der of the house) and more discontent then invite or unite the absent un∣summoned Members, of that Parliament making the rent greater then be∣fore. Upon these resolutions alone, and none other, which Mr. P intended to propose to those then sitting, he went to the Lobby door of the Commons House, accompanied with Sir George Booth, Mr. Arthur Annesley, Sir Iohn Eve∣lyn, Mr. Th. Gewen, Mr. Charles Rich, Mr. Mountague, Mr. Rich. Knightly, Mr. Hungerford, and one or two more; which being shut to keep out the people crowding on the stairs to get in, through whom they could hardly pass; Mr. P. knocked twice or thrice, but could get no admittance, till the door being opened to let out Mr. Nye and some other Ministers, Mr, P. with Sir George Booth and Mr. Annesley, being formost, pressed into the Lobby; and then the door being shut and bolted again, Mr. P. unbolted and held it open till the rest came in; where they finding Mr. John and Mr. James Herbert standing in the Lobby, accquainted them with their intentions to go then into the House, who resolved to go in with them. Coming all up to the House door, which was shut and kept Guarded (as it presently appeared) by some Officers of the army; Mr. P. required them to open the door to let them in, being all Members of the old Parliament; who thereupon demanded; Whether they had continued sitting in it since 1648. to 1653? M. P. and the rest all answe∣red,
That being Members of the old Parliament, they would give no account to them or any others of their sitting, but onely to the House it self whereof they were Members, being contrary to the priviledge of Parliament, which they and others were obliged inviolably to maintain: Upon which demanding their names, they said; that if they would send in a Note of their names to the house, and they ordered them to come in, they should be admitted. Whereto Mr. P. replyed We yet knew not who were within the House, nor whether they were yet sitting, nor up∣on what account they sate; nor was it agreeable with the custome or priviledge of Parliament for one Member to send tickets to his fellow-Members for free admis∣sion into the House, being all equals, and having an equal right freely to enter into it at all times, as well as they; nor was it their duty thus to capitulate with Members, but obey their just commands in opening the door: Which they still re∣fusing, Mr. P. demanded, Who and what they were, being all strangers to them? and by whose authority, or order they thus forcibly kept them out? They answered, they were Officers of the Army, and had sufficint authority to keep them out, if they had not sate since 1640. till 1653. Mr. P. demanded, From whom they had their warrant, since they could have none from those within, being but newly entred; and none else could give them such a warrant, nor they within before they heard them, and gave good reason for it; demanding them to produce their Order, if they had any in writing, that they mght know by whose authority they were thus forcibly kept out; deman∣ding their several names twice or thrice, wherewith they refused to ac∣quaint them. Upon this M P. told them, They doubted of their Authority, or Or∣ders thus to seclude them, because they were either ashamed or afraid to tell them their names, when as thy told them theirs: That they knew not whether they were Officers of the Army, or not, unless they knew their names, so that they might in∣quire the truth of it, or saw their Commissions: and if they were Army Officers in∣deed, they had published a printed Dcl. in all their names that morning, inviting (as they conceiv'd) all Members they formerly secluded, to return & sit again in the House to discharge their trusts: wherein they professed their former force upon, and seclusion of them, to be a backsliding, and wandring into Unrighteous Paths; wich they seemingly repented of; promising to yield their utmost assistance to them to sit in safety; and praying for the presence and blessing of God upon their endeavours: And if now within few hours after this Re∣monstrance published, they thus highly and publikely violated it in the view of all there present by returning to their former Backslidings and unrighteous paths; in secluding those who were Members a fresh, and violating their own Declarati∣on, none would henceforth credit them, or it. Upon which one of them told Mr. P. He knew he was none of them who sate since 1648. till 1653. therefore they were not bound to let him in, being not within their Declaration, who retorted, he thought their repentance had been universal, not partial; of all their forces upon the House and Members, especially of their greatest Dec. 1648. when they not onely secluded, but secured and imprisoned him and forty more in Hell, and other places, and forced away three 3 times as many more for discharg∣ing their trusts, and asserting the true Good Old Cause; against their Commissi∣ons, Trusts Protestations, and printed Remonstrances; which if they would look back upon and well consider (as they proclaim they had done in their New Decl.)
they would find to be one of their greatest Backslidings where they first turned out of the way, which caused God to withdraw his presence and good spirit from them ever since, and give them up to the prosecuting of a new Romish Good Old Cause, which had brought us into that posture, and occasion∣ed those vicissitudes of dangers, and caused God in his providence to make all Essayes to settle us, utterly ineffectual; to convince them of, and re∣claim them from their error, which they now pursued afresh, as vigorously as ever: That for his own part after his imprisonment by them against both Law and Priviledge in 1648. in sundry places, he was again forcibly seised by some of the Army in his house in 1650. and kept a close prisoner neer three years under armed guards of Souldiers in three remote Castles far distant from those then sitting: Therefore they could not make their unrighteous imprisonment of him then without any cause or heaving, a just ground to seclude him from sitting now. But all these expostulations of M. P. and others, not prevailing, they desired all present to take notice and bear witness of this high affront and breach of priviledge in this their forcible seclusion: And so departing, Mr. Knightly meeting Major General Lambert in the Lobby, complained to him of this forcible seclusion, who gave him a civil answer to this effect, That things were now in an hurry, and their entring at this time into the House might cause some disturbance, but doubted not such course would be taken by the Officers of the Army in few daies, that none should be forci∣bly secluded: and so they went from the Lobby into the Hall from whence they came, acquainting those Members they left there with the pre∣mises. After some conference with one another, it was thought fit they should ment about four a clock in the evening under Lincolns Inne Chappel, and in the mean time that every one should equire, what old secluded, or secured Members were now in Town, and how many Members of the Long Parlia∣ment were yet living, chosen or sitting before December 6. 1648. when they were first forcibly secluded by the Army. Some met accordingly, and upon conference found, there were about eighty secluded Members now in London and Westminster, being neer double the number of those sitting that day, and above three hundred Members of all sorts yet living, chosen or sitting in the Commons House before December 1648. over and above those that now sate; all which they conceived ought in justice to be summoned by the Speakers Letter, freely to meet and sit in the House at a conveni∣ent time to be agreed upon: In order whereunto, some ten of them met in the Councel Chamber of Lincolns Inne, (where the old Speaker used to sit in Councel as a Bencher with the rest of the Benchers concerning the af∣fairs of the Society) as the fittest place to write down a Catalogue of all the surviving Members names, by the help of their memories, and the printed List of them; which having finished, they departed, agreeing to meet in Westminster Hall about nine of the clock on Munday morning, whi∣ther M. P. carried the List of the Names formerly written, digested into an Alphabetical order, to communicate it to other Members.
Those that sate meeting on the Lords day, adiourned their House till ten of the clock Monday morning: But the Courts not sitting in Westminster Hall that day, Mr. P. found the Hall very thin, and few Members in it whiles he was standing in the Hall expecting those who promised to meet there, he was twice informed one after another, that there were no guards at all at the house Door, that any person might freely go into it without any examination, there being but few Members within, & the doors standing open. Whereupon he spake to four or five Members there met to go along with him into the House, and if they were freely admitted, to give notice of it to the rest to follow after if they were pleased, some of them were un∣willing to go being formerly repulsed, thinking it better to make a Narra∣tive of their former forcible seclusion on Saturday, and to signifie it by a Letter directed to the Speaker, subscribed with their names, which Mr. P. conceived superfluous, since the door now stood freely open to all, without any Guards to seclude any, and that as he apprehended in pursuite of Ma∣jor General Lamberts promise to Mr. Knightly; and it would be idle to com∣plain of that force by Letter, wherewith they might now acquaint those then sitting by their own mouthes if there were cause. Upon which ground, Mr. Prynne, Mr. Annesly, and Mr. Hungerford about ten of the Clock went to the house, where the doors of the Lobby and House were at first knock ope∣ned to them by the ordinary Door-keepers, upon their telling them they were Members, (there being no Guard at either door:) who delive∣red to each of them as Members a printed Paper, Intituled, A Declaration of the Parliament assembled at Westminster, Saturday 7. May 1659. They found above nine or ten of those who sate within the House, who courteously saluted them: After some short discourses, Mr. Ansley, and Mr. Hungerford leaving Mr. P. in the House, (out of which he resolved not to stir upon any occasion for fear of a new forcible seclusion) went back into the Hall to acquaint the Members in it, they might freely enter if they pleased: Mr. Annesly returning, was forcibly kept out from reentring by some Soul∣diers sent thither (as he conceited) for that purpose, wherewith he acquain∣ted Mr. P. by a note, desiring to speak with him at the House door; which being opened, Mr. Annesly pressed to go in to speak with him, but was denied entrance, unless he would give his paroll presently to come out again and not to stay whithin: whereupon he said, though they had often broken their parolls with him, yet he would not break his paroll but would come forth so soon as he had spoken with Mr. P. which he accordinly performed. Af∣ter this, M. P. had conference with divers Members as they came in, who said they were glad to see him in health, and meet him there again. The House being thin Mr. P. turned to the statute of 17 Caroli, C. 7. reading it to himself, and after that to two other Members, telling them it was a doubt whether the old Parliament was not determined by the Kings death, not∣withstanding that act which was fit to be first freely debated in a full House, before ought else was done. Upon which they demanded, why he came amongst them, if he made a scruple or thought it to be dissolved? who answered to have it fully debated and resolved in a full and free House.
After which Sir Arthur Haslerigge coming in, Mr. P. saluted and told him, He was glad to meet him again in this place; who presently answered, He had nothing to do to sit there as a Member, being formerly secluded. Whereto he replyed, He had as good right to sit there as himself, or any o∣ther Member whatsoever, upon the account of the old Parliament, if in being, having acted, written, suffered more in defence of the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, than himself, or any sitting with him. Upon which Sir Henry Vane coming in, and stepping up to them, said in a mena∣cing manner, Mr. Prynne, What make you here? you ought not to come into this House, being formerly voted out, I wish you as a friend quietly to depart hence, else some course will be presently taken with you for your presumption: which Sir Arthur seconded, telling him, if he refused, that there would be a speedy course taken, and a charge put in against him, for his meetings on Saturday, and actings against the House: To which he replyed, He had as good, if not a better right to sit than either of them: That he knew of no Vote to seclude, nor of any there who had right or power to vote him out, being equally intrusted with themselves for the whole Nation, and those he represented: That he was never convicted of any breach of his Parliamentary trust, and hoped they would have both the justice and patience to hear, before they voted him out: And then he doubted not to make it appear, themselves were greater Infringers of their trusts, and more worthy to be voted out than himself. As for their Charge and menaces, he was no way affrighted with them, it being as free and lawful for him and other Members, to meet and advise together, both as Members and Freemen of England, for preservation of themselves, the peo∣ples Rights and Parliaments Priviledges, when forcibly secluded, as they did on Saturdy; as for themselves, or the Army Officers to meet private∣ly and publickly, both in and out of the House, to deprive them of their priviledges, as they had oft times done of late: That these high menacing words, where a very ill performance of their new published Declaration, de∣livered him at the door, viz. That they were resolved (by the gracious assistance of Almighty God) to apply themselves to the faithfull discharge of their legal Trust; to assert, establish and secure, the property and Liberty of the people in reference unto all, both as Men and as Christians.) which if they should publikely violate and null by any uniust Charge, or proceedings against him, who had suffered so much, both as an English Freemen, Christian, and Member too (by their three years close imprisonment of him without cause or hearing) under their new Free-state, when first erected, and now again upon their very first reviving of it, though a Member, only for coming into the House and meeting with other Members, to claim their rights: It would highly reflect upon their intended new Free-state, and make all out of love with it. Mr. P. having acquainted some secluded Members in the Hall with these passages in the House; who agreeing to send a Letter to the Speaker touch∣ing their forcible seclusion on Saturday, he returned to Lincolns Inne, where he dined in the Hall: immediately after dinner he repaired to Westminster with a resolution to go into the House, if admitted, or protest against the force, if secluded by the Army Guards there placed; he found an whole
Troop of Horse in the Palace-yard, and a Company of Foot on the Stairs, and Court of Requests, drawn thither to keep him and other Members out; whereupon he walked in the Hall till past three a clock, expecting the Speakers coming, with whom he intended to enter: At last, being informed that he went the back way without the Mace, and was gone into the House, Mr. P. to avoid tumult (a company of unknown persons in the Hall going after to see the issue) went purposely forth towards the Abby, till all were gone from the steps; and then going up only with one of his acquain∣tance, (no Member) he found the door and stairs before the Lobby strictly guarded with Red-coats, who with their Halberts crossed the door and steps so thick, that none could pass: whereupon Mr. P. demanded entrance, say∣ing he was a Member; and they being ignorant who he was, permitted him to pass through their pikes into the Lobby, but secluded his friend from go∣ing up with him. When he came at the House door to enter, several Offi∣cers of the Army there placed (one of them sitting in a Chair) told him, That he must not enter, and that they had special Order to keep him out of the House: Whereupon he protested against this their forcible double se∣clusion, as an high contempt and breach of priviledge, contrary to their own and the sitting Members Declaration published that day, demanding in the name of all the Commons of England, and those for whom he was E∣lected, free admission for himself and other Members they kept out by a vi∣sible force of Horse and Foot, which was a worse and more real levying of war against the Parliament, then the beheaded King or his Party were guilty of. After which one of the Army-Officers told Mr. Prynne, he had deserted the Good Old Cause: To which he replied, that the true good Cause for which they were first raised, was only to defend the Kings person, Kingdom, Parliament, all its Members, Priviledges, and secure them against all force and violence whatsoever, which cause they had not only deserted, but be∣trayed, and fought against, contrary to all former Engagements. To which cause he adhered, and desired admission to maintain it. To which he answered, That indeed was once their Good Old Cause, but now it was not so, for since they had pursued another Cause, Mr. P. replied, that then they were real Back-sliders therein, and their cause neither old nor good, but bad, new, and destructive to the former old one. IN SUMME. THomas Campanella, in his Spanish Universal Monarchy, Chap. 30. speaks thus; All Heresies when centred in Atheisme, are by the wise man∣nagement of the Church reduced into the way of truth; for Heresies have their periods as well as Commonwealths, that first from lawful Monarchy, are changed into a Tyranny, from thence to an Aristocracy, thence to a Councel of State, and at length to the confusions of Democracy, and at last (as the final rest of all tumultuous, and otherwise ceaseless distempers) return again into Kingship. FINIS.
