R1547 R43730 42475152 151309
THE Rival Princesses: OR, THE Colchian Court: A NOVEL. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, at the Post-Office in Russel-street in Covent-Garden. 1689.
THE Rival Princesses: OR, THE Colchian Court. IT has been often observed, that there is nothing so Universal as Love; and that there are no People, how bar∣barous soever, but it gives Laws unto. A famous Example of this we have in the late Transactions of the Kingdom of Colchis, where it made appear the im∣menseness of its Power, and how uncon∣troulable and capricious a God he is that prefides over the Hearts and the Inclina∣tions of Man. Colchis is situated at the end of the Black-Sea; to the East it is inclosed with an Island that makes a part of Georgia, which by the people of the Country is
called Imicerta, by the Ancients Iberia. To the South, by the Black-Sea; to the West, by the Kingdom of the Abcas; the Corox and Phosis, Famous Rivers in Ancient History, serve for its Bounds. The Ancient Kingdom of Colchis was larger than it is now; it was formerly fortified against the Abcas by a Wall sixty Miles in length, which has been laid in Ruines these many years; so that now the thick Forests are its chiefest Defence, and greatest Security. The Air is Temperate, as well in respect of the Heat as Cold. The Nobility spend almost their whole time in the Field. They do not build by Cities, and by Towns, nor is there more than two Villages in all the whole Kin∣dom, and those by the Sea-side, for Traf∣fick, and the convenience of Commerce; but the whole Country is so thick set with Houses, that you will hardly travel five Miles without seeing three or four together; whereas in other Countries there are often found Heaths and Defarts of a very large extent, wholly un-inha∣bited, and which are in many places un∣passable. In Colchis there are nine or ten Castles, the chiefest of which is called, the Castle of Kuc's, where the Prince of
Colchis keeps his Court. The Castle is moated and surrounded with a stone Wall, in which there are a great many Pieces of Canon placed for its Defence. The Men are very well shaped, and the Women very handsome; they have their Features very regular. In those that are of any Quality is to be found a Maje∣stick Air; all their Address is so obliging, that they insensibly win our Affection, and seem to Command our Love. They dress themselves with all the Curiosity imagi∣nable. Their Habit is like that of the Persians, but the dress of their Hair after the manner of the European Women. Their Arms are a Lance, Bow and Ar∣rows, a streight Sword, a Mace, and Buckler: there are but few carry Fire-Arms; they are very good Soldiers, sit a Horse well, and handle their Swords with an extra∣ordinary dexterity. I have been more particular in the De∣scription of the Place, because it is so little known to the Europeans; and that nothing is more certain and exact, than this Relation I have given. Levan Dadian was the greatest Prince that ever reigned in Colchis of late Ages; he conquer'd all the Enemies that ever he
made War against, and in short, grew so formidable, that he began to be a ter∣ror to all his Neighbours: He was a great Soldier, and knew the Art of War to a Miracle; his Courage was undeniable, his Magnificence surpassing all his Prede∣cessors; and to give his Character in a few words, had not Love too much ty∣rannized over so great a Heart, he had ended his Reign with all the Glory ima∣ginable, and with the Renown he began it; but his cruel Destiny inspired him with so wicked a Passion, that it oblite∣rated and defaced the remembrance of all his other Vertues, and made him to be consider'd as the most infamous of Men. Levan was very young when he ascend∣ed the Throne, and left to the care of George, Soveraign Prince of Libardian, his Uncle, Protector of the State, who ob∣served Religiously to acquit himself of that high Trust with all imaginable Ho∣nour, meriting the highest Praise for his generous Conduct to him; he honoured him with as tender an Affection, as if he had been his own Child, and always made his Advancement and Glory his chiefest study. He read him early Lessons of Glory;
gave him to know, that nothing was so admirable in a Prince as Justice and Cle∣mency; and that on the contrary, nothing was so blameable as Cruelty or Lenity. He led him to Wars, taught him to Con∣quer his first Fields, and always crown'd him with Success and Glory: He learn'd to be couragious, martial, and fierce from his generous President: He began to be indefatigable in all his Undertakings; so that it was with a great deal of Pleasure the Protector saw all his Care so well re∣warded, in the Advantage the Prince of Colchis made of his Instructions. But as a Cloud to these excellent Qua∣lities, he was unfortunately inspired with a Passion Incestuous and Criminal at once; he became Amorous of the Wife of the Prince his Uncle; all the ties of Blood and Gratitude were here of no other force but to engage him the more strongly: For our Appetites are often so depraved, as nothing has power to fix them but what is not allowable in us to gratifie them with; and the abhorrence which every reasonable man would have had for so injurious a Passion, was the motive that drew Levan the more strongly to it. His Ascendant was Love, and he was
uncontroulable in all things else; nothi besides could govern him, he was impa∣tient of the Counsel of any but the Prince his Uncle, to whom he was obliged to yield Obedience. He never distinguished by particular favours any of his Captains or Courtiers; none was more his Fa∣vourite than another, but he that merited most, was best rewarded: He was so Ab∣solute, that it was but rarely any of his Council durst advise him, and yet he owned an entire dependence to the God of Love, who would have it that this haughty Spirit must submit to the dispo∣sition of a Woman. George, Prince of Libardian, had espou∣sed Homais Dorejan, of the great Family of the Chickalites, a Princess more wicked, and more ambitious than any ever was: She is guilty of all the Passions a Lover's Breast can be capable of; for such are the regards of her passionate, tender, and languishing Eyes, that she never looks but to command Love, and inspire Hope. The Character of her Soul is ambitious, deceitful, cruel, and unconstant; her in∣clinations are obscene, and often tran∣sports her to the excess of Debauch. But before we proceed, it may be necessary to
give some account of the Life of a Per∣son who has so considerable a share in the following Narrative. The History of Homais. HOmais Dorejan, of the great Family of the Chickalites, is a Person of a most engaging Aspect: Her Hair, of which she has a great abundance, is light-brown; and though the colour of her Eyes be grey, nothing was so attracting and pe∣netrating; and it was easie to see by them that the Character of her Soul was Amorous and Inconstant. The turn of her Face was Oval, nothing was purer Carnation than her Lips, or gave birth so soon to such rebellious thoughts in the beholders; to which may be added the excellency of her Teeth, which she took a perfect care to preserve: But all that has been said comes short of her Neck and Breast; no Painter ever drew so ex∣act a symetry of Beauty, a turn till now unknown to Nature, and which was alone capable to inspire desire: Her Hands and
Arms were cast in the same Mold, and nothing could be seen more exact; her Shape was easie, though it was not per∣fect, because that it was not so slender as others; she was inclin'd to fat, and would not suffer her self to be drest after that cumbersome manner which other Women use to preserve themselves in shape: The air of her Person was graceful, moving without constraint, and ever engaging. This won her a great many Hearts, which she wanted Address to improve to the most Advantage, as people do that desire to make themselves lov'd out of vanity, and not inclination: She cared not for moving those persons that she did not ex∣pect some pleasure from their sensibility; and all other of her Conquest were to her incommodious. Her Soul was aspiring, and she wish'd for nothing more than a Crown; but in the mean time, since that was not yet to be had, she did not fail to gratifie her other Pleasures, amongst which, she had the greatest sense for Love and Amorous Engagements. Her Wit was astonishing, and much beyond her Judgment, which often fail'd her in con∣versation when she had the most occasion for it. Her Contempt was general for
the Opinion of the World, and she never regulated her self by it. Her Conversa∣tion was pleasant, and always intermixt with Raillery, which she used in a man∣ner very becoming, and her Wit lay most that way. She had no reserve for her most intimate Acquaintance, nor could her Wit spare her the diversion she found in ridiculing their weaknesses; and yet it was impossible with all these faults for any person not to love her, or desire her conversation. Her Ascendant was Ambition, but her greatest propensity was Love; and it was not long, though in a very tender Age, before she began to experience the effects of it; but as she wanted a great part of that Resolution, which a little time lent her, she conceal'd this inclination in such a manner, as it quite extinguished in her, so that she began to love another, and then another, and so a third, before she made any discovery of it. At length, Osman, first Lord and Bassa in the Court of Libardian, of which George, Uncle to the Prince of Colchis, was Soveraign Prince, was made her Captive: She had likewise for him an irresistible inclination, which encouraged him in the pursuit of
his Love; she had such ways with her, such affected tendernesses, which appear'd not in her as the effects of weakness, but the discovery of a Passion too great to be conceal'd, that Osman was insensibly led into that most precipitated Land of Love: She suffer'd her Eyes to behold his, and fixing of them there in such a manner, as if it were not in her power to remove them thence; she would shew him such a Prospect of Happiness, that the most reasonable of all Men could not have avoided the Snare. But as Osman has a very particular share in this History, when as afterwards his being created Grand Vizier of Colchis, was the fatal occasion of a Passion he entertain'd for the Prin∣cess thereof, and which cost him his Life. It may not be amiss to give the Reader the Character of his Person in this place, before we speak any more of him. Osman was tall, exactly made, and walked with the Air of a Monarch; his Actions were noble, and his Courage ne∣ver found any thing too great for him to undertake: The colour of his Eyes were blew, sweet, passionate, and tender; his Nose was Roman, and which gave an air of greatness to the whole composure.
His Mouth was indifferently large, his under Lip swell'd to a becoming bigness, and nothing was better colour'd: His Teeth were well set, and very white. The make of his Face was Oval, and he had something there, at once very busie, and yet very sweet. His Temper was the best that could be found. The In∣terests of a Friend he always made his own, and knew not any greater pleasure than serving them effectually. He had a Passion for Homais, but it may be more properly called an Amazement, since he had no other thoughts for her than what became very transitory, and hindred him not from engaging in a Passion that was the cause of his death: But as this was not till after he had been deserted by Homais, we will consider him a while as her most passionate adorer. It is hard for us to judge which was the first of these two Persons that began to love each other. At one of the Court-Meetings, that a great Ball was danced, Homais, who became that motion ex∣treamly well, was to take out the Bassa for a Dance; there was nothing done with more disorder between two Persons, and tho' they were perfectly acquainted
with the Figure, it hindred them not from being out so often, that they were forced to part, and take out others to redeem the Credit they had lost; it pro∣ceeded from the mutual surprize they had, and they from that moment began to discern something in each other that could not be seen without concern; the Bassa sigh'd several times, and had the pleasure to hear very tender returns from Homais. In the beginning of a Passion she is very eager, and nothing is to be spared that can be conducing to the enslaving him she loves; but as soon as that is done, and she believes him past retreat, she abandons him, no longer looks upon him with desire, but carries her Charms fur∣ther, to the making of new Conquests. The Bassa found himself at the break∣ing up of the Assembly, to be passionately in Love. The Sultaness his Wife had ob∣served the disorder he was in, she enqui∣red into the cause of it, and he did not hesitate long in the acquainting her with it, but not with too much sincerity; for he told her, that he had found himself ill, and unable at that time to continue the Dance, tho' he did not tell her of what a nature the pain was of which he complain'd.
As for what concern'd Homais, she found her self inevitably charm'd; she sigh'd, she complain'd, her Eyes were no longer so full of that fire so natural to them: She languish'd again for another sight of the Bassa, when she was told, that the Sultaness with Osman were come to visit her. In Colchis the Women have an entire Liberty, and not at all after the manner of the Persians and Turks their Neighbours: They carry themselves after their own inclinations, and never submit to the capriciousness of a Husband: Jea∣lousie is there less absolute than in any other place, and it is not always that a Husband talks of Poysons and Poyniards, when his Wife plays him false; they al∣low a great deal to their natural weak∣ness, tho' for all this so celebrated Indul∣gence, they are not willing to be impos'd upon, no more than the European Hus∣bands; and the Women, when they would deceive, are constrain'd to use the same precautions. A moment after the Bassa entred the Chamber, where Homais was lying on the Bed, languishing and pale: The Sul∣taness came in also. Homais complain'd of a pain at her Heart, which the Phy∣sicians
could give no name to, and she be∣lieved it would be Mortal; she said all this with her Eyes fixt upon the Bassa. He presently reply'd, that if she would venture upon a Charm that he would give her, he did not question but it would Cure her; but that faith was a necessary point, and above all things, she was not to look into it till the same time to Mor∣row; she laugh'd at the seriousness of the Bassa, and tho' she had not a great Opi∣nion of Charms, she would try the Cure, because it came from him; and after that she assured him she would venture upon it, he call'd for Pen and Ink with some Paper, he presently set himself to write, and retiring after he had done, to a cor∣ner of the Chamber, he put something into the Paper, which, as he said, was not to be seen by any body; and after he had neatly made it up, he ask'd for a Ribbon, which he ty'd to it, and shew∣ing it to Homais, when he had finish'd his work, told her, that he must himself tie it about her Neck. She opposed it, as a thing contrary to decency, alledging that if the Sultaness his Wife would do her that Honour, it would be as well. If, said the Bassa, you do not resolve intirely
to follow my Directions, the Charm will be of no effect, and it is absolutely ne∣cessary that I tie it on, because that a great deal of the Vertue depends upon the manner of it: You will suffer, Ma∣dam, continued he, that any of your Physicians approach you in that manner, and is there any more danger in admitting me? I am more your Slave than any other, and more aw'd by the least of your frowns; therefore I beseech you, Madam, not to entertain any thing of distrust of a Man so absolutely at your Devotion. The innocent Sultaness joyn'd her supplications to the Bassa's. I very well perceive, reply'd Homais, that it must be as you will, and that it signifies nothing for me to deny you; come, my Lord, I must submit with the best grace to what cannot be avoided: At these words she gave her Hand to the Bassa to help her to rise from the Bed, and went to her Toylet, where sitting down be∣fore the Glass, she uncovered her Neck, which, as we have before delivered, was perfectly beautiful. This was a Charm that the Bassa was only acquainted with by Report, he had never seen any thing of such a dazling whiteness, nor any
thing so well made: He approached he, but it was with trembling, and without the power to speak. Her disorder was equal to his; he sigh'd, she returned it, and was as much surprized as he. The Sultaness was busied in looking upon those Pictures that were in the Lodging, not at all suspecting that so silent a commerce could have any thing so tender in it, and therefore did not trouble her self about it. After some moments of silence, which was past in a very expressive manner, the Bassa was the first that broke it. What a Prospect do you shew me, Madam, said he? And how impossible is it for one to help dying with Love at the sight of so many Charms? At this he ventur'd to kiss her Neck, which the Sultaness did not see, nor could Homais resist him; her Eyes were tender, her Soul warm'd with the sighs of her Lover; and if the Sul∣taness had not been there, we know not how far her kindness would have carried her; she came in that moment, and in∣terrupted this Scene of Tenderness. The Bassa reproached her secretly for this un∣seasonable Intrusion: He was forc'd to go away after bidding Homais have a good Faith in the Charm, and not to look in
it till the time was expired that he had prescribed her. Whether it were her Opinion of the Charm, or that she had not been at all ill, she drest her the following day to go to their Devotion at the Mosque in all the exactness imaginable, and in the same colour'd Ribbons as the Bassa had wore the preceding day; but before she went, she remembred her to look into the Charm, for the time was already expi∣red; but what was her surprize, when she found in it a very fine Ruby-Ring, with these words in the Paper. This Ruby does not alone bring the De∣claration of my Passion, but it has Charms capable to inspire Homais, having been thus worn by her with the same Sentiments; nor can she refuse coming at six a Clock to the Palace Garden, unless she will render the Charm of no effect, and procure the death of the Slave that conjures her. It was the Custom of the Bassa, with the other People of Quality, to go once every day to the Mosque, where he did not fail to render himself as usual to observe the Reception that Homais would give
him after the Declaration. As for what concern'd her, she very well knew he was to be there, and putting the Ring upon her Finger, she tore the Paper into small pieces, and put them in her Pocket, which in passing by the Bassa she scatter'd at his Feet, pretending to draw out her Handker∣chief, and pass'd on unconcernedly to the place she was to kneel at. Notwithstand∣ing all this, she did not fail during the Devotion to pull off her Glove, and let the Bassa see that she had the Ruby upon her Finger. He knew not what construction to draw from all this; he believed that she shew'd it to him only to express the de∣sire she had of restoring it to him, and that she would take the first Opportunity to do it, but that was too publick a place to entertain her in, unless he had been in a condition of appearing her Lo∣ver, which the Sultaness his Wife, being of an Illustrious Blood, would never con∣sent to, and by consequence he was for∣ced to depart unsatisfied. Homais came according to the conju∣ration to the Palace Garden; but the Bassa, who was nettled at the Affront she had given him, and who could not believe that after such an Action, she would come
to a meeting with him, did not go. She resented this as a Mortal Crime, and be∣gan to repent, that she had given her Heart to him: She had already waited an hour, and began to impatient her self, when a young Lord, that had ob∣served her, and pass'd several times by her, came near to satisfie his Curiosity, and see if he could prevail with her to unmask. She did not know him, and thought that nothing could be better imagined than he was; they had an equal desire to learn who each other were, so that it was not difficult for that Lord to enter into a Discourse with her. If it were possible for me, Madam, said he to her (after a long conversation) to give my Heart to a Person that I have not the Honour to know, and who will not re∣pose confidence enough in me to disco∣ver her self. I should offer mine to you, but you will not be angry, if I declare to you, I cannot be conquer'd by any thing but fair Eyes, and that my Heart is proof against all other Attractions. You do not know, Madam, to what a degree you may enslave me by that dis∣covery, there wants nothing but that for an absolute Conquest. If the Conquest
(reply'd the disguised Princess, who was of a Humour to divert her self in this man∣ner, and to whom that conversation was very pleasing, in that it flatter'd her Va∣nity, and was agreeable to her Inclina∣tions, because it gave her the prospect of a new Lover, younger and better made in her Eyes than was the Bassa, who was an older Acquaintance, and had just the come from offending her in the most sen∣sible manner) is so near being finish'd, I assure my self that you will not repent of the Engagement when you shall see my Face; and it is not for want of con∣fidence in you, that I conceal my self, but some Reasons wholly indispensible, which you shall one day be acquainted with, for I do not intend the Gallantry shall end here; you will be so generous as not to follow me, nor press for any more know∣ledge than what I allow you to have, and I promise that you shall not repent it: You see this Scarf that I wear, remem∣ber it well, for it is by this your good Fortune shall arrive. At these words she went away: The gentile Air, which was inseparable from her, her Wit, and her manner of discoursing had made such an impression on him that they were spoken
to, that he believed her, and did not send after to know who she was, relying on the promise she had made him of a far∣ther Acquaintance, and resolving with himself, that if she were of any Quality, he should easily retrieve her, because he thought it impossible but he should know her again in any Dress, tho' he had not seen her Face. Homais was no sooner got home, but she enquired if she were sent after, and began to be angry at her new Lover for obeying her so unseasonably; however Love was on his side, and she did not con∣demn him by the half so much as she did the Bassa; and being not able to contain for Rage, she went into her Closet, and writ him this Letter. IS it just, my Lord Bassa, that you should so unseasonably abandon me, then when I gave you the greatest Testimonies of my Af∣fection? What account can you give of so criminal a conduct? Was not the Ribbons I hd on, and the Ring on my Finger, suffi∣cient marks of my concern? And if I tore the Paper, which is, I suppose, what you re∣sent so much, it was for fear as it had charm'd my Heart to you, so it should also charm
my Person. But Traytor, for so thou  maugre all that can be said, why didst tho send me to a place where you never intended to be? Or why, if thy intentions had been good, didst thou not send to tell me the cause of thy not coming? But 'tis well, I'le never see thee more, nor will I hear any of thy Ex∣cuses, for they must be all false, like the per∣fidious intender: I abandon thee without any other remorse than that of having once had something that look'd like tenderness for a Man so ungrateful. She sent him this Letter by one of her Pages; he received it, and coldly told him, it required no Answer, and that he might tell his Lady so. Who can ex∣press the Surprize, or rather the Rage of Homais? What can be the meaning of this, cry'd she to her self? Have I flat∣ter'd my self, and is this Beauty mean enough to be despised? Or does not the Bassa love me, and have I not given a wrong Interpretation to his Actions, and ascrib'd that to Love, as was only the effect of Gallantry? Perhaps the Ring that I flatter'd my self with, was given in Raillery; and I have exposed my self after an unpardonable manner; I have
given him liberty to think what he will of my Conduct; and if he has any fa∣vourable thoughts of it, it is more than he is obliged to have. I will write to him once more to ask his Pardon for my mistake, since he cannot but look upon me to be under very fantastical Circum∣stances. But ah! continued she a mo∣ment after, what were the meaning of all those tender regards he gave me, the sighs that were forced in such a passionate manner from him? It must be more than indifferency that could work such a change in him; and there is some Mystery in it which I must learn. At this she set her self to write this second Letter, and which she sent by the same Page. THose that see you, my Lord, would judge you to be a very gallant man; and it is not for nothing that you have that Character in the World. Must I alone com∣plain, that you are wanting to me in what should maintain you in it? I desire the fa∣vour of a visit from you immediately upon your receipt of this, and have accordingly disposed of all things, that we may be sure to have no disturbance in the Conversation. Adieu.
The Bassa did not fail to come with all expedition; and if we consider hi under the Character of a Passionate Lo∣ver, it is not to be doubted, but that he thought himself very happy. Homais seeing him approach, came to him, and touching his hand, said, You have ob∣liged me, my Lord, to be very importu∣nate with you; I have treated you as a Lover, but I am satisfied how much I was mistaken. Ah, for that, Madam, in∣terrupted the Bassa, I was, and still de∣sired to be consider'd as such; and it is not only my greatest Ambition, but my Happiness also. I confess that I have been in fault, and that I was to blame, to judge as I did by Appearances. I thought you would punish my Pre∣sumption, and seeing you scatter the Charm so, I had little reason to expect you would come as you did to the Gar∣den of the Palace, that was the cause of my not coming; if I had had the least hope of your being there, you would have had reason for an ill Opinion of me, if I had not flown to meet you; for there was nothing so much my inclina∣tion. As for your first Letter, if I had answer'd it in the same manner it was
writ, I should have been constrain'd to have treated you with less Respect than I was willing to do; I did not think that I merited the name of Traytor from you, that of your Slave being an Epithet more proper for one that will never betray, tho' always adore you. Here the Bassa ventur'd, seeing that Homais was appeas'd, to press her in his Arms, and having several times kiss'd her fine Neck, he began to be very im∣portunate for greater favours. The trou∣ble you have given me to day, said she to him, does not deserve that you should be consider'd as a Lover: Why did not you endeavour to appease me, when you believed me dis-satisfied with you? but not a Letter, nor the least mark of the regret you express to have had, and which if it were real, would certainly have ap∣pear'd; but I have forgiven you, and, my dear, you are no longer in a possibility of displeasing me, do but love me for ever, and I care not what I endure. There are certain ways in Lovers whol∣ly inexpressible; such languishments, such sighs, such reciprocal regards, which are more comprehensive than the finest Ora∣tory, and more engaging, such as the
Princess and the Bassa were employ'd in; he ventur'd to kiss her Lips, her Neck, to behold the beauty of her Breasts, to press her in his Arms, and to sigh upon her Bosom, whilst she assented by the dy∣ing fire in her Eyes to all that he did or said, and possibly had he had as much presumption as desire, he had made him∣self very happy; but believing he was advanced very far for the first time, and that he had but one step more to make, and that the next meeting would crown his expectations, he accepted of the de∣nyals she made him, and retired after a very long Conversation, but in certain hopes of being very happy the next time they met. In all appearance, Homais was very much in Love with a Man she could treat thus kindly, and to whom she could speak and act after such a tender manner; but Appearances are very deceitful, especi∣ally Appearances drawn from the discour∣ses of People so unconstant as Homais. She found after he was gone, that it was not Love, but an Amorous inclination, that had rendred her so languid and de∣fenceless in the Arms of the Bassa; and she thought still of that new Lover she
had seen in the Palace-Garden, whom she was resolved to be acquainted with, and she knew not whether she did not love him better than she did the Bassa. It was several days before the Bassa had an Opportunity of discoursing the Princess; he saw her very often, but not in Private; it was a long time before he could bring her to a meeting, he sigh'd, he prest, but was still deny'd; she pro∣tested to him, that it was not want of Love in her, but some remains of Honour, which all her Passion for him could not vanquish; and that he ought to rest sa∣tisfied with the possession of her Heart, which she gave him intirely; but as for the rest, it was what she would never grant to any but him that was destined to be her Husband. The Bassa, little sa∣tisfied with this, used all his Address to try if that could procure him any advan∣tage. He repented for having so ill em∣ploy'd those moments when he was last with her; he call'd her false, insensible, and ungrateful to the pain and the pas∣sion he had for her; became lean, scarce eat any thing at all. The Court obser∣ved this alteration in him; and in short, after she had made him languish a good
space, she promised him another meeting for that Night in her Lodging, after her Father should be gone to Bed, and the Family retired. It is not to be askt if the Bassa flew with all imaginable haste to the Rendez∣vous: He found her undrest, and in that Garb nothing could be more amiable; his Passion being heightned by all these Obstacles, he was the most impatient imaginable. I come to ask you for the last time, Madam, said he to her, if it is my Death you design, for in the denyals you make me, you shew me a more ter∣rible Prospect than any the most cruel Torments could present. You know very well, my Lord, reply'd she with a languishing Air, that I love you, and there rests but one thing for me to do to convince you intirely of it, and put it out of dispute: You dispair too soon; and why may not you hope that you may Conquer my Person, since you have still the same Charms that subdu'd my Heart? I do not love you less, since I confess'd to you, that nothing was so dear to me as you. She accompanied these words with a thousand tendernesses. The Bassa held her in his Arms, and believed he
had now found the time, and was resol∣ved to pursue the Occasion. Her Eyes were languishing, her Soul softned with his Passion; and in a word, she was often upon the very point of yielding, tho' no∣thing is harder to overcome than the last pangs of Modesty and Honour. Osman used his utmost Address to vanquish all the scruples she had remaining, and to conquer the feeble resistance she shew'd; but whether it were a return of Vertue, tho' one would believe she had but little; or that she did not love him so much as she imagin'd, for very often we deceive our selves in this point, and fancy our selves more in Love than really we are, she started from that languishing state, and told him, that she would yield, but not then, and that he ought to rest satisfied with her Promise. Osman could not bear so cruel a disappointment without despair. You treat me cruelly, Madam, said he to her; and since you resolve my Happiness, is it not the same thing to day as to mor∣row, and perhaps you will not then have more disposition than now? I promise you, reply'd she, that I will be more fa∣vourable. But when, interrupted the Bassa? Shall I render my self here at the
same hour to morrow? and will you pro∣mise me to make me happy? I consent to what you propose, return'd she, and I'le keep my word with you: You know I love you, and that it is not in my pow∣er to deny you any thing. She left him at these words, and he expected the hour with impatiency; he slept not at all that Night, and on the morrow he was told, that a Page from Homais ask'd to speak with him; he was presently introduced, and deliver'd the Bassa a Letter from his Lady, which was this. IT is with a great deal of regret, my Lord, that I see my self constrain'd to break my Promise with you; there is Com∣pany comes to day, that will not suddenly leave us: You know the Rules of Civility, which nothing can dispence us from; and you love me too well, to desire any thing contrary to them. The pain is more than the half on my side; for when one loves like me, what greater unhappiness is there than being de∣barr'd from what we love? The Bassa was confounded at the sight of this Letter; he found all his Expecta∣tions mouldred to nothing: This was
a disappointment which could not be equalled; he upbraided her, call'd her inconstant, despised her want of Reso∣lution; and in a word, resolved to pur∣sue her no more, since she was too change∣able to be taken: But when he consider'd how lovely she was, and those tender moments he had past with her when she lay in his Arms in a manner unguarded, he repented him that he had employ'd them so ill; but since Time is not to be recall'd when it is once past and gone, and since he was sensible of this; he en∣deavour'd to bring her to another meet∣ing, where he was resolved she should not escape him. To effect this, he be∣gan the way that he was sure would take with her; he knew well her Temper, and that she would do any thing rather than lose a Lover, he therefore resolved to frighten her into complyance, and ac∣cordingly answer'd her Letter with this little Billet. YOƲ are certainly the falsest Woman in the World, and I shall never have a good Opinion of your Sex again for your sake; neither will I ever see you more, un∣less you promise to make me the happiest
Man breathing in the space of Twenty four hours. This Reply, so little expected by Ho∣mais, had the effect the Bassa desired; she could not endure the thoughts of lo∣sing him, and began to see he was not so much her Slave as she imagined. What she had writ him was true, and there was Company to come; but however she design'd to find a time to see him; all was to be sacrificed, rather than suffer him to break his Chains; that was what she could not resolve to think of, besides she had had a great deal of tenderness for him, though the Conversation with that unknown Lord in the Palace-Garden had divided her Inclination; she began to cool towards the Bassa, by the thoughts that he did not improve the Moments when he was with her as he might have done, or as any other in his place would have done: This had given her some dis∣gust for him, which she immediately for∣got upon the sight of his Billet; for her Resentment yielded to her Vanity, and the desire she had of engaging him be∣yond all possibility of Retreat, which she was certain her Kindness could ef∣fect;
and to begin, she writ him this Letter. WHatever Reason you have to complain, I believe, my Lord, that I have more; 'tis certain you love me little, or after a very indifferent manner; how could you treat me else as you do? Any other but me would pu∣nish you with neglect; but you know little my Heart, or my Inclinations; if you accuse me of falshood and want of Affection, I pity rather than condemn you, since it is you that suffer the most by it; I would have you to assure your self that I love you, and that I can have no reserve for you: Be with me at Eleven, that you may be convinced of what I say; since you will have me pass over all Rules of Civility, I consent to it; my Heart easily inclines on your side; it incessantly tells me, that nothing ought to come in com∣petition with what we love. At the reading of this Letter Osman tasted a very sincere Joy, which he be∣lieved would be improved at Night, in the Conversation he was to have with Homais; 'tis certain however he dis∣guised it, he had for her a very strong inclination: She did not make him a
suitable return; nothing was more in Love than she was; Time, which over∣comes all things, had abated much of its vigour; it was a long time, in her Opinion, since she began to favour him, and she began to suspect her slf guilty of Constancy, and was invited to be∣lieve, by the arrival of a Young Lord that day to her Father's Palace, that Osman was not the only Person capable of filling her Heart. The Person that created in her these extraordinary Sentiments, was of a very Noble Family; and tho' there was little left of that Estate to maintain it in its former lustre, he did not cease to make a very handsom appearance. Ismael, for so was he called, was come to Court, to seek for some Opportunity to re-instate his Family in its former Glory: He was seem by Homais the day she had writ her Letter to the Bassa, and was one of the Company, as she inform'd him, was to come. Nothing was better made than Ismael; he was very young, tall, had black sparkling Eyes, with the finest Mouth that could be seen. She was pre∣sently taken with him, and knew him again to be the same that had entertain'd her in the Garden of the Palace, though
she did not know how to tell him so; for he appear'd so reserv'd, and treated her with a respect so dis-engaged from Love, that she thought it impossible for him to entertain any for her: She saw that he did not know her again, nor the tone of her Voice, which made her not deny her self the pleasure of looking upon him; she often met his Eyes, and saw him de∣cline that Commerce as much as he could; she found him however to sigh: when she lookt upon him, he grew disorder'd; and she flatter'd her self from thence, that he began to fee something extraordinary for her. If, said she to him the first mo∣ment she could entertain him singly, the Interest of the Prince my Father can be of any Advantage to you in your Designs at Court, I will engage him to employ it for you with the Soveraign Prince; it is out of a sense of your Merit, that I offer my self to serve you on this Occa∣sion, and would have you to esteem it as such; for nothing could be a greater sa∣tisfaction to me, than that of having ren∣dred you any considerable Service. The favour is so extraordinary, reply'd Ismael, that I were unworthy of the Honour you do me, if I did not set a just value upon
it, and if I did not devote my Life to your Service. 'Tis true, said she, turn∣ing her Eyes in a very dejected manner, which she had half fixt upon his Face, that I shall have a great deal of pleasure in rendring you some, though I should find you without acknowledgment. She finisht these words with a very tender sigh, which he interpreted to his Advan∣tage, and had without doubt told her his sentiments of it, had he not been in∣terrupted by the rest of the Company. Homais resolved the ne time she should see him, to discover to him the inclina∣tion she had to love him, and that she was the same Person he had entertain'd in the Palace-Garden. She retir'd to her Lodging; the hour was approaching that she was to expect the Bassa, who, since her new inclination, was become insup∣portable to her, and she had no other thoughts but indifferency for him, but her Vanity would not let her break with him; as long as she had wit enough to deceive him, she would find some means to keep him her Slave, and yet allow him no greater favours than those he was al∣ready possest of; she thought of an Ex∣pedient, and undressing her self, she put
on a very magnificent undress: She was naturally ingenious and curious, and had by her a certain sort of Perfume, which, if but smelt to, overcomes the Senses; stupifies, if not kills, which it does, as it is more or less scented. Homais was re∣solved to divert her self at the Bassa's cost, and to give him just as much as was necessary to cast him into a Trance, which should not however endanger his Life, or be of any long continuance; to that end she writ him a Letter, which was to be delivered him in the Anti-Chamber: After she had finisht it, she scented it with that Perfume, which up∣on the opening of it would cast an Odour to overcome him, and yet without any suspicion on her part. She deliver'd the Letter to the Woman that was her Confi∣dent, and all was ready at the hour she had appointed the Bassa: It is not to be askt whether he were punctual, he flew to meet his Happiness; he had already past part of the Lodging, and was advan∣ced as far as the Anti-Chamber, when he was met by the Woman in waiting; she deliver'd him the Letter, which he ha∣stily opened, fearing another check of Fortune, and read these words.
SInce it is resolved, I invite you, my Lord, to the Reward of your Love, and of your Services: I ask but this in return, that you will not believe me, after this condescen∣tion, to be the lefs mriting of your Heart, which I desire to prserve for ever entirely mine. The Bassa kist this Letter several times with an amorous transport; his Senses were presently seized upon, but he be∣lieved it an effect of the greatness of his Passion; he flew in a moment to the Bed-Chamber, where Homais was expecting him: She appear'd very charming; our Lover flew to her Arms, and had but once prest her in his, when he fell in a swoon upon her Bosom: At this, Homais laugh'd so loud, that if any thing could have recall'd him, that would have done it; but he was secure, and past a sense of the Treachery that was plaid him. She had him secretly carried to his own House, and put into the hands of his Ser∣vants: As for her part, she had all the pleasure she proposed to her self. By this malicious design she was rid of the Bassa, but her thoughts ran continually
of Ismael. She admir'd at her own in∣constancy, how in the Morning she loved Osman with a Passion so precipitate, as to resolve to do all things for his sake; and now she had not only an indifferency for him, but a Passion for another: Thus agitated, it was impossible for her to sleep that Night, nor could the Morning afford her any Repose; she was resolved very often to write to Ismael, to tell him the Passion she had for him, but that she did not know how it would be received; and if he were not already in Love with some other, though she had Charms not only capable to cause, but to excuse incon∣stancy. She languish'd in this restless state, till she was told, that a Page of the Bassa had brought her a Letter from his Lord; she open'd it, and found in it these words. WHat can I say, Madam, capable to excuse me of a weakness, which is however pardonable, if you consider it as the effect of Love? All that I remember of last Night, is, That upon the point of being the happiest of all Men, the greatness of my Pas∣sion made me the miserablest: Your Charms were too dazling, and the sense I had of
them was too much, to bear them without be∣ing transported; you saw in what a manner I fell dead at your feet; attribute it, my Princess, to the effect of Love; had you been less fair, I had been less amorous, and by consequence more happy: What a Reward is this! and what a return for all my disquiets! do not multiply them, by punishing me. The sense of my misfortune will kill me, unless you assure me by a Letter, that you forgive the excess of a Passion, only criminal in be∣ing great. Homais enquired of the Page, how his Lord did, who told her, that he was very ill, and not in a condition to go out of his Chamber; and that Ismael, who was of a near Relation to him, was to pass the day with him. Homais presently re∣solved to go and seek him there, and to that purpose she writ this Letter, in An∣swer to the Bassa's. THE fear I had for you, my Lord, made me lose all thoughts of Resent∣ment. Comfort your self that you are dear to me; that I love you, and long for the return of your Health; a little more mode∣ration will not be amiss for the future. Adieu.
I come to see the Sultaness your Wife to day, that I may have an opportunity of seeing you. Adieu. Homais did nothing but laugh at this Adventure, to see the Credulity of the Bassa, and how he turn'd it all upon Love: She was in a negligent undress, which she put on to make her look more languishing; and in that she thought to please both Osman out of sympathy, and Ismael out of the thoughts that she was become so for the love of him: But the truth of all was, because it became her best; she did not forget to put on the Scarf she had first seen this latter in, and which she had not worn since: And at the usual hour for visiting, she went to wait upon the Sultaness, who was in the Bassa's Chamber, where they brought Homais: Osman was lying upon a Bed; he looked very pale with his late Adven∣ture: Ismael was sitting by, who appear∣ed a thousand times handsomer; than ever; Homais gazed incessantly upon him, which she pretended to the Bassa was out of discretion, that so she might give the Sultaness no umbrage. Osman was not satisfied with this; he pursued her with
his Eyes, and very often surprized hers in the pleasure they took to look upon Ismael: She perceived how uneasie he was, and therefore rose up to be gone: At the motion she made, her Scarf, which she had purposely loosned, fell down; Ismael took it up, and would have resto∣red it to her: She let it remain in his hands some minutes, and smiling, said aloud to him, That he deserved to wear it for the pains he had taken: I believe you are not enough in favour, my Lord, with any of the Ladies of our Court, to receive such Presents from them as yet; and therefore I am resolved to be the first that shall make you any of this nature; and the Sultaness shall, if she please, tie it on. At this the Sultaness, who could not refuse the Office, set her self to do it; the Bassa was greedily looking on, and Homais turning to him, said, Do you not see, my Lord, what I do to employ your Wife, that so I may gain one moment of time with you? And is that all the Design you have in it? returned the Bassa coldly. Yes, replied she; for what other can there be? You are not jealous of your Cou∣sin, sure, whom I have never seen bt twice: You know I love you; teach not
my Heart by your ill-grounded Suspicion, to repent of the Inclination it has to e∣steem you; I am very sorry to see you in this condition. I shall quickly be resto∣red to health, Madam, interrupted he, if you continue your Goodness and your Promise to me. Endeavour you Health first, replied she, and we will talk further of that. She pitied him to see him look so ill; and yet still to talk to her in that manner, she thought his Head ran too much upon Love, for one so pale, so sick, and so al∣tered as he was; and therefore she would say no more to him, not considering that she was the cruel Cause of his illness, for which she had no sort of remorse. The Sultaness had finish'd her Work, and Ismael, who by this time perfectly knew the Scarf, came with so good a Grace, and with so much Joy, to thank Homais for the favour that she had done him, that she answered him with a lan∣guishing air, That it was his fault; if he had not greater Advantages. She could say no more, because the Eyes of the Bassa were incessantly upon him, and she went away some moments after. As soon as the Bassa found himself a∣lone with Ismael, whom he was despe∣rately
jealous of, notwithstanding all that Homais had said to convince him of the contrary, he resolved to frighten him from returning her any favourable appea∣rances: You are doubless, my Lord, said the Bassa to him, seeing him look upon that fine Scarf that had been given him, decoy'd with that mark of Favour from Homais; but deceive not your self too much, she often makes Presents of that nature, and not always neither with de∣sign; I forbid you to entertain any upon her; you know what you owe me, and what occasion you will have for me: If you would not have me abandon you, you must resolve to obey me; I cannot believe you, Cousin, so blind as to yield upon bare appearances; Homais is of an Illustrious Blood, she will never have the Consent of her Father for your Alliance, and therefore I would counsel you betimes to avoid the snare that is set for you. Ismael protested to the Bassa, that he had no thoughts but of obeying him; and that besides, he did not think Ho∣mais to be that Beauty as other People esteemed her. This satisfied the jealous Bassa, who did not believe his Cousin yet so much in Love, as to dissemble with him.
But Ismael easily saw the Motive that induced the Bassa to speak as he did, and therefore did not think himself obliged to tell him the truth of things: He saw the inclination Homais had to love him, and she was too fine a Woman not to make one wish to improve it to the great∣est Advantage. He consider'd, that in marrying her, he should more advance his Fortune, than in any thing the Bassa could do for him, and was therefore re∣solved to make use of it now, when it appeared so favourable; and began from that very moment to entertain a design upon her; therefore taking leave of the Bassa soon after, he went to his own Lodging, where he writ her this Letter. YOƲ have made me to love you twice, Madam; and the Conversation I held with the unknown Lady in the Palace-Gar∣den, which so entirely charmed me, made me to resist the Beauty of Homais, not imagi∣ning there could be in one Woman such a Composition of admirable Qualities. At the first sight of you there was a War in my Breast, because I would not yield that the Charms of your Face should supplant the In∣terest she had made by her Wit: But when
by irresistible Proofs I am inform'd, th could be none but Homais that could m¦tain a Conversation with so much Addre and that the Person of the unknown Lay could be no other but that of my Divine Prin∣cess, it is not to be wonder'd, if I assert my self the most passionate of Lovers; my Heart could not resist such a combination of Charms: It yields, and resolves to give it self up whol∣ly to them, and to follow blindly the Destiny you prepare for it. After he had sent her this Letter, which you may imagine was very well received, though there was no return made to it, he walk'd towards the Palace, and on that side where her Lodgings were; 'twas Night, but not dark, so that it was a very pleasant Season. Homais was walk∣ing upon a Terrass-walk, from whence she perceived him, and immediately knew him, and saw that he lookt attentively upon her; she made no question but that he was there for love of her, and now considers him as one very passionate, which perswaded her it was a great deal of Cruelty to let him languish, when she had so much inclination to the contrary. She call'd him softly to her, and told
him, that he should stay there a quarter of an hour, and then she would send one she confided in to admit him. She re∣tired, and left him so ravish'd at these words, that it was impossible for him to express his joy: She returned to her Wo∣men, was undrest, and laid in Bed; and after all were retired, she sent for Ismael to come to her Chamber: You may ima∣gine his joy, to be brought to the very Bed-side of a charming Woman, that lo∣ved him, and that would be lov'd by him; he was some time kneeling, and kissing her Hand, without the power of saying any thing, till she began with a sigh, and looking tenderly upon him, You see, my Lord, how far you are trusted; and that having never seen you but twice, you are this moment in a possibility of expecting all from me; I may say with a truth, that Love is a weakness, and the greatest of all frailties; you see what it makes me do, judge of the violence of it, by the extraordinary effects it produces: At these words she raised her Lover from his knees, where he was kneeling, to sit by her on the Bed: The excess of his joy had so transported him, that he could not sustain himself there, he let himself fall
in a languishing manner by her, and after two or three moments of silence, he said thus to her: Since you flatter me so much, Madam, in the Opinion of your Love, and that I enjoy at this moment the greatest of favours from you, give me at least leave to hope, that you will not de∣ny me the proofs I demand of you; and that you will permit me — All is per∣mitted you, interrupted she; but is this a time to believe any thing can be refused you? or where is the necessity for asking for what you may take? is it to redouble my shame, and make me more sensible of the injury I do my Honour? Ah, for that, Madam, reply'd he hastily, you need not to have any fear that I would violate it; I were unworthy then indeed of the Honour you do me, I will be the pre∣server of it; and since I love you in so sacred a manner, you need not to have any apprehensions: I would make you my Wife, and it is to that inestimable Happiness I aspire; if you love me, as you pretend, you cannot refuse it me, nor ought you to have any regret, for admit∣ting me thus alone by Night, when I shall have had the Honour to Marry you— Ah, interrupted the deceived Homais,
where is the occasion for all this? and cannot we love without marrying? At these words she took the Hand of her Lo∣ver, and laying it upon her Breast, taught him by that Action, and by what she had said, that it was a much easier thing than he imagined it; if his surprize were great, his joy was not less, though perhaps he had rather have advantaged his Fortune, than have gratified his Passion; but who could resist so strong a Temptation? They must have had very little of the Lover, to have been able to have done it. Ismael had a quite contrary Opinion of her before; for when he believed her en∣tirely vertuous, he would have thought it his greatest Happiness to have marry'd her; now he rendred thanks to his good Angel, for delivering him from so appa∣rent a danger, and past the Night with her doubly satisfied. You see in what a posture the Affairs of the Bassa were in; he had been pro∣mised the first Embrace, and is hardly now in a possibility of having the second; he that had loved her with so perfect a resignation, and to whom she had made so tender returns; he, I say, to have the Reward of all his Services given to ano∣ther,
that she had never seen before, is a sufficient example of her inconstancy; and after which injustice, we cannot won∣der at any thing she does. The following day she drest her self to appear at a splendid Collation her Father gave to the Prince of Libardian, who was come from Colchis, for the good of his own Affairs, and resolved to make some short stay at Court: He was a Prince in the declension of his Age, but his Con∣versation was sweet and ingenuous; his Soul was amorous, and he still retain'd that part of his Youth; he had a passio∣nate inclination for the Service of the fair Sex, and knew admirably well to make his Court, so that he was ever well re∣ceived, as well for his Merits, as Quality; in short, what occasion is there for us to speak farther of his Person? He came to the Entertainment, and was presently charm'd with the Beautiful Homais: The first impressions she made upon his Heart, was too strong, ever to b efaced; never was so sudden and so entire a Conquest; he had not seen her since her being a Woman, for that the Regency of Colchis obliged his absence from his own Court, Homais quickly perceived the Effects her
Beauty had wrought on the Heart of her Soveraign; she affected a sort of sensibi∣lity her self, to engage him the more; she hearkned with attention to all that he said, and gave it its due commendation: Praises from the mouth of a Person we love, are ever well received; the Prince flatter'd himself from thence, that he was not indifferent to her; and she, who had found in him what would gratifie her Am∣bition, was resolved to Marry without Loving, and accordingly treated him af∣ter such a manner, as perswaded him her inclinations were as strong for him, as his were violent for her; this, in lieu of disgusting, the more inflamed him; for there is nothing works so much upon Old People, as this Opinion; it makes them vain and fantastick; they think it not impossible for them to create Love in Per∣sons; they believe any thing, rather than that they are Old, and are easily flatter'd into an Opinion of what they desire; they trust all appearances, though never so ridiculous, provided it hits the wishes of their Souls, and are most accessary to their own deceiving. Homais, who was not ignorant of this, pleased her self to see the effects of her
Dissimulation, and how greedily the Prince received the Poison of her Praises: The most ingenuous are often the soonest de∣ceived, when they meet with those Per∣sons they would be lov'd by; and their own Hearts being exempt from Flattery, they believe all the World as sincere as themselves, especially when there is no appearance of Interest they can have in it. We are not to wonder then, that the Prince, who was himself an honest Man, suspected no deceit in Homais: He enter∣tain'd her presently with his Love, which she received with a feigned Modesty, which is the truest way to create a good Opinion in those we would enslave. She appear'd very reserv'd, but her Eyes, which she did not much manage to the contrary, went into their usual languishment, which perswaded the Prince, who carefully ob∣served them, that she was not insensible: He allow'd a great deal to her Youth and Modesty, and to spare her the confusion, he believed himself lov'd by her, without her telling him so. A Lover so commodious, who inter∣prets every thing to his own Advan∣tage, was the properest for Homais, in
the design she had of gaining a Husband; and when he prest hr to Marry, she re∣ferr'd all to hr Father, who she knew wold embrace wih joy th Honour that was don h; but above all things, she enjoyn hi crcy in the management of the Affair: This she did because of the Bassa; she knew not how he would re∣ceive the News of a Rival, and was there∣fore resolved to keep fair with him, till the business should be put past his Power to undo. As soon as the Entertainment was over, and Homais alone, she sent a Page to enquire of his Health, with this Letter. WHY did not you send to day, my Lord, to tell me the state of your Health? Do you think that I have no fears for you? Or do you so little value my Life, as to take no care of it in the preservation of your own? Adieu. Put me quickly out of the pain I am in, in this uncertainty. Adieu. She writ him this Letter to quiet him, and assured her self, though she had not heard from him all that day, that he was still ill, or he would have been to wait upon the Prince at the Entertainment,
since there was a possibility of seeing her there; she thought her self secure that she should not be troubled with him that night, and therefore sent another Page to seek out Ismael with this second Let∣ter. HOw irksom was that Crowd of People, my Dear, to day! They did not allow me a moment to speak with you; 'tis now in our power to redeem the time past, and to re∣compence by the pleasure of being alone, the pain we had by being in company. Adieu. I would have you come with the soonest. Adieu. The Page that had the Letter of the Bassa in charge, found him walking in the Garden of the Pallace: He was better towards night, and had some thoughts of a visit to Homais, and to that end was going to write to her, to beg the favour of a meeting. When her Letter came, he was transported with it, and told the Page he would go and carry the Answer himself; and immediately crossed the Gallery that led to her Lodging: He was entred before she had notice of it; and bing come so far, she could not deny him admittance to the Bed-Chamber where she
was, he appearing pale, but had however a great deal of joy diffused over his face. He threw himself on his knees by the bed, where she was lying in expectation of Ismael's coming: He kiss'd her fair hand, which she gave to raise him from the ground, and in all probability he had there been very happy, if possession of her we love can make us so, when the Woman that was of her Confidence came to give her notice that her Father was coming, and would in two minutes be there. When our Destiny is capricious, 'tis in vain that we expect to be happy. The unfortunate Bassa, more dead than alive at this most cruel disappointment, was for∣ced to suffer himself to behid; he would go into the Dressing-room, but Homais told him, That it would be too near; that her Father might perhaps take the fancy to go in; and that he came not there at that hour for nothing; and that he must resolve to enter a Closet at the further end of the Dressing-Room: They had no time to lose, she thrust him in with a great deal of precipitation; and locking the door, took the key in her pocket, and went again to the Bed-Chamber, where she found that it was Ismael, and not her
Father, that had alarm'd her so: She had suspected the truth of this before, and laughed to her self at the design of the poor Bassa, who whilst she held him lock'd up in that restraint, suffered the most sensible of Injuries from her, in that she bestowed her favours upon a young Rival, who had no other advantage over him, but that of a shorter acquaintance with this fickle Princess: He told her, That as soon as he had received her Let∣ter, he flew with all possible haste to obey her Commands. The Conversation was very tender, and lasted a good space; the Bassa, began to be very impatient; he heard a Man's voice, but believing it was her Father's, he durst not make the least noise. Homais would punish him once for all, and was resolved to detain him there yet longer, when her Woman came running in, to tell her that of a truth her Father, with the Prince of Li∣bardian, was come of her side, and would be immediately with her. This confoun∣ded her, she was disordered beyond re∣covery; she knew not what to do with Ismael, she consulted him and her Wo∣man, and presently resolved to put him into the Dressing-Room, for that there
was no other place: She remembred that she had the Bassa lock'd up, and that he could not come out, if he should en∣deavour it; which she doubted not but he would do, if he suspected there was another in the outer-Room; she gave it to Ismael in charge, that he should not make the least noise, nor remove from the place where she put him; that be-besides her Father, she had other appre∣hensions, which she would tell him when time served; that it concerned her Life, he should exactly obey her; and that if he did not, it might be fatal to all: She recommended him to the care of the Gods, and had not a long time been so devout as then. By the time she was re∣turned to her Chamber, the Prince with her Father was entred in; they told her that the reason of their coming at that late hour, was to acquaint her with the News which had been brought the Prince, of an Incursion the Abcas had made into the Kingdom of Colchis: They have broke the Truce, Madam, said the Prince to her, which we had taken with them; and it is necessary that I instantly depart to pu∣nish their Faithlesness; but, Madam, it is death for me to leave you; in the un∣certainty
of my Happiness; the Prince your Father has made me hope, that you will not refuse your Consent to my Glo∣ry; and nothing of less consequence than the preservation of my Life, should have brought me here, at an hour very unfit to visit Persons of your Rank and Merit. Here Homais declined her Eyes, being in an uncertainty what to say, and dreading of all things that she should be discover∣ed, when her Father in a few words told her, That the Prince was so much taken with her, as to resolve upon a Marriage with her, for the following day, because he was to depart within two; and strict∣ly commanded her to receive the Honour, with that resignation as became her. It is I that am to esteem it my Glory, re∣plied the Prince; but passionate as I am, I shall refuse it, unless the beautiful Ho∣mais agree without reluctancy; it is bet∣ter that I should die, than affront her re∣pose. My Lord, interrupted she, I have too much Obedience for my Soveraign, and too much Admiration for his rare Qualities, to deny my Heart to merit so irresistibly: I yield, Prince of Libardian, pursued she, in giving him her hand, and believe that the Duty I owe a Parent, is
the least inducement to this Condescen∣tion. I receive this Happiness, answered the Prince (in kissing her fair hand) with all the Transports that can proceed from Adorations so sincere as mine: And when I repay with Baseness or Infidelity the Favour, I give you leave to destroy that Life, over which I give you an absolute disposal. After they had thus resolved upon the Wedding the following day, the Prince with her Father retired, fear∣ing to incommode Homais by a longer stay at so unusual an hour. But it is time to return to the Bassa, whom we left in the Closet of Homais: How did he accuse Heaven and his hard Fate, for taking him from the Arms of that charming Woman! He remain'd in that cruel constraint some moments, with∣out any other use of Reason; and all his Sense was employ'd in reproaching his irreconcilable Stars; at length his Re∣sentments gave place to his Curiosity, and the desire he had of rejoining those Con∣versations which had been so cruelly in∣terrupted; he listned attentively to hear if the Person was gone, whom he mistook for the Father of Homais, and heard sighs which could not proceed from any but
passionate Lovers, whom he judged to be engaged in a Conversation too amorous for his Repose or Honour: An, now is this cry'd he: Has this fickle Person thus abused us? we must ruine this fortunate Rival, and undo her. As he was in these thoughts, he heard the door of the Dres∣sing-Room open, with all that had been said to Ismael; and Homais was no soo∣ner returned to her Chamber, but he softly opened the door of the Cabinet, which went with a spring, and was more than Homais remembred; and calling to Ismael in a low voice, Here, here, my Lord, come in here, or Homais may want room for a third. Never was any Sur∣prize comparable to Ismael's; he heard his Cousin's voice, which he perfectly knew; and coming to him into the Clo∣set, which the Bassa shut upon him, Is it possible, my Lord Osman Bassa, that I should find you in the Closet of Homais? and is this then the result of that good Advice you gave me? I see well the In∣terest you took in it. It is very true, my Lord, replied the Bassa, and you are not mistaken: I have had some concern for Homais, and should have made no difficul∣ty to have owned it to you, upon your least
distrust; but this renders you more cul∣pable, and you should have took the war∣ning I gave you. An what, would you have had me, replied Ismael, return'd with cruelty and disdain those Advances that were made? No, my Lord Bassa, that is not like a gallant Man; though perhaps had I known how faithless she is, I should have taken another manner of Conduct. We have both, answered Os∣man, too much Honour to be imposed up∣on, and we must both abandon her; she is not worth our Anger, neither shall she be the occasion of a Quarrel between us. Here he imbraced Ismael, and gave him a short account of his Engagement with Homais; and Ismael repaid his Civility, by the confession of his; after which, they both resolved never again to speak to her. The Bassa was irreconcilably di∣satisfied with her, as having the greatest reason to be so, and therefore renounced her without reluctancy; but Ismael, who had been well treated by her, found that his Obedience to the Bassa, had as great a share in the business, as his Honour could have, though he loved no more than others, to be cajoal'd with, in such an imposing manner.
As soon as the Prince of Libardian was departed, Homais came into the Dressing-Room, with a design to send away Is∣mael, and release the Bassa; but what was her surprize, when opening the door, she found not her Lover, nor any other, though she had not much time to reflect? for the Closet being open'd by the Bassa, he came out of it, followed by Ismael, who only saluting Homais with a pro∣found respect, went out of the Chamber, and out of her Lodging, without her ha∣ving the freedom of spirit to speak to them. But at length having recovered her sur∣prize by a happy presence of mind, which Nature had blest her with; she ran after them, intending to recall the Bassa, but it was too late, he was gone, and she re∣turned in a desperate rage: Ah! cry'd she, be not these the Actions of Traytors, to combine thus together to destroy my repose? Then she reflected with hor∣rour on that Adventure; and fearing it should make a noise, and prevent her Mar∣riage with the Prince, she resolved to write to the Bassa, whom she loved best, in this disposition of her Soul, because she had most injur'd him; and she doubted
not but to recall him, since she had her Heart to reward his return; nay, she in that moment resolved to sacrifice to him all her Kindnesses for Ismael, who she had satisfied her Curiosity with, and therefore intended to abandon. She much feared the Spirit of Osman, who had been ill treated, and therefore resol∣ved to imploy all her Arts, to make him return to her, believing it the only way to hinder him from talking. But with these Resolutions, it was im∣possible for her to sleep that night; she passed it in a thousand inquietudes, and resolved to write to him as soon as he should be awake: She forgot it was to be her Wedding-day; and when it was morning, she arose, but was prevented from sending her Letter, by this follow∣ing one, which she read not without per∣plexity. YOƲ will doubtless wonder to hear any thing from Persons that ought no longer to remember you; you have very well decei∣ved us, and better than any other could have done, because there were two that loved so well, and were by consequence so much blind∣ed; but now that we are no longer so, and
fear not any new weaknesses from your Charms, we owe so much to the remembrance of that tenderness we had for you, as to put you in mind that you need not fear any thing from us; a generous Spirit can never be brought to injure what he once adored, what∣ever Reasons there are to excite Revenge: We do not reproach you; and find no disposi∣tion at all to complain; we are already de∣parted upon your receipt of this, to the War against the Abcas; our Prince has comman∣ded it, and our Inclinations make it easie to obey. After the two Illustrious Cousins were departed from Homais's Lodging, they began to consult their Hearts, if they had force enough to carry them through in the Resolution they had taken. It was more easie for Ismael to resolve of it, be∣cause he had not been so long in love; and his Passion being only the effect of Gra∣titude, it slackned when he was convinced that he was not the only beloved; besides he had no further expectations, which made him less ardent; for nothing so much takes off from a violent Inclinati∣on, as the acquisition of Desire. On the other side, the Bassa had been in conti∣nual
apprehension, and still deceived, which at length tired him, and made him less sollicitous of the Lover: He could have wished for his revenge; but there be∣ing no time nor possibility to effect it, he must resolve to think no more of her, but to consider her only as one that me∣rited not the being beloved. He had not been long come home, when he was sent for by the Prince; and being such a Per∣son as I have described him; it was no wonder that he was honour'd with the esteem of all. The Prince of Libardian, who knew his Courage and Experience, created him Prime Visier of Colchis, and made him General under him of that Army, which he intended should march against the Abcas, with immediate Or∣ders to go to the Castle of Rucs, where Leron then resided, to receive his Com∣mands, and to get all things in a rea∣diness against his return to Colchis, which should be in two days. The new Visier found this Imployment very agreeable to his Inclinations; it was much for his Honour, and would oblige his absence from the faithless Homais. Ismael saw the occasion too glorious not to embrace it; he told the Visier that he would at∣tend
him, and share with him the danger of the War, as well as he had done the Favour of Homais. They were presently to depart; and before they went, writ that Letter which was last inserted: The Visier, who well knew her temper, was affraid it would more afflict her than all the Reproaches that could be made her; he was not deceived in his Opinion, for it more perplexed the Soul of that haugh∣ty Princess, than the most outragious Exclamations could have done, by rea∣son of the indifferency it was writ with: She tore it into a million of pieces at the reading; she fancied that she had most reason to complain: The Traytors, cries she, (all transported with Rage) never loved me, and I detest them both▪ and upon both shall my revenge be fatal: The Prince whom I am going to espouse, will, I am certain, remit his Power to me, and I will punish as I see occasion. In this resolution, she suffered her self to be dressed to all the advantage imagi∣nable; and her temper being naturally gay, she had not much to do to appear so on this occasion, though her Heart was however deeply affected. The Prince came, and the Marriage was celebrated
with all the pomp of the Country; it pleased the Vanity of the new Princess, to see the Court that was made to her; her Melancholy gave place to it, and she never appear'd in better-humour: The Prince was ravish'd with his good For∣tune, and believ'd himself the most hap∣py of all Men. Homais wanted not Ad∣dress to improve the advantagious Sen∣timents he had of her: Never was there any thing seen more Glorious than that Ceremony, nor any thing more Beautiful than Homais: The Prince was more in Love than ever, and she had the pleasure to see her Ambition gratified, which ever was her most powerful Ascendant. In the mean time the Visier was ar∣rived at the Castle of Rucs, where being confirmed in his Ministry by the Prince of Colchis, he assembled the Forces, that since the late War had been quartered in several Camps throughout the Kingdom, and marched with them against the Abcas, leaving the Princes of Colchis and Libar∣dian to follow with the Main Body. His Orders were, not to meet those Abcas that had made an inroad into the Coun∣try, but to fall himself into the Territo∣ries of the Abcas, whilst the Princes fought
their Army, which was, as we have de∣clared, by a breach of Truce, entred Colchis. We shall pass over in a few words the particulars of this War, and only content our self with acquainting the Reader with the result thereof, which was highly advantageous to the Victori∣ous Colchians. The Visier, according to his Orders, fell into the Country of the Abcas with his Army, and having easily vanquished what Forces he found upon the Borders, he marched uncontroulably far up into the heart of the Continent, burning and destroying all that was fruit∣ful or habitable. The King of the Abcas, with the Prince his Son, was marching against him (as he understood) with a potent Army, which he knew himself not strong enough to encounter; therefore he resolved to retreat with his Forces to∣wards the two Princes, whom he intend∣ed to joyn. Pursuant to this Resolution, he speedi∣ly dis-encamped, and marched on his left Hand through the Country of the Abcas, being informed by his Spies, that the Princes of Colchis and Libardian had vanquished their Enemies; and not con∣tent with repelling the remnant of the
conquer'd Army, they were also entred the Country of the Abcas with great Ho∣stility, which had obliged the King to alter the design he had of fighting the Visier, for that of meeting that more formidable Army, led on by two such Victorious and Renowned Princes. Os∣man being confident that the Intelligence was good, did not however alter the de∣sign he had taken, but marched, as I said, on the left hand, with an intent to fall upon the Rear of the Abcan Army. Continuing his March, he entred a high Forrest, made very delightful by Nature and Art, which had embellish'd it with admirable Industry: There ran a clear Stream through it, and at the en∣trance on the other side he discovered a great many magnificent Pavilions, which he presently understood to be the Resi∣dence of a Beautiful Lady, whom he saw before him, abandon'd to all the rigour of War, her Guards having, upon the fight of the Visier's Army, basely fled from her defence into the adjoyning Mountains. As soon as he saw this beauteous Cap∣tive, the Visier was himself the van∣quished; she was surrounded with a Train
of Thirty Ladies, who by a world of Tears bewailed their hard Fate, whilst she alone stood unmoved at the danger: She was habited in a slight Dress for the Field, branched with Gold, and clasped in some places with Diamonds: Her sta∣ture was of the tallest, and her shape a perfect symetry; but when we cast our Eyes upon her Face, it is impossible to see so many Charms, without being mo∣ved; her Hair of a shining black, with Eyes of the same colour, that sparkled with all the fire common to them; her Complexion not to be equall'd by any thing, but the Majesty of her Mien, which enough declared that she had not lost her Courage with her Liberty. She was Armed with a Poyniard, which the Prin∣cesses of the Blood usually wear when they are in the Field; and she having in vain exhorted those of her Guard, which were yet within hearing, to dye, rather than yield themselves to be Slaves; but seeing she could but ill prevail over Per∣sons struck with a panick fear, she drew her Poyniard, to prevent the Insolence of any that should be wanting in their re∣spect to her. The Visier being not ig∣norant of her design, beheld her with
infinite Admiration, and would perswade his Heart, that the Princess of Libardian was not comparable, in point of Beauty, to this unknown Lady, approached her with fear enough, and saluting her after the manner of the Colchians, I know not, Madam, (said he, in letting fall the point of his Sword) what it is you see in us rude enough to give you so much ap∣prehension; the most barbarous would cease to do so, at a sight so beautiful; and you, of all the World, ought not to fear any violence, especially when, like now, you meet with a Person who has a Heart, such as a gallant man ought to have; you are capable of producing asto∣nishing effects in the most insensible; we all obey you, and your Authority is Ab∣solute in all places where the great Visier of Colchis shall Command: His Quarrel extends not to the Abcan Ladies; and it is enough that he conquer the Men, to dispute with Women is too much. My Courage, reply'd that charming fair, ne∣ver leaves me; though another would be surprized, perhaps, at a turn of Fortune, insupportable; the distance being very great between a Prison and a Throne; the assurance you give me is not displea∣sing,
and you are better instructed, tha to treat ill a Princess, and the Daughter of the King of Abca, who was diverting her self in this Forrest, with her Court, believing her self free from the dangers of the War, in a place remote enough from it, in our apprehension; another, perhaps, would not tell you thus much being your Prisoner, and the chance of War giving you right to use me as you please; but you are too generous to treat me as other than a Princess; I have al∣ready an esteem for you, I believe I am not deceived, and that you are what you appear to be. The Visier was so charmed with the Beauty of the Princess, that he remain'd without reply. She saw the effects of her Beauty, and viewing Osman with a fatal Tenderness, which her Heart could not resist, for the best made Man of the East; You are dumb, my Lord, renewed she; is it from the chief Visier of Colchis that I must have returns so silent? Must I go with you, and not be assured of the Care of my Conqueror? Too obliging Princess, reply'd the Visier, beginning to recover himself, the Reproach is just that you make, but durst I explain it to you,
it would be found not disadvantageous to a Beauty so miraculous; but, pursued he with a sigh, you do ill to call me your Conqueror; would to the Gods my Li∣berty were as certain; you have yours, Madam, intirely; and though I run the danger of my Princes Anger, what would not one do to oblige one so lovely as you? Command me to conduct you to the place you will retire, though, durst I add, I make my self by this separation, the most unhappy of all Men. The Princess, by a little blush that came into her Face; let him know, that she un∣derstood him; she had never seen any that appear'd to her so handsom; she took her Eyes from him with difficulty, and a sigh, which forced it self from her Breast, let her know, that her Heart was more engaged than she thought it was; how∣ever, a sense of Glory would make her treat him as if she did not understand him. I know not (my Lord, said she with a serious air) if I may believe you in earnest, when you tell me, that I am free; my Liberty is a greater Present, than I am willing to receive of an Enemy to my Father and my Country; I am no other than your Prisoner, the King will
not let me long be so; allow me only to send him an account of my being taken by you, and I assure my self you will not treat me ill. The Visier, as much in Love as he was, would not permit the Princess any longer to be a Prisoner; he conjur'd her to re∣ceive her Liberty from him, since her Qua∣lity being unknown to his Soldiers, there would be no talk made of it; he chose, as he said, to be deprived of his greatest Happiness, which was that of seeing her, rather than to incommode her. The Princess, by a fatal prepossession, admi∣red this Generosity of her Lover. It is against my self I speak, Madam, did he renew, when I desire you to accept your freedom; alas! how dear is it going to cost me? And since it is impossible for me to live and not adore you; I am go∣ing to prevent your disdain, by a death, which I design as a punishment to that presumptive Heart, which is not able to resist you: I speak to you as well for the first time, as the last; have the goodness to pardon me, I go to Death, which, perhaps, I shall receive from the King your Fathers Arm, as a Reward for that Love, which my Stars have created in me,
for the Princess his Daughter, and which  know to be highly audacious: As he finish'd these words, he bowed, not ex∣pecting her Answer, and mounted his Horse, whilst the Princess returned to her Pavilion, conducted by her Guards, who were returned from the Mountains, by the permission of the Visier. The Princess was glad that he had not staid her Reply, which her Glory requi∣red should be a severe one; and she re∣solved to make him sensible of his Pre∣sumption; but then on the other side, she fear'd her Heart, it would not have her angry at a Person so amiable, and to whom she had such powerful Obligati∣ons. She was several days in great despon∣dency, the more she reflected on the Vi∣sier, the greater was her Tenderness for him: How often did she call her Glory to her aid? But Love, that had so sud∣denly possess'd that Heart (before insen∣sible) being once entred, would not aban∣don his Station: How often did she ex∣claim against her Weakness and his Pre∣sumption, who without being a Sove∣raign Prince, had dared to make a De∣claration of Love to her? he that was an
Enemy to the King her Father, and who was then engaged in an actual War a∣gainst him, and had ruin'd with Fire and Desolation a great part of his Ter∣ritories. But then, she would also reflect on what he had done for her, his Gene∣rosity, his reciprocal Passion; and in a word, all those fine Qualities, that ren∣dred him so amiable: Alas, how weak was her Glory, to her Love! in treating him ill, she should ruine all her Repose, and though he was no Soveraign Prince, he was of Rank in the World, and pos∣sess'd a thousand inimitable Vertues; when, I say, she was with some frailty, considering of all this, Ah! cry'd she out, what Treachery is this? How does my Inclination betray my Glory? I must ne∣ver suffer it to be conquer'd; and should my Weakness augment, how would my Reputation be blasted? and into what irreparable inconveniencies would they not lead me? But how hard is it to avoid ones Destiny? And by a turn of Refle∣ction, I foresee this Passion will ruine me, it has already undone my Peace; and though it is in vain to contend with a Fate so determinate, we may hide our weakness, that is yet in our power to do,
and by endeavouring to treat the Visier ll, we may at length come to do it with∣out reluctancy. But ah! renewed she a moment after, my Destiny has taken care of me, I need not fear a Person that I shall never see any more: Is he not re∣turned already to Colchis? Is he not far from me, and beyond the power of any more perplexing my Heart with so much anxiety? In the mean time the Victorious Prin∣ces of Colchis and Libardian, having sent their Orders to the Visier, to fall upon the Rear of the Abcas, presented the Bat∣tel to that King, who had indeed a more numerous Army, because he had been well prepared before he broke the Truce, and designed the entire Conquest of Col∣chis, though his hopes had been defeated with his first Army, and made him stand only on the defensive part: It was within few hours of Night before he accepted the Battel, because he staid for the coming up of a considerable reinforcement of Horse led by the Prince his Son, a gal∣lant young Prince, and who behaved him∣self with a Courage proportionate to his Birth: In a word, the Body being ar∣riv'd, they joyned Battel, and the Visier
fell in upon the Rear, where he was re∣solutely expected by the Prince of the Abcas, who knowing him to be near, su∣spected his Design. There had not a long time been fought a Combat so bloody; Fortune would not decide the Palm, and the Night came on, just as the Victory began to incline to the Colchians; they were separated by the darkness, and the Retreat being sounded, the Visier came over, with the remainder of his Forces, to the two Princes, having been much wounded in the Fight, by a parti∣cular Combat he had had against the Prince of the Abcas, over whom he had some advantage. The Prince of Libardian, who lived not, in a divided state from his Charming Wife, grew impatient of that tedious War, and resolved to conclude it by a lasting Peace; and the day no sooner ap∣peared, than in lieu of renewing the Fight, as he might very successfully have done, he sent to the King of the Abcas, to take a Truce for two Months, appoint∣ing Commissioners to meet from either side, upon the Frontiers, to agree upon the Articles of Peace; the principal one was, a Marriage between the Prince of
Colchis and the Princess Bassima, Daugh∣ter to the King of the Abcas. Levan being extream Amorous, yield∣ed, not without repugnance, to this Al∣liance, as not knowing any thing of the Beauty of her he was to Marry; but the Protector, who was a great Statesman, knew well the Advantage, and disposed the Prince of Colchis to obey him. The Picture of Bassima being brought to Levan one day, during the Negotiation, he found in it so many Charms, that he be∣gan to be in Love with the Original; he shew'd it to all his Court, and having particularly asked the Opinion of Osman, whom he knew could judge of Beauty; but that Minister had no sooner cast his Eyes upon it, but he grew pale with sur∣prize, seeing it to be no other than that Princess whom he adored, and whom he had encountred in the Forest. Levan observing the disorder of his Visier ral∣lied him for too much sensibility of heart, that would not let him, without surprize, see the Picture of a handsom Woman, who, perhaps, fell very short of what the Painter had made her; but to put that Minister quite in despair, he told him, that she was within a few days to
be his Wife; and that it was him, as his first Minister and Favourite, that he in∣tended to honour with the Character of Proxy, and that he should prepare his Equipage, to go within a few days to the King of Abcas Court, to Espouse the Princess Bassima, whom he was al∣ready impatient to see. Osman reply'd with such an aukward air, to the favour of his Master, that Levan knew not what to interpret it to; but not believing he had been prepossessed, he made no far∣ther reflection upon it. Never was any Destiny more cruel than this! How often did the Visier lament his hard Fate? But after perplexing himself in vain, by a turn of thought, he found himself not so wretched as he had fan∣cied; a Marriage with Levan, would in∣fallibly bring Bassima to the Colchian Court, where he should have Opportunities to see and discourse her frequently, which was more than he durst ever hope, should she remain in Abca. He considered fur∣ther, that should she assent (which was very improbable) to Espouse him, he was not in a possibility of accepting the Honour, because he was already married to a high-born Sultaness, the Sister of
the Prince of Libardian, who though none of the youngest, and a Woman he had never loved, yet it was by her Interest in the Protector, that he came to be first Minister of Colchis; Selima, for so was she call'd, loved the Visier with a parti∣cular affection, and would have sooner died than quitted her Interest and Preten∣sions to him, though the first Woman of the World should desire it of her. In the mean time, the Treaty for Peace went on; but it is not our Design to enter upon the Affairs of State, nor the Proposals that were offered; let it suffice, that in the end the Peace was ra∣tified, and the Visier named to Marry the Princess Bassima by Proxy. Osman prepared all things with a Ma∣gnificence suitable to his temper; most of the Colchian Nobility put themselves into his Train; and being the first Man after the Prince and the Protector, it added much to the Splendour of the Em∣bassy; Ismael accompanied him during all the War, and would not now forsake him; he was some time after married to the Lady of the greatest Quality and For∣tune in Abca, who had been taken with him in the Forest, where she attended
Bassima, as he did Osman; and in few. years he raised himself by the Favour of the Princess of Libardian, to to be the greatest Man in Colchis. The Visier con∣fided in him his new Inclinations for the Abcan Princess, and deplored to him his hard Fate, that was going to treat him with nothing but Misfortunes. The Visier was met within a days Journey of the King's Pavillions (where he then resided) by the Prince of the Abcas, who embraced him with much esteem, after the trial he had had of his Valour in the late War; and the following day brought him to his Audience to the King, who received him suitably to his Rank and the Character he bore. After the Ce∣remony was past, the Prince conducted Osman to a magnificent Pavillion, that had been prepared for him, where he left him to his repose, and went himself to inform the Princess Bassima of what had passed: With what incredible surprize did she not learn the Quality and Name of the Ambassadour of Colchis! She had heard long before of the Sacrifice they intended to make of her; and her Soul had suffered terrible Conflicts, in the thought that she must Marry into a place
where she should be every day obliged to see the Person for whom she had a fatal Tenderness: But her Soul being as eleva∣ted as her Vertue, she resolved never to suffer that Minister to entertain her with his Passion, which could not but be cri∣minal; and carefully to conceal from him her own Weakness of Heart, she would submit to so fatal a Conjunction, though she saw there was little Happiness to be expected for her, by a Marriage with a Person so amorous and inconstant as Li∣van was given out in the World to be. She took therefore a resolution worthy her Glory and Verture; and whilst the Visier was in his Pavillion, distracted with fears and hopes that she would forgive or punish his presumption, he saw an Eunuch enter his Tent, which she had sent to him; who no sooner found himself a∣lone with the Visier, who had comman∣ded out the Attendants, thn saluting him after the Abcan mode, My Lord Vi∣sier, said he to him, I am sent to you by the Princess Bassima, who is both offended and obliged by you; she owes you her Li∣berty, 'tis true, but she says that your Presumption has much taken off from her
Acknowledgment; she is a Princess jea∣lous of her Glory, and refuses you Audi∣ence, unless you bring with you Senti∣ments conformable to your Estate and hers; you are a great Minister, and can∣not be ignorant but a perseverance would be ruinous for you, and very dangerous for both: You are not permitted to see her, unless you renounce a Passion, that she knows not from whence it took en∣couragement to declare it self; in a few days she will be authorized to command you, that which she now intreats: She is going to be your Soveraign, your Queen; she will have it in her power to ruine you; and though she be too gene∣rous to expose even her Enemies, yet here her Glory is interessed, and she will be obliged to seek redress from the Prince her Husband, should you disobey. Not, my Lord, pursued the Eunuch, but she believes you sensible of your Duty, and gives you this Advice, as to a good Friend, she was once obliged to you for her Free∣dom, and abhors Ingratitude, as much as she loves her Glory; she should he sorry to be wanting in acknowledgment; she is willing to forgive what is past, and to lose the remembrance of your Crime, if
you are not your self wanting in your Obedience to her. What, that I shall cease to love her? replied the Visier; it is impossible, it is not in my power to do it; I am contented to live without Hope, but then she must allow me to adore her. Do you well consider, my Lord Visier, interrupted the Eunuch, what it is you say? how do you think this Discourse will sound in the Ears of a vertuous Prin∣cess? I shall be sorry to make her ac∣quainted with the difficulty you find in obeying her Commands; but I cannot dispense my self from being faithful to her Interest, and in pronouncing the Sen∣tence of your Banishment from all places that she shall honour with her presence. Ah, hold, interrupted the Visier, I assent to all that you have said; I will die, I will never see her more, but yet I must love her as long as I live; you wonder much at my Conduct, but I deserve your pity; I am upon the point of renouncing all my Hopes, my Happiness, but tell my Divine Princess she shall be obey'd; I will no more speak to her of my Passion, it shall not any longer offend her; but cruel as she is, I must love her still, it is not in my power to do other; and she
ought to pardon, in an unfortunate Lover, a Passion which he is so little master of: Yes, you may tell her she shall be obey'd, at the price of all my Repose. The Princess found greal consolation in the Promise of the Visier; she prescri∣bed her self a very severe Conduct, and and was resolved to follow it. The next day, he came to pay her the Compliment of the Prince his Master; this Minister, notwithstanding his Cha∣racter, had something so different from the mein of an Ambassadour, that it was easie to see he would be properer to sol∣licit an Affair of Love for himself, than another: What poison was it to his Re∣pose, to find the Princess more beautiful than in the field! Her Dress was more regular, her Looks composed, and cer∣tainly nothing was ever seen so amiable; her Eyes were large and sweet, as well as sparkling; her Mouth was inimitable, her Teeth of an orient so white, that few e∣qual'd them. Osman was lost irrecove∣rably, and he owed to his good Fortune (that was assisting) the acquitting him∣self with general applause, of the Com∣mission his Prince had given him.
Some days after, the Nuptials were ce∣lebrated, with the pomp so essential to that Country in matter of Marriage; but it was with a mortal despair that the Vi∣sier performed the Ceremony; the Prin∣cess perceived it, and assisted with a Me∣lancholy suitable to the state of her Soul; she gave her hand indeed to the Visier, but, alas! it was for another; and all her Repose was offered by that cruel Sacri∣fice: Osman durst not explain to her his Thoughts; his Eyes were full of sorrow, and his Air dejected; they passed over the Entertainment without being sen∣sible of what was said to them: The Visier made it his business to observe the Princess, he found agreeable entertainment in her Melancholy; and in that temper of Mind it was that gave him most satis∣faction. The day appointed for their depar∣ture, Osman, who had not said any thing to the now Princess of Colchis since the Audience, so exactly had he observed her Orders, as not to speak even of indiffe∣rent things, found her all alone in a Gar∣den, cut out of part of a Forest that join'd her Pavillion; her People being retired to a distance, she was entertaining her
self with the thoughts of her misfortune; she believed none to be so unhappy as her self, and stood thus a good while leaning over a Balustrade that formed an ascent, into an open Arbor, when she heard a person sigh behind her; it was the Visier, who had not dared to interrupt her, and who had been there already half an hour: My Lord Visier, said the Princess to him, what is it you come to seek for here? To die Madam, replied he dejectedly; that would be undoubtedly a much happier state, for nothing can be so miserable as the Life I live. You think so, answered the Prin∣cess; but it is so customary a thing to be∣lieve our own Misfortunes greater than others, that I do not wonder you flatter your self in that point. Alas! Madam, renewed he sighing, I am so fully satisfied of my own unhappiness, that I have not the good fortune to doubt it; my Prince is my Rival, but what a difference in our Destinies! I must complain of my cruel Stars, that in failing to make me the least of Men, has made me the miserablest; either of the two extreams, and I had been blest, a Soveraign Prince, or a Slave; in this latter, I should at least have been exempted from a hapless Love; and your
Majesty too well understands the happi∣ness of the first; it is that which my Prince is going to possess, and perhaps without valuing the Blessing as he ought to do. Take heed (my Lord) interrupt∣ed the Princess, what it is you say; a fa∣tal Conjunction has made his Interest mine; had I not a real esteem for you, I should not pardon you thus much; but take heed what you do, follow the Ad∣vice I gave, and rely upon your own Pro∣mise. I shall obey you all my life, repli∣ed Osman, and it shall not be my fault, if your Majesty finds occasion to complain of me; if I am sometimes criminal, when I cannot avoid being so, your Majesty must have some indulgence for involun∣tary Errours, and be so favourable as to believe I obey you, as far as is possible for me to do. The Prince of the Abcas broke up this Conversation, by coming to tell his fair Sister, that every thing was in order for her departure. The King, the Queen, and the whole Court, accompanied them a days Jour∣ney; but the Prince left them not till they came upon the Frontiers, that the Visier found it impossible once to renew his Conversation with the Princess; and
not long after his departure, they were met by the Princes of Colchis and Libar∣dian, and their Court. Never did any Prince appear so satis∣fied with his good Fortune, as Levan, up∣on the sight of that amiable Princess; he embraced a thousand times the Protector for procuring him that Blessing, and re∣warded profusely the amorous Minister for his safe Conduct of her into Colchis, where they were no sooner arrived, but the Prince would have the Marriage con∣summated. The Visier not able to see the good for∣tune of his Prince, beg'd leave to retire some short time, to put his own Affairs in order; which being granted, he depar∣ted from the Castle (notwithstanding all the Caresses of the Sultaness Selima, who used her endeavours to stay him) with a resolution not to return, till the Passion of the Prince began to cool, which he knew would not be long, in a person so amo∣rous and inconstant. Alas, how true did he Prophesie? Le∣van was a Prince not design'd by Love to persevere in so laudable a Passion; he became less affiduous after some time; he was pauled, and began to search after
other fair Objects. Oh, what a grief was this to the fair Wise of this Incon∣stant? And how flattering was that tran∣quillity she had promised her self? The Visier's Retreat had left her no disturbance on that part; and till this ill-timed in∣constancy, she found more Happiness in her Marriage, than she could have hoped; but to those that have misfortunes for their Lot, all those traverses that are made to avoid them, are either ineffectual, or bring them sooner upon us; this was too plain, on this occasion; the Princess complain'd to her Husband, that his cares were not the same; and (in a word) brought him the sooner to know, that he no longer loved her as he had done, though she were much more beauteous than any thing he could ever love. That which the more confirmed him in his injustice to the Princess of Colchis, was an Adventure which happen'd to him some days after, and which I am going to relate. One Solemn day, that he was seeing some Fire-works play, and the Cannon in the Castle discharged, a Slave  came upon the Rampire, and knowing Ismael amongst all the Train of Courtiers,
pull'd him by the Arm, and begg'd him, to present him to the Prince, for he had an Affair of Consequence to impart to him. Ismael enquired what it might be? But the Slave gave him many denials, and in the end, told him, that if he would not present him, he must desire the fa∣vour of some other. Ismael believing in∣deed that it was of moment, came up to the Prince, having an easie access to him, and told him the whole story of the Slave: Levan caused him to called, and enquired of him the business: My Lord, reply'd (boldly) the Slave, the Affair is for your Cabinet, and you will believe me, when I assure your Majesty my Ad∣dress is from the finest Woman of the World, that has for your Highness a pas∣sionate inclination. The Prince imme∣diately fired at this, yet not knowing whether the Advice were good, he paused some moments; but his Curiosity over∣came all other Considerations, and telling the Slave, that he rely'd, in point of Beauty, upon no other judgment than his own; bid him come with Ismael at an hour he told him, to his Cabinet. The Prince had an impatiency, which could not be other than an ill Omen of
his approaching Misfortune, and there∣fore retired sooner, than People thought, to his Lodgings, where were already the Slave and Ismael attending his coming in his Cabinet; this latter withdrew, be∣cause the Prince had not told him, that he might stay; and the Slave no sooner saw himself alone with the Prince, than kneeling, he presented him the Picture of a very fair Woman, set in Crystal, with this Letter. To the Prince of Colchis. EXamine the Miniature I send you, and assure your self the Painter has not flatter'd me; consider if I merit the hard Fate of Confinement, which I am at present reduced to; and if your Generosity shall tell you, no; you will break those Chains which hold me, and are proof against any inferiour Power: 'Tis to this I sollicite you, but not unless you find in your self as much in∣clination as desire to know a Person, as yet unknown to you, though her Heart has long since been acquainted with your Merit; and that she owns no greater desire, than of ma∣king proportionate impressions upon yours.
The Prince of Colchis read this Letter with surprize, and beheld the Divine Picture with admiration; he found there Beauties which presently seized his Heart, and drawing it to his Lips, he kissed it; Ah, cry'd he, what colour'd Hair is here! what Eyes! what a Mouth, and the Oval turn to the Face, which gives it an irre∣sistible Air! Tell me (said he, turning to the Slave) tell me, I conjure thee, the Charming Original, who has already filled me with Love, upon the bare sight of her Picture, and the reading of her melting Billet, whose Chains is it I am to break: And is it possible that in Na∣ture there can be found persons capable of giving trouble to this amiable Beauty? My Lord (reply'd the Slave) I am for∣bid to tell your Highness what you de∣mand of me; and the fair person that sent me, will take it as a mark of your Passion for her, if you press me not to a discovery, which upon the assurance of your sensibility, she will make you her self: And your Majesty may well imagine she intends not to stop here, her Request at present is, the Honour of an Answer to her Letter, which I can assure your Highness, she impatiently expects. That
I love her already, reply'd the Prince, is undeniable; therefore I will take the Reasons thou givest me, and obey this Charming Beauty. Then having a while longer gazed upon that fine Picture, he found what was requisite for writing, and answer'd her Letter thus. To the fairest Person that ever was. I Can return you (Madam) no other An∣swer, than that I love you; it must be all my Language, in that alone I break your Chains, I see you free, and in the Arms of the Prince of Colchis. He deliver'd this Billet to the Slave, giving him great promises of Liberty and Advancement, when he returned with the discovery of that Charming Person, which he impatiently longed to know. When the Slave was gone, the Prince con∣templated the Picture, and found it so handsom, and the love of the Original so extraordinary, that he was not able to deny his Heart to so many Charms. Ah! cry'd he, how certain is it, that had I known you first, I should have anticipa∣ted your Passion; and the danger of ac∣knowledgment,
or ingratitude, had not then been on my side: But how impos∣sible is it to be cruel to so fine a Woman? What do I say? rather how can I behold her without dying with Love? He said a great deal more to that fine Picture, and was so long entertaining his Curiosity, that Ismael, who waited without, and pretended to some confidence in the mat∣ter, because he introduced the Slave, came to the door of the Cabinet, impa∣tient to know the Adventure, and hoping his Prince would call him in, which he was not mistaken in; for Levan hearing some tread, call'd, and Ismael having shewed himself, the Prince bid him en∣ter; and being naturally not very secret in matter of Love, found this young Lord a very fit Confident, and related to him at large the whole story, giving him the Letter to read, and then shewing him the Picture, upon which he had no sooner cast his Eyes, but he knew it to be that of the Princess of Libardian. Ah, said he to himself, perfidious Homais! Then turning to the Prince, my Lord, said he, you will pardon my surprize, when I ac∣quaint your Highness, that this fair per∣son, who is a thousand times fairer than
this Picture, is yet the Wife of the Prince our Uncle, upon whom he so passionately otes, and the fair Homais, born of the llustrious Family of the Chickalites. Is his possible, reply'd the Prince? And are you sure that you are not mistaken? I am so well assured of it, my Lord, answer'd Ismael, that if your Highness please, I could this very Night bring you to the sight of the Princess of Libardian, who, as I am certainly informed, is confin'd, through he Jealousie of that Prince, in the Castle of Phasia, upon the Confines of Libar∣dian, not many hours riding from this place. Ah, Ismael, let us not delay a moment the seeing that Charming Prin∣cess, reply'd Levan; what though she be the Wife of the Protector, she is too fair, o be ill treated; and We were unworthy o live, did We not return the passion she has for Us. In finishing these words, he der'd Ismael to get Horses ready as soon as it was Night, for he would not defer iting that Princess, and would take ne with him but Ismael, to whom he at very moment gave the greatest harge in the Kingdom, next the Prime ister, and assured him of all manner of vour.
It is a long time, that we have left th fair Princess of Libardian, without say¦ing any thing of her: Her Marriage wit the Prince was no sooner over, than h conducted her to the Castle of Phasia where he left her, to go against the Ab∣cans. She lived there in a profound so∣litude; for Selima, having by some un∣lucky Adventure, found one of her Let¦ters to Osman, failed not the day afte the Wedding, to shew it to her Brother beseeching him to take Order for her Re¦pose, and his own Honour; and not per¦mit any Conversation between the Visie and the Princess. This gave the poo Prince of Libardian (who passionate loved his Bride) such a passion of Je¦lousie, that subtle as she is, she perceive it in its birth, and cast her self a thou¦sand times at his Feet, intreating him  tell her, what it was that had disorder' him. The Prince, all easie to whatev she desired of him, gave her the Lette and acquainted her with what the S¦taness his Sister had told him. Homa as I have before said, having a presen of Mind, above all Women, read the le¦ter without any emotion, and assured t Prince, it was only Selima's supicio
and that she had never since she was born pake to Osman with the Language of ove; moreover, that was none of her Letter, nor did she know to whom it belonged; she could the better say this, because it was not signed with any Name, and she usually writ her Billets in diffe∣rent Characters from her other Letters; so that it was hard for her to be detected: In a word, she so well perswaded the Prince, that if he were not really cured of his supicions, he seemed to be so; and her aversion and hatred, together with her desire of Revenge, set her in such a vein of rallying the Visier, that she made the Prince desire her to forbear, because he loved well his Sister, & would not hear her Husband ill spoken of; for Homais pro∣ceeded so far, as to conjure him to take the Great Seal from the new Visier, and to settle his Repose, confine him to some place far from the Court, where she might never see him. The Prince, the Man o the World, of the best Principles, would not do as she desired him; and not be∣lieving her very sincere (though he pas∣sionately loved her, and found it his greatest Affliction to believe her false) when he departed from her, he left a
Guard, pretending it out of State and Safety to her Royal Person, but in truth to confine her to the Castle, where, as I have said, she led a Melancholy Life, and a thousand times repented her self, of having married a Prince so capricious, and so jealous. At length the Truce being taken with the Abcas, be returned to Pha∣sia, and caressed her with all the passion imaginable; he visited her often, during the Negotiation for Peace; she was then but of the Age of sixteen, and it was to be wondred, how a Person so young could have so much penetration. She lay in here of a Young Prince, who was named Alexander, and afterwards came to be Prince of Colchis. She had like to have died in her Labour, and the Prince of Libardian knew not till then that he loved her so much; he stirred not a mo∣ment from her Bed-side, and often fainted with extremity of despair, when her Life was in danger. All these Testimonies of Affection, which would have softned any other Heart but hers, served but to give her more trouble, because she saw the greater was his Passion, the more impor∣tunate would he be: At length she re∣covered, and found her Beauty not at all
impaired, the Prince her Husband thought it every day received new lustre, her shape was become more delicate; and, in a word, she never appeared with greater Beauty. When the Marriage was of the Prince of Colchis, she sollicited the Prince of Libardian, to let her come to Court, which he could not resolve upon, being alarm'd by the jealous Sultaness his Sister, who, upon the Visier's retiring, assured him, it was only in order to see Homais: This made him that he confined her more closely, though he failed not by all man∣ner of good treatment, to gain her; but she fell into such a languishing fit of Me∣lancholy, and so much detestation of him, that she resolved to dye, rather than con∣tinue in a Life so miserable. The Prince of Colchis had been represented to her, as the Prince in the World, the best made, and the most gallant. She began, upon these Reports, to entertain a great deal of Curiosity to see him; but that being impossible, she desired of the Prince her Husband, that he would send her the Pictures of the Prince and Princess of Colchis: He fail'd not to oblige her in this, not suspecting the fatal Consequence. She found the Princess too charming for
her Designs, but thought  all the Men in the East not comparable to Levan. She had both these Pictures in Miniature; and her Husband seeing she affected them so much, caused that to be brought to her, which in great, represented the Prince of Colchis Victorious over the Abcas: She so excessively indulged the inclination she had to love him, that in a few days she felt all the pain that arises from the great∣est passions; and she learnt with incredi∣ble joy, that Levan no longer lov'd the Princess, but to say better, was grown weary of her: She thought this a fit conjuncture of time for her Designs; the Prince of Libardian she abhorred, and wicked, as I have described her, it is not to be wondred, that she engaged so for∣cibly in a passion incestuous and abomina∣ble. She knew too well the greatness of her own Beauty, and fear'd not to Con∣quer the Heart of Levan, since his being in Love with her, assured her of her Li∣berty; and she even despaired not of be∣ing one day in the place of the Princess of Colchis; besides she desired to be re∣venged upon the Visier, whom she hated much more than she did Ismael, because this latter acted only at the instigation of
Osman. In short, without any further delay, she gain'd one of her Slaves, who was the same that had introduced Ismael into her Lodgings, and sent him with those Instructions before related, to the Prince of Colchis. Oh, how great was her Anxiety during the absence of the Slave! With what impatiency did she look out for his return? Her Heart beat, her colour rse and fell at the least tread; at last, after long expectation, he arri∣ved, and declaring to her, the joy that Levan had, upon the sight of so fair a Picture, presented her the Prince's Let∣ter, which she had no sooner read, then that she fell down dead with transports, and it was some moments before she re∣covered her self; then having again ex∣amined the Slave, she made him repeat them often, and took an infinite delight in hearing him relate the disorder the Prince was in at so unusual an Adven∣ture. It was some hours in the Night, when, not yet weary of these Reflections, she saw the same Slave, that she had sent, enter her Chamber, follow'd by a per∣son, mufled in a Cloak, which he had no sooner thrown off, but she knew him to
be Ismael: Her surprize was great at so unexpected a sight, and she knew not how, without some confusion, to behold him. Fair Princess, said he (in ap∣proaching her) the Prince of Colchis has honoured me with the knowledge of what has passed between you; and you are to reckon your self very happy, that the Discovery was made to no other. Can you then have the goodness to for∣give my frailty, interrupted the Princess, and talking no more of what is passed, keep Levan's secret and mine? I love him, Ismael, but it is only upon the sight of his Picture, and by sending him mine, I pretended to create in him a reciprocal passion. Your design has taken effect (Madam) reply'd Ismael, and our Prince this moment waits you in the Garden-House of the Castle. Is this possible to be true, renewed Homais? Ah! Ismael, if things hit right, there shall be no Em∣ploy, nor Honours too great for you; in a word, you shall command the Prince himself, and you shall no longer need a dependance on the false Visier, whom I intend to ruin. The amorous Prince of Colchis, having found himself as much in Love, as it was
possible for one to be, with a person he did not know, took Horse in the begin∣ning of the night, and, with Ismael, came to the Castle of Phasia, very well known to this young Lord, (who was now crea∣ted a Bassa) for he had a very fair House stood near it, where he resided before he came to Court: He knew, well all the Appartments in the Castle; and being come under the Walls, they found the Bridge drawn, and the Watch set, so that there was no entrance without discove∣ring the Prince's Quality, which they in∣tended not to do; the young Bassa's Cre∣dt lay at stake, he grew almost despe∣rate, and resolved to hazard all things, rather than not satisfie his impatient Ma∣ster, to whom he had promised so much: The Castle-Garden lay South of the North-Gate, where the Great Watch was kept; the Wall about the Castle was low, I mean that made of Stone, and the Mote ruinated and dry, when the Phasis that ran by, was at a low ebb, as it hapned to be then; Ismael left Levan, and without much difficulty got over the Stone-wall; the night was very dark, and he feared not to be discovered by the Centinels on the Bulwarks; the Mud-wall was of an
easie ascent, the Turf being slid in many places for want of repair, because the Prince of Libardian feared not to be in∣vaded on that side, being upon the Bor∣ders of Colchis. Ismael, after some time, ascended the Mud-wall, and easily leap'd down the Curtain, which reached the whole length of the Garden, bound with nothing but a Myrtle-hedge, because that part of the Castle was accounted sacred; and none of the Souldiers durst walk in that quarter, since Homais resided there: Ismael being thus happily got to the Gate of the Garden without discovery, knew well that the Prince of Libardian was in∣disposed at the Castle of Rucs, and that there was no danger of him; but just when he was going to leap the Hedge, a Centinel that kept watch near the Gar∣den-gate, bid him stand; Ismael had his Sword drawn in his hand, and the Soul∣dier having no Fire-arms, he came bold∣ly up to him and told him, That he must either resolve to die, or assist himself and the Prince in the design they had to enter the Garden: The Centinel well knowing Ismael, as having seen him at Court when it was his turn to be of the Prince of Li∣bardian's Guard, readily assented to what
he desired; the Bassa assured him of re∣ward, and giving him some pieces of Gold, bid him go and enquire for a Slave he named to him, and which was the same that had brought the Message to Levan; the Souldier found it no great matter of difficulty to find him, and soon after brought him to Ismael; the Bassa in few words told him that the Prince wai∣ted without, and asked him how they should contrive his admittance? The Souldier was alled to the Council, who in hopes of having his Fortune made (and well assured to be kill'd, if he was unfaithful) told the Bassa, that some pa∣ces farther there was a Sally-part which rose not far from the Mote, and would bring the Prince unseen, and without the trouble of climbing into the Castle: The Slave approved of the Advice, and they all three defcended to it; there was (also) little care took of this, no more than of the Fortifications, for the Reasons before mentioned, so that the Bassa found no op∣position than what rose from the rubbish of Brick and Stone, which were fallen in∣to it for want of repair. It was not long before they found the Prince, who was wholly impatient; and being assured by
the Slave (whom he knew again) that Homais was the Woman he sought, pro∣mised both to him, and the Souldier Pre∣ferments and Reward, and bid the Bassa take care of their Advancement; they came through the same way into the Ca∣stle, and easily got into the Garden; the Slave conducted the Prince to a Sum∣mer-house, which was prettily adorned with Lanskips and other Curiosities; and leaving him there, went with the Bassa to the appartment of Homais. How impatiently did Levan expect the coming of that charming Princess, whose bare Picture had fill'd him with Love! and the praises Ismael gave him of her Sense, ravished him the more; he had not waited long, when the Slave came and set up twelve Wax-Tapers to enlighten the place: Levan saw there his own Pi∣cture crowned with Laurel, and victo∣rious over the Abcas; not far different from it, was that of Homais in great, upon which the Prince fixed his eyes with amorous regards, but he was agree∣ably diverted from that entertainment, by the sight of that charming Princess, who entred the Summer-house in a pompous undress, led by Ismael Bassa.
The interview between two persons who had never seen each other, and yet were passionately in love, upon the fight of a Picture, must sure have something extraordinary. We confess it to you, Reader, that for our part we find it im∣possible to express to you the emotions of these two amiable persons, who were of so uncommon a make, as the most skilful Artist, let his flattery be never so gross, with all his agreeing Colours, would find natural Graces in them, not to be imitated by Art; and by consequence they were abundantly satisfied, that in each other there were Charms above feeble representations, and that they as much surpassed their Picture, as they did all other Beauties. Levan was of an extraordinary propor∣tion, his Hair black, his Eyes large, and of the same colour; but there was in them so much fire, together with Regards amorous as his Soul, that it was hard for a Lady to resist their lustre; his Nose was well proportioned; and if he wanted any thing, it was a littie clearness in his Com∣plexion, which was enough recompensed by a Majestick lofty Air, that was visible in his Countenance; his Lips were bet∣ter
colour'd than Vermillion; but above all, his Shape was so exact, as not a per∣son in his Kingdom but yielded him the advantage: We have already given you the Character of his Soul, without speak∣ing of his Sense, which was not only a∣bove all Princes, but equal'd the greatest pretenders to Wit, and he passionately loved People of that Character: He had often complained, that his Wife had little, or at least kept it from him by a severity in her Discourse, which he approved not of, and took as a certain sign of her ha∣ving more Judgment and Wisdom, than that flashy Wit which (in his Opinion) made up all the Charms of Conversati∣on: He also complained, that as she sui∣ted ill his Genius, her Complexion too well agreed with his to make him love her, being black as well as himself; and that he should have had much more kind∣ness for her, had she been either fair or brown. What then, Reader, dost thou think were the thoughts of this Prince (knowing his Opinion to be such) when he encountred with the beautiful Homais? who had in her Face and Temper, all that Nature could have framed to please the amorous Prince; certainly his Satis∣faction
is hard to be defined, and would be prejudiced, should we compare it to any other than what Homais resented, at the sight of a Prince so raised above other Men. He flew presently from the place where he was to meet her, and throwing him∣self at her knees, he embraced them with inconceivable ardour, his Soul being ready to expire with his sighs, and it was long before he could speak to her in any other Language; her Cheeks were redder than her Lips, with the shame of what she had done, and obliged her with a great Hand∣kerchief which she held in one hand, to cover her Blushes: Is it possible, Madam, cried the Prinee full of transport, that the Person of the World, the most amiable, should of her self call me to a Conquest, a thousand times more inestimable than the Crown I wear! I love you by Inclination as well as Gratitude; and my Heart can ill defend it self against such a Concur∣rence of Obligations: Where was I in those fatal Moments, when you were married to the Protector! Ah, cruel Prince! it is I only ought to possess a Wife so charming, because that there is not a Heart like mine so full of Love, to
make the returns to so great a Beauty, which it may justly claim. He said a great deal more to her on this occasion, and she answered him with an insinuation that really touched him; she conjur'd him not to interpret to a want of Vertue, that irresistible Inclination she found in her self to love him, to break her Chains, to bring her to Court, and to allow her some place in his Thoughts. He answer∣ed to all this Discourse, with a Passion agreeable to what he felt; and being re∣ally inflamed, he assured her, That it was impossible for him to live from her; and the only Request he would make her, should be to preserve his Memory; with∣out which happiness, he should be the most unfortunate Man in the World: They enlarged themselves a great deal farther on this; and being the two Peo∣ple in the World that had the most Wit, it was impossible they should resist each other: The Prince daring beyond all Men, pressed the fair Homais for greater Proofs of her Love; but she had a design to manage him better, and assured him he was never to expect nothing but her Heart; her Honour was something so sa∣cred, as she would chuse to die, rather
than betray it by her criminal Inclinati∣ons: But her Eyes so contradicted her Words, that they gave the Prince no de∣spair, and he doubted not with a little better acquaintance to satisfie all her scruples. In a word, though it was the longest night of the year, day brake be∣fore he could think of leaving her; the Bassa, who had been a Witness to the Conversation, conjured him to depart, telling him the People would be up in the Castle, and he could not possibly scape undiscovered: Levan sighed with regret, and before he would go, conjured Homais to send the same Slave with a Letter to him that day, that he might carry one back from him; he kissed a thousand times her fair Hand, and assured her that he would take order for her bringing to Court in a short time: The light of the Tapers gave place to the approaching day, before the Bassa could take him from her knees; and it is certain she did not much press him to retire; at length he departed, and having left the Castle with the same precaution he entred it, got on Horseback with Ismael Bassa; and all the way between that place and the Court, he entertain'd him with nothing but the
Beauty of Homais, in such a manner, as he knew very well that he was deeply tou∣ched with it. In the mean-while, the unfortunate Vi∣sier not able longer to live from his ado∣rable Princess, finding that solitude fed his Melancholy, and being call'd upon by the importance of his Charge, to return to Court, he came again to the Castle of Rues: The two Princes receiv'd him well, though Selima had given her Bro∣ther some distrust of him. The Princess of Colchis had a Melancholy incurable; the loss of her Husband's Affection, had reduced her to such a temper, that it the more estranged him from her; nor did the Thoughts of the Visier, which inces∣santly crouded her Mind, less afflict and discompose her. Homais, the most satisfied Princess of the World, to see the good effects of her Design, fail'd not, in obedience to her Lover, to send him a Letter by that Slave, which was thus expressed.
To the Prince of Colchis. THe Thoughts that I am not wholly dis∣agreeable to my Soveraign, has given me a proportionate satisfaction; but I con∣jure you entertain not any that may represent my Conduct to be criminal; that would cer∣tainly drive me into despair; for I should never be satisfied of your Love, when I was not assured of your Esteem; and yet as it is, I confess I am not wholly freed from that fear I would avoid; for if it be true, as they say, That our Sex is no longer loved by yours, when they once find us touched with their Passion: What is Homais to expect, who begins her Engagement with that which ruines all Intelligences in Love! But my un∣common proceeding, deserves as uncommon event; you are unavoidably to love me, and never to disesteem me; nothing but the sense of your Merit could have won me to so much Irregularity; and the Returns I expect, must have something more in them than Gra∣titude, that alone being not powerful enough to satisfie the Heart of Homais.
This Letter encreased the Esteem Le∣van had for her; he made her a Return so tender, and with so much sincerity, that she was convinced the Prince made not any Reflections upon her Conduct, that were disadvantagious for her, and had all imaginable reason to be satisfied with the good success of her Enter∣prize. In the mean while, the impatiency he was in to bring her to Court, made him almost precipitate that Design; he advi∣sed with Ismael Bassa, and they resolved the business should be done whilst the In∣disposition of the Protector lasted, because he should be no obstacle to that Design. Levan, ever complaisant to his Wife, feigned to have for her more care than ordinary; and seeing her very melan∣choly, he conjured her, if she had any de∣sign to pleasure him, to seek her Cure by Divertisments, or some other way; and knowing how much she loved Hunting, he proposed to her that Recreation. The Princess, whose only desire it was to live well with her Husband, assented to it; and he ordered every thing should be got ready for the next day: The plot was that they should Hunt near the Castle
of Phasia; and the new Bassa, who, as we have said, had a very fair House near it, was to Treat the Prince and Princess at it; where it would follow of course, that Homais would come, and pay her Devoir to the Princess of Colchis, with whom Levan designed she should return to Court. The Protector was not of the Company, his indisposition having not yet left him. They all mounted on Horse-back; that is to say, the Prince and Princess, Osman Visier, the Sultaness Selima, Ismael Bassa, with all the Nobility, and the Colchian and Abcan Ladies, that were of the Prin∣cess Bassima's Court. The Prince of Colchis, being the most impatient of Men, after he had seen a little of the Course, left the Company to follow after, and with Ismael Bassa galloped to the Castle of Phasia, pretend∣ing to look upon the Fortifications. Ho∣mais understanding of his arrival, attend∣ed with all her Women, and her Guards, went to meet him upon the Bridge: The Prince seemed surprized to see her, and having demanded, who she was, of those that followed him, Ismael Bassa with a feigned Gravity told him, she was Prin∣cess
of Libardian. Levan saluted her with much Respect, and conducted her back to the Palace in the Castle, where he was no sooner left without any other Wit∣nesses than Ismael Bassa, but he threw himself at her Feet, and said all to her that could be expected from a Heart so passionate; and having received recipro∣cal assurances of her concern for him, her Chariot being made ready, he conducted her to it, and mounted himself on Horse∣back, to go and Dine at Ismael's House. Homais, as she said, was going to ren∣der her Devoir to the Princess of Colchis; her Guards attending her thither; who having had Orders, not to let her pass out of the Castle, durst not however dis∣pute with Levan, and contented them∣selves with not forsaking her, believing she would return after the Entertainment was over, to repose again in the Castle. During this Affair, the unfortunate Vi∣sier, not able to support that Grief which oppress'd him, and yet not knowing how to dispossess himself of it, had not said any thing to the Persons in Company all the way they rode, but thinking inces∣santly on his Divine Princess, he sigh'd in no other Accents; they came to Ismael
Bassa's House before Levan, and the Prin∣cess Bassima, being wearied with Riding, laid her self upon a Bed in that Apart∣ment they had conducted her to. She dismissed her Ladies of their Attendance, to refresh themselves for some moments; so that the Visier, who never abandoned her, found himself alone at the Beds-feet, without any witnesses of his passion, but that Divine Princess to whom it was ad∣dress'd. He came to the side of the Bed where she lay, and kneeling by her, I continue to suffer for your Majesty, said he with much perplexity, and you con∣tinue to be cruel to me; I will dye this hour, to prevent the continuance of in∣supportable Misfortunes; and to free my Divine Princess from Persecutions that she esteems offensive to her Glory, though the bright Heavens may attest the Innocency of my flames. The Visier paused here, fearing to incense her; but seeing that in the place of answering him, she only wept, and held a Handkerchief to her Eyes, to hinder him from seeing her weakness; Rich Tears, renewed the Vi∣sier; is it possible that there can be any Misfortune upon Earth forcible enough to make you fall? Tell me, my Princess,
what it is that afflicts you: Must this Miserable dye, to expiate that Crime you so obligingly reprove me of? You have seen me long wonted to Sufferings, and Death is preferable to their continuance my charming Bassima, there is Glory in obeying you; behold in me the most ab∣solute of all your Slaves, and believe me, I will find that thing wholly impossible, that shall make me ineffectually receive your Commands. I doubt neither of your Good will, nor your Obedience (reply'd the Princess with the same sorrow) but it is not from you, my Lord, that they can receive redress; the Prince my Hus∣band's inconstancy is the source of those Tears you see me shed, and in this la∣mentable state there is nothing besides, but what is forbiddden me. He is my Soveraign, interrupted the Visier; but the least of your Commands to the con∣trary, should not make me esteem him as such: I say this to your Majesty, to assure you of the resignation I have for all things that you shall desire; and you may well be∣lieve, Madam, that resolving to sacrifice my Life to your disdain, I should but lit∣tle hesitate to offer any others to your re∣pose; not but that I am assured of your
Majesty's refusal to this Proposition; I m too well acquainted with the sense ou have of your Glory, to suspect it can receive the least voluntary Tarnish; receive the Advice I offer you, your Heart is cast in such a mold of Grandeur, that it ought to see without disturbance those Accidents indeed capable to shock a Con∣stancy less setled: pity then the Weak∣ness of the Prince, but appease not his Vanity by the Sacrifice of your Repose; revenge his insensibility, and bestow else∣where a Heart, that will make up all the Felicity of Osman, and without which he must inevitably despair. Ah, my Lord! answered the Princess, in letting her Hand fall near the Visier, how ruinous are you? and how much must I condemn Advice which I must never follow? My Heart is not raised above other Mortals, like them I have passion of Anger, and of Weakness; but all this can never make me Criminal; it is your part to remem∣ber the promise you have made me, and mine, my Lord, to follow the Rules of my Duty. Ah! cry'd the Visier, all tran∣sported with despair, this is not a time, when my Life is at stake, to tell me such cruel News; revoke that Order, my
Charming Bassima, or reiterate it to make me dye; my Miseries are arrived to tha height, that I must necessarily sink unde them; it will be indeed a glorious death, could I be but assured it would leave my Princess any Remorse. What then would you have me do, reply'd she with a sigh? Must I avow to you, that my Heart was never touched with that Tenderness for any, as it has been for you since the first Minute that I beheld you? Yes, my Lord, you bear not all the Misfortunes common to us both: I would never have told you this (and upon which there shall to other consequence depend, than saving that Life that is more estimable to me than all others) had not the infidelity of my Husband given me some disgust of him; but this is all you are ever to hope for, and dare not henceforward complain to me of your Sufferings, since that I acquaint you mine are incomparably more extraordinary, by how much my Glory, and the Customs of my Sex (which can∣not be dispensed with by a Vertuous Prin∣cess) ties me to more rigid Laws than yours. Love (my Charming Soveraign, reply'd the Visier, ready to sink with rapture) acknowledges no difference of
Sexes; and since he has taken pity of my orments, oppose him not; love me as ell by inclination as constraint, and make me dye with delight, after having been so many times near dying with sorrow: How glorious have you made my Destiny! And in this Triumphant minute, how have I forgotten all my past Misfortunes? Redouble, if it be possible, this Happi∣ness; tell me, you will no longer oppose the Testimonies of my passion, nor the good inclination of yours; hearken to my sighs, and let my extraordinary passion produce reciprocal effects in that Breast, already prepared to receive a favourable impression. I have done ill, I see, my Lord, interrupted the Princess coldly, in avowing for you any Tenderness; and you build very fantastick hopes upon an unsure Foundation; my good Opinion of you shall never make me Criminal: You are married, and I am not more free; you have Vertue, and I have Glory; let us not destroy so goodly a Fabrick, regu∣late your flame by mine, we must silently suffer; though I avow to you, before all that we reverence, I could have lived with you preferrable to the highest Monarch in the Universe; but this our inclination is
disapproved by a Fate quite contra∣ctive; nor take it ill, if I Command you not any more to entertain me with your Love; I will say all for you that you can desire, and do you also do me this Justice in your Heart, as to think, never nothing but you could ever Rival my Glory; God and Man would be offended, should I do for you any more; my own Heart would no longer esteem you, should you desire it. The Princess could not finish the Dis∣course, because she had notice, that the Prince was arrived with Homais; the Vi∣sier begg'd leave to retire to compose himself; he passed then down another way into the Gardens, where he consul∣ted with his Heart, what he was to hope or fear; he found the Princess tender be∣yond expectation, and this gave him so much joy, that he long walked in the Garden without any other thought; Ah, said he aloud in the Transports of his Love, how incomparable is my Felicity! Charming Bassima, it suffices only that you continue your Bounties, to make me dye with a surfeit of Pleasure. As he finished these words, he entred an Arbor that was near, and did not presently per∣ceive (so great was his Transport) the
Sultaness Selima his Wife all in Tears, sitting upon the Turf, and leaning her Arm upon the Table. Osman started back, and found that she had apparently over∣heard him; of all Persons in the World she was the least welcome to him at that moment; but desiring to avoid any Dis∣course with her, he was going out again, without enquiring into the cause of her Grief. Selima rising all in a rage, pur∣sued him out of the Arbor, Come back, Deceiver, cry'd she to him all incensed, come back, perfidious Osman, and give me at least some Reasons for thy Infide∣lity, and of thy Barbarity, who canst be∣hold me here ready to dye, without once satisfying thy self of the occasion, though thou knowest too well, that there is no∣thing upon Earth I adore so much as thee. I am always ready to Oblige you in any thing, reply'd the Visier, and I imagine not what moves you to call me Deceiver. Yes, false as thou art, interrupted she, all incensed, I have heard, I have seen all, that thou camest from saying, with the Princess of Colchis; and after this Dis∣covery, never speak to me more; just Heaven will Revenge me, and I only live to desire it. Do you consider well who
you speak of, Madam, interrupted Os∣man, and that none are concern'd in this but your own Husband, and your Sove∣raign Mistress? When they both betray me, answer'd the Sultaness, it is fit I lose all considerations for them: Then, con∣tinuing her Discourse with much vehe∣mency, she learnt him, how, that with∣out having any manner of suspicion, she heard from the next Gallery that joyn'd the Chamber, all that had been said by him and the Princess. And do not you find in it, Madam, said the Visier to her, that we are more unhappy than Criminal? You are more Treacherous than all, an∣swer'd she, and I will no longer acknow∣ledge you for my Lord; at these words she went out of the Arbour, and ran as fast as she could down the Walk, intend∣ing to quit the Garden; the Visier over∣took her, when she had made almost to the end, and catching hold of her, he kneeled upon her Petticoat, that she could not stir; For Gods sake, Madam, said he to her, out of breath, consider what you do, before you ruine me and the Princess of Colchis; I will love you as long as you live, and you may well be assured, that in that Intelligence of Friendship between
Bassima and my self, there is nothing Cri∣minal enough to wrong you in those Em∣braces that are due only to you. The Treason is aimed at my Heart, retorted the Sultaness, and I can never forgive you. As she said these words, she endea∣voured to break from him, when she saw not far from her, the Prince and Princess of Colchis, with the Princess of Libar∣dian, who were come into the same Walk. The Visier rose from his knees as soon as he saw them, and the Sultaness slightly saluting them, turned into ano∣ther Walk; the Visier could not follow her, as he would have done, because the Prince called him, and presented him to Homais, I have promised to shew your Highness, said the Prince to her, the Vi∣sier, whom you have so much commend∣ed. A Person so extraordinary, reply'd Homais, can have nothing less said of him; but it is an uncommon thing, to see a Husband at the feet of his Wife, with the same earnestness as if he were a Lo∣ver; and if I desired any thing, it should be to know what this extraordinary thing could be: Sure, added the Princess of Colchis, it must be worth knowing, and I desire the Information. You shall
have it, Madam, answer'd the Visier, as soon as the Sultaness will give me leave to tell it. If that hinders, I'le go my self and seek her, reply'd Homais; and assuring my self of so much power over my Husband's Sister, I will instantly return with her. At these words she gave her Hand to Ismael, who had just before given her a short whisper, to tell her from Selima, that she had something of mo∣ment to say to her, and expected her in an Arbor not far off. The Prince of Col∣chis saw her go, without daring to fol∣low her, for fear of his Wife; and the Visier, who was more perplexed than was ever any Man, would have given his Life to hinder Discourse between the Sul∣taness and the Princess of Libardian, whom he had reason to believe hated him from what had formerly passed between them; he knew not whether he had best follow her, and the Princess of Colchis, who had remained in that Chamber to receive Ho∣mais, quickly found that there was some more than ordinary, intelligence between that fair Cousin and the Amorous Prince her Husband, and was descending into the Garden on purpose to find the Visier, to oblige him to make his Remarks, and to
tell her his Opinion of them; but when she saw him in that posture, at the feet of his Wife, the jealousie she had of the Prince, yielded in part to that she was possessed with for her Lover; and turning to him, seeing him in so strange a pen∣siveness, after the departure of Homais, Thou hast ill required (said she to him softly, that the Prince her Husband should not hear) that Tenderness I acknow∣ledged for thee; Selima Triumphs over my weakness, which thou hast made her acquainted with, and ye both scorn your Soveraign; if I cannot hate thee, I will at least not love thee; and I warn thee, never again to speak to me: At these words she turn'd to the Prince, and gave him her hand, making a sign to the Visier to go off, which he did, the most sur∣prized, and the most lost Man alive. Mean time, the enraged Sultaness bur∣sting with Revenge and Jealousie, seeing Homais in the Garden, whom she su∣spected had a kindness for the Visier; she resolved to tell her what had pass'd between him and the Princess of Colchis, that she might tell it the Prince of Libar∣dian. As soon as she turned into that Walk, she met with Ismael, whom she
sent, as has been related, to fetch the fair Homais to her; they no sooner met in the appointed Arbor, but Selima embracing her with much distraction, related to her every word of that Conversation the Visier had held with Bassima: Homais would not at first believe it, till the Sul∣taness reiterated it to her: And I conjure you, added she at last, not to say any thing of it but to the Prince my Brother; you may both together, perhaps, do some∣thing for my repose: But what do I say? I am never to hope for any; I go this minute to reside in the uttermost Con∣fines of my Brother's Territories, never again to behold that false Man, of whose Fortune, maugre his Perjury, I desire the Protector to be careful; adieu, my dear Sister, I hazard nothing in acquainting you with this Secret; and I recommend to you and my Brother, that Husband whom I love above my Life, and yet whom I must never see again. As she fi∣nished these words, she went out of the Arbor, with such an Air, as made the cruel Homais have some pity upon her. Selima found Ismael at the entrance, and with his assistance got to Horse, with her People; and being already in the Prince
her Brother's Territories, she resolved not to return to Colchis, but rode forward to another Castle in Libardian, whither she intended to retire her self. But the unfortunate Visier, who had lately thought himself the happiest Person breathing, by a turn of Destiny, found his Misery as in∣supportable as his Joy; his Wife had dis∣covered him, his Princess whom he a∣dored had accused and banished him. Homais, that Enemy to his Fortune, was returned, and what was worst, shared the Secret of the Sultaness, as he did not que∣stion. With these Thoughts he wandred he knew not where, and Fortune con∣ducted his steps into that same Arbor where Homais was alone; she no sooner saw him enter, but casting her Eyes up∣on him with disdain, Your Lordship is mistaken, said she to him, the Princess of Colchis, whom you undoubtedly seek, is not here. I neither sought the one nor the other, Madam, replied the Visier; and perhaps I disturb your Highness, whom I see doubtless in expectation of a more happy Lover. As much in haste as you are, my Lord Visier, interrupted she, stay to receive my Thanks for the favour of your last Letter; I shall never forget it, at
least till I have requited it. You owe me in∣deed something, Madam, answered he, for passing by without that Revenge, which any other less Gallant than my self would perhaps have taken, Falshoods that my Ho∣nour rather than my Inclination has resen∣ted; I owe too much to my Lord Protector, to cast my Eyes upon the Princess he has honoured with his Affection. The Prince my Husband, it seems, is much obliged to you, replied Homais, but he would be yet more, if you had a little more concern for the Sultaness his Sister, and for the Prince his Nephew: Once more, my Lord, you see the Princess of Colchis is not here; and it is best for me to retire, to leave you to the liberty of the place; possibly she may not be long absent, it becomes a Gentleman to be first upon the place ap∣pointed. Rather, Madam, returned the Visier, it belongs to me to retire; I have not forgot the Offices I did you, when I was shut in your Closet; I pretend not to incommode you, and I had at first with∣drawn, if you had not with-held me. As he finished these words, they saw the Princess of Colchis appear at the end of a Walk that led to that Arbor. Well, my Lord, renewed Homais, have I not di∣vin'd
right? but I'll leave you to the En∣tertainment. As she finished these words, she got out of the Visier's arms, that strove to hold her, and turning hastily into ano∣ther Walk, where she was still in sight of Bassima and Osman, she met the Prince of Colchis, who was seeking her; he saw only with the Eyes of Love, and beheld not the Princess, and the Visier so near him, only the charming Homais, whom he ran to meet, and catching her in his arms, Why, my amiable Cousin, said he aloud, have you so long abandon'd me? The Princess his Wife seeing this cruel action, Ah, how I am betray'd by all, said she, in coming to the Prince! Levan struck as with thun∣der at that voice, staid not to hear her Complaints, but bidding the Visier con∣duct her in, he himself led Homais; and calling all his People about him, he im∣mediately got to horse, and with the Princess of Libardian, and the afflicted Bassima, returned to the Castle of Rucs, commanding his Wife and the Visier not to say any thing to the Protector of what had passed. What a Night was this for these four Illustrious Persons! Homais found an in∣different Reception from the Protector,
to whom she related the Adventure of the Sultaness: He knew not well what to think of it, but conjured her not to say any thing to the Prince of it; he appro∣ved not of her coming to Court, and told her that she must resolve to return with∣in two days. She received this Sentence as her Doom, and parting with him in some anger, she went to those Lodgings that had heen prepared for her, taking the pretence of his Indisposition for not passing the Night with him: And as she had before agreed with the Prince, she sent to give him an account of what her Husband had said to her. Levan came alone with Ismael not long after, without light or noise to her Chamber, where she was already in Bed; the young Bassa was sent to secure any surprizal from the Quarter where the Protector was lodg'd: The Room was but enlightned with one single Taper: Homais became nothing better than her Night-dress; and she had been often told, that she looked handsomest in Bed: The Prince found her to his mind in that state, and a hun∣dred times embraced her as she lay: But what do you think, my Lord, she answer∣ed, that the Princess will say after the
discovery she has made? She will never allow me to love you; and I must avow, my Husband is so capricious, I cannot possibly live with him. I forbid you to do it, my dear Cousin, replied the amo∣rous Prince; I would deny you to the Gods, should they ask you of me; I hate my Wife, since I have found out her in∣commodious humour. Ah, my Lord, in∣terrupted Homais, if your Majesty knew all, you would hate her much more for being too commodious; but the Prote∣ctor has forbidden me to relate to you that which I think in Honour you should know; and if your Highness commands me, I will tell it to you. If it be heinous e∣nough to destroy her, returned the Prince, I would not be ignorant of it; for I am resolved to make use of the first pretence to ruine her; I desire nothing more than to get rid of her, that I may enjoy my charming Homais at liberty. Then she re∣counted to him with aggravation all that Selima had told her, and the reason of her retiring her self. The Prince was tran∣sported with rage and choler at this re∣lation; and reflecting certain things in his mind, They have abused me, whispe∣red he to Homais; and I remember well,
that Osman the Traytor was surprized when he first saw the Picture of Bassima. Nay, my Lord, rejoyned Homais, I am informed, that this Intelligence began be∣fore the Peace was concluded; and if you examine him, you will find him guilty in point of Interest, as well as that of Love; this Princess was his Prisoner of War, whom he took in a Forest, with thirty other Ladies, some days before the last Battel was fought; and upon a bra∣vado, returned her  her freedom; he made nothing but her Heart his Cap∣tive, and not considering the good of the State, nor what the success of the War might have been, voluntarily released her, without once acquainting your Ma∣jesty, or the Protector. You have said enough of State, my dear Cousin, inter∣rupted the Prince, pressing her hand, the Villain shall die, and the Trayteress shall be punished with infamy; and this shall not be long deferred; but, my charming Princess, will you do nothing for me? behold how passionately I love you! there is nothing I can deny you; what hinders us from being this Night happier than the Gods themselves? Honour, my dear Prince, returned she with a sigh, forbids me
to do it; ah, reconcile my Glory to my Flame, and I shall willingly receive you. And never any other way, replied the Prince? Can you ruine what you created, and leave me languishing and cold? shew me only a prospect of Heaven, and forbid me the hopes of enjoying it? This is what I am obliged to do, answer'd Ho∣mais, though it cost me my Life; it is bet∣ter to die with Honour, than live with In∣famy. But, interrupted the Prince, when I have rejected that Trayteress my Wife, will you not yield to marry me, maugre my Uncle's title to you? answer me, my fair Cousin; I must see you mine, or you must see me dead: How charming are you, and how sensible is my Heart of those Graces that adorn you! When Bassima is no longer in my Throne, nor in my Bed, will you not yield that I should place you there? How destructive are you, my dear Cousin? returned Homais; and how little shall I consider, for your sake, any thing but my Vertue? my Father con∣strained me to give my hand to the Pro∣tector, whom I have ever hated; he re∣wards my Beauty with nothing but Pri∣sons and solitude; he takes my Heart from that Person to whom it is destin'd
a Sacrifice; he pretends to deny me for ever the sight of you, why does he not rather command my Death? how much easier would it be to obey him? for I can die, my Lord, but I can never acquit you. Neither shall you, my charming Cousin, replied the amorous Prince; my Uncle shall know I stand not in need any longer of his Government; he shall yield you to me, or I will dispeople as well Colchis as his Libardian, and leave not a person alive in either of the Kingdoms to dispute our Felicities; I am concern'd in Honour that the Visier should die, and Bassima shall be punish'd; yes, my Cousin, and then you shall not deny to be mine. When this is effected, answer'd the Prin∣cess, I will be yours; that is to say, I will marry you; I think it very laudable for me to please my self, after having once been sacrificed to the Will of my Fa∣ther. They passed a long time in Dis∣course of this nature; it was late before they parted, and the satisfaction of the Prince made him sleep till i the middle of the following day; but the Jealousie and Affliction of the Princess Bassima, suffer'd her not to take a moments re∣pose; she represented to her self all the
accidents of that fatal day; her suspicions were true, the Prince her Husband was false to her, and was become incestuously amorous of his Uncle's Wife; but it was the falsness of the Visier that most sen∣sibly touched her; What, said she to her self, that Man for whom I have done and suffered so much, is it possible he should be perfidious! ah, no; and we did ill not to hear the Reasons he would perhaps have given us. Whilst she was thus busied in these Reflections, her chief Eunuch brought her this Letter, which she read not without emotion. OSMAN Visier TO THE Princess of COLCHIS. IF it were not absolutely necessary, Madam, for your concerns, that I should break the silence you undeservedly enjoyned me, I would have fled to death rather than disobey'd you; but as long as any danger threatens my divine Princess, it is necessary that I warn her of
it: Selima, whom you saw me kneel to, fatally over-heard all our Discourse, it was that that made me her suppliant; for very far from betraying you, I sought to secure you: Homais has been acquainted with the Ad∣venture, though I know not whether it will go any further: See, Madam, if you had reason to condemn me; Ah, is this the Ten∣derness you promised me? Is this the Con∣cern, this the Preference? I am retiring from this Fatal Court, and go to languish in so∣litude, to complain to Insensibles, to the Rocks and Trees, of my obdurate Princess; your Disdain only will finish my Life; I reject the assistance of Sword, or Poyson, my Despair is alone more violent than them; though could I but once see my Soveraign before I dye for her, to taste those Joys that would anticipate the possession of Heaven, I should esteem Death only as a short Parenthesis between Paradise and her, and fly to him without feeling the Tormentor: All is easie that one suffers for you, and how cruel soever they in reality are, there is Delight and Glory in those Suffer∣ings. The Princess no sooner finished the reading of this Letter, but laying it up∣on the Table, she traversed the Chamber
with some disturbance; at length, com∣posing her thoughts, she cast her Eyes upon the Eunuch, Whence had you this Letter, said she to him, and where is the Visier? He waits not far off upon the Terrass, Madam, answer'd the Eunuch, and begs admittance of your Majesty. I cannot allow him it at this time, she re∣ply'd, but you may tell him, that my Anger is vanish'd. Ah! interrupted the Visier, entring from that Door which opened upon that Terrass, how agreeable is that voice! Confirm it, my Princess, and let us Arm our selves against all Mis∣fortunes. Ah, my Lord, answer'd she, do you well consider what Advantage you give our Enemies, should they know of this interview? And what account shall I make of receiving a Lover, and a Subject into my Chamber by Night, with∣out the consent and knowledge of my Husband? You owe him nothing, Ma∣dam, reply'd Osman; nor am I any lon∣ger engaged to Selima; let us renounce them both, as they have abandon'd us: The Prince of Libardian has related to me all our Discourse, as he had it from Homais; and though he has conjur'd her to say nothing of it, she loves Levan too
well, to obey the Protector. My Heart tells me, that if we remain till to Mor∣row, the mischief will be unavoidable; let us secure our selves then, whilst we have time; I have Horses and Chariots in readiness for your Flight, If you will agree that we take it together: The King your Father will afford you a secure Re∣treat; and as for me, I am assured of one at the Port, if I please to retire to Con∣stantinople: It is certain that your Husband is a passionate Lover of Homais, and she will ruine us to advance her self; fly whilst it's dark, and let me have the Ho∣nour of being your Conductor. If I were culpable indeed, reply'd the Prin∣cess, I should dispose my self to follow your Advice; but when I have no other Crimes but my Misfortunes, I see no∣thing that should oblige me to shun them; and to be innocent, is better than to be happy, if we cannot buy that Hap∣piness but with the loss of our Innocency. Ah, my fair Princess, he answer'd, throw∣ing himself upon his knees, and embra∣cing hers with an addition of Passion and Despair, by reposing too much confidence in your Innocency, you pronounce the Sentence of your Death: Know well,
that you shall be condemn'd without hearing; and those Persons, whose In∣terest so much it is to remove you, will never consider the lawfulness or unlaw∣fulness of the business. All this, reply'd the Princess, may probably come to pass, and I question not but that my Husband aims at my Life; I will willingly sacri∣fice it to him, so he hurt not my Fame; but I fear the ruine of the one, will be the consequent of both; and they will begin my Death, by blasting that Glory, which I have always been so zealous to preserve entire; and yet, my Lord, though I see this misery coming on very fast, I cannot resolve to seek any refuge against it; and I so firmly believe a Destiny in our Actions, that it will be in vain for me to avoid mine: Leave me then to suffer that which my hard Fate has prepared for me; it is not just that I should involve you in my ruine, you are more innocent than I am, for I know my self not freed from what the vertuous call culpable; I have lov'd a Man not my Husband, I have suf∣fered, I have avow'd it to him, and re∣pined at Fortune, for not making me the Present of a Heart, when I had been in a capacity to receive it; a Heart, I say, that
I value more than I ought, and for which I must suffer Death, or Shame. A Tor∣rent of Tears stopt the course of the Prin∣cesses words, and the Visier, who bore her Company in that sad Employment, maugre the greatness of his Courage, could not say any thing to mitigate her Affliction. At length Bassima having wi∣ped away her Tears, and coming near the Visier, My Lord, said she to him, since you cannot be ignorant how dear you are to me, I would have you secure my Repose, by putting your Person out of danger; take your way to the Port, sol∣licite the Sultan for me, and endeavour to make him the Arbitrator of my De∣stiny; my Husband fears the Ottoman Arms, and if the Grand Signior commands him to live well with me, he dares not disobey; fear not that in the interim any misfortune should befall me, if Levan has any Jealousie, he will temper it better, than to ruine an illustrious Princess as I am: But I will not warrant you, my Lord, that if you remain in this Court, you can be secure; he will undoubtedly cause you to be murdered, after which I should have but little satisfaction in Life. Depart then, Osman, continued she, embracing him with
an eminent disorder, and boast that you are the only Person could create in me so much weakness as this. Your Majesty, reply'd the Visier, must allow me not to abandon you; and since you do not re∣solve to save your self by flight, I will stay in Colchis and perish with you. They had a great deal of other Discourse to this effect, when they saw the Prince of Li∣bardian enter the Chamber very pale, and much astonished: Innocent and unhappy Lovers, said he to them, refuse not a Companion in misfortune, but assist a miserable Prince in the most deplorable extremity it is possible for one to be re∣duced. That Woman whom I have mar∣ried dishonours me; Levan is this mo∣ment with her, and nothing but want of power to revenge my self, makes me thus tamely suffer those Criminal Em∣braces: Fly, beautiful Princess, they have doom'd you to Sufferings; but leave me the Visier to assist me in our common and just Vengeance. Ah, Sir, answer'd Bas∣sima, I must resist this Advice; Heaven will surely limit our Distress, and I am resolved to abide by the most cruel effects of an unjust Anger, and an unreasonable Jealousie. As they were thus debating,
one of the Protector's Spies came to give him Advice, that the Prince of Colchis was return'd from Homais, to his own Lodging: Assist me, Osman, renewed the Prince of Libardian, in the just design of regaining my Wife. If you please, Ma∣dam, I warrant you safe Protection in Libardian, and you shall instantly depart with Homais, whom I am going to seize upon; I have already sent Orders to my Officers to Arm themselves, and the For∣ces they Command, to defend my Terri∣tories, should my ungrateful Rival invade me, as I apprehend; resist no longer, abandon a cruel Tyrant, and I solemnly promise you, to die in your Defence. Lead me where you please, Sir, reply'd the Princess, I hesitate not; and what my Vertue would not have me bestow upon the Visier, desire of safety makes me ac∣cept from you. Then they all went softly to the Chamber of Homais, which the Visier easily forced, none of the Guards being within hearing; and the Protector having caused her to dress her self, led her down unwillingly, though she could not resist him, and put her with the Prin∣cess of Colebis into a Chariot that waited. Himself, the Visier, and their People,
mounting their Horses, took a full gallop to the Castle of Phasia, where being ar∣rived, they conducted Bassima to the best Lodgings, and remitted Homais a close Prisoner to hers. After some necessary Orders for the securing the Castle, the Prince of Libar∣dian came to his Wife, and casting a de∣jected look upon her, mingled with An∣ger, How have I deserved, Madam, to be betraied by you? Have I been guilty in point of Tenderness? or was there other Interest in my Marriage, than what arose from possessing so fair a Person? Tell me then, ungrateful Woman, do you merit other than Death from me? And is it not just that I should rob thee of my Heart, a Present which thou hast no me∣rit to pretend to? Condemn me not without hearing, Sir, interrupted the Prin∣cess, casting her self at his Feet, I adore you, and no Person alive has any Interest in Homais but your self; I have never be∣traid you, Levan is indeed touched with my Beauty, but if he loves, he also de∣spairs; and last Night, when he visited me in my Bed, without my knowledge or permission, I treated him as much be∣low his Quality, as his flame is below his
Duty: Believe me, Sir, and restore me to your Love; let me suffer Imprisonment, and Chains, provided you rob me not of your Esteem; but rifled of that, what pleasure can there be for me in this Life? Be touched with my pain, and if my Beauty has lost its lustre, and its power, let my Innocence be justified, and no lon∣ger suspect a Vertue, which Heaven can testifie: The Prince, who occasioned your suspicions, shall never again behold me. Are you still insensible? Do I still find you cold? Is it true, that you have no love for me? Let me then, as I have often sworn, not survive so fatal a period to my Happiness; my Justification finds no Credit, it is by my Death that I must be cleared; in saying these words she snatch∣ed her Husband's Poyniard, with which she was going to wound her self, had he not prevented her; but she would not restore it to him, till he promised to be∣lieve what she had said, to forgive Ap∣pearances, and no longer to hold her Criminal; after which, she made use of all her Power over him, and so prevail'd, that he took in the Poison of her Cares∣ses, and return'd them with his, to all the degree of fondness that had ever past
between them. He left her at perfect Liberty, and bid her visit the Princess: She kept him with her, to prevent his looking after the Affairs of the Castle, that the Prince of Colchis, whom she knew would pursue them, might surprize it, if possible; but seeing she must let him depart, she repeated those Vows she had made him. Let us talk no more of what is past, reply'd he, it is sufficient you have promised me never to fall again; Hove you to that degree of fondness, that should you again betray me, it would cost me my Life; my despair would exceed all my other Passions; and by how much you would be baser than all other Women, so much would my Love surpass my Re∣sentments; and I must die for you, when I shall not be suffer'd to live with you; preserve me then, my Dear, and suffer not your perfectest adorer to be unhappy. After this, with reiterated assurances of Tenderness, he departed, and she imme∣diately set her self to write to the Prince of Colchis. Her Note was thus.
THEY have taken me from you, but imagine not my consent could be given to what should separate us. Do I need sol∣licite you to relieve me? Has Love no room in your Heart? Let Revenge then animate you to the Conquest of this Castle; here are your Wife, and her Lover your Rival, and your Mistress; and with a little diligence you will find all so unprovided, that it will be as hard for the Soldiers to resist your Vi∣ctorious Arms, as for Homais to deny you her Heart, or cease to make wishes for yor Prosperity. The Victory will unite us, and with such an assurance, I think it impossible you should be cold, or delay such an Ʋnder∣taking. She sent this by the Slave who had carried her first; he took the Advantage of the Night, and unseen got over the Walls. Homais waited the effect with an impatience suitable to her Temper. She was now to visit the Princess, and eat with her; and her wicked Spirit car∣rying her very far, she imagined it easie to Poison her; the Prince of Colchis, she thought, would not dare to put her to Death, and till she was removed, her Am∣bition
would never be gratify'd: Con∣sulting then nothing but what that sug∣gested, she took a large Diamond, and pounding it very small, called to her a trusty Confident, who was to give the Princess her Drink, and order'd him to administer the fatal Potion. It is to be avow'd, that in all parts of the Earth Villains are not wanting; and one shall almost every where find Persons, who for Reward and Honours, will stick at nothing; of this Nature was him Homais employ'd; he took an Oath of Secrecy, and too faithfully discharged his Promise. That hour did the unfortunate Princess drink her last, without any suspicion of the Treason. Never was she more amia∣ble, and the wicked Homais, who saw it administred, trembled and look'd pale at the horridness of the Fact. After Supper, the Prince of Libardian, remit∣ting the Government of the Castle to the Visier, took Horse, to go and meet his Forces, and to give Orders for new Le∣vies. He took a tender farewell of his Wife, and shed some Tears upon that ungrateful Bosom, that desired nothing more than his ruine.
An hour before day, the Prince of Colchis, with Six Thousand Horse, and Ten Thousand Foot, arrived, and be∣leaguer'd the Castle. The Slave Homais had sent, met him upon the way; Levan, furious as a Lion, had no sooner been in∣formed of the flight of his Wife, and Uncle, his Mistress, and the Visier, but assembling all his Forces which lay en∣camped about the Castle of Rucs, he marched with all imaginable haste to∣wards the Frontiers. The Letter of Ho∣mais was what added wings to his Enter∣terprize. He sat down before the Castle, and having summon'd it in vain, he gave Orders, to Storm it, knowing well it could not hold out an hour. The Visier was then with the Princess, and upon this Advice, taking a tender farewel of her, he was going where his Honour called him, resolving to die, rather than yield the place; but he was met upon the great Stairs by Homais, and part of the Garrion-Soldiers, that served for her Guard. Yield thy self, Osman, said she to him, my Faction has prevail'd, the Prince of Colchis is entring, I am Master here, and thou my Prisoner. Shameless, Princess, reply'd the Visier, hast thou no
Honour nor Fidelity to thy Husband? At these words he drew his Sword, and kill'd the most advanced, which was the Offi∣cer that commanded; but being alone, he found it impossible to prevail, he heard the loud shouts of the Prince's Ar∣my, who were entred the Castle; so that resolving to die at the feet of his Princess, he retreated back to the Gallery that led to her Lodging. Homais perceiving his intent, did not pursue him; her Policy suggesting to her, he would appear more culpable to the Prince of Colchis, when found alone with Bassima. So leaving a strong Guard upon the Appartment, she went her self to meet the Conqueror. Osman entring the Chamber, found the Princess fainting upon a Couch, the Poy∣son began feebly to operate, which joyn∣ing with her Fears, carried her into Fits: We are fast, said the Visier, supporting her in his Arms; Homais has betray'd us, the Soldiers are revolted, the Prince is entring, and will in a minute be with us; let us employ, my Princess, the time we have left, in revenging our selves by the highest Joys; send me not unblest to the shades: They have five Doors to force, which I took care to shut after me, before
they enter this; we have leisure for a taste of Happiness; prevent the cruel Death my Enemies design me, by a more pleasing one; I promise my self, my Prin∣cess, in enjoying you, though it be amidst all this Tumult and Horror, so much de∣light, that if I survive the Minute to suffer the effecs of my Enemy's Sword, it will he without feeling the smart, the extasie will possess all my Faculties; and if you love me, as you have said, you ought to prevent the pains of Death, or, which is worse, those I shall find by your denyal: Then kissing her Mouth with all the eagerness of a passionate Adorer, They conclude me Happy, my Princess, why will yau not make me so? After Ages will not know our Innocence; and is it not the same thing to be culpa∣ble, as to be thought so? We have no time to lose, we hear them already for∣cing the Door that leads to this Appart∣ment; convince me that you have truly lov'd, and in this last moment of Life oppose me not with a shadow of Vertue, only known to our selves: The World has already condemned us, let us deserve their censure, and make my Destiny en∣vied by all succeeding Lovers, that have
a taste agreeable to mine. Ruine me not, my Lord, reply'd the Princess, embracing him; command your Passions, and imi∣tate me in self-denial; the just Heavens will not suffer us to die whilst we are Innocent: I must forbid your Hopes, for were there not an after-unhappiness, which I see your Love has excluded from your Memory, that Fidelity I owe my Husband, that veneration I have for Ver∣tue, and the Peace of a good Conscience, are of force enough to make me refuse your unjust desires: Regulate your flame by mine, and consider a transitory mo∣ment is of little weight, compared to Eternal Happiness; we ought only now to think of dying, and I promise, that your Destiny shall be mine. Then lay∣ing her Face to his, we must separate my dear Osman, you have brought my Vertue to a cruel Tryal, and held it, for some moments, in suspense. 'Tis enough, answer'd he, you hate, or at least treat me as if you did: Farewel, cruel Prin∣cess; we must indeed separate for ever: I go to die, and you to the Embraces of a Husband, whom you love a thousand times beyond me. Destroy me not by this inhumanity, reply'd she, in retaining
him; What would have me to do? Ju∣stifie, Madam, that certain Maxim, That no Woman can be in Love, and be discreet. Agree, Sir, to that unalterable one, That ceasing to Estiem; we forget to Love. And though it be granted, that Opinion shares deep in that Passion, yet is a true flame much beholden to the Merit of the Per∣son adored; and it ows to it all its Con∣stancy. I am now dying, as you see, but were my fears more remote, my Health perfecter, my Vertue would not be weaker; resign your Passion, and cease this extravagant Request; we hardly hear what we speak to each other, for the noise of our Enemies Swords, and the violence they use to get us into their Power. Is this a time to change Inno∣cence into Guilt? Ah! protect my Ho∣nour, and lete us only think, that we must never meet again. Adieu then, vertuous and Charming Princess, forgive the vio∣lence of my desires; I will regulate them henceforward, live happy in the Embraces of your Husband, and bestow some Tears upon my Death. Rather, she reply'd, you would live to regret mine; they are coming, one last Embrace, preserve your Heart for me, and let us die Happy, for
we die Innocent. Here the Door was force open, and the Prince Colchis entred with a furious Aspect. Take the Adulteress, said he, and let me kill the Traitor. At these words he ran furiously. at the Visier; Osman warded the blow, but at the same time was wounded behind, and quickly born to the Ground by the Soldiers. Carry him to the Dungeon of the Castle, cry'd Levan; load him with Irons, let not the Villain have Meat or Rest, till the hour of his Death. And for you, Madam, turning to Bassima, my Council shall determine your Fate; if I considered my just Resentments, and not your being Daughter to a King, you should die this moment, to clear my Honour. Here he commanded her to be taken away, and would not hear speak. Not long after, he assembled his Council, and decreed, She should be sent home to the King her Father, with her Hands and Nose cut off, and her Eyes put out. See if ever Cruelty proceeded further; the most Charming, most Innocent, and most Vertuous Princess of the Earth, having a Sentence past upon her more rigid than a Criminal could have merited. But she, too fair to suffer so unjust a Destiny, died that
day (of the Poison Homais had given her) the moment after she had heard the discharge of that Cannon, in which, by the cruel Order of the Prince of Colchis, Osman was cram'd alive, and shot off in∣to the Air, so that his Carkass shatter'd into a thousand pieces. The unfortunate Prince of Libardian escaped, as we have said, no sooner heard the sad Catastrophe, with the second fall of his Wife, but he retired himself to the utmost Limits of his Territories, and put himself and his Train into close Mourning for fourscore days, for the loss of his faithless Wife; then Arming all his People, he marched to receive his un∣grateful Cousin, who pursued him with his Conquering Army. The wretched Pro∣tector, whose pains could be only eased by Death, maintain'd the Fight for some time with great Animosity; but seeing his hopes of Victory as desperate as those of his Love and Honour, he engaged him∣self amongst the thickest of his Enemies, and upon their Sword-points found in his Death a rest from all his Misfortunes. The end of all things of this Nature, I know well, ought to be a Punishment of Vice, and Reward of Vertue; but
Truth being the thing that in all my Un∣dertakings chiefly animates my Pen, I knew not well how to dispense my self from relating it as in reality it was. The wicked Homais was not long unmarried, and being the source of all the Injustice committed by Levan, she likewise reven∣ged them upon him; he died by Poison, which she administred, to make room for the Coronation of her Son Alexander, and her own Regency; ungratefully re∣paying all the Kindness and Fondness of that poor Prince, whom she had ruined. Ought not Ladies then, to preserve their Vertue with care, for that once violated, what Crimes are they not guilty of? Whereas on the other side, it is very dif∣ficult for a Woman to be Criminal and Chaste. FINIS.
Some BOOKS Printed for R. Bentley. Folio. 1. BEaumont's and Fletcher's Plays in one Volume, con∣taining 51 Plays. 2. Mr. William Shakespear's Plays in one Volume. 3. Towerson's Works compleat in one Volume. 4. Dr. Allestry's Sermons in one Vo∣lume. 5. Dr. Comber's Works, the four Parts in one Volume. 6. The Council of Trent; By Fa∣ther Paolo. 7. Toriano's Italian Dictionary.
8. Mr. Milton's Paradise lost, with 13 Copper Cuts finely engraven, to express the whole Poem. 9. Milton's Paradise Regain'd; in the same Volume, Paper, and Print, to bind with it. 10. Fodina Regalis; or, the Histo∣ry of the Laws of Mines. By Sir John Pettus. 11. Bishop Brownrig's Sermons. Books in Quarto. 1. The Burnt Child dreads the Fire. 2. A Treatise of our Sanguinary Laws against Papists. 3. Dr. Whitby's Answer to S. Cressy. 4. Mr. Nathanael Lee's Plays in one Volume. 5. Mr. Thomas Otway's Plays in one Volume.
Books in Octavo. 1. Dr. Whitby, Of Idolatry. 2. Dr. Whitby, Of Host-Worship. 3. The Life of the Marshal Turenne. 4. The Secret History of the House of Medicis. 5. Cornelius Agrippa, Of the Vanity of Arts and Sciences. 6. Mauger's French Grammar. Edit. 13. 7. Lipsius, Of Constancy. 8. Agiates, Queen of Sparta. 9. Nicorotis. 10. Pluraliry of Worlds, Transla∣by Mr. Glanvil. 11 Boylo's Art of Poetry; Tran∣slated by Mr. Soames. 12. Poems and Songs, By Mr. Cuts. 13. Sir James Chamberlain's Poems. 14. Mr. Coppinger's Poems. 15. Madam Colonna's Memoirs. 16. Hudibras compleat, in Three Parts.
17. Seneca's Morals; By Sir Roger L'Estrange. 18. Comber's Companion to the Altar. 19. Godfrey of Boloign; A Poem. 20. Plato's Apology of Socrates. 21. Natural History of the Passions. Books in Duodecimo. 1. Present State of England. 2. Enter into thy Closet. 3. Moral Essays, in Four Volumes. 4. A perfect School of Instructions for the Officers of the Mouth. 5. A Prospect of Humane Misery. 6. Vanity of Honour, Wealth, and Pleasure. 7. Bishop Andrew's Devotions. 8. Covent-Garden Drollery. 9. Zelinda; A Romance. 10. Happy Slave. 11. Hatige, or the King of Tameran. 12. Homais Queen of Tunit. 13. Triumphs of Love.
14. Obliging Mistress. 15. Unfortunate Hero. 16. Countess of Salisbury. 17. Count Teckely. 18. Essex and Elizabeth. 19. The Pilgrim. 20. The Empire betray'd; by whom, and how. 21. The Character of Love. 22. Don Henrick. 23. Princess of Fez. 24. Marce Christianissimus. 25. Gallant Ladies; in two Parts. 26. Victorious Lovers. 27. Love in a Nunnery. 28. Duke of Lorrain. 29. Minority of St. Lewis. 30. Queen of Majorca. 31. Count de Soysons. 32. Clytie. 33. Dialogues of the Dead; in two Parts. 34. Neapolitan; or, the Defender of his Mistress.
35. Instructions for a young Noble∣man. 36 Five Love-Letters from a Nun to a Cavalier. 37. Five Love-Letters from the Ca∣valier in Answer to the Nun's. 38. Religio Laici, in a Letter to Mr. Dryden. 39. Count Gabalis. 40. The chast Seraglian. 41. Rules of Civility. 42. The Extravagant Poet. 43. New Disorders of Love. 44. Ottoman Gallantry; or, The Life of the Bassa of Buda.
