r94 e260_43 99871080 123478
THE CONVERTS LETTER To his old freinds. Or the Apologie of a Commander of the Kings Party, for diting of that party, and bearing Armes for the PARLIAMENT. Wherein is shewed, that those pretences, of De∣fending the Protestant Religion, the fundamentall Lawes, the Liberties of the Subjects &c. on that party, are but specious. What Irish, and Papists, have been ooured & ifly intrusted. How if that Army doth conquer, as it is now moulded, Popery and Tiranny, of necessity must be introduced. With the lawfullnesse of bearing defensive Armes by the PARLIAMENT. Veritas non querit Angulos. Romans the 16.17.18. Now I beseech you brethren, marke them which cause Divisions and offences contrary to the Doctrine which yee have learned and a∣void them. For they that are such serve not the Lord Iesus Christ but their owne Belly and by good words and faire speeches deceive the Hearts of the simple. Printed and Published according to Order. LONDON Printed for H. Twyford at the three Daggers in Fleet-street MAY 30. 1645.
The Apologie of a Commander of the Kings, for diserting that party, and bearing Arms for the Parliament, with the rea∣sons that induced him thereto. To all my old fellow Protestant Souldiers, in the Kings Army these. Fellows in Arms, NEver had any man greater confidence of the Kings owne integrity, and power of himselfe, in the managing of his owne businesse then I had. But now, my feares too truly tell mee otherwise in point of power; And I very much pitty many honest, and sound Protestants a∣mongst you, great enemies to Popery, which are ingaged on that party, out of the same con∣fidence that I was; Whom I wish (though ne∣ver that occasion, to pry into the secrets of the times, which I have had) to consider well with themselves, and they shall find Prince Ru∣pt and his Accomplices fight, even so much for the Priviledges, and Liberties of the Subjects, as the Papists doe, for the Protestant Religi∣on. I lay nothing of this on the King, God forbid (in an injurious way) I should touch so much as the skirt of his garment. But it is apparent, there are those who buzze into his Majesties eares extreame (pretended) injury in point of Prerogative, &c. which in effect is but to engage him, in opinionated necessitie, to make use of their help, to right himselfe. And under colour thereof to draw his Majesty (as pretended principle) by accident to countenance the Malignant de∣signes of Papists, and publick disturbers of the Peace, to accomplish their own ends. And lest I should be thought a generall Satyrist ra∣ther then to tell particular truths, I shall descend to some particulars. I know, that most of you which have Commissions in that Army have in them this specious clause incerted; For defence of the Kings Royall Person and Authority, the Protestant Religion, the Lawes of the Land, the Liberty of the Subjects, and priviledges of the Parliament. But how farre these Commissions in these particulars are pursued, I shall offer by the occurrences, since time is the best teller of truth, in things of this nature. I shall draw my first observation from Ireland, which wil shew how far this is pursued in matter of Religion; And herein (I must confesse) I did think the Rebellion in that Kingdome to be an act of their owne, without any allowance from England, although it was alwayes allea∣ged by the Irish, that they had the Kings Commission for it; That they were the Queens Souldiers: that they fought for their religion, &c. He that doth but consider how, and on what tearms, the Cessation there was made (pretended to be an act of necessity) how many of the
Irish Rebels were drawn over into England under the name of the Protestant Army there? Such as Welch his Regiment of horse; The re∣cruit of St. Legers Regiment of foot, now the Duke of Yorks regiment. Osullivan (the Lord of Muskeries Cook) his Troop, with many others which have butchered the Protestants in that Kingdome. He that doth but consider with himself, what Irish have been alwayes Liegers about the King, viz. The Lord Taffe, the Lord of Costeloe, Sir John Dungan, Garrat Talbot, George Evelin, Mr. Robinson, Mr. William Brent, Philip Roch, Doctor Meara (Physitian to Prince Rupert) Rob. Welsh, Rich-Power, Captain O Bryan, Major ô Neil, Edmond Keogh Butler, &c. be∣sides English Papists (the bellows and fomenters of war) cānot but re∣member: that the statutes inacted in this Kingdom against popish Re∣cusants, have been well put in execution according to the Kings Pro∣clamation about this time three years to that purpose.10. Aug. 1642. Or shall we not think this Proclamation was set forth meerly to delude the people. He that doth but remember how many thousands of the Kings loyall Protestant Subjects of Ireland, were bereaved of their lives and estates, without any provocation or injury offered. And how the King by act of Parliament, granted the power and care of Reducement of that Kingdom to the Parliament of England, cannot but think very strange∣ly of the pacification in that Kingdom, made or to be made, on such dishonourable tearms, when as no satisfaction shall bee made for the effusion of so much innocent blood, or for the poore Protestant Inha∣bitants losses, be they never so great. He that doth but consider, how the Irish papists & Rebels, have been honoured, and trusted both in England and Ireland, and what immuni∣ties have been granted them, viz. Muskery must be made President of Mounster and Thomond; The Parliament of Ireland must be allowed to be held at Kilkenny, the Metropolis of Rebellion; Poynings act must be reversed, which is, that no Act of Parliament shal passe until it be first certified into England, and allowed of by the King and his Councell, so as the Irish shall by this have liberty to make what acts they please. The Protestant party (if they dare adventure their throats) must come to Kilkenny to the Parliament. Edmond Fitzgerrald (otherwise called Edmond ô Clenlas) must be made a Barroner, for the good service he did in Ireland, in raising & maintaining a Troop of horse, and a foot Com∣pany in rebellion all the wars against the Protestants. Robert Welsh, and Rich. Power must be Knighted, as part of their Irish Court agents, and have great commands conferred on them, one to command a Bri∣gade of horse in England and the other to be made a Collonel, and then Governour of Bartley in the place of Collonel Veale, a Protestant, that must be suspected and put forth. Bryan ô Neale, Edmund Butler, Garrat Talbot (another part of their Irish Court agents) must be Knighted at least, if not Baronets, and great commands must be conferred on them. He that doth but remember, how at the beginning of this Parlia∣ment, the foure main Jesuiticall spirits of this Kingdome were banish∣ed
by act of Parliament with the Kings owne consent, viz. Sir, John Winter Walt. Mountague, Sir Toby Mathews, and Sir Kenelm Digby; And yet of these, how much Winter is honoured and trusted now, is publikely knowne, insomuch that Protestants in Bristoll must be shot to death for refusing to go under his command. And Walt. Mountague (though a known Jesuite, and taken in London as a spye) must bee thought in exchange worthy of a Captaine and Lievtenant of horse, more then the Earle of Cleaveland, that is a Peere of the Realme, and commanded a Brigade of horse, if what was offered may be beleeved. He that doth but consider what Garrisons on the Kings party are, and have been intrusted in the hands of Papists viz. In Oxford, the Kings head quarter, Sir Arthur Aston must be Governour, and Collonel Gage (since shine) his assistant. In Bristoll the next grand Garrison, the Lord Herbert, the Lord Rivers, the Lord Sturton &c must have the superintendent, or directive power, Mounsier Garnier (a French Pa∣pists of the Queens placing) is Major of the Town, and a Jesuite (as I am informed) is the Governours Capt Lievtenant. In Basing are the Marquesse of Winchester and his retinue; In the Forrest of Deane, are Sir Jo. Winter and his. In Barkley Castle. Collonel Power (as I named before) and Slowley his Major. In Nunny Castle, Captaine Pratar, &c. These all in these places have the command. And by these in one cor∣ner of the Kingdome, you may judge of other Parts, as Expede Hercu∣lem, by the dimension of the foot the whole body. He that doth but consider (besides these) in the Armies who are most intrusted or respected, shall find them to be most Papists. Such as Collonel William Arundel of Warder and his horse Regiment, all Pa∣pists. Robert Bret Lievtenant-Collonel to Courtney made a Barro∣net. Peter Treviltan, Major of foot to Prince Maurice. Major Webb▪ sometimes to be Major Generall for Dorsetshire. Richard Hunt, Lievtenant-Collonel to the Queens Regiment of foot. Cum multis alis quos nunc per scribere longum est. These, you know, I presume, which are all within my knowledge; be∣sides Captains and others of meaner command, And besides Irish, Scot∣tish, Dutch, and French papists amongst the Cavalry, which for num∣ber are like the Locusts in Egypt. These are only in my memory, and I beleeve I here mention in particular an inconsiderable number of them in comparison with the whole. If I might beleeve some of the Irish Rebell Cōmissionets who told it me themselves, & I declared is much to severall persons. It is intendd  and 10000 of the Irish Rebels in England suddenly. And if this be  way or these the persons b whom the Protestant Religion is . O f these are any Symptomes or tokens  of the times.
I take the word defence to be correlative to the word offence. And as in the word, so in the matter; there can be no defence without offence, or injury first offered. Yet this was that pretence of defence, under co∣lour whereof the Rebels of Ireland massacred, plundered, and expel∣led the Protestants for no other offence, then for teaching them civili∣ty, and how to live like Christians. So as here is the first offence offered by Papits cloaked in the name of defence, and under colour of main∣taining their Religion, Lawes, and Liberties. I professe I thought really the King intended (according to his seve∣rall Protestations, Vows and Declarations, with seeming innovations made by Parliament and their party) to performe all these things pre∣tended, which engaged me to serve amongst you. 1. Because it was said to maintaine the Protestant Religion estab∣lished by law, which was sound in all fundamentall points of do∣ctrine. Howsoever it was in discipline, I did not then so well consider. 2. That it was to maintaine the fundamentall Lawes established, legally, under seeming presidents of authority and antiquity. To which I saw no answer, although there were one published. 3. Because they were engaged amongst you persons of great ho∣nour and fortunes, reputed good Protestants, whom I thought in this monarchicall government, setled by law would not longer assist the King in this war, then whiles he maintained the Protestant Religion, and governed by the Lawes. 4. That so long as there was no other proper strength but Prote∣stants and subjects. And that army trusted in the hands of such; There was no danger of popery, or tiranny, if the King should prevaile by the sword, although some few Papists were made use of, as a ministeriall hand only. And for my part I assure you charity binds me to the same opinion of the reallity of the Kings owne intentions in the same still, though I am otherwise satisfied of his power in performance thereof, for when I consider. 1. What power and influence a beloved Queen may have on the Kings actions; Which was Solomons case and our sad experience can witnes. 2. What Councellours and advisers are againe most in favour, belo∣ved, honoured and trusted which projected the greivances that begot, these Wars and which were the primitive cause of our miseries. 3. That by the occurrences, it doth plainly appeare the Irish Wars, were set on foote by the same Councells. 4. That the fundamentall Laws of the Kingdome, are made a stal∣king horse to creep under covert, rather then a path to walke by. And that it strayned at to make an unlimited prerogative in the King for their own ends. 5. That al Commanders in the Kings army are by degrees new moulded, for the most part. And that army put into the hands of the
two Princes, Papists, forreigners, or such as have betrayed their trusts to ambition or avarice. 6. That oppression and injury by plundering and otherwise, is ra∣ther palliated then punished. And all Laws (but what the will of eve∣ry man by the sword doth administer) become dead letters. 7. That such numbers of Auxillary Forces, as Papists, French, Irish. Dutch, &c. are brought in and intrusted when as Protestants are sus∣pected, put forth, and discountenanced. 8. That of necessity that army, (as now it is) in all humane pro∣bability must produce popery and Tiranny by constraint of their power, if the sword thereof prevaile, these things being considered and the faire carriage on the Parliament side, I presume it will satisfie all indifferent persons on your party, aswell as me, that the Parliament aymeth at nothing but those ends which are religious, honorable just, legall, and according to their Covenant. For defence of the Kings Roy∣all person and authority in the preservation and defence of the true Religi∣on, and liberties of the Kingdome with their owne just rights and priviled∣ges, &c. The Parliament is that great Court of justice and Councell of State which was freely convened and consented unto to continue by the Kings own expresse authority and confirmation; That by the ancient and known priviledges of the same hath power to raise the Posse Regni as a Sheriffe by the Common Law, hath to raise the Posse Comitatus, to obvene and suppresse all insurrections and disorders, and to exe∣cute justice. In whose Ordinances the Kings implyed (though not ex∣presse) assent, is declared by law: Which are to be obeyed more then the orders or rules of any other Court of Justice. It hath jurisdiction & cognizance over all persons, and in all causes, in these his Majesties Do∣minions. The Members whereof, in duty (if not by oath) more then the Judges in other Courts, ought not to deferre, or delay to doe ju∣stice, Neque propter magnum sigilum neque propter parvum, although the Kings expresse Commands were against it. So long as their is on there party no quarrell but defence, and no∣thing else aymed at, but to pursue the Covenant, which is the same, the King himselfe took in Scotland. So long as there is, no other end, but to defend the ancient Laws, and Liberties established. And to reforme the Church of England, in discipline according to the patterne of other Protestant Churches, which are allowed by those Protestants under the Hierarchy to be found in doctrine in all parts of the essence of Religion, and in discipline not so subject to tirannicall oppression and exorbitancy. So long as Episcopacy, the Church government so much stood for by you (though alleaged to be antient) is not Iure divino, but polliticall, confessed by the author of the New distemper, allowed to be printed at Oxford, and the same, which the best reason, and authority authentique doe speake. So long as the Litturgie or booke of Com∣mon prayer established by Law in Edward the sixths time, (if all in it
were good and without exception,) were but a thing indifferent and then put to the question, whether it were better to expunge the ould Litturgy or Masse Booke, or to compose a new. When although it was carryed at present (wanting our experience) that it was better to ex∣punge the old. Yet D. Ridley B. of London, since a Martyr in the Church (for the same reasons now thought fit) and many others were then for erecting a new one. So long as any prayers according to found doctrine, and the word of God comming from the sincerity of the heart and true devotion, may be as good and effectuall to salvation, as the Booke of Common Prayer (if all in it were good and without of∣fence.) It is more safe in this quarrell to joyne with the Parliament, and their party, be they for the Presbiteriall or Independent discipline, being both Protestants sound in doctrine, then to joyne with the Pa∣pists, that are neither sound in doctrine nor discipline. The Scots they first bear defensive Armes, for defence of their Reli∣gion, Lawes, and Liberties; where no effusion of blood was; And this is approved of in the ct of pacification in that Kingdome by the King himselfe to be a laudable undertaking. The Irish they beare Armes on the same pretence, and shed the blood of many thousands of innocent persons without any provoca∣tion;A hundred thousand com∣puted at least yet this must be hushed up, approved of under a Pacification, and many of them are honoured and specially intrusted for it. And must the English tamely lie still, and suffer Religion, Lawes, Liber∣ties, and themselves to be trampled on by persons disaffected; only out of a Conscientious scruple, that they ought not to beare Armes a∣gainst the Annoynted of the Lord (as is said) when the King is made but the cloake to their designes, although it be to defend the Religion, Lawes, and Liberties (which truly lye at stake) from innovati∣on. David (that was a man after Gods owne heart) in a private quarrell as to himselfe, made not this scruple, when he offered the King of Gath to goe up to battell against Saul; And at most he was ingaged but in his owne private defence, from tirranny and oppression. Much more may be done when the Publique Cause of Religion, Lawes, and Liberties are endangered. Kings commands in a Monar∣chichall government, are like the Lawes of God in the two Tables, which declare their full will, and their subjects duty. Their wils are so setled in the Lawes established, that they are to be obeyed in their commands, but so far, as they are agreeable to the Lawes and noe further. The very heathen (by the light of nature only) did confesse, and alow it to be the most just, and honorable quarrell in the world to fight pro aris, & fls, for their Gods and Countrey. And Propatria mori pulchrum. that it was a gallant thing to dye for their Countrey. The most strict Divines under the Gospell (though in a private quarrell hold it fit to turne the other care to the smiter rather than smite againe) yet noe waies allow us to tollerate injuries offered un∣to God.Nehemiah .3. Maccah 13.1. We must not  we see Religion, Lawes, and Liber∣tie
trampled on, lye still in the ditch and cry God help only, (when God hath given us power) without using the means to establish them; And to expect deliverance by the immediate hand of God, in a mira∣culous way as of ould time.Math. 4.5.6. When the divell tempted our Saviour to throw himselfe from the Pinacle of the Temple, The Devine observeth, That Christ would not cast himselfe downe (though he might have saved himselfe,D. Sutin his Dere 14 without the Ministrye of Angles) to shew us not to seeke super∣naturall meanes, when God doth lend us naturall. We tempt him when we seeke health without a medicine, or victory without a combate, wee tempt him, when by reason or counsell we may avoyd some evill, and yet explore his power; And last of all we tempt him when we enquire to far into his wisdome, or require that unlawfully, which he is wot to offer by meanes. And therefore when the cause is just the authority lawfull, the intent good that God may be glorified a right continued,I. 235. and imminent dangers avoyded at is and may be lawfull for Christians to take Armes, And soe to doe is nothing contrary (as some have dreamed) to Christian Peace &c. with this cation, That,  desire of superiority be not the cause of our taking Armes.Iam. 136. It was the course in the primitive Church to stand up at the reahear∣sall of the Creede with their hands on their swords as ready to defend that fayth. It is according to the law of nature, Vim vi repellere, for every creature to defend themselves from injury, much more the pub∣lique state or Church and Common weale. It is a trespasse justifiable by the Common Law to kill another, se defendendo, in defence of him∣selfe, or his goods. By the Matriall Law Kings in the darke are not distinguished from enemyes but by the Worde▪ which is the Law. Nei∣ther are they to be knowne, but by the Lawes (which distinguish Kings from other men) in these times of darkenes. The King is the untain of justice, from whence by the Cōmom Law and Chri∣stian charity, is pesmed can  streame. He is a  of the Church, x under Christ in these his Majesties Donions But if the foun∣tain branch into two streams by suffocation on pollution o the old channel I will leave the polluted or muddy streame, and swimm o sake in the cleare oe if the bead be disaffecte by any the members is (with all d reverence to the had) I will joyne with those member least disaffected to cueth rest and endeavour to take of that distemper from the head. And if by experimentall practice, it appeare that any member be incurable. To save the head, and the rst of the body. I say Enserceidendum est ne pars sincera tratur. Let it b cut off, least it pur fi the est. If the King therefore by evill Councell and advce personally commad on thing,Acts. 4.19. the Lawes etal shed and the Gospell bi the contrary, I will honour the King but obey the Lawe,Acts. 5.29. and the Gospell in which is the Kings implyed assent And the Parliament also, which s the Kings highest Court of justice and Coun∣cell of state, can best expound interpret and give vigour to the Lawes: And doe desire the fluishing of the true light of the Gospell. Therefore I say, with Moses unto such s are of the Parliament, and their party who I now beleve, and perceive to manage their busines with sincerity, Dread not nor be affraide for your God fighteth for you,Deut. 29.30. but goe on, and prosper. And I desire to oyne with you in the worke. For salvation belongeth unto the Lord, and his blessing is with his people. Farewell and I am in charity still.Psalme. 3.8. W.R. Aprill. the 4. 1645. FINIS
