S2937 E1085_13 99867087 119377
The Stationers to the Reader. GEntlemen, the entreaty of several Per∣sons, our friends, hath enduced us to the publishing of this Piece, which (when the life of action was added to it) pleased gene∣rally well. It hath been the desire of several (who know we have many pieces of this nature in our hands) that we should publish them, and we con∣sidering the general mirth that is likely, very suddainly to happen about the Kings Coronation; and supposing that things of this Nature, will be acceptable, have therefore begun with this which we know may be easily acted, and may be now as fit for a private recreation as formerly it hath been for a publike. If you please to encourage us with Your acceptance of this, you will enduce us to bring you forth our store, and we will assure you that we are plentifully furnished with things of this Nature; Receive this then with good will as we intend it, and others shall not only succeed it but you shall continue us Your Servants, FRANCIS KIRKMAN. HENRY MARSH
The Names of the Actors. Quince the Carpenter who speaks the Pro∣logue. Bottome the Weaver Pyramus. who likewise may present three Faries. Flute the Bellowsmender. Thisbe. Snout the Tinker. Wall. Snug the Ioyner. Lion. Starveling the Taylor. Moonshine. Oberon King of the Fairies, who likewise may pre∣sent the Duke. Titania his Queen the Dutchesse. Pugg. a Spirit a Lord.
THE Merry conceited Humours OF Bottome the Weaver. Enter Bottome the Weaver, Quince the Carpeuter, Snug the Ioyner, Elute the Bellows mender, Snout the Tinker, and Starveling the Taylor. Bottome COme Neighbours let me tell you, and in troth I have spoke like a man in my daies, and hit right too, that if this business do but displease his Graces fancy, we are all made men for ever. Quince. I believe so too neighbour, but is all our compa∣ny here? Bott. You had best to call them generally man by man according to the Scrip. Qu. Here is the scrowl of every mans name which is thought fit through all Athens, to play in our enterlude be∣tween the Duke and the Dutchess on his Wedding day at night. Bott. First good Peter Quince say what the Play treats of, then read the names of the Actors, and so grow on to a point. Qu. Marry our play is the most Lamentable Comedy, and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisbe. Bott. A very good piece of work I assure you, and a merry;
now good Peter Quince call forth your Actors by the Scrowl, Masters spread your selves. Qu. Answer as I call you, Nicolas Bottome the Weaver. Bott. Ready, name what part I am for, and proceed. Qu. You Nic. Bottome are set down for Pyramus. Bott. Wat is Pyramus, a Lover or a Tyrant? Qu. A Lover that kills himself most gallantly for Love. Bott. That will ask some tears in the true performing of it, If I do it, let the audience look to their eyes: I will move storms, I will condole in some measure, to the rest, yet my chief humour is for a Tyrant. I could play Eroles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in two, make all split, the raging Rocks, and shivering shocks shall break the locks of Prison gates, and Phibbus carre shall shine from far, and make and marre, the foolish fates: Now name the rest of the Players. This is Eroles reigne, a Tyrants reigne, a Lover is more condoling. Qu. Francis Flute the Bellowes-mender Flut. Here Petter Quince Qu. You must take Thisbe on you, Flut. What is Thisbe a wandering Knight? Qu. It is the Lady that Pyramus must love. Flut. Nay faith, let not me play a woman, I have a beard coming Qu. Thats all one, you shall play it in a mask and you may speak as small as you will Bott. And I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too. I'le speak in a monstrous little voice Thisne Thisne, ah Pyra∣mus my lover deare thy Thisbe deare and lover deare. Qu. No no, you must play Pyramus, and Flute you This∣be Bott. Well proceed. Qu. Robbin Starveling the Taylor Star. Here Peter Quince Qu. Robbin Starveling you must play Thisby's mother. Tom Snout the Tinker Sno. Here Peter Quince.
Qu. You Pyramus father, my self Thisby's father, Snug the Joyner you the Lyons part; and I hope theres a play fitted Snug. Have you the Lyons part written? Pray you if it be, give it me for I am slow of study. Qu. You may do it Ex tempore for it is nothing but roaring Bott. Let me play the Lyon too, I will Roare that I will do any mans heart good to hear me, I will roare that I will make the Dake say let him roare again let him roare again Qu. if you should do it too terribly, you would fright the Dutchesse and the Ladyes that they would shrike and that were enough to hang us all All. That would hang every mothers Son Bott. I graunt you freinds that if they should fright the Laydes out of their witts, they would have no more discre∣tion but to hang us, but I will aggravate my voice so that I will roare you as gentle as any Sucking Dove, I will roare and twere any Nightingal Qu. You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus is a sweetfaced man a proper man as one shall see in a Summers day, a most lovely Gentleman like man, therefore you must needs play Pyramus. Bott. Well I will undertake it, what beard had I best play it in? Qu. Why what you will Bott. I will discharge it either in your straw coloured beard, your Orange Tawny beard, your purple in graine beard, or your French crown coloured beard, your perfect Yellow. Qu. Some of your French crowns have no haire at all and then you'l play barefaced. But maisters here are your parts and I am farther to entreat you, request you and de∣sire you, to con them by to morrow night, & meet me in the Palace Wood a mile without the Town by moonlight, there we will rehearse, for if we meet in the City wee shall be doggd by company and our devices known; in the mean time
I will draw a bill of properties such as our play wants? I pray fail mee not. Bott. We will meet and there we may rehearse more ob∣scenely and Couragiously. Take pain. Be presect. Adieu. Qu. At the Dukes Oake we meet? Bott. Enough hold or cutt Bowstrings— Exeunt. Enter Oberon King of the Fayries and Pugg a Spirit. Ob. I am resolved and I will be revenged Of my proud Queen Titania's injury, And make her yeild me up her beloved page; My gentle Pugg come hither thou Rememberest Since that I sat upon a Promontory, And heard a Mermaid on a Dolphins Back Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath, That the rude Sea grew civil at her Song; And certain States shot madly from their Spheares, To hear the Sea-maids musick. Pug. I remember. Ob. That very time I saw (but thou couldest not) Flying between the cold Moon and the earth Cupid all armed a certain aime hee took, At a faire Vestal throned by the west; And loo'st his love-shast smartly from his bow, As it should peirce a hundred thousand hearts: But I might see young Cupids fiery shaft Quench in the chast beames of the watry Moon, And the Imperial Votress passed on In maiden meditation fancy free, Yet markt I where the bolt of Cupid fell It fell upon a litle westerne flower Before milk white now purple with loves wound, And maidens call it love in Idleness; Fetch me that flower the hearb I shew'd thee once The juice of it on sleeping eye lids laid
Will make or man or woman madly Dote Upon the next live Creature that it sees; Fetch me this hearb and be thou here again Ere the Leviathan can swim a league. Pug. I'le put a Girdel about the earth in forty minutes. Exit. Ob. Having once this juyce; I'le watch Titania when she is a sleep And drop the liquor of it in her eyes, The next thing when she waking looks upon (Be it on Lyon, Bear or wolfe or Bull On medling Monkey or on busy Ape) She shall persue it with the soul of love And ere I take this Charme from off her sight (As can take it with another hearb) I'le make her render up her page to me. Welcom wanderer, what ar't returned with it? Pug. I there it it is. Ob. Come give it me? There is a bank Titania useth of In nights to sleep on, but see where she comes Enter Queen and Faires. Exit Pug. I'le stand aside you may depart. Qu. Come now a Roundel and a fairy song To please my eye first then intice me sleep Then to your offices and let me rest Fayries first Dance and then sings 1. You Spotted Snakes with double tongue Thorny Hedghoges be not seen Newts and blind worms do no wrong Come not mere our Fairy Queen Philomele with melody Singing your sweet Lullaby Lulla lulla lullaby lulla lulla lullaby
Nere harme, nor spell nor Charme Come our lovely Lady by So good-night with lullaby. 2 Fairy. Weaving spiders come not here Hence you longlegd spinners hence Beetles black approach not neare; Worme nor snayle do no offence: Philomele with melody. &c. 1 Fairy Hence away now all is well One a loofe stand Centinell. Exeunt Faires. Ob. What thou seest when thou dost wake Oberon comes to her and touches her eye lids. Do it for thy true love take, Love and languish for his sake; Be it Ounce or Catt or Beare Pard or Bore with Bristled hair In thine eye that shall appear, when thou awakest it is thy dear Wake then some vile thing is neere. Exit. Enter Bottome Quince Snug Flute Snoute and Starveling Bott. Are we all met? Quin. Pat pat, and heres a marvellous convenient place for our rehearsall This green Plot shall be our stage, This hau∣thorne Brake our tyring house, and we will do it in action as we will do it before the Duke. Bott. Peter Quince. Qu. What sayst thou Bully Bottome? Bott. There are things in this Comedy of Pyramus and Thisby that will never please, first Pyramus must draw a Sword to kill himself which the Ladyes can't abide, how an∣swer you that? Snout. Berlaken a parlous feare. Star. I believe we must leave the killing out, when all's done.
Bott. Not a whit, I have advice to make all well. Write me a Prologue, and let the Prologue seem to say we will do no harme with our swords, and that Pyramus is not killed indeed: and for the more better assurance tell them that I Pyramus am nor Pyramus but Bottome the wea∣ver, this will put them out of feare. Qu. Well, we will have such a Prologue and it shall be written in eight and six. Bott. No make it two more let it be written in eight and eight. Snout. Will not the Ladyes be afraid of the Lyon? Star. I fear it I'le promise you. Bott. Masters we ought to consider with our selves to bring in (God sheild us) a Lyon among Ladies is a most dreadful thing, For there is not a more fearfull wild-foule then your Lion living, and we ought to look to it. Snout. Therefore another Prologue must tell he is not a Lyon. Bott. Nay, You must name his name, and halfe his face must be seen through the Lions Neck, and he himself must speak through saying thus, or to the same effect, Ladyes or faire Ladyes, I would wish you, or I would request you, or I would intreat you not to tremble; my life for yours, if you think I come hither as a Lyon it were pitty of my life, no, I am no such thing I am a man as other men are, and there indeed let him name his name and teil plainly I am Snug the Joyner. Qu. Well it shall be so: But there is two hard things, that is to bring the moon light into a Chamber, for you know Pyramus and Thisbe met by moonlight. Snug. Doth the moon shine that night we play our play. Bott. A Calender a Calender look in the Almanack find out moonshine sind out moonshine. Qu. Yes, it doth shine that night? Bott. why then may you leave a casement of the great Chamber window where we play open, and the Moon may shine in at the Casement.
Qui. I, or else one must come with a bunch of Thornes and a Lanthorne, & say he comes to disfigure, or to present the person of Moon-shine. Then there is another thing, we must have a wall in the great Chamber, for Pyramus and Thisbe (saies the story) did talk through the Chink of a wall. Snug. You can never bring in a Wall, what say you Bot∣tom? Bott. Some man or other must present Wall, and let him have some Plaister, or some Lome, or some Rough cast about him to signifie Wall, or let him hold his fingers thus, and through that Crany shall Pyramus and Thisbe whisper. Qui. If that may be then all is well, come sit down eve∣ry mothers son and rehearse your parts, Pyramus you begin, when you have spoken your speech enter into that Brake, and so every man according to his Cue— Enter Pug. Pug. What Hempen Home-spuns have we swaggering here so neer the Cradle of the Fayry Queen. What? a play toward? I'le be an Auditor, and Actor too perhaps if I sea cause. Quin. Speak Pyramus Thisby stand forth. Pyra. Thisby, the flowers of Odious savours sweet. Quin. Odours, Odours. Pira. Odours savours sweet, so hath thy breath my dearest Thisbe dear. But hark a voice: stay thou but here a while, and by and by I will to thee appear. Pug. A stranger Piramus then ere plaid here. Exit. Pyr. Exit after him This. Must I speak now? Quin. I marry must you. For you must understand that he goes but to see a Noyse that he heard, and is to come again. This. Most Radiant Pyramus, Most Lilly white of hue.
Of colour like the red Rose on triumphant Bryer. Most Brisky Juvenal, and the most lovely Jew. As true as truest Horse that never yet would Tyre. I'le meet thee Pyramus at Ninus Tombe. Qui. Ninus Tombe man: why, you must not speak that yet; That you answer to Piramus: you speak all your part at once Cues and all, Piramus enter, your Cue is past, it is, ne∣ver Tire. This. O as true as truest Horse that yet would never Tire. Pir. If I were faire Thisby I were only thine. Quince. O monstrous! O strange! we are haunted; pray masters fly-Masters help. Exeunt the Clownes Pug. I'le follow you, I'le lead you about a round. Through Bog, through Bush, through Brake, through Bryar. Sometimes a Horse I'le be, sometimes a Hound, a Hogge, a headlesse Beare; sometimes a Fire, and Neigh, and Bark, and Grunt, and Roare, and Burn, like horse, hound, hog, beare, fire, at every turne, Enter Bottome with an Asses head. Bott. Why do they run away, this is knavery of them to make me afeard. Enter Snout. Sno. O Bottome thou art changed, what do I see on thee? Bott. What do I see? you see an Asses head of your own do you? Enter Peter Quince Quin. Blesse thee Bottome, blesse thee, thou art transla∣ted. Exeunt Bott. I see their knavery, this is to make an asse of me, and fright me if they could, but I will not stir from this place do they what they can, I will walk up and down here,
and will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid. he sings The Woosel cock so black of hew, with Orange Tawny bill. The Thros'le with his note so true, Queen of Fairy wakes and looks upon him. the Wren and little quill. Tita. What Angel wakes me from my flowry bed? Bott. The Finch, the Sparrow, and the Lark. The Plain-song Cuckow Gray, whose note full many a man doth Mark, and dare not answer Nay. For indeed who should set his wit to so foolish a bird? who would give a bird the lye though he should cry Cuckow ne∣ver so. Tita. I pray thee gentle mortal sing again, mine eare is much enamoured of thy note. On the first view to say, to sweare I love thee so is mine eye enthralled to thy shape and thy faire vertues force (perforce) doth move me. Bott. Me thinks (Mistresse) you should have little rea∣son for that, and yet to say truth reason and love keep little company together now adayes. The more the pitty that some honest neighbours will not make them freinds. Nay I can Gleek upon occasion. Tita. Thou art as wise as thou art beautifull. Bott. Not so neither: but if I had wit enough to get out of this Wood, I have enough to serve my own tne. Tita. Out of this wood do not desire to go. Thou shalt remaine here whether thou wilt or no. I am a spirit of no common fare The summer still doth tend upon my state, and I do love thee, therefore go with me I'le give thee Fairies to attend on thee, and they snall fetch thee jewels from the Deep, and sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep, and I will purge thy mortall grosseness so,
That thou shalt like a Ayery spirit go. Enter Peaseblossome, Cobweb, and Mustarseed three Fairies Fair. Ready and I, and I, and I, where shall we go. Tita. Be kind and curteous to this Gentleman, hop in his walks and Gambol in his eyes. feed him with apricots and Dewberries, with purple Grapes, Green Figs, and Mulberries. The honey bags steale from the humble Bees, and for white tapers crop their waxen thighs, and light them at the fiery glow-wormes eyes To have my love to bed and to arise, And pluck the wings from painted Butterflies To Fan the Moon-beames from his sleeping eyes. Nod to him Elves, and do him Curtesies. 1. Fai. Haile mortal Haile. 1. 2. Fai. Haile. 3. Fai. Haile. Bott. I cry your worships heartily mercy. I beseech your worships name. Cob. Cobweb. Bott. I shall desire you of more acquaintance good Ma∣ster Cobweb, if I cut my singer, I shall make bold with you. Your name honest Gentleman? Peas. Pease-blossome. Bott. I pray commend me to Mrs. Squash your Mother and to Master Pease-cod your Father, I shall desire of you more acquaintance too. Your name I beseech you Sir. Mus. Mustard-seed. Bott. Good Mr. Mustard-seed, I know your patience well? That same cowardly Giant-like Ox-Beefe hath de∣voured many a Gentleman of your house; I promise your kindred have made my eyes water ere now. I desire
you more acquaintance good Master Mustard-seed. Tita. Come waite upon him, lead him to my Bower. The Moon me thinks looks with a warry eye, And when she weeps, weep every little Flower: Lamenting some enforced chastity. Tye up my lovers tongue, bring him silently. Exeunt Enter Oberon King of Fairies Solus. Ob. I wonder if Titania he awaked. Then what it was that next came in her eye, Which she must dore on in extremity. Enter Pugg. Here comes my messenger, now now Mad spirit What night-rule now about this haunted Grove? Pugg. My Mistresse with a Monster is in love Near to her Close and consecrated bower, Whiles she was in her dull and sleeping hower A Crew of Patches, rude Mechanicals, That work for bread upon Athenian stalls, Were met together to rehearse a play Intended for great Theseus Nuptial day. The shallowest Thick-skin of that barren sort, Who Piramus presented in their sport. Forsook his Scene, and entred in a brake Where I did him at this advantage take; An Asses Nose I fixed on his head, Anon his Thisby must be answered, And forth my mimick comes when they him spy, As Wild-geese that the creeping Fowler eye; Or russet-pated Choughs many in sort (Rising and cawing at the Guns report) Sever themselves, and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly, and at our stamp ore and ore one falls He murther cryes, and help from Athens calls. Their sense thus weak lost with their fear thus strong Made senceless things begin to do them wrong. For Bryars and Thornes at their apparel snatch Some sleeves, some hats, from Yeilders all things catch. I led them on in this distracted feare, And left sweet Pyramus translated there. When in that moment so it came to passe Titania wak'd, and straight-way lov'd an asse. Exit Ob. This fall out better then I could devise, I shall now be avenged upon my Queen. But see she comes, I'le stand aside. Enter Queen, Bottome, Fairies. Tita. Come sit thee down upon this Flowry bed, While I thy aimable Cheeks do coy, And stick musk Roses on thy sleek smooth head, And kiss thy faire large eares, my gentle Joy. Bott. Where's Pease-blossome? Peas. Ready. Bott. Scratch my head Pease-blossome, where's Monsieur Cobweb. Cob. Ready. Bott. Monseur Cobweb, good Monseur get your weapons in your hand, and kill me a red humble Bee on the top of a Thistle, and good Monsieur bring me the honey bag. Do not fret your self too much in the action Monsieur, and good Monsieur have a care the honey bag break not, I would be loath to have you ore flown with a honey bag Signior. Where's Monsieur Mustard-seed. Mus. Ready. Bott. Give me your newfe Monsieur Mustard-seed.
Pray le ave your Curtesie good Monsieur. Mus. What's your will? Bott. Nothing good Monsieur, but to help Cavaliero Cob∣web to scratch; I must to the Barbers Monsieur, for me thinks I am marvaillous hairy about the face, and I am such a Tender asse if my hair does but tickle me I must scratch. Tita. What wilt thou hear some musick my sweet love? Bott. I have a reasonable good eare in musick, let us hear the Tong and the bones. Musick Tongs Rurall Musick. Tita. Or say sweet love what thou desirest to eate? Bott. Truly a peck of provender, I could maunch your good dry Oates, me thinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay, good hay, sweet hay hath no fellow. Tita. I have a ventrous Fairy That shall seek the Squirils hoard And fetch the new Nuts Bott. I had rather have a handfull or two of dried pease. But I pray let none of your people stirr me, I have an exposi∣tion of sleep come upon me. Tita. Sleep thou and I will winde the in my armes Fairies begon and be allwaies away So doth the wood bind the sweet Honisuckle Gently entwist, the female Ivy so Enrings the barky fingers of the Elme O how I love thee? How I dote on thee? Ob. Welcome good Pug. Oberon approaches Seest thou this sweet sight? Enter Pug, Her dotage now do I begin to pitty For meeting her of late behind the wood Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool I did upbraid her and fall out with her, For she his hairy temples then had rounded With Coronet of fresh and Fragrant flowers, And that same Dew which some time on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearl; I stood now within the pretty flouriers eyes Like teares that did there own disgrace bewaise And she in mild terms begd my patience I then did aske of her her Changeling child Which streight she gave me and her fairy sent To beare him to my bower in Fairy land. And now I have the boy I will undo This hateful imperfection of her eyes And gentle Pug take this transformed Scalpe From off the head of this Athenian swain That he awaking may returne to Athens and thinke no more of this nights accidents But as the sierce vexation of a dream But first I will release my fairy Queen. Bee thou as thou was wont to be See thou as thou was wont to see, Dians bud or Cupids Flower Hath such force and blessed power. Now my Titania wake you my sweet Queen Tit. My Oberon what visions have I seen Me thought I was inamored of an asse. Ob. There lies your love. Tit. How came these things to pass Oh how mine eyes do loath this visage now. Ob. Silence a while. Pug take thou off his head he puls off his asses head Pug. When thou awakes with thine own fools eyes peep. Exeunt. After a while Bottome wakes. Bott. When my cue comes call me, and I will answer, my next is most faire Pyramus hei ho. Peter Quince, Flute the bellowes mender? Snout the Tinker? Starveling? Gods my life stolne hence and left me asleep, I have had a most rare vision, I had a dream past the witt of man to say what
dream it was. Man is but an Asse if he go about to expound this dream, me thought I was thers no man can tell what me thought I was, and me thought I had, but a man is but a patched fool if he will offer to say what me thought I had, the eye of man hath not heard, the eare of man hath not seen, mans hand is not able to cast, his tongue to conceive, not his heart report what my dream, was. I will get Peter Quince to write a Ballad of this dream, it shall be called Bottomes dream because it hath no Bottom and I will sing it in the la∣ter end of the Play before the Duke, peradventure to make, it the more gratious I will sing it at her death. Exit Enter Quince, Flute, Thisby, Snout and Starveling. Qu, Have you sent to Bottoms house? is he come yet? Star. He cannot be heard of, out of doubt he is transpor∣ted. Flute. If he come not then the play is marrd, it goes not forward doth it? Qu. It is not possible, you have not a man in all Athent able to discharge Pyramus but he. Flut. Noe: He hath simply the best wit of any handy∣crafts man in Athens. Qu. Yea and the best person too, and he is a very Para∣mour for a sweet voice. Flu. You must say Paragon, a Paramour is God blesse us a thing of naught. Enter Snug the Ioyner. Snug Masters, the Duke is now coming from being mar∣ried at the Temple, oh if our sport had gone forward, we had all been made men. Flu. O sweet Bully Bottome, thou hast lost six pence a day during his life, he could not have scaped six pence a day, and the Duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyra∣mus
I'le be hang'd, he would have deserved sixpence a day in Pyramus or nothing. Enter Bottome. Bott. Where are these lads? Where are these hearts? Qu. Bottome! O most couragious day! oh most hapy hour▪ Bott. Masters I am to discourse wonders, but aske me not what, for if I tell you I am no true Athenian, I will tell you every thing as it fell out. Qu. Let us hear sweet Bottome. Bott. Not a word of me, all that I will tell you is that the Duke hath dined, get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new Ribbands to your Pumps, meet pre∣sently in the Pallace every man look over his part for the short and the long is, our play is preferred, in any case let Thisby have clean linnen: and let not him that plaies the Lyon pare his Nailes for they shall hang out for the Ly∣ons clawes, and most dear actors eate no Onions nor Garlick, for we are to utter sweet breath and doubt not to hear them say it is a sweet Comedy. No more words away: go away. Exeunt. Enter Duke, Dutchess and two Lords. Egaeus. May all things prove propitious to this match And heavens power down whole showers of joy to waite Within your Royal walkes your Board, your bed Duke. Thanks kind Egaeus, but what pleasant maskes What dances have we now to weare away This long age of three hours which yet we have To spend ere bed time? 1. Lord. And't please your grace, there is a scene Tedious yet breif to be presented of The love of Pyramus and Thisbe Mirth very Tragical Duke. Merry and Tragical? tedious and breif. That is hot Ice, and wondrous Strange snow? how shall we find a concord in this discord?
2. Lord. A play there is my Lord, some ten words long Which is as briefe as I have known a play, But by ten words my Lord it is too long Which makes it tedious, For in all the play Theres not one word apt, one player fitted; And Tragical my noble Lord it is For Pyramus therein doth skill himself Which when I saw rehearst I must confess Made my eyes water but more merry tears The passion of loud laughter never shed Duke What are they that do play it? 1. Lord Hard handed men that worke in Athens here Which never laboured in their minds till now And now have toyled their unbreathed memories With this same play against your Nuptials Duke. And we will hear it, let them approach. They take their seates, Enter Prologue. Pro. If we offend it is with our good will. That you should think we come not to offend But with good will, To shew our simple skil, That is the true beginning of our end. Consider then, we come but in despite, We do not come as minding to content you Our true intent is. All for your delight We are not here. That you should here repent you The actors are at hand, And by their show You shall know all that you are like to know. Duke. This fellow doth not stand upon points. 1. Lord. He hath read his prologue like a Rough Colt, he knowes not the Stop. A good moral my Lord. It is not enough to speak, but to speak true. Dutch. Indeed he hath plaid on his Prologue like a Child on the recorder, a sound but ot in government. Duke. His speech was like a tangled chaine nothing im∣paired but all disordered. Who is the next?
Enter Pyramus Thisbe, Wall, Moonshine and Lyon. Prolo. Gentels perchance you wonder at this show; But wonder on till truth doth make all things plain: This man is Pyramus if you would know; This beauteous Lady Thisbe is certain. This man with Lime and Rough-cast doth present Wall the vile Wall which did these lovers sunder, And through Walls chink (poor soules) they are content To whisper, at the which let no man wonder. This man with Lanthorne Dog, and bush of Thorne Presenteth Moon-shine; for if you will know, By Moon-shine did these lovers think no scorne To meet at Ninus Tombe, there there to woe. This Grisly beast (which Lyon height by name) The trusty Thisbe coming first by night Did scare away, or rather did affright, And as she sled her mantle she did fall, Which Lyon vile with bloody mouth did staine; Anon comes Pyramus sweet youth and tall, And finds his gentle Thisbie's mantle slaine, Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade He bravely broach't his bloody boiling breast, And Thisbe tarrying in Mulberry shade His Dagger drew and dyed. For all the rest Let Lyon, Moon-shine, Wall, and Lovers twaine At large discourse, while here they do remaine. Exeunt all but Wall. Duke. I wonder if the Lyon be to speak? 2. Lor. No wonder my Lord, one Lyon may, when ma∣ny Asses do. Wall. In this same enterlude it doth befall That I one Snug (by name present a wall, And such a wall as I would have you think As had in it a crnned hole or chink, through which the Lovers Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often very secretly. This loame, this rough-cast, and this stone doth show that I am that same wall the truth is so, And this the Cranny is right and sinister, through which the fearful lovers are to whisper. Duke. VVould you desire lime and haire to speak better. 2. Lor. It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard dis∣course my Lord. Duke. Pyramus draws near the wall, Silence— Enter Pyramus Pyra. O Grim lookt night! O night with hue so black! O night which ever art when day is not. O night, O night, alack, alack, alack I fear my Thisbie's promise is forgot; And thou O wall, thou sweet and lovely wall, that stands between her fathers ground and mine, Thou Wall, O Wall, O sweet and lovely Wall Shew me thy Chink to blink through with mine eyes. Thanks Curteous Wall; Iove sheild thee well for this. But what see I? No Thisby do I see. O witched Wall through whom I see no blisse: Curst be thy stones for thus deceiving me. Duke. The Wall me thinks being sensible should curse againe. Pyram. No in truth Sir he should not, Deceiving me Is Thisbies Cue, she is to enter, and I am to spy her through the Wall, you shall see it will fall. Enter Thisby. Pat as I told you; yonder she comes. Thisb. O Wall full often hast thou heard my moanes For parting my faire Pyramus and me. My Cherry lips have often kist thy stones, Thy stones with Lime and Haire knit up in thee. Pyra. I hear a voice, Now will I to the Chink To spy if I can see my Thisbies face. Thisby. This. My love, thou art my love I think.
Pyra. Think what thou wilt I am thy lovers Grace, And like Limander am I trusty still. This. And I like Helen till the fates me kill. Pira. Not Thafalus to Procrus was so true. This. As Shalafus to Procrus I to you. Pira. O kisse me through the hole of this vile Wall. This. I kisse the Wall hole, not your lips at all. Pira. Will thou at Ninnies tombe meet me straight way? This. Tide life ride death I'le come without delay. Exeunt Pir. and Thisby. Wall. Thus have I VVall my part discharged so. Exit Wall Duke. Now is the Moral downe between the two neigh∣bours. 2. Lor. No remedy my Lord when Walls are so wilfull. Dutch. This is the silliest stuffe that ever I heard. Duke. The best in this kinde are but shaddows, and the worst no worse, if imagination amend them. Dutch. It must be your imagination then, not theirs. Duke. If we imagine no worse of them then they of themselves, they may passe for excellent men. Here comes two noble Beasts in, a Man and a Lyon. Enter Lyon and Moon-shine. Lyon. You Ladies, you whose gehtle hearts do fear the monstrous Mouse that creeps on floore; May now perchance both quake and tremble here, When Lyon rough in wildest rage doth roare. Then know that I one Snug the Joyner am, A Lyon fell, nor else no Lyons damme, For if I should as Lyon come in strife Into this place, t'were pitty of my life. Duke. A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience. 2. Lor. The very best at a beast my Lord that ever I saw. 1. Lor. This Lyon is a very Fox for his valour. Duke. True, and a Goose for his discretion. 2. Lor. Not so my Lord, for his valour cannot carry his
discretion, and the Fox carries the Goose. Duke. His discretion I am sure cannot carry his valour, for the Goose carries not the Fox. It is well, leave it to his discretion. Moon. This Lanthorne doth the horned Moon present. 2. Lor. He should have worne the horns on his head. Duke. He is no Crescent, and his horns are invisible within the circumference. Moon. This Lanthorne doth the horned Moon present; my self the man ith Moon doth seeem to be. Duke, This is the grearest error of all the rest, the man should be put in the Lanthorne, how is he else the man in the Moon. 2. Lor. He dares not come in there for the Candle, for you see 'tis already in snuffe. Dutch. I am weary of this moon, would he would change, Duke. It appears by his small light of Discretion that he is in the Waine: but yet in curtesie in all reason we must stay the time. 1. Lor. Proceed Moon? Moon. All that I have to say is, to tell you that the Lan∣thorne is the Moon; I the man in the Moon, this thorne-Bush my bush, and this Dog my Dog. 2. Dor. Why, all these should be in the Lanthorne, for they are in the Moon. But silence, here comes Thisbe. Enter Thisbe This. This is old Ninnies tombe: where is my love. Lyon. Oh— the Lyon roares, Thisby runs off 1. Lor. Well roar'd Lyon. Duke. Well run Thisby. Dutch. Well shone Moon. Truly the moon shines with a good grace. Duke. Well mouz'd Lyon 2. Lord. And then came Pyramus 1. Lord. And so the Lyon vanisht Enter Pyramus Pyr. Sweet moone I thank thee for thy sunny beames
I thank the moon for shining now so bright For by thy gratious golden glittering Streames I trust to tast of truest Thisbes sight But stay: O spight! but marke poor knight What dreadful dole is here? Eyes do you see! How can it be! O dainty Duke! O deare! Thy mantell good; what stain'd with blood Approach you furies fell O Fates come come, cut thred and thrum Quail, crush, conclude and quell. Duke. This passion and the death of a dear freind would go neere to make a man look sad. Dut. Beshrew my heart but I pity the man Pyr. O wherefore nature didst thou Lyons stame? Since Lyon wild hath here defloured my deare Which is, no no, Which was the fairest Dame That livd that loved that liked that look'd with cheere Come teares confound, out sword and wound The pap of Pyramus I that left pap where heart doth hap Thus eye I thus thus thus Now am I dead, now am I fled, my soul is in the sky Tongue loose thy light moon take thy flight Exit Moonshine. Now dye dye dye dye dye 2. Lord. No dye but am ace for him for hees but one 1. Lord. Less then an ace man for hees dead hees nothing Duke. With the help of a Surgeon he might yet reco∣ver and prove an Asse. Dutch. How chance moonshine is gon before. Thisbe comes back and finds her slain lover Enter Thisbe Duke. She finds him by starlight Here She comes and her passion ends the play Dut. Me thinks she should not use a long one, for such a Pyramus I hope she will be breif.
2. Lor. A Moth will turn the ballance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe is the better. 1. Lor. She hath spyed him already with those sweet eyes. 2. Lor. And thus she means. Videlicet. This. Asleep my love? What dead my dove? O Pyramus arise, Speak, Speak. Quite dumbe? Dead, dead? a tombe Must cover thy sweet eyes. These lilly lips, this cherry nose. These yellow Cowslip cheeks are gone, are gone, lovers make moane, His eyes were as green as leeks. O Sisters three, come come to me with hands as pale as milk, lay them in gore, since you have shore with sheares, his thred of silk. Tongue not a word; Come trusty Sword, Come blade my breast imbrue, And farewell freinds, thus Thisbe ends. Adieu Adieu Adieu. Duke. Moon-shine and lyon are left to bury the Dead. 2. Lor. I and Wall too. Bott. No I assure you, the wall is down that parted their Fathers. VVill it please you to see the Epilogue, or to hear a Burgo-mask dance between two of our company. Duke. No Epilogue pray you, for your play needs no excuse, never excuse. For when the Players are all Dead, there need none to be blamed. Marry if he that writ it had playd Pyramus, and hung himself in Thisbies Garter, it had been a fine Tragedy, and so it is truly, and very notably dis∣charged; but come, your Burgo-mask, let your Epilogue alone. After a Dance, Exeunt Omnes. Advertisement. If you please to repaire to our Shops aforementioned, you may be furnished with all Plays that were ever yet Printed. FINIS
