S3498A 99896279 154073
The Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet of RARIETIES or the Ingenious Gentlewoman & Servant Maids Delightfull Companion London Printed for N. Bodington & I Blare
The Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet OF RARITIES: OR, THE Ingenious Gentlewoman and Servant Maids Delightfull Companion. Containing many Excellent Things for the ACCOMPLISHMENT of the FEMALE SEX, after the exactest Manner and Method, Viz. (1.) The Art of Distilling. (2.) Making Arti∣ficial Wines. (3.) Making Syrups. (4.) Conserving Preserving, &c. (5.) Candying and Drying Fruits, &c (6.) Confectioning. (7.) Carving. (8.) To make Beautifying-waters, Oyls, Pomatums, Musk-balls, Per∣fumes, &c. (9.) Physical and Chyrurgical Receipts. (10.) The Duty of a Wet Nurse; and to know and cure Diseases in Children, &c. (11.) The Compleat Chamber-Maids Instructions in Pickling, making Spoon-meats, Washing, Starching, taking out Spots and Stains, Scowring Gold or Silver-Lace, Point, &c. (12.) The Experienced Cook-Maid, or Instructions for Dressing, Garnishing, making Sawces, serving up; together, with the Art of Pastry. (13.) Bills of Fare. (14.) The Accomplished Dairy-Maids Di∣rections, &c. (15) The Judicious Midwives Di∣rections, how Women in Travail before and after Delivery ought to be used; as also the Child; and what relates to the Preservation of them both. To which is added a Second Part, Containing Directions for the Guidance of a young Gentle∣woman as to her Behaviour & seemly Deportment, &c. The Second Edition, with many Additions. LONDON, Printed by W. W. for Nicholas Boddington in Duck-Lane; and Josiah Blare on London-Bridge. 1687.
Licensed and Entred accor∣ding to Order.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Reader, IN consideration that variety is most taking, especially of such things as are highly necessary; I have thought it convenient, not only for Delight, but for the Accomplishment of the Female Sex, to set forth what must undoubtedly turn to their advantage, and consequently more than a Preface can express, or a sudden conception bring forth, if seriously and deliberately considered, to
a degree of Practice; for indeed without industry,  the smallest matter cannot be brought to perfection. Things Natural and Artifi∣cial owe their Original to Labour and In∣dustry; the first to the visible and insen∣sible Workings of Nature; the second to that of the Creature: nor without these could the World subsist. But to come nearer the subject-matter. In the following Treatise you will find not only Approved Rules, Instructions and Directions for particular persons, whose ability and leasure may contribute in an extraordinary manner to the highest Ac∣quirement, but such as are sutable to all degrees and capacities; such as must con∣tribute to the Advancement of each Indi∣vidual Female, to a Station that may ren∣der her acceptable in the eyes of great ones, or at least create her a good repute, and pronounce her happy, though moving in a lower sphere. All that we can term Ac∣complish'd in Female Conduct, is briefly to be found in the following Pages; di∣gested into so easie and plain a method, that it will, no doubt, insensibly attract
the desire of the Reader to make an Essay; and that Essay being found both profitable and delightfull, will carry her further in the progress of Pleasure and Advantage, till she confesses the Time and Cost was well bestowed, and becomes an Admonisher of others to make the like improvement; no∣thing of this nature being more exact in directing the Female Sex in what is seem∣ly and profitable from Infancy to extre∣mity of Age, and is a fit Companion upon all commendable occasions, in whatsoever state or condition, even from the Lady, to the inferiour Servant-Maid; being a Directory, in which nothing necessary for the Accomplishment and Qualification of the Sex is omitted, in relation to Education, Breeding, good Manners, courtly Deportment, prudent Conduct, and Management of Affairs, being the very Quintessence of whatever has been practised or published, and more perhaps than can probably be expected in so small a Book. But thinking no labour too much to advantage the fair Sex, I have travelled through the World of
Curiosi∣ties,  to furnish out this Cabinet of Ra∣rities, in hopes it will find a kind accep∣tance, and turn to the advantage of those who rightly consider it. In expectation of which, I remain, LADIES, &c. Yours to serve you in what I may, John Shirley.
The Accomplished Ladies Rich Closet of Rarities, &c. CHAP. I. Rules and Directions for a Gentlewoman in the Art and Way of Alimbecking, Distilling and making sundry sorts and kinds of Waters Phy∣sical, Chyrurgical, and pleasantly usefull on di∣vers occasions; With the Order, Manner of Composition, and Quantity of Ingredients, &c. A Limbecking and Distilling are held by many to be Learned, or taken by the Ancients from the Opera∣tion of the Sun in its effectually Exhaling the Sublunar moisture, and Rarify∣ing the gross and indigested Vapours in a more subtil Region; and indeed Distillations participate of a Solar vertue, as being by their penetrating Qualities, and insensible Operations, more quick, subtil and enliven∣ing. Wherefore I have thought it
highly  convenient to give Directions in this Chapter, how to Distill and draw off such Waters from Herbs, and other Cordial matters, as may contribute to the preservation of health, and wherewith a Gentlewoman, being furnished, may be instrumental in saving the Lives, or at least in doing good to her poor Neigh∣bours: And in this case the Simples that are to be put into the Still together to draw off your compound Waters, which indeed are the most effectual in their Operations, ought to be considered: the several Directions for which, take as followeth. A distilled Water, good to prevent the Danger of Infectious Air, Plague, Pestilence, &c. Take the buds, or green husks of Wal∣nuts, or the leaves of that Tree, a handfull; of Rue the like quantity, and as much Baum: bruise them, and add of Mugwort, Celen∣dine, Angelica, Agrmony, Pimpernel and wild Dragons or Snap-dragons, each half a handfull: bruise them as the former, and be∣ing put into an Earthen-pot or Glass, pour on them a Gallon and a half of White or Rhe∣nish-wine, and let them stand four days, af∣terward putting the Wine and Herbs in an Alembeck, draw off the Quintessence: or it may be done, for want of conveniency, in a cold Still.
The Famous Water, called Dr. Stevens's Water is made to the best advantage; thus. Take a gallon of French Wine, of Cloves, Mace, Carraways, Coriander and Fennel-seeds, Gallinga, Ginger, Cinamon, Grains, Nutmeg, Anniseed, of each a dram: to these add Camomoil, Sage, Mint, Rue, red Roses, Peletory of the Wall, wild Marjoram, wild Thyme, Lavender, Penyroyal, the Roots of Fennel, Parsley and Setwall, of each four ounces; and having bruised them, put them into two quarts of Canary, and the like quan∣tity of Ale; and then having stood sixteen hours, with often stirring, draw off the Quin∣tessence by Alembeck over a soft fire. This Water is a wonderfull fortifier of Nature in all cold Diseases, preserving Youth, comfor∣ting the Stomach, and is given with success to such as are afflicted with the Stone or Gravel. Cinamon-Water is properly made thus. Take half a pound of Cinamon, bruise it and steep it in a quart of White-wine, a quart of Rose-water, and a pint of Muscadel, twelve hours, with often stirring; and from this A∣lembeck three pints, which will not be only pleasant, but fortifie nature, and restore lost vigour.
To make Rosemary-Water. Take the Flowers and Leaves of Rose∣mary in their prime, half a pound and four unces of Elicampane Roots, a handfull of Red Sage, three ounces of Cloves, the same quantity of Mace, and twelve ounces of An∣iseeds: beat the Herbs together, and the Spices separately, putting to them four gal∣ons of White-wine; and after a weeks stan∣ding, distill them over a gentle fire. Spirit of Wine, how to make it. To Distill, or rather Alembeck, Spirit of Wine, is to draw off any Wine you think fit over a gentle fire to what height you please, by often rectifying it; and is very good mo∣derately taken, in cold distempers, or to mix with Cordial Waters of a cooler nature. To make Treacle-water excellent good, in case of Surfeits, or the like disorders of the Body. Take the Husks of green Walnuts four handfulls, of the Juyce of Rue, Cardus, Mari∣golds and Baum, of each a pint; green Peta∣sitis Roots one pound, Angelica and Master∣wort, of each half a pound; the Leaves of Scordium four handfulls; old Venice-Treacle and Mithridate, of each eight ounces; six quarts of Canary; of Vinegar three quarts, and of Lime-juyce one
quart: which being  two days dijested in a Bath in a close Vessel, distill them in Sand, &c. A Cordial Mint-Water is thus made. Take two handfulls of Mint green, two handfulls of Cardus, and one of Wormwood, and soak them in new Milk; being bruised, and after three or four hours infusion, draw off the water by way of Distillation, and keep is close stopped for your use, it being excel∣lent good in case of pains in the Belly or Stomach. An excellent Water for Sore Eyes, or to Restore the sight. Take Smallage, Rue, Fennel, Vervein, Agremony, Scabeous, Avens, Hounds-tongue, Eufrace, Pimpernel and Sage, of each a hand∣full; Roach-Allum half an ounce, Honey a spoonfull, dissolved in Rose-water: distill them in a cold Still; and when you use it, put in a little Allum and Honey, and suffer it to dissolve, washing your Mouth with it Evening and Morning. An excellent Water for a Canker. Take of the Bark of an Elder-tree, Sorrel and Sage, of each two handfulls: stamp them well, and strain out the Liquid part, mingling it with double the quantity of White-wine; and often with a feather dipped in it, wash the Sore, &c.
A Water very good for a Fistula. Take a pint of White-wine, an ounce o the Juyce of Sage, Borace in Powder thre peny weight, Camphire-powder the weigh of a groat: boil them two hours over a gen¦tle fire; strain them through a Woollen-cloth; and being cold, wash therewith the place grieved. An excellent Water to cleanse any filthy Ulcer. Take of the Water of Plantane, and that of Red Roses, each a pint; the Juyces of Housleek, Nightshade and Plantane, of each a quarter of a pint: Red Roses half a hand∣full, Myrtle, Cyprus-nuts, of each half an ounce; of the Rind of Pomgranate three drams, St. John's Wort half a handfull, Flow∣ers of Molleyn half as much, Myrrh, Frank∣incense, each a scruple; Honey of Roses a pound and four ounces: distill them toge∣ther, and of the Water take a pint, and dis∣solve in it six ounces of Conserve of Roses, and one ounce of Syrup of dry Roses, with twelve drops of the Oyl of Brimstone, and wash the place grieved. An excellent Water for the Heats and Inflamma∣tion of the Eyes. Take of Alloes Epatick, fine Sugar, Tut∣ty-stone powdered,
each an ounce; of red  and white Rose-water, each a pint: put them in a double glass, and set them in Balneo Ma∣ria five or six days, often shaking them, and with a feather dipped in it, wash your Eyes as often as you see occasion, as likewise your Forehead and Temples. An excellent Water for a sore Leg, or for a Can∣ker in any part or place. Take of Woodbine-leaves, Ribwort, Plan∣tane, Abinte, of each a handfull clarified; English Honey three spoonfuls, Roach-Allum an ounce: put them into three quarts of Run∣ning-water, and let them seeth till a third part be consumed; then strain out the liquid part, and keep it in a new glazed Earthen-pot for your use, washing the afflicted place with it twice a day. A Water to turn back the Rheum that afflicts the Eyes. Take of red Rose-water six ounces, White-wine and Eye-bright-water, of each the like quantity; Lapis-Tuttiae three scruples, Al∣loes Epatick the like quantity, fine Sugar two ounces: put them into a Glass with a narrow neck, and set them in the Sun for the space of thirty days, shaking them twice a day, and then with the liquid part wash the Eye-lids, Temples, Forehead, and the Nape of the Neck.
An excellent Water to cool the Liver and Heart as also in case of a Feaver, Surfeit, or Ill di∣gestion. Take two handfulls of Wood-sorrel, the like of Barbary-leaves, half a dozen Plan∣tane-roots washed and sliced, two ounces of Mellion-seed; of Comfry and Borrage-flow∣ers, each an ounce: steep them in a gallon of fair water, well sweetned with Sugar-candy, and distill them, giving the party grieved two ounces of the Water, with an ounce of the Syrup of Citron or Lemon. An excellent Water for an Internal Bruise. Take two handfulls of Scabeous-flowers of Peny-royal, Camomoil, Smallage and Bay-leaves, each a handfull; Myrrh pulverized half an ounce; Harts-horn two ounces, and two quarts of Malaga-wine: bruise the Herbs &c. in the Wine, and then distill them alto∣gether, and let the party drink two ounces of the Water morning and evening. An excellent Water for the Stone, to provoke Urine, and prevent Stoppage, &c. Take two quarts of new Milk, Saxifrage Parsley, Peletory of the Wall, Mother, Time, green Sage, Radish-roots sliced, of each a
handfull: steep the Herbs and Roots over  night in the Milk, and distill them the next morning: which done, mingle six spoonfulls of the Water, with as much White-wine; in∣to which grating a third part of a Roasted Nutmeg, drink it off; and so continue to do divers times, and you will find extraordi∣nary benefit thereby. Poppy-Water, how to make it. Take two pound of red Poppy-leaves, half an ounce of bruised Cloves, and the like quantity of sliced Nutmeg: steep these in a quart of Canary, and after two hours stan∣ding, put them into your Still, and draw off the Water over a gentle fire. Cordial Angelica-Water is made thus. Take of Cardus Benedictus a handfull well dried, of Angelica-roots three ounces, of Nutmeg, Cinamon and Ginger, each an ounce; of Myrrh half an ounce, and one dram and a half of Saffron; of Cardamums, Cubebs, Galingal and Pepper, of each a quar∣ter of an ounce: bruise them and steep them in two quarts of Canary, and draw them off with a common Still. Aquamirabilis is thus made. Take three pints of White-wine; of the ce of Celendine and
Aquavitae, each a  pint; Cardamer, and the Flowers of Me¦lilot, a dram of each; of Cubebs, Gallinga Cloves, Mace and Ginger, of each a dram bruise them and put them to the Liquo where soaking all night, the next morning se them on a Stiil in Glass Alimbeck, and draw off the Quintessence. The Water prevents the Putrefaction of th Blood; is good in case of the swelling of th Lungs; removes the Heart-burn, and pur¦geth Flegm and Melancholy, &c. Divers other Waters of Physical Vertu I might mention; but having many thing yet to propose, and intending brevity, shall proceed from Distilled Physical Water to give Directions for making Artifici Wines, &c. And as for such Waters as a for Beautifying, I shall treat of them in ano¦ther place.
CHAP. II. Instructions for a Gentlewoman how to make Ar∣tificial Wines and other pleasant Liquors, ne∣cessary and profitable both for Sale, and to be kept in private Houses for the Accommodation of Friends, &c. AS there are many pleasant Liquors made rather Artificial than Natural, so it will not be amiss to say something of them, which for variety may not prove pleasant only, but profitable, and are very commendable to be kept in the House for the Entertainment of Friends and Strangers; who being perhaps rarely used to such, will set a value on them above any other. But to the purpose. To make Cherry-Wine. Stone your Cherries before they are too ripe; press them in a Press, or through a clean cloth, and let the Juyce settle, then draw it off, and bottle it up with half an ounce of Loaf-sugar, and a piece of Cina∣mon in each bottle; and tying the Cork down, let it stand six weeks; and then being opened, it will drink pleasant and brisk. Hypocras is made thus.
Take a gallon of White or Rhenish-wine, and put to it two pound of Loaf-sugar, Ci¦namon, Mace, Pepper, Grains, Galingal and Cloves, of each a quarter of an ounce bruising the Spices, and putting them into the Wine; in which they having been close covered for the space of ten days, draw of the Wine, and renew it with other Wine, and an addition of Sugar: and so you may do three or four times, but the first is the best; nor is there a pleasanter Liquor imaginable. To make Wormwood-Wine. Take a gallon, or what quantity you think fit, of the smallest White-wine; put into it the peel of two Lemons, half an ounce of Mace, and a quarter of an ounce of Cina∣mon; adding a pound of white Sugar to each gallon, and stop them up close in a Vessel; and after they have stood six days, you may draw off the Wine, and put it up in Bottles. Rasberry, Strawberry, or Curran-wine, may be made as that of Cherries, but the li∣quor being boiled up with the Sugar before the Spices are put in, will keep the longest. An excellent Liquor may be likewise drawn from Plumbs, of pleasant taste, dissolving in some of the Liquor hot two or three spoon∣fulls of New-Ale-Yest to make it work; and afterward keep it in a cool place, that it may Rarifie the better.
Goosberry-wine is made the same way, only adding some blades of Mace, and slices of Ginger: As for the Wine of English Grapes, only Rarifie it with fine white Sugar-candy beaten into Powder. And since there re other pleasant Liquors besides these, I hink it not improper to say something of hose that are most in request. To make the best sort of Mead. Take a quart of Spring-water, and three uarts of small Beer, as clear as may be; add o them a pound and a half of clarified Ho∣ey, two ounces of the distilled Water of weet Marjorum, three or four sprigs of Rosemary and Bays: boil them together on gentle fire, ever scuming off what rises to he top, and then put it into a vessel to purge, x days after which bottle it up for your use. To make Steponey, a Liquor formerly much in use. Take a gallon of Spring-water, and stone pound and a half of the best Raisins of the un, and putting to them half a pound of fine ugar, press upon them the Juyce of three Lemons; slicing likewise the peel, and ad∣ing to the Water a quart of White-wine; il it, and when it is boiling-hot, pour it in∣ a pot upon the Raisins, Sugar, &c. and pping it close, let it stand six hours; after at stir it about, and let it stand two days
more; at the end of which strain it, and press the Raisins; and when you find the Liquor clear, put it up into Bottles for your use. Cock-Ale is thus made. Take a young Cock, and having stoned four pound of Raisins of the Sun, boil the and him in fair water, and then slice four Nutmegs, adding to them an ounce of Mace and half a pound of Dates: beat them well and put them into two quarts of Canary and having added to them the boiled Liquor in which the Cock must be boiled in a man¦ner to pieces: strain the Liquor, and pre what is solid; and after your Ale has don working, pour it in, and stop it down close two quarts is sufficient for a Barrel; the bottle it up, and in a month it will be fit drink. To make Rack, an Indian Liquor. Take a quart of Water, a pint of Brand and a pint of Canary; add half an ounce  beaten Ginger, and the like quantity of C¦namon, the Juyce of four Lemons, and tw ounces of Rose-water, with half a pound fine Loaf-sugar; put into it a hot Toast, it b∣ing well stirred, it is the Prince of Liquors. Choccolate is made with Choccolate, Mill Eggs, White-wine, Rose-water, and Mace Cinamon, which the party fancies, they
bei ll boiled together over a gentle fire; two unces of Choccolate, eight Eggs, half a pound f Sugar, a pint of White-wine, an ounce of Mace or Cinamon, and half a pound of Sugar, nswering in this case a gallon of Milk. Many other Liquors there are, as Methe∣in, Perry, Syder, Bracket, Tea, Coffee, &c. ut the way of making them being vulgarly nown, I shall spare my Instruction, and pro∣eed to Directions for making Syrups. CHAP. III. structions for a Gentlewoman in preparing and making Physical and Cordial Syrups, pleasant and profitable on sundry occasions, &c. Highly necessary to be kept in Families for the preser∣vation of Health, &c. Yrups are of two kinds, one Physical, and the other pleasant and usefull on sundry her occasions: But of these I shall treat thout distinction, the use of them being so blickly known, and indeed it is improper e to incert it. But to proceed. To make Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers. Take the red part of the Flowers, separa∣ from the white, to the
quantity of half a  peck; let them soak a night in Spring-water then boil them, and add to them a gallon Water wherein they were boiled, and in which, after boiling, they have been strong pressed, twelve pound of white Sugar, an half a pint of Rose-water, then boil up t Liquor with the Sugar into the thickness o Syrup, and keep it for your use. Some the are that make it without fire, but in my op¦nion this way must be the best for keeping. To make Syrup of Violets. Take the Flowers of the blew Violet clipping off the Whites, and to a pound them add a quart of boiling-water, and for pound of white Sugar; stirring them to¦ther, and stopping them close in an Earth vessel four days; then strain them, press out the liquid part; which being moderate heated on a gentle fire, will thicken into Syrup. To make Syrup of Wormwood. Take Roman Wormwood (the Lea only) half a pound; Leaves of red Roses, Flowers, two ounces; Indian-spike th drams; of the best White-wine a quart, the like quantity of the Juyce of Quinces; for want of it, Syder: bruise and infuse th for the space of twenty six
hours; then be¦ing them till the liquid part is half consum  strain out the remainder, and adding two pounds of sugar; boil it up into a syrup. To make Syrup of Lemons. Take a gallon of the Juyce of sound Le∣mons, strain it, and let it clarifie, and boil it up with six or seven pounds of fine sugar, till it be of the thickness of a syrup, and sweet enough for your purpose. An Excellent Syrup to preserve the Lungs, and for the Astma. Take of Nettle-water and Coltsfoot-water each a pint, Anniseed and Liquorish-powder of each two spoonfuls, Raisins of the Sun one handful, sliced Figs, number four: boil them together till a fourth part be consumed, strain the liquid part, and make it up into a syrup, with a pound of white Sugar-candy bruised into powder, and take two spoonfuls of it each morning fasting. An Excellent Syrup to open Obstructions, and help the shortness of Breath. Take Hysop of the first years growth, and Peny-royal, of each a handful; stamp them, and strain out the Juyce, and add of English Honey the like proportion: heat them in a Pewter dish over a chasing-dish of Coles till he Juyce and Honey be well incorporated, and making it continually fresh; let the party
afflicted take early each morning, and late each night, two spoonfuls. To make Syrup of Roses by Infusion. Take of the Water of Infusion of white Roses five pounds, clarified Sugar four pounds, and boil them with a gentle fire to the thick∣ness of a syrup, then soak two pounds of fresh white Roses in six pound of warm wa∣ter, suffering them to stand for the space of twelve hours close covered, then ring them out, and put in other fresh Roses, and so con∣tinue to do till the Water has the perfect scent of the Roses, and then the Water is fit∣ting for the Sugar to be dissolved in, and used as aforesaid. This Syrup draweth from the Entrails thin choler, and waterish humours, and is therefore fitting to be taken moderately by children, aged Persons, and such as are afflicted with the super∣abundance of either Choler or Phlegm. How to make Catholicum Majus. Take of the four great cold seeds cleansed, and of white Poppy-seeds each a dram, Gum-Dragant three drams, red Roses, yellow Saunders, Citron and Cinamon each two drams, Ginger one dram, of the best and choicest, Rubarb and Diacridum each hal an ounce, Agarick, Turbith, of each two drams,
white Sugar dissolved in Rose-water  wherein two ounces of Senna have been con∣cocted, one pound: make them into Tables of three scruples, and let one Table be the dose. It gathereth humours from all parts of the Body, and expells them without molesting health, or impairing of the strength, but rather fortifying nature, &c. Syrup of Radish; how to make it. Take of the Roots of Garden and wild Radishes, of each an ounce; of Saxifrage, Kneeholm, Borage, Sea-Holly, Pettywhin, O Cammack or Ground-Furz, Parsley, Fen∣nel, each half an ounce: the Leaves of Beto∣ny, Pimpernel, wild Time, Tendercrop, of Nettles, Cresses, Samphire, Venus-hair, of each a handfull: the fruit of Sleepy Night-shade and Jubebs, of each twenty: the seed of Basil, Burr, Parsley of Macedonia, Car∣roways, Seseli, yellow Carrots, Grommel, Bark of Bay-tree Root, of each a scruple; Raisins stoned, Licoras, of each a dram: boil them in ten pounds of water till four of them be consumed, then strain it, and with four pounds of Sugar, and half the quantity of clarified Honey, make the liquid part into a Syrup over a gentle fire, adding an ounce of beaten Cinamon, and half the quantity of grated Nutmeg. This being taken at convenient times, expelleth Gravel and
Stone, and scowreth the Kidneys,  if it be mixed with other lenitive and scowring matters; and also provokes Urine. Syrup of Vinegar compound; how to make it. Take of the best Wine-Vinegar a gallon, boil it, and take off the scum that arises; then stamp Endive, Maiden-hair and Wood-sorrel, with Barbaries or green Grapes; press out the Liquor, and put it into the Vinegar, to the quantity of a quart; boil them up till a fourth part be consumed, then add six pounds of Sugar, or so much as will make it into a Syrup, and give two spoonfulls at a time with success, in case of any hot distem∣per or feavorish disorder of the Body, or to expell gross phlegmatick humours. Oxymel simple; how to make it. Take of the clearest Water and clarified Honey, of each four pounds; boil them till half the Water be consumed, then add of Wine-Vinegar two pounds, and suffer them to boil to a syrup. This syrup extenuateth the gross humours, takes away slimy matter, and opens all Obstructions and Asthma, that is, Obstruction of the Lungs, with Phlegm, from whence ariseth shortness of breath. Syrup of Barberries is made thus. Take your Barberries, picked from the stalks, boil them to a
pulp, then strain and  rarifie the Juyce; then boil it up, being six pounds, with six pounds of fine Sugar into a syrup: or if you find that will not thicken it sufficiently, you may add more. To make Syrup of Cowslips. Take a gallon of the Distilled simple Wa∣ter of Cowslips, and put into it half a peck of the flowers clean picked, the yellow part on∣ly; boil them up with the Water, and add to the liquid part, after it is strained from them, six pound of sugar, heating it over the fire till it become a syrup. To make Syrup of Maiden-hair. Take the Herb so called to the quantity of six ounces, shred it a little, and add of Li∣corish-powder two ounces and a half, steep them twenty four hours in three quarts and a pint of hot water: add five pounds of fine Su∣gar to the Liquor, after it is boiled and con∣sumed a third part, and set it again on the fire till it become a syrup. To make Syrup of Licoris. Take of the Root of Licoris newly drawn from the ground, two ounces, scrape it into Powder of Coltsfoot, four ounces of Maiden-hair and Hysop, each half an ounce: infuse them twenty four hours in three quarts of
Water, then boil them till a half part be con∣sumed: which done, strain out the remain∣der, and with a pound of clarified Honey, and the like quantity of Loaf-sugar, boil it up into a syrup. To make Syrup of Cittron Peels. Take of the Peels of yellow Cittrons a pound, of the Berries, or Juyce of the Berries of Cherms, a dram; steep them a night in Spring-water to the quantity of two quarts, then boil them till a half part be consumed, and taking off the scum, strain it, then boil it up to a syrup, with two pound and a half of Sugar. To make Syrup of Harts-horn, or rather Harts-tongue. Take of the Herb called Harts-tongue, the Roots of both sorts, of Bugloss, Polipodium, of the Oak, Bark of Caper-roots, Tameris, Hops, Maiden-hair, Baum, of each two oun∣ces: boil them in five quarts of Spring-water till a fifth part be consumed; to which add four pounds of fine sugar, and boil it up to a syrup. To make Syrup of Cinamon, (which is excellent good in case of Faintings or cold Distem∣pers.) Take of the best Cinamon four ounces; bruise it and
steep it in three pints of White-wine,  and a pint of small Cinamon-water, three days by a gentle fire, add three pound of Sugar when it is strained, and boil it up to a syrup. To make the Syrup of Quinces. Take three quarts of the Juyce of Quin∣ces, let it be well setled and clarified; boil it over a gentle fire till half be consumed, then add three pints of Red-wine, with four pounds of white Sugar, and a dram and a half of Cinamon, and of Cloves and Ginger two scruples, and boil them up into a syrup. To make Syrup of Hysop. Take a handfull of the Herb so called Figs, Dates and Raisins, of each an ounce: boil them in three pints of Water till a third part be consumed, strain and clarifie the re∣mainder with the Whites of two Eggs ad∣ding two pound of fine Sugar, and so make it up into a syrup, and it will continue good a twelvemonth. To make an Excellent Syrup for a Cough or Cold, or to restore decaying Lungs. Take two quarts of Spring-water, put into it an ounce of Sydrack, half an ounce of Maiden-hair, two ounces of Elicampane-roots sliced:
boil them in an Earthen-vessel  till half be consumed, add more to the liquid part, strained off two pound of Sugar, and boil it up into a syrup; two spoonfulls of which, take morning and evening, being a wonderfull restorative. To make Syrup of Elder, now greatly in use. Take the Elder-berries fresh, when they are full ripe, strain out the Juyce, boil it till a third part be consumed; scum it clean, and add to a gallon, an ounce of Mace and six pound of Sugar, boiling it up to a syrup. To make Syrup of Roses. Take a gallon of fair water, and a quart of White-wine, put into them when they boil, a peck of red Roses pickt, and let them boil till they appear white: then press them, and put them into the liquid part, and boil it often, adding the Whites of two Eggs well beaten, and a pound of Sugar to each pint of Liquor; and when you find it sufficiently thick, preserve it in Glasses or Earthen-vessels close stopped, for your use. To make Syrup of Vinegar. Take of the Roots of Smallage, Fennel, Endive, of either three ounces; of the Leaves of Anniseed, Smallage, Fennel, Endive, half an ounce of each: boil them gently in three quarts of Spring-water till half be consumed,
then strain and clarifie it with three pound of Sugar, and add a quart of White-wine Vine∣gar, and boil it up to a syrup. To make Syurp of Saffron. Take a pint of Endive-water, two oun∣ces of Saffron finely beaten, steeping it in the Water for the space of two days; at the end of which, strain out the Saffron, and with a pound of Sugar, boil it up to a syrup. To make Syrup of Mint. Take the Juyce of ripe Quinces, and of Pomgranets, of each a pint and a half: dried Mint half a pound, and of the Leaves of red Roses two ounces; let them steep a day and a night in the Liquor: boil it then till half is consumed, and add four pound of Sugar to make it into a syrup. These, as the most material, I thought fit expresly to mention; what remains, a Gentlewomans discretion, by these Rules may direct her to perform. And so I pro∣ceed to give Directions for Preserving and Conserving, &c.
CHAP. IV. Instructions for a Gentlewoman in Preserving and Conserving Fruits, Flowers, Roots, and what else is usefull on sundry occasions for set∣ting out Banquets, &c. PReserving of Fruits, Roots and Flowers, &c. to be at hand for ornament or taste, is, no doubt, a curious Art. Wherefore that a Gentlewoman should not be ignorant of such curiosities, I shall incert many Directi∣ons worthy to be observed, and at the same time speak something of Conserving, &c. To Preserve Mulberries. Strain two quarts of the Juyce of Mulber∣ries, and add to it a pound and a half of su∣gar; boil them together over a gentle fire, till they become in a manner a syrup, then put into it three quarts of Mulberries, not over ripe; and after they have had one boil, take them off, and put them together, with the Liquor, into an Earthen-vessel, stop them close, and keep them for your use. To Preserve Gooseberries. Take them before they be over-ripe, cut off their stalks and tops; and if you have lea∣sure, stone them; then laying in an
Earthen-vessel  a Layer of sugar, lay upon it a Layer of Goosberries; and so do between every Lay, till your Vessel be almost full: then add about a pint of Water to six pound of Goos∣berries; and the Goosberries having before been scalded, set them in this manner over a gentle fire, and let the sugar melt: when being boiled up, you may stop them up, and reserve them for your use. To preserve Cherries. Take your Cherries when they are in their prime, and scattering some Sugar and Rose-water at the bottom of your Preserving-pan, put them in by degrees, still casting in your su∣gar, remembring there be put an equal weight of either; and being set on a quick fire, you may add a pint of White-wine, if you would have them plump; and when you find the syrup boil'd up sufficiently, take them off, and put them into your Gally-pots for use. To Preserve Apricocks. Observe when they are moderately ripe to pare and stone them, laying them a night in your Preserving-pan amongst Sugar, it being layed in Lays, and in the morning put a small quantity of fair Water or White-wine, and set them on Embers, and by in∣creasing a gentle fire, melt the Sugar; when being a little scalded, take them off, and let∣ting
them cool; set them on again, and boil them up softly till they are tender and well coloured, at what time take them off, and when they are cool put them up in Glas∣ses or Pots for your use. To preserve green Walnuts. Observe to gather them on a dry day, be∣fore they have any hard shell, and boil them in fair water till they lose their bitterness; then put them into cold water, and peel off their Rine, and lay them in your Preserving-pan with layings of Sugar to the weight of the Nuts, and as much water as will wet it, so boil 'em up over a gentle fire; and again being cool, do it a second time, and put them up for your use. This way Nutmegs, with their green Husks, are Preserved. To preserve green Pippins. Observe to take them e're they are too ripe, chusing the greenest, pare them and boil them in water till they are exceeding soft, then take out the cores, and mingle the pulp with the water, ten Pippins and two pound of Sugar, being sufficient to boil up a Pottle of water; and when it is boiled to a thickness, put in the Pippins you intend to Preserve, and let them boil till they contract a greener colour then natural. And in this
manner you may preserve Plumbs, Peaches,  Quinces, or any thing of that kind that you are desirous to have green and pleasant. To preserve Barberries. Observe that you chuse the fairest bun∣ches, gathered in a dry day, and boil seve∣ral bunches in a Pottle of Claret till they are soft: strain them then, and add six pound of Sugar and a quart of Water; boil them up to a syrup, & put your Barberries scalded into the liquor, and they will keep the year round. To Preserve Pears. Observe that you gather those that are sound, not over-ripe, and laying at the bot∣tom of an Earthen-Pot or Pan; a laying of Vine-leaves, lay another laying of Pears up∣on them, and so do till the Pot is full: then to a pound of Pears add half a pound of Su∣gar, and as much fair Water as will dissolve it over a gentle fire; where suffer them to boil till they are somewhat soft, and then set them by for your use. To preserve Black Cherries. Pluck off the stalks of about a pound, and boil them in Sugar and fair Water, till they be∣come a pulp, then put in your other Cherries, with stalks, remembring to put half a pound of Sugar to every pound of Cherries; when find∣ing the Sugar to be boiled up to that thick∣ness,
that it will rope, take them off and s them by, using them as you see convenient. To Preserve Eringo-Roots. Take of the Roots that are fair and kno¦ty two pound, wash and cleanse them, the boil them over a gentle fire very tender, a¦ter that peel off their out-most Rind, but b¦ware of breaking them after they have lai a while in cold water; put them into you Sugar boiled up to a syrup, allowing to eac pound of Sugar three quarters of a pound o Roots; which boiling a short time over gentle fire, you may set them to cool, an then put them up for your use. As for Elicampane-Roots, scrape and cu them thin to the pith, in lengths about you finger, and put them into water, which yo must often shift to take away the bitterness at which rate, being used twenty days, pu three quarters of a pound of Sugar to every pound of Roots, the Roots being first boil∣ed tender over a gentle fire till you find the Sugar has sufficiently taken; and then being cool, put them up in a Gally pot or Glass; And much at the same rate may manage any thing of this or the like nature, as Grapes, Peaches, Plumbs, &c. Conserving Flowers or Fruits is somewhat different from this: Wherefore for the better instruction, I shall say something con∣cerning it.
o Conserve or keep any sort of Flower, as Roses, Violets, Cowslips, Gilleflowers, &c. Take your Flowers well blown and clean cked, bruise them very small in a Mortar, with three times the weight of Sugar; after which take them out, and put them into a ipkin; and having thorowly heated them ver the fire, put the Conserve up in Gally-ots for your use. To Conserve Strawberries. Strain them, being first boiled in fair wa∣er, and boil the pulp in White-wine and Su∣gar as much as is convenient to make them iff, &c. And thus you may Conserve any ort of Fruit, the difference not being great etween this and making Fruit Paste; of which I shall speak hereafter. CHAP. V. Instructions for a Gentlewoman in Candying Fruits, Flowers, Roots, &c. As also in dry∣ing Fruits, and other things necessary to be ob∣served, after the exactest and newest Mode and Method, &c. CAndying Fruits, Roots and Flowers, be∣ing an excellent way of gendering them pleasant and lasting, is the next thing inten∣ded
to be discoursed on: Directions for which take as followeth. To Candy Ginger. Take the fairest pieces, pare off the rind▪ and lay them in water twenty four hours and having boiled double-refined Sugar to the hight of Sugar again; when it begins to be cold, put in your Ginger and stir it till i is hard to the Pan; when taking it out piece by piece, lay it by the fire, and afterward put it into a warm Pot, and tye it up close▪ and the Candy will be firm. To Candy Orange-peel. Take Peels of the best Civil Oranges, the meat being taken out, and put them into Water and Sugar boiling hot; where being well softned, boil Rose-water and Sugar up to a hight, till it becomes Sugar again; the draw your Peels through it, and dry them in an Oven or Stove, or before the fire. To Candy Cherries. Take them before they are full ripe, stone them, and having boiled your fine Sugar to a hight, pour it on them gently, moving them, and so let them stand till almost cold, and then taken out and dried by a fire, &c.
To Candy Elicampane-Roots. Take them from the syrup in which they ave been Preserved, and dry them with a loth; and for every pound of Roots, take a ound and three quarters of Sugar: boil it o a hight, and dip your Roots into it when ot, and they will take it well. To Candy Barberries. You must take them out of the Preserve, nd wash off the syrup in warm water, then ift fine Sugar on them, and put them into n Oven or Stove to dry, stirring or mo∣ving them the mean while, and casting more Sugar upon them till they are dry. To Candy Grapes. You must take them after they are Preser∣ved, and use them as the former. To Candy Eringo-Roots. Take the Roots pared and boiled to a convenient softness, and to each pound add two pound of fine Sugar, clarifie it with the Whites of Eggs that it may be transparent; and being boiled to a hight, dip in your Roots two or three at once, and afterward dry them in an Oven or Stove for your use. And in this fashion you may Candy any thing as to Fruit or Roots, to
which, Candying is pro∣per.  And as for Flowers, which that w are pleasant and ornamental, you may Ca¦dy them after the following manner wi their stalks and leaves, viz. Take your various sorts of Flowers, the stalks, if they are extraordinary long somewhat shorter; and having added abo eight spoonfulls of Rose-water to a pound white Sugar, boil it to a clearness; and as begins to grow stiff and cool, dip your Flow¦ers into it; and taking them out presently lay them one by one in a Sieve, and hold over a chasing-dish of Coles, and they wi dry and harden. To dry Plumbs, Pears, Apples, Grapes, or the lik You must first Preserve them, then was or wipe them; after which set them upo Tin Plates in a Stove, or for want of it a Oven, not to hot, and turn them as you see occasion, observing ever to let them hav their Stalks on. These things more especially being fit to be understood by a young Gentlewoman,  have spoken of them in order: And since there are many other things necessary, o which I have said nothing, I shall proceed to give Instructions, as they occur, which I hope will prove altogether as profitable.
CHAP. VI. structions for a Gentlewoman in making of Marmalade, Paste of Fruit, Artificial Fruit, Jellies of Fruit, Quiddanies, Fruit-cakes, Honey, Conserve for Tarts, Maccaroons, Com∣fits and Confections, after sundry forms and manners. To make Marmalade of Oranges. Are your Oranges as thin as may be, and let 'em boil till they are soft in two or ree waters, then take double the number f good Pippins; divide them and take a∣ay the core; boil them to pap without lo∣ng their colour: strain the pulp, and put a und of Sugar to every pint; then take out e pulp of the Oranges, and cut the peel, nd boil it till it is very soft: bruise it in the yce of two or three Lemons, and boil it up a thickness with your Apple-pap, and half pint of Rose-water. To make Paste of Cherries. Boil the Cherries till they come to be ve∣ soft, and strain the pulp through a fine eve, and add a pound of Sugar to a pint; ffen it with Apple-pap, and boil it up to a ght, then spread it upon Plates and dry it.
To make Marmalade of Grapes. Take the ripest Grapes, gathered in a dr day, spread them upon a Table where th Air and the Sun may come at them; afte which, take from them the stalks and seed boiling the Husk and Pulp, or Juyce in a Pa with often scuming, whilst it is reduced to third part, and then let the heat be gentle and when you find it thickned, strain through a Sieve; and boiling it once more add a small quantity of fine sugar, or th Powder of white Sugar-candy, and so put i up in Pots covered with Paper for you use. To make Honey of Mulberries. Take the Juyce of the black Mulberries and add to a pound and a half of their Juyc two pound of clarified Honey, and boil ther up with often scuming till a third part be con¦sumed. To make Jelly of Quinces, Currans or Gooseberries Take the Fruit, and press out the Juyce clarifie it, and add to each quart a pound o sugar, clarified and boiled up to a Candy hight; then boil them together till a thir part be consumed; then add a pint of White wine, wherein an ounce of Cherry-tree o Plumb-tree Gum has been dissolved, and i will make it a perfect Jelly.
To make Lemon-Cakes, or Cakes of Lemons. Take fine sugar half a pound, to two oun∣es of the Juyce of Lemons, and the like uantity of Rose-water; boil them up till hey become Sugar again, then grate into it, e rind of hard Lemons; and having well corporated them, put them up for your se into coffins, &c. being cold, and cover m with Paper. Artificial Walnuts are thus to be made. Take a Sugar-plate and print it like a Wal∣ut kernel, yellowing the in-side with Saf∣on; then take seraced Sugar and Cinamon, nd work them with Rose-water, in which um-dragon has been steeped, into a Paste, nd print it in a Mould made like a Walnut-ell; and when the kernel and shell are dry, ose them together with Gum-dragon or um-Arabick, and they will deceive the uest, who will take 'em for real Walnuts. To make Artificial Oranges and Lemons. Take Moulds of Alablaster made in three eces, bind two of them together, and let em lye in the water an hour or two; boil∣g to a hight, in the mean time as much su∣ar as will fill them: the which being poured to the Mould, and the lid put quickly on, by suddenly turning will be hollow:
And  so in this case to the colour of the Fruit yo cast, you must colour your sugar in boiling. To make red Quince-Cakes. Take the syrup of Quinces and Barbarie of each a quart; cut into it about a doze Quinces free from rind and core: boil the till they are very soft, then strain the pu or liquid part, and boil it up with six poun of sugar till it be Candy-proof; then take out and lay it upon Plates, as thin as yo think convenient, to cool. Clear or transparent Quince-Cakes are ma thus. Take a pint of the syrup of Quinces, an a quart of that of Barberries: boil and cl∣rifie them over a gentle fire, keeping the free from scum; then add a pound and quarter of Sugar to the Juyce, Candying a much more, and putting it in hot, and keeping it stirring till it be near cold, at wha time spread & cut it into Cakes as the forme To make Marmalade after the Italian fashion. Take about thirty Quinces, pare them take out their cores, and put to them a quar of water and two pound of sugar; boil them till they are soft, then strain the juyce and th pulp, and boil them up with four pound o sugar till they become sufficiently thick.
To make white Quince-cakes. Clarifie your sugar with the Whites of ggs, putting to two pound a quarter of a nt of water; which being boiled up, add y sugar, and highten it to a Candy: then e Quinces being pared, cored and scalded, eat them to pulp, and put them into the iling sugar, not suffering them to boil long efore you take them off, and lay them on lates. To make Maccaroons. Blanch a convenient quantity of Almonds, y putting them into hot water: beat them e in a Mortar, strewing on them as you eat fine seraced Sugar; and when they are ell mixed, add the Whites of Eggs and ose-water; and when they are of a conve∣ent thickness, drop the Butter on Wafers yed on Tin-plates, and bake 'em in a gen∣e Oven. To make a Leach of Almonds. Take half a pound of Almonds blanched, eat them in a Mortar, and add a pint of w Milk, and strain them; add more, two oonfulls of Rose-water, and a grain of usk, with half an ounce of the whitest ng-gass, and strain them a second time for our use.
To make Sugar smell like Spice. Lay lumps of Sugar under your Spice, sprinkle them with some of the Distilled-wat To make a Quiddany of Plumbs, Apples, Quin or any other Fruit that is proper. Take a quart of the Liquor of the Prese¦ved Fruit, and add a pound of the Fruit ra separated from the stone, rind or core: b it up with a pound of Sugar till it stands u¦on a knife-point like a Jelly. To make a Conserve for Tarts of any Fruit th will keep all the Year. Take the Fruit you intend, peel off t rind, and remove the core or stone, th put them into a Pot, and bake them with small quantity of Water and Sugar; bei bak'd, strain 'em through a strong cloth adding Cinamon, Sugar and Mace, very sin∣ly seraced, boil them on a gentle fire t they become as thick as a Jelly, and th put them up into Pots or Glasses stopp close, and they will have their proper ta at any time. To preserve Medlers. Take the Fruit and scald them in fair w¦ter till the Skin may be easily taken off, th stone them at the head, and add to ea
pound, a pound of Sugar, and let them boil till the Liquor become ropey; at what time take them off, and set them by for your use. To make Sweet-meats of any Apples. Make your Jelly with those that are most soft and pleasant, then cutting other Apples round-ways, put them into a Glass or Pot, and let them stand six days, then boil 'em with the addition of a quarter of a pound of Sugar, to a pound of Liquor, not breaking them, but seasoning them further with the Juyce of Lemons, Oranges, Cloves, Mace, and Perfuming them with a grain of Amber-grease. To make each sort of Comfits, vulgarly called Covering-seeds, &c. with Sugar; observe as followeth. You must provide a Pan of Brass or Tin, to a good depth, made with Ears to ang over a Chafing dish of Coles, with a Ladle and Slice of the same Mettal; then cleanse your Seeds from dross, and take the finest Sugar well beaten: put to each a quar∣er of a pound of Seeds, two pounds of Su∣gar; the Seeds being first well dried, and your Sugar melted in this order, put into he Pan three pounds of Sugar, adding a int of Spring-water, stirring it till it be moi∣tened, and suffer it to melt well over a clear
fire till it ropes, after that, set it upon hot Em∣bers, not suffering it to boil, and so from your Ladle let it drop upon the Seeds, and keep the Bason wherein they are continually mo∣ving, and between every Coat rub and dry them as well as may be; and when they have taken up the Sugar, and by the motion are rolled into order; dry them in an Oven, or before a fire, and they will be hard and white. Thus, Gentlewomen, have I let you under∣stand the depth of Curiosities of this kind, and such as are sutable to be done by your self, or at least to be observed whether they are done as they ought, by those you imploy to perform 'em, whether your House-keeper or Woman; for if your self appear ignorant herein, those that perform it will either have your want of understanding in contempt, or not perform as they ought. Wherefore lea∣ving them to be considered and practised by you at leasure, I shall proceed to the remain∣ing Curiosities in their order. And first, as to what belongs properly, especially in many cases, to your self, lest by too long abste∣nance your Appetite should be paul'd. I in∣vite you to a Table furnished with dainties, and really let you understand what your Be∣haviour must or ought to be abroad or at home; and how, if it comes to your turn▪ you must handle your Knife and Fork, &c.
in Carving the several sorts of Fowl, Fish and Flesh, of Beasts, &c. CHAP. VII. Instructions for a Gentlewoman in her Behaviour at the Table, abroad and at home, with the Terms and Manner of Carving Fowl, Flesh, of Beasts and Fish, with Directions to know the choicest pieces in either, and such as are most acceptable. THough you may think it strange, and al∣together a matter that might have been spared to instructed you as to Behaviour in a Marriage state; yet let me tell you, though I shall hereafter say something as to this Point, yet the Behaviour of Youth differs from that of riper years; and since it is an Introducti∣on to other matters, let your wonder cease, and observe what follows. Being at the Table in your due place, ob∣serve to keep your Body strait, and lean not by any means with your Elbows, nor by ra∣venous Gesture discover a voracious Appe∣tite: Knaw no bones, but cut your Meat de∣cently with the help of your Fork; make no noise in calling for any thing you want, but speak softly to those that are next, or wait to give it;
nor be so dis-ingenious as to shew.  your dislike of any thing that is before you, if strangers be at the Table; especially at ano∣thers Table; Eat not your Spoon-meat so hot that it makes your Eyes water, nor be seen to blow it. Complain not of a queazy sto∣mack; wipe your Spoon every time you dip it in the dish; if you eat Spoon-meat with o∣thers, eat not too fast, nor unseemly; nei∣ther be nice or curious at the Table by min∣cing or mimping, as if you liked not the Meat or the Company; where you see variety, yet reach not after them, but stay till you have an opportunity, and then shew an indiffer∣ency as to your choice; and if it chance to happen you have a Plate with some piece you fancy not presented, wait your opportu∣nity till it be taken away and changed; no be inquisitive (for that is uncomely) to know what such a Fowl or such a Joynt cost, no discourse of Bills of Fare; take not in you Wine or other liquor too greedily, nor drink till you are out of breath, but do things with decency and order. If you are abroad a Dinner, let not your hand be first in an dish, nor take your place unseemly; neithe be induced to Carve, though the Mistriss the house out of a complement intreat it unless you see a necessity for it; and wher ever you Carve, keep your
fingers from your mouth; throw not any thing over you  shoulder, neither take or give any thing on that side where a Person of Quality, or one much above you is seated; nor reach your arms over other dishes to reach at what you like better. And so leaving what else is re∣quisite in this kind to be observed, I proceed to give you, First, the Terms of Carvers: Secondly, the manner of Carving: and, Thirdly, Directions to know the best pie∣ces, &c. And of these in their order. First, That you may the better be enabled to direct those you appoint to Carve, if you Carve not your self, the most expert in that dextery give the following Terms, by way of distinguishment, and properly in the cut∣ting up all manner of small Birds: the di∣rection for it is Thighing them, as Larks, Woodcocks, Pigeons, &c. Directions for cutting up a Plover, is to mince it; a Quail and Partridge, to wing them; a Pheasant, to lay it; a Curlew, to untie it; a Bittern, to unjoynt it; a Peacock, to disfigure it; a Crane, to display it; a Hern, to dismember t; a Mallard, to unbrace it; a Chicken, to n frust it; a Swan, to lift it; a Goose, to ear it: And so in Flesh of Beasts, as Creek hat Deer, Unlace, that Coney, Leach that rawn. So in case of Fish; As Chine the almon; String the Lampry; Splat the Pike; awce the Place and Tench; Splay the ream; Side the
Haddock; Culpon the  Trout; Tusk the Barble; Transon the Eel; Tame the Crab; Barb the Lobster; Tranch the Sturgeon, and the like, or much to the same effect, in case of others not mentioned. But passing them over, for brevities sake, I come to the second thing to be considered, which is the manner of cutting up. If you take it upon you to Carve a Swan, called in the proper term Lifting, slit him down-right in the middle of the breast, and through the back, from the neck to the rump, laying the slit sides downward in the dish, without tearing the flesh, and serve the sawce up in Sawcers. The term of Carving a Goose is to rear or break her in this manner. Take off the legs very fair, then cut of the belly-piece round, close to the lower end of the breast, and with your knife, lace her down on each side a thumbs breadth from the breast-bone, taking off the wings with the flesh you first laced, raising it cleaver from the bone, then cut up the merry-thought, and another piece of flesh which you formerly laced; turn the carkass, and divide it at the back-bone above the loin; then lay the rump end of the back-bone at the fore-end of the merry-thought with the fleshy side upward, and the wings on each side contrary, that so the boney end of the legs may stand up in the middle of the dish, and the wings on their
out-side, put∣ting  under the wing Pinions, the two long pieces of flesh, &c. and let the ends meet under the leg-bones. In carving or dismembring a Hern. Lace her down the breast, and take off both the legs; then raising up the flesh, take it clean off with the Pinions; then sticking the head in the breast, set the Pinion on the contrary side of the carkass, and the legs on the other side, so that the ends of the bones may meet cross over it. In cutting up a Bustard or Turkey. The leg being raised up very fair, open the joynt with the sharp point of your knife, and lace down the breast on both sides, without taking off the leg or the pinion; then raise up the merry-thought, and between the top of the breast-bone and the merry-thought, lace down the flesh on both sides, and raise up the flesh called the Brawn; turn it outward on both sides, but neither cut it off nor break t; then cut off the wing-pinions at the body oynt, and stick on each side the pinion, in the place where you turned out the Brawn, cutting off the sharp end, and taking the middle-piece, that will fit the place. And n this manner a Capon or a Pheasant may be cut up, but cut not off the Pinions of the for∣mer, the divided Gizard serving to supply he place where the Turkies wings were ut.
In unbracing a Mallard. Observe that you raise up the pinion and leg, not taking them off: raise likewise the merry-thought from the breast, and lace it down sloapingly on each side the breast, and loosening the joynts, leave it undivided. In displaying a Crane. Unfold the legs and cut off the wings by the body joynts then sawce both the wings and legs with powder of Ginger, Mustard, Salt and Vine¦gar: and so a Bittern may be unjoynted, o any other Fowl of that nature. Your Partridge or Plover minced, &c White-wine, Powder of Ginger and Salt i a proper sawce. In unlacing a Coney. Turn the belly up¦wards, cutting the belly-pieces from the Kidney, then with the point of your knife loosen the kidneys, and flesh between, to ei¦ther side of the bone; when turning up the back-side of the Rabit, cut it cross between the wings, and lace it down close by the bone on eitherside; then open the flesh from the bone against the kidney, and opening th legs, slit them from the Kidney to the rump and lay them close in order. A Pig being chined, is generally divide into four quarters, the Head divided, an the Ears taken off, and the rest left to th discretion of the Carver.
A Salmon is chined down the back, or la∣ced on each side the back-bone, and divided into Mediums and Extremities, greater or lesser, at discretion. And thus far having gi∣ven you an insight into the terms and me∣thods of Carving; I shall let you, in the next place, know what is to be done in the distri∣bution of what is carved, that it may find the better acceptance: As, Thirdly, If you have a friend at the Ta∣ble you would oblige more than another, & if Chickens boil'd be the first dish, the breast is to be preferred, and next the leg; for in all boiled fowl, the leg is accounted better than the wing; though in roasted ones, if they be wild-fowl, the wing is chief: and the reason that is given is, because it is exceeding ten∣der by means of its continual motion; and add, as a curiosity on the other hand, that the legs of tame fowl not using the wing, but too often scratching, are to be preferred as the best nourishment; though it is generally held in wild and tame fowl, as Pullets, Turkies, Capons, Geese, Duck, Mallard, Pheasant, Dotril, and the like, that the merry-thought and the wing is best, however they are most acceptable, and the next part, that which is laced on the breast-bone. As for Butchers meat. In roast Beef, that which is within side the Surloin is most pri∣zed; and in other peices, that which is
curi∣ously  striped with fat and lean; and so in boil'd Beef. In a Loin of Veal the Nut-piece or Kid∣ney-piece is the best to be presented. In a Leg of Mutton, there is a little round bone on the in-side, above the handle, that is fit with the meat upon it to be presented, and is in great esteem among the curious: As it appeared by a Gentleman, who after long Coursing, being extream hungry, and finding that bone untouched in a cut Leg of Mutton, refused to eat by reason he fancied Boorish people had had the first handling of it, or o∣therwise their discretion would have direct∣ed them to have taken that piece. A Shoulder of Mutton being cut between the handle and the flap, the fat Nut there found is the choicest piece, and worthiest to be presented. And in a roasted Pig the Wo∣men especially prefer the under Jaw and the Ear, though on the other hand the Neck and middle-piece is preferrable. In a Hare, Coney or Leverit, the back-piece, just in the middle, is held of great e∣steem, though some nicely covet the piece by the side of the tail, commonly called the Huntsman's piece. In all Fish without shells, the Jole, or that part next to the head, is to be esteemed; and in a Lobster or Crab, the claw.
If Fish or sliced Flesh be in Paste, 'tis pro∣per to touch it with your Knife, Fork or Spoon; and raising it conveniently, lay it upon a Trencher or Plate in the best order, not by any means, delivering it to the hand of the party with your Knife, Fork or Spoon, but on a Plate. All sorts of Tarts, Custards, wet Sweet-meats and Cakes, being cut in the dish where∣in they were served up, must be layed like∣wise with the point of a Knife, handsomely on a Plate and presented. Thus having shewed you how to behave your self, and, in some part to manage good cheer; it will be highly necessary to consi∣der, that a young Gentlewomans Beauty is an Ornament next to that of her Virtue; and though Nature is prodigally lavish in furnish∣ing your Faces with charms, yet seeing she is deficient, and casualties impair the per∣fection of you lovely Sex, I think fit to impart such Secrets, as by harmless ways what is wanting or disordered, may be supplied or repaired: In which, the following Treatise will direct you.
CHAP. VIII. The Closet of Beauty, or Modest Instructions for a Gentlewoman in making Beautifying Wa∣ters, Beautifying Oyls, Pomatums, Reparati∣ons, Musk-balls, Perfumes, and other Curio∣sities: Highly necessary and advantageous in the Practice, &c. GEntlewomen, Imagine not that I under∣take this Treatise to create in you the least self-conceit or extravagant opinion of your Merits, by putting into your hands an opportunity to render your selves more beau∣tifull, if possibly it may be, but to preserve what you have, at least from the ruins of time, or any unfortunate accident, for neat∣ness on this side the Region of Pride is to be observed in that as well as in Apparel; nay in a cleanly observance, even Health it self is concerned. But to proceed. If Hair, that comely Ornament of your Sex, be wanting, occasioned by Sickness or defect of moisture, &c. To recover it. Take the Ashes of Hysop-roots, the Juyce of Marshmallows, and the Powder of Eli∣campane-roos, of each an ounce: boil them in half a pint of White-wine, with a dram of the Oyl of Tartar, till half be consumed, and
with the remainder Anoint the ball'd place, and the hair will be restored. To preserve the Hair from falling off. Burn Pigeons dung to Ashes, of which take the quantity of an ounce, put them into  pint of water where Wood-ashes have oaked: then add two ounces of the Juyce of enegreen or Housleek, and one of fine Su∣gar-candy, and half an ounce of Rosemary lowers: boil them together, strain them well, and wash the place six or seven times, and the Hair will not only remain firm, but what is fallen off will renew. Of Hair grow too thick or unseemly in any part of the Body. Take Gum-Arabick, and boil it to the hickness of a Salve in the Juyce of Hemlock, and lay it on the place Plaster-wise; and when it is taken off, which must not be un∣er two days, it will bring off the Hair by he roots, not permitting any more to grow n that place. To make the Hair fair and beautifull. Cleanse it from dust by washing it in Rose-Vinegar, then boil an ounce of Turmerick, the like quantity of Rubarb, with the leaves of Bay-tree cut small, to the quantity of a handfull, boiled in a quart of
water, where∣in  half a pound of Allom has been dissolved and by often washing your Head with th decoction, it will make your Hair fair an lovely, unless it be a deep red, or exceedin black. To cleanse the Skin of the Face and make beautifull. Take and distill the Blossoms of Pease an Beans with the like quantity of the flowers o Fumitory and Scabeous, and wash the Fac with it morning and evening, anointing it a¦terward with a small quantity of Oyl o Myrrh; and by often using it, you will hav cause to admire the effects. Rosemary flow¦ers boiled in White-wine, have likewise thei wonderfull quality in this kind. To take away Freckles. Take the Galls of two Cocks, a handful of Rye-flower or Meal, a pint of Verjuice two ounces of Plantane-water, and one o the Oyl of Bitter Almonds: boil them, an strain out the liquid part, when a third par is consumed, then boil it again till it become a kind of an Ointment; and often anointing the Face therewith, will remove 'em. To make a clear, white and smooth Skin. Take an ounce of Barrows grease, the Whites of two Eggs,
half an ounce of the shes of Bay-tree roots or leaves, a quarter f an ounce of Honey of Roses, and a quarter f a pint of Plantane-water: boil them till hey become an Ointment, and use it to the nd above-mentioned. To take away Sun-burn. A handfull of Spanish Salt dissolved in the uyce of two Lemons, is a speedy remedy, he Face and Hands being often rubbed with , and it as often suffered to dry upon them To take away Wrinkles, and make the Face look youthfull. Take of Brandy, or Spirit of Wine, a quar∣er of a pint; of Bean-flower and red Rose-ater, each four ounces; Water of Lillies, our ounces; the Juyce of Briony-roots, two unces; and of the decoction of Figgs, two unces: Incorporate them over a gentle fire, nd use it as a Wash. To take away the Red Spots, occasioned by the Small Pox. Wash your Face with Juyce of Lemon, which beaten Allom and Bay-salt has been issolved; and to wear out the Pits, or pre∣ent them gnawing deeper, as you grow in ears, Take half a pint of the Spirit of Vine∣ar, an ounce of Mustard-seed, a quarter of pint of the Juyce of
Marshmallows, and a  handfull of Bran: boil them together, an put the liquid part in a Viol, with whic wash your Face morning and evening, an you will find the effect will answer the trou¦ble. To take away Pimples and Redness in the Face▪ Dissolve half an ounce of Alom in th White of an Egg, and a spoonfull of Vine¦gar: beat it together till it is well mixed, an when you go to bed, lay it Plaster-wise up¦on the place, and your desire will be effect¦ed. To take away the hot swelling of the Face. Boil Rosemary-blossoms, or leaves o Groundsil and Chamomile in White-wine and not only wash your Face in the Juyce but lay the Herbs stamped with a small quan¦tity of Oyl of Roses, Pultis-wise, to the plac afflicted. To Restore a Ruby Face to its former Complexion▪ Take the yolks of two Eggs, an ounce o fresh Butter, four drams of Camphire, ha a pint of Rose-water, an ounce of the Oy of Bays: mingle them well by heating then over a fire, and anoint the Face with th Oyntment, for they will produce, if well bea¦n
and kept stirring, and strained through a oollen cloth an, Oyl, &c. To make the Hands soft and white. Take of Bean and Lupin-flower, of each handfull; of Starch, Corn, Rue and Orice, nd sweet Almonds, two ounces: beat or rind them together, and with the Powder ash your Hands often. To make an Excellent Wash-ball for the Hands and Face. Take two ounces of Calamus aramaticus, of Rose-flowers, and the flowers of Lavender, each a handfull; three ounces of Orice, and n ounce of Cyprus: beat them well, scrape nto the Powder of them, being sifted as much Castle sope as will make it into Balls, when mollified with Rose-water. To prevent marks of the small Pox, in the Face. Boil Cream and Honey of Roses to an Oyntment, and therewith anoint the places, during the Patients sickness, where you fear the deformity. To make Teeth white and continue sound. Take of the Powder of Roach-Allum a quarter of an ounce, the like quantity of the Powder of fine Pumice-stone, half as much Bay-salt,
and half a quarter of a pint of the  Juyce of red Sage: boil them over a gent fire till they appear thick, and with the re¦due rub your Teeth every morning, washin your Mouth with Water and Honey. For want of this, boil a like quantity Rosemary, Sage and Allom, in Spring-wate rub your Teeth therewith, and wash you Mouth with the Juyce or Water of Ladie Thistle root, or the root of Hore-hound, an it will restore the Gums, and preserve th Teeth white and firm. A fine Pumice-stone only will make Teeth if found, as white as Ivory, by gentle rub¦bing. To cause a sweet Breath. Take four ounces of Cummin-seed, a much of Anniseed, with half as much of th tops of Lavender: bruise them and boil them in Wine, sweetned with white Sugar-candi drink, when you rise and go to bed, an ounce of the liquid part, and in ten or twelve days your Breath will be as sweet as ever, unless the Lungs are putrefied. If your Eyes are Blood-shot, to remove that un∣seemly grievance. Take two ounces of the Roots of red Fen∣nel, stamp them and press out the Juyce, and mingle it with half an ounce of clarified Ho∣ney:
heat them gently over the fire till they come an Oyntment, anoint therewith the e-lids, and drop a drop with a feather into ch Eye: and in so doing, and washing em with White-wine or Eye-bright-water, e redness will vanish. A rotten Apple, Bole-armorick and Bread, ade into a Poultis, by braying them in a ortar, and laying them over the Eyes, wet∣d a little with Eye-bright-water, between o fine cloths, will do the same; as also move an Inflammation. by the Wind, or sharpness of the Air, clefts hap∣pen in your Lips. Take Deers Suet an ounce, the like quan∣ty of Spermaceti; add thereto an ounce of e Juyce of Housleek or Senegreen, and ake them into an Oyntment, and anoint our Lips, or any part of your Face so af∣cted; it will likewise serve for your Hands, &c. doing it when you go to bed, and draw∣g on a pair of soft Gloves. To restore a singular Complexion in the Face where it is wanting. Take green Hysop, when the Flowers are n it, stamp it, and strain out the Juyce: weeten it with white Sugar-candia, and boil up with a third part of the
Juyce of Pom∣granets;  and when it is clarified use you self to drink six spoonfulls of it in warm A morning and evening, and you will find th advantage. To remove any ill scent from out of the Nostri Snuff up or inject with a Sirringe, White wine, wherein Ginger, Cloves and Calamin have been boiled, and provoke your self t sneeze with the Powder of Piritum, steepe in the Juyce of Senegreen, and afterwar dried to it's original dryness in the Sun. To make a sweet Water to be used by Gentlew∣men on sundry occasions. Take a pint of the Water of Mugwort half a pint of the distilled Water of Peach-blossoms, drop into them, when warm eigh or nine drops of the Oyl or Spirit of Cloves and as much of Nutmegs: stop it close, and shake it when you use it. To take away Warts, very troublesome, on sundry occasions. Take the Juyce of Senegreen and Purslain adding to it an ounce of both together, ten or twelve drops of Oyl of Tartar, and wash the Warts with it when hot, and they will fall away.
o kill Black-headed Worms in the hands or face. Take half a pint of Wormwood-water, an unce of the Ashes of Suthern-wood, and alf an ounce of black Sope: boil them till he moisture be so far consumed, that they ome to a thickness: then add an ounce of Oyl, make them into an Oyntment, and a∣oint the place where they be, which you ay perceive by their black heads, and they will, by often doing it, dye and waste away. To take away Freckles, Morphew or Scars in the face. Take half a pint of the Spirit of Wine, Rosemary-flowers two ounces, the Juyce of Elder-leaves two ounces, and the Marrow of Sheeps-feet or Hogs-feet two ounces; boil hem till a third part be consumed, and anoint your face therewith. Or for want of it, Take of the Oyl or Oyntment of Cittern four ounces, and two of Pomatum; anoint your face with them when well incorporated, and six hours after wipe it off, and wash your face with Bean-flower or Rosemary-flower water. In case of a Ring-worm in the Face. Take half a quarter of a pint of the Vine∣gar of Squills, a quarter of an ounce of the uyce of Sellendine, three drams of the Oyl of Tartar, and as much
of the Powder of  Alloes: heat them over the fire till they come thick, and lay some of it Plaster∣ to the place grieved. To cleanse the Body and make it comely. Take red Roses two handfulls, of red Sa and Lavender-flowers the like quantity handfull of Featherfew, and as many B¦leaves: boil them in Spring-water, adding handfull or two of Salt, and wash your as warm as with conveniency you may. To Curl the Hair. Take three ounces of Pine-nut kerne dry them and beat them into Powder, th add to them half a pint of the Water of Wa flowers, and two ounces of the Oyl of My¦tle: boil them into a thickness, and strain out the liquid part, anoint the Hair, and  it up; and so you will find it will in twice thrice doing keep the curl. To make Hair black. Take two ounces of the Juyce of gre Walnuts, as much of that of red Poppey an ounce of the Oyl of Myrtle, and of th of Costomary, the like quantity: boil 'em an Oyntment, and anoint the Hair therewi often, and it will effect your desire.
Gentlewomen, your Breasts be over-large, (and by that means troublesome) to reduce them. Make an Oyntment of Roach-Allom and yl of Roses, with a small quantity of Scabe∣s-water, and they will contract themselves being often anointed. To make a sweet Bath. Take the flowers or peels of Cittrons, the wers of Oranges and Gessamine, Laven∣r, Hysop, Bay-leaves; the flowers of Rose∣mary, Comfry, and the seeds of Coriander, dive and sweet Marjorum; the Berries of yrtle and Juniper: boil them in Spring-ater, after they are bruised, till a third part  the liquid matter is consumed, and enter in a Bathing tub, or wash your self with it arm, as you see occasion, and it will in∣ferently serve for Beauty and Health. make Musk-bags to lay amongst your Cloaths. Take the flowers of Lavender-cotton six nces, Storax half an ounce, red Rose-aves two ounces, Rhodium an ounce: dry em and beat them to Powder, and lay them a bag wherein Musk has been, and they'l  an excellent scent, and preserve your oaths from Moths or Worms.
To make Musk-balls. Take of the flower of Almonds six ounce Castle-sope six ounces: wet them in Ro-water, and infusing two grains of Mus make the Paste up into balls without he¦ing. To make burning Perfume. Take an ounce of Storax, the like quan¦ty of Mace, Cinamon and Nutmeg: bru them together, and add the Powder of C¦sa, and two ounces of the Oyl of Myrrh, more if that suffice not to make it into roll or instead of it, you may use Virgins Wa and being set on fire, it will cast a precio scent. To make a scent of Rosemary. Take your Perfumer, and heat it over chasing-dish of coals; put into it, being pr¦ty hot, two spoonfulls of Rose-water, h a handful of Rosemary-tops, and six dra of Sugar, and all the house will be scented. Another excellent Perfume; how to make it. Take a quarter of a pint of Rose-wate two grains of Amber-grease, two peny weig of Sugar, and a grain of Civit; beat them t¦gether, and put them into your Perfumin pot over the fire, and it will send forth a d¦licate odour.
An Excellent Perfume good against Infectious Air, and exceeding pleasant; how to make it Observe to take half a quartern of Spike-water, as much of Rose-water; a quarter of an ounce of Cloves, with seven or eight Bay-eaves shread; and six grains of Sugar, and boil them in your Perfumer. To make Musk-Cakes. Take half a pound of red Roses; bruise them well, and add to them the water of Basil, the Powder of Frankincense, making it up with these a pound; add four grains of Musk: mix them well to a thickness, make them into Cakes, and dry them in the Sun. Thus, Gentlewoman, have I made you sensible of such Curiosities, as are not only pleasant, but as highly advantageous. And now least you should be wanting in what is further necessary in the preservation and re∣stauration of Health, I shall give you some admirable Receipts in Physick and Chyrur∣gery, that you may be helpfull to your self and others: Such they are, as have been of∣ten administred, and used with success; and such as, if rightly and seasonably applied, can do no harm; nor are they unfit for the Closet of a Gentlewoman, therefore accept them in good part.
CHAP. IX. Instructions for a Gentlewoman in many Excel∣lent Receipts, Physical and Chyrurgical, ten¦ding to the restauration and preservation of Health, in old and young, according to the bes approved Rules and Methods, safe and easi in the Application, and successful in the Operation. IF any person be afflicted with the Griping of the Guts, Take Juniper-berries, Fen∣nel, Anniseeds, Bay-berries, Tormentilo, Bist¦wort, Balaustius and Pomgranet-seeds, o each an ounce: bruise them adding of Rose-leaves a handfull: boil them in Milk, pres out the liquid part, and add more the yolk o an Egg, and six grains of Laudanum: prepare it warm, and give it Clister-wise. For Pains in the Head. Take a Rose-cake, steep it in Bettony water, and apply it to the Forehead and Temples cold, often wetting it, and the Pai will abate. In case of an Ague. Take Rye-meal, temper it well with the yolk of an Egg, then spread it Plaster-wise and strow upon it the Powder of Juniper
berries, and lay it to the parties Wrists, gi∣ving him to drink a draught of hot Ale, wherein blew Lilly-roots have been steeped a night, and a white Flint-stone red hot quen∣ched, and let him or her thereupon go into a hot bed; and by several times using it, the advantage will appear. Or, Take two quarts of small Ale, shread into it a handfull of Parsley, and the like quantity of red Fennel, of Centory and Pim∣pernel, each a handful: boil them in the Ale till a third part be consumed; sweeten it then with Sugar-candy, and let the party drink it hot upon the approach of the cold fit. For the yellow Jaundice. Take a large Onion, make it as hollow as you can; put into the cavity a quarter of an ounce of Venice-Treacle, and as much Ho∣ney, with a dram of Saffron: set the Onion on a gentle fire, and when by often turning it is sufficiently roasted, press it together with what was in it, and let the party grieved take a spoonfull of it for three days together in White-wine. For the black Jaundice. Take Sage, Parsley, Groundsil and Smal∣age, and boil them in Pottage with Swines-flesh; and in often eating it, the grievance will be removed.
For a dry Cough. Take Anniseeds an ounce, the like quan∣tity of Ash-keys, as many Violet-flowers and the Powder of Licoris: beat them to¦gether, when dried, till they be a Powder then put them into a pint of White-wine sweetning it with two ounces of white Sugar candia: boil them into an Electuary, and le the party take the quantity of a Walnut eve¦ry morning fasting, drinking after it a glas of warm Ale or Milk. To make a green Ointment. Take a pound of Barrows-grease, add it an ounce of Verdigrease, of Salgem ha a scruple: make them up into an Ointment over a soft fire, and it is used with success i case of old sores or bruises. To break an Imposthume or Swelling. Take an ounce of the Roots of White Li∣lies, half a large Onion, and half an ounce of Barrows-grease; stamp them together and being fryed, lay it hot to the place. To remove the humour that occasions the Green sickness in Virgins and young Widows. Take a quart of Claret, a pound of bles Currans, a handfull of young Rosemary-top with half an ounce of Mace:
bruise them  and boil the liquid part to a pint, and let the party afflicted drink half a pint hot morning and evening for a week together. Sir Philip Parry's Emplaister; how to make it, and its Virtue. Take of Olive-oyl two pounds, red Lead one pound, white Lead one pound; beat and serace them; of Castle-sope twelve ounces: incorporate them in an Earthen-pot well gla∣zed, then set them on a gentle fire for an hour and half, stirring them continually till the matter become the colour of Oyl, and somewhat dark. Try it on a Plate, if it cleave not thereto, it is enough, then spread it on your Linnen, or dip the Linnen into it, and smooth it with a sleek-stone, and it will not lose it's Virtue in many years. This Plaister, applied to the Stomack, provoketh Appetite, taketh away the grief or pain. Ap∣plied to the Reins, it stoppeth the Bloody-flux, the Running of the Reins, the Heat in the Kidneys, and the weakness of the Back, and is good for Swellings, Bruises, Aches, &c. A most Approved Plaister for the Rupture. Take of Alloes and Cittron one ounce, Dragons blood an ounce, Myrrh an ounce, Mastick, Bole-Armonick, Gum-dragant, of each three ounces; make them into a Pow∣der, and with the Juyce of red Housleek, work them into a Plaister.
A Salve Excellent to draw and heal, &c. Take a pennyworth of Turpentine, as much Virgins Wax as a Walnut, the like quantity of fresh Butter, a spoonfull of Honey melt them into a pan, and strain the substance into fair water, and make it into a Roll for your use. An Excellent Emplaister for a new or old Sore. Take of Rosine four ounces, melt it, then of Turpentine take an ounce, and two ounces of Wax, the like of Sheeps-suet cleared from the skin, and a spoonful of Olive-oyl: boil them over a gentle fire, and then strain them into water, and apply them as a Salve. Dr. Morsus Emplaister, commonly called Oxe∣crotium. Take Ship-Pitch, Saffron, Colophony, Bees-wax, of each three ounces; Turpentine, Gal∣banum, Amoniacum, Myrrh, fine Frankin∣cense, Mastick, of each an ounce and three scruples: lay your Galbanum a night in Vi∣negar, then boil and strain it; melt your Gums, and mingle them by stirring: put in last your Turpentine, and being well incor∣porated, make it into Rolls, and use it in case of Pains, Aches, Bruises, Strains, Dislo∣cations, and to strengthen the Nerves, &c.
Oyl of Rosemary-flowers; how to make it, with its Virtual Operation. Take a good quantity of Rosemary-flow∣ers stamp them and put them into a Glass with strong Wine: stop the Glass close, and set it in the Sun six days, then distill the Flow∣ers and Wine with a soft fire, and the effect will produce both Water and Oyl; separate them, and keep the Oyl close in a Glass. This Oyl is good against the inveterate Head∣ach, it comforteth the Memory, and perserveth the sight, by being drunk in a Glass of Wine, or dropped into the Eyes: being dropped into the Ears, it helpeth Deafness, and is good in case of the Dropsie, yellow Jaundice, Rising of the Mother, &c. An Excellent Powder to provoke Urin, and send forth the Gravel and Stone. Take a Flint-stone and beat it in a Mortar to a fine and subtil Powder, serace it and keep it in a Bladder till you have occasion to use it, then take half a dram fasting in a Glass of White-wine or Ale, and keep your self warm. A Powder to ease the Pains of the Gout. Take of fine Ginger two drams, four drams of dried Elecampane-root, Licoras half an ounce, Sugar-candy three ounces
beat them to a fine Powder, and serace the drinking off the Powder, a dram at a time fasting in a Glass of Ale. A Water for easing the Pains in the Teeth. Take of red Rose-leaves half a handfull, Pomgranet-flowers the like quantity, two Galls thin sliced; boil them in three quarters of a pint of red Wine, and half a pint of fair Water, untill a third part be consumed; strain them, and hold a spoonfull at a time in your mouth, and lay a hot cloth to your cheek dipped in the liquid part, &c. An Excellent Water for the Ulceration of the Yard. Take Water wherein Iron has been often ¦ces of Pomgranet-piles and flowers of each, three drams; of Plantane and Housleek, each an ounce and a half; of Honey of Roses, Turpentine, each half a pound; Allum six ounces, white Copperas three drams: boil them till half be consumed, then add Verdi∣grease three ounces; strain them, and gent∣ly boil them again; then letting them settle, take the thin and rarify'd part, and inject it with a Syringe, anointing the place grieved with the other part.
An Ointment to cleanse Sores either old or new. Take two ounces of Turpentine, wash it well in a Barly-water, put it to the yolks of six new-laid Eggs, Honey of Roses, or com∣mon Honey four ounces: mingle them well over a gentle fire till they become an Oint∣ment, and then dip the Tents or Pledgets in it, and apply them. Flos Unguentorum; how to make it; together with its Excellent Virtue. Take Rosin, Perrosin, of each half a pound; Virgins Wax, Frankincense, of each four oun∣ces; Mastick half an ounce; Stags-suet four ounces; Camphire two drams: Pound, and melt them over a gentle fire, then strain them into a Pottle of White-wine; and when it is luke-warm, put thereto three oun∣ces of Turpentine, stirring it till it be cold, and then put it up for your use. It is exceeding good for old Wounds, in order to the ingendring good flesh, and cleansing them; wasting likewise the bad flesh, and is good for all manner of Imposthumes in the Head, and in the Body; also for Strains in the Sinews: It draweth out Thorns or Splinters of Bones; it healeth Botches and Scabs, and is good for the Noli me tangere; and is an excellent Sear-cloth for the Gout, Sciatica or Aches in any part of the Body.
For a Scald, or any Burn, an Excellent Ointment Take of Cream a quart, Fern-roots a handfull: slice and wash the Roots, and the boil them in the Cream in an Earthen-pot till they Jelly, and at what time there is an oc∣casion to use it: Ferment it with a Spatula, and apply it on a Linnen-cloth, often renew∣ing it. An Excellent Ointment to asswage Pain, and coo any extraordinary Heat by what means soever it happen. Take of white Carrate four ounces, Oyl of Roses ten ounces, red and white Saunders, red Roses, Myrrh, Olibanum and Mastick, of each two drams; Camphire half a dram, Turpentine two ounces and a half, and make them into an Unguent. A Tobacco-Salve for any fresh Wound. Take of the Juyce of green English To∣bacco a quart, of Olive-oyl a pint, of Wax and Turpentine, each an ounce and half; an ounce of Verdegrease: boil them over a gen∣tle fire for an hours space, and make them up in Rolls for your use. Note, That the best Cloth for Plaister is new Lockram, and the worst Calico, or such cloth as has been starched.
For the shrinking of the Nerves or Sinews, a Plaister. Take of Water-cresses and Cammomile, each a handfull; stamp them and fry them with a handful of Wheaten-meal, and two ounces of Honey; then spread them on a cloth, and apply them to the place at hot as may be well endured. A Dredge Powder, that purgeth Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy. Take of Turbith one ounce, Ginger, Ci∣namon, Mastick, Gallengale, grains of Pa∣radise, Cloves, Anniseeds, the Herb called Mercury's Finger and Diagrdium of each half an ounce: the leaves of Senna two ounces Loaf-sugar four ounces; dry them that the may be pulverized, and mingling them well take a dram in a morning fasting either in a glass of White-wine or warm Ale. An Excellent Powder to purge the Head by Sneezing. Take of the Roots of Sneezing-wort o Bartram an ounce, Castorum half an ounce of white Hellebore and black Hellebore each an ounce; Marjorum a handfull: dry them and make them into a Powder, using the Powder moderately as you see occasion.
An Excellent Powder for the Falling-sickness. Take a Mans Scull that has not ben a∣bove a year buried: bury it in hot Embers till it become white, and easie to be broken: Then take off the uppermost part of the head to the top of the crown, and beat it into Powder; then grate a Nutmeg, and put it to it, with two ounces of the blood of a Dog dried and powdered: mingle them together, and give the grieved party a dram morning and evening in White-wine or new Milk. An Excellent Powder for hollow Ulcers. Take Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, Sar∣cocol, Bole-armorick, Dragons blood and arly-meal, of each an ounce: make them nto a Powder, and sprinkle a little of it in the Ulcer, &c. and bind it up: which often doing, will fill it with flesh. A Powder to Incarnate any Wound. Take of Hog-Fennel half an ounce, Flow¦erdelize five drams, Myrrh three grains, he greater and lesser Centaury, of each two rams: Round Aristolocia, Tuttioe, Oppoponax, Meal of Orobus, each two drams and a half: eat them into fine Powder, and strew them pon the wound as you see occasion.
An Excellent Powder to stay the bleeding of Wounds, &c. Take Quick-Lime, Dragons Blood, Al∣es, Frankincense, Copperas, of each four rams: incorporate them, and being finely owdered with Cobwebs, and the White of n Egg: apply the Powder by sprinkling it n the wound. An Excellent Poultis for any Ach, Sprain or Dis∣location. Take of Smallage, Marshmallows, Cam∣momile and Groundsil, each a handful well icked: stamp them and fry them in six oun∣ces of Barrows grease with the yolks of two Eggs, and apply them as hot as may be well endured to the place grieved. An Excellent Powder in case of the Small Pox, or any Infectious distemper. Take half an ounce of English Saffron, dry it till it may be pulverized, add to it six grains of Bezoar-stone, a dram of Myrrh, and an ounce of white Sugar-candy: Incor∣porate them, and let the party take a dram at a time in White-wine, not exceeding a spoonfull.
An Excellent Confection to preserve against t Plague, or any Pestilential disease; as al from the effects of bad Airs. Take green Walnuts, number six: Bau and Rue, of each a handfull; Plantane an Bettony the like quantity: bruise them wit fine Sugar and Spirit of Wine then dry th whole matter in an Oven or Stove till it be¦comes as solid as Conserve of Roses, and le the party take fasting as much as a Hazle-nu For the Consumption, an Excellent Receipt. Take the Hearts of three Sheep new kil¦led, cleansed from the blood and strings soak them a night and a day in White-wine dry them again, and put them into a new glazed Pipkin, covering them above and be¦low with Rosemary-branches: then add Cloves, Sugar, Harts-horn, of each three ounces, and four ounces of white Sugar-can¦dy, and as much Asses Milk as will cover them; then stop them close with Paste, and let them stand in an Oven the Baking o Houshold-bread; after that press out the liquid part, and take a spoonful morning and evening. An Excellent Drink for the Windiness of the Sto∣mack or Spleen. Take a handful of Broom-buds, the like quantity of
Anniseeds; of the Roots of Sca∣beous  an ounce: boil them in a quart of new Ale, sweeten the liquid part with brown Su∣gar, and drink half a quartern hot at a time morning and evening, or when you find your self oppressed; and in so continuing it for a week, you will find great relief. The Lord Denise's Excellent Medicine for the Gout; how to make and apply it. Take four handfulls of Burdock-leaves, with the stalks on, shread them and bruise them: strain out the Juyce and clarifie it, adding half the quantity of Olive-oyl, and keep it close stopped in a glass; and as you use it, apply it with a hot cloth to the place grieved. To make Gascoign-Powder. Take of white Amber, Seed, Pearls, Harts-horn, Eyes of Crabs and white Corral of each half an ounce; of the black Thighs of Crabs, calcined before they are boiled, two ounces; adding to every ounce before mentioned an ounce of Oriential Bezoar: bruise and serace them to a fine Powder, and it is excellent, two scruples of it drunk in a spoonfull of Wine, to expell evil va∣pours from the brain to comfort and corro∣borate the heart, and restore a decaying con∣stitution; and for the better keeping, you may make it into Lozenges with the Jelly of Harts∣horn and Saffron.
For the Dropsie. Take Setwell, Calamus-aromaticus and Ga∣lingale, of each an ounce; of Spikenard, hal an ounce: bruise them, and hanging in a bag, let them be covered with two gallons o Ale, the which at four days end let the party drink morning and evening. To make an Excellent Water for any Disease in the Eyes. Take half a pint of White-wine, and as much of white Rose-water; of the Water of Celendine, Rue, Eye-bright and Fennel, each two ounces; of Prepared Tuttiae six ounces: of Cloves as many; of Sugar-Rosate a dram: mix them over a soft fire, and being clarified, wash your Eyes therewith as you see occasion. To break the Wind. Take the Juyce of red Fennel and Anni-seed in warm Ale. To prevent spitting Blood. Take Rue, Smallage, Mint and Bettony; boil them in new Milk, and drink the liquid part as hot as you can. To stay bleeding at the Nose. Take the Juyce of Bettony, with a small quantity of Salt in
it, and snuff it up your Nose, d stop it in with the Herb, the Juyce of ung Nettles; and Sugar is good upon the e occasion. To kill a Fellon. Take the hard roasted yolk of an Egg, d beating it with a roasted Onion, lay it to e place grieved. make an Excellent Salve for a Scald, Burn, Cut or any old Sore. Take a pint of Olive-oyl, half a pound of ees-wax, red Lead three ounces, red Wine wo ounces, and Deers-suet three ounces; oil them together in a glazed Earthen-vessel ll they are of a darkish colour, and then ake it up into a Salve for your use. To remove the Pain of the Tooth-ach. Take Henbane-seed, Hysop-seed, and the owder of the root of black Helebore: bruise hem together, and make them up into small ellets with a little Tar or Turpentine: If e Tooth be hollow, stop it in with Lint; if ot, let it lye between your Cheek and um. For the Feaver. Take two handfulls of Wood-sorrel, the ke of the Leaves of Barberries: boil them
Spring-water, sweeten it with Sugar, and  give the party two scruples of Bezoar-po¦der in a quarter of a pint of it, and it wond¦fully prevails against the distemper. Many more things there are that rem fitting for a Gentlewoman to know; but to be tedious, I shall refer them to your S¦vants in their several places and station▪ And supposing you by this time to have re¦ed the fruits of a chaste and happy Marriag and blessed with a tender, yet smiling, O spring, that it may flourish. Taking my lea Madam, of you, I shall proceed to give yo Nurse and Nursery-Maid instructions and ¦rections; and so to the rest in order. CHAP. X. The wet Nurse her Duty and Office; and how s¦ought to be qualified that undertakes so gre a charge: With directions how she ought to her self as to her Diet; and by what means keep her Milk in good temper, &c. AS for Directions to a dry Nurse, who business it is to look after a Gentlewo¦man when she lyes in; it will not be ami to wave them, since few that undertake su a charge are ignorant what is necessary as Usage and Diet: Nor is the Midwife in th case
wanting to give Directions, if the Ge¦tlewoman  her self (as few are after the first ing in) were ignorant in that affair. herefore intending to say something of it, treating of the Duty and Office of a Mid∣fe, I willingly here omit it, and proceed to e Charge and Office of a wet Nurse, whose re it is to bring up Children till a conve∣ency offer to wean them: And first, I shall scribe what manner of Person a good urse ought to be. In this case, a good Nurse ought to be of a iddle-stature, plump of body, though not ver corpulent; of a sanguine complection, easant and cheerfull, clear skinn'd and well oportioned. For her Conditions, they must be sutable: nger must be a stranger to her, and her de∣ght naturally in Children; not drowsie nor lf-conceited; her Age must be a Medium, etween five and twenty and forty, being ne that has been well Educated; and see e want for nothing; for if she be necessita∣ed, the Child must pine; or if Sickness hap∣en through accident or disorder, her Milk s injured thereby: Yet Temperance must e her greatest care, for fear by excess of eat or drink the Milk be corrupted or in∣amed; and in all things her care of her harge must let her Prudence appear. Take  Woman whose Child was a Boy, to Nurse ne of that kind, and on the
other side the  contrary, considering she ought not to  with child during the discharge of this g Office, least she spoil both her Nursery a that she goes with. A Nurse in this case ought in her Diet avoid salt Meats, Onions, Garlick, Lee Mustard, too much Salt, Vinegar or Pepp and such like things as create bad nutrime or inflame and heat the blood. Strong dr immoderately must be shunn'd, for that w occasion a super-abounding of Choler in t Child, as Cheese and Fish, will Melancho and Phlegm: nor ought she to sleep sudda¦ly after Meals, but be active and in motion, create a natural digestion; a good Air oug to be chosen for the more kindly respiratio for a gross Air is frequently the occasion o dull wit and much corpulency, and a pu thin Air of the contrary, the Air on ma occasions being advantageous or disadva¦tageous to the faculties of Life, or passions the Mind in their several operations, it bei a kind of a food to the Intellectuals. As for the Milk, divers things are to considered, but the chief is wholsome a moderate Diet; and to correct defects, L her observe if her Milk be too hot, which o¦ten appears by the Childs frowardness; if let the Nurse take in her Posset-drink Salad Pottage, Endive, Succory, Lettice, Sorr Plantane, or
such like cooling Herbs: If s d it too cold, which will appear by the ilds over-drowsiness, let her do the like th Cinamon, Vervine, Bugloss, Mother, ime or Burrage. To cause Milk where it is wanting, Take art of the Hoof of the fore-foot of a Cow lcined to Powder; a dram of which let e Nurse drink morning and evening in arm Cows Milk or Ale. For want of the former, Take Lady-Thistle; stamp it, and squeeze out the Juyce; which boiled in Milk, an ounce to a pint you may conveniently take, drinking it off warm. And thus being careful in seasonably order∣ng the Child in dressing, undressing, and what n the like nature is convenient, no doubt it will thrive and come to perfection. The best Colour of a Child, when new∣born, is red, which soon turns to a Rosey; for those that are white, if they live, will be subject to diseases. A little crying, if not too often, eases the brain of watery-matter, and inlarges the Lungs; but too much crying occasions Catarrhs and Ruptures. The first month it must only suck often, changing the breast, but not over-charging its stomack; after which a pap of white Bread and Milk seasonably given, between whiles, will streng∣then it; and let there be an hour between sucking and feeding, using it in that manner till the Teeth come.
The Teeth coming forth by degrees, gi it more solid food, not denying it Meat th is small cut, and may be easily chewed Keep it well swathed, and beware it stan not too soon for fear of distorting the Leg In such places as bathing of Children is co¦venient, omit it not; from the seventh month twice a week, till it is weaned. At a twelvemonth old, if it be health wean it, not giving it suddainly strong food but by degrees; and the first seven years Di∣et ought to be such as, by it's nourishment causeth growth. And from this I shall proceed to say some∣what of Diseases incident to Children, and prescribe Remedies which Nurses ought to use on sundry occasions. CHAP. XI. Of Distempers in Infants; and how to Remedy them: Together with Directions to the Nur∣sery-Maid in the discharging her Duty and Office, &c. CHildren in their tender age are subject to many distempers; wherefore a Nurse ought to be skilful in Medicines, such as are prevalent
on sundry occasions, by reason Child may be lost before a Physitian can be d. Wherefore I shall give her Instructi∣ns what to do in the most dangerous cases. For the Epilepsis or Convulsion. Take Majestery of Cole, a scruple, of Male Piony-roots a scruple, and as much of eaf Gold; work them into a Powder, and ive it the Child in a spoonfull of Breast-Milk. For the Chasing of the Hips. Change the Clouts often, sprinkling on hem Litherage of Silver, Seed and Leaves of Roses, Frankincense and burnt Allum made nto a Powder, or anoint them with white Ointment and Diapompholigos. To remove the Stoppage of Urine. Take Saxifrax-roots six drams, Calcine hem with an ounce of the Blood of a Hare: bruise them into a Powder, and give the Child from a scruple to half a dram in a spoonful of White-wine. For the Strutting of the Navel. Use a Plaister or Poultis of Cumming, Lu∣pins and Bay-berries beaten into Powder, and wet with White-wine. For the Inflamation of the Navel.
Take a quarter of a handful of Mallows, stamp them with half an ounce of Bar meal, and with Fenugreek and Lupins, t ounces of each: make them into a Ca¦plasm with Oyl of Roses, and apply them the place grieved. To destroy Worms. Take of Worm-seed two drams, and Coralline and Harts-horn prepared, each dram; Roots of Piony, Dittany, Majeste of Coral, each a scruple: make them into Powder, and give a scruple at a time in spoonful of Peach-flower water. For Vomiting. Take a quarter of an ounce of Honey Roses, and the like quantity of Syrup Mint, and give it the Child at four times. For the Hickets. Take Mastick an ounce, Dill and Fran¦incense, of each two drams; Cummin-see a dram: make them small, and apply the with the Juyce of Mint upon a plaster or sod of Flax. For Hard breeding of Teeth. Rub the Gums with your finger dipped Honey, or give the Child Candle made o Virgins Wax to nable on, and Foment th cheeks with the Decoction of Althaea, Camm¦mile-flowers, & the seed of Dill.
For the Bladder in the Gums. Take Lintills husked, beat them into pow∣der, and lay them upon the Gums, or take half an ounce of the flower of Mellium; make it into a Lineament and apply it. To prevent Squint-Eyes. Hang a Picture, and set a Candle on the contrary side; or use to cocker the Infant on that side, till the Eye-strings contract. For a Scald Head. Take the Scab off gently with a cleanser, moistning the skin with Hogs grease upon Colewort-leaves; or rather take the Juyce of Fumitory, Dock, Coleworts and Elecam∣pane, of each half an ounce, with Litherage, Oyl of Rue, Hogs-grease and Wax, make a mollifying Oyntment: then take Starch two ounces, Rosin half an ounce; boil them in water, and lay them upon the scald places Poultis-wise, suffering them to lye there se∣veral days: then suddainly pull them off, and use mollifying things to correct the di∣stemper, &c. In case of a Feaver. Give the Infant a quarter of an ounce of Syrup of Violets, and as much of that of Wood-sorrel, for the Measles or Small Pox; Give them Saffron, and a small quantity of Manna in Milk, or a spoonfull of
White-wine.  And thus much for the principal Distempers in Children. As for the Nursery-Maids business, to whose care Children are frequently commit¦ted, when capable of running about, it is to love and cherish them, to see they have wha is fitting in due season, to keep them within compass and government, to see they carry their legs and bodies strait and even, and that they disorder themselves by no untoward tricks and actions, but that they be cleanly and neat; and if she discovers any alteration in complection, constitution or habit of body tending to sickness or other discommodity, either to apply fit remedies her self, or inform those of it who delivered them to her charge without delay, least a Remedy come too late She is to keep them within bounds, but no be churlish nor dogged to them, but rather to be merry and pleasant; contriving such Pastimes as may best sute with their age and constitutions; keeping their Apparel in goo order, and not shewing too much love t one, nor disregard to the other: And by thi means a Maid will gain Love and Applaus from all parties.
CHAP. XII. The Compleat Chamber-Maids profitable Instruc∣tion as to her Behaviour in Managing of Af∣fairs, making choice Spoon-meats, Pickling Sawces, Washing and Starching Tiffany, Lawn, Sarsenets, Silks, Point, &c. Scowring Gold and Silver Lace; taking Spots out of Silk, Woollen, Linnen, Stuffs, Perfuming, &c. A Chamber-Maid that would be prefer∣red, gain or continue a good opinion, must, in the first place, be grave and respect∣ull to those whom she serves, neat in her abit, loving to her fellow-servants, and affa∣le to all declining wanton gestures that may ender her suspected of Livity; that she eep all things in her Chamber in good or∣er, and have them in readiness on all oc∣asions to take off the care of the Mistriss: killed likewise she must, or ought to be, in ying fine knacks, and be just in returning er accounts: If there be no Butler, she must e all things decently managed for the Ac∣ommodation of the guest in the Parlour and ining-room; and, above all, have a regard  the Linnen, Plate, and other Furniture un∣ her Command: And besides her skill in ressing and Attiring her Mistriss, be skilfull making Spoon-meats, Pickling things use∣full
for Sawces, or Garnishing, Washing and Starching Tiffanies, Lawns, black and whit Sarsnet, Points, and other curious Lace: A likewise she ought to be skilfull at making such scowring Materials as will cleanse Si¦ver or Gold Lace, Silver or Gold Plate, take Spots out of Linnen, Silks, Stuffs or Cloth▪ And because these are in a manner secrets, shall lay down Instructions for as many a are materially usefull: And first of Spoon meats. To make a French Barley-Posset after the new¦est fashion. Boil half a pound of French Barley in tw quarts of new Milk; and when the Milk  near boiled away, add three pints of swee Cream, then boil it a quarter of an hour, an sweeten it with fine sugar: put in three o four blades of Mace and a piece of Cinamon this done, take a pint of White-wine, an pour the liquid Cream into it, frothing it up. To make an Excellent Broth. Cut off the wings and legs of two Cock wash and parboil them till the scum appear take them out, and wash them in cold wate then with a pint of Rhenish-wine, and tw quarts of strong Broth, put them into a Pi¦kin; add two ounces of China root, an oun and a half of Harts-horn, with a small qua¦ity
of Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, whole Pepper and Salt: stop the Pipkin close, and setting it in a pot of boiling-water, so hat that water get not into it for the space of six hours; then pour out the Broth, and squeese the Juyce of Lemons into it, and serve it up. To make Pottage of French Barley. Take a pound of Barley very clean, put it into three quarts of Milk whilst boiling; then add a quart of Cream, an ounce of Salt, six blades of Mace, and a piece of Cinamon: let them boil a little, and become thick: serve it up with white sugar scraped thereon. To make Pannado, after the best fashion. Take a quart of Spring-water, which be∣ing hot on the fire, put into it slices of fine Bread, as thin as may be; then add half a pound of Currans, a quarter of an ounce of Mace: boil them well, and then season them with Rose-water and fine Sugar, and serve them up. To make an Excellent White-pot. Take two quarts of Cream, boil in it, in a short time, half an ounce of Mace, a piece of Cinamon, and half a Nutmeg; then cut a white peny loaf exceeding thin, then lay the slices at the bottom of a dish, and cover
them with Marrow: add likewise a dozen yolks of Eggs to the Cream, well beaten in Rose-water, and sweeten it with a sufficient quantity of Sugar: then take out the Spices, beat up the Cream well, and fill a broad Bason in which the Bread, Raisins and Marrow was laid, and bake it: when it is enough, scrape white Sugar on it, and serve it up. All strengthning Jellies are made by boil∣ing such Flesh as are of a tender and glutte∣nous substance, till it is in a manner dissolved in the Broth; and adding Wine, Sugar, Spice, Salt, or as you will have it seasoned, and ser∣ving it up with Sipits, or alone. More I might mention of this kind; but intending largely to treat of Cookery, I shall wave them, and proceed to the next, which is Pickling Fruits and Flowers, &c. To Pickle Cucumbers, so that they may wear a lasting Green. Take your Cucumbers, of a moderate size, wash them in Water and Salt, there letting them steep six hours; then boiling Wine-vine∣gar, Dill and Fennel-tops, Coriander-seeds, Cloves and Mace, with a little Bay-salt, and a pint of the Juyce of Mint: put them into it when warm, and stop them up for a month. To make French Beans a lasting Green.
Boil them in Water, and a small quantity  of Salt, till they are a little soft; then having sharp Vinegar, Pepper and Bay-leaves ready boiled, with some blades of Cinamon: put them into it, and stop them up as the former. Thus Broom-buds, Ash-keys, green Grapes, green Plumbs, Gooseberries, Currans, and the like, may be Pickled, though the latter must be only Scalded. To Pickle Barberries. Take the fairest Bunches, dip them into warm water, and then make a Pickle with a pint of sharp Vinegar to a gallon of Water that has been well boiled and scummed; and to each gallon add a quart of Bay or Spanish Salt; and putting in the Barberries, keep them down with a stone. So Quinces, Apples, green Walnuts and Olives are Pickled. To Pickle Mushroons. Take a quart of Water, and a pint of Vi∣negar; put your Mushroons, the smallest, boiling-hot into it: and when they have con∣tracted a kind of softness, take them out, and put them to the sharpest Vinegar, with whole Pepper, long Ginger, Mace and Bay-leaves. And thus you may Pickle Clove-Gilliflowers, Prim-Roses, Roses, Cowslips, green Peaches, or the like. As for Sampher, it is boyled in Salt and Water to a little
tenderness, and then put up  with a Pickle made of half Vinegar, and half water and salt, boiled up to a hight. And thus much for Pickles. To Wash Tiffanies. Take the finest Crown-soap; soap them on their Hems or Laces, and with a gentle hand pass them through three Lathers, for∣bearing to wring or wrince them, but keep∣ing them from the Air; dry them over the flame of Brimstone: then to a pound of Starch, add a quarter of an ounce of Smalt, if you think convenient, but on necessity as much Allum as a Hazle-nut: boil it to a fine∣ness, and charge it lightly on your Tiffanies, and dry them, being wet therewith, by a fire, still clapping them in your hands; and when they are very clear, shape them by the pat∣tern you took before they were washed, and iron them with a smooth, though quick Iron, till they shine, and you will find little diffe∣rence as to the gloss between them and new. Some there are, that instead of Starch, use Gum-water. To Wash Sarsnet. If white, spread it upon a smooth clean board long-ways; soap it well, but let the Soap lye thin; then with a small hard Brush
raise a gentle Lather, by brushing it the right  w of the Silk; and turning it in order, do the other side in the same manner, then cleanse it with fair water, and make a new Lather hot, and renew it three times with turning; then cast the piece into hot water, where Gum has been dissolved, and a small quanti∣ty of Smalt infused; let it lye there covered a convenient time; then folding it smooth, dry it as well as you can by clapping it be∣tween your hands, then dry it over Brim∣stone; and spreading it on the Table, iron it with a hot Iron on the right side. Black Sarsnets, in Washing, are managed the same way, only they are wrinced gene∣rally in small Beer, without any Gum, and ironed upon a Woollen-cloth. The Modish way to Wash and Starch Point-Laces. Put your Points into a Tent, and make a strong Lather with Castle or Cake-soap, then with a small soft Brush dipped therein, rub your Point well, continuing to wash it on both sides till it have passed four Lathers: wrince it then in fair water, and afterward pass i gently through blew water; then starch it over on the wrong side lightly with very thin Starch, and follow it with your brush; after that suffer it to dry, and with a round bod∣kin open the holes or parts that in washing were closed; as also
the Gimp or Over-lay∣ing,  and not suffering it to be too ble gently iron it on the wrong side, and set it out to advantage. Coloured Silks may be Washed as white Sarsnet, avoiding the blew water, or drying over Brimstone. To take a Spot or Stain out of Silks, Worsted or Woollen. Take two ounces of Castle-soap, half an ounce of Bone calcined, half an ounce of Camphire: make them up into little balls with the Water of Betony, and Lather the place with a small quantity of warm Vine∣gar, and it will effect your desire. Cake-soap, Lemon-juyce, and Roach-allum, will do the like. To take Pitch, Rosin, Tarr, or soft Wax, out of Stuffs or Woollen. Take Oyl of Turpentine, and suffer it to soak in a while; then rub the Cloth or Stuff together, and it will crumble out. To take the Stain of Fruit, Ink, or the like, out of Linnen. Take Castle-soap, boil it to a Jelly in Milk; lay it upon the Spot a night, then pour upon it the Juyce of a Lemon: and in doing so, after a Washing or two, the Spot will disappear.
To cleanse Silver or Gold Lace. Take it off, and dipping a Brush continu∣ally in burnt Allum: rub it gently over, and the Colour will be restored. An Excellent way to Perfume Gloves, is this. Take of Storax and Calamint, each an ounce; of Benjamine two ounces, the first and the last being to be beaten by them∣selves; add to them an ounce of the weaker Cinamon-water, and four ounces of the Oyl of sweet Almonds: mingle them with a Mul∣ler on a stone; and having first wetted your Gloves with Hysop-water, gently anoint them with the Perfume, and it will smell be∣yond expectation. To cleanse all sorts of Plate. Lay it in Soap-lees a night, then with Salt and Vinegar rub out the Spots, after daub it over with Chalk and Vinegar: dry it by the fire, and with a warm Woollen-cloth rub it off, and it will look as bright as new. Thus have I unravell'd, or at least exposed to some such secrets as are not common; From whence I shall proceed to give the Virtuous Cook-Maid Instructions.
CHAP. XIII. The Experienced Cook-Maid and Cook, or Di∣rections for the newest and most Excellent way of dressing Flesh, Fish and Fowl of all sorts, and in divers manners; As also making Pyes, Tarts, Custards: Likewise what relates to the under Cook-Maid and Scullery-Maid; with other variety. SInce the Cook-Maids charge and care is no less than the former, and her labour more, I shall give her what encouragement I can in rendering matters plain and easie: As for her skill, it must chiefly consist in dressing all sorts of Meat, as Flesh, Fish and Fowl, in preparing of bak'd Meats and Pa∣stry, and to be expert in making Sawces, and garnishing proper to the several varieties that must consequently offer. And therefore these things I shall consider; she, in the first place, considering to have all her Kitchin-materials in good order. A Capon, or Chickens and white Broth, being frequently the first dish, dress it after this manner. Boil the Capon, &c. in water and salt, then take three pints of the strongest Broth, adding to it a quart of
White-wine, and a quarter of  a pound of Dates: stew it in a Pipkin, and add half a pound of white Sugar, and a small quantity of large Mace; the Marrow of three Marrow-bones, and of white Endive a hand∣full: stew 'em leasurely, and strain the yolk of ten Eggs with part of the Broth before the Capons or Chickens are dished up, observing hat the Eggs curdle not: the Fowls being dished up, garnish the dish with Dates, Mace, Endive, and Preserved Barberries. Red or Fallow Deer, how to Roast. Take a Side, or half the Hanch, and par∣boil it; so doing, stuff it with all manner of sweet Herbs, mingled with minced Beef-suet; day the Caul over, and roast it in that man∣ner: when it is enough, serve it up with Vi∣negar, Bread, Claret-wine, Ginger and Cloves boiled up with a few sprigs of Rosemary. Neats-Tongues roasted. Take a large Tongue, boiled tender, blan∣ched and cold; make a hole at the large end, and take out a great part of the Meat: mince it, and put it in again with sweet Herbs, hard yolks of Eggs, Pippins, Ginger, Beef-suet, all minced small, and stop up the hole with a Caul of Veal: Lard it, and being roasted, serve it up with Butter, Gravy, and Juyce of Oranges; garnishing the dish with Barberries and slices of Lemon.
Neats-Tongue and Udder, how to boil. Let both of these be fair and young, indiffe¦rently seasoned: boil them in Water, a little seasoned with Salt and Pepper; and when you find they are sufficiently done, blanch the Tongue, slice it in half, lay it on each side the Udder: serve 'em up with carved Sipits, run over with Butter and Vinegar: garnish your dish with Parsley, Barberries and Marigold-leaves. How to boil Land or Sea-Fowl. Take the larger sort, half roast 'em, put them after that into a Pipkin with Claret-wine, the Gravy, and as much strong Broth as will cover them; add Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, a slice or two of Onion, and a little Salt: all being well stewed together, serve them up with Sipits and green Garnish, as Violet or Marigold-leaves, &c. The smaller sort of Wild-fowl, as Black∣birds, Plovers, Quails, Rails, Thrushes, Snites, Larks; cut off the heads and legs, truss and boil them; scum your boyler, and add White-wine, Currans, Dates, Marrow, Pepper and Salt: being all well boyled or stewed, dish them on carved Sipits; sawce them with Rose-water, Sugar and beaten Al∣monds; garnish the dish with Almonds bea∣ten small, Rose-water and Sugar.
To roast a Hare. Observe when she is cased, not to cut off er hinder Legs nor Ears, but thrust one Leg hrough the Ham of the other; and making slit, do the like by the Ears, and so roast her as you do a Rabit. The proper sawce is Marjorum, Thyme, Winter-savory, Beef-uet, hard yolks of Eggs, sweet Butter, Su∣gar, Nutmeg, Water and Vinegar; minced and boil up to a sawce, serving your Hare up whole. To roast a Shoulder of Mutton the best way. Take Oysters parboiled, mince Winter-savory, the yolks of hard Eggs, grated Bread: mingle them together, all but the Oyster, being small; and then making holes in convenient places, stuff them in as you see convenient, about five or six and twenty Oy∣sters being sufficient, and the other Oysters, with the like Ingredients, put into half a pint of Claret; add three or four slices of Onion, and a couple of Anchoveys; to them put the Gravy, with the yolks of two beaten Eggs, and a sufficient quantity of Nutmeg and sweet Butter: garnish your dish with Lemon-peel and Barberries. To boil Pigeons with Rice. Observe to stuff their Bellies with sweet
Herbs, then put them into your boiler with Mutton-broth; boil a small quantity of Rice in Cream, with a blade or two of Mace: which being seasoned with Sugar, lay them in the dish with their Breasts upward, and lay it thick upon them; squeese in the Juyce of two Lemons; garnish the dish with Ma∣rigold-flowers, and serve it up. To roast an Udder. First let the Udder be boiled, and stuck full of Cloves: spit it when cold, and baste it with sweet Butter; being sufficiently brown∣ed, draw it back: make sawce of grated Bread, Butter, Vinegar and Cinamon; lay it in the dish with Sugar as a garnishment, and serve it up. To Stew a Carp. Take the largest well-trimmed Carp, gut it, wash it and lay it in a Pewter-dish; take half a pint of White-wine, with a piece of Butter, Mace, Parsley, Thyme and Winter-savory minced small; put them into the fishes belly, and let it stew a quarter of an hour: mince then the hard yolks of two Eggs; lay it with the Herbs about it, and sprinkling on Sugar, serve it up.
To bake Steaks in the French fashion. With Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt, season your eaks lightly; take the lean part of a Leg  Mutton, mince it small, with some Beef-et and sweet Herbs, as Thyme, Peneroyal d Marjorum; take grated Bread, yolks of ggs, Raisins of the Sun, of each a like quan∣y: work them into rolls, and put them n the Steaks in a deep round Pye: sprinkle em with Verjuyce, and close them up, li∣uoring it with the Juyce of two or three ranges. To boil a Fore-Loin of Pork the best way. Season it indifferently, and boil it well, en have in readiness Sorrel stripped a con∣derable quantity: beat it, and put to it me crumbs of Bread and hard yolks of ggs, with Mustard and Salt, and so serve it , the dish being garnished with green aves. dress a Leg of Mutton to the best advantage. In salt and water boil it for the space of an our, then cut it into thin slices, set it in a sh over the fire, adding a little Salt, grated utmeg, Shalot, Thyme and Winter-savo∣; placing another dish upon it, and stew∣g it; adding a piece of Butter, serve it up, e dish garnished with Pickled Oysters and rberries.
To boil a Brisket, Surloin, Chine, Rump, Flan Fillet or Buttock of Beef, to the best advantag After a week or ten days powdering, it left to your discretion, whether or not yo will stuff them: which if you do, it must done with such sweet Herbs as are sutabl mingling minced Suet and Nutmeg with and thrust them in at convenient place and being well boiled, serve them in on Brui with roots boiled in Milk. To Stew a Leg of Lamb the best way. Take the Meat, slice it and put it into yo Stewing-pan; season it well with Salt a Nutmeg; add Butter, Raisins in the Su Currans and Gooseberries: it being w stewed, take the yolks of four Eggs, a qua¦ter of a pint of Wine-vinegar, two ounc of Sugar: beat them well together over gentle fire, place it in the sawce; strew S¦gar over it, and serve it up. To boil a Leg of Veal and Bacon the best way. Take and Lard the former with Bacon, a a small quantity of Lemon-peel; take a c¦venient piece of Bacon and boil with it; a when your Bacon is boiled, cut it in piec and season it with dried Sage and Pep small beaten: lay the Bacon about the Ve and serve it with Sawcers of green saw
arnished with Marigold-flowers, Barberries d Parsley. A Rump of Beef to Stew the best way. Let your Beef be seasoned with Salt, Pep∣er and Nutmeg; lay the fat side downward  an Earthen-pan, then put in an equal po∣on of Water and Elder-vinegar, to the quan∣y of three quarts; add two Onions, and alf a handfull of the tops of Rosemary; and ewing it three hours over a soft fire, take it , and dish it with Sipits; garnishing with emon-peel, and sawcing with the Gravy, e fat being scummed off. To bake a Hare the best way. Take a large Hare minced, and well sea∣ed with beaten Mace, Salt and Pepper, aking a proportion of the head and shoul∣rs, and lay in a layer of Flesh, and Lard, d Butter above and beneath, and serve it with Gallentine sawce, in Sawcers. To roast a Rabit with Oysters, the best way. Take a large fat Rabit, wash it and dry then half a pint of Oysters after the same nner: put them into the Belly of the Ra∣ with a couple of shread Onions, large ce, whole Pepper, and sprigs of Thyme:  'em up; and when the Rabit is roasted, ce them with Butter, and
the yolks of hard  Eggs, and dish the Rabit up; garnishing th dish with red Beet-roots and Orange-peel. To Carbanado Hens or Pullets, the best way. Take half a dozen hard yolks of Egg half a pint of White-wine, and the Gravy mince the Eggs, and boil them up with On¦on, or some Shalots; add grated Nutmeg with a Ladle or two full of drawn Butter dish your Fowl; pour the sawce on them garnishing your dish with Lemon-peel an Violet-leaves. To set off a dish of Marrow, &c. Take a pound of fine Paste, rowl it ve thin, and the Marrow taken whole out four bones; cleave it in quarters; season with Pepper, Salt and Dates, all minced; la¦ing one piece in your Paste, framing it pea¦codwise; and so use the rest: then fry the in Butter and Sugar, and serve them up, ga¦nished with Borage-flowers. To stew a Pheasant, the best fashion or way. Take a large Pheasant, roast him till ¦nough, then boil it gently in Mutton-bro adding whole Pepper, Mace, the slice or t of an Onion, Pruins, Currans and Vinega sufficient to make it sharp; then colour Broth with bruised Pruins, and serve up Pheasant in it.
To Carbinade Mutton, the best way. Broil a breast or shoulder of Mutton, scot∣hing it with your knife; strow on them minced Thyme, grated Nutmeg, and a little Salt, with Claret-wine, Capers, Gravy and a shread Shalot, garnishing with a Lemon-peel. To roast a Pig. Take a fat one, cleanse his belly, put in∣to it minced Sage, Currans, Mace, and gra∣ed Nutmeg: roast him indifferently by a soaking fire, then make up a brisk fire to crackle him, and serve him up with Currans, Bread, Sage, Butter and Nutmeg, made into a thin sawce, with Rose-water. To stew Venison, the best way. Take fat Venison, either raw or potted, slice it and put it into your stewing-pan, with Claret-wine, Rosemary-tops, Cloves, Sugar, Vinegar, and grated Bread: being well stew∣ed, add grated Nutmeg, and serve it up, gar∣nished with Luke-Olives. To make a Fricacy of Chickens, the best way. Take four or five Chickens about two months old, scald and flea them; put them in Water and White-wine; then take a large Onion, ten or twelve blades of Mace, and the quantitity of a Nutmeg grated: tye
them up in a cloth, with a bundle of sw Herbs and Salt; put them into an Earthe-pan, and let them simper a while; then ta three or four Anchoveys, five or six Egg half a pound of the best Butter dissolved  a pint of Mutton-broth; shread the Spic small, with a quarter of a pound of Caper mix them with the other sawce, and layin the Chickens upon it, serve them up with S¦pits, garnished with sliced Lemon. Thus yo may dress and dish up Partridges or Pigeon with only the abatement of the Eggs. To Stew a Fillet of Beef, the newest way. Take the tenderest, and remove the Ski and Sinews; steep it in White-wine, scatter¦ing on it a small quantity of Pepper and Salt▪ then covering it with Wine, add more Pep¦per; and keeping it close down with waight, suffer it to steep two nights an a day: when taking it out, put it into a Earthen-pot with Beef-broth, cover it on gentle fire; adding a few Cloves and Mace and standing over the fire till it is tender, i will be of an admirable taste: serve it u with the Broth. The newest way to boil a Wild-Duck. The Duck being half roasted, take her of the Spit; put her into a Pan with a pint o
Claret, and as much Mutton-broth; three  Onions cut, and a bundle of sweet Herbs; ee or four slices of Bacon, and some whole pper: cover the Pan with another; and hen it is stewed or boiled sufficiently, ve it up with the Broth. To bake a Pig the best way. Take a Pig, and dress him well as for roast∣g; mould him up in a coffin of Clay, but∣ed a little within: put him into an Oven ght hours, so that the Clay being dried, the g will be very crisp; then serve him up th sawce as for roasting. boil a Pullet, Capon or Chicken, the best way. Truss them, and put them into Mutton-oth, with Mace, Spinage and Endive, Ma∣gold-flowers, Bugloss, Borage, Sorrel and rsley: and when they are enough, garnish e dish with Borage and Marigold-flowers, d serve them up in Sipits. To boil a Capon or Chicken with Sugar-pease. Take the Pease when young, and dry em in the cods, taking them from thence  the quantity of two or three handfulls; t them into an Earthen-vessel, with about lf a pound of fresh Butter, and near half a at of fair Water; add whole Pepper, Mace d Olive-oyl, of each a small quantity: and ur
Capon and Chicken being well boiled,  strain the Pease and other Ingredients, a serve them up as sawce with the yolks of t or three Eggs, and half a quartern of Sack. To hash a Capon or Pullet, the best way. Take either of them cold, after havi been roasted; take out the brains, and min them small with the flesh of the wings; th take off the legs and rump intire, then a strong Broth and Gravy, sliced Nutmeg Onion and Salt, and stew the divided par in a large Pipkin; and when they are w stewed, add some Oysters, Juyce of Orang and a yolk of an Egg, and serve them up  Sipits; garnished with Oranges sliced, a Flowers. And thus any Fowl of this or t like kind may be hashed. To boil a Pullet or Capon with Asparagrass. Boil the Fowl in fair water; put bruis Mace, chopped Parsley and sweet Butter in its belly, tying up the vent: being boile take out the Parsley and Mace, garnishi the dish with it; in which have Asparagra ready boiled, place it in good order. To fry a Rabit with sweet Sawce. Cut it in pieces orderly, and wash it wel then dry it in a coth, and fry it with swe Butter: being half fryed, slice some of it v¦ry small; put it into a quarter of a pint
Cream, the yolks of two Eggs, some gra∣ted Nutmeg and Salt: when the Rabit is thoroughly fryed, pour them upon it, and keep 'em stirring, adding Verjuyce, fresh Butter and Sugar a like quantity, and serve them up with Sipits; garnishing the dish with any green thing. To Stew a Mallard. First let it be half roasted, then cut it into small pieces, putting it into a dish, with Gra∣vy, fresh Butter, and a handfull of minced Parsley, with two or three Onions and a hard Lettice: let them stand an hour, then add Pepper, Salt and Lemon-juyce, and serve it up with Sipits, and a garnish of Lemon-peel. To fry a Neats-Tongue the best way. The Tongue being boiled and blanched, cut it, season it with Cinamon, grated Nut∣meg and Sugar; then add yolks of Eggs and Lemons cut in small pieces, frying them in spoonfulls with sweet Butter; then heat it hot, pour on your Tongue the sawce and su∣gar, and serve it up. To boil a Haunch of Venison in the best manner. Stuff it with sweet Herbs, Parsley and Beef-suet minced small, as likewise with the yolk of hard Eggs; the stuffing materials
being seasoned with Salt, Nutmeg and Ginger, and  the Venison being powdered, boil it in strong Broth, and in another pot two or three Col¦leflowers, adding to them a quart of new Milk; and they being taken up, boil in the same liquor a handfull or two of Sorrel o Spinage; then part of the Broth being taken away, put in Vinegar, sweet Butter, grated Bread and Nutmeg; then lay the Spinage upon sipits round the dish, laying the Veni∣son in the middle, and Colliflowers in order▪ garnishing the dish with Parsley, Spinage▪ and Marigold-flowers. To roast a Goose in the newest fashion. Draw your Goose, and put her on a Spit laying her to a gentle fire, which you must increase by degrees: then take nine or ten soft Apples, or Pippins for want of them; boi them in a pint of White-wine, sweeten them with Sugar, and then add a small quantity o Mustard when they are come to a pulp, and a spoonfull of Rose-water: stir them well, and put it in Sawcers apart; though for gree Geese the sawce is generally the Juyce o Sorrel, scalded Gooseberries, Butter and Sugar. To boil a Pike the best way. Wash and gut it, bring the head and ta together in a circle, scotching the back t make it pliable; boil it in Water, Salt an
Vinegar, putting it in when the water boils; it being enough, take it out, and serve it up with Ginger, grated Bread, Butter, White-wine, Oysters, Dates, and the Juyce of Le∣mons; garnished with green Leaves or Flowers. To Stew a Pike the best way. Wash out the blood, flat it, and lay it in a dish, cover it with White-wine; add, when it boils, whole Cinamon, Mace, Salt and sweet Butter, and dish it up on sipits. To boil a Salmon the best way. Cover it with Water, add Rosemary and Thyme-tops, Winter-savory and Salt: then add more a pint of Vinegar, and serve it up with Butter, the Juyce of Lemons and An∣choveys made into sawce. To roast an Eel the best way. Take one pretty large Eel, take out the ntrails after it is skinned, then fill the belly with sweet Herbs and Butter, beaten together n a Mortar; after that draw the skin over a∣gain, and fasten the Eel with strings to the Spit, and moderately roast it; then with the Herbs, Anchovey-sawce and Butter, together with the Gravy, serve it up.
To roast a Lobster the best way. Take a large one, whilst alive, bind up th claws, and fasten it to the Spit before a gen¦tle fire; baisting it first with Water and Salt then with Butter and Claret-wine; and whe it is enough, break the shell, take out the Meat and serve it up with Anchovey-sawce and stewed Oysters. To roast a Pound of Butter. Lay your Butter in water till it be ver stiff, then fix it upon a small Spit; lay i down before a gentle fire; and as soon as i begins to drop, dredg Bread on it, and so con¦tinue to do, adding a little beaten Cinamon and Sugar till the Bread has soaked up all the Butter: which done, make the out-side brown and serve it up in the nature of a Quaking pudding, with Verjuyce, Butter, Rose-wate and Sugar. To make Sauseages the best way. Take a Leg of Pork, divide the fat fro the lean, and chop the latter small, with Ma¦jorum, Peny-royal, Thyme and Winter savo¦ry, adding Salt, Pepper, and a little Ginge together, with half the quantity of Meat Beef-suet; and being very small, fill it i Sheeps-guts with a Whalebone-fescue, an dry them in a Chimney for your use.
To dress a dish of Anchoveys the hest way. Take the best Leghorn Fish, about a year ld, not being rusty, wash them, and smooth ff the white and scales; divide them equally four quarters at length, lay one laying wa∣ing in and out, and between them another rait, in the figure of a Star, making of the ones the figure of a Crown, and placing it the center of the dish: garnish it with L∣ois, Olives, Sampher, Pickled Barberries, Pickled Broom-buds, Mushroons, Capers, and slices of Pickle Cucumbers, in what form ou please; adding a sufficient quantity of Oyl and Vinegar. How to dress a dish of Caveer the best way. Take that which is not rusty nor over∣ried, steep it in the best Florence-Oyl for he space of an hour; then take it out, and work it with a little Vinegar and Pepper into form or figure as best fancies you, and then garnish it with Olives and Barberries, ser∣ing it up with Oyl. The best way to dress a dish of Pickle-Herrings. Take new Herrings, or the best you can get, take off the skins, and take out the bones, ice the Herrings, and mince them very small; hen shread Pickle-Cucumbers, Shalots or Onions, Lemon-peel,
Codlings, Pippins or  Pome-waters: mix the whole matter with Capers, Barberries and Broom-buds: gar∣nish the dish with Olives, French-beans and Mushroons: make it into a figure, add Oyl, Vinegar and Pepper, and serve it up: or, if you please, you may garnish it with Pickled-Oysters. To set out a dish of Pickles. Place in the midst your Cucumber, then your large Olives, then French-Beans at length, and small Olives between them, then Mushroons and Capers, and on the edges of the dish Pickled Grapes, Pickled Gilli-flow∣ers and Broom-buds, and so serve them up. How to Pot Fowl in order to their keeping by Sea or Land, &c. Roast Ducks, Mallards, Teals, Widgeons, Pigeons or Chickens: drain them from the Gravy, and put into the bellies of them a little Pepper and Salt, with a little bruised Mace and some Cloves; then take the fat that came from them, press them a little flattish, and mixing the fat with sweet Herbs; when you have laid your Fowl in order in a glazed Earthen-pot, pour the melted Butter, &c. hot on them till they are covered; on that strew some Pepper and slices of Nutmeg; then cover it with Bay-leaves, and close it up with Leather: and being fast tied down, rub
a little Butter on the Leather to keep it moist, and the Fowl will keep a twelvemonth. To dress Kid with the colour and taste of Venison. Take a Haunch well fleshed, and indiffe∣rent fat, pluck away the skin and superfluous fat; open it from the bone, and thrust in some Peter-salt, then lay it two hours in water that has been newly heated; after that dry it, and put it on your Spit, or bake it in a Pasty, and it will have the colour and flavour of Ve∣nison. An Excellent way of Hashing any sort of Meat. Take your Meat, slice it thin, sprinkle it with a little Salt, Pepper, and shreaded sweet Herbs, put it into your Pan with a piece of fresh Butter and the Juyce of a Lemon; add a few bruised Cloves, Oysters, and an Ancho∣vey: garnish your dish with Parsley and sli∣ces of Lemon, and serve it up. How to roast a Salmon the best way. Take a Jole or Rand, and divide it into four pieces; season it with Salt and grated Nutmeg: stick on it a few Cloves, and fasten it on a small Spit, putting between it a few Bay-leaves; stick in the out-side little sprigs of Rosemary; baste it with Butter; save the dripping; sawce it with Butter, Verjuyce, and Juyce of Oranges; garnishing it with some slices.
To fry Salmon the best way. Take a Chine, Jole or Rand, fry it in the best Butter; and finding it crisp, let your sawce be made of Claret-wine, sweet But∣ter, grated Nutmeg, Orange-juyce, and the liquor of Pickled-Oysters: heat them toge∣ther, and pour them on the Fish: and for a garnish, lay Parsley and Sage-leaves fryed in Butter. How to recover tainted Venison, and make Mutton, Beef or Lamb, pass for Venison. As for the first, wrap it up in a clean cloth a little dampish, dig a hole in the Earth, put it in, and let it lye twenty-four hours, and the scent will be gone, the Earth drawing it away. As for the latter, Take your Mutton, &c. and dip it in Pig's blood, or any wholesome warm blood; then parboil it in small Beer and Vinegar, and let it stand all night; then put to it some Turnsole, and bake it, and it will look and eat like Venison. To roast a Carp the best way. Draw and wash him alive, taking out his Intrails, and with Lemon-juyce, Caro∣ways, grated Bread and Nutmeg, Currans, Cream, Almond-paste and Salt, make a Pud∣ding, and put it into its belly, insomuch that
it may fill it full, the Pudding being put through the Gills, and fasten them: and when it is roasted, make sawce with what drops from it; adding the Juyce of Oranges, Ci∣namon, Sugar and Butter, and dish it up. To Stew a Carp the French way. Take him alive, and bleed him; then take out all his Intrails, and scrape the Scales from off the back; then take a quart of Claret, Mace, Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs, sweet Herbs, a large Onion and Salt: let them boil in the Stew-pan, then put in the Carp, with half a pound of sweet Butter; it being enough, lay it in a dish, and make a sawce of grated Bread, Lemon-juyce, beaten Butter, and what re∣mains of the liquid part in the Stew-pan, and garnish it with green Spinage and stew∣ed Oysters. To Stew Oysters after the best manner. Take the largest, parboil them in the wa∣ter that comes from them, and afterward wash them in warm water; put them into a Pipkin, adding Onion, Mace, Pepper, Nut∣meg, and a pint of Wine, with as much Vi∣negar, if you have two quarts of Oysters; add likewise a pound of sweet Butter, and a spoonfull of Salt; then dish them up with Si∣pits, having stewed them, and garnish with Barberries and Lemon-peel.
To Stew Flounders. Take the largest, draw and wash them, giving them a scotch or two on the belly; put to them, being in your stewing-pan, small Oysters, Pepper, Ginger, an Onion, sweet Herbs, Salt, suffering them to stew as soon as may be, then dish them up with sipits: And for sawce, take beaten yolks of Eggs, Lemon-juyce, Butter, and a little Ginger; garnishing with Lemon-peel. To roast an Eel the Dutch way. Strip her, put into her Belly grated Bread, sweet Herbs and Butter; then draw the skin over her again, and fasten her to the Spit; baisting her with salt and water: being e∣nough, take off the skin by ripping it up, and serve her up with the Herbs made into a sawce, with Butter and Juyce of Lemons, and a little Claret-wine. To Stew Breams. Draw, dry them, and let them be well salted; lay them on a Grid-iron over a Char∣cole fire; suffer them to be brown on both sides; then put half a pint of Claret into a Pewter-dish, set it over the fire to boil, add three Anchoveys, two sliced Onions, a pint of Oysters, and a little Thyme: when it has boiled, put to it a little melted Butter and
Nutmeg; then dish up the Fish, and pour the sawce on it, with yolks of hard Eggs minced. To boil a Mullet the best way. Save the Liver and Roe, and scald him; then put the water on boiling-hot, adding half a pint of Claret, and a bunch of sweet Herbs, Salt, Vinegar, and two Onions, with a sliced Lemon: take a Nutmeg, quarter it, with Mace and Butter, drawn with Claret, dissolving in it two or three Anchoveys: sea∣son the sawce with salt; dish up your Fish; and serve it up with a garnish of stewed Oy∣sters and Bay leaves. At one and the same charge, as to the Saw∣ces, you may dress a dozen of either of the last mentioned Fish. How to dress a Cods-head the best way. The Head being cut fair, boil it in water and salt, adding a pint of Vinegar, that the Head may be a little more than covered; putting into the mouth of it a quart of Oy∣sters, a bundle of sweet Herbs and an Oni∣on, binding the Jaws with a thread: when it is well boiled, set it a drying over a cha∣fing-dish; then take Oyster-liquor, a sliced Onion, and two or three Anchoveys; ad∣ding a quarter of a pint of White-wine, and a pound of sweet Butter: pour them on the Head, and stick the Oysters where
they will enter: scatter over it grated Bread and Nutmeg; garnish the dish with sliced Lemon, or any green thing. And thus have I given you Instruction as to the Dressing, &c. Flesh, Fish, and Fowl: And now proceed to the remaining necessa∣ry part of Cookery, which is Pastry. CHAP. XIV. The Cook-Maids Directions in making Pyes, and managing Pastry to the best and Modish man∣ner and advantage. AS Pastry is the most curious part of Cookery, so it is to be considered even beyond what I have mentioned in other mat∣ters, and chiefly in these Observations. 1. Observe your Flower be fine, and free from Bran, or any defect; and having laid it on a smooth Table, or in a Kneading-Trough, 2. Heat your Liquor, suffering it to sim∣per, scumming off what arises; and if it be for Tarts, Custards, or the like, let it be fair wa∣ter, with a small Ingredient of Rose-water and Malaga-wine, so that it taste of either: But for larger Pyes, made with Meat or the like, add Butter a pound to two quarts of liquor,
nd to either of them, in moulding Eggs or New-Ale-yest, according as you would have our Paste light or solid; which I leave to your discretion. 3. As for those that are to be raised very hin, work them up cold; but those of large∣ness, that will admit a good substance, for the more ease and pliableness, let the Paste be warm, working them into a form with your Hands, Roaler, Nippers, Spur-iron, Knife and Plate: Mark the Garnishing, or flourish on he lid or sides, I leave likewise to your dis∣cretion. But that you may the better under∣stand the form of the most curious thing of this nature, I have caused them to be incer∣ted in the following Pages, and so proceed to the filling them, &c. To make an Oyster-Pye. Let the Oysters be parboiled in their own liquor; wash and dry them; season them with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and the hard yolks of Eggs; and the Pye being made Oval, put into it Currans and sliced Dates, and on them lay the Oysters; add large Mace, Barberries, sliced Lemon and Butter; and when it is baked, put into it White-wine, Sugar and Butter.
Flourishes to be drawn on the pastry of pies.
Flourishes to be drawn on the pastry of pies.
To make a Veal-Pye the best way. Raise your Paste well, cut a Leg of Vea in slices, season it with Salt, Pepper, and Nut∣meg, adding some large Mace, laying the Meat with Raisins of the Sun and Currans in the Pye, and fill it with Butter; and when baked, serve it up hot. The best way to make a Carp-Pye. Draw, scald and wash a large Carp or two, season him or them with Salt, Pepper and Nut∣meg, then fill the Pye with them, good store of Butter, Raisins of the Sun, slices of Orange, and Juyce of Lemon: close it up and bake it. The best way to make a Chicken-Pye. Truss your Chickens, and flat the Breast-bones; and having raised your Paste, lay them in order, filling their bodies with Butter, lay∣ing above and beneath Raisins, Currans, Pru∣ins, Cinamon, Sugar, Mace and Salt, with a convenient quantity of Butter; and when it is baked, pour in Rose-water, White-wine, beaten Cinamon, Sugar and Verjuyce: with the which serve it up, &c. To make a Warden-Pye the best way. First bake your Wardens gently in a little Water and Claret, adding a pound of Sugar, covering your Pot or Pan with a lid of dough;
d when they are cold, lay them into your ye with Cloves, Cinamon, Sugar, and a art of the liquor, and bake it gently. o make a Pye with Sweet-breads and Lamb-stones. Slit your Lamb-stones, skin and wash them, ke the Liver of a Lamb, shread it small, nd slice an Udder-part of a Leg of Veal; hich being seasoned with Mace, Cloves, Salt nd Nutmeg made small, as also Pepper; read into it three or four Pippins, and the ke quantity of the peels of candied Lemons nd Oranges, five or six Dates cut in the mid∣le and stoned, with Currans, Carraway-eeds, white Sugar, and half a pint of Rose-water and Verjuyce; add more a couple of Eggs: make it into balls, and with the Juyce f Sorrel green it, laying a Sweet-bread and  Lamb-stone till it is nearfull, covering them with Citron-peel, Dates and slices of Lemon; nd being baked enough, pour in Butter, White-wine, Sugar, and the beaten yolks of ggs, scraping Sugar on the lid to set it off. To bake a Turkey the best way. When your Turkey is parboiled, Lard im, season him with Pepper, Salt, Cloves nd Mace: flat the Breast, and put him into our Coffin or Pye, and fill it with Butter, when it is baked and cold, and so serve it up.
To make an Artichoak-Pye the best way. Take the bottoms of half a dozen Art choaks, boil them tender, season them wit Ginger, Mace, Salt and Sugar: lay Marrow at the bottom of your Pye, and them upon it; cover them with Marrow, sliced Dates Raisins of the Sun: and being half baked put in a quarter of a pint of Canary, wherein Orange-peel has been boiled, then bake it well To make a Marrow-Pudding the best way. Blanch a pound of Almonds, beat them small with Rose-water, take a pound of fin Sugar, grate a penny white Loaf and a Nut∣meg; add a pint of Cream, the Marrow o two or three bones, and a grain or two o Amber-grease: mingle them with a littl salt; fill the skin you intend it shall be in and boil it moderately. The best way to make a Custard. Take and boil a quart of Cream wit whole Spice; beat the yolks of ten Eggs and five Whites, with a little Cream: put them into the Cream when cold, then put it into Paste; strew Comfits on it, and bake it. To make an Umble-Pye the best way as has bee Approved.
Take Beef-suet, mince it and lay it in you  Coffin, or, if you please, slices of Larded Ba∣on; then take your Umbles, and cut them to small pieces as big as Hazle-nuts, and our Bacon about the same bigness; then ake grated Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; strew hem on the top, then lay a laying of Bacon, nd on that another of Butter, and so close it p: and being baked, liquor it with stripped hyme, Claret and Butter well beaten to∣gether. A Venison-Pasty, the best way to make. Having well powdered your Haunch or ide, and cleared it from sinews, bones and kin; season it with Pepper and Salt, and beat with your Roaler, making it proportiona∣ble for a Pasty; then make your Paste with ne Flower, allowing to a peck three pound f Butter and twelve Eggs: work it with old water to a convenient stiffness, suffering t to be as thick as your thumb; then take it pon your Roaler, and open it again upon a ouple of sheets, or so much as will serve of ap-paper: and having your White minced, nd beaten with water, lay it proportionably pon the Pasty to the breadth and length of he Venison: then in the White lay the Veni∣on, and wash it round with a feather; put on he border, season the top of the Venison, and urn over the other leaf, and so close your asty: then drive out
another border for  garnishing the Pasty from the sides to th top; the device of which is left to your di¦cretion: then vent it at the top, set it into well-heated Oven, and suffer it to soak as i ought, viz. four or five hours; then draw it and pour Butter well melted in at the top. To make an Excellent Minced-Pye. Take Neats-Tongues, parboil them till they may be peel'd; then mince them with a like quantity of Beef-suet, stoned Raisins and picked Currans: make them in a manner like pap, then mingle a little fine Sugar, with a glass or two of old Mallaga; then add slices of candied Citron-peel, and put the whole, being well mingled, into a coffin, the form o which is left to your discretion, and strew on it a few Caraway-comfits, and so bake it moderately. To make an Eel-Pye the best way. Take the best silver Eels, indifferent large, strip, gut and wash them: cut them to pie∣ces at about a fingers length; shread a hand¦full of sweet Herbs, with some Parsley and an Onion; season them with Pepper, Salt, bea∣ten Cloves, Mace and grated Nutmeg; when the coffin or crust being reared and fashioned to your mind, put them in, and strew over them some Currans, and a few slices of Le∣mon over that; put a laying
of Butter, and lose your coffin with the lid; and when the Pye is baked, put in Butter melted with a ittle Vinegar, and beaten up with the White of an Egg. The best way to make a Gooseberry-Tart. Take your Gooseberries before they are ipe, being well picked, scald them till they will break in a Spoon; then strain out the ulp, and beat it up with half a dozen Eggs, and stir them well together on a chafing-dish of coles; adding Rose-water, and sweetning hem with Sugar; and when it is cold, you may put it into your coffin, and moderately ake it, or serve it up in Plates without ba∣king. To make a Pippin or Codling-Tart, or of any such like Fruit. Take your Pippins, gather'd before they are over ripe, pare them, and take the core clear off, strew some Sugar and Rose-water on them; and each Pippin being cut in four quarters, lay them in order between every aying; place thin slices of Quince, then add syrup of Quinces, or of the same fruit; after that strow over the Sugar, mixed with a little Cinamon; and closing all up in the coffin, bake them gently, that they may be well soaked.
To make a Paste of Marrow, &c. Take the Marrow of six bones, shrea them with a considerable quantity of Apple well pared and cored; then add a sufficien quantity of Sugar, and put them into a Puff paste; and having fryed them in a Pan wit sweet Butter, serve them up with Sugar an Cinamon. To make a Pye of Calves-feet, the best way. Having boiled your Calves-feet well, tak out the bones and grissles, as many as are con¦venient; shread them as small as you can, an season them with Cloves and Mace; add t them a good quantity of Currans, Raisins and Dates, the latter well stoned, then with a sufficient quantity of sweet Butter, put the into your coffin, breaking on them som whole Cinamon and sliced Nutmeg; the scatter over them some Salt, and close the up, leaving a vent to pour in when the Pye i baked, a quantity of Verjuyce, beaten Cina¦mon and fresh Butter well beaten together. To make the best Cakes. Take a sufficient quantity of fine Flower a quarter the weight of it in picked and wash¦ed Currans, a pound of Carraway-comfits half
a pound of Marmalade of Oranges, th olks of a dozen Eggs, half a pint of Malm∣y or Mallaga, a quarter of a pint of Rose-water: Mould them together with a little New-Ale-yest, and as much Milk as will ake them up into Cakes; then Ice them ver with Sugar, or wash them over with anary, well beat, with the yolk of an Egg, nd bake them in a gentle Oven. To make the best Cheese-cakes. Take new Milk, and put as much Runnet o it as will well bring it to a Curd; then rain out the Whey in a cloth, between two atts: which done, beat up the Curd with he yolk of Eggs, White-wine, Rose-water nd Sugar; after that, add as many Currans s you see convenient: then having made our Puff-paste of fine Flower, Eggs, Milk, nd New-Ale-yest, put it into a fashion; and eing well knit at the corners, and rowled ith a Pastry-spur, put in the Curd, and wash over with the yolk of an Egg, using a fea∣er for that purpose.
CHAP. XV. How to make several Sawces for Roast or Boile on all occasions. AND now since many have been des¦rous to have an account of Sawces i General, I think it not amiss to place it as a Appendix to Cookery; and further, to give th Reader an account of the seasonable Bills o Fare, much observed by the Curious for eve¦ry Month in the Year: But of these in the order. The general Sawce for green Geese Gooseberries scalded, and coloured agai with the Juyce of Sorrel strewed over wit Butter and Sugar, and served up on Sipits and for most Land-fowl, the pulp of stewe Pruins, the Gravy, Cinamon, Ginger and S¦gar boiled up to a thickness, and served in Sawcers. For roasted Mutton, the general Sawc are Capers, Sampher, the Gravy, a sliced Sh¦lot, and a little Pepper stewed together: Claret-wine, Ginger, the Gravy and an On¦on. For boiled Mutton, Take Verjuyce, Bu¦ter, Currans, Sugar, and a
little Cinamon mix them well over a fire, and serve the up with Sipits or White-broth, made of gr¦ted Bread, Currans, Rose-water and Sugar, with the yolks of two Eggs. The general Sawce for roast Veal is Juyce of Orange, Butter, Verjuyce, grated Nutmeg and Claret-wine, or sweet Herbs chopped small, with the yolks of two or three Eggs boiled hard in Vinegar, Butter, and grated Bread, Currans, beaten Cinamon and whole Cloves; for boil'd Veal, Green-sawce. For red Deer, sweet Herbs chopped small, the Gravy, with the Juyce of an Orange or Lemon, and grated Bread or Vinegar, Claret-wine, Ginger, Cinamon and Sugar, boiled up with a sprig of Rosemary, some whole Cloves and grated Bread; and if you stuff or farce your Venison, let it be with whole Cloves, sweet Herbs and Beef-suet, the two latter cut very small. For roast Pork, Apples quartered, boiled in fair water, and the pulp mixed with But∣ter, Sugar, and a little Verjuyce; or Sugar, Mustard, Pepper, and the Gravy: For boil∣ed Pork, chopped Sage, boiled Onions, Pep∣per, Mustard, and grated Bread, or Mustard, Vinegar and Pepper. For Rabits, Sage, Parsley, Butter, Vine∣gar, and the Gravy; or beaten Butter, Vine∣gar and Pepper: For a boiled Rabit, Oni∣ons, sweet Herbs, Pepper, grated Bread and Sugar, served on Sipits.
For Hens roasted, the Gravy, Claret-wine,  Pepper, and an Onion, boiled with the Head Neck, or Gizard: or beaten Butter, the Juyc of a Lemon, Pepper, and the yolks of hard Eggs: For a Hen boiled, white Broth and Sipits, with Lemon-peel and the yolk of a Egg minced small. For roast Chickens, Butter, Verjuyce, th Gravy or Butter, Vinegar, boiled up with Su¦gar, and the substance of an Anchovey, ser¦ved up on thin slices of Bread: For boiled Chickens, strong Mutton-broth, grated Bread, chopped Parsley, and the Juyce of a Lemon, with a good piece of Butter, wel mixed, and served up on Sipits in order. For roasted Pigeons, Verjuyce, Butter, and boiled Parsley shread into it, and beate thick: or Claret-wine, stewed Onion, Gravy and Pepper, seasoned a little with Salt: Fo boiled Pigeons, strong Mutton-broth, the Juyce of Sorrel, the yolks of Eggs beaten i raw, and a sprig of Rosemary: or Sprout and Bacon. For a Peacock, Turkey, Partridge, Phea¦sant, or the like roasted, Boiled Shalots, Pep¦per, Salt, grated Bread and Gravy: or On¦on, grated Nutmeg, Manchet, the yolk o Eggs, Salt, and the Juyce of Oranges, boile up to the thickness of Water-grewel: o bruise the kernels of small Nuts, with grate Bread, Nutmeg, Saffron, Cloves, the Juyc of Oranges and strong Broth: boil them up to a thickness.
For a stubble Goose, slice Pome-waters, boil them soft; Mash them in White-wine, and add to the pulp Butter, Sugar, Verjuyce, and the Gravy. For a Mallard or Duck roasted, Take Oy∣ster-liquor, the Gravy of the Fowl, divided Onions, Nutmeg, and an Anchovey: stew them together, and serve it up in the liquid part: or Vinegar, Cloves and Sugar, a blade of Mace and a Shalot: If boiled, take slices of Carrot, shread Parsley and Winter-savory, Mace, Verjuyce and grated Bread. For any kind of Sea-fowl roasted, Take grated Bread, Cinamon, Ginger and Sugar, Claret and Wine-Vinegar: boil them with Rosemary and Cloves to a convenient thick∣ness; strain them and serve them up as a ve∣ry good sawce: or Gravy, Claret-wine, an Onion and Pepper, with a small piece of But∣ter. For roasted Salmon, Take Oyster-liquor, a slice of Nutmeg, the Gravy, and the Juyce of Oranges and Butter; beat them up to a thickness: or beaten Cloves, the Gravy, gra∣ted Nutmeg and grated Bread, beat up with Butter, the yolk of an Egg and Vinegar: For boiled Salmon, Butter, Vinegar, Nut∣meg, and the Intrails of the Salmon.
To make an Excellent Green-Sawce, to serve o any occasion wherein it is requisite. Take large Sorrel, white Bread grated pared and cored Pippins, some sprigs o Mint, a quantity of Verjuyce sufficient t moisten it; and being stamped very small scrape Sugar on it, and mix it well together and so serve it up, with Pork, Veal, Chick¦ens, Kid, Lamb, Gosling, or the like, the being boiled. For all sorts of small Birds roasted. Take the Gravy, Pepper, Butter, an their Livers and Gizards, minced with Pars¦ley, or the Gravy of a Capon, Ginger, an the yolk of an Egg beaten together, wit a little Butter and Vinegar. And thus muc may suffize for Sawces, so necessary to b known by all that pretend to Cookery.
CHAP. XVI. Directions to know what is in Season throughout the Twelve Months of the Year; and what ought to be served up as the first and second Courses, &c. March. NEats-Tongues and Udders. 2. Boil∣ed Chickens. 3. A dish of stewed Oysters with Anchovey-sawce. 4. A dish of young Rabits. 5. A grand Sallad. Second Course. 1. A dish of Soles or Smelts. 2. A dish of Marinate-Flounders. 3. A Pye of Lamb∣ones. 4. Asparagrass, if to be gotten. 5. A Warden-Pye. April. 1. Green-Geese, or Veal and Bacon. 2. A oasted Haunch of Venison. 3. A Lumber-Pye. 4. Rabits. 5. Tarts. Second Course. 1. Cold Lamb. 2. A cold Neats-Tongue Pye. 3. Salmon, Lobsters and Prawns. 4. A dish of Asgaragrass. May. 1. Boiled Chickens. 2. Roast Veal. 3. Roast Capons. 4. Roast Rabits.
Second Course. 1. Artichoke-Pye just out of the Oven. 2. Westphalia-ham. 3. Tarts. 4. Sturge∣on, Salmon, Lobsters. 5. A dish of Aspa∣ragrass. 6. A Tansey. Iune. 1. Boiled Neats-Tongues, or a Leg of Mutton and Colli-flowers. 2. A Steak-Pye. 3. A Shoulder of Mutton. 4. A Fore-quar∣ter of Lamb. Second Course. 1. A Sweet-bread Pye. 2. A Capon roa∣sted. 3. A Gooseberry-Tart. 4. Strawber∣ries and Cream, or Strawberries, with Rose-water, White-wine and Sugar. Iuly. 1. A Westphalia-ham and Pigeons. 2. A Loin of Veal. 3. A Venison-Pasty. 4. A Capon. Second Course. 1. Green-pease or French-beans. 2. A Codling-Tart. 3. Artichokes, or an Arti∣choke-Pye. 4. Roasted Chickens with Sum∣mer-sawce. August. 1. A Calves-head and Bacon. 2. An Olio, or grand-boiled savory Meat. 3. A Haunch of Venison. 4. A fat Pig well roasted, with good sawce. Second Course. 1. Marinate Smelts. 2. A Pigeon-Pye.
3. A dish of roasted Chickens. 4. A Pippin-Tart. 5. Codlins and Cream. September. 1. Boiled Hens and white Broth. 2. Neats-Tongues and Udders roasted. 3. A Pow∣dered Goose. 4. A roasted Turky. Second Course. 1. Potato-Pye. 2. Roasted Partridges. 3. A dish of Larks. 4. A dish of Cream and seasonable Fruit. October. 1. A Fillet of Veal. 2. Two roasted Brand-geese. 3. A grand Sallad. 4. A roa∣sted Capon. Second Course. 1. Pheasants, Pigeons and Pouts. 2. A dish of Quails and small Birds. 3. A War∣den-Pye. 4. Tarts and Custards. November. 1. A shoulder of Mutton stuffed with Oy∣sters. 2. A Loin of Veal. 3. A roasted Goose. 4. A Venison-Pasty. Second Course. 1. A Larded Her, and another not Lar∣ded. 2. A sowced Tarbet. 3. Two Phea∣sants, the one Larded, and the other not. 4. A Collar of Beef. 5. A sowced Mullet and Base. 6. Gellies, and Tarts of Fruits in season. December. 1. Stewed Broth of Mutton and Marrow-bones.
2. Lambs-head and White-broth. 3. A roasted Chine of Beef. 4. Minced Pyes. 5. A Turky stuck with Cloves, roasted. 6. Two roasted Capons, the one Larded, the other not. Second Course. 1. A young Kid or Lamb roasted whole. 2. A dish of Partridges. 3. Polonian Sausa∣ges, and a dish of Anchoveys, garnished with Mushroons. 4. A dish of Caveer and Pickled Oysters. 5. A Quince-Pye. 6. A dish of Woodcocks. Ianuary. 1. A Collar of Brawn and Mustard. 2. A couple of Pullets boiled with White-broth. 3. A roasted Turky. 4. A hashed shoulder of Mutton. 5. Two Geese. 6. A Surloin of Beef. 7. Minced Pyes. 8. A Loin of Veal. 9. A Venison Pasty. 10. A Marrow Pye. 11. A couple of Capons roasted. 12. A Lamb roasted. 13. Woodcocks, Partridges and small Birds dished up with sawce. Second Course. 1. A soused Pig. 2. A Warden Pye. 3. A cold Neats-Tongue. 4. A soused Capon. 5. A dish of Pickled Oysters and Mushroons. 6. A Jole of Sturgeon. 7. A Goose or Turky-Pye. February. 1. A Bacon-chine. 2. A Loin of Veal, or Beef roasted.
3. A Lamb-pye or Minced-pye.  4. A couple of Wild-Ducks roasted. 5. A dish of fryed Oysters. 6. A couple of Rabits roasted. 7. A Skirret-pye. Second Course. 1. A roasted-Lamb. 2. A dish of Pigeons. 3. A Pippin-Tart. 4. A Jole of Sturgeon. 5. A cold Turky-pye. And thus having in all its Material parts, or what is most requisite, given such Directi∣ons to an Ingenious Cook-Maid, as may qua∣lifie her, if duly observed, for the Service of Persons of Worth. I might say likewise something of the under Cook-Maid and Scullery-Maid; but they being both depen∣dants upon the former, and their business consisting in helping the Cook-Maid, the greatest matter beside is to keep themselves and the Kitchin-Materials neat and clean. And so I take my leave of them, and pro∣ceed to the Dairy-Maid.
CHAP. XVII. The Accomplished Dairy-Maid, or Directions to make all manner of Junkets and pleasant things wherein Milk, Cream, &c. is an In∣gredient, the Modish and Experienced way; plain, easie, and exceeding necessary. THE Dairy-Maids place and office, though not so universal, is little inferiour to that of the Cook-Maid, in making variety of Jun∣kets: besides which, her chief business is to go neat and cleanly, and to keep all so under her Jurisdiction; observing the Kine are well fed; and that Butter and Cheese are made of proper Milks, and in their proper season: To make which, few that undertake that business being ignorant, I shall proceed to give Instructions for the making of Junkets, the most curious part of her office, and for which Persons of Quality peculiarly retain such Servants. But to proceed. To make fresh Cheese of Cream. Take a Pottle of new Milk warm from the Cow, Almonds blanched half a pound: beat them small; add a pint of Cream, a quarter of a pint of Rose-water, half a pound of Su∣gar, half an ounce of beaten Cinamon and
Ginger; then add Runnet; bread it up and  whey it; press it in a Mould, and serve it up in a dish of Cream. Cream and Codlings, how to order in the best manner. Scald your Codlings, take off the skins, and cut the core; mix the pulp with Sugar and Rose-water; add a quarter of a pint of Canary, and a quart of Cream, and serve it up. To make an Excellent Junket. Take Goats or Ews Milk, put them over a fire; and when they are a little warm, then add Runnet, and let it cool; then strow on it Cinamon and Sugar, over that cast Cream, and strew Sugar upon the Cream, with Rose-water. To make a Whip'd Syllabub. Take a pint of Cream, six spoonfulls of Sack, the Whites of two Eggs, two ounces of fine Sugar, and with Birch-twigs beat it till it froth well; scum it and put it into your Syllabub-pot. To make Cream of Codlings. Seald them and peel off the skin, scrape the pulp from the core, and strain the pulp, mixed with Sugar and Rose-water, through a course linn cloth: lay your Codling-pulp in the idde of a dish, and raw Cream round it; adding more Sugar and Rose-water.
To make a Cream-Tart. Take Manchet, chip it and grate it; mix it with good Cream and sweet Butter; take a dozen yolks of Eggs, beat them well with Cream, adding four ounces of sugar: boil them altogether till they come to a thickness; make two leaves of Paste as thin as can be raised, but very shallow: put the Materials before mentioned into it, and cover it with the lid; then bake it, strew sugar on it, and serve it up. To make Curran-Cream. Bruised red Currans in boiled Cream, strain them through a Sieve; add Sugar and Cina∣mon, and so serve it up: And so you may by Rasberries or Strawberries. To make Cream of Eggs. Take a quart of Cream; and when it is hot, beat into it the Whites of five Eggs, and let it boil, adding two spoonfulls of Rose-water: being enough, let it cool, and add a little salt, and scrape on it fine sugar. To make Curd-Cakes. Take a pint of Curds, four Eggs, leaving two of the Whites; add sugar and grated Nutmeg, with a little Flowe: mix them well, and drop them like itters into a Fry∣ing-pan, in which Butter is hot.
To make fresh Cheese. Take a race of Cinamon, scald it in new Milk or Cream; and taking it off, sweeten it with sugar; then take a spoonfull of Run∣net to two quarts of Milk; cover it close, and let it stand till the Cheese comes: strew then upon it Sugar and Cinamon, and serve it up with sipits dipped in Canary or White-wine. To make Gooseberry-Cream. Let your Gooseberries be boiled; or for want of green ones, your Preserved ones will do: and when your Cream is boiled up, put them in, adding small Cinamon, Mace and Nutmeg; then boil them in the Cream, and strain all through a cloth, and serve it up with Sugar and Rose-water. To make a Cream Fool. Heat two quarts of Cream; when it is boiled, add the yolks of twelve Eggs, ha∣ving first beat it in the three or four spoonfulls of cold Cream, straining them into the hot; stir them to prevent burning: when having boiled a pretty while, take them off and let them cool, adding two or three spoonfulls of Sack; fasten sipits to the dish with syrup of Rasberries: sweeten your Cream, pour it in, and serve it up.
To make Clouted Cream. Set new Milk on the fire twelve hours, without suffering it to boil; add Sugar and Cinamon, with a third part of Cream, and serve it up. To make a Gooseberry-Fool. Pick your Gooseberries not ripe, boil them in clean water to a pulp; take six yolks of Eggs, a quart of new Milk, Rose-water and Sugar; put the latter in when the former is well boiled, and suffering them to boil a while, serve the whole up in a large dish when it is cold. To make a Tansey. Take six Eggs, but the Whites only of three; beat them in Cream, then stamp green Wheat-blades, Violets, Spinage, Succory and Strawberry-leaves, of each a handfull, with a few Walnut-tree-buds; adding Cream as you beat them: strain out the Juyce, and add it to the Eggs, and more Cream; as also crumbs of Bread, Cinamon, Nutmeg, Salt and sweet Butter, the latter being put into the Frying-pan; adding, lastly, the Juyce of Tansey and Sugar: fry them like a Pan-cake, very thin, and serve it up with Rose-water and Sugar.
To make Snow-Cream. Take the Gleer of half a dozen Eggs and Rose-water, beat them with feathers till they ecome like Snow; lay it on heaps, and Cream that has been boiled and cooled, with scraped Loaf sugar: heat it again, and serve up as soon as it comes to be cold a second me, upon Rosemary or Bay-branches to hicken; that it may stick the better, add me grated Bread. To make a pleasant Syllabub. Take two quarts of Milk come newly from he Cow, half a pint of Verjuyce being ad∣ed, take off the curd, and put to it more a int and a half of Cream: beat them toge∣ther with Sack and Sugar, and put them in∣o your Syllabub-pot for your use. To make a Cream, called Quince-Cream. Roast four or five ripe Quinces, and pare hem; cut them from the core in thin slices; oil the slices in a pint of sweet Cream, with root of whole Ginger: when it is boiled to pulp, strain it; and adding Sugar, serve it p cold. To make the best Jumballs. Take a handfull or two of Wheat-flower, nd a pound of white Sugar;
mix them well,  adding the Whites of two Eggs, and a poun of blanched Almonds well beaten, with ha a pound of sweet Butter, and a spoonfull o two of Rose-water: to these add more, ha a pint of Cream; mould it till it become a Past; rowl it into what shape you please and dry it a while, then gently bake it: O this quantity you may make twenty or mor How to make an Angellet. Take a pint of Cream, and double th quantity of Milk, putting to them a sma quantity of Runnet; and when it thickens take it up with a Spoon, and put it into a Fa there let it continue till it is very stiff, the salt it; and when it is so, let it dry, and a the end of three Months eat it. To make Sage-Cream. Take a quart of Cream, boil it well, the add a quarter of a pint of the Juyce of re Sage, half as much Rose-water, and a qua¦ter of a pound of Sugar, and it will be a excellent dish. And thus you may use with any sweet Herbs, which will render pleasant and healthfull.
Messeline, or Mixture, of rare and curious Receipts, Things and Mat∣ters; Added as an Appendix to this Impression, for the better encou∣ragement of the Buyer, not any of them being to be found amongst the Curiosities of the first Edition of this usefull Book. Most Approved Physical Receipts. n Excellent Balm for the Epilesie, Vertigo, Palfie, Cramp, and Pain in the Back; and all cold Afflictions of the Nerves and Joynts. TAke of the Red sort of Old Tile-stone, in small pieces; Calcine or burn them, nd quench them in the purest Olive-oyl; fter which beat them into fine Powder, and ut that Powder, sprinkled with a little Mus∣adel, into a Cucurbite of Glass, Luting the oynts well together; and it being in that anner set over a gentle fire, the Balm will rise: which being taken
away, and used by  anointing the afflicted part, or snuffing u the Nostrils, will ease the Pains premised. A Receipt to make Orvetine, or the famous An¦tidote against Poyson, Infection, by being a¦mongst diseased persons, or suddenly coming in¦to infections or noysome Air, and to prevent o eraducate any contagious Disease, disperse Cold and prevail against Agues and Feavers. Take of the Powder of Bezora-stone two drams, the Powder of dried Foxes Lung half an ounce, the Oyl of Cinamon a dram half an ounce of the Juyce of Herb-a-grace the Powder of Red Corral a dram, and two scruples of beaten Peel; add to these half an ounce of Elecampane-roots, and two dram of Storax bruised into Powder: put them in¦to half a pint of Red-wine, and let them sim∣per over a gentle fire till they are well incor∣porated, and then make them into an Electu∣ary, keeping it as close as may be from the Air, and take, as occasion requires it, abou the quantity of a Hazle-nut, and after it som warm Broth or warm Posset-drink; keeping your self close for an hour or two after, and it will effect wonders. An Excellent Wine, or Medicinable Drink, against the Pox, Plague, Measles, Small Pox, Spotted Feaver, or any infectious disease. Take of the best Old Mallaga a quart, add
it a pint of Rhenish-wine; Then take of um, Sage, Rue, Red Sage, Maiden-hair, d the Leaves of Germand, each an ounce: uise them and boil them gently in the Wine a third part be consumed, then add Pep∣er, Ginger and Nutmeg, of each three drams ll beaten, and of Venice-Treacle an ounce: astly, put in a quarter of a pint of Saffron d Angelica-waters, and Morning and Even∣g take a spoonfull to your great advantage, thereby you will be eased of the oppressi∣ that Nature labours under, and be inabled conquer the disease. Rare Curiosities, not before made Publick. Marmalade of Pruins, Raisins, Currans, &c. how to make it of an Amber Colour, capable of keeping a Year. TAke your Fruit, and steep them in a proportionable quantity of Water, till y being over a gentle fire they become soft nd pulpy; then stone the Pruins or Raisins, nd put them into as much Canary as will yet them; after that press out the pulp, and oil it up with some
slices of Quinces; then  strain it again, and put to each pound h a pound of Sugar, and half a pound of c¦rified brown Sugar-candy in powder; a¦so putting the pulp, well mixed with the a¦dition, and sprinkled with Rose-water, into glazed-pot: dry it a little in an Oven or Ston and keep it for your use. A Perfume wherewith to Perfume any Confect¦ons, &c. Take of Myrrh a scruple, Musk the lik quantity, Oyl of Nutmeg the like: infu them in Rose-water, and with it sprinkle you Banqueting preparatives, and the scent w be as pleasant as the taste. To make a Dish seem a pleasant Garden, or plea¦sant Hill of Fruits and Flowers. Take a dish that is somewhat large, cove it with it with another of the like bigness, an place the uppermost over with Paste of A¦monds, in lay'd with red, white, blew an green Marmalade or Quiddany, in the figur of Flowers and Banks; then take the Bran¦ches of candied Flowers, and fix them up right in order, and upon little Bushes erected and covered over with Paste, fix your preser¦ved or candied Cherries, Plumbs, Pears, Ap¦ples, Gooseberries, Currans, and the like, each in his proper place: and for Leaves, you may use coloured Paste,
Wax, Parchment or Horn d this, especially in Winter, wil appear not y gloriously strange, but even strike, if it be ll ordered, admiration in the beholders. e Approved way to keep Gooseberries, Cherries, Currans, Cornelian-Berries, Plumbs, Apricocks, Grapes, and the like, all the Year, in their sub∣stance, colour, and proper taste, in order to make Tarts, or the like, at any time of the year, as if it were at the proper season. Take Stone-bottles, glazed within and with∣ut; boil them well in fair water, then dry em in the Sun; after which, having gather∣d your Fruit somewhat before they are ripe, ke them free from Leaves, and with but in∣different Stalks, and put them whole, with∣out any bruising, into the Bottles: then take ir water, and boil it till no more scum will ppear; after that let it settle, and so draw  off, adding to each quart a quarter of a ound of white Sugar-candy in Powder, and  boil it up again with a quarter of a pound f Loaf-sugar till no more scum will appear; hen the liquid part being cool, fill up the Bottles; after which stop them with sound Corks; and having pieces of thin and pliable Lead, clap them over the Corks, and wyre  down under the bearing or rising of the Necks, and set them in a close Vault, and when you open them the Fruit will be fresh and sound. Some there are that
hold this  may be done without any Liquor, but t I hold the best and surest way to prese them either from shriveling up for want moisture, or becoming musty. To make Frayse appear like Rashers of Bacon▪ Take of fine Flowre half a peck, ming one half by it self with Water and Butt and to the other add Milk wherein Turnso has been steeped, with a little of the Powd of Lake; and having cut them out into ¦ces, fix a slice of the one to a slice of the ¦ther at your discretion; and when they a¦fryed gently, or rather baked, they will d¦ceive the most curious as to the sight of the Curiosities, rare and new, for th Beautifying and Adorning th Female Sex, with other matte of moment. To make a young Face exceeding Beautifull, an an old Face very Tollerable. TAke of Benjamine two handfulls, Scab¦ous the like quantity, the Roots Comfry a handfull,
Peny-royal and Rosema¦ry,  of each a handfull: wash and pick them an, then steep them a day and a night in White-wine, sprinkling them afterward with wder of Myrrh; and so put them into a ld Still, and the Water so drawn off will ceed any Wash in use, and not at all pre∣dice the party when she leaves it off, as ose which are Chymically prepared do,  rendering those old and withered even the prime of their youth, who accustom emselves thereto. A sweet Wash to cause the Body to cast a fra∣grant scent when washed therewith. Take Hysop a handfull, Baum the like antity, Garden-Musk and the Bloom of Peach-tree, of each half a handfull: in∣se them, with the Powder, into Frankin∣nse, and a small quantity of the Oyl of ikenard, in running-water, over a gentle e, and so with the liquid part wash or bathe e Body, and it will over and above create fresh and pleasant colour. Excellent Oyntment to Beautifie the Hands and Face, and take away any Deformity: ne∣ver before Published. Take of the Oyl of Myrrh half an ounce, o ounces of the Marrow of Hogs or Calves∣t, an ounce
of the Water of Tartar, and lf an ounce of the Oyl of Spikenard: mix  them well over a gentle fire, and alla their heat with two ounces of the Oyl sweet Almonds: and being cool, anoint t Face or Hands therewith, and it will not on¦ly take away any Spots, Morphew, or t like, but create a lovely colour, and rend a pleasing or tempting softness. Such Pow'r, you Beauties, I thought fit to give▪ That killing others, you might let me live. To make a Rough Skin smooth, and Wrinkles d appear. Take of the Oyl of Swallows an ounce, t like quantity of that of the Mandrake; ha an ounce of the Oyl of Pomgranet, and ha a pint of Ews Milk: incorporate them to moderate thickness over a gentle fire, an then add a quarter of a pint of the Crea of Almonds, and with it supple and anoi the rough part; and in so often doing yo will find it restored; as also the wrinkles an wither'dness to be fill'd up and plump'd.
Rare and new Experiments rela∣ting to Lawndering, &c. never before Published. To restore Linnen that is scorched by hanging, or being too near the fire, &c. TAke half a pint of Vinegar, two ounces of Fulling-Earth, an ounce of Hen's ung, half an ounce of Cake-soap, and the uyce of two Onions: boil them to a thick∣ess, and spread the substance Plaister-wise pon the scorched place, and it will (if the corching be not quite through, so that the hreads are not dissolved) recover the scorch, nd render it, after a Washing or two, as be∣fore. To make Cloaths that have been abused in Washing, Yellow or Mildewed by lying in damp places, white and fair. Take of the Oyl of Orpine two ounces, the Water of Plantane the like quantity, and of he Juyce of Burdock-roots two ounces: crape into them half a pound of Castle-soap, and a quarter of a pound of the best Fulling-Earth, with a like quantity of Chalk: infuse hem in hot water, and let
the Cloaths soak in  it over a gentle fire; and so washing them out in other water, five or six hours after you will find them exceeding white. To recover Lawn, Tiffany, Musling or Lace, when they are faded. Take of the Water of Vervine a quart half a pint of the Water that distills from the Vine, a handfull of the Roots of Primroses and as many Rosemary-flowers; add to these a quart of new Milk; boil them toge¦ther, with the further addition of two ounce of Allom-powder, and steep the things there¦in a night and a day, by which means they will in Washing not only prove much whi¦ter, but cotract themselves, grow stiff and continue a gloss or lustre, for a time, a if they were new. These things being exactly performed by those for whose sake they were written will, no doubt, turn to their credit and ad¦vantage.
CHAP. XVIII. The Judicious Midwives Advice, or Directions relating to the Delivery of Women in case of Natural or Unnatural Births; dead Children, &c. Also how they ought to be used before and after Delivery: With Excellent Receipts and Applications in divers cases; and for Curing distempers incident to the Sex, &c. AS this undertaking ought to be perform∣ed with modesty and caution, so I shall bserve both; and though it may seem brief o some, yet it cannot but be necessary and sefull: Wherefore I have placed it as an ppendix to this necessary Book, and in all, onsulted the Opinion of the Learned. As for a Midwife, she ought to be well ualified, knowing and expert before she ndertakes so great a charge; not too hasty, or too slow in the performance of her office, nd ever have the fear of God before her eyes,  the Egyptian Midwives had, when they re∣sed to destroy the Hebrew Male-children,  regarding their Oaths on Earth, which is, doubt, bound in Heaven. But not longer  prologue, I shall proceed to the material atter; and, first, what ought to be observed pon the lying down of a Woman in Child∣ed.
If her Travail be hard and tedious, to in¦liven her spirits, and keep her in heart, giv her Cordial Essence, Syrups or Cordial Wa¦ters, such as are sutable on such occasions▪ She may also take Chicken-broth, seconded by a poached Egg, or such like-matter; no to excess, but moderately. As for the po¦stures in case of Delivery, few are ignorant of them; therefore, to avoid abscenity, I shal wave them, and proceed to what is mor necessary and material. In case of Delivery, the Midwife must wit patience expect the assistance of Nature, whic on that occasion wonderfully operates, an not abruptly break the Membrane, lest th life of one or the other be endangered, unle a great necessity require it, but rather suffe the Childs head to do it; and when that done, and the pangs come gently, draw fort the Birth, if it be the right way forward; not, means must be used to turn it, as th motion of the Woman, and the diligence the Midwife. Walking up and down th Room, in this case, if the Woman be able, not at all amiss, nor sudden turning her sel whereby she may reduce the Infant to a rig posture, and so have an easie Delivery: fo Children in the Womb lying cross-way or sprawling, not only occasion danger to th Woman, and hard Labour, but sometime by reason of an unskilfull Midwife, Death
he one or the other, the Natural Birth being with the head foremost; and when a Child s so taken forth, commonly with the face ownward, lay it upon its back for the ad∣antage of respiration, and then with an In∣rument very sharp let the Midwife cut the Navel-string about four Inches from the fast∣ing, tying that that remains with a piece of ilk string; cover then the Child's head and stomach, not suffering any thing to press the ace. The Child being thus ordered, let the Midwife commit it to the Nurse, or the Wo∣man that assists, and take care of the Wo∣mad in bed, in taking from her the Secon∣ine or After-birth with care and caution, which is easiest done, they being contracted Membranes, by easily moving till Nature ef∣fect the rest; and if there appear a difficulty herein, many are of the opinion, that the Womans holding Salt in her hand fast grasp∣d, it is much available in facilitating the usiness. Breathing hard, or rather straining when the Breath is held, is another expedi∣nt; or by straining to Vomit; all being helps o Nature: But if these prove ineffectual, the cent of Assa-foetida is an Expedient, or drink∣ng the Juyce of Elder, especially if the Wo∣man be troubled with the Wind-colick, cha∣ing the Belly is not the least expedient to forward the matter,
for thereby the Wind  that obstructs, is dispersed or expelled:  these fail, the Midwife, by her discretion must gently draw them forth. Many Births, there are that are called Un¦natural, because they by accident, or the evi scituation of the Womb come not forward the right way, some lying cross, others with their feet downward, others sprawling; som with their necks bowing, and others wit their arms stretched out, so that they creat great pain and trouble: Therefore of these I shall speak and give Instructions to those of the profession that herein are ignorant. In many of these cases, great caution mus be used to turn the Child, not only by th motion of the Woman, but by Fomentations if occasion require, and by the hand o the Midwife, either to turn the Child in th Womb the right way, or to contract th Members, that it may be brought forth by delating the Womb, and thereby making sufficient way to do it, removing what ob¦structs the passage; and having by degree brought the Infant into a convenient posture if it may be, tenderly move it, the hand being before that attempt anointed with Pomatum the weakest, or what is more convenient fresh Butter; letting forth the Waters, i they are not come down; and whether i lye cross or sprawling, feel for the feet; and having gotten them, by degrees draw the
nfant gently forth, incouraging the Woman o strain, and giving her leave between whiles breathe; and that in such a case the hold ay not fail, a linnen cloth about the Thigh f the Child will not be amiss; and after the irth, do as in case of a Natural Birth. If a dead Child be in the Womb, and Na∣ure be deficient, as in that case mostly it is, rt must be used, and the Child, if it can∣ot be otherwise, must be drawn forth with n Instrument hooked and fastned in the Scull y the Eye-hole. This likewise must be done with caution, and the Woman after it care∣ully regarded; incouraging her, and not be∣ng dismayed at any cross accident, but ra∣her recollect her senses, that she may be the etter able to perform her office, Wit, in the reatest Exegencies, being most needfull: And when she is cased of her burthen, give er for her further comfort a Toast in Ipo∣ras or Canary: or in case she cannot be de∣vered with conveniency, the better to in∣force it, let her take the following Drink. Cut blew Figs six or seven; Mugwort, the eeds; of Rue and Fenugreek, of each two rams; Water of Peny-royal and Mother-wort, six ounces: decoct them till half be consumed; strain them, and add of Saffron hree grains, and the Trochises of Myrrh a dram, and a dram of beaten Cinamon: swee∣en the liquid part, and suffer her to drink it not.
Resting a while, let her again try her strength, but not put it out to extremity, lest she become too feeble; and then if she be not eased of her burthen, it will not be amiss to make a Suffumation of Oppoponax, Castor Sulphur and Assa-foetida, of each a dram bea∣ten to Powder, and wetted to a stiffness, with the Juyce of Rue burnt on a chafing-dish o coles, and the smoak pass through the nar∣row end of a Funnel, so as to affect the Ma∣trix only, and so wait the good time. A Woman being delivered either of a Na∣tural or Cross Birth, it will be convenient, i she have had hard labour, to wrap her in the Skin of a Sheep, the fleshy side being warm towards her, especially to her Reins and Bel∣ly: or for want of it, a Coney or Hare's Skin newly flea'd and warm, chafing her Belly with Oyl of St. John's Wort, and swathing her Back and Belly with fine linnen a quarter of a Yard broad, covering her Flanks with a Quilt or little Pillow, applying a warm cloth to her Nipples, but use not presently striving by any Application to drive back the Milk, lest it cause an Inflamation by the continu∣ing of the evil humour twelve hours at least, being allow'd by Physitians for the circulati∣on and settlement of the Blood, and what was cast upon the Lungs by vehement agitation; for in this case Nature is wonderfully out of frame, there not being a Vein nor Artery but what is stretched and moved.
About six hours after Delivery, or less, a restorative may be made of the yolks of two Eggs, a pint of White-wine, a quart of Milk, of Oyl of St. John's Wort and Roses, each an ounce; Plantane and Rose-water, of each the like quantity: mix them well, and dip a cloth into them folded; warm it and apply it to the Breasts, and it will much abate the pangs. To sleep immediately, though the Wo∣man be inclinable, is not at all convenient; four hours after Delivery give her Caudles and nourishing Liquids, and let her sleep if she is minded: And in case of a Natural Birth, no more is required, unless some more than ordinary indisposition happen. But in case of Unnatural Births, or extre∣mity, other things are to be considered; As to observe a temperate diet, which must con∣sist for the first five days of Penados-broths, Jelly of Chickens or Calves-feet, poached Eggs, French Barley-broth, &c. and as she strengthens, so let her increase her eating. If no Feaver afflict her, she may, as she sees occasion, drink Wine moderately, Syrup of Roses or Maiden-hair, and such-like Astrin∣gents: And so the danger being past, Broths of Meat, or Meat it self, will not be amiss, that she may the better recover her strength, the eighth day being the soonest to
venture on them, the Womb then, for the most part, purging it self; avoiding, as much as may be, sleep in the day-time. And in case of Costive∣ness, or the like obstruction, which too fre∣quently happen, a Clyster of mollifying Herbs are a present removal: And in all such cases, and many other, what follows is held mate∣rial. Marsh and Field-mallows, Peletory of the Wall, Camomoil and Melilot-flowers, of each a handfull: boil them in Water where∣in a Sheeps-head has been boiled; strain them when boiled, and into a quart put an ounce of course Sugar, and as much Honey, with an ounce and a half of fresh Butter; and if it opperate not to the purpose, half an ounce of Catholicum will not be amiss. It is usual for Women to Wash after Deli∣very; and how to make these Washes, not being vulgarly known, I shall give directi∣ons. For the first Wash, Take a handfull of Cher∣vil; which being boiled in a quart of Water, add a spoonfull of Honey of Roses, and wash with it eight days, and then use another, viz. Take red Roses, put them in a Linnen bag, boil them in half a pint of Water, and as much White-wine; strain the liquid part, and use it. Some require a third, and that may be made of the Decoction of Roses, and a pint o Myrrh-water. To make Astringents usefull on this occa∣sion,
Take the Seed of Pomgranet, Roach-Allom and Galls, of each two ounces; Red Roses, and the Roots of Knot-grass, of each four ounces; the Rinds of Pomgranet and Cassa, of each three ounces; Water-Roses, Myrrh and Burnet, of each an ounce; half a quartern of White-wine; and of Smith's-Water a quarter of a pint. Take two bags of a quarter long, and half the breadth; boil them in Water, with the Drugs, &c. and ap∣ply them successively, as is convenient. To make an excellent Plaster, Take Venice-Turpentine, Spermaceti, Rose and Planane-water, of each an ounce and a half, with eight ounces of Bees-wax: bruise and melt them, adding an ounce of white Lead: make a Plaster of it, and apply them to the Belly and Nipples, anointing them first with Spermaceti, and it will remove the Inflamation, and af∣ford much strength. Cleansing before rising being convenient, I shall not omit to give Directions, as thus: Take half a pound of bitter Almonds, blanch them and beat them into Paste, with Powder of Grise, and the yolk of an Egg: put it into bags of Shammey, and dip it into Red-wine, and apply it to the places whence the Cere-cloth was taken, and wash it in the Wine wherein Orange-flowers have been steeped.
To prevent the curdling of the Milk in the Breast, Boil the Roots of Althaea in White-wine-Vinegar, strain the liquid part through a Sieve, adding Bean-flower an ounce, Oyl of Mastick two ounces, Powder of dried Mint and Rue, of each a dram: make them into an Oynment, and anoint the Breasts. To dry up the Milk, many ways are used, but this the best, viz. Take new Honey, the Juyce of a Sparemint and Shepherds-purse, of each an ounce, and put half an ounce into Chicken-broth each morning. To renew a pain in the Breast, Take two ounces of Bees-wax, Oyl of Nutmeg and Rape-oyl, of each half an ounce: make them into an Oyntment; spread them Plaster-wise, and apply them to the Breast. In case the Belly swell, which after deli∣very often happens, Take Barley and Bean-flowre, finely sifted, of each four ounces; half a pound of Spanish Figs; of the Powder of Brick, two ounces; one ounce of Cyprus-nuts: boil them well in the Water of a Smith's Forge, and apply them as a Lina∣ment to the Belly. If an Inflamation of the Breast happen, make a Cataplasm of the Leaves of Melilot and Night-shade, each a handfull, boiled in Spring-water; adding two ounces of Bean-flowre, of Oyl of sweet Almonds and Oat∣meal, each an ounce, and make a timely Ap∣plication.
To cure a Tumour in the Breast, which oceeds from a thick and unnatural Vapour ising from the Menstrual blood, the Wo∣an must be moderate in diet, drinking Wa∣r wherein Cinamon and Anniseeds have een concocted; as likewise the Rind of Ci∣on; observing evermore to take such things s are proper to provoke the Courses; as the uyce of Celendine, Groundsel, Camomoil, nd Ground-Ivy boiled in White-wine: and  often so doing you will remove the pain, nd render ease to the part. Additional Experiments, or the Judici∣ous Midwives farther Instructions, not published in the former Edition. And first of Weakness, &c. IF it happen that the Woman after her De∣livery be very weak, then, to prevent her much striving, the Nurse, with other help, must turn her as occasion requires, lest the whole frame being out of order, the dispersed humour gather to one place, and create a re∣lapse, which is very dangerous: notwithstan∣ding, for a farther prevention of it, she may take at the end of  days the following Cordial, viz.
Take of the Syrup of Violets half an ounce the like quantity of that of Citrons; add t these two drams of the Powder of Rhubarb and an ounce of Treacle-water, with as muc Diascordium dissolved in it as will lye upon Six-pence; and to all these add half a pint o Hysop-water, and let her take an ounce at time, and after it some Broth or warm Posse the Midwife being ever carefull that nothing of the After-birth remains, lest thereby Fits and Obstructions may be occasioned. The Woman in this case ought likewise to be very carefull of her self till the Body, that by any violent or unnatural Birth especially is much distempered and disordered be setled, and in good temper; for often by a too time∣ly rising and stirring, the cold has opportuni∣ty to penetrate and settle in the open parts of the Joynts, causing numbness and pains in Limbs, and sometimes by such violent intru∣sions ferments the Blood to the degree of a Feaver. To prevail against which, Take of the Powder of Elecampane an ounce, Conserve of Red Roses two ounces, Pomgranet-seeds beaten to Powder an ounce: dissolve them in White-wine, two drams or somewhat more at a time, and drink the Wine as warm as may be convenient.
New and rare Experiments in Cookery, not before made Publick; as also in Dairying. To roast a Salmon whole the Italian way. TAke a middle-siz'd Salmon, draw him, and scrape off the Scales, drying him without and within with a cloth: Then take ne grated Bread, grated Nutmeg, the Juyce of sweet Marjorum, Currans and Butter, ma∣ing them up with new Milk into a Pudding, he which you must thrust in at his Gills till he Belly be pretty well stuffed; then with white Filliting bind him to the Spit; and at first baste him with a little Salt and Water, then with Verjuyce and Sugar, and, lastly, with Butter and Red-wine beaten up toge∣ther: when being enough, open his Belly, slit him in two halves, and lay the Pudding one half on one side, and the other on the o∣ther side, and serve him with a Garnish of whole Spices and Anchovey-sawce. To roast a Turky, Swan, Heron or Bittron, the French way. Draw your Fowl, put sweet Herbs, shread into a Linnen bag, with Butter and Spices: put that into its Belly, then with hot water baist it
till it is in a manner parboiled on the  Spit; after that dry it with a cloth, then bai it with Butter and Ginger till it is roasted, and serve it up with Butter, Anchoveys, and th sweet Herbs; garnishing the dish with Le∣mon-peel and green things, &c. To make a Spanish Syllabub the best way. Take new Milk a gallon, the Flowre o sweet Almonds half a pound, Rose-water two ounces, Lime-juyce half a pint, the Juyce of Strawberries or Raspices a pint, and a quart of Canary-wine, with two pounds of Sugar; beating them and stirring them toge∣ther till they froth and become of a pleasing colour. The Dutch way to make Orange-Butter. Take new Cream two gallons, beat it up to a thickness, then add half a pint of Orange-flower Water, and as much Red-wine; and so being become the thickness of Butter, it re∣tains both the colour and scent of an Orange. And thus have I performed my promise in this kind; from whence I shall proceed to the Second Part.
THE SECOND PART, OR, Appendix to the foregoing Work. Containing Directions for Behaviour, as to what relates to the Female Sex, on all occasions, &c. The Author's Admonition to Parents, or such as have the Tuition of Children, &c. AMong all the Temporal Blessings, God out of the abundance of his Bounty and Goodness has bestowed upon Man∣kind, Parents, in dutifull and obedi∣ent Children, have the greatest: Great indeed it is to have Children, and so it was held and ac∣knowledged by the Fathers and Wise-men of Old; insomuch that Barrenness was not only looked up∣on as a Reproach, but a more immediate Mark of Heavenly displeasure. Sarah's heaviness was tur∣ned into joy when Isaac was born. Rachel was so impatient, that she desired Jacob (as not consi∣dering they were the immediate Gift of the Al∣mighty) to give her Children, or she should dye. The Motber of Sampson, when the Angel told her (who had it seems been a long time Barren)
that she should conceive a Son, greatly rejoyce Hannah praying before the Lord with an uprig Heart, and pouring out her Supplications to hi to take away the Reproach of her Barrenness had her Petition answered in bringing forth S¦muel. Great was the joy of Elizabeth, the Wi of Zacharias, and Mother of John the Baptis when she found she had conceived; insomuch th she cryed as in a Rapture, Thus hath the Lor dealt with me in the days wherein he looke on me, to take away my Reproach among men. And one of the chief Blessings the King Prophet pronounceth to the just and upright Ma is, That his Children shall be like Olive branches round his Table. If the having Children creates such joy, how ought it to multipl in the Hearts of Parents, who are appointed by God to watch over them for their good, whe through their incouragement and industry they se them arrive, in some measure, to a perfection, in the knowledge and practice of Divine and Mora Virtues, whereby they are rendered not only capa∣ble of an Immortal state, but of gaining a good Re∣pute and lasting Memory amongst Men: The con∣sideration of which, doubtless, made Solomon deli∣ver it as a Maxim, That, A wise Son made a glad Father. And in this case Children are more bound to their Parents for their Education, than for their Bearing them: Nor is it a Duty less incum∣bent on Parents in the discharge of their Duty to∣wards
God, to see, to their utmost, those Children  has intrusted them with, as pledges of his kind∣ss, brought up in his fear, by a timely seasoning m in the ways of Virtue, than it is on the Chil∣ens to make gratefull returns and acknowledg∣nts for the care and cost they have bestowed on m, in nurturing and bringing them up; imagi∣ng, that upon the receiving of every such Blessing, ey hear the Almighty Donor speaking as Pha∣ah's Daughter did to the Mother of Moses, ake this Child and Nurse it for me, &c. hese things rightly weighed and considered, may duce those Parents, who would be happy in their osterity, to be more than ordinarily diligent in ying a good foundation for Virtue to build upon, eir own good Example being ever the Corner∣one of such a Structure; for nothing sooner makes impression in tender years, than Precedents in∣mcy, like Wax, taking and retaining the figure of hat Seal which first impress'd it, unless it be rude∣ defac'd by another, or purposely destroyed. On this occasion much more may be said, but Parents naturally inclining to do what may turn o the advantage of their Children, I shall in this place press it no farther, but proceed to lay down Rules and Directions for the Carriage and Con∣duct of Young Gentlewomen, &c. That climb∣ng by degrees to the Summit of Internal Adorn∣ment, they may raise themselves a lasting Monu∣ment, seeing Virtue survives Time, and shakes Hands with Eternity. Yours to serve you, J. S.
CHAP. I. Admonitions to Young Gentlewomen, i the first place, to observe their Dut towards God. TO be inflamd with the Love of Sacre Things, is undoubtedly a foundatio for early Virtue to build on, and i frequently an Introduction to whatever w can justly or truly term Good or Great Therefore as you first owe your Duty to Go who made you, and on whom depends you Being and Well-being, not only here, but here after; you must, above all things, conside his Glory, and indeavour, as much as in yo lyes, to render him tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving imploring the assistance of his divine Grace to instruct and inable you to supply your defects, and increase your know¦ledge, and in so, Remembring your Creator in the days of your Youth. That God, who loves the early Sacrifice of the Heart, will not be wanting to over-shadow you with the Wings of his Providence, and keep you from falling into those snares Satan lays to intrap you. To induce you to holy desires, and confirm you in the way of Truth, as you increase in strength. As soon as you are capable to read
well, (which ought to be in the sixth year of our Age at farthest, for otherwise you or our Parents will be subject to a censure of nowledge) you must apply your self to the reading of good Books; and strive, the more u read, the more to conceive a delight and leasure therein; that growing up, you may y with Holy David, From my Youth have I ved thy Law. And in seriously considering hat you read, it will be very profitable for ou to retain in your memory such comfor∣table Sentences as, being repeated, raise in ou a holy joy, or more than ordinary desire o meditate and enter upon a Contemplation f those things that are thereby expressed; nd these must be chiefly taken from Holy Writ: But, above all things, be not remiss n the duty of Morning and Evening Prayer; and that you may be the better prepared for such holy Exercise, get by heart, and retain in your memory the Pater-Noster, or the Lord's Prayer, the Belief, or the Apostle's Creed, and other good Prayers sutable to your capacity. Get by heart likewise the Churches Catechism, but especially the Ten Commandments, that you may the better understand the Will of that God that made you, and the World; and be cautious to offend him in breaking any of his Laws by thought, word or deed, consi∣dering that from him, who is the searcher of hearts, nothing
can be hid; for to him Dark¦ness  is as Light, and before him all the secre of our hearts are laid open. Lying, abov all things, must be abhorred, and the Nam of God never mentioned but upon pious an lawfull occasions, (and then too with th profoundest reverence.) The company o naughty Children, whose words and manner may offend or tend to corrupt Youth, thoug your near Relations, must not only be repro¦ved by you, but growing incorrigible or in reclamable, shun'd and avoided; and, as of¦ten as stands with your conveniency, espe¦cially every day between the Morning an Evening Duties of Prayer, read little or mor some portion of Scripture with heed, reve¦rence, and a comely gesture, as considering it is the Word of God, Written by Holy Men inspired for our Learning. And if it be in pri¦vate you read, where none but your self i present, pause and meditate on those Sacred Truths as your Heart is most inclinable. As for the Sabbath-day, a Day holy set a¦part by God, as more peculiarly designed fo his Worship, though it ought on no day to be omitted. Observe to keep it with the greatest strictness, keeping not only you Actions and Words, but, if possible, your ve¦ry Thoughts within compass; and spend tha day especially in Praise and Thanksgiving both in private and publick Devotion, with a firm Faith, and full relyance on
God's mercy  and goodness, for your protection and preser∣ation in this life, and for his promises of a etter life in the World to come. When you are at Church, let not your yes by any means wander, nor your Body ove in an unseemly gesture; but in all things behave your self, that you may be an ex∣mple to others. If at any time you are ex∣osed to Melancholy or Discontent, pray to od to remove it; if to Mirth, let it be harm∣ss and innocent, avoiding leud sights, or aring Songs that may tend to corruption d debauchery; but rather follow on this, well as the former occasion, St. James's rection or advice, viz. If any be afflicted,  him pray: if merry, let him sing Psalms, c. 5.13. And in thus doing you will treasure up essings to your self; for if you carefully per∣rm your duty in serving God as you ought, e will not with-hold from you any thing at is necessary; for to those that seek first e Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness, all her things shall be added. And thus much may briefly suffice to in∣ruct you how you ought in duty to behave our self towards your Maker: From which shall proceed to the next incumbent, which your Duty towards your Parents, &c.
CHAP. II. Instructions for Young Gentlewomen Behaving themselves dutifully towar their Parents. AS our Parents are those from who next God, we have our Being, and b whose tender care and inseparable love w are nourished and preserved from innumer¦ble dangers and hazards; therefore oug we to render them sutable returns, as far we are able, and more expresly in a grat¦full acknowledgment by our duty and obse¦vance. Therefore, young Gentlewome take notice that you should no sooner arri at moderate years of understanding, but yo ought to understand your Duty towar your Parents; and that you may not plea ignorance, I will briefly lay down such Rul as may inform you what is necessary to observed. In the first place, your Reverence, Lov and Obedience, is strictly required, not o¦ly by the tyes of Nature; but by God's ho Word, as sundry places in Scripture ma¦fest; nor can their Infirmities in any-wise a solve you, or dispence with your non-perfo¦mance; but
in such a case you ought to do¦ble  your observance, that thereby, as much s in you lyes, with Shem and Japhet you may hide their weakness and defects, from he eyes of others, lest the Curse that befell Cham, the unnatural discoverer of his Fa∣hers nakedness, fall upon you: or the more readfull threat of the Wise-man, in Prov. 30.7. The Eye that mocketh his Father, or despi∣th to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley hall pluck it out, and the young Eagles shall eat up: That is, the very fowls of the Air, who are mindfull of those that gave them be∣g, shall testifie against the disobedient, and ecome their Enemies. But nearer to the urpose. You must observe at all times to obey the Will of your Parents (if it be in your power, nd not contrary to God's Command) with∣ut repining, seeming unwilling, or entring nto dispute, performing what you do with heerfulness, shewing by your willing mind your ready obedience, and by your quick dispatch demonstrating the pleasure you take n the performance, shunning all occasions of giving them any disquiet, pacifying their nger, if it at any time arise, with submission either in words or by behaviour, tempering our actions with a moderate sweetness of disposition and silence, for too much osten∣ation or loquicity is displeasing; when your Parents grieve, be you sad; when they re∣joyce
be you pleasant, as sympathizing wit them in heaviness and joy; yet be not over inquisitive into the cause; but if you are de¦sirous to know it, wait their leasure to revea it, or learn it from some other hand. Forget not to pray for your Parents as of¦ten as you put up your Vows to Heaven beseeching the Almighty to showre his Bles¦sings upon them, that in multiplying they may redound to their advantage and you comfort; which is one great advance by which a Child endeavours to make his Pa¦rents restitutien for their care and tender¦ness; for nothing without calling God to you assistance can in that nature be effectual, the difference being otherwise so vast between what has been done for you, and what you can do to deserve it. Let not the hopes of Riches, no, nor the severity of your Parents, imprint in you mind a desire of their Death, lest the Al¦mighty be offended, and shorten your days frustrating you not only of what you so ear∣nestly desired, but of that, which, withou those unlawfull desires, you might in his good time have enjoyed. Shun those that speak ill of your Parents and would make them seem contemptible in your eyes: Nor let their Poverty, should you be advanced by any means to Riches or Honour, render your Duty and Obedience
ess, for they cannot be but the same in all onditions: If they be poor, you ought to elieve them, if it be in your power: If they re weak of understanding, you must (if you e it absolutely necessary, or be required so o do) assist them with your Counsel: If they e injured or oppressed, you must, as much s in you lyes, endeavour to succour and re∣ress them, for no years can exempt you om observing your Duty to your Parents; or ought you to dispose of your self in Mar∣age, nor otherwise, without their allowance nd consent, your Person being indispensi∣ly theirs in a lawfull way to dispose of, as ey for your advantage shall think fit. And  it was under the Law of Moses in relation a Virgins vow; the which, though she ad made, yet if her Father approved it not, was void; as in Numbers, chap 30. vers. 5. ut if her Father disallow her in the day that he eareth, not any of her Vows nor her Bonds where∣with she hath bound her Soul shall stand; and e Lord shall forgive her, because her Father dis∣lowed her. By this we see the great Power hat Parents had over their Children, even  a degree of cancelling and rendering of on-effect the obligation of a Vow, which ower was given by God himself: Nor is it bservable that those who disobey their Pa∣nts in any thing that is
lawfull, or neglect  or despise them in their distress or poverty ever prosper: Or if they flourish for a time yet are they generally fitted in the same way for Children cannot fathom the joy and sor¦row of their Parents in this kind, till they become Parents themselves; and then, too often, they bewail their remisness. But to conclude as to this Particular. Certain it is, that no poverty, fault or un¦kindness of Parents, can dispense with tha Duty and Obedience which, by the Law o God and Nature, Children owe their Pa¦rents for the tender care, labour and cost bestowed on them: Nay, though Parent should prove unnatural, and expose them even in their Infancy, to a desperate fortun of hazard and danger; yet still those Chil¦dren are bound to perform their duty, and look for their reward from him who is th Author of all Blessing; who, for so doing has promised us length of days, and seldom fails to make those days comfortable to us.
CHAP. III. Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman at the Age of Six, or upward, how to be∣have her self towards her Parents, Su∣periours, Equals and Inferiours, and upon sundry other occasions; as Learn∣ing, &c. HAving briefly discoursed the two main Points, I shall now proceed to give you a Scheme of decent and comely Beha∣viour in General, to render you Accomplish∣ed in your Non-age, and introduce you to that which is more materially to be obser∣ved and practised. In all your undertakings, let it be observed that you are an enemy to Sloth, not only by your early rising, but by your activity; for having neatly dressed you, or caused some other to do it, having prostrated your self before your Maker, and refreshed you with what was appointed, fall upon your Knees before your Parents, and receiving their Bles∣sing, hasten to School; or else betake your self to such business as your Parents or Go∣verness (if you are under one) shall appoint you at home, doing it with cheerfulness, and respect those that
are over you, as well in  their absence, as when they are present; and whether it be Reading, or any curious Work observe that your Face and Hands are clean and that you handle no dirty or greasy things; neither presume to eat before those who are your Instructors; whilst you are at your Work or Lesson, if there be more un∣der the same Tuterage, as in such cases is usual, behave your self kindly towards them; call no unseemly Names, nor make unsea∣sonable Complaints: Defraud them not, though of trivial things; nor take the least matter by force that is not your own; be courteous and mild; win a decent and win∣ning Behaviour. If your Mistress or Gover∣ness be sharp and severe, strive by your dili∣gence to prevent displeasure or correction; and as you approach or return from her, make your Reverence, and the like, to your Parents; when you come into their Pre∣sence, or retire, make your obeisance in the most becoming and obliging manner, to your Superiours and Equals; nor forget at any time to be courteous to your Inferiours: Besure your Tongue run not too fast, but in Discourse be moderate; Speak with delibera∣tion, and well weigh your Words before you utter them; and where you are seated, ob∣serve that you continue till you are called thence, or it is time to leave it. In
reading, upon any occasion, use not a Tone, but read distinctly, observing your Stops, that you may he better understand what you read. In Writing, beware that you blot not your Pa∣er, but imitate your Copy in cutting your Letters fair and even; Let not your Work, of ny sort, be soiled or dirty, and keep what hings you use in good order, and render your Parents an account of your improvement. When you are to be at Meat, be not out of the way, but attend the Grace, and then taking the place that is appointed you: After having done your Reverence to your Parents and Company, see that your Napkin be fast∣ned about you, or pinned to save your cloaths from greasing, and thankfully take what is given you without craving; nor is it seemly for you to speak at the Table, unless you are asked a question, or there be some great oc∣casion. Cut your Meat handsomely, and be not over desirous of Sawce, nor of another sort of Meat, before you have disposed of what is in your Plate or Trencher. Put not both your hands to your Mouth at once, nor eat too greedily: Let not your Mouth or Fingers be greasy no more than needs must; and when you are satisfied, take your Plate or Trencher with you, or give it to those that wait, and retire, but not out of the Room till Grace is said, and the Cloth taken away; at what time making your obeisance, you may depart, unless you are desired to
stay:  Nor must you sit before your Parents, Go∣verness or Superiours, unrequired, unless you are at your Meat, Needle, Writing, or the like; and observe that you attempt not to drink in any company till you have emptied your Mouth; and that you breathe not, nor blubber in the Cup or Pot. As for your Re∣creation, when leasure hours permit, let it be innocent and moderate, never staying late abroad; and, above all, be wary in the choice of your Companions; and as you grow up, shun the Conversation of those that have a report of Lightness, lest they draw you into a snare, or bring a scandal causlesly upon your good Name, but chuse those whose Reputations are candid; Converse with those who are modest, yet affable; Stay not, at any time, where the least occasion of Lightness and Wantonness is administred; nor lend your Ear to discourse tending to Lewdness; and, for the generality, rather chuse to be seen than heard. For your Carriage, in the general, let it be a Medium, not expressing too much reser∣vedness, which, by some, is interpreted Pride; nor too much freedom or familiarity, which, on the other hand, will be looked upon for Fondness. Be no Makebate between your Parents and their Servants; nor at any time tell a Lye to excuse a fault, or keep you from the
hand of correction. Go to bed in  due season, without any noise, and never be seen in unseemly Laughter; nor in pointing with your Finger, or nodding with your Head, especially in company, or in places of Divine Worship: Honour Age, and pity those that are distressed by Poverty, or any other Affliction; Speak not at any time scorn∣fully, or in a taunting way, but be courteous to all; and in so doing you will gain a good repute, and forward your self in those things that will render you Praise-worthy. CHAP. IV. Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman how to behave her self towards her Gover∣ness and Servants, &c. BEing come to more years of discretion, there are many things requisite to be known that I have not yet mention'd; an account of which, as they offer, I shall deli∣ver in their proper places: And, in the first place, I shall say something of a Governess, appointed by Indulgent Parents to instruct a Young Gentlewoman; as also of the Maid-Servant that is to attend her, &c. As for your Governess, if discreetly cho∣sen, she must
be a Woman of gravity and  discretion, one that is learned in curious Arts, such as you are desirous to improve; and although her Age render her reserved, yet must you not censure her as ridged, but comply with her lawfull Commands; and by your mildness and industry move her to gen∣tleness, refraining by all means to make Com∣plaints, especially unjust ones; for in disappro∣ving of her, whom your Parents has thought fit to set over you, you tax them with Imbe∣cility in chusing, and by that Complaint will either incur their displeasure, or, by remo∣ving your Governess, perhaps procure a worse: which causing, undoubtedly, a second Complaint, will possess your Parents with a jealousie of your untractableness and ill dis∣position. Some there are that covet to be under a young Governess, with whom they may have the more familiar conversation, though to their small advantage; for it is somewhat improbable that a Person, who cannot per∣haps Govern her own youthfull frailties, should discharge so great a Trust as she ought; Nor is it Morally possible for any Person to be a good Governess, unless she has her self been the Mother of Children, and had the bringing them up; for then, and but till then, can she be fully sensible of Youth∣full frailties, and know what tenderness, and what
Correction ought to be used:  However, consider with your self, that in being comfortable to her, you obey your Parents, who thought fit to commit you to her charge; and that if you do otherwise, you disobey God, in abusing or slighting their care and indulgence, who study your advan∣tage: Therefore let not the Servants, nor any other, create a misunderstanding between you and her, but in Prudence and Charity forget or forgive what ever you conceive to be an injury, as wisely considering you are no competent Judge in your own case. To the Servants you must be courteous and affable, but not over-familiar, lest it be∣get contempt. Tell no Tales of them to your Parents, but rather strive to hide their failings, unless they be such as are prejudicial or unseemly; and do them what good you can. If at any time you find occasion to re∣prove them, let your Reproofs be rather Ad∣monishments than Reproaches: Be not pee∣vish nor froward in your Dressing, or in any other office done you by the Maid, that more immediately attends you, but by gentle words let her know her Error, that she may amend it: which method will oblige and command a constant diligence, which otherwise would be but Eye-service; and if your Parents be angry with their Servants, or any of them, do you become their Mediator: And turn not, by
any means, your Face from the Poor;  but if it be in your power, without offending your Parents, relieve them; or, as you see occasion, petition on their behalf: by which demeanour you will command Love and Re∣verence, and gain the Character of an hum∣ble Spirit: In which you may rest satisfied, that it is better to be Good than Great; and that Humility forcibly commands Love and Service, when Pride, on the contrary, begets Hatred and Contempt. If Heaven has en∣dowed you with a large Fortune, and a no∣ble Birth, let your Virtues shine with the greater lustre; and, above all things, give God the praise, and use what you have to his glory, and your own comfort. CHAP. V. Instructions for Young Gentlewomen how to behave themselves in all Societies, upon sundry occasions. WEll to deport and behave your self in Company, upon all occasions, re∣quires a sound judgment, and much caution, few being capable of bringing themselves within that compass: yet, for your better Instruction. I shall lay down what I think most necessary to be observed.
And first, to qualifie your self to under∣nd the quaint, modish and courtly Ex∣essions, it is convenient that you learn the tin, French and Italian Tongues, not only Rote, but by Rule and Grammar, the bet∣ to understand them, since the most resi∣d English has borrowed from these Lan∣ages, and without this Knowledge you ll be at a loss to understand those that ut∣ high Phrases in the Court-Air, as they rm it; nor in this case must you be igno∣nt in Singing, Dancing, and Playing upon ch Musick as is sutable to your Sex; though  Exercising your self herein, you must be ry modest and moderate, your words, on  occasions, being but few, yet to the pur∣pose; Discretion, Silence and Modesty be∣g the Ornaments of the Female Sex. And  Society is that which all Creatures natu∣rally covet, so, if it be well chosen and ma∣aged, it is recreatory to the Body and Mind: ut as bad Society is worse than none, so is to be avoided. Wherefore be not easily won to enter into iscourse with those you know not, unless ome urgent business require it, lest you be suspected of Levity and Indiscretion. Always observe to consort your self with your Bet∣ters or Equals, knowing them to be virtu∣ous; and avoid too much familiarity with
Inferiours, unless you find them very dis∣creet, lest you fall into contempt, if Female or if Male, lest you give them encourag¦ment to make their Addresses of Courtshi and by subtil ways to insinuate themselves i¦to your good liking: for Love, that tak the Diadem from Queens, is blind; an Passion distinguishes not Servility from Grea¦ness: by which means, though you are hig in Birth and Fortune, you may be brought t a yielding, which may turn to the grief o your Parents, or perhaps to their and you own disgrace. And in this case presume no too much upon your own strength, by inte¦changing Gloves, Rings, Ribons, or suc things which you may term Trifles, lest, by this kind of familiarity, Love by insensibl ways opens a passage to your Heart; alway considring it implies weakness, or want o discretion in the besieged, to parly with th besiegers. Be not over-desirous of being seen often▪ for ostentation sake, especially in places o resort, lest you expose your self to the as∣sault of the Tempter, and purchase that curiosity with the loss of your Honour, by giving Licentious Amorists liberty to meet you in your Walks, and by powerfull per∣swasions to listen to their Syreens Charms, whilst you are no longer capable of master∣ing your Affections, but let them loose
at a venture, to your undoing: Nor trust too ch to Female-Confidents, lest, for their n advantage, they perswade you to a lding: and in Speech be not over-lavish any. As for your Dress, let it be neat, but not dy, for Virtue is comely in any Dress;  be content to appear in your native Beau∣: Let your Dressing-time be short, and ur Recreation moderate: In your Speech  Behaviour shun all Affectation; and be not er-fond of new Fashions, especially such are Apish or unbeseeming: and in that se let your Dress make known you are no end to Formality. When you enter a oom to pay your Respects to your Parents, periors or Equals, let it be done with a ave and modest Countenance, making your urtzies at three Approaches; and in the me order retire. When you sit or walk ith any, observe that you do not rudely ke the upper hand, nor express any words at may give offence. Never speak evil of ny behind their backs, for those you speak to, may imagine you will do as much by em. Keep your Eyes from wandering. tare not Men full in the Face, nor cast pri∣ate Glances. Do not Flout, nor be loud in aughter, lest, by straining your Mouth, Wrinkles appear in your Cheeks and Fore∣ead, you thereby become
deformed, or ap∣pear much older than you are. Wherefore in all things observe to behave your s modestly and discreetly abroad and at hom that you may become an Example to othe and thereby deserve the Imitation and A¦plause, not only with those you associat but of such as shall have knowledge of yo Virtues and good Conduct. And so leavi you to consider of what has been said, I sha proceed to Particulars of great moment. CHAP. VI. Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman Manage her Gate and Gesture; to G¦vern her Eyes and Tongue, &c. upo sundry necessary occasions. AS there are many other nice matters re¦quisite for the true Accomplishment of Young Gentlewoman, I shall endeavour to la down what is Material in the most easie Me¦thod: And first of the Gate, or Gesture, tha ought to be observed upon sundry occasion▪ And in this case observe that you walk no carelesly or lightly, shouldering, as it were your Companions, nor strutting or jutting i a proud manner; Keep (in your walk) you Head steady, your Countenance not to much elevated, nor too much dejected Keep your Arms likewise
steady, and throw em not about as if you were flying: Let ur Feet rather incline a little more in∣ard than outward, lest you be censured lay-footed; for by the motion of the Body, e thoughts of the Mind may be discovered: whether the Party be of loose or proud haviour, or humble and complacient. Do t run or go extream fast in places of Con∣urse, unless great occasion require it; for such violent motions it is not always in ur power to keep your Body steady; nay,  too much haste you may chance to fall, d expose to view what you would con∣al. And as the Gesture of the Body is mly and commendable, so is the Manage∣nt or Government of the Eye; in which ny things are to be observed, and chiefly se. Keep your Eyes, as we may call it, with∣ compass; that is, let them not be too ch fixed upon idle and vain objects, nor wn away by unseemly sights; roll them about in a careless and lascivious man∣; nor stare Men in the Face as if you were king Babies in their Eyes; Send not pri∣e Glances; or look, as they call it, with f a Face, turning your Head, as it were, a∣e: Look not at any time over your Shoul∣e: if you have opportunity to turn you: en not your Eyes too wide, thereby to ort your
Countenance; nor keep them  in a manner half shut. Wink not too ofte nor cast your Eyes ascance, as if you squinte neither keep them too reserved; nor scor¦fully turn them away when any Object ¦fers. Look not too much downward; n with a more than ordinary Elevation. Ga not often against the Sun, nor on the Fir both of them being things that impair t Lustre of the Eyes. When you discour with a Woman, look her in the Face with  much composedness as you can: but if wi a Man, to look a little downward, for M¦desty is commendable, lest your earnest g¦zing in his Face be interpreted in the wo¦sence: But, above all things, as often as o¦portunity will permit, lift up your Eyes your Redeemer, and, with holy David, i¦plore him, to turn them away from Vanity for the Eyes being the Windows of the So lets in Good or Evil, according as it fixes, is intent upon good or bad Objects; the¦fore chuse the former, and refuse the latt And the better to inable you to look up t to him upon all occasions, God has giv Man and Woman five Muscles to move a guide the Eyes, and the Principal of the to draw it upward without pain; Where all irrational Creatures have but four turn their Eyes about, as being made for other end than to revert the dust fro
whence they sprung, whilst the noble rat  Creature, endued with an immortal Soul,  capable of those blessed Mansions of which has a prospect, and towards which he ght to lift his Eyes. But leaving the rest your discretion, I shall pass on to say some∣ng of Speech and Complement, &c. In this case, let all your Discourses be to e purpose, and suffer not your Comple∣ents to be high-flown, extravagant, blunt nonsensicial; but, in all, sute them with odesty, to the capacity and quality of the rson to whom you utter them; and see they one upon fit occasion, and in season; be∣e not to Congratulate persons, when you ould Condole them; use in your utterance  Hems nor Stammerings; Sputter not as u speak, nor speak many Sentences be∣een breathings; use no Tautologies or ected words or lispings; neither speak th a Tone, nor too much confidence; up not, nor stare with your Eyes; Point with your finger, nor express in your course those insipid and insignificant words de-ye see, de-ye hear, understand-ye me, rk-ye me, sed-she, sed-he, or the like; for u can never be an Oratress, if you accu∣me your self to 'em; never talk too long, ereby to tire your Auditors, nor broach an seasonable discourse; observe that you in∣rupt not any person when he or
she is  speaking; and what you speak, let it be wi deliberation. Some there are that affect s¦lence, and are little heard in any compan▪ Let me tell you, Ladies, this is an erro and implies the party extreamly reserved and not desirous of Society; or that her u¦derstanding is so weak, she dares not tru her Tongue to utter the sence of her Sou to whom the Words of the Philosopher, u¦tered upon his observing one sit silent in great Assembly, may be aptly applied, vi If thou art wise, thou art a fool: If a fo wise in holding thy peace. Never strain yo words to a pitch of Eloquence, that th sound is more admired than the sence; b let a moderate flourish rather suffice, an comprehend much in a few words: Decli to speak much before Gravity, and multitu of years, unless urgent occasion require i and beware that you speak not till you a bidden to hold your Tongue; for inde Womens discourse should not be much, b¦cause Modesty and Moderation is her Orn¦ment, and are in themselves a moving R¦torick. And when you have opportuni of discourse, let it not taste of Confidenc Affectation or Conceitedness, nor border u¦on Obscenity. These things considered a practised, will render your discourse a¦ceptable, and free you from the censure the Wise and Judicious. And thus mu¦
these Particulars: From whence I shall oceed to speak something of Habit, and its ecency; as also of Fashions commendable d discommendable. CHAP. VII. Directions for a Young Gentlewoman how she ought to be seen in her Habit or Apparel; and what Garb is most com∣mendable, and otherwise, according to the Quality of the Wearer. THough God has framed Men and Wo∣men beautifull and feemly in every part, yet it is no ways disagreeable to his Will, that Nature should be improved by rt, to render a Creature he highly regards he more commodious: as appears by his Cloathing our first Parents with more du∣able Garments than they themselves had provided to cover their nakedness; nor is it (as some Cynical persons have it) Pride to go neatly attired, for by that the parties dis∣cretion is better known than her Fortune, and the Body kept in a due proportion and order.
It matters not, Ladies, of what Stuffs o Silks your Cloathings are made, so they b decent and civil; neither by their ridicu¦lousness discovering the Wearer foolish an slovenly; nor by their gaudy and carele putting on, to render her suspected of loos or light behaviour, or at least-wise subjec her to the censure of the ignorant. Appare may be rich, and yet decent; and indeed whether it be rich or not, if decent, th matter is not great; though, in this case, leave it to the discretion of Young Gentle women, or those that provide them Appa¦rel, to let it be sutable to their Quality o Fortune; and will not be of the Morose and Cynical temper of some, who either believe or spitefully give it as their opinion, tha gorgeous on glittering Apparel is the Attire of Sin, and suits with the Pride of the Wear¦ers heart; but am perswaded that the Qua¦lity of the Person extenuates the Quality thereof, and renders that opinion vain and frivolous. Since we read that Noble Wo∣men, in all Ages, went in sumptuous Attire; nor was it indecent nor unbecoming the Cha∣racter they bore; yet rarely find they were given to cove various Fashions, but con∣tented themselves with such Adornments as became their modesty; for indeed what a∣vail they, unless to shew the profuseness of
e Wearer, or should it be to attract the ves of Mankind. Know, Gentlewomen, at Men of sence are not taken with glit∣ing Apparel, no, nor External Beauty, so uch as with the Internal Adornment of e Mind. And if by these Allurements lf Wits and Idiots should be captivated, ur Triumph would not be worth the cost. Yet, I must confess, there is a kind of pri∣ledge in Youth to go gay; which should oo severely reprove, I might justly merit ur displeasure; yet that Gaity may as well  in Decency as otherwise, the use of Ap∣rel being to dignifie the wearer: Nor does Virtuous demeanour more lively appear, an in Look, Speech, Gesture and Habit, ithin the compass of Modesty, though amonds, Gold, and other pretious things, re made for use; and without being im∣oyed, would be ineffectual: Therefore to ear them, in my opinion, is one of the iefest Ends for which Nature produced em, or Art brought them to a fuller per∣ction. The Pride in this case being only ntered in the Mind, and not in the Exter∣l Ornaments; which is rather known by e Carriage and Deportment of the Wearer, an by the Garments. And though to af∣ct Novelty,
and run into every Fashion, be  not commendable, yet Moderation is n amiss; For two Reasons: As first, shou you always keep in a fashion, though d¦cent, it would be looked upon as a conce¦ted singularity; or to continue in any strang garb, after the fashion is altered, would a¦pear ridiculous, and cause laughter, esp¦cially amongst the ruder sort; as much as Woman of fourscore to be habited in t Garb of a Gentlewoman of sixteen; or see a Dairy-Maid in her Ladies attire Therefore whatever you wear, let it proportionably to your Body, and sutab to your degree. In a word, Let your Virtue appear your Gesture, by Humility and a mode behaviour; In your Looks by a compose sweetness; In your Speech by Affabilit comprehended within the bounds of Mod¦ration; and in your Habit by decency, an a regulation sutable to your Birth and Fo¦tune; whereby you will gain an Estee more valuable than whatever you can othe ways propose to your self on this side Ete¦nity.
CHAP. VIII. Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman how to proceed in their Seasonable Re∣creations; and what is to be observed therein. SInce moderate Recreation is not unbe∣coming a Young Gentlewoman, I think t not amiss to give my Opinion in that case, what is most commendable, and what to be observed therein, as well relating to heir Seasonableness, as to the Carriage and Behaviour that ought to be observed there∣n. A Ball, amongst other Recreations, is much n esteem with Young Gentlewomen, because here they are sure to meet their Compeers n merriment; yet lest at such a place a Young Gentlewoman by her folly or un∣advisedness expose her self to Laughter or Contempt, observe, that if you understand the Rules of Dancing; yet be not too for∣ward to engage your self therein, lest you intangle your self so far, that you are puzled, and at a loss, perhaps for want of under∣standing the Rules and Formalities practised in that place. And as you ought not to be too forward, so be not too hard to be
per∣swaded,  or abruptly, in a huffing humour, force your hand from any that offers to ac∣commodate you, but rather run the hazard of an error or mistake in your performance, than let the least pride or rudeness appear; or give those that are present, occasion to think you are subject to either. In this case be not, by any means, affected; nor when you undertake to Dance, be not tedious, but perform what you undertake with Modesty and Moderation, that by a quick dispatch you may give way to others. As Dancing is an External Accomplishment, so Vocal Musick is an Internal one, yet they may indifferently serve for either, though the last is preferred; therefore if you are expert in your Notes, &c. and can Sing well, when you are in company, upon the intrea∣ty of a Friend, who knows you so qualified, be not obstinate in complying; yet be brief, and let your Song be such as may give no offence: and when you have done, look not as if you expected Applause, but keeping your Station with a composed Countenance, give way to another to second you, if any present is desirous, or can be prevailed with to do it; observing never to cough nor strain when you enterprize it, nor to stop in the middle to crave Attention: And the like ob∣serve in your playing on Instrumental Mu∣sick,
not in that Point being tedious in com∣mencing  your Harmony, when others do the like: give attention, not interrupting them with discourse. And in this case let both your Songs and Tunes be modest, ingenious and pleasant, avoiding, by any means, what may tend to the corruption of good Manners: And as Dancing is the best and readiest way to put the Body, upon all occasions, in a gracefull posture; so Musick is that which tempers the Soul with mildness, and disposes it to sweetness. In Limning, or Drawing to the Life, many Young Gentlewomen, as well of former as latter times, have exercised their Parts, and in that Curiosity found much Recreation; it being, in my Opinion, an Art sutable to the accute Wit of the Female Sex: Nor is Poe∣try to be rejected, for by that is the Mind enlivened, as it were, and tuned to the har∣monious Numbers of the Muses, and fur∣nished with lofty Expressions. Next to these, Engraving may take place, a thing practised by many Virtuous Gentle∣women: but amongst solitary Recreations, if they may be so termed, Reading of Hi∣story, or such Romances wherein Virtue and Gallantry are lively Portrayed; or such as contain Stories of chast and virtuous Love, are to be preferred. These being allowed, I think it not amiss to advise Young
Gentlewomen, at leasure hours,  to recreate themselves in seeing Stage-plays, wherein many things are represented, that by due construction, may redound to their im∣provement in understanding; though some are so Stoically severe, to condemn this kind of Recreation, as altogether tending to the corruption of good Manners; yet they can give little reason for it. These and suck-like Recreations being to be preferred, there is something more to be considered; which is the fit Time or Sea∣son, &c. The principal thing to be considered in this case is, how you ought to keep within compass, and not run into excess, or any ways give offence, damage, prejudice or scandal to any; or by immoderate pursuing it, impair your Health or Reputation, which too often falls out; besotting a cheerfull Complection, and over-whelming, in a man∣ner, the principal Virtue. And if you right∣ly consider this, and consequently recreate your self with Moderation, at seasonable hours, and in proper seasons, it will not on∣ly quicken your Apprehension, but contri∣bute much to your bodily Health; and can∣not be any-ways offensive to the Almighty, who debars us from nothing innocent and harmless that is for our advantage. So that from hence I may draw a conclusion, That Men and Women may enjoy those Pleasures
to which they, with Modesty and Modera∣tion, incline; with a proviso, they launch not out so far as to abuse them. CHAP. IX. Instructions for the Guidance of a Young Gentlewomans fancy, in relation to Love; and how she ought to behave her self towards those that seek to gain her in Marriage, &c. HAving laid down many things highly necessary, and mainly conducing to the Accomplishment of a Young Gentlewoman; I shall now proceed to a more difficult and weighty matter than what has hitherto been mentioned; and that is, to direct her how to guide her Fancy in the Mighty business of Love; A thing, you'll say, somewhat strange to propose: But what cannot the Merits of a virtuous Woman create in the Mind of her Admirer. This indeed, if it proved happy and successfull, will undoubted make her a∣mends in her former care and diligence, and render her an entire felicity on Earth; for Love is the Concord and Harmony of the Universe, nothing subsisting in its proper or∣der without it; nor can there be any hap∣piness
when it is wanting; yet there is, as in this case, as in many others, degrees, or rather counterfeits; for Love it self, in its purity, admits of no Adulteration or mixture, but is essential and unlimited: but many there are that would appear to wear the badge of this sacred Virtue, who only make it an Umbrage to obtain their unlawfull de∣sires and advantage: And though they may indeed, for a time, express an extraordinary Passion, and, not to speak the worst of 'em, entertain a feavourish desire; which is to be known by their earnestly gazing upon the Object they at that time perhaps admire; yet it being only a Passion, and not founded upon Virtue, it is not properly Love, nor can it render the expected felicity; but bla∣zing a while in the enjoyment it sought, spends it self; and being spent, like a false Star or Comet, expires: or, on the other hand, not obtaining its ends, changes into dis∣regard or mortal hatred; and of such a Pas∣sion, whether at the time it is proposed, real or feigned, you must beware. That Young Gentlewomen, arriving at maturity, are prone to Love and Liking; it would be insignificant for one to relate, see∣ing it is so well known. The Eye and the Ear being seldom wanting to convey to the Soul what is desirable; the one charming it with beautifull sights, and the
other with  rhetorical and melodious sounds; yet give not these official members too much scope on this occasion, lest they insensibly ruin you, by betraying your Affections to what is sordid or inconsiderable; but keep, as it were, a guard upon your Heart, to prevent the entrance either of a lawless or disadvan∣tageous Passion. Consider well before you give way, even to imagination in that kind; weigh deliberately each particular, and be seriously intent on what is to come, as well as what is present, not suffering your self, for the present satisfying your Appetite, to be carried away with the Torrent of a Passion, that will unavoidably carry you into the Gulf of Misery. Man indeed is a noble Crea∣ture, and for his sake Woman was made, and therefore ought to be complacient; but being left at liberty to chuse where she thinks fit for her advantage, it is more than com∣mon prudence to make such a choice to her humour. The former of which may, but the latter cannot be quickly discovered: But, above all, let not a Young Gentlewoman for Interest, or by over-perswasion, give her self to one she cannot affect, lest she dearly repent at leasure what is past redressing, there being nothing more grievous than a loathed bed, for that, most commonly, cancels all other Earthly felicities; nay, many times shakes the very foundation of Modesty,
and  struggles with Virtue, till it enters at one door, and drives it out at the other. And this is too often the Parents cruelty to their Daughters, who being past the youthfull pleasure of a Reciprocal Love, aim rather at their Greatness than their Happiness; though contrary to the opinion of Wise Themistocles, who, on the like occasion, preferred an honest Poor Man, before a Rich vitious Man; in these words, viz. That he had rather Marry his Daughter to a Man without Money, than to Money without a Man. And much to the same purpose was the Answer of the Magna∣nimous Portia, Daughter to Cato, upon her being demanded when she would Marry; said she, When I find one that seeks my Love more than my Riches; that is, one that she could meet with an equal Passion. As for your Behaviour in this case, it must be grave and modest, though not sowre or too much reserved, lest it be interpreted for Pride, or want of discretion. Blushes, upon sundry occasions, are very seemly; which, like moving Oratory, let your Lover know the little Flames of Love are playing about your Heart, and silently betray your Passion. A kind of pleasing Love there is, which, though it have taken possession of the Heart, is either through modesty, or fear of failing if it were proposed, desirous to be concealed; not but that if
these Obstacles were removed,  they would freely discover it. And this, Gentlewomen, is on your part, who love those that are ignorant of your Passion; yet did they know it, would be more transported than your selves. And this you strive to express by the silent Language of the Eyes, for Lovers Eyes will talk; nor is it always in their power to keep them from wandring. But in this, as in all the mystery of Love, move with deliberation, and let Caution be the scale of your Affection. Consider your happiness, or its contrary depends upon the cast; and that there are many consequent matters or circumstances that a discreet Wo∣man will not only discourse, but discuss, be∣fore she enter upon that Honourable, but ha∣zardous, state of Matrimony: And these chiefly are to be taken notice of, viz. Dis∣parity in Descent: Fortunes and Friends fre∣quently beget distraction in the mind: Dis∣proportionable years create dislike; and loathing obscurity of Descent, begets con∣tempt; and unequality of Fortune, discontent. These are the hazards to which unconsidering Lovers expose themselves; these the Rocks on which they shipwrack their Peace: And yet herein you ought to be contented, if once it is past redress. As you ought to be slow in entertaining Lovers, so be constant in retaining one that is worthy, that you may thereby gain a
greater esteem. Boast not of the multitude of your Suitors; nor be proud that you are admired above others of your rank and qua∣lity. Give not those you cannot fancy ground to believe you do or will love them; neither by rudeness, unseemly words or carriage, any affront, but decline, as much as with modesty and civility you may, their com∣pany; giving them as little opportunity as may be to find you alone; nor receive any thing from them by way of Presentation, lest, when they find they are rejected, they exclaim against you as mercenary, or one that gives way to Courtship for your advan∣tage. Be not covetous of Strangers acquain∣tance on this occasion; nor rely too much upon a Female-confident, lest the one prove troublesome, and the other pick-locks your Breast of those Secrets you are not desirous to publish. Whining and sneaking Preten∣ders are likewise to be avoided; as also such as strive with Tears and Imprecations to possess you with an opinion of their good meaning: But where Manly Beauty, bra∣very of Spirit, Moderation in Speech, and a greater readiness in performance, than in promising, are centered in one Person; who tempers his Actions with discretion, humility and sobriety, you ought to be complacient; and if such a one fall to your share, imagine your Lot
is cast in a fair Land; and till  you find such an one, let not your Affections loose, if you can possibly restrain 'em; shun Temptations; Avoid, above all things, Ease, Idleness, the Reading of Debauchery in Books, or too much pampering your self with lusci∣ous Fare; for these are Incitements to wan∣ton Love. Ease makes you Love, as that o'er-comes you Wills; Ease is the Food, and cause of all your Ills. Gentlewomen, Let me intreat you never to be so desirous of Marriage, as desirous to be Married well, for that is the center to which Discretion ought to tend; though some, more forward than wise, think, if they get a Husband, they have their Ends; though, by sad experience, they are too frequently con∣vinced of that mistake. And before you en∣ter into this Honourable Estate, lay aside all childish behaviour, wanton fancy, and what else is inconsistent with Gravity: and so being happily Married, you may promise your selves many days of pleasure and true felicity. And now, the better to encourage such as are cold and reserved, or at least have the subtilty to dissemble it with such coyness, as if Nature had benummed them, and rendered in a manner useless the faculties of Life; I shall proceed to say something of the Honourable State of Marriage, &c.
CHAP. X. A brief Discourse of the Honourable State of Matrimony or Marriage, &c. THat Marriage was ordained and ap∣pointed by God himself, is beyond all peradventure; who, in his Eternal Wisdom, thinking it not fit for Man to be alone, made him an Internus sensus, a second self, to be the sweet Co-partner of his pleasure, and Com∣panion in the easie labour that was first as∣signed: A Cabinet, in which he might re∣pose his in-most Secrets, and be delighted with the last best Blessing; nor could he be accounted intirely himself, before this Con∣junction, which made them still but one Flesh; the Wife by every virtuous or ho∣nest Husband, being to be termed as she was by our grand Parent, Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh. Nor was it less the care of the Almighty, for two Causes, to ordain so near a Union: First, for the increase of Po∣sterity; and secondly, to prevent Lawless Lust, by bounding and bridling the inordi∣nate Affections and wandring Desires. We find it in the Oeconomy of Zenophon, That Matrimonial Conjunction, even by the Appoint∣ment of Nature, is not only the pleasantest, but the profitablest kind of life.
Wherefore, seeing the Estate of Matrimo∣y is the most sure, safe and delightfull Sta∣on, altogether pleasing to the Almighty, it ught not to be declined. Our Blessed Sa∣iour highly commends it, and expressed is Approbation by working his first Mira∣cle at that of Canaan in Gallilee; and Saint Paul styles a Virtuous Woman the Crown and Ornament of her Husband; Commanding him o cherish her. And that this strict Union may have greater force upon eithers mind, he makes the most sacred Comparison ima∣ginable; affirming, That the Husband is the Head of the Wife, as Christ is the Head of the Church. In this case there is comfort in Adversity, as well as pleasure in Prosperity; by such a contexture of Souls, if I may so term it, an Elizium of Happiness is created; and, in some measure, Paradise restored. Where Virtuous Love unites, what can make a se∣paration? Not the Terrors of Death, nor Hell's black Legions, by temptation nor af∣frightment, can destroy it. Great indeed is the Blessing, and more than can well be ex∣pressed; in the World there is nothing more beautifull or comfortable; it is a sweet So∣ciety, full of Trust and unshaken Loyalty; A Fellowship, not of unruly and distempered Love, but of intire and indeared Affection▪ the one being as different from the other, a
heat from cold, dryness from moisture; a the inflamed disorder of a Feaver, to the tem¦perate and natural heat of a healthfull Body Wherefore I pronounce those that Marry to their content, and are united in the chas Indearments of Reciprocal Love to be truly happy; the Wife being the Joy of the Hus∣band, and the Husband the Consolation o the Wife, who takes care to protect her from Violence and Reproach on all occasi∣ons, and is as tender of her Fame, as his Life: And beside these, this happy State pro∣duces a happy Off-spring, the Pledges of chast connubial Love, not only as a present Blessing, but a comfort and support in old Age. So that whatever by loose and lasci∣vious persons, whose Debauches have cor∣rupted them beyond recovery, may be said of Marriage, it was and is held, both by Christians and Heathens, the consummation of Earthly felicity. From which I shall proceed to the Relation of what is requi∣site to be observed by a Virtuous Wife towards her Husband, &c.
CHAP. XI. Instructions for a Young Gentlewoman, when Married, how to carry and be∣have her self towards her Husband, &c. as becomes a Virtuous Wife; or Fa∣mily-Directions in order to a Happy Life, &c. AS Marriage is an Honourable Estate, so are there many weighty things to be observed by those that enter upon it; though Love is the supreme matter, yet it ought to be attended with Prudence, Care, and Diligence, or else it will waste it self, and totter in its Sphere; and, above all things, repine not at your lot when it is fallen to your share, but weigh your condi∣tion in the scale of Content and Discretion, and it will be the better supported. If your Husband be very young, and gi∣ven to Excursions incident to youthfull frail∣ty, let your riper experience bring him to a better understanding, and your usage more easie, than to attempt by extremities to wean him from what he affects; but rather let your good Example, modest Reprovements, and the course of Time work upon his head-strong Nature; and
either through shame, or a re∣form  of Judgment, he will be brought to be himself; for doubtless Conjugal duty, tem∣pered with softness and affability, is of force to conquer the Morosest temper. If your Husband be much superiour to you in Years, so that he is not as comply∣able able as Youth, yet let his Years beget in you a greater Reverence and Respect; and let his sage Instructions be your Rule, and the square of your Actions; keeping in all things his Counsel, and not suffer so much as an un∣chast Thought to defile his Bed; Locking up his Counsels in your Breast as a sacred Cabi∣net of Trust, and bear with his infirmities, being in his Age a Staff to support him, and a Hand of help upon all lawfull occasions. If your Husband is Exalted in the World by Riches or Honour, let not your Mind be puffed up, nor Pride come near your Heart, but be affable, humble, courteous and charitable, which will gain you a Name not to be purchased with Treasure; and wink not at your Husband's over-lavish profuse∣ness; nor at his over-penurious or covetous inclination, but mildly admonish him of the ill conveniency and danger of either, that so he may be perswaded to reserve a provi∣dent Care for his own, and avoid Excess; and, on the other hand, enjoy what is fitting, and shun baseness.
Though after Marriage you find your self  ot so happy in the things of this World, as Riches and Honour, &c. as you expected; but that, on the contrary, you are griped with the pinching hand of Poverty, let the poor condition of your Husband add to your Virtue, in furnishing you with Patience and Meekness; for there is not that dange∣rous want, some imagine, where there wants no content: and in this, by any means, cross the unadvised Proverb, of Loves going out at ne Door, when Poverty comes in at the other: And so consequently falling into a cold and Aguish distemper, dies unlamented. And let your Affection contemporize in all Afflic∣tion; nor be shaken with the Winds of Ad∣versity, seeing no improsperous Affair ought to divide you from him to whom you have vowed your Faith, and unto whom you have individually tied your self. These things resolved, and well expostu∣lated, your Christian constancy will make you fortunate in spite of opposition; nor will the bitter encounter of unseasonable or undue Repentance struggle with your Mind, or ever prevail against your Reason. In this case the Example of some Women have been famous. Sulpitia, the Wife of Lentulus, though she might have lived at ease, sold all her Pos∣sessions; sold all she had, and followed her Husband into Banishment; nor could any
thing restrain the Noble Ipsicrates from ac¦companying her vanquished Husband in al extremities. Theogina, Wife to Agathocles, voluntarily partaking of her Husband's miseries, and ac¦companying him when he was forsaken of al others, generously declared, That she had no only betaken her self to be his Companion in Prospe¦rity, but in all Fortunes which possibly might be¦fall him. Many more I might name, but these may suffice to a Virtuous mind. The more particular Duties of a Wife, or rather Obligations of Love to him, to whom sacred Tyes have bound her, are chiefly these viz. To esteem him above all others, not to entertain any mean or low thoughts o him or his Actions, but in all things to give him a due respect; and in due observance of what is lawfull, strive to increase his repute amongst Men, rather than in the least to di∣minish it, that in so doing you may own him the superiour Virtue, and not by your indis∣cretion betray his weakness, or rather your own; for so have the wise and virtuous Wo∣men of all Ages done; and those that do o∣therwise, are highly to be censured of impru∣dence. Be peaceable and pleasant towards your Husband, not being angry when he is at any time so, but pacifie him with winning and obliging
words; and if you should carelesly, r otherwise, raise him to a Passion, be not ong e'er you apply your self to appease it, by shewing a regret, or kind relenting, for what has occasioned it, or by sound reason et him understand his error; and prepare for him what is necessary in due order, with all maginable neatness and advantage; shew∣ng, above all things, respect to his Friends and Relations, whether abroad or at home, which must of necessity create in him a grea∣er portion of Love and Respect for your self. Suffer, by no means, your Ears to be pene∣rated with idle and detracting Stories of him n whom you ought to delight, but banish and detest against such Makebates, whom the power of Darkness sets on work, to over∣throw your Peace, or to move you to a sepe∣ration, which is not lawfull; for those whom God hath joyned together, let no Man put asun∣der. Nor is it less expected, that a Curse will fall on those that attempt it. As for your Children, bring them up in the fear of God, and in duty and obedience to your selves, that it may be well for them and their posterity, for those are the indear∣ing pledges of Connubial Love, that more nearly cement the hearts of Man and Wife, and are the summ of their Earthly felicity. Observe, that what your Husband commits to your Management, let it be done cheer∣fully, carefully, and with prudence, to the
best advantage, and that nothing be waste and spoiled to his detriment by your self o Servants; but so live, that the springs o Love, if not of Prosperity, may ever flo to water your Hearts with joy, and rende Life comfortable; and you thereby be th better inabled to serve your Maker, and su¦port your selves in what condition soever. CHAP. XII. Instructions for a Gentlewoman Married how she ought to carry her self toward her Servants, and in the ordering her Houshold Affairs, &c. AS a Gentlewomans care, next to tha of her Husband and Children, ough to be in the Well-government of her dome¦stick Affairs, that cannot consequently be done without a due regard in her proper Per¦son, the ill conveniency of too much confi¦dence in second Management, being too fre¦quently apparent: And this must be done, besides what you set your helping-hand to, by inspecting the Actions of your Servants, and by behaving your self towards them as you ought, that your good Example may be their Guide.
If you find by experience you have a Ser∣ant faithfull and ingenious in her Station, ve her encouragement, by letting her know ou are not unsensible of her industry; by which, if she be of a sweet disposition, you ill animate her to proceed with alacrity; ough some there are, that finding them∣lves well accepted, will grow proud and onceited, and imagine they by their Service y such obligations on those they serve, that ey cannot conveniently be without them. nd in this case too much familiarity will be∣et contempt, though encouragement, where is deserved, even on this occasion, ought ot altogether to be wanting, but be pro∣ortioned to a degree of advantage; not by ny means dis-heartning a good Servant in he performance of her duty, by often find∣g fault, or being continually over them, ut rather bear with light faults, if they be ot a means to create greater. If it be your misfortune to have a bad Ser∣ant, whose negligence turns to your displea∣ure or disadvantage, and no gentle Admo∣itions and convincing Arguments are of orce to reform her: Fret not your self, nor e heard unseemly to exclaim, but rather let er upon fair warning, and such as will stand with your conveniency, take her lot in ano∣her place, not disparaging your self to retain rom
her what is her due, nor giving an ill  character of her when she is gone; by whic she being rejected as an unfit Servant, may through necessity, be obliged to take evi courses, and thereby be brought to sham and disgrace. In this case, and any other, avoid Passion and be not Rixarius, for either of these ill be¦come a Gentlewoman; your main busine with your Servants being to see they do wha is fitting, and that they lavish not out, no waste that wherewith you intrust them; fo this being neglected, the fault will be charge upon your self. It is an unbecoming thing in Servants t be affected with flaunting Fashions, and gau¦dy Attire, above their degree, and indeed no sutable to their station; and to restrain thi a Mistriss ought to concern her self, yet eve allowing and encouraging them to go nea which will redound to both their credits; fo a Maid that goes careless and slutternly i her Attire, cannot be cleanly in her Office of imployment; nor must a Mistriss by an means confine or restrain her Servants from serving God, but rather dispence with busine to give them opportunity; nay, Exhort the to return Tribute of Praise and Thanksgivin to their Maker for all the benefit they hav received at his hands; and see that goo hours be kept upon all occasions.
Other things necessary to be observed an hat your Cattel and Poultry are fed in due eason; and that your Stables, and all other ut-places, be kept cleanly, especially your rew-house and Bake-house; and that nothing herein be wasted or squandered away by the esort of idle people, that too frequently flat∣er and wheedle your Servants to your disad∣vantage. In the Kitchen it is requisite that you see no Necessaries are wanting, nor the seasoning of Meats, and other things, in due time neglected, lest by that defect you hap∣pen to be disgraced at your own Table. And arther, that the Cloth be laid in due season, whereby there may be no excuse for those that spoil what is provided by over-doing. The Chamber, above all things, must be kept neat, and the Furniture regarded, that  be not injured by Dampness, Dust or Moths; considering, as occasion requires, to Air them oth by the Fire within, and the Sun with∣out, and cleanse them from Dust by beating. The Cellar and Pantry too must be regar∣ed, that in Frolicks and extravagant Mer∣ments great spoil and waste be not made by ervants and their Visitants; and weekly or monthly take an exact account of what is ex∣pended, that so your Expences may be pro∣portioned to your Estate or Income; and in all things carry your self prudently, as be∣comes the Character of a Gentlewoman and a good Housewife. FINIS.
