T1071 E1068_1 99869124 170619
Sergeant THORPE Judge OF ASSIZE for the NORTHERN CIRCVIT, His CHARGE, As it was delivered to the Grand-Jury at York Assizes the twentieth of March, 1648. and taken in Shortwriting. Clearly epitomizing the Statutes belonging to this Nation, which concerns (and, as a golden rule, ought to regulate) the severall estates and conditions of men. And (being duely observed) do really promote the Peace and Plenty of this Commonwealth. Printed at York by Tho: Broad, 1649.
Serjeant Thorp, Judge of the Assise for the Northern Circuit, his Charge, as it was delivered at York Assises 20 March, 1648. and taken in Short-Hand. GEntlemen, Friends, and Countreymen, I do not question but that the Stile, and Title of our Commissions under which we are now to act and execute the Authoritie and Power committed to our hands, being changed from Carolus Rex Angliae, to Custodes Libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti, works divers effects upon the Tempers and spirits of men, according as the spi∣rits themselves are tempered and affected; and that some of those spirits (like the Sunne upon Wax) it softens into Obedience and compliance, and others of them again (like the same Sun upon Clay) it hardens into stiffnesse and oppression. Proud, Ambitious, and Malignant spirits finding themselves frustra∣ted and defeated hereby of their designed Hopes and hope∣full Designes, for obtaining their desired Ends; and being filled with prejudice to others, and self-love to their own opini∣ons, and therefore having turned themselves aside from the use of their own Reason, and from all Overtures and Arguments of sa∣tisfaction, and having given up their understanding to blinde Affections,— it startles and confounds with Passions and Amaze∣ments, heightned into choller and disdaine; Because looking thorow the false Glasse of their own self-Interest, they finde no∣thing therein but imaginary shakings of Foundations, overturn∣ing of Laws, and confused heaps of Ruines & Distractions. But to these, if any such be present, (especially if they have been for∣merly ingaged in open Warre against the publike Interest of the Nation, and so are cast by Gods justice for their Transgressions into a mean and low condition) All I shall say (with the poor comfort of calamity, Pitie) is this, That if they have not alrea∣dy tasted enough of the Cup of Gods wrath for their misdoings, let them take heed they ingage not again, for fear that hereafter they be inforced to drink the Dreggs of his displeasure. Other silly spirits there are, who standing unbottomed upon any solid Principles of their owne, finde themselves tossed to and fro with the Winde which blows from others mouthes; one while, liste∣ning to the Prophet who bids them go up to Ramoth-Gilead and
prosper; and by and by again yeelding to him that bidds them not go up for fear of perishing, and so they are carryed into crosse and oblique opinions and actions, tending to, and endange∣ring their utter Ruine and Destruction. And to these men, all I shall say, and advise, is this, That they will forthwith repair to the School of Reason, and suffer themselves to be guided and led by impartiall and wholesome Lessons and Instructions, to a better Information of their judgements, whereby they may be settled upon undenyable grounds in the knowledge of themselves and the truth, and of their own Right, Interest, and Concernment. But another sort of men there are, who are willing to let their eyes stand in the place where Nature set them, and to make use of that Reason and judgement which God hath given them, and with erected mindes, to apprehend the sense of their own future happinesse, and to hearken to the voyce which calls them to the flourishing actions of a reformed Commonwealth, and therefore do entertain this Change with sutable Opinions and Comply∣ance from these grounds which they thus propound and argue with themselves. 1. That all Power and Authority is Originally and Prima∣rily in God, and comes from God; and this they rest upon as being a Scripture truth. 2. That God, out of his Wisdome and Providence, hath dis∣pensed and transmitted so much of this Authority and Power to men, as is necessary for their use. First, as in relation to the Infe∣riour Creatures, to Rule and Governe them as Lord and King. And as in relation to one another from a Principle of Nature, [Conservatio sui-ipsius] To seek and endeavour their own preser∣vation and security, which Principle draws them to this Conclusi∣on [Salus populi suprema Lex,] The safety of the people is the supreme Law both of Nature and Nations. And from this Na∣turall Principle, and supreme Law of Nature, however all men in their Originall Creation are all of one and the same Sub∣stance, Mould, and Stamp, yet for preservations sake, they finde a fitnesse in Subordinations and Degrees among them, for the better ordering of their Affairs; and so they appoint Rulers, and authorize Governours over them, as Trustees for themselves. They also elect Government, create Rules, Orders, and Laws, by which they will have their Rulers and Governours to guide and Steer their Actions in the course of their Government, to which they will conform their obedience: and this Truth is ascertained from hence, That there were People before there were either
Rulers or Governours of People, and that therefore these Ru∣lers and Governours were but made by the People, and for the people, with this Reserve, That whensoever the people should perceive that their Trustees & Governours did turn potestatem in∣to potentim, the Power and Authoritie of Government, by Rule and Law formerly agreed upon, and consented unto by the peo∣ple, into an Armed Force; and that they did alter the Peoples Rempublicam into the Governours Rem privatam, and that their Government ceasing to be free, was made to hang over the peo∣ples heads as a Lordly Scourge to their destruction; Then, and from, thenceforth, and that with good comlinesse of reason, the people betake themselves to thoughts of Reformation; and find∣ing cause to dislike their former choice, being not tyed by any Scripture to any one Forme of Government, they choose againe and take some other Form, differing from that before, whereby they will avoid the evils they suffered under their former choice, and enjoy the good of a more beneficiall preservation; for, like Marriners and men in a Ship at Sea, they will no longer trust an unskilfull or perfidious Stearsman, lest they should be found guilty of their own ensuing Shipwrack and destruction. This brings me to the next Assertion and Position, which I own as a most certain Truth and my greatest earthly assurance, That the People [under God] is the Originall of all just Pow∣er, and that let the Government runne out into what Forme it will, Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy, yet still the Originall Fountain thereof is from the Consent and Agreement of the Peo∣ple. From this Assertion and Position I am led on further, by plain reason to understand, That Rulers and Governours are accoun∣table to the People for their mis-government; namely, when they transgresse the Rules and Lawes by which the people did agree they would be governed. But let me not be mistaken, for when I say Accountable to the People, I doe not mean to the hu∣mours and fancies of particular men in their single & naturall ca∣pacities, but to the people in their Politique Constitution, law∣fully assembled by their Representative. Touching the Government of this Nation, it hath anciently been Monarchicall in the frame and constitution of it, but yet it never was a pure Monarchie, for a pure Monarchie is a clear Ty∣ranny; but it was a Politicall Monarchie, or Monarchy govern∣ed by Lawes, taking in thereto all the goods, and avoiding all the ills both of Aristocracy and Democracie; and so I may truly say, that look upon the Frame and constitution of it alone, and as it
were, upon the Theoreticall and contemplative part of it; and supposing it possible that the Practise would answer the Theo∣rie, no man can deny, but that it was a Frame of most ex∣cellent Order and Beautie; For, first, it had a King the chiefest Officer, one single Person; and therefore avoiding the proud Fa∣ctions and contentions usually happening in Aristocracy, as like∣wise the disordered confusions common in single Democracy; but yet a King bounded and compassed with Lawes above him, be∣ing the Rules already made and given him to Rule by; and with a necessitie of concurrence and complyance with Lords and Com∣mons below him, for future Legislative Power and Authority, and so avoiding the danger of Tyrannie usually incident to Monar∣chies, which commonly makes the Monarchs Will the Law, and so establishing the Government upon this Foundation, Voluntas Imperatoris Lex esto. But [alas] when I have shewed you the Frame and Constitu∣tion of the late Government, I have shewed you all the Beauty of it; for when you come to examine the practical part, you shall find nothing lesse then excellency or perfection in it. Look into your own Stories, and you shall alwayes finde the King and great Lords (Comites suos, as they were called) incroaching upon the peoples Liberties & Rights, incroaching to themselves superlative Prero∣gatives, and Dominion over them: On the other side you shall finde again the People struggling to preserve themselves and their own Interest, labouring still to avoid the miseries and to free themselves from the mischiefs of their sufferings. The Times and Transactions before the Norman William got the Crown, and which past among the Brittains, Romans, Danes, and Saxons, being dark and obscure, I passe by, and therefore I shall onely speak something of the times and transactions since. First, the Tyrannicall Domination of that first William and his sonne the second William, gave the People to see their ensuing miseries; for though they made choice of the second William, who was but a second sonne, and rejected Robert his Elder Brother, yet they soon found their kindnesse was suddenly forgotten, when once the Crown was obtained, and therefore they refused when he was dead to chuse again, till by ingagements, Oathes, and Royall Promises of better Government, they were cheated into a second Election of Henry the first, who was a younger bro∣ther likewise. But it was not long after ere Monarchie plaid Rex, and Pleasure and Will Ruled, the whole Kingdom almost was turned into Forrests; the Lawes which the people were brought
to live under, and obey, were the cruell and insupportable Laws of the Forrest, which were made rather to preserve the Beasts, then the People within the bounds of Forrests. Then the people finding no other remedy, betook themselves to thoughts of Re∣formation, as I told you at the first. And in the time of King Stephen, at Renymeed, they demanded restitution of St. Edwards Laws, for so they call'd that Saxon Edward, who was dead many years before, without any Heir or Successor of that kinde, (for we never read of any St. King since him:) And by those Lawes they say they will be governed, and to those Laws they will con∣forme. Hereupon a new Compact is made, the Articles of Re∣nymeed, containing most of St. Edwards Lawes, are confirmed and established, by consent in Parliament, & so the people are for that time satisfyed, and think themselves very safe (as they well might think so) under the security of an Act of Parliament. But yet this Act proved no security, for in a short time after all was let loose again, and the same mischiefs and oppressions upon the peo∣ple were still continued, as before, and many more additions made thereto, to the utter inslaving of the English Nation. Hereupon the people stand up once more for their Liberties and Native Rights in the ancient Lawes of the Land, and de∣mand the second time to have them confirmed, and to be kept from violation; and so in the ninth year of King Henry the third was the great Charter of the Liberties of England [being but a Declaration of the ancient Common Lawes of the Land, and little differing from the Articles of Renymeed, together with the Char∣ter of the Forrest,] framed and consented unto in full Par∣liament, and are the first Acts of Parliament now extant in Print. And so the people sat down again under the protection of this second Securitie; but how weak a Security it prov'd, let the pra∣ctise of the next King, and all succeeding Kings tell you, though it hath been confirmed and allowed by themselves two and thirty times; for in the two next Kings times you shall finde the good∣men of the Land discountenanc'd, and vain, loose, and wanton persons to be the men in highest esteem; nay, Murderers and Robbers and the like, cherisht and maintain'd; and if brought to publike justice, and condemned for their misdoings, yet pardo∣ned again, and set at Liberty, and though [by the Fundamen∣tall Law] Parliaments [the usuall Salve for the peoples Soars] were to bee called and held twice a year, yet were they laid aside, and rarely made use of; and then when they were called, it was but to serve the Kings turn for granting Subsidies, or the
like And this when the people perceived, in the time of King Edward the second, they thought fit to question his mis-govern∣ment by Articles of Impeachment in Parliament against him, and then to depose him from his Kingly Office, and to make his Son (during his Fathers life-time) Warden of the Kingdome, and shortly after they made him King (while his father lived) by the name of Edward the third. And now are Acts of Parliament made against the former mischiefs: first, against the Kings granting Pardons to Robbers and Murderers; and four Acts of Parliament are made in the neck of one another,6. E. 1. 9. 2. E. 3. 2. 4. E. 3. 13. 10. E. 3. 2. 14. E. 3. 13. and pursuing one another before telling the King plainly, that he may not, hee must not grant Pardons, but where he may do it by his Oath, namely, in case of Homicide, by misfortune, and Homicide in his owne defence. Secondly, for more frequent holding of Parliaments, namely, That they should be held once a year, and oftner if need be. But little effect did these produce, for the mischiefs have continued, and the people have still suffered (by the breach of those Laws, even untill these very times) the very same mis∣chiefs as before. In the time of King Richard the second, the disorders of the Court, and Oppressions upon the people from thence were so great and unsupportable, that the people Articled against that King, and likewise deposed him; and so they afterward did in like manner Depose King Henry the sixt, & K. Edward the fourth by consent in Parliament. Thus you see how the exercise of Kingly Office within this Nation hath been made use on to the damage of the people, and how the people again have put in ure their Authoritie over their Kings, to call them to an account for their mis-governments. Touching the last King much hath been said, and too much hath been felt by this Countie, in relation to the last Warre. But (pardon me if I tell you so) it was a just punishment of God upon us of this Countie; for, I may truly say, the Warre had its Rise and Beginning here, here in this Countie, nay, here in this Court, for this was the first place in Eng∣land where any Grand-Juries of the Countie charged them∣selves and their Countrey men with any Taxe to raise a Warre against the Publike Interest of the people, as they did here when at Summer Assizes in the year 1642. they charged the Countie with a Tax of 8600 pounds, to maintain 1000 Dragoons upon pretence to keep the Country in Peace. But, alas, the Dragoons were no sooner raised, but they were made use on for another
Service, namely, to attend the Kings Standard at Nottingham, and from thence were carryed to fight at Edgehill against the Parlia∣ments Forces, for better keeping the Peace in Yorkshire. And though it be true, that this Tax of 8600 pounds was never levy∣ed, yet our own great Lords and Gentlemen made it the Founda∣tion and Rise of another Tax of thirty thousand pounds, which they laid and levyed upon the Countie in October after, for bring∣ing in the Earl of Newcastle and his Forces. But (as I said before) Gods punishment is just upon us, for as the Warre began here, so it hath ever since continued among us, even at this day, when all the rest of the Kingdome is in Peace and quietnesse, onely we are now upon Sieging, at our owne Charge, of you cursed Castle at Pontefract, which began at first, and continues to be the last of all our Enemies Holds and Garrisons within this Nation. But to return to the point of the Kings Incroachments upon the Peoples Liberties, and therein I will clearly tell you my own thoughts in one particular, and instance in that one, (but it is to my Apprehension, Ʋnum magnum, and instar omnium) it is as the Lyon said of her Whelp when the Fox upbraided her, That she was not so fruitfull in procreation as the Fox, but brought forth onely one Lyon at once, ('tis true, saith the Lyon) but that one is a Lyon: And so I may say by the Kings Negative Voyce in Parliament, for admit but this one peece of Preroga∣tive to be just, and consonant to the Constitution of the Govern∣ment, and I dare affirm, that the English Nation were in a pos∣sibility (by that Constitution of Government) to be as arrant Slaves and Vassals, as were in Turkie, or among the Moors in the Gallies: For let the King put what Oppression he will upon the People, let their grievances and burthens be never so great, and let him [at the peoples Desires] call Parliaments for redresse thereof never so often, and let never so good Bills be prepared and pre∣sented to him, for Reformation, yet still he shall put them off with this Royall Complement, Le Roy Sadvisera, signifying (quoad the Practise) in plain English, I will not help you, nor release the unjust Burthens and Oppressions I have laid upon you. But add to this that other Incroachment of the Lords Negative Voyce upon the people, which they also have with much Lordli∣nesse practised in answer to the Commons Bills, though of highest concernment for their Weale, (however they expresse that Nega∣tive in Court Language and good words, We will send an answer by Messengers of our owne; as if the people should expect they
meant to return some concurrence with them, when [God knows] nothing is lesse thought upon, or meant by them.) And now let the people see their own condition, now let them consider how they have been abused by good words and phrases, which if they had clearly & universally understood the meaning of; or if these Negatives had been clearly exprest, in down-right language, [We will not help you, or, We will not ease you of your Burthens or Oppressions that lie so heavy upon you,] truely then I presume the people would long since have been stirr'd up to help themselves, and to have endeavoured as well to take away the mischief, as to avoid the miserie of such a Government. For mine own part I speak it freely from my heart, That as I am a Free∣man both by Birth an Education, and am Inheritable to the Laws and Free-Customes of England; so I do naturally desire the security of Government, and I do willingly submit to the justice of known Lawes: But I have ever adhorred all Arbitrary Pow∣ers, or to be subject to the Wils or Passions of men; & therefore I have alwayes thought (since I could think any thing upō grounds of Judgement or Reason) That so long as these two fore-mentio∣ned Negatives remained upon the people, there could be no secu∣rity or freedome in their Government; and there was no one thing that hath so firmly fixt me in the way I have gone, where∣in I now am, and to oppose the other, as the mischiefs I under∣stood to bee in the two Negative Voyces of the King and the Lords. Adding to these two fundamentall Court-Errours, and destructive Positions, maintain'd and held forth to the people by flattering Royalists, and proud and ambitious Prelates and Cour∣tiers, viz. First, That the King had an Originall right to Rule; And secondly, That the King was accountable to none but GOD for his misgovernment: Lay but these two together with the Nega∣tive Voyce, and let any man judge what they may and must ne∣cessarily produce in point of Tyrannie and Oppression over the people. Thus have I shewed you the true Originall of all Power and Authority, and from whence it is that the Exercise of Authority and Power is practised among men, over one another; I have shewed you also the justice which lies in this, That Kings, Rulers, and Governours [and particularly the King of this Nation] should be accountable to the People for their misgovernments; and how de∣structive a Tenent it is to say, That a King hath right to Rule over men upon Earth, and that yet GOD hath not given a Power to earth∣ly men to call him to account for misgovernment; unlesse you will
suppose that Kings at first did fall from Heaven, and were sent down from above to exercise their wils, and act their lusts below. Having said thus much upon this subject onely to give a hint, from whence you may observe (till the Parliaments own Decla∣ration be publisht, which I hope will fully and clearly set them out) what the Grounds and Reasons were that the Parliament hath found the Kingly Office within this Nation to be uselesse, and dangerous, and why therefore they will no more trust the Crown upon the Head of any one Person, nor transferre the cu∣stodie of the Liberties of England and Englishmen into the Pow∣er of another, who may abuse them; and therefore why likewise they resolve to keep the Crown within its proper place the Ca∣binet of the Law, and to allow the Law onely to King it among the people, and that the people themselves [by their Represen∣tatives] shall be the onely Keepers of their own Liberties, by Authoritie derived from their own Supreme and Soveraign pow∣er; which brings me now to the stile of our Commissions, Custo∣des libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti. And touching the King of England his right to Rule, or Title of Law by Inheritance and Descent to the Crown of England, thus much may be safely and truely said, That if it be an Ancient and Originall Inheritance fixt in one Family, it was gain'd at first by the power of the sword, and by Conquest, which Title in Law is but a disseisin and an unlawfull Title, and therefore may bee again as justly regained, as it was gained at first by Force, and by the stronger Arm and sharper Sword; And as it was so gain'd at first, so it hath been ever since either by the like pure force, or else by consent in Parliament upon particular cases kept and maintained; and so you will finde if you look how every King since the Norman William (call'd the Conquerour) came to the Crown; For of all those four and twenty Kings and Queenes which have since that time Kingd it among us, there are but seven of them who could pretend Legally to succeed their former Pre∣decessors, either by Lyneall, or Collaterall Title. I have not lea∣sure to repeat the particulars, and this I have said may serve to give you occasion (if you be so minded) to look further into it, and to satisfie your judgements herein, and by consequence to keep you from ingaging against your selves and the Nation, for a Name, or for a Thing which is not truth. Now I come to that which is our true businesse, our work of the first magnitude, Opus diei in die suo, the Articles of your Charge which I intend [for the better helping of your memories]
to deliver to you in writing, with the Laws and the punishments, and briefly to runne over the rehearsall of the Facts onely, with∣out further mention concerning them; yet with such necessary Expositions and Explanations of particulars as shall be needfull in my passage through them; adding onely this for an Animad∣version to you, That you and I are trusted at this time with the administration of Justice in our own Countrey, amidst all the Temptations which our severall Relations of Friends, Kindred, or Acquaintance can Offer unto us; which shews, that they who do so trust us, have great assurance and confidence in us; and then we must conclude, that this confidence puts a greater obligation upon us to fidelitie and integritie in the discharge and performance of that Trust committed to us; adde to this that [Vinculum animae] the Bond of the Soule the Obligation of an Oath, and I doubt not but it will be found, that though Love, Fear, and particular Interest be the usuall Cords which halter Justice, that yet at this time they will be found to be among us but sorry and unmasculine pieces of Rhetorick, either to af∣fright us from, or soften us in our duties. The matter of your Charge will be to inquire into, and finde out the severall Offences which have been committed and done against the Politique Body of the Commonwealth, as so ma∣ny severall Diseases and infirmities in the severall parts of the na∣turall Body of a man, which distemper and endanger the health of the whole, and they are of four sorts. First, such as are against the Peace of the Commonwealth, or whereby Publike Peace is disturbed, and those I call Diseases in∣dangering the heart of this Politique Bodie. Secondly, such as are against the Justice of the Common∣wealth, or whereby publique justice is perverted, and those I call Diseases indangering the Head of this politique Body. Thirdly, such as are against the plenty of the Commonwealth, or whereby publike plenty is diminished, and those I call Disea∣ses against the stomack of this politique Body. Fourthly, such as are against the beauty and good Complexi∣on of the Commonwealth, or whereby this beautie and good Complexion is discoloured and defaced, contained under the Name of Common Nusances, and those I call Diseases against the Senses, the Leggs and the Feet of this politique Body. Touching those against Peace, they are of five sorts. 1. Treasons, which againe are either High-Treason or Petty-Treason.
2. Felonies, which again are done either against the Person, or Possession of another. 3. Premunire. 4. Misprisions. 5. Trespasses. High-Treasons are these. 1. If any levy Warre against the supreme Authority of the Nation, or adhere to the enemies thereof. And when I do so expresse it, Supreme Authority, I give you the meaning of the Stat. 25. E. 3. 2. which mentions it thus, If any levie warre against the King, or adhere to the Kings enemies within the Realm; for the name and word King [quatenus the chiefe Officer betrusted with the Government in the Administration of that Government] is fre∣quently used to set forth the publique Interest of the People, so we call it The Kings Peace, The Kings Coyne, The Kings High-way, and the like, all which in truth are the publike concernments of the people, being for their publike use and benefit, and are there∣fore exprest and exhibited unto us under the notion of the Kings Name, because he is their publike Officer, and trusted for them; so that to levie warre against the King, or to adhere to the Kings enemies, is to levie war against the Kingdom, & the Government of it, and the Supreme Power & Authority of it; or, which is more plain in the expression, to levie war without lawfull Warrant and Authority so to do; & yet this I beleeve was that which hath mis∣led (& perhaps may still mislead) many of our Country men, That because they had the Person of the King with them, [betwixt whom and whom there were mutuall and reciprocall deceivings] and they [never remembring that when in Person hee deserted the Parliament, he left the King and Kingly Authority behinde, him, because he left the Kingly Office, and the Power thereof, and publike Government behinde him) they catcht at the shadow, but let go the substance, and so under colour of fighting for the King, they fought against him. Yet because omnis non capit hoc, every man did not understand this distinction betwixt the poli∣tique and naturall body of the King, therefore see how merci∣fully and favourably the Parliament hath dealt with these men, that they have not prest the rigour of Law upon the Offenders of this kinde, whose Offences being High-Treason by the funda∣mentall justice of this Nation, and so their Lives, whole Estates, Lands and Goods being forfeited to the Law for the same, yet this forfeiture hath not beene exacted upon them; but, in hope they will at last see their Errours, and repent for their misdoings, the Parliament hath been pleased to carry a more tender hand,
and by way of commutation to passe over their Offences with the punishment of a small fine for such misdoings, yet with this silent admonition, like that to the woman in the Gospell, Go thy way and sinne no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee. 2. If any counterfeit the Great Seal, Privie Seal, or Privie-Signet. 3. If any counterfeit the Coyn of the Nation, or otherwise Clipp or diminish it. 4. If any kill a Judge of Justice or Oyer and Terminer in his Place doing his Office. 5. If any Jesuite or Seminary Priest, born in England, and Or∣dained and Professed beyond-Sea, by Authority derived from the Sea of Rome, do come into, or abide within this Realm. 6. If any the second time extoll, defend, or maintain within this Realm the usurped Jurisdiction or Authority of the Pope, or any other Forraign Prince. 7. If any bring over and put in ure, or receive from beyond-Sea any Bull or Instrument of Absolution, or Reconciliation, to Absolve the people of this Nation from their Allegiance here to the Sea of Rome, or indeavour the second time to withdraw the People to the obedience of the Sea of Rome, or if any be Absolved, Reconciled or withdrawn. And here you must understand, that in Treasons all Actors and Consenters are Principalls, and there are no Accessaries at all in Treason. Pettie-Treasons are these. If a servant kill his or her Master or Mistris. If a Wife kill her Husband. Premunire. Touching Premunire, it is properly a Writt or Processe of Sum∣mons awarded against such as brought in Bulls, or Citations from the Court of Rome to obtain Ecclesiasticall Benefices, by way of Provision before they fell void; for of old time divers Acts of Parliament were made, viz. in the times of K. Edward the third, K. R. 2. and K. H. 4. against the Popes exercise of Jurisdiction within this Nation, and against those subjects that did appeale from the Courts of Justice here to the Court of Rome, and who obtain'd Provisions there to have Abbeys, and Priories, or Bene∣fices with Cure here, which proceedings tended (say those Sta∣tutes) to the destruction of the Realm, and of Religion; There∣fore these being held to be great Offences, and so tending to the
disherison of the Rights belonging to the Crown and people of England, and to the destruction of the common Law, are made to be grievously punishable, viz. To be imprisoned during life, To forfeit Lands and Goods, and to be put out of the protection of the Law. Afterward other later Laws were made in the time of Queen Elizabeth against other Offences of like nature, wherewith you have now to do, namely, If any send over or contribute money or relief for maintenance of any Iesuite, or Seminary Priest, or Colledge beyond-Sea. If any extoll defend or maintain the jurisdiction or authority of the Pope, (or of any other forraign Prince) within this Nation. If any bring over any Agnus Dei, Crosses, Pictures, or Beads, Hallow'd (as they call it) at Rome, to disperse among the Peo∣ple, or if any person receive any such, or know of this Offence, and conceal it three dayes. If any do Aid or Assist those who put in ure any Popes Bulls, or Instruments of Absolution brought from Rome. Misprision of Treason are these. If any know another to be guiltie of High-Treason, and doe conceal it. If any Forge or Counterfeit Forreign Coyn, not currant here. If any utter Counterfeit Coyn, knowing it to be such. If any strike, or draw a Sword to strike a Justice sitting in place of judgement. Fellonies against the person of another are those. If any commit Homicide, viz. kill or slay another. If out of precedent malice, exprest or implyed, it is murther. If upon a sudden falling out, it is man-slaughter. If in doing a lawfull Action, it is called Chance-Medley, misad∣venture or misfortune. If in his own defence, it is so stiled, Homicide se defendendum; and so also Poisoning, Stabbing, and Witching to death are Homicides. If any commit Rape, viz. have the carnall knowledge of a wo∣man against her Will, or with her Will, if shee bee under ten years old If any take away, or consent, or assist to take away any Maid, Widdow, or Wife against her Will, she being then interested in Lands or Goods.
If any marry a second Husband, or Wife, the first being alive. If any commit Buggery, or Sodomy, a crime Inter Christianos non nominandum, sayes the Indictment. If any Gipsey or counterfeit Egyptian have continued a moneth within this Nation. If any person appointed by Law to abjure, refuse it, or returne after abjuration. If any do wilfully and maliciously cut out the Tongue, or put out the eyes of another. If any receive, or relieve, or maintain any Jesuite or other Semi∣nary Priest, knowing him to be such. If any incorrigible Rogue, judged dangerous, and banished, re∣turn again: If any dangerous Rogue, branded in the Shoulder, returne again to a Roguish life. If any person infected with the Plague wilfully go abroad, and converse among company. Felonies against the Possession are these. If any break a Dwelling-House in the night, with intent to do any Felonious Act there. If any robb another by the high way, or take any thing pri∣vately from his person. If any take the Goods of another in his absence, with intent to steal them. If any servant go away with his Masters Goods (delivered to him) with intent to steal them, being of the value of forty shil∣lings, or above. If any robb a Church. If any maliciously burn the House, or Stack of Corn, or Barne of Corn of another. If any take up a Hawk, and do not carry her to the Sheriffe to be proclaimed. If any do the second time forge any Deed, Evidence, or Wri∣ting, and publish it to be a good Deed. If any acknowledge a Fine, or Judgement, or Deed to be in∣rolled in the Name of another, and not being the true person. If any Rase, Imbezzell, or withdraw any Record of the Court. If any use the Art of Multiplication of Gold, or Silver. If any Hunt by night in Parks or Warrens with painted Faces, or other disguises, and deny it upon examination. If any persons above twelve in number raise any Tumults or unlawfull assemblies.
If above 40 persons shal assemble together to do any unlawfull Act, and shall continue together three hours after Proclamation for their departure. If any depart out of this Nation to serve a Forraigne Prince, without leave, and before Bond entered, and Oath taken ac∣cording to the Statute. If any Soldier, or Marriner, who hath received Prest-wages, according to the Statute, do afterward depart from their Service without License. If any such Souldier or Marriner do wander and begge, with∣out a Passe, or if they counterfeit their Passe. If any Person having the Custody of publike Stores of Victu∣all, or Ammunition, imbezzell or purloin any of it, to the va∣lue of twenty shillings, or above. If any do the second time transport sheep beyond-Sea. If any perswade another to commit any Felony, or receive and assist any Felon after the Felonie committed, these are Accessaries to the Felonie. If any rescue a Felon from prison. if any Felon break Prison, and escape, or be suffered to escape, and be rescued. Misprision of Felony is this. If any know another to have committed Felony, and do not re∣veal it. Trespasses and Offences against the peace Finable are these. If any Menace, Assault, Beat, or wound another. if any make unlawfull entry upon other mens Lands, or un∣lawfully take away other mens Goods. if any make unlawfull Assemblies, Routs, or Riots. If any chide, or brawle, or draw a weapon to strike, or doe strike in a Church or Church-yard. if any keep a Fair, or Market in a Church or Church-yard. If any say, or hear Masse If Papists be absent from Church a moneth together If any keep a Recusant Schoolmaster, or other Recusant ser∣vant in his house: If any shall voluntarily disturb the Preacher in his Sermon: If any affirm that the eating of Fish, or forbearing flesh at set times is necessary for our salvation, or for other purpose, then as a politick constitution:
If any frame, make, or publish any false, scandalous, or libel∣lous Writing or Picture against another, or to the disgrace of others, or whereby to move contention amongst men. And touching this devillish invention of Libelling and Defa∣ming others, in these dayes more frequent then ever, by false and horrible lies and slanders, and Pamphlets publisht even against the Parliament it self and every Member of it, and every man that wishes well to it, your selves can testifie how frequent it is, and hath been of late, and therefore I beseech you be carefull to finde out some of those who have been offenders in it: And thus you have here mention of the Offences against Pub∣like Peace, which are as so many Diseases in the Heart of the Po∣tique Body of the Commonwealth. Next comes the Offences against Publike Iustice, which are also to be found out by us; and these are either against Iustice in the generall, or are Offences by Officers trusted in particular Administrations, or by Artificers, and Labourers, and Masters and servants. Offences against Justice in generall. IF any be a common stirrer and procurer of Law-Sutes, or a common Brabler or Quarreller among his Neighbours; this is Barratry. If any Buy or Contract for a pretended Right or Title to Land, or other thing in Controversie of Suite, this is unlawfull buying of Titles: If any maintain the Law-Suite of another, to have part of the thing in demand, or otherwise; this is maintenance of Champerty. If any get Goods of another into his hands by false Tokens and Messages; this is a deceit punishable. If any counterfeit any Deed or Writing, and publish it as true, this is Forgerie: If any corrupt a Jurie man, by Briberie, or Menace, to divert him from giving a just Verdict, this is Imbracerie: If any corrupt you of the Grand-Jurie by Bribes, or otherwise, to make favourable Presentments: If any Informer upon Poenall Laws do not duely pursue his Information, or if he sue out Processe before the Information be exhibited, or compound before the Defendant hath answered,
or after answer, without License: If any wilfully and corruptly swear falsly in evidence to a Ju∣rie, it is perjury, and to procure another so to do, is suborna∣tion of Perjurie: If any take more Interest upon Loan of Money, then after 8 l. per Centum for a year, this is unlawfull Usury and Extortion. Touching publike Officers trusted in the administration of Justice, and failing in their duty. First the Sheriffe. THis is a great Officer, and is much trusted in the Service of the People, and by the Statute of Articulum super Chartas, is to be chosen yearly by the People, that they might the better be assured of those they trusted: But this Priviledge of Election (among others) the People have lost, and the Court of later Times did learn how to make profit, both by Electing Sheriffs, as also by keeping them off from being Elected: In his Office you finde him a Judge, and a Minister of Justice: He is a Judge in his Court, called the Turne, and sits as Judge, and hath the profits in the Court, called The Countie Court. Touching the Turne If the Sheriffe or his Deputy do not send Indictments found in his Turne, to the next Sessions: If the Sheriff or Bailiffs arrest any person upon an Indictment in his Turne, or levie the Fines, or Amerciaments imposed in his Turne, without Warrant indented from the Sessions. Touching the Countie Court. If the Sheriffe, or his Bailiffe enter Plaints in his Countie Court in the Absence of the Plaintiffe, or of some other known person authorized by him. If the Sheriffe or his Bailiffs enter more Plaints then one in his Countie Court upon one Cause of Action. If the Sheriffe or his Bailiffs fail to Summon the Defendant to appear at the County Court: If the Sheriffe or his Bailiffs leavie the Amerciaments set in the Countie Court upon the Defendants for not Appearing, call'd The Sheriffs Amerciaments, without an indented Estreet between him and two Justices of the Peace, as a Minister of Justice.
As a Minister of Justice. If the Sheriffe let his Countie or Bailiwick to farme: If the Sheriffe or his Bailiffes collect the Greenwax Estreats of the Exchequer, without shewing the Estreats under Seal. If the Sheriffs Officer or Gaoler for any cause but Court-Fees, detain any prisoner in Gaol after the Court hath discharged him. If any Sheriffe make out any Warrant to make an Arrest, not having the Processe then in his custody: If the Sheriff or his Deputie take for Breaking-up a Common Law mean Processe, and making an Arrest, above two shillings four pence, viz. twenty pence the Warrant, four pence the Ar∣rest, and four pence the Bond, if the Defendant be Bound, or four pence the Gaoler, if the Defendant come to the Gaole: If the Sheriff or his Deputy take above one shilling at pound for raising an Execution under one hundred pounds, & six pence at pound for every hundred pounds more, and this after the Ex∣ecution is levyed: If the Sheriff or his Bailiff take any Money, or other Reward for sparing an Arrest, or for letting to Bayl persons not Baylable, or for shewing him any other favour: If the Sheriffs refuse to let to Bayl persons Arrested upon mean Processes, who are Baylable by Law: If the Sheriff or his Deputy take a Bond for appearance of any other Forme then that directed by the Statute: If the Sheriff return any Jurors without their true Additions. If the Sheriff or his Deputie take any thing for making and returning Pannels of Juries, or take above four pence for the Copie of one Pannell. If the Sheriff or Gaoler deny to receive without Fee Felons sent to the Gaole. If the Bayliff of any Libertie do not perform the same duties as they are injoyned to Sheriffs in executing Warrants & Processes di∣rected to them: Touching the Constable. This is an Officer of Iustice, and an Officer of Peace, and is of great Trust and good use, if he perform his Duty, and there∣fore by the way let me say, that care must be taken by the Ju∣stices of Peace, and Stewards in Leetes, that able and honest persons, and fit for the service be put into this imployment.
IF he do not endeavour to preserve the Peace, and prevent the breach of it. If he do not Arrest night-walkers, and suspected persons. If he do not hastily pursue, Hue and Crie after Murtherers, and Robbers: If he do not cause Watch by Night, and Ward by Day to bee kept within his Office from Ascension day to Michaelmas day, and Ward by day the rest of the year. If he do not truly execute and return all Warrants sent to him from Justices of the Peace: If he do not appoint in Easter week Overseers of Highwayes: If he do not apprehend Beggars, Rogues and Vagabonds that are wandring or begging within his Office, and if any have hin∣dred him from doing his dutie therein; If he do not punish by Stocking such as refuse to labour in Hay and Harvest Time: If he do not Inventory Felons Goods hapning within his Office. If he do not once a month search Alehouses, Maltmakers hou∣ses, and houses of gaming and Bawdery. If he do not present at the Sessions, or to the next Justices, the disorders in Alehouses, defects in Highwayes, Recusants absence from Church; And such as keep Doggs, Gunnes, Nets, and the like, for the unlawfull taking of Wilde-Fowle, and Hares. If he do not drive the Commons within his Office for infected and unlawfull Cattell, once (at least) in Summer: Coroner. IF he fail to performe his dutie upon Summons, as well where the Fact is by misadventures, as by mans hand: If he take any Fee where the Fact is by misadventure. If he take any Fee above thirteene shillings foure pence where the Fact is by mans hand, and that of the Goods of the Manslayer, if he be in Custodie, or if he escape, then of the Town where the Fact was done. Cleark of the Market. IF hee take any common Fine for dispensing with faults in Weights and Measures. If he take any Fee for Marking Weights and Measures, but
those allowed, one pennie for a Bushell, and 100 weight; half a penny for half a Bushell, and halfe 100 weight; a farthing for every lesse weight or Measure. Cleark of the Peace. IF he take any Fee for his Office doing, but those allowed, viz. For an Alehouse Recognisance one shilling. For a Badgers or Drovers License two shillings. For Inrowlling Presentments for Recusants, For Inrowling of a Recognizance of a Rogue taken into ser∣vice, one shilling. For Inrowling a Deed of Bargain, and Sale of Land, being un∣der forty shillings per Annum value, one shilling. And if it exceed forty shillings per annum value, two shillings six pence. Ordinary. If he take any Fee but those allowed for Proving of a Will, or granting an Administration, viz. Where the Inventorie exceeds fortie pounds, five shillings. Where it is under forty pounds, and above five pounds, his fee is three shillings six pence. Where but five pounds or under, he must have six pence. Or a penny for every ten Lines ten Inches long, which Rate is also allowed for their Copies; And what is taken more then those, is Extortion. If any Minister take any Mortuary, but where the custome of the Place allowes it; or where it is allowed, if he take any Mor∣tuary for an Infant, Feme Covert, or Traveller; or if hee take any thing where the Inventory is under ten Marks, or if he take above three shillings four pence where the Inventory is above ten Marks, and under thirty pounds; or if he take above fix shil∣lings eight pence where the Inventory is above thirty pounds and under forty pounds; or if he take above ten shillings where the Inventory is above forty pounds. Searchers and Sealers of Leather. IF they be not appointed by the Owner of the Market in Mar∣ket Townes: If they (being appointed) refuse the Office:
If they do not in covenient time performe their Dutie and Of∣fice upon particular occasions when Leather is brought to them to view: If they be not furnisht with a Register-Book and a Seal. If they fail to set down all Bargains of Tand and unwrought Leather. If they allow such as is insufficient or disallow such as is suffici∣ent. If they take any Fee, save such as is allowed, viz. for every can Hides two pence, and for every six dozen of Calf-Skins 2 pence: If Triers of Tand-Leather seized for insufficient be not appoin∣ted by the Owners and Rulers of Fairs or Markets. If the Tryers refuse to perform their dutie. Tolgatherers. IF Owners or Rulers of Fairs and Markets have not appointed some certain place for sale of Horses there, and a Toll-gatherer to attend. If the Toll-gatherer do not sit in open place in Markets and Fayers, where Horses and Cattell are sold, and continue there from ten of Clock in the Morning, till Sunne-set. If he do not keep a Register-Book, and therein set down the Bargains brought before him, and have the Parties and Vouchers present which he knows. If he take any Fee or Reward save that allowed, viz. a penny for one Bargain. If any person comming in as a Voucher, take upon him the knowledge of the Seller, and do not intruth know him. If the Toll-gatherer refuse to deliver a Copie of his Entry, or take above two pence for it. Overseers of the Poor. IF they refuse to execute their Office, being appointed thereto by the Justices of Peace. If they do not provide a common stock, and take care to keep the Poor at work upon the common Stock of the Parish. If they doe not meet once a moneth particularly to conferre about the performance of their dutie. If they do not raise a weekly Taxation for the maintenance of the impotent poor.
If they suffer their Parishners to wander and begge out of their Parish. Overseers of High-Wayes. IF they refuse to execute the Office, being chosen thereto by the Constable and Neighbourhood. If they do not upon the next Sunday after Easter appoint publikely in the Church six dayes betwixt that and Midsum∣mer for the Neighbours to meet for mending the Highwayes in the Parish. If they doe not attend at the dayes appointed to direct the Works. If they do not present to the next Justice of Peace, or at the next Sessions the defaults of absent Parishners. If they do not present to the two next Justices of Peace the defects of Highwayes, & of not scowring the Ditches, that should lead and avoid the Water from standing in High-wayes. Touching Artificers, Labourers, Masters and Servants. IF Artificers, Labourers or Servants conspire what Wages to take and not to work under those Rates. If Artificers or Labourers undertake Work, and depart before it be finished. If they do not continue from five a Clock in the Morning till seven at night in the Summer, and from seven till five in Winter. If Labourers or Servants take any more Wages then the Rates allowed by the Justices. If any Servant assault Master or Mistresse. If a Tradesman retain a Journeyman for lesse time then a year. If for every three Prentises they do not keep one Journeyman, and for every Prentise above three one Journeyman more. If they refuse to labour in Hay-time or Harvest. If a servant depart from one Parish to another without a Te∣stimoniall from his Master. If any Master Hire any such servant wanting a Testimoniall. If any servant depart within his Terme, or at the end of his Terme without a Quarters warning, unlesse the cause be allowed before two Justices of Peace. If any Master put away his Servant within his Term, or at the
end of his Terme, without a Quarters-warning, unlesse the cause be allowed before two Justices of Peace. Braziers and Pewterers. IF any Brazier or Pewterer buy or exchange any Metall belong∣ing to his Trade, but in his open Shop, or Fair, or Market. If they sell their Wares of Metall not of the Allay of London. If they use any deceitfull Weights, or false Beams. Cordwayners, viz. Tanner, Currier, Shoomaker and Butcher dealing with the Hide. Tanner. IF he set his Fatts in Tannhills. If he overlime his Hides. If he Tann any Leather in warme Owze: If he do not work the Lyme well out of the Leather: If he use any Stuffe but Malt, Meale, Tapwort, Henn-dung, Culidding, Ashbark, Oakbark: If he use any deceitfull mixture for raising his Hides: If he suffer his Hides to be frozen with Winter Frost, or to be parcht with Sommer-Sunne, or to bee dryed by the fire: If he Tann any rotten Hides: If he do not renew his Owze so oft as need requires: If he do not keep his Soal-Leather twelve moneths, and upper Leather nine moneths in the Owze: If he sell any Tann'd Leather, which is insufficiently Tann'd. If he sell any Tann'd Leather out of a Market. If he sell any Tann'd Leather before it be search't and Seal'd. If any Tanner be a Curryer or Shoomaker, or use any other Trade which cuts Leather, or è contra. Curryer. IF he dwell out of a Market Town, or exercise his Trade in a Shoomakers House. If he Currey any Leather but such as is sufficiently Tann'd. If he use any other stuffe in Currying outer Soal Leather, but good hard Tallow, and no lesse thereof then the Leather will re∣ceive. If he gash or scall'd any Hide, or shave any Leather too thinne.
If he refuse to Curry Leather brought to him with stuffe to work it, or if he keep it in Summer above eight dayes, and in Winter above sixteen dayes If he be a Tanner or Shoomaker while he is a Curryer. Shoomaker. IF he do not make his Wares of good Leather, Soal and Upper Leather well Tann'd, and well Sew'd with threed well-wax'd, and twisted, and hard-drawn with Hand-Leathers. If he mixe his Wares, part Neats Leather, part Calf, Horse or Bull Hide. If he Sell any Wares upon Sundayes. Butcher. IF he gash, slaughter, or cut any Hide in Fleaing. If he water any Hide save in June, July, or August. If he sell any corrupt or rotten Hides. If he sell any Hide but in open Market. If he use the Trade of a Tanner. Tann'd Leather. IF any buy Tann'd Leather Red and unwrought, and doe not make it into made Wares. If any but Tanners buy rough Hides. If any buy Tann'd Leather out of a Market. If any buy Tann'd Leather, before it be Searcht and Sealed. If any refuse and resist the Searchers to make Search. If any ingrosse Oak-Bark. Cloth-makers. IF any use Racking of Linnen Cloth, or use Lime, or other un∣due mixture in Whitening Linnen-Cloth. Cooper. IF he make his Ware of unseasoned Wood: If he do not make it of due Assize, viz. The Barrell 36 gal∣lons of Beer, and of Ale 32 gallons.
The Kilderkin 18, or 16, gallons of Soap: The Firkin 9, or 8, gallons. If he do not set his Mark upon it: Tile-maker. IF he do not digg his earth before the first of November, and turne it over before the first of February, and turn it again be∣fore the first of March, and then trie and tue it from Stones: If he make them of lesse Assize then ten inches and a half long, and six inches and a quarter broad; gutter Tyle ten inches long, and ridge Tyle fourteen inches long, and half an inch and quar∣ter thick. And so I have done with the Offences of this kinde, which are against publique Justice; and now I come to those which are against the publike plentie of the Stores of food and provision for the people, and are therefore in these hard and dear times to be most carefully prevented, if it may be, at least by such wayes as the Law directs: Touching the Plentie of the Countrey, and the disorders by Victuallers IN generall whatsoever tends to inhance the Price of Victuall by unlawfull increasing particular mens profits by, it is an offence against the plenty of it, and therfore If any do buy any sort of Victuall as it is comming to a Market or Fair either by Water or Land, it is forestalling. If any buy Victuall in a Market, and sell it again within four miles, it is regrating: If any buy any dead Victuall or Corne growing upon the ground, with intent to sell it again, it is ingrossing: If any Victuallers conspire to sell their Victuall at unreasonable prices: If any Victuallers sell any unwholesome Victuals: If any buy Corn having sufficient for his House-Provision for a year, and do not bring so much other Corn to the Market to bee sold: If any Drover or other buy Cattell, and sell them again alive within five weeks: If any person take upon him to be a Bagger of Corn, not being
lawfully Lycensed by four Justices of Peace. If any buy Butter or Cheese in grosse, and sell it againe in grosse, or by retaile out of an open shop. If any forbear to rear Calves yearly, viz. one Calf for every two Kye, or every threescore sheep he keeps; or do not keep a miltch Cow for every threescore Sheep. If any transport Sheep, Corn, Butter or Cheese beyond-sea. If any keep above two thousand Sheep at once. If any destroy Wilde-Fowls Egges, or take Wilde-Fowle be∣tween the last of May and the last of August. If any Hawk in standing-Corn: If any (not qualified) keep Doggs, Ferrets, Netts, or Engines to take Hares, Conies, Phesants, or Partridges: If any trace Hares in the Snow: If any Take or Kill Phesants, or Partridges with Engines, Nets, or Snares, or by shooting in Gunnes. If any shoot Hail shot in Gunnes: If any hunt or kill Deer in Park or Warren: If any sell Phesant Partridge or Hare. Alehouse-Keepers. IF any Alehouse-Keeper keep an Alehouse not being Licensed thereto: If they sell lesse then a quart a penny the best, and two quarts a penny of the worser sort: If they suffer unlawfull Games, Tables, Cards or Dice in their Houses: If Inkeepers do not sell their Hay & Oats at reasonable Prizes: If Tavern-keepers suffer people to sit Tippling in their houses If any person continue Tippling and Drinking in Tavern, Inn or Alehouse: If any person be drunk. Bakers. IF any Baker sell his Bread of lesse weight then the due Assize, viz. proportionable to the price of Corn in the Market, as it is regulated by a Printed Assize-book, set out to that purpose. If they do not set their proper Mark upon their Bread: If they give above thirteen to the dozen. If any but Bakers bake Horse-Bread to sell.
Butchers. IF any Butcher kill and sell Calfes under five weeks old, or any weanling under two years old: If they sell any mezelled Hogges, or Beast that dyed of the Murrain, or other corrupt or unwholsome meat. Fish. IF any destroy the Frie of Fish, or Fish with Nets lesse then two Inches and a half, wide in the Mash: If any kill any Salmon under sixteen Inches long, or Pickerils under ten inches long, or Trowts under eight inches long, or Bar∣bels under twelve inches long: If dried fish (brought in by strangers) be not of due Assize, viz. in Barrells of Herring two and thirty gallons, in Barrells of Eels thirteen gallons: in a Butt of Salmon fourscore & 4 gallons. If any bring Codd or Lyng from beyond-Sea in Barrels to be sold, or otherwise then loose in bulk: if any set Tax, or Toll, or restraint upon fish brought into this Nation to be sold: If any cut out or destroy Heads or Damms of Ponds, Motes, or Stews of fish, or fish many severall fishings. Malt-makers. IF any Maltmaker do not make his Malt of good and sweet Bar∣ley, not Mow-burnt or Spired Barley. If they do not rubb it, and dresse it well, and fanne half a Peck of dust out of every Quarter: If it be lesse time then three weeks in the Fatt, Flowre, & drying. Milner. IF any Milner take excessive Toll for grinding Corn, viz. above a twentieth part, or four and twentieth part, according to the strength of the Water. Wine. JF any bring in Wine in Forraign Bottomes. If any bring in Wine in Vessels not of due Assize, viz. the
Butt 126 gallons, Hogshead 63 gallons, Pipe 126 gallons, Terce 84 gallons, Tunne 252 gallons. If any sell Wine above the Price Proclaimed in Chancery. And thus you see how the Publike plenty of the Countrey is di∣minished for a few mens particular gains, & you see also how the abuses may be reformed, to a general advantage of all the people. Lastly, Common Nusances are to be enquired after. TOuching Common-Nusances, or Offences done against the generall easements of the People, as against the health, beautie, and good Complexion of the Body Politick, are these. If any erect a Cottage, and do not lay four Acres of ground to it, to be occupyed with it: If any continue such unlawfull Cottage. If any keep an Inmate, or undersitter in a Cottage. If any common Bridge be out of repair: If High-wayes to Market Towns be not inlarged and cleansed of Wood 200 Foot at least: If any common High-way be out of repair, or if any Ditches be unscowred, or undrest, which should convey and avoid the water from standing in High-wayes: If the Parishners have not met at the day appointed to mend the High-wayes, as the Law directs: If any keep common-gaming houses, Bowling-Allies, or the like: If any common Vagabonds and Beggars, or wandring Rogues, or dangerous Rogues do passe, or be suffered to passe from place to place, or be relieved in places where they come: If any keep or use unlawfull Weights and Measures not accord∣ing to the Standard of the Exchequer; or if Weights and Mea∣sures of the Standard Assize be not kept in every Market Towne: If any use any Weights or Measures unsearch'd or unseal'd: If any prophane the Lords Day, viz. by travelling that day, or by using sports, and unlawfull exercises that day: If any prophanely swear or curse: If any keep a stoned Horse in any common ground, not being fourteen handfuls high And thus you see how the wisdome of the Common Laws of this Nation, and of the Parliaments from time to time hath pro∣vided
for the security and ease of the people, and hath furnished us with a Salve for every Soar, and gives us rules and instructions how to govern our selves, that we may be helpfull and usefull to one another; and from whence it is that we may well conclude, If we keep the Law the Law will keep us, and that If we place the Law in the Throne the Law will preserve & protect us in safetie and security. Touching these Offences which are committed by disobedient & lawless persons, you who are cull'd out from all the parts of the Countrey and chosen to be the chief Agents and first Movers (as I may speak) in this work of Justice, which is the subject of this dayes Service, and are the Countreys Trustees for that purpose; I do not question but your publike spirits are such, and common love to your Countrey such (taking in even your own Interests & particular Profits and Concernments) that you will be more then ordinarily carefull to cleanse the Countrey of these Weeds, and darnell and Cockle that growes up among the Corn, Those wic∣ked and unreasonable men, which are as Pricks and Goads in the Sides of others, and live idlely, loosely and wickedly among the people, and are as so many Plague-Soars spread over the bodie of the Countie; and the way to cleanse the Countrey of them, is is to execute Justice upon them; for the execution of Justice is the work of God himself, the end of the Law, the Command of the Parliament, the Magistrates Honour, the Offendors Terrour, and the expectation of all honest men: And therefore (as once it was spoken in another case) let it not seeme a small thing to you who are to begin this Work of Justice, that you are separa∣ted from the Congregation, and brought near to the God of Hea∣ven to do the Service of the Tabernacle and to stand before the people, and to minister unto them. And having said thus much, I leave what remains to your diligence: All our Service begins in you, its your Ignoramus, or Billa vera which opens and shuts, which shuts and no man opens. FINIS.
