w3264 e2130_2 99867643 119587
'ΕΥΛΟΓΙΑ. The Parents blessing their Children: And the Children begging (on their Knees) their Parents BLESSINGS, Are pious Actions, warrantable by the Word of God, and practi∣ctised by Gods Saints and Servants. With a Model of private Pray∣ers, or occasional Helps in retired De∣votions. Legibus Comparatum est; ut Charitas li∣berorum Parentes Amiciores redderet Reipublicae, M.T. Cicero ad Brutum. By Ed. WOLLEY, D.D. and Chap∣lain in ordinary to His Majestie. LONDON, Printed ly T. R. for William Palmer, at the sign of the Palm-tree in Fleetstreet, 1661
Jacob blessing his sons And Israel stretched out his right hand & laid it vpon Emphraims head, who was y: younger, and his left hand vpon Manassehs head: guiding his hands wittingly: for Manasseh was the first born. Gen: 48. ver: 14.
TO THE READER. KIng Solomon coun∣selled to take the little FoxesCant. 2.15. that spoiled the Vines and tender grapes, but King David his father passio∣nately complainedPsalm 80.13. against the Boar of the Wood, and the wild beasts of the Field that did wast and devour the Vine that was brought out of Ae∣gypt and had filled the Land.
The Royal Prophet gives the Reason of that Ruine and desola∣tion, why the Vine was cut down and burnt up with firePsalm. 80.12. because all her hedges and fences were broken down. This latter Age hath produced many such wild and savage bruits, who Infatua∣ted with Avarice and Ambition, have neither feared God nor honoured their King; nor spared any thing that was sacred or So∣veraign. The Rise of their un∣godly Principles and proceedings was munted (doubtlesse) from Infidlity or Impiety, pride and disobedience which precipitate a carnal mind into all varieties of desperate Attempts; And through a want of the fear of God and true humility, a man (though
a Rational Creature) is little bet∣ter then an Incarnate Devil. It is highly necessary therefore to build our House a good Foun∣dation; that when the winds and stormes and waves arise & blow and beat Against it, the Fabrick may neither shake nor fall. This may be most securely done by Lay∣ing Humility the basis of our structure, & obedience a Corner stone more securely to incement and Ʋnite us towards God and towards Man: And this most clearly will have successe when it springeth genuinely from this Native Root. Thus the Juice and Sap in the Winter courteous∣ly returns towards the Roots to comfort their Mother, which in the Spring dutifully ascends
beautifying each branch and bow with Blossomes Leaves or Fruit, and so to make a thankfull Pre∣sent to the beames of the Sun their Father. This duty of honour and respect to Parents, man may learn from the very vegetatives which spread forth their bran∣ches as their hands and fingers towards Heaven, and at Autumn return a thankful sacrifice; the Fruit that falls from their loaded and yielding Armes on their mo∣ther Earth. It were a great shame for man the noblest Crea∣ture to be guilty of Ingratitude; and as it is a foul Errour to be Accounted a harsh Parent, so it is a heavy crime to be look't upon as a dishonouring or disobedient Child.
Now that the Duties of these Relations may reciprocate with greater Comfort and advantage to all Parties Concerned; this Discourse adventures abroad first, that Parents instructing their Children to practise the Duty of asking Blessing may be the better satisfied in the Truth, fitness, Custom, and Innocency of their just Commands. Second∣ly, That Children thus honour∣ing their Parents, and depend∣ing on their favour, and so daily craving their Blessings: may the more chearfully con∣tinue their Testimonies of ho∣nour in their humble and affe∣ctionate Comportment towards them: And so by this meaues A mutuall Communication of
of Love and Honour, and the duty of asking Blessing in a Mo∣ral Civil and sober behaviour, may more happily be derived to Posterity. Thirdly, This may be as a Cordial to strengthen and settle some weaker stomachs: which have been poysoned or in∣fected with the Pharisaical Le∣ven or New Doctrine of this la∣ter Vertiginous Age, which in an Athenian humour or faction, hath gaped after nothing but Newes and Noveltie. Fourthly, The Conscientious and Innocent pra∣ctise of this Duty rightly set and stated (it is hoped) may prove as a Pilot: after these Stormes and Tempests of Vast Confusion; to guide all sober minded Tem∣pers into the Haven of Pru∣dence
and Peace, and that nei∣ther the Parents nor Childrens souls may be longer tossed with e∣very puff of new wind and facti∣ous doctrine of humane and Tem∣porizing faction. Lastly, as the Occasion of this subject was gi∣ven for better satisfaction, and to Remove all scruple and scandal in some of more tender Conscien∣ces: so it carrieth with it a Can∣did design towards all who shall read it, with some hopes that the Parental and Filial Duty first observed; True honour may as∣cend more properly and with plentifull Obedience towards the Civil and Spiritual Fathers of the Kingdom and Countrey. Farewell.
ΕΥΛΟΓΙΑ. The Parents blessing the O∣bedient Children, and the childrens asking a blessing from their Parents, are pi∣ous exercises, warrantable by the Word of God the Holy Scriptures. CHAP. I. NAture, though she seem Rude, and to govern by none but confused Rules, guideth Children to a du∣tiful respect of their Parents, as well
as Parents in a tender care towards their children. This mutual bond is twisted by the hand of Providence, that Generations and Successions may be derived to Posterity. And if Pa∣rents did not cherish and nourish their children, they were in a De∣gree more irrational then Beasts. And if children should not reflect with duty and kindnesse on their Pa∣rents, they were little better then unthankful Devils. Chap. 2. Reason, and all civil Relations enforce and perswade the Parents care, and the childrens duty and obe∣dience, without which Humane So∣ciety would be dissolved. For the unity of Government is first founded in the Family, and if the Relations of honour and obedience fail there, Homo homini Lupus. Man growes as savage as a Wolf. And it is a certain Truth, that He who is undutiful to his natural Father:
can neither be faithful to his Master the Aeconomical Father, nor loyal or obedient to the Supream Magistrate the King, who is the civil Father of the Countrey. Therefore it was the de∣termination of Seneca: (a rational Heathen) lib. 3. de Benef. cap. 3. Pa∣rentes non amare, Impietas est, non ag∣noscere, Insania est: That not to love Parents, was Impiety, but not to ac∣knowledge them, was bruitish Mad∣nesse. Thus far Nature and Reason (though dim Lights) are able to Guide us. Chap. 3. But the Holy Scriptures send forth more bright Beams of Truth, and teach us that these holy Exercises of the Parents blessing their children, and the childrens begging a Blessing from their Parents, are warrantable, and consonant to the word of God; Evidencing plainly their care & ten∣dernesse who Blesse, and their Honour, Reverence; and obedience who ask the
Blessing. But that this Truth may be more clearly discerned, it is ve∣ry pertinent that it be rightly un∣derstood what it is (first) Benedicere to blesse, and (secondly) what it is Benedictionem petere to beg a Blessing. To blesse is both attributed to God, and to his creatures: First, to God: God created man in his own Image, and blessed them, Gen. 1.28. Thus Christ our Saviour blessed his Apostles, Luke 24.50, 51. In which place, both the Manner, and the mea∣sure of the Benediction is most re∣markable: For, he lifted up his hands & blessed them. And again, as he blessed them he was parted from them. This Bles∣sing of Christs was attended with the Disciples Adoration, Luke 24.52.  they fell down, they bow∣ed their heads or bended their Knees: saith the Text, They worshiped. And as Baptism is commanded  in the Name; so the blessing is pro∣nounced : In the grace, love & communion of the Father, the Son & the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.13. Thus God blessed the creatures.
Chap. 4. The Creatures they Blesse like∣wise: so did the Angels blesse Jacob. Gen. 32.26. And the Patriarch would not let him go, until he had blessed him. Man also blesseth man. Thus Solomon the King blessed his Subjects, 1 King. 8.55. Aaron the Priest lift up his hand and blessed the people, Levit▪ 9.22. Melchisedeck blessed Abraham; the King of peace blessed the Patriarch, that mighty Warriour, Gen. 15.19. And as to the Paternal Benediction, Isaac blesseth Jacob, Gen. 27.4, 25. and Esau, Gen. 27.39, 40. and Jacob blesseth Joseph and his two sonnes, Gen. 48.9, 15. and Laban (though an uncircumcised Canaanite, yet) had this spark of Grace in his heart, Gen. 31.55. Early in the morning he rose up, and kissed his Sonnes and his Daughters, and blessed them. Yet if it be objected this was a Legal rather
then Evangelical practice; It is an∣swered that S. Luke presents Elizabeth pronouncing the Blessing to the Vir∣gin Mary, Luke 1.42. Blessed art thou amongst women. And Simeon, Luk. 2.3. Blessing both Joseph, and the Virgin Mary; and S. Paul seems to make Melchisedeck's blessing of Abraham, Gen. 14.19. not only to be Legal but Evangelical, Heb. 7.1, 6. and at the 7th. ver. plainly tels all Chri∣stians, both the Father and the Son, their duty, where the Apostle puts it out of all doubt  without contradiction: The Fathers duty is to blesse, the Son's to beg the Blessing, for the less is blessed of the Greater. Chap. 5. Now as the Scripture warranteth the Father in blessing his children: so it directeth the child how to beg his Fathers blessing. And therefore as we have understood Who is to bless; so it is necessary to know what it is
Benedicere to blesse. Benediction or Blessing hath a great Variety of ac∣ceptions in the Holy Scripture. 1. To Bless signifies to Praise, Ps. 103.21, 22. 2. To give thanks, Gen. 14.20, 24, 27. 3. To consecrate or sanctifie, 1 Cor. 10.16. 4. To wish well to another, Gon. 47.7.10. 5. To of∣fer a present or gift, Gen. 33.11. 1 Sam. 25.27. 6. To encrease or multiply, Gen. 1.28. 7. To san∣ctifie and multiply, Matth. 14.19. 8. To adopt, and Agnize, Mark 10.16. Christ's proceeding there is an Example for the Parents tender∣nesse to, and blessing of their obedi∣ent children, for in that passage there are five remarkable Circumstances: 1. Christ's command; Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not. 2. Christ's Declaration; of such is the Kingdom of God. 3. His embracing, or Acceptation; He took them into his Armes. 4. The impo∣sition of his hands: he laid his hands upon them: 5. His Adoption of them; for he Blessed them: saying, of such
is the Kingdom of God. Now the Pa∣rents blessing hath an Influence, or an Effect on all, or most of these kinds: First, the Parents blesse the chil∣dren when they Nourish them. This was Jacob's care, Gen. 32.22,23. Secondly, Education is the Parents Blessing, Gen. 18.19. Acts 7.21, 22. Moses was made happy this way; be∣ing the Adopted Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and Learned in all the Wis∣dom of the AEgyptians, and thereby made mighty in words and deeds. S. Paul hath made a Lasting Record of this kind of Blessing, 2 Tim. 1.5. of Lois and Eunice, who instructed Timothy in the Faith, though his father were a Greek, or Infidel, Acts 16.1. And it is from the Ground of his Education that S. Paul doth so strictly charge his Disciple Timothy,2 Tim. 3.14, 15.Continue thou in the things which thou hast learned, and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them, and that from a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures. Thirdly, Tender love and dear af∣fection
towards the children is a bles∣sing of the Parents; which appeares eminently in those holy Patriarchs, Jacob, and Joseph towards their chil∣dren, Gen. 42.36. Gen. 48.9. Fourthly, ProtectionGen. 33.13.ProvisionGen. 25.5, 6.CounselGen. 27.43.Moderate Correction1 Sam. 2.23. Heb. 12.7.Care in their marriageGen. 24.2. 4.Pardon for their faults [f] and prayer for their good [g] are all Blessings from the Fa∣ther to their children.Job 1.5.Job is a rare Example in this kind; who san∣ctified his Sons, Rose up early in the Morning, and offered up burnt Offer∣ings, according to the Number of them all; For Job said, It may be that my Sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job continually, his sanctifying was doubtlesse his Bles∣sing of his Sons, wishing them well, and praying for them. By this it may more easily be concluded: first, who is, and secondly, what it is to Blesse. The Parents Relation thus explica∣ted, the Childrens will more orderly follow: whose duty it is to Beg, or ask their Parents Blessing.
Chap. 6. God having given Lawes for his own Worship in the four first Com∣mandements: In the next words or∣daineth Honour and Reverence to be exhibited to Parents, Exod, 20.12. Honour thy Father and thy Mother. From which words and Law (when we understand what is meant by Ho∣nour) the Childrens duty will more clearly appear: Who, in order to the payment of that debt of Honour, they owe to their Parents: will be the better encouraged to practice that Humble and Religious duty, and not to think themselves dishonoured, or disobliged if they beg, or daily ask their Parents blessing on their Knees, when they first see, or salute them in the Morning, or take leave of them at Night. Most Writers and Expositors on the Fifth Commandement rather tell men what Honour imports, then what it is: and describe the Concomitants
or Consequences, and Effects of Ho∣nour, but more sparingly, or lesse plainly set forth the Nature and Es∣sence of it. Therefore in this nice Point, it is highly Necessary to know what Honour (due from the children to the Parents) is. Some conclude that Honour im∣ports three things in this Comman∣dement. First, Obedience to their lawfull Commands:Col. 3.20. Ephes. 6.1.2. And to confirm this, they instance in the Example of the Recabites, obeying the command of their father Jonadab, Jer. 35.8. Of Isaac, submitting to his fathers Knife to cut his innocent throat, Gen. 22.10. Of Christ, who went down with his Parents to Nazareth, and was , subject and obedi∣ent to them, Luke 2.51. Secondly, Honour imports Reve∣rence; which is discerned either by Words or Deeds, Thus King Solo∣mon seems to comment on the fifth Commandement, Prov. 23.22. Ho∣nour thy Father that begat thee, and thy
Mother that bare thee, and despise her not. And as he was a Teacher, so he was a Practiser and Example of this Duty, 1 King. 2.19. For, when his Mother approached near to speak unto him, the King humbly saluted so dear a Subject; he rose from his Throne to meet his Mother; he bowed himself unto her: First begging her Blessing, not adventuring to return to his Throne untill he had Reveren∣ced her; and then as a dutiful Son, he caused a Seat to be set for the Kings Mother, and she sat at his right hand. Joseph is such another pattern of Pie∣ty, and Reverence towards his Fa∣ther Jacob. He was next to Pharaoh in AEgypt, and the King command∣ed that the AEgyptians should call him Abrech, Gen. 41.43. Which word hath a double signification in the Original: either tender Father, or Bow the head, and kneel down. The Militia of the Land was intirely in his Power, Gen. 41.40. At thy word shall all the people be Armed: and at the 44. ver. No man was to
dare to lift up his hand or foot without his Order. Yet this mighty Prince in his power and plenty, thinks him∣self most happy when he hath but an Opportunity to Honour and Reve∣rence his aged Father, though but a meer Sphepheard, Gen. 47.4. and rea∣dy like a poor begger to starve for bread. It is most eminently and pas∣sionately recorded, Gen. 46.29. how Joseph made ready his Charret and went to Gosben to meet Israel his Fa∣ther, and presented himself unto him, (most probably first on his Knees) and fell on his Neck, and wept on his Neck a good while: and Joseph who was stiled and pro∣claimed Abrech, and had so many Knees bended to him: certainly he bended to his aged Father to gain a Blessing from him. Chap. 7. A third importance of Honour,  is Judged Maintenance; implying, that if the Parent be blind, the Son (as
Job, cap. 25.15.) is to be the Fathers Eye; if lame, the child is to be his Fathers foot or staffe: Christ himself is an Example of this Duty, who (at his death) took care for his Mother the blessed Virgin, John 19.27. The Philosopher thinks it reasonable (A∣ristt. Ethic. lib. 9. cap. 2. that chil∣dren who have received life from their Parents, should (to their utter∣most) endeavour to preserve their Parents life. And some pious Hea∣thens are very famous even to these dayes, for their tender thankfulnesse to their decrepid and aged Parents. By the help of these three Lights; Obedience, Reverence and Mainte∣nance, we perceive somewhat more, but not all that this Command, Ho∣nour thy Father and thy Mother, doth present. Chap. 8. The children are yet obliged to many other observant and dutiful Respects: For, as a Father hath
the trust and charge of many excel∣lent Relations and Priviledges, to be sometimes Actively, sometimes Passively manifested towards his children: so are children recipro∣cally charged with many singular Duties, which by the Lawes of God they are bound to repay, and Retri∣bute (on all Occasions) to their ten∣der-hearted Parents: as, First, to Love them with cordial affection; Thus Elisha beggeth of Elijah, 1 King. 19.20. when he had cast his Mantle upon him, Let me I pray thee go and kisse my Father and Mother; (what may that otherwise signifie then to beg their blessing?) and take my leave of them: and then (said Elisha) I will follow thee; and Elijah thought it fit and necessary: Go; Return. Secondly, It is a Testimony of the childrens honouring the Parents, when they not only bear with, but cover their Infirmities. Thus did Sem and Japhet, Gen. 9.23. when their Father was overcome with wine, they
took a Mantle and put it on their shoul∣ders, and went backward, and covered the Nakednesse of their Father with their faces backward, so that they saw not their Fathers Nakednesse. This bearing with, or rather hiding of their fathers Infirmity, procured a blessing on Sem and Japhet, Gen. 9.26, 27. But as a Father and a Pro∣phet, he denounceth a curse on Cham and his posterity, who had so undu∣tifully derided, and dishonoured his aged Father. Thirdly, Honour signifies an hum∣ble submission to the fathers Will; and Jeptha's daughter is such an Ex∣ample of Obedience in this kind, that she rather chooseth to yield up her life at her fathers direction, then that he should violate or once break his Vow, Judges 11.36, 37. Thus Samuel, though but an Infant, no soon∣er was weaned and parted from his Mothers breast; but was instantly removed from her company, 1 Sam. 1.24. And when his Mother had wea∣ned him, she brought him to the House of
the Lord in Shiloh, the child was young, as the original signifies, a very child when he ministred before the Lord, girded in a linnen Ephod, 1 Sam. 2.18. And no reason can be given of the Mothers parting with Samuel, or of the tender Infant's parting from his dear Mother, but that the child had as well an humble submission, as the Mother a Resolution to make good her Vow, when she begged her Son from God, 1 Sam. 1.11. Fourthly, the honouring of Pa∣rents stayed not here. S. Paul char∣geth children to Recompence their Pa∣rents; Imposeth this as a duty, as a Debt, not as an Act of Charity to supply their Necessity, but as ob∣liged to this kind of Gratitude. If any Widow hath children, let them first learn piety at home, , 1 Tim. 5.4. that is, to requite their Parents: Now that which is requited hath been former∣ly merited; And Recompence is no∣thing but the conscientious discharge of a spiritual or civil Debt, though
it have no formal or legal Obligati∣on in foro judicii; or in the Courts of earthly Judges: And it is Mr. Beza's Note on this place:1 Tim. 5.4.Natura ipsa docet Majoribus vicem rependere, & Deo gratum est hoc officium. The re∣quiting of Parents is a Lesson taught by Nature; A rational service, and as a sweet smelling sacrifice, is gratefull and acceptable to God. Chap. 9. These Beams will yet shine more brightly, and shew the Nature of Honour to Parents more perspicu∣ously if they be distinguished from all other Qualities, which seem to be of like Relation or similitude. For the word [] whether derived of the word , or , admits of great variety of significations. As first, Acceptation or Entertain∣ment, John 4.44. A Prophet  is not without honour: that is, as S. Luke explains it, Luke 4.24. : a Prophet
is not accepted in his own Coun∣trey. Secondly, Civil Subordination, Rom. 13.7. . Render to all their dues, Honour; to whom Ho∣nour: So Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. In both places is pressed the duty of obeying Magistrates, and honouring the King. Thirdly, Honour signfies the Va∣lue, rate or price of a thing. Thus the High Priest did use it, Mat. 27.6. crying out in their Hypocrisie a∣gainst Judas, and the Traytors mo∣ney; It is not lawful to put it into the Treasury, because it is  the price of blood. Fourthly, Dignity is comprehen∣ded under the word Honour, Heb. 13.4. : Marriage is Honourable, or a Worthy Noble Relation. Fifthly, It signifies what is ex∣ceedingly dear and precious, 1 Cor. 3.12. , a precious Stone, Revel. 21.11. That Honour which children owe their Parents compre∣hendeth
hendeth all these Parents may require and expect, and the children are obliged (sine murmure) to pay all or any of their duties, when Occasionally they shall require them from them. Chap. 10. The Schooles endeavour yet more Exactly to instruct children in the Lesson of their duty towards their Parents: Acquainting us that Ho∣nour is Testimonium Excellentiae quae est in homine: A Testimony of that sin∣gular Excellency that is in a Man. Tho. Aqu. 1•. 2d•ae. Qu. 2. Art. 1. And where can a child (though never so great, rich or wise) reflect with more admiration, then on the Excellency of his own Parents, from whom he hath received Life and Being? First, They tell us that there is much difference between Laus, Gloria, Reverentia, & Honor. That Laus tan∣tum est in Verbis, & est respectu eorum quae sunt ad finem. That praise chiefly
consists in verbal commendations, and is but conversant about those things, that are only conducing to a further end: Tho. Aqu. 2a 2dae Qu. 103. Art. 1. Secondly, That Glory is not so much Honour, as an Effect of it; So the Philosopher 1 Ethic. cap. 12. By this the goodness, worth and dignity of another is more clearly manifest∣ed, Clarescit Bonitas in notitia pluri∣morum. And thence some will have Gloria, quasi Claria, or Clara cum Laude Notitia; A more bright and splendent Knowledge. so S. Ambr. and S. August. gloss on the Word. Thirdly, That Reverence is ra∣ther a part of Honour, then Honour it self. For whether it be perform∣ed in word or deed, by a venerable Estimation arising from the mind, or an humble comportment from the Body: yet it is but as the branch to the Root, as a way leading to some further End; Principium motivum, a principle Motive, or preparation of him who Reverenceth, and not the
compleat Honour that is due to him who is Reverenced, Tho. Aqu. 2a 2dae Qu. 103. ad Arg. 1. Fourthly, The Schooles affirm that Honor amongst all External good things is the chiefest: because it is Praemium virtutis & Testimonium Ex∣cellentiae. Tho. Aq. 1a 2dae quest. 2do Art. 2do. the reward of Vertue, and su∣pream Testimony of Worth and Ex∣cellency. Now as the Objects do di∣versificate, and vary in their worth & praeeminency; so do the Agents in their. Influences and dispositions. And therefore because none do come in the Scales of comparison with Parents in their relation to their children; therefore the Honour due unto them ought to be the sincerest, the exactest, the Highest, and next to that which is due to God, the Al∣mighty Father of all. And hence it is that there followeth another Va∣luation, which the Learned put upon honour, before Love. For the child who truly honours his Father, aymeth particularly at his Fathers good; but
Love and Charity hath a more Ge∣neral Object, spreading its Grace U∣niversally on all: Honor respicit pro∣prium Bonum honorati; sed Amor re∣spicit Bonum in Communi. Tho. Aqu. 2a 2dae. qu. 25. Art. 1. Arg. 3. Christi∣ans love their Brethren as Christi∣ans; but children honour their Pa∣rents not only as Christians, but as Christian children; obliged to that singular Duty by God himself, Exod. 20.12. Now a the beams of the Sun when they concenter in one point are more Energetical and operative, then when the Rayes of that glorious Body are in their diffusion: so is it with children, who truly honour their Parents: Their dutifull affections being terminated and fixed in a par∣ticular Object of honouring their Parents, the Effect is of greater force; the duty better performed; the parents more highly honoured: and God who commands the duty, better served and obeyed.
Chap. 11. Neither is it sufficient that chil∣dren hounour their Parents in their heart only, but likewise they are to perform it by their outward Signes, testimonies and Gestures: The reason is, Quia honor, quoad Deum, potest esse in solo Corde; sed quoad hominem, est in signis exterioribus. Tho. Aq. Quaest. 103. Art. 1. God who is a Spirit, is the Searcher of the heart, and can fashion, and find out all the thoughts and secret motions of the mind and soul; but Man is a limited creature, and can only Judge by the visible or external Actions. So then it is not enough for children only cordially, but corporally, and with Reverential exteriour Gestures to honour and re∣spect their Parents. The Propositions made so evident and plain, the Con∣clusion may the better follow; That it is Warrantable by Gods Word, Expedient and Lawfull, that chil∣dren crave & ask their Parents bles∣sing.
In which Religious Exercises these three Advantages must needs follow: First, that God hereby is obeyed, and better served. Secondly, the Parents more highly honoured and Esteemed. Thirdly, the children are more certainly Blessed and comfor∣ted. Chap. 12. First, The child asking his Fa∣thers Blessing; by this pious duty God is Glorified. In the primitive age of the World the holy Patri∣archs and fathers of Families, were constituted Kings, Priests and Pro∣phets in their patenal Jurisdiction: Kings, to rule and Govern; Priests, to pray and sanctifie; Prophets, to teach and Instruct their Families. These Offices were very eminently performed by Abraham, who was King and Soveraign Commander, when his kinsman Lot was taken pri∣soner and made a captive? armed his trained servants born in his own house?
three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them to Dan, and he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by might, and smote them, and pursued them to Hoba, which is on the left hand of Damascus, and he brought back all the goods, and his Brother Lot and his goods, and all the Women also, and all the peo∣ple, Gen. 14.14, 15, 16. As a Priest, he refused not to sacrifice his only Son; Senile pignus, & semen promis∣sum; but (commanded by God) laid his child on the Altar and stretched out his hand to have slain him, had not the Angel of God restrained him, Gen. 22.9, 10, 11. verses. God is pleased to acknowledge him a Pro∣phet also, and to blesse him; and tel∣leth man why he blesseth him: For I know that Abraham will command his children and his houshold after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord to do justice and Judgement, Gen. 18.18, 19. Now we are the children of the prophets, Acts 3.25. the sons of Abraham, if we do the works of A∣braham, John 8.39. Gal. 3.8. And in
this respect, when the child asketh his Fathers blessing, and thereby ac∣knowledgeth a Royal, parental, and Soveraign power in the Father, who by Gods Law is to rule and govern his children: he honoureth God, whose Image and Authority (as a Vicegerent on Earth) the Father re∣presenteth, by regulating his children and servants. But the Father is not only to be honoured, as having a Na∣tural Soveraign Trust from God, but as a Priest, who (after Jobs example) Job 1.5. riseth up early every morning and offereth burnt offerings, and every night burneth Incense; that is, prayeth with, or for his Family both Morning and Evening. And therefore the chil∣dren daily craving a Blessing from their Parents, who pray for them, God is hereby glorified, and (this Law being more exactly observed every morning and evening) He is better served. Again, Parents are not only as our oeconomical Kings to govern us, & our Priests to pray with and for us; but they are as our Pro∣phets
to instruct us. In this Relation we owe them continual honour, and constant Reverence. The Argument is a minore ad majus, from S. Pauls Do∣ctrine of the Heir, who, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing from a ser∣vant, though he be lord of all jure haere∣ditario: but is under Tutors and Go∣vernours, untill the time appointed by the Father, Gal. 4.1, 2. Now if a fatherlesse heir owe such Exact duty to Tutors and Governours; and a living child to the Commands, or Testament of a dead Father, what Honour and Obedience doth a child owe to a living Father or Mother, who as Prophets teach and instruct them daily? So then to ask their Blessing, who have such care of their souls & bodies, is a testimony of their care to keep Gods Law; and hereby also God is more glorified. For if Heires owe so much Reverence and respect to civil Tutors and Gover∣nours, how humble and obedient ought children to be to their Natural and tender Parents?
Chap. 13. There is yet another Argument which seemeth very stoutly to press children to the the Religious practice of asking blessing, because the holy Commandements of God were pri∣marily and chiefly recommended to the Fathers and the heads or Masters of Families. This is evident in the Scripture; for Moses descending from the Mount, he called for the Elders of the people, that is, the fa∣thers or chiefest of the Tribes and Fa∣milies, Exod. 19.7. and laid before their faces all the Words which the Lord commanded him: and at the 14, 15. verses Moses prepared the people to receive the Law with a Blessing of Sanctification. See and observe Gods own Order and Me∣thod. God blesseth Moses, and Moses blesseth the Elders of the people, the Fathers; and the Fathers they are to bless their children. This Argument is yet corroborated, and strengthen∣ed
from the Moral Law it self; where for Method, God having command∣ed our duties to him in the first Table, immediately requireth chil∣dren in the first Commandement of the second Table to honour their Pa∣rents: as next to God, or in Gods place on earth, or because the neg∣lect of this one Commandement might cause (infallibly) Disorder, and Violation of all the rest. And as the fifth Commandement is pri∣mary in the second Table for Order; so for matter. In all the Comman∣dements their observation seems chiefly recommended to the Exact care of the Fathers or Masters of the Families, who are obliged to teach their children, and their Childrens children from generation to genera∣tion. And the fourth Commande∣ment to this purpose is not only Im∣perative, but Authoritative in Parents and Masters; where it is evident and plain, though the duties of the ten Commandements are of Univer∣sal concernment to all Ages and peo∣ple;
Yet Parents and Masters have a more particular charge flowing from the Words of that Comman∣dement. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Thou shalt do no manner of work, Thou nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy Cattel, nor the stranger that is within thy Gates. So that, in some de∣gree of Gods Trust: the Fathers and Masters of Families are Custodes utrius{que} Tabulae, Deut. 6. v. 7, 8. the Conservators of Gods Lawes; which though commanding all, yet particularly are recommended to their charge, as to those who are not only bound to give an account for themselves, but for their children, their servants, their cattel, and the stranger that is within their Gates. The Case thus stated, the Parents being in so high and Immediate Trust from God; what duty can be too humble, or too often from the children to their Parents? Who cannot but put a high Reputation in
the presence of God, Angels and men, on their Humility, when they Bow their bodies, and Bend their Knees, and crave, as their daily bread from God, so a daily Blessing from their Parents. Chap. 14. The Truth thus opened, it may without scruple or danger be apply∣ed to the most tender conscience; and without any snares to sin, or jug∣ling subtile sophistry, that the Cu∣stom of the Church of England, where the Parents use to blesse their chil∣dren, humbly, daily begging their Blessing; is a most Religious practice, consonant, and not repugnant, expe∣dient, & not forbidden by the Word of God. Yet two sorts of Objections may seem to arise, and so first startle, and amaze, then deter and diswade from this pious Exercise. To some this may appear somewhat superstitious, or to lean and encline too much to
Popery and Idolatry: But to free all from such erroneous deluding opini∣on, doubts, fear or danger; there is no spice of Idolatry, nor any such unclean drug, or ill ingredient in this innocent composition of begging the Parents blessing. As to the Ro∣manist: First, It is a practise rarely used or known in some Roman-Ca∣tholike Countreys; Or rather cun∣ningly not taught in the Church of Rome: so that the Italians, Spanish, Germanes and French (for the most part) use it not: And it may be very probable for this Reason, that the Parents having less Reverence from their children, and the Children less honour for their Parents; the Popish Priests might more securely and craftily ensnare, and subjugate the mutual Relations of both parents and children entirely to themselves: e∣specially then, when they are chain∣ed to them on their bended knees in their Auricular duties; and answer∣ing to such Questions, as are propo∣sed to them, when they are opening
their hearts in an humble and peni∣tent Confession. The Doctrine of which Confession (if rightly used, and as Christ hath recommended to his Church) is of as much comfort, as truth; founded on Christ's own Command, Matth. 11.28. which words Venite ad Me are explained, Matth. 10.40, to Me: that is, in my Absence to my Apostles, and their lawful and right Successors, the vigi∣lant Bishops, and faithful Pastors of Gods Church: whose Commission is large, and will continue in force to the end of the World in haec verba; Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and what soever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Matth. 18.18. And it is an Infallible truth, that the lawfull Pastors only are Ministerial∣ly, and most properly trusted with hearing penitent Confessions, and then giving and pronouncing Abso∣lution in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to the quieting of the troubled spirit and
wounded Conscience of the humble & repenting Sinner. Yet there are E∣vangelical Steps which lead children to a dutifull confession of their faults and offences to their compassionate Parents. This is most eminent in the poor broken hearted relenting Prodigal, who first Resolveth on his Confession: saying, I will go to my Father, and then perfecteth his Resolution, by acknowledging his er∣rour, first accusing, then proclaim∣ing against himself, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy Son. Luke 15.18, 19, 20, 21. On which words Mr. Beza (though no Patron of the Doctrine or practise of Con∣fession in the people, or absolution from the Venerable Pastor of Gods Church) hath this Note (of which some present advantage may be made) In vera Resipiscentia inest sensus peccati cum tristitia & pudore conjunctus, unde nascitur Confessio, quam sequitur Absolutio: that is, There is a sense of sin in Repentance con∣joyned
and mixed with shame and sorrow for it; hence springs an In∣genious and free Confession, which is recompenced with the Act of gra∣cious Remission, or Absolution by compassionate parents. And as Confession of sinnes to the Parents, craving their pardon, or begging their Blessing is not sinfull, whether the Ppists use it or use it not: So Quoad Rem, it is not superstitious, and so praeter, or contra verbum Dei, that is, without Warrant from, or against the Word of God. To make this more clear, it is necessary that it be rightly understood, that Superstition is vitium Religioni oppositum secundum excessum, quo quis divinum exhibet Cul∣tum vel cui non debet, vel non eo modo quo debet, Tho. Aq. 2a 2dae. qu. 92. Art. 1. that is, Superstition is an er∣rour opposing true Religion in ex∣cesse, giving or Attributing divine Worship where it is not due or law∣full, or a worshipping the true God after a superstitious and false man∣manner. But the honour that Pa∣rents
may justly expect, and children are obliged dutifully to pay, is so far from being an Errour, that it is a Truth, so far from being superflu∣ous, that it is necessary; and chil∣dren seldom or never are found guil∣ty of an excess of their obedience to their Parents; and therefore the duty being commanded and requi∣red by God, the children are obliged to honour their Parents; in which holy Exercise there cannot be the least fear, or danger, or tincture of superfluity or Superstition. Chap. 15. And whereas some may object, that the begging of the Parents bles∣sing on their Knees may Rob God of his Worship, or relish of Idolatry: (which is a most heinous sin, as di∣rectly thwarting and opposing the very Letter of the first and second Commandements of the Moral law:) Let such Inventors of dangerous O∣pinions know, that he who comman∣deth
the keeping of One, expecteth the keeping and observation of all the Law; and he that is guilty of the breach of one, is guilty of all. This is the Method of S. Paul himself; arguing with the Rabbies and Do∣ctors of his Age: Thou therefore that teachest another, teachest thou not thy self? Thou that teachest a man should not steal, doest thou steal? Thou that sayest a man should not commit Adul∣tery, dost thou commit Adultery? thou that abhorrest Idols, dost thou commit sacriledge? Rom. 2.21, 22. From all these concluding Questions it may be Logically, and rationally re∣solved, that he that lesseneth or In∣hibiteth the childrens duty in the most Reverend and humble manner towards the Parents: doth either weakly erre in Judgement, or cun∣ningly dawb with untempered mor∣tar; hypocritically pretending zeal to God, but not sincerely intending his Divine Worship; when, for Gods Commandements, men dare to shuffle in their own Doctrines and
Traditions, and (on pretence of I∣dolatry) exempt, or discourage the children from their duties towards their Parents. This was the Pharisees own Way long since, condemned by Christ, Matth. 15.56. who taught the World a better Lesson, and con∣cluded himself, that honouring of parents is not Idolatry: which sin (if rightly understood) is an exhi∣biting or devoting and giving that worship to the creature, which is only and divinely due to God. So Tho. Aq. 2a 2dx. qu. 94. art. 1. Ido∣latria est exhibere Latriam (id est) cul∣tum Dei Creaturae. This is certainly an high and most horrid sinne: But children are not to honour their Pa∣rents as God, but as Men, and not only as Men, but as Parents; and not so much because their Parents ex∣pect, or require their Duty, as be∣cause God directs, and commands the performance of it. God is to be loved and served with all our hearts, with all our minds, with all our soules, and our Neighbours are
to be loved as our selves. And as to our Parents they are to be honour∣ed, as God hath commanded; which duty cannot be performed without the treble Observation of Natural, Civil and Moral respects. Nature teacheth to be affectionate, because the are our Generators: Civility ob∣ligeth us to them, because they are or have been Conservators: And there is a Moral respect due to them, which strictly binds the conscience because of Gods Commandements; All these ought and may be done, without suspition of the gross and horrid sin of Idolatry. Chap. 16. To others the practise of asking the Parents Blessing seems of Novel∣ty, or Work derogatory from the Worship and honour of God: And thus are some seperated, and have started aside from this holy pra∣ctise, fearing or at least resusing to give their Parents that honour,
which God commands, out of a singular, or self-opinion, that giving so much as is due to their Parents, they may not Reserve, or so suffici∣ently Worship God as he requires. Our Saviour Christ seems to take notice of such humorous and Pha∣risaical and phanatick conceipts, ari∣sing from the heads of some schis∣matical Innovators, when he lived on earth. The place is very worthy of singular observation, recorded by Saint Matthew, from the first to the tenth verseMat. 15.1. of the fifteenth Chapter, where the Scribes and Pharisees bold∣ly make the assault, or on-set on Christ, demanding a reason, ver. 2. why do thy Disciples transgress the Tra∣ditions of the Elders? for they wash not their hands, when they eat bread. Christ suddenly makes a Reply by another Question, ver. 4. Why do ye also trans∣gresse the Commandements of God by your Traditions? implying, that as the God of Israel was above the El∣ders of Israel; so the Commande∣ments of God above the Lawes of
Men, and Traditions of the Elders. And then Christ tells them of their sin, and Transgression, ver. 4. God commanded, saying, Honour thy Fa∣ther and Mother, Exod. 20.12. Deut. 5.16, and he that curseth Father or Mother let him die the death, Levit. 20.9. Prov. 20.20. Having set down the Law, and detected their Hypocrisie and sinne, he further ar∣gueth, ver. 5. But ye say, whosoe∣ver shall say to his father or mother it is , or as it is Originally in St. Mark, chap. 7.11. Corban, that is to say, a Gift by whatsoever thou might∣est be profited by me, &c. (as it followeth Matth. 15.16.) and ho∣nour not his father or his mother, shall be free. From these observations and Objections Christ inferreth and presseth this Conclusion; Thus, or therefore have ye made the Commande∣ments of God of none Effect by your Traditions: and then accuseth them, as dissembling Hypocrites, of whom Isaiah prophesied, This people draw∣eth nigh unto me with their mouth, but
their heart is far from me, Esay 29.18. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the Commande∣ments of Men, or Directories of meer hu∣mane Invention. This Argument of Christs, which so plainly accuseth the Jewes of their Impiy towards their Parents, may Invite Christians to more exact performance of their Reverence and Duty towards their Parents; Inasmuch as this Law is not only proclaimed by Moses, and the Ministration of the Angels, nor only written by the finger of God; but also often preached and publish∣ed to the World by Christ, the Eter∣nal Word of God; greater then Mo∣ses, or Solomon, or all the sonnes of Men. Chap. 17. It is remarkable in this Argu∣ment against the Pharisees, that Christs method and Moses's differ in the distribution of this Law (viz.) Honour thy Father and Mother. For,
when Moses delivered it to the peo∣ple: it was accompanied with a Promise, That thy dayes may be long in the Land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee: But the two Evangelists, both St. Matthew and St. Mark (in the places cited before) present our Saviour teaching the Commandement either strictly in the Duty, (viz.) Honour thy Fa∣ther and thy Mother; or else (with∣out mentioning of the Blessing or Promise) threatning the disobedi∣ence thereof, positively with a curse, Dominus hic Praemium praetermittit, ponit, quod terribilius est, scilicet, Poe∣nam; ut & ipsos stupefaceret, & alios attraheret. Chrysost, Hom, 12. Levit. 20.9. He that curseth Father or Mother let him die the death: as if Christ had said, He that neglecteth his duty, or despiseth or dishonour∣eth his Parents, is so far from pity or pardon, that he deserves to die the death. Thus Christ seems to pro∣secute with Indignation those who should prove Violaters of this Law.
And if there be any Branches of di∣sobedience (as it is probable too many) in this Pharisaical hypocri∣tical Age; Christ hath discovered the bitter Root from whence they spring: that is, from the vain Tra∣ditions of some Schismatical and pharisaical Directors seditiously af∣fected: or from Disobedient children, who (as the Scribes and Pharisees of old) prefer the New and singular Opinions and Traditions of some Giddy-brain'd Teachers, before the Commandements of God. Nei∣ther ought any to fear that God is lessened in his honour, if the Pa∣rents are Revereneed by their chil∣dren, but on the contrary God is more abundantly, and highly Ho∣noured in the performance of this Duty: because, first, his Comman∣dement is observed: secondly, by this meanes children are (as on a lad∣der or scale) to climb up the higher towards God, the Almighty Father of Heaven and Earth: thirdly, by this humble deportment, taught by
Christ in his Gospel, they more In∣nocently avoid the censure and sus∣pition of Hypocrisie: fourthly, they more securely keep and preserve themselves from Gods curse and in∣dignation: and lastly, they more happily obtain the Blessing promi∣sed, both in this life, and that which is to come. Chap. 18. To all this it may be further ad∣ded, and justly pleaded, that Ho∣nour and Reverence is to be given from children to their Parents, not only because they are Generators, but Parents, Patres & Matres: not only their begetters, but their Fa∣thers and Mothers, which are terms of kindnesse, and rather proper then common Names in their Re∣lations, sounding out nothing but sweetnesse, tendernesse, care, com∣fort and compassion. Thus the Learned comment upon the words: Pater & Mater Nomina Pietatis; of∣ficiorum
Vocabula, naturae Vincula. St. Hierom de vita Eremit. ad Helio∣dorum. They are pious Relations, and Bonds of Natural affection. A. mor & honor, love and honour chief∣ly differing modo operandi, in the manner of Operation; Love natu∣rally descends from the Parents to∣wards the children Descendit amor, ascendat honor, Love runnes as the stream from the Fountain, Honor, as an high and fruitfull Tide, re∣turns fully and freely towards the Fountain. And therefore Honour should plentifully, and supernatu∣rally and spiritually commanded by God own Word and Lawes. If yet any enquire how, that is, in what manner, or how often, that is, at what times, the Parents should bless their children, or the children beg their Parents blessing? it may be easi∣ly answered, The Parents are first directed to have a Preparation, and Inclination to blesse their Obedient
children at all times: but (if there be conveniency or occasion) to bless them particularly every Mor∣ning and Evening, that the Sun of the Firmament may not set, or rise again on the wrath, neglect, or Discontent of such near, and dear Relations. And this blessing is not to pass slightly, or cursorily; but with great regard to what is done. For the Fathers blessing is not only a Te∣stimony of Love to his child, but a prayer to God for him, a part of the Fathers daily Devotion for his child to God; and a kind of Recommen∣dation or Dedication of his child for Gods further blessing. There∣fore this picus Practice is to be per∣formed with greater care, that God may be more sincerely glorified, the Parents blessing may be more truly honoured, and the children receiving this grace and favour, may be more certainly blessed. This Rule well observed, the Parents will not take the Name of God in vain. For the Blessing thus imparted with Reve∣rence
and godly fear; God is daily honoured hereby, and whether the Blessing from the Parents be a Pray∣er to God, or a Testimony of paternal affection; or an earnest and pledg of future Kindnesse and Benevolence from the Indulgent Parents to the Obedient children; God cannot but be well pleased, where parents are so tender and carefull first of Gods Honour, and then of their own. Chap. 19. Another, or second Question is, How, that is, in what manner, or how often that is, at what times it may be expedient for children to make their Addresses to their Pa∣rents. It may be answered to the first Quaere; (How?) that they are to address to their Parents in the most Reverend gesture, and most humble posture, and behaviour. No Law or Reason Will, or Can assert the contrary, and if uncovering of the Head, bowing of the Body, bend∣ing
of the Knee; all of these, or some of these be civilly allowed from Subjects to their Soveraigns, from the people to their Magistrates (so that they are commanded to kneel at their Barres) or from servants to∣wards their Masters; Parents may expect as much if not more, from their children addressing to them not only in a civil, but a Conscientious and venerable Comportment, to beg their Blessing. And it is very ob∣servable to this purpose, that as God restrained in the second ommande∣ment: saying, Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven Image, Thou shalt not Bow down and Worship: So affirmatively, or positively in the fifth Precept of the second Table, he commandeth, Honour thy Father and Mother; and this Honour is not to be performed but verbis, & Signis, in words, signes, or exterior deeds: and therefore uncovering of the Head, bowing of the Body or bend∣ing of the Knee, are commendable and expedient gestures in craving
or begging the Parents Blessing? And St. Paul setting forth to the whole world his Ecclesiastical Ca∣nons, by his Apostolical Jurisdiction, amongst other things, charged this upon the Church of Corinth; that they should be Reverend Hearers of Gods Word, and Reverend Recei∣vers of Gods holy Sacraments; plainly declaring that every man () whether Father, or child pray∣ing or prophesying, his Head being co∣vered, dishonoureth his Head, 1 Cor. 11.4. On which Words Mr. Beza hath put forth this Note: Hinc Col∣ligit viros, si operto Capite (quod tum habebatur subjectionis signum) publicis caetibus ad audiendum verbum, & con∣cipiendas preces coactis intersint, sua veluti dignitate seipsos privare, contra Dei Ordinationem. That is, * If men being present in the publike Con∣gregation to hear the Word of God, or joyn in prayers, had their heads covered: they did deprive them∣selves (ipso facto) of that Dignity God had given them, against Gods
Ordinance. As for the Parenthesis, though it be Translated among the Authors Notes, yet it hath not a Warrantable Testimony of Antiqui∣ty to defend that Assertion. And Mr-Beza is very bold with St. Paul, to conclude his Rule and Canon to be only Temporal and Politick, as it is his Note on the same Words: but it is probable, that which S. Paul preached at Corinth for Reverence, decency and Order in Gods Church, was not so well taught, or so well Learn't at Geneva. However, from this Doctrine and Order of St. Pauls Constitution, children may learn to be uncovered, to bend their Knees, and to be Reverent in their behavi∣our; when they come to crave their Parents Blessing, as being the Pro∣phets and Priests of the Families, who Instruct them, ond daily pray with and for them. And if the sons of Noah were so exceedingly modest, that they durst not so much as peep or look at their Fathers Infirmity, but went backward with their* Quo ad unc habe∣batur sub∣jectionis Signum.
Mantles upon their shoulders, Gen. 9.23. to hide his Nakednesse, with what great Reverence and humility, bending, bowing, or kneeling, may it be concluded that Shem and Japhet came unto their Father, when they received his Blessing? Gen 9.26, 27. From all these Arguments, it cannot but be allowable, expedient and Warrantable, for children craving their Parents Blessing, to kneel and beg it in the most dutifull and hum∣blest gesture; The Parents being as Josephs Sheafe; their children round about their Table are to Bow and make obeysance to them, Gen. 37.7. And though the children be as glo∣rious as the Sun, the Moon, or the Starres for Honour, Riches, Power, or any other Excellency: yet still they are obliged to honour their Pa∣rents, and to Bow down themselves unto them even to the Earth, Gen. 37. ver. 10. ASir Tho. Moore, L. Chancel∣lor of Eng∣land in K. Henry the eighths time. Countryman of our own (as the History Relates) had this humility and honour for his Pa∣rents, as he approached near to
them, when he was in a far higher Degree of civil Honour, then his Fa∣ther, to fall down on his Knees and ask his Blessing: And it was a very high Example; pious and commen∣dable in those two Princes, the one a Son, the other a Mother; the Son a King, the Mother a Queen, yet a Subject: to see them strive which should be first on their Knees; the Son (a King) to ask his Mothers Blessing; or the Mother (a Subject) to kiss her Sons, a Kings hands; And it was no lesse admirable to ob∣serve which should be longest and Last upon their Knees: the Mother stooping to performe her civil Re∣spect, or the Son to perform his natural and Moral Duty to his Mother. But Gods Commande∣ment is above Mans, and civil Re∣lations bind not so fast, as Moral and Eternal Statutes, Imposed by God himself.
Chap. 20. The Direction now given, how children ought to addresse to their Parents in asking blessing, it yet re∣mains to discover when, or at what times, it is proper: To this Quaere it is answered, that Honour and Re∣verence is always due from the children to Parents; and this they owe them, as Requisites belonging to their Persons, their Names, their Memories, but properly and chiefly to their Persons. Yet this Right is most rationally performed, when 'tis done (if possible) twice a day. As God commanded a Morning and Evening Sacrifice: so the Parents (who bear Gods Image and Trust) may expect the first fruits of their childrens duty in the Morning, and their Acknowledgement as thank∣full Incense in the Evening. The Blessing in the Morning may cause a happier success to their strength, their healths, their labours, their
studies, their Lawfull desires, and Endeavours: The Blessings at the Evening may be as a Seal of the Pa∣rents good Will, and cordial affe∣ction, liking or approving of what hath passed in the day. And by this means Parents and children may more securely and quietly lye down, and take their Natural Repose; Both being first recommended to God in their prayers, without whose Blessing neither Relation can Rest or sleep in safety, Psalm 127. ver. 3. Chap. 21. The Action and practise of giving and asking Blessing being thus War∣ranted, yet the Ignorant Parents or unskilfull Children may demand, Quo stilo, in what phrase, termes or words the Blessing may be craved, or Granted? (for the Relations conti∣nue all along to both parties.) To this it may be answered, that the children are not strictly obliged to any single form, or Mode of Words;
provided the Request made by the children to their Parents in this kind be Regulated, and consonant to the Rules and Examples of Piety, and the practise of Gods servants, whose lights have so shined on Earth that We beholding their good Works, may glorifie our Father which is in Heaven, Matth. 5.16. To this Purpose, the sons of Noah are Pat∣terns of Modesty, lowliness and hu∣mility, Gen. 9.23, 26. when they obtained the Blessing from their Fa∣ther; Isaac of Innocency receiving the Blessing of his Father Abraham, Gen. 22.17. In blessing I will blesse thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee, thy Seed shall be as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand on the Sea∣shore: Plenty and Victory, shall be Isaac's blessing; His seed shall possesse the Gate of his Enemies. Jacob was a great Example of Humility and O∣bedience * in hearkning to his Mo∣thers counsel for the obtaining his Father Isaac's Blessing. He ap∣proacheth with goodly Rayment on
his shoulders; (formerly his Bro∣ther Esau's, as Primogenitus) but he having sold his birthright, justly lost his Fathers Blessing: The Scripture thereupon brandeth him to posterity as one unthankful to God and Na∣ture; (A prophane person, who for one Morsel of meat sold his Birthright, Heb. 12.16.) It was an Ancient custom in the Primitive Ages of the World, Primogenitos habuisse vestem quandam Specialem, aut Spiritualem, quam in Sacrificiis tantum induebant, eusque in Solemnitatibus, & Conviviis benedicere solitos fratribus natu mino∣ribus, recepturos tandem Parentum be∣nedictionem. D. Hiero. de Authorit. Hebraeor. Scriptor. Super Genes. 27. & Isidor. in Genes. 26. super illum Locum, Vende mihi Primogenita: That is, The First-born did wear more costly Garments, a more special or Spiritual Rayment, which they did put on when they were to offer Sa∣crifice; And thus accountred and attired, they used to blesse their younger Brethren, met together at
their Solemnities and Festivals; And thus arrayed they prepared them∣selves, approaching to receive their Parents Blessing. Jacob had likewise pleasant Perfumes about his Neck, and Came with a sweet, soft and humble voyce when he begged his Fathers Blessing. Elisha followed Elijah with zeal, affection and Resolution, and would not leave him untill he had blessed him: He craveth and cal∣leth for a double portion of Elijah's Spirit, 2 King. 2.9. And when the two Prophets were parted by the Charriot and Horses of fire, then Elisha cryes out more passionately, My father; my father, the Charriot of Israel and the horsmen thereof: At those words the Mantle of Elijah fell, wherewith he divided the streames of Jordan, and passed over, 2 King. 2.14. The Shunamite (her son being dead) came with as much hast as humility, with as much Im∣portunity, as affliction, hoping to get a Blessing from the Prophet. She bended her knees, and bowed to his
feet, 2 King. 4.27. She commanded her servant to saddle the Asse, and to drive on, ver. 24. and in the anguish of her soul; she took an Oath and sware, As the Lord liveth I will not leave thee until I have gained a Blessing for my son, ver. 30. The Convert Mary Magdalen begging a Blessing from Christ, came with Courtesie, pre∣senting her Box of Oyntment; with modesty, she stood behind; with sorrow, weeping for her sins; with humility washing Christs feet with her Teares; with Repentance, wi∣ping his feet with those Locks that had vainly enticed others: with af∣fection, kissing Christs feet with those tender Scarlet lips, that had been formerly the deceitfull Baits of sin, Luke 7.37, 38. Here was cer∣tainly a Broken heart, and Bended knees, and all the Testimonies, and Circumstances of Humility, and Re∣verence of a penitent sinner craving pardon and a blessing from her Sa∣viour: Her Brackish Teares were her passionate Orators, her actions,
and affections were perswasive Elo∣quence to plead for her. The Cana∣nitish-woman came to Christ with out-cryes and Lamentation, and said, Have mercy upon me, &c. Luke 15.22. At the 25. ver. she fell down and wor∣shiped him, saying, Lord help me; at the 27. verse Christ discerneth her con∣stancy, her patience, her perseve∣rance, and then the blessing came, ver. 28. Be it unto thee as thou wilt. There is yet one Example of hu∣mility which exceedeth all others, set us by our Saviour, and recorded by S. Matthew 26.39. who begging a Blessing from his Father; humbly fell on his face and prayed, saying, Oh my father if it be possible let this Cup passe from me, neverthelesse not as I will, but as thou wilt; All these Ex∣amples in the Patriarchs and Pro∣phets, the Disciples and Christ himself, invite us to an humble and Dutifull Style, when we make our Requests either for a blessing from God, or our Parents. And that which God requires from us in a divine
and spiritual manner when we make our prayers to the Father of Lights, may be performed in a civil and mo∣ral Rite, to our Parents when we crave their blessing. And it is St. Pauls Argument for Parents: Heb. 12.9. If Children owe their Parents such Reverence and subjection under their Correction; with what submisse Lan∣guage, begging and entreating, With what humble Gestures kneeling or prostrating themselves down to the Earth, ought they to addresse to their Parents, expecting their Bles∣sing, their favour, their Benevolence, their Prayers to God for them, and their reconcilement to them? If these Examples seem too General, and therefore of weaker force, or lesse obliging, as not strictly direct∣ing which best to follow: Chil∣dren are to be instructed, that they are concerned as to them all, on several occasions or respects, when they are to present their duties to their Parents. So that the modesty of Shem and Japhet, the Innocency
of Isaac, the Obedience and Ac∣tivenesse of Jacob, the zeal and affection of Elisha, the Importunity of the Shunamite, the passionate teares of Mary Magdalen, the out∣cryes and Lamentations of the Ca∣nanitish woman, and the humility of Christ; falling on his face, and praying to his Father: These are all Warrantable Examples, both works, and Words teaching the phrase, or Manner how to beg the Parents Blessing; This difference only first reserved, God is to be Worshiped as the Father of Spirits, Eternal and Immortal, and the Parents to be Honoured as the Fathers and Mo∣thers of their childrens Flesh. God is to be called on with Faith, with a divine and spiritual Invocation, and the Parents are to be entreated by their children with civil and Mo∣ral supplications, when they sue to them for their blessings. And hereby they honour God himself in honour∣ing those whom he commands shall be honoured, by the express Order and words of his Law. Chap. 22.
Yet if all these Instances seem but as Lines that rest in the Circum∣ference, and stretch not so far as the Center of the Point, and Argument in hand; More particularly, chil∣dren may beg their Parents Blessing either per Lachrimas, by their Tears, or per Verba, by humble Words, or else per Signa, some Actions imply∣ing and representing the desires and Affections of their hearts. And in this regard (as S. Hierom on ano∣ther occasion speaking of the Priests) Omnia in Liberis debent esse Vocalia. All circumstances in children should be Vocal, in some degree or other speaking forth their Duty to their parents. Those who cannot speak may Weep, as Mary Mag∣dalen, Luke 7.38. of whom we read not, that she spake a Word. Little Infants (whilst they cannot speak) let them learn to lift up their hands, or testifie their Obedienee by some
other Circumstances, as of humbling the head, or using the Flexure of the Knees. This weeping is a silent king of Begging, this bending an an obedient sign or Mode of entreat∣ing the Parents favour. Now, that teares have Tongues appears in King Davids phrase; The Lord (saith that Royal Prophet) hath heard the voyce of my Weeping: : thus the Sep∣tuagint; It may seem more pas∣sionate from the Original:  that is, he hearkned or listened at∣tentively, or, he put his Ear into my Weeping. Parents thus touch∣ed, thus Accosted, cannot but have compassion and tendernesse for their weeping children, though they crave not their Blessing by any composure of Words at all. There is another way of obtaining the Parents bles∣sing, and that is per Signa, when the obedient children coming to their Parents on this Religious Errand or Businesse, manifest the desires of their hearts by some signal exteri∣our
gestures; declaring their affe∣ctions by their Actions, and speak the sense of their Minds by by the humble deportment of their Bo∣dies: as it is commonly and civilly performed sometimes by the unco∣vering to the head, kissing of the hand, moving of the Leg; so ma∣king their honour by Courchee, and so bowing the Bodies, or bending the Knees: which Ceremonies if per∣formed by Equals, whether ac∣quaintances, kindred, strangers, or friends: they pass only, and are so judged as meer civil Respects; as Familiar amongst Heathens as Chri∣stians: But when they are ballanced and guided by the Conscience: as actions due to the several Relations of Magistrates, Masters and Parents, at is, Fathers and Mothers, they  not meerly from Custom or hu∣mane Civility, but from a better Foundation, that which God hath laid, on which a higher building is to be raised, Honour thy Father and Mother, which is the first Commande∣ment
with promise; and such a one, as if not rightly observed will cause a Breach or neglect of all that fol∣low: And it is to be feared, that he that takes the Liberty to disho∣nour his Parents, will make little or no Conscience whom he doth murder, from whom he Robs, whom he defileth with his Lust, how false he is to his Neighbour, or how co∣vetous of his Neighbours goods. If then Kings and Princes or Supreme Magistrates may expect duty and honour from their Subjects and peo∣ple, not only for fear, but as charged by a conscientious Obligation, Rom. 13.3, 4, 5. not only for wrath, but for conscience sake, If Masters are not only to be serve with eye-service, but fidelity of the heart, and that their Eyes are to watch and wait on their Ma∣sters and Mistresses business: What degrees of Duty are children to pre∣sent to their Parents? in whom these branches of honour and Obedience to Magistrates and Masters are pri∣marily and Originally founded.
Chap. 23. There is yet another Way or Mode of Addresse to Parents per Verba, by Words; which are to be accompanyed and cloathed with hu∣mility, Reverence and Honour. And if a pious Christian Custom not of∣fending Any, (if rightly under∣stood) nor opposing the Word of God, may Warrant Obedient chil∣dren: They asking their Parents blessing may lawfully say (as com∣monly taught by their Parents in haec Verba) I pray you Father or Mo∣ther, pray to God to blesse me: Or as some others use it, I pray you Fa∣ther or Mother Give me your Bles∣sing. Thus God himself directeth King Abimelech to pray to Abraham, that Abraham a Prophet might Pray for him, Gen. 20.7, 17. So Abra∣ham pray'd to God for him, and God heard his servant Abraham, and God healed Abimelech. Pharaoh entreat∣ed Moses and Aaron to pray for him,
and his plagued Countrey, Exodus 9.28. The people cryed out to Samuel, pray for thy servants to the Lord thy God, 1 Sam. 12.19. St. Paul puts life into this Religious Ex∣ercise by his own practise: Precor autem Vos fratres. I beseech you Bre∣thren for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for me, Rom. 15.36. Precum officium ab eis Postulat, ostendit quare in quibusvis difficultatibus niti nos ma∣xime oporteat: Mr. Beza Commenteth thus on the Words: On some Oc∣casions a conjunction and Commu∣nity of prayers is very Necessary. St. Paul was as earnest with the E∣phesians as the Romanes; pray for me, Ephes. 6.19. and with the Philippi∣ans as the Ephesians: I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, Phil. 1.19. Thus the Apostle entreateth the Colossians, Chap. 4. verse 3. and the Thessalonians, 2 Thes. 3.1. and the Jewes his own Nation, Heb. 13.19. After this manner God
counselled Jobs three friends, Eli∣phas the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuite, and Zophar the Naamathite, and commanded them, Go unto my servant Job and offer up for your selves a burnt Offering, and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I ac∣cept. And they did as the Lord com∣manded them, and the Lord also accept∣ed Job, and they god a Blessing, Job 42.8, 9, 10. Now if Kings and peo∣ple beg a blessing from their Pro∣phets and Priests: Nay, if the A∣postles entreat their Disciples to pray for them: How earnest ought children to be with their parents for their Zealous and assiduous prayers? to beg their Blessing, and to pray their parents to pray to God for his Blessing on them? And if the fer∣vent prayer of a Righteous man availeth much, Certainly the affectionate de∣sires and prayers of tender-hearted compassionate parents, (whose bow∣els yearn in them for their children; either having erred ignorantly, or offended wilfully, and afterward
repenting heartily) cannot but re∣ceive good successe, and Grace from the Mercy-seat of Almighty God. Chap. 24. Some use a shorter style, and fold up their Duty in fewer Words, (viz.) I pray you Father or Mother give me your Blessing: Which Kind is as pathetical, and may prove as Effectual as the Other, there being no contradiction at all betwixt them, but only a difference, or, modus Lo∣quendi; Importing the same thing: The children using this phrase, im∣ply equally as much; and when they say, Give your Blessing, it is the same, received by the parents, and intend∣ed by the children, as, Give the Blessing of your prayers; give your affectionate Testimony towards us, or assure us of the Continuance of your tender care and goodnesse to∣wards us, and of our hope and Ex∣pectation in You.
Chap. 25. There are yet some who use a shorter and more Concise phrase then this Last: when they appear in the Dutiful address of asking Blessing; Making the Text of Scri∣pture the Warrant, the Method and matter of their pious request, say∣ing no more then what Esau did to his Father, Bless me, O my Father or Mother, Genes. 27.38. where the vulgar Latine hath it Pater mihi obse∣cro ut Benedicas which importeth as much, as, I pray or beseech you Fa∣ther bless me: the Septuagint coming nearer to the Original, translate the Words  pro∣perly rendred in the English Trans∣lation, Blesse me, even me, O my Father, Gen. 27.38. The Patriarch Jacob useth the like Words craving a bles∣sing from Isaac, and saying, Let my Father arise, and eat of his Sons Veni∣son, ut Benedicat mihi anima sua: Ge∣nes. 27.31. that his soul might bless
me. In all these varieties there are differences, but not contradiction; & the children being thus taught & in∣structed by their Religious parents how, and when to ask their Blessing, or guided by these Examples of ho∣ly Scripture, are more exactly di∣rected how to honour, and after what manner to crave their parents Blessing. Chap. 26. The Children being thus Inform∣ed, it will be as pertinent that the parents be advised how, or after what manner they are to bestow their Blessing on their Obedient children. And to this Case it may be answer∣ed, that as the children diversificate in the manner of their Requests, craving the Blessing: to their pa∣rents may safely vary in the Distri∣bution of their Benedictions, as to their phrase, or Method of their Dispensations; and yet the Bles∣sing be no whit lesse in effect or O∣peration.
Isaac in blessing his Son Jacob, prayeth to God, Deus Omni∣potens tibi Benedicat, God Almighty Blesse thee and make thee fruitfull, Genes. 28.3. Joseph changeth his style of Blessing into other Words, composed of the rare Ingredients of pity and piety, and blessed his Bro∣ther Benjamin, and said, God be gra∣cious to thee my Son, Genes. 43.29. Frater natu major minori Benedixit: Here the Elder Brother (being a Fa∣ther to Pharaoh and the Aegyptians) blesseth the younger, according to St. Pauls speech (mentioned before) the Lesse is Blessed of the better or greater, Heb. 7.7. There is a va∣riety of Blessings recorded in the Book of Deuteronomy: when MosesMoses. vr Dei b∣dixit s∣is Israel ate or∣tm . Deut. 31. received Jacobs blessings on his po∣sterity, blessed his children; Let Reuben live, Deuter. 33.6. Lord hear the voyce of Judah, ver. 7. Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with Levi, thy holy One, ver. 8. The Lord shall cover Benjamin all the Day long, ver. 12. As he blesseth Joseph, he pray∣eth
for the good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush, Let the Blessing come on the head of Joseph, and up∣on the top of the head of him that was separated from his Brethren, ver. 16. Let Zebulon rejoyce in his going out, and Issachar in his Tents, ver. 18. Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad; Dan is as a Lion; Nephali possess thou the West and the South; let Asher be blessed with children, and Dip his feet in Oyl, Deuter. 33.22, 23, 24. Here were multitudes of Blessings variously expressed from the Tender goodness of a loving and Kind Father of his people. There is yet another more exact from of Blessing which God taught Moses, and Moses taught Aaron and his sonnes; And that continues as a Moral or Eternal Direction; teach∣ing both Jewes and Christians how the Priests should bless the people, or the Parents their children; On this wise shall ye bless the children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord blesse thee, and keep thee, The
Lord make his face to shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee; The Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee and give thee peace: and they shall put my Name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them, Numbers 6.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. verses. Such Lan∣guage as this King David taught; The Blessing of the Lord be upon you, Psalm 129.8. There are some other Circumstances and Concomitants, which Parents use in the Blessing of their children, and their Childrens children, Besides their Votal and Vocal Benedictions and prayers. Is∣rael calleth for his Grandchildren, and saith to Joseph, Bring them unto me and I will blesse them, Genes. 48.10. and he kissed them and embraced them: And Joseph brought them out from between his Knees, and he Bowed with his face to the Earth; And Joseph took them Both, Ephraim in his right hand, toward Israels left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand towards Israels right hand, and brought them near unto him; And Is∣rael
stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraims head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasse's head, guiding his hand, wit∣tingly; and thus he blessed Joseph and his Grandchilden, Gen. 48.15, 20. Heb. 11.21. Christ himself seem∣eth to Crown this Way of Bene∣diction, and recommendeth it by his Example to all Ages; who at his Ascention led his Disciples out as far as Bethany, and he lift up his hands and blessed them; And it came to passe while he blessed them, he was parted from them and carried up into Heaven, Luke 24.50, 51. In this Farewell of our Saviours; three pas∣sages are more highly remarkable: First, that Christ led his Apostles to Bethany, Quae domus obedientiae dici∣tur; that is, as it signifies, to the house or Village of Obedience: Ʋt qui propter Inobedientiam perversorum descenderat, propter Obedientiam Con∣versorum ascenderet: That as he de∣scended in compassion for those who had been Disobedient, he might
gloriously ascend for the Consola∣tion of those who were convered and become Obedient; so Venerable Bede. Secondly, when he had led his Disciples to Bethany, he lifted up his hands; forsan vim Conservativam influens eis usque ad adventum Spiri∣tus, & fortassis instruens nos, ut quo∣ties recedimus; Benedictionibus Subdi∣tos Deo recommendemus; Theophil. Either to influence them with a Conservative power, and to streng∣then his Apostles untill a plenary mission of the holy Ghost: Or to instruct them, and others, to Recom∣mend those who were Obedient Souls, to Gods Favour and further Blessings. Thirdly, Having led his Apostles to Bethany, and having lift∣ed up his hands, he Blessed them: Quod autem elevatis manibus Benedixit eis, significat quod deceat Benedicentem cuiquam ornatum esse variis Operibus, & arduis, respectu aliorum: The Ele∣vation of his hands may rightly sig∣nifie the Transcendent Excellency of Christ's person, in whom Super∣lative
fulness dwelt, that he might be more able and compleat to dis∣pence and diffuse his Heavenly Be∣nedictions; whose Salutations were in peace after his Resurrection; Peace be unto you, St. John 20.19, 21. But his Valediction were in his Bles∣sing of his Disciples at his Ascenti∣on, St. Luke 24.51. These Examples of the Patriarch Jacob: and of Christ our Lord, may teach all Parents the right Rules and Method how to bless their children: and (if there be cause) to manifest their good Will and affections towards them, not on∣ly with the Word of their Mouthes, but with the imposition of their hands upon their childrens heads, as Jacobs were on Ephraims and Manasses: or with an Elevation or Expansion of them towards heaven to beg a bles∣sing from God: and by this Circum∣stance to teach their children to be Supernal and Spiritual in their Thoughts, and more Coelestial in their Conversations; By admitting them to come unto them, as the Pa∣triarch
triarch Jacob called for for his Grandchildren, and then passionate∣ly Kissed and Embraced them, and so blessed them. Yet the nhildren may not expect a Blessing nor the Pa∣rents freely part with it, untill the children are brought to the house, and habit of Obedience: as Christ led his Disciples first to Bethany, and then blessed them. Chap. 27. There is yet an Objection to be removed out of the Way, which may seem in some degree to inter∣rupt the practice of this Affectionate and Religious Duty; raised from the Conceipt, that the Patriarchs ra∣ther gave their Blessings as Prophets, then as Parents: and that the Bles∣sings were pronounced rather out of prophetical praevision, then out of parental and fatherly Affection. To this it is easily Answered, The Pa∣triarchs are to be considered as to both Relations: first as Prophets,
who spake of old as they were inspi∣red by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21: and in this Respect, by Inspirations, Visions, & Revelations they did fore∣tell, instruct, & acquaint their posteri∣ties what Blessings were likely to fol∣low them or fall upon them. Secondly, The Patriarchs are to be looked up∣on as Parents, Fathers, Mothers, Grandfathers or Grandmothers, or other Superiour degrees in Consan∣guinity and Blood; and in this Re∣lation the Parents Blessing rather riseth from Affection, then Revela∣tion; and rather from the force of tender and natural Love, then the Spirit of prophesie: which although they differ in their Subjects, (pro∣phesie looking only after that which is Verum, Truth, and the affections of the Parents only looking and long∣ing after that which is Bonum good for his Child,) yet it is not incon∣sistent but that a divine Prophet may be a tender Parent, and as well impart his Blessings to Obedient children, as to Reveal, and Foretell
to them Gods good pleasure con∣cerning them and their posterities, and their future Condition. And it is as true, that Parents (though no Prophets) may (as warranted by the Rules and Examples of ho∣ly Scriptures) Blesse their dutifull children. To this purpose it is ob∣served of Jacob Blessing the twelve Tribes, Genesis 48.15. Jacob bene∣dicit filiis Joseph, hoc est, oratione Precatur eis benedictionem divinam, & Conferri eis Corporalia simul & Spiritualia Bona; as Marlorat hath it on that action of Jacobs: that is, The Patriarch Blessing his Sonnes and Grandsons, did not only pro∣phesie and foretell, but passionately did pray for a divine Benediction on his children, and begged of God temporal and Spiritual Bene∣dictions for them. So then not on∣ly prophetical, but all Natural Christian parents may, and ought (on just occasions) to pray for Gods Blessing on their posterities, and their Childrens children; The one being
only the impulse and Motion of Gods holy Spirit, and extraordinary, the o∣ther being the fruits of Natural and tender affection guided by the Word of God, and so directed to a more holy End: and which freely and na∣turally streaming from the head or Fountain cannot stop nor stay, but if interrupted, speedily swelleth; or like an Inundation spreadeth and overfloweth; & the natural Channel being stopped or dammed up casual∣ly falleth into some other obvious Course. Chap. 28. These things considered, Pa∣rents ought to be exceeding Cau∣tious how, or what they teach their children, and what they practise on this Account; (viz.) that the Pa∣triarchs gave their Blessings not meerly, and only as Parents, but as Prophets: For, mis-guided by such mistakes, God may be dishonoured, the children unblessed, and the Pa∣rents (guilty both of the Breach of
Gods Law, and the childrens misery and unhappiness) lyable to a more sad and heavy account: and the Links and Bands of these near Re∣lations once Crack't or Broken, great mischiefs may ensue, which no Art can cure, nor Reason or Counsel ce∣ment and repair. St. Paul there∣fore to bind this Cord the faster, and that the natural Affections and inclinations of Parents might meet with no Obstruction, teacheth the parents their Duty, as well as their children, theirs. It is true, the A∣postle first beginneth with the chil∣dren, commanding them, Children obey your Parents in the Lord, Ephes. 6.1. This precept is corrobora∣ted with a three-fold Argument: First, quia Deus sic sancivit, be∣cause God hath so Ordained. Se∣condly, Justissima est haec Obedientia, & rationi consentanea, this Obedi∣ence is just and most agreeable to Nature and Reason. Thirdly, ab utili, this Duty is the better to be observed because of the blessing
and advantage Got by it, Domi∣nus hoc Praeceptum inter caetera pe∣culiari benedictione dignatus est, saith Mr. Beza, ut bene tibi si t, that it may be Well with thee, and that thou mayst live long upon the Earth, E∣phes. 6.3. Chap. 29. The Apostle having first taught the Children, undertaketh the pa∣rents, and as strictly chargeth them: , that is, And ye Fa∣thers provoke not your children: as if the Apostle should have said, Be not over severe, harsh, Tyrannical and Cruel: for they are your chil∣dren, not your slaves; your Sonnes and Daughters, and not your Sub∣jects: made yours and to be kept yours, not only by a civil Com∣pact, but a Moral and Natural Ob∣ligation. And there might be some danger, least, if the Children ob∣serve their parents not enclined to give them their Blessing, they may
unreverently neglect to give that Honour that is due to their Pa∣rents, and so (easily tempted with stubborn pride) refuse to Bow or Beg their Parents Blessing. The Apostle considered this Duty of the Parents to be so necessary, that he gives the like Canon to the Colossi∣ans, as he did to the Ephesians; only changeth , Ephes. 6.4. into , the first trans∣lated ne Provocate, provoke not, the latter ne irritate, do not stir up or Irritate, or provoke not to Anger or Vexation. On both which pla∣ces it is observed, Patrum officium est; moderate, & ad Dei gloriam jure patriae potestatis Ʋti, that is, It is the Fathers Duty to exercise his paternal power with Moderation, Prudence and Discretion, that God may be the more Glorified. Re∣quiritur ut parentes in liberos sint be∣nigni: It is required that Parents be Courteous, and tender towards their Obedient children. And it is  Ifallible truth, where the
Golden Reciprocal Union of parents blessing their children, and the children Honouring their Parents is constantly kept and observed; there cannot but be length of Happy dayes, or such as Lead to Immu∣table and Eternal Happinesse in Heaven. On the contrary, where the Parents forgetting all Natural Affection, are over bitter, harsh, and Tyrannical to their Children; they convert Honour to Neglect, Obedience to sturdinesse, and Re∣bellion, and Love into hatred, con∣tempt and scorn. And though the Parents on no occasion or provoca∣tion whatsoever are to be requited with such unnatural Taunts and returnes: Yet these are the Fami∣liar and common Effects of incom∣passionate neglect, or injust, impi∣ous, and Imprudent provocations; And from hence it proves often∣times, that where the Parents ought to place and expect their greatest Joy and Solace; even from thence, even from their own Bowels, they
reap and gather the sad Harvests of their owne occasioned Sor∣rowes. Chap. 30. But the Sin of provocation in Parents is more Rare and lesse fre∣quent, by Reason that God and Nature incline the parents hearts to Kindnesse and Compassion towards their children; And Love Natu∣rally descends and looks down∣ward. The more dangerous and spreading sin is Disobedience in children, who (though never provok∣ed at all) know too well, and learn too sodenly, by naturall depravati∣on, to offend, dishonour and Diso∣bey their Loving and compassio∣nate parents: And from this Root spring up many Shoots and bran∣ches of Impiety, which, in conclu∣sion, occasion much mischief, and much misery, often attended with Temporal, Spiritual & Aeternal ma∣ledictions
ledictions and Curses. Cham and his posterity are miserable & sad Exam∣ples of Gods Judgements in this Kind. The Scripture only tells, that Ham the Father of Canaan saw the Nakednesse of his Father, and told his two Brethren without, Ge∣nesis 9.22. The Sin of his disobe∣dience is not more largely descri∣bed, but rather gently remembred, then freely opened. Moses record∣eth, that Cham saw his fathers Na∣kednesse, and did not cover it, or, he did not only see with his Eyes, but talk with his Tongue, he told his two Brethren without. At the first sight: this sin of Chams seems to be but of a lesser size; yet it appears that God was so highly offended at it, that it forced a curse to fall on Cham and Canaan and their suc∣ceeding generations. For, whether it be construed a prophesie, or a Fathers Wish and Imprecation; in both kinds it is very terrible. And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger sonne had done unto
him, and he said, cursed be Cana∣an, a servant of servants shall he be to his Brethren. In which Words, undoubtedly the Mouth of Noah, and the pen of Moses (who wrote the History) were guided directly by the Spirit of God. Who, to declare his Odium to the sinne of Disobedience in children, maketh Cham and his posterity sad and mi∣serable Spectacles to all future A∣ges of the World. The Curse was not only denounced and inflicted on Cham, but the Lord doth long before point out as it were with his Finger where, and how this plague should burn in the House of Cham; whose children and Generations being both Aegyptians, Genes. 12.15. and Aethiopians, Genes. 10.8, 9, 10. and Canaanites, Numbers 13.28. Genes. 15.16. They and their Childrens children felt the bitter smart of this plague and Curse for dishonour and Disobedience to pa∣rents. And, what condition can be more miserable for children,
then to be in the Scorn and Curse of their Parents who begat them, who bred them, and would care∣fully and tenderly provide for them, if they had but the Grace and Goodnessed to Honour and obey them as God commands. And it is for the sin of Disobedience and Undu∣tifulnesse, that children prove their Parents greatest Crosses and Cala∣mities, and most Insupportable Grief. Thus David was afflicted and forced to complain of Absa∣lom, 2 Sam. 16.11. Lamenting his condition to Abishai, and to all his Servants: Behold my Son which came forth of my Bowels seeketh my life. This Dart pierced more sharply, wounded more deeply then all the poysoned arrowes of his Enemies; in so much that the King extenu∣ates Shimei his cursings and Rail∣ings, as more tolerable; because such high Rebellion and Disobedience rose from Absalom Davids darling, and the fruit of his own Bowels. It was from hence that this great
worthy, Renowned Champion, (though in other Rencounters of In∣vincible Courage) yet, Alarm'd by his Sons disloyal Apostacy, and Disobedient Conspiracy, a pannick fear possesseth his Royal Soul, and the Messenger had no sooner told the Newes, that the hearts of the men of Israel were after Absa∣lom, but incontinently without fur∣ther debate or Counsel, 2 Sam. 15.13. the King quitted his Hold of Zion, and his Royal City, saying to his servants that were with him at Je∣rusalem, Arise, let us flee, for we shall not else Escape from Absalom: make speed to depart, least he over∣take us sodainly, and being evil upon us, smite the City with the Edge of the Sword. It was the Disobedi∣ence of this Undutifull Sonne that forced more teares from his Fathers Eyes, more sighs and Sobs from his Fathers heart, then all his E∣nemies: In all his Enterprises, the King with his Attendants and Guards were never in such a po∣sture
as was occasioned by this un∣naturall provocation. The Story is most pathetical in the second of Sa∣muel, 15.30. And David went up by the ascent of Mount Olivet, and wept as he went up barefoot, and all the people that were with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up: Every Word doth Emphasis Grief, and Eccho Re∣grett: represent rather a Tragedy already acted, then an Enemy to be Attacqued; rather a Funeral solemnized then a Battel to be fought: Covering of the head, Weeping, and Walking barefoot, being rather Emblems of grief, then preparations to fight, kill, or conquer. But, see what strange Convulsions a Disobedient son for∣ceth into the heart of a tender and compassionate Father! What a Tempest was suddenly raised in Davids Soul by the Breath of an undutifull child! and how Rest∣lesse the Fathers Spirit was, tossed with the Billowes of fear, care,
Love and grief: considering that his own safety and his sonnes were not consistent: that the Killing of his Enemy must be the slaying of his Sonne; that the subduing of the Rebels must be the Destruction of his Subjects; That his Victories must be raised by the fall of him, for whom his Bowels did Yearn, and had most affection; or by the Death of some seduced and stray∣ing sheep, deluded by fair words, & sweet Baits; for whom their true Pastour and Prince had the Designes of clemency, pardon and gracious compassion: This was very Visi∣ble in the Kings pleasure or com∣mand, who charged his three Ge∣nerals, Joab, Abishai and Ittai, 2 Sam. 18.2, 5. Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even Absalom my Son; Of whose death when the King received Newes from Cushi; 2 Sam. 18.33. he was much mo∣ved, and as overflowed with an Inundation of Grief; he went up to the Chamber over the Gate, and
Wept, & as he went thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, Oh Absalom my Son, my Son. By these Examples and sad Effects, it is very easie to dis∣cern the unpleasant Fruits that stubborn and Disobedient children occasion and produce to their grie∣ved and Afflicted Parents. But as to themselves their sinnes may prove much more dangerous and dam∣nable; for, whilst by their wilfull Disobedience, their scorn and con∣tempt, they cause their Parents faces to Wither, their Cheeks to furrow, their Hearts to ake, and their Eyes to weep, and (in conclu∣sion) sooner hasten their Gray Head to lie on a cold clod in their Graves; they may in the mean time hasten heavy Judgements to fall on them∣selves; and after a short life of Dis∣obedience and unrepented Sinnes; hurry, and hasten themselves to Hell. As then the love of Gods favour and Blessing, and the Hopes of a Gracious promise, should in∣vite
children to be Gracious, Du∣tifull and Obedient; so should the Terrours of Gods Threats, and the Vengeance of his Justice; with the fearfull Execution of many heavy plagues and punishments, teach and perswade children to take heed of the horrid sinne of unworthy and unnatural Disobedience. Chap. 31. It was pride and Disobedience that was the Cause,Epist. St. Jude ver. 6. of Lucifers fall; and this sinne suffered not Elyes undutifull Sonnes, Hophni and Phineas to live out half their dayes, but they were slain with the sword, 1 Sam. 4.11. According to Gods Law, Deuter. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. If a man have a Rebellious son,Judicial Law.which will not obey the voyce of his Father, or the voyce of his Mother, and when they have chastened him he will not hearken to them: Then shall his Fa∣ther and his Mother lay hold of him,
and bring him out to the Elders of the City, and to the Gate of his Place: And they shall say to the Elders of the City: This our Sonne is stubborn and rebellious: he will not obey our voyce, he is a Glutton and a drun∣kard: and all the men of the City shall stone him with stones untill he Die: so shalt thou put the Evil from among you; and all Israel shall hear and fear. The Judgements of God thus threatned against undutifull and Rebellious children, cannot but ter∣rifie the hearts of all who have Natural good dispositions, or any spark of Grace: to be of more meek, sweet and pious Tempers and humble Behaviours towards their Parents: of which heavenly Com∣portment Christ our Saviour was pleased to be a Blessed Copy and Example to his Church. Thus St. Luke writeth, Luke 2.57. He went down to Nazareth with his Pa∣rents, and was subject to them: and 'tis true, Omnis Actio Christi est in∣structio
Christiani. Christs Actions are our best Instructions: and St. Hierom speaks aptly to this pur∣pose, Christus venerabatur matrem, colebat nutricium. Hieron. Epist. de vit and. Susp. Connub. He Reve∣verenced his Mother as her Son, and Honoured Joseph his supposed Father, using (as many Learned Authors affirm) and exercising Fi∣lial and oeconomicall Duties in their House untill the Thirtieth Year of his Age. Where Christ is the Example: Let no Christi∣an child refuse to follow the Pat∣tern of his Obedience, nor vain∣ly think his Subjection to his Pa∣rents (as too many do) infirmita∣tis sed pietatis officium, to be a Duty of Infirmity, but of Pietie. Amb. in Luc. lib. 2. cap. 2. It is the Judgement of a Lord Bishop, and late more eminent Light of the Church of England, that the Tenth or last Commandement is the Fountain from whence all the
rest of the second Table do pro∣ceed, as the streams from the Con∣duit Head; and the streames ad∣mit a second division: for, they either equally and generally reflect on all, as being our Neighbours; as the five last; or else are re∣strained to a more particular and restrict Relation as the fifth, Ho∣nour thy Father and Mother, as from whom thou hast (by Gods order and permission) thy very Essence and Being. Bishop An∣drews Exposition on the fifth Com∣mandement, where the same Au∣thor Collecteth from Philo, that Honour due to Parents is prefer∣red before all other Duties due to Men; and it is placed as it were  in Confinio, in the Confines of a Mortal, and an Ae∣ternal Nature; in the Middle of the first and second Table; for, take away this one Duty of the childrens Honouring and Obeying their Parents, and then all Duties
to God, and man will speedily Cease and fall to the Ground. This is due to them not only as a Reward of Excellency, the proper Object of Honour, (as the Schooles speak) but it is to be tendred and given to Parents though they be Aged, Ignorant, infirm or Impo∣tent; The duty of this Comman∣dement being not directed in the Word Dilige love, but Honora, ho∣nour thou. Chap. 32. If there be any nice Stomach that will not digest this Meat, or will cavil at this Duty, pretend∣ing Scripture for their Warrant; Objecting, that None is to be cal∣led Father on Earth, much lesse Honoured as Father, from those Words, Matthew 23.9. It is an∣swered, that properly, and accor∣ding to the Rules of Divinity it is
true, There is no other Father but God; for other Parents are, as the Heathen say, : the Instruments of Generation un∣der God; and therefore Paterni∣ty being ascribed both to God and Man: It is in God Originally, and properly, and in man deri∣vatively and instrumentally: as it may be seen in the Words of the Apostle Saint Paul, who makes God the first Father, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is Named, Ephes. 3.17. as he is the first, so he is the last: So David, When my Father and Mother forsake me, the Lord taketh me up, Psalm 27.16. Now, if all paternity or Fatherhood be derived from God to men, who be Fathers by parti∣cipation: Their Merit, or what is due to them, signified in the Name [Father] must be drawn from God who is the Fountain of that Honour, that falleth and flow∣eth from Fathers. There is yet
something in the very Word in the Original, , Father, which is derived, as Bishop Andrews con∣ceives, from  to will and de∣sire, because of that tender and af∣fectionate desire that Parents have of their childrens good. Thus Job was Pater Pauperum, Job 29.16. And was the Father hath a significant Name from the Hebrew; so hath the Mother from the Greek Language,  quaero vehe∣menter, quia victum partui quaerit, because she seeks to be a preserver of her Children. And this was one end of her Creation, to be a Helper, not only to her Husband, but to her children. So then, the very Terms of Father and Mother may most justly force and require a Duty of Honour from their chil∣dren. As the Termes and Names of Father and Mother present the Excellency of those near Relati∣ons: so the Duty commanded is pressed in a word of equal ac∣ceptation.
The Hebrew  which is translated to Honour, doth first signifie to be heavy, or make hea∣vy: Grave esse, aut aggravare; and by a Metaphor it is used for Honour: Because as Gold and Sil∣ver the more weighty they are, the more they are of price and Va∣lue; Thus our Parents as the most precious Relations, merit the chiefest Honour and highest Va∣luation from their children. As the Hebrew, so the Greek Word hath as Emphatical a significati∣on to oblige the children to their Duty, , Honour seems to have a derivation from , pendo, to weigh, prize, and esteem; And these two words are commonly used by Solon, Plato, and the Ro∣mane Legislators, requiring Obedi∣ence to the Lawes; Thus Ari∣stotle  are the same with  Arist. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 17. Et lib. 5. cap. 6. Whether then the Termes of Fa∣ther
and Mother, or the Duty of Honour be considered, it is very important, and most significant; that as Care, Tendernesse, Love, Provision, Education, and Mainte∣nance is due from Parents: so on the other part Honour, Obedi∣ence, a Submissive Gratitude, and humble deportment in Word and Deed is due to the tender∣hearted Parents: And what Ge∣sture more presenteth Honour in Approaches; then Uncovering the head, bowing of the Body, or bending of the Knees? And what Words can so suddenly Conquer compassionate Parents, as when they hear their children praying; and see them humbly begging their Blessing on their Knees? This Way is so facile ad easie, that it often Molifies the Rockie disposition of hard-hearted Pa∣rents, who, provoked to Wrath and Unkindnesse by stubborn Dis∣obedience, are converted, and
in a Moment changed to sweet∣nesse, tendernesse and Love, by the Earnest Prayers and humble Gestures of Relenting and Obedi∣ent children. It were pity then, nay, a great and Imprudent Absur∣dity (if not an Impiety) that this Duty should not be used amongst Christians, which is in it self so Innocent, to the Relations so Com∣mendable, and by the Word of God, and holy Examples, so Lawfull and Warrantable. The Sonne of Sirach, *: doth both Counsell and Countenance the whole Discourse with many Evin∣cing Arguments, and powerfull perswasions, directing his Sonne, and telling him:Ecesiasti. 2.3.The Lord hath given the Father Honour over the children,  and hath canfirmed the Authority of the Mother over the sonne;   whoso honoureth his Father ma∣keth an Attonement for his sins;  And he that honoureth his Mother,   is
as one that layeth up Treasure; Whoso honoureth his Father, shall have joy of his own children; and when he maketh his prayer he shall be heard: he that Honoureth his Fa∣ther shall have long life, and he that is Obedient to the Lord, will be a comfort to his Mother: He that feareth the Lord will Honour his father,  and will do service un∣to his Parents as to his Masters: Honour thy Father and Mother both in word and deed,  that a Bless∣ing may come upon thee from them; for the blessing of the Father E∣stablisheth the Houses of Children,   but the Curse of the Mother root∣eth out Foundations: Glory not in the dishonour of thy Father:  for thy Fathers dishonour is no glory un∣to thee, for the glory of a man is from the honour of his Father and a Mother in dishonour is a re∣proach unto the children.   My son, help thy Father in his Age, and
grieve him not as long as he li∣veth. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him and de∣spise him not when thou art in thy full strength, for the Relieving of thy Father shall not be forgotten, and in stead of sinnes it shall be added to build thee up. In the day of thine affliction it shall be re∣membred; thy sinnes shall melt away as the Ice in the fair warm Wea∣ther. He that forsaketh his Father is as a blesphemer, and he that angreth his Mother is Cursed of God. It is facile and easie to Collect and Conclude from this divine Coun∣sellour, that an Attonement for sinnes is made; that a Treasure is laid up; That Joy is added: Prayers are heard; Long life is procured; Houses are Establish∣ed, and built up: Afflictions re∣membred, and sinnes are made to melt away as the Ice in the fair warm weather; When Children
rightly pay and render that Ho∣nour, Duty, Reverence, and Obe∣dience to their Parents, which God commandeth. FINIS.
'ΕΥΔΟΧΙΑ. A Model of private Prayers: OR, Occasional Helps in Retired Devotions. . Damasc. Composed by Edward Wolley, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and are to be sold by William Palmer, at the sign of the Palm-tree in Fleet-street, and at the Gun in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1661.
'ΕΥΔΟΧΙΑ. A Model of private Prayers, OR, Occasional Helps in Retired Devotions. The Creed. I believe in God the Father Almighty, &c. The Lords Prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven, &c.
TO THE Kings mos Excellent MAJESTY; Charles, by the Grace of GOD, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. SIR, GOd hath made your Majestie not only a King, but Pater Patriae; the Father of all your King∣domes and Countries. In this Reflexion All your Subjects owe
you Loyaltie and Allegiance, and are (as dutifull Children) to render Honour and obedience to your Sacred Person and Com∣mands; They are (on all just grounds) to supply your Ma∣jestie with Support and Mainte∣nance, and to adventure, and hazard their dearest lives and richest Fortunes in the Defence of your Royal Crown and Dig∣nitie. This Truth hath been Sea∣led in the blood of many thou∣sand Loyal Subjects of your three Kingdomes, who in your Maje∣sties, and in your Royal Fathers Service of the Wars, chose rather to lose their lives, then their Loyaltie. Thus whilest others of looser Principles started from their Duty; your Loyal-hearted
People, as obedient Children, were faithfull to the Death, and the vigour of their Reso∣lutions was (Probably) raised from the sure Foundations of Pietie, and Gods holie Law, which commandeth jure posi∣tivo Honour thy Father and thy Mother. And had this Moral dutie been well taught, and well learn't: It is very Possible this latter Age had not produced such Black Rebellion; but that the Church might have had better Christians, your Ma∣jestie better subjects, Masters better servants, and Parents more obedient Children. To meliorate all which Relations, this Manual adventures into the World under the Ʋmbrage of
your Majesties Grace and fa∣vour, which hath encouraged the Endeavours of Your Majesties Devoted and obedient Subject and Chaplain E. WOLLEY.
To the READER. THis Model or Ma∣nuel of private prayers is adjoyn∣ed to the Pa∣rents Blessings, the rather, be∣cause it aymeth chiefly, at the begetting of true Honour and Obedience to all Superiours, whether Spiritual, or Civil, or Natural: And what help so good, what ayre so sweet, or Soares so high, as the breath and perfume of holy and true
Devotion, which reacheth, and is quickly elevated from the Altar of an humble heart to the Throne of God; yet it is possible that good affecti∣ons may want expressions, And weak and wandring Tra∣vellers require a Guide; e∣specially after the dismall stormes of a bloody civil War, and the confusions and di∣stractions produced by that ugly Monster. But now the tempest being over (thanks and praise to Almighty God) it may be seasonable to endea∣vour to settle the minds of many: who, as Passengers at Sea, have had their conscien∣ces shipwracked for many yeares, or carried away with
the puffs of strange Doctrine; And to refresh others, who have felt their share in the late bitter stormes, and are not yet securely Return'd into the Haven, where their souls may be at rest; to rectifie whose stomachs, and comfort whose spirits nothing Can be more Cordial and proper, then Pri∣vate and Publick Prayer. Farewell.
A Prayer for a King, or a Soveraign Prince. O Most Gracious Lord, who in great favour and mercy hast set a Crown of pure Gold upon my head, and a Royal Scepter in may hand;Psalm 21. and hast girded me with a sword of Power: make my honour great in thy Sal∣vation; Prevent me still with the blessings of goodnesse: keep my heat upright in thy service, suf∣fer not evil Counsel to Approach near mine Eares, Nor wicked Ex∣amples to present themselves be∣fore mine eyes: Let not Lyars abuse Truth, nor Flatterers corrupt or Alienate my Love fromt it.Psal. 101. Streng∣then
then my Resolutions against proud looks and high stomachs, that I may not suffer them, nor deceitfull per∣persons to dwell in my House, or those who tell Lies to tarry in my sight: Continue me a Nursing-father to thy Church, and a true Defender of the Faith; A graci∣ous Soveraign to all my Subjects: And that all my thoughts, Words and Actions may be so seasoned with Grace, and the fear of God, that my eyes may look unto such as be faithfull in the Land, and that they may dwell with me: And that those who lead a Godly life may be my servants. Above all things, let me have Understanding in the way of Godlinesse, that I may walk in thy House with a perfect heart; And let Justice sit with me on my Throne, and Prudence with me at my Counsels: Let Temperance be my Companion, and Fortitude my Encouragement, and so adorn my soul with Moral Vertue and hea∣venly graces: That whilst I live on
Earth I may still grow in favour with God and man: and when I shall be dissolved from my earthly Tabernacle, I may receive an Im∣mortal Crown of Glory: and all for Jesus Christs sake our Lord and Saviour. Amen. The Subjects Prayer. ALmighty Lord, who Art the God of Order, and not the Author of Confusion; Give me grace to reflect on my own condi∣tion, and to know my self that I may the better perform my Duty to∣wards God and towards man. Con∣tinue my heart Loyal faithfull and Obedient to my Soveraign, and make me dutiful and submissive to the Lawes. Let neither Ambition nor covetousnesse tempt my soul to sin, nor Rebellion bewitch and In∣snare my affections from my Prince; Give me grace ever chearfully to
Render unto Caesar those things which are Caesars: and to God those things which are Gods: that I may live and prosper under a happy Government, and end my dayes in peace and the quiet of a good con∣science: and so may be in the End Eternally blessed, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Captaines or Commanders Prayer. ALmighty God, who art King of Kings and Lord of Hosts: and commandest all things both in Heaven and Earth, make me truly Zealous and couragious in a good cause. Let neither Death nor dan∣ger terrifie my soul from thy ser∣vice, nor the force and rage of E∣nemies affright my Resolutions: pre∣serve my heart in obedience to my Superiours, and make them willing, chearful & successful whom I com∣mand:
Cover my head in the day Battel, and let me dwell under the defence of the most High: suffer me not to be afraid of any terrour by night, or for the Arrow that flyeth by day; Give thy holy Angels charge over me to keep me in all my wayes, And as a good Centuri∣on, let Faith be my shield, Righte∣ousnesse my Brest-plate, Hope my Helmet, a good conscience my Com∣rade and companion: That thus ar∣med and fighting with the sword of the Spirit, I may gain Victory o∣ver all my Enemies: and in the End may rest in Peace and Triumph in glory, with Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour. Amen.
The Private soldiers Prayer. MOst gracious and mercifull Lord, look favourably on me thy poor servant, let thy glory be the ground of my encourage∣ment, and a good cause only oc∣casion my feet to march, and my hands to fight; make me truly Va∣liant in the day of battel, and pre∣serve me from death and danger; Arm me with patience in distresse, and with Resolutions of Fidelity in thy honour and service: let neither a Babylonish garment nor a wedg of Gold, unjustly tempt my affe∣ctions, nor power and successe make me fierce and cruel; let not plenty Lull me in security, nor drown me in debauched intemperance; and let not Victory encline me to pride or insolency, direct me that I may do violence to no man: Neither ac∣cuse any falsely, and to be contented with my wages: And so dispose of
me in all my Thoughts, words and deeds, that in Peace and War, in life and death, I may have the joy and comfort of a good conscience: And all this I humbly crave for Je∣sus Christs sake my Lord and Sa∣viour. Amen. The Masters Prayer. MOst blessed Lord, who doest Rule and govern all things: I beseech thee that I may walk humbly before thee, with a perfect and upright heart in my Vocation and Calling: keep my lips from fraud and guile, and my hands from unjust dealings: Let my conversa∣tion be just and innoent towards God and towards man; give a bles∣sing to my endeavours, and prosper the works and labours of my hands: suffer me not to be harsh or bitter to those that serve me, nor to be un∣civil to my Neighbours, Let truth
and honesty keep me company, and a good conscience be my compa∣nion day and night: And so direct the whole Race and course of my life that I may live all my daies in thy fear, and die in thy favour and love, for Jesus Christs sake my blessed Saviour and Redeemer. A∣men. The Servants Prayer. HOlie, Righteous and blessed Lord, who dost preserve and provide for those that trust in thee, look graciouslie on the thine un∣worthy servant, Let thy fear dwell ever in my heart, and the honour of thy blessed Name inflame my soul with love of thee; keep my thoughts from Temptation to evil, my hands from fraud and deceit, from picking, Purloyning or stealing; Restrain my tongue from cursing, swearing or blaspheming, and from evil speak∣ing
lying and slandering good Lord deliver me; let Diligence and O∣bedience to just commands, make me to delight in my Emploiments, and to add a chearfulnesse to my service, make me sincere to my Masters trust, and to perform the Duty of my place with fear and trembling in singlenesse of heart, as unto Christ; Not with Eie-ser∣vice, as a man-pleaser, but as a servant of Christ doing the Will of God from the heart. And that all things under my care may prosper and have better successe; Influence the Graces of thy Ho∣lie Spirit upon my soul, that be∣ing guided by thee I may ever serve thee in Righteousnesse and true holinesse through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Guardians Prayers. O Lord who art the God of Truth, and seest and searchest the hearts of all men, keep me upright and sincere in that trust that is recommended to my care: suffer me not to be drawn aside with covetous lust, nor to be carried away with the torrent of Prodigal expences: confine my thoughts within the bounds of Justice and Moderation, that I may give a hap∣pie account of my Stewardship, and prove just and innocent before God and man: Let not oppression against the Orphans crie against me, nor unrighteous dealing corrupt my conscience: If riches encrease, let not my heart be set upon them, but give me grace to keep Innocencie, and to do the thing that is right, that I may obtain peace at the last. These are the blessings I humbly crave, (most blessed Lord) for Jesus Christs sake our Saviour. Amen.
The Wards or Orphans Prayer. MOst gracious God and merci∣full Lord, who art pleased to be a husband to the Widow and a father to the Orphans, I beseech thee to look with pitie and mercie upon me; comfort me in the time of trouble, and relieve me in all distress. Provide me food and Rai∣ment, let thy goodness be my com∣fort, ond thy Prudence my Store∣house; help me to the benefit of a civil and Christian Education, that I may in some degrees, grow in favour with God and man, let not my conversation be corrupted with Vice, nor my soul poison'd with sin: Beautifie my Resoluti∣ons with humilitie, contentedness and Obedience, that I may be ob∣servant under Tutors and Gover∣nours untill the time appointed; Encrease my faith in thee, O Lord, and make me ever to depend on
thy mercie: And so season my younger yeares with grace, that all my daies may be blessed and acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ my blessed Saviour. Amen. The Tutours Prayer. OEternal and Immortal Lord, who art Wisdom, Righteous∣ness, Sanctification and Redempti∣on, Enlighten my Understanding with the bright beams of thy Fa∣vour, Rectifie my Judgement and preserve it from Errour, let not Schism, heresie, or Atheism encline or direct my thoughts from the love of Truth, and so lead me by the grace of thy holy Spirit into the paths of Righteousness, that I may be able to guide others to the Knowledge and love of Learning, and Wisdom: And I humbly pray thee (blessed Lord) that holiness
may dwell so fully in my heart: that all my life I may be a good Example to others, and make thy glorious light so to shine before men, that in all things I may glorifie thy holy Name through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Pupils or Scholars Prayer. MOst gracious Father and bles∣sed Lord, I do most hum∣bly confess that I am fearfully and wonderfully made, and that thou hast preserved me ever since I hanged about my mothers neck, be pleased stil to be propitious to me, to give me a wise Religious and Un∣derstanding heart, that I may the better learn to know and fear thy holy Name: Let not perversness or frowardness interrupt my stu∣dies, nor Idleness benumbe, or childish wantonness disperse or
startle my affections from the love of Learning; keep me innocent from the Contagion of evil compa∣ny, and let not lewd Examples in∣fect my tender Yeares, bend my heart with true obedience to my Teachers, and make me diligent and active in the performance of my Dutie: and so regulate the whole frame of my Conversation, that I may grow up as a young Plant, supported and propped with thy grace, that in due time I may prove a polished corner of thy Temple, for Jesus Christ's sake. A∣men. The Husbands Prayer. MOst mercifull Lord, who hast admitted me to the holy state of Matrimony instituted in Paradise; give me thy heavenly grace to live Reverently, discreet∣ly, advisedly, soberly, and in the
fear of God in that holy Ordinati∣on; Command my affections and guide them that I may love my wife, as my own bodie, my flesh, and my bone; and as Christ loved his Church and gave himself for it. Suffer not any Root of bitterness to spring from my heart, nor to spread in my looks or language, or in any action towards my beloved, but let me so live in love with her and dwell to∣gether in honour, knowledge, and the fear of the Lord, that we may be heires together of the grace of life, and that our prayers may not be hindred: and so enjoying the comfort of a holy life on earth, I may in the End obtain Eternal life in Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Wife's Prayer. ALmighty Lord, who knowest best how to dispose of thy servants and Handmaids: Assist me with thy grace and favour, that being joined in the holy state of Matrimome, I may preserve it Honourable and Undefiled, keep my heart in an humble submission to my husband as being my head, so that I may render him Reve∣rence honour and Obedience, make my Conversation to be chast cou∣pled with the fear of God, my life innocent and inoffensive, and my spirit mild and quiet, so that if any obey not the Word, he may be wonne without the word, by the conversation of his Wife. Pro∣tect me (O Lord) from all Tem∣ptations of evil Inclinations, and preserve me from the motions, looks, and Inticements of lewd and wicked companie; let modestie
ever appear in my looks, and Cha∣stitie dwell in my Thoughts, that I may be a comfort and delight to my husband, and in all my Con∣versation an Example of grace and Vertue: All this I humbly beg for Christ Jesus sake my Saviour and Re∣deemer. Amen. The Widowes Prayer. O God, who art Just in all thy works, and holy in all thy wayes; look on me thy poor ser∣vant with the tender eye of pitie and mercie: Comfort me in my sad and solitarie condition; be my head and Husband, to direct me in all my troubles: Protect me with thy Power; refresh me with thy Favour, Counsel me with thy Wis∣dom, and be my Refuge in all dan∣gers and extremities; Let not Vio∣lence and oppression Injure my In∣nocent weakness, nor any wanton
Thoughts surprise me; preserve me from the Attempts of lascivious approaches: and let chast and mo∣dest Resolutions keep me company: defend me from the Rage and fury of Ungodly and Unreasonable men, give me grace to dedicate my self both in soul and bodie to thy ser∣vice; And so to continue in thy favour and Protection, that my life may have comfort, and my End may be truly happie through Je∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Virgins Prayer. HOlie, Holie, Holie, Lord God of Hosts: who dwellest be∣tween the Cherubims, and whose eies cannot but with displeasure, look on any thing that is Impure, preserve me in thy Faith and Fa∣vour, that I may glorifie thee in bodie and soul, keep my eies from vain Objects, and my Eares from
wanton discourse; let not my senses be surprised, nor my Reason cap∣tivated with any lustfull inclinati∣ons: Purifie my heart from all un∣cleanness, and defend and keep me from the wiles and assaults of the World, the flesh and the Devil: let my choisest delight be fixed in the honour and service of my God; And let my Affections be set chiefly on those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God; Let Ho∣linesse and Charitie beautifie my Conversation; and let me be a Companion to those who lead a godly life, that thy Name may be glorified, and my body and soul in the End Eternally saved through Je∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Jaylors Prayer. ALmightie Lord, who art the Creator of Heaven and Earth, be pleased to touch my heart with a true fear and Reverence of thy Holy Name; let not Asperitie or fiercenesse raise a tempest in my soul, but give me grace that I may perform the Dutie of my place, with fidelitie and a good consci∣ence, let neither the power nor the Treacherie of those, who are committed to my Custodie, be able to do me any injurie; Com∣fort with pitie, and relieve with mercie all who are innocent, and graciously deliver Joseph out of all his afflictions: shew him mercy and give him favour, Help those that are indebted to their Libertie, in∣clining their Creditors to pati∣ence and pitie, and so relieve them out of thine abundant store, that they may owe nothing to
any man but Love: As to Male∣factors and Offenders, Lord give them penitent and relenting hearts, that the Lawes being satisfied, and Vice punished, thy Name may be feared, Offenders terri∣fied, and their soules saved: And let thy Grace and Goodnesse so season my soul, that I may as well Treat the Innocent with mer∣cie and kindnesse as Command the most mischievous, with Ju∣stice and Prudence; I Lord hear my prayers, and let my Cry come unto thee, for Jesus Christs sake my only Lord and Saviour. A∣men.
The innocent prisoners Prayer. O Lord, in whom we live, move and have our being; from whom we derive both health and happinesse, receive my sighes and groanes: Consider my Tears, hear my Prayers, and have pitie on me, who am fast bound in mi∣serie an Iron: Suffer not a dark Dungeon to be my chamber, nor the cold stones my Couch: Let not Hunger, Thirst and nakedness devour me, nor Lice and nastiness destroy me; Suffer not the stocks or shackles to hurt my hands, legs or feet, nor the Iron to enter into my soul. O look graciously on my innocencie; Preserve me constant and faith∣full in true Zeal and love to thy Church; Strengthen my Loyaltie and Resolutions of faith and true Allegiance towards my King; And whilest it pleaseth thee (O
God) to make triall of me: let not any earthly torments afright me from my true love to thy ser∣vice; Make my face to shine with chearfulnesse, as thou didst Saint Stevens; Amidst my greatest trou∣bles, if it be thy good pleasure de∣liver me out of miserie, and from the hands of all my Enemies: if not (blessed Lord) thy Will be done: let not crueltie tire my pa∣tience, nor any earthly Ad∣vantage so corrupt my Consci∣ence, but that I may continue faithfull to the death, so that in the End, I may receive the Crown of life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Malefactors prayer in prison. O God, to whom Justice, and Vengeance belongeth: I beseech thee, let not thy Wrath or displeasure further fall upon me, but have mercy on me and that right soon; for now I am come in∣to great miserie; my sinnes have laid hold on me long since, and now thy Justice hath found me out. I have offended, and now am pu∣nished, abused my Libertie, and therefore am Imprisoned: (O Lord) wash me from my sinnes, and cleanse me from mine iniqui∣ties, Though they be Crimson and Scarlet sinnes, yet be pleased to pardon and forgive them all. Give me grace to look on my sinnes as the causes and provocations of thy Judgements: and to consider my transgressions as the only occasions of my shame and sorrow: make
my stony heart to relent, and to gush out with streames of teares: that I have so offended God and man. Strengthen my faith in my Saviour Jesus, and save my soul for his precious Merits sake: let not hardnesse of heart, and Impe∣nitencie bewitch, or benumme my soul, but have mercie upon me, and (if it be thy good pleasure) that I must die for my offences to satisfie thy Justice; Righteous Lord, be pleased that my sufferings and example may deterr all others from such notorious crimes, and let my poor soul be Eternally sa∣ved, through thy great mercies in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Exiles prayer. ALmighty God, who for my sinnes hast forced me to for∣sake my Countrey, and Kindred, and my Fathers house; give me grace to possess my soul in pati∣ence, to submit chearfully to thy heavenly Will, and ever to de∣pend on thy mercie and goodness; let not the sinnes of strangers en∣tice me, nor their Errours ensnare me to any wickedness; keep me sound and firm in the true Faith of Christ, and suffer not subtile delu∣sions to Infatuate my soul, nor evil Examples to corrupt my manners. Preserve me from the poison of Schism, Heresie, Atheism & Aposta∣cie; let thy Truth be my Guide, and thy Mercie my Protection; let holy and humble Resolutions to depend on thy Favour comfort me in my di∣stress: and in good time, If it be thy blessed Will, O Lord, deliver
me from banishment and restore me to my own Countrey, that I may yet live to praise thee in the great Congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Captives prayer. O Most Just and Righteous Lord; It hath pleased thee to suf∣fer me to fall into the hand of cru∣el barbarous and bloody people, who deny my blessed Saviour Je∣sus Christ, and despise the Holie Gospel the Word of Life; I hum∣bly beseech thee (most gracious Father) to behold my sad condi∣tion with a tender Eye of sweet compassion; and to strengthen my faith in all trials of my Enemies; let neither the cruelty of men or Devil, or any else be able to sepa∣rate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Give
me courage to resist all perswasi∣ons and force, that might Invade or remove my Resolutions from thy Truth; let thy honour be my sal∣vation, and the Name of my Sa∣viour Jesus my Joy and comfort in all assaults and troubles: keep me constant and faithful to thy service in my greatest extremities, and make me to rejoyce in the cross of Christ: And not to be terrified or ashamed, bearing about me the marks of our Lord Jesus: Grant me (Lord) a speedie and happie deliverance out of my Enemies hands: If it be otherwise determin∣ed, whether I die or live, what∣ever I do or suffer, God give me grace to glorifie his holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. A∣men.
The poor beggers prayer. MOst sweet and blessed Lord: who art the light of Israel and the comfort of all who are in distess and miserie: look merci∣fully on my sad and low condition, who am cloathed with Rags, and pinch'd with povertie, which like an Armed man is ready to seize upon me: Remember thine Accu∣stomed goodness (gracious Lord) and supply my necessities with thine Abundant Kindness; sweeten my sufferings with heavenly supplies: and let not hunger and thirst, cold, and nakedness Utterly Devour me, Mollifie the hard hearts of those who behold my miserie, that they may have compassion towards me: and thou (O Lord) who makest the Lillies to grow, and feedest Ravens and Fowles of the Ayre; Provide food and Raiment for thy poor servant, and for thy mercies
sake Ransom and redeem me from my sad extremities: An yet if it please thee to make further trial of my patience and submission, (Lord) grant me a contented heart. And though I continue poor and needie, yet make me rich in the gifts and graces of thy holy Spi∣rit, that though I find no compas∣sion at rich mens doores, yet when I die, I may (as Lazarus) be carri∣ed by the Angels into Abraham's bosome, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. The Seamans prayer. O Almightie and Everlasting Lord God, Thou givest us leave to go down to the Sea in Ships, and to have our business in great Waters, to behold the Works of the Lord, and to see the Wonders in the Deep. Preserve
us when the stormie wind Ariseth: and lifteth up the loftie Waves: let not our soules melt with trou∣ble, when we are carried up to the Heaven or down again to the Deep; Though we Reel to all fro and stagger like Drunken men, and be at our wits end: yet, hear us graciously when we cry unto thee (O Lord) in our trouble, and deliver us out of our Distress; make the storm to cease, that the proud Waves may be still and calm, Deliver us both day and night from the dangers of the deep, and suffer neither Pirats nor theeves nor any of our Enemies, to terrifie or take, or hurt us, to damage our ship or spoil our goods. Let our Voyage be prosperous, and en∣deavours successfull, and in the end, make us glad (O Lord) that we may be at rest: And bring us to the Haven where we would be, that we may praise the Lord for his goodness and declare the Won∣ders that he doth for the children
of men, that his Name may be e∣ver exalted, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Midwives prayer. O Lord Eternal and Almighty, who commandest all thy ser∣vants to be usefull & helpful one to another, be pleas'd to give me both skill and Courage to assist and help thy Handmaid in her la∣bour and travail: let not my hands or heart fail at her approaching danger, make my endeavours hap∣py and successfull, and graciously answer the requests and desires of thy humble servant, who now earn∣estly prayeth for thy Blessing: let this Handmaid have ease and comfort in her greatest pangs and sorrows, that so by thy Providence and Goodness, being delivered from death and danger, she may be
made a joyfull Mother by the fruit of her Womb and birth of her Child. Grant Lord that the In∣fant may be receiv'd into the world with comfort, and made thy ser∣vant by Adoption and Grace, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Womans prayer in her la∣bour and travail. ALmightie and most graci∣ous God; I know and be∣lieve that strength and weakness, danger and deliverance, life and death are in thy hands: I beseech thee earnestly for Christ Jesus sake, to comfort me in this time of trial that is now at hand: forgive my sinnes which have cau∣sed my sorrowes, Mitigate and asswage my pain and pangs, and though I approach near the doors
of death, yet recover me again, and suffer me not to faint or pe∣rish in so great a danger: streng∣then my faith and patience, and give me happy deliverance of the fruit of my Womb: And graci∣ously convert all my sorrowes into Joy. O let my life be precious in thy sight, that my preservation e∣ver may oblige me to set forth thy praise and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Aged persons prayer. O Immortal and Almightie God, who art Eternity and the Ancient of daies; be propitious and merciful to me thy Aged servant; Though my face be furrowed and wrinckled, yet be pleased to Renew thy graces dai∣ly in me, and let thy holy Spirit breath afresh the gales of thy Love and Favour on my soul, for∣sake me not in my old Age (O
Lord) (seeing the evil dayes are come upon me, and the yeares wherein I take no pleasure, Though the Sun grow dark and my Eyes dimme, the keepers of the house tremble, the strong men bow them∣selves, the grinders cease, and all the frame of my feeble body be terrified and shaken, yet forsake me not (most gracious Lord) in my old age; guide and keep me in the paths of Righteousness to the end of my dayes: let no of∣fensive Diseases overtake me, nor my former sinnes find me out to detect me, or Accuse me, and suffer not the frailties and Errours of my youth now to seize on my fainting spirits, but let thy grace and goodness be my comfort, and thy mercy and pity, my deliverance, from my sinnes, and thy displeasure: that I may End and consummate the few daies of my Pilgrimage in love, Joy and Peace both with God and man, though Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The young mans prayer. BLessed, holy, and Righteous Lord; Teach me to remem∣ber my Creator in the daies of my youth, and train me in the pathes wherein I ought to go, suf∣fer me not to walk in the counsel of the Ungodly, to stand in the wayes of sinners, or to sit in the seat of the scornful: direct me how I may so cleanse my wayes, that I may take heed thereto ac∣cording to thy Word. Give me grace to seek thee with my whole heart, that I may not wander from thy Commandements: make thy Word the Treasure of my soul, so that I may not sin against thee. Allay all hot and unruly passions with the dew of thy grace: sow the seeds of Vertue in the garden of my soul, and Weed out of my heart all Inclinations to Vice and sin; keep me zealous to the love
and duty of thy Lawes, and make me to stand in awe, and to be af∣fraid, more of displeasing thee then of all the world besides: Let not my heart be tempted with evil thoughts, or the wicked devices of men or Devils, nor my life corrupt∣ed and debauched with lewd and ungodly companie. Give me grace (O Lord) to keep my lips from guile, and my Tongue from cur∣sing, lying, swearing and all pro∣phaness: let my body be a Recep∣tacle and Temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in, and my soul so filled with thy grace and heavenly Benedicti∣on: that in the End both may be eternally saved, through the me∣rits of thy blessed Son, my blessed Saviour Jesus. Amen.
The Fathers prayer. O Most glorious God and gracious Father in Jesus Christ our Lord; let thy goodness and tender compassion en∣cline thy Eares to my prayers and supplications: Teach my heart to belive in thee, and to love, ho∣nour, and fear thee above all things: make me a holy and hum∣ble Example of Pietie, Truth, Righteousnesse and goodnesse, be∣fore my Children, whom thou hast given me: Let all my thoughts words and deeds savour of Grace and Vertue; let thy holy Com∣mandements be my path to walk in: Thy Word my light and Lan∣thorn to guide me? Thy Sacra∣ments my Refection and comfort, Thy strength my stay, Thy Pro∣tection
my Refuge: A good con∣science my Cordial, and thy praise and glory my chiefest End and aime: cloath me with Innocen∣cie, Truth and uprightnesse: and so adorn me with thy Grace and Goodnesse, that I may bring up my children in the true faith and fear of God, that I and they may in the End prove Heires of Salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord thy bessed Sonne, O Lord; and our Saviour Jesus. So be it. Amen.
The Mothers Prayer. O Lord Holy and Righteous, be gracious and propiti∣ous to me thy humble servant; and thou who dwellest in Heaven above; Consider and hearken to the devout prayers of thy Handmaid. As thou hast made me a Mother, so make me a grave and modest Matron; an Example of Holinesse and good∣nesse, in word and deed, to my Children: let it be my chief∣est care to breed and bring them up, blessed Lord, in thy Comman∣dements, that cleaving fast to thy Law even from their tender years, they may never fail in their Du∣ty towards God or man, nor de∣part from it; Continue me ten∣der and compassionate to my chil∣dren,
and let not pride, cove∣tousnesse, filthy lusts or World∣ly Vanities withdraw or divert my true love from them: make my children my delight and O∣live Branches round about my Ta∣ble, whiles they are young: And when they grow into riper age, make them the stay and comfort of my Age, and give me and mine thy holy Grace (O Lord) that we may ever love and serve thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Childes Prayer. A Lmightie God and loving Father, who hast Grace and mercy for all thy ser∣vants, who have pity and kind∣ness for themselves. Continue thy goodnesse and preservation over me, that I may believe in thee, and fear, honour and love thee, with all my heart, with all my mind and with all my soul: make me Zealous in thy Worship and thankfull for thy mercies, and to serve thee truly and faithfully all the daies of my life. Teach me, (O Lord) to love my Neighbour as my self, and give me a Ten∣der heart devoutly to love, ho∣nour ond succour my Father and Mother: A Loyal heart to ho∣nour and obey my King and his
Ministers, an humble heart to sub∣mit my self to all my Gover∣nours, Teachers, spiritual Pastors, and Masters: so Guide and Go∣vern (blessed Lord) my whole life both in body and soul, that in my younger and riper yeares, in my youth and age, I may enjoy the comfort of thy holy Spirit, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
An Innocent Martyrs prayer, or, a Loyal subjects prayer dying for a good Cause. O Lord, who knowest the thoughts of all mens hearts, and discernest the secrets of the soul, be my guide and com∣fort in my Resolutions, and let my love to thy Truth be the only Load∣stone of my affections in this great Trial of my Christian Faith and patience: let not the terrour nor torments of cruel men, not any temptations of Satan, divert my thoughts from thy service; And whether I shall die or live, and end my daies by a violent or a Na∣tural dissolution, Give me grace still to put my trust in thy mercy,
and to be true and faithful to the death: suffer me not to be ashamed of my chain; nor discouraged with harsh unmercifull usage, and asad and cold Imptisonment. Though I be de∣prived of competent food and Rai∣ment, threamed with death and haled to execution: yet be pleased (gracious Lord) to be my help and Refuge in all my miserie. And so strengthen my faith and affi∣ance in thy mercie and goodnesse, that I may not be afraid of the flame of fire or faggot, nor be dis∣maied at the sharpness of the Ax or Sword, and though my gar∣ments be rouled in blood, yet let the glorie of a righteous and good cause invite and oblige my Resolu∣tions to constancie and perseve∣rance, so that I may not be asha∣med or afrighted, though I be forced by bloody minded men to a Halter or a Gibbet, make me able by an innocent life, and a Religi∣ous Death, to convert my very E∣nemies,
nemies, as the noble Armie of Martyrs, and to be a faithfull wit∣ness of thy Truth. In my greatest Agonie and Trial, give me grace to remember those great Worthies, who for their Saviours sake were stoned, were sawen asunder, and were slain with the sword: or ra∣ther, give me grace to look on my blessed Saviour; who, for the Glo∣ry that was set before him, de∣spised the shame, endured the cross, and is now set down at the right hand of God; and, if I must suffer and die, so it be for a good cause and a good conscience, The Lords holie Name be blessed, who for this light Affliction which lasteth but for a moment, will reward his ser∣vants with a Crown and weight of Eternal Glorie, which was pur∣chased, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Travailers prayer. MOst blessed Lord, who art the Protector of Heaven, and earth, and of all thy Crea∣tures, look graciously upon me thy humble servant, Defent and keep me in my Journey: bless my go∣ing cut and my coming in, be with me at my rising up, and at my down-sitting. Go with me and preserve me whilest I am in the way, and succour and supply me with food and Raiment: com∣fort me when I am weary with rest and refreshment, and let me abide under the shadow of the Al∣mightie, that I may be defended under his Wings; and safe under his Feathers: so that the terrours of the night may be makee me afaid, nor the Arrow that flieth by day come near to hurt me:
Suppress the Violence of wicked and ungodly men, that they may not have any power to do me hurt or injurie. And then (most gra∣cious God) who hast such a ten∣der care of the stranger, the Wi∣dow, and the Orphan: Bless and prosper me in my Journe, as thou didst Isaac's servant. O let me not fall into the hands of Thieves and Robbers, as the un∣happie Travailer, who passed from Jerusalem to Jericho: nor to be insna∣red or surprised with the force or craft of cruel, deceitfull and mischie∣vous-minded men: Suffer me not to be stripped of my garments, nor maimed or wounded in my body, but be pleased to give thy holy An∣gels charge over me, to keep me in all my wayes. And so to bear me in their hands, that I may not so much as dash my foot against a stone; Continue to me the Bles∣sing of Health and strength, Peace and Libertie. And so prosper my
travail and endeavours, that I may go out and Return both in thy fear and favour, and so receiving a good success in my Journey; may have ever cause to praise thy holie Name for the goodness and mercie which endureth for Ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A private Morning Prayer. ALmightie and most gracious Lord, who hast detended me from all the terrours of dark∣ness this last night past, and hast refreshed my body and soul with the favour of sweet fleep, Rest and Repose: give me grace this day entirely to devote and dedicate my self to thy honour and service:
Let the beames of thy goodness Radiate and shine upon me to dis∣solve the Clouds of Ignorance, and to dispel and scatter from my heart the works of darkness, and all Inclinations to sinne and wic∣kedness: Keep me from this Day as the Apple of thine Eye, and suffer neither the World, the flesh or the Devil to insnare or entice me to any Evil: Set a watch be∣fore the door of my lips, that they may neither Utter pervers∣versness my eies to be the windowes of I∣niquitie, to delight in sinne, or to stare after Vanitie. Keep my hands in innocencie, and restrain my feet that they may not be forward or swift to shed blood, or to Act any mischief: Let not my Throat be an open devouring Sepulchre, nor my Tongue defiled with cur∣sing, lying or swearing: but so bless me (O Lord God) in Through, word and deed, that I may like
Zechariah and Elizabeth, be up∣right and blamelesse in my con∣versation: I beseech thee (Hea∣venlie Father) to prosper me in that Station and Calling, where∣in thou hast placed me, and make me a light to others by my good Examples. And so preserve me by thy Mercie and Providence, that I may neither run into any sinne, nor fall into any kind of danger. O let thy holie Angels by my Guardian, thy holie Word my Guide, and thy holie Spirit my Counsellour and Comforter. And so direct and inflame my Affecti∣ons, that I may chiefly delight in Truth and Innocencie, that my whole conversation may be Hea∣venlie, blamelesse and inoffensive; Let the fear of thy holie Name work so powerfullie on my soul, that I may never swerve or De∣viate from the paths of Righte∣ousnesse, but walk on still in them, that I may in the End obtain E∣verlasting
verlasting life, though Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen- A Private Evening Prayer. O Eternal and Almightie Lord, who art the Watchman of Israel, and whose Eies neither slum∣ber nor sleep, be favourable and gracious, and continue thy Prote∣ction and goodness towards me. As thou hast blessed me this day past, so be pleased to receive me into thy gracious preservation this Evening and night ensuing: for∣give my sinnes, that they may nei∣ther provoke thy wrath or dis∣pleasure, nor terrifie or wound my conscience; wash my stained soul in the Crimson blood of Christ Je∣sus
my Redeemer; Nail all my offences fast to his meritorious Cros, burie my iniquities in the Grave of his Humilitie; And so strengthen may faith in Christ, that I may firmly believe that all my sinnes are expiated, through the bitter death and Passion of my Lord and Saviour; from these in∣ward perswasions raise true com∣forts to my conscience, and assist me with the Grace that I may not of∣fend thee, but Ever studie and En∣deavour to please thee (O my God) in Righteousness and true Holiness: In this humble con∣fidence of thy future favour: (Lord) I recommend my soul and bodie unto thine Almightie Providence and Protection; Ear∣nestly beseeching, that as I have received many Blessings and Tokens of thy Love this day: so I may this might be safe under the Wings of thy tender goodness. Preserve me from the terrours of darkness, and
suffer me neither to be assaulted, nor afrighted with any Evil; quiet my conscience with the assurance of the forgiveness of my sinnes, for my Saviours sake; and let me not be scared with Dreames, nor de∣filed with lustful Thoughts: send me sweet sleep and repose, that being thereby refreshed, I may be the better enabled to walk before God and man in my Vocation and calling: let not the hands of cruel men, nor any of thy Judgements surprise or overtake me, but let thy Power be my Defence and thy Mer∣cie my sure Deliverance, that I may lie down and rest in peace, and by thy favour rise the next morn∣ing with joy and comfort: And all this I humbly beg for the glorie of thy Name, and for thy tender mer∣cie in Jesus Christ my blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. Our Father which art in Heaven, &c.
A private prayer for a sick person. ALmightie Lord, in whom we live, and move, and have our being; look down from Heaven: Behold, visit, and relieve me thy sick servant; Let not my sinnes encrease my sorrowes, nor mine offences heighten thy dis∣pleasure; Strengthen me in my greatest infirmities, and fortifie my Resolutions to bear with patience, whatever Load thou shalt please to lay upon me: O forsake me not when my strength faileth me, and go not far from (O God) but in all my extremities make hast corrected me with sickness, and hast brought great troubles and Adversities upon me, leading
me in thy displeasure, even to the very gates of Death, yet be plea∣sed (Graelens Lord) to turn a∣gain to refresh me with thy mer∣cie, and to bring me out of the Deep of all my sorrowes. Com∣fort me yet on every side after thy sharp chastisements, and give me grace to make a holy Use of all thy fatherlie Visitations. And whe∣ther my sicknesse comes upon me for the exercise of my patience, a Trial of my faith, or a corre∣ction for my finnes: (Blessed God) grant that I may give an humble and a heartie submission to thy good Will and pleasure; and nei∣ther vainly to despise thy correcti∣on, nor weakly to faint, being now rebuked by God himself, if it be thy heavenlie Will: Grant (O Lord) that I may recover my health and strength again before I go from hence and be no more seen: if it be otherwise determi∣ned, whether it be for health or
sicknesse, for life or Death, Gods Will be done, the Lords Name be praised. In the mean time (Bles∣sed Lord) defend my sould with the shield of Faith, Arm my Re∣solutions with the sword of the Spirit, and cover and comfort my heart and conscience with the Brest∣plate of Righteousness, that I may be the better able to resist the Temptation of Satan, and the Va∣nities of the World, and not to shrink or to be swallowed up in the Gulf of my own infirmities or carnal weaknesse; (O Lord) make my bed in all my sicknesse, and comfort me in all my sorrowes: discharge me from my disease, and restore me to health and strength again if it be thy Will, that I may live to praise thy Holie Name, for thy great and sweet me∣cies, and all this I humbly crave for Jesus Christs sake my only blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen.
A prayer for a sick person dying and departing out of the World. MOst gracious and Immor∣tal God, with whom the soules and spirits of all the Saints departed in thy faith an fear do live Eternally, in Bliss and Glorie; shew thy most Ten∣der favour and mercie towards me, in this my greatest Agonie and Af∣fliction; Behold now (O Lord) how my house is readie to fall, my Dust and Ashes are returning to the Grave; my flesh trembleth; my Boyling blood is readie to cool; my Eies grow dimme, and the whole frame of strength and Na∣ture failes; my Tale is Told, my Glass is run, and the hour of Death is nigh at hand; I beseenh
thee (blessed Lord) to comfort and assist me in this juncture of extremities, and inundation of sorrowes: Inflame my heart with Charitie and love towards all the World: strengthen my faith a∣gainst all Temptations: give me a sure Hope an firm confidence in thy. Mercie and Goodness: conti∣nue to me the Blessing of Pati∣ence, constancie and perseverance to the End: that when I am dis∣solved and depart this life, my soul may be elevated to Everlast∣ing Joyes in the companie of the blessed Angels: And that my bo∣die, being reposed in a bed of clay until the day of Judgement, may then receive a happie and glori∣ous Resurrection. Let the remain∣der of my Thoughts be fixed on my Redeemer, and be Intirelie coelestiallie disposed, that my pas∣sage may be more certain, sure, and easie towards Heaven. And being purged from all my sins in the blood
of Christ, I may follow the Holie Lamb of God, and wait on my Re∣deemer in Everlasting Happiness. Give me grace and courage free∣ly to part with the World, and all Transitorie Vanities, and whol∣ly to resign and recommend my body and soul into thy hands, that so I may continue thy faithfull ser∣vant and Soldier to my lives End: and having fought the fight and finished my course, I may receive the Immortal Crown of Glorie, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour. Amen.
A Prayer for the Ʋniversities and Schooles of Learning. LOrd, who art the Author and giver of all good things, I beseech thy fatherly mer∣cy, to be Ever favourable and Propitious to the two Universities, and to all other Schooles and So∣cieties of Learning and pious Edu∣cation, in this Kingdom, and of all other his Majesties Dominions: And as thou hast stirred up the hearts of many Worthies to be∣come Founders, and Benefactors of those famous Seminaries and Seed-plots: so let their Names and Me∣mories be precious in the sight of God and man, for their good and charitable works; make succeed∣ing generations to imitate, and to be in love with their Examples;
that Learning and Languages with Arts and Sciences, and the true Religion and the fear of God, may every dae more and more prosper and flourish: Keep the Schooles of the Prophets from the Rapine & Ruine of covetous hearts, and sacrilegious hands; Cleanse those Fountaines and Well-springs of Life, from the commixture of Ignorance and Impietie. Let not Schism, Heresie or Atheism, Lurk or shelter themselves under the Roof of those happie Foundati∣ons, nor Boastingly set up them∣selves against Unitie, Peace and Pietie (O Lord) let those Lamps never want Oyl: but that they may shine brightly abroad to the dispelling of Darknesse; the sup∣pressing of Errour, and to the Defence and Maintenance of Gods true Religion and Vertue: Make them who are in power to be truly worthie, diligent and faith∣full
to their trust; and kindle the love of Wisdom and Learning in the Affections of all the Sonnes of the Prophets: That the streames of Knowledge plentifully flowing from those pleasant Fountaines: the whole Land may be refresh∣ed, the People instructed, the Church Edified, and God Al∣mightie glorified in all things: Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A private prayer for the Church of England. ALmighty God thou hast cast us out and scattered us abroad: Thou hast been displeased at us: O turn to us again: And though thou hast
moved the Land, and divided it, yet be pleased to heal the sores thereof, for it shaketh: though thou hast shewed thy people heavy things, and given them a drink of deadly Wine: yet, at last, give a token to such as fear thee, that they may triumph because of the Truth; be pleased (Gracious Lord) to be ever a help in the time of trouble, bless the Catho∣like Church of Christ. And more especially the Church of England; which like a Dove before the birds of prey, and a Lilly amidst the Thornes, is inviron'd on every side with mortal Enemies. Continue this Church A pillar of Truth; and a Mother of many Blessings to all her children. Preserve her in Doctrine and Discipline, that she may keep the Unitie of the Spi∣rit in the bond of Peace, in the Right Dispensation of thy Heaven∣ly Word, and in the blessed Use and Administration of thy holie
Sacraments. Let not sacrilegious hands make a prey of the Chur∣ches Patrimonie: Nor covetous minds Rob her of her Revenues: Suffer not the wicked to take the Houses of God into possession. But (O Lord) think upon thy Congre∣gation which thou hast Redeem∣ed and purchased of old: Think upon the Tribe of thine Inheri∣tance, and of the Dust of Sion: And let not them who have done such Evils in thy Sanctuarie, con∣tinue any longer thy holy places to be Dennes of Thieves, or the Re∣ceptacles of mischief and propha∣nesse. O let not heathenish mind∣ed men come into thine Inheri∣tance to defile thy Holy Temple, or to make Jerusalem an heap of stones. Suffer not the men of Vio∣lence to smite down thy people, or to trouble thine Heritage, to murder the Widow, or the Stran∣ger, or to put the Fatherlesse to Death, nor to shed the blood of
thy servants, like water on every side of Jerusalem: But (O Lord) As thou hast been our Refuge from one generation to Another, so be∣come gracious to the Land: as thou hast turned away the Captivity, so forgive the offences of thy peo∣ple, and cover their sinnes, that they may still rejoyce in thy Salvati∣on. Send (Blessed Lord) into this Church faithfull and holy Bishops, Pastors and Curates, that they may both by their life and Doctrine set forth thy true and holy Word, and rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments to the glory of thy ho∣ly Name, and the Churches peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A Subjects private prayer for his Soveraign. O Lord, who hast wonder∣fully delivered our Dread Soveraign ever since he was born: And after many Try∣als and Dangers, hast restored him to his Royal Throne and Digni∣ty; I earnestly beseech thee (mer∣cifull God) still to be Gracious and Propitious to thine Anointed, and as thou hast made his peo∣ple to shout with joyfull Acclama∣tions for the Kings return, so let him dwell securely in their hearts and dutifull Affections. Preserve his Royal Person from all perill and danger: Endue him with the overflowing Graces of thy Holy Spirit, and Adorn his soul with Vertue and goodness, that he may have a long, happy, peaceable and
Prosperous Reign to the joy and comfort of all his Loyal Subjects: and to the terrour and Amaze∣ment of all his Enemies. And when it shall please thee (O Lord) that he shall cease to Reign on Earth; Give him a Crown of Glo∣ry and Eternal life which shall last for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Subjects private prayer for the Queen-Mother, the Duke of York, and the Royal Progeny. MOst gracious Lord, who hast made three Kingdomes hap∣py, by the encrease of a Roy∣al Off-spring: be pleased to con∣tinue thy mercy and favours to Ma∣ry the Queen-Mother; to James Duke of York, and to all the bran∣ches
of that Princely Progeny; let their persons be ever precious in thy sight: Prevent them all with the Blessings of thy goodness, com∣pass them about with Songs of De∣liverance after their many sorrowes. Let peace and plenty be their dai∣ly Attentants: and let their Ho∣nour be Great in thy Salvation; Give them many happy dayes on Earth, and in the End Crown them all with Eternal Glory, for Jesus Christs sake our Lord and Saviour. Amen. . 1 Tim. 1.17. FINIS.
The Contents. 1. THe Kings prayer. Page 1. 2. The Subjects prayer. p. 3 3 The Captaines prayer. p. 4 4 The Soldiers prayer. p. 6 5 The Masters prayer. p. 7 6 The servants prayer. p. 8 7 The Guardians prayer. p. 10 8 The Wards prayer. p. 11 9 The Tutors prayer. p. 12 10 The Pupils prayer. p. 13 11 The Husbands prayer. p. 14 12 The Wifes prayer. p. 16
13 The Widowes prayer. p. 17 14 The Virgins prayer. p. 18 15 The Jaylors prayer. p. 20 16 The innocent prisoners prayer. p. 22 17 The Malefactors prayer in prison. p. 24 18 The Exiles prayer. p. 26 19 The Captives prayer. p. 27 20 The beggers prayer. p. 29 21 The Seamans prayer. p. 30 22 The Midwives prayer. p. 32 23 The woman in travails prayer. p. 33 24. The Aged persons prayer. p. 34 25. The young mans prayer. p. 36 26. The Fathers prayer. p. 38 27. The Mothers prayer. p. 40
28. The Childes prayer. p. 42 29. An Innocent Martyrs Prayer. p. 44 30. The Travailers prayer. p. 47 31. A private Morning-prayers. p.49 32. A private Evening prayer p. 52 33. A private prayer for a sick per∣son p. 55 34. A prayer for a sick person dying and departing out of the World. p. 58 35. A prayer for the Universities. p. 61 36. A private prayer for the Church of England. p. 63. 37. A Subjects private prayer for his Soveraign. p. 67 38. A Subjects private prayer. p. 68
